AN APOLOGY FOR THE True Christian Divinity, As the same is Held Forth, and
Preached, by the People, called in Sc^^^, QUAKERS: BEING A full Explanation and
Vindication of their Principles and Doctrines, by many Arguments, deduced from
Scripture and Right Reason, and the Testimonies of FAMOUS AUTHORS, both ancient
and Modern: With a full Answer to the strongest Objections usually made against
them.

Presented to the KING.

Written in Latin and English, By ROBERT BARCLAY, And since Translated into
High Dutch, Low Dutch, and French, for the Information of Strangers.

THE SIXTH EDITION in English.

Acts 24.14. -- After the Way which they call Heresy, so worship I the God of
my Fathers, believing all things which are written in the Law and the Prophets.

Titus 2.11. For the Grace of God, that brings Salvation, has appeared to
all Men. Ver. 12. Teaching us, that denying Ungodliness and worldly Lusts, we
should live Soberly, Righteously, and Godly in this present World Ver 13.
Looking for that blessed Hope, and glorious Appearing of the Great God, and our
Savior Jesus Christ. Ver 14. Who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us
from all Iniquity, and purify unto himself a peculiar People, zealous of good
Works

1 Thessalonians 5.21. Prove all things, hold fast that which is good.

NEW PORT, Rhode Island: Printed by JAMES FRANKLIN. 1729.

UNTO CHARLES II. KING OF Great Britain, And the Dominions thereunto belonging:
ROBERT BARCLAY, A Servant of JESUS CHRIST, called of GOD to the Dispensation of
the Gospel, now again Revealed, and after a long and dark Night of Apostasy,
commanded to be Preached to all Nations, Wishes Health and Salvation.
AS the Condition of Kings and Princes puts them in a Station more obvious to
the View and Observation of the World, than that of other Men, of whom (as
Cicero observes) neither any Word or Action can be obscure; so are those Kings
(during whose appearance upon the Stage of this World, it pleases the Great
KING of Kings singularly to make known unto Men the wounderful Steps of his
Unsearchable Providence) more signally observed, and their Lives and Actions
more diligently remarked and inquired into by Posterity; especially, if those
things are such, as not only relate to the outward Transactions of this World,
but also are signalized by the Manifestation or Revelation of the Knowledge of
God in matters Spiritual and Religious. These are the things that rendered the
Lives of Cyrus, Augustus Caesar, and Constantine the Great, in former Times,
and of Charles the Fifth, and some other Modern Princes in these last Ages, so
Considerable.

But among all these Transactions, which it has pleased God to permit, for the
Glory of his Power, and the Manifestation of his Wisdom and Providence, no Age
furnishes us with things so strange and mavelous, whether with respect to
matters Civil or Religious, as these, that have fallen out within the compass
of thy time; who, though thou be not yet arrived at the Fiftieth Year of thy Age,
have yet been a Witness of stranger things, than many Ages before produced. So
that, whether we respect those various Troubles, wherein thou found'st thy self
engaged, while scarce got out of thy Infancy; the many different Afflictions,
wherewith Men of thy Circumstances are often unacquainted; the strange and
unparalleled Fortune that befell thy Father; thy own narrow Escape, and
Banishment following thereupon, with the great improbability of thy ever
Returning, (at least without very much Pains, and tedious Combatings;) or
finally, the incapacity thou were under to accomplish such a Design;
considering the Strength of those that had possessed themselves of thy Throne,
and the Terror they had inflicted upon Foreign States: And yet that, after all
this, thou should be Restored without Stroke of Sword, the help or
assistance of Foreign States, or the contrivance and work of Humane Policy; all
these do sufficiently declare, that it is the Lord's Doing; which, as it is
mavelous in our Eyes, so it will justly be a matter of Wonder and
Astonishment to Generations to come; and may sufficiently serve, if rightly
observed, to confute and confound that Atheism, wherewith this Age does so much
abound.

As the Vindication of the Liberty of Conscience (which thy Father, by giving
way to the important Clamours of the Clergy, the answering and fulfilling of
whose unrighteous Wills, has often proved hurtful and pernicious to Princes,
sought in some part to restrain) was a great occasion of the Troubles and
Revolutions; so the Pretense of Conscience was that which carried it on, and
brought it to that pitch it came to. And though (no doubt) some, that were
engaged in that Work, designed good things, at least in the beginning, (albeit
always wrong in the manner they took to accomplish it, viz. by Carnal Weapons;)
yet so soon as they had tasted of the sweet of the Possessions of them they had
turned out, they quickly began to do those things themselves, for which they
had accused others. For their Hands were found full of Oppression, and they
hated the Reproof of Instruction, which is the Way of Life: And they evilly
entreated the Messengers of the Lord, and caused to beat and imprison his
Prophets, and persecuted his People, whom he had called and gathered out from
among them; whom he had made to beat their Swords into Plow-shares, and their
Spears into Pruning-books, and not to learn Carnal War any more: But he raised
them up, and armed them with Spiritual Weapons, even with his own Spirit and
Power, whereby they testified in the Streets and Highways, and public Markets
and Synagogues, against the Pride, Vanity, Lusts and Hypocrisy of that
Generation, who were Righteous in their own Eyes; though often cruelly Entreated
therefore: And they faithfully prophesied and foretold them of their Judgment
and Downfall, which came upon them; as by several Writings and Epistles,
delivered to Oliver and Richard Cromwell, the Parliament, and other then
Powers, yet upon Record, does appear.

And after it pleased God to Restore thee, what Oppressions, what Banishments,
and Evil Entreatings they have met with, by Men pretending thy Authority, and
cloaking their Mischief with thy Name, is known to most Men in this Island;
especially in England, where there is scarce a Prison that has not been filled
with them; nor a Judge before whom they have not been haled: Though they could
never yet be found Guilty of any things, that might deserve that Usage.
Therefore the Sense of their Innocence did, no doubt, greatly contribute to
move thee, Three Years ago, to cause some Hundreds of them to be set at
Liberty: For indeed their Sufferings are singular, and obviously
distinguishable from all the rest of such as live under thee, in these two
respects.

First, In that among all the Plots, contrived by others against thee, since
thy return into Britain, there was never any, owned of that People, found or
known to be guilty, (though many of them have been taken and imprisoned upon
such kind of Jealousies) but were always found Innocent and Harmless, (as
became the Followers of Christ) not covering after, nor contending for the
Kingdoms of this World; but subject to every Ordinance of Man, for Conscience
sake.

Secondly, In that, in the bettest times of Persecution, and the most violent
Prosecution of those Laws made against Meetings (being clothed with Innocence)
they have boldly stood to their Testimony for God, without creeping into Holes
or Corners, or once biding themselves, as all other Dissenters have done; but
daily met, according to their custom, in the public places appointed for that
end; so that none of thy Officers can say of them, That they have surprised
them in a Corner, overtaken them in a private Conventicle, or catched them
lurking in their secret Chambers; nor needed they to send out Spies to get
them, whom they were sure daily to find in their open Assemblies, testifying
for God and his Truth.

By which, those that have an Eye to see, may observe their Christian Patience
and Courage, Constancy and Suffering, joined in one, more than in any other
People, that differ from them, or oppose them. And yet in the midst of all
those Troubles, thou can bear witness, That as on the one part, they never
sought to detract from thee, or to render thee and thy Government odious to the
People, by nameless and scandalous Pamphlets and Libels; so on the other hand,
they have not spared to Admonish, Exhort and Reprove thee; and have faithfully
discharged their Consciences toward thee, without Hattering Words, as ever the
true Prophets in Ancient Times used to do to those Kings and Princes, under
whose Power, Violence or Oppression was acted.

And albeit it is evident by Experience, to be most agreeable both to Divine
Truth, and Humane Policy, to allow every one to serve God according to their
Consciences; nevertheless those other Sects, who, for the most part, durst not
peep out in the Times of Persecution, while these Innocent People stood bold
and faithful, do now combine in a joint Confederacy (notwithstanding all the
former Janglings and Contentions among themselves) to render us odious; seeking
unjustly to wrest our Doctrine and Words, as if they were both inconsistent
with Christianity and Civil Society: So that to effectuate this their Work of
Malice against us, they have not been ashamed to take the Help, and commend the
Labors of some invidious Socinians against us. So do Herod and Pontius Pilate
agree to crucify Christ.

But our Practice, known to thee by good Experience to be more consistent with
Christianity and Civil Society, and the Peace and Welfare of this Island, than
that of those that thus accuse us, does sufficiently guard us against this
Calumny; that we may indeed appeal to the Testimony of thy Conscience, as a
Witness for us in the face of the Nations.

These things moved me to present the World with a Brief, but True Account of
this People's Principles, in some short Theological Propositions; which,
according to the Will of God, proving successful, beyond my expectation, to the
satisfaction of several, and to the moving in many a desire of being farther
informed concerning us, as being every where evil spoken of, and likewise
meeting with public Opposition by some, as such will always do, so long as the
Devil rules in the Children of Disobedience; I was thereby further engaged, in
the Liberty of the Lord, to present to the World this Apology of the Truth held
by those People: Which, because of thy Interest in them, and theirs in thee, as
having first appeared, and mostly increased in these Nations under thy Rule, I
make bold to Present unto thee.

Thou know, and have Experienced, their Faithfulness toward their God,
their Patience in Suffering, their Peaceableness toward the King, their
Honesty, Plainness and Integrity in their faithful Warnings and Testimonies to
thee; and if thou will allow thy self so much time as to read this, thou may
find how Consonant their Principles are both to Scripture, Truth, and Right
Reason. The Simplicity of their Behavior, the Generality of their Condition,
as being Poor Men and Illiterate; the Manner of their Porcedure, being without
the Wisdom and Policy of this World, has made many conclude them Fools and
Madmen; and neglect them, as not being capable of Reason. But though it be to
them as their Crown, thus to be esteemed of the Wise, and Great and Learned of
this World, and though they rejoice to be accounted Fools for Christ's sake;
yet of late, some, even such, who in the World's account are esteemed both Wise
and Learned, begin to judge otherwise of them, and find, that they hold forth
things very agreeable both to Scriptue, Reason, and true Learning.

As it is inconsistent with the Truth I bear, so it is far from me to use this
Epistle as an Engine to flatter thee, the usual design of such Works; and
therefore I can neither Dedicate it to thee, nor crave thy Patronage, as if
thereby I might have more Confidence to present it to the World, or be more
hopeful of its success. To God alone I owe what I have, and that more
immediately in Matters Spiritual; and therefore to him alone, and to the
Service of his Truth, I dedicate whatever Work he brings forth in me: To whom
only the Praise and Honor appertains, whose Truth needs not the Patronage of
Worldly Princes; his Arm and Power being that alone, by which it is Propagated,
Established and Confirmed. But I found it upon my Spirit, to take occasion to
Present this Book unto thee; that as thou have been often warned by several of
that People, who are Inhahitants of England; so thou may not want a
seasonable Advertisement, from a Member of thy Ancient Kingdom of Scotland; and
that thou may know (which I hope thou shall have no reason to be troubled
at) that God is raising up and increasing that people in that Nation. And the
Nations shall also hereby know, that the Truth we profess, is not a Work of
Darkness, nor propagated by stealth; and that we are not ashamed of the Gospel
of Christ, because we know it to be the Power of God to Salvation; and that we
are no ways so inconsistent with Government, nor such Disturbers of the Peace,
as our Enemies, by traducing us, have sought to make the World believe we are:
For which, to thee I dare appeal, as a Witness of our Peaceableness and
Christian Patience.

Generations to come shall not more admire that singular step of Divine
Providence, in Restoring thee to thy Throne, without outward Bloodshed, than
they shall admire the Increase and Progress of this Truth, without all outward
Help, and against so great Opposition; which shall be none of the least things
rendering thy Memory Remarkable.

God has done great things for thee, he has sufficiently shown thee, That it
is by Him Princes rule, and that He can pull down and set up at his pleasure.
He has often faithfully warned thee by his Servants, since he Restored thee to
thy Royal Dignity, that thy Heart might not wax wanton against him, to forget
his Mercies and Providence toward thee; whereby he might permit thee to be
soothed up, and lulled asleep in thy Sins, by the Flattering of
Court-Parasites, who by their fawning, are the Ruin of many Princes.

There is no King in the World, who can so Experimentally testify of God's
Providence and Goodness; neither is there any, who rules so many free People,
so many true Christians: Which thing renders thy Government more Honorable,
thy Self more Considerable, than the Accession of many Nations, filled with
slavish and superstitious Souls.

Thou have tasted of Prosperity and Adversity; thou know what it is to be
Banished thy Native Country, to be Over ruled, as well as to Rule, and sit upon
the Throne; and being oppressed, thou have reason to know how hateful the
Oppressor is, both to God and Man: If after all these Warnings and
Advertisements, thou do not turn unto the Lord with all thy Heart; but forget
him, who remembered thee in thy distress, and give up thy Self to follow Lust
and Vanity; surely great will be thy Condemnation.

Against which Snare, as well as the Temptation of those, that may or do feed
thee, and prompt thee to ^il, the most Excellent and Prevalent Remedy will be,
to apply thy self to the Light of Christ, which shines in thy Conscience,
which neither can, nor will flatter thee, nor suffer thee to be at ease in thy
Sins; but does and will deal plainly and faithfully with thee, as those, that
are Followers thereof, have also done.

GOD Almighty, who has so signally hitherto Visited thee with his Love, so
touch and reach thy Heart, ever the Day of thy Visitation be expired, that thou
may effectually Turn to Him, so as to improve thy Place and Station for his
Name. So wishes, so prays,

Thy Faithful Friend and Subject, Robert Barclay.
From (...) place of my Pilgrimage, (...) my Native Country of Scotland, the 25
th of the Month called November, in the YEAR. 1675.
R. B. Unto the Friendly Reader wishes Salvation.
FOrasmuch as that, which above all things I propose to my self, is to Declare
and Defend the Truth; for the Service whereof I have given up and devoted
myself, and all that is mine: Therefore there is nothing which for its sake (by
the help and assistance of God) I may not attempt. And in this Confidence, I
did some time ago publish certain Propositions of Divinity, comprehending
briefly the chief Principles and Doctrines of Truth; which, appearing not
unprofitable to some, and being, beyond my Expectation, well received both by
Foreigners, though dissenting from us, (albeit also opposed by some Envious Ones)
did so far prevail, as in some part to remove that false and monstrous Opinion,
which Lying Fame, and the Malice of our Adversaries, had implanted in the Minds
of some, concerning us and our Doctrines. In this respect it seemed to me not
fit to spare my Pains and Labor.

Therefore, being acted by the same measure of the Divine Spirit, and the like
design of Propagating the Truth, by which I published the Propositions, I
judged it meet to explain them somewhat more largely at this time, and defend
them by certain Arguments.

Perhaps my Method of Writing may seem not only different, but even contrary,
to that which is commonly used by the Men called Divines, with which I am not
concerned: For that I confess my self to be not only no Imitator and Admirer of
the School Men, but an Opposer and Despiser of them, as such; by whose Labor I
judge the Christian Religion is so far from being bettered, that it is rather
destroyed. Neither have I sought to accommodate this my Work to itching Ears,
who desire rather to comprehend in their Heads the sublime Notions of Truth,
than to embrace it in their Hearts: For what I have written comes more from my
Heart than from my Head; what I have heard with the Ears of my Soul, and seen
with my inward Eyes, and my Hands have handled of the Word of Life; and what
has been inwardly manifested to me of the things of God, that do I declare;
not so much minding the Eloquence and Excellency of Speech, as desiring to
demonstrate the Efficacy and Operation of Truth; and if I err sometimes in the
former, it is no great matter; for I act not here the Grammarian, or the
Orator, but the Christian; and therefore in this I have followed the certain
Rule of the Divine Light, and of the Holy Scriptures.

And to make an end; What I have written, is written not to feed the Wisdom and
Knowledge, or rather vain Pride of this World, but to starve and oppose it, as
the little Preface prefixed to the Propositions does show; which, with the
Title of them, is as follows.

Theses Theologicae.
To the CLERGY, of what Sort soever, unto whose Hands these may come; but more
particularly to the Doctors, Professors, and Students of Divinity, in the
Universities and Schools of Great Britain, whether Prelatical, Presbyterian, or
any other: ROBERT BARCLAY, a Servant of the LORD GOD, and one of those who in
Derision are called Quakers, wishes unfeigned Repentance unto the
Acknowledgment of the Truth.

FRIENDS,
UNto You these following Propositions are offered, in which, they being read
and considered in the Fear of the Lord, you may perceive that simple, naked
Truth, which Man by his Wisdom has rendered so obscure and mysterious, that
the World is even burdened with the great and voluminous Tractates which are
made about it; and by their vain Jangling and Commentaries, by which it is
rendered an hundred Fold more dark and intricate than of it self it is: Which
great Learning (so accounted of) to wit, your School Divinity (which take up
almost a Man's whole Lifetime to learn) brings not a whit nearer to God,
neither makes any Man less wicked, or more righteous than he was. Therefore
has God laid aside the Wise and Learned, and the Disputers of this World; and
has chosen a few despicable and unlearned Instruments (as to Letter-learning)
as he did Fishermen of old, to publish his pure and naked Truth, and to free
it of those Mists and Fogs, wherewith the Clergy has clouded it, that the
People might admire and maintain them. And among several others, whom God has
chosen to make known these things (seeing I also have received, in Measure,
Grace to be a Dispenser of the same Gospel) it seemed good unto me, according
to my Duty, to offer unto you these Propositions; which (though short, yet) are
weighty, comprehending much, and declaring what the true Ground of Knowledge
is, even of that Knowledge which leads to Life Eternal; which is here witnessed
of, and the Testimony thereof left unto the Light of Christ in all your
Consciences.

Farewell. R. B.

The First Proposition. Concerning the true Foundation of Knowledge.
SEeing the height of all Happiness is placed in the true Knowledge of God,
John 17.3
( This is Life Eternal; to know the true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have
sent) the true and right Understanding of this Foundation, and Ground of
Knowledge, is that which is most necessary to be known and believed in the
first place.

The Second Proposition. Concerning Immediate Revelation.
Mat. 11.27.
Seeing no Man knows the Father but the Son, and he to whom the Son reveals
him; and seeing the Revelation of the Son is in and by the Spirit; therefore
the Testimony of the Spirit is that alone, by which the true Knowledge of God
has been, is, and can be only revealed; who, as by the Moving of his own
Spirit, converted the Chaos of this World into that wonderful Order, wherein it
was in the beginning, and created Man a Living Soul, to rule and govern it; so
by the Revelation of the same Spirit, he has manifested himself all along unto
the Sons of Men, both Patriarchs, Prophets and Apostles; which Revelations of
God by the Spirit, whether by outward Voices and Appearances, Dreams, or inward
objective Manifestations in the Heart, were of old the formal Object of their
Faith, and remains yet so to be; since the Object of the Saints Faith is the
same in all Ages, though set forth under diverse Administrations. Moreover, these
divine Inward Revelations, which we make absolutely necessary for the Building
up of True Faith, neither do nor can ever contradict the outward Testimony of
the Scriptures, or right and sound Reason. Yet from hence it will not follow,
that these Divine Revelations are to be subjected to the Examination, either of
the outward Testimony of the Scriptures, or of the Natural Reason of Man, as to
a more noble or certain Rule or Touchstone: For this Divine Revelation, and
Inward Illumination, is that which is evident and clear of it self, forcing by
its own evidence and clearness, the Well-disposed Understanding to assent,
irresistably moving the same thereunto, even as the common Principles of
Natural Truths move and incline the Mind to a natural assent: (Such as are
these, That the whole is greater than the parts; that two contradictory Sayings
cannot be both true, or false) which is also manifest according to our
Adversaries Principle, who (supposing the possibility of Inward Divine
Revelations) will nevertheless confess with us, that neither Scripture nor
sound Reason will contradict it: And yet it will not follow, according to them,
that the Scripture, or sound Reason, should be subjected to the Examination of
the Divine Revelations in the Heart.

The Third Proposition. Concerning the Scriptures.
From these Revelations of the Spirit of God to the Saints, have proceeded the
Scriptures of Truth, which contain, 1. A faithful Historical Account of the
Actings of God's People in diverse Ages, with many singular and remarkable
Providence attending them. 2. A Prophetical Account of several things, whereof
some are already past, and some yet to come. 3. A full and ample Account of all
the chief Principles of the Doctrine of Christ, held forth in diverse precious
Declarations, Exhortations and Sentences, which, by the Moving of God's Spirit,
were at several times, and upon sundry occasions, spoken and written unto some
Churches and their Pastors. Nevertheless, because they are only a Declaration
of the Fountain, and not the Fountain it self, therefore they are not to be
esteemed the Principal Ground of all Truth and Knowledge, nor yet the adequate
primary Rule of Faith and Manners. Nevertheless, as that which gives a true
and faithful Testimony of the first Foundation, they are and may be esteemed a
secondary Rule, subordinate to the Spirit, from which they have all their
excellency and certainty; for as by the Inward Testimony of the Spirit we do
alone truly know them, so they testify, that the Spirit is that Guide, by
which the Saints are led into All Truth; therefore, John 16.13 Romans 8.14.
according to the Scriptures, the Spirit is the first and principal Leader. And
seeing we do therefore receive and believe the Scriptures, because they
proceeded from the Spirit, therefore also the Spirit is more originally and
principally the Rule, according to that received Maxim in the Schools, Propter
quod unumquodque est tale, illud ipsum est magis tale. Englished thus: That for
which a thing is such, that thing it self is more such.

The Fourth Proposition. Concerning the Condition of Man in the Fall.
All Adam's Posterity (or Mankind) both Jews and Gentiles, as to the first Adam
(or Earthly Man) is fallen, degenerated, and dead; deprived of the Sensation
(or feeling) of this Inward Testimony, Romans 5.12, 15.
or Seed of God, and is subject unto the Power, Nature, and Seed of the
Serpent, which he sows in Men's Hearts, while they abide in this natural and
corrupted State: From whence it comes, That not their Words and Deeds only, but
all their Imaginations are Evil perpetually in the sight of God, as proceeding
from this depraved and wicked Seed. Man therefore, as he is in this State, can
know nothing aright; yea, his Thoughts and Conceptions concerning God, and
things Spiritual (until he be disjoined from this evil Seed, and united to the
Divine Light) are unprofitable both to himself and others. Hence are rejected
the Socinian and Pelagian Errors, in exalting a Natural Light; as also the
Papists, and most of Protestants, who affirm, That Man, without the true Grace
of God, may be a true Minister of the Gospel. Nevertheless, this Seed is not
imputed to Infants, until by Transgression they actually join themselves
therewith; for they are by Nature the Children of Wrath, Ephesians. 2.2.
who walk according to the Power of the Prince of the Air.

The Fifth and Sixth Propositions. Concerning the Universal Redemption by
Christ, and also the Saving and Spiritual Light, wherewith every Man is
enlightened.
The Fifth Proposition.
God, out of his Infinite Love, Ezekiel. 18 23 Isai. 49 6. John 3.16. and 1.9.
Tit. 2.11. Ephesians. 5.13. Heb. 2.9.
who delights not in the Death of a Sinner, but that all should Live and be
Saved, has so loved the World, that he has given his only Son, a Light, that
whosoever believes in him should be saved; who enlightneth every Man that
comes into the World, and makes manifest all things that are reprovable, and
teaches all Temperance, Righteousness, and Godliness. And this Light
enlightneth the Hearts of all in a day, in order to Salvation, if not resisted.
Nor is it less Universal than the Seed of Sin, being the Purchase of his Death,
1 Cor. 15.22
who tasted Death for every Man. For as in Adam all die, even so in Christ all
shall be made alive.

The Sixth Proposition.
According to which Principle (or Hypothesis) all the Objections against the
Universality of Christ's Death, are easily solved; neither is it needful to
recur to the Ministry of Angels, and those other Miraculous Means, which, they
say, God makes use of to manifest the Doctrine and History of Christ's Passion,
unto such who (living in those places of the World, where the outward Preaching
of the Gospel is unknown) have well improved the first and common Grace: For
hence it well follows, that as some of the old Philosophers might have been
saved; so also may some now (who by Providence are cast into those remote Parts
of the World, where the Knowledge of the History is wanting) be made Partakers
of the Divine Mystery, if they receive and resist not that Grace, A
Manifestation whereof is given to every Man to pr^fit withal. 1 Cor. 12.7.
This certain Doctrine then being received (to wit) That there is an
Evangelical and Saving Light and Grace in all, the Universality of the Love and
Mercy of God toward Mankind (both in the Death of his Beloved Son, the Lord
Jesus Christ and in the Manifestation of the Light in the Heart) is established
and confirmed, against all the Objections of such as deny it. Heb. 2.9.
Therefore Christ has tasted Death for every Man; not only for all kinds of
Men, as some vainly talk; but for every one, of all kinds: The Benefit of whose
Offering is not only extended to such, who have the distinct outward Knowledge
of his Death and Sufferings, as the same is declared in the Scriptures; but
even unto those, who are necessarily excluded from the Benefit of this
Knowledge by some inevitable Accident. Which Knowledge we willingly confess to
be very Profitable and Comfortable, but not absolutely Needful unto such, from
whom God himself has withheld it; yet they may be made Partakers of the
Mystery of his Death (though Ignorant of the History) if they suffer his Seed and
Light (inlightning their Hearts) to take place (in which Light, Communion with
the Father and Son is enjoyed) so as of Wicked Men to become Holy, and Lovers
of that Power, by whose inward and secret Touches, they feel themselves turned
from the Evil to the Good, and learn to do to others, as they would be done by;
in which Christ himself affirms all to be included. As they have then falsely
and erreneously Taught, who have denied Christ to have died for all Men; so
neither have they sufficiently Taught the Truth, who affirming him to have died
for all, have added the absolute necessity of the outward Knowledge thereof, in
order to the obtaining its saving Effect: Among whom the Remonstrants of
Holland have been chiefly wanting, and many other Assertors of Universal
Redemption; in that they have not placed the Extent of his Salvation in that
Divine and Evangelical Principle of Light and Life, wherewith Christ has
enlightened every Man that comes into the World; which is excellently and
evidently held forth in these Scriptures, Genesis 6.3. Deuteronomy. 30.14. John 1.7, 8,
9. Romans 10.8. Tit. 2.11.

The Seventh Proposition. Concerning Justification.
As many as resist not this Light, but receive the same, in them is produced a
holy, pure and spiritual Birth, bringing forth Holiness, Righteousness, Purity,
and all those other blessed Fruits, which are acceptable to God; by which holy
Birth (to wit) Jesus Christ formed within us, and working his works in us, as
we are Sanctified, so are we Justified in the sight of God, according to the
Apostle's words, But ye are Washed, but ye are Sanctified, but ye are
Justified, in the Nane of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God.
Therefore it is not by our works wrought in our will, nor yet by good works,
considered as of themselves; but by Christ, who is both the Gift and the Giver,
and the Cause producing the Effects in us; who, as he has reconciled us while
we were Enemies, does also in his Wisdom save us, and justify us after this
manner; as says the same Apostle elsewhere, According to his Mercy he has
saved us, by the washing of Regeneration, Tit. 3.5.
and the renewing of the Holy Ghost.

The Eighth Proposition. Concerning Perfection.
In whom this holy and pure Birth is fully brought forth, Romans 6.14. Ib 8 13 Ib
6.2.18. 1 John 3 6.
the Body of Death and Sin comes to be crucified and removed, and their Hearts
united and subjected unto the Truth, so as not to obey any Suggestion or
Temptation of the Evil One, but to be free from actual Sinning, and
transgressing of the Law of God, and in that respect, Perfect. Yet does this
Perfection still admit of a Growth; there remains a possibility of Sinning,
where the Mind does not most diligently and watchfully attend unto the Lord.

The Ninth Proposition. Concerning Perseverance, and the possibility of falling
from Grace.
Although this Gift, and inward Grace of God, be sufficient to work out
Salvation; yet in those in whom it is resisted, it both may, and does become
their Condemnation. Moreover, in whom it has wrought in part, to Purify and
Sanctify them, in order to their further Perfection, by disobedience such may
fall from it, and turn it to wantonness, making Shipwreck of Faith; and after
having tasted of the Heavenly Gift, ^ Tim. 16. Heb. 6.4.5, 6.
and been made partakers of the Holy Ghost, again fall away. Yet such an
increase and stability in the Truth, may, in this Life, be attained, from which
there cannot be a total Apostasy.

The Tenth Proposition. Concerning the Ministry.
As by this Gift, or Light of God, all true Knowledge in things Spiritual is
received and revealed; so, by the same, as it is manifested and received in the
Heart, by the strength and power thereof, every true Minister of the Gospel is
ordained, prepared, and supplied in the Work of the Ministry: And by the
leading, moving, and drawing hereof, ought every Evangelist and Christian
Pastor to be led and ordered in his Labor and Work of the Gospel, both as to
the Place where, as to the Persons to whom, and as to the Times when he is to
Minister. Moreover, who have this Authority, may and ought to Preach the
Gospel, though without Humane Commission or Literature; as on the other hand, who
want the Authority of this Divine Gift, however Learned or Authorized by the
Commissions of Men and Churches, are to be esteemed but as Deceivers, and not
True Ministers of the Gospel. Also, who have received this holy and unspotted
Gift, Mat. 10.
as they have freely received, so are they freely to give, without Hire or
Bargainin^, far less to use it as a Trade to get Money by it: Yet if God has
called any from their Employments, or Trades, by which they acquire their
Livelihood, it may be lawful for such (according to the liberty which they feel
given them in the Lord) to receive such Temporals (to wit) what may be needful
to them for Meat and Clothing, as are freely given them by those to whom they
have communicated Spirituals.

The Eleventh Proposition. Concerning Worship.
All true and acceptable Worship to God, is offered in the Inward and Immediate
Moving and Drawing of his own Spirit, which is neither limit^ to Places, Times,
or Persons. For though we are to Worship Him always, in that we are to Fear
before him; yet as to the outward Signification thereof in Prayers, Praises, or
Preachings, we ought not to do it where and when we will, but where and when we
are moved thereunto by the secret Inspirations of his Spirit in our Hearts,
which God hears and accepts of, and is never wanting to move us thereunto,
when need is; of which he himself is the alone proper Judge. All other Worship
then, both Praises, Prayers and Preaching, which Man sets about in his own
will, and at his own appointment, which he can both begin and end at his
pleasure, do or leave undone, as himself sees meet; whether they be a
prescribed Form, as a Liturgy, or Prayers conceived extemporarily, Ezekiel. 13.
Mat. 10 20. Acts 2 4.18.5. John 3.6. and 4.21. Jude 19. Acts 17.23.
by the natural strength and faculty of the Mind, they are all but
Superstitions, Will Worship, and abominable Idolatry in the fight of God; which
are to be denied, rejected and separated from, in this day of his Spiritual
Arising. However it might have pleased him (who winked at the Times of
Ignorance, with respect to the Simplicity and Integrity of some, and of his own
Innocent Seed, which lay as it were buried in the Hearts of Men, under the Mass
of Superstition) to blow upon the dead and dry Bones, and to raise some
Breathings, and answer them; and that until the Day should more clearly dawn
and break forth.

The Twelfth Proposition. Concerning Baptism.
Ephesians. 4.5. 1 Pet. 3.21. Romans 6.4 Gal. 3.17. Col. 2.12. John 3.30.
As there is One Lord, and One Faith, so there is One Baptism; which is not the
putting away the filth of the Flesh, but the answer of a good Conscience before
God, by the Resurrection of Jesus Christ. And this Baptism is a pure and
spiritul thing, to wit, the Baptism of the Spirit and Fire, by which we are
buried with him, that being washed and purged from our Sins, we may walk in
newness of Life; 2 Cor. 1.17.
of which the Baptism of John was a Figure, which was commanded for a time, and
not to continue for ever. As to the Baptism of Infants, it is a mere Humane
Tradition, for which neither Precept nor Practice is to be found in all the
Scripture.

The Thirteenth Proposition. Concerning the Communion, or Participation of the
Body and Blood of Christ.
1 Cor. 10. 16, 17.
The Communion of the Body and Blood of Christ is Inward and Spiritual, which is
the Participation of his Flesh and Blood, by which the Inward Man is daily
nourished in the Hearts of those in whom Christ dwells: John 6.32.33, 35. 1
Cor. 5.8.
Of which things the breaking of Bread by Christ with his Disciples was a
Figure, which they even used in the Church for a time, who had received the
substance, for the cause of the weak; even as abstaining from things strangled,
Acts 15.2^ Joh. 13.14. Jam. 5.14.
and from Blood the washing one another Feet, and the anointing of the Sick
with Oil; all which are commanded with no less Authority and Solemnity than the
former: Yet seeing they are but the Shadows of better things, they cease in
such as have obtained the Substance.

The Fourteenth Proposition. Concerning the Power of the Civil Magistrate, in
Matters purely Religious, and pertaining to the Conscience.
Since God has assumed to himself the Power and Dominion of the Conscience,
who alone can rightly Instruct and govern it; Luke 9.55, 56. Mat. 7.12, 29.
Tit. 3.10.
therefore it is not lawful for any whatsoever, by virtue of any Authority or
Principality they bear in the Government of this World, to force the
Consciences of others; and therefore all Killing, Banishing, Fining,
Imprisoning, and other such things, which Men are afflicted with, for the alone
exercise of their Conscience, or difference in Worship or Opinion, proceeds
from the spirit of Cain, the Murderer, and is contrary to the Truth; provided
always, that no Man, under the pretense of Conscience, prejudice his Neighbor
in his Life or Estate, or do any thing destructive to, or inconsistent with
Humane Society; in which case the Law is for the Transgressor, and Justice to
be administered upon all, without respect of Persons.

The Fifteenth Proposition. Concerning Salutations and Recreations, etc.
Seeing the chief End of all Religion, is to redeem Man from the spirit and
vain Conversation of this World, Ephesians. 5.11 1 Pet. 1.14. John 5.44. Jer. 10.3.
Acts 10.26. Mat 15.13. Col. 2.8.
and to lead into inward Communion with God, before whom, if we fear always, we
are accounted Happy; therefore all the vain Customs and Habits thereof, both in
Word and Deed, are to be rejected and forsaken by those who come to this Fear;
such as the taking off the Hat to a Man, the Bowings and Cringings of the Body,
and such other Salutations of that kind, with all the foolish and superstitious
Formalities attending them; all which Man has invented in his degenerate State,
to feed his Pride in the vain Pomp and Glory of this World; as also the
unprofitable Plays, frivolous Recreations, Sportings and Gamings, which are
invented to pass away the Precious Time, and divert the Mind from the Witness
of God in the Heart, and from the Living Sense of his Fear, and from that
Evangelical Spirit, wherewith Christians ought to be leavened, and which leads
into Sobriety, Gravity, and Godly Fear; in which, as we abide, the Blessing of
the Lord is felt to attend us in those Actions, in which we are necessarily
engaged, in order to the taking care for the sustenance of the outward Man.

AN APOLOGY For the TRUE Christian Divinity.
PROPOSITION I. Seeing the height of all Happiness is placed in the true
Knowledge of God, (this is Life Eternal, John 17.^
to know the true God, and Jesus Christ, whom thou have sent) the true and
right Understanding of this Foundation and ground of Knowledge, is that which
is most necessary to be known and believed in the first place.
HE that desires to acquire any Art or Science, seeks first those Means, by
which that Art or Science is obtained: If we ought to do so in things Natural
and Earthly, how much more then in Spiritual? In this Affair then should our
Inquiry be the more diligent, because he that errs in the Entrance, is not so
easily reduced again into the right Way; he that misseth his Road from the
Beginning of his Journey, and is deceived in his first Marks, at his first
setting forth, the greater his Mistake is, the more difficult will be his
Entrance into the right Way.

Thus when a Man first proposes to himself the Knowledge of God, The Way to
the true Knowledge of God.
from a Sense of his own Unworthiness, and from the great Weariness of his
Mind, occasioned by the secret Checks of his Conscience, and the tender yet
real Glances of God's Light upon his Heart; the earnest Desires he has to be
redeemed from his present Trouble, and the fervent Breathings he has to be
eased of his disordered Passions and Lusts, and to find quietness and peace in
the certain Knowledge of God and in the Assurance of his Love and Good Will
toward him, makes his Heart tender, and ready to receive any Impression; and
so (not having then a distinct discerning) through forwardness imbraceth any
thing that brings present Ease. If either through the Reverence he bears to
certain Persons, or from the secret Inclination to what does comply with his
Natural Disposition, he fall upon any Principles or Means, by which he
apprehends he may come to know God, and so does center himself, it will be hard
to remove him thence again, how wrong sover they may be: For the first Anguish
being over, he becomes more hardy; and the Enemy being near, creates a false
Peace, and a certain Confidence, which is strengthed by the Mind's
unwillingness, to enter again into new doubtfulness, or the former anxiety of a
Search.

This is sufficiently verified in the Example of the Pharisees and Jewish
Doctors, Jewish Doctors and Pharisees resist Christ.
who most of all resisted Christ, disdaining to be esteemed Ignorant; for this
vain Opinion they had of their Knowledge, hindered them from the true
Knowledge; and the mean People, who were not so much pre-occupied with former
Principles, nor conceited of their own Knowledge, did easily believe: Wherefore
the Pharisees up^raid them, John 7.48, 49.
saying, Have any of the Rulers or Pharisees believed on him? But This People,
which know not the Law, are accursed. This is also abundantly proved by the
Experience of all such, as being secretly touched with the Call of God's Grace
unto them, do apply themselves to false Teachers, where the Remedy proves worse
than the Disease; because, instead of knowing God, or the things relating to
their Salvation aright, they drink in wrong Opinions of him; from which it is
harder to be disintangled, than while the Soul remains a Blank, or Tabula rasa.
For they that conceit themselves Wise, are worse to deal with, than they that
are sensible of their Ignorance. Nor has it been less the device of the Devil,
the great Enemy of Mankind, to persuade Men into wrong Notions of God, than to
keep them altogether from acknowledging him; the latter taking with few,
because odious; but the other having been the constant Ruin of the World; For
there has scarce been a Nation found, but has had some Notions or other of
Religion; so that not from their denying any Deity, but from their Mistakes and
Misapprehensions of it, has proceeded all the Idolatry and Superstition of the
World; yea, hence even Atheism it self has proceeded: For these many and
various Opinions of God and Religion, being so much mixed with the Guessings
and uncertain Judgments of Men, have begotten in many the opinion, That there
is no God at all. This and much more that might be said, may show how dangerous
it is to miss in this first step: All that come not in by the right Door, are
accounted as Thieves and Robbers.

Again, How needful and desirable that Knowledge is, which brings Life Eternal,
Epictetus shows, Epictetus.
saying excellently well, Chap. 31. (...). Know that the main Foundation of
Piety, is this, To have (...) right Opinions and Apprehensions of God.

This therefore I judged necessary, as a first Principle, in the first place,
to affirm; and I suppose will not need much further Explanation or Defense, as
being generally acknowledged by all (and in these things, that are without
Controversy, I love to be brief) as that which will easily commend it self to
every Man's Reason and Conscience; and therefore I shall proceed to the next
Proposition; which, though it be nothing less certain, yet by the Malice of
Satan, and Ignorance of many, comes far more under debate.

PROPOSITION II. Of Immediate Revelation.
Seeing no Man knows the Father but the Son, and he to whom the Son reveals
him: Mat. 11 27.
And seeing the Revelation of the Son is in and by the Spirit; therefore the
Testimony of the Spirit is that alone by which the true Knowledge of God has
been, is, and can be only Revealed* Who as by the Moving of his own Spirit, he
disposed the Chaos of this World into that wonderful Order, in which it was in
the Beginning, and created Man a Living Soul, to Rule and Govern it; so by the
Revelation of the same Spirit he has manifested himself all along unto the
Sons of Men, both Patriarchs, Prophets and Apostles: Which Revelation of God by
the Spirit, whether by outward Voices and Appearances, Dreams, or inward
objective Manifestations in the Heart, were of old the formal Object of their
Faith, and remain yet so to be; since the Object of the Saints Faith is the
same in all Ages, though held forth under diverse Administrations. Moreover, these
Divine Inward Revelations, which we make absolutely necessary for the building
up of true Faith, neither do, nor can ever, contradict the outward Testimony of
the Scriptures, or right and sound Reason; yet from hence it will not follow,
that these Divine Revelations are to be subjected to the Test, either of the
outward Testimony of the Scriptures, or of the Natural Reason of Man, as to a
more noble or certain Rule and Touchstone; for this Divine Revelation, and
Inward Illumination, is that which is evident and clear of it self; forcing, by
its own Evidence and Clearness, the well-disposed Understanding to assent,
irresistibly moving the same thereunto, even as the common Principles of
natural Truths do move and incline the Mind to a natural Assent: As, That the
whole is greater than its part; That two Contradictories can neither be both
true, nor both false.

. I. IT is very probable, Revelations by Apostate Christians rejected
that many carnal and natural Christians will oppose this Proposition; who,
being wholly unacquainted with the Movings and Actings of God's Spirit upon
their Hearts, judge the same nothing necessary; and some are apt to flout at it
as ridiculous: Yea, to that height are the generality of Christians apostatized
and degenerated, that though there be not any thing more plainly Asserted, more
seriously Recommended, or more certainly Attested to, in all the Writings of
the holy Scriptures; yet nothing is less minded, and more rejected, by all
sorts of Christians, than Immediate and Divine Revelation; in so much, that
once to lay claim to it, is matter of Reproach. Whereas of old, none were ever
judged Christians, but such as had the Spirit of Christ, Romans 8.9. But now many
do boldly call themselves Christians, who make no difficulty of confessing they
are without it, and laugh at such as say they have it. Of old they were
accounted the Sons of God, who were led by the Spirit of God, ibid. verse. 14.
But now many aver themselves Sons of God, who know nothing of this Leader; and
he that affirms himself so led, is, by the pretended Orthodox of this Age,
presently proclaimed a Heretic. The reason hereof is very manifest, viz.
Because many in these days, under the Name of Christians, do experimentally
find, that they are not acted nor led by God's Spirit; yea, many great Doctors,
Divines, Teachers and Bishops of Christianity (commonly so called) have wholly
shut their Ears from hearing, and their Eyes from seeing thiS Inward Guide, and
so are become strangers unto it; whence they are, by their own Experience,
brought to this Strait, either to confess that they are as yet ignorant of God,
and have only the shadow of Knowledge, and not the true Knowledge of him, or
that this Knowledge is acquired without Immediate Revelation.

For the better understanding then of this Proposition, Knowledge Spiritual and
Literal distinguished.
we do distinguish betwixt the certain Knowledge of God and the uncertain;
betwixt the spiritual Knowledge, and the literal; the saving heart-Knowledge,
and soaring, airy head-Knowledge. The last, we confess, may be diverse ways
obtained; but the first, by no other way, than the inward immediate
Manifestation and Revelation of God's Spirit, shining in and upon the Heart,
inlightning and opening the Understanding.

. II. Having then proposed to my self, in these Propositions, to affirm those
things which relate to the true and effectual Knowledge, which brings Life
Eternal with it; therefore I have affirmed, and that truly, that this Knowledge
is no other ways attained, and that none have any true ground to believe they
have attained it, who have it not by this Revelation of God's Spirit.

The certainty of which Truth is such, that it has been acknowledged by some
of the most refined and famous of all sorts of Professors of Christianity in
all Ages; who being truly upright-hearted, and earnest seekers of the Lord,
(however stated under the disadvantages and epidemical Errors of their several
Sects or Ages) the true Seed in them has been answered by God's Love, who has
had regard to the Good, and has had of his Elect Ones among all, who finding a
distaste and disgust in all other outward Means, even in the very Principles
and Precepts more particularly relative to their own Forms and Societies, have
at last concluded, with One Voice, That there was no true Knowledge of God, but
that which is revealed inwardly by his own Spirit. Whereof take these following
Testimonies of the Ancients.

1. It is the inward Master ( says Augustine) that teaches, it is Christ that
teaches, Ang. ex Tract Epis. Joh. 3.
it is Inspiration that teaches: Where this Inspiration and Unction is
wanting, it is in vain that Words from without are beaten in. And thereafter:
For he that created us, and redeemed us, and called us, by Faith, and dwells
in us by his Spirit, unless he speaks to you Inwardly, it is needless for us
to cry out.

2. There is a difference (says Clemens Alexandrinus) betwixt that which any
one says of the Truth, Clem Alex. l. 1. Strom.
and that which the Truth it self, interpreting it self, says. A Conjecture of
Truth differs from the Truth it self; a similitude of a thing differs from
the thing it self; it is one thing that is acquired by Exercise and Discipline;
and another thing, which by Power and Faith. Lastly, the same Clemens says,
P^aedag.
Truth is neither hard to be arrived at, nor is it impossible to apprehend it,
for it is most nigh unto us, even in our Houses, as the most wise Moses has
insinuated.

3. How is it (says Tertullian) that since the Devil always works, and
stirs up the Mind to Iniquity, Tertullian. Lib. de veland. Virginibus, cap.
1.
that the Work of God should either cease, or desist to act? Since for this end
the Lord did send the Comforter, that because humane Weakness could not at once
bear all things, Knowledge might be by little and little directed formed, and
brought to Perfection, by the holy Spirit, that Vicar of the Lord. I have many
things yet (says he) to speak unto you, but ye cannot as yet bear them; but
when that Spirit of Truth shall come, he shall lead you into all Truth, and
shall teach you these things, that are to come. But of his Work we have spoken
above. What is then the Administration of the Comforter, but that Discipline be
derived, and the Scriptures revealed? etc.

4. " The Law (says Hierom) is spiritual, Hieron. Epi. Paulin. 103.
and there "is need of a Revelation to understand it. And in his Epistle 150,
to Hedibia, Quest. 10. he says, The whole Epistle to the Romans needs an
Interpretation, it being involved in so great Obscurities, that for the
understanding thereof, we need the help of the holy Spirit, who through the
Apostle dictated it.

Athan. de I^ca^nat. V^rbi Dei.
5. So great things (says Athan^sius) does our Savior daily: He draws unto
Piety, persuades unto Virtue, reac^es Immortality, excites to the Desire of
Heavenly Things, reveals Knowledge from the Father, inspires Power against
Death, and shows himself unto every one.

Greg M^ Ho^ (...) the Gospel.
6. Gregory the Great upon these Words [ He shall tea^ you all things] says,
That unless the same Spirit sit upon the Heart of the Hearer, in vain is the
Discourse of the D^or: Let no Man then ascribe unto the Man that that teaches,
what he understands from the Mouth of him that speaks; for unless he that
teaches be within, the Tongue of the Doctor, that is without, labors in vain.

Cyril. Alex. in^ sa^. lib. 13. c. 3.
7. Cyrilius Alexandrinus plainly affirms, That Men know that Jesus is the
Lord by the Holy Ghost, no otherwise, than they who taste Honey, know that it
is sw^t even by its proper Quality.

8. Therefore, (says Bernard) we daily exhort you, Brethren, Bernard. in Psalm
^4.
by speech, that ye walk the ways of the Heart, an^ that your Souls he always
in your hands, that ye may (...) what the Lord says in you. And again, upon
^se Words of the Apostle [ Let him that glories, glory in the Lord] With which
threefold Vice (says he) all sorts of Religious Men are less or more
dangerously affected, because they do not so diligently attend with the Ears of
the Heart, to what the Spirit of Truth (which flatters none) inwardly speaks.

This was the very Basis, and main Foundation, upon which the Primitive
Reformers walked.

Lutherus.
Luther, in in his Book to the Nobility of Germany, says, This is certain,
That no Man can make himself a Doctor of the Holy Scriptures, but the Holy
Spirit alone. And upon the Magnificat, he says, No Man can rightly understand
God, or the Word of God, unless he immediately receive it from the Holy Spirit,
neither can any one receive it from the Holy Spirit, except he find it by
Experience in himself; and in this Experience the Holy Ghost teaches, as in
his proper School, out of which School nothing is taught but mere Talk.

Philip Melancthon, in his Annotations upon John 6. Phil. Melancthon.
Who hear only an outward and bodily Voice, hear the Creature; but God is a
Spirit, and is neither discerned, nor known, nor heard, but by the Spirit; and
therefore, to hear the Voice of God, to see God, By the Spirit alone God is
known.
is to know and hear the Spirit. By the Spirit alone God is known and perceived.

Which also the more Serious to this Day do acknowledge, even all such, who
satisfy themselves not with the Superfice of Religion, and use it not as a
Cover or Art. Yea, all those, who apply themselves effectually to Christianity,
and are not satisfied until they have found its effectual Work upon their
Hearts, redeeming them from Sin, do feel that no Knowledge effectually
prevails, to the producing of this, but that which proceeds from the warm
Influence of God's Spirit upon the Heart, and from the comfortable shining of
his Light upon their Understanding. And therefore to this purpose a late Modern
Author says well, ( videlice^, Dr. Smith of Cambridge, in his Select
Discourses) To seek our Divinity merely in Books and Writings, Dr. Smith of
Cambridge, concerning Book-Divinity.
is to seek the Living among the Dead; we do but in vain many times seek God in
these, where his Truth is too often not so much enshrined as entombed. Intra te
quaere Deum, Seek God within thine own Soul; He is best discerned (...) (as
Pl^tinus phraseth it) by an Intellectual Touch of him, We must see with our
Eyes, and hear with our Ears, and our Hands must handle the Word of Life, (to
express it in St. John's Words) (...), etc. The Soul itself has its Sense as
well as the Body. And therefore David, when he would teach us to know what the
Divine Goodness is, calls not for Speculation, but Sensation: Taste, and see
how good the Lord is. That is not the best and truest Knowledge of God, which
is wrought out by the Labor and Sweat of the Brain, but that which is kindled
within us, by an heavenly Warmth in our Hearts. And again,: There is a
Knowledge of the Truth, as it is in Jesus, as it is in a Christ-like Nature; as
it is in that sweet, mild, humble and loving Spirit of Jesus, which spreads it
self, like a Morning Star, upon the Spirits of good Men, full of Light and
Life. It profits little to know Christ himself after the Flesh; but he gives
his Spirit to good Men, that searches the deep things of God. And again: It is
but a thin airy Knowledge, that is got by mere Speculation, which is ushered in
by Syllogisms and Demonstrations; but that which springs forth from true
Goodness, is (...) (as Origin speaks) It brings such a Divine Light to the
Soul, as is more clear and convincing than any Demonstration.

Apostasy and a false Knowledge introduced
. III. That this certain and undoubted Method of the true Knowledge of God has
been brought out of Use, has been none of the least Devices of the Devil, to
secure Mankind to his Kingdom. For after the Light and Glory of the Christian
Religion had prevailed over a good Part of the World, and dispelled the thick
Mists of the Heathenish Doctrine of the Plurality of Gods, he that knew there
was no Probability of deluding the World any longer that way, did then puff Man
up with a false Knowledge of the true God; setting him on work to seek God the
wrong way, and persuading him to be content with such a Knowledge as was of his
own acquiring, and not of God's teaching. And this Device has proved the more
successful, because accommodated to the natural and corrupt Spirit and Temper
of Man, who above all things affects to exalt himself, in which Exaltation, as
God is greatly dishonored, so therein the Devil has his end; who is not
anxious how much God is acknowledged in Words, provided himself be but always
served; he matters not how great and high Speculations the Natural Man
entertains of God, so long as he serves his Lusts and Passions, and is obedient
to his evil Suggestions and Temptations. Thus Christianity is become an Art,
Christianity is become an Art, acquired by humane Science and Industry.
acquired by humane Science and Industry, as any other Art or Science is; and
Men have not only assumed unto themselves the Name of Christians, but even have
procured to be esteemed as Masters of Christianity, by certain Artificial
Tricks, though altogether Strangers to the Spirit and Life of Jesus. But if we
shall make a right Definition of a Christian, according to the Scripture,
videlicet, That he is one that has the Spirit, and is led by it: How many
Christians, yea, and of those great Masters and Doctors of Christianity, so
accounted, shall we justly divest of that noble Title?

If then such as have all the other Means of Knowledge, and are sufficiently
learned therein, whether it be the Letter of the Scripture, the Traditions of
Churches, the Works of Creation and Providence, whence they are able to deduce
strong and undeniable Arguments (which may be true in themselves) are not yet
to be esteemed Christians, according to the certain and infallible Definition
above mentioned: And if the inward and immediate Revelation of God's Spirit in
the Heart, in such as have been altogether ignorant of some, and but very
little skilled in others, of these Means of attaining Knowledge, has brought
them to Salvation; By Revelation is the true Knowledge of God.
then it will necessarily and evidently follow, that Inward and Immediate
Revelation is the only sure and certain Way to attain the true and saving
Knowledge of God.

But the first is true: Therefore the last.

Now as this Argument does very strongly conclude for this Way of Knowledge,
and against such as deny it; so herein it is the more considerable, because the
Propositions, from which it is deduced, are so clear, that our very Adversaries
cannot deny them. For, as to the first, it is acknowledged, that many Learned
Men may be, and have been, damned. And as to the second, who will deny but many
illiterate Men may be, and are, saved? Not dare any affirm, that none come to
the Knowledge of God and Salvation by the inward Revelation of the Spirit,
without these other outward Means; unless they be also so bold as to exclude
Abel, Seth, Noah, Abraham, Abel, Seth, Noah, etc. infra^ed.
Job, and all the holy Patriarchs from true Knowledge and Salvation.

. IV. I would however not be understood, as if hereby I excluded those other
Means of Knowledge, from any use or service to Man; it is far from me so to
judge, as in the next Proposition, concerning the Scriptures, shall more
plainly appear. The Question is not, what may be profitable or helpful but what
is absolutely necessary. Many things may contribute to further a Work, which
yet are not that main Thing that makes the Work go on.

The Sum then of what is said, amounts to this, That where the true Inward
Knowledge of God is, through the Revelation of his Spirit, there is all;
neither is there an absolute necessity of any other. But where the best,
highest, and most profound Knowledge is, without this there is nothing, as to
the obtaining the great End of Salvation. This Truth is very effectually
confirmed by the first part of the Proposition it self, which in few words
comprehends diverse unquestionable Arguments, which I shall in brief subsume.

That there is no Knowledge of the Father but by the Son.

That there is no Knowledge of the Son, but by the Spirit.

That by the Spirit God has always revealed himself to his Children.

That these Revelations were the formal Object of the Saints Faith.

And Lastly, That the same continues to be the

Of each of these I shall speak a little particularly, and then proceed to the
latter Part.

. V. As to the first, Assert. I. Proved.
viz. That there is no Knowledge of the Father but by the Son, it will not need
much Probation, being founded upon the Plain Words of Scripture, and is
therefore a fit Medium to draw the rest of our Assertions from.

For the infinite and most wise God, who is the Foundation, Root and Spring of
all Operation, has wrought all things by his Eternal Word and Son. John 1.1,
2, 3.
This is that WORD, that was in the beginning with God, and was God, by whom
all things were made, and without whom was not any thing made that was made.
This is that Jesus Christ, by whom God created all things, by whom, Ephesians. 3.9.
and for whom, all things were created, that are in Heaven and in Earth,
visible and invisible, whether they be Thrones, or Dominions, or
Principalities, or Powers, Col. 1.16. Who therefore is called, The first born
of every Creature, Col. 1.15. As then, that infinite and incomprehensible
Fountain of Life and Motion, operateth in the Creatures, by his own Eternal
Word and Power; so no Creature has access again unto him, but in and by the
Son, according to his own express Words, No man knows the Father, but the
Son, and he to whom the Son will reveal him, Matthew. 11.27. Luke 10.22. And
again, he himself says, I am the Way, the Truth, and the Life: No man comes
unto the Father but by me, John 14.6.

Hence he is fitly called The Mediator betwixt God and Man: For having been
with God from all Eternity, being himself God, and also in time partaking of
the Nature of Man; through him is the Goodness and Love of God conveyed to
Mankind, and by him again Man receives and partaketh of these Mercies.

Hence is easily deduced the Probation of this first Assertion, thus:

If no Man knows the Father but the Son, and he to whom the Son will reveal
him; then there is no knowledge of the Father, but by the Son.

But, no Man knows the Father but the Son.

Therefore, there is no knowledge of the Father but by the Son.

The first part of the antecedent are the plain words of Scripture: The
consequence thereof is undeniable; except one would say, that he has the
knowledge of the Father, while yet he knows him not; which were an absurd
Repugnance.

Again, If the Son be the Way, the Truth, and the Life, and that no Man comes
unto the Father but by him; then there is no knowledge of the Father but by the
Son.

But the first is true: Therefore the last.

The antecedent are the very Scripture words. The consequence is very evident:
For how can any know a thing, who uses not the way, without which it is not
knowable? But it is already proved, that there is no other way, but by the Son;
so that whosoever uses not that way, cannot know him, neither come unto him.

Assert. II.
. VI. Having then laid down this first Principle, I come to the second, Proved.
viz. That there is no Knowledge of the Son but by the Spirit; or, That the
Revelation of the Son of God, is by the Spirit.

Where it is to be noted, that I always speak of the saving, certain and
necessary Knowledge of God, which that it cannot be acquired otherways than by
the Spirit, does also appear from many clear Scriptures. For Jesus Christ, in
and by whom the Father is revealed, does also reveal himself to his Disciples
and Friends, in and by his Spirit; as his Manifestation was sometimes outward,
when he testified and witnessed for the Truth in this World, and approved
himself faithful throughout: So being now withdrawn, as to the outward Man, he
does teach and instruct Mankind inwardly, by his own Spirit; He stands at the
door and knocks, and whosoever bears his Voice and opens, he comes in to
such, Rev. 3.20. Of this Revelation of Christ in him, Paul speaks, Gal. 1.16.
in which he places the Excellency of his Ministry, and the Certainty of his
Calling. And the Promise of Christ to his Disciples, Lo, I am with you to the
end of the World, confirms the same thing; for this is an inward Presence and
Spiritual, as all acknowledge: But what relates hereto will again occur. I
shall deduce the Proof of this Proposition from two manifest places of
Scripture: The first is, 1 Cor. 1.11, Proof 1.
12. What Man knows the things of a Man save the Spirit of Man which is in
him? Even so the things of God knows no Man, but the Spirit of God. Now we
have received not the Spirit of the World, but the Spirit which is of God, The
Things of God are known by the Spirit of God.
that we might know the things which are freely given us of God. The Apostle in
the verses before, speaking of the wonderful things which are prepared for the
Saints, after he has declared, that the Natural Man cannot reach them, adds,
that They are revealed by the Spirit of God, verse. 9, 10. giving this reason,
For the Spirit searches all things, even the deep things of God. And then he
brings in the comparison, in the verses abovementioned very apt, and
answerable to our Purpose and Doctrine, that as the things of a Man are only
known by the Spirit of Man; so the things of God are only known by the Spirit
of God: That is, that as nothing below the Spirit of Man (as the Spirit of
Brutes, or any other Creatures) can properly reach unto, or comprehend the
things of a Man, as being of a nobler and higher Nature; so neither can the
Spirit of Man, or the Natural Man, as the Apostle in the 14th Verse subsumes,
receive nor discern the things of God, or the things that are Spiritual, as
being also of a higher Nature; which the Apostle himself gives for the reason,
saying, Neither can he know them because they are Spiritually discerned. So
that, the Apostles words being reduced to an Argument, do very well prove the
matter under Debate, thus:

If that which appertains properly to Man, cannot be discerned by any lower
or baser Principle, than the Spirit of Man; then cannot these things, that
properly relate unto God and Christ, be known or discerned by any lower or
baser thing, than the Spirit of God and Christ.

But the First is true: Therefore also the Second.

The whole strength of the Argument is contained in the Apostle's words
beforementioned; which therefore being granted, I shall proceed to deduce a
second Argument, thus:

That which is Spiritual, can only be known and discerned by the Spirit of God.

But the Revelation of Jesus Christ, and the true and saving Knowledge of him,
is Spiritual:

Therefore the Revelation of Jesus Christ, and the true and saving Knowledge of
him, can only be known and discerned by the Spirit of God.

No Man can call Jesus Lord, etc.
The other Scripture is also a Saying of the same Apostle, 1 Cor. 12.3. No Man
can say, that Jesus is the Lord, but by the Holy Ghost. The Scripture, which is
full of Truth, and answers full well to the enlightened Understanding of the
spiritual and real Christian, may perhaps prove very strange to the carnal and
pretended Follower of Christ, by whom perhaps it has not been so diligently
remarked. Here the Apostle does so much require the Holy Spirit, in the things
that relate to a Christian, that he positively avers, we cannot so much as
affirm Jesus to be the Lord, without it; which insinuates no less, Spiritual
Truths are Lies spoken by Carnal Mlen.
than that the Spiritual Truths of the Gospel are as Lies in the Mouths of
carnal and unspiritual Men; for though in themselves they ^e true, yet are they
not true, as to them, because not known, nor a^ered forth in and by that
Principle and Spirit that ought to direct the Mind, and actuate it; in such
things they are no better than the counterfeit Representations of things in a
Comedy; neither can it be more truly and properly called a real and true
Knowledge of God and Christ, than the actings of Alexander the Great, and
Julius Caesar, etc. if now Transacted upon a Stage, might be called truly and
really their doings, or the Persons representing them might be said truly and
really to have conquered Asia, and overcome Pompey, etc.

This Knowledge then of Christ, which is not by the Revelation of his own
Spirit in the Heart, is no more properly the Knowledge of Christ, Like the
prattling of a Parrot.
than the Prattling of a Parrot, which has been taught a few words, may be said
to be the Voice of a Man; for as that, or some other Bird, may be taught to
sound or utter forth a rational Sentence, as it has learned it by the outward
Ear, and not from any living Principle of Reason actuating it: So, just such is
that Knowledge of the things of God, which the natural and carnal Man has
gathered from the Words or Writings of Spiritual Men, which are not true to
him, because conceived in the natural Spirit, and so brought forth by the wrong
Organ, and not proceeding from the Spiritual Principle; no more than the words
of a Man, acquired by Art, and brought forth by the Mouth of a Bird, not
proceeding from a Rational Principle, are true, with respect to the Bird which
utters them. Wherefore from this Scripture, I shall further add this Argument:

If no Man can say Jesus is the Lord, but by the Holy Ghost, then no Man can
know Jesus to be the Lord, but by the Holy Ghost.

But the First is true: Therefore the Second.

From this Argument there may be another deduced, concluding in the very terms
of this Assertion: thus,

If no Man can know Jesus to be the Lord but by the Holy Ghost, then there can
be no certain Knowledge or Revelation of him but by the Spirit.

But the First is true, therefore the Second.

Assert. III.
. VII. The Third thing affirmed, is, That by the Spirit God always revealed
himself to his Children.

For making appear the Truth of this Assertion, it will be but needful to
consider God's manifesting himself toward, Proved.
and in relation to his Creatures, from the beginning, which resolves it self
always herein. The first Step of all is ascribed hereunto by Moses, Genesis 1.2.
And the Spirit of God moved upon the Face of the Waters. I think it will not be
denied, that God's Converse with Man, all along from Adam to Moses, That
Revelation is by the Spirit of God.
was by the Immediate Manifestation of his Spirit: And afterward, through the
whole Tract of the Law, he spoke to his Children no otherways; which, as it
naturally follows from the Principles above proved, so it cannot be denied,
by such as acknowledge the Scriptures of Truth to have been written by the
Inspiration of the Holy Ghost: For these Writings, from Moses to Malachy, do
declare, that during all that time, God revealed himself to his Children by his
Spirit.

That after the Dispensation of the Law, God's Method of speaking was altered.

First, That God spoke always immediately to the Jews, in that he spoke always
immediately to the High Priest from betwixt the Cherubims; who, when he entered
into the Holy of Holies, Sanctum Sancterum
returning, did relate to the whole People the Voice and Will of God, there
immediately revealed. So that this immediate Speaking never ceased in any Age.

Secondly, From this immediate Fellowship were none shut out, who earnestly
sought after, and waited for it; in that many, besides the High Priest, who
were not so much as of the Kindred of Levi, nor of the Prophets, did receive it
and speak from it; as it is written, Numb. 11.25. where the Spirit is said to
have rested upon the Seventy Elders; None shut out from this Immediate
Fellowship.
which Spirit also reached unto two that were not in the Tabernacle, but in the
Camp; whom when some would have forbidden, Moses would not, but rejoiced,
wishing that all the Lord's People were Prophets, and that he would put his
Spirit upon them, verse. 29.

This is also confirmed Neb. 9. Where the Elders of the people, after their
return from Captivity, when they began to sanctify themselves by Fasting and
Prayer; in which, numbering up the many Mercies of God toward their Fathers,
they say, verse 20. Thou gave also thy good Spirit to instruct them; and
verse 30. Yet many Years did thou forbear, and testify against them by thy
Spirit in thy Prophets. Many are the Sayings of Spiritual David, to this
purpose, as Psalm 51.11, 12. Take not thy holy Spirit from me; uphold me with
thy free Spirit. Psalm 193.7. Whither shall I go from thy Spirit? Hereunto does
the Prophet Isaiah ascribe the credit of his Testimony, saying, chap. 48. v.
16. And now the Lord God and his Spirit has sent me. And that God revealed
himself to his Children under the New Testament, to wit, to the Apostles,
Evangelists, and Primitive Disciples, is confessed by all. How far now this yet
continues, and is to be expected, comes hereafter to be spoken to.

. VIII. The fourth thing affirmed, is, Assert. IV.
That these Revelations were the Object of the Saints Faith of old.

This will easily appear by the definition of Faith, Proved.
and considering what its Object is: For which we shall not dive into the
curious and various Notions of the Schoolmen, but stay in the plain and
positive words of the Apostle Paul, who, Heb. 11. describes it two ways. Faith
(says he) is the substance of things hoped for, and the Evidence of things not
seen: What Faith is?
Which, as the Apostle illustrateth it in the same Chapter by many Examples, is
no other but a firm and certain Belief of the Mind, whereby it rests, and in
a sense possesses the Substance of some things hoped for, through its
Confidence in the Promise of God: And thus the Soul has a most firm Evidence,
by its Faith, of things not yet seen nor come to pass. The Object of this
Faith, is the Promise, Word, or Testimony of God, speaking in the Mind. Hence
it has been generally affirmed, That the Object of Faith is Deus Loquens, etc.
that is, God Speaking, The Object of Faith, Deus Loquens.
etc. Which also is manifest from all those Examples, deduced by the Apostle
throughout that whole Chapter, whose Faith was founded neither upon any outward
Testimony, nor upon the Voice or Writing of Man, but upon the Revelation of
God's Will, manifest unto them, and in them; as in the Example of Noah ver. 7.
thus, By Faith Noah being warned of God, of things not seen as yet, moved with
fear, prepared an Ark to the saving of his House; by the which he condemned the
World, and became Heir of the Righteousness which is by Faith. What was here
the Object of Noah's Faith, Noah 's Faith.
but God speaking unto him? He had not the Writings nor Prophesyings of any
going before, nor yet the Concurrence of any Church or People, to strengthen
him; and yet his Faith in the Word, by which he contradicted the whole World,
saved him and his House. Of which also Abraham is set forth as a singular
Example, being therefore called the Father of the Faithful, Abraham 's Faith.
who is said against hope to have believed in hope; in that he not only
willingly forsook his Father's Country not knowing whither he went, in that he
believed concerning the coming of Isaac, though contrary to natural
probability; but above all, in that he refused not to offer him up, not
doubting but God was able to raise him from the Dead; of whom it is said, That
in Isaac shall thy Seed be called. And last of all, In that he rested in the
Promise, that his Seed should Possess the Land, wherein himself was but a
Pilgrim, and which to them was not to be fulfilled while diverse Ages after. The
Object of Abraham's Faith, in all this, was no other but inward and immediate
Revelation, or God signifying his Will unto him inwardly and immediately by his
Spirit.

But because, in this part of the Proposition, we made also mention of external
Voices, Appearances and Dreams in the Alternative, I think also fit to speak
hereof, what in that respect, may be objected; to wit,

That those, who found their Faith now upon Immediate and Objective Revelation,
ought to have also outward Voices or Visions, Dreams or Apearances for it.

The Ministry of Angels, speaking in the appearance of Men to the Saints of old.
and that he did also reveal some things to them in Dreams and Visions; none of
which we will affirm to be ceased. so as to limit the Power and Liberty of God,
in manifesting himself toward his Childern. But while we are considering the
Object of Faith, we must not stick to that which is but Circumstantially and
Accidentally so, but to that which is Universally and Substantially so.

Next again, We must distinguish betwixt that which in it self is subject to
doubt and delusion, and therefore is received for and because of another; and
that which is not subject to any doubt, but is received simply for, and because
of it felt, as being Prima Veritas, the very First and Original Truth. Let us
then consider how, or how far these outward Voices, Appearances and Dreams,
Revelations by Dreams and Visions
were the Object of the Saints Faith: Was it because they were simply Voices,
Appearances or Dreams? Nay, certainly, we know, and they were not ignorant,
that the Devil can form a sound of words, and convey it to the outward Ear;
that he can easily deceive the outward senses, by making things to appear, that
are not. Y^, do we not see by daily Experience, that the Jugglers and
Mountebanks can do as much as all that, by their Legerdemain; God forbid then,
that the Saints Faith should be founded upon so fallacious a Foundation, as
Man's outward and fallible Senses. What made them then give credit to these
Visions? Certainly nothing else but the secret Testimony of God's Spirit in
their Hearts, assuring them that the Voices, Dreams and Visions were of and
from God. Abraham believed the Angels; but who told him that these Men were
Angels? We must not think his Faith then was built upon his outward Senses; but
proceeded from the secret Persuasion of God's Spirit in his Heart. This then
must needs be acknowledged to be originally and principally the object of the
Saints Faith; without which there is no true and certain Faith, and by which
many times Faith is begotten and strengthened, without any of these outward or
visible Helps; as we may observe in many Passages of the Holy Scripture, where
it is only mentioned, And God said, etc. And the Word of the Lord came unto
such and such, saying, etc.

That this did import an outward audible Voice to the Carnal Ear.

The Spirit witnesses with our spirit; but not to our outward Ears, The Spirit
speaks to the spiritual Ear, not to the outward.
Rom 8.16. And seeing the Spirit of God is within us, and not without us only,
it speaks to our spiritual, and not to our bodily Ear. Therefore I see no
reason, where it is so often said in Scripture, The Spirit said, moved,
hindered, called such or such a one, to do or forbear such or such a thing,
that any have to conclude, that this was not an Inward Voice to the Ear of the
Soul, rather than an Outward Voice to the Bodily Ear. If any be otherwise
minded, let them, if they can, produce their Arguments, and we may further
consider of them.

From all then which is above declared, I shall deduce, an Argument to conclude
the Probation of this Assertion, thus:

That which any one firmly believes, as the ground and foundation of his Hope
in God, and Life Eternal, is the formal Object of his Faith.

But the inward and immediate Revelation of God's Spirit, speaking in and unto
the Saints, was by them believed, as the ground and foundation of their Hope in
God, and Life Eternal.

Therefore these inward an immediate Revelations were the formal Object of
their Faith.

. IX. That which now comes under Debate, is, Assert. V. Proved.
what we asserted in the last place, to wit, That the same continues to be the
Object of the Saints Faith unto this day. Many will agree to what we have said
before who differ from us herein.

There is nevertheless a very firm Argument confirming the Truth of this
Assertion, included in the Proposition it self, to wit, That the Object of the
Saints Faith is the same in all Ages though held forth under diverse
Administrations. Which I shall reduce to an Argument, and prove thus:

First, Where the Faith is one, the Object of the Faith is one.

But the Faith is one: Therefore, etc.

That the Faith is one, is the express words of the Apostle, Ephesians. 4.5. who
places the one Faith with the one God; importing no less than, that to affirm
two Faiths, is as absurd as to affirm two Gods.

Moreover, if the Faith of the Ancients were not one and the same with ours i.
e. agreeing in Substance therewith, and receiving the same definition, The
Faith of the Saints of old, the same with ours.
it had been impertinent for the Apostle, Heb. 11. to have illustrated the
definition of our Faith, by the Examples of that of the Ancients, or to go
about to move us by the Example of Abraham, if Abraham's Faith were different
in nature from ours. Nor does hence any Difference arise, because they believed
in Christ, with respect to his Appearance outwardly as future; and we, as
already appeared: For, neither did they then so believe in him to come, as not
to feel him present with them, and witness him near: seeing the Apostl^ says,
They all drank of that spiritual Rock which followed them, which Rock was
Christ. Nor do we so believe concerning his Appearance past, as not also to
feel and know him present with us, and to feed upon him; except Christ (says
the Apostle) be in you, ye are Reprobates: So that both our Faith is one,
terminating in one and the same thing. And as to the other Part or Consequence
of the Antecedent, to wit, That the Object is one, where the Faith is one; the
Apostle also proves it in the forecited Chapter, where he makes all the
Worthies of old, Examples to us. Now wherein are they imitable, but because
they believed in God? And what was the Object of their Faith, but inward and
immediate Revelation, as we have before proved? Their Example can be no Ways
applicable to us, except we believe in God, as they did; that is, by the same
Object. The Apostle clears this yet further by his own Example, Gal. 1.16.
where he says, So soon as Christ was revealed in him, he consulted not with
Flesh and Blood, but forthwith believed and obeyed. The same Apostle, Heb.
13.7.8. where he exhorts the Hebrews to follow the Faith of the Elders, adds
this Reason, Considering the End of their Conversation, Jesus Christ, the same
to day, yesterday, and for ever: Hereby notably insinuating, that in the Object
there is no alteration.

Diversity of Administration:

Cor. 12.4, 5, 6. centereth always in the same Object; the same Spirit, the
same Lord, the same God.

But further, If the Object of Faith were not one and the same, both to us and
to them, then it would follow, that we were to know God some other way, than by
the Spirit.

But this were absurd: Therefore, etc.

Lastly, This is most firmly proved from a common and received Maxim of the
Schoolmen, to wit, Omnis actus specificatur a^ objecto, Every Act is specified
from its Object: From which (if it be true, as they acknowledge; though for the
sake of many, I shall not recur to this Argument, as being too nice and
Scholastic; neither lay I much stress upon those kind of Things, as being that
which commends not the Simplicity of the Gospel) If the Object were different,
the Faith would be different also.

Such as deny this Proposition now a days, use here a Distinction; granting,
that God is to be known by his Spirit; but again denying, that it is Immediate
or Inward, but in and by the Scriptures, in which the Mind of the Spirit (as
they say) being fully and amply expressed, we are thereby to know God, and be
led in all things.

As to the Negative of this Assertion, That the Scriptures are not sufficient,
neither were ever appointed to be the adequate and only Rule, nor yet can guide
or direct a Christian, in all those things that are needful for him to know, we
shall leave that to the next Proposition to be examined. What is proper in this
place to be proved, is, That Christians now are to be led inwardly and
immediately by the Spirit of God, even in the same Manner (though it befall not
to many to be led in the same Measure) as the Saints were of old.

. X. I shall prove this by diverse Arguments; Christians are now to be led by
the Spirit, in the same manner as the Saints of old.
and first from the Promise of Christ in these Words, John 14.16. And I will
pray the Father, and he will give you another Comforter, that he may abide with
you for ever. Verse. 17. Even the Spirit of Truth, whom the World cannot
receive, because it sees him not, neither knows him; but ye know him, for he
dwells with you, and shall be in you. Again, Verse. 26. But the Comforter,
which is the Holy Ghost, whom the Father will send in my Name, he shall teach
you all things, and bring all things to your Remembrance; and 16.13. But when
the Spirit of Truth shall come, he shall lead you into all Truth: For he shall
not speak of himself; but whatsoever he shall hear, he shall speak, and shall
declare unto you things to come. We have here first, who this is, and that is
diverse ways expressed, to wit, The Comforter, the Spirit of Truth, the Holy
Ghost, the Sent of the Father in the Name of Christ. And hereby is sufficiently
proved the sottishness of those Socinians, and other carnal Christians, who
neither know nor acknowledge any Internal Spirit or Power, but that which is
merely Natural, by which they sufficiently declare themselves to be of the
World, who cannot receive the Spirit, because they neither see him, nor know
him. Secondly, Where this Spirit is to be, He dwells with you, and shall be
in you. And, Thirdly, What his Work is, He shall teach you all things, and
bring all things to your Remembrance, and guide you into all Truth, (...).

Query I.
As to the First, Most do acknowledge that there is nothing else understood,
than what the plain words signify: Who is this Comforter?
Which is also evident by many other places of Scripture, that will hereafter
occur; neither do I see, how such as affirm otherways, can avoid Blasphemy: For
if the Comforter, the Holy Ghost, and Spirit of Truth, be all one with the
Scriptures, then it will follow that the Scriptures are God, Nonsensical
Consequences from the Socinians belief of the Scriptures being the Spirit.
seeing it is true that the Holy Ghost is God. If these Men's Reasoning might
take place, wherever the Spirit is mentioned, in relation to the Saints,
thereby might be truly and properly understood the Scriptures: Which, what a
nonsensical Monster it would make of the Christian Religion, will easily appear
to all Men. As where it is said, A Manifestation of the Spirit is given to
every Man to profit withal; it might be rendered thus, A Manifestation of the
Scripures is given to every Man to profit withal; what notable Sense this would
make, and what a curious Interpretation, let us consider by the sequel of the
same Chapter, 1 Cor. 12.9, 10, 11. To another the Gifts of Healing, by the same
Spirit; to another, the working of Miracles, etc. But all these works that
one and the self same Spirit, dividing to every Man severally as he will. What
would now these great Masters of Reason, the Socinians, judge, if we should
place the Scriptures, here instead of the Spirit? Would it answer their Reason,
which is the great Guide of their Faith? Would it be good and sound Reason in
their Logical Schools, to affirm that the Scripture divides severally, as it
will, and gives to some the Gift of Healing, to others the working of
Miracles? If then this Spirit, a Manifestation whereof is given to every Man to
profit withal, be no other than that Spirit of Truth, beforementioned, which
guides into all Truth, this Spirit of Truth cannot be the Scripture. I could
infer an Hundred more Absurdities of this kind, upon this sottish Opinion; but
what is said may suffice. For even some of themselves, being at times
forgetful, or ashamed of their own Doctine, do acknowledge, that the Spirit of
God is another thing, and distinct from the Scriptures, to Guide and Influence
the Saints.

Secondly, That this Spirit is inward, in my opinion, needs no Interpretation,
or Commentary, Query II. Where is his place?
He dwells with you, and shall be in you. This Indwelling of the Spirit in
the Saints, as it is a thing most needful to be known and believed; so is it as
positively asserted in the Scripture, as any thing else can be. If so be that
the Spirit of God dwell in you, says the Apostle to the Romans, chap. 8.9. And
again, Know ye not that your Body is the Temple of the Holy Ghost, 1 Cor. 6.19.
And that the Spirit of God dwells in you? 1 Cor. 3.16. Without this the
Apostle reckons no Man a Christian. If any Man (says he) have not the Spirit
of Christ, he is none of his. These Words immediately follow those above
mentioned, out of the Epistle to the Romans, But ye are not in the Flesh, if so
be the Spirit of God dwell in you. The Context of which shows, The Spirit
within, the main Token of a Christian.
that the Apostle reckons it the main Token of a Christian, both positively
and negatively: For in the former Verses, he shows how the carnal Mind is
Enmity against God, and that such as are in the Flesh cannot please him. Where
subsuming, he adds concerning the Romans, that they are not in the Flesh, if
the Spirit of God dwell in them. What is this but to affirm, that they in whom
the Spirit dwells, are no longer in the Flesh, nor of those who please not God,
but are become Christians indeed? Again, in the next Verse he concludes
negatively, that, If any Man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his;
that is, he is no Christian. He then that acknowledges himself ignorant, and a
Stranger to the Inward In being of the Spirit of Christ in his Heart, does
thereby acknowledge himself to be yet in the Carnal Mind, which is Enmity to
God; to be yet in the Flesh, where God cannot be pleased; and in short,
(whatever he may otherways know or believe of Christ, or however much skilled
or acquainted with the Letter of the Holy Scripture) not yet to be
(notwithstanding all that) attained to the least Degree of a Christian; yea,
not once to have embraced the Christian Religion. For take but away the Spirit,
and Christianity remains no more Christianity, than the dead Carcass of a Man,
when the Soul and Spirit is departed, remains a Man; which the Living can no
more abide, but do bury out of their Sight as a noisome and useless thing,
however acceptable it has been, when actuated and moved by the Soul. Lastly,
Whatsoever is Excellent, whatsoever is Noble, whatsoever is Worthy, whatsoever
is Desirable in the Christian Faith, is ascribed to this Spirit; without which
it could no more subsist, than the outward World without the Sun. Hereunto have
all true Christians, in all Ages, attributed their Strength and Life. It is by
this Spirt, that they avouch themselves to have been converted to God, to have
been redeemed from the World, to have been strengthened in their Weakness,
comforted in their Afflictions, confirmed in their Temptations, imboldened in
their Sufferings, and triumphed in the midst of all their Persecutions, Yea,
The Writings of all true Christians are full of the great and notable Things,
The great and notable Acts that have been and are performed by the Spirit in
all Ages.
which they all affirm themselves to have done, by the Power, and Virtue, and
Efficacy of this Spirit of God working in them. It is the Spirit that
quickneth, John 6.63. It was the Spirit that gave them Utterance, Acts 2.4. It
was the Spirit by which Stephen spoke, That the Jews were not able to resist,
Acts 6.10. It is such as walk after the Spirit, that receive no Condemnation,
Romans 8.1. It is the Law of the Spirit that makes free, verse. 2. It is by the
Spirit of God dwelling in us, that we are redeemed from the Flesh, and from the
Carnal Mind, verse. 9. It is the Spirit of Christ dwelling in us, that quickneth
our mortal Bodies, verse. 11. It is through this Spirit, that the deeds of the
Body are mortified, and Life obtained, verse. 13. It is by this Spirit that we
are, adopted, and cry ABBA Father, verse. 15. It is this Spirit that bears
witness with our spirit that we are the Children of God, verse. 16. It is this
Spirit that helps our Infirmities, and makes Intercession for us, with
Groanings which cannot be uttered, verse. 26. It is by this Spirit that the
glorious Things which God has laid up for us, which neither outward Ear has
heard, nor outward Eye has seen, nor the Heart of Man conceived, by all his
reasonings, are revealed unto us, 1 Cor 2.9, 10. It is by this Spirit, that
both Wisdom and Knowledge, and Faith, and Miracles, and Tongues, and
Prophecies, are obtained, 1 Cor. 12.8, 9, 10. It is by this Spirit, that we are
all Baptized into one Body, verse. 13. In short, what thing relating to the
Salvation of the Soul and to the Life of a Christian, is rightly performed, or
effectually obtained, without it? And what shall I more say? For the time would
fail me, to tell of all those things, which the Holy Men of Old have declared;
and the Saints of this day, do witness themselves to enjoy, by the Virtue and
Power of this Spirit dwelling in them. Truly my Paper could not contain those
many Testimonies, whereby this Truth is confirmed; wherefore, besides what is
abovementioned out of the Fathers, whom all pretend to Reverence, and those of
Luther and Melancthon, I shall deduce yet one observable Testimony out of
Calvin, because not a few of the Followers of his Doctrine do refuse and deride
(and that as it is to be feared, because of their own Non-experience thereof)
this way of the Spirit's In-dwelling, as uncertain and dangerous; that so, if
neither the Testimony of the Scripture, nor the Sayings of others, nor right
Reason can move them, they may at least be reproved by the Words of their own
Master, who says in the third Book of his Institutions, Cap. 2. on this wise:

Calvin of the Necessity of the Spirit's In-dwelling in us.
But they allege, it is a bold Presumption for any to pretend to an undoubted
Knowledge of God's Will; which (says he) I should grant unto them, if we
should ascribe so much to our selves, as to subject the Incomprehensible
Counsel of God to the rashness of our Understandings. But while we simply say,
with Paul, that we have received not the Spirit of this World, but the Spirit
which is of God; by whose Teaching we know those things that are given us of
God: What can they prate against it, without reproaching the Spirit of God? For
if it be a horrible Sacrilege to accuse any Revelation coming from him, either
of a Lie, of Uncertainty or Ambiguity, in asserting its Certainty, wherein do
we offend? But they cry out, That it is not without great Temerity, that we
dare so boast of the Spirit of Christ. Who would believe that the Sottishness
of these Men was so great, who would be esteemed the Masters of the World, that
they should so fail in the first Principles of Religion? Verily I could not
believe it, if their own Writings did not testify so much. Paul accounts those
the Sons of God, who are acted by the Spirit of God; but these will have the
Children of God acted by their own Spirits, without the Spirit of God. He will
have us call God Father, the Spirit dictating that Term unto us, which only can
witness to our Spirits, that we are the Sons of God. These, though they cease
not to call upon God, do nevertheless demit the Spirit, by whose guiding he is
rightly to be called upon. He denies them to be the Sons of God, or the
Servants of Christ, who are not led by his Spirit; but these feign a
Christianity that needs not the Spirit of Christ. He makes no Hope of the
blessed Resurrection, unless we feel the Spirit residing in us; but these feign
a Hope without any such a feeling. But perhaps they will answer, that they deny
not but that it is necessary to have it, only of Modesty and Humility we ought
to deny and not acknowledge it. What means he then, when he commands the
Corinthians to try themselves, if they be in the Faith; to examine themselves,
whether they have Christ, whom whosoever acknowledges not dwelling in him, is a
Reprobate? By the Spirit which he has given us, says John, we know that he
abides in us. And what do we then else but call in question Christ his
Promise, while we would be esteemed the Servants of God, without his Spirit,
which he declared he would pour out upon all his? Seeing these things are the
first grounds of Piety, Without the Spirit's Presence, Christanity must cease.
it is miserable Blindness to accuse Christians of Pride, because they dare
glory of the Presence of the Spirit; without which glorying, Christianity it
self could not be. But by their Example they declare, how truly Christ spoke,
saying. That his Spirit was unknown to the World, and that those only
acknowledge it, with whom it remains. Thus far Calvin.

If therefore it be so, Why should any be so foolish, as to deny, or so unwise,
as not to seek after this Spirit, which Christ has promised shall dwell in his
Children? They then that do suppose the Indwelling and leading of his Spirit to
be ceased, must also suppose Christianity to be ceased, which cannot subsist
without it.

Query III.
Thirdly, What the Work of this Spirit is, is partly before shown, What is the
Work of the Spirit?
which Christ compriseth in two or three things, He will guide you into all
Truth; He will teach you all things, and bring all things to your remembrance.
John 16.13. and 14.26.
Since Christ has provided for us so good an Instructor, what need we then
lean so much to those Traditions and Commandments of Men, wherewith so many
Christians have burdened themselves? What need we set up our own carnal and
corrupt Reason for a Guide to us, in Matters spiritual, The Spirit the Guide.
as some will needs do? May it not be complained of all such, as the Lord did
of old, concerning Israel, by the Prophets, Jer. 2.13. For my People have
committed two Evils, they have forsaken me, the Fountain of Living Waters; and
hewed them out Cisterns, broken Cisterns, that can hold no Water? Have not many
forsaken? Do not many deride and reject this Inward and Immediate Guide, this
Spirit, that leads into all Truth; and cast up to themselves other ways, broken
ways indeed, which have not all this while brought them out of the Flesh, nor
out of the World, nor from under the dominion of their own Lusts, and sinful
Affections; whereby Truth, which is only rightly learned by this Spirit, is so
much a Stranger in the Earth?

From all then that has been mentioned, concerning this Promise, and these
Words of Christ, A perpetual Ordinance to God's Church and People.
it will follow, That Christans are always to be led inwardly and immediately
by the Spirit of God dwelling in them; and that the same is a standing and
perpetual Ordinance, as well to the Church in general in all Ages, as to every
individual Member in particular; as appears from this Argument:

The Promises of Christ to his Children are Yea and Amen, and cannot fail, but
must of necessity be fulfilled

But Christ has promised, That the Comfor^, the Holy Ghost, the Spirit of
Truth, shall ^lde with his Children for ever, shall dwell with them, shall be
in them; shall lead them into all Truth, shall teach them all things, and bring
all things to their Remembrance.

Therefore, The Comforter, the Holy Ghost, the Spirit of Truth, his abiding
with his Children, etc. is Yea and Amen, etc.

Again: No Man is redeemed from the Carnal Mind, which is at Enmity with God,
which is not subject to the Law of God, neither can be: No Man is yet in the
Spirit, but in the Flesh, and cannot please God, except he in whom the Spirit
of God dwells.

But every true Christian is (in measure) redeemed from the Carnal Mind, is
gathered out of the Enmity, and can be subject to the Law of God; is out of the
Flesh, and in the Spirit, the Spirit of God dwelling in him.

Therefore every true Christian has the Spirit of God dwelling in him.

Again: Whosoever has not the Spirit of Christ, is none of his; that is, no
Child, no Friend, no Disciple of Christ.

But every true Christian is a Child, a Friend, a Disciple of Christ.

Therefore every true Christian has the Spirit of Christ.

Moreover: Whosoever is the Temple of the Holy Ghost, in him the Spirit of God
dwells and abides.

But every true Christian is the Temple of the Holy Ghost.

Therefore in every true Christian the Spirit of God dwells and abides.

But to conclude: He in whom the Spirit of God dwells, it is not in him a
lazy, dumb, useless thing; but it moves, actuateth, governs, instructs,
and teachech him all things, whatsoever are needful for him to know; yea,
brings all things to his remembrance.

But the Spirit of God dwells in every true Christian:

Therefore the Spirit of God leads, instructs, and teaches every true
Christian, whatsoever is needful for him to know.

That the Spirit does now lead and influence the Saints, but that he does it
only subjectively, or in a blind manner, by inlightening their Understandings,
to understand and believe the Truth delivered in the Scriptures; but not at all
by presenting those Truths to the Mind, by way of Object, and this they call,
Medium incognitum Assentiendi, as that, of whose working a Man is not sensible.



Arg. I.
1. Because there be many Truths, which as they are applicable to particulars,
and individuals, and most needful to be known by them, are in no wise to be
found in the Scripture, as in the following Proposition shall be shown

Besides, the Arguments already adduced to prove, that the Spirit does not only
subjectively help us to discern Truths, elsewhere delivered, but also
objectively present those Truths to our Minds. For that which teaches me all
things, and is given me for that end; without doubt presents those things to my
mind, which it teaches me. It is not said, It shall teach you how to
understand those things that are written; but, It shall teach you all things.
Again, That which brings all things to my Remembrance, must needs present them
by way of Object; else it were improper to say, It brought them to my
Remembrance; but only, that it helps to remember the Objects brought from
elsewhere.

My second Argument shall be drawn from the Nature of the New Covenant; by
which, Arg. II.
and those that follow, I shall prove that we are led by the Spirit, both
Immediately and Objectively. The Nature of the New Covenant is expressed in
diverse places: And

Isa. 59.21. As for me, this is my Covenant with them, says the Lord, My
Spirit that is upon thee, and my Words which I have put into thy mouth, shall
not depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the Mouth of thy Seed, nor out of the
mouth of thy Seed's Seed, says the Lord, from henceforth and for ever. The
Leadings of the Spirit.
By the latter part of this, is sufficiently expressed the Perpetuity and
Continuance of this Promise, It shall not depart, says the Lord, from
henceforth and for ever. In the former part is the Promise it self, which is
the Spirit of God being upon them, and the Words of God being put into their
Mouths.

First, This was Immediate, for there is no mention made of any Medium; he
says not, 1. Immediately.
I shall by the Means of such and such Writings or Books, convey such and such
Words into your Mouths; but My Words, I, even I, says the Lord, shall put into
your Mouths.

Secondly, This must be Objectively; 2. Objectively.
for ( the Words put into the Mouth) are the Object presented by him. He says
not, The Words which ye shall see written, my Spirit shall only enlighten your
Understandings to assent unto; but positively, My Words which I have put into
thy Mouth, etc. From whence I Argue thus:

Upon whomsoever the Spirit remains always, and puts words into his Mouth,
him does the Spirit teach Immediately, Objectively, and Continually.

But the Spirit is always upon the Seed of the Righteous, and puts Words
into their Mouths, neither departs from them:

Therefore the Spirit teaches the Righteous Immediately, Objectively, and
Continually.

New Covenant is yet more amply expessed, Jer. 31.33. which is again repeated
and re-asserted by the Apostle, Heb. 8. 10, 11. in these words, For this is the
Covenant that I will make with the House of Israel, after those days, says the
Lord, I will put my Laws into their Minds, and write them in their Hearts, and
I will be to them a God, and they shall be to me a People. And they shall not
teach every Man his Neighbor, and every Man his Brother, saying, Know the
Lord; for they shall all know me from the least to the greatest.

The Object here is God's Law placed in the Heart, and written in the Mind;
from whence they become God's People, and are brought truly to know him.

The Difference between the Outward and Inward Law.
In this then is the Law distinguished from the Gospel: The Law before was
outward, written in Tables of Stone; but now is inward, written in the Heart:
Of old the People depended upon their Priests for the Knowledge of God, but now
they have all a certain and sensible Knowledge of Him; concerning which,
Augustine speaks well, in his Book De Litera and Spiritu; from whom Aquinas
first of all seems to have taken occasion to move this Question, Whether the
New Law be a written Law, or, an Implanted Law? Lex scripta, vel Lex indita?
Which he thus resolves, Affirming, That the New Law, or Gospel, is not properly
a Law written, as the Old was but Lex Indita, an Implanted Law; and that the
old Law was written without, but the new Law is written within, on the Table of
the Heart.

How much then are they deceived, who instead of making the Gospel preferable
to the Law, The Gospel Dispensation more glorious than that of the Law.
have made the Condition of such as are under the Gospel far worse? For no
doubt it is a far better, and more desirable thing, to converse with God
Immediately, than only Mediately, as being a higher and more glorious
Dispensation: And yet these Men acknowledge, that many under the Law, had
Immediate Converse with God, whereas they now cry it is ceased.

Again, Under the Law there was the Holy of Holies, into which the High Priest
did enter, and received the Word of the Lord immediately from betwixt the
Cherubims, so that the People could then certainly know the Mind of the Lord;
but now, according to these Men's Judgment, we are in a far worse Condition,
having nothing but the outward Letter of the Scripture, to guess and divine
from; concerning one Verse of which, scarce two can be found to agree. But
Jesus Christ has promised us better things (though many are so unwise, as not to
believe him) even to guide us, by his own unerring Spirit, and has rent and
removed the Vail, whereby not only one, and that once a Year, may enter; but
all of us at all times have access unto him; as often as we draw near unto him
with pure Hearts, he reveals his Will to us by his Spirit, and writes his Laws
in our Hearts. These things then being thus premised; I argue,

Where the Law of God is put into the Mind, and written in the Heart, there the
Object of Faith, and Revelation of the Knowledge of God is inward, immediate
and objective. But the Law of God is put into the Mind, and written in the
Heart of every True Christian, under the new Covenant. Therefore the Object of
Faith, and Revelation of the knowledge of God to every True Christian, is
inward, immediate and objective.


The assumption is the express Words of Scripture: The Proposition then must
needs be true, except that which is put into the Mind, and written in the
Heart, were either not inward, not immediate, or not objective, which is most
absurd.

John, 1 John 2. ver. 27. But the Anointing, which ye have received of him, The
Anoining recommended as.
abides in you, and ye need not that any Man teach you: but as the same
Anointing teaches you of all things, and is Truth, and no Lie, and even as it
has taught you, ye shall abide in him.

First, This could not be any special, peculiar, or extraordinary privilege,
but that which is common to all the Saints, Common.
it being a general Epistle, directed to all them of that Age.

Secondly, The Apostle proposes this Anointing in them, Certain.
as a more certain Touchstone for them to discern and try Seducers by, even
than his own Writings; for having in the former verse said, that he had Written
some things to them, concerning such as Seduced them, he begins the next verse,
But the Anointing, etc. and ye need not that any Man teach you, etc. which
infers, that having said to them what can be said, he refers them for all to
the inward Anointing, (which teaches all things) as the most firm, constant,
and certain Bull-wark, against all Seducers.

Lastly, That it is a lasting and continuing thing; the Anointing which
abides; if it had not been to abide in them, it could not have taught them all
things, neither guided them against all hazard. From which I argue thus:

He that has an Anointing abiding in him, which teaches him all things, so
that he needs no Man to teach him, has an inward, and immediate Teacher, and
has some things inwardly and immediately Revealed unto him. But the Saints
have such an Anointing: Therefore, etc.


I could prove this Doctrine from many more places of Scripture, which for
brevity's sake I omit; and now come to the second part of the Proposition,
where the Objections usually formed against it are answered.

these Revelations are uncertain.

Thesis and the Hypothesis, that is, betwixt the Proposition and Supposition.
For it is one thing to affirm, that the true and undoubted Revelation of God's
Spirit, is certain and infallible; and another thing to affirm, that this or
that particular Person, or People, is led infallibly by this Revelation, in
what they Speak or Write, because they affirm themselves to be so led, by the
inward and immediate Revelation of the Spirit. The first is only by us
asserted, the latter may be called in question. The question is not, who are,
or are not so led? But whether all ought not, or may not be so led?

Seeing then, we have already proved, The Certainty of the Spirit's Guidance
proved.
that Christ has promised his Spirit to lead his Children, and that every one
of them both ought, and may be led by it; If any depart from this certain
Guide, in Deeds, and yet in Words pretend to be led by it into things, that are
not good, it will not from thence follow, that the true guidance of the Spirit
is uncertain, or ought not to be followed, no more than it will follow, that
the Sun shows not light, because a Blind Man, or one who wilfully shuts his
Eyes, falls into a Ditch at Noon day for want of Light; or that no Words are
spoken, because a Deaf Man hears them not: or that a Garden full of fragrant
Flowers has no sweet smell, because he that has lost his Smelling, does not
Smell it; the fault then is in the Organ, and not in the Object.

All these Mistakes therefore are to be ascribed to the Weakness or Wickedness
of Men, and not to that Holy Spirit. Such as bend themselves most against this
certain and infallible Testimony of the Spirit, use commonly to allege the
Example of the old Gnostics, and the late Monstrous and Mischievous Actings of
the Anabaptists of Munster; all which touches us nothing at all, neither
weakens a whit our most true Doctrine. Wherefore, as a most sure Bulwark
against such kind of Assaults, was subjoyned that other part of our
Proposition, thus; Moreover, these Divine and Inward Revelations, which we
establish, as absolutely necessary for the founding of the True Faith, as they
do not, so neither can they at anytime contradict the Scriptures Testimony, or
sound Reason.

-- By Experience.
Besides the intrinsic and undoubted Truth of this Assertion, we can boldly
affirm it, from our certain and blessed Experience. For this Spirit never
deceived us, never acted nor moved us to any thing that was amiss; but is clear
and manifest in its Revelations, which are evidently discerned of us, as we
wait in that pure and undefiled Light of God (that proper and fit Organ) in
which they are received. Therefore if any reason after this manner,

(That because some Wicked Ungodly, Devilish Men, have committed wicked
Actions, and have yet more wickedly asserted, that they were led into these
things by the Spirit of God,

Therefore, No Man ought to lean to the Spirit of God or seek to be led by it.)

The Absurdity of the Consequence.
I utterly deny the Conseqence of this Proposition; which, were it to be
received as true, then would all Faith in God, and Hope of Salvation, become
uncertain, and the Christian Religion (...) turned into mere Skepticism. For
after the same manner I might reason thus:

Because Eve was deceived by the Lying of the Serpent:

Therefore she ought not to have trusted to the Promise of God.

Because the old World was deluded by Evil Spirits:

Therefore ought neither Noah, nor Abraham, nor Moses, to have trusted the
Spirit of the Lord.

Because a lying spirit spoke through the Four Hundred Prophets, that persuaded
Ahab to go up and fight at Ramoth Gilead:

Therefore the Testimony of the true Spirit of Micaiah was uncertain, and
dangerous to be followed.

Because there were seducing spirits crept into the Church of old:

Therefore it was not good, or uncertain, to follow the Anointing which taught
all things, and is Truth, and no Lie.

Who dare say, that this is a necessary Consequence? Moreover, not only the
Faith of the Saints, and Church of God of old, is hereby rendered uncertain,
but also the Faith of all sorts of Christians now, is liable to the like
hazard; even of those who seek a Foundation for their Faith elsewhere, than
from the Spirit. For I shall prove by an inevitable Argument, ab Incommodo, i.
e. from the Inconveniency of it, that if the Spirit be not to be followed upon
that account, and that Men may not depend upon it, as their Guide, because
some, while pretending thereunto, commit great Evils; that then, nor Tradition,
nor the Scriptures, nor Reason, which the Papists, Protestants and Socinians,
do respectively make the Rule of their Faith, are any whit more certain. 1.
Instances of Tradition.
The Romanists reckon it an Error to Celebrate Easter any other ways than that
Church does. This can only be decided by Tradition. And yet the Greek Church,
which equally lays claim to Tradition with her self, does it otherwise. Yea,
so little effectual is Tradition to decide the case, that Polycarpus, the
Disciple of John, Eusebius. Hist. Eccles. lib. 5. c. 26.
and Anicetus, the Bishop of Rome, who immediately succeeded them (according to
whose Example both sides concluded the Question ought to be decided) could not
agree. Here of necessity one behoved to Err, and that following Tradition.
Would the Papists now judge we dealt fairly by them, if we should thence aver,
That Tradition is not to be regarded? Besides, in a matter of far greater
Importance, the same difficulty will occur, to wit, in the Primacy of the
Bishop of Rome; for many do affirm, and that by Tradition, That in the first
Six Hundred Years the Roman Prelates never assumed the Title of Universal
Shepherd, nor were acknowledged as such. And, as that which altogether
overturneth this Persidency, there are that allege, and that from Tradition
also, That Peter never saw Rome; and that therefore the Bishop of Rome cannot
be his Successor. Would ye Romanists think this sound Reasoning, to say, as ye
do?

Many have been deceived, and erred grievously, in trusting to Tradition.

Therefore we ought to reject all Traditions, yea, even those by which we
affirm the contrary, and as we think prove the Truth.

Lastly, In the Conc. Flor. Sess. 5. decreto quodam Conc. Ephesians. Act. 6. Sess 11.
and 12. Council. Flor. Sess. 18.20. Conc Flor. Sess. 21. p. 480. and seqq.
Council of Florence, the chief Doctors of the Romish and Greek Churches, did
debate whole Sessions long, concerning the Interpretation of one Sentence of
the Council of Ephesus, and of Epiphanius, and Basilius, neither could they
ever agree about it.

Secondly, As to the Scripture, the same difficulty occurreth: The Lutherans
affirm they believe Consubstantiation, by the Scripture, which the Calvinists
deny; as that which (they say) according to the same Scripture, is a gross
Error. The Calvinists again affirm absolute Reprobation, which the Arminians
deny, affirming the contrary: Wherein both affirm themselves to be ruled by the
Scripture and Reason, in the matter. Should I argue thus then to the Calvinists?

Here the Lutherans and Arminians grossly err, by following the Scripture:

Therefore the Scripture is not a good and certain Rule; and e contra.

Would either of them accept of this Reasoning as good and sound? What shall I
say of the Episcopalians, Presbyterians, Independents, and Anabaptists of Great
Britain, who are continually buffering one another with the Scripture? To whom
the same Argument might be alleged, though they do all unanimously acknowledge
it to be the Rule.

And Thirdly, As to Reason, I shall not need to say much; for whence come all
the Controversies, 3. Of Reason.
Contentions and Debates in the World, but because every Man thinks he follows
right Reason? The debates hence arising betwixt the old and late Philosophers.
Hence of old, came the Jangles betwixt the Stoics, Platonists, Peripateticks,
Pythagoreans, and Cynicks; as of late, betwixt the Aristotelians, Cartesians,
and other Naturalists: Can it be thence inferred, or will the Socinians, those
great Reasoners, allow us to conclude, because many, and that very wise Men,
have erred, by following (as they supposed) their Reason, and that with what
Diligence, Care and Industry they could, to find out the Truth, that therefore
no Man ought to make use of it at all, nor be positive in what he knows
certainly to be Rational? And thus far as to Opinion; the same uncertainty it
no less incident unto those other Principles. Anabaptists for their wild
Practices, and Protestants and Papists for their Wars and Bloodshed, each
pretending Scripture for it.


. XIV. But if we come to Practices, though I confess, I do with my whole Heart
abhor and detest those wild Practices, which are written concerning the
Anabaptists of Munster; I am bold to say, As bad, if not worse things, have
been committed by those, that lean to Tradition, Scripture and Reason: Wherein
also they have averred themselves to have been authorized by these Rules. I
need but mention all the Tumults, Seditions and horrible Bloodshed, wherewith
Europe has been afflicted these diverse Ag^; in which Papists against Papists,
Calvinists against Calvinists. Lutheran: against Lutherans, and Papists
assisted by Protestants, against other Protestants assisted by Papists, have
miserably shed one another Blood, Hiring and Forcing Men to kill one another,
who were Ignorant of the Quarrel, and Strangers to one another: All, mean
while, pretending Reason for so doing, and pleading the Lawfulness of it from
Scripture.

For what have the Papists pretended for their many Massacres, Tradition,
Scripture, and Reason made a Cover for Persecution and Murder.
acted as well in France, as elsewhere, but Tradition, Scripture and Reason?
Did they not say, That Reason persuaded them, Tradition allowed them, and
Scripture commanded them to Persecute, Destroy, and Burn Heretics, such as
denied this plain Scripture, Hoc est Corpus meum, This is my Body? And are not
the Protestants assenting to this Bloodshed, who assert the same thing, and
encourage them, by Burning and Banishing, while their Brethren are so treated
for the same Cause? Are not the Islands of Great Britain and Ireland (yea, and
all the Christian World) a lively Example hereof, which were diverse Years
together as a Theater of Blood where many lost their Lives, and Numbers of
Families were utterly destroyed and ruined? For all which, no other cause was
principally given than the Precepts of the Scripture. If we then compare these
Actings with those of Munster, we shall not find great difference; for both
affirmed and pretended they were called, and that it was lawful to Kill, Burn,
and Destroy the Wicked. We must Kill all the Wicked, said those Anabaptists;
that we that are the Saints, may possess the Earth. We must Burn obstinate
Heretics, say the Papists, that the Holy Church of Rome may be purged of
rotten Members, and may live in Peace. We must cut off Seducing Separatists,
say the Prelatical Protestants, who trouble the Peace of the Church, and refuse
the Divine Hierarchy, and Religious Ceremonies thereof. We must Kill, say the
Calvinistick Presbyterians, the Profane Malignant, who accuse the Holy
Consistorial and Presbyterian Government, and seek to defend the Popish and
Prelatick Hierarchy; as also those other Sectaries that trouble the Peace of
our Church. What difference I pray thee, Impartial Reader, see thou betwixt
these?

The Anabaptists went without, and against the Authority of the Magistrate; so
did not the other.

Sects against one another. The Behavior of the Papists toward Henry the
third and fourth of France; Examples of Popish Cruelties.
their designs upon James the sixth in the Gun-Powder-Treason; as also their
Principle of the Pope's Power to depose Kings, for the cause of Heresy, and to
absolve their subjects from their Oath, and give them to others, proves it
against them.

And as to the Protestants, how much their Actions differ from those other
abovementioned, Protestant Violences and Persecutions in Scotland, England and
Holland.
may be seen by the many Conspiracies and Tumults, which they have been active
in, both in Scotland and England, and which they have acted within these
Hundred Years, in diverse Towns and Provinces of the Netherlands. Have they not
often times sought, not only from the Popish Magistrates, but even from those
that had begun to Reform, or that had given them some liberty of Exercising
their Religion, that they might only be permitted, without Trouble or
Hinderance, to Exercise their Religion, promising they would not hinder or
molest the Papists in the Exercise of theirs? And yet did they not on the
contrary, so soon as they had Power, trouble and abuse those Fellow-Citizens,
and turn them out of the City, and which is worse, even such, who together with
them, had forsaken the Popish Religion? Did they not these things in many
Places against the Mind of the Magistrates? Have they not publicly with
contumelious Speeches, assaulted their Magistrates, from whom they had but just
before sought and obtained the free Exercise of their Religion? Representing
them, so soon as they opposed themselves to their Hierarchy, as if they
regarded neither God nor Religion? Have they not by violent Hands possessed
themselves of the Popish Churches, so called, or by Force, against the
Magistrates Mind, taken them away? Have they not turned out of their Office and
Authority whole Councils of Magistrates, under Pretense, that they were
addicted to Popery? Which Popish Magistrates nevertheless they did but a little
before acknowledge to be ordained by God; affirming themselves obliged to yield
them Obedience and Subjection, not only for Fear, but for Conscience sake; to
whom moreover the very Preachers and Overseers of the Reformed Church had
willingly sworn Fidelity; and yet afterward have they not said, That the
People are bound to force a wicked Prince to the Observation of God's Word?
There are many other Instances of this kind to be found in their Histories, not
to mention many worse things, which we know to have been acted in our Time, and
which for Brevity's sake I pass by.

Lutheran Seditions against the Reformed Teachers, and Assault upon the
Marquess of Brandenburgh, etc. in Germany.
I might say much of the Lutherans, whose tumultuous Actions against their
Magistrates, not professing the Lutheran Profession, are testified of by
several Historians worthy of Credit. Among others, I shall propose only one
Example to the Readers Consideration, which fell out at Berlin, in the Year,
1615. Where the seditious Multitude of the Lutheran Citizens, being stirred up
by the daily Clamours of their Preachers, did not only violently take up the
Houses of the Reformed Teachers, overturn their Libraries, and spoil their
Furniture; but also with reproachful Words, yea, and with Stones, assaulted the
Marquess of Brandenburgh, the Elector's Brother, while he sought by smooth
Words to quiet the Fury of the Multitude: They killed ten of his Guard,
scarcely sparing himself; who at last, by Flight, escaped out of their Hands.

All which sufficiently declares, that the Concurrence of the Magistrate does
not alter their Principles, but only their Method of Procedure. So that for my
own part, I see no Difference betwixt the Actings of those of Munster, and
these others, (whereof the one pretended to be led by the Spirit, the other by
Tradition, Scripture and Reason) save this; that the former were rash, heady
and foolish, in their Proceedings, and therefore were sooner brought to
nothing, and so into Contempt and Derision: But the other being more Politic
and Wise in their Generation, held it out longer, and so have authorized their
Wickedness more, with seeming Authority of Law and Reason. But both their
Actings being equally Evil, the Difference appears to me to be only like that
which is betwixt a simple filly Thief, that is easily catched, and hanged
without any more ado; and a Company of resolute bold Robbers, who being better
guarded, though their Offense be nothing less, yet by Violence do (to evite the
Danger) force their Masters to give them better Terms.

From all which then it evidently follows, that they argue very ill, that
despise and reject any Principle, because Men, pretending to be led by it, do
evil; in case it be not the natural and consequential Tendency of that
Principle, to lead unto those Things that are evil.

Again, It does follow from what is above asserted, that if the Spirit be to be
rejected upon this Account, all those other Principles ought on the same
account to be rejected. And for my part, as I have never a whit the lower
esteem of the Blessed Testimony of the Holy Scriptures; nor do the less respect
any solid Tradition, that is answerable and according to Truth; neither at all
despise Reason, that noble and excellent Faculty of the Mind, because wicked
Men have abused the Name of them, Let none reject the Certainty of the Unerrng
Spirit of God, because of false Pertenders to it.
to cover their Wickedness, and deceive the Simple: So I would not have any
reject or diffide the Certainty of that Unerring Spirit, which God has given
his Children, as that which can alone guide them into all Truth, because some
have falsely pretended to it.

. XV. And because the Spirit of God is the Fountain of all Truth and found
Reason, therefore we have well said, That it cannot contradict neither the
Testimony of the Scripture, nor right Reason: Yet (as the Proposition it self
concludes, to whose last part I now come) it will not from thence follow, that
these Divine Revelations are to be subjected to the Examination either of the
outward Testimony of Scripture, or of the humane or natural Reason of Man, as
to a more noble and certain Rule and Touch stone; for the Divine Revelation,
and Inward Illumination, is that which it evident by it self, forcing the well
disposed Understanding, and irresistibly moving it to assent, by its own
Evidence and Clearness, even as the common Principles of natural Truths do bow
the Mind to a natural Assent.

He that denies this part of the Proposition, must needs affirm, that the
Spirit of God neither can nor ever has manifested it self to Man, without the
Scripture, or a distinct discussion of Reason; or that the Efficacy of this
Supernatural Principle, working upon the Souls of Men, is less evident than
Natural Principles in their common Operations; both which are false.

For First, Through all the Scriptures we may observe, That the Manifestation
and Revelation of God by his Spirit, to the Patriarchs, Prophets and Apostles,
was Immediate and Objective, as is above proved; which they did not examine by
any other Principle, but their own Evidence and Clearness.

Secondly, The Self-Evidence of the Spirit.
To say that the Spirit of God has less Evidence upon the Mind of Man, than
Natural Principles have, is to have too mean and too low Thoughts of it. How
comes David to invite us, to taste, and see that God is good, if this cannot be
felt and tasted? This were enough to overturn the Faith and Assurance of all
the Saints, both now and of old. How came Paul to be persuaded, that nothing
could separate him from the Love of God, but by that Evidence and Clearness,
which the Spirit of God gave him? The Apostle John, who knew well wherein the
Certainty of Faith consisted, judged it no ways absurd, without further
Argument, to ascribe his Knowledge and Assurance, and that of all the Saints
hereunto, in these Words, Hereby know we that we dwell in him, and he in us,
because he has given us of his Spirit, 1 John 4.13. And again, 5, 6. It Is the
Spirit that bears witness, because the Spirit is Truth.

Observe the Reason brought by him, Because the Spirit is Truth: Of whose
Certainty and Infallibility I have heretofore spoken. We then trust to and
confide in this Spirit, because we know, and certainly believe, that it can
only lead us aright, and never mis-lead us; and from this certain Confidence it
is that we affirm, The Spirit contradicts not Scripture, nor right Reason.
That no Revelation coming from it, can ever contradict the Scriptures
Testimony, nor right Reason: Not as making this a more certain Rule to our
selves, but as condescending to such, who not discerning the Revelations of the
Spirit, as they proceed purely from God, will try them by these Mediums. Yet
those that have their Spiritual Senses, and can favor the things of the
Spirit, as it were in prima instantia, i. e. at the first Blush, can discern
them without, or before they apply them either to Scripture or Reason: Just as
a good Astronomer can calculate an Eclipse infallibly, Natural Demonstrations
from Astronomy and Geometry.
by which he can conclude (if the Order of Nature continue, and some strange
and unnatural Revolution intervene not) there will be an Eclipse of the Sun or
Moon such a Day, and such an Hour; yet can he not persuade an ignorant Rustic
of this, until he visibly see it. So also a Mathematician can infallibly know,
by the Rules of Art, that the three Angles of a right Triangle, are equal to
two right Angles; yea, can know them more certainly, than any Man by Measure.
And some Geometrical Demonstrations are by all acknowledged to be infallible,
which can be scarcely discerned or proved by the Senses; yet if a Geometer be
at the Pains to certify some ignorant Man concerning the Certainty of his Art,
by condescending to measure it, and make it obvious to his Senses, it will not
thence follow, that that Measuring is so certain as the Demonstration it self;
or that the Demonstration would be uncertain without it.

. XVI. But to make an End, I shall add one Argument to prove, That this inward,
Immediate, Objective Revelation, which we have pleaded for all along, is the
only, sure, certain, and unmovable Foundation of all Christian Faith: Which
Argument, when well weighed, I hope will have Weight with all Sorts of
Christians; and it is this:

Immediate Revelation of all Christian Faith, the Immovable Foundation
That which all Professors of Christianity, of what Kind soever, are forced
ultimately to recur unto, when pressed to the last, That for and because of
which all other Foundations are recommended, and accounted worthy to be
believed, and without which they are granted to be of no Weight at all, must
needs be the only most true, certain, and unmovable Foundation of all
Christian Faith.

But Inward, immediate, Objective Revelation, by the Spirit, is that which all
Professors of Christianity, of what kind soever, are forced ultimately to recur
unto, etc.

Therefore, etc.

The Proposition is so evident, that it will not be denied; The Assumption
shall be proved by Parts.

And First; As to the Papists, Papists Foundation their Church and Tradition,
Why?
they place their Foundation in the Judgment of the Church and Tradition. If we
press them to say, Why they believe as the Church does; Their Answer is,
Because the Church is always led by the Infallible Spirit. So here the Leading
of the Spirit, is the utmost Foundation. Again, if we ask them, Why we ought to
trust Tradition? They answer, Because these Traditions were delivered us by the
Doctors and Fathers of the Church; which Doctors and Fathers, by the Revelation
of the Holy Ghost, commanded the Church to observe them. Here again all ends in
the Revelation of the Spirit.

And for the Protestants and Socinians, Protestants and Socinians make the
Scriptures their Ground and Foundation Why?
both which acknowledge the Scriptures to be the Foundation and Rule of their
Faith; the one is subjectively influenced by the Spirit of God to use them; the
other, as managing them with and by their own Reason. Ask both, or either of
them, Why they trust in the Scriptures, and take them to be their Rule? Their
Answer is, Because we have in them the Mind of God delivered unto us, by those,
to whom these Things were inwardly, immediately, and objectively revealed by
the Spirit of God; and not because this or that Man wrote them, but because the
Spirit of God dictated them.

It is strange then, Christians by Name, and not by Nature, hold Revelation
ceased, contrary to Scripture.
that Men should render that so uncertain and dangerous to follow, upon which
alone the certain Ground and Foundation of their own Faith is built; or that
they should shut themselves out from that Holy Fellowship with God, which is
only enjoyed in the Spirit, in which we are commanded both to walk and live.

If any, reading these Things, find themselves moved, by the Strength of these
Scripture Arguments, to assent, and believe such Revelations neccessary; and
yet find themselves strangers to them (which, as I observed in the beginning,
is the cause that this is so much gainsaid and contradicted) Let them know,
that it is not because it is ceased to become the Privilege of every true
Christian, that they do not feel it; but rather because they are not so much
Christians by Nature, as by Name: And let such know, that the secret Light,
which shines in the Heart, and reproves Unrighteousness, is the small Beginning
of the Revelation of God's Spirit, which was first sent into the World to
reprove it of Sin, John 16.8. And as, by forsaking Iniquity, thou come to be
acquainted with that Heavenly Voice in thy Heart, thou shall feel, as the Old
Man, or the Natural Man, that savoureth not the things of God's Kingdom, is put
off, with his evil and corrupt Affections and Lusts; I say, thou shall feel the
New Man, or the Spiritual Birth and Babe raised, which has its Spiritual
Senses, and can see, feel, taste, handle, and smell the things of the Spirit;
but till then, the knowledge of things Spiritual, is but as an Historical
Faith. But as the description of the Light of the Sun, Who wants his Sight,
sees not the Light.
or of curious Colors, to a Blind Man, who, though of the largest capacity,
cannot so well understand it, by the most acute and lively Description, as a
Child can by seeing them: So neither can the Natural Man, of the largest
capacity, by the best words, even Scripture-words, so well understand the
Mysteries of God's Kingdom, as the least and weakest Child who tastes them, by
having them Revealed inwardly and objectively by the Spirit.

Wait then for this, in the small Revelation of that pure Light, which first
reveals things more known; and as thou becom'st fitted for it, thou shall
receive more and more, and by a Living Experience easily refute their
Ignorance, who ask, How do thou know, that thou art acted by the Spirit of
God? Which will appear to thee a Question no less ridiculous, than to ask one,
whose Eyes are open, How he knows the Sun shines at Noonday? And though this be
the surest and certainest way to answer all Objections; yet by what is above
written, it may appear, that the Mouths of all such Opposers, as deny this
Doctrine, may be shut, by unquestionable and unanswerable Reasons.

PROPOSITION III. Concerning the Scriptures.
From these Revelations of the Spirit of God to the Saints, have proceeded the
Scriptures of Truth, which contain, I. A faithful Historical Account of the
Actings of God's People in diverse Ages; with many singular and remarkable
Providence attending them. II. A Prophetical Account of several things,
whereof some are already past, and some yet to come. III. A full and ample
Account of all the chief Principles of the Doctrine of Christ, held forth in
diverse precious Declarations, Exhortations and Sentences, which, by the moving
of God's Spirit, were at several times, and upon sundry occasions, spoken and
written unto some Churches and their Pastors.


Nevertheless, because they are only a Declaration of the Fountain, and not the
Fountain it self; therefore they are not to be esteemed the principal Ground of
all Truth and Knowledge, nor yet the adequate, primary Rule of Faith and
Manners. Yet, because they give a true and faithful Testimony of the first
Foundation, they are and may be esteemed a secondary Rule, subordinate to the
Spirit, from which they have all their Excellency and Certainty: For, as by the
inward Testimony of the Spirit, we do alone truly know them; so they testify,
That the Spirit is that Guide, by which the Saints are led into all Truth;
therefore, John 16.13 Romans 8.14
according to the Scriptures, the Spirit is the first and principal Leader.
Seeing then, that we do therefore receive and believe the Scriptures, because
they proceeded from the Spirit; for the very same Reason is the Spirit more
originally and principally the Rule, according to the received Maxim in the
Schools, Propter quod unumquodque est tale, illud ipsum est magis tale: That
for which a thing is such, the thing it self is more such.

. I. THE former Part of this Proposition, though it needs no Apology for it self,
yet it is a good Apology for us, and will help to sweep away that, among many
other Calumnies, wherewith we are often loaded, as if we were Vilifiers and
Deniers of the Scriptures; for in that which we affirm of them, it does appear
at what a high Rate we value them, The Holy Scriptures the most Excellent
Writings in the World.
accounting them (without all Deceit and Equivocation) the most excellent
Writings in the World; to which not only no other Writings are to be preferred,
but even in diverse Respects not comparable thereto. For, as we freely
acknowledge, that their Authority does not depend upon the Approbation of
Canons of any Church, or Assembly; so neither can we subject them to the
fallen, corrupt, and defiled Reason of Man: And therein, as we do freely agree
with the Protestants, against the Error of the Romanists; so on the other Hand,
we cannot go the Length of such Protestants, as make their Authority to depend
upon any Virtue or Power, that is in the Writings themselves; but we desire to
ascribe all to that Spirit, from which they proceeded.

We confess indeed, there wants not a Majesty in the Style, a Coherence in the
Parts, a good Scope in the Whole; but seeing these things are not discerned by
the Natural, but only by the Spiritual Man, it is the Spirit of God that must
give us that Belief of the Scriptures, which may satisfy our Consciences.
Therefore some of the chiefest among Protestants, both in their particular
Writings, and public Confessions, are forced to acknowledge this.

Hence Calvin, though he says, he is able to prove, Calvin's Testimony, That the
Scriptures Certainty is from the Spirit.
that if there be a God in Heaven, these Writings have proceeded from him; yet
he concludes another Knowledge to be necessary: Instit. lib. 1. cap. 7. Sect 4.

But if (says he) we respect the Consciences, that they be not daily molested
with Doubts, and stick not at every Scruple, it is requisite that this
Persuasion which we speak of, be taken higher than Humane Reason, Judgment, or
Conjectures; to wit, from the secret Testimony of the Holy Spirit. And again,
To those that ask, that we prove unto them by Reason, that Moses and the
Prophets were inspired of God to speak: I Answer, That the Testimony of the
Holy Spirit is more excellent than all Reason. And again, Let this remain a
firm Truth, That he only whom the Holy Ghost has persuaded, can repose himself
on the Scripture with a true Certainty. And lastly, This then is a Judgment,
which cannot be begotten, but by a Heavenly Revelation, etc.

The same is also affirmed in the first public Confession of the French
Churches, The Confession of the French Churches.
published in the Year 1559. Art. 4. We know these Books to be Canonical, and
the most certain Rule of our Faith, not so much by the common Accord and
Consent of the Church, as by the Testimony, and inward Persuasion of the Holy
Spirit.

Thus also in the 5th Article of the Confession of Faith, Churches of Holland
assert the same.
of the Churches of Holland affirmed by the Synod of Dort. We receive the^e
Books only for Holy and Canonical, not so much because the Church receives and
approves them, as because the Spirit of God does witness in our Hearts, that
they are of God.

Westminster Confession the same.
And lastly, The Divines, so called, at Westminster, who began to be afraid of,
and guard against the Testimony of the Spirit, because they perceived a
Dispensation beyond that which they were under, beginning to dawn, and to
eclipse them; yet they could not get by this, though they have laid it down,
neither so clearly, distinctly, nor honestly. as they that went before. It is
in these Words, Chap. 1. Sect. 5. Nevertheless, our full Persuasion and
Assurance of the infallible Truth thereof, is, from the inward Work of the Holy
Spirit, bearing Witness by and with the Word in our Hearts.

By all which it appears, how necessary it is, to seek the Certainty of the
Scriptures from the the Spirit, and no where else. The infinite Janglings, and
endless Contests of those that seek their Authority elsewhere, do witness to
the Truth hereof.

Apocripha.
For the Ancients themselves, even of the first Centuries, Conc. Laod. Can. 59
in Cod. Ec. 163 Conc. Laod. held in the Year 364. excluded from the Canon Eccl.
the Wisdom of Solomon, Judith, Tobias, the M^ccabees, which the Council of
Carthage, held in the Year 399, received.
were not agreed among themselves concerning them, while some of them rejected
Books which we approve, and others of them appproved those which some of us
reject. It is not unknown to such as are in the least acquainted with
Antiquity, what great Contests are concerning the second Epistle of Peter, that
of James, the second and third of John, and the Revelations, which many, even
very Ancient, deny to have been written by the beloved Disciple and Brother of
James, but by another of that Name. What should then become of Christians, if
they had not received that Spirit, and those Spiritual Senses, by which they
know how to discern the True from the False? It Is the Privilege of Christ's
Sheep indeed, that they hear his Voice, and refuse that of a Stranger; which
Privilege being taken away, we are left a Prey to all Manner of Wolves.

. II. Though then we do acknowledge the Scriptures to be a very Heavenly and
Divine Writing, the Use of them to be very Comfortable and Necessary to the
Church of Christ, and that we also admire, and give Praise to the Lord, for his
wonderful Providence, in preserving these Writings so pure and uncorrupted, as
we have them, through so long a Night of Apostasy, to be a Testimony of his
Truth, against the Wickedness and Abominations, even of those, whom he made
instrumental in preserving them; so that they have kept them to be a Witness
against themselves; yet we may not call them the principal Fountain of all
Truth and Knowledge, nor yet the first adequate Rule of Faith and Manners,
because the principal Fountain of Truth, must be the Truth it self, i. e. That,
The Scriptures are not the principal Ground of Truth.
whose Certainty and Authority depends not upon another. When we doubt of the
Streams of any River or Flood, we recur to the Fountain it self, and having
found it, there we desist, we can go no further; because there it springs out
of the Bowels of the Earth, which are inscrutable. Even so the Writings and
Sayings of all Men, we must bring to the Word of God, I mean the Eternal Word,
and if they agree hereunto, we stand there; for this Word always proceeds,
and does eternally proceed from God, in and by which the unsearchable Wisdom of
God, and unsearchable Counsel, and Will conceived in the Heart of God, is
revealed unto us. That then the Scripture is not the principal Ground of Faith
and Knowledge, as it appears by what is above spoken; so it is provided in the
latter Part of the Proposition, which being reduced to an Argument, runs thus:

That, whereof the Certainty and Authority depends upon another, and which is
received as Truth, because of its proceeding from another, is not to be
accounted the principal Ground and Origin of all Truth and Knowledge.

But the Scriptures Authority and Certainty depend upon the Spirit, by which
they were dictated; and the Reason why they were received as Truth, is, because
they proceeded from the Spirit.

Therefore they are not the principal Ground of Truth.

To confirm this Atgument, I added the School-Maxim, Propter quod unumquodque
est tale, illud ipsum magis est tale. Which Maxim, though I confess it does not
hold universally, in all things; yet in this it both does and will very well
hold, as by applying it, as we have above intimated, will appear.

The same Argument will hold, as to the other Branch of the Proposition,
Neither are they the primary Rule of Faith and Manners.
That it is not the primary adequate Rule of Faith and Manners; thus:

That which is not the Rule of my Faith in believing the Scriptures themselves,
is not the primary adequate Rule of Faith and Manners:

But the Scripture is not, nor can it be the Rule of that Faith, by which I
believe them, etc.

Therefore, etc.

That the Spirit is the Rule.
But as to this Part, we shall produce diverse Arguments hereafter, as to what is
affirmed, That the Spirit, and not the Scriptures, is the Rule, it is largely
handled in the former Proposition, the Sum whereof I shall subsume in one
Argument, thus:

If by the Spirit we can only come to the true Knowledge of God: If by the
Spirit we are to be led into all Truth, and so be taught of all Things; Then
the Spirit, and not the Scriptures, is the Foundation and Ground of all Truth
and Knowledge, and the primary Rule of Faith and Manners.

But the first is true; Therefore also the last.

Next, The very Nature of the Gospel it self declares, That the Scriptures
cannot be the only and chief Rule of Christians, else there should be no
Difference betwixt the Law and the Gospel. As from the Nature of the New
Covenant, by diverse Scriptures, described in the former Proposition, is proved.

But besides these which are before mentioned, Wherein the Law and Gospel
differ.
herein does the Law and the Gospel differ, in that the Law being outwardly
written, brings under Condemnation, but has not Life in it to save; whereas
the Gospel, as it declares and makes manifest the Evil, so it being an Inward
Powerful Thing, gives Power also to obey, and deliver from the Evil. Hence it
is called (...), which is Glad Tidings; the Law or Letter, which is without us,
kills: But the Gospel, which is the inward Spiritual Law,, gives Life; for it
consists not so much in Words, as in Virtue. Wherefore such as come to know it,
and be acquainted with it, come to feel greater Power over their Iniquities,
than all outward Laws or Rules can give them. Hence the Apostle concludes, Romans
6.14. Sin shall not have Dominion over you: For ye are not under the Law, but
under Grace. This Grace then, that is Inward, and not an Outward Law, is to be
the Rule of Christians: Hereunto the Apostle commends the Elders of the Church,
saying, Acts 20.32. And now, Brethren, I commend you to God, and to the Word of
his Grace, which is able to build you up, and to give you an Inheritance among
all them which are sanctified. He does not commend them here to outward Laws or
Writings, but to the Word of Grace, which is Inward, even the Spiritual Law,
which makes free, as he elsewhere affirms, Romans 8.2. The Law of the Spirit of
Life in Christ Jesus, has made me free from the Law of Sin and Death. This
Spiritual Law is that which the Apostle declares he preached and directed
People unto, which was not outward, as Romans 10.8. is manifest; where,
distinguishing it from the Law, he says, The Word is nigh thee, in thy Heart,
and in thy Mouth; and this is the Word of Faith which we preach. From what is
abovesaid, I argue thus:

The principal Rule of Christians under the Gospel, is not an outward Letter,
nor Law outwardly written and delivered; but an inward Spiritual Law, engraven
in the Heart, the Law of the Spirit of Life, the Word that is nigh, in the
Heart and in the Mouth. But the Letter of the Scripture is outward, of it self
a dead thing, a mere Declaration of good things, but not the things themselves.
Therefore it is not, nor can be, the chief or principal Rule of Christians.


The Scripture not the Rule.
. III. Thiirdly That which is given to Christians for a Rule and Guide, must
needs be so full, as it may clearly and distinctly guide and order them in all
things and Occurrences that may fall out.

But in that there are many hundreds of things, with a regard to their
Circumstances, particular Christians may be concerned in, for which, there can
be no particular Rule had in the Scriptures:

Therefore the Scriptures cannot be a Rule to them.

I shall give an Instance in two or three Particulars, for to prove this
Proposition. It is not to be doubted, but some Men are particularly called to
some particular Services; their being not found in which, though the Act be no
general positive Duty; yet in so far as it may be required of them, is a great
Sin to omit: For as much as God is zealous of his Glory, and every Act of
Disobedience to his Will manifested, is enough not only to hinder one greatly
from that Comfort and inward Grace, which otherwise they might have, but also
brings Condemnation.

As for Instance: Some are called to the Ministry of the Word; Paul says,
There was a necessity upon him to preach the Gospel; Woe unto me, if I preach
not.

If it be necessary that there he now Ministers of the Church, as well as then,
then there is the same Necessity upon some, more than upon others, to occupy
this Place; which Necessity, as it may be incumbent upon particular Persons,
the Scripture neither does nor can declare.

That the Qualifications of a Minister are found in the Scripture, and by
applying these Qualifications to my self, I may know whether I be fit for such
a Place or no.

Bishop, or Minister, as they are mentioned both in the Epistle to Timothy and
Titus, are such as man ^e found in a private Christian; yea, which ought is
some measure to be in every true Christian: So that, that gives a Man no
Certainty. Every Capacity to an Office, gives me not a sufficient Call to it.

Next again, By what Rule shall I judge, if I be so qualified? How do I know
that I am sober, meek, holy, harmless? Is not the Testimony of the Spirit in my
Conscience that which must assure me hereof? And suppose that I was Qualified
and Called, yet what Scripture-Rule shall inform me, whether it be my duty to
preach in this or that place, in France or England, Holland or Germany; Whether
I shall take up my Time in confirming the Faithful, Reclaiming Heretics, or
Converting Infidels, as also in Writing Epistles to this or that Church?

The general Rules of the Scripture, viz. To be diligent in my Duty, to do all
to the Glory of God, and for the good of his Church, can give me no light in
this thing. Seeing two different things may both have a respect to that way,
yet may I commit a great Error and Offense, in doing the one, when I am called
to the other. If Paul, when his Face was turned by the Lord toward Jerusalem,
had gone back to Achaia, or Macedonia, he might have supposed he could have
done God more acceptable Service, in Preaching and confirming the Churches,
than in being shut up in Prison in Judea; but would God have been pleased
herewith? Nay certainly. Obedience is better than Sacrifice; and it is not our
doing that which is good simply, that pleases God, but that good which he
wills us to do. Every Member has its particular place in the Body, as the
Apostle shows, 1 Cor. 12. If then, I being the Foot, should offer to exercise
the Office of the Hand; or being the Hand, that of the Tongue, my Service would
be troublesome, and not acceptable; and instead of helping the Body, I should
make a Schism in it. That which is good for one to do, may be sinful to another.
So that, that which is good for another to do, may be sinful for me: For, as
Masters will have their Servants to obey them, according to their good
pleasure, and not only in blindly doing that, which may seem to them to tend to
their Master's profit; whereby it may chance (the Master having business both
in the Field and in the House) that the Servant, that knows not his Master's
will, may go to the Field, when it is the mind of the Master he should stay,
and do the business of the House: Would not this Servant then deserve a
Reproof, for not answering his Master's mind? And what Master is so sottish and
careless, as having many Servants, leaves them in such disorder, as not to
assign each his particular Station, and not only the general term of, Doing
that which is profitable; which would leave them in various doubts, and no
doubt, end in confusion?

Shall we then dare to ascribe unto Christ, in the ordering of his Church and
Servants, that which in Man might justly be accounted Disorder and Confusion?
The Apostle shows this distinction well, Diversities of Gifts.
Romans 12.6, 7, 8. Having then Gifts differing according to the Grace that is
given to us; whether Prophecy, let us prophecy according to the proportion of
Faith, or Ministry, let us wait on our Minstiring; or he that Teaches, on
Teaching; or he that Exhorts, on Exhortation. Now what Scripture-Rule shows
me, that I ought to Exhort, rather than Prophecy? or to Minister, rather than
Teach? Surely none at all. Many more Difficulties of this kind, occur in the
Life of a Christian.

Moreover, That which of all things is most needful for him to know, to wit, Of
Faith and Salvation can the Scripture assure thee?
whether he really be in the Faith, and an Heir of Salvation, or no, the
Scripture can give him no certainty in, neither can it be a Rule to him. That
this Knowledge is exceeding desirable and comfortable, all do unanimously
acknowledge; besides, that it is especially commanded, 2 Cor. 13.5. Examine
your selves, whether ye be in the Faith, prove your selves; know ye not your
own selves, how that Jesus Christ is in you, except ye be Reprobates? And 2
Pet. 1.10. Wherefore the rather Brethren, give all diligence to make your
Calling and Election sure. Now, I say, what Scripture-Rule can assure me, that
I have true Faith? That my Calling and Election is sure?

If it be said, By comparing the Scripture-Marks of true Faith with mine:

I demand, Wherewith shall I make this Observation? What shall ascertain me,
that I am not mistaken? It cannot be the Scripture: That Is the Matter under
Debate.

If it be said, My own Heart:

How unfit a Judge is it in its own case? And how like to be partial,
especially if it be yet unrenewed? The Heart of Man deceitful.
Does not the Scripture say, That it is deceitful above all things? I find the
Promises, I find the Threatenings, in the Scripture; but who tells me, that
the one belongs to me, more than the other? The Scripture gives me a mere
Declaration of these things, but makes no Application; so that the Assumption
must be of my own making, thus; as for Example: I find this Proposition in the
Scripture;

He that believes, shall be saved: Thence I draw this Assumption,

But I, Robert, believe:

Therefore, I shall be saved.

The Minor is of my own making, not expressed in the Scripture; and so a Humane
Conclusion, not a Divine Position; so that my Faith and Assurance here, is not
built upon a Scripture Proposition, but upon a Humane Principle; which, unless
I be sure of elsewhere, the Scripture gives me no certainty in the matter.

Again, If I should pursue the Argument further, and seek a new Medium out of
the Scripture, the same difficulty would occur, thus:

He that has the true and certain Marks of true Faith has true Faith.

But I have those Marks:

Therefore, I have true Faith.

For the Assumption is still here of my own making, and is not found in the
Scriptures; and by consequence the Conclusion can be no better, since it still
follows the weaker Proposition. This is indeed so pungent, The Inward
Testimony of the Spirit the Seal of Scripture. Promises.
that the best of Protestants, who plead for this Assurance, ascribe it to the
inward Testimony of the Spirit, (as Calvin, in that large Citation, cited in
the former Proposition) so that, not to seek further into the Writings of the
Primitive Protestants, (which are full of such Expressions) even the
Westminster Confession of Faith affirms, Chap 18. Sect. 12. This certainty is
not a bare Conjecture and probable Persuasion, grounded upon Fallible Hope, but
an Infallible Assurance of Faith, founded upon the Divine Truth of the Promise
of Salvation; the inward Evidences of these Graces, unto which these Promises
are made; the Testimony of the Spirit of Adoption, witnessing to our Spirits,
that we are the Children of God; which Spirit is the Earnest of our
Inheritance, whereby we are sealed to the day of Redemption.

Moreover, The Scripture it self, wherein we are so earnestly pressed to seek
after this Assurance, does not at all affirm it self a Rule sufficient to give
it, but wholly ascribes it to the Spirit, as Romans 8.16. The Spirit it self
hears witness with our spirit, that we are the Children of God. 1 John 4.13.
Hereby know we that we dwell in him, and be in us, because he has given us of
his Spirit; and chap 5.6. And it is the Spirit that bears witness, because
the Spirit is Truth.

. IV. Lastly, That cannot be the only, That the Scriptures are not the chief
Rules
principal nor chief Rule, which does not universally reach every Individual,
that needs it, to produce the necessary effect; and from the use of which
(either by some innocent and sinless Defect, or Natural, yet harmless and
blameless Imperfection) many (who are within the compass of the visible Church,
and may, without absurdity, yea, with great probability, be accounted of the
Elect) are necessarily Excluded, and that either wholly, or at least from the
immediate use thereof. But it so falls out frequently concerning the
Scriptures, 1. Deaf People, Children and Idiots Instanced.
in the case of Deaf People, Children and Idiots, who can by no means have the
benefit of the Scriptures. Shall we then affirm, that they are without any Rule
to Godward, or that they are all damned? As such an Opinion is in it self very
absurd, and inconsistent both with the Justice and Mercy of God, so I know no
sound Reason can be alleged for it. Now if we may suppose any such to be under
the New Covenant Dispensation, as I know none will deny; but that we may
suppose it without any absurdity, we cannot suppose them without some Rule and
Means of Knowledge; seeing it is expressly affirmed, They shall all be taught of
God, John 6.45. And they shall know me from the least to the greatest, Heb.
8.11. But Secondly, Though we were rid of this difficulty, how many illiterate,
and yet good Men, are there in the Church of God, who cannot read a Letter in
their own Mothers Tongue? Which Imperfection, though it be inconvenient, I cannot
tell whether we may safely affirm it to be sinful; these can have no immediate
Knowledge of the Rule of their Faith: So their Faith must needs depend upon the
credit of other Men's Reading or Relating it unto them; where either the
altering, adding, o^ omitting of a little word may be a Foundation in the poor
Hearer, of a very dangerous Mistake, whereby he may either continue in an
Iniquity ignorantly, or believe a Lie confidently. 2. Papists conceal the
Second Commandment from the People.
As for Example, the Papists in all their Catechisms, and public Exercise of
Examination, toward the People, have boldly cut away the Second Command,
because it seems so expressly to hit against their Adoration and Use of Images;
whereas many of these People, in whom, by this Omission, this false Opinion is
fostered, are under a simple impossibility, or at least a very great
difficulty, to be outwardly informed of this abuse. But further, suppose all
could read the Scriptures in their own Language, where is there one of a
Thousand that has that through Knowledge of the Original Languages, in which
they are written, so as in that respect immediately to receive the benefit of
them? 3. The Uncertainty of the Interpreters of the Scriptures, and their
Adulterating it.
Must not all these here depend upon the Honesty and Faithfuless of the
Interpreters? Which how uncertain it is for a Man to build his Faith upon, the
many Corrections, Amendments, and various Essays, which even among Protestants
have been used, whereof the latter have constantly blamed and corrected the
former, as guilty of Defects and Errors, does sufficiently declare. And that
even the last Translations in the vulgar Languages need to be corrected (as I
could prove at large, were it proper in this place) learned Men do confess. But
last of all, there is no less difficulty even occurs to these skilled in the
Original Languages, who cannot so immediately receive the Mind of the Authors
in these Writings, as that their Faith does at least obliquely depend upon the
Honesty and Credit of the Transcribers, since the Original Copies are granted
by all not to be now extant.

Pliero. Ep. 28. ad Lucin. p. 247.
Of which Transcribers Jerome in his time complained, saying, That they wrote not
what they found but what they understood. And Epiphanius says, That in the
good and correct Copies of Luke it was written, Epiph. in Anacnor. Tom. Oper.
that Christ Wept, and that Irenaeus does cite it; but that the Catholics
blotted it out, fearing lest Heretics should have abused it. Other Fathers
also declare, That whole Verses were taken out of Mark, because of the
Manichees.

But further, The various Lections of the Hebrew Character, etc.
the various Lections of the Hebrew Character, by reason of the Points, which
some plead for, as coaevous with the first Writings; which others, with no less
probability, allege to be a later Invention; the disagreement of diverse
Citations of Christ and the Apostles, with those Passages in the Old Testament;
they appeal to the great Controversies among the Fathers, whereof some highly
approve the Greek Septuagint, decrying and rendering very doubtful the Hebrew
Copy, as in many places vitiated, and altered by the Jews; other some, and
particularly Jerome, exalting the certainty of the Hebrew, and rejecting, yea,
even deriding the History of the Septuagint, which the Primitive Church chiefly
made use of; and some Fathers, that lived Centuries before him, affirmed to be
a most certain thing. And the many various Lections in diverse Copies of the
Greek, and the great Alterations among the Fathers of the first three Centuries
(who had greater opportunity to be better informed, than we can now lay claim
to) concerning the Books to be admitted or rejected, as is above observed. I
say, all these, and much more which might be alleged, puts the Minds, even of
the Learned, into infinite Doubts, Scruples, and inextricable Difficulties:
Whence we may very safely conclude, That Jesus Christ, who promised to be
always with his Children, to lead them into all Truth, to guard them against
the Devices of the Enemy, and to establish their Faith upon an unmovable Rock,
left them not to be principally ruled by that, which was subject in it self to
many uncertainties: And therefore he gave them his Spirit, as their principal
Guide, which neither Moths nor Time can wear out, nor Transcribers nor
Translators corrupt; which none are so Young, none so Illiterate none in so
remote a Place, but they may come to be reached, and rightly informed by it.

Through and by the Clearness which that Spirit gives us, it is that we are
only best rid of those difficulties that occur to us, concerning the
Scriptures. The real and undoubted Experience whereof I my self have been a
Witness of, with great Admiration of the Love of God to his Children in these
latter days: For I have known some of my Friends, who profess the same Faith
with me, faithful Servants of the most high God, and full of Divine Knowledge
of his Truth, as it was immediately and inwardly revealed to them by the
Spirit, Wrong Translations of Scriptures discerned in the Spirit, by the
unlearned in Letters.
from a true and living Experience; who not only were ignorant of the Greek and
Hebrew, but even some of them could not read their own vulgar Language; who
being pressed by the Adversaries with some Citations out of the English
Translation, and finding them to disagree with the Manifestation of Truth in
their Hearts, have boldly affirmed the Spirit of God never said so; and that it
was certainly wrong: For they did not believe that any of the Holy Prophets, or
Apostles, had ever written so; which, when I on this account seriously
examined, I really found to be Errors and Corruptions of the Translators: Who,
as in most Translations, do not so much give us the genuine Signification of
the Words, as strain them to express that, which comes nearest to that Opinion
and Notion they have of Truth. And this seemed to me to suit very well with
that Saying of Augustine. Epist. 19. ad Hen. Tom. 2. fol. 14. after he has said,
That he gives only that Honor to those Books which are called Canonical, as to
believe that the Authors thereof did in wri^ng, not err. He adds, And if I
shall meet with any thing in these Writings, that seems repugnant to Truth, I
shall not doubt to say, that either the Volume is Faulty or Erroneous: That the
Expounder has not reached what was said, or that I have in no wise understood
it. So that he supposes, that in the Transcription and Translation, there may
be Errors.

Whether I think hereby to render the Scripture altogether Uncertain, or
Useless?

Paul chiefly mentions in two places, Romans 15.4. Whatsoever things were written
aforetime, were written for our Learning; that we, through Patience and comfort
of the Scriptures, might have Hope. 2 Timothy 3.15.16.17. The Holy Scriptures are
able to make wise unto Salvation, through Faith which is in Jesus Christ. All
Scripture given by Inspiration of God, is profitable for Correction, for
Instruction in Righteousness, that the Man of God may be perfect, thoroughly
furnished unto every good Work.

For though God do principally and chiefly lead us by his Spirit; yet he
sometimes conveys his Comfort and Consolation to us, through his Children, whom
he Raises up and Inspires, to speak or write a Word in season; whereby the
Saints are made Instruments in the hand of the Lord, to strengthen and
encourage one another; which do also tend to perfect, and make them wise unto
Salvation; The Saints mutual Comfort, is the same Spirit in all.
and such as are led by the Spirit, cannot neglect, but do naturally love, and
are wonderfully cherished by that, which proceeds from the same Spirit in
another; because such mutual Emanations of the Heavenly Life, tend to quicken
the mind, when at any time it is overtaken with heaviness. Peter himself
declares this to have been the end of his Writing, 2 Pet. 1.12, 13. Wherefore I
will not be negligent, to put you always in remembrance of these things; though
ye know them, and be established in the present Truth. Yea, I think it meet, as
long as I am in this Tabernacle, to stir you up, by putting you in remembrance.

God is Teacher of his People himself; and there is nothing more express, than
that such as are under the New Covenant, they need no Man to teach them: Yet it
was a fruit of Christ's Ascension, to send Teachers and Pastors, for perfecting
of the Saints. So that the same Work is ascribed to the Scriptures, as to
Teachers; the one to make the Man of God perfect, the other for the Perfection
of the Saints.

As then Teachers are not to go before the Teaching of God himself, under the
New Covenant, but to follow after it; neither are they to rob us of that great
Privilege, which Christ has purchased unto us by his Blood; so neither is the
Scripture to go before the Teaching of the Spirit, or to rob us of it.

Secondly, God has seen meet, that herein we should, as in a Looking-Glass,
see the Conditions and Experiences of the Saints of old; The Scriptures a
Looking-Glass.
that finding our Experience answer to theirs, we might thereby be the more
confirmed and comforted, and our Hope strengthened of obtaining the same end;
that observing the Providence attending them, seeing the Snares they were
liable to, and beholding their Deliverances; we may thereby be made wise unto
Salvation, and seasonably reproved, and instructed in Righteousness.

The Scriptures Work and Service
This is the great Work of the Scriptures, and their Service to us, that we may
witness them fulfilled in us, and so discern the stamp of God's Spirit and ways
upon them, by the inward acquaintance we have with the same Spirit and Work in
our Hearts. The Prophecies of the Scriptures are also very comfortable and
profitable unto us, as the same Spirit inlightens us, to observe them
fulfilled, and to be fulfilled: For in all this, it is to be observed, that it
is only the Spiritual Man that can make a right use of them: They are able to
make the Man of God perfect, (so it is not the Natural Man) and whatsoever was
written aforetime, was written for our comfort, [our] that are the Believers, [
our] that are the Saints; concerning such the Apostle speaks: For as for the
other, the Apostle Peter plainly declares, that the unstable and unlearned
wrest them to their own Destruction: These were they that were unlearned in the
Divine and Heavenly Learning of the Spirit, not in Humane and School
Literature; in which, we may safely presume, that Peter himself, being a
Fisherman, had no skill; for it may, with great probability, yea certainty, be
affirmed, that he had no knowledge of Aristotle's Logic, Logic.
which both Papists and Protestants, now degenerating from the Simplicity of
Truth, make the Handmaid of Divinity (as they call it) and a necessary
Introduction to their carnal, natural and humane Ministry. By the infinite
obscure Labors of which kind of Men, mixing in their Heathenish Stuff, the
Scripture is rendered at this day of so little service to the simple People:
Whereof if Jerome complained in his time, now Twelve Hundred Years ago, Hierom
Epist. 134. ad Cypr. tom. 3. saying, It is wont to befall the most part of
Learned Men, that it is harder to understand their Expositions, than the things
which they go about to Expound; What may we say then, considering those great
Heaps of Commentaries since, in Ages yet far more corrupted?

. VI. In this respect above mentioned then, we have shown what Service and Use
the Holy Scriptures, as managed in and by the Spirit, are of to the Church of
God; wherefore we do account them a Secondary Rule. The Scriptures a secondary
Rule.
Moreover, because they are commonly acknowledged by all, to have been written
by the Dictates of the Holy Spirit, and that the Errors, which may be supposed
by the Injury of Times to have slipped in are not such, but that there is a
sufficient clear Testimony left to all the Essentials of the Christian Faith;
we do look upon them, as the only fit outward Judge of Controversies among
Christians; and that whatsoever Doctrine is contrary unto their Testimony, may
therefore justly be rejected as False. And for our parts, we are very willing,
that all our Doctrines and Practices be tried by them; which we never refused,
nor ever shall, in all Controversies with our Adversaries, as the Judge and
Test. We shall also be very willing to admit it, as a positive certain Maxim,
That whatsoever any do, pretending to the Spirit, which is contrary to the
Scriptures, be accounted and reckoned a Delusion of the Devil. For as we never
lay claim to the Spirit's Leadings, that we may cover our selves in any thing
that is Evil; so we know, that as every Evil contradicts the Scriptures, so it
does also the Spirit in the first place, from which the Scriptures came, and
whose Motions can never contradict one another, though they may appear sometimes
to be contradictory to the Blind Eye of the Natural Man, as Paul and James seem
to contradict one another.

Thus far we have shown both what we believe, and what we believe not,
concerning the Holy Scriptures; hoping, we have given them their due place. But
since they that will needs have them to be the Only, Certain and Principal
Rule, want not some show of Arguments, even from the Scripture it self (though it
no where call it self so) by which they labor to prove their Doctrine; I shall
briefly lay them down by way of Objections, and Answer them, before I make an
end of this mattter.

Isaiah 8.20. To the Law and to the Testimony; if they speak not according to
this Word, it is because there is no Light in them. Now this Law, Testimony,
and Word, they plead to be the Scriptures.

Law and Word to be Inward: But suppose it was Outword, it proves not the case
at all for them, neither makes it against us; for it may be confessed, without
any prejudice to our Cause, That the outward Law was more particularly to the
Jews a Rule, and more principally than to us; seeing their Law was Outward and
Literal, but ours under the New Covenant, (as has been already said) is
expressly affirmed to be Inward and Spiritual: So that this Scripture is so far
from making against us, that it makes for us; To try all things, by what?
for if the Jews were directed to try all things by their Law, which was
without them, written in Tables of Stone; then if we will have this Advice of
the Prophet to reach us, we must make it hold parallel to that Dispensation of
the Gospel which we are under: So that we are to try all things (in the first
place) by that Word of Faith, which is preached unto us, which the Apostle
says, is in the Heart; and by that Law, which God has given us, which the
Apostle says also expressly, is written and placed in the Mind.

Lastly; If we look to this place, according to the Greek Interpretation of the
Septuagint, out Adversaries shall have nothing from thence to carp; yea, it
will favor us much: For there it is said, that the Law is given us for a help;
which very well agrees, with what is above asserted.

John 5.39. Search the Scriptures, etc.

Here, say they, we are commanded, by Christ himself, to search the Scriptures.

First; That the Scriptures ought to be searched, we do not at all deny; but
are very willing to be tried by them, as has been above-declared: But the
Question is, Whether they be the Only and Principal Rule? Which this is so far
from proving, that it proves the contrary; for Christ checks them here, for
too high an esteem of the Scriptures, and neglecting of him that was to be
preferred before them, and to whom they bare witness; as the following words
declare. For in them ye think ye have Eternal Life, and they are they which
testify of me: Search the Scriptures, etc.
And ye will not come unto me, that ye might have Life. This shows, that while
they thought, they had Eternal Life in the Scriptures, they neglected to come
unto Christ, to have Life, of which the Scriptures bore witness. This answers
well to our purpose, since our Adversaries now do also exalt the Scriptures,
and think to have Life in them; which is no more, than to look upon them as the
only principal Rule, and Way to Life; and yet refuse to come unto the Spirit,
of which they restifie, even the inward Spiritual Law, which could give them
Life: So that the cause of this Peoples Ignorance and Unbelief, was not their
want of respect to the Scriptures; which though they knew, and had a high esteem
of; yet Christ testifies in the former Verses, that they had neither seen the
Father, nor heard his Voice at any time; neither had his Word abiding in them;
which had they then had, then they had believed in the Son. Ye search the
Scriptures; which Interpretation the Greek word will bear, and so Pasor
translateth it: Which by the reproof following, seems also to be the more
genuine Interpretation, as Cyrillus long ago has observed.

. VIII. Their Third Objection is from these words, Acts 17.11. These were more
noble than those in Thessalonica, in that they recieved the Word with all
readiness of mind, and searched the Scriptures daily, whether those things were
so.

Here, say they, the Bereans are commended, for searching the Scriptures, and
making them the Rule.



Secondly; It is to be observed, that these were the Jews of Berea, to whom
these Scriptures, which were the Law and the Prophets, The Bereans searching
the Scriptures, make them not the only Rule to try Doctrines.
were more particularly a Rule; and the thing under Examination was, whether
the Birth, Life, Works, and Sufferings of Christ, did answer to the Prophecies
that went before of him; so that it was most proper for them, being Jews, to
examine the Apostle's Doctrine by the Scriptures, seeing he pleaded it to be a
fulfilling of them. It is said nevertheless in the first place, That they
received the Word with cheerfulness; and in the second place, They searched the
Scriptures: Not that they searched the Scriptures, and then received the Word;
for then could they not have prevailed to Convert them, had they not first
minded the Word abiding in them, which opened their Understandings; no more,
than the Scribes and Pharisees, who (as in the former Objection we observed)
searched the Scriptures, and exalted them, and yet remained in their Unbelief;
because they had not the Word abiding in them.

Lastly, If this Commendation of the Jewish Bereans might infer, That the
Scriptures were the only and principal Rule to try the Apostles Doctrine by;
what should have become of the Gentiles? How should they ever have come to have
received the Faith of Christ, who neither knew the Scriptures, nor believed
them? We see in the end of the same Chapter, The Athenians instanced.
how the Apostle, preaching to the Athenians, took another method, and directed
them to somewhat of God within themselves, that they might feel after him. He
did not go about to Proselyte them to the Jewish Religion, and to the Belief of
the Law and the Prophets, and from thence to prove the Coming of Christ, nay,
he took a nearer way. Now certainly, the Principal and only Rule is not
different; one to the Jews, and another to the Gentiles; but is Universal,
reaching both: Though secondary and subordinate Rules and Means may be various,
and diversely suited, according as the People, they are used to, are Stated and
Circumstantiated: Even so we see, that the Apostle to the Athenians, used a
Testimony of one of their own Poets, which he judged would have Credit with
them: And, no doubt, such Testimonies whose Authors they esteemed, had more
weight with them, then all the Sayings of Moses and the Prophets, whom they
never knew nor would have cared for. Now because the Apostle used the Testimony
of a Poet to the Athenians, will it therefore follow, he made that the
Principal, or only Rule to try his Doctrine by? So neither will it follow, that
though he made use of the Scriptures to the Jews, as being a Principle already
believed by them, to try his Doctrine, that from thence the Scriptures may be
accounted the Principal or only Rule.



If the Scripture be not the adequate, principal, and only Rule, then it would
follow, that the Scripture is not complete, nor the Canon filled; that if Men
be now immediately Led and Ruled by the Spirit, they may add new Scriptures, of
equal authority with the old; whereas every one that adds, is cursed: Yea, what
assurance have we, but at this rate every one may bring in a new Gospel
according to his fancy?



That it is not enough to deny these Consequences if they naturally follow from
your Doctrine of Immediate Revelation, and denying the Scripture to be the only
Rule.



Secondly: We have shut the Door upon all such Doctrine, in this very Position;
affirming, That the Scriptures give a full and ample Testimony to all the
principal Doctrines of the Christian Faith. For we do firmly believe, that
there is no other Gospel or Doctrine to be preached, but that which was
delivered by the Apostles; and do freely subscribe to that saying, Let him that
preaches any other Gospel, Gal. 1.8.
than that which has been already preached by the Apostles, and according to
the Scriptures, be accursed.

So we distinguish betwixt a Revelation of a new Gospel, and new Doctrines, A
new Revelation is not a new Gospel.
and a new Revelation of the good old Gospel and Doctrines; the last we plead
for, but the first we utterly deny. For we firmly believe. That no other
foundation can any Man lay, than that, which is laid already. But that this
Revelation is necessary, we have already proved; and this does sufficiently
guard us against the hazard insinuated in the Objection.

As to the Scriptures being a filled Canon, I see no necessity of believing it.
Books Canonical.
And if these Men, that believe the Scriptures to be the only Rule, will be
consistent with their own Doctrine, they must needs be of my Judgment; seeing
it is simply impossible to prove the Canon by the Scriptures. For it cannot be
found in any Book of the Scriptures, that these Books, and just these, and no
other, are Canonical, as all are forced to acknowledge; how can they then evite
this Argument?

That, which cannot be proved by Scripture, is no necessary Article of Faith.

But the Canon of the Scripture; to wit, that there are so many Books
precisely, neither more or less, cannot be proved by Scripture.

Therefore, it is no necessary Article of Faith.

That the admitting of any other Books to be now written by the same Spirit,
might infer the admission of new Doctrines.

I deny that Consequence; for the Principal or Fundamental Doctrines of the
Christian Religion, are contained in the tenth part of the Scripture; but it
will not follow thence, that the rest are impertinent, or useless. If it should
please God to bring to us any of those Books, which by the injury of time are
lost, which are mentioned in the Scripture; ^oks lost.
as, The Prophecy of Enoch; the Book of Nathan, etc. or the Third Epistle of
Paul to the Corinthians; I see no reason, why we ought not to receive them, and
place them with the rest. That which displeases me, is, that Men should first
affirm, that the Scripture is the only and principal Rule, and yet make a great
Article of Faith of that, which the Scripture can give us no light in.

As for Instance: How shall a Protestant prove by Scripture, to such, as deny
the Epistle of James to be Authentic, that it ought to be received?

First, If he would say, Because it Contradicts not the rest, (besides that
there is no mention of it in any of the rest;) perhaps these Men think, it does
contradict Paul, in relation to Faith and Works. But if that should be granted,
it would as well follow, that every Writer, that Contradicts not the Scripture,
should be put into the Canon. And by this means, these Men fall into a greater
Absurdity, than they fix upon us: For thus they would equal every one the
Writings of their own Sect with the Scriptures; for I suppose they judge, their
own Confession of Faith does not Contradict the Scriptures: Will it therefore
follow, that it should be bound up with the Bible? And yet it seems impossible,
Whether the Epistle of James be Authentic, and how to know it.
according to their Principles, to bring any better Argument, to prove the
Epistle of James to be Authentic. There is then this unavoidable necessity to
say, We know it by the same Spirit, from which it was written; or otherwise to
step back to Rome, and say, We know by Tradition, that the Church has declared
it to be Canonical; and the Church is Infallible. Let them find a Mean, if they
can. So that out of this Objection, we shall draw an Unanswerable Argument ad
hominem, to our purpose.

That, which cannot assure me, concerning an Article of Faith, necessary to be
believed, is not the primary, adequate, only Rule of Faith, etc.

But the Scripture cannot thus assure me:

Therefore, etc.

I prove the Assumption thus:

That, which cannot assure me concerning the Canon of the Scripture, to wit,
that such Books are only to be admitted, and the Apocrypha excluded, cannot
Assure me of this:

Therefore, etc.

Lastly, As to these words Rev. 22.18. That if any Man shall add unto these
things, God shall add unto him the Plagues that are written in this Book: I
desire they will show me how it relates to any thing else than to that
particular Prophecy. Now the Canon of the Scripture is filled up, no Man is to
write more from that Spirit; yea, do not all confess, that there have been
Prophecies, and true Prophets since? The Papists deny it not. And do not the
Protestants affirm, that John Hus prophesied of the Reformation? Was he
therefore Cursed? Or did he therein Evil? I could give many other Examples,
confessed by themselves. What it means to add to the Scriptures.
But moreover, the same was in effect commanded long before, Prove. 30.6. Add
thou not unto his words, least he reprove thee, and thou be found a Liar: Yet
how many Books of the Prophets were written after? And the same was said by
Moses, Deuteronomy. 4.2. Ye shall not add unto the Word which I command you; neither
shall ye diminish ought from it. So that, though we should extend that of the
Revelation, beyond the particular Prophecy of that Book, it cannot be
understood, but of a new Gospel, or new Doctrines, or of restraining Man's
spirit, that he mix not his Humane Words with the Divine; and not of of a new
Revelation of the Old, as we have said before.

PROPOSITION IV. Concerning the Condition of Man in the Fall.
All Adam's Posterity (or Mankind) both Jews and Gentiles, Romans 5.12, ^5.
as to the first Adam (or Earthly Man) is fallen, degenerated, and dead;
deprived of the Sensation (or feeling) of this Inward Testimony, or Seed of
God; and is subject unto the Power, Nature, and Seed of the Serpent, which he
sows in Men's Hearts, while they abide in this Natural and Corrupted Estate:
From whence it comes, that not only their Words and Deeds, but all their
Imaginations, are Evil perpetually in the sight of God, as proceeding from this
depraved and wicked Seed. Man therefore, as be is in this State, can know
nothing aright; yea, his Thoughts and Conceptions, concerning God, and things
Spiritual (until he be dis-jointed from the Evil Seed, and united to the Divine
Light) are unprofitable both to himself and others. Hence are rejected the
Socinian and Pelagian Errors, in exalting a Natural Light; as also the Papists,
and most of Protestants, who affirm, That Man without the true Grace of God,
may be a true Minister of the Gospel. Nevertheless, this Seed is not imputed to
Infants, until by Transgression, they actually join themselves therewith; for
they are by Nature the Children of Wrath, who walk according to the Power of
the Prince of the Air, Ephesians. ^
and the Spirit that now works in the Children of Disobedience, having their
Conversation in the Lusts of the Flesh, fulfilling the Desires of the Flesh,
and of the Mind.

. I. HItherto we have discoursed, how the True Knowledge of God is attained and
preserved; also of what Use and Service the Holy Scripture is to the Saints.

We come now to examine the State and Condition of Man, as he stands in the
Fall, what his Capacity and Power is; and how far he is able, as of himself, to
advance in relation to the Things of God. Of this we touched a little in the
beginning of the second Proposition; but the full, right and through
Understanding of it, is of great Use and Service; because from the Ignorance
and Altercations that have been about it, there have arisen great and dangerous
Errors, both on the one hand, and on the other. While some do so far exalt the
Light of Nature, or the Faculty of the Natural Man, as capable of himself, by
virtue of the inward Will, Faculty, Light and Power, that pertains to his
Nature, to follow that which is good, and make real Progress toward Heaven.
And of these are the Pelagians, and Semi-Pelagians of old; and of late the
Socinians, and diverse others among the Papists. Others again will needs run
into another Extreme, (to whom Augustine, Augustin's Zeal against Pelagius.
among the Ancients, first made way in his declining Age, through the heat of
his Zeal against Pelagius) not only confessing Men incapable of themselves to
do good, and prone to evil; but that in his very Mother's Womb, and before he
commits any Actual Transgression, he is Contaminate with a real Guilt, whereby
he deserves Eternal Death: In which respect, they are not afraid to affirm,
That many poor Infants are Eternally Damned, and for ever endure the Torments
of Hell. Therefore the God of Truth, having now again Revealed his Truth (that
good and even Way) by his own Spirit, has taught us to avoid both these
Extremes.

That then, which our Proposition leads to treat of, is,

What the Condition of Man is, in the Fall; and how far incapable to ^ddle in
the things of God.

That God does not impute this Evil to Infants, until they actually join with
it: That so, by Establishing the Truth, we may overturn the Errors on both
parts.

Teachers, which want the Grace of God, we shall refer that to the Tenth
Proposition, where the matter is more particularly handled.

Part I.
. II. As to the first, not to dive into the many curious Notions, which many
have, concerning the Condition of Adam before the Fall; Adam 's ^all.
all agree in this, That thereby he came to a very great Loss, not only in the
things which related to the outward Man, but in regard of that true Fellowship
and Communion he had with God. This Loss was signified unto him in the Command,
For in the day thou eatest thereof, thou shall surely dye, Genesis 2.17. This
Death could not be an outward Death, or the Dissolution of the outward Man, for
as to that, he did not dye yet many Hundred Years after; so that it must needs
respect his Spiritual Life, and communion with God. The Consequence of this
Fall, besides that which relates to the Fruits of the Earth, is also expressed,
Genesis 3.20. So he drove out the Man, and he placed at the East of the Garden of
Eden Cherubims, and a Flaming Sword which turned every way, to keep the way of
the Tree of Life. Now whatsoever literal Signification this may have, we may
safely ascribe to this Paradise, a mystical Signification, and truly account it
that Spiritual Communion and Fellowship, which the Saints obtain with God by
Jesus Christ; to whom only these Cherubims give way, and unto as many as enter
by him, who calls himself the Door. Guilt not ascribed to Adam's Posterity.
So that, though we do not ascribe any whit of Adam's Guilt to Men, until they
make it theirs by the like Acts of Disobedience; yet we cannot suppose, that
Men, who are come of Adam naturally, can have any good thing in their Nature as
belonging to it; which he, from whom they derive their Nature, had not himself
to Communicate unto them.

If then we may affirm, that Adam did not retain in his Nature (as belonging
thereunto) any Will or Light capable to give him Knowledge in Spiritual Things,
then neither can his Posterity: For whatsoever real good any Man does, it
proceeds not from his Nature, as he is Man, or the Son of Adam; but from the
Seed of God in him, as a new Visitation of Life, in order to bring him out of
this Natural Condition: So that, though it be in him, yet it is not of him; and
this the Lord himself witnessed, Genesis 6.5. where it is said, He saw that every
imagination of the Thoughts of his Heart was only evil continually. Which
words, Every Imagination of the Natural Man is evil.
as they are very Positive, so are they very Comprehensive. Observe the
Emphasis of them; First, there is every Imagination of the Thoughts of his
Heart; so that this admits of no Exception of any Imagination of the Thoughts
of his Heart, Secondly, Is only evil continually; it is neither in some part
evil continually, nor yet only evil at sometimes; but both only evil, and
always and continually evil; which certainly excludes any good, as a proper
effect of Man's Heart, naturally: For that which is only evil, and that always,
cannot of its own Nature produce any good thing. The Lord expresses this
again, a little after, chap. 8.21. The Imagination of Man's Heart is evil from
his Youth. Thus inferring how natuaral and proper it is unto him; from which I
thus argue:

If the Thoughts of Man's Heart be not only evil, but always evil, then are
they, as they simply proceed from his Heart, neither good in part, nor at any
Time: But the first is true; Therefore the last.


Again,

If Man's Thoughts be always and only evil, then are they altogether useless
and ineffectual to him, in the things of God. But the first is true; Therefore
the last.


The Heart of Man deceitful.
Secondly, This appears clearly from that Saying of the Prophet Jeremiah, chap.
17.9. The Heart is deceitful above all things, and desperately wicked. For who
can, with any Color of Reason, imagine, that That which is so, has any Power
of it self; or is any wise fit to lead a Man to Righteousness, whereunto it is
of its own Nature directly opposite? This is as contrary to Reason, as it is
impossible in Nature, that a Stone of its own Nature, and proper Motion, should
flee upwards: For, as a Stone of its own Nature inclines and is prone to move
downwards toward the Center; so the Heart of Man is naturally prone and
inclined to Evil; some to one, and some to another. From this then I also thus
argue:

That which is deceitful above all things, and desperately wicked, is not fit,
neither can it lead a Man aright, in things that are good and honest. But the
Heart of Man is such: Therefore, etc.


But the Apostle Paul describes the Condition of Man in the Fall, at large,
Romans 3.10. Psalm. 14 34 and 53. 2, etc.
taking it out of the Psalmist. There is none righteous, no not one; There is
none that understands, there is none that secketh after God. They are all
gone out of the way, they are altogether become unprofitable; there is none
that does good, no not one. Their Throat is an open Sepulcher, Man's Estate in
the Fall.
with their Tongues they have used Deceit, the Poison of Asps is under their
Lips: Whose Mouths are full of Cursing and Bitterness. Their Feet are swift to
shed Blood; Destruction and Misery are in their ways: And the way of Peace have
they not known. There is no fear of God before their Eyes. What more positive
can be spoken? He seems to be particularly careful to avoid, that any good
should be ascribed to the Natural Man, he shows how he is polluted in all his
Ways; he shows how he is void of Righteousness, of Understanding, of the
Knowledge of God, how he is out of the Way; and in short, Unprofitable; than
which, nothing can be more fully said, to confirm our Judgment: For if this be
the Condition of the Natural Man, or of Man as he stands in the Fall, he is
unfit to make one right step to Heaven.

That is not spoken of the Condition of Man in general; but only of some
particulars; or at the least, that it comprehends not all.

What then? Are we better than they? No, in no wise; for we have before proved
both Jews and Gentiles, that they are all under Sin, as it is written: And so
he goes on. By which it is manifest, that he speaks of Mankind in general.

verse. 14. to wit. That the Gentiles do by Nature the things contained in the
Law, and so consequently do by Nature that which is good and acceptable in the
sight of God.

Man's own Nature, which is corrupt and fallen; but of the Spiritual Nature,
which proceeds from the Seed of God in Man, By what nature the Gentiles did
do the things of the Law.
as it receives a new Visitation of God's Love, and is quickened by it: Which
clearly appears by the following words, where he says; These not having a Law,
(i. e. outwardly) are a Law unto themselves, which shows the work of the Law,
written in their Hearts. These Acts of theirs then, are an effect of the Law
written in their Hearts; but the Scripture declares, that the Writing of the
Law in the Heart, is a part, yea, and a great part too, of the New Covenant
Dispensation; and so no consequence not part of Man's Nature.

Secondly; If this Nature, here spoken of, could be understood of Man's own
Nature, which he has as he is a Man, then would the Apostle unavoidably
contradict himself; since he elsewhere positively declares, The natural Man
discerns not, etc.
That the Natural Man discerns not the things of God, nor can. Now I hope,
the Law of God is among the things of God, especially as it is written in the
Heart. The Apostle, in the 7th Chapter of the same Epistle, says, verse. 12.
That the Law is Holy, Just, and Good; and verse. 14. That the Law is Spiritual,
but he is Carnal. Now in what respect is he Carnal, but as he stands in the
Fall, Unregenerate? Now what inconsistency would here be, to say. That he is
Carnal, and yet not so of his own Nature; seeing it is from his Nature that he
is so denominated? We see the Apostle contra-distinguisheth the Law, as
Spiritual, from Man's Nature, as Carnal and Sinful. Wherefore, as Christ says,
Mat. 7.16
There can no Grapes be expected from Thorns, nor Figs of Thiftles; so neither
can the fulfilling of the Law, which is Spiritual, Holy and Just, be expected
from that Nature, which is Corrupt, Fallen and Unregenerate. Whence we
conclude, with good Reason, The Gentiles Spiritual Nature, in doing the Law.
that the Nature here spoken of, by which the Gentiles are said to have done
the things contained in the Law, is not the common Nature of Man; but that
Spiritual Nature that arises from the Works of the Righteous and Spiritual
Law, that is written in the Heart. I confess, they of the other extreme, when
they are pressed with this Testimony by the Socinians and Pelagians, as well as
by us, when we use this Scripture, to show them, how some of the Heathens by
the Light of Christ in their Heart, come to be saved, are very far to seek;
giving this answer, That ther^ were some Relics of the Heavenly Image left in
Adam, by which the Heathens could do some good things. Which, as it is in it
self without proof, so it cantradicts their own Assertions elsewhere, and gives
away their Cause. For if these Relics were of force, to enable them to fulfill
the Righteous Law of God, it takes away the Necessity of Christ's Coming; or,
at least leaves them a way to be saved without him; unless they will say,
(which is worst of all) That though they really fulfilled the Righteous Law of
God; yet God damned them, because of the want of that particular Knowledge,
while he himself withheld all means of their coming to him, from them: But of
this hereafter.

. III. I might also here use another Argument, from these words of the Apostle,
1 Cor. 2. where he so positively excludes the Natural Man from an understanding
in the things of God; but because I have spoken of that Scripture in the
beginning of the Second Proposition, Socinians exalting the Light of the
natural Man.
I will here avoid to repeat what is there mentioned, referring thereunto: Yet
because the Socinians, and others, who exalt the Light of the Natural Man, or a
Natural Light in Man, do object against this Scripture; I shall remove it, ere
I make an end.

The Greek word (...) ought to be translated Animal, and not Natural; else, say
they, it would have been (...). From which they seek to infer, That it is only
the Animal Man, and not the Rational, that is excluded here, from the
discerning the things of God. Which shift, without disputing about the Word, is
easily refuted; neither is it any wise consistent with the scope of the place.
For,

Animal Life is no other than that which Man has common with other Living
Creatures; The Animal Man is the same with Natural.
for as he is a mere Man, he differs no otherwise from Beasts, than by the
Rational Property. Now the Apostle deduceth his Argument in the foregoing
Verses, from this Simile; That as the things of a Man cannot be known, but by
the spirit of a Man; so the things of God, no Man knows, but by the Spirit of
God. But I hope these Men will confess unto me, that the things of a Man are
not known by the Animal Spirit only i. e. by that which he has common with the
Beasts; but by the Rational: So that it must be the Rational, that is here
understood. Again, the Assumption shows clearly that the Apostle had no such
intent, as these Men's gloss would make him to have? viz. So the things of God
knows no Man, but the Spirit of God: According to their Judgment he should
have said, The things of God knows no Man by his Animal Spirit, but by his
Rational Spirit: For to say, The Spirit of God, here spoken of, is no other
than the Rational Spirit of Man, would border upon Blasphemy, since they are so
often cantra-distinguished. Again, going on he says not, that they are
Rationally, but Spiritually discerned.

Secondly, The Apostle, throughout this Chapter, shows how the Wisdom of Man is
unfit to judge of the things of God, and ignorant of them. Now I ask these Men,
Whether a Man be called a Wise Man from his animal Property, or from his
Rational? The Rational Man, in the Natural State excluded from discerning the
things of God.
If from his Rational, then it is not only the Animal, but also the Rational,
as he is yet in the Natural State, which the Apostle excludes here, and whom he
contra distinguishes from the Spiritual, verse 15. But the spiritual Man
judges all things; this cannot be said of any Man, merely because Rational, or
as he is a Man; seeing the Men of greatest Reason, if we may so esteem Men,
whom the Scripture calls Wise as were the Greeks of old, not only may be, but
often are enemies to the Kingdom of God; while both the Preaching of Christ is
said to be Foolishness with the Wise Men of this World, and the Wisdom of this
World is said to be Foolishness with God. Now whether it be any ways probable,
that either these Wise Men, that are said to account the Gospel foolishness,
are only so called with respect to their Animal Property, and not their
Rational; or that the Wisdom, that is Foolishness with God, is not meant of the
Rational, but only the Animal Property, any Rational Man, laying aside
Interest, may easily judge.

. IV. I come now to the other part, to wit, Infants, no Sin imputed to the^
that this evil and corrupted Seed is not imputed to Infants, until they
actually join with it. For this there is a Reason given in the end of the
Proposition it self, drawn from Ephesians. 2. For these are by Nature Children of
Wrath, who walk according to the Prince of the Power of the Air, the Spirit
that now works in the Children of Disobedience. Here the Apostle gives their
evil walking, and not any thing that is not reduced to act, as a Reason of
their being Children of Wrath. And this is suitable to the whole strain of the
Gospel, where no Man is ever threatened or judged for what Iniquity he has not
actually wrought; Such indeed as continue in Iniquity, and so do allow the Sins
of their Fathers, God will visit the Iniquity of the Fathers upon the Children.

Is it not strange then, that Man should entertain an Opinion so absurd in it
self, and so cruel and contrary to the Nature, as well of God's Mercy, as
Justice; concerning the which, the Scripture is altogether silent? But it is
manifest, that Man has invented this Opinion out of Self-Love, and from that
bitter Root, The ^bsolute Decree of Election, springs from Self-Love.
from which all Errors spring; for the most part of Protestants, that hold
this, having (as they fancy) the Absolute Decree of Election to secure them and
their Children, so as they cannot miss of Salvation, they make no difficulty to
send all others, both Old and young, to Hell. For whereas Self-love (which is
always apt to believe that which it desires) possesses them with a Hope, that
their part is secure; they are not sollicitous how they leave their Neighbors,
which are the far greater part of Mankind, in these Inextricable Difficulties.
The Papists again use this Opinion, as an Art to augment the Esteem of their
Church, and Reverence of its Sacraments; seeing they pretend, it is washed away
by Baptism; only in this they appear to be a little more Merciful, in that they
send not these Unbaptized Infants to Hell, but to a certain Limbus; concerning
which the Scriptures are as silent, as of the other. This then is not only not
Authorized in the Scripture, but contrary to the express Tenor of it. The
Apostle says plainly, Romans 4.15. Where no Law is, there is no Transgression:
To Infants there is no Law, so no Transgression.
And again, 5.13. But Sin is not imputed, where there is no Law. Than which
Testimonies, there is nothing more positive; since to Infants there is no Law,
seeing as such, they are utterly incapable of it; the Law cannot reach any but
such as have, in some measure, less or more, the exercise of their
Understanding, which Infants have not, So that from thence I thus argue: Sin is
imputed to none, where there is no Law. But, to Infants there is no Law:
Therefore, Sin is not imputed to them.


The Proposition is the Apostle's own words; the Assumption is thus proved:

Those, who are under a Physical Impossibility of either hearing, knowing, or
understanding any Law, where the Impossibility is not brought upon them by any
Act of their own, but is according to the very Order of Nature appointed by
God; to such there is no Law. But Infants are under this Physical
Impossibility: Therefore, etc.


Secondly; What can be more positive than that of Ezekiel. 18.20. The Soul that
sins, it shall die: The Son shall not bear the Father's Iniquity? For the
Prophet here first shows, what is the Cause of Man's Eternal Death, which he
says, is his Sinning; and then, as if he purposed expressly to shut out such an
Opinion, he assures us, The Son shall not bear the Father's Iniquity. From
which I thus argue:

If the Son bear not the Iniquity of his Father, Infants bear not Adam's
Transgression.
or of his immediate Parents, far less shall he bear the Iniquity of Adam. But
the Son shall not bear the Iniquity of his Father: Therefore, etc.


. V. Having thus far shown how absurd this Opinion is, I shall briefly examine
the Reasons its Authors bring for it.

Adam was a public Person, and therefore all Men sinned in him, as being in
his Loins. And for this they allege that of Romans 5.12. Wherefore as by one Man
sin entered into the World, and Death by sin; and so Death passed upon all Men,
for that all have sinned, etc. These last words, say they, may be translated,
In whom all have sinned.

Adam is a public Person, is not denied; and that through him there is a Seed
of Sin propagated to all Men, which in its own Nature is sinful, and inclines
Men to Iniquity; yet will it not follow from thence, that Infants, who join not
with this Seed, are guilty. As for these words in the Romans, the reason of the
Guilt there alleged, is, For that all have sinned. Now no Man is said to sin,
unless he actually sin in his own Person; for the Greek words (...) may very
well relate to (...), which is the nearest Antecedent; so that they hold forth,
how that Adam, by his Sin, gave an entrance to Sin in the World: And so Death
entered by sin, (...) i. e. upon which (viz. Occasion) or, in which (viz.
Death) all others have sinned, that is, Actually in their own Persons; to wit,
all that were capable of sinning: Of which Number that Infants could not be,
the Aposte clearly shows by the following verse, Sin is not imputed, where
there is no Law: And since, as is above proved, there is no Law to Infants,
they cannot be here included.

Psalm 51.5. Behold, I was shapen in Iniquity, and in Sin did my mother
conceive me. Hence, they say, it appears, that Infants from their Conception
are guilty.

Conceived in Sin, answered.
It is said indeed, In Sin did my Mother conceive me; not, My Mother did
conceive me a Sinner. Besides, that so interpreted, contradicts expressly the
Scripture beforementioned, in making Children guilty of the Sins of their
immediate Parents, (for of Adam there is not here any mention) contrary to the
plain words, The Son shall not bear the Father's Iniquity.

That the Wages of Sin is Death; and that seeing Children are subject to
Diseases and Death, therefore they must be guilty of Sin.

Death, the Wages of Sin, answered.
and of Adam's Sin, is confessed; but that that infers necessarily a Guilt in
all others, that are subject to them, is denied. For though the whole outward
Creation suffered a decay by Adam's Fall, which groans under Vanity; according
to which it is said in Job, That the Heavens are not clean in the sight of God;
yet will it not from thence follow, that the Herbs, Earth, and Trees, are
Sinners.

Next, Death, though a consequent of the Fall, incident to Man's Earthly
Nature, is not the Wages of Sin in the Saints, but rather a Sleep, by which
they pass from Death to Life; which is so far from being troublesome and
painful to them, as all real Punishments for Sin are, that the Apostle counts
it Gain: To me, says he, to die is Gain, Phil. 1.21.

That if Adam 's Sin be not imputed to those who actually have not sinned, then
it would follow, that all Infants are saved.

viz. That many Infants eternally perish; not for any sin of their own, but
only for Adam 's Iniquity: Where we are willing to let the Controversy stop,
commending both to the Illuminated Understanding of the Christian Reader.

This Error of our Adversaries, is both denied and refused by Zwinglius, that
Eminent Founder of the Protestant Churches of Zwitzerland, in his Book De
Baptismo; for which he is Anathematized by the Council of Trent, in the fifth
Session. We shall only add this Information: That we confess then, that a Seed
of Sin is transmitted to all Men, from Adam, (although imputed to none, until by
sinning they actually join with it) in which Seed he gave Occasion to all to
Sin; and it is the Origin of all evil Actions and Thought in Men's Hearts,
(...) to wit, (...) as it is in Romans 5. i. e. In which Death all have sinned.
For this Seed of Sin is frequently called Death in the Scripture, and the Body
of Death; seeing indeed it is a Death to the Life of Righteousness and
Holiness: Therefore its Seed, and its Product, is called the Old Man, the Old
Adam, in which all Sin is, Original Sin no Scripture Phrase.
for which cause we use this Name to express this Sin, and not that of Original
Sin; of which Phrase the Scripture makes no mention, and under which invented
and unscriptural Barbarism, this Notion of Imputed Sin to Infants, took place
among Christians.

PROPOSITIONS V. and VI. Concerning the Universal Redemption by Christ, and
also the Saving and Spiritual Light, wherewith every Man is Enlightened.
PROPOSITION V.
GOD, out of his Infinite Love, who delights not in the Death of a Sinner,
Ezekiel. 12.32. and 33.11.
but that all should live and be saved, has so loved the World, that he has
given his only Son a Light, that whosoever believes in him, shall be saved,
John 3.16. Who inlightneth every Man that comes into the World, John 1.9. And
makes manifest all things, that are reproveable, Ephesians. 5.13. And teaches all
Temperance, Righteousness, and Godliness. And this Light lightneth the Hearts
of all, in a day, in order to Salvation; and this is it, which reproves the Sin
of all Individuals, and would work out the Salvation of all, if not resisted.
Nor is it less Universal, than the Seed of Sin, being the Purchase of his
Death, who tasted Death for every Man. For as in Adam all die, even so in
Christ all shall be made alive, 1 Cor. 15.22.

PROPOSITION VI.
According to which Principle (or Hypothesis) all the Objections against the
Universality of Christ's Death, are easily solved; neither is it needful to
recur to the Ministry of Angels, and those other Miraculous Means, which, they
say, God uses, to manifest the Doctrine and History of Christ's Passion unto
such, who (living in the places of the World, where the outward Preaching of
the Gospel is unknown) have well improved the first and common Grace. For as
hence it well follows, that some of the Old Philosophers might have been saved;
so also may some (who by Providence are cost into those Remote Parts of the
World, where the Knowledge of the History is wanting) be made Partakers of the
Divine Mystery, if they receive, and resist not that Grace, A Manifestation
whereof is given to every Man to profit withal. 1 Cor. 12.17
This most certain Doctrine being then received, that there is an Evangelical
and Saving Light and Grace in all, the Universality of the Love and Mercy of
God toward Mankind (both in the Death of his Beloved Son, the Lord Jesus
Christ, and in the Manifestation of the Light in the Heart) is established and
confirmed, against all the Objections of such as deny it. Therefore Christ has
tasted Death for every Man; Heb. 2.9.
not only for all kinds of Men, as some vainly talk; but for Every Man, of all
kinds: The Benefit of whose Offering, is not only extended to such who have the
distinct outward Knowledge of his Death and Sufferings, as the same is declared
in the Scriptures: but even unto those, who are necessarily excluded from the
Benefit of this Knowledge, by some inevitable Accident. Which Knowledge we
willingly confess to be very Profitable and Comfortable; but not absolutely
Needful unto such, from whom God himself has withheld it; yet they may be
made Partakers of the Mystery of his Death (though ignorant of the History) if
they suffer his Seed and Light (inlightning their Hearts) to take place, (in
which Light, communion with the Father and the Son is enjoyed) so as of wicked
Men, to become holy; and Lovers of that Power, by whose inward and secret
Touches, they feel themselves turned from the Evil to the Good, and learn to do
to others, as they would be done by; in which Christ himself affirms all to be
included. As They have then falsely and erroneously taught, who have denied
Christ to have died for all Men; so neither have They sufficiently taught the
Truth, who affirming him to have died for all, have added the absolute
necessity of the outward Knowledge thereof, in order to obtain its saving
Effect. Among whom the Remonstrants of Holland have been chiefly wanting, and
many other Assertors of Universal Redemption; in that they have not placed the
Extent of his Salvation in that Divine and Evangelical Principle of Light and
Life wherewith Christ has enlightened every Man that comes into the World;
which is excellently and evidently held forth in these Scriptures, Genesis 6.3.
Deuteronomy. 30.14. John 1.7, 8, 9, 16, Romans 10.8. Titus 2.11.

HItherto we have considered Man's fallen, lost, corrupted and degenerated
Condition.

Now it is fit to enquire, How and by what means he may come to be Freed out of
this miserable and depraved Condition: Which in these two Propositions is
declared and demonstrated; which I thought meet to place together, because of
their Affinity; the one being, as it were, an Explanation of the other.

Absolute Reprobatio^, that horrible and blasphemous Doctrine described.
As for that Doctrine, which these Propositions chiefly strike at, to wit,
Absolute Reprobation: according to which some are not afraid to assert, That
God, by an Eternal and Immutable Decree, has Predestined to Eternal
Damnation the far greater part of Mankind, not considered as Made, much less as
Fallen, without any respect to their Disobedience or Sin; but only for the
demonstrating of the Glory of his Justice; and that for the bringing this
about, he has appointed these miserable Souls necessarily to walk in their
wicked Ways, that so his Justice may lay hold on them: And that God does
therefore not only suffer them, to be liable to this Misery in many parts of
the World, by withholding from them the Preaching of the Gospel, and Knowledge
of Christ; but even in those places where the Gospel is preached, and Salvation
by Christ is offered; whom, though he publicly invite them, yet he justly
condemns for Disobedience, albeit he has withheld from them all Grace, by
which they could have laid hold on the Gospel, viz. Because he has by a secret
Will, unknown to all Men, ordained and decreed without any respect had to their
Disobedience or Sin) that they shall not obey, and that the offer of the Gospel
shall never prove effectual for their Salvation; but only serve to aggravate
and occasion their greater Condemnation.

I say, As to this Horrible and Blasphemous Doctrine, our Cause is common with
many others, who have both Wisely and Learnedly, according to Scripture,
Reason, and Antiquity, refuted it: Seeing then that so much and so well, is
said already against this Doctrine, that little can be super-added, except what
has been said already* I shall be short in this respect. Yet, because it lies
so in Opposition to my way, I cannot let it altogether pass.

. I. First; This Doctrine a Novelty.
We may safely call this Doctrine a Novelty, seeing the first Four Hundred
Years after Christ, there is no mention made of it: For as it is contrary to
the Scripture's Testimony, and to the Tenor of the Gospel; so all the Ancient
Writers, Teachers, and Doctors of the Church, pass it over with a profound
Silence. The Rise of it.
The first Foundations of it were laid in the later Writings of Augustine; who,
in his Heat against Pelagius, let fall some expressions, which some have
unhappily gleaned up, to the establishing of this Error; thereby contradicting
the Truth, and sufficiently gainsaying many others, and many more and frequent
Expressions of the same Augustine. Afterward was this Doctrine fomented by
Dominicus a Friar, and the Monks of his Order; and at last unhappily taken up
by John Calvin, (otherwise a Man in diverse respects to be commended) to the
great Staining of his Reputation, and Defamation both of the Protestant and
Christian Religion: Which, though it received the Decrees of the Synod of Dort
for its Confirmation, has since lost ground, and begins to be exploded by most
Men of Learning and Piety in all Protestant Churches. However we should not
oppugn it for the Silence of the Ancients, Paucity of its Assertors, or for the
Learnedness of its Opposers, if we did observe it to have any real bottom in
the Writings or Sayings of Christ and the Apostles; and that it were not highly
Injurious to God himself, to Jesus Christ our Mediator and Redeemer; and to the
Power, Virtue, Nobility and Excellency of his Blessed Gospel; and lastly, unto
all Mankind.

1. It Is highly injurious to God, in making him the Author of Sin.
. II. First; It is highly Injurious to God, because it makes him the Author of
Sin; which of all things is most contrary to his Nature. I confess the
Assertors of this Principle deny this Consequence; but that is but a mere
Illusion, seeing it so naturally follows from their Doctrine, and is equally
Ridiculous, as if a Man should pertinaciously deny, that One and Two makes
Three. For if God has decreed that the Reprobated Ones shall perish, without
all respect to their evil Deeds, but only of his own Pleasure; and if he has
also decreed, long before they were in Being, or in a Capacity to do Good or
Evil, that they should walk in those wicked Ways, by which, as by a secondary
Means, they are led to that end: Who, I pray, is the first Author and Cause
thereof, but God, who so willed and decreed? This is as natural a Consequence
as any can be: And therefore, although many of the Preachers of this Doctrine
have sought out various, strange, strained and intricate Distinctions, to
defend their Opinion, and evite this horrid Consequence; yet some, and that of
the most Eminent of them, have been so plain in the matter, as they have put it
beyond all doubt. Of which I shall instance a few among many Passages. Calvin
in cap. 3. Genesis Id. 1 Inst. c. 18. S. 1. Id lib. de Praed. Id. lib. de Provid.
Id. Inst. cap 23. S. 1.
I say, That by the Ordination and Will of God, Adam fell. God would have Man
to fall. Man is blinded by the Will and Commandment of God. We refer the Causes
of Hardening us to God. The highest or remote Cause of Hardening is the Will of
God. It follows, that the hidden Counsel of God is the Cause of Hardening.
These are Calvin's Expressions. Beza lib. de Praed.
God (says Beza) has Predestined, not only unto Damnation, but also unto
the Causes of it, whomsoever he saw meet. Id. de Praed. ad. Art. 1.
The Decree of God cannot be excluded from the Causes of Corruption. Zanch. de
Ex^ae at q. 5 Id l. b. 5.
It is certain (says Zanchius) that God is the first Cause of Obduration.
Reprobetes are held so fast under God's Almighty Decree, that they cannot but
sin and perish. Not D^i cap 2. de Praed.
Faraeus lib 3. de Amiss. great. c. 2. ibid. c. 1.
It is the Opinion (says Paraeus) of our Doctors, That God did inevitably
Decree the Temptation and Fall of Man. The Creature Sins indeed necessarily,
by the most just Judgment of God. Our Men do most rightly affirm, That the Fall
of Man was necessary and inevitable, by Accident, because of God's Decree.
Martyr in Romans
God (says Martyr) does incline and force the Wills of wicked Men into great
Sins. Z^ing. li^. de Prove. c. 5.
God (says Zwinglius) moves the Robber to Kill. He kills, God forcing him
thereunto. But thou will say, He is forced to sin; I permit truly that he is
forced. Resp ad Vorst. part 1. p. 120.
Reprobate Persons (says Piscator) are absolutely ordained to this twofold
end; To undergo Everlasting Punishment, and necessarily to sin; and therefore
to sin, that they may be justly Punished.

If these Savings do not plainly and evidently Import, that God is the Author
of Sin, we must not then seek these Men's Opinions from their Words, but some
way else: It seems as if they had assumed to themselves that monstrous and
twofold Will they feign of God; one by which they declare their Minds openly,
and another more secret and hidden, which is quite contrary to the other. Nor
does it at all help them, to say, That Man Sins willingly; since their
Willingness, Proclivity, and Propensity to Evil, is (according to their
Judgment) so necessarily imposed upon them, that he cannot but be Willing,
because God has Willed and Decreed him to be so. Which Shift is just as if I
should take a Child incapable to resist me, and throw it down from a great
Precipice; the weight of the Child's Body indeed makes it go readily down, and
the Violence of the Fall upon some Rock or Stone, beats out its Brains, and
kills it. Now then, I pray, though the Body of the Child goes willingly down (for
I suppose, as to its Mind, it is incapable of any Will) and the weight of its
Body, and not any immediate stroke of my hand, who perhaps am at a great
distance, makes it dye; Whether is the Child, or I, the proper cause of its
Deith? Let any Man of Reason judge, if God's part be not (with them) as great,
yea more immediate, in the S^ns of Men (as by the Testimonies above brought
does appear) whether does not this make him not only the Author of Sin, but
more Unjust, then the unjustest of Men.

2. It makes God delight in the Death of a Sinner.
. III. Secondly; This Doctrine is Injurious to God, because it makes him
delight in the Death of Sinners; yea, and to will many to die in their Sins,
contrary to these Scriptures, Ezekiel. 33 11. 1 Timothy 2.3, 4. 2 Pet. 3.9. For if he
has created Men only for this very End, that he might show forth his Justice
and Mercy in them, as these Men affirm; and for effecting thereof has not only
with held from them the Means of doing Good, but also Predestined the Evil,
that they might fall into it; and that he Inclines and Forces them into great
Sins; certainly he must necessarily delight in their Death, and will them to
die; seeing against his own Will he neither does nor can do any good.

. IV. Thirdly; 3. It renders Christ's Mediation ineffectual.
It is highly Injurious to Christ our Mediator, and to the Efficacy and
Excellency of his Gospel: For it renders his Mediation ineffectual, as if he
had not by his Sufferings thoroughly broken down the middle Wall, nor yet
removed the Wrath of God, nor purchased the Love of God toward all Mankind; if
it was afore-decreed, that it should be of no Service to the far greater part
of Mankind. It is to no purpose to allege, that the Death of Christ was of
Efficacy enough to have saved all Mankind; if in effect its Virtue be not so
far extended, as to put all Mankind into a Capacity of Salvation.

Fourthly; 4. It makes the Gospel a Mock.
It makes the Preaching of the Gospel a mere Mock and Illusion, if many of
these, to whom it is preached be by an irrevocable Decree, excluded from being
benefitted by it: It wholly makes useless the Preaching of Faith and
Repentance, and the whole Tenor of the Gospel-Promises and Threatenings, as
being all relative to a former Decree and Means before appointed to such:
Which, because they cannot fail, M^ needs do nothing but wait for that
Irresistible Juncture, which will come, though it be but at the last hour of his
Life, if he be in the Decree of Election: And be his Diligence and Waiting what
it can, he shall never Attain it, if he belong to the Decree of Reprobation.

Fifthly; It makes the Coming of Christ, 5. It makes the Coming of Christ, an
Act of Wrath.
and his Propitiatory Sacrifice, which the Scripture affirms to have been the
Fruit of God's Love to the World, and transacted for the Sins and Salvation of
all Men, to have been rather a Testimony of God's Wrath to the World, and one
of the greatest Judgments, and severest Acts of God's Indignation toward
Mankind; it being only ordained to save a very few, and for the Hardening, and
Augmenting the Condemnation of the far greater number of Men, because they
believe not truly in it; the Cause of which Unbelief again (as the Divines [so
called] above assert) is the hidden Counsel of God: Certainly the Coming of
Christ was never to them a Testimony of God's Love, but rather of his
Implacable Wrath: And if the World may be taken for the far greater number of
such as live in it, God never loved the World, according to this Doctrine, but
rather hated it greatly, in sending his Son to be Crucified in it.

6. It renders Mankind in a worse Condition than the Devils --
. V. Sixthly; This Doctrine is highly Injurious to Mankind; for it renders them
in a far worse Condition, than the Devils in Hell. For these were sometimes in
a capacity to have stood, and do suffer only for their own Guilt; whereas many
Millions of Men are for ever tormented, according to them, for Adam's Sin,
which they neither knew of, nor ever were accessory to. It renders them worse
than the Beasts of the Field, of whom the Master requires no more than he is
able to perform; and if they be killed, Death to them is the end of Sorrow;
whereas Man is for ever tormented, Than the Israelites under Pharaoh.
for not doing that which he never was able to do. It puts him into a far worse
Condition than Pharaoh put the Israelites: For though he withheld Straw from
them; yet by much Labor and Pains they could have gotten it: But from Men they
make God to withold all means of Salvation, so that they can by no means
attain it. Yea, they place Mankind in that condition, which the Poets seign of
Tantalus, Tantalus his Condition.
who oppressed with Thirst, stands in Water up to the Chin, yet can by no means
reach it with his Tongue; and being tormented with Hunger, has Fruit hanging
at his very Lips, yet so as he can never lay hold on them with his Teeth; and
these things are so near him, not to nourish him, but to torment him. So do
these Men. They make the outward Creation of the Works of Providence, the
Smitings of the Conscience, sufficient to Convince the Heathens of Sin, and so
to Condemn and Judge them; but not at all to help them to Salvation. They make
the Preaching of the Gospel, the offer of Salvation by Christ, the Use of the
Sacraments, of Prayer and good Works, sufficient to Condemn those they account
Reprobates within the Church; serving only to inform them, to beget a seeming
Faith, and vain Hope; yet, because of a secret Impotency, which they had from
their Infancy, all these are wholly ineffectual to bring them the least step
toward Salvation; and do only contribute to render their Condemnation the
greater, and their Torments the more violent and intolerable.

Having thus briefly Removed this false Doctrine, (which stood in my way)
because they that are desirous, may see it both Learnedly and Piously Refuted
by many others; I come to the matter of our Proposition, which is; That God out
of his infinite Love, who delights not in the Death of a Sinner, but that all
should live and be saved, has sent his only Begotten Son into the World, that
whosoever believes in him, might be saved: Which also is again affirmed in the
Sixth Proposition, in these words, Christ tasted Death for every Man.
Christ then tasted Death for every Man, of all kinds. Such is the Evidence of
this Truth, delivered almost wholly in the express words of Scripture, that it
will not need much Probation. Also, because our Assertion herein is common with
many others, who have both Earnestly and Soundly, according to the Scripture,
pleaded for this Universal Redemption; I shall be the more brief in it, that I
may come to that, which may seem more singularly and peculiarly ours.

Christ's Redemption Universal, contrary to the Docrine of Absolute Reprobation.
. VI. This Doctrine of Universal Redemption, or Christ's dying for all Men, is
of it self so evident from the Scripture-Testimony, that there is scarce found
any other Article of the Christian Faith, so frequently, so plainly, and so
positively Asserted. It is that, which makes the Preaching of Christ to be
truly termed the Gospel or an Annunciation of Glad-Tidings to all. Thus the
Angel declared the Birth and Coming of Christ to the Shepherds to be, Luke
2.10. Behold, I bring you good Tidings of great Joy, which shall be to All
People: He says not, to a Few. Now if this Coming of Christ had not brought a
Possibility of Salvation to all, it should rather have been accounted, Bad
Tidings of great Sorrow to most People; neither should the Angel have had
reason to have sung, Peace on Earth, and good Will toward Men, if the greatest
part of Mankind had been necessarily shut out from receiving any benefit by it.
How should Christ have sent cut His to Preach the Gospel to every Creature,
Mark 16.15. (a very Comprehensive Commission) that is, to every Son and
Daughter of Mankind, without all Exception? He commands them to preach
Salvation to all, Repentance and Remission of Sins to all; Warning every one,
and Exhorting every one, as Paul did Col. 1.28. The Gospel is preached to every
Man.
Now how could they have preached the Gospel to every Man, as became the
Ministers of Jesus Christ, in much assurance, if Salvation by that Gospel had
not been possible unto all? What! if some of those had asked them, or should
now ask any of the Doctors, who deny the Universality of Christ's Death, and
yet preached it to all promiscuously, Has Christ died for me? How can they,
with Confidence, give a certain Answer to this Question? If they give a
Conditional Answer, as their Principle obliges them to do, and say, If thou
Repent, Christ has died for thee; does nor the same Question still recur? Has
Christ died for me, so as to make Repentance possible to me? To this they can
answer nothing; unless they run in a Circle. Whereas the Feet of those, that
bring the glad Tidings of the Gospel of Peace, are said to be Beautiful; for
that they preach the Common Salvation, Repentance unto All; offering a Door of
Mercy and Hope to All, through Jesus Christ, who gave himself a Ransom for All.
The Gospel invites All: And certainly by the Gospel, Christ intended not to
deceive and delude the greater part of Mankind, when he invites, and cries,
saying; Come unto me all ye that are weary and heavy laden, and I will give you
rest. If All then ought to seek after him, and to look for Salvation by him, he
must needs have made Salvation possible to All: For who is bound to seek after
that, which is impossible? Certainly it were a Mocking of Men, to bid them do
so. And such as deny, that by the Death of Christ, Salvation is made possible
to all Men, do most Blasphemously make God mock the World, in giving his
Servants a Commission to Preach the Gospel of Salvation unto all, while he has
before decreed, that it shall not be Possible for them to receive it. The
Absurdity of that Doctrine of Absolute Reprobation.
Would not this make the Lord to send forth his Servants with a Lie in their
Mouth, (which were Blasphemous to think) commanding them, to bid All and Every
One Believe, That Christ died for them, and had purchased Life and Salvation:
Whereas it is no such thing, according to the forementioned Doctrine? But
seeing Christ, after he arose, and perfected the Work of our Redemption, gave a
Commission to preach Repentance, Remission of Sins, and Salvation to all; it is
manifest, that he died for all. For He that has Commissionated his Servants
thus to Preach, is a God of Truth, and no Mocker of poor Mankind; neither does
he require of any Man, that which is simply impossible for him to do: For that
no Man is bound to do that which is impossible, is a Principle of Truth,
engraven in every Man's Mind. And seeing he is both a most Righteous and
Merciful God, it cannot at all stand either with his Justice or Mercy, to bid
such Men Repent or Believe, to whom it is impossible.

. VII. Moreover, if we regard the Testimony of the Scripture in this matter;
where there is not one Scripture, which I know of, that affirms, Christ not
to die for All; there are diverse, that positively and expressly assert, He did;
as, 1 Timothy 2.1, 3, To Pray for all; for Christ died for all --
4, 6. I exhort therefore, that first of all, Supplications, Prayers,
Intercessions, and giving of Thanks, be made for all Men, etc. For this is good
and acceptable in the sight of God our Savior, who will have all Men to be
saved, and to come to the Knowledge of the Truth; who gave himself a Ransom for
All, to be testified in due time. Except we will have the Apostle here to
assert quite another thing than he intended, there can be nothing more plain to
confirm what we have asserted. And this Scripture does well answer to that
manner of Arguing, which we have hitherto used: For, first, the Apostle here
recommends them to Pray for all Men: And to obviate such an Objection, as if he
had said with our Adversaries, Christ prayed not for the World, neither wills
be us to pray for all; because he wills not that all should be saved, but
has ordained many to be damned, that he might show forth his Justice to them;
he obviates, -- And will have all Men to be saved.
I say, such an Objection, telling them, that it is good and acceptable in the
sight of God, who will have all Men to be saved. I desire to know, what can be
more expressly affirmed, or can any two Propositions be stated in terms more
contradictory, than these two; God wills not some to be saved; and God
wills all Men to be saved, or God will have no Man perish. If we believe the
last, as the Apostle has affirmed, the first must be destroyed; seeing of
Contradictory Propositions, the one being placed, the other is destroyed.
Whence (to conclude) he gives us a Reason of his Willingness, that all Men
should be saved, in these words, Who gave himself a Ransom for all; as if he
would have said, Since Christ Died for all, since he gave himself a Ransom for
all, therefore he will have all Men to be saved. This Christ himself gives, as
the Reason of God's Love to the World, in these words: John 3.16. God so loved
the World, that he gave his Only Begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him,
should not perish, but have Everlasting Life; compared with 1 John 4.9. This (
whosoever) is an Indefinite Term, from which no Man is excluded. From all which
then, I thus Argue:

Argum. ^
For whomsoever it is lawful to Pray, to them Salvation is possible: But it is
lawful to Pray for every Individual Man in the whole World: Therefore Salvation
is possible unto them.


I prove the Major Proposition thus:

Arg. ^.
No Man is bound to pray for that which is impossible to be attained; But every
Man is bound and commanded to pray for all Men: Therefore it is not impossible
to be obtained,
I prove also this Proposition further, thus; Arg. 3.
No Man is bound to pray, but in Faith: But he that prays for that, which he
judges simply impossible to be obtained, cannot pray in Faith: Therefore, etc.


Again: Arg. 4.
That which God wills, is not impossible: But God wills all Men to be
saved: Therefore it is not impossible.


And Lastly; Arg. 5.
Those, for whom our Savior gave himself a Ransom, to such Salvation is
possible: But our Savior gave himself a Ransom for all: Therefore Salvation is
possible.


Heb. 2. 9. in these words: But we see Jesus, who was made a little lower than
the Angels, for the suffering of Death, crowned with Glory and Honor, that he
by the Grace of God might taste Death for every Man. He that will but open his
Eyes, may see this Truth here asserted. If he tasted Death for every Man, then
certainly there is no Man for whom he did not taste Death; then there is no
Man, who may not be made a sharer of the benefit of it: For he came not to
condemn the World, but that the World through him might be saved, John 3.17. He
came not to judge the World, but to save the World, John 12.37. Wnereas, Our
Adversaries false Doctrine of a great part of Mankind being pre-ordained for
Damnation, refuted
according to the Doctrine of our Adversaries, he rather came to condemn the
World, and judge it; and not that it might he saved by him, or to save it. For
if he never came to bring Salvation to the greater part of Mankind, but that
his coming, though it could never do them good, yet shall augment their
Condemnation; from thence it necessarily follows, that he came not of Intention
to Save, but to Judge and Condemn the greater part of the World, contrary to
his own express Testimony; and as the Apostle Paul, in the words above cited,
does assert Affirmatively, That God wills the Salvation of all; so does the
Apostle Peter assert Negatively, That he wills not the perishing of any, 2
Pet. 3.9. The Lord is not slack concerning his Promise, as some Men count
slackness, but is long-suffering to usward, not willing that any should
perish, but that all should come to repentance. And this is Correspondent to
that of the Prophet Ezekiel, 33.11. As I live, says the Lord, I have no
pleasure in the death of the Wicked, but that the Wicked turn from his way and
live. If it be safe to believe God, and trust in him, we must not think, that
he intends to cheat us by all these Expressions through his Servants; but that
he was in good earnest. died for us; but left us under an impossibility of
Salvation. What means all those earnest Invitations, all those serious
Expostulations, all those regre^ting Contemplations, wherewith the Holy
Scriptures are full? As, Why will ye die, O House of s^el? Why will ye not come
unto me, that ye might have Life? I have waited to be gracious unto you: I have
s^g^t to gather you: I have knocked at the door of your Hearts: Is not your
destruction of your selves? I have called all the day long. If Men, who are so
invited, be under no capacity of being saved, if Salvation be impossible unto
them; shall we suppose God in this, to be no other, but like the Author of a
Romance, or Master of a Comedy, who amuses and raises the various Affections
and Passions of the Spectators, by diverse and strange Accidents; sometimes
leading them into Hope, and sometimes into Despair? All those Actions, in
effect, being but a mere Illusion, while he has appointed what the Conclusion
of all shall be.

Thirdly; This Doctrine is abundantly confirmed by that of the Apostle, 1 John
2.1, 2. And if any Man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ
the Righteous. And he is the Propitiation for our Sins; and not ours only, but
also for the Sins of the whole World. The way which our Adversaries take to
evite this Testimony, Adversaries Comment upon the Word, the Whole World.
is most foolish and ridiculous: The [World] here, say they, is the World of
Believers: For this Commentary, we have nothing but their own Assertion; and
so, while it manifestly destroys the Text, may be justly rejected. For, first,
let them show me, if they can, in all the Scripture, where the [ whole World]
is taken for Believers only; I shall show them, where it is many times taken
for the quite contrary; as, The World knows me not: The World receives me not:
I am not of this World: Besides all these Scriptures, Psalm 17.14. Isai. 13.11.
Mat. 18.7. John 7.7. and 8.26. and 12.19. and 14.17. and 15.18, 19. and 17.14.
and 18.20. 1 Cor. 1.21. and 2.12. and 6.2. Gal. 6.14. James 1.27. 2 Pet. 2.20.
1 John 2.15. and 3.1. and 4.4, 5. and many more. Secondly; The Apostle, in this
very place, contra-distinguisheth the World from the Saints, thus; And not for
ours only, but for the Sins of the whole World: What means the Apostle by (
Ours) here? Is not that the Sins of Believers? Was not he one of those
Believers? And was not this an universal Epistle, written to all the Saints,
that then were? So that according to these Men's Comment, there should be a
very unnecessary and foolish Redundancy in the Apostle's words as if he had
said, He is a Propitiation not only for the Sins of all Believers, but for the
Sins of all Believers: Is not this to make the Apostle's words void of good
Sense? Let them show us, wherever there is such a manner of speaking in all
the Scripture; where any of the Penmen first name the Believers in Concreto
with themselves, and then contra-distinguish them from some other whole World
Believers. That ( whole World) if it be of Believers, must not be the World we
live in. But we need no better Interpreter for the Apostle, than himself; who
uses the very same Expression and Phrase in the same Epistle, chap. 5.16.
saying We know that we are of God, and the whole World lies in Wickedness:
There cannot be found in all the Scripture, two places which run more parallel;
seeing in both, the same Apostle, in the same Epistle, to the same Persons,
contra-distinguisheth himself, and the Saints, to whom he writes, from the
whole World; which, according to these Men's Commentary, ought to be understood
of Believers: As if John had said, We know particular Believers are of God; but
the whole World of Believers lies in Wickedness. What absurd wresting of
Scripture were this? And yet it may be as well pleaded for, as the other; for
they differ not at all. Seeing then that the Apostle John tells us plainly,
That Christ not only died for him, and for the Saints, and Members of the
Church of God, to whom he wrote; but for the whole World: Let us then hold it
for a certain and undoubted Truth, notwithstanding the Cavils of such as oppose.

This might also be proved from many more Scripture-Testimonies, if it were at
this season needful. All the Fathers, so called, and Doctors of the Church, for
the first Four Centuries, preached this Doctrine; according to which they
boldly held forth the Gospel of Christ, The Heathens invited to Salvation; none
predestined to Damnation.
and Efficacy of his Death; inviting and entreating the Heathens to come and be
Partakers of the Benefits of it; showing them, how there was a Door open for
them All to be saved, through Jesus Christ; not telling them, that God had
Predestined any of them to Damnation, or had made Salvation impossible to
them, by withholding Power and Grace, necessary to believe, from them. But of
many of their Sayings, which might be alleged, I shall only instance a few.

Augustine, on the 95th Psalm, says The Blood of Christ is of so great Worth,
that it is of no less value than the whole World.

Prosper ad Gall. c. 9. The Redeemer of the World gave his Blood for the World,
The Testimonies of the Doctors and Fathers of the first Church, that Christ
died for all.
and the World would not be Redeemed, because the Darkness did not receive the
Light. He that says, The Savior was not Crucified for the Redemption of the
whole World, looks not to the Virtue of the Sacrament, but to the part of
Infidels; since the Blood of our Lord Jesus Christ is the Price of the whole
World; from which Redemption they are Strangers, who either delighting in their
Captivity, would not be Redeemed, or after they were Redeemed, returned to the
same Servitude.

The same Prosper, in his Answer to Vincentius's first Objection: Seeing
therefore because of one common Nature, and cause in Truth, undertaken by our
Lord, all are rightly said to be Redeemed; and nevertheless, all are not
brought out of Captivity: The property of Redemption, without doubt, belongs
to those, from whom the Prince of this World is shut out, and now are not
Vessels of the Devil, but Members of Christ; whose Death was so bestowed upon
Mankind, that it belonged to the Redemption of such, who were not to be
regenerated. But so, that that which was done by the Example of one, for all,
might, by a singular Mystery, be celebrated in every one. For the Cup of
Immortality, which is made up of our Infirmity and the Divine Power, has
indeed that in it, which may Profit all; but if it be not Drank, it does not
Heal.

The Author de vocat. Gentium, lib. 11. cap. 6. There is no cause to doubt, but
that our Lord Jesus Christ died for Sinners and wicked Men; and if there can be
any found, who may be said not to be of this Number, Christ has not died for
all; he made himself a Redeemer for the whole World.

Chrysostom on John 1. If he Inlightens every Man coming into the world; How
comes it, that so many Men remain without Light? For all do not so much as
acknowledge Christ; How then does he enlighten every Man? He illuminates indeed
so far as in him is; but if any, of their own accord, closing the Eyes of their
Mind, will not direct their Eyes unto the Beams of this Light; The cause of
remaining in Darkness.
the cause that they remain in Darkness, is not from the Nature of the Light,
but through their own Malignity; who willingly have rendered themselves
unworthy of so great a Gift: But why believed they not? Because they would not:
Christ did his part.

The Arclatensian Synod, held about the Year 490. Pronounced him accursed, who
should say, that Christ has not died for all, or that he would not have all
Men to be saved.

Ambr. on Psalm. 118. Ser^. 8. The mystical Son of Righteousness is arisen to
all; he came to all; he suffered for all; and rose again for all: And therefore
he suffered, that he might take away the Sin of the World: But if any one
believe not in Christ, he Robs himself of this general Benefit even as if one
by closing the Windows, The Sunbeams shut out, heat not.
should hold out the Sunbeams; the Sun is not therefore not arisen to all,
because such a one has so robbed himself of its heat: But the Sun keeps its
Prerogative; it is such a ones Imprudence, that he shuts himself out from the
common Benefit of the Sun.

The same Man, in his 11th Book of Cain and Abel, cap. 13. says; Therefore he
brought unto All the means of Health; that whosoever should Perish, may ascribe
to himself the causes of his Death, who would not be cured, when he had the
Remedy, by which he might have escaped.

. IX. Seeing then, that this Doctrine of the Universality of Christ's Death is
so certain and agreeable to the Scripture-Testimony, and to the sense of the
purest Antiquity; it may be wondered, how so many, some whereof have been
esteemed not only Learned, but also Pious, have been capable to fall into so
gross and strange an Error. But the cause of this does evidently appear, in
that the way and Method, by which the Virtue and Efficacy of his Death is
communicated to all Men, has not been rightly understood, or indeed has been
erroneously Affirmed. The Pelagians, Pelazian Errors.
ascribing all to Man's Will and Nature, denied Man to have any Seed of Sin
conveyed to him from Adam. And the Semi-Pelagians making Grace as a Gift
following upon Man's Merit, or right improving of his Nature; according to
their known Principle, Facienti quod in se est, Deus non deneg^ gratiam.

This gave Augustine, Prosper, and some others, occasion, laboring in
opposition to these Opinions, to magnify the Grace of God, and paint out the
Corruptions of Man's Nature (as the Proverb is, of those that seek to make
straight a crooked Stick) to incline to the other extreme. Extremes fallen into
by some, making God the Author of Sin.
So also the Reformers, Luther and others, finding among other Errors, the
strange Expressions used by some of the Popish Scholasticks, concerning
Free Will, and how much the Tendency of their Principles is to exalt Man's
Nature, and lessen God's Grace; having all those Sayings of Augustine, and
others, for a Pattern, through the like Mistake run upon the same extreme: Though
afterward the Lutherans, seeing how far Calvin and his Followers drove this
matter, (who, as a Man of subtle and profound Judgment, foreseeing where it
would Land, resolved above-board to assert, That God had decreed the Means, as
well as the End, and therefore had ordained Men to Sin, and excites them
thereto; which he labors earnestly to defend) and that there was no avoiding
the making of God the Author of Sin; thereby received occasion to discern the
falfity of this Doctrine, and disclamed it; as appears by the latter Writings
of Melancthon, Epist. Hist. Eccl. Lucas O^an C^t. 16.14 cap. 32.
and the Mompelgartensian Conference, where Lucas Osiander, one of the
Collocutors, terms it Impious; calls it a making God the Author of Sin; and a
horrid and horrible Blasphemy. Yet, because none of those who have asserted
this Universal Redemption, since the Reformation, have given a clear, distinct,
and satisfactory Testimony, how it is communicated to all, and so have fallen
short of fully declaring the Perfection of the Gospel Dispensation: Others have
been thereby the more strengthened in their Errors. Which I shall illustrate by
one singular Example.

The Arminians and other Assertors of Universal Grace, use this, as a chief
Argument.

That which every Man is bound to believe, is true;

But every Man is bound to believe that Christ died for him;

Therefore, etc.

Of this Argument the other Party deny the Assumption, saying; That they, who
never heard of Christ, are not obliged to believe in him; and seeing the
Remonstrants (as they are commonly called) do generally themselves acknowledge,
that without the outward Knowledge of Christ, there is no Salvation; that gives
the other Party yet a stronger Argument for their precise Decree of
Reprobation. Remonstrants Opinion strengthens the precise Decree of Reprobation.
For, say they, seeing we all see really, and in effect, that God has with
held from many Generations, and yet from many Nations, that Knowledge which is
absolutely needful to Salvation, and so has rendered it simply impossible unto
them; Why may he not as well with hold the Grace necessary to make a saving
Application of that Knowledge, where it is preached? For there is no ground to
say, That this was Injustice in God, or Partiality, more than his leaving those
others in utter Ignorance; the one being but a withholding Grace to apprehend
the Object of Faith; the other, a withdrawing the Object it self. For answer
to this, they are forced to draw a Conclusion from their former Hypothesis, of
Christ's dying for all, and God's Mercy and Justice, saying. That if these
Heathens, who live in these remote places, where the outward Knowledge of
Christ is not, did improve that common Knowledge they have, to whom the outward
Creation is for an Object of Faith; by which they may gather, that there is a
God; then the Lord would, by some Providence, either send an Angel to tell them
of Christ, or convey the Scriptures to them, or bring them some way to an
opportunity to meet with such as might inform them. Which, as it gives always
too much to the Power and Strength of Man's Will and Nature, and favors a
little of Socinianism and Pelagianism, or at least of Semi-Pelagianism; so,
since it is only built upon probable Conjectures, neither has it evidence
enough to convince any, strongly tainted with the other Doctrine; nor yet does
it make the Equity and wonderful Harmony of God's Mercy and Justice toward
all, so manifest to the Understanding. So that I have often observed, that
these Assertors of Universal Grace, did far more pithly and strongly overturn
the false Doctrine of their Adversaries, than they did establish and confirm
the Truth and Certainty of their own. And though they have Proof, sufficient from
the holy Scriptures to confirm the Universality of Christ's Death, None by an
irrevocable Decree, excluded from Salvation.
and that none are precisely, by any irrevocable Decree, excluded from
Salvation; yet I find, when they are pressed, in the respects above mentioned,
to show how God has so far equally extended the Capacity to partake of the
Benefit of Christ's Death unto all, as to communicate unto them a sufficient
way of so doing, they are somewhat in a strait, and are put more to give us
their Conjectures, from the certainty of the former presupposed Truth, to wit,
(that because Christ has certainly died for all, and God has not rendered
Salvation impossible to any, therefore there must be some way or other, by
which they may be saved, which must be by improving some common Grace, or by
gathering from the Works of Creation and Providence) than by really
demonstrating, by convincing and spiritual Arguments, what that way is.

. X. It falls out then, that as Darkness, and the great Apostasy, came not upon
the Christian World all at once, but by several Degrees, one thing making way
for another; until that thick and gross Vail came to be overspread, wherewith
the Nations were so blindly covered, from the seventh and eigth, until the
sixteenth Century; even as the Darkness of the Night comes not upon the outward
Creation at once, but by degrees, according as the Sun declines in each
Horizon; so neither did that full and clear Light and Knowledge of the glorious
Dispensation of the Gospel of Christ, appear all at once; the work of the first
Witnesses being more to testify against, and discover the Abuses of the
Apostasy, than to establish the Truth in Purity. He that comes to build a new
City, must first remove the old Rubbish, before he can see to lay a new
foundation; and he that comes to a House greatly Polluted, and full of Dirt,
will first sweep away and remove the Filth, before he put up his own good and
new Furniture. The dawning of the Day dispels the Darkness, and makes us see
the things that are most Conspicuous; but the distinct discovering and
discerning of things, so as to make a certain and perfect Observation, is
reserved for the arising of the Sun, and its shining in full Brightness. And we
can, from a certain Experience, boldly affirm, that the not waiting for this,
but building among, yea, and with the Old Popish Rubbish; and setting up before
a full Purgation, has been to most Protestants, the foundation of many a
Mistake, and an occasion of unspeakable Hurt. The more full Discovery of the
Gospel reserved to this our Age.
Therefore the Lord God, who, as he sees meet, does communicate and make known
to Man, the more full, evident, and perfect Knowledge of his Everlasting Truth,
has been pleased to reserve the more full Discovery of this Glorious and
Evangelical Dispensation, to this our Age, albeit diverse Testimonies have
thereunto been born by some noted Men in several Ages, as shall hereafter
appear. And for the greater Augmentation of the Glory of his Grace, that no Man
might have whereof to boast, he has raised up a few despicable and illiterate
Men; and for the most part Mechanics, to be the Dispensers of it; by which
Gospel, all the Scruples, Doubts, Hesitations and Objections, abovementioned,
are easily and evidently answered: and the Justice, as well as Mercy of God,
according to their divine and heavenly Harmony, are exhibited, established and
confirmed. According to which certain Light and Gospel, as the knowledge
thereof has been manifested to us, by the Revelation of Jesus Christ in us,
fortified by our own sensible Experience, and sealed by the Testimony of the
Spirit in our Hearts; we can confidently affirm, and clearly evince, according
to the Testimony of the Holy Scriptures, the following Points:

Proposition I.
. XI. First; That God, who out of his infinite Love, sent his Son, the Lord
Jesus Christ, into the World, who tasted Death for every Man, has given to
every Men, whether Jew or Gentile, Turk or Scythian, Indian or Barbarian, of
whatsoever Nation, A Day of Visitation to all.
Country or Place, a certain Day or Time of Visitation, during which Day or
Time, it is possible for them to be saved, and to partake of the Fruit of
Christ's Death.

That for this end God has communicated and given unto every Man a Measure of
the Light of his own Son, a Measure of Grace or a Measure of the Spirit; A
Measure of Light in all.
which the Scripture expresses by several Names; as sometimes of the Seed of
the Kingdom, Mat. 13.18, 19. The Light that makes all things manifest, Ephesians.
5.13. The Word of God, Romans 10.18. or Manifesitations of the Spirit, given to
profit withal 1 Cor. 12.7. A Talent, Mat. 25.15. A little Leaven, Mat. 13.33.
The Gospel preached in every Creature, Col. 1.23.

That God, in and by this Light and Seed, invites, God's Salvation wrought by
the Light in all.
calls, exhorts, and strives with every Man, in order to save him; which, as it
is received, and not resisted, works the Salvation of All, even of those who
are ignorant of the Death and Sufferings of Christ, and of Adam's Fall, both by
bringing them to a sense of their own Misery, and to be sharers in the
Sufferings of Christ inwardly, and by making them partakers of his
Resurrection, in becoming Holy, Pure and Righteous, and recovered out of their
Sins. By which also are saved they that have the knowledge of Christ outwardly,
in that it opens their Understanding, rightly to use and apply the things
delivered in the Scripture, and to receive the saying use of them: But that
this may be resisted and rejected in both, in which then God is said to be
resisted and pressed down, and Christ to be again Crucified, and put to open
Shame, in and among Men. And to those, as thus resist and refuse him, he
becomes their Condemnation.

First then; According to this Doctrine, Consequences, 1.
the Mercy of God is excellently well exhibited, in that none are necessarily
shut out from Salvation; and his Justice is demonstrated, in that he condemns
none, but such, to whom he really made offer of Salvation; affording them the
means sufficient thereunto.

Secondly; This Doctrine, if well weighed, Cons. 2.
will be found to be the Foundation of Christianity, Salvation and Assurance.

Thirdly; Cons. 3.
It agrees and answers with the whole Tenor of the Gospel Promises and Threats,
and with the Nature of the Ministry of Christ, according to which, the Gospel,
Salvation, Repentance, is commanded to be preached to every Creature, without
respect of Nations, Kindreds, Families or Tongues.

Fourthly; Cons. 4.
It magnifies and commends the Merits and Death of Christ, in that it not only
accounts them sufficient to save all; but declares them to be brought so nigh
unto all, as thereby to be put into the nearest capacity of Salvation.

Fifthly; It exalts above all, the Grace of God, Cons. 5.
to which it attributes all good, even the least and smallest Actions that are
so; ascribing thereunto, not only the first Beginnings and Motions of Good, but
also the whole Conversion and Salvation of the Soul.

Cons. 6.
Sixthly; It contradicts, overturns, and enervates the false Doctrine of the
Pelagians, Semi-Pelagians, Socinians, and others, who exalt the Light of
Nature, the Liberty of Man's Will; in that it wholly excludes the Natural Man
from having any place or portion in his own Salvation, by any acting, moving or
working of his own, until he be first quickened, raised up, and acted by God's
Spirit.

Cons. 7.
Seventhly; As it makes the whole Salvation of Man solely, and alone, to depend
upon God; so it makes his Condemnation wholly, and in every respect, to be of
himself; in that he refused, and resisted somewhat, that from God wrestled and
strove in his Heart; and forces him to acknowledge God's just Judgment, in
rejecting and forsaking of him.

Cons. 8.
Eighthly; It takes away all ground of Despair; in that it gives every one cause
of Hope, and certain Assurance, that they may be saved: Neither does feed any
in Security, in that none are certain, how soon their Day may expire: And
therefore it is a constant Incitement and Provocation, and lively Encouragement
to every Man, to forsake Evil, and close with that which is Good.

Cons. 9.
Ninthly; It wonderfully commends as well the Certainty of the Christian
Religion among Infidels, as it manifests its own Verity to all; in that it is
confirmed and established by the Experience of all Men: Seeing there was never
yet a Man found, in any place of the Earth, however Barbarous and Wild, but
has acknowledged, that at some time or other, less or more, he has found
somewhat in his Heart, reproving him for some things Evil, which he has done;
threatening a certain H^er, if he continued in them; as also promising and
communicating a certain Peace and Sweetness, as he has given way to it, and
not resisted it.

Tenthly; Cons. 10.
It wonderfully shows the excellent Wisdom of God, by which he has made the
Means of Salvation so Universal and Comprehensive, that it is not needful to
recur to those miraculous and strange Ways; seeing, according to this most true
Doctrine, the Gospel reaches All, of whatsoever Condition, Age, or Nation.

Eleventhly; It is really and effectually, Cons. 11.
though not in so many Words, yet by Deeds, established and confirmed by all the
Preachers, Promulgators, and Doctors of the Christian Religion, that ever were,
or now are, even by those that otherways in their Judgment oppose this
Doctrine; in that they all, whatever they have been, or are, or whatsoever
People, Place or Country they come to, do preach to the People, and to every
Individual among them, that they may be saved; entreating and desiring them to
believe in Christ, who has died for them. So that, what they deny in the
general, they acknowledge of every particular; there being no Man to whom they
do not preach, in order to Salvation; telling him, Jesus Christ calls, and
wills him to believe and be saved; and that if he refuse, he shall therefore be
condemned, and that his Condemnation is of himself. Such is the Evidence and
Virtue of Truth, that it constrains its Adversaries, even against their wills,
to plead for it.

Lastly; According to this Doctrine, Cons. 12.
the former Argument used by the Arminians, and evited by the Calvinists,
concerning every Man's being bound to believe, that Christ died for him, is, by
altering the Assumption, rendered Invincible, thus;

That which every Man is bound to believe, is true:

But every Man is bound to believe, that God is merciful unto him:

Therefore, etc.

This Assumption no Man can deny, seeing His Mercies are said to be over all his
Works. And herein the Scripture every way declares the Mercy of God to be, in
that he invites and calls Sinners to Repentance, and has opened a Way of
Salvation for them: So that, though those Men be not bound to believe the
History of Christ's Death and Passion, who never came to know of it; yet they
are bound to believe, that God will be merciful to them, if they follow his
ways; and that he is merciful unto them, in that he reproves them for Evil, Our
Adversaries unmerciful Assertion of God.
and incourages them to Good. Neither ought any Man to believe, that God is
unmerciful to him, or that he has from the beginning ordained him to come into
the World, that he might be left to his own Evil Inclinations, and so do
wickedly, as a Means appointed by God, to bring him to Eternal Damnation;
which, were it true, as our Adversaries affirm it to be of many Thousands, I
see no reason why a Man might not believe it; for certainly a Man may believe
the Truth.

As it manifestly appears, from the thing it self, that these good and
excellent Consequences follow, from the Belief of this Doctrine; so from the
Probation of them, it will yet more evidently appear. To which, before I come,
it is requisite to speak somewhat concerning the State of the Controversy,
which will bring great Light to the matter. For, from the not right
understanding of a matter under debate, sometimes both Arguments on the one
hand, and Objections on the other, are brought, which do no way hit the Case;
and hereby also our Sense and Judgment therein will be more fully understood
and opened.

Qu. 1.
. XII. First then; By this Day and Time of Visitation, which we say God gives
unto all, during which they may be saved, The Stating of the Question.
we do not understand the whole time of every Man's Life; though to some it may
be extended even to the very Hour of Death, as we see in the example of the
Thief converted upon the Cross: But, such a Season, at least, as sufficiently
exonerateth God of every Man's Condemnation, which to some may be sooner, and
to others later, according as the Lord in his Wisdom sees meet. So that many
Men may outlive this Day, That many may outlive the Day of God's Visitation.
after which there may be no possibility of Salvation to them, and God justly
suffers them to be hardened, as a just Punishment of their Unbelief, and even
raises them up, as Instruments of Wrath, and makes them a Scourge one against
another. Whence, to Men in this Condition, may be fitly applied those
Scriptures, which are abused to prove, That God incites Men necessarily to sin:
This is notably expressed by the Apostle, Romans 1. from verse 17, to the end;
but especially verse 28. And even as they did not like to retain God in their
knowledge, God gave them up to a Reprobate Mind, to do those things which are
not convenient. That many may outlive this Day of God's Gracious Visitation
unto them, is shown by the Example of Esau, Heb. 12.16.17. who sold his
Birthright; so he had it once, and was capable to have kept it; but
afterward, when he would have inherited the Blessing, he was rejected. This
appears also by Christ's weeping over Jerusalem, Luke 19.42. saying, If thou
had known in this thy day, the things that belong unto thy Peace; but now
they are hid from thine Eyes: Which plainly imports, a time when they might
have known them, which now was removed from them, though they were yet alive; but
of this more shall be said hereafter.

. XIII. Secondly; By this Seed, Grace, Qu. 2.
and Word of God, and Light, wherewith we say, every one is enlightened, and
has a measure of it, which strives with him, in order to save him; and which
may, by the stubbornness and wickedness of Man's will, be quenched, bruised,
wounded, pressed down, slain and crucified, we understand not the proper
Essence and Nature of God, precisely taken; which is not di^isible into Parts
and Measures as being a most pure, simple Being, void of all Composition or
Division, and therefore can neither be resisted, hurt, wounded, crucified, or
slain, The Light, what it is, and its Properties described.
by all the Efforts and Strength of Men: But we understand a Spiritual,
Heavenly, and Invisible Principle, in which God, as Father, Son and Spirit,
dwells; a measure of which Divine and Glorious Life is in all Men, as a Seed,
which of its own Nature draws, invites, and inclines to God; and this some call
Vehiculum Dei, or the Spiritual Body of Christ, the Flesh and Blood of Christ,
which came down from Heaven; of which all the Saints do feed, and are thereby
nourished unto Eternal Life. And as every unrighteous Action is witnessed
against, and reproved by this Light and Seed; so by such Actions it is hurt,
wounded and slain, and flees from them, even as the Flesh of Men flees from
that which is of a contrary Nature to it. Now, because it is never separated
from God nor Christ, but wherever it is, God and Christ are as wrapped up
therein: Therefore, and in that respect, as it is resisted, God is said to be
resisted; and where it is born down, God is said to be pressed, as a Cart under
Sheaves; and Christ is said to be slain and crucified. And on the contrary, as
this Seed is received in the Heart, and suffered to bring forth its natural and
proper Effect, Christ comes to be formed and raised, of which the Scripture
makes so much mention, calling it, The New Man, Christ within, the Hope of
Glory. This is that Christ within, which we are heard so much to speak and
declare of, every where Preaching Him up, and Exhorting People to believe in
the Light, and obey it, that they may come to know Christ in them, to deliver
them from all Sin.

But by this, as we do not at all intend to equal our selves to that Holy Man,
the Lord Jesus Christ, who was born of the Virgin Mary, in whom all the Fullness
of the Godhead dwells Bodily; That the Fullness of the Godhead dwells in
Christ bodily, etc.
so neither do we destroy the Reality of his present Existence, as some have
falsely Calumniated us. For, though we affirm, that Christ dwells in us, yet not
immediately, but mediately, as he is in that Seed, which is in us; whereas he,
to wit, the Eternal Word, which was with God, and was God, dwelt immediately in
that Holy Man. He then is as the Head, and we as the Members; he the Vine, and
we the Branches. Now, as the Soul of Man dwells otherwise, and in a far more
immediate manner, in the Head and in the Heart, than in the Hands or Legs; and
as the Sap, Virtue, and Life of the Vine lodges far otherwise in the Stock and
Root, than in the Branches; so God dwells otherwise in the Man Jesus, than in
us. We also freely reject the Heresy of Apollinarius, who denied him to have
any Soul, but said, The Body was only acted by the Godhead: As also the Error
of Eutyches, who made the Manhood to be wholly swallowed up of the Godhead.
Wherefore, as we believe he was a true and real Man; so we also believe, that
he continues so to be Glorified in the Heavens, in Soul and Body, by whom God
shall Judge the World, in the great and general Day of Judgment.

. XIV. Thirdly, We understand not this Seed, Qu. 3.
Light or Grace, to be an Accident, as most Men ignorantly do, but a real
Spiritual Substance, That the Light is a Spiritual Substance, which may be felt
in the Soul, and apprehended.
which the Soul of Man is capable to feel and apprehend; from which that real,
spiritual, inward Birth in Believers raises, called the New Creature, the New
Man in the Heart. This seems strange to Carnal-minded Men, because they are not
acquainted with it; but we know it, and are sensible of it, by a true and
certain Experience; though it be hard for Man in his natural Wisdom to comprehend
it, until he come to feel it in himself; and if he should, holding it in the
mere Notion, it would avail him little. Yet we are able to make it appear to be
true, and that our Faith concerning it, is not without a solid Ground: For it
is in and by this Inward and Substantial Seed in our Hearts, as it comes to
receive Nourishment, and to have a Birth or Geniture in us, that we come to
have those Spiritual Senses raised, by which we are made capable of tasting,
smelling, seeing and handling the things of God: For a Man cannot reach unto
those things by his natural spirit and senses, as is above declared.

Next; We know it to be a Substance, because it subsists in the Hearts of
wicked Men, even while they are in their Wickedness, as shall be hereafter
proved more at large. Now no Accident can be in a Subject, without it give the
Subject its own Denomination; as where Whiteness is in a Subject, there the
Subject is called White. So we distinguish betwixt Holiness, as it is an
Accident, which denominates Man so, The Degrees of its Operation in the Soul of
(...).
as the Seed receives a place in him; and betwixt this Holy, Substantial Seed,
which many times lies in Man's Heart, as a naked Grain in the Stony Ground. So
also, as we may distinguish betwixt Health and Medicine; Health cannot be in a
Body, without the Body be called Healthful, because Health is an Accident; but
Medicine may be in a Body that is most Unhealthful, for that it is a Substance.
And, as when a Medicine begins to work, the Body may in some respect be called
healthful, and in some respect unhealthful; so we acknowledge, as this Divine
Medicine receives place in Man's Heart, it may denominate him in some part Holy
and Good; though there remain yet a corrupted, unmortified part, or some part of
the Evil Humors unpurged out; for where two contrary Accidents are in one
Subject, as Health and Sickness in a Body, the Subject receives its
Denomination from the Accident which prevails most. So many Men are called
Saints, good and holy Men, and that truly, when this Holy Seed has wrought in
them, in a good measure, and has somewhat leavened them into its Nature, though
they may be yet liable to many Infirmities and Weaknesses, yea, and to some
Iniquities. For, as the Seed of Sin, and Ground of Corruption, yea, and the
Capacity of yielding thereunto, and sometimes actually falling, does not
denominate a good and holy Man impious; so neither does the Seed of
Righteousness in Evil Men, and the possibility of their becoming one with it,
denominate them good or holy.

. XV. Fourthly; Qu. 4.
We do not hereby intend any ways to lessen or derogate from the Atonement and
Sacrifice of Jesus Christ; but on the contrary, do magnify and exalt it. For,
as we believe all those things to have been certainly transacted, which are
recorded in the Holy Scriptures, concerning the Birth, Life, Miracles,
Sufferings, Resurrection and Ascension of Christ; so we do also believe, that
it is the Duty of every one to believe it, to whom it pleases God to reveal the
fame, and to bring to them the Knowledge of it; yea, we believe it were
Damnable Unbelief not to believe it, when so declared, but to resist that Holy
Seed, which, if minded, would lead and incline every one to believe it, as it
is offered unto them; though it reveals not in every one the outward and
explicit Knowledge of it, nevertheless it always assenteth to it, ubi
declaratur, where it is declared. Nevertheless, as we firmly believe it was
necessary, that Christ should come, that by his Death and Sufferings he might
offer up himself a Sacrifice to God for our Sins, who his own self bare our
Sins in his own Body on the Tree; so we believe, That Remission of Sins is only
and alone by Christ.
that the Remission of Sins, which any partake of, is only in and by Virtue of
that most Satisfactory Sacrifice, and no otherwise. For it is by the Obedience
of that One, that the Free gift is come upon All to Justification. For we
affirm, That as all Men partake of the Fruit of Adam's Fall; in that, by reason
of that Evil Seed, which through him is communicated unto them, they are prone
and inclined unto Evil, though Thousands of Thousands be ignorant of Adam's Fall,
neither ever knew of the Eating of the Forbidden Fruit; so also many may come
to feel the Influence of this Holy and Divine Seed and Light, and be turned
from Evil to Good by it, though they knew nothing of Chist's coming in the Flesh,
through whose Obedience and Sufferings it is purchased unto them. And as we
affirm, The History is profitable with the Mystery.
it is absolutely needful, that those do believe the History of Christ's
outward Appearance, whom it pleased God to bring to the Knowledge of it; so we
do freely confess, that even that outward Knowledge is very comfortable to such
as are subject to it, and led by the inward Seed and Light. For, not only does
the sense of Christ's Love and Sufferings tend to humble them, but they are
thereby also strengthened in their Faith, and encouraged to follow that
Excellent Pattern, which he has left us, who suffered for us, as says the
Apostle Peter, 1 Pet. 2.21. Leaving us an Example, that we should follow his
steps: And many times, we are greatly edified and refreshed with the Gracious
Sayings which proceed out of his Mouth. The History then is profitable and
comfortable with the Mystery, and never without it; but the Mystery is and may
be profitable, without the explicit and outward knowledge of the History.

Qu. 5.
But Fifthly; This brings us to another Question, to wit, How Christ is in all
Men.
Whether Christ be in all Men, or no? Which sometimes has been asked us, and
Arguments brought against it; because indeed it is to be found in some of our
Writings that Christ is in all Men; and we often are heard, in our public
Meetings and Declarations, to desire every Man to know and be acquainted with
Christ in them; telling them, that Christ is in them. It is fit therefore, for
it moving of all Mistakes, to say something in this place concerning this
matter. We have said before, how that a Divine, Spiritual and Supernatural
Light is in all Men; how that that Divine Supernatural Light or Seed is
Vehiculum Dei; how that God and Christ dwells in it, and is never separated
from it; also how that (as it is received and closed with in the Heart) Christ
comes to be formed and brought forth: But we are far from ever having said,
That Christ is thus formed in all Men, or in the Wicked: For that is a great
Attainment; which the Apostle traveled, that it might be brought forth in the
Galatians. Neither is Christ in all Men by way of Union, or indeed, to speak
strictly, by way of Inhabitation; because this Inhabitation, as it is generally
taken, imports Union, or the manner of Christ's being in the Saints: As it is
written, I will dwell in them, and walk in them, 2 Cor. 6.16. But in regard
Christ is in all Men, as in a Seed, yea, and that he never is, nor can be,
separate from that holy, pure Seed and Light, which is in All Men; therefore
may it be said in a larger Sense, that he is in All, even as we observed
before. The Scripture says, Amos 2.13. God is pressed down as a Cart under
Sheaves; and Christ crucified in the Ungodly: Though to speak properly and
strictly, neither can God be pressed down, nor Christ, as God, be crucified. In
this respect then, as he is in the Seed, which is in All Men, we have said,
Christ is in All Men, and have preached and directed All Men to Christ in them;
Christ crucified in Man by Iniquities.
who lies crucified in them, by their Sins and Iniquities; that they may look
upon him, whom they have pierced, and repent: Whereby He, that now lies as it
were slain and buried in them, may come to be raised, and have dominion in
their Hearts over all. And thus also the Apostle Paul preached to the
Corinthians and Galatians, 1 Cor. 2.2. Christ crucified in them, (...), as the
Greek has it: This Jesus Christ was that which the Apostle desired to know in
them, and make known unto them, that they might come to be sensible, how they
had thus been Crucifying Christ; that so they might Repent and be Saved. And
forasmuch as Christ is called that Light, that enlightens every Man, The Light
of the World; therefore the Light is taken for Christ, who truly is the
Fountain of Light, and has his Habitation in it for ever. Thus the Light of
Christ is sometimes called Christ, i. e. that in which Christ is, and from
which he is never separated.

. XVI. Sixthly; It will manifestly appear, by what is abovesaid, that we
understand not this Divine Principle to be any part of Man's Nature, nor yet to
be any Relics of any good, which Adam lost by his Fall; in that we make it a
distinct separate thing from Man's Soul, and all the Faculties of it: Yet such
is the Malice of our Adversaries, that they cease not sometimes to Calumniate
us, as if we preached up a Natural Light, or the Light of Man's Natural
Conscience. Next, There are that lean to the Doctrine of Socinus and Pelagius,
who persuade themselves, through mistake, and out of no ill design to Injure
us, as if this which we Preach up, were some Natural Power and Faculty of the
Soul, and that we only differ in the wording of it, and not in the thing it
self: Whereas there can be no greater difference, than is betwixt us in that
matter: For we certainly know, that this Light, of which we speak, is not only
distinct, but of a different Nature from the Soul of Man, The Faculties of Man's
Reason.
and its Faculties. Indeed that Man, as he is a Rational Creature, has Reason
as a natural Faculty of his Soul, by which he can discern things that are
Rational, we deny not; for this is a property natural and essential to him, by
which he can know and learn many Arts and Sciences, beyond what any other
Animal can do, by the mere Animal Principle. Neither do we deny, but by this
Rational Principle, Man may apprehend in his Brain, and in the Notion, a
Knowledge of God, and Spiritual Things: Yet, that not being the right Organ, as
in the Second Proposition has more at length been signified, it cannot profit
him toward Salvation; but rather hinders; and indeed the great cause of the
Apostasy has been, that Man has sought to fathom the things of God, in and by
this Natural and Rational Principle, and to build up a Religion in it,
neglecting and over-looking this Principle and Seed of God in the Heart; so
that herein, in the most Universal and Catholic Sense, has Antichrist in
every man set up himself, and sits in the Temple of God, Antichrist in the
Temple of God.
as God, and above every thing that is called God. For, men being the Temple of
the Holy Ghost, as says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 3.16. when the Rational Principle
sets it self up there above the Seed of God, to reign and rule as a Prince in
Spiritual Things, while the Holy Seed is wounded and bruised; there is
Antichrist in every man, or somewhat exalted above and against Christ.
Nevertheless, we do not hereby affirm, as if Man had received his Reason to no
purpose, or to be of no service unto him, in no wise: We look upon Reason as
fit to order and rule Man in things Natural. The Divine Light, and Natural
Reason distinguished.
For as God gave two great Lights to rule the outward World, the Sun and Moon;
the greater Light to rule the Day, and the lesser Light to rule the Night: So
has he given Man the Light of his Son, a Spiritual Divine Light, to rule him
in things Spiritual; and the Light of Reason to rule him in things Natural. And
even as the Moon borrows her Light from the Sun, so ought Men (if they would be
rightly and comfortably ordered in Natural Things) to have their Reason
enlightened by this Divine and Pure Light. Which enlightened Reason in those that
obey and follow this true Light, we confess may be useful to Man, even in
Spiritual Things, as it is still subservient, and subject to the other; even as
the Animal Life in Man, regulated and ordered by his Reason, helps him in going
about things that are Rational. We do further rightly distinguish this from
Man's Natural Conscience; The Light distinguished from Man's natural Conscience.
for Conscience being that in Man, which arises from the Natural Faculties of
Man's Soul, may be defiled and corrupted: It is said expressly of the Impute,
Titus 1.15. That even their Mind and Conscience is defiled. But this Light can
never be corrupted nor defiled; neither did it ever consent to Evil or
Wickedness in any; for it is said expressly, that it makes all things manifest
that are reprovable, Ephesians. 5.13. And so is a faithful Witness for God,
Conscience defined.
against every Unrighteousness in Man. Now Conscience, to define it truly,
comes from (Conscire) and is that Knowledge, which arises in Man's Heart, from
what agrees, contradicts, or is contrary to any thing believed by him;
whereby he becomes Conscious to himself, that he transgresses, by doing that
which he is persuaded, he ought not to do. So that the Mind being once blinded,
or defiled with a wrong Belief, there raises a Conscience from that Belief,
which troubles him, when he goes against it. As for Example: Example of a Turk.
A Turk who has possessed himself with a false Belief, that it is unlawful for
him to drink Wine; if he do it, his Conscience smites him for it: But though he
keep many Concubines, his Conscience troubles him not; because his Judgment is
already defiled with a false Opinion, that it is lawful for him to do the one,
and unlawful to do the other. Whereas if the Light of Christ in him were
minded, it would reprove him, not only for committing Fornication; but also, as
he became obedient thereunto, inform him that Mahomet was an Impostor; as well
as Socrates was informed by it, in his day, of the Falsity of the Heathen's
Gods.

Example of a Papist
So, if a Papist eat Flesh in Lent, or be not diligent enough in Adoration of
Saints and Images, or if he should Condemn Images, his Conscience would smite
him for it; because his Judgment is already blinded with a false Belief
concerning these things: Whereas the Light of Christ never consented to any of
those Abominations. Thus then Man's Natural Conscience is sufficiently
distinguished from it; for Conscience follows the Judgment, does not inform
it; but this Light, as it is received, removes the Blindness of the Judgment,
opens the Understanding, and rectifies both the Judgment and Conscience. So we
confess also, that Conscience is an excellent thing, where it is rightly
informed and enlightened: Wherefore some of us have fitly compared it to the
Lanthorn, The Natural Conscience Compared to a Lanthorn, and the Light of
Christ the Candle.
and the Light of Christ to a Candle: A Lanthorn is useful, when a clear Candle
burns and shines in it; but otherwise of no use. To the Light of Christ then,
in the Conscience, and not to Man's Natural Conscience, it is, that we
continually commend Men; this, not that, is it which we preach up, and direct
People to, as to a most certain Guide unto Life Eternal.

Lastly, This Light, Seed, etc. appears to be no Power or Natural Faculty of
Man's Mind; because a Man that is in his Health, can, when he pleases, stir up,
move and exercise the Faculties of his Soul; he is absolute Master of them; and
except there be some natural Cause or Impediment in the way, he can use them at
his pleasure: But this Light and Seed of God in Man, he cannot move and stir up
when he pleases; but it moves, blows, and strives with Man, as the Lord sees
meet. For, though there be a Possibility of Salvation to every Man, during the
Day of his Visitation; yet cannot a Man, at any time, when he pleases, or has
some sense of his Misery, The Waiting upon the Movings of the Light and Grace.
stir up that Light and Grace, so as to procure to himself tenderness of Heart;
but he must wait for it: Which comes upon all, at certain times and seasons,
wherein it works powerfully upon the Soul, mightily tenders it, and breaks it;
at which time, if Man resist it not, but closes with it, he comes to know
Salvation by it. Even as the Lake of Bethesda did not Cure all those, that
washed in it; but such only, as washed first, after the Angel had moved upon
the Waters; so God moves in Love to Mankind, in this Seed in his Heart, at some
singular times, setting his Sins in order before him, and seriously inviting
him to Repentance, offering to him Remission of Sins and Salvation; which, if
Man accept of, he may be saved. Now there is no Man alive, and I am confident
there shall be none to whom this Paper shall come, who, if they will deal
faithfully and honestly with their own Hearts but must be forced to
acknowledge, they have been sensible of this in some measure less or more;
which is a thing, that Man cannot bring upon himself, with all his Pains and
Industry. This then, O Man and Woman! is the Day of God's gracious Visitation
to thy Soul, which thou shall be happy for ever, if thou resist not. This is
the Day of the Lord, which as Christ says, is like the Lightning which shines
from the East unto the West; Mat. 24.27.
and the Wind, or Spirit, which blows upon the Heart, John. 3.8.
and no Man knows whether it goes, nor whence it comes.

Qu. 7.
. XVII. And lastly; This leads me to speak concerning the manner of this Seed
or Light's Operation in the Hearts of all Men, which will show yet more
manifestly, how we differ vastly from all those, that exalt a Natural Power or
Light in Man; and how our Principle leads above all others, to attribute our
whole Salvation to the mere Power, Spirit, and Grace of God.

To them then, that ask us after this manner, How do ye differ from the
Pelagians and Arminians? For if two Men have equal sufficient Light and Grace,
and the one be saved by it, and the other not; is it not because the one
improves it, the other not? Is not then the Will of Man the Cause of the one's
Salvation beyond the other? I say, to such we thus Answer: That as the Grace
and Light in all, is sufficient to save all, and of its own. nature would save
all; so it strives and wrestles with all, The Light's Operation in order to
Salvation.
for to save them; he that resists its striving, is the cause of his own
Condemnation; he that resists it not, it becomes his Salvation: So that in him
that is saved, the working is of the Grace, and not of the Man; and it is a
Passiveness, rather than an act; though afterward, as Man is wrought upon, there
is a Will raised in him, by which he comes to be a co-worker with the Grace:
For according to that of Augustine, He that made us without us, will not save us
without us. So that the first step is not by Man's working, but by his not
contrary-working. And we believe that at these singular Seasons of every Man's
Visitation, abovementioned; as Man is wholly unable of himself to work with
the Grace, neither can he move one step out of the Natural Condition, until the
Grace lay hold upon him; so it is possible to him to be passive, and not to
resist it, as it is possible for him to resist it. So we say, the Grace of God
works in and upon Man's Nature; which, though of it self wholly corrupted and
defiled, and prone to Evil; yet is capable to be wrought upon by the Grace of
God; even as Iron, though a hard and cold Metal of it self, may be warmed and
softened by the heat of the Fire, and Wax melted by the Sun. And as Iron or Wax,
when removed from the Fire or Sun, returns to its former condition of
coldness and hardness: So Man's Heart, as it resists, or retires from the Grace
of God, returns to its former condition again. I have often had the manner of
God's Working, in order to Salvation toward all Men, illustrated to my Mind,
by one or two clear Examples, which I shall here add, for the Information of
others.

The first is, Of a Man heavily diseased; to whom I compare Man in his fallen
and natural Condition. The Example of a Diseased Man and the Physician.
I suppose God, who is the great Physician, not only to give this Man Physic,
after he has used all the Industry he can for his own Health, by any skill or
knowledge of his own: (As those that say, If a Man improve his Reason, or
Natural Faculties, God will super-add Grace: Or, as others say, That he comes
and makes offer of a Remedy to this Man outwardly, leaving it to the liberty
of Man's Will, either to receive it, or reject it.) But He, even the Lord, this
great Physician, comes, and pours the Remedy into his Mouth, and as it were
lays him in his Bed; so that if the Sick Man be but passive, it will
necessarily work the Effect: But if he be stubborn and untoward, and will needs
arise up and go forth into the cold, or eat such Fruits as are hurtful to him,
while the Medicine should operate; then, though of its nature it tends to cure
him; yet it will prove destructive to him, because of those Obstructions, which
it meets with. Now, as the Man that should thus undo himself, would certainly
be the cause of his own Death; so who will say, that if cured, he owes not his
Health wholly to the Physician, and not to any Deed of his own; seeing his part
was not any Action, but a Passiveness?

The Example of Men lying stupefied in a dark P^t, and their Deliverer.
The Second Example is, Of diverse Men lying in a dark Pit together, where all
their Senses are so stupefied, that they are scarce sensible of their own
Misery: To this I compare Man, in his Natural, Corrupt, Fallen Condition. I
suppose not, that any of these Men, wrestling to deliver themselves, do thereby
stir up or engage one able to deliver them, to give them his help; saying with
himself, I see one of these Men willing to be delivered, and doing what in him
lies, therefore he deserves to be assisted; as say the Socinians, Pelagians,
and Semi-Pelagians. Neither do I suppose, that this Deliverer comes to the top
of the Pit, and puts down a Ladder, desiring them that will, to come up; and so
puts them upon using their own Strength and Will to come up; as do the Jesuits
and Arminians: Yet, as they say, such are not delivered without the Grace;
seeing the Grace is that Ladder, by which they were delivered. But I suppose,
that the Deliverer comes at certain times, and fully discovers and informs them
of the great Misery and Hazard they are in, if they continue in that Noysom and
Pestiferous Place; yea, forces them to a certain Sense of their Misery (for the
wickedest Men, at times, are made sensible of their Misery by God's Visitation)
and not only so, but lays hold upon them, and gives them a pull, in order to
lift them out of their misery: Which, if they resist not, will save them; only
they may resist it. This being applied as the former, does the same way
illustrate the matter. Neither is the Grace of God frustrated, though the
Effect of it be diverse, according to its Object; being the Ministration of
Mercy and Love, in those that reject it not, but receive it, John 1.12. but the
Ministration of Wrath and Condemnation, in those that do reject it, John 3.19.
Even as the Sun, by one Act or Operation, A Simile of the Sun's melting and
hardening etc. power.
melts and softneth the Wax, and hardens the Clay. The nature of the Sun is
to cherish the Creation, and therefore the Living are refreshed by it, and the
Flowers send forth a good savor, as it shines upon them, and the Fruits of the
Trees are ripened; yet cast forth a dead Carcass, a thing without Life, and the
same reflection of the Sun will cause it to stink, and putrify it; yet is not
the Sun said thereby to be frustrated of its proper effect. So every Man,
during the Day of his Visitation, is shined upon by the Sun of Righteousness,
and capable of being influenced by it, so as to send forth good Fruit, and a
good Savor, and to be melted by it; but when he has sinned out his Day, then
the same Sun hardens him, as it does the Clay, and makes his Wickedness more
to appear and putrify, and send forth an evil Savor.

. XVIII. Lastly; As we truly affirm, All have Grace sufficient for Salvation
given them of God.
That God wills no Man to perish, and therefore has given to all, Grace
sufficient for Salvation; so we do not deny, but that in a special manner, he
works in some, in whom Grace so prevails, that they necessarily obtain
Salvation; neither does God suffer them to resist. For it were absurd to say,
that God had not far otherwise extended himself toward the Virgin Mary, and
the Apostle Paul, than toward many others: Neither can we affirm, that God
equally loved the Beloved Disciple John, and Judas the Traitor; yet so far,
nevertheless, as none wanted such a measure of Grace, by which they might have
been saved; all are justly Inexcusable. And also, God working in those, to whom
this prevalency of Grace is given, does so hide himself, to shut out all
Security and Presumption, that such may be humbled, and the free Grace of God
magnified, and all reputed to be of the Free-Gift; and nothing from the
strength of Self. Those also who perish, when they remember those Times of
God's Visitation toward them, wherein he wrestled with them by his Light and
Spirit, are forced to confess; that there was a time, wherein the Door of Mercy
was open unto them, and that they are justly Condemned, because they rejected
their own Salvation.



The first is deduced from these places of Scripture, wherein God seems
precisely to have decreed and predestined some to Salvation; and for that
end, to have ordained certain means, which fall not out to others; as in the
Calling of Abraham, David, and others, and in the Conversion of Paul; for these
being numbered among such, to whom this prevalency is given, the Objection is
easily loosed.

The second is drawn from those places, wherein God seems to have ordained some
wicked Persons to Destruction; and therefore, to have obdurd their Hearts, to
force them unto great Sins, Predestination to Salvation, and Pre-ordination to
Destruction. Answered.
and to have raised them up, that he might show in them his Power; who, if they
be numbered amongst those Men, whose Day of Visitation is past over, that
Objection is also solved; as will more evidently appear to any one, that will
make a particular application of those things, which I at this time, for
Brevity's sake, thought meet to pass over.

. XIX. Having thus clearly and evidently stated the Question, and opened our
Mind and Judgment in this matter; as diverse Objections are hereby prevented, so
it will make our Probation both the easier and the shorter.

Prop. I. Proved.
The first thing to be proved, is, That God has given to every Man a Day or
Time of Visitation, wherein it is possible for him to be saved. If we can
prove, that there is a Day and Time given, in which those might have been saved
that actually perish, the matter is done: For none deny, but those that are
saved, have a Day of Visitation. This then appears, Those that perish had a Day
of Mercy offered them.
even to those that did perish; challenging them, for that they did not accept
of, nor close with God's Visitation, and Offer of Mercy to them. Thus the Lord
expresses himself then first of all to Cain, Genesis 4.6, 7. And the Lord said
unto Cain, Instances. 1. Cain.
Why art thou wroth? And why is thy countenance fallen? If thou do well,
shall thou not be accepted? If thou do not well, sin lies at the door: This
was said to Cain, before he slew his Brother Abel, when the Evil Seed began to
tempt him, and work in his Heart; we see how God gave warning to Cain in
season, and in the Day of his Visitation toward him, Acceptance and Remission,
if he did well: For this Interrogation, Shall thou not be accepted? imports an
Affirmative, Thou shall be accepted, if thou do well. So that, if we may
trust God Almighty, the Fountain of all Truth and Equity, it was possible in a
Day, even for Cain to be accepted. Neither could God have proposed the doing of
Good, as a condition, if he had not given Cain sufficient strength; whereby he
was capable to do Good. This the Lord himself also shows, even that he gave a
Day of Visitation to the Old World, Genesis 6.3. 2. The Old World.
And the Lord said, My Spirit shall not always strive in Man; for so it ought
to be translated. This manifestly implies, that his Spirit did strive with Man,
and does strive with him for a Season; which Season expiring, God cease to
strive with him, in order to save him: For the Spirit of God cannot be said to
strive with Man, after the Day of his Visitation is expired; seeing it
naturally, and without any resistance, works its effect then, to wit,
continually to Judge and Condemn him. From this Day of Visitation, that God
has given to every one, it is, that he is said to wait to be Gracious, God is
Long-suffering, and long waiting to be Gracious unto all --
Isai. 30.18. And to be Long-suffering, Exodus 34.6. Numb. 14.18. Psalm. 86.15.
Jer. 15.15. Here the Prophet Jeremy, in his Prayer, lays hold upon the
Long-suffering of God; and in his Expostulating with God, he shuts out the
Objection of our Adversaries, in the 18th verse; Why is my Pain perpetual, and
my Wound incurable, which refuses to be healed? Will thou altogether be unto
me as a Liar, and as Waters that fail? Whereas, according to our Adversaries
Opinion, the Pain of the most part of Men is perpetual, and their Wound
altogether incurable: Yea, the Offer of the Gospel, and of Salvation unto them,
is as a Lie, and as Waters that fail, being never intended to be of any effect
unto them. The Apostle Peter says expressly, that this Long-suffering of God
waited, in the days of Noah, for those of the Old World, 1 Pet. 3.20. Which,
being compared With that of Genesis 6.3. beforementioned, does sufficiently hold
forth our Proposition. And that none may object, that this Long-suffering, or
striving of the Lord, was not in order to save them; -- In order to save them.
the same Apostle says expressly, 2 Pet. 3.15. That the Long-suffering of God
is to be accounted Salvation; and with this Long suffering, a little before in
the 9th verse, he couples, That God is not willing that any should perish.
Where, taking him to be his own Interpreter, (as he is most fit) he holds
forth, That those to whom the Lord is Long-suffering, (which he declares he
was to the Wicked of the Old World, and is now to all, not willing that any
should perish) they are to account this Long-suffering of God to them,
Salvation. Now, how or in what respect can they count it Salvation, if there be
not so much as a possibility of Salvation conveyed to them therein? For it were
not Salvation to them, if they could not be saved by it. In this matter Peter
further refers to the Writings of Paul, holding forth this, to have been the
Universal Doctrine. Where it is observable, what he adds upon this occasion,
how there are some things in Paul 's Epistles, Some things in Paul's Epistles
hard to be understood.
hard to be understood, which the unstable and unlearned wrest to their own
destruction; insinuating plainly this, of those Expressions in Paul's Epistles,
as Romans 9. etc. which some unlearned in spiritual things, did make to
contradict the Truth of God's Long-suffering toward all, in which he wills
not any of them should perish, and in which they all may be saved. Would to God
many had taken more heed than they have done, to this Advertisement! That place
of the Apostle Paul, which Peter seems here most particularly to hint at, does
much contribute also to clear the matter, Romans 2.4. Despisest thou the Riches
of his Goodness, and Forbearance, and Long-suffering, not knowing that the
Goodness of God leads thee to Repentance? Paul speaks here to the
Unregenerate, and to the Wicked, who (in the following verse, he says)
Treasure up Wrath unto the Day of Wrath; and to such he commends the Riches of
the Forbearance and Long-suffering of God; showing, that the tendency of God's
Goodness leads to Repentance. How could it necessarily tend to lead them to
Repentance? How could it be called Riches or Goodness to them, if there were
not a Time, wherein they might Repent by it, and come to be sharers of the
Riches exhibited in it? From all which, I thus Argue:

Arg. If God plead with the Wicked, from the Possibility of their being
accepted; If God's Spirit strive in them for a season, God's Spirit strives in
the Wicked.
in order to save them, who afterward perish; If he wait to be Gracious unto
them; If he be Long-suffering toward them; and if this Long-suffering be
Salvation to them, while it endures; during which time God wills them not to
perish, but exhibiteth to them the Riches of his Goodness and Forbearance, to
lead them to Repentance; then there is a Day of Visitation, wherein such might
have been, or some such now may be saved, who have perished; and may, if they
Repent not, perish:

Proof II.
But the First is true; Therefore also the Last.


. XX. Secondly; This appears from the Prophet Isaiah, 5.4. What could I have
done more to my Vineyard? The Vineyard planted, brought forth wild Grapes.
For in verse. 2. he says; He has fenced it, and gathered out the stones
thereof, and planted it with the Choicest Vine: And yet (says he) when I
looked it should have brought forth Grapes, it brought forth wild Grapes.
Wherefore he calls the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, and Men of Judah, to judge
betwixt him and his Vineyard, saying; What could I have done more to my
Vineyard, then I have done in it? And yet (as is said) it brought forth Wild
Grapes: Which was applied to many in Israel, who refused God's Mercy. The same
Example is used by Christ, Mat. 21.33. Mark 12.1. Luke 20.9. where Jesus shows,
how to some a Vineyard was planted, and all things, given necessary for them,
to get them Fruit to pay or restore to their Master; and how the Master many
times waited to be Merciful to them, in sending Servants after Servants, and
passing by many Offenses, before he determined to destroy and cast them out.
First then, This cannot be understood of the Saints, or of such as Repent and
are Saved; for it is said expressly, He will destroy them. Neither would the
Parable any ways have answered the end for which it is alleged, if these Men
had not bee^ in a capacity to have done Good; yea, such was their Capacity,
that Christ says in the Prophet, What could I have done more? So that it is
more than manifest, that by this Parable, repeated in three sundry Evangelists,
Christ holds forth his Long-suffering toward Men, and their Wickedness, to
whom Means of Salvation being afforded, do nevertheless resist, to their own
Condemnation. To these also parallel these Scriptures, Prove. 1.24, 25, 26. Jer.
18.9, 10. Mat. 18.32, 33, 34. Acts 13.46.

Lastly; That there is a Day of Visitation given to the Wicked, wherein they
might have been saved, and which being expired, they are shut out from
Salvation, appears evidently by Christ's Lamentation over Jerusalem, expressed
in three sundry places, Mat. 23.37. Luke 13.34. and 19.41, 42. And when he was
come near, he beheld the City, and wept over it; saying, If thou had known,
Christ's Lamentation over Jerusalem.
even thou, at least in this thy day, the things that belong to thy Peace; but
now they are hid from thine Eyes! Than which, nothing can be said more evident,
to prove our Doctrine. For, First, He insinuates, that there was a Day wherein
the Inhabitants of Jerusalem might have known those things that belonged to
their Peace. Secondly, That during that Day, he was willing to have gathered
them, even as a Hen gathers her Chickens. A familiar Example, yet very
significative in this case; which shows, that the Offer of Salvation made unto
them, was not in vain on his part, but as really, and with as great
cheerfulness and willingness, as a Hen gathers her Chickens. Such as is the
Love and Care of the Hen toward her Brood, such is the Care of Christ, to
gather lost Men and Women, to redeem them out of their corrupt and degenerate
State. Thirdly, That because they refused, the things belonging to their Peace
were hid from their Eyes. Why were they hid? Because ye would not suffer me to
gather you; ye would not see those things that were good for you, in the season
of God's Love toward you; and therefore now, that day being expired, ye cannot
see them: And for a farther Judgment, God suffers you to be hardened in
Unbelief.

God hardens, when?
So it is, after real offer of Mercy and Salvation rejected, that God hardens
Men's Hearts, and not before. Thus that Saying is verified, To him that has,
shall be given; and from him that has not, shall be taken away, even that
which he has. This may seem a Riddle, yet it is according to this Doctrine
easily solved. He has not, because he has lost the season of using it, and so
to him it is now as nothing; for Christ uses this Expression, Mat. 25.26. upon
the occasion of the taking the one Talent from the slothful Servant, and giving
it to him that was diligent; The one Talent was sufficient.
which Talent was no ways insufficient of it self, but of the same nature with
those given to the others, and therefore the Lord had reason to exact the
Profit of it, proportionably, as well as from the rest: So, I say, it is after
the rejecting of the Day of Visitation, that the judgment of Obduration is
inflicted upon Men and Women, as Christ pronounces it upon the Jews, out of
Isai. 6.9. which all the Four Evangelists make mention of, Mat. 13.14. Mark
4.12. Luke 8.10. John 12.40. And last of all, the Apostle Paul, after he had
made offer of the Gospel of Salvation to the Jews at Rome, pronounces the
same, Acts 28.26. after that some believed not; Well spoke the Holy Ghost, by
Isaiah the Prophet, unto our Fathers, saying, Go unto this People, and say,
Hearing ye shall hear, and shall not understand; and seeing ye shall see, and
shall not perceive. For the Heart of this People is waxed gross, and their Ears
are dull of hearing, and their Eyes have they closed; lest they should see with
their Eyes, and hear with their Ears, and understand with their Hearts, and
should be converted, and I should heal them. So it appears, that God would have
them to see, but they closed their Eyes; and therefore they are justly
hardened. Cyril, Alex.
Of this matter Cyrillus Alexandrinus, upon John, lib. 6. cap. 21. speaks well,
answering to this Objection. But some may say, If Christ be come into the
World, that those that see may be blinded, their Blindness is not imputed unto
them; but it rather seems that Christ is the Cause of their Blindness, who
says, He is come into the World, that those that see may be blinded. But
(says he) they speak not Rationally, who object these things unto God, and are
not afraid to call him the Author of Evil. For, as the sensible Sun is carried
upon our Horizon, that it may communicate the Gift of its Clearness unto all,
and make its Light shine upon all; but if any one close his Eyelids, The Cause
of Man's remaining in Darkness, the closing his Eyes.
or willingly turn himself from the Sun, refusing the benefit of its Light, he
wants its Illumination, and remains in Darkness; not through defect of the Sun,
but through his own fault. So that the true Sun, who came to enlighten those
that sat in Darkness, and in the Region of the shadow of Death, visited the
Earth, for this cause, that he might communicate unto all the Gift of Knowledge
and Grace, and Illuminate the inward Eyes of all by a peculiar Splendour: But
many reject the Gift of this Heavenly Light, freely given to them, and have
closed the Eyes of their Mind, least so excellent an Illumination or
Irradiation of the Eternal Light should shine unto them. It is not then through
defect of the true Sun, but only through their own Iniquity and Hardness; For,
as the wise man says, (Wisdom 2.) Their Wickedness has blinded them.

From all which, I thus argue:

The Obstinate jews had a day.
If there was a day, wherein the obstinate Jews might have known the things
that belonged to their Peace, which, because they rejected it, was hid from
their Eyes; If there was a time wherein Christ would have gathered them, who
because they refused, could not be gathered: Then such as might have been
Saved, do actually Perish, that slighted the Day of God's Visitation toward
them, wherein they might have been converted and saved: But the first is true:
Therefore also the last.


Prop. II. Proved.
. XXI. Secondly, That which comes in the second place to be proved, is, That
whereby God offers to work this Salvation, during the Day of every Man's
Visitation; and that is, That he has given to every Man a measure of saving,
sufficient, and supernatural Grace. This I shall do, by God's Assistance, by
some plain and clear Testimonies of the Scripture.

First, From that of John 1.9. That was the true Light, which inlightneth every
Man that comes into the World. The Light enlightening every Man etc. --
This place does so clearly favor us, that by some it is called, The Quakers
Text; for it does evidently demonstrate our Assertion; so that it scarce needs
either Consequence or Deduction, seeing it self is a Consequence of two
Propositions, asserted in the former Verses, from which it follows, as a
Conclusion, in the very Terms of our Faith. The First of these Propositions is,
The Life that is in him, is the Light of Men: The Second, The Light shines in
the Darkness; and from these two he infers, that He is the tru^ Light, that
lights every Man that comes into the World.

Observe. 1.
From whence I do in short observe, that this Divine Apostle calls, Christ the
Light of Men, and gives us this as one of the chief Properties, at least
considerably and especially, to be observed by us, seeing hereby, as he is the
Light; and as we walk with him in that Light, which he communicates to us, we
come to have Fellowship and Communion with him; as the same Apostle says
elsewhere, 1 John 1.7. Secondly, That this Light shines in Darkness, -- Not to
a certain number of Men, but every Man.
though the Darkness comprehend it not. Thirdly, That this true Light
enlightneth every Man that comes into the World. Where the Apostle, being
directed by God's Spirit, has carefully avoided their Captiousness, that would
have restricted this to any certain number: Where every one is, there is none
excluded. Next, Should they be so obstinate, as sometimes they are, as to say,
that this [ every Man] is only every one of the Elect: These words following,
Every Man that comes into the World, would obviate that Objection. So that it
is plain, there comes no Man into the World, whom Christ has not enlightened in
some measure, and in whose dark Heart this Light does not shine; though the
Darkness comprehend it not, yet it shines there, and the nature thereof is to
dispel the Darkness, where Men shut not their Eyes upon it. The Light
dispelling Darkness, bege^s Faith.
Now for what end this Light is given, is expressed verse. 7. where John is said
to come for a Witness, to bear witness to the Light, that all Men through it
might believe; to wit, through the Light, (...) which does very well agree with
(...), as being the nearest Antecedent, though most Translators have (to make
it s^ with their own Doctrine) made it relate to John, as if all Men were to
believe through John. For which, as there is nothing directly in the Text, so
it is contrary to the very strain of the Context. For, seeing Christ has
lighted every Man with this Light, Is it not that they may come to believe
through it? All could not believe through John, because all Men could not know
of John's Testimony; whereas every Man, being lighted by this, may come there
through to believe. John shined not in Darkness; but this Light shines in the
Darkness, that having dispelled the Darkness it may produce and beget Faith.
And, Lastly, We must believe through that, and become Believers through that, by
walking in which, Fellowship with God is known and enjoyed; but as has been
above observed, it is by walking in this Light, that we have this Communion and
Fellowship, not by walking in John, which were nonsense. So that this Relative
(...), must needs be referred to the Light, whereof John bears witness, that
through that Light, wherewith Christ has lighted every Man, all Men might come
to believe. Seeing then this Light, is the Light of Jesus Christ, and the
Light, The Light is Supernatural, Saving, and Sufficient.
through which Men come to believe; I think it needs not be doubted, but that
it is a Supernatural, Saving, and Sufficient Light. If it were not
Supernatural, it could not be properly called the Light of Jesus; for though all
things be his, and of him, and from him; yet those things which are common and
peculiar to our Nature, as being a part of them, we are not said in so special
a manner to have from Christ. Moreover, the Evangelist is holding out to us
here the Office of Christ, as Mediator; and the Benefits, which from him as
such, do redound unto us.

Observe. 2.
Secondly, It cannot be any of the Natural Gifts or Faculties of our Soul,
whereby we are said here to be enlightened, because this Light is said to shine
in the Darkness, and cannot be comprehended by it. The Darkness is Man's
natural State and Condition.
Now, this Darkness is no other, but Man's Natural Condition and State; in
which Natural State he can easily comprehend, and does comprehend, those things
that are peculiar and common to him, as such. That Man in his Natural condition
is called Darkness, see Ephesians. 5.8. For ye were sometimes Darkness, but now are
ye Light in the Lord. And in other places, as Acts 26.18. Col. 1.13. 1 Thessalonians.
5.5. where the Condition of Man in his Natural State, is termed Darkness*
Therefore, I say, this Light cannot be any Natural Property or Faculty of Man's
Soul; but a Supernatural Gift and Grace of Christ.

Observe. 3.^
Thirdly; It is Sufficient and Saving.

Arg. 1.
That which is given, That all Men through it may believe, must needs be Saving
and Sufficient: That by walking in which, Fellowship with the Saints, and the
Blood of Christ, which cleanses from all sin, is possessed, must be
sufficient: But such is the LIGHT, 1 John 1.7. Therefore, etc.


Moreover; Arg. 2.
That, which we are commanded to believe in, that we may become the Children of
the Light, must be a Supernatural, Sufficient, and Saving Principle: But we are
commanded to Believe in the Light: Therefore, etc.


The Proposition cannot be denied. The Assumption is Christ's own words, John
12.36. While ye have the Light, believe in the Light, that ye may be the
Children of the Light.

That by [Light] here, is understood Christ's outward Person, in whom he would
have them believe.

Messiah that was to come, is not denied; but how they evince, Whether Christ's
outward Person was the Light?
that Christ intended that here, I see not: Nay, the place it self shows the
contrary, by these words, While ye have the Light; and by the verse going
before, Walk, while ye have the Light, lest Darkness come upon you: Which words
import, That when that Light, in which they were to believe, was removed, then
they should lose the Capacity, or Season of Believing. Now, this could not be
understood of Christ's Person: The Jews might have believed in him, and many
did savingly believe in him, as all Christians do at this day, when the Person,
to wit, his Bodily Presence, or Outward Man, is far removed from them. So that
this Light, in which they were commanded to believe, must be that Inward, The
Light of Christ is not Christ's outward Man or Person.
Spiritual Light, that shines in their Hearts for a season, even during the Day
of Man's Visitation; which, while it continues to Call, Invite and Exhort, Men
are said to have it, and may believe in it; but when Men refuse to believe in
it, and reject it, then it cease to be a Light to show them the Way; but
leaves the Sense of their Unfaithfulness as a Sting in their Conscience; which
is a Terror and Darkness unto them, and upon them; in which they cannot know
where to go, neither can work any ways profitable, in order to their Salvation.
And therefore to such Rebellious Ones, the Day of the Lord is said to be
Darkness, and not Light, Amos 5.18.

From whence it appears, that though many receive not the Light, (as many
comprehend it not) nevertheless this Saving Light shines in all, that it may
save them. Cyrillus Alexandrinus Upon John lib 1. chap. 11.
Concerning which also, Cyrillus Alexandrinus says well, and defends our
Principle: With great Diligence and Watchfulness (says he) does the Apostle
John endeavor to Anticipate and Prevent the vain Thoughts of Men: For there is
here a wonderful Method of sublime things, and Overturning of Objections. He
had just now called the Son the true Light, by whom he affirmed, that every Man
coming into the World, was enlightened; yea, that he was in the World, and the
World was made by him. One may then Object, If the Word of God be the Light,
and if the Light enlighten the Hearts of Men, and suggest unto Men Piety, and
the understanding of things; if he was always in the World, and was the Creator
or Builder of this World, why was he so long unknown unto the World? It seems
rather to follow, because he was unknown to the World, therefore the World was
not enlightened by him, nor he totally Light. Lest any should so object, he
divinely infers (And the World knew him not) Let not the World (says he)
accuse the Word of God, and his Eternal Light, but its own Weakness; for the
Son enlightens, The Son enlightens; but Man through negligence buries
Illumination*
but the Creature rejects the Grace that is given unto it, and abuses the
Sharpness of Understanding granted it, by which it might have naturally known
God; and, as a Prodigal, has turned its sight to the Creatures, neglected to
go forward, and through Laziness and Negligence, buried the Illumination, and
despised this Grace. Which, that the Disciple of Paul might not do, he was
commanded to Watch: Therefore it is to be imputed to their Wickedness, who are
Illuminated, and not unto the Light. For as albeit the Sun rises upon all, yet
he that is blind receives no benefit thereby; none thence can justly accuse
the brightness of the Son, but will ascribe the cause of not seeing, to the
Blindness: So I judge, it is to be understood of the Only Begotten Son of God;
for he is the true Light, and sends forth his Brightness upon all; but the
God of this World, as Paul says, has blinded the Minds of those that believe
not, 2 Cor. 4.4. that the Light of the Gospel shine not unto them. We say then,
that Darkness is come upon Men, not because they are altogether deprived of
Light; for Nature retains still the strength of Understanding divinely given
it; but because Man is dulled by an evil habit, and become worse, and has made
the measure of Grace, in some respect, to languish. When therefore the like
befalls to Man, the Psalmist justly prays, crying, Open my Eyes, that I may
behold the wonderful things of thy Law. For the Law was given, that t^ Light
might be kindled in us; the Blearedness of the Eyes of our Minds being wiped
away, and the Blindnes^ being removed, which detained us in our former
Ignorance. By these words then, the World is accused as Ungrateful and
Unsensible, not knowing its Author, nor bringing forth the good Fruit of the
Illumination; that it may now seem to be said truly of all, which was of Old
said by the Prophet, of the Jews; I expected, that it should have brought forth
Grapes, but it brought forth wild Grapes. For the good Fruit of the
Illumination was the Knowledge of the Only Begotten, as a Cluster hanging from
a Fruitful Branch. etc.

From which it appears, Cyrillus believed, that a saving Illumination was given
unto all. For as to what he speaks of Nature, Grace no natural (...).
he understands it not of the common Nature of Man by it self; but of that
Nature, which has the strength of Understanding divinely given it: For he
understands this Universal Illumination to be of the same kind with that Grace,
of which Paul makes mention to Timothy, saying; Neglect not the Grace that is
in thee. Now, it is not to be believed, that Cyrillus was so ignorant, as to
judge that Grace to have been some Natural Gift.

The Seed of the Kingdom is sown in several sorts of Grounds without
distinction.
in the Parable of the Sower, Mat. 13. from verse. 18. Mark 4. and Luke 8.11. He
says, That this Seed, sown in those several sorts of Grounds, is the Word of
the Kingdom, which the Apostle calls the Word of Faith, Romans 8.10. James 1.21.
(...), the Implanted, Ingrafted Word, which is able to save the Soul; the words
themselves declare, that it is that which is Saving, in the nature of it; for
in the good Ground it fructified abundantly.

Let us then observe, That this Seed of the Kingdom, this Saving, Supernatural,
and Sufficient Word, was really sown in the Stony, Thorny Ground, and by the
Way-side, where it did not profit, but became useless, as to these Grounds: It
was, I say, the same Seed, that was sown in the good Ground. It is then the
fear of Persecution, and deceitfulness of Riches (as Christ himself
interprets the Parable) which hinders this Seed to grow in the Hearts of
many: Not but that, in its own nature, it is sufficient; being the same with
that which grows up and prospers in the Hearts of those who receive it. So
that, though All are not saved by it, yet there is a Seed of Salvation planted
and sown in the Hearts of All by God, which would grow up, and redeem the Soul,
if it were not choked and hindered. Concerning this Parable, Victor Antiochenus
(on Mark 4. as he is cited by Vessius, in his Pelogian History, Book 7.) says,
That Our Lord Christ has liberally sown the Divine Seed of the Word, and
proposed it to All, without Respect of Persons; and as be that sows,
distinguishes not betwixt Ground and Ground, but simply casts in the Seed,
without distinction; so our Savior has offered the Food of the Divine Word,
so far as was his part; although he was not ignorant what would become of many.
Lastly, He so behaved himself, as he might justly say, What should I have done,
that I have not done? And so this answers the Parable of the Talents, Mat.
25. he that had two Talents was accepted, as well as he that had five, because
he used them to his Master's profit: And he that had one, might have done so;
his Talent was of the same nature with the rest, it was as capable to have
proportionably brought forth its interest, as the rest. And so, though there be
not a like proportion of Grace given to All, to some five Talents, to some two
Talents, and to some but one Talent; yet there is given to All, that which is
sufficient; and no more is required, than according to that which is given: For
unto whomsoever much is given, from him much shall be required, Luke 12.48. He
that had the two Talents, was accepted for giving four, nothing less than he
that gave the ten: So should he also that gave the one, if he had given two;
and no doubt, one was capable to have produced two, as well as five to have
produced ten, or two four.

Thirdly; This Saving, Spiritual Light, is the Gospel, which the Apostle says
expressly, The Light is the Gospel, the Power of God preached in every Creature
under Heaven.
is preached In every Creature under Heaven; even that very Gospel, whereof
Paul was made a Minister, Col. 1.23. For the Gospel is not a mere Declaration
of good things, being the Power of God unto Salvation, to all those that
believe, Romans 1.16. Though the outward Declaration of the Gospel be taken
sometimes for the Gospel; yet it is but Figuratively, and by a Metonymy. For,
to speak properly, the Gospel is this Inward Power and Life, which preaches
Glad Tidings in the Hearts of all Men, offering Salvation unto them, and
seeking to Redeem them from their Iniquities; and therefore it is said to be
preached In every Creature under Heaven: Whereas there are many Thousands of
Men and Women, to whom the outward Gospel was never preached. Therefore the
Apostle Paul, Romans 1. where he says, The Gospel is the Power of God unto
Salvation, adds. That therein is revealed the Righteousness of God, from Faith
to Faith; and also the Wrath of God against such as hold the Truth of God in
unrighteousness: For this reason (says he) Because that which may be known of
God is manifest in them; for God has showed it unto them. Now, that which may
be known of God, is known by the Gospel, which was manifest in them. For those,
of whom the Apostle speaks, had no outward Gospel preached unto them; so that
it was by the inward Manifestation of the Knowledge of God in them, which is
indeed the Gospel preached in Man, that the Righteousness of God is revealed
from Faith to Faith; that is, it reveals to the Soul that which is Just, Good
and Righteous; and that, as the Soul receives it, and believes, Righteousness
comes more and more to be revealed, from one degree of Faith to another. For
though (as the following verse says) the outward Creation declares the Power of
God; yet that which may be known of him, is manifest within: By which Inward
Manifestation, we are made capable to see and discern the Eternal Power and
Godhead in the outward Creation; so, were it not for this Inward Principle, we
could no more understand the Invisible Things of God, by the outward visible
Creation, than a Blind Man can see and discern the variety of Shapes and
Colors, or judge of the Beauty of the outward Creation. Therefore he says
First, That which may be known of God, is manifest in them; and in and by that,
they may read and understand the Power and Godhead in those things that are
outward and visible. And though any might pretend, that the outward Creation
does, of it self, without any Supernatural or Saving Principle in the Heart,
even declare to the Natural Man, that there is a God; yet what would such a
Knowledge avail, if it did not also communicate to me what the Will of God is,
The outward Creation may beget a Persuasion in Man of an Eternal Power o^
Virtue.
and how I shall do that which is acceptable to him? For the outward Creation,
though it may beget a Persuasion, that there is some Eternal Power or Virtue, by
which the World has had its beginning; yet it does not tell me, nor does it
inform me, of that which is Just, Holy and Righteous, how I shall be delivered
from my Temptations and Evil Affections, and come unto Righteousness: That must
be from some inward Manifestation in my Heart. Whereas those Gentiles, of whom
the Apostle speaks, knew by that inward Law, and Manifestation of the Knowledge
of God in them, to distinguish betwixt Good and Evil, as in the next Chapter
appears, of which we shall speak hereafter. The Prophet Micah, speaking of Man
indefinitely, or in general, declares this, Mi^. 6.8. He has showed thee, O
man, what is good. And what does the Lord require of thee, but to do Justly,
and to love Mercy, and to walk Humbly with thy God? He does not say, God
requires, till he has first assured, that he has showed unto them. Now,
because this is showed unto All Men, and manifest in them; therefore says the
Apostle, is the Wrath of God revealed against them, for that they hold the
Truth in Unrighteousness; that is, the Measure of Truth, the Light, the Seed,
the Grace in them; for that they hide the Talent in the Earth; that is, in the
earthly and unrighteous part in their Hearts, and suffer it not to bring forth
Fruit, but to be choked with the sensual Cares of this Life, the Fear of
Reproach, and the Deceitfulness of Riches; as by the Parables abovementioned
does appear. But the Apostle Paul opens and illustrates this matter yet more,
Romans 10. where he declares, That the Word, which he preached, (now the Word,
which he preached, and the Gospel which he preached, and whereof he was a
Minister, is one and the same) is not far off, but nigh, in the Heart, and in
the Mouth; which done, he frames as it were the Objection of our Adversaries,
in the 14th and 15th verses; How shall they believe in him, of whom they have
not heard; And how shall they hear without a Preacher? This he answers in the
18th verse, saying; But (I say) have they not heard? Yes verily, their sound
went into all the Earth, and their words unto the ends of the World;
insinuating, The Divine Preacher (the Word nigh) has s^nded in the Ears and
Hearts of all M^n.
that this Divine Preacher has sounded in the Ears and Hearts of all Men; for
of the Outward Apostles, that Saying was not true, neither then, nor many
Hundred Years after; yea, for ought we know, there may be yet great and
spacious Nations and Kingdoms, that never have heard of Christ nor his
Apostles, as outwardly. This Inward and Powerful word of God, is yet more fully
described in the Epistle to the Hebrews, chap. 4. v. 12.13. For the Word of God
is quick and powerful, and sharper than any two-edged Sword, piercing even to
the dividing asunder of Soul and Spirit, and of the Joints and Marrow, and is a
Discerner of the Thoughts and Intents of the Heart. The Virtues of this
Spiritual Word are here enumerated: It is Quick, because it searches and tries
the Hearts of All; no Man's Heart is exempt from it; for the Apostle gives this
Reason of its being so, in the following verse; But all things are naked,
Before whom all things are manifest.
and opened unto the Eyes of him, with whom we have to do: And there is not any
Creature that is not manifest in his sight. Though this ultimately and mediately
be referred to God, yet nearly and immediately it relates to the Word or Light;
which, as has been before proved, is in the Hearts of all, else it had been
improper to have brought it in here. The Apostle shows how every Intent and
Thought of the Heart is discerned by the Word of God, And every Thought and
Intent of the Heart.
because all things are naked before God; which imports nothing else but it is
in and by this Word, whereby God sees and discerns Man's Thoughts; and so must
needs be in all Men, because the Apostle says, There is no Creature that is
not manifest in his sight. The Faithful Witness.
This then is that faithful Witness and Messenger of God that bears witness for
God, and for his Righteousness in the Hearts of all Men: For he has not left
Man without a Witness, Acts 14.17. and he is said to be given for a Witness to
the People, Isai. 55.4. And as this Word bears witness for God, so it is not
placed in Men, only to Condemn them. For as he is given for a Witness so says
the Prophet, A Leader and Commander.
He is given for a Leader and a Commander. The Light is given, that all through
it may believe, John 1.7. For Faith comes by Hearing, and Hearing by this Word
of God; which is placed in Man's Heart, both to be a Witness for God, and to be
a Means to bring Man to God, through Faith and Repentance; It is therefore
Powerful that it may divide betwixt the Soul and the Spirit: A two-edged Sword.
It is like a Two-edged Sword, that it may cut off Iniquity from him, and
separate betwixt the Precious and the Vile; and because Man's Heart is cold and
hard, like Iron naturally, therefore has God placed this Word in him, which is
said to be like a Fire, A Fire and a Hammer.
and like a Hammer, Jer. 23.29. that like as by the heat of the Fire, the Iron
(of its own nature cold) is warmed, and by the strength of the Hammer, is
softened and framed, according to the mind of the Worker: So the cold and hard
Heart of Man is, by the Virtue and Powerfulness of this Word of God, near and
in the Heart, as it resists not, warmed and softened, and receives a Heavenly
and Celestial impression and Image. The most part of the Fathers have spoken
at large, touching this Word, Seed, Light, and saving Voice, calling all unto
Salvation, and able to save.

Clem. Alex.
Clemens Alexandrianus says, lib. 2. Stromat. The Divine Word has cried,
calling all, knowing well those that will not obey; and yet, because it is in
our power, either to obey, or not to obey, that none may have a pretext of
Ignorance, it has made a righteous Call, and requires but that which is
according to the ability and strength of every one. The self-same, in his
Warning to the Gentiles. For, as (says he) that Heavenly Ambassador of the
Lord, The Grace of God, that brings Salvation, has appeared unto all, etc.
This is the new Song, Coming, and Manifestation of the Word, which now shows it
self in us, which was in the beginning, and was first of all. And again, Hear
therefore, ye that are a-far off, hear ye who are near; The Gathering unto the
one and alone Love.
the Word is bid from none, the Light is common to all, and shines to all.
There is no Darkness in the Word; let us basten to Salvation, to the New Birth,
that we being many, may be gathered into the One alone Love. Ibid. He says,
That there is infused into all, but principally into those that are trained up
in Doctrine, a certain Divine Influence, (...). And again, He speaks concerning
the Innate Witness, worthy of belief, which of it self does plainly choose that
which is most honest. And again, he says, That it is not impossible to come
unto the Truth, and lay hold of it, seeing it is most near to us, in our own
Houses, as the most wise Moses declares, living in three parts of us, viz. in
our Hands, in our Mouth, and in our Heart; This, says he, is a most true Badge
of the Truth, which is also fulfilled in three things, namely, in Counsel, in
Action, in Speaking. And again, he says also unto the Unbelieving Nations;
Receive Christ, receive Light, receive Sight, to the end thou may rightly
know both God and Man. The Word that has enlightened us, The Enlightening Word.
is more pleasant than Gold, and the Stone of great Value. And again he says,
Let us receive the Light, that we may receive God; Let us receive the Light,
that we may be the Scholars of the Lord. And again, he says to those Infidel
Nations, The Heavenly Spirit helps thee to resist and flee Pleasure. Again,
lib. Strom. 5. (he says) God forbid that Man be not a Partaker of Divine
Acquaintance, (...) who in Genesis is said to be a partaker of Inspiration. And
Paed. lib. 1. cap. 3. There is (says he) some lovely and some desirable thing
in Man, which is called, the In-breathing of God, (...). The same Man, lib. 10.
Strom. directs Men unto the Light and Water in themselves, who have the Fie
of the Soul darkened or dimmed through Evil up-bringing and Learning: Let them
enter in unto their own Domestic Light, or unto the Light, which is in their
own House, (...), unto the Truth, which manifests accurately and clearly these
things, that have been written.

Justin Martyr, in his first Apology says, Just. Martyr.
That the Word, which was, and is, is in all; even that very same Word, which
through the Prophets, foretold things to come.

The Writer of the Calling of the Gentiles, says, Auth. de voc. Gen^.
lib. 1. cap. 2. We believe according to the same (viz. Scripture) and most
Religiously confess, that God was never wanting in care to the generality of
Men: Who, although he did lead by particular Lessons, a People gathered to
himself, unto Godliness; yet he withdrew from no Nation of Men, the Gifts of
his own Goodness, that they might be convinced, that they had received the
Words of the Prophets, and Legal Commands, in Services and Testimonies of the
first Principles. Cap. 7. he says, That he believes, that the help of Grace
has been wholly withdrawn from no Man. Lib. cap. 1. Because, albeit Salvation
is far from Sinners, yet there is nothing void of the Presence and Virtue of
his Salvation. Cap. 2. But seeing none of that People, ^ver whom was set both
the Doctrines, were justified, but through Grace by the Spirit of Faith; who
can question, but that they, who of whatsoever Nation, in whatsoever times,
could please God, were ordered by the Spirit of the Grace of God; which, albeit
in fore-time, it was more sparing and hid, yet denied it self to no Ages; being
in Virtue one, in Quantity different, in Counsel unchangeable, in Operation
multifarious.

That it is by this Light, Seed, or Grace, Proved.
that God works the Salvation of all Men; and many come to partake of the
Benefit of Christ's Death, and Salvation purchased by him. God's Salvation
wrought by the Light in all.
By the inward and effectual Operations of which, as many Heathens have come to
be partakers of the promises, who were not of the Seed of Abraham after the
Flesh; so may some now, to whom God has rendered the Knowledge of the History
impossible, come to be saved by Christ. Having already proved, that Christ has
died for All; that there is a Day of Visitation given to All, during which
Salvation is possible to them; and that God has actually given a Measure of
Saving Grace and Light unto All, preached the Gospel to and in them, and placed
the Word of Faith in their Hearts; the matter of this Proposition may seem to
be proved. Yet shall I a little (for the further Satisfaction of all, who
desire to know the Truth, and hold it as it is in Jesus) prove this from two or
three clear Scripture-Testimonies, and remove the most common, as well as the
more strong Objections usually brought against it.

1 Part.
Our Theme then has two parts; First, That those that have the Gospel, and
Christ outwardly preached unto them, are not saved, but by the working of the
Grace and Light in their Hearts.

2 Part.
Secondly, That by the Working and Operation of this, many have been, and some
may be saved, to Whom the Gospel has never been outwardly Preached, and who
are utterly ignorant of the outward History of Christ.

As to the first, though it be granted by most, 1 Part. Proved.
yet because it is more in Words than Deeds (the more full discussing of which,
will fall in, in the next Proposition, concerning Justification) I shall prove
it in few words. And first from the words of Christ to Nicodemus, John 3.3.
Verily, verily I say unto thee, The New Birth (or Regeneration) comes not by
the outward Knowledge of Christ.
Except a Man be born again, he cannot see the Kingdom of God. Now this Birth
comes not by the outward Preaching of the Gospel, or Knowledge of Christ or
Historical Faith in him; seeing many have that, and firmly believe it who are
never thus renewed. The Apostle Paul also goes so far, while he commends the
Necessity and Excellency of this New Creation, as in a certain respect, to lay
aside the outward Knowledge of Christ, or the Knowledge of him after the Flesh,
in these words, 2 Cor, 5.16, 17. Wherefore, henceforth know we no Man after the
Flesh, yea, though we have known Christ after the Flesh, yet now henceforth know
we him no more. Therefore if any Man be in Christ, he is a New Creature, old
things are passed away, behold all things are become new. Whence it manifestly
appears, that he makes the Knowledge of Christ after the Flesh, but as it were,
the Rudiments which young Children learn; which, after they are become better
Scholars, are of less use to them; because they have, and possess the very
Substance of those first Precepts in their Minds. As all Comparisons halt in
some part, so shall I not affirm this to hold in every respect; yet so far will
this hold, that as those, that go no farther than the Rudiments, are never to
be accounted Learned; and as they grow beyond these things, so they have less
use of them; even so such, as go no farther than the outward Knowledge of
Christ, shall never inherit the Kingdom of Heaven. But such as come to know
this New Birth, to be in Christ indeed, to be a New Creature, to have Old
Things past away, and all things become New, may safely say with the Apostle,
Though we have known Christ after the Flesh yet now henceforth know we him no
more. Now this New Creature proceeds from the Work of this Light and Grace in
the Heart: -- But by the Work of Light and Grace in the Heart.
It is that Word, which we speak of, that is sharp and piercing, that Implanted
Word, able to save the Soul, by which this Birth is begotten; and therefore
Christ has purchased unto us this Holy Seed, that thereby this Birth might be
brought forth in us which is therefore also called, The Manifestation of the
Spirit, given to every one to profit withal; for it is written, that by one
Spirit we are all Baptized into one Body. And the Apostle Peter also ascribes
this Birth to the Seed and Word of God which we have so much declared of,
saying, 1 Pet. 1.23. Being born again, not of Corruptible Seed, but of
Incorruptible, by the Word of God, which lives and abides for ever. Though then
this Seed be small in its Appearance, so that Christ compares it to a Grain of
Mustard Seed, which is the least of all Seeds, Mat. 13.31, 32. and that it be
hid in the earthly part of Man's Heart: Yet therein is Life and Salvation
toward the Sons of Men wrapped up; which comes to be revealed, as they give way
to it. And in this Seed, in the Hearts of all Men, is the Kingdom of God, as in
Capacity to be produced, The Kingdom of God is in the Seed, in the Hearts of a^
Men.
or rather exhibited, according as it receives depth, is nourished and not
choked: Hence Christ says, that the Kingdom of God was in the very Pharisees,
Luke 17.20.21. who did oppose and resist him, and were justly accounted as
Serpents, and a Generation of Vipers. Now the Kingdom of God could be no other
ways in them, than in a Seed, even as the Thirty fold and the Hundredfold is
wrapped up in a small Seed, lying in a barren Ground, which springs not forth,
because it wants Nourishment: And as the whole Body of a great Tree is wrapped
up potentially in the Seed of the Tree, and so it brought forth in due season;
and as the Capacity of a Man or Woman is not only in a Child, but even in the
very Embryo; even so the Kingdom of Jesus Christ, yea, Jesus Christ himself,
Christ within, who is the Hope of Glory, and becomes Wisdom, Righteousness,
Sanctification and Redemption, is in every Man and Woman's Heart, in that
little Incorruptible Seed, ready to be brought forth, as it is cherished and
received in the Love of it. For there can be no Men worse, than those
Rebellious and Unbelieving Pharisees were; and yet this Kingdom was thus within
them, and they were directed to look for it there: So it is neither lo here,
nor lo there, in this or the other Observation, that this is known; but as this
Seed of God in the Heart is minded and entertained. And certainly hence it is
(even because this Light, Seed and Grace, that appears in the Heart of Man, is
so little regarded, and so much over-looked) that so few know Christ brought
forth in them. Calvinists, Papists, Arminians and Socinians Errors, ^i^g the
Light to be saving.
The one sort, to wit, the Calvinists, they look upon Grace as an irresistible
Power, and therefore neglect and despise this Eternal Seed of the Kingdom in
their Hearts, as a low, insufficient, useless thing, as to their Salvation. On
the other hand, the Papists, Arminians and Socinians, they go about to set up
their Natural Power and Will, with one consent, denying, that this little Seed,
this small Appearrance of the Light, is that Supernatural, Saving Grace of God
given to every Man, to save him. And so upon them is verified that Saying of
the Lord Jesus Christ, This is the Condemnation of the World, that Light is
come into the World, but Men love Darkness rather than Light; the reason is
added, Because their Deeds are Evil. All confess they feel this but they will
not have it to be of that Virtue. Some, will have it to be Reason; some a
Natural Conscience; some, certain Relics of God's Image, that remained in
Adam. So Christ, as he met with Opposition from all kinds of Professors in his
Outward^ Appearance, The Meanness of Christ's Appearance in the Flesh.
so does he now in his Inward. It was the meanness of his Outward Man that made
many despise him, saying, Is not this the Son of the Carpenter? Are not his
Brethren and Sisters among us? Is not this a Galilean? And came there ever a
Prophet out of Galilee? And such like Reasonings. For they expected an outward
Deliverer, who as a Prince, should deliver them with great ease from their
Enemies; and not such a Messiah as should be Crucified shamefully, and as it
were lead them into many Sorrows, Troubles and Afflictions. So the Meanness of
this Appearance makes the Crafty Jes^its, the pretended Rational So^inians, and
the Learned Arminians, overlook it; desiring rather something, that they might
exercise their Subtilty, Reason and Learning about, and use the Liberty of
their own Wills. And the secure Calvinists, they would have a Christ to Save
them without any Trouble; to Destroy all their Enemies for them, without them,
and nothing or little within; and in the mean while be at ease to live in their
Sins secure. Whence, when all is well examined, the cause is plain; it is,
Because their Deeds are Evil, that with one consent they reject this Light: The
Nature of the Light.
For it checks and reproves the Wisest of them all, and the Learned of them
all in secret; neither can all their Logic silence it, nor can the securest
among them stop its Voice from crying, and reproving them within, for all their
Confidence in the outward Knowledge of Christ, or of what he has suffered
outwardly for them. For, as has been often said, In a Day it strives with all,
wrestles with all; and it is the Unmortified Nature, the First Nature, the Old
Adam, yet alive in the Wisest, in the Learned, in the most Zealous for the
outward Knowledge of Christ, that denies this, that despises it, that shuts it
out, to their own Condemnation. They come all under this description, Every one
that does Evil, hates the Light, neither comes to the Light, lest his Deeds
should be reproved, John 3.20. So that it may be said now, and we can say, from
a true and certain Experience, as it was of old, Psalm 118.22. Mat. 21.42. Mark
12.10. Luke 20.17. Acts 4.11. The Stone which the Builders, of all kinds, have
rejected, the same is become unto us the Head of the Corner. Glory to God for
ever! who has chosen us a first Fruits to himself in this Day, wherein he is
arisen to plead with the Nations; and therefore has sent us forth to Preach
this Everlasting Gospel unto All, Christ nigh to All, the Light in All, the
Seed Sown in the Hearts of All, that Men may come and apply their Minds to it.
And we rejoice, that we have been made to lay down our Wisdom and Learning
(such of us, as have had some of it) and our Carnal Reasoning, to learn of
Jesus, and fit down at the Feet of Jesus in our Hearts, and hear him, who there
makes all things manifest, and reproves all things by his Light, Ephesians. 5.13. For
many are Wise and Learned in the Notion, The Wise and learned in the Nation,
Cruc^ers of Christ.
in the Letter of the Scripture, as the Pharisees were, and can speak much of
Christ, and plead strongly against Infidels, Turks and Jews, and it may be also
against some Heresies; who in the mean time are Crucifying Christ in the small
Appearance of his S^ed in their Hearts. O! better were it to be stripped naked
of all, to account it as Dross and Dung, and become a Fool for Christ's sake,
thus knowing him to Teach thee in thy Heart, so as thou may witness him
raised there, feel the Virtue of his Cross there, and say with the Apostle, I
glory in nothing save in the Cross of Christ, whereby I am crucified to the
World, and the World unto me. This is better than to write Thousands of
Commentaries, and to preach many Sermons. And it is thus to preach Christ, None
are sa^ed by the Knowledge of the History, but by the Operation of the Light of
Christ in the Mystery
and direct People to his pure Light in the Heart, that God has raised us up,
and for which the Wise Men of this World account us Fools; because, by the
Operation of this Cross of Christ in our Hearts, we have denied our own Wisdom
and Wills in many things, and have forsaken the vain Worships, Fashions and
Customs of this World. For these diverse Centuries the World has been full of a
dry, fruitless and barren Knowledge of Christ, feeding upon the Husk, and
neglecting the Kernel; following after the Shadow, but Strangers to the
Substance. Hence the Devil matters not how much of that Knowledge abounds,
provided, he can but possess the Heart, and rule in the Will, crucify the
Appearance of Christ there, and so keep the Seed of the Kingdom from taking
Root. For he has led them abroad, lo here, and lo there; and has made them
wrestle in a false Zeal, so much one against another, Contentiors (...) it
outward Observations, and Lo here is.
contending for this outward Observation, and for the other outward
Observation, seeking Christ in this and the other External Thing, as in Bread
and Wine; contending one with another how he is there, while some will have him
to be present therein this way, and some nhe other way; and some in Scriptures,
in Books, in Societies, and Pilgrimages, and Merits. But some confiding in an
external barren Faith, think all is well, if they do but firmly believe, that
he died for their Sins past, present, and to come; while in the mean time,
Christ lies crucified and slain, and is daily resisted and gainsaid in his
Appearance in their Hearts. Thus from a sense of this Blindness and Ignorance,
that is come over Christendom it is, The Call of God to (...) Christendom.
that we are led and moved of the Lord, so constantly and frequently to call
All, invite All, request All, to turn to the Light in them, to mind the Light
in them, to believe in Christ, as he is in them: And that in the Name, Power
and Authority of the Lord, not in School-Arguments and Distinctions (for which
many of the Wise Men of this World account us Fools and Mad Men) we do charge
and command them to lay aside their Wisdom, to come down out of that Proud,
Airy, Brain-Knowledge, and to stop that Mouth, how Eloquent soever to the
Worldly Ear it may appear, and to be silent, and sit down as in the Dust, and
to mind the Light of Christ in their own Consciences: Which, if minded, they
would find as a sharp two-edged Sword in their Heart, and as a Fire and a
Hammer, that would knock against, and burn up all that carnal, gathered,
natural Stuff, and make the stoutest of them all Tremble, and become Quakers
indeed. Which those, that come not to feel now, and kiss not the Son, while the
Day lasts, but harden their Heart, will feel to be a certain Truth, when it
is too late. To conclude, as says the Apostle, All ought to Examine
themselves, whether they be in the Faith indeed; and try their own selves: For
except Jesus be in them, they are certainly Reprobates, 2 Cor. 13.5.

. XXV. Secondly; 2. Part. Proved.
That which remains now to be proved, is, That by the Operation of this Light
and Seed, some have been, and may yet be saved, to whom the Gospel is not
outwardly preached, That many by the Light may b^ saved, that have not the
outward Knowledge of Christ.
nor the History of Christ outwardly known. To make this the easier, we have
already shown how that Christ has died for all Men; and consequently these are
Enlightened by Christ, and have a measure of Saving Light and Grace; yea, that
the Gospel, though not in any outward Dispensation, is preached to them, and in
them: So that thereby they are stated in a Possibility of Salvation. From
which, I thus argue:

Arg.
To whom the Gospel, the Power of God unto Salvation, is manifest, they may be
saved, whatever outward Knowledge they want. But this Gospel is preached in
every Creature; in which is certainly comprehended many that have not the
outward Knowledge: Therefore of those, many may be saved.


But to those Arguments, by which it has been proved, That all Men have a
Measure of saving Grace, I shall add one, and that very observable, not yet
mentioned, viz. that excellent Saying of the Apostle Paul to Titus, chap. 2. v.
11. The Grace of God, that brings Salvation, has appeared to all Men; teaching
us, that denying Ungodliness and Worldly Lusts, we should live Soberly,
Righteously, and Godlily in this present World: Than which, there can be
nothing more clear, it comprehending both the parts of the Controversy. First;
it testifies, that it is no Natural Principle or Light, but says plainly, It
brings Salvation. Secondly; it says not, that it has appeared to a Few, but
unto All Men. The Fruit of it declares also how Efficacious it is, seeing it
comprehends the whole Duty of Man: The Saving Grace of God, teaching the whole
Duty of Man.
It both teaches us, first, to forsake Evil, to deny Ungodliness and Worldly
Lusts; and then it teaches us our whole Duty. First, to live Soberly; that
comprehends Temperance, Chastity, Meekness, and those things that relate unto a
Man's self. Secondly, Righteously; that comprehends Equity, Justice and
Honesty, and those things which relate to our Neighbors. And Lastly, Godlily;
which comprehends Piety, Faithfulness and Devotion; which are the Duties
relating to God. So then there is nothing required of Man, or is needful to
Man, which this Grace teaches not. Yet I have heard a public Preacher, (one
of those that are accounted Zealous Men) to evite the strength of this Text,
deny this Grace to be Saving, and say; It was only intended of common Favors
and Graces, such as is the Heat of the Fire, and outward Light of the Sun. Such
is the Darkness and Ignorance of those that oppose the Truth; whereas the Text
says expressly, that it is Saving. Others, that cannot deny, but it is Saving,
allege; The Absurdity of our Adversaries comment upon the word All, denying
Grace to be Saving. Tit. 2.11.
This ( All) comprehends not every Individual, but only All Kinds: But is a
bare Negation sufficient to overturn the strength of a positive Assertion? If
the Scriptures may be so abused, what so absurd, as may be not pleaded for from
them? Or what so manifest, as may not be denied? But we have no reason to be
staggered by their denying, so long as our Faith is found in express terms of
the Scripture; they may as well seek to persuade us, that we do not intend that
which we affirm (though we know the contrary) as make us believe, that when the
Apostle speaks forth our Doctrine in plain words, yet he intends theirs, which
is the quite contrary. And indeed, can there be any thing more absurd, than to
say, Where the word is plainly ( All) Few is only intended? For they will not
have ( All) taken here for the greater Number. Indeed, as the Case may be
sometimes, by a Figure ( All) may be taken, of two Numbers, for the greater
Number; but let them show us, if they can, either in Scripture, or Profane or
Ecclesiastical Writings, that any Man that wrote Sense, did ever use the word (
All) to express, of two Numbers, the lesser. Whereas they affirm, that the far
lesser Number have received Saving Grace; and yet will they have the Apostle,
by ( All) to have signified so, Though this might suffice; yet to put it further,
beyond all question, I shall Instance another Saying of the same Apostle, that
we may use him as his own Commentator; Romans 5.18. Therefore as by the Offense
of One, Judgment came upon all Men to Condemnation; even so by the
Righteousness of One, the Free Gift came upon all Men unto Justification of
Life. Here no Man of Reason, except he will be obstinately ignorant, will deny,
but this similitive Particle ( As) makes the ( All) which goes before, and
comes after, to be of one and the same extent: Or else let them show us one
Example, either in Scripture, or elsewhere, among Men that speak proper
Language, where it is otherwise. We must then either affirm that this Loss,
which leads to Condemnation, has not come upon All; or say, that this
Free-Gift is come upon All by Christ. Whence I thus Argue: Arg.
First; If All Men have received a Loss from Adam, which leads to Condemnation;
then All Men have received a Gift from Christ, which leads to Justification.
But the First is true; Therefore also the Last.


From all which it naturaly follows, that All Men, Even the H^at ^s may be
saved by the Light.
even the Heathens, may be saved: For Christ was given, as a Light to enlighten
the Gentiles, Isai. 49.6. Now, to say that tho they might have been saved, yet
none were, is to judge too Uncharitably. I see not what Reason can be alleged
for it; yea, though it were granted, which never can be, that none of the
Heathens were saved; it will not from thence follow, that they could not have
been saved. or that none now in their Condition can be saved; For, A non esse
ad non pass non detur sequella; i. e. That Consequence is false, that
concludes a thing cannot be, because it is not.

Objection) That there is no Name, under Heaven, by which Salvation is known,
but by the Name JESUS.

Therefore they (not knowing this) cannot be saved.

The Literal Knowledge of Christ is not saving his the R^ Experimented.
the Name JESUS indeed, (which signifies a Savior) to free them from Sin and
iniquity in their Hearts, they are saved by it. I confess, there is no other
Name to be saved by: But Salvation lies not in the Literal, but in the
Experimental Knowledge; albeit those that have the Literal Knowledge, are not
saved by it, without this real Experimental Knowledge: Yet those that have the
Real Knowledge, may be saved without the External; as by the Arguments
hereafter brought, will more appear. For if the outward distinct Knowledge of
him, by whose means I receive benefit, were necessary for me, before I could
reap any Fruit of it; then, by the Rule of Contraries, it would follow, that I
could recieve no hurt, without I had also the distinct Knowledge of him that
occasioned it; whereas Experience proves the contrary. How many are injured by
Adam's Fall, that know nothing of ever there being such a Man in the World, or
of his eating the Forbidden Fruit? Why may they not then be saved by the Gift
and Grace of Christ in them, making them Righteous and Holy, though they know not
distinctly how that was purchased unto them by the death and Sufferings of
Jesus, that was Crucified at Jerusalem; especially seeing God has made that
Knowledge simply impossible to them? As many Men are killed, by Poison infused
into their Meat, though they neither know what the Poison was, nor who infused
it: So also on the other hand, how many are cured of their Diseases, by good
Remedies, who know not how the Medicine is prepared, what the Ingredients are,
nor oftentimes who made it? The like may also hold in Spiritual Things, as we
shall hereafter prove.

. XXVI. First; If there were such an abloute necessity for this outward
Knowledge, The outward Knowledge not essential to Salvation: Instance, Infants
and deaf Persons.
that it were even of the Essentials of Salvation, then none could be saved
without it; whereas our Adversaries deny not, but readily confess, that many
Infants and Deaf Persons are saved without it: So that here they break that
General Rule, and make Salvation possible without it. Neither can they allege,
that it is because such are free from Sin; seeing they also affirm, that all
Infants, because of Adam's Sin, deserve Eternal Condemnation, as being really
guilty in the sight of God; and of Deaf People, it is not to be doubted, and
Experience shows us, that they are subject to many common Iniquities, as well
as other Men.

That these Children are the Children of Believing Parents.



Deaf People may be made sensible of the Gospel by Signs:

That the Son of God took on him Man's Nature, was born of a Virgin, and
suffered under Pontius Pilate?

That they are within the Bosom of the visible Church, and Partakers of the
Sacraments:

Protestants confess) they confer not Grace ex opere opexato. And will they not
acknowledge, that many are in the Bosom of the Church, who are visibly no
Members of it? But if this Charity be extended toward such, who are where the
Gospel is preached, so that they may be judged capable of Salvation, because
they are under a simple impossibility of distinctly knowing the means of
Salvation; what Reason can be alleged, why the like Charity may not be had to
such, as though they can hear, A Chinees or Indian excusable for not knowing the
History of the Death of Christ, etc.
yet are under a simple impossibility of Hearing, because it is not spoken unto
them. Is not a Man in China, or in India, as much to be excused for not knowing
a thing which he never heard of, as a deaf Man here, who cannot hear? For as
the deaf Man is not to be blamed, because God has been pleased to suffer him
to lie under this Infirmity; so is the Chinees, or the Indian, as excusable,
because God has with held from him the opportunity of Hearing. He that cannot
hear a thing, as being necessarily absent, and he that connot hear it, as being
naturally deaf, are to be placed in the same Category.

Peter, Acts 10.34. Of a Truth I perceive, that God is no respecter of Persons;
but in every Nation, he that fears him, and works Righteousness, is
accepted of him. Peter was before liable to that mistake, that the rest of the
Jews were in, judging that all were Unclean, except themselves, and that no Man
could be saved, except they were Proselyted to their Religion, and Circumised.
But God showed Peter otherways in a Vision, and taught him to call nothing
common or unclean; and therefore, God regarded the Prayers of Cornelius, a
stranger to the Law.
seeing that God regarded the Prayers of Cornelius, who was a stranger to the
Law, and to Jesus Christ, as to the outward; yet Peter saw that God had
accepted him; and he is said to fear God, before he had this outward Knowledge:
Therefore Peter concludes, that every one, that in every Nation, without
Respect of Persons, fears God, and works Righteousness is accepted of him.
So he makes the Fear of God, and the Working of Righteousness, and not an
outward Historical Knowledge the Qualification: They then that have this,
wherever they be, they are saved. Now we have already proved, that to every
Man that Grace is given whereby he may live Godlily and Righteously; and we
see, that by this Grace Cornelius did so, and was accepted, and his Prayers
came up for a Memorial before God, From what Scripture and Job learn his
excellent knowledge?
before he had this outward Knowledge. Also, was not Job a perfect and upright
Man, that feared God, and eschewed Evil? Who taught Job this? How knew Job
Adam's Fall? And from what Scripture learned he that excellent Knowledge he
had, and that Faith, by which he knew his Redeemer lived? (For many make him as
old as Moses) Was not this by an Inward Grace in the Heart? Was it not that
Inward Grace, that taught Job to eschew Evil, and to fear God? And was it not
by the Workings thereof, that he became a just and upright Man? How does he
reprove the Wickedness of Men, Chap. 24. And after he has numbered up their
Wickedness, does he not condemn them, verse. 13. for Rebelling against this
Light, for not knowing the Way thereof, nor abiding in the Paths thereof? It
appears then, Job believed that Men had a Light, and that because they Rebelled
against it, therefore they knew not its Ways, and abode not in its Paths: Even
as the Pharisees, who had the Scriptures, are said to Err, not knowing the
Scripture And also Job's Friends, though in some things wrong; Job's Friends,
their excellent Sayings.
yet who taught them all those excellent Savings and Knowledge which they had?
Did not God give it them, in order to save them? Or was it merely to condemn
them? Who taught Elihu, That the Inspiration of the Almighty gives
Understanding; that the Spirit of God made him, and the Breath of the Almighty
gave him Life? And did not the Lord accept a Sacrifice for them? And who dare
say, that they are Damned? But further, the Apostle puts this Controversy out
of doubt; for, if we may believe his plain Assertions, he tells us, Romans 2.
That the Heathens did the things contained in the Law. From whence I thus argue:

Arg.
In every Nation, he that fears God, and works Righteousness, is accepted:
But many of the Heathens feared God, and wrought Righteousness: Therefore they
were accepted.


The Minor is proved from the Example of Cornelius: But I shall further prove
it thus;

He that does the things contained in the Law, fears God, and works
Righteousness: But the Heathens did the things contained in the Law: Therefore
they feared God, and wrought Righteousness.


Can there be any thing more clear? For if to do the things contained in the
Law, be not to fear God, and work Righteousness, then what can be said to do
so, seeing the Apostle calls the Law spiritual, holy, just and good? But this
appears manifestly by another Medium, taken out of the same Chapter, verse. 13.
So that nothing can be more clear: The words are, The doers of the Law shall be
justified. From which I thus argue, without adding any word of my own;

Arg.
The Doers of the Law shall be justified: But the Gentiles do the things
contained in the Law.


All, that know but a Conclusion, The Gentiles justified doing the Law.
do easily see what follows from these express words of the Apostle. And
indeed, he, through that whole Chapter labors, as if he were Contending now
with our Adversaries, to confirm this Doctrine, verse. 9, 10, 11. Tribulation
and Anguish upon every Soul of Man that does evil, to the Jew first, and also
to the Gentile: For there is no Respect of Persons with God. Where the Apostle
clearly Homologates, or confesses to the Sentence of Peter before mentioned;
and shows, that Jew and Gentile, or as himself explains in the following
Verses, both they that have an outward Law, and they that have none, when they
do good, shall be justified. And to put us out of all doubt, in the very
following Verses, he tells, That the Doers of the Law are justified, and that
the Gentiles did the Law. So that except we think, he spoke not what he
intended, we may safely conclude, that such Gentiles were Justified and did
partake of that Honor, Glory and Peace which comes upon every one that does
good; even the Gentiles, that are without the Law, when they work good; seeing
with God there is no Respect of Persons. So as we see, that it is not the
having the Outward Knowledge that does save, without the Inward; so neither
does the want of it, to such to whom God has made it impossible, who have the
Inward, bring Condemnation. And many that have wanted the Outward, have had a
knowledge of this Inwardly, by Virtue of that Inward Grace and Light given to
every Man, working in them, by which they forsook Iniquity and become Just and
Holy as is above proved; Many wanting the History, were sensible of the Loss by
Adam and Salvation come by Christ in themselves
who, though they knew not the History of Adam's Fall, yet were sensible in
themselves of the Loss that came by it, feeling their Inclinations to Sin, and
the Body of Sin in them: And though they knew not the Coming of Christ, yet were
sensible of that Inward Power and Salvation which came by him, even before,
(...) well as since his Appearance in the Flesh. For a question whether these
Men can prove, that all the Patriarchs and Fathers, before Moses, had a
distinct Knowledge either of the one or the other, or that they knew the
History of the Teee of Knowledge of Good and Evil, and of Adam's eating the
Forbidden Fruit; far less that Christ should be Born of a Virgin, should be
crucified, and treated in the manner he was. For it is justly to be believed
that what Moses wrote of Adam, and of the First Times, was not by Tradition,
but by Revelation; yea, we see that not only after the writing of Moses, but
even of David, and all the Prophets, How little the Je^s knew Christ mistaking
the Prophets
who prophesied so much of Christ, how little the Jews, that were expecting and
wishing for the Messiah, could thereby discern him when he came, that they
Crucified him as a Blasphemer, not as a Messiah, by mistaking the Prophecies
concerning him; for Peter says expressly, Acts 3.17. to the Jews, That both
they and their Rulers did it through Ignorance. And Paul says, 1 Cor. 2.8.
That had they known it, they would not have Crucified the Lord of Glory. Yea,
Mary her self, to whom the Angel had spoken, and who had laid up all the
miraculous Things accompanying his Birth in her Heart, she did not understand
how, when he disputed with the Doctors in the Temple, that he was about his
Father's Business. And the Apostles, that had believed him, conversed daily
with him, and saw his Miracles, could not understand, neither believe those
things which related to his Death, Sufferings and Resurrection, but were in a
certain respect stumbled at them.

. XXVII. So we see, how that it is the Inward Work, and not the Outward History
and Scripture, that gives the true Knowledge; and by this Inward Light, many of
the Heathen Philosophers were sensible of the Loss received by Adam, The
Heathens were sensible of the Loss received by Adam.
though they knew not the outward History: Hence Plato asserted, That Man's Soul
was fallen into a dark Cave, where it only conversed with Shadows. Pythagoras
says, Man wandereth in this World as a Stranger, banished from the Presence of
God. And Plotinus compares Man's Soul, fallen from God, to a Cinder, Heathen
Philosophers Divine Knowledge. Plato. Pithag. Plotin.
or dead Coal, out of which the Fire is extinguished. Some of them said, That
the Wings of the Soul were clipped, or fallen off, so that they could not flee
unto God. All which, and many more such Expressions, that might be gathered out
of their Writings, show, that they were not without a sense of this Loss. Also,
they had a Knowledge and Discovery of Jesus Christ inwardly, as a Remedy in
them, to deliver them from that Evil Seed, and the Evil Inclinations of their
own Hearts, though not under that particular Denomination.

Some called him a Holy Spirit, as Seneca, Epist. 41. who said, There is a Holy
Spirit in us, Cicero calls it an Innate Light. Lactan. In Sect.
that treats us as we treat him. Cicero calls it an Innate Light, in his
Book De Republica, cited by Lactantius, 6 Instit. where he calls this Right
Reason given unto all, Constant and Eternal, calling unto Duty by Commanding,
and deferring from Deceit by Forbidding. Adding, That it cannot be abrogated,
neither can any be freed from it, neither by Senate nor People; that it is one
Eternal, and the same always to all Nations; so that there is not one at Rome,
and another at Athens: Whosoever obeys it not, must flee from himself, and in this
is greatly tormented, although he should escape all other Punishments. Plotinus
also calls him Light, saying, That as the Sun cannot be known, but by its own
Light, so God cannot be known, but with his own Light: And as the Eye cannot
see the Sun, but by receiving its Image, so Man cannot know God, but by
receiving his Image; and that it behooves Man to come to Purity of Heart,
before he could know God; calling him also Wisdom, a Name frequently given him
in Scripture; see Prove. 1.20. to the end; and Prove. 8.9, 34. where Wisdom is
said to Cry, Entreat, and Invite all, to come unto her, and learn of her: And
what is this Wisdom, but Christ? Hence such as came among the Heathen, to
forsake Evil, and cleave to Righteousness, were called Philosophers, that is,
Philosop^r's Whence so called?
Lovers of Wisdom. They knew this Wisdom was nigh unto them, and that the best
Knowledge of God, and Divine Mysteries, was by the Inspiration of the Wisdom of
God. Phocylides affirmed, That the Word of the Wisdom of God was best. His
words in the Greek are, Phocylides
(...).

And much more of this kind might be instanced, by which it appears they knew
Christ; and by his working in them, were brought from Unrighteousness to
Righteousness, and to love that Power by which they felt themselves redeemed;
so that, as says the Apostle, They show the Work of the Law written in their
Hearts, and did the things contained in the Law; and therefore, as all Doers of
the Law are, were no doubt justified, and sav^d thus by the Power of Christ in
them. And as this was the Judgment of the Apostle, so was it of the Primitive
Christians. Socrates a Christian, etc.
Hence Justin Martyr stuck not to call Socrates a Christian, saying, That all
such as lived according to the Divine Word in them, which was in all Men, were
Christians; such as Socrates and Heraclitus, and others among the Greeks, etc.
That such as live with the Word, are Christians without Fear or Anxiety.

Clemens Alexandrinus says, Clem. Al.
Apol. 2. Strom. lib. 1. That this Wisdom or Philosophy was necessary to the
Gentiles, and was their School master to lead them unto Christ, by which of old
the Greeks were justified.

Nor do I think, says Augustine, August. de Civ. D^i.
in his Book of the City of God (lib. 18. cap. 47.) that the Jews dare affirm,
that none belonged unto God, but the Israelites. Upon which place, Ludovicus
Vives says, Lud. Vives
That thus the Gentiles not having a Law, were a Law unto themselves; and the
Light so living, is the Gift of God and proceeds from the Son; of whom it is
written, that he inlightneth every Man that comes into the World.

Augustine also testifies in his Confessions, lib. 7. cap. 9. The Platonists saw
the Word in the beginning; which was Light.
That he had read in the Writings of the Platonists, though not in the very
same Words, yet that, which by many and multiplied Reasons did persuade, that
in the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God; this was in the
beginning with God, by which all things were made, and without which nothing
was made, that was made: In him was Life, and the Life was the Light of Men:
And the Light shined in the Darkness, and the Darkness did not comprehend it.
And albeit the Soul gives Testimony concerning the Light; yet it is not the
Light, but the Word of God: For God is the true Light, which enlighteneth every
Man that comes into the World; and so repeats to verse 14. of John 1. adding,
These things have I there read.

Yea, Hai Ebn Yokdan.
there is a Book translated out of the Arabic, which gives an account of one
Hai Ebn Yokdan; who, without converse of Man, living in an Island alone,
attained to such a profound Knowledge of God, as to have immediate Converse
with him, and to affirm, That the best and most certain Knowledge of God, is
not that which is attained by Promises premised, and Conclusions deduced; but
that which is enjoyed by Conjunction of the Mind of Man, with the supreme
Intellect, The Supr^am Intellect enjoyed by the Mind of Man.
after the Mind is purified from its Corruptions, and is separated from all
Bodily Images, and is gatherd into a profound Stilness.

. XXVIII. Seeing then, it is by this inward Gift, Grace and Light, that both
those that have the Gospel preached unto them, come to have Jesus brought forth
in them, and to have the saving and sanctified use of all outward Helps and
Advantages: And also by this same Light, that all may come to be saved; and
that God Calls, Invites, and Strives with all, in a Day, and saves many, to
whom he has not seen meet to convey this outward Knowledge; therefore we
having the Experience of the Inward and Powerful Work of this Light in our
Hearts, even Jesus revealed in us, cannot cease to Proclaim the Day of the
Lord, The Day of the Lord proclaimed
that is arisen in it, crying out with the Woman of Samaria, Come and see one
that has told me all that ever I have done; Is not this the Christ? That
others may come, and feel the same in themselves, and may know, that that
little small thing that reproves them in their Hearts, however they have
despised, and neglected it, is nothing less than the Gospel preached in them;
Christ, the Wisdom and Power of God, being in and by that Seed, seeking to save
their Souls.

Of this Light therefore Augustine speaks in his Confessions, lib. 11. cap. 9.
In this beginning, O God! thou made the Heavens and the Earth, in thy Word,
in thy S^n, Augustine trembled at the Inshinings of the Light unto him; and why?
in thy Virtue, in thy Wisdom, wonderfully saying, and wonderfully doing: Who
shall comprehend it? Who shall declare it? What is that shines in unto me, and
smites my Heart without Hurt, at which I both Tremble, and am Inflamed? I
Tremble, in so far as I am unlike unto it; and I am Inflamed, in so far as I am
like unto it: It is Wisdom which shines in unto me, and dispelleth my Cloud,
which had again covered me, after I was departed from that Darkness, and
Rampire of my Punishments. And again, he says, lib. 10. cap. 27. It is too
late that I have loved thee, O thou Beautifulness. so Ancient and so New! Late
have I loved thee, and behold thou wast within, and I was without, and there
was seeking thee! Thou did Call, thou did Cry, thou did break my
Deafness. thou glancedst, thou did shine, thou chasedst away my Darkness.

Of this also our Countryman George Buchanan speaks thus, in his Book,
Buchanan testifying to the Light.
De Jure regni apud Scotos: Truly, I understand no other thing at present, than
that Light, which is divinely infused into our Souls: For when God formed Man,
he not only gave him Eyes to his Body, by which he might shun those things that
are hurtful to him, and follow those things that are profitable; but also has
set before his Mind, as it were a certain Light, by which he may discern things
that are Vile, from things that are Honest: Some call this Power, Nature,
others the Law of Nature: I truly judge it to be Divine, and am persuaded, that
Nature and Wisdom never say different things. Moreover, God has given us a
Compend of the Law, which in few words comprehends the whole; to wit, That we
should love him from our Hearts, and our Neighbors as our selves. And of this
Law all the Books of the Holy Scriptures which pertain to the forming of
Manners, contain no other, but an Explication.

This is that Universal, Evangelical Principle, in and by which this Salvation
of Christ is exhibited to All Men, both Jew and Gentile, Jew and Gentile,
Scythian and barbarian, Partakers of the Salvation of Christ.
Scythian and Barbarian, of whatsoever Country or Kindred he be: and therefore
God has raised up unto himself, in this our Age, faithful Witnesses and
Evangelists, to preach again his Everlasting Gospel, and to direct All, as well
the High Professors, who Boast of the Law and the Scripture, and the outward
Knowledge of Christ, as the Infidels and Heathens, that know not him that way,
that they may all come to mind the Light in them, and know Christ in them, the
Just One, (...), whom they have so long killed, and made merry over, and he
has not resisted, James 5.6. And give up their Sins, Iniquities, false Faith,
Professions, and outside Righteousness, to be crucified by the Power of his
Cross in them; so as they may know Christ within to be the Hope of Glory, and
may come to walk in his Light, and be saved, who is that True Light, that
enlightneth every Man that comes into the World.

PROPOSITION VII. Concerning Justification.
As many as resist not this Light, but receive the same, it becomes in them a
Holy, Pure and Spiritual Birth, bringing forth Holiness, Righteousness, Purity,
and all those other Blessed Fruits which are acceptable to God, by which Holy
Birth, to wit, Jesus Christ formed within us, and working his Works in us, as
we are Sanctified so are we justified in the sight of God, according to the
Apostle's words; But ye are Washed, but ye are Sanctified, but ye are
Justified, in the Name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God, 1 Cor.
6.11. Therefore it is not by our Works, wrought in our Will, nor yet by Good
Works, considered as of themselves; but by Christ, who is both the Gift and the
Giver, and the Cause producing the Effects in us; who as he has reconciled us,
while we were Enemies, does also in his Wisdom save us, and justify us after
this manner, as says the same Apostle elsewhere; According to his Mercy he
saved us, by the washing of Regeneration, and the renewing of the Holy Ghost,
Tit. 3.5.

. 1. THE Doctrine of Justification comes well in order, after the discussing of
the Extent of Christ's Death, and of the Grace thereby communicated; some of
the sharpest Contests concerning this having from thence their Rise. Many are
the Disputes among those called Christians, concerning this point; and indeed,
if all were truly minding that which Justifies, there would be less Noise
about the Notions of Justification. I shall briefly review this Controversy,
as it stands among others, and as I have often seriously observed it; then in
short state the Controversy, as to us, and open our Sense and Judgment of it:
And lastly, prove it (if the Lord will) by some Scripture-Testimonies, and the
certain Experience of all that ever were truly Justified.

. II. Observe. 1.
That this Doctrine of Justification has been and is greatly vitiated in the
Church of Rome, The Method of Justification taken by the Church of Rome.
is not by us questioned; though our Adversaries (who for want of better
Arguments, do often make Lies their Refuge) have not spared in this respect to
Stigmatize us with Popery; but how untruly, will hereafter appear. For to speak
little of their Meritum ex Condigno, which was (no doubt) a very common
Doctrine of the Romish Church, especially before Luther; though most of their
Modern Writers, especially in their Controversies with Protestants do partly
deny it, partly qualify it, and seem to state the matter only, as if they were
Propagaters and Pleaders for Good Works, by the others denied. Yet if we look
to the Effects of this Doctrine among them, as they appear in the generality of
their Church Members, not in things disapproved, but highly approved and
commended by their Father the Pope, and all his Clients, The Pope's Doctrine of
Merits, the most beneficial of all his Revenues.
as the most beneficial Casuality of all his Revevenue; we shall find, that
Luther did not without great ground oppose himself to them in this matter: And
if he had not run himself into another extreme (of which heareafter) his Work
would have stood the better. For in this, as in most other things, he is more
to be commended, for what he pulled down of Babylon, than for what he built of
his own. Whatever then the Papists may pretend, or even some good Men among
them may have thought. Experience shows, and it is more than manifest, by the
universal and approved Practice of their People, that they place not their
Justification so much in Works that are truly and morally Good, and in the
being truly renewed and sanctified in the Mind, as in such things as are either
nor Good nor Evil, or may truly be called Evil, and can no otherways be
reckoned Good, than because the Pope pleases to call them so. Papists
Justification depends upon the Pope's Bulls
So that if the matter be well sifted, it will be found that the greatest part
of their Justification depends upon the Authority of his Bulls, and not upon
the Power, Virtue and Grace of Christ, revealed in the Heart, and renewing of
it; as will appear, First, From their Principle concerning their Sacraments,
which they say, confer Grace, ex opere operato. So that if a Man partake but of
them, Their Sacraments.
he thereby obtains Remission of Sin, though he remains as he was; the Virtue of
the Sacrements making up the want that is in the Man. So that this Act of
Submission and Faith to the Laws of the Church, and not any real inward Change,
is that which justifies him. As for Example; if a Man make use of the
Sacrament (as they call it) of Penance, Papists Penance.
so as to tell over his Sins to a Priest, though he have not true Contrition
(which the Lord has made absolutely necessary for Penitent Sinners) but only
Attrition, a Figment of their own) that is, If he be sorry he has sinned, not
out of any love to God, or his Law, which he has transgressed, but for fear of
Punishment; yet does the Virtue of the Sacrament (as they affirm) procure to
him Remission of Sins; so that being absolved by the Priest, he stands accepted
and justified in the sight of God. This Man's Justification then procceedeth
not from his being truly Penitent, and in any measure inwardly changed and
renewed, by the working of God's Grace in his Heart; but merely from the Virtue
of the Sacrament, and Authority of the Priest, who has pronounced him
Absolved; so that his Justification is from somewhat without him, and not
within him.

Secondly; This will yet more appear in the matter of Indulgences, where
Remission of all Sins, Papist-Indulgences.
not only past, but for years to come, is annexed to the visiting such and such
Churches and Relics, saying such and such Prayers; so that the Person that so
does, is presently cleared from the guilt of his Sin, and justified and
accepted in the sight of God. As for Example: He that in the great Jubilee,
will go to Rome, and present himself before the Gate of Peter and Paul, and
there receive the Pope's Blessing; or he that will go a Pilgrimage to James's
Sepulcher in Spain, or to Mary of Loretto, is upon the performance of those
things promised Forgiveness of Sin. Now if we ask them the Reason how such
things, as are not morally good in themselves, come to have Virtue? They have
no other answer, but because of the Church's and Pope's Authority; who being
the great Treasurer of the Magazine of Christ's Merits, lets them out upon such
and such Conditions. Thus also the invention of saying Mass, Papists-Mass, what
it is?
is made a chief Instrument of Justification; for in it they pretend to offer
Christ daily to the Father, a Propitiatory Sacrifice for the Sins of the Living
and Dead: So that a Man, for Money, can procure Christ thus to be offered for
him when he pleases: by which Offering he is said to obtain Remission of Sins,
and to stand Justified in the sight of God. From all which, and much more of
this nature which might be mentioned, it does appear, that the Papists place
their Justification, not so much in any Work of Holiness, really brought forth
in them, and real forsaking of Iniquity, as in the mere Performance of some
Ceremonies, and a blind Belief which their Teachers have begotten in them; that
the Church and the Pope, having the absolute Dispensation of the Merits of
Christ, have power to make these Merits effectual for the Remission of Sins,
and Justification of such, as will perform those Ceremonies. This is the true
and real method of Justification, taken by the generality of the Church of
Rome, and highly commended by their public Preachers, especially the Monks, in
their Sermons to the People; of which I my self have been an Ear and an
Eyewitness: However some of their modern Writers have labored to qualify it
in their Controversies. Luther and the Protestants opposing the Pope's Doctrine
of Works, fell into the other Extreme, of no Good Works necessary to
Justification.
This Doctrine Luther and the Protestants then had good Reason to deny and
oppose; though many of them ran into another Extreme, so as to deny Good Works to
be necessary to Justification; and to preach up, not only Remission of Sins,
but Justification by Faith alone, without all Works, however good. So that Men
do not obtain their Justification, according as they are inwardly Sanctified
and Renewed; but are Justified merely by Believing that Christ died for them;
and so some may perfectly be Justified, though they be lying in gross Wickedness;
as appears by the Example of David, who they say was fully and perfectly
Justified, while he was lying in the gross Sins of Murder and Adultery. As then
the Protestants have sufficient ground to quarrel and confute the Papists,
concerning those many Abuses in the matter of Justification; showing how the
Doctrine of Christ is thereby vitiated and overturned, and the Word of God made
void by many and useless Traditions, the Law of God neglected, while foolish
and needless Ceremonies are prized and followed, through a false Opinion of
being Justified by the performance of them; and the Merits and Sufferings of
Christ (which is the only Sacrifice appointed of God for Remission of Sins)
derogated from, by the setting up of a daily Sacrifice, Papists Device to get
Money.
never appointed by God, and chiefly devised out of Covetousness to get Money
by: So the Protestants, on the other hand, by not rightly establishing and
holding forth the Doctrine of Justification, according as it is delivered in
the Holy Scriptures, have opened a Door for the Papists to accuse them, as if
they were Neglecters of Good Works, Enemies to Mortification and Holiness, such
as esteem themselves Justified, while lying in great Sins: By which kind of
Accusations (for which too great ground has been given out of the Writings of
some rigid Protestants) the Reformation has been greatly defamed and hindered,
and the Souls of many ensnared. Whereas who will narrowly look into the matter,
may observe these Debates to be more in specie, than in genere, seeing both do
upon the matter land in one, and like two Men in a Circle, who though they go
sundry ways, yet meet at last in the same Center.

For the Papists, they say; Papists Belief of Justification meets in the same
Center with the --
They obtain Remission of Sins, and are justified by the Merits of Christ, as
the same are applied unto them in the use of the Sacraments of the Church; and
are dispensed in the Performance of such and such Ceremonies, Pilgrimages,
Prayers and Performances, though there be not an inward Renewing of the Mind, nor
knowing of Christ inwardly formed; yet they are remitted, and made Righteous,
ex opere operato, because of the Power and Authority accompanying the
Sacraments, and the Dispensers of them.

The Protestants say; -- Protestants Belief.
That they obtain Rimission of Sins, and stand justified in the sight of God,
by Virtue of the Merits and Sufferings of Christ; not by infusing Righteousness
into them, but by pardoning their Sins, So says the Westminster Confession of
Faith, Chap. 11. Sect. 1.
and by accounting and accepting their Persons as righteous; they resting on
Him and his Righteousness by Faith; which Faith, the Act of Believing, is not
imputed unto them for Righteousness.

So the Justification of neither here is placed in any Inward Renewing of the
Mind, or by Virtue of any Spiritual Birth, or Formation of Christ in them; but
only by a bare Application of the Death and Sufferings of Christ, outwardly
performed for them: Whereof the one lays hold on a Faith resting upon them, and
hoping to be justified by them alone; the other, by the saying of some outward
Prayers and Ceremonies, which they judge makes the Death of Christ effectual
unto them. I except here (being unwilling to wrong any) what things have been
said, as to the necessity of inward Holiness, either by some modern Papists, or
some modern Protestants, who in so far as they have labored after a Midst
betwixt these two Extremes, have come near to the Truth; as by some Citations
out of them, hereafter to be mentioned, will appear: Though this Doctrine has
not, since the Apostasy, (so far as ever I could observe) been so distinctly
and evidently held forth, according to the Scripture Testimony, as it has
pleased God to reveal it, and preach it forth in this Day, by the Witnesses of
his Truth, whom he has raised to that end. Which Doctrine, though it be briefly
held forth and comprehended in the Thesis it self; yet I shall a little more
fully explain the State of the Controversy, State of the Controversy.
^s it stands betwixt us, and those that now oppose us.

Expl. 1.
. III. First then, as by the Explanation of the former Thesis appears. We
Renounce all Natural Power and Ability in our selves, Justification springs of
and from the Love of God.
in order to bring us out of our lost and fallen Condition, and first Nature;
and confess, that as of our selves we are able to do nothing that is good; so
neither can we procure Remission of Sins, or Justification, by any Act of our
own, so as to merit it, or draw it as a debt from God, due unto us: But we
acknowledge all to be of and from his Love, which is the Original and
Fundamental Cause of our Acceptance.

Secondly; God manifested this Love toward us, Expl. 2.
in the sending of his Beloved Son, the Lord Jesus Christ, into the World,
Christ giving himself a Sacrifice for us.
who gave himself for us an Offering and a Sacrifice to God, for a
sweet smelling Savor; and having made Peace through the Blood of his Cross,
that he might reconcile us unto himself, and by the Eternal Spirit offered
himself without Spot unto God, and suffered for our Sins, the Just for the
Unjust, that he might bring us unto God.

Thirdly then; Forasmuch as all Men, Expl. 3.
who have come to Man's Estate, (the Man Jesus only excepted) have sinned,
therefore All have need of this Savior, to remove the Wrath of God from them,
due to their Offenses; in this respect he is truly said, to have born the
Iniquities of us All, in his Body on the Tree; and therefore is the Only
Mediator, having qualified the Wrath of God toward us; so that our former Sins
stand not in our way, being by Virtue of his most Satisfactory Sacrifice
removed and pardoned. Neither do we think, that Remission of Sins is to be
expected, sought, To Remission of Sins.
or obtained any other way, of by any works or Sacrifice whatsoever. (Though as
has been said formerly, The only Mediator betwixt God and Man.
they may come to partake of this Remission, that are ignorant of the History.)
So then Christ, by his Death and Sufferings, has Reconciled us to God, even
while we are Enemies; that is, he offers Reconciliation unto us; we are put
into a capacity of being Reconciled; God is willing to forgive us our
Iniquities, and to accept us; as is well expressed by the Apostle, 2 Cor. 5.19.
God was in Christ, reconciling the World unto himself, not imputing their
Trespasses unto them, and has put in us the Word of Reconciliation. And
therefore the Apostle, in the next Verses, entreats them, in Christ's stead, to
be Reconciled to God; intimating, that the Wrath of God, being removed by the
Obedience of Christ Jesus, he is willing to be Reconciled unto them, and ready
to remit the Sins that are past, if they Repent.

A Twofold Redemption.
We consider then our Redemption in a twofold respect or state; both which in
their own nature are perfect, though in their application to us, the one is
not, nor cannot be, without respect to the other.

1. The Redemption of Christ without us.
The First is, The Redemption performed and accomplished by Christ for us, in
his Crucified Body, without us: The other is the Redemption wrought by Christ
in us; which no less properly is called and accounted a Redemption than the
former. The first then is that whereby a Man, as he stands in the Fall, is put
into a capacity of Salvation, and has conveyed unto him a measure of that
Power, Virtue, Spirit, Life and Grace, that was in Christ Jesus; which, as the
Free-Gift of God, is able to counter-ballance, overcome, and root out the Evil
Seed, wherewith we are naturally, as in the Fall, leavened.

2. The Redemption wrought by Christ in us.
The Second is that, whereby we witness and know this pure and perfect
Redemption in our selves, purifying, cleansing and redeeming us from the power
of Corruption, and bringing us into Unity, Favor and Friendship with God. By
the first of these two, we that were lost in Adam, plunged in the bitter and
corrupt Seed, unable of our selves to do any good thing, but naturally joined
and united to Evil, forward and propense to all Iniquity, servants and slaves
to the power and spirit of Darkness, are notwithstanding all this, so far
Reconciled to God by the Death of his Son, while Enemies, that we are put into
a capacity of Salvation; having the Glad-Tidings of the Gospel of Peace offered
unto us; and God is Reconciled unto us in Christ, calls and invites us to
himself; in which respect we understand these Scriptures: Ephesians. 2.15. 1 John
4.10. Ezekiel. 16.6. 1 Pet. 2.22.24. and 3.18.
He slew the Enmity in himself. He loved us first; seeing us in our Blood, he
said unto us, Live; he, who did not sin his own self, bare our sins in his own
Body on the Tree; and he died for our sins, the Just for the Unjust.

By the Second, we witness this capacity brought into Act; whereby receiving,
and not resisting, the purchase of his Death, to wit, the Light, Spirit, and
Grace of Christ revealed to us, we witness and possess a real, true and inward
Redemption from the power and prevalency of Sin; and so come to be truly and
really Redeemed, Justified, and made Righteous, and to a sensible Union and
Friendship with God. Thus he died for us, that he might Redeem us from all
Iniquity; and thus we know him, Titus 2.14. Phil. 3.12.
and the Power of his Resurrection, and the Fellowship of his Sufferings, being
made conformable to his Death. This last follows the first in order, and is a
conseqence of it, proceeding from it, as an Effect from its Cause; so as none
could have enjoyed the last, without the first had been (such being the Will of
God;) so also can none now partake of the first, but as he witnesses the last.
Wherefore as to us, they are Both Causes of our Justification: The first the
Procuring Efficient, the other the Formal Cause.

Fourthly; We understand not by this Justification by Christ, barely the Good
Works, Expl. 4.
even as wrought by the Spirit of Christ; for they, as Protestants truly
affirm, are rather an effect of Justification than the Cause of it: The
Formation of Christ in us begets good Works.
But we understand the Formation of Christ in us, Christ born and brought forth
in us; from which, Good Works as naturally proceed, as Fruit from a fruitful
Tree. It is this Inward Birth in us, bringing forth Righteousness and Holiness
in us, that does Justify us; which, having removed and done away the contray
nature and spirit, that did bear Rule, and bring Condemnation, now is in
dominion over all in our Hearts. Those then that come to know Christ thus
formed in them, do enjoy him wholly and undivided, who is the LORD our
RIGHTEOUSNESS, Jer. 23.6. This is to be Clothed with Christ, and to have put
him on, whom God therefore truly accounted Righteous and Just. This is so far
from being the Doctrine of Papists, that as the generality of them do not
understand it; so the Learned among them oppose it, and dispute against it, and
particularly Bellarmine. Thus then, as I may say, the Formal Cause of
Justification is not the Works, to speak properly, they being but an Effect of
it; but this Inward Birth, this Jesus brought forth in the Heart: Who is the
Well-beloved, whom the Father cannot but accept, and all those, who thus are
sprinkled with the Blood of Jesus, and washed with it. By this also comes that
Communication of the Goods of Christ unto us, by which we come to be made
Partakers of the Divine Nature, as says Peter, 2 Pet. 1.4. and are made one
with him, as the Branches with the Vine, and have a title and right to what he
has done and suffered for us: Christ's Obedience, Righteousness, Death and
Sufferings, are ours.
So that his Obedience becomes ours, his Righteousness ours, his Death and
Sufferings ours. And by this Nearness we come to have a sense of his
Sufferings, and to suffer with his Seed, that yet lies pressed and crucified in
the Hearts of the Ungodly; and so travel with it, and for its Redemption, and
for the Rpentance of those Souls, that in it are Crucifying as yet the Lord of
Glory. Even as the Apostle Paul, who by his Sufferings is said to fill up that
which is behind of the Afflictions of Christ for his Body, which is the Church:
Though this be a Mystery, sealed up from all the Wise Men, that are yet ignorant
of this Seed in themselves, and oppose it; nevertheless some Protestants speak
of this Justification by Christ inwardly put on; as shall hereafter be recited
in its place.

Expl. 5.
Lastly; Though we place Remission of Sins in the Righteousness and Obedience of
Christ, performed by him in the Flesh, as to what pertains to the remote
procuring Cause; and that we hold our selves formally justified by Christ Jesus
formed and brought forth in us: Yet can we not (as some Protestants have
unwarily done) Exclude Works from Justification. Good Works are not excluded
Justification.
For though properly we are not Justified for them, yet are we Justified in them;
and they are necessary, even as Causa sine qua non, i. e. The Cause without
which none are Justified. For the denying of this, as it is contrary to the
Scriptures Testimony; so it has brought a-great Scandal to the Protestant
Religion, opened the Mouths of Papists, and made many too secure, while they
have believed to be Justified without Good Works. Moreover, though it be not so
safe to say, They are Meritorious; yet seeing they are Rewarded, many of those
called the Fathers, have not spared to use the word [ Merit] which some of us
have perhaps also done, in a qualified sense; but no ways to infer the Popish
Abuses abovementioned. And lastly, if we had that Notion of Good Works, which
most Protestants have, we could freely agree to make them not only not
necessary, but reject them as hurtful: viz. That the best Works, even of the
Saints, are defiled and polluted. For though we judge so of the best Works
performed by Man, endeavoring a Conformity to the outward Law, by his own
Strength, and in his own Will; yet we believe, that such Works as naturally
proceed from this Spiritual Birth, and Formation of Christ in us, are Pure and
Holy, even as the Root from which they come; and therefore God Accepts them,
justifies us in them, and Rewards us for them, of his own Free Grace. The State
of the Controversy being thus stated, these following Positions do hence-from
arise, in the next place to be proved.

. IV. First; That the Obedience, Sufferings, Position 1.
and Death of Christ, is that, by which the Soul obtains Remission of Sins, and
is the procuring Cause of that Grace, by whose Inward Workings Christ comes to
be formed inwardly, and the Soul to be made conformable unto him, and so just
and justified. And that therefore, in respect of this Capacity and Offer of
Grace, God is said to be Reconciled; not as if he were actually Reconciled, or
did actually Justify, or account any Just, so long as they remain in their
Sins, really impure and unjust.

Position 2.
Secondly; That it is by this Inward Birth of Christ in Man, that Man is made
just, and therefore so accounted by God: Wherefore, to be plain, we are thereby
and not till that be brought forth in us, formally (if we must use that word)
Justified in the sight of God; because Justification is both more properly ard
frequently in Scripture, taken in its proper signification, for making one
Just, and not reputing one merely such, and is all one with Sanctification.

Position 3.
Thirdly; That since Good Works as naturally follow from this Birth, Good Works
are Causa sine qu^ non -- of Justification.
as heat from Fire; therefore are they of Absolute Necessity to Justification,
as Causa sine qua non, i. e. though not as the Cause for which; yet as that in
which we are and without which we cannot be Justified. And though they be not
Meritorious, and draw no debt upon God, yet he cannot but accept and reward
them; for it is contrary to his Nature to deny his own; since they may be
perfect in their kind, as proceeding from a pure, holy Birth and Root.
Wherefore their Judgment is false, and against the Truth, that say, That the
holiest Works of the Saints are defiled and sinful in the sight of God: For
these Good Works are not the Works of the Law, excluded by the Apostle from
Justification.

Position 1.
. V. As to the first, I prove it from Romans 3.25. Whom God has set forth to be
a Propitiation through Faith in his Blood, to declare his Righteousness for the
Remission of Sins that are past, The Efficacy of Christ's Death to redeem Man
out of Evil.
through the forbearance of God. Here the Apostle holds forth the Extent and
Efficacy of Christ's Death, showing, that thereby, and by Faith therein,
Remission of Sins that are past is obtained; as being that, wherein the
Forbearance of God is exercised toward Mankind. So that, though Men, for the
Sins they daily commit, deserve Eternal Death, and that the Wrath of God should
lay hold upon them; yet by Virtue of that most satisfactory Sacrifice of Christ
Jesus, the Grace and Seed of God moves in love toward them, during the Day of
their Visitation; yet not so as not to strike against the Evil (for that must
be burned up and destroyed) but to redeem Man out of the Evil.

Secondly; If God were perfectly Reconciled with Men, and did esteem them Just,
while they are actually Unjust, and do continue in their Sins; then should God
have no Controversy with them: I do not only speak concerning Men before
Conversion, who afterward are Converted, whom yet some of our Antagonists
called Antinomians, do ^ver were Justified from the Beginning; but also
touching those, who (according to the common Opinion of Protestants) have been
Converted: Whom albeit they confess, they persist always in some Misdeeds, and
sometimes in haino^s Sins, as is manifest in David's Adultery and Murder; yet
they assert to be perfectly and wholly Justified.
How comes he then so often to Complain, and to Expostulate so much throughout
the whole Scripture with such, as our Adversaries confess to be Justified;
telling them, That their Sins separate betwixt him and them? Isai. 59.2. For
where there is a perfect and full Reconcilation, there is no Separation. Yea,
from this Doctrine it necessarily follows, either that such for whom Christ
died, and whom he has thus Reconciled, never Sin; or that, when they do so,
they are still Reconciled, and their Sins make not the least Separation from
God; yea, that they are Justified in their Sins. From whence also would follow
this abominable Consequence, that the good Works and greatest Sins of such, are
alike in the sight of God; seeing neither the one serves to Justify them, nor
the other to break their Reconcilation; which occasions great Security, and
opens a door to every lewd Practice.

Thirdly; Pr. III.
This would make void the whole Practical Doctrine of the Gospel, and make
Faith it self needless. For if Faith and Repentance, and the other Conditions
called for throughout the Gospel, be a Qualification upon our part necessary to
be performed; then before this be performed by us, we are either fully
Reconciled to God, or put in a capacity of being Reconciled to God, he being
ready to Reconcile and Justify us, as these Conditions are performed: Which
latter, if granted, is according to the Truth we profess. And if we are already
perfectly Reconciled and Justified, before these Conditions are performed,
(which Conditions are of that Nature, that they cannot be performed at one
time, but are to be done all ones Lifetime) then can they not be said to be
absolutely needful: Which is contrary to the very express Testimony of
Scripture, which is acknowledged by all Christians: For without Faith it is
impossible to please God: Heb 11.6. John 3.18. Luke 13.3. Romans 8.13.
They that believe not, are condemned already, because they believe not in the
Only Begotten Son of God: Except ye Repent, ye cannot be saved: For if ye live
after the Flesh, ye shall die. And of those that were Converted: I will remove
your Candlestick from you, Apoc. 2.5.
unless ye Repent. Should I mention all the Scriptures that positively and
evidently prove this, I might transcribe much of all the Doctrinal Part of the
Bible. For since Christ said, It is Finished, and did finish his Work Sixteen
Hundred Years ago, and upwards; if he so fully perfected Redemption then, and
did actually Reconcile every one, that is to be saved; A Door of Mercy opened
by Christ, upon Repentance.
not simply opening a Door of Mercy for them, offering the Sacrifice of his
Body, by which they may obtain Remission of their Sins, when they Repent, and
communicating unto them a measure of his Grace, by which they may see their
Sins, and be able to Repent; but really make them to be reputed as Just, The
Antinomians Opinion of Reconciliation and Justification.
either before they believe (as say the Antinomians) or after they have
assented to the Truth of the History of Christ, or are sprinkled with the
Baptism of Water, while nevertheless they are actully Unjust, so that no part
of their Redemption is to be wrought by him now, as to their Reconciliation and
Justification; then the whole Doctrinal Part of the Bible is useless, and of no
profit: In vain were the Apostles sent forth to preach Repentance and Remission
of Sins; and in vain do all the Preachers bestow their Labor, spend their
Lungs, and give forth Writings; yea, much more in vain do the People spend
their Money, which they give them for Preaching; seeing it is all but Actum
agere, but a vain and ineffectual Essay, to do that which is already perfectly
done without them.

lastly; To pretermit their Humane Labors as not worth the disputing, whether
they be needful or not, since (as we shall hereafter show) themselves confess,
the best of them is sinful; this also makes void the present Intercession of
Christ for Men. What shall become of that great Article of Faith, by which we
affirm, That he sits at the Right Hand of God, daily making Intercession for
us; Christ's daily making Intercession for us.
and for which end the Spirit it self makes Intercession for us, with
Groanings, which cannot be uttered? For Christ makes not Intercession for
those, that are not in a Possibility of Salvation; that is absurd. Our
Adversaries will not admit that he prayed for the World at all; and to pray for
those, that are already Reconciled, and perfectly Justified, is to no purpose:
To pray for Remission of Sins, is yet more needless, if all be remitted, past,
present, and to come. Indeed there is not any solid Solving of this, but by
acknowledging, according to the Truth, That Christ by his Death removed the
Wrath of God, so far as to obtain Remission of Sins for as many as receive that
Grace and Light that he communicates unto them, and has purchased for them by
his Blood: Which, as they believe in, they come to know Remission of Sins past,
and Power to save them from Sin, and to wipe it away, so often as they may fall
into it by unwatchfulness or weakness, if applying themselves to this Grace,
they truly Repent. For to as many as receive him, he gives Power to become the
Sons of God: So none are Sons, none are Justified, none Reconciled, until they
thus receive him in that little Seed in their Hearts: And Life Eternal is
offered to those, who by patient continuance in well doing, seek for Glory,
Honor, and Immortality: For if the Righteous Man depart from his
Righteousness, his Righteousness shall be remembered no more. And therefore, on
the other part, none are longer Sons of God, and Justified, than they patiently
continue in Righteousness and Well doing. And therefore Christ lives always
making Intercession, during the Day of every Man's Visitation, that they may be
Converted And when Men are in some measure Converted, he makes Intercession,
that they may continue, and go on, and not faint, nor go back again. Much more
might be said to confirm this Truth; but I go on to take notice of the common
Objections against it, which are the Arguments made use of to propagate the
Errors contrary to it.

. VI. The first and chief is drawn from that Saying of the Apostle before
mentioned, 2 Cor. 5.18, 19. God has reconciled us to himself by Jesus Christ:
God was in Christ reconciling the World unto himself; not imputing their
Trespasses unto them.

That Christ fully perfected the Work of Reconciliation, while he was on Earth.

Reconciliation) be understood the Removing of Wrath, and the Purchase of that
Grace, by which we may come to be Reconciled, we agree to it; but that that
place speaks no more, appears from the place it self: For when the Apostle
speaks in the Perfect Time, saying, He has Reconciled us, he speaks of himself
and the Saints; who having received the Grace of God, purchased by Christ, The
difference between Reconciled to Christ, and Reconciling.
were through Faith in him actually Reconciled. But as to the World, he says (
Reconciling) not ( Reconciled) which Reconciling, though it denotes a time
somewhat past; yet it is by the Imperfect Time, denoting, that the thing begun
was not perfected. For this Work Christ began toward All, in the Days of his
Flesh, yea, and long before; for He was the mediator from the Beginning, and
the Lamb slain from the Foundation of the World: But in his Flesh, after he had
perfectly fulfilled the Law, and the righteousness thereof, and rent the Vail,
and made way for the more clear and universal Revelation of the Gospel to All,
both Jew and Gentile; he gave up himself a most satisfactory Sacrifice for Sin;
which becomes effectual to as many as receive him in his inward Appearance, in
his Light in the heart. Again, This very place shows, that no other
Reconciliation is intended, but the Opening of a Door of Mercy, upon God's
part, and a Removing of Wrath for Sins that are past; so as Men,
notwithstanding their Sins, are stated in a capacity of Salvation: For the
Apostle in the following Verse, says, Now then, we are Ambassadors for Christ,
as though God did beseech you by us; we pray you, in Christ's flead, be ye
Reconciled to God. For if their Reconciliation had already been perfectly
accomplished, what need any Entreating then to be Reconciled? Ambassadors are
not sent after a peace already perfected, and Reconciliation made, to entreat
for a Reconciliation; for that implies a manifest Contradiction.

Secondly; They object, Verse 21. of the same Chapter, For he has made him to
be Sin for us, who knew no Sin, that we might be made the Righteousness of God
in him.

That as our Sin is imputed to Christ, who had no Sin; so Christ's
Righteousness is imputed to us, without our being Righteous.

Christ bare our Sins, and suffered for us, and was among Men, accounted a
Sinner, and numbered among Transgressors; yet that God reputed him a Sinner, is
no where proved. For it is said, He was found before him Holy, Harmless, and
Undefiled; Heb. 7.26. 1 Pet. 2.22.
neither was there found any Guile in his Mouth. That we deserved these things,
and much more for our Sins, which he endured in Obedience to the Father, and
according to his Counsel, is true; but that ever God reputed him a Sinner,
Men's I^^d Righteousness (...) refut^.
is denied: Neither did he ever die, that we should be reputed Righteous; though
no more really such, than he was a Sinner (as hereafter appears.) For indeed,
if this Argument hold, it might be stretched to that length, as to become very
pleasing to wicked Men, that love to abide in their Sins: For if we be made
Righteous, as Christ was made a Sinner, merely by imputation, then as there was
no Sin, not in the least in Christ; so it would follow, that there needed no
more Righteousness, no more Holiness, no more inward Sactification in us, than
there was Sin in him. So then by his ( being made Sin for us) must be
understood, his Suffering for our Sins, that we might be made Partakers of the
Grace purchased by him; by the Workings whereof we are made the Righteousness
of God in him. For that the Apostle understood here a being made really
Righteous, and not merely a being reputed such, appears by what follows, seeing
in verse. 14, 15, 16. of the following Chapter, he argues largely against any
supposed Agreement of Light and Darkness, Righteousness and Unrighteousness;
which must needs be admitted, if Men are to be reckoned Ingrafted in Christ,
and real Members of him, merely by an Imputative Righteousness, wholly without
them, while they themselves are actually Unrighteous. And indeed, it may be
thought strange, how some Men have made this so Fundamental an Article of their
Faith, which is so contrary to the whole strain of the Gospel: A thing, Christ
in none of all his Sermons and Gracious Speeches ever willed any to rely upon;
always recommending to us Works, as Instrumental in our Justification. And the
more it is to be admired at, because that Sentence or Term (so frequently in
their Mouths, and so often pressed by them, as the very Basis of their Hope and
Confidence) to wit, Christ's Imputed Righteousness not found in all the Bible.
The Imputed Righteousness of Christ, is not to be found in all the Bible, at
least as to my Observation. Thus have I passed through the first part, and that
the more briefly, because many, who assert this Justification by bare
Imputation, do nevertheless confess, That even the Elect are not Justified,
until they be Converted; that is, not until this Imputative Justification he
applied to them by the Spirit.

. VII. I come then to the Second thing proposed by me, which is; Posit. II.
That it is by this inward Birth, or Christ formed within, By Christ formed
within, we are Justified.
that we are (so to speak) formally Justified in the sight of God. I suppose, I
have said enough already to demonstrate, how much we ascribe to the Death and
Sufferings of Christ, as that, whereby Satisfaction is made to the Justice of
God, Remission of Sins obtained, and this Grace and Seed purchased; by and from
which this Birth proceeds. The thing now to be proved is, That by Christ Jesus
formed in us, we are justified, or made just. Let it be marked, I use
Justification in this sense upon this occasion.

First then, I prove this by that of the Apostle Paul, 1 Cor. 6.11. And such
were some of you; but ye are Washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are
Justified in the Name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God. First,
This ( Justified) here understood, Justified, i. e. Being made Ju^ really, not
by ^aputation.
must needs be a being really made Just, and not a being merely imputed such;
else ( Sanctified) and ( Washed) might be reputed a being esteemed so, and not
a being really so; and then it quite overturns the whole Intent of the Context.
For the Apostle showing them in the preceding Verses, how the Unrighte^s cannot
inherit the Kingdom of God; and descending to the several Species of
Wickedness, subsumes, That they were sometimes such, but now are not any more
such. Wherefore, as they are now Washed and Sanctified, so are they Justified:
For if this Justification were not Real, then it might be alleged, that the
Corinthians had not forsaken these Evils, but though they still continued in
them, were notwitwstanding Justified: Which as in it self it is most absurd, so
it luculently overturneth the very Import and Intent of the place; as if the
Corinthians, turning Christians, had not wrought any real Change in them; but
had only been a Belief of some barren Notions, which had wrought no alteration
in their Affections, Will, or Manner of Life. For my own part, I neither see
any thing, nor could ever yet hear or read any thing, that with any color of
Reason did evince ( Justified) in this place to be understood any other ways,
than in its own proper and genuine Interpretation of being made Just. And for
the more clear understanding hereof, let it be considered, that this word (
Justify) is derived either from the Substantive Justice, The Derivation of the
Word Justify considered.
or the Adjective just: Both which words import the Substantive, that true and
real Virtue in the Soul, as it is in it self, to wit, it signifies really, and
not suppositively, that Excellent Quality expressed and understood among Men by
the word ( Justice;) and the Adjective (just) as applied, signifies a Man or
Woman, who is Just, that is, in whom this Quality of Justice is stated: For it
would not only be great Impropriety, but also manifest Falsity, to call a Man
Just, merely by supposition; especially if he were really Unjust. Now this word
( Justify) formed from Justice, or just, does beyond all question signify a
making just; it being nothing else, but a Composition of the Verb facio, and
the Adjective justus, which is nothing else than thus, justifico, i. e. Justum
facio, I make Just; and (Justified) of justus and fio, as justus fio, I become.
Just and justifi^atus, i. e. justus factus, I am made Just. Thus also is it
with Verbs of this kind, as sanctifico, from sanctus holy, and facio;
honorifico, from honor and facio; sacrifico from sacer and facio: All which are
still understood of the Subject really and truly endued with that Virtue and
Quality, from which the Verb is derived. Therefore as none are said to be
Sanctified, Justified none are, while they actually remain Unjust.
that are really Unholy, while they are such; so neither can any be truly said
to be Justified, while they actually remain Unjust. Only this Verb justify,
has, in a Metaphorical and Figurative sense, been otherwise taken, to wit, in
a Law sense; as when a Man really guilty of a Crime, is freed from that
Punishment of his Sin, he is said to be justified; that is, put in the place,
as if he were just. For this use of the word, has proceeded from the true
supposition, That none ought to be acquitted, but the Innocent. Hence also that
manner of speaking, I will justify such a Man, or I will justify this or that,
is used from the supposition, that the Person and Thing is really justifiable:
And where there is an Error and Abuse in the Matter, so far there is also in
the Expression.

This is so manifest and apparent, that Paraeus, Paraeus de Just. cont. Bell.
l. 2. c. 7 p. 4^
a chief Protestant (and a Calvinist also in his Opinion) acknowledges this; We
never at any time said (says he) nor thought, that the Righteousness of Christ
was imputed to us, that by him we should be named formally Just, and be so, as
we have diverse times already showed; for that would no less soundly fight with
right Reason, than if a guilty Man, absolved in Judgment, should say, that he
himself was formally Just by the Clemency of the Judge granting him his Life.
Now, is it not strange, that Men should be so facile in a matter of so great
Concernment, as to build the Stress of their Acceptance with God, upon a mere
borrowed and metaphorical Signification, to the excluding, Holiness required;
therefore good works are.
or at least esteeming that not necessary, without which the Scripture says
expressly, No Man shall ever see God? For if Holiness be requisite and
necessary, of which this is said, then must good Works also; unless our
Adversaries can show us a holy Man without good Works. But moreover, (
Justified) in this Figurative sense is used for Approved; and indeed for the
most part, if not always in Scripture, when the word ( Justify) is used, it is
taken in the worst part; that is, that as the use of the word that way is an
Usurpation, so it is spoken of such as usurp the thing to themselves, while it
properly does not belong unto them; as will appear to those that will be at the
pains to Examine these places, Exodus 23.7. Joh 9.20. and 27.5. Prove. 17.15.
Isai. 5.23. Jer. 3.11. Ezekiel. 16.51, 52. Luke 10.29. and 16.15. which are all
spoken of Men justifying the Wicked, or of Wicked Men justifying themselves;
that is, approving themselves in their Wickedness. If it be at any time in this
signification taken in good part, it is very seldom, and that so obvious and
plain by the Context, as leaves no scruple. But the Question is not so much of
the use of the word, where it is passingly or occasionally used, as where the
very Doctrine of Justification is handled. Where indeed to mistake it, viz. in
its proper place, so as to content our selves with an Imaginary Justification,
while God requires a Real, is of most dangerous Consequence. For the
Disquisition of which, let it be considered, that in all these places to the
Romans, Corinthians, Galatians, and elsewhere, where the Apostle handles this
Theme, the word may be taken in its own proper Signification without any
absurdity. As, where it is often asserted in the abovementioned Epistles to
the Romans and Galatians, Justified, its proper Signification.
That a Man cannot be justified by the Law of Moses, nor by the Works of the
Law: There is no absurdity nor danger in understanding it, according to its own
proper signification, to wit, that a Man cannot be made just by the Law of
Moses; seeing this so well agrees with that Saying of the same Apostle, That
the Law makes nothing perfect. And also where it is said, We are justified by
Faith, it may be very well understood of being made just; seeing it is also
said, That Faith purifys the Heart; and no doubt the Pure in heart are Just;
and the Just live by Faith. Again, where it is said, We are justified by Grace,
We are justified by Christ, We are justfied by the Spirit; it is no ways absurd
to understand it of being made Just, seeing by his Spirit and Grace he does
make Men just. But to understand it universally, the other way, merely for
Acceptance and Imputation, would infer great Absurdities, as may be proved at
large; but because I judged it would be acknowledged, I forbear at present for
Brevity's sake. But further, in the most weighty places, where this word
Justify is used in Scripture, with an immediate relation to the Doctrine of
Justification, Justificatition signifys a making Just.
our Adversaries must needs aknowledge it to be understood of making Just, and
not barely in the Legal Acceptance: As first, in that of 1 Cor. 6.11. But ye
are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified, as I before have
proved; which also many Protestants are forced to acknowledge. Thysius Disp. de
Just. These. 3.
Neither diffide we (says Thysius) because of the most great and strict
Connection, that Justification does sometimes seem also to comprehend
Sanctification, as a Consequence, as in Romans 8.30. Tit. 3.7. 1 Cor. 6.11. And
such sometimes were ye, but ye are Washed, etc. Zanchius having spoken
concerning this sense of Justification, adds, saying; Zanchius in cap. 2. ad
Ephesians. ver 4 loc. de Just.
There is another signification of the word, viz. for a Man from Unjust to be
made Just, even as Sanctified signifys from Unholy to be made Holy: In which
signification, the Apostle said (in the place above cited) And such were some
of you, etc. That is, Of Unclean, ye are made Holy; and of unjust, ye are made
just by the Holy Spirit, for Christ's sake, in whom ye have believed. Of this
signification is that, Rev. 22.11. Let him that is just, be just still; that
is, really from just, become more just; even as from unjust, he became just.
And according to this signification the Fathers, and especially Agustin, have
interpreted this word. Thus far he. H. Bulling.
H. Bullinger, on the same place, 1 Cor. 6. speaks thus; By diverse words
(says he) the Apostle signifies the same thing when he says, Ye are washed,
ye are sanctified, ye are justified.

Secondly; In that excellent Saying of the Apostle, so much observed, Romans
8.30. Whom he called, them he also Justified; and whom he Justified, them he
also glorified: This is commonly called the Golden Chain, as being acknowledged
to comprehend the Method and Order of Salvation. And therefore, if ( Justified)
were not understood here in its proper signification, of being made just,
Sanctification would be excluded out of this Chain. And truly it is very worthy
of Observation, that the Apostle, in this succinct and compendious Account,
makes the word (Justified) to comprehend all betwixt Calling and Glorifying;
Righteousness the only Medium by which from our Calling we pass to
Glorification.
thereby clearly insinuating, that the being really Righteous, is that only
Medium, by which from our Calling we pass to Glorification. All for the most
part do acknowledge the word to be so taken in this place; and not only so, but
most of those, who oppose, are forced to acknowledge, that as this is the most
proper, so the most common Signification of it: Thus diverse famous Protestants
do acknowledge. D. Cham. Tom. 3. de Sanct. l 10. p. 1.
We are not (says D. Chamierus) such impertinent Esteemers of Words, as to be
ignorant, nor yet such importunate Sophists, as to deny, that the words of
Justification and Sanctification do infer one another; yea, we know, that the
Saints are chiefly for this reason so called, because that in Christ they have
received Remission of Sins: And we read in the Revelation, Let him that is
just, be just still; which cannot be understood, except of the fruit of
Inherent Righteousness. Nor do we deny, but perhaps in other places they may be
promiscuously taken, especially by the Fathers. Beza in c. 3. ad Tit. verse. 7.
I take (says Beza) the name of Justification largely, so as it comprehends
whatsoever we acquire from Christ, as well by Imputation, as by the Efficacy of
the Spirit in sanctifying us. So likewise is the word of Justification taken,
Romans 8.30. Melancthon says, Melanct. in Apol Conf. Aug.
That to be Justified by Faith, siignifies in Scripture, not only to be
pronounced Just, but also of Unrighteous, to be made Righteous. Also some chief
Protestants, though not so clearly, yet in part, hinted at our Doctrine, whereby
we ascribe unto the Death of Christ, Remission of Sins, and the Work of
Justification unto the Grace of the Spirit acquired by his Death. Martenus
Boraeus, explaining that place of the Apostle, Borae. in Genesis C. 15. ad verb.
Credidit Abraham Deo. p. 161
Romans 4.25. Who was given for our Sins, and Rose again for our Justification,
says: There are two things beheld in Christ, which are necessary to our
Justification; the one is his Death, the other is his Arising from the Dead. By
his Death, the Sins of this World behoved to be expiated: By his Rising from
the Dead, it pleased the same Goodness of God to give the Holy Spirit, whereby
both the Gospel is believed, and the Righteousness, lost by the fault of the
First Adam, is restored. And afterward he says; The Apostle expresses both
parts in these words, Who was given for our sins, etc. In his Death is beheld
the satisfaction for Sin; in his Resurrection, the Gift of the Holy Spirit, by
which our Justification is perfected. And again, Idem. lib. 3. Reg. cap. 9. v
4. p. 681.
the same Man says elsewhere; Both these kinds of Righteousness are therefore
contained in Justification, neither can the one be separate from the other. So
that in the Definition of Justification, the Merit of the Blood of Christ is
included, both with the Remission of Sins, and with the Gift of the Holy Spirit
of Justification and Regeneration. Martinus Bucerus says; Bucerus in Romans 4.
ad ver. 16.
seeing by One Sin of Adam the World was lost, the Grace of Christ has not
only abolished that One Sin, and Death which came by it; but has together
taken away those infinite Sins, and also led into full Justification,
Righteousness, a Conformity to the Image of the First-Begotten.
as many as are of Christ; so that God now not only remits unto them Adam' s
sin, and their own, but also gives them therewith the Spirit of a solid and
perfect Righteousness, which renders us Conform unto the Image of the
First-Begotten. Begotten. And upon these words ( by Jesus Christ) he says; We
always judge, that the whole benefit of Christ tends to this, that we might be
strong through the Gift of Righteousness, being rightly and orderly adorned
with all Virtue; that is, Restored to the Image of God. And lastly, W. Forbes,
in Considerat. Modest. de Just. lib. 2. Sect. 3.
William Forbes, our Countryman, Bishop of Edinburgh, says; Whenever the
Scripture makes mention of the Justification before God, as speaks Paul, and
from him (besides others) Augustine, it appears, that the word (Justify)
necessarily signifys not only to pronounce Just in a Law sense; but also really
and inherently to make Just; because that God does otherwise justify a Wicked
Man, then Earthly Judges. For he, How God justifies the Wicked.
when he justifys a Wicked or Unjust Man, does indeed pronounce him, as these
also do; but by pronouncing him Just, because his Judgment is according to
Truth, he also makes him really of Unjust, to become Just. And again, the same
Man, upon the same occasion, answering the more rigid Protestants, who say,
That God first Justifys, and then makes Just; he adds: But let them have a
care, lest by too great and empty Subtilty, unknown both to the Scriptures and
the Fathers, they lessen and diminish the Weight and Dignity of so great and
divine a Benefit, so much celebrated in the Scripture, to wit, Justification of
the Wicked. For if (...) the formal Reason of Justification of the Ungodly,
does not at all belong his Justification, ( so to speak) i. e. his being made
Righteous; then in the Justification of a Sinner, although he be justified, yet
the stain of Sin is not taken away, but remains the same in his Soul as before
Justification: And so, notwithstanding the benefit of Justification, he remains
as before, Unjust and a Sinner; and nothing is taken away, but the guilt and
obligation to pain, and the offense and enmity of God, through Non-Imputation.
But both the Scriptures and Fathers do affirm, that in the Justification of a
Sinner, their Sins are not only remitted, forgiven, covered, not imputed, but
also taken away, blotted out, cleansed, washed, purged, and very for removed
from us; as appears from many places of the Holy Scripture. The same Forbes
shows us at length, in the following Chapter, That this was the Confessed
Judgment of the Fathers, out of the Writings of those, who hold the contrary
Opinion; some whereof, Calvin. Inst. l. 3. c. 11. Sect. 15.
out of him, I shall note. As, First; Calvin says, That the Judgment of
Augustine, or at least his manner of speaking, is not throughout to be received,
who although he took from Man all Praise of Righteousness, and ascribed all to
the Grace of God; yet he refers Grace to Sanctification, by which we are
Regenerate through the Spirit unto Newness of Life. Chemnitius says;
Chemnitius in Exam. Conc. Trid. de Just. p. 129.
That they do not deny, but that the Fathers take the Word (Justify) for
Renewing, by which Works of Righteousness are wrought in us by the Spirit. And
p. 130. I am not ignorant, that the Fathers indeed often use the word
(Justify) in this signification, to wit, of making Just. Zanchius in cap. 2.
ad Ephesians. ver. 4. loc. de Just. These. 13.
Zanchius says, That the Fathers, and chiefly Augustine, interpret the word
(Justify) according to this signification, to wit, of making Just; so that,
according to them, to be Justified, was no other, than of Unjust to be made
Just, through the Grace of God for Christ. He mentions more, but this may
suffice to our purpose.

. VIII. Having thus sufficiently proved, Assert. I.
that by Justification is to be understood, a really being made Righteous: I do
boldly affirm, Christ revealed and formed in the Soul of a Man, is the formal
Cause of Man's Justification.
and that not only from a Notional Knowledge, but from a real inward
Experimental Feeling of the thing, That the immediate, nearest, or formal Cause
(if we must, in condescendence to some, use this word) of a Man's Justification
in the sight of God, is, the Revelation of Jesus Christ in the Soul, changing,
altering, and renewing the mind, by whom (even the Author of this inward Work)
thus formed and revealed, we are truly Justified and Accepted in the sight of
God. For it is, draw near to God, and stand with Confidence before his Throne,
being purged by the Blood of Jesus inwardly poured into our Souls, and clothed
with his Life and Righteousness therein revealed. And this is that Order and
Method of Salvation, held forth by the Apostle in that Divine Saving, Romans
5.10. For if when we were Enemies, we were reconciled to God by the Death of
his Son; much more, being reconciled, we shall be saved by his Life. For the
Apostle first holding forth the Reconciliation wrought by the Death of Christ,
wherein God is near to receive and redeem Man, holds forth his Salvation and
Justification to be by the Life of Jesus. Now that this Life is an Inward,
Spiritual Thing, revealed in the Soul, whereby it is renewed and brought forth
out of Death, where it naturally has been by the Fall, and so Quickened and made
Alive unto God, the same Apostle shows, Ephesians. 2.5. Even when we were dead in
sins and trespasses, he has quickened us together in Christ (by whose Grace ye
are saved) and has raised us up together. Now, this none will deny to be the
Inward Work of Renovation; and therefore the Apostle gives that reason of their
being saved by Grace; which is the Inward Virtue, and power of Christ in the
Soul: But of this place more hereafter. Of the Revelation of this Inward Life,
the Apostle also speaks, 2 Cor. 4.10. That the Life also of Jesus might be
made manifest in our Bodies; and verse 11. That the Life also of Jesus might be
made manifest in our mortal flesh. Now this inward Life of Jesus is that,
whereby, as is before observed, he said, We are saved.

That it is by this Revelation of Jesus Christ, and the new Creation in us,
that we are justified, does evidently appear from that Excellent Saying of the
Apostle, included in the Proposition it self, Tit. 3.5. According to his mercy
he has saved us, by the washing of Regeneration, and renewing of the Holy
Ghost, etc. Now that, whereby we are saved, that we are also no doubt justified
by; which words are in this respect synonymous. The Immediate Cause of
Justification is the Inward work of Regeneration.
Here the Apostle clearly ascribes the immediate Cause of Justification to this
Inward Work of Regeneration, which is Jesus Christ revealed in the Soul, as
being that, which formally states us in a capacity of being Reconciled with
God; the Washing of Regeneration, being that inward Power and Virtue, whereby
the Soul is cleansed, and clothed with the Righteousness of Christ, so as to be
made fit to appear before God.

Thirdly; Pr. III.
This Doctrine is manifest from 2 Cor. 13.5. Examine your own selves, whether
ye be in the Faith; prove your own selves, Know ye not your own selves, how
that Jesus Christ is in you, except ye be Reprobates? First, It appears here
how earnest the Apostle was, that they should know Christ in them; so that he
presses this Exhortation upon them, and Inculcates it three times. Secondly, He
makes the cause of Reprobation, or not Justification, The Cause of Reprobation
is Christ not known by inward Revelation.
the want of Christ thus revealed and known in the Soul: Whereby it necessarily
follows, by the Rule of Contraries, where the Party is alike (as in this case
it is evident) that, where Christ is inwardly known, there the Persons
subjected to him are approved and Justified. For there can be nothing more
plain than this, That if we must know Christ in us, except we be Reprobates, or
unjustified Persons; if we know him in us, we are not Reprobates, and
consequently Justified Ones. Like unto this is that other saying of the same
Apostle, Gal. 4.19. My little Children, of whom I travel in Birth again, until
Christ be formed in you; and therefore the Apostle terms this, Christ within,
the Hope of Glory, Col. 1.27, 28. Now that which is the Hope of Glory, can be
no other, than that which we immediately and m^st nearly rely upon for our
Justification, and that whereby we are really and truly made Just. And as we do
not hereby deny, but the Original and Fundamental Cause of our Justification
is, the Love of God manifested in the Appearance of Jesus Christ in the Flesh;
who by his Life, Christ by his Death and Sufferings has opened a way for our
Reconciliation.
Death, Sufferings and Obedience, made a way for our Reconciliation, and became
a Sacrifice for the Remission of Sins that are past, and purchased unto us this
Seed and Grace, from which this Birth arises, and in which Jesus Christ is
inwardly received, formed, and brought forth in us, in his own pure and holy
Image of Righteousness; by which our Souls live unto God, and are clothed with
him, and have put him on, even as the Scripture speaks, Ephesians. 4.23, 24. Gal.
3.27. We stand Justified and Saved in and by him, and by his Spirit and Grace.
Romans 3.24. 1 Cor. 6.11. Tit. 3.7. So again, Reciprocally, we are hereby made
partakers of the fullness of his Merits and his cleansing Blood is near, to wash
away every Sin and Infirmity, and to heal all our Backslidings, as often as we
turn toward him by unfeigned Repentance, and become renewed by the Spirit.
Those then, that find him thus raised, and ruling in them, have a true ground
of Hope to believe that they are justified by his Blood. But let not any
deceive themselves, so as to foster themselves in a vain Hope and Confidence;
that by the Death and sufferings of Christ they are Justified, so long as Sin
lies at their door, Genesis 4.7. Iniquity prevails, and they remain yet unrenewed
and unregenerate; lest it be said unto them, I know you not. Let that saying of
Christ be remembered, Not every one, that says Lord, Lord, shall enter, but he
that does the Will of my Father, Mat. 7.21. To which let these Excellent
Sayings of the Beloved Disciple be added; Little Children, let no Man deceive
you, he that does Righteousness is Righteous, even as he is Righteous. He that
Commits Sin is of the Devil; because if our Heart condemn us, God is greater
than our heart, and knows all things, 1 John 3.7. and 20.

Many famous Protestants bear witness to this Inward Justification by Christ,
inwardly revealed and formed in Man. As, 1. M. Borhaeus: Borhaeus in Genesis p.
162.
In the Imputation (says he) wherein Christ is ascribed and imputed to
Believers for Righteousness, the Merit of his Blood, and the Holy Ghost given
unto us by Virtue of his Merits, The Testimonies of Famous Protestants of
Inward Justification.
are equally included. And so it shall be confessed, That Christ is our
Righteousness, as well from his Merit, Satisfaction, and Remission of Sins
obtained by him, as from the Gifts of the Spirit of Righteousness. And if we do
this, we shall consider the whole Christ, proposed to us for our Salvation, and
not any single part of him. The same Man, p. 169. In our Justification then
Christ is considered, who breathes and lives in us, to wit, by his Spirit put
on by us; concerning which putting on, the Apostle says, Ye have put on
Christ. And again, p. 171. We endeavor to treat in Justification, not of part
of Christ, but him wholly, in so far as he is our Righteousness every way. And
a little after: As then blessed Paul, in our Justification, when he says, Whom
he Justified, them he Glorified, comprehends all things which pertains to our
being Reconciled to God the Father, and our Renewing, which fits us for
attaining unto Glory, such as Faith, Righteousness, Christ, and the Gift of
Righteousness Exhibited by him, whereby we are Regenerated, to the fulfilling
of the Justification which the Law requires: So we also will have all things
comprehended in this cause, which are contained in the recovery of
Righteousness and Innocence. And p. 181. The Form (says he) of our
Justification is the Divine Righteousness it self, by which we are formed Just
and Good. This is Jesus Christ, who is esteemed our Righteousness, partly from
the forgiveness of Sins, and partly from the renewing and the restoring of that
Integrity, which was lost by the fault of the first Adam: So that this New and
Heavenly Adam being put on by us, (of which the Apostle says, Ye have put on
Christ) ye have put him on, I say, as the Form. so the Righteousness, Wisdom,
and Life of God. So also affirms Claudius Albertus Inuncunanus; Inuncun.
see his Orat. Apodict. La^saniae Exc^s. 1^87. Orat. 2. p. 86, 87. Zuinglius.
Zuinglius also in his Epistle to the Princes of Germany, as cited by
Himmelius, c. 7. p. 60. says; That the Sanctification of the Spirit is true
Justification, which alone suffices to Justify. Estius.
Estius upon 1 Cor. 6.11. says, Lest Christian Righteousness should be thought
to consist in the Washing alone, that is, in the Remission of Sins, he adds
the other degree or part, [but ye are Sanctified] that is, ye have attained to
purity, so that ye are now truly Holy before God. Lastly, expressing the sum of
the benefit received in one word, which includes both the parts; But ye are
Justified (the Apostle adds) in the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ, ( that is,
by his Merits) and in the Spirit of our God, ( that is, the Holy Spirit
proceeding from God, and Communicated to us by Christ. R. Baxter.
) And lastly, Richard Baxter, a famous English Preacher, in his Book called
Aphorisms of Justification, p. 80. says, That some ignorant Wretches gnash
their Teeth at this Doctrine, as if it were flat Popery, not understanding the
nature of the Righteousness of the New Covenant; which is all out of Christ in
our selves, though wrought by the Power of the Spirit of Christ in us.

Posit. III
. IX. The Third Thing proposed to be considered is, concerning the necessity of
Good Works to Justification. I suppose there is enough said before, to clear us
from any Imputation of being Popish in this matter.

Whether we have not said, or will not affirm, that a Man is justified by Works?

in answer hereunto, James 2.24. That ^rks a^ (...).
Ye see then how that by Works a Man is Justified, and not by Faith only. I
shall not offer to prove the Truth of this saying, since what is said in this
Chapter by the Apostle is sufficient to Convince any Man, that will read and
believe it; I shall only from this, derive this one Argument:

Arg.
If no Man can be Justified without Faith, and no Faith be living, not yet
available to Justification without Works, Then Works are necessary to
Justification. But the First is true; Therefore also the Last.


For this Truth is so apparent and evident in the Scriptures, that for the
proof of it, we might transcribe most of the precepts of the Gospel. I shall
Instance a few, which of themselves do so clearly assert the thing in question;
that they need no Commentary, nor further Demonstration. And then I shall
answer the Objections made against this, which indeed are the Arguments used
for the contrary Opinion, Heb. 12.14. Without Holiness no Man shall see God.
Not the Sa^s, ^t the D^ are ^s^d.
Mat. 7.21. Not every one, that says unto me Lord, Lord, shall enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven, but (...) that does the Will of my Father which is in
Heaven. John 13.17. If ye know these things, happy are ye if ye do them. 1 Cor.
7.19. Circumcision is nothing, and Uncircumcision is nothing, but the keeping
of the Commandments of God. Rev. 22.14. Blessed are they that do his
Commandments, that they may have right to the Tree of Life, and may enter in
through the Gates into the City: And many more that might be instanced. From
all which, I thus Argue:

Arg.
If those only can enter into the Kingdom, that do the Will of the Father; If
those be accounted only the Wise Builders and happy, that do the Savings of
Christ; If no Observation avail, but only the keeping of the Commandments; and
if they be blessed, that do the Commandments, and thereby have right to the
Tree of Life, and entrance through the Gate into the City; Then Works are
absolutely necessary to Salvation and Justification. But the First is true; and
therefore also the Last.


The Consequence of the Antecedent is so clear and evident, that I think no man
of sound Reason will call for a Proof of it.

That Works are not necessary to Justification: First, because of that Saying
of Christ, Unprofitable Servants.
Luke 17.10. When ye shall have done all these things that are commanded you,
say, We are unprofitable Servants, etc.

Answer; As to God, we are indeed unprofitable, for he needs nothing, neither
can we add any thing unto him: God needs nothing.
But as to our selves, we are not unprofitable; else it might be said, that it
is not profitable for a Man to keep God's Commandments; which is most absurd,
and would contradict Christ's Doctrine throughout. Does not Christ, Mat. 5.
through all those Beatitudes, pronounce Men blessed for their Purity, for their
Meekness, for their Peaceableness, etc.? And is not then that, for which Christ
pronounces Men blessed, profitable unto them? These that had improved their
Talents, were called good and faithful Servants.
Moreover, Mat. 25.21, 23. Does not Christ pronounce the Men good and faithful
Servants, that improved their Talents? Was not their doing of that then
profitable unto them? And verse 30. it is said of him that hid his talent, and
did not improve it, Cast ye the unprofitable Servant into utter darkness. If
then their not improving of the Talent made the Man unprofitable, and he was
therefore Cast into utter Darkness, it will follow by the Rule of Contraries,
so far at least, that the improving made the other profitable; seeing, if our
Adversaries will allow us to believe Christ's Words, this is made a Reason, and
so at least a Cause Instrumental of their Acceptance: Well done, good and
faithful Servant, thou have been faithful over a few things, I will make thee
Ruler over many things; enter thou into the Joy of thy Lord.

Romans 3.20. Because by the Deeds of the Law there shall be no Flesh Justified
in his sight. And verse 28. Therefore we conclude, that a Man is Justified by
Faith, without the Deeds of the Law.

Answ. We have shown already, what place we give to Works, even to the best of
Works, in Justification; The Works of the Gospel, or Grace, distinguished from
that of the Law.
and how we ascribe its immediate and formal Cause to the Worker brought forth
in us, but not to the Works. But in Answer to this Objection, I say there is a
great difference betwixt the Works of the Law and those of Grace, or of the
Gospel. The first are excluded, the second not, but are necessary. The first
are those, which are performed in Man's own Will, and by his Strength, in a
conformity to the outward Law and Letter; and therefore are Man's own imperfect
Work, or Works of the Law, which makes nothing perfect: And to this belong all
the Ceremonies, Purifications, Washings, and Traditions of the Jews. The second
are the Works of the Spirit of Grace in the Heart, wrought in conformity to the
Inward and Spiritual Law; which Works are not wrought in Man's Will, nor by his
Power and Ability, but in and by the Power and Spirit of Christ in us, and
therefore are pure and perfect in their kind (as shall hereafter be proved) and
may be called Christ's Works, for that he is the immediate Author and Worker of
them: Such Works we affirm absolutely necessary to Justification, so that a Man
cannot be Justified without them; and all Faith without them is dead and
useless, as the Apostle James says. Now, that such a distinction is to be
admitted, and that the Works excluded by the Apostle, in the matter of
Justification, are of the first kind, will appear, if we consider the occasion
of the Apostle's mentioning this, as well here, as throughout in his Epistle to
the Galatians, where he speaks of this matter, and to this purpose at large:
Which was this, That whereas many of the Gentiles, that were not of the Race or
Seed of Abraham, as concerning the Flesh, were come to be Converted to the
Christian Faith, and believe in him, some of those that were of the Jewish
Proselytes, thought to subject the Faithful and Believing Gentiles to the legal
Ceremonies and Observations, as necessary to their Justification: This gave the
Apostle Paul occasion at length, The occasion of the Apostle's speaking of
(...) of the Law, which are ex^d.
in his Epistle to the Romans, Galatians, and elsewhere, to show the use and
tendency of the Law, and of its Works, and to contra-distinguish them from the
Faith of Christ, and the Righteousness thereof; showing how the former was
ceased, and become ineffectual; the other remaining, and yet necessary. And
that the Works excluded by the Apostle are of this kind of Works of the Law,
appears by the strain of his Epistle to the Galatians, Chap. 1, 2, 3, and 4.
For after (in Chap. 4.) he upbraideth them for their returning unto the
Observation of Days and Times, and that (in the beginning of Chap. 5.) he
shows them their Folly, and the Evil Consequence of adhering to the
Ceremonies of Circumcision; then he adds, v. 6. For in Christ Jesus neither
Circumcision nor Uncircumcision avails; but Faith, which works by love; and
thus he concludes again, chap. 6. v. 15. For in Christ Jesus neither
Circumcision avails, nor Uncircumcision, but a new Creatre. From which places
appears that distinction of Works before mentioned, whereof the one is
excluded, the other necessary to Justification. For the Apostle shows here,
that Circumcision (which word is often used to comprehend the whole Ceremonies
and Legal Performances of the Jews,) is not necessary, nor does avail. Here are
then the Works which are excluded, by which no Man is Justified; but Faith,
which works by love, but the new Creature, this is that which avails, which
is absolutely necessary: For Faith, that works by love, cannot be without
Works; for, as it is said in the same 5 th Chapter, v. 22. Love is a Work of
the Spirit: Also the New Creature, if it avail and be necessary, cannot be
without Works; seeing it is natural for it to bring forth Works of
Righteousness. Again, that the Apostle no ways intends to exclude such good
Works, appears, in that in the same Epistle he exhorts the Galatians to them,
The usefulness and necessity of good Works.
and holds forth the usefulness and necessity of them, and that very plainly,
c. 6. v. 7, 8, 9. Be not deceived, says he, God is not mocked; for whatsoever
a Man sows, that shall he also reap: for he that sows to the Flesh, shall
of the Flesh reap Corruption; but he that sows in the Spirit, shall of the
Spirit reap Life Everlasting. And let us not be weary of well doing, for in due
season we shall reap, if we saint not: Does it not hereby appear, how necessary
the Apostle would have the Galatians know, that he esteemed good Works to be?
To wit, not the outward Testimony and Tradition of the Law, but the fruits of
the Spirit, mentioned a little before; by which Spirit he would have them to be
led, and walk in those good Works: As also, how much he ascribed to these good
Works, by which he affirms Life Everlasting is reaped. Now, that cannot be
useless to Man's Justification, which capacitates him to reap so rich a Harvest.

lastly; For a full Answer to this Objection, and for the establishing of this
Doctrine of good Works, I shall instance another Saying of the same Apostle
Paul, which our Adversaries also in the blindness of their minds make use of
against us; to wit, Tit. 3.5. Not by Works of Righteousness, which we have
done, but acording to his Mercy be saved us, Justified not by our legal
Performances, but the (...) of the Spirit.
by the washing of Regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost. It is
generally granted by all, that [ Saved] is here all one as if it had been said
[ Justified.] Now there are two kinds of Works h^ mentioned; one, by which we
are not saved, that is, not Justified; and another, by which we are saved, or
justified. The first, the Works of Righteousness which we have wrought, that
is, which we in our first, fallen Nature, by our own strength, have wrought,
our own legal Performances; and therefore may truly and properly be called
ours, whatever specious appearances they may seem to have. And that it must
needs, and ought to be so understood, does appear from the other part, By the
Washing of Regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost; seeing Regeneration is
a Work, comprehensive of many good Works, even of all those which are called,
The Fruits of the Spirit.

That these may also be called ours, because wrought in us, and also by us many
times, as Instruments.

crucified with Christ, we are become dead with him, have partaken of the
Fellowship of his Sufferings, are made conformable to his Death; and our first
Man, our old Man with all his Deeds, as well the openly Wicked, as the
seemingly Righteous, Not We, but Christ in us, is the Worker of Righteousness.
our legal Endeavors, and foolish Wrestlings, are all buried and nailed to the
Cross of Christ; and so it is no more we, but Christ alive in us, the Worker in
us. So that though it be We in a sense, yet it is according to that of the
Apostle to the same Gal. c. 2. v. 20. I am crucified, yet nevertheless I live,
yet not I, but Christ lives (...): Not I, but the Grace of Christ in me These
Works are especially to be ascribed to the Spirit of Christ, and the Grace of
God in us, as being immediately thereby acted and led in them, and enabled to
perform them. And this manner of Speech is not strained, but familiar to the
Apostles; as appears, Gal. 2.8. For he that wrought effectually in Peter to the
Apostleship of the Circumcision, the same was mighty in me, etc. Phil. 2.13.
For it is God which works in you, both to will and to do, etc. So that it
appears by this place, that since the washing of Regeneration is necessary to
Justification, and that Regeneration comprehends Works, Works are necessary;
and that these Works of the Law, that are excluded, are different from these,
that are necessary and admitted.

Thirdly; They object, That no Works, yea, not the Works of Christ in us, can
have place in Justification, because nothing that is impure can be useful in
it; and all the Works wrought in us are impure. For this they allege that
Saying of the Prophet Isaiah, chap. 64. v. 6. All our Righteousnesses are as
filthy rags; adding this reason, That seeing we are impure, so must our Works
be; which, though good in themselves, yet as performed by us, they receive a
tincture of Impurity, even as clean Water passing through an unclean Pipe is
defiled.

impure Works are useful to Justification, is confessed; but that all the Works
wrought in the Saints are such, is denied. And for answer to this, the former
distinction will serve. We confess, that the first sort of Works
abovementioned, are impure; but not the second: Because the first are wrought
in the unrenewed State, but not the other. And as for that of Isaiah, it must
relate to the first kind; for though he says, What sort of Righteousness is as
filthy Rags.
All our Righteousnesses are as filthy rags; yet that will not comprehend the
Righteousness of Christ in us, but only that which we work of and by our
selves. For should we so conclude, then it would follow, that we should throw
away all Holiness and Righteousness; since that which is as filthy Rags, and as
a menstruous Garment, ought to be thrown away; yea, it would follow, that all
the Fruits of the Spirit, mentioned Gal. 5. were as filthy Rags: Whereas on the
contrary, some of the Works of the Saints are said to have a Sweet Savor in
the Nostrils of the Lord; are said to be an Ornament of great price in the
sight of God; are said to Prevail with him, and to be Acceptable to him; which
filthy Rags and a menstruous Garment, cannot be. Yea many famous Protestants
have acknowledged, Calvin's and others, their sense concerning Isai. 64.6. of
our Righteousness.
that this place is not therefore so to be understood. Calvin upon this place
says, That it is used to be cited by some, that they may prove, there is so
little Merit in our Works, that they are before God filthy and defiled: But
this seems to me to be different from the Prophet's Mind (says he) seeing he
speaks not here of all Mankind. Musculus.
Musculus upon this place says, That it was usual for this People to presume
much of their Legal Righteousness, as if thereby they were made clean;
nevertheless they had no more cleanness, than the unclean Garment of a Man.
Others expound this place concerning all the Righteousness of our Flesh; that
Opinion indeed is true: Yet I think that the Prophet did rather accommodate
these Sayings to the Impurity of that People in legal Terms. (Bertius) Episto^
praefixae dissertann.
The Author (commonly supposed Bertius) speaking concerning the true sense of
the 7th Chapter of the Epistle to the Romans, has a Digression touching this
of Isaiah, saying; This place is commonly corrupted by a pernicious wresting;
for it is still alleged, as if the meaning thereof inferred the most excellent
Works of the best Christians, Jam Cor^. Apolog. Impress. Paris. 1597 page 78.
etc. James Coret, a French Minister in the Church of B^sil, in his Apology
concerning Justification, against Alescales, says; Nevertheless according to
the Counsel of certain good Men, I must admonish the Reader, that it never come
into our Minds to abuse that saying of Isai. 64.6. against good Works, in which
it is said, that all our Righteousnesses are as filthy Rags; as if we would
have that which is good in our good Works, and proceeds from the Holy Spirit,
to be esteemed as a filthy and unclean thing.

. XII. As to the other part, That seeing the best of Men are still Impure and
Imperfect, therefore their Works must be so: It is to beg the question, and
depends upon a Proposition denied; and which is to be discussed at further
length in the next Proposition. But though we should suppose a Man not thoroughly
Perfect in all respects; yet will not that hinder, but good and perfect Works
in their kind may be brought forth in them by the Spirit of Christ: Neither
does the Example of Water going through an unclean Pipe hit the matter;
because, though Water may be capable to be tinctured with uncleanness; yet the
Spirit of God cannot, whom we assert to be the Immediate Author of those Works
that avail in Justification: And therefore Jesus Christ his Works in his
Children are pure and perfect, and he works in and through that pure thing of
his own forming and creating in them. Moreover, if this did hold, according to
our Adversaries supposition, That no Man ever was or can be perfect; it would
follow, Were the Miracles and Works of the Apostles, wrought by the Power of
Christ in them, impure and imperfect?
that the very Miracles and Works of the Apostles, which Christ wrought in
them, and they wrought in and by the Power, Spirit and Grace of Christ, were
also impure and imperfect; such as their Converting of the Nations to the
Christian Faith; their Gathering of the Churches, their Writing of the Holy
Scriptures; yea, and their offering up and Sacrificing of their Lives for the
Testimony of Jesus. What may our Adversaries think of this Argument, whereby it
will follow, that the Holy Scriptures, whose Perfection and Excellency they
seem so much to magnify, are proved to be impure and imperfect, because they
came through impure and imperfect Vessels? It appears by the Confessions of
Protestants, that the Fathers did frequently attribute unto Works of this kind,
that Instrumental Work, which we have spoken of in Justification, (albeit some
ignorant Persons cry out, it is Popery; and also diverse, and that famous
Protestants, do of themselves confess it. Amandus Polanus, Am. Polanus.
in his Symphonia Catholica, cap. 27. de Remissione Peccatorum, p. 651. places
this Thesis as the common Opinion of Protestants, Our Doctrine of Justification
and Works, is not Popery.
most agreeable to the Doctrine of the Fathers: We obtain the Remission of Sins
by Repentance, Confession, Prayers and Tears, proceeding from Faith, but do not
Merit, to speak properly; and therefore we obtain Remission of Sins not by the
Merit of our Repentance and Prayers, but by the Mercy and Goodness of God.
Innocentius Gentiletus, Gentiletus Ex Impress. Genev. 15.16.
a Lawyer of great Fame among Protestants in his Examen of the Council of
Trent, p. 66, 67. of Justification, having before spoken of Faith and Works,
adds these words: But seeing the one cannot be without the other, we call them
both conjunctly Instrumental Cuuses. Zanchius in his Fifth Book, De Natura Dei,
Zanchius.
says; We do not simply deny, that good Works are the Cause of Salvation, to
wit, the Instrumental, rather than the Efficient Cause, which they call [fine
qua non.] And afterward, Goods Works are the Instrumental Cause of the
Possession of Life Eternal; for by these, as by a means and a lawful way, God
leads unto the Possession of Life Eternal. G. Amesius says, G. Ames. in
Medulla S. Theologiae, l. 2. c. 1. These. 30.
That our Obedience, albeit it be not the Principal and Meritorious Cause of
Life Eternal, is nevertheless a Cause in some respect, administering, helping
and advancing toward the Possession of the Life. Also Richard Baxter, in his
Book above cited, p. 155. says, R. Baxter.
That we are Justified by Works in the same kind of Causality, as by Faith, to
wit, as being both Causes sine qua non, or Conditions of the New Covenant, on
our part requisite to Justification. And p. 195. he says, It is needless to
teach any Scholar, who has read the Writings of Papists, how this Doctrine
differs from them.

Of the Merit and Reward of Works.
But lastly, Because it is fit here to say something of the Merit and Reward of
Works, I shall add something in this place of our Sense and Belief concerning
that matter. We are far from thinking, or believing, that Man merits any thing
by his Works from God, all being of Free Grace; and therefore do we, and always
have denied that Popish Notion of Meritum ex Condigno. Nevertheless we cannot
deny, but that God, out of his Infinite Goodness, wherewith he has loved
Mankind, after he communicates to him his holy Grace and Spirit, does,
according to his own will, Recompense and Reward the Good Works of his
Children: GOD Rewards the Good Works of his Children.
And therefore this Merit of Congruity or Reward, in so far as the Scripture is
plain and positive for it, we may not deny; neither wholly reject the word, in
so far as the Scripture makes use of it. For the same Greek (...) which
signifies ( Merit) is also in those places, where the Translators express it
Worth, or Worthy, as Mat. 3.8. 1 Thessalonians. 2.12. 2 Thessalonians. 1.5, 8. Concerning
which, R. Baxter says, in the Book above cited, p. 8. But in larger sense, as
Promise is an Obligation, and the thing Promised is said to be Debt; so the
Performers of the Conditions are called Worthy, and that which they perform,
Merit; although properly all be of Grace, and not of Debt. Also those, who are
called the Fathers of the Church, frequently used this word of Merit, whose
Sayings concerning this matter, I think not needful to insert, because it is
not doubted, but evident, that many Protestants are not averse from this word,
in the sense that we use it. The Apology for the Augustan Confession, Art. 20.
has these words; We agree that Works are only Meritorious, not of Remission of
Sins, or Justification; but they are Meritorious of other Rewards Corporal and
Spiritual, which are indeed as well in this Life, as after this Life. And
further, Seeing Works are a certain fulfilling of the Law, they are rightly
said to be Meritorious; it is rightly said that a Reward is due to them.

In the Acts of the Conference of Oldenburgh, the Electoral Divines (p. 110.
and 265.) say, Conference of Oldenburgh.
In this sense our Churches also are not averse from the word (Merit) used by
the Fathers; neither therefore do they defend the Popish Doctrine of Merit.

G. Vossius of the word Merit.
G. Vossius, in his Theological Thesis concerning the Merits of good Works,
says; We have not adventured to condemn the word (Merit) wholly, as being
that, which both many of the Ancients use, and also ths Reformed Churches have
used in their Confessions. Now that God judges and accepts Men according to
their Works, is beyond doubt to those that seriously will read and consider
these Scriptures, Mat. 16.27. Romans 2.6, 7, 10. 2 Cor. 5.10. James 1.25. Heb.
10.35. 1 Pet. 1.17. Rev. 22.21.

. XIII. And to conclude this Theme, let none be so bold as to mock God,
supposing themselves Justified and Accepted in the sight of God, by Virtue of
Christ's Death and Sufferings, while they remain Unsanctified and Unjustified
in their own Hearts, Job 8.13.
and Polluted in their Sins, lest their Hope prove that of the Hypocrite, which
perishes. Neither let any foolishly imagine, that they can by their own Works,
or by the Performance of any Ceremonies or Traditions, The Hope of the ^p^crite
shall perish, but Grace is to the Humble
or by the giving of Gold or Money, or by afflicting their Bodies in
Will Worship and voluntary Humility, or foolishly striving to Conform their Way
to the outward Letter of the Law, flatter themselves, that they Merit before
God, or draw a Debt upon him, or that any Man or Men have power to make such
kind of things Effectual to their Justification; last they be found foolish
Boasters and strangers to Christ and his Righteousness indeed. But blessed for
ever are they, that having truly had a sense of their own Unworthiness and
Sinfulness, and having seen all their own Endeavors and Performances fruitless
and vain, and beheld their own Emptiness, and the vainity of their vain Hopes,
Faith and Confidence, while they remained inwardly pricked, pursued and
condemned by God's Holy Witness in their hearts; and so having applied
themselves thereto, and suffered his Grace to work in them, are became changed
and renewed in the spirit of their minds, past from Death to Life, and know
Jesus arisen in them working both the Will and the Deed; and so having put on
the Lord Jesus Christ, in effect are clothed with him, and partake of his
Righteousness and Nature; such can draw near to the Lord with boldness, and
know their Acceptance in and by him; in whom, and in as many as are found in
him, the Father is will-pleased.

PROPOSITION VIII. Concerning Perfection.
In whom this Pure and Holy Birth is fully brought forth, the Body of Death and
Sin comes to be Crucified and removed, and their Hearts united and subjected to
the Truth; so as not to obey any Suggestions or Temptations of the Evil One; to
be free from Actual Sinning and Transgressing of the Law of God, and in that
respect, perfect: Yet does this perfection still admit of a Growth; and there
remains always in some part a Possibility of Sinning, where the Mind does not
most diligently and watchfully attend unto the Lord.

. I. SInce we have placed Justification in the Revelation of Jesus Christ
formed and brought forth in the Heart, there working his Works of
Righteousness, and bringing forth the Fruits of the Spirit: The Question is,
How far he may prevail in us, while we are in this Life, or we over our Souls
Enemies, in and by his strength? Those that plead for Justification wholly
without them, merely by Imputative Righteousness, denying the necessity of
being clothed with Real and Inward Righteousness, These are the Words of the
Westminster larger Catechism.
do consequently affirm, That it is impossible for a Man, even the best of Men,
to be free of Sin in this Life, which, they say, no Man ever was; but on the
contrary, that none can, neither of himself, nor by any Grace received in this
Life, (O wicked saying against the Power of God's Grace!) keep the Commandments
of God perfectly; but that every Man does break the Commandments in Thought,
Word and Deed: Whence they also affirm, as was a little before observed, That
the very best Actions of the Saints, their Prayers, their Worships, Whether it
is possible to keep the Commandments of God?
are impure and polluted. We on the contrary, though we freely acknowledge this
of the natural fallen Man, in his first state, whatever his Profession or
Pretense may be, so long as he is Unconverted and Unregenerate: Yet we do
believe, that those, in whom Christ comes to be formed, and the New Man brought
forth, and born of the Incorruptible Seed, Part I.
as that Birth, and Man in Union therewith, naturally does the Will of God; so
it is possible, Controversy stated.
so far to keep to it, as not to be found daily Transgressors of the Law of
God. And for the more clear stating of the Controversy, let it be considered:

1. Natural Knowledge
. II. First; That we place not this possibility in Man's own Will and Capacity,
as he is a Man, the Son of fallen Adam, or as he is in his Natural State,
however wise or knowing, or however much endued with a notional and literal
Knowledge of Christ, thereby endeavoring a Conformity to the Letter of the
Law, as it is outward.

2. The New Birth.
Secondly; That we attribute it wholly to Man, as he is Born again, renewed in
his Mind, raised by Christ, knowing Christ alive, reigning and ruling in him,
and guiding and leading him by his Spirit, and revealing in him the Law of the
Spirit of Life; which not only manifests and reproves Sin, but also gives power
to come out of it.

Thirdly; That by this we understand not such a Perfection as may not daily
admit of a Growth; 3 Growth in Perfection.
and consequently mean not, as if we were to be as Pure, Holy, and Perfect, as
God in his Divine Attributes of Wisdom, Knowledge and Purity; but only a
Perfection proportionable and answerable to Man's measure, whereby we are kept
from Transgressing the Law of God, He that improved his Two Talents, was
nothing less accepted, than be with the ^e.
and enabled to answer what he requires of us; even as he that improved his Two
Talents, so as to make Four of them, perfected his Work, and was so accepted of
his Lord, as to be called a good and faithful Servant, nothing less than he
that made his Five Ten. Even as a little Gold is perfect Gold in its kind, as
well as a great Mass; and a Child has a perfect Body, as well as a Man, though
it daily grow more and more. Thus Christ is said, Luke 2.52. to have increased
in Wisdom and Stature, and in favor with God and Man; though before that time he
had never sinned, and was (no doubt) perfect, in a true and proper sense.

Fourthly; Though a Man may witness this for a season, and therefore all ought
to press after it; 4. Wiles of the Enemy.
yet we do not affirm, but those that have attained it in a measure, may, by
the Wiles and Temptations of the Enemy, fall into Iniquity, and lose it
sometimes, if they be not watchful, Every Sin weakens a Man in his Spiritual
Condition, but does not destroy him altogether.
and do not diligently attend to that of God in the Heart. And we doubt not,
but many good and holy Men, who have arrived to Everlasting Life, have had
diverse Ebbings and Flowings of this kind; for though every Sin weakens a Man in
his Spiritual Condition, yet it does not so as to destroy him altogether, or
render him incapable of rising again.

Lastly; Though I affirm, that after a Man has arrived to such a Condition, 5.
Righteousness made Natural.
in which a Man may not sin, he yet may sin; I will nevertheless not deny, but
there may be a State attainable in this Life, in which to do Righteousness may
become so natural to the Regenerate Soul, that in the stability of this
Condition they cannot sin. Others may perhaps speak more certainly of this
State, as having arrived to it: For me, I shall speak modestly, as
acknowledging my self not to have arrived at it; yet I dare not deny it, for
that it seems so positively to be asserted by the Apostle, in these words, 1
John 3.9. He that is born of God, sins not; neither can he, because the Seed
of God remains in him.

Part II. Sect. 1.
The Controversy being thus stated, which will serve to obviate Objections, I
shall proceed first, to show the absurdity of that Doctrine, that pleads for
Sin, for term of Life, even in the Saints.

Sect. 2.
Secondly; Prove this Doctrine of Perfection from many pregnant Testimonies of
the Holy Scripture.

Sect. 3.
And lastly, Answer the Arguments and Objections of our Opposers.

Sect. I. Proof 1.
. III. First then; This Doctrine, viz. That the Saints nor can, nor never will
be free of sinning in this Life, The Doctrine of pleading for Sin Term of Life,
absurd.
Is inconsistent with the Wisdom of God, and with his Glorious Powder and
Majesty, Who is of purer Eyes than to behold Iniquity Hab. 1.13.
; who having purposed in himself to gather to him, that should Worship him and
be witnesses for him on Earth, a chosen People, does also no doubt sanctify
and purify them. For God has no delight in Iniquity, but abhors
Transgression; and though he regard Man in Transgression, so far as to pity him,
and afford him Means to come out of it; yet he loves him not, neither delights
in him, as he is joined thereunto. Wherefore if Men must be always joined to
Sin, then God should always be at a distance with them; as it is written, Isai.
59.2. Your Iniquities have separated between you and your God, and your Sins
have hid his Face from you; whereas on the contrary, the Saints are said to
partake even while here, of the Divine Nature, 2 Pet. 1.4. And to be One Spirit
with the Lord, 1 Cor. 6.17. Now no unclean thing can be so. It is expressly
written, That there is no Communion betwixt Light and Darkness, 2 Cor. 6.14.
But God is Light, and every Sin is Darkness in a measure: What greater stain
then can there be than this upon God's Wisdom, Has God's Wisdom been wanting
to prepare a Means to serve and worship him perfectly?
as if he had been wanting to prepare a Means, whereby his Children might
perfectly serve and worship him; or had not provided a way, whereby they might
serve him in any thing; but that they must withal still serve the Devil, no
less, yea, more than himself? For he that sins, is the servant of sin, Romans
6.16. and every Sin is an act of service and obedience to the Devil. So then,
if the Saints sin daily in Thought, Word and Deed, yea, if the very Service
they offer to God be Sin, surely they serve the Devil more than they do God:
For besides that they give the Devil many entire Services, without mixture of
the least grain to God; they give God not the least Service, in which the Devil
has not a large share: And if their Prayers, and all their Spiritual
Performances, be sinful, the Devil is as much served by them in these, as God,
and in most of them much more; since they confess, that many of them are
performed without the Leadings and Influence of God's Spirit. Now who would not
account him a foolish Master, among Men, who being able to do it, and also
desirous it might be so, yet would not provide a Way whereby his Children and
Servants might serve him more entirely than his avowed Enemy; or would not
guard against their serving of him, but be so imprudent and unadvised in his
contrivance, that whatever way his Servants and Children served him, they
should no less, yea, often much more, serve his Enemy? What may we then think
of that Doctrine, that would infer this Folly upon the Omnipotent and Only Wise
GOD?

Proof II. Its Inconsistency with the Justice of God.
. IV. Secondly; It is inconsistent with the Justice of God. For since he
requires Purity from his Children, and commands them to abstain from every
Iniquity, so frequently and precisely, as shall hereafter appear; and since his
Wrath is revealed against all Ungodliness and Unrighteousness of Men; it must
needs follow, that he has capacitated Man to answer his Will; or else, that he
requires more than he has given power to perform; which is to declare him
openly Unjust, and with the slothful Servant to be a hard Master. We have
elsewhere spoken of the Injustice these Men ascribe to God, in making him to
Damn the Wicked, to whom, they allege, he never offered any means of being
good. But this is yet an Aggravation more irrational and inconsistent, to say,
That God will not afford to those, whom he has chosen to be his own (whom they
confess he loves) the means to please him. What can follow then from so
strange a Doctrine? This Imperfection in the Saints, either proceeds from God,
or from themselves. If it proceeds from them, it must be, because they are
short in improving or making use of the Power given them, whereby they are
capable to obey; and so it is a thing possible to them (as indeed it is by the
help of that Power;) but this our Adversaries deny: They are then not to be
blamed for their Imperfection, and continuing in Sin, since it is not possible
to them to do otherwise. If it be not of themselves, it must be of God, who
has not seen meet to allow them Grace in that degree to produce that effect:
And what is this but to attribute to God the height of Injustice, to make him
require his Children to forsake Sin, and yet not to afford them sufficient
Means for so doing? Surely this makes God more Unrighteous than wicked Men; Who
will give their Children a Stone, instead of Bread?
Who if (as Christ says) their Children require Bread of them, will not give
them a Stone; or instead of a Fish, a Serpent. But these Men confess, We ought
to seek of God power to redeem us from Sin, and yet believe, they are never to
receive such a Power; such Prayers then cannot be in Faith, but are all vain.
Is not this to make God as Unjust to his Children, as Pharaoh was to the Is^es,
in requiring Brick, and not giving them Str^ But blessed be God, he deals not
so with those that truly trust in him, and wait upon him, as these Men vainly
imagine; for such faithful Ones find of a Truth, that his Grace is sufficient
for them; and know how, by his Power and Spirit, to overcome the Evil One.

. V. Thirdly; Poorf III
This evil Doctrine is highly Injurious to Jesus Christ, and greatly Derogates
from the Power and Virtue of his Sacrifice, The great and principal End of
Christ's Coming and Appearance was, for the removing of Sin, and to redeem us
from all Iniquity.
and renders his Coming and Ministry, as to the great End of it, ineffectual.
For Christ (as for other Ends) so principally he appeared for the Removing of
Sin for the Gathering a Righteous Generation, that might serve the Lord in
Purity of Mind, and walk before him in Fear, and bring in Everlasting
Righteousness, and that Evangelical Perfection which the Law could not do.
Hence he is said, Tit. 2.14. To have given himself for us, that he might redeem
us from all Iniquity, and purify unto himself a Peculiar People, zealous of
good Works: This is certainly spoken of the Saints, while upon Earth. But
contrary thereunto, these Men affirm, That we are never redeemed from all
Iniquity; and so make Christ's giving of himself for us, void and ineffectual;
and give the Apostle Paul the Lie plainly, by denying, that Christ purifieth to
himself a peculiar People, zealous of good Works. How are they zealous of good
Works, who are ever committing evil ones? How are they a purified People, that
are still in Impurity, as are they that daily sin, unless Sin be accounted no
impurity? Moreover it is said expressly, 1 John 3.5, 8. That for this purpose
the Son of God was manifested, that he might destroy the works of the Devil;
and ye know that he was manifested to take away our sins. But these Men make
this purpose of none effect; for they will not have the Son of God to destroy
the Works of the Devil in his Children, in this World: Neither will they at all
believe, that he was manifest to take away our Sins, seeing they plead a
Necessity of always living in them. And lest any should wrest this place of the
Apostle, as if it were spoken only of taking away the Guilt of Sin; as if it
related not to this Life; the Apostle, as of purpose to obviate such an
Objection, adds in the following Verses, Whosoever abides in him, sins not,
etc. I hope then they sin not daily in Thought, Word and Deed. Let no Man
deceive you, he that does Righteousness, is Righteous, even as he is Righteous;
he that commits Sin, is of the Devil: But he that sins daily in Thought,
Word and Deed, commits Sin; how comes such a one then to be the Child of
God? And if Christ was manifest to take away Sin, how strangely do they
overturn the Doctrine of Christ, that deny that it is ever taken away here? And
how injurious are they to the Efficacy and Power of Christ's Appearance? Came
not Christ to gather a people out of Sin, into Righteousness; out from the
Kingdom of Satan, into the Kingdom of the dear Son of God? And are not they,
that are thus gathered by him, his Servants, his Children, his Brethren, his
Friends? Who as he was, so are they to be in this World, Holy, Pure and
Undefiled. And does not Christ still watch over them, stand by them, pray for
them, and preserve them by his Power and Spirit, walk in them, and dwell among
them; even as the Devil, on the other hand, The Devil dwells among the
Reprobates
does among the Reprobate Ones? How comes it then, that the Servants of Christ
are less his Servants, than the Devil's are his? Or is Christ unwilling to have
his Servants thoroughly pure? Which were gross Blasphemy to assert, contrary to
many Scriptures. Or is he not able, by his Power to preserve and enable his
Children to serve him? Which were no less Blasphemous to affirm of him;
concerning whom the Scriptures declare, That he has Overcome Sin, Death, Hell,
and the Grave, and Triumphed over them openly; and that All Power in Heaven and
Earth is given to him. But certainly, if the Saints sin daily in Thought, Word
and Deed, as these Men assert, they serve the Devil daily, and are subject to
his Power; and so he prevails more than Christ does, and holds the Servants of
Christ in bondage, whether Christ will or not. But how greatly then does it
contradict the End of Christ's coming, as it is expressed by the Apostle, Ephesians.
5.25, 26, 27. Even as Christ also loved the Church, and gave himself for it,
that he might sanctify and cleanse it with the washing of Water, by the Word:
That he might present it to himself a glorious Church, not having spot or
wrinkle, or any such thing; but that it should be holy, and without blemish.
Now if Christ has really thus answered the thing he came for, then the Members
of this Church are not always finning in Thought, Word and Deed; or there is no
difference betwixt being Sanctified and Unsanctified, Clean and Unclean, Holy
and Unholy, being daily Blemished with Sin, and being without Blemish.

the Work of the Ministry, the Preaching of the Word, the Writing of the
Scripture, and the Prayers of Holy Men, altogether useless and ineffectual. As
to the first, Ephesians. 4.11. Pastors and Teachers are said to be given for the
Perfection of the Saints, etc. until we all come in the Unity of the Faith, and
of the Knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect Man, unto a measure of the
Stature of the fullness of Christ. Now if there be a necessity of sinning daily,
and in all things, then there can be no Perfection; for such as do so, cannot
be esteemed Perfect. And if for Effectuating this Perfection in the Saints,
Pastors, Teachers and Scriptures are given for the Perfecting of the Saints.
the Ministry be appointed and disposed of God, do not such as deny the
possibility hereof, render the Ministry useless, and of no profit? Seeing there
can be no other true use assigned, but to lead People out of Sin, into
Righteousness. If so be these Ministers assure us, that we need never expect to
be delivered from it, do not they render their own Work needless? What needs
Preaching against Sin, for the reproving of which, all Preaching is, if it can
never be forsaken? Our Adversaries are Exalters of the Scriptures in words,
much crying up their Usefulness and Perfection: Now the Apostle tells us, 2 Timothy 3.17. That the Scriptures are for making the Man of God perfect; and if
this be denied to be attainable in this Life, then the Scriptures are of no
profit; for in the other Life we shall not have use for them. It renders the
Prayers of the Saints altogether useless; seeing themselves do confess, they
ought to pray daily, that God would deliver them from Evil, and free them from
Sin, by the help of his Spirit and Grace, while in this World. But though we
might suppose this Absurdity to follow, That their Prayers are without Faith;
yet were not that so much, if it did not infer the like upon the holy Apostles,
who prayed earnestly for this end, and therefore (no doubt) believed it
attainable, Col. 4.12. Laboring fervently for you in Prayers, that ye may
stand perfect, etc. 1 Thessalonians. 3.13. and 5.23, etc.

contrary to common Reason and Sense. For the two opposite Principles, Darkness
and Light, Sin and Righteousness, inconsistent together?
whereof the one rules in the Children of Darkness, the other in the Children
of Light, are Sin, and Righteousness: And as they are respectively leavened and
acted by them, so they are accounted either as Reprobated, or Justified; seeing
it is Abomination in the sight of God, either to Justify the Wicked, Prove.
17.15.
or Condemn the Just. Now to say, that Men cannot be so leavened by the one, as
to be delivered from the other, is in plain words to affirm, That Sin and
Righteousness are consistent; and that a Man may be truly termed Righteous,
though he be daily sinning in every thing he does: And then what difference
betwixt Good and Evil? Is not this to fall into that great Abomination, of
putting Light for Darkness, and calling Good Evil and Evil Good? Since they
say, The very best Actions of God's Children are defiled and polluted; and that
those that sin daily, in Thought; Word and Deed, are good Men and Women, the
Saints and Holy Servants of the Holy Pure God: Can there be any thing more
Repugnant than this, to common Reason? Since the Subject is still denominated
from that Accident, that does most influence it; as a Wall is called White,
when there is much Whiteness; and Black, when there is much Blackness; and such
like. But when there is more Unrighteousness in a Man, than Righteousness; that
Man ought rather to be denominated Unrighteous, than Righteous. Then surely, if
every Man sin daily in Thought, Word and Deed, and that in his Sins there is no
Righteousness at all, and that all his Righteous Actions are polluted, and
mixed with Sin; then there is in every Man more Unrighteousness, than
Righteousness; If all daily sin, where is the righteous Man then, spoken of in
Scripture?
and so no Man ought to be called Righteous, no Man can be said to be
Sanctified or Washed. Where are then the Children of God? Where are the
Purified Ones? Where are they, who were sometimes Unholy, but now Holy; that
sometimes were Darkness, but now are Light in the Lord? There can none such be
found then at this rate, except that Unrighteousness be esteemed so: And is not
this to fall into that Abomination above mentioned, of Justifying the Ungodly!
This certainly lands in that horrid Blasphemy of the Ranters, that affirm, The
Blasphemy of the Ranters or Libertines.
There is no difference betwixt Good and Evil, and that all is one in the sight
of God: I could show many more gross Absurdities, evil Consequences, and
manifest Contradictions, implied in this Sinful Doctrine, but this may suffice
at present; by which also, in a good measure, the Probation of the Truth we
affirm, is advanced. Yet nevertheless, for the further evidencing of it, I
shall proceed to the Second thing proposed by me, to wit, to prove this from
several Testimonies of the Holy Scriptures.

Sect. II. Proof I.
. VIII. And first, I prove it from the peremptory, positive Command of Christ
and his Apostles; seeing this is a Maxim engraven in every Man's Heart
naturally, That no Man is bound to do that which is impossible: ^e ye perfect,
etc. Keep my Commandments.
Since then Christ and his Apostles have Commanded us to keep all the
Commandments, and to be perfect, in this respect; it is possible for us so to
do. Now, that this is thus Commanded, without any Commentary or Consequence, is
evidently apparent from these plain Testimonies, Mat. 5.48. and 7.21. John
13.17. 1 Cor. 7.19. 2 Cor. 13.11. 1 John 2.3, 4, 5, 6. and 3.2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7,
8, 9, 10. These Scriptures intimate a positive Command for it, they declare the
absolute Necessity of it; and therefore, as if they had purposely been written
to answer the Objections of our Opposers, they show the Folly of those, that
will esteem themselves Children or Friends of God, while they do otherwise.

Secondly; It is possible, because we receive the Gospel, The Possibility of it.
and Law thereof, for that effect; and it is expressly promised to us, as we are
under Grace, as appears by these Scriptures, Romans 6.14. Sin shall not have
dominion over you; for ye are not under the Law, but under Grace: And Romans 8.3.
For what the Law could not do, in that it was weak through the Flesh, God
sending his own Son, etc. That the Righteousness of the La^ ^ight be fulfilled
in us, The difference of the Law and Gospel.
etc. For if this were not a Condition both requisite, necessary, and
attainable under the Gospel, there were no difference betwixt the bringing in
of a better Hope, and the Law which made nothing perfect; neither betwixt
those, which are under the Gospel, or who under the Law, enjoyed and walked in
the Life of the Gospel, and mere Lag^lists. Whereas the Apostle, throughout
that whole sixth to the Romans, argues not only the Possibility, but Necessity
of being free from Sin, from their being under the Gospel, and under Grace, and
not under the Law; and therefore states himself, and those to whom he wrote, in
that Condition, in these verses, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. and therefore in the 11, 12,
13, 16, 17, 18 verses, he argues both the Possibility and Necessity of this
freedom from Sin, almost in the same manner we did a little before; and in the
22 d he declares them in measure to have attained this Condition, in these
words, But now being made free from Sin, and become Servants to God, ye have
your fruit unto Holiness, and the end Everlasting Life. And as this Perfection,
Perfection, and freedom from Sin, attained and made possible by the Gospel.
or Freedom from Sin, is attained and made Possible, where the Gospel and
Inward Law of the Spirit is received and known; so the Ignorance hereof has
been and is an occasion of opposing this Truth. For Man not minding the Light
and Law within his Heart, which not only discovers Sin, but leads out of it,
and so being a stranger to the new Life and Birth that is Born of God, which
naturally does his Will, and cannot of its own Nature transgress the
Commandments of God, does, I say, in his Natural State, look at the
Commandments, as they are without him, in the Letter; The Letter kills, and
makes not alive.
and finding himself reproved and convicted, is by the Letter killed, but not
made alive. So Man, finding himself wounded, and not applying himself Inwardly
to that which can heal, labors in his own Will after Conformity to the Law, as
it is without him; which he can never obtain; but finds, the more he wrestles,
the more he falls short. So this is the Jew still in effect, with his Carnal
Commandment, with the Law without, in the First Covenantstate, which makes not
the Comers thereunto perfect, as pertaining to the Conscience, Heb. 9.9. though
they may have here a Notion of Christianity, and an External Faith in Christ.
This has made them strain and wrest the Scriptures for an Imputative
Righteousness, wholly without them, to cover their Impurities; and this has
made them imagine an Acceptance with God possible, though they suppose it
impossible ever to obey Christ's Command. But alas! O deceived Souls: That will
not avail in the day, wherein God will judge every Man according to his Work,
whether good or bad. It will not save thee to say, It was necessary for thee to
sin daily in Thought, Word and Deed; for such as do so, have certainly obeyed
Unrighteousness: And what is provided for such, but Tribulation and Anguish,
Indignation and Wrath; even as Glory, Honor, and Peace, Immortality and
Eternal Life, to such as have done good, and patiently continued in well-doing.
So then, if thou desire to know this Perfection and Freedom from Sin,
possible for thee, turn thy Mind to the Light and Spiritual Law of Christ in
the Heart, and suffer the Reproofs thereof; bear the Judgment and Indignation
of God upon the Unrighteous Part in thee, as therein it is Revealed, which
Christ has made tolerable for thee; How we partake of Christ's Sufferings, and
are made Conformable unto his Death.
and so suffer Judgment in thee to be brought forth into Victory; and thus come
to partake of the Fellowship of Christ's Sufferings, and be made Conformable
unto his Death, that thou may feel thy self Crucified with him to the World,
by the Power of his Cross in thee; so that that Life, that sometimes was alive
in thee to this World, and the Love and Lusts thereof, may die; and a new Life
be raised, by which thou may live henceforward to God, and not to or for thy
self; and with the Apostle thou may say, Gal. 2.20. It is no more I, but
Christ alive in me; and then thou will be a Christian in Deed, and not in Name
only, as too many are; then thou will know what it is to have put off the Old
Man with his deeds, who indeed sins daily in Thought Word and Deed; and to have
put on the New Man, that is renewed in Holiness, after the Image of him that
has created him, Ephesians. 4.24. and thou will witness thy self to be God's
Workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto Good Works; and so not to sin always.
Mat. 11.30 1 John ^.3.
And to this New Man, Christ's Yoke is easy, and his Burden is light; though it
be heavy to the Old Adam; yea, the Commandments of God are not unto this
grievous; for it is his Meat and Drink to be found fulfilling the Will of God.

Lastly; This Perfection, or Freedom from Sin, is possible, because many have
attained it; according to the express Testimony of the Scripture. Many have
attained Perfection.
Some before the Law, and some under the Law, through witnessing and partaking
of the Benefit and Effect of the Gospel; and much more many under the Gospel.
As first, It is written of Enoch, Enoch walked with God, and was perfect.
Genesis 5.22, 24. that he walked with God; which no Man while sinning, can; nor
does the Scripture record any failing of his. It is said of Noah, Genesis 6.9. and
of Job, 1.8. and of Zacharias and Elizabeth, Luke 1.6. That they were Perfect.
But under the Gospel, besides that of Romans abovementioned, see what the
Apostle says of many Saints in general, Ephesians. 2.4, 5, 6. But God, who is rich
in Mercy, for his great Love, wherewith he has loved us, even when we were
dead in Sins, has quickened us together with Christ (by Grace ye are saved) and
has raised us up together, and made us sit together in heavenly places in
Christ Jesus, etc. I judge, while they were sitting in these heavenly places,
they could not be daily finning in Thought, Word and Deed, neither were all
their Works, which they did there, as filthy Rags, or as a menstruous Garment:
See what is further said to the Hebrews, 12.22, 23. Spirits of just Men made
perfect. And to conclude, let that of the Revelations, 14.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. be
considered; where, though their being found without fault, be spoken in the
present time, yet it is not without respect to their Innocence, while upon
Earth; and their being Redeemed from among Men, and no Guile found in their
Mouth, is expressly mentioned in the time past. But I shall proceed now, Sect.
III.
in the third place, to Answer the Objections, which indeed are the Arguments
of our Opposers.

If we say that we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the Truth is not in
us: This they think Invincible.

If we say, we have no sin, etc. objected.
that can receive so many Answers? As first, [ If we say we have no sin, etc.]
will not import the Apostle himself to be included. Sometimes the Scripture
uses this manner of Expression, when the Person speaking cannot be included;
which manner of Speech the Grammarians call Metaschema^ismus. Thus James 3.9,
10. speaking of the Tongue, says, Therewith bless we God, and therewith curse
we Men; adding, These things ought not so to be: Who from this will conclude,
that the Apostle as one of those Cursers? But Secondly, We sin daily in
Thought, Word and Deed; far less that the very Good Works, which God works in
us by his Spirit, are sin: Yea, the very next verse clearly shows, that upon
Confession and Repentance; we are not only forgiven, but also cleansed; He is
faithful to forgive us our Sins and to cleanse us from all Unrighteousness:
Here is both a Forgiveness, and removing of the Guilt, and cleansing or
removing of the Filth; for to make Forgiveness and Cleansing, to belong both to
the removing of the Guilt, as there is no reason for it from the Text, so it
were a most violent forcing of the words, and would imply a needless Ta^tology.
The Apostle having shown, how that not the Guilt only, but even the Filth also
of Sin is removed subsumes his words in the time past in the 10th verse, If we
say we have not sinned, we make him a Liar. Thirdly, As Augustine well observed,
in his Exposition upon the Epistle to the Galatians; It is one thing not to
sin, and another thing not to have sin: The Apostles words are not, It is one
thing, not to sin; and another thing, not to have Sin
If we say we sin not, or commit not sin daily; but, If we say we have no sin:
and betwixt these two there is a manifest difference; for in respect all have
sinned, as we freely acknowledge, all may be said in a sense to have sin.
Again, Sin may be taken for the Seed of Sin, which may be in those, that are
redeemed from actual Sinning: But as to the Temptations and Provocations
proceeding from it, being resisted by the Servants of God, and not yielded to,
they are the Devil's Sin, that tempts; not the Man's, that is preserved.
Fourthly, Answ. 4.
This being considered, as also how positive and plain, once and again, the
same Apostle is, in that very Epistle, as in diverse places above cited; is it
equal or rational, to strain this one place, presently after so qualified and
subsumed in the time past, to contradict not only other positive Expressions of
his, but the whole tendency of his Epistle, and of the rest of the holy
Commands and Precepts of the Scripture?

Secondly; Their Second Objection is from two places of Scripture, much of one
signification: The one is, 1 Kings 8.46. For there is no Man that sins not.
The other is, Eccl. 7.20. For there is not a just Man upon Earth, that does
good and sins not.

First, These affirm nothing of a daily and continual sinning, so as never to
be redeemed from it; but only, that all have sinned, or that there is none that
does not sin, though not always, so as never to cease to sin; and in this lies
the Question. Yea, in that place of the Kings, he speaks within two Verses of
the returning of such with all their Souls and Hearts; which implies a
Possibility of leaving off Sin. Secondly, Diversity of Seasons and
Dispensations respected.
There is a respect to be had to the Seasons and Dispensations; for if it
should be granted, that in Solomon's time, there was none that sinned not; it
will not follow, that there are none such now, or that it is a thing not now
attainable by the Grace of God under the Gospel; For, A non esse ad non posse
non valet sequela. And lastly, This whole Objection hangs upon a false
Interpretation; for the Hebrew Word, ^ECAITAU, may be read in the Potential
Mood, thus, There is no Man who may not sin, as well as in the Indicative: So
both the old Latin, Junius and Tremellius, and Votablus have it; and the same
Word is so used, Psalm 119.11. I have bid thy Word in my Heart, LEMAGNAN LO
ECAITAU LECAU, that is to say, That I may not sin against thee, in the
Potential Mood, and not in the Indicative; which being more answerable to the
Universal Scope of the Scriptures, the Testimony of the Truth, and the Sense
almost of all Interpreters, doubtless ought to be so understood, and the other
Interpretation rejected as spurious.

Thirdly; They object some Expressions of the Apostle Paul, Romans 7.19. For the
good that I would, I do not; but the evil which I would not, that I do. And
Verse 24. O wretched Man that I am! who shall deliver me from the Body of this
Death?

Cursing, in James, beforementioned. But there is nothing in the Text, that
does clearly signify the Apostle to be speaking of himself, or of a Condition
he was then under, or was always to be under; yea, on the contrary, in the
former Chapter (as before is at large shown) he declares, They were dead to Sin;
Paul personates the Wretched Man, to show them the Redeemer.
demanding, how such should yet live any longer therein? Secondly; It appears,
that the Apostle personated one not yet come to a Spiritual Condition, in that
he says, Verse 14. But I am carnal, sold under Sin. Now, is it to be imagined,
that the apostle Paul, as to his own proper Condition, when he wrote that
Epistle was a Carnal Man, who in chap. 1. testifies of himself, That he was
separated to be an Apostle, capable to impart to the Romans spiritual Gifts;
and chap. 8. ver. 2. That the Law of the Spirit of Life in Christ Jesus had
made him free from the Law of Sin and Death? So then he was not Carnal. And
seeing there are Spiritual Men in this Life, as our Adversaries will not deny,
and is intimated through this whole 8th Chapter to the Romans; it will not be
denied, but the Apostle was one of them. So then, as his calling himself
Carnal, in chap 7. cannot be understood of his own proper state; neither can
the rest of what he speaks there of that kind be so understood: Yea, after,
verse. 24. where he makes that Exclamation, he adds in the next verse; I thank
God, through Jesus Christ our Lord; signifying, that by him he witnessed
deliverance; and so goes on, showing how he had obtained it, in the next
Chapter, viz. 8. v. 35. Who shall separate us from the Love of Christ? And ver.
37. But in all these things we are more than Conquerors: And in the last verse,
Nothing shall be able to separate us, etc. But where ever there is a continuing
in Sin, there is a separation in some Degree; seeing every Sin is contrary to
God, and (...), i. e. a Transgression of the Law, 1 John 3.4. and whoever
commits the least Sin, is overcome of it; and so, Whom Sin has conquered, he
is no Conqueror.
in that respect, is not a Conqueror, but conquered. This Condition then, which
the Apostle plainly testified, he with some others had obtained, could not
consist with continual remaining and abiding in Sin.

Fourthly; They object the Faults and Sins of several eminent Saints, as Noah,
David, etc.

Whether good Men may not fall into sin? which is not denied; but, Whether it
be not possible for them not to sin? It will not follow, because these Men
sinned; that therefore they were never free of sin, Can they that sin, be never
freed from Sin?
but always sinned: For at this rate of Arguing, it might be urged according to
this Rule Contraiorum par ratio, i. e. The reason of Contraries is alike: That
if, because a good Man has sinned once or twice, he can never be free from
Sin, but must always be daily and continually a Sinner all his Life long; then
by the Rule of Contraries, If a wicked Man have done good once or twice, he can
never be free from Righteousness, but must always be a righteous Man all his
Lifetime: Which as it is most absurd in it self, so it is contrary to the plain
Testimony of the Scripture, Ezekiel. 33.12, to 18.

Lastly They Object, That if Perfection, or Freedom from Sin, be attainable,
this will render Mortification of Sin useless; and make the Blood of Christ of
no service to us; neither need we any more pray for Forgivevess of Sins.

Who fights, and not in hopes to overcome his Foe?
but by Mortification. Does the hope and belief of Overcoming, render the Fight
unnecessary? Let Rational Men judge, which has most sense in it; to say, as
our Adversaries do, It is necessary that we fight and wrestle, but we must
never think of overcoming; we must resolve still to be overcome: Or to say, Let
us fight, because we may overcome? Whether do such as believe they may be
cleansed by it, or those that believe they can never be cleansed by it, render
the Blood of Christ most Effectual? If two Men were both grievously diseased,
and applied themselves to a Physician for remedy; which of those do most
commend the Physician and his Cure, he that believes he may be cured by him,
and as he feels himself cured, confesses that he is so, and so can say, This
is a skilful Physcian, this is a good Medicine, behold I am made whole by it?
Or he that never is cured, nor ever believes that he can, so long as he lives?
As for praying f^ Forgiveness, we deny it not; Praying for Forgiveness of Sin.
for that all have sinned; and therefore all need to pray that their sins past
may be blotted out, and that they may be daily preserved from sinning. And if
hoping or believing to be made free from Sin hinders praying for Forgiveness of
Sin; it would follow, by the same inference, that Men ought not to forsake
Murder, Adultery, or any of these gross Evils; seeing the more Men are Sinful,
the more plentiful occasion there would be of asking Forgiveness of Sin, and
the more work for Mortification. But the Apostle has sufficiently refuted such
Sin-pleasing Cavils in these words, Romans 6.1.2. Shall we continue in Sin, that
Grace my abound? God forbid.

But lastly; It may be easily answered by a Retortion to those that press this,
from the words of the Lord's Prayer, Forgive us our debts, That this militates
no less against perfect Justification, than against perfect Sanctification. For
if all the Saints, the least as well as the greatest, be perfectly Justified in
that very hour wherein they are Converted, as our Adversaries will have it,
then they have Remission of Sins long before they die. May it not then be said
to them. What need have ye to pray for Remission of Sin, who are already
Justified, whose Sins are long ago forgiven, both past and to come?

. X. But this may suffice: Testimonies of the Fathers concerning Perfection, or
Freedom from Sin.
Concerning this possibility Jerome speaks clearly enough, lib 3. adver.
Pelagium; This we also say, that a Man may not sin, if he will, for a time and
place, according to his bodily weakness, so long as his Mind is intent, so long
as the Cords of the Cythar relax not by any Vice; and again in the same Book,
Which is that, that I said, Jerome.
that it is put in our power (to wit, being helped by the Grace of God either
to sin, or not to sin. For this was the Error of Pelagius, which we indeed
reject and abhor, and which the Fathers deservedly withstood, That Man by his
natural strength, without the help of God's Grace, could attain to that state,
so as not to sin. And Augustine himself, Augustine.
a great Opposer of the Pelagian Heresy, did not deny this possibility, as
attainable by the help of God's Grace; as in his Book de Spiritu and Litera,
cap. 2. and his Book de Natura and Gratia, against Pelagius cap. 42, 50, 60.
and 63. de Gestis Concilii Palestini, cap. 7. and 2. and de Peccato Originali,
Gelasius.
lib. 2. cap. 2. Gelasius also in his Disputation against Pelagius, says, But
if any affirm, that this may be given to some Saints in this life, not by the
power of Man's strength, but by the Grace of God, he does well to think so
confidently, and hope it faithfully; for by this Gift of God all things are
possible. That by the Gift of God all things are possible.
That this was the common Opinion of the Fathers, appears from the words of the
Aszansick Council, Canon last, We believe also this according to the Catholic
Faith, that all that are baptized through Grace by Baptism received, and Christ
helping them, and co-working, may and ought to do whatsoever belongs to
Salvation, if they will faithfully Labor.

Conclusion
. XI. Blessed then are they that believe in him who is both able and willing to
deliver as many as come to him through true Repentance from all Sin, and do not
resolve, as these Men do, to be the Devil's Servants all their Lifetime; but
daily go on forsaking Unrighteousness, Phil. ^.14.
and forgetting those things that are behind, Pr^s. forward to the Mark, t^
Prize and ^oring.
press forward toward the Mark, for the Prize of the high calling of God in
Christ Jesus: Such shall not find their Faith and Confidence to be in vain; but
in due time shall be made Conquerors through him, in whom they have believed,
and so overcoming, shall be established as Pillars in the House of God, so as
they shall go no more out, Rev. 3.12.

PROPOSITION IX. Concerning Perseverance, and the Possibility of falling from
Grace.
Although this Gift, and inward Grace of God, be sufficient to work out
Salvation; yet in those in whom it is resisted, it both may and does become
their Condemnation. Moreover they, in whose Hearts it has wrought in part to
purify and sanctify them, in order to their further Perfection, may by
Disobedience fall from it, turn it to Wantonness, Jude 4. make Shipwreck of
Faith, 1 Timothy 1.19. and after having tasted the Heavenly Gift, and been made
Partakers of the Holy Ghost, again fall away, Heb. 6.4, 5, 6. Yet such an
increase and stability in the Truth may in this Life be attained, from which
there can be no total Apostasy.

. I. THE first Sentence of this Proposition has already been treated of in the
fifth and sixth Propositions, where it has been shown, that that Light, which
is given for Life and Salvation, becomes the Condemnation of those that refuse
it; and therefore is already proved in those Places, where I did demonstrate
the Possibility of Man's resisting the Grace and Spirit of God: And indeed, it
is so apparent in the Scriptures, that it cannot be denied, by such as will but
seriously consider these Testimonies, Prove. 1.24, 25, 26. John 3.18, 19. 2 Thessalonians. 2.11, 12. Acts 7.51. and 13.46. Romans 1.18. As for the other Part of it,
That they, in whom this Grace may have wrought in a good measure, in order to
purify and sanctify them, tending to their further Perfection, may afterward
through disobedience fall away, etc. The Testimonies of the Scripture, included
in the Proposition it self, are sufficient to prove it to Men of unbyassed
Judgment: But because, as to this part, our cause is common with many other
Protestants, I shall be the more brief in it. For it is not my design to do
that which is done already, neither do I covet to appear knowing, by writing
much; but simply purpose to present to the World a faithful account of our
Principles; and briefly to let them understand, what we have to say for our
selves. I. A falling from Grace by Disobedience, t^inced.


. II. From these Scriptures then included in the Propsition (not to mention
many more, which might be urged) I argue thus:

Arg. 1.
If Men may turn the Grace of God into Wantonness, then they must once have had
it: But the first is true: Therefore also the Second.


Arg. 2.
If Men may make Shipwreck of Faith, they must once have bad it; neither could
they ever have had true Faith, without the Grace of God: But the First is true:
Therefore also the Last.


Arg. 3.
If Men may have tasted of the Heavenly Gift, and been made Partakers of the
Holy Spirit, and afterward fall away; they must needs have known in Measure
the Operation of God's Saving Grace and Spirit, without which no Man could
taste the Heavenly Gift, nor yet partake of the Holy Spirit: But the first is
true: Therefore also the Last.


II. The Doctrine of ^^tion and Reprobation is inconsistent with Preaching, and
daily Exhortation.
Secondly; Seeing the contrary Doctrine is built upon this false Hypothesis,
That Grace is not given for Salvation to any, but to a certain Elect Number,
which cannot lose it; and that all the rest of Mankind, by an absolute Decree,
are debarred from Grace and Salvation; that being destroyed, this falls to the
Ground. Now as that Doctrine of theirs is wholly inconsistent with the daily
Practice of those that preach it; in that they exhort People to believe and be
saved, while in the mean Time, if they belong to the Decree of Reprobation, it
is simply impossible for them so to do; and if to the Decree of Election, it is
needless: Seeing it is as impossible to them to miss of it, as has been before
demonstrated. So also in this matter of Perseverance, their Practice and
Principles are no less inconsistent and contradictory. For while they daily
exhort People to be Faithful to the end, showing them, if they continue not,
they shall be cut off, and fall short of the Reward; which is very true: But no
less inconsistent with that Doctrine, that affirms, There is no hazard, because
no possibility of departing from the least measure of true Grace: Which if
true, it is to no purpose to beseech them to stand, to whom God has made it
impossible to fall. I shall not longer insist upon the Probation of this;
seeing what is said, may suffice to answer my design; and that the thing is
also abundantly proved by many of the same Judgment. That this was the Doctrine
of the Primitive Protestants, thence appears, that the Augustane Confession
condemns it as an Error of the Anababtists, to say, That who once are
Justified, they cannot lose the Holy Spirit: Many such like Sayings are to be
found in the common places of Philip Melancthon. The Opinion of the Fathers
concerning falling from Grace
Vossius in his Pelagian History, lib. 6. testifies, That this was the common
Opinion of the Fathers: In the Confirmation of the Twelfth Thesis, page 587. he
has these words; That this, which we have said, was the Common Sentiment of
Antiquity, those at present can only deny, who otherways perhaps are Men not
unlearned, but nevertheless in Antiquity altogether strangers, etc. These
things thus observed, I come to the Objections of our Opposers.

First, they allege, That those places mentioned of making Shipwreck of Faith,
is only understood of seeming Faith, and not of a real true Faith.

Tim. 1.19. where the Apostle adds to Faith, a good Conscience, A good and
evil Conscience.
by way of Complaint: Whereas, if their Faith had been only seeming and
hypocritical, the Men had been better without it, than with it; neither had
they been worthy of blame, for losing that, which in it self was evil. But the
Apostle expressly adds, [ and of a good Conscience,] which shows it was Real;
neither can it be supposed, that Men could truly attain a good Conscience,
without the Operation of God's Saving Grace; far less, that a good Conscience
does consist with a seeming, false, and hypocritical Faith. Again, These places
of the Apostle being spoken by way of Regret, clearly import, that these
Seize they had fallen from, were good and real, not false and deceitful;
else he would not have Regretted their falling from them: And so he says
positively, They tasted of the Heavenly Gift and were made partakers of the
Holy Ghost, etc. not that they seemed to be so; which shows this Objection is
very frivolous.

Secondly; They allege, Phil. 1.6. Being confident of this very thing, that he
which has begun a good Work in you, will perform it, until the day of Jesus
Christ, etc. and 1 Pet. 1.5. Who are kept by the Power of God through Faith
unto Salvation.

Salvation is proposed upon certain Conditions by us to be performed.
than as the Condition is performed upon our part; seeing Salvation is no other
ways proposed there, but upon certain necessary Conditions to be performed by
us; as has been above proved, and as our Adversaries also acknowledge, as Romans
8.13. For if ye live after the Flesh, ye shall die; but if ye through the
Spirit do mortify the deeds of the Body, ye shall live. And Heb. 3.14. We are
made partakers of Christ, if we hold the beginning of our Confidence steadfast
unto the end. For if these places of the Scripture, upon which they build their
Objection, were to be admitted without these Conditions, it would manifestly
overturn the whole Tenor of their Exhortations throughout all their Writings.
Some other Objections there are, of the same nature, which are solved by the
same Answers; which also, because largely treated of by others, I omit; to come
to that Testimony of the Truth, which is more especially ours in this matter,
and is contained in the latter part of the Proposition, in these words; Yet
such an increase and stability in the Truth may in this Life be attained, from
which there cannot be a total Apostasy.

. IV. As in the Explanation of the fifth and sixth Propositions I observed,
that some, that had denied the Errors of others concerning Reprobation, and
affirmed the Universality of Christ's Death, did notwithstanding fall short in
sufficiently holding forth the Truth; and so gave the contrary party occasion,
by their defects, to be strengthened in their Errors: So may it be said in this
Case. The two Extremes some run into, by asserting a final falling or not
falling from Grace impossible.
As upon the one hand they Err, that affirm, That the least degree of true and
saving Grace cannot be fallen from; so do they Err upon the other hand, that
deny any such stability to be attained, from which there cannot be a total and
final Apostasy. And betwixt these two Extremes lies the Truth apparent in the
Scriptures, which God has revealed unto us by the Testimony of his Spirit, and
which also we are made sensible of, by our own sensible Experience. And even as
in the former Controversy was observed, so also in this, the defense of Truth
will readily appear to such as serously weigh the matter: For the Arguments
upon both hands, rightly applied, will as to this hold good; and the
Objections, which are strong, as they are respectively urged against the two
opposite false Opinions, are here easily solved, by the establishing of this
Truth. For all the Arguments, which these allege that affirm, There can be no
falling away, may well be received upon the one part, as of those who have
attained to this Stability and Establishment, and their Objections solved by
this Confession; so upon the other hand, the Arguments alleged from
Scripture-Testimonies, by those that affirm the possibility of falling away,
may well be received of such, as are not come to this Establishment, though
having attained a measure of true Grace. Thus then the contrary Batterings of
our Adversaries, who miss the Truth, do concur the more strongly to establish
it, while they are destroying each other. But lest this may not seem to suffice
to satisfy such as judge it always possible for the best of Men, before they
die, to fall away; I shall add, for the proof of it, some brief Considerations,
from some few Testimonies of the Scripture.

I. Watchfulness and Diligence is of Indispensible necessity to all.
. V. And first, I freely acknowledge, that it is good for all to be Humble, and
in this respect not over Confident, so as to lean to this, to foster themselves
in Iniquity, or lie down in Security, as if they had attained this Condition;
seeing Watchfulness and Diligence is of indispensible necessity to all Mortal
Men, so long as they breathe in this World: For God will have this to be the
constant Practice of a Christian, that thereby he may be the more fit to serve
him, and better armed against all the Temptations of the Enemy. For since the
Wages of Sin is Death, there is no Man, while he sins, and is subject
thereunto, but may lawfully suppose himself capable of perishing: Hence the
Apostle Paul himself says, 1 Cor. 9.27. But I keep under my Body, and bring it
into subjection; lest that by any means, when I have preached to others, I my
self should be a castaway. Here the Apostle supposes it possible for him to
be a castaway; and yet it may be judged, he was far more advanced in the
Inward Work of Regeneration, when he wrote that Epistle, than many who now
adays too presumptuously suppose they cannot fall away; because they feel
themselves to have attained some small degree of true Grace. But the Apostle
makes use of this Supposition, or Possibility of his being a Castaway (as I
before observed) as an Inducement to him to be Watchful; I keep under my Body,
last, etc. Nevertheless, the same Apostle at another time, in the sense and
feeling of God's Holy Power, and in the Dominion thereof, finding himself a
Conqueror there through over Sin and his Soul's Enemies, makes no difficulty
to affirm, Romans 8.38. For I am persuaded, that neither Death nor Life, etc.
Which clearly shows, that he had attained a Condition, from which he knew he
could not fall away.

But Secondly; II. A Condition attainable in this life, from which there is no
falling away.
It appears such a Condition is attainable, because we are Exhorted to it; and,
as has been proved before, the Scripture never proposes to us things
impossible. Such an Exhortation we have from the Apostle, 2 Pet. 1.10.
Wherefore the rather, Brethren, give diligence to make your Calling and
Election sure. And though there be a Condition here proposed; yet since we have
already proved, that it is possible to fulfill this Condition, then also the
Promise annexed thereunto may be attained. And since, where Assurance is
wanting, there is still a place left for doubtings and despairs; if we would
affirm it never attainable, then should there never be a place known by the
Saints in this World, wherein they might be free of doubting and despair: Which
as it is most absurd in it self, so it is contrary to the manifest Experience
of Thousands.

Thirdly; God has given to many of his Saints and Children, and is ready to
give unto All, III. A certain Assurance and Establishment given of God to many
of his Saints and Children.
a full and certain Assurance, that they are his, and that no Power shall be
able to pluck them out of his hand. But this Assurance would be no Assurance,
if those, who are so Assured, were not Established and Confirmed, beyond all
doubt and hesitation: If so, then surely there is no possibility for such to
miss of that which God has assured them of. And that there is such Assurance
attainable in this Life, the Scripture abundantly declares, both in general,
and as to particular Persons. As first; Rev. 3.12. Him that overcomes, will I
make a Pillar in the Temple of my God, and he shall go no more out, etc. which
contains a General Promise unto All. Hence the Apostle speaks of some that
are sealed, 2 Cor. 1.22. Who has also sealed us, and given the Earnest of the
Spirit in our Hearts: Wherefore the Spirit so sealing, is called the Earnest or
Pledge of our inheritance, Ephesians. 1.13. In whom ye were sealed by the Holy Spirit
of Promise. And therefore the Apostle Paul, not only in that of the Romans
abovenoted, declares himself to have attained that Condition; but 2 Timothy 4.7.
he affirms in these words, I have fought a good Fight, etc. which also many
good Men have and do witness. And therefore, as there can be nothing more
manifest, than that which the manifest Experience of this Time shows, and
therein is found agreeable to the Experience of former Times; so we see, there
have been both of old and of late, that have turned the Grace of God into
Wantonness, and have fallen from their Faith and Integrity; thence we may
safely conclude such a falling away possible. We also see, that some of old and
of late have attained a certain Assurance, some time before they departed, that
they should Inherit Eternal Life; and have accordingly died in that good hope:
Of and concerning whom, the Spirit of God testified, That they are saved.
Wherefore we also see, such a State is attainable in this Life, from which
there is not a falling away: For seeing the Spirit of God did so testify, it
was not possible, that they should perish; concerning whom He, who cannot lie,
thus bare witness.

PROPOSITION X. Concerning the Ministry.
As by the Light, or Gift of God all true Knowledge in things spiritual is
received and revealed, so by the same, as it is manifested and received in the
Heart, by the strength and power thereof, every true Minister of the Gospel is
ordained, prepared, and supplied in the Work of the Ministry; and by the
leading, moving, and drawing hereof, ought every Evangelist and Christian
Pastor to be led and ordered in his labor and work of the Gospel, both as to
the Place where, as to the Persons to whom, and as to the Time wherein he is to
minister. Moreover, they who have this Authority, may and ought to preach the
Gospel, though without Humane Commission or Literature; as on the other hand,
they who want the Authority of this Divine Gift, however learned or authorized
by the Commission of Men and Churches, The Gospel to be preached freely. Mat.
10.^.
are to be esteemed but as Deceivers, and not true Ministers of the Gospel.
Also they who have received this holy and unspotted Gift, as they have freely
received it, so are they freely to give it, without Hire or Bargaining, far
less to use it as a Trade to get Money by. Yet if God has called any one from
their Employment or Trades, by which they acquire their Livelihood; it may be
lawful for such, according to the Liberty which they feel given them in the
Lord, to receive such Temporals (to wit, what may be needful for them for Meat
and Clothing) as are given them freely and cordially by those, to whom they
have communicated Spirituals.

. I. HItherto I have treated of those things which relate to the Christian
Faith and Christians, as they stand each in his private and particular
Condition; and how and what way every Man may be a Christian indeed, and so
abide. Now I come in order to speak of those things that relate to Christians,
as they are stated in a Joint-Fellowish and Communion, and come under a visible
and outward Society; which Society is called the Church of God, The Church of
God is the spiritual Body of Christ.
and in Scripture compared to a Body; and therefore named the Body of Christ.
As then in the Natural Body there be diverse Members, all concurring to the
common end of preserving and confirming the whole Body; so in this Spiritual
and Mystical Body, there are also diverse Members, according to the different
Measures of Grace and of the Spirit, diversely administered unto each Member; and
from this Diversity arises that Distinction of Persons in the Visible Society
of Christians, as of Apostles, Pastors, Evangelists, Ministers, etc. That which
in this Proposition is proposed, is, What makes or constitutes any a Minister
of the Church, what his Qualifications ought to be, and how he ought to behave
himself? But because it may seem somewhat preposterous, to speak of the distinct
Offices of the Church, until something be said of the Church in general, though
nothing positively be said of it in the Proposition; yet as here implied, I
shall briefly premise something thereof, and then proceed to the particular
Members of it.

II. It is not in the least my design to meddle with those tedious and many
Controversies, wherewith the Papists and Protestants do tear one another
concerning this thing; but only according to the Truth manifested to me, and
revealed in me by the Testimony of the Spirit, according to that proportion ^f
Wisdom given me, briefly to hold forth, as a necessary Introduction both to
this matter of the Ministry and of Worship, which follows, those thing, which
I, together with my Brethren, do believe conc^ning the Church.

The [ Church] then, according to the Grammatical Signification of the word, as
it is used in the Holy Scripture, signifies an Assembly, or Gathering of many
into one place; for the Substantive (...) comes from the word (...) I call out
of, The Etymo^ of the Word (...) the Church, and Signification of it.
and or^ginally from (...) I call; and indeed, as this is the Grammatical Sense
of the Word, so also it is the Real and Proper Signification of the Thing; the
Church being no other thing, but the Society, Gathering, or Company of such as
God has called out of the World, and Worldly Spirit, to walk in his LIGHT and
LIFE. The Church then, so defined, is to be considered, as it comprehends all
that are thus Called and Gathered truly by God, both such as are yet in this
Inferior World, and such as having already laid down the Earthly Tabernacle,
are passed into their Heavenly Mansions; which together do make up the one
Catholic Church, (concerning which there is so much Controversy.) Out of
which Church, No Salvation without the Church
we freely acknowledge, there can be no Salvation; because under this Church,
and its Denomination, are comprehended all, and as many, of whatsoever Nation,
Kindred, Tongue or People they be (though outwardly strangers, and remote from
those who profess Christ and Christianity in words, and have the benefit of the
Scriptures) as become Obedient to the holy Light, and Testimony of God in their
Hearts, so as to become sanctified by it, and cleansed from the Evils of their
ways. What the Church is.
For this is the Universal or Catholic Spirit, by which many are called from
all the four corners of the Earth, and shall sit down with Abraham, Isaac and
Jacob: By this the secret Life and Virtue of Jesus is conveyed into many that
are afar off; even as by the Blood that runs into the Veins and Arteries of the
Natural Body, the Life is conveyed from the Head and Heart unto the extremest
parts. Turks and Jews m^ b^ Members of this Church.
There may be the Members therefore of this Catholic Church both among
Heathens, Turks, Jews, and all the several sorts of Christians, Men and Women
of Integrity and Simplicity of Heart, who though blinded in something in their
Understanding, and perhaps burdened with the Superstitions and Formality of
the several Sects, in which they are engrossed; yet being upright in their
Hearts before the Lord, chiefly aiming and laboring to be delivered from
Iniquity, and loving to follow Righteousness, are by the secret Touches of this
Holy Light in their Souls, inlivened and quickened, thereby secretly united to
God, and therethrough become true members of this Catholic Church. Now the
Church in this respect, has been in being in all Generations; for God never
wanted some such Witnesses for him, though many times slighted, and not much
observed by this World: And therefore this Church, though still in being, has
been oftentimes, as it were Invisible, in that it has not come under the
Observation of the Men of this World, being, as says the Scripture, Jer. 3.14.
One of a City, and two of a Family. And yet though the Church thus considered,
may be as it were hid from wicked Men, as not then gathered into a Visible
Fellowship, yea, and not observed even by some that are Members of it; yet may
there notwithstanding many belong to it: As when Elias complained, he was left
alone, 1 Kings 19.18. God answered unto him; I have reserved to my self seven
thousand Men, who have not bowed their knees to the Image of Baal; whence the
Apostle argues, Romans 11. the being of a Remnant in his day.

II. The Definition of the Church of God, as gathered into a visible Fellowship.
. III. Secondly; The Church is to be considered, as it signifies a certain
Number of Persons, gathered by God's Spirit, and by the Testimony of some of
his Servants (raised up for that end) unto the Belief of the true Principles
and Doctrines of the Christian Faith; who, through their Hearts being united by
the same Love, and their Understanding informed in the same Truths, gather,
meet, and assemble together, to wait upon God, to worship him, and to bear a
Joint-Testimony for the Truth against Error, suffering for the same, and so
becoming, through this Fellowship, as one Family and Household in certain
respects, do each of them watch over, teach, instruct, and care for one
another, according to their several Measures and Seize: Such were the
Churches of the Primitive Times, gathered by the Apostles; whereof we have
diverse mentioned in the Holy Scriptures. And as to the Visibility of the Church
in this respect, there has been a great Interruption since the Apostles days,
by reason of the Apostasy; as shall hereafter appear.

. IV. How to became a Member of that Church
To be a Member then of the Catholic Church, there is need of the Inward
Calling of God by his Light in their Heart, and a being leavened into the
Nature and Spirit of it, so as to forsake Unrighteousness, and be turned to
Righteousness, and in the inwardness of the Mind to be cut out of the wild
Olive Tree of our own first fallen Nature, and ingrafted into Christ by his
Word and Spirit in the heart. And this may be done in those, who are strangers
to the History, (God not having pleased to make them partakers thereof) as in
the fifth and sixth Propositions has already been proved.

To be a Member of a particular Church of Christ, The outward Profession of the
Members of the true Church
as this Inward Work is indispensibly necessary, so is also the Outward
Profession of, and Belief in Jesus Christ, and those holy Truths delivered by
his Spirit in the Scriptures; seeing the Testimony of the Spirit recorded in
the Scriptures, does answer the Testimony of the same Spirit in the Heart, even
as face answers face in a glass. Hence it follows, that the inward Work of
Holiness, and forsaking Iniquity, is necessary in every respect to the being a
Member in the Church of Christ; and that the outward Profession is necessary to
be a Member of a particular gathered Church, but not to the being a Member of
the Catholic Church; yet it is absolutely necessary, where God affords the
opportunity of knowing it: And the outward Testimony is to be believed, where
it is presented and revealed; the Sum whereof has, upon other occasions, been
already proved.

. V. But contrary hereunto, the Devil, that works and has wrought in the
Mystery of Iniquity, The Members of the Antichristian Church in the Apostasy,
their empty Profession.
has taught his Followers to affirm, That no Man, however holy, is a Member of
the Church of Christ, without the outward Profession; and that he be initiated
thereunto by some outward Ceremonies. And again, That Men who have this outward
Profession, though inwardly unholy, may be Members of the true Church of
Christ, yea, and ought to be so esteemed. This is plainly to put Light for
Darkness, and Darkness for Light; as if God had a greater regard to Words than
Actions, and were more pleased with vain Professions, than with real Holiness:
But these things I have sufficiently refuted heretofore. Only from hence, let
it be observed, that upon this false and rotten Foundation Antichrist has
builded his Babylonish Structure, and the Antichristian Church in the Apostasy
has hereby reared her self up to that Height and Grandeur she has attained;
so as to exalt her self above all that is called God, and sit in the Temple of
God, as God.

The Decay of the Church.
For the particular Churches of Christ, gathered in the Apostle's days, soon
after beginning to decay, as to the inward Life, came to be overgrown with
several Errors, and the Hearts of the Professors of Christianity to be leavened
with the Old Spirit and Conversation of the World. Yet it pleased God for some
Centuries to preserve that Life in many, whom he emboldned with Zeal to stand
and suffer for his Name through the Ten Persecutions: But these being over,
When men became Christians by Birth, and not by Conversion, Christianity came
to be lost.
the meekness, gentleness, love, long-suffering, goodness and temperance of
Christianity came to be lost. For after that the Princes of the Earth came to
take upon them that Profession, and that it ceased to be a Reproach to be a
Christian, but rather became a means to Preferment; Men became such by Birth
and Education, and not by Conversion and Renovation of Spirit: Then there was
none so Vile, none so Wicked, none so Profane, who became not a Member of the
Church. And the Teachers and Pastors thereof becoming the Companions of
Princes, and so being enriched by their Benevolence, and getting vast Treasures
and Estates, became puffed up, and as it were drunken with the vain Pomp and
Glory of this World: And so Marshalled themselves in manifold Orders and
Degrees; not without innumerable Contests and Altercations, who should have the
As was betwixt the Bishop of Rome, and the Bishop of Constantinople.
Precedence. So the Virtue, Life, Substance, and Kernel of Christian Religion
came to be lost, and nothing remained but a Shadow or Image; which dead Image,
or Carcass of Christianity (to make it take the better with the Superstitious
Multitude of Heathens, that became engrossed in it, not by any inward
Conversion of their Hearts, or by becoming less Wicked or Superstitious; but by
a little change in the Object of their Superstition) not having the inward
Ornament and Life of the Spirit, became decked with many outward and visible
Orders, and beautified with the Gold, Silver, precious Stones, and the other
splendid Ornaments of this perishing World: So that this was no more to be
accounted the Christian Religion, and Christian Church, notwithstanding the
outward Profession, than the dead body of a Man is to be accounted a living
man; which, however cunningly embalmed, and adorned with ever so much Gold or
Silver, or most precious Stones, or sweet Ointments, is but a dead Body still,
without Sense, In the Church of Rome are no less Superstitions and ceremonies
introduced, than were either among Jews or Heathens
Life or Motion. For that Apostate Church of Rome has introduced no less
Ceremonies and Superstitions into the Christian Profession, than was either
among Jews and Heathens; and that there is and has been as much, yea, and more
Pride, Covetousness, unclean Lust, Luxury, Fornication, Profanity and Atheism
among her Teachers and chief Bishop, than ever was among any sort of People,
none need doubt, that have read their own Authors, to wit, Platina, and others.

Whether, and what Difference there is betwixt the Protestants and Papists in
Superstitions?
Now, though Protestants have reformed from her in some of the most gross Points,
and absurd Doctrines, relating to the Church and Ministry; yet (which is to be
regretted) they have but lopped the Branches, but retain and plead earnestly
for the same Root, from which these Abuses have sprung. So that even among
them, though all that Mass of Superstition, Ceremonies and Orders, be not again
established; yet the same Pride, Covetousness and Sensuality is found to have
overspread and leavened their Churches and Ministry; and the Life, Power and
Virtue of true Religion is lost among them; and the very same Death,
Barrenness, Dryness and Emptiness, is found in their Ministry. So that in
effect they differ from Papists, but in Form and some Ceremonies; being with
them Apostatized from the Life and Power the true Primitive Church and her
Pastors were in: So that of both it may be said truly (without breach of
Charity) that having only a form of Godliness (and many of them not so much as
that) they are Deniers of, yea, Enemies, to the power of it. And this proceeds
not simply from their not walking answerable to their own Principles, and so
degenerating that way, (which also is true;) but which is worse, their setting
down to themselves, and adhering to certain Principles, which naturaly, as a
cursed Root, bring forth these bitter Fruits: Those therefore shall afterward
be examined and refuted, as the contrary Positions of Truth in the Proposition
are explained and proved.

For as to the Nature and Constitution of a Church i. e. National.
(abstract from their Disputes concerning its constant Visibility, The
Protestant Church, how they become Members thereof.
Infallibility and the Primacy of the Church of Rome) the Protestants, as in
Practice, so in Principles, differ not from Papists; for they ingross within
the compass of their Church whole Nations, making their Infants Members of it,
by sprinkling a little Water upon them; so that there is none so Wicked or
Profane, who is not a Fellow Member; no evidence of Holiness being required to
constitute a Member of the Church. And look through the Protestant Nations, and
there shall no difference appear in the Lives of the generality of the one,
more than of the other; but he, who rules in the Children of Disobedience,
reigning in both: So that the Reformation, through this defect, Christianity
chiefly consists in the Renewing of the Heart
is but in holding some less gross Errors in the Notion; but not in having the
Heart reformed and renewed, in which mainly the Life of Christianity consists.

. VI. But the Popish Errors concerning the Ministry, which they have retained,
A Popish, corrupt Ministry, all Evils follow.
are most of all to be Regretted, by which chiefly the Life and Power of
Christianity is barred out among them, and they kept in Death, Barrenness and
Dryness: There being nothing more hurtful than an Error in this respect. Like
Priest, like People.
For where a false and corrupt Ministry enters, all other manner of Evils
follow upon it, Hose^ 4 9.
according to that Scripture Adage, Like People, like Priest: For by their
influence, instead of ministering Life and Righteousness, they minister Death
and Iniquity. The whole backslidings of the Jewish Congregation of Old are
hereto ascribed: The Leaders of my People have caused them to Err. The whole
Writings of the Prophets are full of such Complaints; and for this cause under
the New Testament, we are so often warned and guarded to beware of false
Prophets, and false Teachers, etc. What may be thought then, where all, as to
this, is out of order; where both the Foundation, Call, Qualifications,
Maintenance, and whole Discipline are different from, and opposite to the
Ministry of the Primitive Church; yea, and necessarily tend to the shutting out
of a Spiritual Ministry, and the bringing in and establishing of a Carnal? This
shall appear by parts.

Quest. I.
. VII. That then, which comes first to be questioned in this matter, is,
concerning the Call of a Minister; to wit, What makes, or how comes a Man to
be a Minister, Pastor, or Teacher in the Church of Christ?

inward Power and Virtue of the Spirit of God. For, as says our Proposition,
Having received the true Knowledge of things spiritual, The Call of a Minister,
and wherein it consists.
by the Spirit of God, ( without which they cannot be known) and being by the
same in measure purified and sanctified, he comes thereby to be called and
moved to minister to others; being able to speak from a Living Experience, of
what he himself is a witness; and therefore, knowing the Terrors of the Lord,
he is fit to persuade Men, etc. 2 Cor. 5.11. And his Words and Ministry,
proceeding from the inward Power and Virtue, reach to the Heart of his Hearers,
and make them approve of him,

First: That which is necessary to make a Man a Christian, 1. The necessity of
an Inward Call to make a man a Christian.
so as without it he cannot be truly one, must be much more necessary to make a
Man a Minister of Christianity; seeing the one is a degree above the other, and
has it included in it: Nothing less than he, that supposes a Master, supposes
him first to have attained the Knowledge and Capacity of a Scholar. They that
are not Christians, cannot be Teachers and Ministers among Christians:

But this Inward Call, Power and Virtue of the Spirit of God, is necessary to
make a Man a Christian; as we have abundantly proved before in the Second
Proposition, according to these Scriptures, He that has not the Spirit of
Christ, is none of his. As many as are led by the Spirit of God, are the Sons
of God:

Therefore this Call, Moving and Drawing of the Spirit, must be much more
necessary to make a Minister.

Secondly; 2. The Ministry of the Spirit requires the Operation and Testimony
of the Spirit.
All Ministers of the New Testament ought to be Ministers of the Spirit, and
not of the Letter, according to that 2 Cor. 3.6. and as the old Latin has it,
Not by the Letter, but by the Spirit: But how can a Man be a Minister of the
Spirit, who is not inwardly Called by it? And who looks not upon the Operation
and Testimony of the Spirit, as Essential to his Call? As he could not be a
Minister of the Letter, who had thence no ground for his Call, yea, that was
altogether a stranger to, and unacquainted with it; so neither can he be a
Minister of the Spirit, who is a stranger to it, and unacquainted with the
Motions thereof, and knows it not to draw, act, and move him, and go before him
in the Work of the Ministry. I would willingly know, how those that take upon
them to be Ministers (as they suppose) of the Gospel, merely from an outward
Vocation, without so much as being any ways sensible of the Work of the Spirit,
or any Inward Call therefrom, can either satisfy themselves or others, that
they are Ministers of the Spirit, or wherein they differ from the Ministers of
the Letter? For

Thirdly; If this Inward Call, 3. Under the Law the People needed not to doubt,
who should be Priests and Ministers.
or Testimony of the Spirit, were not essential and necessary to a Minister,
then the Ministry of the New Testament should not only be no ways perferable
to, but in diverse respects far worse than that of the Law. For under the Law,
there was a certain Tribe allotted for the Ministry, and of that Tribe certain
Families set apart for the Priesthood and other Offices, by the immediate
Command of God to Moses; so that the People needed not to be in any doubt, who
should be Priests and Ministers of the holy things: Yea, and besides this, God
called forth, by the immediate Testimony of his Spirit, several at diverse times
to teach, instruct, and reprove his People, as Samuel, Nathan, Elias, Elisha,
Jeremiah, Amos, and many more of the Prophets: But now under the New Covenant,
where the Ministry ought to be more spiritual, the Way more certain, and the
Access more easy unto the Lord, our Adversaries, by denying the necessity of
this Inward and Spiritual Vocation, make it quite other ways. For there being
now no certain Family, or Tribe, to which the Ministry is limited, we are left
in uncertainty, to choose and have Pastors at a venture, without all certain
Assent of the Will of God; having neither an outward Rule, nor Certainty in
this affair, to walk by: For that the Scripture cannot give any certain Rule in
this matter, has in the Third Proposition concerning it, been already shown.

4 Christ the Door.
Fourthly; Christ proclaims them all Thieves and Robbers, that enter not by him
the Door into the Sheepfold, John 10.1.
but climb up some other way; whom the Sheep ought not to hear: But such as
come in without the Call, Movings and Leadings of the Spirit of Christ,
wherewith he leads his Children into all Truth, come in certainly not by
Christ, who is the Door, but some other way; and therefore are not true
Shepherds.

Succession pleaded by the false Church from Christ and his Apostles.
. VIII. To all this they object the Succession of the Church; alleging, That
since Christ gave a Call to his Apostles and Disciples, they have conveyed that
Call to their Successors, having power to ordain Pastors and Teachers; by which
power the Authority of Ordaining and making Ministers and Pastors is
successively conveyed to us; so that such, who are Ordained and Called by the
Pastors of the Church, are therefore true and lawful Ministers; and others, who
are not so Called, are to be accounted but Intruders. Hereunto also some
Protestants add a Necessity, though they make it not a thing Essential; That
besides this Calling of the Church, every one being Called, ought to have the
Inward Call of the Spirit, inclining him so chosen to his Work: But this they
say is subjective, and not objective; of which before.

The Call of the Spirit preferred to any other by Primitive Protestants
in that it has been often mentioned, especially by the Primitive Protestants
in their Treatises of this Subject, it shows how much they were secretly
Convinced in their Minds, that this Inward Call of the Spirit was most
Excellent, and preferable to any other; and therefore in the most Noble and
Heroic Acts of the Reformation they laid claim unto it; so that many of the
Primitive Protestants did not scruple both to despise and disown this Outward
Succession
Call, when urged by the Papists against them. But now Protestants, having gone
from the Testimony of the Spirit, plead for the same Succession; and being
pressed (by those, whom God now raises up by his Spirit, Modern Protestants
denying the Call of the Spirit.
to reform those Abuses that are among them) with the Example of their Fore
fathers Practice against Rome, they are not at all ashamed utterly to deny,
that their Fathers were called to their Work by the inward and immediate
Vocation of the Spirit; clothing themselves with that Call. which they say
their Forefathers had, as Pastors of the Roman Church. For thus (not to go
further) affirms Nicolaus Arnoldus Who gives himself out, Doctor and
Professor of Sacred Theology at Franequer.
in a Pamphlet written against the same Propositions, called, A Theologick
Exercitation, Sect. 40. averring; That they pretended not to an Immediate Act
of the Holy Spirit; but Reformed by the Virtue of the Ordinary Vocation which
they had in the Church, as it then was, to wit, that of Rome, etc.

. IX. Many Absurdities do Protestants fall into, by deriving their Ministry
thus through the Church of Rome. Absurdities Protestants fall into, by deriving
their Mini^try through the Church of Rome.
As first, They must acknowledge her to be a true Church of Christ, though only
Erroneous in some things; which contradicts their ^ore-fathers, so frequently,
and yet truly, calling her Antichrist. Secondly; they must needs acknowledge,
that the Priests and Bishops of the Romish Church, are true Ministers and
Pastors of the Church of Christ, as to the Essential part; else they could not
be fit Subjects for that Power and Authority to have resided in; neither could
they have been Vessels capable to receive that Power, and again transmit it to
their Successors. Thirdly; It would follow from this, that the Priests and
Bishops of the Romish Church, are yet really true Pastors and Teachers. For if
Protestant Ministers have no Authority, but what they received from them; and
since the Church of Rome is the same she was at that time of the Reformation,
in Doctrine and Manners; and she has the same Power now, she had then; and if
the Power lie in the Succession, then these Priests of the Romish Church now,
which derive their Ordination from those Bishops that Ordained the first
Reformers, have the same Authority, which the Successors of the Reformed have;
and consequently are no less Ministers of the Church than they are. But how
shall this agree with that Opinion, which the Primitive Protestants had of the
Romish Priests and Clergy, Luther affirmed, that a Woman might be a Preacher.
to whom Luther did not only deny any Power or Authority; but contrariwise
affirmed, That it was wickedly done of them, to assume to themselves only this
Authority to Teach, and be Priests and Ministers, etc. For he himself affirmed,
That every good Christian (not only Men, but even Women also) is a Preacher.

The pretended Succession of Papists and Protestants explained.
. X. But against this vain Succession, as asserted either by the Papists or
Protestants, as a necessary thing to the Call of a Minister, I Answer; That
such as plead for it, as a sufficient or necessary thing to the Call of a
Minister, do thereby sufficiently declare their Ignorance of the Nature of
Christianity, and how much they are strangers to the Life and Power of a
Christian Ministry, which is not entailed to Succession, is an outward
Inheritance; and herein, as has been often before observed, they not only make
the Gospel not better than the Law, but even far short of it. For Jesus Christ,
as he regards not any distinct particular Family, or Nation, in the gathering
of his Children; but only such, as are joined to, and leavened with his own
pure and righteous Seed: So neither regards he a bare outward Succession, where
his pure, immaculate and righteous Life is wanting; for that were all one. He
took not the Nations into the New Covenant, that he might suffer them to fall
into the old Errors of the Jews; or to approve them in their Errors: But that
he might gather unto himself a pure People out of the Earth. The Jews of Error
of Abraham's outward Succession.
Now this was the great Error of the Jews, to think they were the Church and
People of God, because they could derive their outward Succession from Abraham;
whereby they reckoned themselves the Children of God, as being the Offspring
of Abraham, who was the Father of the Faithful. But how severely does the
Scripture rebuke this vain and frivolous Pretense? Telling them, That God is
able of the stones to raise Children unto Abraham; and that not the outward
Seed, but those that were found in the Faith of Abraham, are the true Children
of faithful Abraham. Far less then can this pretense hold among Christians,
seeing Christ rejects all outward Affinity of that kind; These, says he, Mat.
12.4^ etc. Mark 3.33. etc.
are my Mother, Brethren and Sisters, who do the Will of my Father, which is in
Heaven: And again; He looked round about him, and said, Who shall do the Will
of God, these (said he) are my Brethren. So then, such as do not the Commands
of Christ, are not found clothed with his Righteousness, are not his Disciples;
and that which a Man has not, he cannot give to another: And it is clear, The
Form (of Godliness) is entailed to the Power and Substance, and not the
Substance to the Form
that no Man nor Church, though truly Called of God, and as such having the
Authority of a Church and Minister, can any longer retain that Authority, than
they retain the Power, Life and Righteousness of Christianity: For the Form is
entailed to the Power and Substance; and not the Substance to the Form. So that
when a Man cease inwardly in his Heart to be a Christian (where his
Christianity must lie) by turning to Satan, and becoming a Reprobate, he is no
more a Christian, though he retain the Name and Form; than a dead man is a Man,
though he has the Image and Representation of one; or than the Picture or Statue
of a Man is a Man: And though a dead Man may serve to a Painter to retain some
imperfect Representation of the Man, that sometimes was alive, and so one
Picture may serve to make another by; yet none of those can serve to make a
true Living Man again, Succession (...) ^rrupted
neither can they convey the Life and Spirit of the Man; it must be God, that
made the Man at first, that alone can revive him. As Death then makes such
Interruption of an outward natural Succession, that no Art nor outward Form can
uphold; and as a dead Man, after he is dead, can have no Issue; neither can
dead Images of Men, make living Men: So that it is the Living that are only
capable to succeed one another; and such as die, so soon as they die, cease to
succeed, or to transmit Succession. So it is in Spiritual things; The Living
Members make the Church: Life lost, the Church i^ ceasing.
it is the Life of Christianity, taking place in the Heart, that makes a
Christian; and so it is a number of such, being alive, joined together in the
Life of Christianity, that make a Church of Christ; and it is all those, that
are thus alive and quickened, considered together, that make the Catholic
Church of Christ: Therefore where this Life cease in one, then that one
cease to be a Christian; and all Power, Virtue and Authority, which he had as
a Christian, cease with it: So that if he has been a Minister or a Teacher,
he cease to be so any more: And though he retain the Form, and hold to the
Authority in words, yet that signifies no more, nor is it of any more real
Virtue and Authority, than the mere Image of a dead Man. And as this is most
agreeable to Reason, so it is the Scriptures Testimony; for it is said of
Judas, Judas sell from his Ministry by Transgression.
Acts 1.25. That Judas sell from his Ministry and Apostleship by Transgression;
so his Transgression caused him to cease to be an Apostle any more: Whereas,
had the Apostleship been entailed to his Person, so that Transgression could
not cause him to lose it, until he had been formally degraded by the Church
(which Judas never was, so long as he lived) Judas had been as really an
Apostle, after he betrayed Christ, as before. And as it is of one, so of many,
yea, of a whole Church: For seeing nothing makes a Man truly a Christian, but
the Life of Christianity, inwardly Ruling in his Heart; so nothing makes a
Church, but the gathering of several true Christians into one Body. Now where
all these Members lose this Life, there the Church cease to be, though they
still uphold the Form, and retain the Name: For when that which made them a
Church, and for which they were a Church, cease; then they cease also to be a
Church: And therefore the Spirit, speaking to the Church of Laodicea, The
Luke-warmness of the Church of Laodicea.
because of her Luke-warmness, Rev. 3.16. threatens to spue her out of his
Mouth. Now, suppose the Church of Laodicea had continued in that Luke warmness
and had come under that Condemnation and Judgment, though she had retained the
Name and Form of a Church, and had had her Pastors and Ministers, as no doubt
she had at that time; yet surely she had been no true Church of Christ, nor had
the Authority of her Pastors and Teachers been to be regarded, because of an
outward Succession, though perhaps some of them had it immediately from the
Apostles. From all which I infer, That since the Authority of the Christian
Church and her Pastors is always united, and never separated from the inward
Power, Virtue, and righteous Life of Christianity; where this cease, that
cease also. But our Adversaries acknowledge, That many, if not most of those,
by and through whom they derive this Authority, were altogether destitute of
this Life and Virtue of Christianity: Therefore they could neither receive,
have, nor transmit any Christian Authority.

That though the generality of the Bishops and Priests of Rome, during the
Apostasy, were such wicked Men; yet Protestants affirm, and thou thy self
seem to acknowledge, that there were some good Men among them, whom the Lord
regarded, and who were true Members of the Catholic Church of Christ; might
not they then have transmitted this Authority?

The Protestants plead for a Succession inherent.
which they can never show, nor yet pretend to: But generally place this
Succession as inherent in the whole Pastors of the Apostate Church. Neither do
they plead their Call to be good and valid, because they can derive it through
a Line of good Men, separate and observably distinguishable from the rest of
the Bishops and Clergy of the Romish Church; but they derive it as an Authority
residing in the whole: For they think it Heresy to judge, that the Quality or
Condition of the Administrator does any ways invalidate or prejudice his work.

This vain and pretended Succession not only militates against, and fights with
the very manifest purpose and intent of Christ, in the gathering and calling of
his Church; but makes him (so to speak) more blind and less prudent, than
natural Men are in conveying and establishing their outward Inheritances. For
where an Estate is entailed to a certain Name and Family, An Estate void of
Heirship devolves to the Prince, ^one clai^ it but whom he sees meet to give
it: So the Heirship of Life is e^yed from Christ the true Heir.
when that Family wears out, and there is no lawful Successor found of it,
that can make a just Title appear, as being really of Blood and Affinity to the
Family; it is not lawful for any one of another Race or Blood, because he
assumes the Name or Arms of that Family, to possess the Estate, and claim the
Superiorities and Prilviledges of the Family; but by the Law of Nations the
Inheritance devolves into the Prince as being Ultimus haeres; and so he gives
it again immediately to whom he sees meet, and makes them bear the Name and
Arms of the Family, who then are entitled to the Privileges and Revenues
thereof. So in like manner, the True Name and Title of a Christian, by which he
has Right to the Heavenly Inheritance, and is a Member of Jesus Christ, is
inward Righteousness and Holiness, and the Mind redeemed from the Vanities,
Lusts, and Iniquities of this World; and a gathering or Company, made up of
such Members, makes a Church. Where this is lost, the Title is lost; and so the
true Seed, to which the Promise is, and to which the Inheritance is due,
becomes extinguished in them, and they become dead as to it; and so it retires,
and devolves it self again into Christ, who is the Righteous Heir of Life; and
he gives the Title and true Right again immediately; to whom it pleases him,
even to as many as being turned to his pure Light in their Consciences, come
again to walk in his Righteous and Innocent Life, and so become true Members of
his Body which is the Church. So the Authority, Power and Heirship is not
annexed to Persons, as they bear the bare Names or retain a Form, holding the
mere Shell or Shadow of Christanity: But the Promise is to Christ, and to the
Seed in whom the Authority is inherent, and in as many as are one with him, and
united unto him by Purity and Holiness, and by the inward Renovation and
Regeneration of their Minds.

Moreover, this pretended Succession is contrary to Scripture-definitions, and
the Nature of the Church of Christ, and of the true Members. For first; The
Church is the House of God, the Pillar and Ground of Truth, 1 Timothy 3.15. But
according to this Doctrine, 1. The House of God is (...) po^nted Nest; No (...)
nor Pretender ^re can rest.
the House of God is a polluted Nest of all sorts of Wickedness and
Abominations, made up of the most ugly, defiled and perverse Stones that are in
the Earth; were the Devil rules in all manner of Unrighteousness. For so our
Adversaries confess, and History informs, the Church of Rome to have been, as
some of their Historians acknowledge; and i^ that be truly the House of God,
what may we call the House of Satan? Or may we call it therefore the House of
God, notwithstanding all this Impiety, because they had a bate Form, and that
vitiated many ways also; and because they Pretended to the name of
Christianity, though they were Antichristian, Devilish and Atheistical in their
whole Practice and Spirit, and also many of their Principles? Would not this
infer yet a greater Absurdity, as if they had been something to be accounted
of, because of their Hypocrisy and Deceit, and false Pretenses? Whereas the
Scripture looks upon that as an Aggravation of Guilt, and calls it Blasphemy,
Rev. 2.9. Of two wicked Men, he is most to be abhorred, who covers his
Wickedness with a vain Pretense of God and Righteousness: Even so these
abominable Beasts, and fearful Monsters, who look upon themselves to be Bishops
in the Apostate Church, were never a whit the better, that they falsely
pretended to be the Successors of the Holy Apostles; unless to Lie be
commendable, and that Hypocrisy be the way to Heaven. Yea, were not this to
fall into that Evil condemned among the Jews, Jer. 7.4. Trust ye not in lying
words, saying, the Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord, the Temple of
the Lord are these; thoroughly amend your ways, etc. as if such outward Names
and Things were the thing the Lord regarded and not inward Holiness? Or can
that then be the Pillar and Ground of Truth, which is the very Sink and Pit of
Wickedness; from which so much Error, Superstition, Idolatry, and All
Abomination springs? Can there be any thing more contrary both to Scripture and
Reason?

Secondly; 2. Christ is the Head, his Bo^ undefiled.
The Church is defined to be the Kingdom of the dear Son of God, into which the
Saints are translated; being delivered from the Power of Darkness. It is called
the Body of Christ, which from him by Joints and Bands having nourishment
ministered, and kint together, increases with the Increase of God, Col. 2.19.
But can such Members, such a Gathering, as we have demonstrated that Church and
Members to be, among whom they allege their pretended Authority to have been
preserved, and through which they derive their Call; can such, I say, be the
Body of Christ, or Members thereof? Or is Christ the Head of such a corrupt,
dead, dark, Abominable stinking Carcass? If so, then might we not as well
affirm against the Apostle, 2 Cor. 6.14. That Righteousness has fellowship
with Unrighteousness, What Fellowship has Christ with Belial?
that Light has communion with Darkness, that Christ has concord with Belial,
that a Believer has part with an Infidel, and that the Temple of God has
agreement with Idols? Moreover, no Man is called the Temple of God, not of the
Holy Ghost, but as his Vessel is purified, and so he fitted and prepared for
God to dwell in: And many, thus fitted by Christ, become his Body, in and among
whom he dwells and walks; according as it is written, I will dwell in them, and
walk in them, and I will be their God, and they shall be my People. It is
therefore that we may become the Temple of Christ, and People of God, that the
Apostle in the following Verse exhorts, saving out of the Prophet, Wherefore
come out from among them, 2 Cor. 6.17, 18.
and be ye separate, says the Lord, and touch not the unclean thing, and I
will receive you, and I will be a Father unto you, and ye shall be my Sons and
Daughters; says the Lord Almighty. But to what purpose is all this
Exhortation? And why should we separate from the Unclean, if a mere outward
Profession and Name be enough to make the true Church, and if the Unclean and
Polluted were both the Church and lawful Successors of the Apostles, inheriting
their Authority, and transmitting it to others? Yea, how can the Church be the
Kingdom of the Son of God, as contra-distinguished from the Kingdom and Power
of Darkness? And what need, yea, what possibility of being Translated out of
the one into the other, if those that make up the Kingdom and Power of
Darkness, be real Members of the true Church of Christ; and not simply Members
only, but the very Pastors and Teachers of it? But how do they increase in the
Increase of God and receive Spiritual Nourishment from Christ the Head, that
are Enemies of him in their Hearts, by wicked works, and openly go into
Perdition? Verily, as no Metaphysical and Nice Distinctions, (that though they
were practically, as to their own private States. Enemies to God and Christ,
Priest's frivolous Distinction of Enemies to God by Practice, and Members of
his Church by Office.
and so Servants of Satan; yet they were, by virtue of their Office, Members
and Ministers of the Church, and so able to transmit the Succession) I say, as
such invented and frivolous Distinctions will not please the Lord God, neither
will he be deluded by such, nor make up the glorious Body of his Church with
such mere outside Hypocritical Shows, nor be beholden to such painted
Sepulchers, for to be Members of his Body, which is sound, pure and undefiled;
and therefore he needs not such false and corrupt Members to make up the
defects of it: So neither will such Distinctions satisfy truly Tender and
Christian Consciences; especially considering, the Apostle is so far from
desiring us to regard that, as that we are expressly commanded, to turn away
from such as have a Form of Godliness, but deny the Power of it. For we may
well Object against these, The Answer of a poor Rustic to a proud Prelate.
as the Poor Man did against the Proud Prelate that went about to cover his
vain and unchristian like Sumptuousness, by distiniguishing, that it was not as
Bishop, but as Prince he had all that Splendour: To which the poor Rustic
wisely is said to have answered; When the Prince goes to Hell, what shall
become of the Prelate? And indeed this were to suppose the Body of Christ to be
defective, and that to fill up these defective places, he puts counterfeit and
dead stuff, instead of real Living Members; like such as lose their Eyes, Arms,
or Legs, who make counterfeit ones of Timber or Glass instead of them. But we
cannot think so of Christ; neither can we believe, for the Reasons above
adduced, that either we are to account, or that Christ does account, any Man or
Men a whit the more Members of his Body, because, though they be really wicked,
they hypocritically and deceitfully cloth themselves with his Name pretended
to it; for this is contrary to his own Doctrine, where he says expressly, John
15.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, etc. That he is the Vine, and his Disciples are the
Branches; that except they abide in him, they cannot bear fruit; and if they be
unfrutful, they shall be cast forth as a Branch, and wither. Now I suppose
these cut and withered Branches, A Withered Branch can draw no Nourishment; so
has no Life nor Virtue,
are no more true Branches, nor Members of the Vine; they can no more draw Sap
nor Nourishment from it, after that they are cut off, and so have no more
Virtue, Sap nor Life: What have they then to Boast or Glory of any Authority,
seeing they want that Life, Virtue and Nourishment, from which all Authority
comes? So such Members of Christ as are become dead to him through
Unrighteousness, and so derive no more Virtue nor Life from him, are cut off by
their Sins, and wither, and have no more any true or real Authority; and their
boasting of any, is but an Aggravation of their Iniquity by hypocrisy and
deceit. But further, would not this make Christ's Body a mere shadow and
phantasm? Yea, would it not make him the Head of a life-less, rotten, stinking
Carcass, having only some little outward false show, while inwardly full of
rottenness and dirt? A Living Head upon a Lif-less Body, what a Monster ^ould
that be?
And what a Monster would these Men make of Christ's Body, by assigning it a
real, pure, living, quick Head, full of Virtue and Life; and yet tied to such a
dead lifeless Body, as we have already described these Members to be, which
they allege to have been the Church of Christ? Again, The Members of the
Church of Christ are specified by this Definition, to wit as being the
sanctified in Christ Jesus, 1 Cor. 1.2. But this Notion of succession supposes
not only some Unsanctified Members to be of the Church of Christ, but even the
whole to consist of Unsanctified Members; yea, that such as were professed
Necromancers, and open Servants of Satan, were the true Successors of the
Apostles, and in whom the Apostolic Authority resided, these being the
Vessels, through whom this Succession is transmited; though many of them, as all
Protestants, and also some Papists confess, attained these Offices in the (so
called) Church not only by such means as Simon Magus sought it; but by much
worse, even by Witchcraft, Murder, Traditions, Money and Treachery, which
Platina himself confesses In the Life of Benedict. 4. of John 16. of Sylvester
3. of Bonif^ce 8. of Steph. 6. of Joan 8. Also Onuphrius Annotations upon this
Papess (or Popess) toward the end.
of diverse Bishops of Rome.

. XI. But such as Object not this Succession of the Church (which yet most
Protestants begin now to do) distinguish in this matter, affirming, That in a
great Apostasy, such as was that of the Church of Rome, God may raise up some
singularly by his Spirit, who from the Testimony of the Scriptures, perceiving
the Errors into which such as bear the name of Christians are fallen, may
instruct and teach them; and then become Authorized by the People's joining
with, and accepting of their Ministry only. Most of them also will affirm, That
the Spirit herein is subjective, and not objective.

where a Church is Reformed, (such as they pretend the Protestant-Churches are)
there an ordinary, orderly Call is necessary; and that of the Spirit, as
extraordinary, is not to be sought after: Alleging, That Res aliter se habet
in Ecclesia Constituenda, quam in Ecclesia Constituta; that is, There is a
difference in the Constituting of a Church, and after it is Constituted.

A difference objected between a constituting Church and one as constituted
and needing Reformation, as well as they did, and do the Papists; and
therefore we may justly lay claim, if we would, to the same Extraordinary Call,
having the same Reason for it, and as good evidence to prove ours, as they had
for theirs. As for that Maxim, viz. That the Case is different in a
constituting Church, and a Church constituted, I do not deny it; and therefore
there may be a greater measure of Power required to the one, than to the other;
and God in his Wisdom distributes the same as he sees meet. But that the same
Immediate Assistance of the Spirit is not necessary for Ministers in a Gathered
Church, as well as in Gathering One, I see no solid Reason alleged for it. For
sure Christ's Promise was, To be with his Children to the end of the World; and
they need him no less to preserve and guide his Church and Children, than to
gather and beget them. Nature taught the Gentiles this Maxim, Non minor est
Virtus, quam quaerere, parta, tueri. Englished thus, For to Defend what ye
attain,
Requires no less Strength than to gain.
For it is by this Inward and Immediate Operation of the Spirit (which Christ
has promised to lead his Children with into all Truth, and to teach them all
things) that Christians are to be led in all steps (as well last as first)
which relates to God's Glory and their own Salvation; as we have heretofore
sufficiently proved, and therefore need not now repeat it. It Is a Device of
Satan for Men to put the Spirit's leadin^s far off to former times.
And truly this Device of Satan, whereby he has got People to put the Immediate
Guidings and Leadings of God's Spirit, as an extraordinary thing, a far off,
which their Forefathers had, but which they now are neither to wait for, nor
expect, is a great cause of the growing Apostasy upon the many gathered
Churches; and is one great Reason why a dry, dead, barren, lifeless, spiritless
Ministry, which leavens the People into the same Death, does so much abound,
and is so much overspreading even the Protestant Nations, that their Preachings
and Worships, as well as whole Conversation, is not to be discerned from
Papists, by any fresh living Zeal, or lively Power of the Spirit accompanying
it; but merely by the difference of some Notions and Opinions.

That if we have such an Immediate Call, as we lay claim to, we ought to
confirm it by Miracles.

Whether Mirac^es be now necessary to confirm the Gospel? John Baptist and
diverse Prophets did none.
that they did to the Papists; to wit, That we need not Miracles, because we
preach no new Gospel, but that which is already confirmed by all the Miracles
of Christ and his Apostles; and that we offer nothing, but that which we are
ready and able to confirm by the Testimony of the Scriptures, which both
already acknowledge to be true: And that John the Baptist, and diverse of the
Prophets did none, that we here of, and yet were both Immediately and
Extraordinarily sent. This is the common Protestant Answer, therefore may
suffice in this place; though, if need were, I could say more to this purpose,
but that I study Brevity.

. XIII. There is also another sort of Protestants, to wit, the English
Independents, The Constitution of the Independent Church.
who differing from the Calvinistical Pre^byterians, and denying the Necessity
of this Succession, or the Authority of any National Church, take another way;
affirming, That such as have the benefit of the Scriptures, any Company of
People, agreeing in the Principles of Truth, as they find them there declared,
may constitute among themselves a Church, without the Authority of any other;
and may choose to themselves a Pastor who by the Church thus constitute and
consenting, is Authorized; requiring only the Assistance and Concurrence of the
Pastors of the Neighboring Churches, (if any be) not so much as absolutely
necessary to Authorize, as decent for Orders sake. Also they go so far, as to
affirm, That in a Church so constitute, any gifted Brother (as they call them)
if he find himself qualified thereto, may instruct, exhort, Gifted Brethren.
and preach in the Church; though as not having the Pastoral Office, he cannot
administer that they call their Scraments.

To this I answer, That this was a good step out of the Babylonish Darkness,
and no doubt did proceed from a real Discovery of the Truth, and from the sense
of a great Abuse of the promiscuous National Gatherings. Also this Preaching of
the Gifted Brethren (as they called them) did proceed at first from certain
lively Touches and Movings of the Spirit of God upon many: But (alas!) because
they went not forward, that is much decayed among them; Their Loss and Decay.
and the Motions of God's Spirit begin to be denied and rejected among them
now, as much as by others.

But as to their pretended Call from the Scripture, The Scripture gives no Call
to Persons individual.
I answer: The Scripture gives a mere Declaration of true things, but no Call
to particular Persons; so that though I believe the things there written to be
true, and deny the Errors which I find there testified against; yet as to those
things, which may be my particular Duty, I am still to seek; and therefore I
can never be resolved in the Scripture, whether I (such a one by name) ought to
be a Minister? And for the resolving this Doubt, I must needs recur to the
Inward and Immediate Testimony of the Spirit; as in the Proposition concerning
the Scriptures more at large is shown.

. XIV. From all this then we do firmly conclude, that not only in a general
Apostasy it is needful, Men be extraordinarily Called, and raised up by the
Spirit of God; but that even when several Assemblies or Churches are gathered
by the Power of God, (not only into the Belief of the Principles of Truth, so
as to deny Errors and Heresies, but also into the Life, Spirit and Power of
Christianity, so as to be the Body and House of Christ indeed, and a fit Spouse
for him) that he who gathers them, does also, for the preserving them in a
lively, True Ministers Qualifications, Call and Title.
fresh and powerful Condition, raise up, and move among them by the inward
immediate Operation of his own Spirit, Ministers and Teachers, to instruct, and
teach, and watch over them: Who being thus called, are manifest in the Hearts
of their Brethren, and their Call is thus verified in them; who, by the feeling
of that Life and Power that passes through them, being inwardly builded up by
them daily in the most holy Faith, become the Seals of their Apostleship. And
this is answerable to another Saying of the same Apostle P^ 2 Cor. 13.3. Since
ye seek a proof of Christ's speaking in me, Their laying on of hands, a mock to
God and man; a keeping the Shadow, whilst the Substance is wanting.
which to you wards is not weak, but is mighty in you. So this is that which
gives a true substantial Call and Title to a Minister, whereby he is a real
Successor of the Virtue, Life and Power that was in the Apostles, and not of
the ^are Name: And to such Ministers, we think the outward Ceremony of
Ordination, or laying on of Hands, not necessary; neither can we see the use of
it: Seeing our Adversaries, who use it, acknowledge, that the Virtue and Power
of communicating the Holy Ghost by it, is ceased among them. And is it nor then
foolish and ridiculous for them, by an apish Imitation, to keep up the Shadow,
when the Substance is wanting? And may not they, by the same Rule, where they
see Blind and Lame Men, in imitation of Christ and his Apostles, bid them see
and walk? Yea, is it not in them a mocking of God and Men, to put on their
hands, and bid Men Receive the holy Ghost, while they believe the thing
impossible, and confess that that Ceremony has no real effect? Having thus far
spoken of the Call, I shall proceed next to treat of the Qualifications and
Work of a true Minister. Quest. II


. XV. As I have placed the true Call of a Minister in the Motion of this Holy
Spirit; so is the Power, The Qualifications of a Minister.
Life and Virtue thereof, and the pure Grace of God that comes therefrom, the
chief and most necessary Qualification; without which he can no ways perform
his Duty, neither acceptably to God, nor beneficially to Men. Philosophy and
School Divinity will never make a Gospel Ministry.
Our Adversaries in this case affirm, that three things go to the making up of
a Minister, viz. 1. Natural Parts, that he be not a fool. 2. Acquired Parts,
that he be learned in the Languages, in Philosophy and School Divinity. 3. The
Grace of God.

The two first they reckon necessary to the being of a Minister, so as a Man
cannot be one without them; the third they say goes to the well-being of one,
but not to the being; so that a Man may truly be a lawful Minister without it,
and ought to be heared and received as such. But we (supposing a Natural
Capacity, that one be not an Idiot) judge the Grace of God indispensibly
necessary to the very being of a Minister, as that without which any can
neither be a true, nor lawful, nor good Minister. As for Letter Learning, we
judge it not so much necessary to the well-being of one, though accidentally
sometimes in certain respects it may concur, but more frequently it is hurtful
than helpful; as appeared in the Example of Taulerus, who being a Learned Man,
a poor Laick instructed the Learned Taulerus.
and who could make an Eloquent Preaching, needed nevertheless to be instructed
in the way of the Lord by a poor Laick. I shall first speak of the necessity of
Grace, and then proceed to say something of that Literature which they judge so
needful.

Call, so may we much more here. If the Grace of God be a necessary
Qualification to make one a true Christian, it must be a Qualification much
more necessary to constitute a true Minister of Christianity. That Grace is
necessary to make up a true Christian, I think will not be questioned; God's
Grace alone does constitute a true and lawful Teacher.
since it is by Grace we are saved, Ephesians. 2.8. It is the Grace of God that
teaches us to deny Ungodliness, and the Lusts of this World, and to live
Godlily and Righteously, Tit. 2.11. Yea, Christ says expressly, That without
him we can do nothing, John 15.5. and the way whereby Christ helps,
assisteth, and works with us, is by his Grace: Hence he says to Paul, My
Grace is sufficient for thee. A Christian without Grace, is indeed no
Christian, but an Hypocrite, and a false Pretender. Then I say, If Grace be
necessary to a private Christian, far more to a Teacher among Christians, who
must be as a Father and Instructor of others; seeing this Dignity is bestowed
upon such as have attained a greater Measure than their Brethren. Even Nature
it self may teach us, that there is more required in a Teacher, than in those
that are Taught; and that the Master must be above and before the Scholar, in
that Art or Science which he teaches others. Since then Christianity cannot be
truly enjoyed, neither any Man denominated a Christian without the true Grace
of God, therefore neither can any Man be a true and lawful Teacher of
Christianity without it.

Proof II. Arg. Who first must be a Member of the Body, and then Life is
received, and Virtue from the Head.
Secondly; No Man can be a Minister of the Church of Christ, which is his Body,
unless he be a Member of the Body, and receive of the Virtue and Life of the
Head:

But he that has not true Grace, can neither be a Member of the Body, neither
receive of that Life and Nourishment which comes from the Head:

Therefore far less can he be a Minister to Edify the Body.

That he cannot be a Minister, who is not a Member, is evident; because who is
not a Member, is shut out and cut off, and has no place in the Body; whereas
the Ministers are counted among the most eminent Members of the Body: But no
Man can be a Member, unless he receive of the Virtue, Life and Nourishment of
the Head: For the Members that receive not this Life and Nourishment, Decay and
Wither, and then are cut off. And that every true Member does thus receive
Nourishment and Life from the Head, the Apostle expressly affirms, Ephesians. 4.16.
From whom the whole Body being fitly joined together, and compacted by that
which every joint supplieth, according to the effectual working in the measure
of every part, makes increase of the Body, unto the Edifying of it self in
Love. Now this that thus is communicated, and which thus uniteth the whole, is
no other than the Grace of God; and therefore the Apostle in the same Chapter,
ver. 7. says, But unto every one of us is given Grace according to the measure
of the Gift of Christ; and verse. 11. he shows how that by this Grace and
Gift, both Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors and Teachers, are given for
the Work of the Ministry, and Edifying of the Body of Christ. And certainly
then, no Man destitute of Grace, is fit for this Work, seeing that all that
Christ gives, are so qualified; and these that are not so qualified, are not
given, nor sent of Christ; are not to be heard nor received, nor acknowledged
as Ministers of the Gospel; because his Sheep neither ought, The Sheep of
Christ, neither ought nor will hear the Stranger* Voice.
nor will hear the Voice of a Stranger. This is also, clear from 1 Cor. 12.
throughout; for the Apostle in that Chapter, treating of the diversity of
Gifts, and Members of the Body, shows how by the working of the same Spirit
in different Manifestations or Measures, in the several Members of the Body,
the whole Body is edifyed; saying, Verse 13. That we are all baptized by the
One Spirit, into one Body; and then Verse 28. he numbers up the several
Dispensations thereof, which by God are set in the Church through the various
working of his Spirit, for the Edification of the whole. Then, if there be no
true Member of the Body, which is not thus baptized by this Spirit, neither any
thing that works to the edifying of it, but according to a Measure of Grace
received from the Spirit; surely without Grace none ought to be admitted to
work or labor in the Body; because their Labor and Work without this Grace
and Spirit, would be but ineffectual.

. XVI. Thirdly; That this Grace and Gift is a necessary Qualification to a
Minister, is clear from that of the Apostle Peter, 1 Pet. 4.10, 11. As every
Man has received the Gift, even so minister the same one to another, as good
Stewards of the manifold Grace of God. If any Man speak, let him speak as the
Oracles of God: If any Man minister, let him do it as of the Ability which God
gives: That God in all things may be glorified through Jesus Christ; to whom
be Praise and Dominion for ever. The ministering must be by the Gift and Grace
received.
Amen. From which it appears, That those that minister, must minister according
to the Gift and Grace received; but they that have not such a Gift, cannot
minister thereunto. Secondly, As good Stewards of the manifold Grace of God:
Good Stewardship, Of what? Of God's abounding Grace, which is the Ability and
Stewardship received.
But how can a Man be a good Steward of that which he has not? Can ungodly
Men, that are not gracious themselves, be good Stewards of the manifold Grace
of God? And therefore in the following Verses he makes an exclusive limitation
of such, that are not thus furnished; saying, I^ any man speak, let him speak
as the Oracles of G^d; and if any man minister, let him do it as of the Ability
that God gives: Which is as much as if he had said, They that cannot thus
speak, and thus minister, ought not to do it: For this [ If] denotes a
necessary Condition. Now what this Ability is, is manifest by the former Words,
to wit, the Gift received, and the Grace whereof they are Stewards; as by the
immediate Context and Dependency of the Words does appear: Neither can it be
understood of a mere natural Ability; because Man in this Condition is said not
to know the things of God, and so he cannot minister them to others. And the
following words show this also, in that he immediately subjoineth, That God in
all things may be glorified: But surely God is not glorified, but greatly
dishonored, when natural Men, from their mere natural Ability, meddle in
Spiritual Things, which they neither know nor understand.

Fourthly; That Grace is a most necessary Qualification for a Minister, appears
by those Qualifications, which the Apostle expressly requires, 1 Timothy 3.2. Tit.
1. etc. where he says, A Bishop must be Blameless, Vigilant, Sober, of good
Behavior, apt to Teach, Patient, a lover of good Men; Just, Holy, Temperate,
as the Steward of God, holding fast the faithful Word, as he has been Taught.
Upon the other hand, He must neither be given to Wine, nor a Striker, nor
Covetous, nor Proud, nor Self-willed, How can a Bishop have these Virtues
without the Grace of God?
nor soon Angry, Now I ask, If it be not impossible that a Man can have all
these abovenamed Virtues, and be free of all these Evils, without the Grace of
God? If then these Virtues (for the producing of which in a Man, Grace is
absolutely necessary) be necessary to make a true Minister of the Church of
Christ, according to the Apostle's Judgment; surely Grace must be necessary
also.

Concerning this thing a learned Man, and well skilled in Antiquity, about the
time of the Reformation, writes thus; Whatsoever is done in the Church, either
for Ornament or Edification of Religion, whether in choosing Magistrates,
Whatsoever is done in the Church, without the Ministry of Gods Spirit, is vain
and wicked
or instituting Ministers of the Church, except it be done by the Ministry of
God's Spirit, which is as it were the Soul of the Church, it is vain and
wicked. For whoever has not been called by the Spirit of God, to the great
Office of God, and Dignity of Apostleship, as Aaron was, and has not entered
in by the Do^r, which is Christ, but has otherways risen in the Church by the
Window, by the Favors of Men, etc. truly such a one is not the Vicar of Christ
and his Apostles, Who is Judas Iscariot's Vicar?
but a Thief and Robber, and the Vicar of Judas Iscariot, and Simon the
Samaritan. Hence it was so strictly appointed, concerning the Election of
Prelates (which holy Dionisius calls Sacrament of Nomination) that the Bishops
and Apostles, who should oversee the Service of the Church, should be men of
most entire Manners and Life, powerful in sound Doctrine, to give a Reason for
all things. So also Franciscus Lambertus Avenionensis in his book concerning
Prophecy, Learning, Tongues, (...) Spirit of Prophecy Argentor. excus. an.
1516. de prove. c. 24.
another, about the same time, writes thus; Therefore it can never be, that by
the Tongues, or Learning, any can give a sound Judgment concerning the Holy
Scriptures and the Truth of God. Lastly (says he) the Sheep of Christ seek
nothing but the Voice of Christ, which he knows by the Holy Spirit, wherewith
he is filled: He regards not Learning, Tongues, or any outward thing, so as
therefore to believe this or that to be the Voice of Christ, his true Shepherd;
he knows, that there is need of no other thing, but the Testimony of the
Spirit of God.

That if all Ministers had the saving Grace of God, then all Ministers should
be saved; seeing none can fall away from, or lose Saving Grace.

Hypothesis, purely denied by us; and we have in the former Proposition,
concerning Perseverance, already refuted it.

Secondly; It may be objected to us, That since we affirm that every Man has a
measure of true and saving Grace, there needs no singular Qualification either
to a Christian, or Minister; for seeing every Man has this Grace, then no Man
needs forbear to be a Minister for want of Grace.

special and particular Call from the Spirit of God; which is something besides
the Universal Dispensation of Grace to All; according to that of the Apostle:
Heb. 5.4.
No Man takes this honor unto himself, but he that is called of God, as was
Aaron. Moreover, All have God's Grace, which Calls to Righteousness, but all
are not so leavened into its Nature, to bring forth Fruits a bla^eless, holy
Life.
we understand by Grace as a Qualification to a Minister, not the mere Measure
of Light, as it is given to reprove, and call him to Righteousness; but we
understand Grace, as it has Converted the Soul, and Operateth Powerfully in
it; as hereafter, concerning the Work of Ministers, will further appear. So we
understand not Men simply, as having Grace in them, as a Seed, (which we indeed
affirm All have in a measure) but we understand Men that are Gracious, leavened
by it into the Nature thereof; so as thereby to bring forth those good Fruits
of a blamless Conversation, and of Justice, Holiness, Patience and Temperance,
which the Apostle requires as necessary in a true Christian Bishop and Minister.

Thirdly; They So Nic. Arn^ldus Sect 32 upon Thesis 4.
Object the Example of the false Prophets, of the Pharisees, and of Jud^s.

first; As to the false Prophets, here can nothing be more foolish and
ridiculous; as if because there were false Prophets, really false without the
Grace of God, therefore Grace is not necessary to a true Christian Minister.
Indeed if they had proved, that true Prophets wanted this Grace, The false, not
the true Prophets, want the Grace of God.
they had said something: But what have false Prophets common with true
Ministers but that they pretend falsely that, which they have not? And because
false Prophets want true Grace, will it therefore follow, that true Prophets
ought not to have it, that they may be true, and not false? The Example of the
Pharisees and Priests under the Law, will not answer to the Gospel Times; The
Service under the Law was not purely Spiritual, but Figurative; for the
performance of which, as they beho^'d to be purified from their outward
Pollutions: So the Ministers of the Gospel must be inwardly without blemish.
because God set apart a particular Tribe for that Service, and particular
Families, to whom it belonged by a lineal Succession; and also their Service
and Work was not purely Spiritual, but only the performance of some outward and
carnal Observations and Ceremonies, which were but a shadow of the Substance
that was to come: And therefore their Work made not the Comers thereunto
perfect, as appertaining to the Conscience; seeing they were appointed only
according to the Law of a carnal Commandment, and not according to the Power of
an endless Life. Notwithstanding, as in the Figure they behoved to be without
Blemish, as to their outward Man; and in the performance of their Work, they
behoved to be washed and purified from their outward Pollutions; so now under
the Gospel Times, the Ministers in the Antitype must be inwardly without
Blemish in their Souls and Spirits; being as the Apostle requires, blamless,
and in their Work and Service must be pure and undefiled from their inward
Pollutions, and so clean and holy, that they may offer up Spiritual Sacrifices,
acceptable to God by Jesus Christ, The Ministry of the Disciples of Christ
before the Work was finished was more Legal than Evangelical.
1 Pet. 2.5. As to Judas, the Season of his Ministry was not wholly
Evangelical, as being before the Work was finished, and while Christ himself
and his Disciples were yet subject to the Jewish Observances and Constitutions;
and therefore his Commission, as well as that which the rest received with him
at that time, was only to the House of Israel Mat. 10.5, 6. which made, that by
virtue of that Commission the rest of the Apostles were not empowered to go
forth and preach after the Resurrection, until they had waited at Jerusalem for
the pouring forth of the Spirit: So that it appears, Judas's Ministry was more
Legal than Evangelical. Secondly: Judas's Case, as all will acknowledge, was
singular and extraordinary, Judas was immediately Called of Christ, and
preached freely, which our Adversaries will not do; although they make him a
Pattern of their Graceless Ministry, saying he had not the least Measure of
God's Grace at that time.
he being immediately Called by Christ himself, and accordingly furnished and
empowered by him to Preach, and do Miracles; which immediate Commission our
Adversaries do not so much as pretend to, and so fall short of Judas, who
trusted in Christ's Words, and therefore went forth and preached, without Gold
or Silver, or Scrip for his Journey giving freely, as he had freely received;
which our Adversaries will not do, as hereafter shall be observed: Also that
Judas at that time had not the least measure of God's Grace, I have not as yet
heard proved. But is it not sad, that even Protestants should lay aside the
Eleven good and faithful Apostles, and all the rest of the holy Disciples and
Ministers of Christ, and betake them to that one, of whom it was testified,
that he was a Devil, for a Pattern and Example to their Ministry? Alas! It is
to be Regretted, that too many of them resemble this Pattern over much.

Ibid Nic. Arnoldus.
That in case it were necessary, then such as wanted it could not truly
administer the Sacraments; and consequently the People would be lest in doubts
and infinite scruples, as not knowing certainly whether they had truly received
them, because not knowing infallibly whether the Administrators were truly
Gracious Men.



. XVIII. What true Learning is?
Though then we make not Humane Learning necessary, yet we are far from excluding
true Learning; to wit, that Learning which proceeds from the Inward Teachings
and Instructions of the Spirit, whereby the Soul learneth the secret Ways of
the Lord, becomes acquainted with many inward Travels and Exercises of the
Mind; and learneth by a living Experience how to overcome Evil, and the
Temptations of it, by following the Lord, and walking in his Light, and waiting
daily for Wisdom and Knowledge immediately from the Revelation thereof; and so
lays up these Heavenly and Divine Lessons in the good Treasure of the Heart;
as honest Mary did the Sayings which she heard, and Things which she observed:
And also out of this Treasure of the Soul, as the good Scribe, brings forth
things new and old; according as the same Spirit moves, and gives a true
liberty, and as need is for the Lord's Glory, whose the Soul is, and for whom;
and with an Eye to whose Glory, she, which is the Temple of God, learneth to do
all things. This is that good Learning which we think necessary to a true
Minister; The good Learning which is necessary to a true Minister.
by and through which Learning a Man can well instruct, teach, and admonish in
due season; and testify for God from a certain Experience; as did David,
Solomon, and the holy Prophets of old, and the blessed Apostles of our Lord
Jesus Christ, Who testified of what they had seen, heard, felt, and handled of
the Word of Life, 1 John 1.1. Ministering the Gift according as they had
received the same, as good Stewards of the manifold Grace of God; and preached
not the uncertain Rumors of Men by hearsay, which they had gathered merely in
the Comprehension, while they were strangers to the thing in their own
Experience in themselves: As to teach People how to believe, while themselves
were unbelieving; or how to overcome sin, while themselves are slaves to it, as
all ungracious Men are; or to believe and hope for an Eternal Reward, which
themselves have not as yet arrived at, etc.

Literature is first the Knowledge of Latin, Greek and Hebrew.
. XIX. But let us examine this Literature, which they make so necessary to the
Being of a Minister; as in the first place, the knowledge of the Tongues, at
least of the Latin Greek and Hebrew. The Reason for this is, That they may read
the Scriptures, which is their only Rule, in the Original Languges, and thereby
be the more capable to Comment upon it, and Interpret it, etc. That also, which
made this knowledge be the more prized by the primitive Protestants was indeed
that dark Barbarity that was over the World, Before the Reformation the Prayers
of the People were performed in the Latin Tongue.
in the Centuries immediately preceding the Reformation; the knowledge of the
Tongues being about that time, (until it was even then Restored by Erasmus and
some others) almost lost and extinct. And this Barbarity was so much the more
abominable, that the whole Worship and Prayers of the People was in the Latin
Tongue; and among that vast number of Priests, Monks and Friars, scarce one of
a thousand understood his Breviary, or that Mass that he daily read and
repeated; the Scriptures being, not only to the People, but to the greater part
of the Clergy, even as to the Literal Knowledge of it, as a sealed Book. The
Zeal and Endeavors of the first Reformers Commended.
I shall not at all discommend the Zeal, that the first Reformers had against
this Babylonish Darkness, nor their pious Endeavors to translate the Holy
Scriptures; but I do truly believe, according to their knowledge, that they did
it heartily: And therefore to answer the just desires of those that desire to
read them, and for other very good Reasons, The Knowledge of Languages
Commendable, and Schools necessary.
as mantaining a Commerce and Understanding among diverse Nations by these
common Languages, and other of that kind; we judge it necessary and
commendable, that there be public Schools, for the teaching and instructing
such Youth, as are inclinable thereunto in the Languages. And although the Papal
Ignorance deserved justly to be abhorred and abominated; we see nevertheless,
The Papists Literature and Knowledge, especially the Jesuits.
that the true Reformation consists not in that Knowledge: Because although since
that time the Papists, stirred up through Emulation of the Protestants, have
more applied themselves to Literature, and it now more flourishes in their
Universities and Cloisters, than before, (especially in the Ignatian or
Jesuitick Sect) they are as far now as ever from a true Reformation, and more
obdured in their pernicious Doctrines. But all this will not make it a
necessary Qualification to a Minister, far less a more necessary Qualification
than the Grace of God, and his Spirit; because the Spirit and Grace of God can
make up this want in the most Rustic and Ignorant; The Spirit is the truest
Interpreter of the Scriptures, whether from the Original Languages, or without
them.
but this Knowledge can no ways make up this want of the Spirit in the most
Learned and Eloquent. For all that which Man by his own Industry, Learning and
Knowledge in the Languages, can interpret of the Scriptures, or find out, is
nothing without the Spirit; he cannot be certain, but may still miss of the
sense of it; whereas a poor Man that knows not a Letter, when he hears the
Scriptures read, by the same Spirit he can say, This is true; and by the same
Spirit he can understand, open and interpret it, if need be: Yea, he finding
his condition to answer the Condition and Experience of the Saints of old,
knows and possesses the Truths there delivered, because they are sealed and
witnessed in his own Heart by the same Spirit. And this we have plentiful
Experience of in many of those Illiterate Men, whom God has raised up to he
Ministers in his Church in this day; so that some such, by his Spirit, have
corrected some of the Errors of the Translators, as in the Third Proposition
concerning the Scriptures, A poor Shoemaker that Could not rea^, refutes a
Professor of Divinity's false Assertions from Scripture.
I before observed. Yea, I know my self a poor Shoemaker, that cannot read a
word, who being assaulted with a false Citation of Scripture, from a public
Professor of Divinity, before the Magistrate of a City, when he had been
Preaching to some few that came to hear him; I say, I know such a one (and he
yet lives) who though the Professor (who also is esteemed a Learned Man)
constantly asserted his saying to be a Scripture-Sentence, yet affirmed, not
through any certain Letter-Knowledge he had of it, but from the most certain
Evidence of the Spirit in himself, that the Professor lied; and that the Spirit
of God, never said any such thing, as the other affirmed: And the bible being
brought, it was found as the poor Shoemaker had said.

. XX. The second part of their Literature, 2. Logic and Philosophy not needful
to a Preach^.
is Logic and Philosophy, an Art so little needful to a true Minister, that if
one, that comes to be a true Minister, has had it, it is safest for him to
forget and lose it; for it is the Root and Ground of all Contention and Debate,
and the way to make a thing a great deal Darker, than Clearer. For under the
pretense of Regulating Man's Reason, into a certain Order and Rules, that he
may find out (as they pretend) the Truth, it leads into such a Labyrinth of
Contention, as is far more fit to make a Sceptick, than a Christian, far less a
Minister of Christ; yea, it often hinders Man from a clear understanding of
things, that his own Reason would give him; and therefore, through its manifold
Rules and diverse Inventions, it often gives occasion for a Man that has little
Reason, Foolishly to speak much to no purpose, Seeing a Man that is not very
Wise, may notwithstanding be a perfect Logician; and then, if ye would make a
Man a Fool to purpose, that is not very Wise, do but teach him Logic and
Philosophy, and whereas before he might have been fit for something, he shall
then be good for nothing, but to speak Nonsense; for these Notions will so
swim in his Head, that they will make him extremely Busy about nothing. The
use of Logic is to see its Emptiness.
The use that wise Men and solid make of it, is, to see the emptiness thereof;
therefore says one, It is an Art of Contention and Darkness, by which all
other Sciences are rendered more obscure, and harder to be understood.

If it be urged, That thereby the Truth may be maintained and confirmed, and
Heretics confuted.

Logic, as that Lucae Osia^ ^st H^es lib 2 Cap. 5. Cert. 4.
Heathen Philosopher acknowledged, who, Disputing with the Christian Bishops,
in the Council of Nice, An Heathen Philosopher disputing with the ^i^ in the
council of Ni^, was Converted to the Christian Faith by a^ ignorant old Man,
whom they could not.
was so Subtle, that he could not be overcome by them; but yet by a few words
spoken by a simple old Rustic, was presently convinced by him, and converted
to the Christian Faith; and being inquired how he came to yield to that
ignorant old Man, and not to the Bishops; he said, That they contended with him
in his own way, and he could still give Words for Words; but there came from
the old Man that Virtue which he was not able to resist. This secret Virtue and
Power ought to be the Logic and Philosophy wherewith a true Christian Minister
ought to be furnished; and for which they need not be beholden to Aristotle.
Natural Logic useful
As to Natural Logic, by which Rational Men, without that Art and Rules, or
Sophistical Learning, deduce a certain Conclusion out of true Propositions,
which scarce any Man of Reason wants; we deny not the use of it, and I have
sometimes used it in this Treatise which also may serve without that Dialectick
Art. As for the other part of Philosophy, 3 Ethics, or the M^^ Rules to
Christians not needful
which is called Moral, or Ethics, it is not so necessary to Christians, who
have the Rules of the Holy Scriptures, and the Gift of the Holy Spirit, by
which they can be much better Instructed. 4 Physics, and the Metap^si^ (...)
no Pr^ (...) of the Truth.
The Physical and Metaphysical part may be reduced to the Arts of Medicine and
the Mathematics, which have nothing to do with the Essence of a Christian
Minister. And therefore the Apostle Paul, who well understood what was good for
Christian Ministers, and what hurtful, thus exhorted the Colossians, Col. 2.8.
Beware lest any Man spoil you through Philosophy and vain Deceit. And to his
Beloved Disciple Timothy, he writes also thus, 1 Timothy 6.20. O Timothy! keep
that which is committed to thy Trust, avoiding prefane and vain Bablings, and
oppositions of Science, falsely so called.

. XXI. III. T^ Learned School Divinity obnoxious, a Moniter. A Letter-Knowledge
Heath^iz'd
The third and main part of their Literature is School Divinity, a Monster made
up of some Spiritual Notions of Truth, and the Heathenish Terms and Maxims;
being as it were, the Heathenish Philosopy Christianiz'd, or rather, the
Literal External Knowledge of Christ Heathenized. It is Man in his first,
fallen, natural State, with his Devilish Wisdom, pleasing himself with some
Notions of Truth, and adorning them with his own Serpentine and Worldly Wisdom;
because he thinks the Simplicity of the Truth too low and mean a thing for him:
And so despises that Simplicity, wheresoever it is found, that he may set up
and exalt himself, puffed up with this his monstrous Birth. It is the Devil
darkening, obscuring, and vailing the Knowledge of God, with his sensual and
carnal Wisdom; that so he may the more securely deceive the Hearts of the
Simple, and make the Truth, as it is in it self, despicable and hard to be
known and understood, by multiplying a Thousand hard and needless Quest ons,
and endless Contentions and Debates. All which, whosoever perfectly knows, he is
not a whit less the Servant of Sin, than he was; but ten times more, in that he
is exalted, and proud of Iniquity, and so much the further from receiving,
understanding, or learning the Truth, as it is in its own naked Simplicity;
because he is full, learned, rich, and wise in his own Conceit: And so those,
that are most skilled in it, wear out their Day, and spend their precious Time,
about the infinite and innumerable Questions they have feigned and invented
concerning it. A certain Learned Man called it, A two fold Discipline, as of
the Race of the Centaurs, partly proceeding from Divine Sayings, partly from
Philosophical Reasons. A Thousand of their Questions they confess themselves to
be no ways necessary to Salvation; and yet many more of them they could never
agree upon, but are, and still will be, in endless Janglings about them. ^s
needless Questions and endless Janglings.
The Volumes that have been written about it, a Man in his whole age, though he
lived very Old, could scarce read; and when he has read them all, he has but
wrought himself a great deal more Vexation and Trouble of Spirit, than he had
before. These certainly are the Words without Knowledge, by which Counsel has
been darkened, Job 38.2. They make the Scripture the Text of all this Mass; and
it is concerning the Sense of it that their voluminous Debates arise. But a Man
of a good upright Heart, may learn more in half an hour, and be more certain of
it, by waiting upon God and his Spirit in the Heart, than by reading a Thousand
of their Volumes, which by filling his Head with many needless Imaginations,
may well stagger his Faith, but never confirm it: And indeed those that give
themselves most to it, are most capable to fall into Error, as appears by the
Example of Origin, who, by his Learning, was one of the first, that, falling
into this way of Interpreting the Scriptures, wrote so many Volumes, and in
them so many Errors, as very much troubled the Church. Whereby Arrius fell into
Error and Schism
Also Arrius, led by this Curiosity and Humane Serutiny, despising the
Simplicity of the Gospel, fell into this Error, which was the cause of that
horrible Heresy, which so much troubled the Church: Methinks the Simplicity,
Plainness, and Brevity of the Scriptures themselves, should be a sufficient
Reproof for such a Science, and the Apostles being Honest, Plain, Illiterate
Men, may be better understood by such kind of Men now, than with all that Mass
of Scholastic Stuff, which neither Peter, nor Paul, nor John, ever thought of.

. XXII. But this Invention of Satan, The apostasy, and its dangerous
Consequence.
wherewith he began the Apostasy, has been of dangerous Consequence; for
thereby he at first spoiled the Simplicity of Truth, by keeping up the
Heathenish Learning, which occasioned such uncertainty, even among those called
Fathers, Many of the Fathers do not only Contradict each other, but themselves
also, and why?
and such Debate, that there are few of them to be found, who by reason of this
mixture, do not only frequently Contradict one another, but themselves also.
And therefore, when the Apostasy grew greater, he, as it were, buried the
Truth with this vail of Darkness, wholly shutting out People from true
Knowledge, and making the Learned (so accounted) busy themselves with idle and
needless Questions; while the weighty Truths of God were neglected, and, as it
were, went into Desuetude. Now, though the grossest of these Abuses be swept away
by Protestants; yet the Evil Root still remains, and is nourished and upheld,
and upon the growing hand, that this Science is kept up, and deemed necessary
for a Minister: For, while the pure Learning of the Spirit of Truth is
despised, and neglected, and made ineffectual, Man's fallen earthly Wisdom is
upheld; and so in that he labors and works with the Scriptures, being out of
the Life and Spirit those that wrote them were in, by which they are rightly
understood, and made use of. And so he that is to be a Minister, Merchandising
with the Scriptures: What it is. See also 2 Pet. 2.3.
must learn this Art or Trade of Merchandising with the Scriptures, and be
that, which the Apostle would not be, to wit, a Trader with them, 2 Cor. 2.17.
That he may acquire a Trick from a Verse of Scripture, by adding his own barren
Notions and Conceptions to it, and his uncertain Conjectures, and what he has
stolen out of Books, (for which end he must have of necessity a good many by
him) and may each Sabbath Day (as they call it or oftener, make a Discourse for
an Hour long; and this is called the Preaching of the Word: And this they call
the Preaching of the Word.
Whereas the Gift, Grace, and Spirit of God, to teach, open and instruct, and
to preach a word in season, is neglected; and so Man's Arts and Parts, and
Knowledge and Wisdom, which is from below, set up and established in the Temple
of God, yea, and above the little Seed; Thus Antichrist is Established above
the Seed of the Kingdom.
which in effect is Antichrist, working in the Mystery. And so the Devil may be
as good and able a Minister, as the best of them; for he has better skill in
Languages, and more Logic, Philosophy, and School Divinity, How the Devil may
be a Minister of the Priests Gospel.
than any of them; and knows the Truth in the Notion, better than they all, and
talks more Eloquently than all these Preachers. But what avails all this? Is
it not all but as Death, as a painted Sepulcher, and dead Carcass, without the
Power, Life and Spirit of Christianity, which is the Marrow and Substance of a
Christian Ministry? And he that has this, and can speak from it, though he be a
poor Shepherd, or a Fisherman, and ignorant of all that Learning, and of all
those Questions and Notions; yet speaking from the Spirit, his Ministry will
have more Influence toward the Converting of a Sinner unto God, than all of
them who are learned after the Flesh; as in that Example of the old Man, at the
Council of Nice, did appear.

The Power of God by weak Instruments restoring the Simplicity of Truth.
. XXIII. And if in any Age, since the Apostles days, God has purposed to show
his Power by weak Instruments, for the battering down of that Carnal and
Heathenish Wisdom, and restoring again the ancient Simplicity of Truth, this is
it. For in our Day, God has raised up Witnesses for himself, as he d^d
Fishermen of old; many, yea, most of whom, are Laboring and Mechanic Men;
who, altogether without that Learning, have, by the Power and Spirit of God,
struck at the very Root and Ground of Babylon; and in the Strength and Might of
this Power, have gathered Thousands (by reaching their Consciences) into the
same Power and Life, who, as to the outward part, have been far more knowing
than they, yet not able to resist the Virtue that proceeded from them. Of which
I my self am a true Witness; and can declare from a certain Experience, because
my Heart has been often greatly broken and tendered by that Virtuous Life, The
Powerful Ministry of Illiterate Men.
that proceeded from the Powerful Ministry of those Illiterate Men: So that by
their very Countenance, as well as Words, I have felt the Evil in me often
chained down; and the Good reached to and raised. What shall I then say to you,
who are Lovers of Learning, and Admirers of Knowledge? Was not I also a Lover
and Admirer of it, who also sought after it, according to my Age and Capacity?
But it pleased God, The Time of the Author's first Convincement.
in his unuttterable Love, early to withstand my vain Endeavors, while I was
yet but Eighteen Years of Age; and made me seriously to consider (which I wish
also may befall others) That without Holiness and Regeneration, no Man can see
God; and that the Fear of the Lord is the beginning of Wisdom, Job 28.2^.
and to depart from Iniquity, a good Understanding; and how much Knowledge
puffs up, and leads away from that inward Quietness, Stilness, and Humility
of Mind, where the Lord appears, and his Heavenly Wisdom is revealed. If ye
consider these things, then will ye say with me, that all this Learning, Wisdom
and Knowledge, gathered in this fallen Nature, is but as Dross and Dung, in
comparison of the Cross of Christ; especially being destitute of that Power,
Life and Virtue, which I perceived these Excellent (though Despised, because
Illiterate) Witnesses of God to be filled with: And therefore seeing, that in
and among them, I, with many others, have found the Heavenly Food, that gives
Contentment, let my Soul seek after this Learning, and wait for it for ever.

Qu. III.
. XXIV. Having thus spoken of the Call and Qualifications of a Gospel Minister;
that which comes next to be considered, The Work of a Minister.
is, What his proper Work is, how, and by what Rule he is to be ordered? Our
Adversaries do all along go upon Outward, and therefore have certain
prescribed Rules and Methods, contrived according to their Humane and Earthly
Wisdom: We, on the contrary, walk still upon the same Foundation, and lean
always upon the immediate Assistance and Influence of that Holy Spirit, which
God has given his Children, to teach them all things, and lead them in all
things: Which Spirit, The Holy Spirit, a Spirit of Order, and not of Confusion.
being the Spirit of Order, and not of Confusion, leads us, and as many as
follow it, into such a comely and decent Order, as becomes the Church of God.
But our Adversaries, having shut themselves out from this immediate Counsel and
influence of the Spirit, have run themselves into many Confusions and
Disorders, seeking to establish an Order in this matter. For some will have
first a Chief Bishop, or Pope, to Rule and be Prince over all; Popish Orders
and Offices.
and under him by degrees, Cardinals, Patriarchs, Archbishops, Priests,
Deacons, Subdeacons; and besides these, Acoluthi, Tonsorati, Ostiarii, etc.
And in their Theology (as they call it) Professors, Batchelors, Doctors, etc.
And others are to have every Nation Independent of another, having its own
Metropolitan or Patriarch; and the rest in order subject to him, as before.
Others again are against all Precedence among Pastors, and Constitute their
Subordination not of Person, but of Power: As first the Consistory, or Session;
then the Class, or Presbytery; then the Provincial; and then the National Synod
or Assembly. Thus they Tear one another, and contend among themselves,
concerning the Ordering, Distinguishing, and making their several Orders and
Offices; concerning which there has been no less Contest, not only by way of
Verbal Dispute; but even by Fighting, Tumults, Wars, Devastations and
Bloodshed, than about the Conquering, Wars and Bloodshed about Church
Government.
Overturning and Establishing of Kingdoms. And the Histories of late times are
as full of the various Tragedies, acted upon the account of this Spiritual and
Ecclesiastical Monarchy and Commonwealth, as the Histories of old times, that
gave account of the Wars and Contests, that fell out both in the Assyrian,
Persian, Greek and Roman Empires: These last, upon this account, though among
those that are called Christians, have been no less Bloody and Monstrous, than
the former among Heathens, concerning their outward Empires and Governments.
Now all this, both among Papists and Protestants, The Ground and Cause thereof.
proceeds in that they seek in Imitation to uphold a Form and Shadow of
things, though they want the Power, Virtue and Substance; though for many of their
Orders and Forms, they have not so much as the Name in the Scripture. But in
opposition to all this Mass of Formality, and heap of Orders, Rules and
Governments, we say, the Substance is chiefly to be sought after, and the
Power, Virtue and Spirit, is to be known and waited for, which is One in all
the different Names and Offices the Scripture makes use of; as appears by 1
Cor. 12.4. (often beforementioned) There are diversities of Gifts, but the
same Spirit. And after the Apostle, throughout the whole Chapter, has shown
how one and the self-same Spirit works in, and quickneth each Member; then in
verse 28. he shows, how thereby God has set in the Church, first Apostles,
secondly Prophets, Teachers, etc. And likewise to the same purpose, Ephesians. 4.11.
he shows, how by these Gifts he has given some Apostles, some Prophets, some
Evangelists, some Pastors, some Teachers, etc. Now it was never Christ's
purpose, nor the Apostles, that Christians should, without this Spirit and
Heavenly Gift, set up a Shadow and Form of these Orders, and so make several
Ranks and Degrees, to establish a Carnal Ministry of Men's making, without the
Life, Power and Spirit of Christ: The Work of Antichrist and Mystery of
Iniquity.
This is that Work of Antichrist, and Mystery of Iniquity, that has got up in
the dark Night of Apostasy. But in a true Church of Christ, gathered together
by God, not only into the Belief of the Principles of Truth, but also into the
Power, Life and Spirit of Christ, the Spirit of God is the Orderer, Ruler and
Governor; as in each particular, so in the general. And when they Assemble
together, to Wait upon God, and to Worship and Adore him; Such as the Spirit
sets apart to the Ministry, their Brethren bear them.
then such as the Spirit sets apart for the Ministry, by its Divine Power and
Influence, opening their Mouths, and giving them to Exhort, Reprove and
Instruct with Virtue and Power; these are thus of God ordained and admitted
into the Ministry, and their Brethren cannot but hear them, receive them, and
also honor them, for their Works sake. And so this is not Monopolized to a
certain kind of Men, as the Clergy (who are to that purpose Educated and
brought up, The Clergy and Laics.
as other carnal Artists) and the rest to be despised as Laics; but it is left
to the free Gift of God, to choose any, whom he sees meet thereunto, whether
Rich or Poor, Servant or Master, Women may preach
Young or Old, yea, Male or Female. And such as have this Call, verify the
Gospel, by preaching not in Speech only, but also in Power, and in the Holy
Ghost, and in much Fullness, 1 Thessalonians. 1.5. and cannot but be received and heard
by the Sheep of Christ

That I seem hereby to make no distinction at all betwixt Ministers and others;
which is contrary to the Apostle, saying 1 Cor. 12.29. Are all Apostles? Are
all Prophets? Are all Teachers? etc. From thence they insinuate; That I also
contradict his comparison in that Chapter, of the Church of Christ with a
Humane Body; as where he says, verse 27. If the whole Body were an Eye, where
were the Hearing? If the whole were Hearing, where were the Smelling? etc. Also
the Apostle not only thus distinguishes the Ministers of the Church in general
from the rest of the Members, but also from themselves; as naming them
distinctly and separately, Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors and
Teachers, etc.

Diversity of Names makes no distinct Offices; but which may cs-^ c^de, or be
together in one Person.
is not for to distinguish separate Offices, but to denote the different and
various Operations of the Spirit; a manner of Speech frequent with the Apostle
Paul, wherein he sometimes expatiates to the illustrating of the Glory and
Praise of God's Grace: As in particular, Romans 12.6. Having then Gifts differing
according to the Grace that is given us, whether Prophecy, let us prophecy
according to the proportion of Faith; or Ministry, let us wait on our
Ministering; or he that Tracheth, on Teaching; or be that Exhorts, on
Exhortation. Now none will say from all this, that these are distinct Offices,
or do not or may not co-incide in one Person as may all those other things,
mentioned by him in the subsequent Verses, viz. Of Loving, being kindly
Affectioned, Fervency of Spirit, Hospitality, Diligence, blessing, Rejoicing,
etc. which yet he numbers forth as different Gifts of the Spirit, and according
to this Objection, might be placed as distinct and separate Offices, which were
most absurd.

Prophecy and P^op^ing, its twofold signification.
Secondly; In these very places mentioned, it is clear, that it is no real
Distinction of separate Offices; because all acknowledge, that Pastors and
Teachers (which the Apostle there no less separateth and distinguishes, than
Pastors and Prophets, or Apostles) are one and the same, and co-incide in the
same Office and Person; and therefore may be said so of the rest. For [
Prophecy] as it signifies the foretelling of things to come, is indeed a
distinct Gift, but no distinct Office; and therefore our Adversaries do not
place it among their several Orders: Neither will they deny, but that both may
be and have been given of God to some that not only have been Pastors and
Teachers, and that there it has coincided in one Person with these other
Offices; but also to some of the Laics: And so it has been found, To
Prophecy, a Privilege ^f T^a^s, and of all the Saints.
according to their own Confession, without the Limits of their Clergy.
Prophecy in the other sense, to wit, as it signifies a Speaking from the Spirit
of Truth, is not only peculiar to Pastors and Teachers, who ought so to
Prophecy; but even a common Priv^ledge to the Saints. For though to Instruct,
Teach and Exhort, be proper to such as are more particularly called to the Work
of the Ministry; yet it is not so proper to them, as not to be (when the Saints
are met together, as any of them are moved by the Spirit) common to others: For
some Acts belong to all in such a Relation: But not only to those within that
Relation; Competunt omni, sed n^n s^l^. Thus to see and bear, are proper Acts
of a Man; seeing it may be properly predicated of him, that he hears and
sees: Yet are they common to other Creatures also. So to Prophecy in this
sense, is indeed proper to Ministers and Teachers; yet not so, but that it is
common and lawful to other Saints, when moved thereunto, though it (...) not
proper to them by way of R^lation: Because, notwithstanding that Motion, they
are not particularly called to the Work of the Ministry; as appears by 1 Cor.
14. where the Apostle at large declaring the Order and ordinary Method of the
Church, says; verse. 30, 31. But if any thing be revealed to another, that
sits by, let the first hold his peace; for ye may all prophecy ^ne by one,
that all may learn, and all be comforted: Which shows, that none is here
excluded. But yet that there is Subordination, according to the various
measures of the Gift received, the next Verse shows; And the spirits of the
Prophets are subject to the Prophets: For God is not the A^or of Confusion, but
of Peace. Now that Prophesying, in this sense, may be common to all Saints,
appears by verse 39. of the same Chapter; where speaking to [ A^l] in general,
he says; Wherefore, Brethren, cover to Prophecy: And verse 1. he exhorts
them, saying; Desire Spiritual Gifts, but rather that ye may Prop^esie.

Secondly; As to Evangelists, the same may be said. Who are Evangelist and
(...) th^r any way term themselves so now adays.
For whoever preaches the G^spel, is really an Evangelist; and so consequently
every true Minister of the Gospel is one: Else what proper Office can they
assign to it, unless they should be so foolish as to affirm, that none were
Evangelists, but Matthew, Mark Luke and John, who wrote the Account of Christ's
Life and Sufferings? And then it were neither a particular Office, seeing John
and Matthew were Apostles, Mark and Luke Pastors and Teachers; so that there
they co-incided in one. And indeed it is absurd to think, that upon that
particular account the Apostle used the word [ Evangelist.] Calvin
acknowledges, That such as preach the Gospel in purity, after some time of
Apostasy, may be truly called Evangelists; and therefore says, That there
were Apostles in his time; and hence the Protestants, at their first coming
forth, termed themselves Evangelici, or Evangelicks.

Lastly; An Apostle, Who is an Apostle?
if we look to the Etymology of the word, signifies One that is sent; and in
respect Every true Minister is sent of God, in so far he is an Apostle: Though
the Twelve, because of their being specially sent of Christ, were therefore
called Apostles, (...), or per Eminentiam, They were not ^ted to such a Number.
i. e. by way of Excellency. And yet that there was no Limitation to such a
Number, as some foolishly imagine, it appears, because, after that Number was
filled up, the Apostle Paul was afterward so called: Therefore we judge, that
these are no distinct separa^e Offices, but only Names used upon occasion, to
express the more Eminent Arising and shining forth of God's Grace. As if any
Minister of Christ should ^ow Proselyte or turn a whole Nation to the Christian
Faith, Whether any Man be called an Apostle this Day.
though he had no distinct Office; yet I doubt not but both Papists and
Protestants would judge it tolerable, to call such an one an Apostle, or an
Evangelist. For some of the Jesuits call of their Sect, Apostles of India, and
of Japan, upon this alleged account: And Calvin testifies, that there were
Apostles and Evangelists in his time, upon the account of the Reformation: Upon
what Account John Knox was called the Apostle of Scotland
Upon which account we have known John Knox often called the Apostle of
Scotland. So that we conclude, that Ministers, Pastors or Teachers, do
comprehend All; and that the Office is but One. And therefore in that respect
we judge, there ought to be no Precedence among them: To prove which, I shall
not insist, seeing it is shown largely, and treated of by such as have denied
the Diocesan Episcopacy, as they call it.

That I seem to make no distinction betwixt the Minister and People; Liberty to
Prophesy all have, by the Spirit.
I Answer: If it be understood of a liberty to Speak or Prophecy by the
Spirit, I say, all may do that, when moved thereunto, as above is shown. But we
do believe and affirm, that some are more particularly called to the Work of
the Ministry; and therefore are fitted of the Lord for that purpose: Whose Work
is more constantly and particularly to instruct, exhort, admonish, oversee, and
watch over their Brethren; and that as there is something more incumbent upon
them in that respect, than upon every Common Believer; so also, as in that
relation, there is due to them from the Flock such Obedience and subjection, as
is mentioned in these Testimonies of the Scripture, Heb. 13.17. 1 Thessalonians. 5.12,
13. 1 Timothy 5.17. 1 Pet. 5.5. Also besides these, The Elders take care for the
Widows, the Poor and Fatherless.
who are thus particularly called to the Ministry and constant labor in the
Word and Doctrine, there are also the Elders; who, though they be not moved to a
frequent Testimony, by way of Declaration in Words; yet as such as are grown up
in the Experience of the blessed Work of Truth in their Hearts, watch over and
privately admonish the Young, care for the Widows, the Poor and Fatherless; and
care and look that nothing he wanting, but that Peace, Love, Unity, Concord and
Soundness be preserved in the Church of Christ; and this answers to the Deacons
mentioned Acts 6.

That which we oppose, is, The distinction of Clergy and Laity not to be found
in Scripture.
the distinction of Laity and Clergy (which in the Scripture is not to be
found) whereby none are admitted unto the Work of the Ministry, but such as are
Educated at Schools on purpose, and instructed in Logic and Philosophy, etc.
and so are at their Apprenticeship to learn the Art and Trade of Preaching,
even as a Man learns any other Art; whereby all other honest Mechanic Men, who
have not got this Heathenish Art, are excluded from having this Privilege. And
so he that is a Scholar, thus bred up, must not have any honest Trade, whereby
to get him a Livelihood, if he once intend for the Ministry; but he must see to
get him a Place, and then he has his set hire for a Livelihood to him. He must
also be distinguished from the rest, by the Color of his Clothes; for he must
only wear Black, Their Gark
and must be a Master of Arts: But more of this hereafter.

. XXVII. As this manner of separating Men for the Ministry is nothing like the
Church in the Apostles days, so great Evils have and do follow upon it. For
first; Parents, seeing both the Honor and Profit that attends the Clergy, do
allot their Children sometimes from their Infancy to it; and so breed them up
on purpose. And others come to Age, upon the same account, betake them to the
same Trade; and having these Natural and Acquired Parts, that are judged the
necessary Qualifications of a Minister, are thereby admitted; and so are bred
up in Idleness and pleasure, thinking it a disgrace for them to work with their
hands; only if they study a little out of their Books, The Clergy's Study out
of B^oks; the Gift of God neglected.
to make a Discourse once or twice a Week, during the running of an H^ur-Glass:
Whereas the Gift, Grace and Spirit of God ^o call, gift and qualify for the
Min^stry is neglected and overlooked. And many Covetous, Corrupt, Earthly,
Carnal Men, having a mere show and Form, but strangers to, and utterly ignorant
of the inward Work of Grace upon their hearts, are brought in and intrude
themselves; and so through them Death, Barreness and Darkness, and by
consequence Superstition, Error and Idolatry, have entered and leavened the
Church. And they that will narrowly observe, may find, that it was thus the
Apost^sie came to take place; of the Truth of which I could give many Examples,
which for Brevity^s sake I omit. For so the Office, Reverence and Respect due
to it, were annexed to the mere Name; so that when once a Man was ordained a
Bishop or a Priest, he was heard and believ^d though he had noth^ng of the
Spirit, Power and Life that the true Apostles and Ministers were in; that in a
short time the Succession came to be of the Name and Title, and the Office was
thereto annexed, and not (...) the Nature, Virtue and Life. Which in effect
made them to cease to be the Ministry and Ministers of Christ, but only a
Shadow and vain Image of it: Which also decaying, was in some Ages so
metamorphosed, that not only the Substance was lost, but the very Form wholly
vitiated, altered and marred; that it may be far better said of the pretended
Christian Church, as was disputed of Theseus's Boat, The marred Church Compared
to Thesus's pieced Boat.
(which by the piecing of many new pieces of Timber, was wholly altered)
whether indeed it were the same or another? But in case that the first had been
of Oak, and the last pieces put in but of rotten Fir, and that also the Form
had been so far changed, as to be nothing like the first; I think it would have
suffered no dispute, but might have easily been concluded to be quite another,
retaining nothing but the Name, and that also unjustly. Secondly; The Abuse
f^lowing the Distinction of Lait^ and Clergy.
From this distinction of Laity and Clergy this Abuse also follows, that good,
honest, mechanic Men, and others who have not learned the Art and Trade of
Preaching, and so are not Licentiated according to these Rules they prescribe
unto themselves; such, I say being possessed with a false Opinion, that it is
not lawful for them to meddle with the Ministry, nor that they are any ways fit
for it, because of the defect of that Literature; do thereby neglect the Gift
in themselves, and quench many times the pure Breathings of the Spirit of God
in their Hearts: Which, if given way to, might prove much more for the
Edification of the Church, than many of the conned Sermons of the Learned. And
so by this means, the Apostle's Command and Advice is slighted, who exhorts,
1 Thessalonians. ^.19.20. Not to quench the Spirit, nor despise Prophesying. And all
this is done by Men pretending to be Christians, who glory, that the first
Preachers and Propagators of their Religion were such kind of plain mechanic
Men, Both Protestants and Papists exclude Mechanic Men from preaching, who
greatly contributed to the Reformation.
and illiterate. And even Protestants do, no less than Papists, exclude such
kind of Men from being Ministers among them; and thus limit the Spirit and Gift
of God, though their Fathers, in opposition to Papists, asserted the contrary;
and also their own Histories declare, how that kind of Illiterate Men did
without Learning, by the Spirit of God, greatly contribute in diverse places to
the Reformation.

By this it may appear, that as in Calling and Qualifying, so in Preaching and
Praying, and the other particular steps of the Ministry; every true Minister is
to know the Spirit of God, by its Virtue and Life, to accompany and assist him:
But because this relates to Worship, I shall speak of it more largely in the
next Proposition; which is concerning Worship. The last thing to be considered,
and inquired into, is, concerning the Maintenance of a Gospel-Minister: But
Before I proceed, I judge it fit to speak something in short concerning the
Preaching of Women; and to declare, what we hold in that matter.

Women's public Preaching and Praying asserted.
Seeing Male and Female are one in Christ Jesus, and that he has given his
Spirit no less to one, than to the other; when God moves by his Spirit in a
Woman, we Judge it no ways unlawful for her to Preach in the Assemblies of
God's People. Neither think we that of Paul, 1 Cor. 14.34. to reprove the
Inconsiderate and Talkative Women among the Corinthians, who troubled the
Church of Christ with their unprofitable Questions: Or that 1 Timothy 2.11, 12.
That Women ought to learn in silence, not usurping Authority over the Man, any
ways Repugnant to this Doctrine; because it is clear, that Women have Prophesied
and preached in the Church, else had that Saying of Joel been badly applied by
Peter, Acts 2.17. And seeing Paul himself, in the same Epistle to the
Corinthians, gives Rules how Women should behave themselves in their public
Preaching and Praying, it would be a manifest Contradiction, if that place were
otherwise taken in a larger sense: And the same Paul speaks of a Woman that
labored with him in the Work of the Gospel; and it is written, that Philip had
Four Daughters that Prophesied. Acts 21.9.
And lastly, It has been observed, that God has Effectually in this day
Converted many Souls by the Ministry of Women; Qu. IV.
and by them also frequently Comforted the Souls of his Children: Which
manifest Experience puts the thing beyond all Controversy. Ministers
Maintenance.
But now I shall procceed to speak of the Maintenance of Ministers.

The Ministers Fo^d and their M^ten^ stated.
. XXVIII. We freely acknowledge, as the Proposition holds forth, that there is
an Obligation upon such, to whom God sends, or among whom he raises up a
Minister, that (if need is) they minister to his necessities. Secondly; That it
is lawful for him to receive, what is necessary and convenient. To prove this,
I need not insist, for our Adversaries will readily grant it to us; for the
thing we affirm is, that this is all that these Scripture Testimon^es, relating
to this thing, do grant; Gal. 6.6. 1 C^r. 9.11, 12, 13, 14. 1 Timothy 5.16. That
which we then oppose in this matter, is; First, That it should be Constrained
and Limited. Secondly, That it should be Superfluous, Chargeable and Sumptuous.
And Thirdly, The manifest Abuse thereof; of which I shall also briefly treat.

As to the first, our Adversaries are forced to recur Law; a Refuge they use in
defending most of their Errors and Superstations, Against Constrained
Maintenance
which are contrary to the Nature and Purity of the Gospel.

God appointed the Levites the Tithes; therefore they belong also to such, as
Minister in Holy Things under the Gospel.

Priests had a Maintenance allowed them under the Law, Tithes were appointed
for the Levites, not for Gospel Preachers.
so also the Ministers and Preachers under the Gospel; which is not denied: But
the Comparison will not hold, that they should have the very same; since first,
there is no express Gospel-Command for it, neither by Christ nor his Apostles.
Secondly; The Parity does no ways hold betwixt the Levites under the Law, and
the Preachers under the Gospel; because the Levites were one of the Tribes of
Israel, and so had a right to a part of the Inheritance of the Land, as well as
the rest of their Brethren; and having none, had this allotted to them in lieu
of it. Next, the Tenth of the Tithes was only allowed to the Priests that
served at the Altar, the rest being for the Levites; and also to be put up in
Store Houses, for entertaining of Widows and Strangers. But these Preachers,
notwithstanding they inherit what they have by their Parents, as well as other
Men, yet claim the whole Tithes, allowing nothing either to Widow or Stranger.
But as to the Tithes, I shall not insist; because diverse have clearly and
learnedly treated of it apart; and also diverse Protestants do confess them not
to be jure Divino: And the Parity, as to the quota, does not hold; but only in
general, as to the Obligation of a Maintenance. Which Maintenance, though the
Hearers be obliged to give, and fail of their Duty, Reason 1. The Gospel freely
to be preached, without so much a Year.
if they do not; yet that it ought neither to be stinted, nor yet forced, I
prove; because Christ, when he sent forth his Apostles, said; Freely ye have
received, freely give, Mat. 10.8. and they had liberty to receive Meat and
Drink, from such as offered them, to supply their need. Which shows, that they
were not to seek or require any thing by force, or to stint, or make a bargain
before hand; as the Preachers, as well among Papists as Protestants, do in
these days; who will not Preach to any, until they be sure first of so much a
Year: But on the contrary, these were to do their Duty, and freely to
communicate (as the Lord should order them) what they had received, without
seeking or expecting a Reward.

Nic. Arnoldus his answer to Freely ye have received, etc.
The answer of this, given by Nicolaus Arnoldus, Exercit. Theolg. Sect. 42, 43.
is not to be forgotten; but indeed to be kept upon Record for a Perpetual
Remembrance of him and his Brethren; for he frankly answers after this manner;
We have not freely received, and therefore are not bound to give it freely. The
Answer, I confess, is ingenuous and good: For if those that receive freely, are
to give freely; it would seem to follow, by the Rule of Contraries, that those
who receive not freely, ought not to give freely; and I shall grant it. Only
they must grant me, that they preach not by and according to the Gift and Grace
of God received; nor can they be good Stewards of the manifold Grace of God, as
every true Minister ought to be: Or then they have gotten this Gift or Grace by
Money, Simon Magus.
as Simon Magus would have been compassing it, since they think themselves not
bound to give it without Money again. But to be plain, I believe be intended
not, that it was from the Gift or Grace of God they were to preach; but from
their acquired Arts and Studies, which has cost them much Labor, and also
some Money at the University. And therefore, as he that puts his Stock into the
public Bank, expects Interest again; so these Scholars, having spent some
Money in Learning the Art of Preaching, think they may boldly say, they have it
not freely; for it has cost them both Money and Pains, and therefore they
expect both Money and Ease again. And therefore as Arnoldus gets Money for
Teaching his young Students the Art and Trade of Preaching; so he intends they
should be paid, before they give it again to others. It was of old said, All
things are set to sale at Rome, To Franequer applied.
Omnia venalia Romae, i. e. All things are set to sale at Rome; but now the
same Proverb may be applied to Franequer: And therefore Arnoldus's Students,
when they go about to Preach, may safely seek and require hereby, telling their
Hearers their Master's Maxim; Nos grates non accepimus, ergo neque gratis dare
tenemur. But then they may answer again, that they find them and their Master
to be none of his Ministers; who, when he sent forth his Disciples, gave them
this Command, Freely ye have received, freely give; and therefore we will have
none of your teaching, because we perceive you to be of the number of those,
Isai. 56.1^
that look for their Gain from their Quarter.

. XXIX. Secondly; The Scripture-Testimonies, Reason 2.
that urge this, are in the same nature of those, that press Charity and
Liberality toward the Poor, and command Hospitality, etc. But these are not,
Mere Voluntary Deeds, no Man can stint the^.
nor can be stinted to a certain quantity, because they are Deeds merely
Voluntary, where the Obedience to the Command lies in the good will of the
Giver, and not in the matter of the thing given; as Christ shows in the
Example of the Widow's Mite. So that, though there be an Obligation upon
Christians, to minister of outward things to their Ministers; yet there can be
no definition of the quantity, but by the Giver's own consent; and a little
from one may more truly fulfill the Obligation, than a great deal from another.
And therefore as Acts of Charity and Hospitality can neither be limited nor
forced; so neither can this.

That Ministers may and ought to exhort, persuade, yea, and earnestly press
Christians (if they find them defective therein) to Acts of Charity and
Hospitality, and so may they do also to the giving of Maintenance.

stinted and forced Maintenance, for which there cannot so much as the show of
one solid Argument be brought from Scripture. I confess, Ministers may use
Exhortation in this, as much as in any other case, even as the Apostle did to
the Corinthians, showing them their Duty: Paul's Labor was, that the Gospel
might be without Charge.
But it were fit for Ministers, that so do, that their Testimony might have the
more weight, and be the freer of all suspicion of Covetousness and
Self-interest, that they might be able to say truly, in the fight of God, that
which the same Apostle subjoyns upon the same occasion; 1 Cor. 9.15, 16, 17,
18. But I have used none of these things. Neither have I written these things,
that it should be so done unto me: For it were better for me to die, than that
any man should make my glorying void. For though I preach the Gospel, I have
nothing to glory of; for necessity is laid upon me, yea, Woe is unto me, if I
preach not the Gospel. For if I do this thing willingly, I have a reward; but
if against my will, a dispensation of the Gospel is committed unto me. What is
my Reward then? Verily, that when I preach the Gospel, I may make the Gospel of
Christ without Charge, that I abuse not my power in the Gospel.

Thirdly; Reason 3.
As there is neither Precept nor Example for this forced and stinted
Maintenance in the Scripture; so the Apostle in his solemn farewell to the
Pastors and Elders of the Church of Ephesus, Paul Covered no Body's Silver or
Gold.
guards them against it, Acts 20.33, 34, 35. But if the thing had been either
lawful or practiced, he would rather have exhorted them to be content with
their stinted Hire, and not to covet more; whereas he shows them, First, by
his own Example, that they were not to covet or expect any Man's Silver or
Gold. Secondly, that they ought to work with their Hands for an honest
Livelihood, as he had done. And Lastly, he exhorts them so to do from the words
of Christ, Because it is a more blessed thing to give, than to receive; showing
that it is so far from a thing that a true Minister ought to aim at, or expect,
that it is rather a burden to a true Minister, and cross to him, to be brought
upon necessity so to lack.

. XXX. Fourthly, Reason 4.
If a forced and stinted Maintenance were to be supposed, it would make the
Ministers of Christ just one with those Hirelings, No Hireling fitting the
Gospel of Christ.
whom the Prophet cried out against. For certainly, if a Man make a Bargain to
Preach to People for so much a Year, so as to refuse to Preach, unless he have
it; and seek to force the People to give it by Violence; it cannot be denied,
that such a one preached for Hire, Mic. 3.5.
and so looks for his Gain from his Quarter; yea, and prepares War against such
as put not into his mouth: But this is the particular special Mark of a false
Prophet, and an Hireling, and therefore can no ways belong to a true Minister
of Christ.

Next, that a Superfluous Maintenance, that is, Moderate (...) ^ants and
Papists exclaim against the Excess of the Clergy's Revenues
more than in reason is needful, ought not to be received by Christian
Ministers, will not need much Proof. seeing the more Moderate and Sober both
among Papists and Protestants, readily confess it, who with one Voice exclaim
against the excessive Revenues of the Clergy: And that it may not want a Proof
from Scripture, what can be more plain, than that of the Apostle to Timothy? 1 Timothy 6.7, 8, 9, 10. where he both shows wherewith we ought to be Content, and
also the hazard of such as look after more; and indeed, since that very
Obligation of giving Maintenance to a Minister, is founded upon their Need, and
such as have opportunity to Work, are commended rather in not Receiving, than
in Receiving; it can no ways be supposed lawful for them to receive more than
is sufficient. And indeed, were they truly Pious and Right, though Necessitous,
they would rather incline to take too little, than be gaping after too much.

The Excess of the Priests and Bishops Revenues.
the vast Revenues which the Bishops and Priests have, both Papist and
Protestant, do declare; since I Judge it may be said without any Hyperbole,
that some particular Persons have more paid them Yearly, than Christ and his
Apostles made use of in their whole Lifetime; who yet wanted not what was
needful as to the outward Man, and no doubt deserved it far better, than those
that enjoy that fullness. But it is manifest, these Bishops and Priests love
their far Benefices, and the Pleasure and Honor that attends them, so well,
that they purpose neither to follow Christ, nor his Apostles Example or Advice
in this matter.

objected, That Christians are become so hard hearted, and generally so little
heed spiritual Things, that if Ministers had not a settled and stinted
Maintenance, secured them by Law, they and their Families might Starve for want
of Bread.

for such a Ministry: But it says nothing as to such as are called and sent of
God, They wanted nothing, whom God sent; they Labored with their Hands.
who sends no Man a way faring upon his own charges; and so go forth in the
Authority and Power of God, to turn People from Darkness to Light, for such can
trust to him that sends them, knowing that he requires nothing of any, but
what he gives Power to perform; and so when they return, if he inquire, can
say, they wanted nothing. And such also when they stay in a place (being
immediately furnished by God, and not needing to Borrow and Steal what they
Preach from Books, and take up their time that way) fall a working at their
lawful Employments, and labor with their Hands, as Paul did, when he gathered
the Church at Corinth. And indeed, if this Objection had any weight, the
Apostles and primitive Pastors should never have gone forth to Convert the
Nations, for fear of Want. Does not the Doctrine of Christ teach us to Venture
all, and Part with all, to serve God? Can they then be accounted Ministers of
Christ, who are afraid to preach him, lest they get not Money for it; or will
not do it, until they be sure of their Payment? What serves the Ministry for,
but to Perfect the Saints, and so to Convert them from that hard-heartedness?

I have labored and preached to them, and they are hard-hearted still, and
will not give me any thing.

Mat. 10.14. If they re^ thy Test^mony, sh^e the D^ from off thy Feet.
if they would give thee; but thou ought to shake (...) the Dust from thy
Feet, and leave them. And how frivolous this Objection is, appears, in that in
the darkest and most superstitious Times, the Priests Revenues increased most,
and they were most richly rewarded, though they deserved least. So that he that
is truly sent of God, as he needs not, so neither will he be afraid of Want, so
long as he serves so good a Master; neither will he ever forbear to do his Work
for that Cause. And indeed such as make this Objection, show truly that they
serve not the Lord Christ, but their own Belly, and that makes them so anxious
for want of Fo^d to it.

Lastly, as to the Abuses of this kind of Maintenance; indeed he, that would go
through them all, The many a u^s Priests Maintenance brings.
though he did it passingly, might make of it alone an huge Volume, they are so
great and numerous. For this Abuse, as others, crept in with the Apostasy;
there being nothing of this in the primitive Time: Then the Ministers claimed
no Tithes, neither sought they a stinted or forced Maintenance; but such as
wanted, had their Necessity supplied by the Church; and others wrought with
their Hands. But the Persecutions being over, and the Emperors and Princes
coming under the Name of Christians, the Zeal of those great Men was quickly
abused by the Coveteousness of the Clergy, who soon learned to change their
Cottages with the Palaces of Princes; and rested not, until by degrees some of
them came to be Princes themselves, nothing Inferior to them in Splendour,
Luxury and Magnificence; a method of living, that honest Peter and John, the
Fisher men, and Paul the Tent-maker, never coveted; and perhaps as little
imagined, that Men pretending to be their Successors, should have arrived to
these things. And so soon as the Bishops were thus sea^d and constitute
forgetting the Life and Work of a Christian, they went usually by the Ears
together, about the Precedence and Revenues, each covering the Chiefest and
Fattest Benefice. It is also to be regretted to think, how soon this Mischief
crept in among Protestants; The Protestants having forsaken the Pope, yet would
not forsake the rich Popish Revenues.
who had scar^ well appeared, when the Clergy among them began to speak at the
old rate, and show, that though they had forsaken the Bishop of Rome, they were
not resolved to part with their old Benefices: And therefore so soon as any
Princes or States shook off the Pope's Authority, and so demolished the Abbeys,
Nunneries, and other Monuments of Superstition, the reformed Clergy began
presently to cry out to the Magistrates, to beware of meddling with the Churches
Patrimony; several exclaiming against making a lawful Use of those vast
Revenues that had been superstitiously bestowed upon the Church (so called) to
the Good and Benefit of the Commonwealth, as no less than Sacrilege.

But by keeping up of this kind of Maintenance for the Ministry, and
Clergymen, so called, 1. The Clergy's Covetousness.
their is first a Bait laid for Covetousness, which is Idolatry, and of all
things most Hurtful; so that for Covetousness sake, many being led by the
desire of filthy Lucre, do apply themselves to be Ministers, that they may get
a Livelihood by it. If a Man have several Children, he will allot one of them
to be a Minister, which if he can get it to be, he reckons it as Good as a
Patrimony; so that a set Benefice has always a good many Expectants, and then
what Bribing, what Courting, what Industry, and shameful Actions, are used to
acquire these things, is too openly known, and needs not to be proved.

The Scandal that here-through is raised among Christians, is so manifest, The
Greedy Kirk, a Proverb.
that it is become a Proverb, That the Kirk is always greedy. Whereby the Gift
and Grace of God being neglected, they have for the most part no other Motive
or Rule, in applying themselves to one Church more than another, but the
greater Benefice. For though they hypocritically pretend, at their accepting of,
and entering into their Church, that they have nothing before them, but the
Glory of God, and the Salvation of Souls; yet if a richer Benefice offer it
self, they presently find it more for God's Glory, to remove from the first,
and go thither. And thus they make no difficulty often to change, while
notwithstanding they accuse us, that we allow Ministers to go from Place to
Place, and not to be tied to one Place; but we allow this, not for the gaining
of Money, but as moved of God. For if a Minister be called to minister in a
particular Place, he ought not to leave it, except God call him from it, and
then he ought to obey: For we make the Will of God inwardly revealed, and not
the Love of Money, and more Gain, the Ground of removing.

2. The Clergy's Luxury.
Secondly; From this Abuse, has proceeded that Luxury and Idleness, that most
of the Clergy live in, even among Protestants, as well as Papists, to the great
Scandal of Christianity. For not having lawful Trades to work with their Hands,
and being so superfluously and sumptuously provided for, they live in Idleness
and Luxury: And there does more Pride, Vanity, and Worldly Glory appear in
their Wives and Children, than in most others; which is open and evident to all.

3 The Clergy's Cruelty
Thirdly; They become hereby so glued to the Love of Money, that there is none
like them in Malice, Rage and Cruelty: If they be denied their Hire, they rage
like drunken Men, fret, fume, and as it were, go mad. A Man may sooner satisfy
the severest Creditor, than them; the general Voice of the Poor does confirm
this. For indeed they are far more exact in taking up the Tithes of Sheep
Geese, Swine and Eggs, etc. and look more narrowly to it, than to the Members
of their Flock: They will not miss the least Mite; and the poorest Widow cannot
escape their avaritious Hands. Poor Widows M^te cannot escape the Priests
greedy Hands.
Twenty Lies they will hear unreproved; and as many Oaths a Man may swear in
their hearing without offending them; and greater Evils than all this, they can
overlook. But if thou owe them ought, and refusest to pay it, then nothing
but War will they thunder against thee, and they will stigmatize thee with the
horrible Title of Sacrilege, and send thee to Hell without Mercy; as if thou
had committed the Sin against the Holy Ghost. Of all People, we can best bear
witness to this; for God having shown us this corrupt and Antichristian
Ministry, The Work of Antichrist is Fury, Envy, Malice.
and called us out from it, and gathered us unto his own Power and Life, to be
a separate People, so that we dare not join with, nor hear these Antichristian
Hirelings, neither yet put into their Mouths, or feed them: O! What Malice,
Envy, and Fury has this raised in their Hearts against us? That though we get
none of their Wares, neither will buy them, as knowing them to be naught, yet
will they force us to give them Money: And because we cannot for Conscience
sake do it, our Sufferings have upon that Account been unutterable. Yea, to
give Account of their Cruelty, and several Sorts of Inhumanity used against us,
would make no small History. These avaritious Hirelings have come to that
Degree of Malice and Rage, that several poor laboring Men have been carried
Hundreds of Miles from their own Dwellings, and shut up in Prison, some Two,
some Three, yea, some seven Years together, for the Value of One Pound
Sterling, and less. I know my self a poor Widow, A Widow for the Title of (...)
For ^rs in Prison.
that for the Tithes of her Geese, which amounted not to Five Shillings, was
about Four Years kept in Prison, Thirty Miles from her House. Yea, they by
Violence, for this Cause, have plundered of Men's Goods the Hundred fold, and
prejudiced much more: Some lost their Lives in nasty Holes, some wounded by the
Priests, etc.
Yea, Hundreds have hereby spilt their Innocent Blood, by dying in the filthy
noisome Holes and Prisons. And some of the Priests have been so enraged, that
Goods thus ravished could not satisfy them; but they must also satisfy their
Fury, by beating, knocking, and wounding with their Hands innocent Men and
Women, for refusing (for Conscience sake) to put into their Mouths.

The only way then soundly to Reform and Remove all these Abuses, and take away
the Ground and Occasion of them, is, to take away all stinted and forced
Maintenance and Stipend: And seeing those things were anciently given by the
People, that they return again into the public Treasure; and thereby the
People may be greatly benefitted by them, for that they may supply for those
public Taxations and Impositions, that are put upon them, and may ease
themselves of them. Whosoever heap Teachers to themselves. let them provide their
Stipend.
And whoever call or appoint Teachers to themselves, let them accordingly
entertain them: And for such as are called and moved to the Ministry by the
Spirit of God, those that receive them, and taste of the good of their
Ministry, will no doubt provide things needful for them, and there will be no
need of a Law to force a Hire for them: For he that sends them, will take care
for them; and they also, having Food and Raiment, will therewith be content.

The Difference between the Ministry of the Quakers, and their Adversaries.
. XXXIII. The Sum then of what is said, is, That the Ministry that we have
pleaded for, and which also the Lord has raised up among us, is, in all its
Parts, like the true Ministry of the Apostles and Primitive Church. Whereas the
Ministry our Adversaries seek to uphold and plead for, as it does in all its
Parts differ from them; so, on the other hand, it is very like the false
Prophets and Teachers, testified against and condemned in the Scripture: As may
be thus briefly illustrated.

1. The Ministry and Ministers we plead for, The True Ministers Call.
are such as are immediately called and sent forth by Christ and his Spirit
unto the Work of the Ministry: So were the holy Apostles and Prophets, as
appears by these Places, Mat. 10.1, 5. Ephesians. 4.11. Heb. 5.4.

1. But the Ministry and Ministers our Opposers plead for, are such as have no
immediate Call from Christ, to whom the Leading and Motion of the Spirit is not
reckoned necessary; but who are called, sent forth, and ordained by wicked and
ungodly Men: Such were of old the false Prophets and Teachers, as appears by
these Places, Jer. 14.14, 15. item, chap. 23.21. and 27.15.

2. The Ministers we plead for, True Ministers Guide.
are such as are acted and led by God's Spirit, and by the Power and Operation
of his Grace in their Hearts, are in some measure converted and regenerate, and
so are good, holy, and gracious Men: Such were the holy Prophets and Apostles,
as appears from 1 Timothy 3.2, 3, 4, 5, 6. Tit. 1.7, 8, 9.

2. But the Ministers our Adversaries plead for, are such to whom the Grace of
God is no needful Qualification; and so may be true Ministers, according to
them, though they be ungodly, unholy, and profligate Men: Such were the false
Prophets and Apostles, as appears from Mic. 3.5, 11. 1 Timothy 6.5, 6, 7, 8, etc.
2 Timothy 3.2. 2 Per. 2.^, 2, 3.

3. The Ministers we plead for are such as act, move, True Ministers Work.
and labor in the Work of the Ministry; not from their own mere natural
Strength and Ability, but as they are acted, moved, supported, assisted and
influenced by the Spirit of God, and minister according to the Gift received,
as good Stewards of the manifold Grace of God: Such were the holy Prophets and
Apostles, 1 Pet. 4.10, 11. 1 Cor. 1.17. 1 Cor. 2.3, 4, 5, 13. Acts 2.4. Mat.
10.20. Mark 13.11. Luke 12.12. 1 Cor. 13.2.

3. But the Ministers our Adversaries plead for, are such as wait not for, nor
expect, nor need the Spirit of God, to act and move them in the Work of the
Ministry; but what they do, they do from their own mere natural Strength and
Ability, and what they have gathered and stolen from the Letter of the
Scripture, and other Books, and so speak it forth in the strength of their own
Wisdom and Eloquence, and not in the Evidence and Demonstration of the Spirit
and Power: Such were the false Prophets and Apostles, as appears, Jer. 23.30,
31, 32, 34, etc. 1 Cor. 4.18. Jude 16.

True Ministers Humility.
4. The Ministers we plead for, are such as being holy and humble, contend not
for Precedence and Priority; but rather strive to prefer one another, and serve
one another in love; neither desire to be distinguished from the rest by their
Garments and large Phylacteries, nor seek the Greetings in the Marketplace nor
uppermost Rooms at Feasts, nor the chief Seats in the Synagogues; nor yet to be
called of Men Master, etc. Such were the holy Prophets and Apostles, as appears
from Mat. 23.8, 9, 10. and 20.25, 26, 27.

4. But the Ministers our adversaries plead for are such as strive and contend
for Superiority, and claim Precedence over one another; affecting and
ambitiously seeking after the forementioned things; Such were the false
Prophets and apostles in time past, Mat. 23.5, 6, 7.

True Ministers Free Gift.
5. The Ministers we plead for, are such as having freely received, freely give;
who covet no Man's Silver, Gold or Garments; who seek no Man's Goods, but seek
them, and the Salvation of their Souls: Whose Hands supply their own
Necessities, working honestly for Bread to themselves and their Families. And
if at any time they be called of God so as the Work of the Lord hinder them
from the use of their Trades, take what is freely given them, by such to whom
they have communicated Spirituals; and having Food and Raiment, are therewith
content: Such were the holy Prophets and Apostles, as appears from Mat. 10.8.
Acts. 20.33, 34, 35. 1 Timothy 6.8.

5. But the Ministers our Adversaries plead for, are such as not having freely
received, will not freely give; but are covetous, doing that which they ought
not, for filthy Lucre's sake; as to preach for Hire, and Divine for Money, and
look for their Gain from their Quarter, and prepare War against such as put not
into their Mouths, etc. Greedy Dogs, which can never have enough. Shepherds,
who feed themselves, and not the Flock; eating the Fat, and clothing themselves
with the Wool; making Merchandise of Souls; and following the way of Balaam,
that loved the Wages of Unrighteousness. Such were the false Prophets and
Apostles, Isai. 56.11. Ezekiel. 34.2, 3, 8. Mic. 3.5, 11. Tit. 1.10, 11. 2 Pet.
2.1.2, 3.14, 15.

And in a word, We are for a Holy, Spiritual, True Ministers Life and
Qualification.
Pure and Living Ministry, where the Ministers are both Called, Qualified and
Ordered, Acted and Influenced in all the steps of their Ministry by the Spirit
of God; which being wanting, we judge they cease to be the Ministers of Christ.

But they judging this Life, Grace and Spirit, no Essential Part of their
Ministry, are therefore for the upholding of an Humane, Carnal, Dry, Barren,
Fruitless, and Dead Ministry; of which (alas) we have seen the Fruits in the
most part of their Churches: Of whom that Saying of the Lord is certainly
verified, Jer. 23.32. -- I sent them not, nor commanded them, therefore they
shall not profit this People at all, says the LORD.

PROPOSITION XI. Concerning Worship.
All true and acceptable Worship to God is offered in the Inward and Immediate
moving and drawing of his own Spirit, which is neither limited to Places, What
the true Worship is that is acceptable to God.
Times, nor Persons. For though we are to Worship him always, and continually
to Fear before him; yet as to the outward signification thereof in Prayers,
Praises or Preachings, How to be performed.
we ought not to do it in our own Will, where and when we will; but where and
when we are moved thereunto by the stirring and secret Inspiration of the
Spirit of God in our Hearts; which God hears and accepts of, and is never
wanting to move us thereunto, when need is; of which he himself is the alone
proper Judge. All other Worship then, both Praises, Prayers or Preachings,
which Man sets about in his own will, and at his own appointment, which he can
both begin and end at his pleasure, do, or leave undone, as himself sees meet,
whether they be a prescribed Form, as a Liturgy, etc. or Prayers conceived
extempore by the natural strength and faculty of the Mind, they are all but
Superstition, Superstition and Will Worship.
Will Worship, and abominable Idolatry in the sight of God, which are now to be
denied and rejected, Idolatry.
and separated from, in this day of his Spiritual Arising. However, it might
have pleased him (who winked at the Times of Ignorance, with a respect to the
Simplicity and Integrity of some, and of his own innocent Seed, which lay as it
were buried in the Hearts of Men under that Mass of Superstition) to blow upon
the dead and dry Bones, and to raise some Breathings of his own, and answer
them; and that until the Day should more clearly dawn and break forth.

. I. THe Duty of Man toward God lies chiefly in these Two Generals, 1. In an
holy Conformity to the pure Law and Light of God, so as both to forsake the
Evil, and be found in the practice of those perpetual and moral Precepts of
Righteousness and Equity. And 2. In rendering that Reverence, Honor and
Adoration to God, that he requires and demands of us; which is comprehended
under Worship. Of the former we have already spoken, as also of the different
Relations of Christians, as they are distinguished by the several Measures of
Grace received, and given to every one; and in that respect have their several
Offices in the Body of Christ, which is the Church. Now I come to speak of
Worship, or of those Acts, whether private or public, general or particular,
whereby Man renders to God that part of his Duty, which relates immediately to
him: And as Obedience is better than Sacrifice, so neither is any Sacrifice
acceptable, but that which is done according to the Will of him, to whom it is
offered. But Men, finding it easier to sacrifice in their own Wills, than obey
God's Will, have heaped up Sacrifices without Obedience; and thinking to
deceive God, as they do one another, give him a show of Reverence, Honor and
Worship, while they are both inwardly estranged and alienated from his Holy and
Righteous Life, and wholly strangers to the pure Breathings of his Spirit, in
which the acceptable Sacrifice and Worship is only offered up. True Worship and
Duty to God-warde corrupted.
Hence it is that there is not any thing relating to Man's Duty toward God,
which among all sorts of People has been more vitiated, and in which the Devil
has more prevailed, than in abusing Man's Mind concerning this thing: And as
among many other, so among those called Christians, nothing has been more out
of order, and more corrupted, as some Papists, and all Protestants, do
acknowledge. As I freely approve whatsoever the Protestants have Reformed from
Papists in this respect; so I meddle not at this time with their Controvesies
about it: Only it suffices me, with them, to deny, as no part of the true
Worship of God, that abominable Superstition and Idolatry, the Popish Mass, The
Popish Mass (Idolatry) denied, with all their Trumpery.
the Adoration of Saints and Angels, the Veneration of Relics, the Visitation
of Sepulchers, and all those other Superstitious Ceremonies, Confraternities,
and endless Pilgrimages of the Romish Synagogue. Which all may suffice to
evince to Protestants, that Antichrist has wrought more in this, If
Protestants have made a perfect Reformation?
than in any other part of the Christian Religion; and so it concerns them
narrowly to consider, whether herein they have made a clear and perfect
Reformation; as to which stands the Controvesie betwixt them and us. For we
find many of the Branches lopped off by them, but the Root yet remaining; to
wit, a Worship acted in and from Man's Will and Spirit, and not by and from the
Spirit of God: For the true Christian and Spiritual Worship of God has been so
early lost, and Man's Wisdom and Will has so quickly and thoroughly mixed it
self herein; that both the Apostasy in this respect has been greatest, and
the Reformation here-from, as to the Evil Root, most difficult. Therefore let
not the Reader suddenly stumble at the account of our Proposition in this
matter; but hear us patiently in this respect Explain our selves, and I hope
(by the assistance of God) to make it appear, that though our manner of Speaking
and Doctrine seem most singular and different from all other sorts of
Christians; yet it is most according to the purest Christian Religion, and
indeed most needful to be observed and followed. And that there be no ground of
mistake (for that I was necessitated to speak in few words, and therefore more
obscurely and dubiously, in the Proposition it self) it is fit in the first
place to explain and hold forth our Sense, and clear the State of the
Controversy.

I. What Worship here is spoken of.
. II. And first, let it be considered, That what is here affirmed, is spoken of
the Worship of God in Gospel Times, and not of the Worship that was under or
before the Law: For the particular Commands of God to Men then, are not
sufficient to Authorize us now, to do the same things; else we might be
supposed at present acceptably to offer Sacrifice, as they did, which all
acknowledge to be ceased. So that what might have been both Commendable and
Acceptable under the Law, may justly now be charged with Superstition, yea, and
Idolatry. So that impertinently, in this respect, does Arnoldus rage against
this Proposition, [Exercit. Theolog. sect. 44.] saying; That I deny all public
Worship, and that, according to me, such as in Enoch' s time publicly began to
call upon the Name of the Lord; and such as at the Command of God went twice up
to Jerusalem to worship; and that Anna, Simeon, Mary, etc. were Idolaters,
because they used the public Worship of these times: Such a Consequence is
most impertinent, and no less foolish and absurd, than if I should infer from
Paul's Expostulating with the Galatians, for their returning to the Jewish
Ceremonies; that he therefore condemned Moses and all the Prophets, as foolish
and ignorant, because they used those things: The forward Man, not heeding the
different Dispensation of times, ran into this impertinency. Though a Spiritual
Worship might have been, and no doubt was practiced by many under the Law, in
great Simplicity; yet will it not follow, Ceremonies under the Law were not
Essential to true Worship.
that it were no Superstition to use all those Ceremonies that they used, which
were by God dispensed to the Jews, not as being Essential to true Worship, or
necessary as of themselves for transmitting and entertaining an holy Fellowship
betwixt him and his People; but in Condesension to them, who were inclinable to
Idolatry. Albeit then in this, as in most other things, the Substance was
enjoyed under the Law, by such as were Spiritual indeed; yet was it veiled and
surrounded with many Rites and Ceremonies, which is no ways lawful for us to
use now, under the Gospel.

. III. Secondly; Albeit I say, II. True Worship is not limited to Time, to
Place or Person.
that this Worship is neither limited to Times, places nor Persons; yet I would
not be understood, as if I intended the putting away of all set Times and
Places to Worship: God forbid I should think of such an Opinion. Nay, we are
none of those that forsake the Assembling of our selves together; but have even
certain Times and Places, in which we carefully meet together (nor can we be
driven therefrom by the Threats and Persecutions of Men) to wait upon God, and
worship Him. To meet together we think necessary for the People of God,
because, Necessity of Meetings.
so long as we are clothed with this outward Tabernacle, there is a necessity
to the entertaining of a Joint and Visible Fellowship, and bearing of an
outward Testimony for God, and seeing of the Faces of one another, that we
concur with our Persons, as well as Spirits: To be accompanied with that inward
Love and Unity of Spirit, does greatly tend to encourage and refresh the Saints.

^ Will Worship does limit the Spirit of God.
But the Limitation we condemn is, that whereas the Spirit of God should be the
immediate Actor, Mover, Perswader and Influencer of Man in the particular Acts
of Worship, when the Saints are met together, this Spirit is limited in its
Operations, by setting up a particular Man or Men to preach and pray in Man's
Will; and all the rest are excluded from so much as believing that they are to
wait for God's Spirit to move them in such things: And so they neglecting that,
which should quicken them in themselves, and not waiting to feel the pure
Breathings of God's Spirit, so as to obey them, are led merely to depend upon
the Preacher, and hear what he will say.

^. True Teaching of the Word of God.
Secondly; In that these peculiar Men come not thither to meet with the Lord,
and to wait for the inward Motions and Operations of his Spirit; and so to pray
as they feel the Spirit to breathe through them, and in them; and to preach, as
they find themselves acted and moved by God's Spirit, and as he gives
utterance; so as to speak a word in season to refresh weary Souls, and as the
present Condition and State of the Peoples Hearts require; suffering God by his
Spirit both to prepare Peoples Hearts, and also give the Preacher to speak what
may be fit and seasonable for them: But he has hammered together in his
Closet, according to his own Will, by his Humane Wisdom and Literature, and by
stealing the words of Truth from the Letter of the Scriptures, and patching
together other Men's Writings and Observations, so much as will hold him
speaking an hour, while the Glass runs; and without waiting or feeling the
inward Influence of the Spirit of God, Priests preach by hap-hazard their
studied Sermons.
he declaims that by hap-hazard, whether it be fit or seasonable for the
People's Condition, or no; and when he has ended his Sermon, he says his
Prayer also in his own will; and so there is an end of the business. Which
Customary Worship, as it is no ways acceptable to God; so how unfruitful it is,
and unprofitable to those that are found in it, the present Condition of the
Nations does sufficiently declare. It appears then, that we are not against set
Times for Worship, as Arnoldus against this Proposition, Sect. 45. no less
impertinently alleges; offering needlessly to prove that which is not denied:
Only these Times being appointed for outward Convenience, we may not therefore
think, with the Papists, that these days are holy, and lead People into a
Superstitious Observation of them; Whether Days are Holy.
being persuaded, that all Days are alike holy in the sight of God. And albeit
it be not my present purpose to make a long Digression concerning the Debates
among Protestants, about the First Day of the Week, commonly called the Lord's
Day; yet for as much as it comes fitly in here, I shall briefly signify our
sense thereof.

. IV. We, Of the First Day of the Week, commonly called the Lord's Day.
not seeing any ground in Scripture for it, cannot be so Superstitious, as to
believe, that either the Jewish Sabbath now continues, or that the First Day of
the Week is the Anti type thereof, or the true Christian Sabbath; which, with
Calvin, we believe to have a more Spiritual Sense: And therefore we know no
Moral Obligation by the Fourth Command, or elsewhere, to keep the First Day of
the Week more than any other, or any Holiness inherent in it. But first, for as
much as it is necessary, that there be some time set apart for the Saints to
meet together to wait upon God: And that secondly, it is fit at some times they
be freed from their other outward Affairs: And that thirdly, Reason and Equity
does allow, that Servants and Beasts have some Time allowed them, to be eased
from their continual Labor: And that fourthly, it appears, that the Apostles
and Primitive Christians did use the First Day of the Week for these Purposes;
We find our selves sufficiently moved for these Causes to do so also, without
superstitiously straining the Scriptures for another Reason: Which, that it is
not to be there found, many Protestants, yea, Calvin himself, upon the Fourth
Command, has abundantly evinced. And though we therefore meet, and abstain from
working upon this Day, yet does not that hinder us from having Meetings also
for Worship at other times.

. V. Thirdly; Though according to the Knowledge of God, revealed unto us by the
Spirit, through that more fu'l Dispensation of Light, which we believe the Lord
has brought about in this Day, we judge it our Duty to hold forth that Pure
and Spiritual Worship, which is acceptable to God, and answerable to the
Testimony of Christ and his Apostles; and likewise to testify against, and deny
not only manifest Superstition and Idolatry, but also all formal Will Worship,
which stands not in the Power of God: The Worship in the Apostasy,
Yet, I say, we do not deny the whole Worship of all those, that have born the
Name of Christians, even in the Apostasy, as if God had never heard their
Prayers, nor accepted any of them: God forbid we should be so void of Charity!
The latter Part of the Proposition shows the contrary. And as we would not be
so absurd on the one hand to conclude, because of the Errors and Darkness that
many were covered and surrounded with in Babylon, that none of their Prayers
were heard or accepted of God; so will we not be so unwary on the other as to
conclude, that because God heard and pitied them, so we ought to continue in
these Errors and Darkness, and not come out of Babylon, when it is by God
discovered unto us. The Popish Mass and Vespers.
The Popish Mass and Vespers I do believe to be, as to the matter of them,
abominable Idolatry and Superstition, and so also believe the Protestants; yet
will neither I or they affirm, that in the Darkness of Popery no
upright-hearted Men, though zealous in these Abominations, have been heard of
God, or accepted of him: Who can deny, Bernard and Bonaventure, Taulerus,
Thomas a Kempis, have tasted of the Love of God.
but that both Bernard and Bonaventure, Taulerus, Thomas a Kempis, and diverse
others have both known and tasted of the Love of God, and felt the Power and
Virtue of God's Spirit working with them for their Salvation? And yet ought we
not to forsake and deny those Superstitions, which they were found in? The
Calvinistical Presbyterians do much upbraid (and I say not without Reason) the
Formality and Deadness of the Episcopalian and Lutheran Liturgies; and yet, The
Bishops Liturgy.
as they will not deny, but there have been some good Men among them; so
neither dare they refuse, but that when that good step was brought in by them,
of turning the public Prayers into the vulgar Tongues, though continued in a
Liturgy, it was acceptable to God, and sometimes accompanied with his Power and
Presence; Yet will not the Presbyterians have it from thence concluded, that
the Common Prayers should still continue; so likewise, though we should confess,
that, through the Mercy and wonderful Condescension of God, there have been
upright in Heart, both among Papists and Protestants; yet can we not therefore
approve of their Way in the General, or not go on to the upholding of that
Spiritual Worship, which the Lord is calling all to; and so to the testifying
against whatsoever stands in the way of it.

. VI. Fourthly; Assemblies of Worship in public, described.
To come then to the State of the Controversy, as to the public Worship, we
judge it the Duty of all, to be diligent in the Assembling of themselves
together (and what we have been, and are, in this matter, our Enemies in Great
Britain, who have used all means to hinder our Assembling together to Worship
God, may bear witness) and when Assembled, the great Work of one and all ought
to be to wait upon God; and returning out of their own Thoughts and
Imaginations, to feel the Lord's Presence, and know a gathering into his Name
indeed, where he is in the midst, according to his promise. And as every one is
thus gathered, and so met together inwardly in their Spirits, as well as
outwardly in their Persons; there the secret Power and Virtue of Life is known
to refresh the Soul, and the pure Motions and Breathings of God's Spirit are
felt to arise; from which, as Words of Declaration, Prayers or Praises arise,
the acceptable Worship is known, which Edifies the Church, and is well pleasing
to God. And no Man here limits the the Spirit of God, nor brings forth his
own conned and gathered Stuff; but every one puts that forth, which the Lord
puts into their Hearts: And it is uttered forth not in Man's Will and Wisdom,
but in the Evidence and Demonstration of the Spirit, Its glorious Dispensation.
and of Power. Yea, though there be not a word spoken, yet is the true Spiritual
Worship performed, and the Body of Christ edified; yea, it may, and has often
fallen out among us, that diverse Meetings have past without one word; and yet
our Souls have been greatly edified and refreshed, and our Hearts wonderfully
overcome with the secret Sense of God's Power and Spirit, which without words
has been ministered from one Vessel to another. This is indeed strange and
incredible, to the mere natural and carnally-minded Man, who will be apt to
judge all time lost, where there is not something spoken, that is obvious to the
outward Senses; and therefore I shall insist a little upon this Subject, as one
that can speak from a certain Experience, and not by meet Hearsay, of this
wonderful and glorious Dispensation; which has so much the more of the Wisdom
and Glory of God in it, as it is contrary to the Nature of Man's Spirit, Will
and Wisdom.

. VII. As there can be nothing more opposite to the natural Will and Wisdom of
Man, The silent waiting upon God obtained.
than this silent waiting upon God; so neither can it be obtained, nor rightly
comprehended by Man, but as he lays down his own Wisdom and Will, so as to be
content to be thoroughly subject to God. And therefore it was not preached, nor
can be so practiced, but by such as find no outward Ceremony, no Observations,
no Words; yea, not the best and purest Words, even the words of Scripture, able
to satisfy their weary and afflicted Souls: Because where all these may be,
the Life, Power, and Virtue, which make such things effectual, may be wanting.
Such, I say, were necessitated to cease from all outward, and to be silent
before the Lord; and being directed to that inward Principle of Life and Light
in themselves, as the most excellent Teacher, Isai. 3^.20.
which can never be removed into a Corner, came thereby to be learned to wait
upon God in the measure of Life and Grace received from him, and to cease from
their own forward Words and Actings, in the natural Willing and Comprehension,
and feel after this inward Seed of Life; that, as it moves, they may move with
it, and be acted by its Power, and influenced, whether to Pray, Preach or Sing.
And so from this Principle of Man's being Silent, and not acting in the things
of God, of himself, until thus acted by God's Light and Grace in the Heart, did
naturally spring that manner of sitting Silent together, and waiting together
upon the Lord. For, many thus principled, meeting together in the pure Fear of
the Lord, did not apply themselves presently to Speak, Pray or Sing. etc. being
afraid to be found acting forwardly in their own Wills, but each made it their
work to retire inwardly to the Measure of Grace in themselves, not being only
Silent as to Words, but even abstaining from all their own Thoughts,
Imaginations and Desires; so watching in a holy Dependence upon the Lord, and
meeting together not only outwardly in one place, but thus inwardly in One
Spirit and in One Name of Jesus, What it is to meet in Jesus Name
which is his Power and Virtue; they come thereby to enjoy and feel the
arisings of this Life; which as it prevails in each particular, becomes as a
Flood of Refreshment, and overspreads the whole Meeting: For Man, and Man's
Part and Wisdom, being denied and chained down in every Individual, and God
exalted, and his Grace in Dominion in the Heart; thus his Name comes to be One
in all, and his Glory breaks forth, and covers all; and there is such a holy
Awe and Reverence upon every Soul, that if the natural part should arise in
any, or the wise part, or what is not one with the Life, it would presently be
chained down, and judged out. And when any are through the breaking forth of
this Power, constrained to utter a Sentence of Exhortation or Praise or to
Breathe to the Lord in Prayer, then all are sensible of it, Prove. 27. verse 19.
for the same Life in them answers to it, as in Water, Face answers to Face.
This is that divine and spiritual Worship, which the World neither knows nor
understands, which the Vulture's Eye sees not into. Advantages of Silent
Meetings.
Yet many and great are the Advantages which my Soul, with many others, has
tasted of hereby, and which would be found of all such as would seriously apply
themselves hereunto: For when People are gathered thus together, not merely to
hear Men, nor depend upon them; but all are inwardly taught to stay their Minds
upon the Lord, Isai. 10.20. and 26.3.
and wait for his Appearance in their Hearts; thereby the forward working of
the Spirit of Man is stayed and hindered from mixing it self with the Worship of
God; and the Form of this Worship is so naked and void of all outward and
worldly Splendour, that all occasion for Man's Wisdom to be excercised in that
Superstition and Idolatry, has no lodging here; and so there being also an
inward quietness and retiredness of Mind, the Witness of God arises in the
Heart, and the Light of Christ shines, whereby the Soul comes to see its own
Condition. And there being many joined together in the same work, there is an
Inward Travel and Wrestling; and also, as the Measure of Grace is abode in, an
overcoming of the Power and Spirit of Darkness; and thus we are often greatly
strengthened and renewed in the Spirits of our Minds, without a word; and we
enjoy and possess the Holy Fellowship and Communion of the Body and Blood of
Christ, Ephesians. 4.23.
by which our inward Man is nourished and fed: Which makes us not to dote upon
outward Water and Bread and Wine, in our spiritual Things. Now as many thus
gathered together, grow up in the Strength, Power and Virtue of Truth; and as
Truth comes thus to have Victory and Dominion in their Souls, Speaking to
Edification
then they receive an Utterence, and speak steadily to the Edification of their
Brethren, and the pure Life has a free passage through them; and what is thus
spoken, edifieth the Body indeed. Such is the evident certanity of that divine
Strength, that is communicatcated by thus meeting together and waiting in
Silence upon God, that sometimes when one has come in, that has been
unwatchful, and wandering in his Mind, or suddenly out of the hurry of outward
business, and so not inwardly gathered with the rest; so soon as he retires
himself inwardly, this Power being in a good measure raised in the whole
Meeting, will suddenly lay hold upon his Spirit, and wonderfully help to raise
up the Good in him, and beget him into the sense of the same Power, to the
melting and warming of his Heart: Even as the warmth would take hold upon a
Man, that is cold, coming into a Stove; or as a Flame will lay hold upon some
little combustible matter being near unto it. Yea, if it fall out, that several
met together be straying in their Minds, though outwardly silent, and so
wandering from the measure of Grace in themselves (which, through the working
of the Enemy, and negligence of some, may fall out) if either one come in, or
may be in, who is watchful, and in whom the Life is raised in a great measure;
as that one keeps his place, he will feel a secret Travel for the rest, in a
Sympathy with the Seed, which is oppressed in the other, and keep from arising
by their Thoughts and Wanderings. A secret Travel one for another in Silent
Meetings.
And as such a faithful one waits in the Light and keeps in this Divine Work,
God oftentimes answers the secret Travel and Breathings of his own Seed,
through such a one; so that the rest will find themselves secretly smitten,
without words: and that one will be as a Midwife, through the secret travel of
his Soul, to bring forth the Life in them; just as a little Water thrown into a
Pump, brings up the rest; whereby Life will come to be raised in all, and the
vain Imaginations brought down: And such a one is felt by the rest, to minister
Life unto them without words. Yea sometimes, when there is not a word in the
Meeting, but all are silently waiting; if one come in, that is rude and wicked,
and in whom the Power of Darkness prevails much, perhaps with an intention to
mock, The Mocker struck with Terror, when no Word is spoken.
or do mischief; if the whole Meeting be gathered into the Life, and it be
raised in a good measure, it will strike Terror into such an one, and he will
feel himself unable to resist; but by the secret strength and virtue thereof,
the power of Darkness in him will be chained down: And if the Day of his
Visitation be not expired, it will reach to the measure of Grace in him, and
raise it up to the Redeeming of his Soul. And this we often bear witness of; so
as we had hereby frequent occasion, in this respect since God has gathered us
to be a People, to renew this old saying of many, Is Saul also among the
Prophets? 1 Samuel 1^.12
For not a few have come to be Convinced of the Truth after this manner: Of
which I my self, in a part, am a true Witness; who not by strength of
Arguments, or by a particular Disquisition of each Doctrine, and Convincement
of my Understanding thereby, came to receive and bear witness of the Truth; but
by being secretly Reached by this Life. For when I came into the silent
Assemblies of God's People, I felt a secret Power among them, which touched my
Heart; and as I gave way unto it, I found the Evil weakening in me, The true
Convincement.
and the Good raised up; and so I became thus knit and united unto them,
hungring more and more after the Increase of this Power and Life, whereby I
might feel my self perfectly Redeemed. And indeed, this is the surest way to
become a Christian; to whom afterward the Knowledge and Understanding of
Principles will not be wanting; but will grow up so much as is needful, as the
natural Fruit of this good Root: And such a Knowledge will not be barren nor
unfruitful. After this manner, we desire therefore all that come among us to be
proselyted; knowing that though Thousands should be Convinced in their
Understandings of all the Truths we maintain; yet if they were not sensible of
this inward Life, and their Souls not changed from Unrighteousness to
Righteousness, they could add nothing to us. For this is that Cement, 1 Cor.
6.17
whereby we are joined as to the Lord, so to one another; and without this none
can Worship with us. The Life of Righteousness does join us to the Lord.
Yea, if such should come among us, and from that Understanding and
Convincement they have of the Truth, speak ever so true things, and utter them
forth with ever so much Excellency of Speech, if this Life were wanting, it
would not edify us at all; but be as sounding Brass, or a tinkling Cymbal, 1
Cor. 13.1.

Our Work and Worship in our Meetings.
. VIII. Our Work then and Worship is, when we meet together, for every one to
watch and wait upon God in themselves, and to be gathered from all Visibles
thereinto. And as every one is thus stated, they come to find the Good arise
over the Evil, and the Pure over the Impure, in which God reveals himself, and
draws near to every Individual; and so he in the midst in the General.
Whereby each not only partakes of the particular Refreshment and Strength which
comes from the Good in himself, but is a sharer of the whole Body, as being a
living Member of the Body, having a Joint Fellowship and Communion with all.
And as this Worship is steadfastly preached, and kept to, it becomes easy; though
it be very hard at first to the Natural Man, whose roving Imaginations, and
running Worldly Desires are not so easily brought to silence. And therefore the
Lord oftentimes, when any turn toward him, and have true desires thus to wait
upon him, and find great difficulty through the unstayedness of their Minds,
does in condescension and compassion cause his Power to break forth in a more
strong and powerful manner. And when the Mind sinks down, and waits for the
Appearance of Life, and that the Power of Darkness in the Soul wrestles and
works against it, then the good Seed, as it arises, will be found to work as
Physic in the Soul; especially if such a weak one be in the Assembly of diverse
others, in whom the Life is arisen in greater dominion: And through the
contrary workings of the Power of Darkness, there will be found an inward
striving in the Soul, Esau and Jacob strove in Rebeccah's Womb.
as really in the Mystery, as ever Esau and Jacob strove in Rebe^kah's Womb.
And from this Inward Travel, while the Darkness seeks to obscure the Light, and
the Light breaks through the Darkness, (which always it will do, if the Soul
give not its strength to the Darkness) there will be such a painful Travel
found in the Soul, that will even work upon the outward Man; so that
oftentimes, through the working thereof, the Body will be greatly shaken; and
many Groans, and Sighs, and Tears, even as the pangs of a Woman in Travel, will
lay hold upon it; yea, and this not only as to one, but when the Enemy (who,
when the Children of God assemble together, is not wanting to be present, to
see if he can let their Comfort) has prevailed in any measure in a whole
Meeting, and strongly works against it, by spreading and propagating his dark
Power, and by drawing out the Minds of such as are met, from the Life in them;
as they come to be sensible of this Power of his, that Works against them, and
to wrestle with it by the Armor of Light, sometimes the Power of God will
break forth into a whole Meeting; and there will be such an inward Travel, The
Travel crowned with a victorious Song.
while each is seeking to overcome the Evil in themselves, that by the strong
contrary workings of these opposite Powers (like the going of two contrary
Tides) every Individual will be strongly exercised, as in a Day of Battle; and
thereby Trembling and a Motion of Body will be upon most, if not upon all:
Which, as the Power of Truth prevails, will from Pangs and Groans, end with a
sweet sound of Thanksgiving and Praise. And from this, The Name of Quakers,
whence it sprung.
the Name of Quakers, i. e. Tremblers, was first Reproachfully cast upon us;
which, though it be none of our choosing, yet in this respect we are not ashamed
of it; but have rather reason to rejoice therefore, even that we are sensible
of this Power, that has oftentimes laid hold upon our Adversaries, and made
them yield unto us, and join with us, and confess to the Truth, before they had
any distinct or discursive Knowledge of our Doctrine; so that sometimes many at
one Meeting have been thus Convinced: And this Power would sometimes also reach
to, and wonderfully work even in little Children, to the Admiration and
Astonishment of many.

Yet Silence is no Law; but Words may follow.
. IX. Many are the Blessed Experiences, which I could relate of this Silence,
and manner of Worship; yet do I not so much commend and speak of Silence, as if
we had a Law in it to shut out Praying or Preaching, or tied our selves
thereunto; not at all: For as our Worship consists not in the Words, so
neither in Silence, as Silence; but in an holy dependence of the Mind upon God:
From which Dependence, Silence necessarily follows in the first place, until
Words can be brought forth, which are from God's Spirit. And God is not wanting
to move in his Children, to bring forth Words of Exhortation or Prayer, when it
is needful; so that of the many Gatherings and Meetings of such as are
convinced of the Truth, there is scarce any, in whom God raises not up some or
other to minister to his Brethren; that there are few Mettings that are
altogether silent. For when many are met together in this one Life and Name, it
does most naturally and frequently excite them to pray to, and praise God, and
stir up one another by Mutual Exhortation and instructions; yet we judge it
needful, there be in the first place some time of Silence; during which, every
one may be gathered inward to the Word and Gift of Grace, from which he that
ministers, may receive strength to bring forth what be ministers; and that
they that hear may have a sense to discern betwixt the precious and the vile,
and not to hurry into the Exercise of these things, so soon as the Bell rings,
as other Christians do. Yea, and we doubt not, but assuredly know, that the
Meeting may be good and refreshful, though from the sitting down, to the rising
up thereof, there has not been a word as outwardly spoken; No absolute
necessity for Words, though from the Life, at times.
and yet Life may have been known to abound in each particular, and an inward
growing up therein and thereby; yea, so as words might have been spoken
acceptably, and from the Life: Yet there being no absolute necessity laid upon
any so to do, all might have chosen rather quietly and silently to possess and
enjoy the Lord in themselves. Which is very sweet and comfortable to the Soul,
that has thus learned to be gathered out of all its own Thoughts and Workings,
to feel the Lord to bring forth both the Will and the Deed; which many can
declare by a blessed Experience. Though indeed it cannot but be hard for the
natural Man to receive or believe this Doctrine: And therefore it must be
rather by a sensible Experience, and by coming to make Proof of it, than by
Arguments, that such can be convinced of this thing; seeing it is not enough to
believe it, if they come not also to enjoy and possess it. Yet in Condesension
to, and for the sake of such as may be the more willing to apply themselves to
the Practice and Experience hereof, that they found their Understandings
convinced of it, and that it is founded upon the Scripture and Reason; I find a
freedom of Mind to add some few Considerationss of this kind, for the
Confirmation hereof, besides what it is before mentioned of our Experience.

. X. To Wait and Watch, Commanded in the Scripture.
That to wait upon God and to watch before him, is a Duty incumbent upon all, I
suppose none will deny; and that this also is a part of Worship, will not be
called in question: Since there is scarce any other so frequently commanded i^
the Holy Scriptures, as may appear from Psalm 27.14. and 37.7.34. Prove. 20.22.
Isai. 30.18. Hosea 12.6. Zach. 3.8. Mat. 24.42. and 25.13. and 26.41. Mark
13.33. and 35.37. Luke 21.36. Acts 1.4. and 20.31. 1 Cor. 16.13. Col. 4.2. 1 Thessalonians. 5.6. 2 Timothy 4.5. 1 Pet. 4.7. Also this Duty is often recommended with
very great and precious Promises, as Psalm 25.3. and 37.9. and 69.6. Isai.
42.23. Lam. 3.25, 26. They that wait upon the Lord, shall renew their strength,
etc. Isai. 40.31. Now, how is this waiting upon God, or watching before him,
but by this Silence, of which we have spoken? Which, as it is in it self a
great and principal Duty, so it necessarily in order both of Nature and Time
precedeth all other. But that it may be the better and more perfectly
understood, as it is not only an outward Silence of the Body, but an inward
Silence of the Mind, from all its own Imaginations and self-cogitations; let it
be considered, according to Truth, and to the Principles and Doctrines
heretofore affirmed and proved, that Man is to be considered in a twofold
respect, to wit, in his natural, unregenerate and fallen State; and in his
spiritual and renewed Condition; from whence arises that distinction of the
Natural and Spiritual Man, so much used by the Apostle, and heretofore spoken
of. Also these two Births of the Mind, proceed from the two Seeds in Man
respectively; to wit, the good Seed and the evil: And from the evil Seed does
not only proceed all manner of gross and abominable Wickedness and profanity,
Whence Wickednesses arise that are spiritual.
but also Hypocrisy, and those Wickednesses, which the Scripture calls
spiritual; because it is the Serpent working in and by the Natural Man in
things that are spiritual; which having a show and appearance of Good, are so
much the more hurtful and dangerous, as it is Satan transformed and
transforming himself into an Angel of Light: And therefore does the Scripture
so pressingly and frequently (as we have heretofore had occasion to observe)
shut out and exclude the Natural Man from meddling with the things of God,
denying his endeavors therein, though acted and performed by the most eminent of
his Parts, as of Wisdom and Utterance.

Also this spiritual Wickedness is of two sorts, though both one in kind, as
proceeding from one Root, yet differing in their Degrees, and in the Subjects
also sometimes. The one is, when as the Natural Man, meddling with, and working
in the things of Religion, does, From whence all Heresies did s^ring?
from his own Conceptions and Divinations, affirm or purpose wrong and
erroneous Notions and Opinions of God, and things Spiritual, and invent
Superstitions, Ceremonies, Observations and Rites in Worship; from whence have
sprung all the Heresies and Superstitions that are among Christians. The other
is, when as the Natural Man, from a mere Conviction of his Understanding, does
in the forwardness of his own will, and by his own natural strength, without
the influence and leading of God's Spirit, go about either in his Understanding
to imagine, conceive, or think of the things of God, or actually to perform
them by Preaching or Praying. The first is a missing both in Matter and Form;
the second is a retaining of the Form, without the Life and Substance of
Christianity; True Christianity, wherein it Consists not
because Christian Religion consists not in a mere Belief of true Doctrines,
or a mere Performance of Acts good in themselves; or else the bare Letter of
the Scripture, though spoken by a Drunkard, or a Devil, might be said to be
Spirit and Life, which I judge none will be so absurd as to affirm: And also it
would follow, that where the Form of Godliness is, there the Power is also;
which is contrary to the express words of the Apostle. For the Form of
Godliness cannot be said to be, where either the Notions and Opinions believed
are erroneous and ungodly, or the Acts performed evil and wicked; for then it
would be the Form of Ungodliness, and not of Godliness: But of this further
hereafter, when we shall speak particularly of Preaching and Praying. Now, though
this last be not so bad as he former, yet it has made way for it: For Men
having first departed from the Life and Substance of true Religion and Worship
to wit, from the inward Power and Virtue of the Spirit, so as therein to Act,
and thereby to have all their Actions enlivened, have only retained the Form
and Show, to wit, the true Words and Appearance: And so acting in their own
natural and unrenewed Wills in this Form, the Form could not but quickly decay,
and be vitiated. For the working and active spirit of Man could not contain it
self within the Simplicity and plainess of Truth; but giving way to his own
numerous Inventions and Imaginations, began to vary in the Form, and adapt to
it his own Inventions; until, by degrees, the Form of Godliness, for the most
part, came to be lost, as well as the Power. For this kind of Idolatry,
Idolatry does hug its own Conceptions.
whereby Man loves, idolizeth, and huggeth his own Conceptions, Inventions,
and Product of his own Brain, is so incident unto him, and seated in his fallen
Nature; that so long as his natural spirit is the first Author and Actor of
him, and is that, by which he only is guided and moved in his Worship toward
God, so as not first to wait for another Guide to direct him; he can never
perform the pure Spiritual Worship, nor bring forth any thing, but the fruit of
the first, fallen, natural and corrupt Root. Wherefore the time appointed of
God being come, wherein by Jesus Christ he has been pleased to Restore the
true Spiritual Worship; and the outward Form of Worship, No Form of Worship,
but the Spirit, is prescribed by Christ.
which was appointed by God to the Jews, and whereof the manner and time of its
performance was particularly determined by God himself, being come to an end,
we find that Jesus Christ, the Author of the Christian Religion, prescribes no
set Form of Worship to his Children, under the more pure Administration of the
New Covenant; If any Object here, That the Lord's Prayer is a prescribed Form
of Prayer, and therefore of Worship, given by Christ to his Children.

I answer; First, This cannot be objected by any sort of Christians, that I
know, because there are none who use not other Prayers, or that limit their
Worship to this. Secondly, This was commanded to the Disciples, while yet weak,
before they had received the Dispensation of the Gospel; not that they should
only use it in Praying, but that he might show them by one Example how that
their Prayers ought to be short, and not like the long Prayers of the
Pharis^es. And that this was the Use of it, appears by all the Prayers, which
diverse Saints afterward made use of, whereof the Scripture makes mention: For
none made use of this, neither repeated it; but used other Words, according as
the thing required, and as the Spirit gave Utterance. Thirdly, That this ought
to be so understood, appears from Romans 8.26. of which afterward mention shall
be made at greater Length, where the Apostle says, We know not what we should
pray for as we ought, but the Spirit it self makes Intercession for us, etc.
But if this Prayer had been such a prescribed Form of Prayer to the Church,
that had not been true; neither had they been ignorant what to pray, nor should
they have needed the Help of the Spirit to teach them.


save that he only tells them, That the Worship now to be performed is
Spiritual, and in the Spirit. And it is especially to be observed, that in the
whole New Testament there is no order nor Command given in this thing, but to
follow the Revelation of the Spirit, save only that general, of Meeting
together; a thing dearly owned, and diligently practiced by us, as shall
hereafter more appear. True it is, mention is made of the Duties of Praying,
Preaching and Singing; Pray, Preach and Sing in Spirit.
but what Order or Method should be kept in so doing, or that presently they
should be set about so soon as the Saints are gathered, there is not one word
to be found: Yea, these Duties (as shall afterward be made appear) are always
annexed to the Assistance, Leadings and Motions of God's Spirit. Since then Man
in his Natural State, is thus excluded from acting or moving in things
Spiritual, how or what way shall he exercise this first and previous Duty of
Waiting upon God, but by silence, To Wait on God, by what it is performed.
and by bringing that Natural part to silence? Which is no other ways, but by
abstaining from his own Thoughts and Imaginations, and from all the
Self-workings and Motions of his own Mind, as well in things materially good,
as evil; that he being silent, God may speak in him and the good Seed may
arise. This, though hard to the Natural Man, is so answerable to Reason, and even
Natural Experience in other things, that it cannot be denied. He that comes to
learn of a Master, if he expect to hear his Master, and be instructed by him, A
Simile of a Master and his Scholar.
must not continually be speaking of the matter to be taught, and never be
quiet; otherwise how shall his Master have time to instruct him? Yea, though the
Scholar were never so earnest to learn the Science; yet would the Master have
reason to reprove him as untoward and indocile; if he would always be meddling
of himself, and still speaking, and not wait in silence patiently to hear his
Master instructing and teaching him; who ought not to open his Mouth, until by
his Master he were commanded and allowed so to do. So also, if one were about
to attend a great Prince, Of a Prince and his Servant.
he would be thought an impertinent and imprudent Servant, who, while he ought
patiently and readily to wait, that he might answer the King when he speaks,
and have his Eye upon him, to observe the least Motions and Inclinations of his
Will, and to do accordingly, would be still deafening him with Discourse, though
it were in Praises of him; and running to and fro, without any particular and
immediate Order to do things, that perhaps might be good in themselves, or
might have been commanded at other times to others: Would the Kings of the
Earth accept of such Servants or Service? To Wait in Silence.
Since then we are commanded to Wait upon God diligently; and in so doing it is
promised, that our Strength shall be renewed; this Waiting cannot be performed
but by a silence, or cessation of the Natural part on our side: Since God
manifests himself not to the outward Man, or Senses, so much as to the inward,
to wit, to the Soul and Spirit. The thinking busy Soul excludes the Voice of
God.
If the Soul be still thinking and working in her own Will, and busily
exercised in her own Imaginations, though the matters, as in themselves, may be
good concerning God; yet thereby she incapacitates her self from discerning the
still, small Voice of the Spirit, and so hurts her self greatly, in that she
neglects her chief Business of Waiting upon the Lord: Nothing less, than if I
should busy my self, crying out and speaking of a Business, while in the mean
time I neglect to hear One who is quietly whispering into my Ear, and informing
me in those things, which are most needful for me to hear and know concerning
that Business. And since it is the chief Work of a Christian to know the
natural Will in its own proper Motions crucified, that God may both move in the
Act and in the Will; the Lord chiefly regards this profound Subjection and
Self-denial. For some Men please themselves as much, Religious Speculations.
and gratify their own sensual Wills and Humors in high and curious
Speculations of Religion, affecting a Name and Reputation that way; or because
those things by Custom, or other ways, are become pleasant and habitual to
them, though not a whit more Regenerated, Sensual Recreations.
or inwardly Sanctified in their Spirits; as others gratify their Lust in
Actions of Sensuality: And therefore both are alike hurtful to Men, and sinful
in the sight of God; it being nothing but the mere fruit and effect of Man's
natural and unrenewed will and spirit. Yea, should one (as many no doubt do)
from a sense of Sin, and fear of Punishment, seek to terrify themselves from
Sin, Thoughts of Death and Hell, to keep out sin, are Fig Leaves.
by multiplying thoughts of Death, Hell and Judgment, and by presenting to
their Imaginations the Happiness and Joys of Heaven, and also by multiplying
Prayers and other Religious Performances; as these things could never deliver
him from one Iniquity, without the secret and inward Power of God's Spirit and
Grace, so would they signify no more, than the Fig Leaves, wherewith Adam
thought to cover his Nakedness. And seeing, it is only the Product of Man's own
natural Will, proceeding from a Self-love, and seeking to save himself, and not
arising purely from that Divine Seed of Righteousness, which is given of God to
all, for Grace and Salvation, it is rejected of God, and no ways acceptable
unto him; since the Natural Man, as Natural, while he stands in that State, is
with all his Arts, Parts and Actings, reprobated by him. This great duty then
of waiting upon God, Denial of ones self.
must needs be exercised in Man's denying Self, both inwardly and outwardly, in
a still and mere dependence upon God, in abstracting from all the Workings,
Imaginations and Speculations of his own Mind; that being emptied, as it were,
of himself, and so thoroughly crucified to the natural Products thereof, he may
be fit to receive the Lord, who will have no Co-partner nor Co-rival of his
Glory and Power. And Man being thus stated, the little Seed of Righteousness,
which God has planted in his Soul, and Christ has purchased for him, even the
measure of Grace and Life (which is burdened and crucified by Man's natural
Thoughts and Imaginations) receives a place to arise, and becomes a holy
Birth, The Holy Birth.
and Geniture in Man; and is that Divine Air, in and by which Man's Soul and
Spirit comes to be leavened: And by waiting therein, he comes to be accepted in
the sight of God, to stand in his Presence, hear his Voice, and observe the
Motions of his holy Spirit. And so Man's place is to wait in this; and as
hereby there are any objects presented to his Mind concerning God, or things
relating to Religion, his Soul may be exercised in them without hurt, and to
the great profi^ both of himself and others; because those things have their
rise not from his own Will, but from God's Spirit. And therefore, as in the
arisings and movings of this, his Mind is still to be exercised in Thinking and
Meditating; so also in the more obvious acts of Preaching and Praying: N.
Quakers are against a meditating Mind.
And so it may hence appear, we are not against Meditation, as some have sought
falsely to infer from our Doctrine; but we are against the Thoughts and
Imaginations of the natural Man, in his own Will, From Nature's Thoughts all
Errors rise, we find.
from which all Errors and Heresies concerning the Christian Religion, in the
whole World, have proceeded. But if it please God at any time, when one or more
are waiting upon him, not to present such objects, as give them occasion to
exercise their Minds in Thoughts and Imaginations, but purely to keep them in
this holy Dependence; and as they persist therein, to cause this secret
Refreshment, and the pure Incomes of his holy Life, to flow in upon them; then
they have good reason to be content, because by this (as we know by good and
blessed Experience) the Soul is more strengthened, renewed, and confirmed in
the Love of God, and armed against the Power of Sin, than any way else: The
Soul renewed, by what? The Holy Life of God.
This being a fore-taste of that real and sensible Enjoyment of God, which the
Saints in Heaven daily possess; which God frequently affords to his Children
here, for their Comfort and Encouragement, especially when they are assembled
together to wait upon him.

. XI. For there are two contrary Powers, or Spirits; Whatever Man does act,
without the Power of God, is not accepted.
to wit, the Power and Spirit of this World, in which the Prince of Darkness
bears rule, and over as many as are acted by it and work from it; and the Power
or Spirit of God in which God works, and bears rule, and over as many as
act in and from it. So whatever be the things that a Man thinks of, or acts
in, however Spiritual or Religious, as to the Notion or Form of them, so long
as he acts and moves in the natural and corrupt Spirit and Will; and not
from, in and by the Power of God, he sins in all, and is not accepted of
God. Prove. 21.4*
For hence both the plowing and praying of the Wicked is sin: As also whatever
a Man acts in and from the Spirit and Power of God, having his Understanding
and Will influenced and moved by it, whether it be Actions Religious, Civil, or
even Natural, he is accepted in so doing in the sight of God, and is blessed in
them. From what is said, Jam. 1.25.
it does appear, how frivolous and Impertinent their Objection is, that say,
they wait upon God in Praying and Preaching; since Waiting does of it self
imply a passive Dependence, rather than an Acting. And since it is, To pray and
preach without the Spirit, is Offense to God.
and shall yet be more shown, that Preaching and Praying without the Spirit, is
an offending of God, not a waiting upon him; and that Praying and Preaching by
the Spirit, pre-supposes necessarily a silent waiting, for to feel the motions
and influence of the Spirit to lead thereunto; and lastly, that in several of
these places, where Praying is commanded, as Mat. 26.41. Mark. 13.33. Luke.
21.36. 1 Pet. 4.7. Watching is specially prefixed, as a previous Preparation
thereunto; so that we do well and certainly conclude, that since Waiting and
Watching are so particularly commanded and recommended, and cannot be truly
performed, but in this inward Silence of the Mind from Men's own Thoughts and
Imaginations; this Silence is and must necessarily be a special and principal
part of God's Worship.

II. This silent Waiting the Devil cannot Counterfeit
. XII. But Secondly; The Excellency of this silent waiting upon God does
appear, in that it is impossible for the Enemy, viz. the Devil, to counterfeit
it, so as for any Soul to be deceived or deluded by him in the Exercise
thereof. Now in all other matters, he may mix himself in with the natural Mind
of Man, and so, by transforming himself, he may deceive the Soul, by busying it
about things perhaps innocent in themselves, while yet he keeps them from
beholding the pure Light of Christ, and so from knowing distinctly his Duty,
and doing of it. For that Envious Spirit of Man's Eternal Happiness knows
well how to accommodate himself, and fit his Snares, for all the several
Dispositions and Inclinations of Men: If he find one not fit to be engaged with
gross Sins, or Worldly Lust, but rather averse from them, and Religiously
inclined, he can fit himself to beguile such an one, by suffering his Thoughts
and Imaginations to run upon Spiritual matters, and so hurry him to work, act,
and meditate in his own Will. For he well knows, that so long as Self bears
rule, and the Spirit of God is not the principal and chief Actor, Man is not
put out of his reach: Altar Prayers, Pulpits Study, cannot shut the Devil out.
So therefore he can accompany the Priest to the Altar, the Preacher to the
Pulpit, the Zealot to his Prayers; yea, the Doctor and Professor of Divinity to
his Study; and there he can cheerfully suffer him to labor and work among his
Books, yea, and help him to find out and invent subtle Distinctions and
Quiddities, by which both his Mind, and others through him, may be kept from
heeding God's Light in the Conscience, and waiting upon him. There is not any
Exercise whatsoever, wherein he cannot enter, and have a chief place, so as the
Soul many times cannot discern it, except in this alone: For he can only work
in and by the Natural Man, and his Faculties, by secretly acting upon his
Imagnations and Desires, etc. and therefore, when he (to wit, the Natural Man)
is silent, there he must also stand. And therefore when the Soul comes to this
Silence, and as it were is brought to nothingness as to her own workings, then
the Devil is shut out; for the pure Presence of God, and shining of his Light
he cannot abide, because so long as a Man is thinking and meditating as of
himself, he cannot be sure, but the Devil is influencing him therein; but when
he comes wholly to be silent, as the pure Light of God shines in upon him, then
he is sure that the Devil is shut out; for beyond the Imaginations he cannot
go, which we often find by sensible Experience. For he that of Old is said to
have come to the gathering together of the Children of God, is not wanting to
come to our Assemblies. And indeed he can well enter and work in a Meeting,
that is silent only as to words, either by keeping the Minds in various Thoughts
and Imaginations, or by stupifying them, so as to overwhelm them with a spirit
of heaviness and slothfulness: But when we retire out of all, and are turned
in, both by being diligent and watchful upon the one hand, and also silent and
retired out of all our Thoughts upon the other; as we abide in this sure place,
we feel our selves out of his reach. Yea, oftentimes the Power and Glory of God
will break forth and appear, just as the bright Sun through many Clouds and
Mists, to the dispelling of that Power of Darkness; which will also be sensibly
felt, seeking to cloud and darken the Mind, and wholly to keep it from purely
waiting upon God.

III. The Worship of the Quakers not stopped or interrupted by Men or Devils.
. XIII. Thirdly; The Excellency of this Worship does appear, in that it can
neither be stopped, nor interrupted by the Malice of Men or Devils, as all
others can. Now Interruptions and Stoppings of Worship, may be understood in a
twofold respect, either as we are hindered from Meeting, as being outwardly by
Violence separated one from another; or when permitted to Meet together, as we
are interrupted by the Tumult, Noise and Confusion, which such as are Malicious
may use to molest or distract us. Now in both these respects, this Worship does
greatly over-pass all others; For how far so ever People be separate or
hindered from coming together, yet as every one is inwardly gathered to the
measure of Life in himself, there is a secret Unity and Fellowship enjoyed,
which the Devil and all his Instruments can never break or hinder. But
secondly; It does as well appear as to those Molestations which occur, when we
are met together, what advantage this True and spiritual Worship gives us,
beyond all others; seeing in despite of a thousand Interruptions and Abuses,
one of which were sufficient to have stopped all other sorts of Christians, we
have been able, through the Nature of this Worship, to keep it uninterrupted as
to God; and also, at the same time, to show forth an Example of our Christian
Patience toward all, even oftentimes to the reaching and convincing of our
Opposers. For there is no sort of Worship used by others, which can subsist
(though they be permitted to meet) unless they be either Authorized and Protected
by the Magistrate, or defend themselves with the Arm of Flesh: But we at the
same time exercise Worship toward God, and also patiently bear the Reproaches
and Ignominies, which Christ prophesied should be so incident and frequent to
Christians. For now can the Papists say their Mass, if there be any there to
disturb and interrupt them? Do but take away the Mass Book the Cha^ice, The
Worship of the Papists soon interrupted.
the Host, or the Priest's Garments; yea, do but spill the Water, or the Wine,
or blow out the Candles (a thing quickly done) and the whole business is
marred, and no Sacrifice can be offered. The Protestants the (...) and
Anabaptists.
Take from the Lutherans, or Episcopa^ians, their Liturgy or Common
Prayer Book, and no Service can be said. Remove from the Calvinists, Arminians,
Socinians, Independents, or Anabaptists, the Pulpit, the Bible, and the Hour
Glass; or make but such a Noise, as the Voice of the Preacher cannot be heard;
or disturb him but so, before he come; or strip him of his Bible or his Books,
and he must be dumb: For they all think it an Heresy, to wait to speak as the
Spirit of God gives utterance; and thus easily their whole Worship may be
marred. But when People meet together, and their Worship consists not in such
outward Acts, and they depend not upon any ones speaking; but merely sit down
to wait upon God, and to be gathered out of all Visibles, and to feel the Lord
in Spirit; none of these things can hinder them, of which we may say of a
truth, We are sensible Witnesses. For when the Magistrates, stirred up by the
Malice and Envy of our Opposers, have used all means possible (and yet in vain)
to deter us from meeting together, and that openly and publicly in our own
hired Houses, for that purpose; both Death, Banishments, Imprisonments,
Finings, Beatings, The Sufferings of the Quakers for their Religious Meetings.
Whippings, and other such Devilish Inventions, have proved ineffectual to
terrify us from our holy Assemblies. And we having, I say, thus oftentimes
purchased our Liberty to meet, by deep Sufferings; our Opposers have then taken
another way, by turning in upon us the worst and wickedest People, yea, the
very Off-scourings of Men, who by all manner of inhumane, beastly and brutish
Behavior, have sought to provoke us, weary us, and molest us; but in vain. It
would be almost incredible to declare, and indeed a shame, that among Men
pretending to be Christians, it should be mentioned, what things of this kind
Men's Eyes have seen, and I my self, with others, have shared of, in Suffering!
There they have often beaten us, and cast water and dirt upon us; there they
have danced, leaped, sung, and spoken all manner of profane and ungodly words;
offered Violence, and shameful Behavior, to grave Women and Virgins; jeered,
mocked and scoffed, asking us, If the Spirit was not yet come? And much more,
which were tedious here to relate: And all this while we have been seriously
and silently sitting together, and waiting upon the Lord. So that by these
things our inward and spiritual Fellowship with God, and one with another, in
the pure Life of Righteousness, has not been hindered. But on the contrary,
the Lord knowing our Sufferings and Reproaches for his Testimony's sake, has
caused his Power and Glory more to abound among us, and has mightily refreshed
us by the sense of his Love, which has filled our Souls; and so much the
rather, as we found our selves, gathered into the Name of the Lord, Proverbs
18.10.
which is the strong Tower of the Righteous; whereby we felt our selves
sheltered from receiving any inward hurt through their Malice: And also that he
had delivered us from that vain Name and Profession of Christianity, under
which our Opposers were not ashamed to bring forth those bitter cursed Fruits.
Yea, sometimes in the midst of this Tumult and Opposition, God would Powerfully
move some or other of us by his Spirit, both to testify of that Joy, which
notwithstanding their Malice we enjoyed, and powerfully to declare, in the
Evidence and Demonstration of the Spirit, against their Folly and Wickedness;
so as the Power of Truth has brought them to some measure of Quietness and
Stilness, and stopped the impetuous Streams of their Fury and Madness: The Rod
of Moses did divide the Sea; through raging Waves the Spirit makes way.
That as even of old Moses by his Rod divided the Waves of the Red Sea, that
the Israelites might pass; so God has thus by his Spirit made a way for us in
the midst of this Raging Wickedness, peaceably to enjoy and possess him, and
accomplish our Worship to him: So that sometimes upon such Occasions several of
our Opposers and Interrupters have hereby been convinced of the Truth, and
gathered from being Persecutors, to be Sufferers with us. And let it not be
forgotten, but let it be inscribed, What Brutish Pranks did not commit that
young Fry of the Clergy?
and abide for a constant Remembrance of the thing, that in these Beastly and
Brutish Pranks, used to molest us in our Spiritual Meetings, none have been
more busy, than the Young Students of the Universities, who were learning
Philosophy and Divinity (so called) and many of them preparing themselves for
the Ministry. Should we commit to Writing all the Abominations committed in
this respect by the young Fry of the Clergy, it would make no small Volume; as
the Churches of Christ, gathered into his Pure Worship in Oxford and Cambridge
in England, and Edinburgh and Aberdeen in Scotland, where the Universities are,
can well bear witness.

. XIV. Moreover, in this we know, How the Old Covenant Worship does differ from
the New.
that we are partakers of the New Covenant's Dispensation, and Disciples of
Christ indeed, sharing with him in that Spiritual Worship, which is performed
in the Spirit and in Truth; because as he was, so are we in this World. For the
Old Covenant Worship had an outward Glory, Temple, and Ceremonies, and was full
of outward Splendour and Majesty, having an outward Tabernacle and Altar,
beautified with Gold, Silver, and Precious Stone; and their Sacrifices were
tied to an outward, particular Place, even the outward Mount Sion; and those
that prayed, behoved to pray with their Faces toward that outward Temple: And
therefore all this behoved to be protected by an outward Arm. Nor could the
Jews peaceably have enjoyed it, but when they were secured from the Violence of
their outward Enemies: And therefore when at any time their Enemies prevailed
over them, their Glory was darkened, and their Sacrifices stopped; and the Face
of their Worship marred: Hence they Complain, Lament and Bewail the destroying
of the Temple as a Loss irreparable. But Jesus Christ, The New Covenant Worship
is Inward. John 1^.36.
the Author and Instructor of the New Covenant-Worship, testifies, that God is
neither to be Worshipped in this, nor that place; but in the Spirit and in
Truth: And forasmuch as his Kingdom is not of this World, neither does his
Worship consist in it, or need either the Wisdom, Glory, Riches, or Splendour of
this World, to Beautify or Adorn it; nor yet the outward Power or Arm of Flesh
to maintain, uphold, or protect it; but it is and may be performed by those
that are Spiritually minded, not withstanding all Opposition, Violence, and
Malice of Men; because it being purely Spiritual, it is out of the reach of
Natural Men to interrupt or molest it. Even as Jesus Christ, the Author
thereof, did enjoy and possess his Spiritual Kingdom, while Oppressed,
Persecuted, and P^ejected of Men, and as in despite of the Malice and Rage of
the Devil, he spoiled Principalities and Powers, triumphing over them, and
through Death destroyed him, that had the Power of Death, that is, Col. 2.15.
the Devil; so also all his Followers both can and do Worship him, not only
without the Arm of Flesh to protect them, but even when Oppressed. For their
Worship being Spiritual, is by the Power of the Spirit defended and maintained:
Carnal Worships cannot stand without the Arm of Flesh.
but such Worships as are Carnal, and consist in Carnal and Outward Ceremonies
and Observations, need a Carnal and Outward Arm to protect and defend them,
else they cannot stand and subsist. And therefore it appears, that the several
Worships of our Opposers, both Papists and Protestants, are of this kind, and
not the true Spiritual and New Covenant-Worship of Christ; because, as has
been observed, they cannot stand without the Protection or Countenance of the
outward Magistrate, neither can be performed, if there be the least Opposition:
For they are not in the Patience of Jesus, to serve and worship him with
Sufferings, Ignominies, Calumnies and Reproaches. And from hence have sprung
all those Wars, Fightings, and Bloodshed among Christians, while each by the
Arm of Flesh endeavored to defend and protect their own Way and Worship: And
from this also spr^ng up that Monstrous Opinion of Persecution; of which we
shall speak more at length hereafter.

. XV. But Fourthly; The Nature of this Worship, IV. True Worship in Spirit
established by Christ.
which is performed by the Operation of the Spirit, the Natural Man being
silent, does appear from these words of Christ, John 4.23, 24. But the hour
comes, and now is, when the true Worshippers shall Worship the Father in
Spirit and in Truth: For the Father seeks such to worship him. God is a
Spirit, and they that worship him, must worship him in Spirit and in Truth.
This Testimony is the more especially to be observed, for that it is both the
first, chiefest, and most ample Testimony, which Christ gives us of his
Christian Worship, as different and contra distinguished from that under the
Law. For First, he shows, that the Season is now come, wherein the Worship
must be in Spirit and in Truth; for the Father seeks such to worship him: So
then it is no more a Worship consisting in outward Observations, to be
performed by Man at set Times or Opportunities, which he can do in his own
Will, and by his own Natural Strength; for else it would not differ in Matter,
but only in some Circumstances, from that under the Law. Next, The Reason
Christ gives for a Worship in Spirit.
as for a Reason of this Worship, we need not to give any other, and indeed
none can give a better, than that which Christ gives, which I think should be
sufficient to satisfy every Christian, to wit, GOD is a SPIRIT, and they that
worship him, must worship him in Spirit and in Truth. As this ought to be
received, because it is the words of Christ, so also it is founded upon so
clear a Demonstration of Reason, as sufficiently evidenceth its Verity. For
Christ excellently argues from the Analogy that ought to be betwixt the Object,
and the Worship directed thereunto:

Arg.
God is a Spirit; Therefore he must be worshipped in Spirit.


This is so certain, that it can suffer no Contradiction; yea, and this Analogy
is so necessary to be minded, that under the Law, when God instituted and
appointed that Ceremonial Worship to the Jews, because that Worship was
Outward, that there might be an Analogy; he saw it necessary to Condescend to
them as in a special manner, to dwell betwixt the Cherubims within the
Tabernacle, and afterward to make the Temple of Jerusalem in a sort his
habitation, The Glory of the Outward Temple.
and cause something of an outward Glory and Majesty to appear, by causing Fire
from Heaven to consume the Sacrifices, and filling the Temple with a cloud:
Through and by which Mediums, Visible to the outward Eye, he manifested himself
proportionably to that Outward Worship, which he had Commanded them to perform.
So now under the New Covenant, he seeing meet in his Heavenly Wisdom to lead
his Children in a path more Heavenly and Spiritual, and in a Way both more
easy and familiar; and also purposing to disappoint Carnal and Outward
Observations, that his may have an Eye more to an inward Glory and Kingdom,
than to an outward, he has given us for an Example hereof, the Appearance of
his Beloved Son, As Moses did from Outward, so Christ delivers his from Inward
Slavery.
the Lord Jesus Christ, who (instead that Moses delivered the Israelites out of
their outward bondage, and by outwardly destroying their Enemies) has
delivered and does deliver us by Suffering, and Dying by the Hands of his
Enemies; thereby Triumphing over the Devil, and his, and our inward Enemies,
and delivering us therefrom. He has also instituted an Inward and Spiritual
Worship: So that God now tieth not his People to the Temple of Jerusalem, nor
yet unto outward Ceremonies and Observations; but takes the Heart of every
Christian for a Temple to dwell in; and there immediately appears, and gives
him direction how to serve him in any outward acts. Since, as Christ argues,
God is a Spirit, he will now be worshipped in the Spirit, where he reveals
himself, and dwells with the contrite in heart. Now, since it is the Heart of
Man that now is become the Temple of God, in which he will be worshipped, and
no more in particular outward Temples, (since as blessed Stephen said, out of
the Prophet, to the Professing Jews of Old, The Most High dwells not in
Temples made with hands) as before the Glory of the Lord descended to fill the
outward Temple, it behoved to be purified and cleansed and all polluted stuff
removed out of it; yea, and the place for the Tabernacle was overlaid with
Gold, the most precious, clean, and clearest of Metals: So also before God be
worshipped in the inward Temple of the Heart, it must also be purified of its
own Filth, and all its own Thoughts and Imaginations, that so it may be fit to
receive the Spirit of God, and to be acted by it. And does not this directly
lead us to that inward Silence, of which we have spoken, and exactly pointed
out? And further, This Worship must be in Truth; intimating, that this
Spiritual Worship, thus acted, is only and properly a true Worship; as being
that which, for the Reasons above observed, cannot be counterfeited by the
Enemy, nor yet performed by the Hypocrite.

. XVI. And though this Worship be indeed very different from the diverse
established invented Worships among Christians, and therefore may seem strange
to many; yet has it been testified of, commended and practiced, by the most
Pious of all sorts, in all Ages, as by many evident Testimonies might be
proved. So that from the professing and practicing thereof, the Name of
Mysticks has arisen, as of a certain Sect, generally commended by all; A
certain Sect of Mysticks among the Papists, their inward Exercise See Sancta
Sophia, printed Anno Dom. 1657
whose Writings are full both of the Explanation and of the Commendation of
this sort of Worship; where they plentifully assert this inward Introversion
and Abstraction of the Mind, as they call it, from all Images and Thoughts, and
the Prayer of the Will: Yea, they look upon this, as the height of Christian
Perfection; so that some of them, though professed Papists, do not doubt to
affirm, That such as have attained this method of Worship, or are aiming at it,
The English Benidictines Testimony for the Spiritual Worship, against their
Masses and set Devotions.
(as in a Book called Sancta Sophia, put out by the English Benedictines,
Printed at Doway Anno. 1657. Tract. 1. Sect. 2. cap. 5.) need not, nor ought to
trouble or busy themselves with frequent and unnecessary Confessions, with
exercising Corporal Labors and Austerities, the using of V^cal Voluntary
Prayers, the hearing of a number of Masses, or set Devotions, or Exercises to
Saints, or Prayers for the Dead, or having solicitous and distracting Cares to
gain Indulgences, by going to such and such Churches, or adjoining ones self to
Confraternities, or intangling ones self with Vows and Promises; because such
kind of things hinder the S^ul from observing the Operations of the Divine
Spirit in it, and from having liberty to follow the Spirit, whither it would
draw her. And yet who knows not, but that in such kind of Observations the very
Substance of the Popish Religion consists? Yet nevertheless, it appears by
this, and many other passages, which out of their Mystic Writers might be
mentioned, how they look upon this Worship, as excelling all other; and that
such as arrived hereunto, had no absolute need of the others: Yea, (see the
Life of Balthazer Alvares, in the same Sancta Sophia, Tract. 3. Sect. 1. cap.
7.) such as tasted of this, quickly confessed, that the other Forms and
Ceremonies of Worship were useless as to them; neither did they perform them,
as things necessary, but merely for Order or Example sake. And therefore, though
some of them were so overclouded with the common Darkness of their Profession,
yet could they affirm, that this Spiritual Worship was still to be retained and
sought for, though there be a necessity of omitting their outward Ceremonies.
Hence Bernard, Bernard preferring the Spirit above Popish Orde^
as in many other places, so in his Epistle to one William, Abbot of the same
Order, says, Take heed to the Rule of God; the Kingdom of God is within you:
And afterward, saying, That their outward Orders and Rules should be observed,
he adds; But otherwise when it shall happen, that one of these two must be
omitted, in such a case, these are much rather to be omitted, than those
former: For by how much the Spirit is more excellent and noble than the Body,
by so much are Spiritual Exercises more profitable than Corporal. Is not that
then the best of Worships, which the best of Men in all Ages, and of all Sects,
have commended, and which is most suitable to the Doctrine of Christ? I say, Is
not that Worship to be followed and performed? And so much the rather, as God
has raised a People to testify for it, and preach it, to their great
Refreshment and Strengthening, in the very face of the World, Those Mysticks
did confine that Mystery to a Cloister.
and notwithstanding much opposition; who do not, as these Mysticks, make of it
a Mystery only to be attained by a few Men or Women in a Cloister; or, as their
mistake was, after wearying themselves with many outward Ceremonies and
Observations, as if it were the consequence of such a labor: But who in the
free Love of God (who respects not Persons, and was near to hear and reveal
himself, as well to Cornelius, a Centurion and a Roman, as to Simeon and Anna;
and who discovered his Glory to Mary, a poor Handmaid, and to the poor
Shepherds, rather than to the High Priests and devout Proselytes among the
Jews) in and according to his free Love, finding that God is revealing and
establishing this Worship, and making many poor Tradesmen, yea, young Boys and
Girls, Witnesses of it, do entreat and beseech all, to lay aside their own
Will-worships and voluntary acts, performed in their own Wills, and by their
own mere Natural Strength and Power, without retiring out of their vain
Imaginations and Thoughts, or feeling the pure Spirit of God to move and stir
in them; that they may come to practice this acceptable Worship, which is in
Spirit and in Truth. But against this Worship they Object.

It seems to be an unprofitable Exercise, for a Man to be doing or thinking
nothing; and that one might be much better employed, either in meditating upon
some good Subject, or otherwise praying to, or praising God.

Waiting to be. Moreover, those have but a carnal and gross Apprehension of
God, and of the things of his Kingdom, that imagine, that Men please him by
their own Workings and Actings: Whereas, as has been shown, the first step for
a Man to fear God, is to cease from his own Thoughts and Imaginations, Isai.
1.16, 17.
and suffer God's Spirit to work in him: For we must cease to do evil, ere we
learn to do well; and this meddling in things spiritual, by Man's own natural
Understanding, We must cease to do i^, ere we learn to do well.
is one of the greatest and most dangerous Evils that Man is incident to; being
that which occasioned our first Parents fall, to wit, a forwardness to desire
to know things, and a meddling with them, both without and contrary to the
Lord's Command.

If your Worship merely consist in inwardly retiring to the Lord, and feeling
of his Spirit arise in you, and then to do outward Acts as ye are led by it;
Set times and places for Meetings.
what need ye have public Meetings at set times and places, since every one
may enjoy this at home? Or should not every one stay at home, until they be
particularly moved to go to such a Place at such a Time; since to meet at set
Times and Places, seems to be an outward Observation and Ceremony, contrary to
what you at other times assert?

Public Meetings their Use, and its Reason asserted,
but only an outward Convenience, necessary for our seeing one another, so long
as we are clothed with this outward Tabernacle: And therefore out Meeting at
set Times and Places is not a part of our Worship, but a preparatory
Accommodation of out outward Man, in order to a public visible Worship, since
we set not about the visible Acts of Worship when we Meet together, until we be
led thereunto by the Spirit of God. Secondly; God has seen meet, so long as
his Children are in this World, to make use of the outward Senses, not only as
a means to convey Spiritual Life, as by speaking, praying, praising, etc. which
cannot be done to mutual Edification, but when we hear and see one another; but
also for to entertain an outward visible Testimony for his Name in the World:
He causes the inward Life (which is also many times not conveyed by the
outward Senses) the more to abound, when his Children assemble themselves
diligently together to wait upon him; that as Iron sharpeneth Iron, Prove. 27.17.
so the seeing of the Face one of another, when both are inwardly gathered unto
the Life, gives occasion for the Life secretly to rise, and pass from Vessel
to Vessel. And as many Candles lighted, and put in one place, do greatly
augment the Light, and make it more to shine forth; so when many are gathered
together into the same Life, there is more of the Glory of God, and his Power
appears, to the Refreshment of each Individal; for that he partakes not only of
the Light and Life raised in himself, but in all the rest* and therefore Christ
has particularly promised a Blessing to such, as Assemble together in his
Name, seeing he will be in the midst of them, Mat. 18.20. And the Author to the
Hebrews does precisely prohibit the neglect of this Duty, as being of very
dangerous and dreadful Consequence, in these words; Heb. 10.24. And let us
consider one another, to provoke unto love, and to good works; not forsaking
the assembling of our selves together, Assembling of our selves is not to be
neglected.
as the manner of some is; -- For if we sin wilfully, after that we have
received the knowledge of the Truth, there remains no more Sacrifice for
sins. And therefore the Lord has shown, that he has a particular respect to
such, as thus Assemble themselves together, because that thereby a public
Testimony for him is upheld in the Earth, and his Name is thereby Glorified;
and therefore such as are right in their Spirits, are naturally drawn to keep
the Meetings of God's People, and never want a Spiritual influence to lead them
thereunto: And if any do it in a mere customary way, they will no doubt suffer
Condemnation for it. Yet cannot the appointing of places and Times be accounted
a Ceremony and Observation, done in Man's Will, in the Worship of God, seeing
none can say that it is an Act of Worship, but only a mere presenting of our
Persons in order to it, as is abovesaid. Which that it was practiced by the
Primitive Church and Saints, all our Adversaries do acknowledge.

Lastly, some object, That this manner of Worship in Silence, is not to be
found in all the Srcipture.

Answer; We make not Silence to be the sole matter of our Worship; In Waiting
for the Spirit's Guidance, Silence is supposed.
since, as I have above said, there are many Meetings, which are seldom (if
ever) altogether silent; some or other are still moved either to Preach, Pray,
or Praise: And so in this, our Meetings cannot be but like (...) Meetings of
the Primitive Churches recorded in Scripture, since our Adversaries confess,
that they did Preach and Pray by the Spirit. And then what Absurdity is it to
suppose, that at some times the Spirit did not move them to these outward Acts,
and that then they were silent? Since we may well conclude, they did not speak,
until they were moved; and so no doubt had sometimes Silence, Acts 2.1. before
the Spirit came upon them, it is said, -- They were all with one accord in one
place: And then it is said, The Spirit suddenly came upon them; but no mention
is made of any one speaking at that time; and I would willingly know, what
Absurdity our Adversaries can infer, should we conclude, they were a while
silent?

But if it be urged, Inst.
That a whole Silent Meeting cannot be found in Scripture.

Silent Meetings are proved from Scripture and Reason.
that it is not Lawful; seeing it naturally follows from other Scripture
Precepts, as we have proved this does. For seeing the Scriputre commands to
meet together, and when met, the Scripture prohibits Prayers or Preachings, but
as the Spirit moves thereunto: If People meet together, and the Spirit move
not to such Acts, it will necessarily follow, that they must be silent. But
further, there might have been many such things among the Saints of Old, though
not recorded in Scripture; and yet we have enough in Scripture, signifying,
that such things were. For Job sat silent seven Days together with his Friends;
Here was a long Silent Meeting. See also Ezra 9.4. and Ezekel 14.1. and 20.1.
Thus having shown the Excellency of this Worship, proving it from Scripture and
Reason, and answered the Objections, which are commonly made against it; which,
though it may suffice to the Explanation and Proof of our Proposition; yet I
shall add something more par^iclarly of Preaching, Praying, and Singing, and so
proceed to the following Proposition.

. XVIII. Preaching, I. What Preaching (...) Protestants and Papists.
as it is used both among Papists and Protestants, is for one Man to take some
Place or Verse of Scripture, and thereon speak for an Hour or Two, what he has
Studied and Premeditated in his Closet, A Studied Talk an hour or two.
and gathered together from his own Inventions, or from the Writings and
Observations of others; and then having got it by Heart, (as a School boy does
his Lesson) he brings it forth, and repeats it before the People. And how much
the fertiler and stronger a Man's Invention is, and the more Industrious and
Laborious he is in Collecting such Observations, and can utter them with the
Excellency of Speech and Humane Eloquence, so much the more is he accounted an
Able and Excellent Preacher.

True Preaching by the Spirit.
To this we Oppose, that when the Saints are met together, and every one
gathered to the Gift and Grace of God in themselves, he that Ministers, being
acted thereunto by the arising of the Grace in himself, ought to speak forth
what the Spirit of God furnishes him with; not minding the Eloquence and
Wisdom of Words, but the Demonstration of the Spirit and of Power: And that
either in the Interpreting some part of Scripture, in case the Spirit, which is
the good Remembrancer, lead him so to do; or otherwise Words of Exhortation,
Advice, Reproof, and Instruction, or the sense of some Spiritual Experiences:
All which will still be agreeable to the Scripture, though perhaps not relative
to, nor founed upon any particular Chapter or Verse, as a Text. Now let us
Examine and Consider, which of these two sorts of Preaching is most agreeable
to the Precepts and Practice of Christ and his Apostles, and the Primitive
Church, recorded in Scripture? For First, as to their Preaching upon a Text, if
it were not merely Customary or Premeditated, but done by the immediate motion
of the Spirit, we should not blame it; but to do it as they do, there is
neither Precept nor Practice, that ever I could observe in the New Testament,
as a part of the Instituted Worship thereof.

Allege, That Christ took the Book of Isaiah, and read out of it, and spoke
therefrom; and that Peter Preached from a sentence of the Prophet Joel.

Peter did it not but as immediately acted and moved thereunto by the Spirit of
God, and that without Premeditation; 1. Christ's and Peter's speaking was not
by Premeditation.
which I suppose our adversaries will not deny: In which case we willingly
approve of it. But what is this to their customary conned way, without either
waiting for, or expecting the Movings or Leadings of the Spirit? Moreover, that
neither Christ nor Peter did it as a settled custom or Form, to be constantly
practiced by all the Ministers of the Church, appears, in that most of all the
Sermons recorded of Christ and his Apostles in Scripture, were without this; as
appears, from Christ's Sermon upon the mount, Mat. 5.1, etc. Mark 4.1, etc. and
Paul's Preaching to the Athenians, and to the Jews, etc. As then it appears,
that this method of preaching is not grounded upon any Scripture-Precept; so
the nature of it is contrary to the Preaching of Christ under the New Covenant,
as expressed and recommended in Scripture. For Christ in sending forth his
Disciples, expressly mentions, that they are not to speak of or from
themselves, or to forecast before hand; but that which the Spirit in the same
hour shall teach them; as is particularly mentioned in the Three Evangelists,
Mat. 10.20. Mark 13.11. Luke 12.12. Now if Christ gave this Order to his
Disciples, before he departed from them, as that which they were to practice,
during his abode outwardly with them; much more were they to do it after his
departure, since then they were more especially to receive the Spirit, to lead
them in all things, and to bring all things to their remembrance, John 14.26.
And if they were to do so, when they appeared before the Magistrates and
Princes of the Earth, much more in the Worship of God, when they stand
specially before him; seeing, as is above shown, his Worship is to be performed
in Spirit: And therefore, after their receiving of the Holy Ghost, it is said,
Acts 2.4. They spoke as the Spirit gave them utterance; not what they had
studied, and gathered from Books in their Closets in a premeditated way.

Franciscus Lambertus his Testimony against the Priests studied Inventions and
Figments.
Franciscus Lambertus before cited, speaks well, and shows their
Hypocrisy; Tract. 5. of Prophecy; Chap. 3. saying; Where are they now, that
Glory in their Inventions, who say, a brave Invention, a brave Invention! This
they call Invention, which themselves have made up; but what have the Faithful
to do with such kind of Inventions? It is not Figments, nor yet Inventions,
that we will have; but things that are solid, invincible, eternal and heavenly;
not which Men have invented, but which God has revealed: For if we believe the
Scripture, our Invention profits nothing, but to provoke God to our ruin.
And afterward, Beware (says he) that thou determine not precisely to speak
what before thou have meditated, whatsoever it be; for though it be lawful to
determine the Text, which thou art to expound, yet not at all the
Interpretation; lest, if thou so do, thou take from the Holy Spirit that
which is his; to wit, to direct thy Speech, that thou may prophecy in the
Name of the Lord, void of Learning, Meditation and Experience, and as if thou
had studied nothing at all; committing thy Heart, thy Tongue, and thy self
wholly unto his Spirit, and trusting nothing to the former Studying or
Meditation; but saying with thy self, in great confidence of the Divine
Promise, The Lord will give a word, with much Power unto those that preach the
Gospel. But above all things, be careful thou follow not the manner of
Hypocrites, who have written almost word by word, what they are to say, as if
they were to repeat some Verses upon a Theater, having learned all their
Preaching, as they do that act Tragedies. And afterward, when they are in the
place of Prophesying, pray the Lord to direct their Tongue; but in the mean
time shutting up the way of the Holy Spirit, they determine to say nothing, but
what they have written. O unhappy kind of Prophets, yea, and truly Cursed,
which depend not upon God's Spirit, but upon their own Writings or Meditation!
Why prayest thou to the Lord, thou false Prophet, to give thee his Holy Spirit,
by which thou may speak things profitable, and yet thou repellest the
Spirit? Why preferrest thou thy Meditation or Study to the Spirit of God?
Otherwise, why committest thou not thy self to the Spirit?

. XIX. Secondly; This manner of Preaching, as used by them, (considering that
they also affirm, 2 The word Man's Wisdom bring begets not Faith.
That it may be, and often is, performed by Men, who are wicked, or void of
true Grace) cannot only not edify the Church, beget or nourish true Faith, but
is destructive to it; being directly contrary to the Nature of the Christian
and Apostolic Ministry mentioned in the Scriptures: For the Apostle preached
the Gospel not in the wisdom of words, lest the Cross of Christ should be of
none Effect, 1 Cor. 1.17. But this Preaching, not being done by the Actings and
Movings of God's Spirit, but by Man's Invention and Eloquence, in his own Will,
and through his natural and acquired Parts and Learning, is in the Wisdom of
Words; and therefore the Cross of Christ is thereby made of none Effect. The
Apostle's Speech and Preaching was not with enticing Words of Man's Wisdom, but
in Demonstration of the Spirit and of Power; That the Faith of their Hearers
should not stand in the Wisdom of Men, but in the Power of God, 1 Cor. 2.3, 4,
5. But this Preaching having nothing of the Spirit and Power in it, both the
Preachers and Hearers confessing they wait for no such thing, nor yet are
oftentimes sensible of it, must needs stand in the enticing words of Man's
Wisdom; since it is by the mere Wisdom of Man it is sought after, and the mere
Strength of Man's Eloquence and enticing Words, it is uttered; and therefore no
wonder, if the Faith of such as hear and depend upon such Preachers and
Preachings, stand in the Wisdom of Men, and not in the Power of God. The
Apostles declared, That they spoke not in the words which Man's Wisdom
teaches, but which the Holy Ghost teaches, 1 Cor. 2.13. But these Preachers
confess, that they are strangers to the Holy Ghost, his Motions and Operations,
neither do they wait to feel them; and therefore they speak in the words, which
their own natural Wisdom and Learning teach them, mixing them in, and adding
them to such words, as they steal out of the Scripture, and other Books; and
therefore speak not what the Holy Ghost teaches.

Thirdly, This is contrary to the Method and Order of the Primitive Church, 3.
True Church's Method was to speak by Revelation
mentioned by the Apostle, 1 Cor. 14.30, etc. where in Preaching every one is
to wait for his Revelation, and to give place one unto another, according as
things are revealed. But here there is no waiting for a Revelation, but the
Preacher must speak, and not that which is revealed unto him, but what he has
prepared and premeditated beforehand.

Lastly; By this kind of Preaching, the Spirit of God, 4. The Spirit is shut
out by Priests to be the Teacher.
which should be the chief Instructor and Teacher of God's People, and whose
Influence is that only which makes all Preaching effectual and beneficial for
the edifying of Souls, is shut out; and Man's natural Wisdom, Learning and
Parts, set up and exalted: Which (no doubt) is a great and chief Reason, why
the Preaching among the generality of Christians is so unfruitful and
unsuccessful. Yea, according to this Doctrine, the Devil may preach, and ought
to be heard also; seeing he both knows the Truth, and has as much Eloquence
as any. But what avails Excellency of Speech, if the Demonstration and Power of
the Spirit be wanting, which touches the Conscience? We see, that when the
Devil confessed to the Truth, yet Christ would have none of his Testimony. And
as these pregnant Testimonies of the Scripture, do prove this part of Preaching
to be contrary to the Doctrine of Christ; so do they also prove that of ours,
before affirmed, to be Conform thereunto.

Have not many been Benefitted, and both Converted and Edified, by the Ministry
of such as have Premeditated their preachings; yea, and has not the Spirit
often concurred, by its Divine Influence, with Preachings thus premeditated, so
as they have been powerfully born in upon the Souls of the Hearers, to their
advantage?

Paul persecuting, was converted: Is therefore persecuting good?
that the thing was good in it self; more than, because Paul was met with by
Christ, to the converting of his Soul, riding to Damascus to persecute the
Saints, that he did well in so doing. Neither particular Actions, nor yet whole
Congregations (as we above observed) are to be measured by the Acts of God's
Condesension in times of Ignorance. But besides, it has oftentimes fallen
out, that God, having a regard to the Simplicity and Integrity either of the
Preacher or Hearers, has fallen in upon the Heart of a Preacher by his Power
and Holy Influence, and thereby has led him to speak things which were not in
his Premeditated Discourse, and which perhaps he never thought of before: And
those passing Ejaculations and Unpremeditated, but Living Exhortations, have
proved more Beneficial and Refreshful both to Preacher and Hearers, than all
their premeditated Sermons. But all that will not allow them to continue in
these things, which in themselves are not approved; but contrary to the
Practice of the Apostles, when God is raising up a People to serve him,
according to the Primitive Purity and Spirituality; yea, such Acts of God's
Condesension, in times of Darkness and Ignorance should engage all more and
more to follow him, according as he reveals his most perfect and spiritual Way.

II. Of Prayer, how the Outward is distinguished from the Inward.
. XXI. Having hitherto spoken of Preaching; now it is fit to speak of Praying,
concerning which the like Controversy arises. Our Adversaries, whose Religion
is all for the most part outside, and such whose Acts are the mere product of
Man's natural Will and Abilities; as they can Preach, so can they Pray when
they please, and therefore have their set particular Prayers. I meddle not with
the Controversies among themselves concerning this; some of them being for set
Prayers, as a Liturgy; others for such as are conceived extempore: It suffices
me, that all of them agree in this, That the Motions and Influence of the
Spirit of God, are not necessary to be previous thereunto; The Priests set
times to Preach and Pray, deny the Spirit.
and therefore they have set times in their public Worship, as before and
after Preaching, and in their private Devotion, as Morning and Evening, and
before and after Meat, and other such occasions; at which they precisely set
about the performing of their Prayers, by speaking words to God, whether they
feel any Motion or Influence of the Spirit, or not: So that some of the
chiefest have confessed, that they have thus prayed, without the Motions and
Assistance of the Spirit, acknowledging, that they sinned in so doing; yet they
said, they looked upon it as their Duty to do so, though to pray without the
Spirit be sin. We freely confess, that Prayer is both very profitable, and a
necessary Duty commanded, and fit to be practiced frequently by all Christians:
But as we can do nothing without Christ, so neither can we Pray, without the
Concurrence and Assistance of his Spirit. But, that the State of the
Controversy may be the better understood, let it be considered, First, That
Prayer is twofold, What Inward Prayer is?
Inward and Outward. Inward Prayer is that secret turning of the Mind toward
God, whereby, being secretly touched and awakened by the Light of Christ in the
Conscience, and so bowed down under the sense of its Iniquities, Unworthiness
and Misery, it looks up to God; and joining issue with the secret shinings of
the Seed of God, it breathes toward him, and is constantly breathing forth
some secret Desires and Aspirations toward him. It is in this sense, that we
are so frequently in Scripture commanded to Pray continually, Luke 18.1. 1 Thessalonians. 5.17. Ephesians. 6.18. Luke 21.36. Which cannot be understood of outward
Prayer; because it were impossible, that Men should be always upon their Knees,
expressing words of Prayer; and this would hinder them from the Exercise of
those Duties, no less positively commanded. What Outward Prayer is?
Outward Proyer is, when as the Spirit (being thus in the Exercise of Inward
Retirement, and feeling the Breathing of the Spirit of God to arise powerfully
in the Soul) receives Strength and Liberty, by a superadded Motion and
Influence of the Spirit, to bring forth either audible Sighs, Groans, or Words,
and that either in public Assemblies, or in private, or at Meat, etc.

As then Inward Prayer is necessary at all times, so, Inward Prayer necessary
at all times.
so long as the Day of every Man's Visitation lasts, he never wants some
Influence, less or more, for the Practice of it; because he no sooner retires
his Mind, and considers himself in God's Presence, but he finds himself in the
Practice of it.

The Outward Exercise of Prayer, Outward Prayer does require a super added
Influence.
as needing a greater and superadded Influence and Motion of the Spirit, as it
cannot be continually practiced, so neither can it be so readily, so as to be
effectually performed, until his Mind be sometime acquainted with the Inward;
therefore such as are diligent and watchful in their Minds, and much retired in
the Exercise of this Inward Prayer, are more capable to be frequent in the use
of the Outward, because that this holy Influence does more constantly attend
them, and they being better acquainted with, and accustomed to the Motions of
God's Spirit, can easily perceive and discern them. And indeed, as such who are
most diligent have a near access to God, and he takes most delight to draw
them by his Spirit, to approach and call upon him; so when many are gathered
together in this watchful Mind, God does frequently pour forth the Spirit of
Prayer among them, and stir them thereunto, to the Edifying and Building up of
one another in Love. But because this Outward Prayer depends upon the Inward,
as that which must follow it, and cannot be acceptably performed, but as
attended with a superadded Influence and Motion of the Spirit, therefore cannot
we prefix set Times to Pray outwardly, We cannot fix set times to Speak and
Pray, to tempt God.
so as to lay a necessity to speak words at such and such times, whether we
feel this Heavenly Influence and Assistance, or no; for that we judge were a
tempting of God, and a coming before him without due Preparation. We think it
fit for us to present our selves before him by this Inward Retirement of the
Mind, and so to proceed further, as his Spirit shall help us and draw us
thereunto: And we find, that the Lord accepts of this, yea, and sees meet
sometimes to exercise us in this silent Place, for the trial of our Patience,
without allowing us to speak further; that he may teach us nor to rely upon
outward Performance, or satisfy our selves, as too many do, with the saying of
our Prayers; and that our dependence upon him may be the more firm and
constant, to wait for the holding out of this Scepter, and for his allowance to
draw near unto him, and with great freedom and enlargement of Spirit upon our
Hearts toward him. Yet nevertheless we do not deny, but sometimes God, upon
particular Occasions very suddenly, yea, upon the the very first turning in of
the Mind, may give Power and Liberty to bring forth Words or Acts of outward
Prayer, so as the Soul can scarce discern any previous motion, Such sin as are
neglecting Prayer.
but the influence and bringing forth thereof may be as it were, simul and
semel; nevertheless that saying of Bernard is true, that All Prayer is lake
warm, which has not an Inspiration prece^ing it. Though we affirm, that none
ought to go about Prayer without this Motion: Yet we do not deny, but such Sin,
as neglect Prayer; but their Sin is, in that they come not to that place, where
they may feel that, that would lead them thereunto. And therefore we question
not, but many, through neglect of this Inward Watchfulness and Retiredness of
Mind, miss many precious opportunities to Pray, and thereby are guilty in the
sight of God; yet would they Sin, if they should set about the Act, until they
first felt the Influence. For as he grossly offends his Master, that lies in
his Bed and sleeps, A Forward and a Careless Servant answers not his Duty.
and neglects to do his Master's Business; yet if such an one should suddenly
get up, without putting on his Clothes, or taking along with him those
necessary Tools and Instruments, without which he could not possibly Work, and
should forwardly fall a doing to no purpose, he would be so far thereby from
repairing his former Fault, that he would justly incur a new Censure: And as
one that is Careless, and other ways Busied, may miss to hear one speaking unto
him, or even not hear the Bell of a Clock, though striking hard by him; so may
many through Negligence, miss to hear God often times calling upon them, and
giving them access to Pray unto him: Yet will not that allow them, without his
liberty, in their own Wills to fall to Work.

And lastly: Though this be the only true and proper Method of Prayer, as that
which is alone acceptable to God; yet shall we not deny, but he oftentimes
answered the Prayers, and concurred with the Desires of some, In times of
Darkness God did often hear their Prayers.
especially in Times of Darkness, who have greatly erred herein, so that some
that have sat down in formal Prayer, though far wrong in the Matter as well as
Manner, without the Assistance or Influence of God's Spirit; yet have found him
to take occasion there-through to break in upon their Souls, and wonderfully
tender and refresh them: Yet, as in Preaching, and elsewhere, has before been
observed, that will not prove any such practices, or be a just Let to hinder
any from coming to practice that pure, Spiritual and Acceptable Prayer, which
God is again restoring, and leading his People into, out of all Superstitions
and mere empty Formalities. The State of the Controversy, and our Sense
thereof, being thus clearly stated, will both obviate many Objections, First,
Spiritual Prayer proved from Scripture.
and make the Answer to others more brief and easy. I shall first prove this
Spiritual Prayer, by some short Considerations from Scripture, and then Answer
the Objections of our Opposers, which will also serve to refute their Method
and Manner thereof.

I. God's Spirit must be felt to move the Mind to Prayer.
. XXII. And First, That there is a necessity of this inward Retirement of the
Mind, as previous to Prayer, that the Spirit may be felt to draw thereunto,
appears, for that in most of those places, where Prayer is commanded, Watching
is prefixed thereunto, as necessary to go before; as Mat. 24.42. Mark 13.33.
and 14 38. Luke 21.36. from which it is evident, that this Watching was to go
before Prayer. Now to what end is this Watching, or what is it, but a waiting
to feel God's Spirit to draw unto Prayer, Ephesians. 6.18.
that so it may be done acceptably? For since we are to Pray always in the
Spirit, and cannot pray of our selves without it acceptably, this Watching must
be for this end recommended to us, as preceding Prayer, that we may Watch and
Wait for the seasonable time to Pray, which is when the Spirit moves thereunto.

II. We know not how to pray, but as the Spirit helps.
Secondly, This Necessity of the Spirit's moving and concurrence, appears
abundantly from that of the Apostle Paul, Romans 8.26, 27. Likewise the Spirit
also helps our Infirmities: For we know not what we should pray for as we
ought; but the Spirit it self makes intercession for us, with Groanings which
cannot be uttered. And he that searches the hearts, knows what is the mind
of the Spirit, because he makes intercession for the Saints, according to the
Will of God. Which first holds forth the incapacity of Men, as of themselves,
to pray or call upon God in their own Wills, even such as have received the
Faith of Christ, and are in measure Sanctified by it; as was the Church of
Rome, to whom the Apostle then wrote. Secondly; It holds forth that, which can
only help and assist Men to Pray, to wit, the Spirit, as that without which
they cannot do it acceptably to God, nor beneficially to their own Souls.
Thirdly; The manner and way of the Spirit's Intercession, with Groans which are
unutterable. And Fourthly; That God receives graciously the Prayers of such,
as are presented and offered unto himself by the Spirit, knowing it to be
according to his Will. Now, it cannot be conceived, but this Order of Prayer,
thus asserted by the Apostle, is most consistent with those other Testimonies
of Scripture, commending and recommending to us the use of Prayer. From which I
thus argue;

Arg.
If any Man know not how to pray, neither can do it without the help of the
Spirit, then it is to no purpose for him, but altogether unprofitable, to pray
without it. But the first is true; Therefore also the last.


Thirdly; III. Pray always in the Spirit, and Watching thereunto.
This necessity of the Spirit to true Prayer, appears from Ephesians 6.18. and
Jude 20. where the Apostle commands to pray always in the Spirit, and watching
thereunto; which is as much, as if he had said, that we were never to pray
without the Spirit, or watching thereunto. And Jude shows us, that such
Prayers as are in the Holy Ghost, only tend to the building up of our selves in
our most holy Faith.

Fourthly; The Apostle Paul says expressly, IV. Man cannot call Christ Lord,
but by the Holy Ghost.
1 Cor. 12.3. That no Man can say that Jesus is the Lord, but by the Holy
Ghost: If then Jesus cannot be thus rightly named, but by the Holy Ghost; far
less can he be acceptably called upon. Hence the same Apostle declares, 1 Cor.
14.15. that he will pray with the Spirit, etc. A clear evidence, that it was
none of his method to pray without it.

V. God will not hear the Prayers of the Wicked.
But Fifthly; All Prayer without the Spirit is Abomination, such as are the
Prayers of the Wicked, Prove. 28.9 And the Confidence that the Saints have, that
God will hear them, is, if they ask any thing according to his Will, 1 John
5.14. So if the Prayer be not according to his Will, there is no ground of
Confidence that he will hear. Now our Adversaries will acknowledge, that
Prayers without the Spirit are not according to the Will of God; and therefore
such as pray without it, have no ground to expect an answer: For indeed to bid
a Man pray without the Spirit, is all one, as to bid one see without Eyes, work
without Hands, or go without Feet. And to desire a Man to fall to Prayer, ere
the Spirit, in some measure, less or more, move him thereunto, is to desire a
Man to see, before he opens his Eyes; or to walk, before he rises up; or to
work with his Hands, before he moves them.

VI. All Sacrifice is Sin, not offered by the Spirit
. XXIII. But lastly. From this false Opinion of Praying without the Spirit, and
not judging it necessary to be waited for, as that which may be felt to move us
thereunto, has proceeded all the Superstition and Idolatry that is among those
called Christians, and those many Abominations wherewith the Lord is provoked,
and his Spirit grieved: So that many deceive themselves now, as the Jews did of
old, thinking it sufficient, if they pay their daily Sacrifices, and offer
their customary Oblations; from thence thinking all this well, and creating a
false Peace to themselves, as the Whore in the Proverbs; because they have
offered up their Sacrifices of Morning and Evening Prayers. And therefore it is
manifest, that their constant use of things does not a whit influence their
Lives and Conversations; but they remain for the most part as bad as ever. Yea,
it is frequent both among Papists and Protestants, for them first to leap, as
it were, out of their vain, light and profane Conversations, at their set hours
and seasons, and fall to their customary Devotion; and then, when it is scarce
finished, and the Words to God scarce out, the former profane Talk comes after
it: So that the same wicked profane Spirit of this World acts them in both. If
there be any such thing as vain Oblations, or Prayers that are Abomination,
which God hears not, (as is certain there are, and the Scripture testifies,
Isai. 66.3. Jer. 14.12.) certainly such Prayers, as are acted in Man's Will,
and by his own Strength, without God's Spirit, must be of that number.

. XXIV. Let this suffice for Probation. Now I shall proceed to answer their
Objections, Concerning Joining in Prayer with others
when I have said something concerning Joining in Prayer with others. Those
that Pray together with one accord, use not only to concur in their Spirits,
but also in the Gesture of their Body; which we also will willingly approve of.
It becomes those, who approach before God to pray, that they do it with bowed
Knees, and with their Heads uncovered; which is our Practice.

Whether it be Lawful to join with others (by those external Signs of
Reverence, albeit not in Heart) who pray formally, not waiting for the Motion
of the Spirit, nor judging it necessary?

How with Idolaters we cannot Join in Prayer.
or to witness against their Worship, we have been present during the same, and
have not found it lawful for us to bow with them thereunto, they have often
persecuted us, not only with Reproaches, but also with Strokes and cruel
Beatings. For this cause they use to accuse us of Pride, Profanity and Madness,
as if we had no Respect or Reverence to the Worship of God, and as if we judged
none could pray, or were heard of God but our selves. Unto all which, and many
more Reproaches of this kind, we answer briefly and modestly; That it suffices
us that we are found so doing, neither through Pride, nor Madness, nor
Profanity; but merely lest we should hurt our Consciences: The reason of which,
is plain and evident; for since our Principle and Doctrine oblige us to
believe, that the Prayers of those, who themselves confess they are not acted
by the Spirit, are Abominations, how can we, with a safe Conscience, join with
them?

That this is the height of Uncharitablenss and Arrogance; as if we judged our
selves always to pray by the Spirit's Motion, but they never; as if we were
never deceived by Praying without the Motions of the Spirit, and that they were
never acted by it: Seeing a b^it they judged not the Motion of the Spirit
always necessary, they Confess nevertheless that it is very profitable and
comfortable, and they feel it often influencing them; which that it sometimes
falls out, we cannot deny.

Doctrine, not to pray without the motion of the Spirit, and that seriously
holding thereunto, they did not bind themselves to Pray at certain prescribed
Times precisely (at which times they determine to Pray, though without the
Spirit) then indeed we might be accused of Uncharitableness and Pride, if we
never joined with them; and if they so taught and practiced, I doubt not but it
should be lawful for us so to do, Shall we confirm the Hypocrite, when praying.
unless there should appear some manifest and evident Hypocrisy and Delusion.
But seeing they confess, that they pray without the Spirit, and seeing God has
persuaded us, that such Prayers are abominable, how can we with a safe
Conscience join with an Abomination? That God sometimes condescends to them, we
do not deny (albeit now when the Spiritual Worship is openly proclaimed, and
all are invited unto it, the case is otherwise, than in those old times of
Apostasy and Darkness) and therefore, albeit any should begin to pray in our
presence, not expecting the Motion of the Spirit; yet if it manifestly appear
that God in condescension did concur with such a one, then according to God's
Will, we should not refuse to join also; but this is rare, lest thence they
should be confirmed in their false Principle. And albeit this seem hard in our
Profession, neverthess it is so confirmed by the Authority both of Scripture
and right Reason, that many convinced thereof have embraced this part before
other Truths which were easier, and as they seemed to some, clearer. Among whom
is memorable of late Years Alexander Skein a Magistrate of the City of
Aberdeen, a Man very modest, and very averse from giving offense to others; who
nevertheless being overcome by the Power of Truth in this matter, behoved for
this cause to separate himself from the public Assemblies and Prayers, and
join himself unto us. Who also gave the reason of his Change, and likewise
succinctly, but yet substantially, comprehended this Controversy, concerning
Worship, in some short Questions, which he offered to the public Preachers of
the City, and I think meet to insert in this place.

1. Query.
Whether or not should any Act of God's Worship be gone about, without the
Motions, Leadings and Actings of the Holy Spirit? Some Questions of A. Skein,
proposed to the Preachers of Aberdeen.


2. If the Motions of the Spirit be necessary to every particular Duty, whether
should he be waited upon, that all our Acts and Words may be according as he
gives utterance and assistance?

3. Whether every one that hears the Name of a Christian, or professes to be a
Protestant, has such an uninterrupted measure thereof, that he may, without
waiting, go immediately about the Duty?

4. If there be an indisposition and unfitness at some times for such
Exercises, at least as to the Spiritual and Lively Performances thereof,
whether ought they to be performed in that Case, and at that Time?

5. If any Duty be gone about, under pretense that it is in obedience to the
External Command, without the Spiritual Life and Motion necessary; whether such
a Duty, thus performed, can in Faith be expected to be accepted of God, and not
rather reckoned as a bringing of strange Fire before the Lord; Levit. 16.1.
seeing it is performed (at best) by the strength of natural and acquired
Parts, and not by the strength and assistance of the Holy Ghost; which was
typified by the Fire that came down from Heaven, which alone behoved to consume
the Sacrifice, and no other?

6. Whether Duties, gone about in the mere strength of natural and acquired
Parts (whether in public or private) be not as really, upon the matter, an
Image of Man's Invention, as the Popish Worship, though not so gross in the
outward appearance? And therefore whether it be not as real Superstition to
countenance any Worship of that nature, as it is to countenance Popish Worship,
though there be a difference in the degree?

7. Whether it be a ground of Offense, or just Scandal, to countenance the
Worship of those, whose professed Principle it is, neither to speak for
Edification, nor to pray, but as the Holy Ghost shall be pleased to assist
them, in some measure, less or more; without which they rather choose to be
silent, than to speak without this Influence?

Unto these they answered but very coldly and faintly; whose Answers likewise
long ago he refuted.

Seeing then God has called us to his Spiritual Worship, and to testify
against the Humane and Voluntary Worships of the Apostasy, if we did not this
way stand Immovable to the Truth revealed, We must not lose our Witnessing for
God.
but should join with them, both our Testimony for God would be weakened and
lost, and it would be impossible steadily to Propagate this Worship in the
World, whose progress we dare neither retard nor hinder by any Act of ours;
though therefore we shall lose not only Worldly Honor, but even our Lives. And
truly many Protestants, through their unsteadness in this thing, for politic
ends, complying with the Popish Abominations, have greatly scandalized their
Profession, and hurt the Reformation: As appeared in the Example of the Elector
of Saxony; who, Elector of Saxony, his Scandal given to Protestants
in the Convention at Augsburg, in the Year 1530, being commanded by the
Emperor Charles the Fifth, to be present at the Mass that he might carry the
Sword before him, according to his place; which when he justly scrupled to
perform, his Preachers taking more care for their Prince's Honor, than for his
Conscience, persuaded him that it was lawful to do it against his Conscience.
Which was both a very bad Example, and great scandal to the Reformation, and
displeased many; Secondly: Objections against Spiritual Prayer, answered
as the Author of the History of the Council of Trent, in his First Book, well
observes. But now I hasten to the Objections of our Adversaries, against this
Method of Praying.

First; They Object, That if such particular Influences were needful to outward
Acts of Worship, then they should also be needful to inward Acts, to wit,
desire and love to God:

But this is absurd; Therefore also that from whence it follows.

State of the Controversy, clears this; because as to those general Duties,
there never wants an Influence, so long as the Day of a Man's Visitation
la^eth; during which time, God is always near to him, and wrestling with him by
his Spirit, to turn him to himself; so that, if he do but stand still, and
cease from his evil thoughts, the Lord is near to help him, etc. But as to the
outward Acts of Prayer, they need a more speicial Motion and Influence, as has
been proved.

Secondly; They object, That it might be also alleged, that Men ought not to
do moral Duties, as Children to honor their Parents, Men to do right to their
Neighbors, except the Spirit move them to it.



Thirdly; They Object, That if a wicked Man ought not to pray without a Motion
of the Spirit, because his Prayer would be sinful; neither ought he to plow by
the same reason, Prove. 21.4.
because the plowing of the wicked, as well as his praying, is sin.

How Acts of Nature differ from the Spirit's.
seeing there is a great difference betwixt Natural Acts, such as eating,
drinking sleeping, and seeking Sustenance for the Body, (which things Man has
common with Beasts) and Spiritual Acts. And it does not follow, because Man
ought not to go about Spiritual Acts without the Spirit, that therefore he may
not go about Natural Acts without it: The Analogy holds better thus, and that
for the proof of our Affirmation, That as Man, for the going about Natural
Acts, needs his Natural Spirit; so to perform Spiritual Acts, he needs the
Spirit of God. That the Natural Acts of the Wicked and Unregenerate are sinful,
is not denied; though not as in themselves, but in so far as Man in that state is
in all things reprobated in the sight of God.

Fourthly; They object, That wicked Men may, according to this Doctrine,
forbear to pray for Years together, alleging, they want a Motion to it.

they ought not to pray without the Spirit, is granted; but then they ought to
come to that place of watching, That wicked Men neglect the Motions of the
Spirit to pray.
where they may be capable to feel the Spirit's Motion. They sin indeed in not
Praying; but the cause of this Sin is their not Watching: So their neglect
proceeds not from this Doctrine, but from there disobedience to it; seeing if
they did pray without this, it would be a double Sin, and no fulfilling of the
Command to Pray: Nor yet would then Prayer, without this Spirit, be useful unto
them. And this our Adversaries are forced to acknowlegde in another case. For
they say, It is a Duty incumbent on Christians to frequent the Sacrament of the
Lord's Supper (as they call it;) Yet they say, No Man ought to take it
unworthily: Yet they plead, that such as find themselves unprepared, must
abstain; and therefore do usually Excommunicate them from the Table. Now, though
according to them, it be necessary to partake of this Sacrament; yet it is also
necessary, that those that do it, do first examine themselves, lest they eat
and drink their own Condemnation: And though they reckon it sinful for them to
forbear, yet they account it more sinful for them to do it, without this
Examination.

Fifthly; They object, Acts 8.22. where Peter commanded Simon Magus, that
wicked Sorcerer, to pray; from thence inferring, That wicked Men may and ought
to Pray.

The Sorcerer may pray, but not without Repentance.
they omit the first and chiefest part of the verse, which is thus, Acts 8. v.
22. Repent therefore of this thy wickedness, and pray God, if perhaps the
thought of thine heart may be forgiven thee: So here he bids him first Repent.
Now the least measure of true Repentance cannot be without somewhat of that
inward Retirement of the Mind, which we speak of: And indeed, where true
Repentance goes first, we do not doubt but the Spirit of God will be near to
concur with, and influence such, to pray to, and call upon God.

Lastly; They Object, That many Prayers begun without the Spirit, have proved
Effectual; and that the Prayers of wicked Men have been heard, and found
acceptable, as Ahab 's.

Next, We do not deny, but wicked Men are sensible of the Motions and
Operations of God's Spirit oftentimes, before their day be expired; from which
they may at times pray acceptably; not as remaining altogether Wicked, but as
entering into Piety, from whence they afterward fall away.

III.
. XXVI. As to the Singing of Psalms, there will not be need of ay long
Discourse; Of Singing Psalms.
for that the case is just the same as in the two former, of Preaching and
Praying. We confess this to be a part of God's Worship, and very sweet and
refreshful, when it proceeds from a true sense of God's Love in the Heart, and
arises from the Divine Influence of the Spirit, which leads Souls to breathe
forth either a sweet Harmony, or words suitable to the present Condition; A
sweet harmonious Sound.
whether they be words formerly used by the Saints, and recorded in Scripture,
such as the Psalms of David, or other words; as were the Hymns and Songs of
Zacharias, Simeon, and the blessed Virgin Mary. But formal Singing has no
Scripture Ground.
But as for the formal customary way of singing, it has in Scripture no
Foundation, nor any ground in true Christianity: yea, besides all the Abuses
incident to Prayer and Preaching, it has this more peculiar, that oftentimes
great and horrid Lies are said in the sight of God: Profane Singing of David's
Condition refuted.
For all manner of wicked profane People take upon them to personate the
Experiences and Conditions of blessed David; which are not only false, as to
them, but also as to some of more Sobriety, who utter them forth. As where they
will sing sometimes, Psalm 22.14 -- My Heart is like Wax, it is melted in the
midst of my Bowels: And verse 15. My strength is dried up like a Potsheard, and
my Tongue cleaves to my Jaws; and thou have brought me into the dust of Death:
And Psalm 6.6. I am weary with my groaning, all the night make I my bed to
swim: I water my couch with my tears: And many more, which those that speak,
know to be false, as to them. And sometimes will confess just after in their
Prayers, that they are guilty of the Vices opposite to those Virtues, which but
just before they have asserted themselves endued with. Who can suppose that God
accepts of such Juggling? And indeed such Singing does more please the carnal
Ears of Men, than the pure Ears of the Lord, who abhors all Lying and
Hypocrisy.

That Singing then, that pleases him, must proceed from that which is PURE in
the Heart (even from the Word of Life therein) in and by which, richly dwelling
in us, Spiritual Songs and Hymns are returned to the Lord, according to that of
the Apstle, Col. 3.16.

But as to their Artificial Music, either by Organs, Artificial Music.
or other Instruments, or Voice, we have neither example nor Precept for it in
the New Testament.

. XXVII. But lastly; The great Advantage of this true Worship of God, which we
profess and practice, is, that it consists not in Man's Wisdom, Arts or
Industry; No Splender of this World at^ds this toward Worship.
neither needs the Glory, Pomp, Riches, nor Splendour of this World, to
beautify it, as being of a Spiritual and Heavenly Nature; and therefore too
simple and contemptible to the Natural Mind and Will of Man, that has no
delight to abide in it, because he finds no room there for his Imaginations and
Inventions, and has not the opportunity to gratify his outward and carnal
Senses: So that this Form being observed, is not like to be long kept pure,
without the Power; for it is of it self so naked without it, that it has
nothing in it to invite and tempt Men to dote upon it, further than it is
accompanied with the Power. Whereas the Worship of our Adversaries, The Canal
Worship pleases Self.
being performed in their own wills, is self-pleasing, as in which they can
largely exercise their Natural Parts and Invention: And so (as to most of them)
having somewhat of an outward and worldly Splendour, delectable to the carnal
and worldly Senses, they can pleasantly continue it, and satisfy themselves;
though without the Spirit and Power, which they make no ways Essential to the
performance of their Worship, and therefore neither wait for, nor expect it.

The Worship of the Quakers.
. XXVIII. So that to conclude, The Worship, Preaching, Praying and Singing,
which we plead for, is such as proceeds from the Spirit of God, and is always
accompanied with its Influence, being begun by its Motion, and carried on by
the Power and Strength thereof? and so is a Worship purely spiritual: Such as
the Scripture holds forth, John 4.23, 24. 1 Cor. 14.15. Ephesians. 6.18, etc.

But the Worship, Preaching, Praying and Singing, which our Adversaries plead
for, and which we oppose, Our Adversaries Worship.
is a Worship which is both begun, carried on, and concluded in Man's own
Natural Will and Strength, without the Motion or Influence of God's Spirit;
which they judge they need not wait for, and therefore may be truly acted, both
as in the matter and manner, by the Wickedest of Men. Such was the Worship, and
vain Oblations, which God always rejected, as appears from Isai. 66.3. Jer.
14.12. etc. Isai. 1.13. Prove. 15.29. Job 9.31.

PROPOSITION XII. Concerning Baptism.
As there is one Lord, and one Faith, Ephesians. 4.5. 1 Pet 3.21. Romans 6.4. Gal. 3
27. Col. 2.12. John 3.30 1 Cor. 1.17.
so there is one Baptism; which is not the putting away the Filth of the Flesh,
but the Answer of a good Conscience before God, by the Resurrection of Jesus
Christ: And this Baptism is a pure and Spiritual Things, to wit, the Baptism of
the Spirit and Fire, by which we are buried with him; that being washed and
purged from our Sins, we may walk in the newness of Life: Of which the Baptism
of John was a Figure, which was commanded for a time, and not to continue for
ever. As to the Baptism of Infants, it is a mere Humane Tradition, for which
neither Precept nor Practice is to be found in all the Scripture.

. I. I Did sufficiently demonstrate, in the Explanation and Proof of the former
Proposition, how greatly the Professors of Christianity, as well Protestants as
Papists, were degenerated in the matter of Worship; and how much Strangers to,
and averse from that true and acceptable Worship, that is performed in the
Spirit of Truth, because of Man's natural Propensity in his fallen State to
exalt his own Inventions, From whence Idolatries and Heathen Superstitions did
spring.
and to intermix his own Work and Product in the Service of God: And from this
Root sprung all the idle Worships, Idolatries, and numerous Superstitious
Inventions among the Heathens. For when God in Condescension to his chosen
People, the Jews, did prescribe to them by his Servant Moses, many Ceremonies
and Observations, as Types and Shadows of the Substance, which in due time was
to be revealed; which consisted for the most part in Washings, outward
Purifications and Cleansings, which were to continue, until the time of
Reformation, until the Spiritual Worship should be set up; and that God by the
more powerful pouring forth of his Spirit and guiding of that Anointing, should
lead his Children into all Truth, and teach them to Worship him in a way more
Spiritual and acceptable to him, though less agreeable to the Carnal and Outward
Senses. Yet notwitstanding God's Condescension to the Jews in such things, we
see that that part in Man, which delights to follow its own Inventions, could
not be restrained, nor yet satisfied with all these Observations; but that
oftentimes they would be either declining to the other Superstitions of the
Gentiles, or adding some new Observations and Ceremonies of their own: To which
they were so devoted, that they were still apt to prefer them before the
Commands of God, and that under the Notion of Zeal and Piety. The Pharisees the
Chiefest among the Jews.
This we see abundantly in the Example of the Pharisees, the Chiefest Sect
among the Jews, whom Christ so frequently reproves for making void the
Commandments of God by their Traditions, Matthew. 15.6, 9, etc. This Complaint
may at this day be no less justly made, as to many, bearing the Name of
Christians, who have introduced many things of this kind, partly borrowed from
the Jews, which they more tenaciously stick to, and more earnestly contend for,
than for the weightier Points of Christianity; because that Self yet alive,
Many things in Christendom are borrowed from the Jews and Gentiles.
and ruling in them, loves their own Inventions better than God's Commands. But
if they can by any means stretch any Scripture-Practice, or Conditional Precept
or Permission, fitted to the Weakness or Capacity of some, or appropriate to
some particular Dispensation, to give some Color for any of these their
Inventions; they do then so tenaciously stick to them, and so obstinately and
obstreperously plead for them, that they will not patiently hear the most solid
Christian Reasons against them. Which Zeal, if they would but seriously Examine
it, they would find to be but the prejudice of Education, and the love of Self,
more than that of God, or his Pure Worship. Of Sacraments so many Controversies.
This is verified concerning those things, which are called Sacraments, about
which they are very Ignorant in Religious Controversies, who understand not how
much Debate, Contention, Jangling, and Quarrelling there has been among those
called Christians: So that I may safely say, the Controversy about them, to
wit, about their Number, Nature, Virtue, Efficacy, Administration, and other
things, has been more, than about any other Doctrine of Christ, whether as
betwixt Papists and Protestants, or among Protestants betwixt themselves. And
how great prejudice these Controversies have brought to Christians, is very
obvious; whereas the things contended for among them, are for the most part but
empty Shadows, and mere Outside things: As I hope hereafter to make appear to
the patient and unprejudicate Reader.

. II. That which comes first under Observation, The Name of Sacrament (not
found in Scripture) is borrowed from the Heathens.
is the Name [ Sacrament,] which is strange, that Christians should stick to,
and Contend so much for, since it is not to be found in all the Scripture; but
was borrowed from the Military Oaths among the Heathens, from whom the
Christians, when they began to Apostatize, did borrow many Superstitious Terms
and Observations, that they might thereby Ingratiate themselves, and the more
easily gain the Heathens to their Religion; which practice, though perhaps
intended by them for good, yet, as being the fruit of Humane Policy, and not
according to God's Wisdom, has had very pernicious Consequences. I see not, how
any, whether Papists or Protestants, especially the latter, can in reason
quarrel with us for denying this Term, which it seems the Spirit of God saw not
meet to inspire the Pen men of the Scriptures to leave unto us.

it is not the Name, but the Thing they contend for:

Answer: Let the Name then, as not being Scriptural, be laid aside, and we
shall see at first entrance, how much Benefit will redound by laying aside this
Traditional Term, and betaking us to plainness of Scripture Language. For
presently the great Contest, about the number of them, will vanish; seeing
there is no Term used in Scripture, that can be made use of, whether we call
them Institutions, Ordinances, Precepts, Commandments, Appointments, or Laws,
etc. that would afford ground for such a Debate; since neither will Papist
affirm, that there are only Seven, or Protestants only Two, of any of these
aforementioned.

Controversy arises from the Definition of the Thing, as well as from the Name.

Sacrament, whether as an outward visible Sign, The Definition of Sacrament
agrees to many other things.
whereby inward Grace is conferred, or only signified. This Definition will
agree to many things, which neither Papist nor Protestants will acknowledge to
be Sacraments. If they be expressed under the Name of Sealing Ordinances, as
some do, I could never see either by Reason or Scripture, how this Title could
be appropriate to them, What Sealing Ordinance does mean?
more than to any other Christian Religious Performance: For that must needs
properly be a Sealing Ordinance, which makes the Persons receiving it
infallibly certain of the Promise, and thing sealed to them.

It is so to them that are faithful.



Besides, we find not any thing called the Seal and Pledge of our Inheritance,
but the Spirit of God; it is by that we are said to be sealed, Ephesians. 1.14. and
4.30. which is also termed the Earnest of our Inheritance, 2 Cor. 1.22. and not
by outward Water, or Eating and Drinking; which, as the Wickedest of Men may
partake of, so many that do, That outward Washing does not cleanse the Heart.
do notwithstanding it, go to Perdition. For it is not outward Washing with
Water, that makes the Heart clean, by which Men are fitted for Heaven: And as
that which goes into the Mouth, does not defile a Man, because it is put forth
again, and so goes to the Dunghill; neither does any thing which Man eats,
purify him, or fit him for Heaven. What is said here in general, may serve for
an Introduction, not only to this Proposition, but also to the other concerning
the Supper. Of these Sacraments (so called) Baptism is always first numbered,
which is the Subject of the present Proposition; in whose Explanation I shall
first demonstrate and prove our Judgment; and then Answer the Objections, and
Refute the Sentiments of our Opposers. As to the first part, these things
following, which are briefly comprehended in the Proposition, Part. I.
come to be proposed and proved.

. III. First: That there is but one Baptism, etc..

Secondly, That this one Baptism, II.
which is the Baptism of Christ, is not a washing with, or dipping in Water,
but a being Baptized by the Spirit.

III.
Thirdly, That the Baptism of John was but a Figure of this; and therefore, as
the Figure, to give place to the Substance; which, though it be to continue, yet
the other is ceased.

first, viz. That there is but one Baptism, there needs no other proof, than
the words of the Text, One Baptism proved
Ephesians. 4.5. One Lord, one Faith, one Baptism: where the Apostle positively and
plainly affirms, that as there is but one Body, one Spirit, one Faith, one God,
etc. so there is but One Baptism.

That the Baptism of Water and of the Spirit make up this One Baptism, by
virtue of the Sacramental Union.

Water Baptism; and so there needs no other reply, but to deny it, as being
repugnant to the plain words of the Text; which says not, Whether Two Baptisms
make up the One.
that there are two Baptisms, to wit, one of Water, the other of the Spirit,
which do make up One Baptism; but plainly, that there is one Baptism, as there
is One Faith, and One God. Now there goes not two Faiths, nor two Gods, nor
two Spirits, nor two Bodies, whereof the one is Outward and Elementary, and the
other Spiritual and Pure, to the making up of the one Faith, the one God, the
one Body, and the one Spirit; so neither ought there to go Two Baptisms to make
up the One Baptism.

secondly, if it be said, The Baptism is but one, whereof Water is the one
part, to wit, the sign; and the Spirit, the thing signified, the other.

If Water be the Type, the Substance must remain.
For if Water be only the sign, it is not the matter of the one Baptism (as
shall further hereafter by its Definition in Scripture appear) and we are to
take the one Baptism for the matter of it, not for the sign, or figure and
type, that went before. Even as where Christ is called the One Offering in
Scripture, though he was typified by many Sacrifices and Offerings under the Law,
we understand only by the one Offering, his offering himself upon the Cross;
whereof though those many Offerings were Signs and Types; yet we say not, that
they go together with that Offering of Christ, to make up the one Offering: So
neither, though Water Baptism was a sign of Christ's Baptism, will it not follow,
that it goes now to make up the Baptism of Christ. If any should be so absurd,
as to affirm, That this One Baptism here, was the Baptism of Water, and not of
the Spirit: That were foolishly to contradict the positive Testimony of the
Scripture, which says the contrary; as by what follows will more amply
appear.

That this One Baptism, which is the Baptism of Christ, is not a Washing with
Water, appears, first, from the Testimony of John, Mat. 3.11. I indeed baptize
you with water unto Repentance; The difference between John's Baptism, and
Christ's.
but he that comes after me, is mightier than I, whose shoes I am not worthy
to bear; he shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost, and with Fire. Here John
mentions two manner of Baptisms, and two different Baptisms; the one with
Water, and the other with the Spirit; the one whereof, he was the Minister of;
the other whereof, Christ was the Minister of: And such as were baptized with
the first, were not therefore baptized with the second: I indeed baptize you,
but he shall baptize you. Though in the present time they were baptized with the
Baptism of Water; yet they were not as yet, but were to be, baptized with the
Baptism of Christ. From all which, I thus ague:

Arg. 1.
If those that were baptized with the Baptism of Water, were not therefore
baptized with the Baptism of Christ; then the Baptism of Water is not the
Baptism of Christ: But the first is true; Therefore also the last.
And again, Arg. 2.
If he, that truly and really administered the Baptism of Water, did
notwithstanding declare; that he neither could, nor did baptize with the
Baptism of Christ; then the Baptism of Water is not the Baptism of Christ: But
the first is true; Therefore, etc.


And indeed to understand it otherwise, would make John's words void of good
sense: For if their Baptisms had been all one, why should he have so precisely
contra-distinguished them? Why should he have said, that those, whom he had
already baptized, should yet be baptized by another Baptism?

That Baptism with Water was the one part, and that with the Spirit the other
part or effect only of the former.

I baptize you with Water, One Baptism is no Part nor Effect of the other.
and he that comes after shall produce the effects of this my Baptism in you
by the Spirit, etc. or he shall accomplish this Baptism in you; but, He shall
baptize you. So then, if we understand the word truly and properly, when he
says, I baptize you; as consenting, that thereby is really signified, that he
did baptize with the Baptism of Water; we must needs, unless we offer violence
to the Text, understand the other part of the Sentence the same way; that where
he adds presently, But he shall baptize you, etc. that he understood it of
their being truly to be baptized with another Baptism, than what he did baptize
with: Else it had been non sense for him thus to have contra distinguished them.

Secondly; This is further confirmed by the Saying of Christ himself, Acts 1.4,
5. But wait for the Promise of the Father, which, says he, ye have heard of
me: For John truly baptized with Water, Who were baptized by John, were still
to wait for Christ's Baptism with the Spirit.
but ye shall be baptized with the Holy Ghost not many days hence. There can
scarce two places of Scripture run more parrallel, than this does with the
former, a little before mentioned; and therefore concludes the same way, as
did the other. For Christ here grants fully that John completed his Baptism,
as to the matter and substance of it: John (says he) truly baptized with
Water; which is as much as if he had said, John did truly and fully, administer
the Baptism of Water, But ye shall be baptized with, etc. This shows that
they were to be baptized with some other Baptism than the Baptism of Water; and
that although they were formerly baptized with the Baptism of Water, yet not with
that of Christ, which they were to be baptized with.

Thirdly; Peter observes the same distinction, Acts 11.16. Then remembered I the
Word of the Lord, how that he said, John indeed baptized with Water; The
Baptism with the Holy Ghost, and that with Water differ.
but ye shall be baptized with the Holy Ghost. The Apostle makes this
application upon the Holy Ghost's falling upon them; whence he infers, that
they were then baptized with the Baptism of the Spirit. As to what is urged
from his calling afterward for Water, it shall be spoken to hereafter. From
all which Three Sentences relative one to another, first of John, secondly of
Christ and thirdly of Peter, it does evidently follow, that such as were truly
and really baptized with the Baptism of Water, were notwithstanding not
baptized with the Baptism of the Spirit, which is that of Christ; and such as
truly and really did, administer the Baptism of Water, did, in so doing, not
administer the Baptism of Christ. So that if there be now but One Baptism, as
we have already proved, we may safely conclude, that it is that of the Spirit,
and not of Water; else it would follow, that the One Baptism, which now
continues, were the Baptism of Water, i. e. John's Baptism, and not the Baptism
of the Spirit, i. e. Christ's, which were most absurd.

That though the Baptism of John, before Christ 's was administered, was different
from it, as being the Figure only; yet new, that both it, as the Figure, and
that of the Spirit as the Substance, is necessary to make up the One Baptism.

Baptism; so that Baptism is not to be accounted as truly administered, where
both are not; which none of our Adversaries will acknowledge: But on the
contrary, Water Baptism is not the true Baptism of Christ.
account not only all those truly baptized with the Baptism of Christ, who are
baptized with Water, though they be uncertain, whether they be baptized with the
Spirit or not; but they even account such truly baptized with the Baptism of
Christ, because sprinkled, or baptized with Water, though it be manifest and most
certain, that they are not baptized with the Spirit, as being Enemies thereunto
in their Hearts by wicked Works. So here, by their own confession, Baptism with
Water is without the Spirit: Wherefore we may far safer conclude, that the
Baptism of the Spirit, which is that of Christ, is and may be without that of
Water, as appears in that of Acts 11. where Peter testifies of these Men, that
they were baptized with the Spirit; though not then baptized with Water. And
indeed the Controversy in this, as in most other things, stands betwixt us and
our Opposers, in that they not only oftentimes prefer the Form and Shadow, to
the Power and Substance; by denominating Persons as Inheritors and Possessors
of the thing, from their having the Form and Shadow, though really wanting the
Power and Substance; and not admitting those to be so denominated, who have the
Power and Substance, if they want the Form and Shadow. This appears evidently,
in that they account those truly baptized with the One Baptism of Christ, who
are not baptized with the Spirit (which in Scripture is particularly called the
Baptism of Christ) if they be only baptized with Water; which themselves yet
confess to be but the Shadow or Figure. The Baptism of ^t Spirit needs a
sprinkling or dipping in Water.
And moreover, in that they account not those who are surely baptized with the
Baptism of the Spirit, baptized; neither will they have them so denominated,
unless they be also sprinkled with, or dipped in Water. But we on the contrary,
do always prefer the Power to the Form, the Substance to the Shadow; and where
the Substance and Power is, we doubt not to denominate the Person accordingly,
though the Form be wanting. And therefore we always seek first, and plead for the
Substance and Power, as knowing that to be indispensably necessary; though the
Form sometimes may be dispensed with, and the Figure or Type may cease, when
the Substance and Anti type come to be enjoyed; as it does in this case, which
shall hereafter be made appear.

Fourthly, That the One Baptism of Christ, is not a washing with Water, appears
from, The plainest Definition of the Baptism of Christ in all the Bible.
1 Pet. 3.21. The like Figure whereunto even Baptism does also now save us (not
the putting away of the filth of the Flesh, but the answer of a good Conscience
toward God) by the Resurrection of Jesus Christ: So plain a Definition of
Baptism is not in all the Bible; and therefore, seeing it is so plain, it may
well be preferred to all the coined Definitions of the School Men. The Apostle
tells us, First, Negatively, what it is not, viz. Not a putting away of the
filth of the Flesh; then surely it is not a washing with Water, since that is
so. Secondly, he tells us Affirmatively, what it is, viz. The answer of a good
Conscience toward God, by the Resurrection of Jesus Christ: Where he
Affirmatively defines it to be the Answer (or Confession, as the Syriack
Version has it) of a good Conscience. Now this Answer cannot be, but where the
Spirit of God has purified the Soul, and the Fire of his Judgment has burned
up the Unrighteous Nature: And those in whom this Work is wrought may be truly
said to be baptized with the Baptism of Christ, i. e. of the Spirit end of
Fire. Whatever way then we take this Definition of the Apostle, of Christ's
Baptism, it confirms our Sentence: For if we take the First, or Negative
part, viz. That it is not a putting away of the filth of the Flesh, then it
will follow, Water Baptism ^t out from the Baptism of Christ.
that Water Baptism is not it, because that is a putting away of the filth of
the Flesh. If we take the Second, and Affirmative Definition, to wit, That it
is the Answer, or Confession, of a good Conscience, etc. then Water Baptism is
not it: Since, as our Adversaries will not deny, Water Baptism does not always
imply it, neither is it any necessary consequence thereof. Moreover, the
Apostle in this place does seem especially to guard against those, that might
esteem Water Baptism the true Baptism of Christ; because (lest by the
Comparison induced by him, in the preceding verse, betwixt the Souls that were
saved in Noah's Ark, and us that are now saved by Baptism; lest, I say, any
should have thence hastily concluded, that because the former were saved by
Water, this place must needs be taken to speak of Water Baptism) to prevent
such a mistake, he plainly affirms, that it is not that, but another thing. He
says not, that it is the Water, or the putting away of the filth of the Flesh,
as accompanied with the answer of a good Conscience; whereof the one, viz. the
Water, is the Sacramental Element, administered by the Minister; and the other,
the Grace or Thing signified, conferred by Christ; but plainly, That it is not
the putting away, etc. than which there can be nothing more manifest to Men
Unprejudicate and Judicious. Moreover, Peter calls this here, which saves, the
(...) the Antitype, or the thing figur^d, whereas it is usually translated, as
if the like Figure did now save us? thereby insinuating, that as they were
saved by Water in the Ark, so are we now by Water Baptism. But this
Interpretation crosses his Sense, he presently after declaring the contrary,
as has above been observed; and likewise it would contradict the Opinion of
all our Opposs^rs. The Protestants denying Water baptism its absolute necessity
to Men's Salvation: Although the Papists say, None can be Saved without it, yet
grant Exceptions
For Protestants deny it to be absolutely necessary to Salvation: And though
Papists say None are saved without it; yet in this they admit a^ Exception, as
of Martyrs, etc. and they will not say, that all that have it, are saved by
Water Baptism: Which they ought to say, if they will understand by Baptism, (by
which the Apostle says we are Saved) Water Baptism. For seeing we are saved by
this Baptism, as all those that were in the Ark, were saved by Water; it would
then follow, that all those that have this Baptism, are saved by it. Now this
Consequence would be false, if it were understood of Water Baptism; because
many by the Confession of all are baptized with Water, that are not saved: But
this Consequence holds most true, if it be understood as we do, of the Baptism
of the Spirit; since none can have this Answer of a good Conscience, and
abiding in it, not be saved by it.

Fifthly: That the One Baptism of Christ is not a washing with Water, as it
has been proved by the Definition of the One Baptism, The Effects and Fruits
of the Baptism of Christ.
so it is also manifest from the necessary Fruits and Effects of it, which are
three times particularly expressed by the Apostle Paul: As first, Romans 6.3, 4.
where he says, That so many of them as were baptized into Jesus Christ, were
baptized into his Death; buried with him by Baptism into Death, that they
should walk in newess of Life: Secondly, to the Gal. 3.27. he says positively,
For as many of you as have been baptized into Christ, have put on Christ: And
Thirdly, to the Col. 2.12. he says, That they were Buried with him in Baptism,
and risen with him through the Faith of the operation of God. It is to be
observed here, that the Apostle speaks generally, without any Exclusive Term,
but Comprehensive of all: He says not, Some of you that were baptized into
Christ, have put on Christ; but, As many of you: Which is as much as if he had
said, Every one of you, that has been baptized into Christ, has put on
Christ. Whereby it is evident, that this is not meant of Water Baptism, but of
the Baptism of the Spirit; Which Effects Water Baptism wants.
because else it would follow, that whosoever had been Baptized with
Water Baptism, had put on Christ, and were risen with him; which all
acknowledge to be most Absurd. Now supposing, all the visible Members of the
Churches of Rome, Galatia, and Coloss, had been outwardly Baptized with Water,
(I do not say, they were; but our Adversaries will not only readily grant it,
but also contend for it) suppose (I say) the Case so, they will not say, they
had all put on Christ; since diverse Expressions in these Epistles to them show
the contrary. So that the Apostle cannot mean Baptism with Water; and yet that
he means the Baptism of Christ, i. e. of the Spirit, cannot be denied; or
that the Baptism wherewith these were Baptized (of whom the Apostle here
testifies, that they had put on Christ) was the One Baptism, I think none will
call in question. Now admit, as our Adversaries contend, that many in these
Churches, who had been Baptized with Water, had not put on Christ; it will
follow, that notwithstanding that Water Baptism, they were Baptized into
Christ, or with the Baptism of Christ; seeing as many of them as were Baptized
into Christ, had put on Christ, etc. From all which I thus argue;

Arg.
If the Baptism with Water, were the One Baptism, i. e. the Baptism of Christ,
as many as were baptized with Water would have put on Christ. But the last is
false; Therefore also the first.


And again;

Arg. 2.
Since as many as are baptized into Christ i. e. with the One Baptism, which is
the Baptism of Christ, have put on Christ; then Water Baptism is not the One
Baptism, viz. the Baptism of Christ. But the first is true: Therefore also the
last.


. V. Thirdly: Since John's Baptism was a Figure, Pro. III.
and seeing the Figure gives way to the Substance, Proved.
al^eit the thing figured remain, to wit, the One Baptism of Christ, yet the
other cease, which was the Baptism of John.

John's Baptism was a Figure of Christ's Baptism, I judge will not readily be
denied; John's Baptism was a Figure of Christ's.
but in case it should, it can easily be proved from the nature of it. John's
Baptism was a being Baptized with Water, but Christ's is a Baptizing with the
Spirit: Therefore John's Baptism, must have been a Figure of Christ's. But
further, that Water Baptism was John's Baptism, will not be denied; That
Water Baptism is not Christ's Baptism is already proved. From which does arise
the Confirmation of our Proposition, thus;

Arg.
There is no Baptism to continue now, but the One Baptism of Christ. Therefore
Water Baptism is not to continue now; because it is not the Baptism of Christ.


John's Baptism is ceased, many of our Adversaries confess: But, John's Baptism
is ceased, our Opposers confess.
if any should allege it otherwise, it may be easily proved by the express
words of John, not only as being insinuated there, where he
contra-distinguisheth his Baptism from that of Christ; but particularly where
he says, John 3.30. He (Christ) must increase, but I (John) must decrease.
From whence it clearly follows, that the increasing or taking place of Christ's
Baptism, is the decreasing or abolishing of John's Baptism: So that if
Water Baptism was a particular part of John's Ministry, and is no part of
Christ's Baptism, as we have already proved, it will necessarily follow, that
it is not to continue.

Secondly: Arg.
If Water Baptism had been to continue a perpetual Ordinance of Christ in his
Church, he would either have practiced it himself, or commanded his Apostles so
to do. But that he practiced it not, the Scripture plainly affirms, John 4.2.
And that he commanded his Diciples to baptize with Water, I could never yet
read. As for what is alleged, that Matthew. 28.19, etc. (where he bids them
baptize) is to be understood of Water Baptism, that is but to beg the Question,
and the grounds for that shall be hereafter examined. Therefore to Baptize with
Water, is no perpetual Ordinance of Christ to his Church.


This has had the more Weight with me, because I find not any standing
Ordinance or Appointment of Christ necessary to Christians, for which we have
not either Christ's own Practice or Command, as to obey all the Commandments,
which comprehend both our Duty toward God and Man, etc. and where the Gospel
requires more than the Law; which is abundantly signified in the 5 th and 6 th
Chapters of Matthew, and elsewhere. Besides, as to the Duties of Worship, he
exhorts us to Meet, promising his Presence; commands to Pray, Preach, Watch,
etc. and gives Precepts concerning some Temporary things, as the Washing of one
another Feet, the breaking of Bread, hereafter to be discussed: Only for this
one thing of Baptizing with Water, (though so earnestly contended for) we find
not any Precept of Christ.

The Gospel puts an end to Carnal Ordinances.
and not Carnal and Ceremonial, is to derogate from the New
Covenant-Dispensation, and set up the Legal Rites and Ceremonies, of which this
of Baptism, or Washing with Water, was one; as appears from Heb. 9.10. where
the Apostle speaking thereof, says, that it stood only in Meats and Drinks,
and diverse Baptisms, and carnal Ordinances, imposed until the time of
Reformation: If then the time of Reformation, or the Dispensation of the
Gospel, which puts an end to the Shadows, become, then such Baptisms and carnal
Ordinances are no more to be imposed. For how Baptism with Water comes now to
be a Spiritual Ordinance, more than before in the time of the Law, does not
appear; seeing it is but Water still, and a Washing of the outward Man, and a
putting away of the Filth of the Flesh still: And as before, those that were so
washed, were not thereby made perfect, as pertaining to the Conscience, neither
are they at this Day; as our Adversaries must needs acknowledge, and Experience
abundantly shows. So that the matter of it, which is a Washing with Water,
and the effects of it, which is only an outward Cleansing, being still the
same, how comes Water Baptism to be less a Carnal Ordinance now, than before?

God confers inward Grace upon some, that are now Baptized.

Jews.

Because it is commanded by Christ now, under the New Covenant.

First, That Is to beg the Question; of which hereafter.

But Secondly, We find, That where the matter of Ordinances is the same, and
the End the same, they are never accounted more or less Spiritual, because of
their different times. Now, was not God the Author of the Purifications and
Baptisms under the Law? Was not Water the matter of them, which is so now? Was
not the End of them to signify an Inward Purifying by an Outward Washing? And
is not that alleged to be the End still? And are the necessary Effects or
Consequences of it any better now than before, since Men are now by the virtue
of Water Baptism, Men are no more now than before by Water Baptism inwardly
cleansed.
as a necessary consequence of it, no more than before, made inwardly clean?
And if some by God's Grace, that are baptized with Water, are inwardly
purified, so were some also under the Law; so that this is not any necessary
consequence or effect, neither of this, nor that Baptism. It is then plainly
Repugnant to right Reason, as well as to the Scripture Testimony, to affirm
that to be a Spiritual Ordinance now, which was a Carnal Ordinance before, if
it be still the same, both as to its Author, Matter and End, however made to
vary in some small Circumstances. The Spirituality of the New Covenant, and of
its Worship established by Christ, consisted not in such superficial
Alterations of Circumstances; but after another manner. Therefore let our
Adversaries show us, if they can, (without begging the Question, and building
upon some one or other of their own Principles, denied by us) where ever Christ
appointed or ordained any Institution or Observation under the New Covenant, as
belonging to the Nature of it, or such a necessary part of its Worship as is
perpetually to continue, which being one in Substance and Effects, (I speak of
Necessary, not Accidental Effects) yet because of some small difference in Form
or Circumstance, was before Carnal, notwithstanding it was commanded by God
under the Law, but now is become Spiritual, because commanded by Christ under
the Gospel? And if they cannot do this, then if Water Baptism was once a Carnal
Ordinance, as the Apostle positively affirms it to have been, it remains a
Carnal Ordinance still; and if a Carnal Ordinance, then no necessary part of
the Gospel, or New Covenant Dispensation; and if no necessary part of it, then
not needful to continue, nor to be practiced by such as live and walk under
this Dispensation. But in this, as in most other things, according as we have
often observed) our Adversaries Judaize, and renouncing the Glorious and
Spiritual Privileges of the New Covenant, are sticking in, and cleaving to,
the Rudiments of the Old, both in Doctrine and Worship, as being more suited
and agreeable to their Carnal Apprehensions, and Natural Senses. But we, on the
contrary, travel above all, to lay hold upon, and cleave unto the Light of the
Glorious Gospel, revealed unto us. And the Harmony of the Truth we profess in
this, The Law distinguished from the Gospel.
may appear, by briefly observing how in all things we follow the Spiritual
Gospel of Christ, as contradistinguished from the Carnality of the Legal
Dispensation; while our Adversaries, through rejecting this Gospel, are still
laboring under the Burden of the Law, which neither they, nor their Fathers,
were able to bear.

For the Law and Rule of the Old Covenant, The Outward Baptism, Worship, Law,
distinguished from the Inward.
and Jews, was outward, written in Tables of Stone and Parchments: So also is
that of our Adversaries. But the Law of the New Covenant is inward and
perpetual, written in the Heart: So is ours.

The Worship of the Jews was outward and carnal, limited to set times, places
and persons, and performed according to set prescribed Forms and Observations:
So is that of our Adversaries. But the Worship of the New Covenant is neither
limited to time, place, nor person; but is performed in the Spirit and in
Truth, and is not acted according to set Forms and Prescriptions, but as the
Spirit of God immediately acts, moves and leads, whether it be to Preach, Pray,
or Sing: And such is also our Worship.

So likewise the Baptism among the Jews under the Law, was an outward Washing
with outward Water, only to typifie an inward Purification of the Soul, which
did not necessarily follow upon those that were thus baptized: But the Baptism
of Christ under the Gospel, is the Baptism of the Spirit, and of Fire; not the
putting away of the filth of the Flesh, but the answer of a good Conscience
toward God: And such is the Baptism that we labor to be baptized withal, and
contend for.

Paul would have been sent to administer it; but he declares positively, 1 Cor.
1.17. That Christ sent him not to Baptize, but to Preach the Gospel: The Reason
That Water Baptism is no ^adge of Christians, like Circumcision of the Jews.
because the Apostle Paul's Commission was as large as that of any of them; and
consequently, he being in special manner the Apostle of Christ to the Gentiles,
if Water Baptism (as our Adversaries contend) be to be accounted the Badge of
Christianity, he had more need than any of the rest to be sent to Baptize with
Water, that he might mark the Gentiles, Converted by him, with that Christian
Sign. But indeed the Reason holds better thus, That since Paul was the Apostle
of the Gentiles, and that in his Ministry he does through all (as by his
Epistles appears) labor to wean them from the former Jewish Ceremonies and
Observations, (though in so doing he was sometimes undeservedly judged by others
of his Brethren, who were unwilling to lay aside those Ceremonies) therefore
his Commission (though as full, as to the preaching of the Gospel, and New
Covenant Dispensation, as that of the other Apostles) did not require of him,
that he should lead those Converts into such Jewish Observations and Baptisms,
however that Practice was indulged in, and practiced by the other Apostles,
among their Jewish Proselytes: Cor. 1.14.
For which cause he thanks God that he had baptized so few; intimating, that
what he did therein, ^ul was ^t sent to ^aptize.
he did not by virtue of his Apostolic Commission, but rather in Condesension
to their Weakness; even as at another time he Circumcised Timothy.

That by this is only to be understood, that he was not sent principally to
baptize* not that he was not sent at all.

spurious, until they bring some better proof for it. He says not, I was not
sent principally to baptize; but I was not sent to baptize.

As for what they urge, by way of Confirmation, Confir.
from other places of Scripture, where [ not] is to be so taken, as where it is
said, I will have Mercy, Mat. 9.13. Hos. 6.6.
and not Sacrifice, which is to be understood, that God requires principally
Mercy, not excluding Sacrifices:

I say, Refut.
this place is abundantly explained by the following words, [ and the knowledge
of God, more than burnt Offerings] by which it clearly appears, that
Burnt-Offerings, which are one with Sacrifices, are not excluded; but there is
no such word added in that of Paul, and therefore the Parity is not
demonstrated to be alike, and consequently the Instance not sufficient; unless
they can prove, that it ought so to be admitted here: Else we might interpret,
by the same Rule, all other places of Scripture the same way; as where the
Apostle says, 1 Cor. 2.5. That your Faith might not stand in the Wisdom of
Men, but in the Power of God; it might be understood, it shall not stand
principally so. How might the Gospel, by this liberty of Interpretation, be
perverted?

That the abuse of this Baptism among the Corinthians, in dividing themselves
according to the Persons by whom they were baptized, made the Apostle speak so;
but that the abuse of a thing does not abolish it.

the Apostle excludes Baptizing, not Preaching, though the abuse [mark] proceeded
from that, no less than from the other. For these Corin^hians did denominate
themselves from those different Persons, by whose Preaching (as well as from
those, by whom they were Baptized) they were Converted, as by the 4, 5, 6, 7
and 8 verses of Chap. 3. may appear: And yet for to remove that Abuse, the
Apostle does not say, What Preaching is a standing Ordinance, and not to be
forborne.
he was not sent to Preach; nor yet does he rejoice, that he had only Preached
to a few; because Preaching, being a standing Ordinance in the Church, is not,
because of any abuse that the Devil may tempt any to make of it, to be forborne
by such as are called to perform it by the Spirit of God: Wherefore the Apostle
accordingly, Chap. 3.8, 9. informs them, as to that, how to remove that Abuse.
But as to Water Baptism, for that it was no standing Ordinance of Christ, but
only practiced as in Condesension to the Jews, and by some Apostles to some
Gentiles also; therefore so soon as the Apostle perceived the abuse of it, he
let the Corinthians understand, how little stress was to be laid upon it, by
showing them, that he was glad, that he had administered this Ceremony to so few
of them; and by telling them plainly, that it was no part of his Commission,
neither that which he was sent to administer.

Query.
Some ask us, How we know that Baptizing here is meant of Water, and not of the
Spirit; which if it be, then it will exclude the Baptism of the Spirit, as well
as of Water?

That which Converts to Christ is the Baptism of the Spirit.
which is more than manifest. For since the Apostle Paul's Message was, to turn
People from Darkness to Light, and Convert them to God; and ^at as many as are
thus Turned and Converted ( so as to have the answer of a good Conscience
toward God, and to have put on Christ, and be arisen with him in Newness of
Life) are baptized with the Baptism of the Spirit. But who will say, that only
those few, mentioned there to be baptized by Paul, were come to this? Or that
to turn, or bring them to this Condition, was not (even admitting our
Adversaries Interpretation) as principally a part of Paul's Ministry as any
other? Since then our Adversaries do take this place for Water Baptism (as
indeed it is) we may lawfully, taking it also, urge it upon them. Why the word
Baptism and Baptizing is used by the Apostle, where that of Water, and not of
the Spirit, is only understood, shall hereafter be spoken to. I come now to
consider the Reasons alleged by such as plead for Water Baptism; Part II.
which are also the Objections used against the Discontinuance of it.

First; Some Object, That Christ, who had the Spirit above measure, was
notwithstanding baptized with Water. As Nic. Arnoldus, John 3 34.
against the Thesis Sect. 46. of his Theological Exercitation.

John, Why Christ was baptized by John.
but the Law also; therefore did he observe the Jewish Feasts and Rites, and
kept the Passover: It will not then follow, that Christians ought to do so now;
and therefore Christ, Mat. 3.15. gives John this Reason of his being baptized,
desiring him to suffer it to be so now; whereby he sufficiently intimates, that
he intended not thereby to perpetuate it as an Ordinance to his Disciples.

Secondly; They object, Mat. 28.19. Go ye therefore, and teach all Nations,
baptizing them in the Name of the Father and of the Son, and of the Holy, Ghost.

Answer is, by granting the whole; but putting them to prove, that Water is
here meant, What Baptism (...) does mean in Mat. 21?
since the ^ext is silent of it. And though in reason it be sufficient upon our
part, that we concede the whole expressed in the place, but deny that it is by
Water, which is an addition to the Text; yet I shall premise some Reasons why
we do so, and then consider the Reasons alleged by those, that will have Water
to be here understood.

Arg. 1.
The first is a Maxim yielded to by all, That we ought not to go from the
literal signification of the Text, except some urgent necessity force us
thereunto. But no urgent necessity in this place forces us thereunto:
Therefore we ought not to go from it.


Secondly, Arg. 2.
That Baptism which Christ commanded his Apostles, was the One Baptism, id^est,
his own Baptism: But the One Baptism, which is Christ's Baptism, is not with
Water, as we have already proved: Therefore the Baptism commanded by Christ to
his Apostles, was n^ Water Baptism.


Thirdly, Arg. 3.
That Baptism which Christ commanded his Apostles, was such, that as many as
were therewith Baptized, did put on Christ: But this is not true of Water
Baptism; Therefore, etc.


Fourthly, Arg. 4.
The Baptism commanded by Christ to his Apostles, was not John's Baptism: But
Baptism with Water was John's Baptism. Therefore etc.


That Christ's Baptism, though a Baptism with Water, did differ from John 's,
because John only Baptized with Water unto Repentance, but Christ commands his
Disciples to Baptize in the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; reckoning,
that in this form, there lies a great difference betwixt the Baptism of John,
and that of Christ.

John's Baptism was unto Repentance, the difference lies not there, because so
is Christ's also: Yea, our advesaries will not deny, but that adult Persons,
that are to be baptized, ought ere they are admitted to Water Baptism, to
Repent and Confess their Sins; and that Infants also, with a respect to, and
consideration of their Baptism, ought to Repent and Confess: So that the
difference lies not here; since this of Repentance and Confession agrees as
well to Christ's as to John's Baptism. But in this our Adversaries are divided;
for Calvin will have Christ's and John's to be all one, Inst. lib. 4. chap. 15.
Sect. 7, 8. Yet they do differ, and the difference is, in that the one is by
Water, the other not, etc.

Secondly, As to what Christ says, in commanding them to baptize in the Name
of the Father, Son, and Spirit, I confess that states the difference, and it is
great; but that lies not only in admitting Water Baptism in this different
Form, by a bare expressing of these Words: For as the Text says no such thing,
neither do I see, how it can be inferred from it. For the Greek is (...), that
is, Of the Name of the Lord, how taken in Scripture.
into the Name; now the Name of the Lord is often taken in Scripture for
something else, than a bare sound of Words, or literal expression, even for his
Virtue and Power; as may appear from Psalm 54.3. Cant. 1.3. Prove. 18.10. and in
many more. Now that the Apostles were, by their Ministry, to baptize the
Nations into this Name, Virtue and Power; and that they did so, is evident by
these Testimonies of Paul, abovementioned, where he says, The Baptism into
the Name, what it is?
That as many of them as were baptized into Christ, have put on Christ: This
must have been a baptizing into the Name, i. e. Power and Virtue; and not a
mere formal Expression of Words, adjoined with Water Baptism; because, as has
been above observed, it does not follow as a natural or necessary consequence
of it. I would have those, who desire to have their Faith built upon no other
Foundation, than the Testimony of God's Spirit and Scriptures of Truth,
thoroughly to consider, whether there can be any thing further alleged for this
Intepretation, than what prejudice of Education, and influence of Tradition,
has imposed. Perhaps it may stumble the unwary and inconsiderate Reader, as if
the very Character of Christianity were abolished, to tell him plainly, that
this Scripture is not to be understood of Baptizing with Water; and that this
Form of Baptizing in the Name of the Father, Son, and Spirit, has no warrant
from Mat. 28, etc.

Whether Christ did prescribe a Form of Baptism, in Mat. 28?
For which, besides the Reason taken from the Signification of ( the Name) as
being the Virtue and Power above expressed, let it be considered, that if it
had been a Form prescribed by Christ to his Apostles, then surely they would
have made use of that Form in the administering of Water Baptism, to such as
they baptized with Water; but though particular mention be made in diverse
places of the Acts, who were baptized, and how; and though it be particularly
expressed, that they baptized such and such, as Acts 2.41. and 8.12, 13, 38.
and 9.18. and 10.48. and 16, 15. and 18.8. yet there is not a word of this
Form. And in two places, Acts 8.16. and 19.5. it is said of some, that they
were baptized in the Name of the Lord Jesus; by which it yet more appears, that
either the Author of this History has been very defective, who having so often
occasion to mention this, yet omitteth so substantial a part of Baptism, (which
were to accuse the Holy Ghost, by whose guidance Luke wrote it) or else, that
the Apostles did no ways understand, that Christ by his Commission, Mat 28. did
enjoin them such a Form of Water Bapt^sm, seeing they did not use it. And
therefore it is safer to conclude, that what they did in administering Water
Baptism, they did not by Virtue of that Commission; else they would have used
it: For our Adversaries, I suppose, would judge it a great Heresy to
administer Water Baptism without that, or only in the Name of Jesus, without
mention of Father or Spirit, as it is expressly said they did, in the two places
above cited.

Secondly; They say, If this were not understood of Water Baptism, it would be
a Tautology, and all one with Teaching.

Nay: Baptizing with the Spirit is somewhat farther than Teaching, or informing
the Understanding; for it imports a reaching to, How Teaching and Baptizing
differ.
and melting the Heart, whereby it is turned, as well as the Understanding
informed. Besides, we find often in the Scripture, that Teaching and
Instructing are put together, without any Absurdity, or needless Tautology, and
yet these two have a greater Affinity, than Teaching and Baptizing with the
Spirit.

Thirdly; They say, Baptism in this place must be understood with Water,
because it is the Action of the Apostles; and so cannot be the Baptism of the
Spirit, which is the Work of Christ, and his Grace, not of Man, etc.

Baptism with the Spirit, though not wrought without Christ and his Grace, is
instrumentally done by Men fitted of God for that purpose; The Baptism with the
Spirit ascribed to godly Men as Instruments.
and therefore no absurdity follows, that Baptism with the Spirit should be
expressed as the Action of the Apostles: For though it be Christ, by his Grace,
that gives Spiritual Gifts, yet the Apostle, Romans 1.11. speaks of his imparting
to them Spiritual Gifts; and he tells the Corinthians, that he had begotten
them through the Gospel, 1 Cor. 4.15. And yet to beget People to the Faith, is
the Work of Christ and his Grace, not of Men. To Convert the Heart, is properly
the Work of Christ; and yet the Scripture oftentimes ascribes it to Men, as
being the Instruments: And since Paul's Commission was, To turn People from
Darkness, to Light, though that be not done without Christ cooperating by his
Grace; so may also Baptizing with the Spirit be expressed, as performable by
Man, as the Instrument, though the Work of Christ's Grace be needful to concur
thereunto: So that it is no absurdity to say, that the Apostles did administer
the Baptism of the Spirit.

Lastly; They say, That since Christ says here, that he will be with his
Disciples to the end of the world, therefore Water Baptism must continue so
long.



Thirdly; They object the constant Practice of the Apostles in the Primitive
Church, who, they say, did always administer Water Baptism to such as they
Converted to the Faith of Christ: And hence also they further urge that of Mat.
28. to have been meant of Water, or else the Apostles did not understand it, in
that in baptizing they used Water; or that in so doing they walked without a
Commission.

Constant Practice of the Apostles, is denied; for we have shown in the Example
of Paul, that it was not so; since it were most absurd to judge, that he
Converted only those few, even of the Church of Corinth, whom he says he
baptized; nor were it less absurd to think, that that was a constant Apostolic
Practice, which he, that was not inferior to the chiefest of the Apostles, and
who declares, he labored as much as they all, rejoiceth, How the Apostles
baptized.
he was so little in. But further, the Conclusion inferred from the Apostles
Practice of Baptizing with Water, to evince that they understood Mat. 28. of
Water Baptism, does not hold: For though they baptized with Water, it will not
follow, that either they did it by Virtue of that Commission, or that they
mistook that place; nor can there be any Medium brought, that will infer such a
Conclusion. As to the other insinuated Absurdity, That they did it without a
Commission; it is none at all: For they might have done it by a Permission, as
being in use before Christ's Death; and because the People, nursed up with
outward Ceremonies, could not be weaned wholly from them. And thus they used
other things, as Circumcision, and Legal Purifications, which yet they had no
Commission from Christ to do, (to which we shall speak more at length in the
following Proposition, concerning the Supper.)

sameness of the Word, because Christ bids them Baptize, and they afterward in
the use of Water are said to Baptize, it be judged probable, that they did
understand that Commission, Mat. 28. to authorize them to Baptize with Water,
and accordingly practiced it.

Go teach all Nations; since some time after, they judged it unlawful to teach
the Gentiles; yea, Peter himself scrupled it, until by a Vision constrained
thereunto; for which after he had done it, The Apostles did scruple the
teaching the Gentiles.
he was for a season (until they were better informed) judged by the rest of
his Brethren. Now, if the Education of the Apostles and Jews, and their
Propensity to adhere and stick to the Jewish Religion, did so far influence
them, that even after Christ's Resurrection, and the pouring forth of the
Spirit, they could not receive nor admit of the Teaching of the Gentiles, though
Christ, in his Commission to them, commanded them to preach to them; what
further Absurdity were it to suppose, that through the like Mistake, the
chiefest of them having been the Disciples of John, and his Baptism being so
much prized there among the Jews, that they also took Christ's Baptism,
intended by him of the Spirit, to be that of Water, which was John's, and
accordingly practiced it for a season? It suffices us, that if they were so
mistaken, (though I say not that they were so) they did not always remain under
that Mistake: Else Peter would not have said of the Baptism, which now saves,
that it is not a putting away of the filth of the Flesh, which certainly
Water Baptism is.

But further, They urge much Peter's baptizing Cornelius; in which they press
two things, First, That Water Baptism is used, even to those that had received
the Spirit. Secondly, That it is said positively, he commanded them to be
baptized, Acts 10.47, 48.

But neither of these does necessarily infer Water Baptism to belong to the New
Covenant-Dispensation, nor yet to be a perpetual standing Ordinance in the
Church. For first, all that this will amount to, Whether Peter's Baptizing some
with Water makes it a standing Ordinance to the Church?
was, that Peter at that time baptized these Men; but that he did it by virtue
of that Commission, Mat. 28. remains yet to be proved. And how does the
baptizing with Water, after the receiving of the Holy Ghost, prove the case,
more than the use of Circumcision, and other Legal Rites, acknowledged to have
been acted by him afterward? Also, no wonder if Peter, that thought it so
strange (notwithstanding all that had been professed before, and spoken by
Christ) that the Gentiles should be made Partakers of the Gospel, and with
great difficulty, not without an extraordinary Impluse thereunto, was brought
to come to them, and eat with them, was apt to put this Ceremony upon them;
which being, as it were, the particular Dispensation of John, the Forerunner
of Christ, seemed to have greater Affinity with the Gospel, than the other
Jewish Ceremonies, then used by the Church; but that will no ways infer our
Adversaries Conclusion. Secondly, as to these words, And he commanded them to
be baptized; it declares matter of Fact, not of Right, and amounts to no
more than, that Peter did at that time, pro hic and nunc, command those Persons
to be baptized with Water, which is not denied: But it says nothing, that
Peter commanded Water Baptism to be a standing and perpetual Ordinance to the
Church; neither can any Man of sound Reason say, if he heed what he says, that
a Command in matter of Fact to particular Persons, loath infer the Thing
commanded to be of general Obligation to all, if it be not otherwise bottomed
upon some Positive Precept. Why does Peter's commanding Cornelius and his
Household to be baptized at that time, infer Water Baptism to continue, more
than his Constraining (which is more than commanding) the Gentiles in general
to be circumcised, and observe the Law? We find at that time, when Peter
baptized Cornelius, it was not yet determined whether the Gentiles should not
be Circumcised; but on the contrary, it was the most general sense of the
Church, that they should: And therefore no wonder, if they thought it needful
at that time, that they should be baptized, which had more Affinity with the
Gospel, and was a Burden less grievous.

Fourthly; They object from the signification of the word (Baptize) which is as
much as to dip and wash with Water; alleging thence that the very Word imports
a being baptized with Water.

Jews, Baptizing signifies dipping, or washing with Water
as Paulus Riccius shows, even before the Coming of John; and that the
Ceremony received that Name from the Nature of the Practice, as used both by
the Jews, and by John. Yea, we find that Christ and his Apostles frequently
make use of these Terms to a more Spiritual Signification: Circumcision was
only used and understood among the Jews to be that of the Flesh; but the
Apostle tells us of the Circumcision of the Heart and Spirit, made without
hands. So that tho Baptism was used among the Jews, only to signify a washing
with Water, yet both John, Christ, and his Apostles, speak of a being Baptized
with the Spirit, and with Fire; which they make the peculiar Baptism of Christ,
as contra-distinguished from that of Water, which was John's, (as is above
shown.) So that though Baptism among the Jews, was only understood of Water; yet
among Christians it is very well understood of the Spirit, without Water: As we
see Christ and his Apostles spiritually to understand things, under the terms
of what had been Shadows before. Thus Christ speaking of his Body (though the
Jews mistook him) said, He would destroy the Temple, and build it again in
three days; and many more that might be instanced. But if the Etymology of the
word should be tenaciously adhered to, it would militate against most of our
Adversaries, as well as against us: For the Greek (...) signifies immergo,
(...) immergo, intirgo, to plunge, and dip in.
that is, to plunge, and dip in; and that was the proper use of Water Baptism
among the Jews, and also by John and the Primitive Christians, who used it:
Whereas our Adversaries, for the most part, only sprinkle a little Water ^n the
Forehead, The (...) of old used Water Baptism, were dipped and plunged; and
those that were only sprinkled, were not admitted to any Office in the Church,
and why?
which does not at all answer to the word ( Baptism.) Yea, those of old among
Christians, that used Water Baptism, thought this dipping or plunging so
needful, that they thus dipped Children: And forasmuch as it was judged, that
it might prove hurtful to some weak Constitutions, Sprinkling, to prevent that
hurt, was introduced; yet then it was likewise appointed, that such as were
only sprinkled, and not dipped, should not be admitted to have any Office in
the Church, as not being sufficiently baptized. So that if our Adversaries will
stick to the word, they must alter their method of sprinkling.

Fifthly; They object John 3.5. Except a Man be born again of Water, and of the
Spirit, etc. Hence inferring the necessity of Water Baptism as well as of the
Spirit.

The Water, that Regenerates i^ ^stica, and inward.
and therefore Protestants rightly affirm, when this is urged upon them by
Papists, to evince the absolute necessity of Water Baptism, that [ Water] is
not here understood of outward Water; but mystically of an inward Cleansing and
Washing. Even as where Christ speaks of being baptized with Fire, it is not to
be understood of outward material Fire, but only of purifying, by a Metonymy;
because to purify, is a proper effect of Fire, as to wash and make clean, is
of Water; where it can as little be so understood, as where we are said to be
saved by the washing of Regeneration, Tit. 3.5. Yea, Peter says expressly, in
the place often cited, as Calvin In the 4th Book of his Insti. c. 15.
well observes, That the Baptism which saves, is not the putting away of the
filth of the Flesh: So that since (Water) cannot be understood of outward
Water, this can serve nothing to prove Water Baptism.

Water) imports here necessitatem Praecepti, though not Medii.

Necessitas Praecepti and Medii, urged.
Water and the Spirit are placed here together, ( Except a Man be born of Water
and the Spirit) where the necessity of the one is urged, as much as of the
other. Now if the Spirit be absolutely necessary, so will also Water; and then
we must either say, that to be born of the Spirit, is not absolutely necessary,
which all acknowledge to be false; or else, that Water is absolutely necessary,
which, as Protestants, we affirm, and have proved, is false: Else we must
confess, that Water is not here understood of outward Water. For to say, that
when Water and the Spirit are placed here just together, and in the same
manner, though there be not any difference or ground for it visible in the Text,
or deduceable from it, That the necessity of Water is here Praecepti, but not
Medii, but the necessity of the Spirit is both Medii and Praecepti; is indeed
confidently to affirm, but not to prove.

Sixthly and lastly; They object, That the Baptism of Water is a visible Sign,
or Badge, to distinguish Christians from Infidels, even as Circumcision did the
Jews.

necessary Precept, or part of the New Covenant Dispensation; it not being
lawful to us, to impose outward Ceremonies and Rites, and say, they will
distinguish us from Infidels. Circumcision was positively commanded,
Circumcision a Seal of the first Covenant.
and said to be a Seal of the first Covenant; but as we have already proved,
that there is no such Command for Baptism, so there is not any word in all the
New Testament, Water Baptism falsely called a Badge of Christianity.
calling it a Badge of Christianity, or Seal of the New Covenant: And therefore
to conclude it is so, because Circumcision was so, (unless some better proof be
alleged for it) is miserably to beg the Question. The professing of Faith in
Christ, and a holy Life answering thereunto, Which is the Badge of Christianity.
is a far better Badge of Christianity, than any outward Washing; which yet
answers not to that of Circumcision, since that affixed a Character in the
Flesh, which this does not: So that a Christian is not known to be a Christian
by his being baptized, especially when he was a Child, unless he tell them so
much. What the Fathers say of Water Baptism, and of the Sign of the Cross.
And may not the professing of Faith in Christ signify that as well? I know
there are diverse of those called the Fathers, that speak much of Water Baptism,
calling it Characterem Christianitatis: But so did they also of the Sign of the
Cross, and other such things, justly rejected by Protestants. For the Mystery
of Iniquity, which began to work in the Apostles days, Heathenish Ceremonies
introduced into the Christian Worship.
soon spoiled the Simplicity and Purity of the Christian Worship, so that not
only many Jewish Rites were retained, but many Heathenish Customs and
Ceremonies introduced in the Christian Worship; as particularly the word (
Sacrament.) So that it is great Folly, especially for Protestants, to plead any
thing of this from Tradition or Antiquity; for we find, that neither Papists
nor Protestants use the Rites exactly, as the Ancients did, who in such things,
not walking by the most certain Rule of God's Spirit, but doting too much upon
outward, were very uncertain. For most of them all, in the Primitive Time, did
wholly plunge and dip those they baptized, which neither Papists, nor most
Protestants do: Yea, several of the Fathers accused some as Heretics, in their
days, for holding some Principles, common with Protestants, concerning it; as
particularly Augustine does the Pelagians, for saying, that Infants dying
unbaptized, may be saved. And the Manichees were condemned, for denying,
Exercism o^ Adjuraetion.
that Grace is universally given by Baptism; and Julian the Pelagian, by
Augustine, for denying Exorcism and Ins^fflation in the use of Baptism: All
which things Protestants deny also. So that Protestants do but foolishly to
upbraid us, as if we could not show any among the Ancients that denied
Water Baptism; seeing they cannot show any, whom they acknowledge not to have
been Heretical in several things, to have used it; nor yet, who using it, The
Sign ^ the Cross.
did not also use the Sign of the Cross, and other things with it, which they
deny. There were some nevertheless in the darkest Times of Popery, Many in
former Ages testified again Water Baptism
who testified against Water Baptism. For one Alanus, page 103, 104, 107.
speaks of some in his time, that were burnt for the denying of it: For they
said, That Baptism had no Efficacy either in Children, or Adult Persons; and
therefore Men were not obliged to take Baptism: Particularly Ten Canonicks, so
called, were burnt for that Crime, by the Order of King Robert of France. And
P. Pithaeus tells in his Fragments of the History of Guienne (which is also
confirmed by one Johannes Floracensis, a Monk, who was Famous at that time) in
his Epistle to Oliva, Abbot of the Ausonian Church: I will, says he, give you
to understand, concerning the Heresy that was in the City of Orleans on
Childermas-day; Ten Canonicks burnt at Orleans, and why?
for it was true, if ye have heard any thing, that King Robert caused to be
burnt alive, near fourteen of that City, of the Chief of their Clergy, and the
more Noble of their Laics, who were hateful to God, and abominable to Heaven
and Earth; for they did stiffly deny the Grace of Holy Baptism, and also the
Consecration of the Lord's Body and blood. The time of this Deed is noted in
these words by Papir. Masson, in his Annals of France, lib. 3. in Hugh and
Robert, Actum Aureliae public anno Incarnationis Domini, 1022. Regni Roberti
Regis 28. Indictione 5. quando Stephanus Haeresiarcha and Accomplices ejus
damnati sunt and exusti Aureliae.

Now, for their calling them Heretics and Manichees, we have nothing but the
Testimony of their Accusers, which will no more invalidate their Testimony for
this Truth, against the Use of Water- Baptism, or give more ground to Charge
us, as being one with the Manichees, than because some, called by them
Manichees, do agree with Protestants in some things, that therefore Protestants
are Manichees, or Heretics, which Protestants can no ways shun. For the
Question is, Whether, in what they did, they walked according to the Truth
testified of by the Spirit in the Holy Scriptures? So that the Controversy is
brought back again to the Scriptures, according to which, I suppose, I have
formerly discussed it.

The Baptism of Infants an Humane Tradition.
As for the latter part of the Thesis, denying the Use of Infant Baptism, it
necessarily follows, from what is above said. For if Water Baptism be ceased,
then surely Baptizing of Infants is is not warrantable. But those that take
upon them to oppose us in this matter, will have more to do, as to the latter
part: For after they have done what they can to prove Water Baptism, it remains
for them to prove, that Infants ought to be baptized. For he that proves
Water Baptism ceased, proves that Infant Baptism is vain: But he that should
prove that Water Baptism continues, has not thence proved, that Infant Baptism
is necessary; that needs something further. And therefore it was a pitiful
Subterfuge of Nic. Arnoldus against this, to say, That the denying of
Infant Baptism belonged to the Gangrene of the Anabaptists; without adding any
further Probation.

PROPOSITION XIII. Concerning the Communion, or Participation of the Body and
Blood of Christ.
The Communion of the Body and Blood of Christ is Inward and Spiritual, 1 Cor.
10.16, 17. John 6.32.33, 35. 1 Cor. 5.18.
which is the Participation of his Flesh and Blood, by which the Inward Man is
daily nourished in the Hearts of those in whom Christ dwells. Of which things
the breaking of Bread by Christ with his Disciples, was a Figure, which they
even used in the Church for a time, who had received the Substance, for the
sake of the weak. Even as abstaining from things strangled, and from Blood,
Acts 15.2^ John 13.14. James 5.14.
the washing one another's Feet, and the anointing of the Sick with Oil: All
which are commanded with no less Authority and Solomnity, than the former; yet
seeing they are but Shadows of better things, they cease in such as have
obtained the Substance.

. I. THE Communion of the Body and Blood of Christ, is a Mystery hid from all
Natural Men, in their first, fallen and degenerate State, which they cannot
understand, reach to, nor comprehend, as they there abide, neither as they
there are, can they be Partakers of it, nor yet are they able to discern the
Lord's Body. And for as much as the Christian World (so called) for the most
part has been still laboring, working, conceiving and imagining, in their own
natural and unrenewed Understandings, about the things of God and Religion;
therefore has this Mystery much been hid and sealed up from them, while they
have been contending, quarrelling, and fighting one with another about the mere
Shadow, Outside and Form, but strangers to the Substance, Life and Virtue.

The Body and Blood of Christ is Spiritual.
. II. The Body then of Christ, which Believers partake of, is Spiritual, and
not Carnal; and his Blood, which they drink of, is Pure and Heavenly, and not
Humane or Elementary, as Augustine also affirms of the Body of Christ, which is
Eaten, in Tractat. Psalm. 90. Except a Man eat my Flesh, he has not in him Life
Eternal: And he says, The words which I speak unto you, are Spirit and Life;
understand spiritually what I have spoken. Ye shall not eat of this Body, which
ye see, and drink this Blood, which they shall spill, which Crucify me -- I am
the living Bread, who have descended from Heaven; he calls himself the Bread,
who descended from Heaven, exhorting that we might believe in him, etc.

Body, what that Flesh and Blood is?

Heavenly Seed, that Divine, Spiritual Celestial Substance, of which we spoke
before, What the heavenly Seed is, whereby formerly, and also now ^ife and
Salvation was and is Communicated.
in the fifth and sixth Propositions. This is that vehiculum Dei, or Spiritual
Body of Christ; whereby and where through, he communicates Life to Men, and
Salvation to as many as believe in him, and receive him; and whereby also Man
comes to have Fellowship and Communion with God. This is proved from the 6th of
John, from verse 32. to the end, where Christ speaks more at large of this
matter, than in any other place: And indeed this Evangelist and beloved
Disciple, who lay in the Bosom of our Lord, gives us a more full Account of the
spiritual sayings and Doctrine of Christ; and it is observable, that though speaks
nothing of the Ceremony, used by Christ, of ^ing Bread with his Disciples,
neither in his Evangelical Account of Christ's Life and Sufferings, nor in his
Epistles; yet he is more large in this Account of the Participation of the
Body, Flesh and Blood of Christ, than any of them all. For Christ, in this
Chapter, perceiving that the Jews did follow him for Love of the Loaves,
desires them (verse. 27.) to labor not for the meat which perishes, but for
that meat which endures for ever: But forasmuch as they, being carnal in their
Apprehensions, and not understanding the Spiritual Language and Doctrine of
Christ, did judge the Manna, which Moses gave their Fathers, to be the most
excellent Bread, as coming from Heaven; Christ, to rectify that mistake, and
better inform them, affirms, First, That it is not Moses, but his Father,
that gives the true Bread from Heaven, verse. 32. and 48. Secondly, This Bread
he calls himself, verse. 35. I am the Bread of Life: And verse. 51. I am the
living Bread, which came down from Heaven: Thirdly, he declares, that this
Bread is his Flesh, verse. 51. This Bread, The Origin Nature and Effects of the
Body, Flesh and Blood of Christ.
that I will give, is my Flesh; and verse. 55. For my Flesh is meat indeed, and
my Blood is drink indeed: Fourthly, the necessity of partaking thereof, verse.
53. Except ye eat the Flesh of the Son of Man, and drink his Blood, ye have no
Life in you; And lastly, verse. 33. the blessed Fruits and necessary Effects of
this Communion of the Body, and Blood of Christ; This Bread gives Life to the
World, verse. 50. He that eats thereof, dies not, verse. 58. He that eats of
this Bread, shall live for ever, verse. 51. Whosoever eats this Flesh, and
drinks this Blood, shall live for ever, verse. 54. And he dwells in Christ,
and Christ in him, verse. 56. And shall live by Christ, verse. 57. From this
large Description of the Origin, Nature and Effects of this Body, Flesh and
Blood of Christ, it is apparent, that it is Spiritual, and to be understood of
a Spiritual Body, and not of that Body, or Temple of Jesus Christ, which was
born of the Virgin Mary, and in which he walked, lived and suffered in the Land
of Judea; because that it is said that it came down from Heaven, yea, that it
is He that came down from Heaven. Now all Christians at present generally
acknowledge, that that outward Body of Christ came not down from Heaven;
neither was it that part of Christ which came down from Heaven. And to put the
matter out of doubt, when the carnal Jews would have been so understanding it,
he tells them plainly, verse. 63. It is the Spirit that quickens, but the
Flesh profits nothing. Solid Reasons, that it is his Spiritual Body, Christ
speaks of.
This is also founded upon most sound and solid Reason; because that it is the
Soul, not the Body, that is to be nourished by this Flesh and Blood. Now
outward Flesh cannot nourish not feed the Soul; there is no Proportion, nor
Analogy betwixt them; neither is the Communion of the Saints with God, by a
Conjunction, and mutual Participation of Flesh, but of the Spirit: He that is
joined to the Lord, 1 Cor 6.17
is One Spirit, not One Flesh. For the Flesh Im an outward Flesh, even such as
was that, wherein Christ lived and walked, when upon Earth; and not Flesh when
transported by a Metaphor, to be understood Spiritually) can only partake of
Flesh, as Spirit of Spirit: As the Body cannot feed upon Spirit, neither can
the Spirit feed upon Flesh. And that the Flesh here spoken of, is Spiritually
understood, appears further, in that, that which feeds upon it shall never
dye: But the Bodies of all Men once dye; yea, it behoved the Body of Christ
himself to dye: That this Body, and Spiritual Flesh and Blood of Christ, is to
be understood of that Divine and Heavenly Seed, before spoken of by us, appears
both by the Nature and Fruits of it. First, its said, It is that which comes
down from Heaven, and gives Life unto the World: Now this answers to that
Light and Seed which is testified of, John 1. to be the Light of the World, and
the Life of Men. This Spiritual Light and Seed, is as Bread to the hungry Soul.
For that Spiritual Light and Seed, as it receives place in Men's Hearts, and
room to spring up there, is as Bread to the hungry and fainting Soul, that is
(as it were) buried and dead in the Lusts of the World; which receives Life
again, and revives, as it tastes and partaketh of this Heavenly Bread: And
they that partake of it, are said to come to Christ; neither can any have it,
but by coming to him, and believing in the Appearance of his Light in their
Hearts; by receiving which, and believing in it, the Participation of this Body
and Bread is known. And that Christ understands the same thing here, by his
Body, Flesh and Blood, which is understood, John 1. by the Light inlightning
every Man, and the Life, etc. appears; for the Light and Life, spoken of John
1. is said to be Christ; He is the true Light: And the Bread and Flesh, etc.
spoken of in John 6. is called Christ; I am the Bread of Life, says he. Again,
They that received that Light and Life, John 1.12. obtained Power to become the
Sons of God, by believing in his Name: So also here, John 6.35. He that comes
unto this Bread of Life, shall not hunger; and he that believes in him, who is
the Bread, shall never thirst. So then, Christ's Outward and Spiritual Body
distinguished
as there was the outward visible Body and Temple of Jesus Christ, which took
its origin from the Virgin Mary; so there is also the Spiritual Body of Christ,
by and through which, He, that was the Word in the beginning with God, and was
and is GOD, did Reveal himself to the Sons of Men in all Ages, and whereby Men
in all Ages come to be made Partakers of Eternal Life, and to have Communion
and Fellowship with God and Christ. Of which Body of Christ, and Flesh and
Blood, The Patriarchs did eat of the Body of Christ.
if both Adam, and Seth, and Enoch, and Noah, and Abraham, and Moses, and
David, and all the Prophets and Holy Men of God, had not eaten, they had not
had Life in them; nor could their inward Man have been nourished. Now as the
outward Body and Temple was called Christ; so was also his Spiritual Body, no
less properly, and that long before that upward Body was in being. Hence the
Apostle says, 1 Cor. 10.3, 4. That the Fathers did all eat the same Spiritual
Meat, and did all drink the same Spiritual Drink: (For they drank of that
Spiritual Rock that followed them, and that Rock was Christ.) This cannot be
understood otherwise, than of this Spiritual Body of Christ; which Spiritual
Body of Christ, though it was the saving Food of the Righteous, both before the
Law, and under the Law; yet under the Law it was veiled and shadowed, and
covered under diverse Types, Ceremonies, and Observations; yea, and not only so,
but it was veiled and bid, in some respect, under the outward Temple and Body
of Christ, or during the continuance of it; so that the Jews could not
understand Christ's Preaching about it, while on Earth: And not the Jews only,
but many of his Disciples judged it an hard saying, John 6.60, 66.
murmuring at it; and many from that time went back from him, and walked no
more with him. I doubt not, but that there are many also at this day,
professing to be the Disciples of Christ, that do as little understand this
matter, as those did, and are as apt to be offended, and stumble at it, while
they are gazing and following after the outward Body; and look not to that, by
which the Saints are daily fed and nourished. For as Jesus Christ, in obedience
to the Will of the Father, did, The Divine Light of Christ, does make the
Saints Partakers of his Body.
by the Eternal Spirit, offer up that body for a Propitiation for the Remission
of Sins, and finished his Testimony upon Earth thereby, in a most perfect
Example of Patience, Resignation and Holiness, that all might be made Partakers
of the Fruit of that Sacrifice: So has he likewise poured forth into the
Hearts of All Men, a Measure of that Divine Light and Seed, wherewith he is
clothed; that thereby, reaching unto the Consciences of all, he may raise them
up out of Death and Darkness, by his Life and Light; and thereby may be made
Partakers of his Body; and there through come to have fellowship with the
Father, and with the Son.

. III. If it be asked, H^w and after what manner, Que^
Man comes to partake of it, and to be fed by it?

I am the Bread of Life, (says he) he that comes to me, shall never hunger;
John 6 33^ and ^5.
he that believes in me, shall never thrist: And again, For my Flesh is meat
indeed, and my Blood is drink indeed. So whatsoever thou art, that ask this
Question, or read these Lines, whether thou accountest thy self a Believer,
or really feel, by a certain and sad Experience, that thou art yet in the
Unbelief; and find, that the outward Body and Flesh of Christ is so far from
thee, that thou can not reach it, nor feed upon it: Yea, though thou have often
swallowed down, and taken in, that which the Papists have persuaded thee to be
the real Flesh and Blood of Christ, and have believed it to be so, The
Lutherans and Calvinists Opinion of the Flesh and Blood of Christ in the Supper
(so called)
though all thy Senses told thee the contrary: Or (being a Lutheran) have taken
that Bread, in and with, and under which, the Lutherans have assured thee, that
the Flesh and Blood of Christ is; Or (being a Calvinist) have partaken of that,
which the Calvinists say (though a Figure only of the Body) gives them that take
it, a real Participation of the Body, Flesh and Blood of Christ; though they
never knew how, nor what way: I say, if for all this, thou find thy Soul yet
barren, yea hungry, and ready to starve, for want of something thou longest
for; know, that that Light, that discovers thy iniquity to thee, that shows
thee thy Barreness, thy Nakedness, thy Emptiness, is that Body that thou must
partake of, and feed upon: But that till, by forsaking Iniquity, thou turnest
to it, come unto it, receivest it, though thou may hunger after it, thou
can not be satisfied with it; for it has no Communion with Darkness; 1 Cor.
6.14.
nor can thou drink of the Cup of the Lord, and the Cup of Devils, and be
Partaker of the Lord's Table, and the Table of Devils, 1 Cor. 10.21. But as
thou suffer that small Seed of Righteousness to arise in thee, How the
Inward Man is nourished.
and to be formed into a Birth, that new substantial Birth, that is brought
forth in the Soul, supernaturally feeds upon, and is nourished by this
Spiritual Body: Yea, as this outward Birth lives not but as it sucks in Breath
by the outward Elementrary Air: So this new Birth, lives not in the Soul, but
as it draws in, and breathes by that Spiritual Air, or Vehicle. And as the
outward Birth cannot subsist, without some outward Body to feed upon, some
outward Flesh, and some outward Drink; so neither can this inward Birth,
without it be fed by this inward Flesh and Blood of Christ, which answers to it
after the same manner, by way of Analogy. And this is most agreeable to the
Doctrine of Christ concerning this matter. For as without outward Food, the
natural Body has not Life; so also says Christ, John 6.53.
Except ye eat the Flesh of the Son of Man, and drink his Blood, ye have no
Life in you: And as the outward Body, eating outward Food, lives thereby; so
Christ says, that he that eats him, John 6.57.
shall live by him. So it is this inward Participation of this inward Man, of
this inward and spiritual Body, by which Man is united to God and has
fellowship and communion with him^ He that eats my Flesh, John 6.56.
and drinks my Blood (says Christ) dwells in me, and I in him; This cannot
be understood of outward Eating of outward Bread: And as by this the Soul must
have fellowship with God, so also, so far as all the Saints are Partakers of
this one Body, and one Blood, they come also to have a Joint-Communion. Hence
the Apostle, 1 Cor. 10.17. in this respect says, that they being many, are one
Bread, and one Body; and to the wise among the Corinthians, Verse 16.
he says, The Bread which we break, is the Communion of the Body of Christ.
This is the true and spirtual Supper of the Lord, which Men come to partake of,
by hearing the Voice of Christ, The true Spiritual Supper of the Lord.
and opening the Door of their Hearts, and so letting him in, in the manner
abovesaid, according, to the plain words of the Scripture, Rev. 3.20. Behold I
stand at the Door and knock; if any Man hear my Voice, and open the door, I
will come in to him, and will sup with him, and he with me. So that the Supper
of the Lord, and the supping with the Lord, and partaking of his Flesh and
Blood, is no ways limited to the Ceremony of breaking Bread, and drinking Wine,
at particular times; but is truly and really enjoyed, as often as the Soul
retires into the Light of the Lord, and feels and partakes of that Heavenly
Life, by which the Inward Man is nourished; which may be, and is often
witnessed by the Faithful at all times; though more particularly, when they are
Assembled together to wait upon the Lord.

. IV. But what Confusion the Professors of Christianity have run into
concerning this matter, is more than obvious; who, Man is not tied to the
Ceremony of breaking Bread and Wine, which Christ did use with his Disciples:
This only was a Shadow.
as in most other things they have done, for want of a true Spiritual
Understanding, have sought to tie this Supper of the Lord to that Ceremony
(used by Christ before his Death) of breaking Bread and drinking Wine with his
Disciples. And though they, for the most part, agree generally in this, yet how
do they contend and debate one against another? How strangely are they pinched,
pained and straightened, to make this Spiritual Mystery agree to that Ceremony?
And what monstrous and wild Opinions and Conceivings have they invented, to
enclose or affix the Body of Christ to their Bread and Wine? From which
Opinion, not only the greatest, and fiercest, and most hurtful Contests, both
among the Professors of Christianity in general, and among Protestants in
particular, have arisen; but also such Absurdities, irrational and blasphemous
Consequences have ensued, as make the Christian Religion odious and hateful to
Jews, What makes the Christian Religion hateful to Jews, Turks and Heathens.
Turks and Heathens. The Professors of Christianity do chiefly divide, in this
matter, into Three Opinions:

The First is of those that say, The substance of the Bread is
Transubstantiated into the very Substance of that same Body, The Papists Faith
of Christ his Flesh and Blood.
Flesh and Blood of Christ, which was born of the Virgin Mary, and crucified by
the Jews: So that after the Words of Consecration (as they call them) it is no
more Bread, but the Body of Christ.

The Lutherans Faith.
The Second is of such as say, The substance of the Bread remains; but that also
that Body is in, and with, and under the Bread: So that both the substance of
Bread, and of the Body, Flesh and Blood of Christ, is there also.

The Calvinists Faith.
The Third is of those, that (denying both these) do affirm, That the Body of
Christ is not there corporally, or substantially; but yet that it is really and
sacramentally received by the Faithful, in the use of Bread and Wine; But how,
or what way it is there, they know not, nor can they tell; only we must believe
it is there; yet so, that it is only properly in Heaven.

It is not my design to enter into a Refutation of these several Opinions; for
each of their Authors and Assertors have sufficiently refuted one another, and
are all of them no less strong, both from Scripture and Reason, in refuting
each their contrary Parties Opinion, than they are weak in establishing their
own. For I often have seriously observed, in reading their respective Writings,
(and so it may be have others) that all of them do notably, in so far as they
refute the contrary Opinions; but that they are mightily pained, when they come
to confirm and plead for their own. Hence I necessarily must conclude, that
none of them had attained to the Truth and Substance of this Mystery. Let us
see if Calvin, (...)
after he had refuted the two former Opinions, be more successful in what he
affirms and asserts for the Truth of his Opinion; who, after he has much
labored in overturning and refuting the two former Opinions, plainly
confesses, that he he knows not what to affirm instead of them. For after he
has spoken much, and at last concluded, J. Calvin's Faith of Christ his Flesh
and Blood uncertain.
That the Body of Christ is there, and that the Saints must needs partake
thereof; at last he lands in these words, Sect. 32. But if it be asked me, how
it is? I shall not be ashamed to confess, that it is a secret too high for me
to comprehend in my spirit, or explain in words. Here he deals very
ingenuously; and yet who would have thought, that such a Man would have been
brought to this straight, in the confirming of his Opinion? Considering but a
little before, in the same Chapter, Sect. 15. he accuses the Schoolmen among
the Papists, The like the Papists.
(and I confess truly) In that they neither understand, nor explain to others,
how Christ is in the Eucharist; which shortly after he confesses himself he
cannot do. If then the Schoolmen among the Papists, do neither understand, nor
yet explain to others, their Doctrine in this matter, nor Calvin can comprehend
it in his spirit, (which I judge, is as much as not to understand it) nor
express it in words, (and then surely he cannot explain it to others) then no
Certainty is to be had from either of them. There have been great Endeavors
used for Reconcilement in this matter, both betwixt Papists and Lutherans,
Lutherans and Calvinists; yea, and Calvinists and Papists; but all to no
purpose: And many Forms and Manners of Expressions drawn up, to which all might
yield; which in the end proved in vain, seeing every one understood them, and
interpreted them in their own way; and so they did thereby but equivocate and
deceive one another. The Reason of this Contention is, because they all wanted
a clear Understanding of the Mystery, and were doting about the Shadow and
Externals. For both the Ground and Matter of their Contest lies in things
extrinsick from, and unecessary to, the main matter. And this has been often
the Policy of Satan, to busy People, Satan bus^ People in outward Signs,
Shadows and Forms, while they neglect the Substance.
and amuse them with outward Signs, Shadows and Forms, making them contend
about that, while in the mean time the Substance is neglected; yea, and in
contending for these Shadows, he stirs them up to the practice of Malice, Heat,
Revenge, and other Vices, by which he establishes his Kingdom of Darkness
among them, and ruins the Life of Christianity. For there have been more
Animosities and Heats about this one particular, and more Bloodshed and
Contention, than about any other. And surely, What has (...) hurtful to the
Reformation.
they are little acquainted with the State of Protestant Affairs, who know not
that their Contentions about this, have been more hurtful to the Reformation,
than all the opposition they met with from their common Adversaries. Now all
those uncertain and absurd Opinions, and the Contentions therefrom arising,
have proceeded from their all agreeing in two general Errors concerning this
thing: Which being denied and receded from, as they are by us, there would be
an easy way made for Reconciliation; and we should all meet in the one
spiritual and true Understanding of this Mystery: And as the Contentions, so
would also the Absurdities, which follow from all the three forementioned
Opinions, cease and fall to the ground.

Two Errors the Ground of the Contention about the Supper.
The First of these Errors is, in making the Communion or Participation of the
Body, Flesh and Blood of Christ, to relate to that outward Body, Vessel, or
Temple, that was born of the Virgin Mary, and walked and suffered in Judea;
whereas it should relate to the Spiritual Body, Flesh and Blood of Christ, even
that Heavenly and Celestial Light and Life, which was the Food and Nourishment
of the Regenerate in all Ages, as we have already proved.

The Second Error is, in tying this Participation of the Body and Blood of
Christ to that Ceremony, used by him with his Disciples, in the breaking of
Bread, etc. as if it had only a Relation thereto, or were only enjoyed in the
use of that Ceremony, which it neither has, nor is. For this is that Bread,
which Christ in his Prayer teaches to call for, terming it (...), i. e. the
supersubstantial Bread, as the Greek has it, and which the Soul partakes of,
without any relation or necessary respect to this Ceremony, as shall be
hereafter proved more at length.

These Two Errors being thus laid aside, and the Contentions arising there from
buried, all are agreed in the main Positions, viz. First, that the Body,
Believers Souls do really feed upon the Flesh and Blood of Christ.
Flesh and Blood of Christ, is necessary for the nourishing of the Soul.
Secondly, that the Souls of Believers do really and truly partake and feed upon
the Body, Flesh and Blood of Christ. But while Men are not content with the
Spirituality of this Mystery, going in their own Wills, and according to their
own Inventions, to strain and wrest the Scriptures, for to tie this Spiritual
Communion of the Flesh and Blood of Christ, to outward Bread and Wine, and such
like Carnal Ordinances; no wonder, if by their Carnal Apprehensions, they run
into Heaps and Confusion. But because it has been generally supposed, that the
Communion of the Body and Blood of Christ had some special Relation to the
Ceremony of breaking Bread; I shall first refute that Opinion, and then proceed
to consider the Nature and Use of that Ceremony, and whether it be now
necessary to continue; answering the Reasons and Objections of such as plead
its Continuance, as a necessary and standing Ordinance of Jesus Christ.

. V. First, It must be understood, I.
that I speak of a necessary and peculiar Relation, otherwise than in a general
respect: For, forasmuch as our Communion with Christ is, and ought to be our
greatest and chiefest Work, That the Communion of the Body and Blood of Christ
has no special Relation to the Ceremony of speaking Bread, neither by Nature
nor Precept.
we ought to do all other things with a respect to God, and our Fellowship with
him; but a special and necessary Respect or Relation is such, as where the two
things are so tied and united together, either of their own Nature, or by the
Command of God, that the one cannot be enjoyed, or at least is not (except very
extraordinarily) without the other. Thus Salvation has a necessary respect to
Holiness, because without Holiness no Man shall see God: And the eating of the
Flesh and Blood of Christ, has a necessary respect to our having Life; because
if we eat not his Flesh, and drink not his Blood, we cannot have Life: And our
feeling of God's Presence, has a necessary respect to our being found meeting
in his Name, by Divine Precept; because he has promised, where two or three are
met together in his Name, he will be in the midst of them. In like manner our
receiving Benefits and Blessings from God, has a necessary respect to our
Prayer; because if we ask, he has promised we shall receive. Now the Communion
or Participation of the Flesh and Blood of Christ, has no such necessity
relation to the breaking of Bread, and drinking of Wine; for if it had any such
necessary Relation, it would either be from the Nature of the thing, or from
some Divine Precept: But we shall show it is from neither; Therefore, etc.
First, It is not from the Nature of it, because to partake of the Flesh and
Blood of Christ, is a Spiritual Exercise; and all confess, that it is by the
Soul and Spirit, that we become real partakers of it; as it is the Soul, and
not the Body, that is nourished by it: But to eat Bread, and drink Wine, is a
natural Act, which in it self adds nothing to the Soul, neither has any thing
that is Spiritual in it; because the most carnal Man that is, can as fully, as
perfectly, and as wholly eat Bread and drink Wine, as the most Spiritual.
Secondly, Their Relation is not by Nature, else they would infer one another:
But all acknowledge, that many eat of the Bread, and drink of the Wine, even
that which they say is Consecrate and Transubstantiate into the very Body of
Christ, who notwithstanding have not Life Eternal, have not Christ dwelling in
them, The Patriarchs and Prophets, without this Ceremony's Use, were true
partakers of Christ's Flesh and Blood.
nor do live by him; as all do, who truly partake of the Flesh and Blood of
Christ, without the use of this Ceremony, as all the Patriarchs and Prophets
did, before this Ordinance (as they account it) was instituted. Neither was
there any thing under the Law, that had any direct or necessary Relation
hereunto; though to partake of the Flesh and Blood of Christ, in all Ages, was
indispensibly necessary to Salvation. For as for the Paschal Lamb, The Paschal
Lamb its End.
the whole End of it is signified particularly, Exodus 13.8.9. to wit, That the
Jews might thereby be kept in Remembrance of their deliverance out of Egypt.
Secondly, It has no Relation by Divine Precept; for if it had, it would be
mentioned in that, which our Adversaries account the Institution of it, or else
in the practice of it by the Saints recorded in Scripture; but so it is not.
For as to the Institution, or rather Narration of Christ's Practice in this
matter, we have it recorded by the Evangelists, Matthew, Mark and Luke: In the
first two, there is only an account of the matter of Fact, to wit, Mat. 26.16.
Mark 14.22 Luke 22.1^.
That Christ brake Bread, and gave it his Disciples to eat; saying, This is my
Body: And blessing the Cup, he gave it them to drink, saying, This is my Blood;
but nothing of any desire to them to do it. In the last, The Institution of the
Supper, or Narration of Christ's Practice therein.
after the Bread (but before the Blessing, or giving them the Wine) he bids
them do it in Remembrance of him; what we are to think of this Practice of
Christ, shall be spoken of hereafter. But what necessary Relation has all
this, to the Believers partaking of the Flesh and Blood of Christ? The End of
this, for which they were to do it (if at all) is, to remember Christ; which
the Apostle yet more particularly expresses, 1 Cor. 11.26. to show forth the
Lord's Death: But to remember the Lord, or declare his Death, which are the
special and particular Ends annexed to the use of this Ceremony, is not at all
to partake of the Flesh and Blood of Christ; neither have they any more
necessary Relation to it, than any other two different Spiritual Duties. For
though they that partake of the Flesh and Blood of Christ, cannot but remember
him; yet the Lord, and his Death, may be remembered (as none can deny) where his
Flesh and Blood is not truly partaken of. So that since the very particular and
express Ceremony may be witnessed (to wit, the remembrance of the Lord's Death)
and yet the Flesh and Blood of Christ not partaken of, it cannot have had any
necessary Relation to it; else the partaking thereof would have been the end of
it, and could not have been attained without this Participation. But on the
contrary, we may well infer hence, that since the positive End of this
Ceremony, is not the partaking of the Flesh and Blood of Christ, and that
whoever partakes of the Flesh and Blood of Christ, cannot but remember him;
that therefore such need not this Ceremony to put them in remembrance of him.

That Jesus Christ calls the Bread here, his Body; and the Wine, his Blood;
therefore he seems to have had a special Relation to his Disciples partaking of
his Flesh and Blood, in the use of this thing.

Body, and the Wine his Blood, would yet infer no such thing; though it is not
denied, but that Jesus Christ, in all things he did, yea, and from the use of
all natural things, took occasion to raise the Minds of his Disciples to
Spirituals. Hence from the Woman of Samaria, The Woman of Samaria. ^n 4 14
her drawing Water, he took occasion to tell her of that living Water, which
whosoever drinks of, shall never thirst; which indeed is all one with his Blood,
here spoken of: Yet it will not follow, The Well, the Loaves, the Bread and
Wine, Christ takes occasion from, to show the Inward Feeding.
that that well or Water had any necessary Relation to the living Water, or the
living Water to it, etc. So Christ takes occasion, from the Jews following him
for the Loaves, to tell them of this Spiritual Bread and Flesh of his Body,
which was more necessary for them to feed upon; it will not therefore follow,
that their following him for the Loaves, had any necessary Relation thereunto.
So also Christ here, being at Supper with his Disciples, takes occasion, from
the Bread and Wine which was before them, to signify unto them, That as that
Bread, which he brake unto them, and that Wine, which he blessed and gave unto
them, did contribute to the preserving and nourishing of their Bodies; so was
he also to give his Body, and shed his Blood, for the Salvation of their Souls.
And therefore the very End proposed in this Ceremony, to those that observe it,
is, to be a Memorial of his Death.

But if it be said, That the Apostle, 1 Cor. 10.16. calls the Bread which he
brake, the Communion of the Body of Christ, and the Cup, the Communion of his
Blood.

I do most willingly subscribe unto it; but do deny, that this is understood of
the outward Bread, neither can it be evinced; but the contrary is manifest from
the Context: For the Apostle in this Chapter speaks not one word of that
Ceremony. For having in the beginning of it shown them, how the Jews of Old
were made Partakers of the Spiritual Food and Water, which was Christ, and how
several of them, through Disobedience and Idolatry, fell from that good
Condition, he exhorts them, by the Example of those Jews, whom God destroyed of
Old, to flee those Evils; showing them, that they, to wit, the Corinthians, are
likewise partakers of the Body and Blood of Christ; of which Communion they
would rob themselves, if they did ^il; because they could not drink of the Cup
of the Lord, and the Cup of Devils; and partake of the Lord^s Table, and the
Table of Devils, verse. 21. Which shows, that he understands not here, the using
of outward Bread and Wine; because those that do drink the Cup of Devils, The
Wickedest may take the outward Bread and Wine.
and eat of the Table of Devils; yea, the wickedest of Men, may partake of the
outward Bread and outward Wine. For there the Apostle calls the Bread One,
verse. 17. and he says, We being many, are one Bread, and one Body; for we are
all partakers of that One Bread. Now if the Bread be One, it cannot be the
outward, or the inward would be excluded; whereas it cannot be denied, but that
it is the partaking of the inward Bread, and not the outward, that makes the
Saints truly One Body, and One Bread. And whereas they say, that the One Bread
here, comprehends both the outward and inward, by virtue of the Sacramental
Union; that indeed is to affirm, but not to prove. As for that figment, The
Sacramental Union pretended a Figment.
of a Sacramental Union, I find not such a thing in all the Scripture,
especially in the New Testament; nor is there any thing can give a rise for
such a thing in this Chapter; where the Apostle, as is above observed, is not
at all treating of that Ceremony; but only from the Excellency of that
Privilege, which the Corinthians had, as believing Christians, to partake of
the Flesh and Blood of Christ, dehorts them from Idolatry, and partaking of the
Sacrifices offered to Idols, so as thereby to offend or hurt their weak
Brethren.

Cry out for in this matter, and are always noising, is from 1 Cor. 11. where
the Apostle is particularly treating of this matter; and therefore from some
words here, they have the greatest Appearance of Truth for their Assertion: As
verse. 27. where he calls the Cup, the Cup of the Lord, and says, That they who
eat of it, and drink it unworthily, are guilty of the Body and Blood of the
Lord, and verse. 26. Eat and drink their own Damnation: Intimating hence, that
this has an immediate or necessary Relation to the Body, Flesh and Blood of
Christ.

Though this at first view may catch the unwary Reader, yet being well
considered, it does no ways evince the matter in Controversy. And for the
Corinthians being in the use of this Ceremony, why they were so, and how that
obliges not Christians now to the same, shall be spoken of hereafter: It
suffices at this time to consider, that they were in the use of it. Secondly,
That in the use of it they were guilty of, and committed diverse Abuses.
Thirdly, That the Apostle here is giving them Directions how they may do it
aright, in showing them the right and proper Use and End of it.

These things being premised, let it be observed, that the very express and
particular use of it, according to the Apostle, is to show forth the Lord's
Death, etc. But to show forth the Lord's Death, and partake of the Flesh and
Blood of Christ, are different things. He says not, As often as ye eat this
Bread, and drink this Cup, ye partake of the Body and Blood of Christ; but, ye
show forth the Lord's Death. So I acknowledge, that this Ceremony, by those
that practice it, has an Immediate Relation to the outward B^dy, and Death of
Christ, upon the Cross, as being properly a Memorial of it; but it does not
thence follow, that it has any Inward or Immediate Relation to Believers
communicating or partaking of the spiritual Body and Blood of Christ; or that
spiritual Supper, spoken of Rev. 3.20. For though in a general way, as every
religious Action, in some respect, has a common Relation to the spiritual
Communion of the Saints with God; so we shall not deny but this has a
Relation, as others. Now for his calling the Cup, the Cup of the Lord, and
saying, They are guilty of the Body and Blood of Christ, and eat their own
Damnation, in not discerning the Lord's Body, etc. I answer, That this infers
no more necessary Relation, than any other religious Act; and amounts to no
more than this, That since the Corinthians were in the use of this Ceremony,
and so performed it as a religious Act, Christ's Act of Bread and Wine is not
obliging others.
they ought to do it worthily, or else they should bring Condemnation upon
themselves. Now this will not more infer the thing so practiced by them, to be
a necessary religious Act, obligatory upon others, than when Romans 14.6. the
Apostle says, He that regards the day, regards it unto the Lord; it can be
thence inferred, that the days, that some esteemed and observed, did lay an
Obligation upon others to do the same. But yet, as he that esteemed a day, and
placed Conscience in keeping it, was to regard it to the Lord; and so it was to
him, in so far as he dedicated it unto the Lord, the Lord's Day; he was to do
it worthily, and if he did it unworthily, he would be guilty of the Lord's Day,
and so keep it to his own Damnation: So also, such as observe this Ceremony of
Bread and Wine, it is to them the Bread of the Lord, and the Cup of the Lord,
because they use it as a religious Act; and forasmuch as their end therein is
to show forth the Lord's Death, and remember his Body that was Crucified for
them, and his Blood that was Shed for them. If, notwithstanding they believe it
is their Duty to do it, and make it a matter of Conscience to forbear, if they
do it without that due Preparation and Examination which every religious Act
ought to be performed in; then, instead of truly remembering the Lord's Death,
and his Body, and his Blood, they render themselves guilty of it, as being in
one Spirit with those that crucified him, The Pharisees guilty of the Blood of
the Prophets.
and shed his Blood, though pretending with thanksgiving and joy to remember it.
Thus the Scribes and Pharisees of old, though in Memory of the Prophets they
garnished their Sepulchers; yet are said by Christ to be guilty of their Blood.
And that no more can be hence inferred, appears from another Saying of the same
Apostle, Romans 14.23. He that doubts is damned, if he eat, etc. Where he,
speaking of those that judged it unlawful to eat Flesh, etc. says, If they eat
doubting, they eat their own Damnation. Now it is manifest from all this, that
either the doing or forbearing of this, was to another, that places no
Conscience in it, of no moment. So, I say, he that eats that, which in his
Conscience he is persuaded is not lawful for him to eat, does eat his own
Damnation: So he also, that places Conscience in eating Bread and Wine, as a
Religious Act, if he do it unprepared, and without that due Respect, wherein
such Acts should be gone about, he eats and drinks his own Damnation, not
discerning the Lord's Body, i. e. not minding what he does, to wit with a
special Respect to the Lord, and by way of special Commemoration of the Death
of Christ.

. VI. I having now sufficiently shown, what the true Communion of the Body and
Blood of Christ is, how it is partaken of, and how it has no necessary Relation
to that Ceremony of Bread and Wine, used by Christ with his Disciples; II.
Whether this Ceremony be a necessary Part of the New Covenant, and Obligatory.
it is fit now to consider the Nature and Constitution of that Ceremony, (for
as to the proper Use of it, we have had occasion to speak before) whether it be
a standing Ordinance in the Church of Christ, obligatory upon all: Or indeed,
whether it be any necessary Part of the Worship of the New
Covenant-Dispensation, or has any better or more binding Foundation, than
several other Ceremonies, appointed and practiced about the same time, which
the most of our Opposers acknowledge to be ceased, and now no ways binding upon
Christians. We find this Ceremony only mentioned in Scripture in four Places,
to wit, Matthew, Mark and Luke, and by Paul to the Corinthians. If any would
infer any thing from the frequency of the mentioning of it, that will add
nothing; for it being a matter of Fact, is therefore mentioned by the
Evangelists: And there are other things, less memorable, as often, Mat. 26 26.
Mar. 14.22 Luke 22.19. 1 Cor. 11.23, etc.
yea oftener mentioned. Matthew and Mark give only an account of the matter of
Fact, without any Precept to do so afterward; simply declaring, that Jesus at
that time did desire them to eat of the Bread, and drink of the Cup: To which
Luke adds these words, This do in remembrance of me. If we consider this Action
of Christ with his Apostles, there will appear nothing singular in it, for a
Foundation to such a strange Superstructure, as many in their Airy Imaginations
have sought to build upon it; for both Matthew and Mark express it as an Act
done by him, as he was eating: Matthew says, The breaking of Bread was no
singular thing, but a Custom among the Jews.
And as they were eating; and Mark, And as they did eat, Jesus took Bread, etc.
Now this Act was no singular Thing, neither any solemn Institution of a Gospel
Ordinance, because it was a constant Custom among the Jews, as Paulus Riccius
observes at length in his Celestial Agriculture; that when they did eat the
Passover, the Master of the Family did take Bread, P. Riccius.
and bless it, and breaking it, gave of it to the rest; and likewise taking
Wine, did the same: So that there can nothing further appear in this, than that
Jesus Christ, who fullfilled all Righteousness, and also observed the Jewish
Feasts and Customs, used this also among his Disciples only, that, as in most
other things, he labored to draw their Minds to a further thing; so, in the
use of this, he takes occasion to put them in mind of his Death and Sufferings,
which were shortly to be, which he did the oftener inculcate unto them, for
that they were averse from believing it. And as for that Expression of Luke,
What it is, To do this in Remembrance of Christ.
Do this in remembrance of me; it will amount to no more, than being the last
time that Christ did eat with his Disciples, he desired them, that in their
Eating and Drinking they might have regard to him, and by the remembering of
that opportunity, be the more stirred up to follow him diligently through
Sufferings and Death, etc. But what Man of Reason, laying aside the Prejudice
of Education, and the Influence of Tradition, will say; That this account of
the matter of Fact, given by Matthew and Mark, or this Expression of Luke, to
Do that in Remembrance of him, will amount to these Consequences, which the
generality of Christians have sought to draw from it; as calling it,
Augustissimum Eucharistiae Sacramentum venerabile altaris Sacramentum; the
principal Seal of the Covenant of Grace, by which all the Benefits of Christ's
Death are sealed to Belivers; and such like things; But to give a further
Evidence, how these Conseqences have not any bottom from the Practice of that
Ceremony, nor from the Words following, Do this, etc. Let us consider another
of the like nature, as it is at length expressed by John, c. 13. v. 3, 4, 8,
13, 14, 15. Jesus rises from Supper, and laid aside his Garments, and took a
Towel, and girded himself: After that, he pours Water into a Basin, and began
to wash the Disciples Feet, and to wipe them with the Towel wherewith he was
girded: Peter said unto him, Thou shall never wash my Feet; Christ's Washing of
Feet, and its manner related.
Jesus answered him, If I wash thee not, thou have no part with me. So after he
had washed their Feet, -- he said, Know ye what I have done to you? If I then,
your Lord and Master, have washed your Feet, ye also ought to wash one another
Feet: For I have given you an Example, that ye should do, as I have done to
you. As to which, let it be observed, Compared with the Breaking of Bread.
that John relates this Passage to have been done at the same time with the
other of breaking Bread; both being done the night of the Passover, after
Supper. If we regard the Narration of this, and the Circumstances attending it,
it was done with far more Solemnity; and prescribed far more Punctually and
Particularly, than the former. It is said only, As he was eating, he took
Bread; so that this would seem to be but an occasional business: But here, he
rose up, he laid by his Garments, he girded himself, he poured out the Water,
he washed their Feet, he wiped them with the Towel: He did this to all of them;
which are Circumstances surely far more observable, than those noted in the
other. The former was a Practice common among the Jews, used by all Masters of
Families, upon that occasion; but this, as to the manner, and Person acting it,
to wit, for the Master to rise up, and wash the Feet of his Servants and
Disciples, was more singular and observable. In the breaking of Bread, and
giving of Wine, it is not pleaded by our Adversaries, nor yet mentioned in the
Text, that he particularly put them into the hands of all; but breaking it, and
blessing it, gave it the nearest, and so they from hand to hand: But here it is
mentioned, that he washed not the Feet of one or two, but of many. He says not
in the former, that if they do not eat of that Bread, and drink of that Wine,
they shall be prejudiced by it; but here he says expressly to Peter, that if he
wash him not, he has no part with him; which being spoken upon Peter's
refusing to let him wash his Feet, would seem to import no less, than not the
Continuance only, but even the Necessity of this Ceremony. In the former he
says, as it were, passingly, Do this in remembrance of me; but here he sits
down again, he desires them to consider what he has done, tells them
positively, The Washing one another Feet, was left as an Example.
That as he has done to them, so ought they to do to one another: And yet
again he redoubles that Precept, by telling them, he has given them an Example,
that they should do so likewise. If we respect the Nature of the thing, it has
as much in it, as either Baptism, or the Breaking of Bread; seeing it is an
outward Element of a cleansing Nature, applied to the outward Man, by the
Command and the Example of Christ, to signify an inward Purifying. I would
willingly propose this seriously to Men, that will be pleased to make use of
that Reason and Understanding that God has given them, and not be imposed
upon, nor abused by the Custom or Tradition of others; Whether this Ceremony,
if we respect either the Time that it was appointed in, or the Circumstances
wherewith it was performed, or the Command enjoining the use of it, has not as
much to recommend it for a standing Ordinance of the Gospel, as either
Water Baptism, or Bread and Wine, or any other of that kind? I wonder then what
Reason the Papists can give, why they have not numbered it among their
Sacraments, except merely Voluntas Ecclesiae and Traditio Patrum.

That it is used among them, in that the Pope, and some other Persons among
them, use to do it once a year to some poor People.

Eucharist, (as they term it) or whence it appeaas from the Text, that [ Do
this in remembrance of me] should be interpreted, that the Bread and Wine were
every day to be taken by all Priests, or the Bread every day, or every week, by
the People; and that that other Command of Christ, Ye ought to do, as I have
done to you, etc. is only to be understood of the Pope, or some other Persons,
to be done only to a few, and that once a year? Surely, there can be no other
Reason for this Difference assigned from the Text. And as to Protestants, who
use not this Ceremony at all, The Protestants use not the Washing of Feet
if they will but open their Eyes, they may see how that by Custom and
Tradition they are abused in this matter, as were their Fathers in diverse
Popish Traditions. For if we look into the plain Scripture, what can be thence
inferred to urge the one, which may not be likewise pleaded for the other; or
for laying aside the one, which may not be likewise said against the
continuance of the other? If they say, That the former, of washing the Feet,
was only a Ceremony; what have they, whence they can show, that this breaking
of Bread is more? If they say, That the former was only a sign of Humility and
Purifying; what have they to prove, that this was more? If they say, That one
was only for a time, and was no Evangelical Ordinance; what has this to make
it such, that the other wanted? Surely there is no way of Reason to evite this:
Neither can any thing be alleged, that the one should cease, and not the
other; or the one continue, and not the other; but the mere Opinion of the
Affirmers, which, by Custom, Education and Tradition, has begotten in the
Hearts of People, a greater Reverence for, and Esteem of the one, than the
other; which, if it had fallen out to be as much recommended to us by
Tradition, would no doubt have been as tenaciously pleaded for, as having no
less Foundation in the Scripture. But since the former, to wit, the washing of
one another's Feet, is justly laid aside, as not binding upon Christians; so
ought also the other, for the same Reason.

The Breaking of Bread not used now in the same manner, as Christ did.
. VII. But I strange, that those that are so clamorous for this Ceremony, and
stick so much to it, take liberty to dispense with the manner or method that
Christ did it in; since none, that ever I could hear of, except some Baptists,
who now do it, use it in the same way that he did it: Christ did it at Supper,
while they were eating; but the Generality of Protestants do it in the Morning
only, by it self: What Rule walk they by in this change?

These are but Circumstances, and not the Matter; and if the Matter be kept to,
the alteration of Circumstances is but of small moment.

Circumstance, which fell out at that time, when Christ eat the Passover? For
if we have regard to that, which alone can be pleaded for an institution, viz.
these words, Do this in remembrance of me; it does as properly relate to the
Manner as Matter. For what may or can they evince in Reason, that these words,
Do this, only signify, eat Bread, and drink Wine; but it is no matter when ye
eat, or how ye eat it, and not as ye have seen me eat it at Supper with you,
who take Bread, and break it, and give it you; and take the Cup, and bless it,
and give it you; so do ye likewise? And seeing Christ makes no distinction in
these words, Do this, it cannot be judged in Reason, but to relate to the
whole; which if it do, all those that at present use this Ceremony among
Christians, have not yet obeyed this Precept, nor fulfilled this Institution,
for all their Clamours concerning it.

That the Time and Manner of doing it by Christ, was but accidentally, as being
after the Jewish Passover, which was at Supper.

that the whole was accidental, as being the Practice of a Jewish Ceremony, as
is above observed; The Breaking of Bread was a Jewish Ceremony.
May it not the same way be urged, that the drinking of Wine was accidental, as
being the natural product of that Country; and so be pleaded, that in those
Countries, where Wine does not grow, as in our Nation of Scotland, we may make
use of Beer or Ale in the use of this Ceremony; or Bread made of other Grain,
than that which Christ used? And yet would not out Adversaries judge this an
Abuse, and not right performing of this Sacrament? Yea, have not Scruples of
this kind occasioned no little Contention among the Professors of Christianity;
Contests between the Greek and Latin Churches Concerning the leavened and
unleavened Bread in the Supper.
What great Contest and Strife has been betwixt the Greek and Latin Churches,
concerning the Bread; While the one will have it Unleavened; reckoning, because
the Jews made use of Unleavened Bread in the Passover, that it was such kind of
Bread that Christ did break to his Disciples; the other Leavened: Therefore the
Lutherans make use of Unleavened Bread, the Calvinists of Leavened. And this
Contest was so hot, when the Reformation was beginning at Geneva, that Calvin
and Farellus were forced to fly for it. But do not Protestants, by these
uncertainties, open a Door to Papists, Farellus.
for their excluding the People from the Cup? Will not ( Do this) infer
positively, that they should do in the same manner, and at the same time, which
Christ did it; as well as that they should use the Cup, and not the Bread only?
Or what Reason have they to dispense with the one more than the Papists have to
do with the other? O what strange Absurdities and Inconveniences have
Christians brought upon themselves, by superstitiously adhering to this
Ceremony! Out of which Difficulties, it is impossible for them to extricate
themselves, The Clergy taking Bread, do bless and give it: The Laity must take
and eat, not bless it
but by laying it aside, as they have done others of the like nature. For
besides what is above mentioned, I would gladly know how, from the words, they
can be certainly resolved, that these words, ( Do this) must be understood to
the Clergy, Take, bless, and break this Bread, and give it to others; but to
the Laity only, Take and eat, but do not bless, etc.

That the Clergy were only present.

Administration of the Cup to the People? Or may not another from thence as
easily infer, That the Clergy only ought to partake of this Ceremony; because
they were the Apostles only then present, to whom it was said, Do this? But if
this ( Do this) be extended to All, how comes it All have not liberty to obey
it, in both blessing, breaking, and distributing, as well as taking and eating?
Besides all these, even the Calvinian Protestants of Great Britian, Hot
Contests about the Manner of taking it, and to whom to give it.
could never yet accord among themselves about the manner of taking it, whether
sitting, standing, or kneeling; whether it should be given to the sick, and
those that are ready to die, or not? Which Controversies, though they may be
esteemed of small moment, yet have greatly Contributed, with other things, to
be the occasion not only of much Contention; but also of Bloodshed and
Devastation: So that in this last respect, the Prelatick Calvinists have termed
the Presbyterians Schismatical and Pertinacious, and they them again,
Superstitious, Idolatrous, and Papistical. Who then, that will open their Eyes,
but may see, that the Devil has stirred up this Contention and Zeal, to busy
Men about things of small moment, that greater matters may be neglected, while
he keeps them in such ado about this Ceremony; while they by aside others of
the like nature, as positively Commanded, and as punctually Practiced; and from
the Observation of which, half so many Difficulties will not follow?

. VII. How then? Have we not reason, not finding the nature of this Practice to
be obligatory upon us, more than those other our Adversaries have laid aside,
to avoid this Confusion; since those that use it, can never agree, neither
concerning the Nature, Efficacy, nor Manner of doing it? And this proceeds,
because they take it not plainly, as it lies in the Scripture; but have so much
intermixed their own Inventions. For would they take it, as it lies, it would
import no more, than that Jesus Christ, at that time, did thereby signify unto
them, that his Body and Blood was to be offered for them; and desired them,
that whenever they did Eat or Drink, they might do it in Remembrance of him,
or with a Regard to him, whose Blood was shed for them. Now that the Primitive
Church, gathered immediately after his Ascension, did so understand it, does
appear from their Use and Practice, if we admit those places of the Acts, where
breaking of Bread is spoken of, to have relation hereto; By breaking of Bread
they had all things in common; Remembering the Lord.
which as our Adversaries do, so we shall willingly agree to: As first, Acts
2.42. And they continued steadfastly in the Apostles Doctrine, and Fellowship,
and in breaking of Bread, etc. This cannot be understood of any Other, than of
their ordinary Eating; for as nothing else appears from the Text, so the
Context makes it plain; for they had all things in common: And therefore it is
said, verse. 46. And they continuing daily with one accord in the Temple, and
breaking Bread from house to house, did eat their meat with gladness and
singleness of heart. Who will not wilfully close their Eyes, may see here, that
their Breaking being joined with their Eating, shows, that nothing else is here
expressed, but that having all things in common, and so continuing together,
they also did break their Bread and eat their Meat together: In doing whereof,
I shall not doubt, but they remembered the Lord; to follow whom they had, with
so much Zeal and Resignation, betaken themselves. This is further manifest from
Acts 6.2. For the Apostles, having the care and distribution of that Money,
which the Believers, having sold their Possessions, gave unto them, Deacons
appointed for serving at Tables.
and finding themselves over charged with that Burden, appointed Deacons for
that business, that they might give themselves continually to Prayer, and to
the Ministry of the Word; not leaving that, to serve Tables. This cannot be
Meant of any Sacramental Eating, or Religious Act of Worship; seeing our
Adversaries make the distributing of that, the proper Act of Ministers, not of
Deacons: And yet there can be no Reason alleged, that that Breaking of Bread,
which they are said to have continued, in, and to have done from House to
House, was other than those Tables that the Apostles served; but here gave
over, as finding themselves overcharged with it. Now as the Increase of the
Disciples did incapacitate the Apostles any more to manage this; so it would
seem, their further increase and dispersing in diverse places, hindered the
continuance of that practice of having things in common: But notwstanding, so
far at least to remember or continue that ancient Cummunity, they did at
certain times come together, and break Bread together. Hence it is said, Acts
20.7. that Paul coming to Troas, And upon the first Day of the Week, At Troas,
the Supper deferred till Midnight.
when the Disciples came together to break Bread, Paul preached unto them,
ready to depart on the morrow, and continued his Speech until Midnight: Here is
no mention made of any Sacramental Eating; but only, that Paul took occasion
from their being together, to preach unto them. And it seems, it was a Supper
they intended (not a Morning-bit of Bread, and Sup of Wine;) else its not very
probable, that Paul would from the Morning have preached until Midnight. But
the 11 th verse puts the matter out of dispute, which is thus, When he
therefore was come up again, and had broken bread, and eaten, and talked a long
while, even till break of day, so he departed. This shows, that the Breaking of
Bread was deferred till that time; for these Words, [ and when he had broken
bread, and eaten,] do show, that it had a Relation to the Breaking of Bread
beforementioned, and that that was the Time he did it. Secondly, Those Words
joined together, [ and when he had broken bread, and eaten, and talked] show,
it was no Religious Act of Worship, They only did eat for refreshing the Body
--
but only an Eating for Bodily Refreshment, for which the Christians used to
meet together some time: And doing it in God's Fear, and Singleness of Heart,
does notwithstanding difference it from the Eating or Feasting of Profane
Persons. And this by some is called a Love-Feast, By some called a Love-Feast
or a being together, not merely to feed their Bellies, or for outward Ends;
but to take thence occasion to eat and drink together, in the Dread and
Presence of the Lord, as his People; which Custom we shall not condemn. But let
it be observed, that in all the Acts there is no other, nor further mention of
this matter. But if that Ceremony had been some solemn Sacrifice, as some will
have it, or such a special Sacrament, as others plead it to be; it is strange,
that that History, that in many lesser things gives a particular Adcount of the
Christians Behavior, should have been so silent in the matter: Only we find,
The Christians began by degrees to depart from the Primitive Purity
that they used sometimes to meet together to break Bread, and eat. Now as the
Primitive Christians began by degrees to depart from that Primitive Purity and
Simplicity, so also to accumulate Superstitious Traditions, and vitiate the
Innocent Practices of their Predecessors, by the intermixing either of Jewish
or Heathenish Rites; so also in the Use of this, very early Abuses began to
creep in among Christians, so that it was needful for the Apostle Paul to
Reform them, and Reprove them therefore, 1 Cor. 11.17 Concerning the Supper of
the Lord (so called) Explained.
as he does at large, 1 Cor. 11. from verse. 17. to the end: Which place we
shall particularly examine, because our Adversaries lay the chief Stress of
their matter upon it; and we shall see whether it will infer any more, than we
have above granted. First, Because they were apt to use that Practice in a
Superstitious Mind, beyond the true Use of it, as to make of it some Mystical
Supper of the Lord, he tells them verse. 20. That their coming together into one
place, is not to eat the Lord's Supper: He says not, This is not the right
manner to eat; but, This is not to eat the Lord's Supper; because the Supper of
the Lord is Spiritual, and a Mystery. Secondly, He blames them, in that they
came together for the worse, and not for the better; the Reason he gives of
this, is, verse. 21. For in eating every one has taken before his own Supper;
and one is hungry, and another is drunken: Here it is plain, Why the Custom of
Supping in common was used among Christians.
that the Apostle condemns them for that, because this Custom of Supping in
general was used among Christians, for to increase their Love, and as a
Memorial of Christ's Supping with the Disciples; that they should have so
vitiated it, to eat it apart, and to come full, who had abundance, and hungry,
who had little at home; whereby the very Use and End of this Practice was lost
and perverted: and therefore he blames them, that they did not either eat this
in common at home, or reserve their eating till they came all together to the
public Assembly. This appears plainly by the following verse 22. Have ye not
Houses to eat and drink in? Or despise ye the Church of God, and shame them
that have not? Where he blames them for their irregular Practice herein, is
that they despised to eat orderly, or reserve their eating to the public
Assembly; and so shaming such, as not having Houses, nor fullness at home, came
to partake of the common Table; who, being hungry, thereby were ashamed, when
they observed others come thither full and drunken. Those that without
Prejudice will look to the place, will see this must have been the case among
the Corinthians: For supposing the Use of this to have been then, as now used
either by Papists, Lutherans, or Calvinists, it is hard making Sense of the
Apostle's words, or indeed to conceive, what was the Abuse the Corinthians
committed in this thing. Having thus observed what the Apostle said above, The
Rise of that Custom.
because this Custom of Eating and Drinking together some time, had its rise
from Christ's Act with the Apostles, the Night he was betrayed; therefore the
Apostle proceeds, verse. 23. to give them an account of that: For I have
received of the Lord, that which also I delivered unto you, that the Lord
Jesus, the same night in which he was betrayed, took Bread, etc. Those that
understand the difference betwixt a Narration of a thing, and a Command, cannot
but see, if they will, that there is no Command in this place, but only an
Account of matter of Fact; he says not, I received of the Lord, that as he
took Bread, so I do command it to you to do so likewise; there is nothing like
this in the place: Yea, on the contrary, verse. 25. where he repeats Christ's
Imperative Words to his Apostles, he places them so as they import no Command;
This do ye, as often as ye drink it, in remembrance of me: And then he adds, That
(...) As of^ imp^rts no Command of this Supper.
For as often as ye eat this Bread, and drink this Cup, ye do show the Lord's
Death, till he come: But these words [ as often] import no more a Command, than
to say, As often as thou go to Rome, see the Capitol, will infer a Command
to me to go thither.

Ye show forth the Lord's Death till he come; insinuating, That this imports a
necessary Continuance of that Ceremony, until Christ Come at the end of the
World to Judgment.

First, that (as often) imports a Command, the contrary whereof is shown;
neither will they ever be able to prove it. Christ's outward and inward Coming.
Secondly, That this Coming, is understood of Christ's last Outward Coming, and
not of his Inward and Spiritual, that remains to be proved: Whereas the Apostle
might well understand it of his Inward Coming and Appearance, which perhaps
some of those Carnal Corinthians, that used to come drunken together, had not
yet known; and others, being weak among them, and inclinable to dote upon
Outward, this might have been indulged to them for a season, and even used by
those, who knew Christ's Appearance in Spirit, (as other things were, of which
we shall speak hereafter) especially by the Apostle, who became Weak to the
Weak, and All to All, that he might save some. To remember Christ's Death till
^e Come to Arise in the heart.
Now those weak and carnal Corinthians might be permitted the use of this, to
show forth, or remember Christ's Death, till he come to arise in them; for though
such need those outward things to put them in mind of Christ's Death, yet such
as are dead with Christ, and not only dead with Christ, but buried, and also
arisen with him, need not such Signs to remember him: And to such therefore the
Apostle says, Col. 3.1. If ye then be risen with Christ, seek those things
which are above, where Christ sits on the right hand of God: But Bread and
Wine are not those things that are above, but are things of the Earth. But that
this whole matter was a mere Act of Indulgence and Condescension of the Apostle
Paul, to the weak and carnal Corinthians, appears yet more by the Syriack And
likewise the other Oriental Versions, as the Arabic and Aethiopick, have it
the same way.
Copy, which verse. 17. in his entering upon this matter, has it thus; In that,
concerning which I am about to command you) or instruct you) I commend you not,
because ye have not gone forward, but are descended unto that which is less,
(or of less Consequence:) Clearly importing, that the Apostle was grieved, that
such was their Condition, that he was forced to give them Instructions
concerning those outward things; and doting upon which, they show they were not
gone forward in the Life of Christianity, but rather sticking in beggarly
Elements. And therefore, verse 20. the same Version has it thus, When then ye
meet together, ye do not do it, as it is just ye should do in the Day of the
Lord, ye eat and drink it: Therefore showing to them, that to meet together to
eat and drink outward Bread and Wine, was not the Labor and Work of that Day
of the Lord. But since our Adversaries are so zealous for this Ceremony,
because used by the Church of Corinth, (though with how little ground, is already
shown) how come they to pass over far more positive Commands of the Apostles,
as matters of no Moment? As first, Acts 15.29. where the Apostles peremptorily
command the Gentiles, To abstain from things strangled.
as that which was the Mind of the Holy Ghost, To abstain from things
strangled, and from Blood: And James 5.14. where it is expressly Commanded, The
Anointing with Oil.
That the Sick be anointed with Oil in the Name of the Lord.

These were only Temporary things, but not to continue.



The Repeal is implied, because the Apostle says, We ought not to be judged in
Meats and Drinks.

Answer; but how can it be evited from militating the same way against the
other Practice? Surely not at all: Nor can there be any thing urged for the
one, more than for the other, but Custom and Tradition.

James, they say, There followed a Miracle upon it, to wit, The recovery of the
Sick; But this being ceased, so should the Ceremony.

Prayer then might as well be forborne, to which also the saving of the Sick is
there ascribed: Yet I shall accept of it, A Ceremony ought to Cease, its Virtue
failing.
because I judge indeed that Ceremony is ceased; only methinks, since our
Adversaries, and that rightly, think a Ceremony ought to cease, where the
Virtue fails, they ought by the same Rule, Thus Laying on of hands
to forbear the laying on of Hands, in imitation of the Apostles, since the
Gift of the Holy Ghost does not follow upon it.

. IX. But since we find, that several Testimonies of Scripture do sufficiently
show, that such External Rites are no necessary part of the New Covenant
Dispensation, therefore not needful now to continue, however they were for a
season practiced of old; I shall instance some few of them, whereby from the
Nature of the thing, as well as those Testimonies, it may appear, The Ceremony
of Bread and Wine is ceased.
that the Ceremony of Bread and Wine is ceased, as well as those other things,
confessed by our Adversaries to be so. The first is Romans 14.17. For the Kingdom
of God is not Meat and Drink, but Righteousness and Peace, and Joy in the Holy
Ghost: Here the Apostle evidently shows, that the Kingdom of God, or Gospel of
Christ, stands not in Meats and Drinks, and such like things, but in
Righteousness, etc. as by the Context does appear; where he is speaking of the
guilt and hazard of judging one another about Meats and Drinks. So then, if the
Kingdom of God stand not in them, nor the Gospel, nor Work of Christ, then the
eating of outward Bread and Wine can be no necessary part of the
Gospel Worship, nor any perpetual Ordinance of it. Another is yet more plain of
the same Apostle, Col. 2.16. the Apostle throughout this whole second Chapter
does clearly plead for us, and against the Formality and Superstition of our
Opposers. For in the beginning he holds forth the great Privileges Christians
have by Christ, who are come indeed to the Life of Christianity; and therefore
he desires them, verse. 6. As they have received Christ, so to walk in him; and
to beware, lest they be spoiled through Philosphy and vain Deceit, after the
Rudiments or Elements of the World, because that in Christ, whom they have
received, is all Fullness: And that they are circumcised with the Circumcision
made without bands (which he calls the Circumcision of Christ) and being buried
with him by Baptism, are also arisen with him through the Faith of the
Operation of God. Here also they did partake of the true Baptism of Christ; and
being such as are arisen with him, let us see whether he thinks it needful,
they should make use of such Meat and Drink, as Bread and Wine, to put them in
remembrance of Christ's Death; or whether they ought to be judged that they did
it not; ver. 16. Let no Man therefore judge you in Meat and Drink: Is not Bread
and Wine Meat and Drink? But why? Which are a Shadow of things to come: But the
Body is of Christ, Then since our Adversaries confess that their Bread and Wine
is a Sign or Shadow; therefore, It Is but a Sign and Shadow, they confess
according to the Apostle's Doctrine, we ought not to be judged in the
Observation of it. But is it not fit for those that are dead with Christ, to be
subject to such Ordinances? See what he says, verse. 22, Wherefore, if ye be
dead with Christ from the Rudiments of the World, why, as though living in the
World, are ye subject to Ordinances? (Touch not, taste not, handle not: And whi^
do perish with the Using.
Which all are to perish with the using) after the Commandments and Doctrines
of Men: What can be more plain? If this serve not to take away the Absolute
Necessity of the Use of Bread and Wine, what can it serve to take away? Sure I
am, the Reason here given is applicable to them, which all do perish with the
using; since Bread and Wine perishes with the using, as much as other things.
But Further, if the Use of Water, and Bread and Wine, were that, wherein the
very Seal of the New Covenant stood, and did pertain to the chief Sacraments of
the Gospel and Evangelical Ordinances (so called,) then would not the Gospel
differ from the Law, or be preferable to it. Whereas the Apostle shows the
difference, The Law was Meats and Drinks not so the Gospel.
Heb. 9.10. in that such kind of Observations of the Jews were as a Sign of the
Gospel, for that they stood only in Meats and Drinks, and diverse washings. But
if the Gospel Worship and Service stand in the same, where is the difference?

These under the Gospel have a Spiritual Signification.

Law: God was the Author of those, as well as Christ is pretended to be Author
of these. But does not this contending for the use of Water, Bread and Wine, as
necessary parts of the Gospel Worship, destroy the Nature of it, The Law has
Shadows, the Gospel brings the Substance.
as if the Gospel were a Dispensation of Shadows and not of the Substance?
Whereas the Apostle, in that of the Colossians above mentioned, argues against
the use of these things, as needful to those that are dead and arisen with
Christ, because they are but Shadows. And since, through the whole Epistle to
the Hebrews, he argues with the Jews to wean them from their Old Worship, for
this Reason, because it was Typical and Figurative: It is agreeable to right
Reason, to bring them to another of the same nature? What ground from Scripture
or Reason can our Adversaries bring us to evince, that one Shadow or Figure
should point to another Shadow or Figure, and not to the Substance? And yet
they make the Figure of Circumcision to point to Water Baptism, and the Paschal
Lamb to Bread and Wine. But was it ever known, that one Figure was the
Antitype of the other, especially, seeing Protestants make not these their
Anti-types to have any more Virtue and Efficacy, than the Type had? For since
as they say, and that truly, Their Sacraments confer not Grace.
That their Sacraments confer not Grace, but that is conferred according to the
Faith of the Receiver; it will not be denied, but the Faithful among the Jews
received also Grace in the use of their Figurative Worship. And though Papists
boast, that their Sacraments confer Grace ex opere operato; yet Experience
abundantly proves the contrary.

. X. But supposing the Use of Water Baptism, Opposers claim a Power to give
their Sacraments; from whence do they derive they derive it?
and Bread and Wine, to have been in the Primitive Church, as was also that of
abstaining from things strangled, and from Blood; the ^se of Legal
Purification, Acts 21.23, 24, 25. and anointing of the Sick with Oil, for the
reasons and grounds before mentioned: Yet it remains for our Adversaries to
show us, how they come by Power or Authority to administer them. It cannot be
from the Letter of the Scripture, else they behoved also to do those other
things, which the Letter declares also they did, and which in the Letter have
as much foundation. Then their Power must be derived from the Apostles, either
mediately or immediately; but we have shown before, in the Tenth Proposition,
that they have no mediate Power, because of the interruption made by the
Apostasy: And for an immediate Power or Command by the Spirit of God, to
administer these things, none of our Adversaries pretend to it. We know, that
in this, as in other things, they make a Noise of the constant Consent of the
Church, Tradition no sufficient ground for Faith.
and of Christians in all Ages: But as Tradition is not a sufficient ground for
Faith, so in this matter especially it ought to have but small weight, for that
in this point of Ceremonies, and superstitious Observations, the Apostasy
began very early; as may appear in the Epistles of Paul to the Galatians and
Colossians. And we have no ground to imitate them in those things, whose
Entrance the Apostle so much withstood, so heavily regretted, and so sharply
reproved. But if we look to Antiquity, we find, that in such kind of
Observances and Traditions, they were very uncertain and changeable; so that
neither Protestants nor Papists do observe this Ceremony as they did, both in
that they gave it to young Boys, and to little Children: The Supper they gave
to (...) and Children.
And for ought can be learned, the Use of this, and Infant Baptism, are of a
like Age; though the one be laid aside both by Papists and Protestants; and the
other, to wit, Baptism of Infants be stuck to. And we have so much the less
Reason to lay weight upon Antiquity, for that, if we consider their profession
of Religion, especially as to Worship, the Ceremonial Part of it, we shall not
find any Church now, whether Popish or Protestant, who differ not widely from
them in many things; as Dallaeus, Dalleaus
in his Treatise concerning the Use of the Fathers, well observes and
demonstrateth. And why they should obtrude this upon us, because of the
Ancients Practice, which they themselves follow not, or why we may not reject
this, as well as they do other things, no less zealously practiced by the
Ancients, no sufficient Reason can be assigned.

I shall not nevertheless doubt, but many whose Understandings have been
clouded with these Ceremonies have notwithstanding, by the Mercy of God had
some secret Sense of the Mystery, which they could not clearly understand,
because it was sealed from them, by their sticking to such outward things; and
that through that secret sense, diving in their Comprehensions, they run
themselves into these Carnal Apprehensions, as imagining the Substance of the
Bread was changed, or that, if the Substance was not changed, yet the Body was
there, etc. And indeed, I am inclinable very favorably to judge of Calvin in
this particular, Calvin's ingeruous Confession commended.
in that he deals so ingeniously to confess, he neither Comprehends it, nor can
Express it in words; but yet by a feeling Experience can say, The Lord is
spiritually present. Now as I doubt (...) but Calvin sometimes had a sense of
his Presence, without the use of this Ceremony, so as the Understanding given
him of God, made him justly reject the false Nations of Trans^tantiation and
Consubstantiation, though he knew not what to establish instead of them; Ephesians.
5.13.
if he had fully waited in the Light that makes all things manifest, and had
not labored in his own Comprehension, to settle upon that External Ceremony,
by affixing the Spiritual Presence as chiefly or principally, though not only (as
he well knew by Experience) there, or especially to relate to it; he might have
further reached unto the Knowledge of this Mystery, than many that went before
him.

. XI. Lastly; If any now at this day, In tenderness of Conscience, God winketh
at Ignorance.
from a true tenderness of Spirit, and with real Conscience toward God, did
practice this Ceremony in the same way, method and manner, as did the Primitive
Christians, recorded in Scripture, I should not doubt to affirm, but they might
be indulged in it, and the Lord might regard them, and for a season appear to
them in the use of these things; as many of us have known him to do to us, in
the time of our Ignorance: Provided always, they did not seek to obtrude them
upon others, nor judge such as found themselves delivered, or that they do not
pertinaciously adhere to them. For we certainly know, that the Day is dawned in
which God has arisen, The Day is Dawned wherein God is Risen, and Worshipped
in Spirit.
and has dismissed all those Ceremonies and Rites, and is only to be
Worshipped in Spirit; and that he appears to them who wait upon him: And that
to seek God in these things, is, with Mary at the Sepulcher, to seek the Living
among the Dead. For we know, that he is Arisen, and Revealed in Spirit, leading
his Children out of these Rudiments, that they may walk with him in his Light:
To whom be Glory for ever. Amen.

PROPOSITION XIV. Concerning the Power of the Civil Magistrate in Matters
purely Religious, and pertaining to the Conscience.
Since God has assumed to himself the Power and Dominion of the Conscience,
who alone can rightly instruct and govern it; therefore it is not lawful for
any whosoever, by virtue of any Authority or Principality they bear in the
Government of this World, to force the Consciences of others; Luke 9.55, 56.
Mat. 7.12, 29. Tit. 3.10.
and therefore all Killing, Banishing, Fining, Imprisoning, and other such
things, which are inflicted upon Men for the alone Exercise of their
Conscience, or Difference in Worship or Opinion, proceeds from the Spirit of
Cain, the Murderer, and is contrary to the Truth: Providing always, That no
Man, under the Pretense of Conscience, prejudice his Neighbor in his Life or
Estate, or do any thing destructive to, or inconsistent with Humane Society; in
which case the Law is for the Transgressor, and Justice is to be administered
upon all, without respect of Persons.

. I. LIberty of Conscience from the Power of the Civil Magistrate, has been of
late Years so largely and learnedly handled, that I shall not need to be but
brief in it; yet it is to be lamented, that few have walked answerably to this
Principle, each pleading it for themselves, but scarce allowing it to others;
as hereafter I shall have occasion more at length to observe.

It will be fit in the first place, for clearing of Mistakes, to say something
of the State of the Controversy, that what follows may be the more clearly
underdood.

By [ Conscience] then, as in the Explanation of the Fifth and Sixth
Propositions I have observed, is to be understood, That Persuasion of the Mind,
which arises from the Understanding's being possessed with the Belief of the
Truth or Falsity of any thing: Which, What Conscience is?
though it may be false or Evil upon the matter, yet if a Man should go against
his Persuasion, or Conscience, he should commit a Sin; because what a Man does
contrary to his Faith, though his Faith be wrong, is no ways acceptable to God.
Hence the Apostle says, Whatsoever is not of Faith, is sin; Romans 14.23
and he that doubts, is damned, if he eat: Though the thing might have been
lawful to another; and that this doubting to eat some kind of Meats (since all
the Creatures of God are good, and for the use of Man, if received with
Thanksgiving) might be a Superstition, or at least a Weakness, which were
better removed. Hence, Ames de Cas. Cons. says, The Conscience, although erring,
does evermore bind, so as that he sins, who does contrary to his Conscience,
i. e. As he supposes.
because he does contrary to the Will of God, although not materially and truly,
yet formally and interpretatively.

So the Question is, First, Whether the Civil Magistrate has Power to force
Men in things Religious, to do contrary to their Conscience; and if they will
not, to punish them in their Goods, Liberties or Lives? This we hold in the
Negative. But Secondly, As we would have the Magistrate avoiding this extreme
of incroaching upon Men's Consciences; so on the other hand, we are far from
joining with, or strengthening such Libertines, as would stretch the Liberty of
their Consciences, to the Prejudice of their Neighbors, or to the Ruin of
Humane Society. We understand therefore by Matters of Conscience, such as
immediately relate betwixt God and Man, or Men and Men, that are under the same
Persuasion: As to meet together and worship God in that way, which they judge
is most acceptable unto him; and not to incroach upon, or seek to force their
Neighbors, otherwise than by Reason, or such other Means, as Christ and his
Apostles used, viz. Preaching, and Instructing such as will hear and receive
it; but not at all for Men, under the Notion of Conscience, to do any thing
contrary to the Mor^l and perpetual Statutes, generally acknowledged by all
Christians: In which case the Magistrate may very lawfully use his Authority,
as on those, who under a pretense of Conscience, make it a Principle to kill
and destroy all the Wicked, id est, all that differ from them; that they, to
wit, the Saints, may Rule; and that therefore seek to make all things common,
and would force their Neighbors to share their Estates with them, and many
such wild Notions; as is reported of the Anabaptists of Munster, which
evidently appears to proceed from Pride and Covetousness, and not from Purity
or Conscience; and therefore I have sufficiently guarded against that, in the
latter part of the Proposition. But the Liberty we lay claim to, is such, as
the Primitive Church justly sought under the Heathen Emperors, to wit, for Men
of Sobriety, Honesty, ^d a Peaceable Conversation, to enjoy the Liberty and
Exercise of their Conscience toward God, and among themselves; and to admit
among them such, as by their Persuasion and Influence, come to be convinced of
the same Truth with them, without being therefore Molested by the Civil
Magestrate. Thirdly, Though we would not have Men hurt in their Temporals, nor
robbed of their Privileges, as Men, and Members of the Commonwealth, because
of their inward Persuasion; yet, we are far from judging, that in the Church of
God there should not be such Censures exercised against such as fall into
Error, as well as such as commit open Evils. And therefore we believe it may be
very lawful for a Christian Church, if she find any of her Members fall into
any Error, after due Admonitions and Instructions, according to Gospel Order,
if she find them Pertinacious, to cut them off, from her Fellowship, by the
Sword of the Spirit, and deprive them of those Privileges, which they had as
Fellow Members; but not to cut them off from the World, by the Temporal Sword,
or rob them of their Common Privileges, as Men; seeing they enjoy not these as
Christians, or under such a Fellowsh^p, but as Men, and Members of the
Creation. Hence Chrysostom says well, (de Anath.) We must condemn and reprove
the Evil Doctrines that proceed from Heretics; but spare the Men, and pray for
their Salvation.

. II. But that no Man, by virtue of any Power or Principality he has in the
Government of this World, has Power over the Consciences of Men, Conscience
the Throne of God.
is apparent, because the Conscience of Man, is the Seat and Throne of God in
him, of which God is the alone proper and infallible Judge, who by his Power
and Spirit, can alone rectify the Mistakes of Conscience; and therefore has
reserved to himself the Power of punishing the Errors thereof, as he sees
meet. Now for the Magistrate to assume this, is to take upon him to meddle with
things not within the compass of his Jurisdiction; for if this were within the
compass of his Jurisdiction, he should be the proper Judge in these things; and
also it were needful to him, as an Essential Qualification of his being a
Magistrate, to be capable to judge in them. But that the Magistrate, as a
Magistrate, is neither proper Judge in these Cases, nor yet that the Capacity
so to be, is requisite in him, as a Magistrate, our Adversaries cannot deny; or
else they must say, That all the Heathen Magistrates, were either no lawful
Magistrates, as wanting something Essential to Magistracy, and this were
contrary to the express Doctrine of the Apostle, Romans 13. or else (which is
more absurd) that those Heathen Magistrates were proper Judges in Matters of
Conscience amongst Christians. As for that Evasion, That the Magistrate ought
to punish according to the Church Censure and Determination, which is indeed no
less, than to make the Magistrate the Church's Hangman; we shall have occasion
to speak of it hereafter. But if the chief Members of the Church, though ordained
to inform, instruct and reprove, are not to have dominion over the Faith nor
Consciences of the Faithful, is the Apostle expressly affirms, 2 Cor. 1.24. then
far less ought they to usurp this Dominion, or stir up the Magistrate to
persecute and murder those, who will not yield to them therein.

Secondly; This pretended Power of the Magistrate, is both contrary unto, and
inconsistent with the Nature of the Gospel, which is a thing altogether
extrinsick to the Rule and Government of Political States, as Christ expressly
signified, saying, His Kingdom was not of this World: And if the Propagating of
the Gospel had had any necessary Relation thereunto, then Christ had not said
so. But he abundantly has shown, by his Example, whom we are chiefly to
imitate in matters of that Nature, that it is by Persuasion, and the Power of
God; not by Whips, Imprisonments, Banishments and Murtherings, that the Gospel
is to be propagated; and that those, that are the Propagators of it, are often
to suffer by the Wicked, but never to cause the Wicked to suffer. When he sends
forth his Disciples, he tells them, he sends them forth as Lambs among Wolves,
Mat. 10.16.
to be willing to be devoured, not to devour; he tells them of their being
whipped, imprisoned and killed for their Conscience; but never that they shall
ever whip, imprison or kill: And indeed, if Christians must be as Lambs, it is
not the Nature of Lambs to destroy or devour any. It serves nothing to allege,
That in Christ's and his Apostles times, the Magistrates were Heathens; and
therefore Christ and his Apostles (nor yet any of the Believers) being no
Magistrates, could not exercise the Power: Because it cannot be denied, but
Christ, being the Son of God, had a true Right to all Kingdoms, Mat. 28.18.
and was righteous Heir of the Earth. Next, as to his Power, it cannot be
denied, but he could, if he had seen meet, have called for Legions of Angels to
defend him, and have forced the Princes and Potentates of the Earth to be
subject unto him, Mat. 26.53. So that it was only, because it was contrary to
the Nature of Christ's Gospel and Ministry, to use any Force or Violence in the
gathering of Souls to him. This he abundantly expressed in his Reproof to the
two Sons of Zebedee, who would have been calling for Fir^ from Heaven, to burn
those that refused to receive Christ: It is not to be doubted, but this was as
great a Crime, as now to be in an Error concerning the Faith and Doctrine of
Christ. That there was not Power wanting, to have punishing those Refusers of
Christ, cannot be doubted; for they that could do other Miracles, might have
done this also. And moreover, they wanted not the precedent of a holy Man under
the Law, as did Elias; yet we see what Christ says to them, Ye know not what
Spirit ye are of, Luke 9.55. For the Son of Man is not come to destroy Men's
Lives, but to save them. Here Christ shows, that such kind of Zeal was no ways
approved of him; and such as think to make way for Christ, or his Gospel,, by
this means, do not understand what Spirit they are of. But if it was not lawful
to call for Fire from Heaven, to destroy such as refused to receive Christ; it
is far less lawful to kindle Fire upon Earth to destroy those that believe in
Christ; because they will not believe, nor can believe as the Magistrates do,
for Conscience sake. And if it was not lawful for the Apostles, who had so
large a measure of the Spirit, and were so little liable to Mistake, to force
others to their Judgment; it can be far less lawful now for Men, that, as
Experience declares, and many of themselves confess, are Fallible, and often
Mistaken, to kill and destroy all such, as cannot (because otherwise persuaded
in their Minds) judge and believe in matters of Conscience, just as they do.
And if it was not according to the Wisdom of Christ, who was and is King of
Kings, by outward Force to constrain others to believe him, or receive him, as
being a thing inconsistent with the Nature of his Ministry and Spiritual
Government; do not they grossly offend him, that will needs be wiser than he,
and think to force Men, against their Persuasion, to conform to their Doctrine
and Worship? The Word of the Lord said, Not by Power and by Might, but by the
Spirit of the Lord, Zach. 4.6. But these say, Not by the Spirit of the Lord,
but by Might and Carnal Power. The Apostle says plainly, We wrestle not with
Flesh and Blood; and, The Weapons of our Warfare are not Carnal, 1 Cor. 10.4.
but Spiritual: But these Men will needs wrestle with Flesh and Blood, when
they cannot prevail with the Spirit and the Understanding; and not having
Spiritual Weapons, go about with Carnal Weapons, to establish Christ's Kingdom,
which they can never do: And therefore, when the matter is well sifted, it is
found to be more out of Love to Self, and from a Principle of Pride in Man, to
have all others to bow to him, than from the Love of God. Christ indeed takes
another method, for he says, He will make his People a willing People in the
Day of his Power: Psalm. 10.31.
But these Men labor against Men's Wills and Consciences, not by Christ's
Power, but by the Outward Sword, to make Men the People of Christ, which they
can never do, as shall hereafter be shown.

But Thirdly; Christ fully and plainly declares to us his sense in this
Matter, in the Parable of the Tares, Mat. 13. of which we have himself the
Interpreter, verse. 38, 39, 40, 41, where he Expounds them to be the Children of
the Wicked One; and yet he will not have the Servants to meddle with them, lest
they pull up the Wheat therewith. Now it cannot be denied, but Heretics are
here included; but these Servants saw the Tares, and had a certain discerning
of them; yet Christ would not they should meddle, lest they should hurt the
Wheat; Thereby intimating, that that Capacity in Man, to be mistaken; ought to
be a Bridle upon him, to make him wary in such matters; and therefore, to
prevent this hurt, he gives a positive Prohibition, But he said, Nay, verse. 22.
So that they, that will notwithstanding be pulling up that, which they judge is
Tares, do openly declare, that they make no Bones to break the Commands of
Christ. Miserable is that Evasion, which some of our Adversaries use here, in
alleging, these Tares are meant of Hypocrites, and not of Heretics! But how
to evince that, seeing Heretics, as well as Hypocrites, are Children of the
Wicked One, they have not any thing, but their own bare Affirmation, which is
therefore justly rejected.

Because Hypocrites cannot be discerned, but so may Heretics.

Spiritual discerning, an discern both Hypocrites and Heretics; and those that
want it, cannot certainly discern either: Seeing the Question will arise,
Whether that is a Heresy, which the Magistrate says is so? And seeing it is
both Possible and Confessed by all, to have often fallen out, that some
Magistrates have judged that Heresy, which was not; punishing Men accordingly
for Truth, instead of Error: There can no Argument be drawn from the
Obviousness or Evidence of Heresy, unless we should conclude, Heresy could
never be mistaken for Truth, nor Truth for Heresy; whereof Experience shows
daily the contrary, even among Christians. But neither is this Shift applicable
to this place; for the Servants did discern the Tares, and yet were liable to
hurt the Wheat, if they had offered to pull them up.

Liberty of Conscience, Deuteronomy. 13.5. where false Prophets are appointed to be
put to Death; and accordingly they give Example thereof.

Jews, and Practices following upon them, are not a Rule for Christians; else
we might by the same Rule say, It were lawful for us to borrow of our
Neighbors their Goods, and so carry them away, because the Jews did so by
God's Command; or that it is lawful for Christians to invade their Neighbors
Kingdoms, and cut them all off without Mercy, because the Jews did so to the
Canaanites, by the Command of God.

That these Commands ought to stand, except they be Repealed in the Gospel.

Jews, is binding upon us, except there be a particular Repeal; then it would
follow, that because it was lawful for the Jews, if any Man killed one, for the
nearest of kindred presently to kill the Murderer, without any order of Law,
it were lawful for us to do so also. And does not this Command of Deuteronomy. 13.9.
openly order him, who is enticed by another to forsake the Lord, though it were
his Brother, his Son, his Daughter, or his Wife, presently to kill him or her?
Thou shall surely kill him, thy hand shall be first upon him, to put him to
death. If this Command were to be followed, there needed neither Inquisition
nor Magistrate to do the business; and yet there is no reason, why they should
shuffle by this part, and not the other; ye, to argue this way, from the
Practice among the Jews, were to overturn the very Gospel, and to set up again
the Carnal Ordinances among the Jews, to pull down the Spiritual Ones of the
Gospel. Indeed we can far better argue from the Analogy betwixt the Figurative
and Carnal State of the Jews, and the Real and Spiritual One under the Gospel:
That as Moses delivered the Jews out of outward Egypt, by an outward Force, and
established them in an outward Kingdom, by destroying their outward Enemies for
them; so Christ, not by overcoming outwardly, and killing others, but by
suffering and being killed, does deliver his chosen Ones, the inward Jews, out
of mystical Egypt, destroying their Spiritual Enemies before them, and
establishing among them his Spiritual Kingdom, which is not of this World. And
as such, as departed from the Fellowship of outward Israel, were to be cut off
by the outward Sword; so those, that depart fom the inward Israel, are to be
cut off by the Sword of the Spirit: For it answers very well, That as the Jews
were to cut off their Enemies outwardly, to establish their Kingdom and outward
Worship, so they were to uphold it the same way. But as the Kingdom and Gospel
of Christ was not to be established or propagated by cutting off or destroying
the Gentiles, but by persuading them, so neither is it to be upheld otherwise.

Secondly, they urge Romans 13. where the Magistrate is said not to bear the
Sword in vain, because he is the Minister of God, to execute Wrath upon such as
do evil. But Heresy, say they, is evil. Ergo.

Hypocrisy also; yet they confess, he ought not to punish that. Therefore this
must be understood of Moral Evils, relative of Affairs betwixt Man and Man, not
of Matters of Judgment or Worship; or else what great Absurdities would follow,
considering that Paul wrote here to the Church of Rome, who was under the
Government of Nero, an impious Heathen, and Persecutor of the Church? Now if a
Power to punish, in point of Heresy, be here included, it will necessarily
follow, that Nero had this Power; yea, and that he had it of God; for because
the Power was of God, therefore the Apostle urges their Obedience. But can
there be any thing more absurd, than to say, that Nero had Power to judge in
such Cases? Surely if Christian Magistrates be not to punish for Hypocrisy,
because they cannot outwardly discern it; far less could Nero punish any Body
for Heresy, which he was incapable to discern. And if Nero had not power to
judge or punish in point of Heresy, then nothing can be urged from this place;
since all that is said here, is spoken, as applicable to Nero, with a particular
Relation to whom, it was written. And if Nero had such a Power, surely he was
to exercise it, according to his Judgment and Conscience, and in doing thereof
he was not to be blamed; which is enough to justify him in his persecuting of
the Apostles, and murdering the Christians.

Thirdly, They object that Saying of the Apostle to the Galatians, 5.12. I
would they were even cut off, which trouble you.

cutting off from the Church, is not, nor can be shown. Beza upon the place
says, We cannot understand that otherwise, than of Excommunication; such as
was that of the incestuous Corinthian. And indeed it is madness to suppose it
otherwise; for Paul would not have these cut off otherwise, than he did
Hymenaeus and Philetus, who were Blasphemers; which was by giving them over to
Satan, not by cutting off their Heads.

The same way may be answered that other Argument, drawn from Rev. 2.20. where
the Church of Thyatira is reproved for suffering the Woman Jezabel: What can be
no other ways understood, than that they did not Excommunicate her, or cut her
off by a Church-Censure. For as to Corporal Punishment, it is known, that at
that time the Christians had not Power to punish Heretics so, if they had had
a mind to it.

Fourthly, They allege, that Heresies are numbered among the Works of the
Flesh, Gal. 5.20. Ergo, etc.

Magistrates have Power to punish all the Works of the Flesh, is denied, and
not yet proved. Every Evil is a Work of the Flesh, but every Evil comes not
under the Magistrate's Cognizance. Is not Hypocrisy a Work of the Flesh, which
our Adversaries confess, the Magistrates ought not to punish? Yea, are not
Hatred and Envy there mentioned, as Works of the Flesh? And yet the Magistrates
cannot punish them, as they are in themselves, until they exert themselves in
other Acts, which come under his Power. But so long as Heresy does not exert
it self in any Act destructive to Humane Society, or such like things, but is
kept within the Sphere of those Duties of Doctrine and Worship, which stand
betwixt a Man and God, they no ways come under the Magistrate's Power.

. IV. But Secondly; This forcing of Men's Consciences, is contrary to sound
Reason, and the very Law of Nature. For Man's Understanding cannot be forced,
by all the Bodily Sufferings another Man can inflict upon him, especially in
Matters Spiritual and Supernatural: It Is Argument, and evident Demonstration of
Reason, together with the Power of God reaching the Heart, that can change a
Man's Mind from one Opinion to another, and not Knocks and Blows, and such like
things; which may well destroy the Body, but can never inform the Soul, which
is a free Agent, and must either accept or reject matters of Opinion as they
are born in upon it, by something proportional to us own nature. To seek to
force Minds in any other manner, is to deal with Men, as if they were Brutes,
void of Understanding; and at last, is but to lose one's labor, and as the
Proverb is, To seek to wash the Black moor white. By that Course indeed, Men
may be made Hypocrites, but can never be made Christians; and surely the
Products of such Compulsion (even where the End is obtained, to with an outward
Assent or Conformity, whether in Doctrine or Worship) can be no ways acceptable
to God, who desires not any Sacrifice, except that, which comes thoroughly
from the Heart, and will have no constrained ones: So that Men, by constrained
Force, are so far from being Members of the Church, that they are made
ten-times more the Servants of Satan, than before; in that to their Error, is
added Hypocrisy, the worst of Evils in the matters of Religion, and that which
above all things the Lord's Soul most abhors.

Their Error notwithstanding is thereby supressed, and the Scandal removed.

Halter or a Faggot. But supposing this Principle, That the Magistrate has
Power to force the Consciences of his Subjects, and to punish them, if they
will not comply: Very great Inconveniences and Absurdities will follow, and
even such as are inconsistent with the Nature of the Christian Religion.

For First, It will naturally follow, that the Magistrate ought to do it, and
sins by omission of his Duty, if he do it not. Will it not then hence be
inferred, that Christ was defective to his Church; who, having Power to force
Men, and to call for Legions of Angels so to do, did notwithstanding not exert
that Power, but left his Church to the Mercy of the Wicked, without so
necessary a Bulwark?

Secondly; Seeing every Magistrate is to exercise his Power, according to the
best Understanding he has, being obliged so to do, for the promoting of what
he in Conscience is persuaded to be Truth: Will not this justify all the
Heathen Emperors in their Persecutions against Christians? Will not this
justify the Spanish Inquisition, which yet is Odious not only to Protestants,
but to many moderate Papists? How can Protestants in reason condemn the Papists
for persecuting them, seeing they do but exercise a Lawful Power, according to
their Conscience and best Understanding; and do no more to them, than the
Sufferers profess they would do to them, if they were in the like capacity?
Which takes away all ground of Commiseration from the Sufferers; whereas that
was the ground that gained of old, Reputation to the Christians, that they,
being Innocent, suffered, who neither had, nor by Principle could, hurt any.
But there is little reason to pity one, that is but dealt by, according as he
would deal with others. For to say, They have not reason to persecute us,
because they are in the wrong, and we in the right, is but miserably to beg the
Question. Does not this Doctrine strengthen the Hands of Persecutors every
where, and that Rationally, from a Principle of Self-preservation? For who can
blame me for destroying him, that I know waits but for an occasion to destroy
me, if he could? Yea, this makes all Suffering for Religion, which of old was
the Glory of Christians, to be but of pure necessity; whereby they are not led
as Lambs to the slaughter, as was the Captain of their Salvation; but rather as
Wolves catched in the Snare, who only bite not again, because they are not
able; but could they get force, would be as ready to lead those the same way,
that led them. Where is the Faith and Patience of the Saints? For indeed, it is
but a small Glory to make a Virtue of Necessity, and Suffer, because I cannot
help it. Every Thief and Murderer would be a Martyr, at that rate; Experience
has abundantly proved this in these last Centuries. For, however each Party
talk of passively obeying the Magistrate in such cases, and that the Power
resides in him; yet it is apparent, that from this Principle it naturally
follows, than any Party, supposing themselves right, should so soon as they are
able, endeavor at any rate to get uppermost, that they might bring under those
of another Opinion, and force the Magistrate to uphold their Way, to the ruin
of all others. What Engine the Pope of Rome used to make of his pretended Power
in this thing, upon any pretense of dislike to any Prince or State, even for
very small Heresies, in their own account, to depose Princes, and set up their
Subjects against them, and give their Dominions to other Princes to serve his
Interest, they cannot be ignorant, that have read the Life of Hildebrand; and
how Protestants have vindicated the Liberty of their Consciences, after this
same manner, is apparent. They suffered much in France, to the great Increase
and Advantage of their Party; but how soon they found themselves considerable,
and had gotten some Princes upon their side, they began to let the King know,
that they must either have the Liberty of their Consciences, or else they would
purchase it; not by Suffering, but by Fighting. And the Experience of other
Protestant States shows, that if Henry the Fourth, to please the Papists, had
not quitted his Religion, to get the Crown the more peaceably, and so the
Protestants had prevailed with the Sword, they would as well have taught the
Papists with the Faggot, and led them to the Stake: So that this Principle of
Persecution, on all hands, is the ground of all those Miseries and Contentions.
For so long as any Party is persuaded, that it is both lawful for them, and
their duty, if in power, to destroy those that differ from them; it naturally
follows, they ought to use all means possible to get that Power, whereby they
may secure themselves in the ruin of their Adversaries. And that Papists judge
it not unlawful to compel the Magistrate, if they be strong enough to do it, to
effect this; Experience shows it to be a known Popish principle, That the Pope
may depose an Heretic Prince, and absolve the People from the Oath of
Fidelity: And the Pope, as is above said, has done so to diverse Princes; and
this Doctrine is defended by Bellarmine against Barclay. The French refused
Henry the Fourth, till he quitted his Religion. And as for Protestants, many of
them scruple not to affirm, That wicked Kings and Magistrates may be deposed
and killed; yea, our Scotch Presbyterians are as positive in it, as any
Jesuits; who would not admit King Charles the Second, though otherwise a
Protestant Prince, unless he would sweat to Renounce Episcopacy, a matter of a
great difference, though contrary to his Conscience. Now how little proportion
these things bear with the Primitive Christians, and the Religion propagated by
Christ and his Apostles, needs no great demonstration; and it is observable,
That notwithstanding many other Superstitions crept into the Church very early,
yet this of Persecution was so inconsistent with the Nature of the Gospel, and
Liberty of Conscience, as we have asserted it, such an innate and natural part
of the Christian Religion, that almost all the Christian Writers, for the first
Three Hundred Years, earnestly contended for it, condemning the contrary
Opinion.

. V. Thus Athanasius; It is the property of Piety not to force, Athan. in
Epist, ad solit. vit. ag. ibid.
but to persuade, in imitation of our Lord, who forced no body, but left it to
the will of every one to follow him, etc. But the Devil, because he has
nothing of Truth, uses Knocks and Axes, to break up the doors of such as
receive him. But our Savior is meek, teaching the Truth; whosoever will come
after me, and whosoever will be my Disciple, etc. but constraining none, coming
to us, and knocking rather, and saying, My Sister, my Spouse, open to me, etc.
And enters when he is opened to, and retires if they delay, and will not open
unto him; because it is not with Swords, nor Darts, nor Soldiers, nor Armor,
that Truth is to be declared, but with Persuasion and Counsel. And it is
observable, that they were the impious Arrians, who first of all brought in
this Doctrine, to Persecute others, among Christians, whose Successors both
Papists and Protestants are in this matter; whom Athanasius thus reproves
further: Athan. Apol. 1. de fuga sua, tom. 1.
Where (says he) have they learned to persecute? Certainly they cannot say,
they have learned it from the Saints; but this has been given them, and taught
them of the Devil. The Lord commanded indeed sometimes to flee, and the Saints
sometimes fled; but to persecute, is the invention and argument of the Devil,
which he seeks against all. And after he says, In so far as the Arrians banish
those that will not subscribe their Decrees, they show that they are contrary
to Christians, and Friends of the Devil.

Hill. contra Aux.
But now, O lamentable (says Hilarious) they are the Suffrages of the Earth,
that recommend the Religion of God, and Christ is found naked of his Virtue,
while Ambition must give Credit to his Name. The Church reproves and fights by
Banishments and Prisons, and forces her self to be believed, which once was
believed, because of the Imprisonments and Banishments her self suffered. She
that once was consecrated by the Terrors of her Persecutors, depends now upon
the dignity of those, that are in her Communion. She that once was propagated
by her banished Priests, now banisheth the Priests. And she boasts now, that
she is loved of the World, who could not have been Christ's, if she had not
been hated of the World.

The Church (says Hierom) was founded by shedding of Blood, and by suffering,
Hieron. Epist 6 2. ad ^e.
and not in doing of hurt. The Church increased by Persecutions, and was
crowned by Matryrdom.

Ambrose, speaking of Auxentius, says thus, Amb Epist. 32. tom. 3.
Whom he (viz. Auxentius) could not deceive by Discourse, he thinks ought to be
killed with the Sword, making bloody Laws with his Mouth, writing them with his
own Hands, and imagining, that an Edict can command Faith.

And the same Ambrose says, That going into France, Amb. Epist. 27.
he would not communicate with those Bishops, that required, That Heretics
should be put to death.

The Emperor Martianus, Mart. Epist. ad Archimand, etc. Mon. Eg. in acta
Council. Chalced. tom. 2. conc. genesis
who assembled the Council of Chalcedon, protests, That he would not force nor
constrain any one to subscribe the Council of Chalcedon, against his will.

Hosi. Epist ad -- Constable ap. At^. in Ep. ad sol. vit, tom. 1.
Hosius, Bishop of Corduba testifies, That the Emperor Constans would not
constrain any to be Orthodox.

Hill. l. 1. ad Constable.
Hilarious says further, That God teaches, rather than exacteth, the knowledge
of himself, and authorizing his Commandments by the Miracles of his heavenly
Works; he wills not, that any should confess him with a forced Will, etc. He is
the God of the whole Universe, he needs not a forced Obedience, nor requires a
constrained Confession.

Ambr. comm. in Luc. l. 7.
Christ (says Ambrose) sent his Apostles to sow Faith; not to constrain, but
to teach; not to exercise coercive Power, but to extol the Doctrine of Humility.

Hence Cyprian, Cypr. Epist. 62.
comparing the Old Covenant with the New, says, Then were they put to Death
with the outward Sword, but now the Proud and Contumacious are cut off with the
Spiriual Sword, by being cast out of the Church. And this answers very well
that Objection, before observed, taken from the Practice of the Jews under the
Law.

Tertull. Apol. c 24.
See (says Tertullian to the Heathens) if it be not to contribute to the
Renown of Religion, to seek to take away the Liberty of Religion, and to hinder
Men their choice of God, that I may not be admitted to adore whom I will, but
must be constrained to serve him, whom I will not. There is none, nay not a
Man, that desires to be adored by any against their will. Ib. Apol. c. 28.
And again, It Is a thing that easily appears to be unjust, to constrain and
force Men to sacrifice against their wills: Seeing to do the Service of God,
there is required a willing Heart. And again, Idem ad Scapul. c. 2.
It is an Humane Right, and Natural Power, that every one Worship what he
esteems; and one Man's Religion does not profit nor hurt another. Neither is it
any piece of Religion, to enforce Religion, which must be undertaken by
Consent, and not by Violence, seeing that the Sacrifices themselves are not
required, but from a willing mind.

Now, how either Papists or Protestants (that boast of Antiquity) can get by
these plain Testimonies, let any Rational Man judge. And indeed I much
question, if in any one point owned by them, and denied by us, they can find
all the Old Fathers and Writers so exactly unanimous. Which shows, how contrary
all of them judge this to be to the Nature of Christianity, and that in the
point of Persecution, lay no small part of the Apostasy; which, from little to
more, came to that, That the Pope upon every small Discontent, would
excommunicate Princes, absolve their Subjects from obeying them, and turn them
in and out at his pleasure. Now if Protestants do justly abhor these things
among Papists, is it not sad, that they should do the like themselves? A thing
that at their first appearance, when they were in their Primitive Innocence,
they did not think on, as appears by that Saying of Luther: Neither Pope nor
Bishop, Luth. lib. de Captivitate, Babylon.
nor any other Man, has power to oblige a Christian to one Syllable, except it
be by his own consent. And again, I call boldly to Christians, that neither Man
nor Angel can impose any Law upon them, but so far as they will; for we are
free of all. And when he appeared at the Diet of Spiers, before the Emperor, in
a particular Conference he had before the Arch Bishop of Triers, and Joachim
Elector of Brandenburg, when there seemed no possibility of agreeing him with
his Opposers, they asking him, What Remedy seemed to him most fit? History of
the Council of Trent.
He answered, The Counsel that Gamaliel proposed to the Jews, to wit, That if
this design was of God, it would stand; if not, it would vanish; which, he
said, ought to content the Pope: He did not say, because he was in the Right,
he ought to be spared. For this Counsel supposes, that those that are
tolerated may be wrong; and yet how soon did the same Luther, e're he was well
secure himself, press the Elector of Saxony to banish poor Carolostadius,
because he could not, in all things, submit to his Judgment? And certainly it
is not without ground reported, That it smote Luther to the Heart (so that he
needed to be comforted) when he was informed, That Carolostadius, in his Letter
to his Congregation, styled himself, A Man banished for Conscience, by the
procurement of Martin Luther. And since both the Lutherans and Calvinists, not
admitting one another to Worship in those respective Dominions, shows how
little better they are, than either Papists or Arrians in this particular. And
yet Calvin says, Calv. Inst. cap. 19. sect. 14.
That the Conscience is free from the power of all Men: If so, why then did he
cause Castellio to be banished because he could not, for Conscience sake,
believe as he did, That God had ordained Men to be damned? And Servetus to be
burned, for denying the Divinity of Christ, if Calvin's Report of him be to be
credited? Which Opinion, though indeed it was to be abominated, yet no less was
Calvin's Practice, in causing him to be burned, and afterward defending, that
it was lawful to burn Heretics; by which he encouraged the Papists to lead his
Followers the more confidently to the Stake, as having for their Warrant the
Doctrine of their own Sect-master: Which they omitted not frequently to twit
them with; and indeed it was to them unanswerable. Hence, upon this occasion,
the Judicious Author of the History of the Council of Trent (in his Fifth Book,
where giving an account of several Protestants that were burned for their
Religion) well and wisely observes it, as a matter of astonishment, that those
of the new Reformation did offer to punish in the case of Religion. And
afterward, taking notice, that Calvin justifies the punishing of Heretics, he
adds: But since the name of Heresy may be more or less restricted, yea, or
diversely taken, this Doctrine may be likewise taken in diverse senses, and may
at one time hurt those, whom at another time it may have benefitted.

Protestant Persecution strengthens the Popish Inquisition.
So that this Doctrine of Persecution cannot be maintained by Protestants,
without strengthening the Hands of Popish Inquisitors; and indeed, in the end,
lands in direct Popery. Seeing, if I may not profess and preach that Religion,
which I am persuaded of in my own Conscience is true, it is to no purpose to
search the Scriptures, or to seek to choose my own Faith by Convictions thence
derived; since whatever I observe, or am persuaded of, I must either subject to
the Judgment of the Magistrate and Church of that place I am in, or else
resolve to remove, or dye. Yea does not this Heretical and Antichristian
Doctrine, both of Papists and Protestants, at last resolve into that cursed
Policy of Mahomet, who prohibited all Reason or Discourse about Religion, as
occasioning Factions and Divisions? And indeed, those that press Persecution,
and deny Liberty of Conscience, do thereby show themselves more the Disciples
of Mahomet, than of Christ; and that they are no ways followers of the
Apostle's Doctrine, who desired the Thessalonians, To prove all things, and
hold fast that which is good, 1 Thessalonians. 5.21. And also says, Unto such as are
otherwise minded, God shall reveal it, Phil. 3.15. not that by Beatings and
Banishments it must be knocked into them.

. VI. Now the ground of Persecution, as has been above shown, is an
unwillingness to suffer; for no Man, that will persecute another for his
Conscience, would suffer for his own, if he could avoid it, seeing his
Principle obliges him, if he had power, by force to establish that which he
judges is the Truth, and so to force others to it. Therefore I judge it mere,
for the Information of the Nations, briefly to add something in this place
concerning the Nature of true Christian Sufferings; whereunto a very faithful
Testimony has been born by God's Witnesses, which he has raised up in this
Age, beyond what has been generally known or practiced for these many
Generations, yea, since the Apostasy took place. Yet it is not my design here
in any wise to derogate from the Sufferings of the Protestant Martyrs, whom I
believe to have walked in Faithfulness toward God, according to the
Dispensation of Light in that Day appearing, and of which many were utter
Enemies to Persecution, as by their Testimonies against it might be made appear.

But the True, Faithful and Christian Suffering is, for, Men to profess what
they are persuaded is right, and so practice and perform their Worship toward
God, as being their true right so to do; and neither to do more in that,
because of outward encouragement from Men; nor any whit less, because of the
fear of their Laws and Acts against it. Thus for a Christian Man to vindicate
his just Liberty, with so much Boldness, and yet Innocence, will in due time,
though through Blood, purchase Peace; as this Age has in some measure
Experienced, and many are Witnesses of it; which yet shall be more apparent to
the World, as Truth takes place in the Earth. But they greatly sin against this
excellent Rule, that in time of Persecution do not profess their own way, so
much as they would, if it were otherwise; and yet, when they can get the
Magistrate upon their side, not only stretch their own Liberty to the utmost,
but seek to establish the same, by denying it to others.

The Innocent Sufferings of the People called, Quakers.
But of this excellent Patience and Sufferings, the Witnesses of God, in scorn
called Quakers, have given a manifest proof: For so soon as God revealed his
Truth among them, without regard to all Opposition, or what they might meet
with, they went up and down, as they were moved of the Lord, preaching and
propagating the Truth in Marketplaces, High ways, Streets, and public
Temples, though daily beaten, whipped, bruised, halled and imprisoned therefore.
And when there was any where a Church or Assembly gathered, they taught them to
keep their Meetings openly, and not to shut the Door, nor do it by stealth,
that all might know it, and who would might enter. And as hereby all just
occasion of fear of Plotting against the Government was fully removed, so this
their Courage and Faithfulness, in not giving over their meeting together (but
more especially the Presence and Glory of God, manifested in the Meeting, being
terrible to the Consciences of the Persecutors) did so weary out the Malice of
their Adversaries, that oftentimes they were forced to leave their Work
undone. For when they came to break up a Meeting, they were forced to take
every Individual out by force; they not being free to give up their Liberty, by
dissolving at their Command; And when they were halled out, unless they were
kept forth by Violence, they presently returned peaceably to their place. Yea,
when sometimes the Magistrates have pulled down their Meeting Houses, they have
met the next day openly upon the Rubbish, and so by Innocence kept their
Possession and Ground, being properly their own, and their right to meet and
worship God being not forfeited to any. So that when Armed Men have come to
dissolve them, it was impossible for them to do it, unless they had killed
every one; for they stood so close together, that no force could move any one
to stir, until violently pulled thence: So that when the Malice of their
Opposers stirred them to take Shovels, and throw the Rubbish upon them, there
they stood unmoved, being willing, if the Lord should so permit, to have been
there buried alive, witnessing for him. As this Patient, but yet Courageous way
of Suffering, made the Persecutors work very heavy and wearisom unto them; so
the Courage and Patience of the Sufferers, using no Resistance, nor bringing
any Weapons to defend themselves, not seeking any ways Revenge upon such
occasions, did secretly smite the Hearts of the Persecutors, and made their
Chariot-wheels go on heavily: Thus after much and many kind of Sufferings thus
patiently born, which to rehearse would make a Volume of it self, which may in
due time be published to the Nations, (for we have them upon Record) a kind of
Negative Liberty has been obtained, so that at present for the most part we
meet together without disturbance from the Magistrate. But on the contrary,
most Protestants, when they have not the allowance and toleration of the
Magistrate, meet only in secret, and hide their Testimony; and if they be
discovered, if there be any probability of making their escape by force (or
suppose it were by cutting off those that seek them out) they will do it;
whereby they lose the Glory of their Sufferings, by not appearing as the
innocent Followers of Christ, nor having a Testimony of their Harmlesness in
the Hearts of their Pursuers; their Fury, by such resistance, is the more
kindled against them. As to this last part, of resisting such as persecute
them, they can lay claim to no Precept from Christ, nor any Example of him, or
his Apostles approved.

When they persecute you in this City, ^ee ye into another. And Acts 9.4. That
the Disciples met secretly, for fear of the Jews. And Acts 9.25. That Paul was
let out of Damascus in a Basket down by the Wall.

First, As to that Saying of Christ, it is a Question, if it had any further
Relation, than to that particular Message, with which he sent them to the Jews;
yea, the latter end of the words seem expressly to hold forth so much, For ye
shall not have gone over the Cities of Juda, till the Son of Man be come. Now a
particular Practice or Command, for a particular time, will not serve for a
Precedent to any, at this day, to shun the Cross of Christ. But supposing this
Precept to reach farther, it must be so understood, to be made use of only
according as the Spirit gives liberty; else no Man that could flee, Fleeing in
time of Persecution, not allowed.
might suffer Persecution. How then did not the Apostles, John and Peter flee,
when they were the first time persecuted at Jerusalem? But on the contrary,
went the next day, after they were discharged by the Council, and preached
boldly to the People. But indeed many are but too capable to stretch such
Sayings as these for Self-preservation, and therefore have great ground to
fear, when they interpret them, that they shun to witness for Christ, for fear
of hurt to themselves, lest they mistake them. As for that private meeting of
the Disciples, we have only an account of the matter of Fact, but that suffices
not to make of it a Precedent for us, and Men's aptness to imitate them in that
(which, for ought we know, might have been an Act of Weakness) and not in other
things of the contrary nature, shows, that it is not a true Zeal to be like
those Disciples, but indeed a Desire to preserve themselves, which moves them
so to do. Lastly, As to that of Paul's being conveyed out of Damascus, the case
was singular, and is not to be doubted, but it was done by a special Allowance
from God, who having designed him to be a principal Minister of his Gospel, saw
meet, in his Wisdom, to disappoint the wicked Council of the Jews. But our
Adversaries have no such Pretext for fleeing, whose fleeing proceeds from
Self-Preservation, not from Immediate Revelation. And that Paul made not this
the method of his procedure, appears, in that at another time, notwithstanding
the persuasion of his Friends, and certain Prophecies of his Sufferings to
come, he would not be dissuaded from going up to Jerusalem, which according to
the fore mentioned Rule, he should have done.

But Lastly, To conclude this matter, Glory to God, and our Lord Jesus Christ,
To this year 17^3 is 53. years.
that now these Twenty Five Years, since we were known to be a distinct and
separate People, has given us faithfully to suffer for his Name, without
shrinking or fleeing the Cross; and what Liberty we now enjoy, it is by his
Mercy, and not by any outward Working or Procuring of our own, but it is He has
wrought upon the Hearts of our Opposers. Nor was it any outward Interest has
procured it unto us, but the Testimony of our Harmlesness in the Hearts of our
Superiors: For God has preserved us hitherto in the patient Sufferings of
Jesus, that we have not given away our Cause by persecuting any, which few, if
any, Christians that I know can say. Now against our Unparalleled, yet
innocent and Christian Cause, our Malicious Enemies have nothing to say, but
that if we had Power, we would do so likewise. This is a piece of mere
unreasonable Malice, and a Privilege they take to judge of things to come,
which they have not by Immediate Revelation; and surely it is the greatest
height of harsh Judgment to say, Men would do contrary to their professed
Principle, if they could, who have from their Practice hitherto given no ground
for it, and wherein they only judge others by themselves: Such Conjectures
cannot militate against us, so long as we are Innocent. And if we ever prove
guilty of Persecution, by forcing other Men by Corporal Punishment to our way,
then let us be judged the greatest of Hypocrites, and let not any spare to
persecute us. Amen, says my Soul.

PROPOSITION XV. Concerning Salutations and Recreations, etc.
Ephesians. 5.11. 1 Pet 1 14 John 5 44. Jer 10 3 A^ 10.26. Mat 15.13. Col. 2.8.
Seeing the chief End of all Religion is to redeem Men from the Spirit and vain
Conversation of this World, and to lead into inward Communion with God, before
whom, if we fear always, we are accounted happy; therefore all the vain Customs
and Habits thereof, both in Word and Deed, are to be rejected and forsaken by
these, who come to this Fear; such as taking off the Hat to a Man, the Bowings
and Cringings of the Body, and such other Salutations of that kind, with all
the Foolish and Superstitious Formalities attending them; all which Man has
invented in his degenerate State, to feed his Pride in the vain Pomp and Glory
of this World: As also the unprofitable Plays, frivolous Recreations, Sportings
and Gamings, which are invented to pass away the precious Time, and divert the
Mind from the Witness of God in the Heart, and from the living Sense of his
Fear, and from that Evangelical Spirit, wherewith Christians ought to be
leavened, and which leads into Sobriety, Gravity, and Godly Fear; in which as
we abide, the Blessing of the Lord is felt to attend us in those Actions, in
which we are necessarily engaged, in order to the taking Care for the
Sustenance of the outward Man.

. I. HAving hitherto treated of the Principles of Religion, both relating to
Doctrine and Worship; I am now to speak of some Practices, which have been the
product of this Principle, in those Witnesses whom God has raised up in this
day, to testify for his Truth. It will not a little commend them (I suppose)
in the judgment of Sober and Judicious Men, that taking them generally (even by
the Confession of their Adversaries) they are found to be free of those
Abominations, which abound among other Professors, such as are Swearing,
Drunkenness, Whoredom, Riotousness, etc. and that generally the very coming
among this People does naturally work such a Change, so that many Vicious and
Profane Persons have been known, by coming to this Truth, to become Sober and
Virtuous; and many Light, Vain and Wanton ones, to become Grave and Serious, as
our Adversaries dare not deny: After it is manner, (...) Papists used to
disapprove the So^y of the ^aldenses, of whom R^inerus a Popish Author so
writes. But this Sect of the ^e^nists has a great show of Truth; for that
they live Righteously before Men, and believe all things well of God, and all
the Articles which are contained in the Creed; only they blasp^ me and hate the
Church of Rome.
Yet that they may not want something to detract us for, cease not to accuse us
for those things, which, when found among themselves, they highly commend; thus
our Gravity, they call Sullenness; our Seriousness Melancholy; our Silence,
Sottishness. Such as have been Vicious and Profane among them, but by coming to
us have left off those Evils; lest they should commend the Truth of our
Profession, they say; That whereas they were Profane before, they are become
worse, in being Hypocritical and Spiritually proud. If any before dissolute and
profane among them, by coming to the Truth with us, become fragal and
diligent, then they will charge them with Covetousness: And if any Eminent
among them for Seriousness Piety, and Discoveries of God, come unto us, then
they will say, they were always subject to Melancholy and to Enthusiasm; though
before, when among them, it was esteemed neither Melancholy not Enthusiasm, in
an evil sense, but Christian Gravity, and Divine Revelation. Our Boldness and
Christian Suffering, they call Obstinacy and Pertinacy; though half as much, if
among themselves, they would account Christian Courage and Nobility. And though
thus, by their Envy, they strive to read all relating to us backwards, counting
those things Vice in us, which in themselves they would extol as Virtues; yet
has the strength of Truth extorted this Confession often from them, That we
are generally a pure and clean People, as to the outward Conversation.

But this, they say, is but in Policy to commend our Heresy.

But such Policy it is, say I, as Christ and his Apostles made use of, and all
good Christians ought to do; yea, so far has Truth prevailed by the Purity of
its Followers, that if one that is called a Quaker, do but that which is common
among them, as to laugh, and be wanton, speak at large, and keep not his word
punctually, or be overtaken with hastiness, or anger, they presently say, O
this is against your Profession! As if indeed so to do were very consistent
with theirs; wherein though they speak the Truth, yet they give away their Cause.
But if they can find any, under our Name, in any of those Evils common among
themselves, (as who can imagine, but among so many Thousands, there will be
some Chaff, since of Twelve Apostles, one was found to be a Devil) O how will
they insult, and make more Noise of the escape of one Quaker, than of an
Hundred among themselves.

. II. But there are some singular things, which most of all our Adversaries
plead for the lawfulness of, and allow themselves in, as no ways inconsistent
with the Christian Religion, which we have found to be no ways lawful unto us,
and have been commanded of the Lord to lay them aside; though the doing thereof
has occasioned no small Sufferings and Bufferings, and has procured us much
Hatred and Malice from the World. And because the Nature of these things is
such, that they do upon the very sight distinguish us, and make us known, so
that we cannot hide our selves from any, without proving Unfaithful to our
Testimony; our Trials and Exercises have here through proved the more numerous
and difficult, as will after appear. These I have labored briefly to
comprehend in this Proposition; but they may more largely be exhibited in these
Six following Propositions.

1. That it is not lawful to give to Men such flattering Titles, as Your
Holiness, Your Majesty, Flattering Titles,
Your Eminency, Your Excellency, Your Grace, Your Lordship, Your Honor, etc.
nor use those flattering Words, commonly called, COMPLEMENTS.

2. That it is not lawful for Christians to kneel, Hat and Knee.
or prostrate themselves to any Man, or to bow the Body, or to uncover the Head
to them.

3. That it is not lawful for Christians to use superfluities in Apparel, as
are of no use, Apparel.
save for Ornament and Vanity.

4. That it is not lawful to use Games, Sports, Plays, Gaming:
nor, among other things, Comedies among Christians under the notion of
Recreations, which do not agree with Christian Silence, Gravity, and Sobriety:
For Laughing, Sporting, Gaming, Mocking, Jesting, vain Talking, etc. is not
Christian Liberty, nor Harmless Mirth.

5. That it is not lawful for Christians to swear at all under the Gospel, not
only not vainly, Swearing.
and in their common discourse, which was also forbidden under the Mosaical
Law, but even not in Judgment, before the Magistrate.

6. That it is not lawful for Christians to resist Evil, Fighting^
or to War or Fight in any case.

Before I enter upon a particular Disquisition of these things, Degrees of
Dignity and Precedence allowed.
I shall first premise some general Considerations, to prevent all Mistakes;
and next add some general Considerations, which equally respect all of them. I
would not have any judge, that hereby we intend to destroy the mutual Relation,
that either is betwixt Prince and People, Master and Servants, Parents and
Children; nay, not at all: We shall evidence, that our Principle in these
things has no such Tendency, and that these Natural Relations are rather
better established, than any ways hurt by it. Next, Let not any judge, that
from our opinion in these things, any necessity of Levelling will follow, or
that all Men must have things in common. Our Principle leaves every Man to
enjoy that peaceably, which either his own Industry, or his Parents, have
purchased to them; only he is thereby instructed to use it aright, both for his
own good, and that of his Brethren; and all to the Glory of God: In which also
his Acts are to be voluntary, and no ways constrained. And further, we say not
hereby, that no Man may use the Creation more or less than another: For we
know, that as it has pleased God to dispense it diversely, giving to some more,
and some less, so they may use it accordingly. The several Conditions, under
which Men are diversely stated, Education differs accordingly.
together with their Educations answering thereunto, do sufficiently show this:
The Servant is not the same way Educated, as the Master; nor the Tenant, as the
Landlord; nor the Rich, as the Poor; nor the Prince, as the Peasant. Now, though
it be not lawful for any, however great Abundance they may have, or what ever
then Education may be, to use that which is merely superfluous: Yet seeing
their Education has accustomed them thereunto, and their Capacity enables them
so to do, without being Profuse or Extravagant, they may use things better in
their kind, than such whose Education has neither accustomed them to such
things, nor their Capacity will reach to compass them. For it is beyond
question, that whatever thing the Creation affords, The lawful or unlawful Use
of the Creation
is for the use of Man, and the moderate use of them is lawful; yet, per
accidens, they may be unlawful to some, and not to others. As for instance, he
that by reason of his Estate and Education has been used to eat Flesh and
drink Wine, and to be clothed with the finest Wool, if his Estate will bear
it, and he use it neither in Superfluity, nor Immoderately, he may do it; and
perhaps, if he should apply himself to feed or be clothed, as are the
Peasants, it might prejudice the Health of his Body, and nothing advance his
Soul. But if a Man, whose Estate and Education had accustomed him to both
courser Food and Raiment, should stretch himself beyond what he had, or were
used to, to the manifest prejudice of his Family and Children, no doubt it
would be unlawful to him, even so to eat or be clothed, as another, in whom it
is lawful; for that that other may be as much mortified, and have denied
himself as much in coming down to that, which this aspires to, as he is willing
to be like him, aspires beyond what he either is able, or has accustomed to
do. The safe place then is, for such as have Fullness, to watch over themselves,
that they use it moderately, and rescind all Superfluities; being willing, so
far as they can, to help the reed of those, to whom Providence has allotted a
smaller allowance. Let the Brother of high degree rejoice, in that he is
abased, The Rich to help the Needy.
and such as God calls in a low degree, to be content with their Condition, not
envying those Brethren, who have greater abundance, knowing they have received
abundance, as to the inward Man; which is chiefly to be regarded. And therefore
beware of such a Temptation, as to use their Calling as an Engine to be Richer,
knowing, they have this advantage beyond the Rich and Noble that are called,
that the Truth does not any ways abase them, nay, not in the esteem of the
World, as it does the other; but that they are rather exalted thereby, in that
as to the inward and Spiritual Fellowship of the Saints, they became the
Brethren and Companions of the greatest and richest; and in this respect, let
him of low degree rejoice, that he is exalted.

These things premised, I would seriously propose unto all such, as mind in
reality to be Christians indeed, and that in Nature, and not in Name only;
Whether it were not desirable, and would not greatly contribute to the
Commendation of Christianity, and to the Increase of the Life and Virtue of
Christ, if all superfluous Titles of Honor, Profuseness and Prodigality in
Meat and Apparel, excess of Gaming, Sporting and Playing, were laid aside and
forborne? And whether such as lay them aside, in so doing, walk not more like
the Disciples of Christ and his Apostles, and are therein nearer their Example,
than such as use them? Whether the laying them aside would hinder any from
being good Christians? Or if Christians might not be better without them, than
with them? Certainly the Sober and Serious among all sorts, will say, Yea. Then
surely such as lay them aside, as reckoning them unsuitable for Christians, are
not to be blamed, but rather commended for so doing: Because that in Principle
and Practice, they effectually advance that, which others acknowledge were
desirable; but can never make effectual, so long as they allow the use of them
as lawful. And God has made it manifest in this Age, that by discovering the
Evil of such things, and leading his Witnesses out of them, and to testify
against them, he has produced effectually in many that Mortification and
Abstraction from the Love and Cares of this World, who daily are Conversing in
the World (but inwardly Redeemed out of it) both in Wedlock, and in their
lawful Employments, which was judged, could only be obtained by such as were
shut up in Cloisters and Monasteries. Thus much in general.

. III. As to the first, we affirm positively, That it is not lawful for
Christians either to give or receive these Titles of Honor, as, Your Holiness,
Your Majesty, Your Excellency, Your Eminency, etc.

First, Titles.
Because these Titles are no part of that Obedience, which is due to
Magistrates or Superiors; neither does the giving them add to, or diminish
from that Subjection we owe to them, which consists in obeying their just and
lawful Commands, not in Titles and Designations.

Secondly, We find not, that in the Scripture any such Titles are used, either
under the Law, Under the Law and Gospel.
or the Gospel: But that in the speaking to Kings, Princes, or Nobles, they
used only a simple Compellation, as, O King! And that without any further
Designation, save perhaps the Name of the Person, as, O King Agrippa, etc.

Thirdly, Lying Titles.
It lays a Necessity upon Christians most frequently to Lie; because the
Persons, obtaining these Titles, either by Election, or Hereditarily, may
frequently be found to have nothing really in them, deserving them, or
answering to them: As some, to whom it is said, Your Excellency, having nothing
of Excellency in them; and who is called, Your Grace, appear to be an Enemy to
Grace; and he who is called Your Honor, is known to be Base and Ignoble. I
wonder what Law of Man, or what Patent ought to oblige me to make a Lie,
Patents do not oblige to a Lie.
in calling Good, Evil; and Evil, Good? I wonder what Law of Man can secure me,
in so doing, from the just Judgment of God, that will make me count for every
idle Word? And to Lie is something more. Surely Christians should be ashamed,
that such Laws, manifestly crossing the Law of God, should be among them.

We ought in Charity to suppose, that they have these Virtues, because the King
has bestowed those Titles upon them, or that they are descended of such, as
deserved them.

Charity destroys not Knowledge: I am not obliged by Charity, either to believe
or speak a Lie. Now it is apparent, and cannot be denied by any, but that those
Virtues are not in many of the Persons, expressed by the Titles they bear;
neither will they allow to speak so to such, in whom these Virtues are, unless
they be so dignified by outward Princes. So that such as are truly Virtuous,
must not be styled by their Virtues, because not privileged by the Princes of
this World; and such as have them not, must be so called, because they have
obtained a Patent so to be: And all this is done by those, who pretend to be
his Followers, that commanded his Disciples, not to be called of Men, Master;
and told them, such could not believe, as received Honor one from another, and
sought not the Honor which comes from God only. This is so plain, to such as
will indeed be Christians, that it needs no Consequence.

Fourthly, As to those Titles of, Holiness, Eminency and Excellency, Your
Holiness, Your Grace, etc.
used among the Papists to the Pope and Cardinals, etc. and Grace, Lordship and
Worship, used to the Clergy among the Protestants, it is a most Blasphemous
Usurpation. For if they use Holiness and Grace, because these things ought to
be in a Pope or in a Bishop, how come they to usurp that peculiarly to
themselves? Ought not Holiness and Grace to be in every Christian? And so every
Christian should say, Your Holiness and Your Grace, one to another. Next, how
can they in reason claim any more Titles than were practiced and received by
the Apostles and Primitive Christians, whose Successors they pretend they are
and as whose Successors (and no otherwise) themselves, I judge, will confess
any Honor they seek is due to them. Now if they neither sought, received, not
admitted such Honor nor Titles, how came these by them? If they say, They did;
let them prove it if they can: We find no such thing in the Scripture. The
Christians speak to the Apostles without any such Denomination, neither saying,
If it please Your Grace, Your Holiness, Hypocrites want Titles
Your Lordship, nor Your Worship; they are neither called, My Lord Peter, nor
My Lord Paul; nor yet Master Peter, nor Master Paul; nor Doctor Peter, nor
Doctor Paul; but singly Peter and Paul; and that not only in the Scripture, but
for some Hundreds of Years after: So that this appears to be a manifest Fruit
of the Apostasy. For if these Titles arise either from the Office or Worth of
the Persons, it will not be denied, but the Apostles deserved them better than
any now, that call for them. But the Case is plain, the Apostles had the
Holiness, the Excellency, the Grace; and because they were Holy, Excellent and
Gracious, they neither used, nor admitted of such Titles: But these having
neither Holiness, Excellency nor Grace, will needs be so called, to satisfy
their ambitious and ostentatious Mind, which is a manifest Token of their
Hypocrisy.

Fifthly, As to that Title of Majesty, usually ascribed to Princes, we do not
find it given to any such in the Holy Scripture; but that it is specially and
peculiarly ascribed unto God, as 1 Chronicles. 29.11. Job 37.22. Psalm 21.5. and 29
4. and 43.3. and 63.1. and 96.6. Isai. 2.10. and 24.14. and 26.10. Heb. 1.3. 2
Pet. 1.16. and many more places. Hence says Jude, verse. 25. To the only wise
God, our Savior, be Glory and Majesty, etc. not to Men. We find in Scripture
the proud King Nebuchadnezzar, assuming this Title to himself, Dan. 4.30. who
at that time received a sufficient Reproof, by a sudden Judgment which came
upon him. Therefore in all the Compellations used to Princes in the Old
Testament, it is not to be found, nor yet in the New. Paul was very civil to
Agrippa, yet he gives him no such Title: Neither was this Title used among
Christians in the Primitive Times. Hence the Ecclesiastical History of the
Reformaiion of France, relating the Speech of the Lord Rochefort, at the
Assembly of the Estates of France, held under Charles the Ninth, in the Year
1590. says, That this Harangue was well remarked, E^el. Hist. lib. 4. p. 445.
in that he used not the word [Majesty] invented by Flatterers of late Years.
Your Majesty not used; How taken Notice of in 1560.
And yet this Author minded not how his Master Calvin used this Flattering
Title to Francis the First, King of France; and not only so, but calls him most
Christian King, in the Epistle to his Institutions; though by his daily
Persecuting of the Reformers, it was apparent, he was far from being such, even
in Calvin's own esteem. Surely the complying with such vain Titles, imposed and
introduced by Antichrist, greatly tended to stain the Reformation, and to
render it defective in many things.

Lastly, All these Titles and Styles of Honor are to be rejected by
Christians; because they are to seek the Honor that comes from above, and not
the Honor that is from below: But these Honors are not that Honor that comes
from above, but are from below. For we know well enough, what industry, The
proud Mind loves Titles.
and what pains Men are at to get these things, and what party it is that seeks
after them, to wit, t^ Proud, Insolent, Haughty, Aspiring Mind, For judge, Is
it the meek and innocent Spirit of Christ, that covets that Honor? Is it that
Spirit, that must be of no Reputation in this World, that has its Conversation
in Heaven, that comes to have fellowship with the Sons of God? Phil. 3.20.
Is it that Spirit, I say, that loves that Honor, that seeks after that
Honor, that pleads for the upholding of that Honor, that frets, and rages,
and fumes, when it is denied that Honor? Lucifer's Spirit.
Or is it not rather the lordly insulting Spirit of Lucifer, the Prince of this
World, he that of old affected and sought after this Honor, and loved not to
abide in the submissive, low Place? And so all his Children are possessed with
the same ambitious proud Mind, seeking and coveting Titles of Honor, which
indeed belong not to them. For let us examine, Who they are, that are
Honorable indeed? Is it not the Righteous Man? 1 Samuel 2.30.
Is it not the Holy Man? Is it not the Humble hearted Man, the Meek-spirited
Man? And are not such those that ought to be honored among Christians? Now, of
these, may there not be poor Men, Laborers, filly Fishermen? And if so, how
comes it that the Titles of Honor are not bestowed upon such? But who are they
that generally receive and look for this Honor? Are they not the Rich Ones,
such as have abundance of the Earth, as be like the Rich Glutton, such as are
Proud and Ambitious, such as are Oppressors of the Poor, such as swell with
Lust and Vanity, and all Superfluity of Naughtiness, who are the very
Abomination and Plague of the Nations? Are not these they, that are accounted
the Honorable, that require and receive the Titles of Honor, proud Hamans?
Now, whether is this the Honor, that comes from God, or the Honor from below?
Does God honor such as daily dishour him, and disobey him? And if this be not
the Honor, that comes from God, but the Honor of this World, which the
Children of this World give and receive one from another; how can the Children
of God Hierom in his Epistle to Celant, admonishes her, That she was to be
preferred to none for her Nobility, for the Christian Religion admits not of
Respect of Persons; neither are Men to be esteemed, because of their outward
Condition, but according to the Disposition of the Mind, to be esteemed either
Noble or Base; he that obeys not Sin, is Free; who is strong in Virtue, is
Noble. Let the Epistle of James be read.
, such as are Christians indeed, give or receive that Honor among themselves,
without coming under the Reproof of Christ, who says, that such as do, cannot
believe? But further, if we respect the Cause, that most frequently procures to
Men these Titles of Honor, there is not One of a Thousand, that shall be found
to be, because of any Christian Virtue; but rather for things to be
discommended among Christians: As by the Favor of Princes, procured by
Flattering, and often by worse means. Yea, the most Frequent, and accounted
among Men most Honorable, is Fighting, or some great martial Exploit, which
can add nothing to a Christian's Worth: Since, sure it is, it were desirable,
there were no Fightings among Christians at all; and in so far as there are, it
shows they are not right Christians. And James tells us, That Fighting proceeds
from the Lusts; So that it were fitter for Christians, by the Sword of God's
Spirit, to fight against their Lusts, than by the Prevalancy of their Lusts, to
destroy one another. Whatever Honor any might have attained of old, under the
Law, this way; we find under the Gospel Christians commended for Suffering, not
for Fighting; neither did any of Christ's Disciples, save one, offer outward
Violence by the Sword, in cutting off Malchus's Ear; for which he received no
Title of Honor, but a just Reproof. Finally, if we look either to the Nature
of this Honor, the Cause of it, the Way it is conveyed, the Terms in which it
is delivered, it cannot be used by such as mind to be Christians in good
earnest.

. IV. Now besides these general Titles of Honor, what gross Abuses are crept
in among such as are called Christians, in the use of Complements, wherein not
Servants to Masters, or others, with respect to any such kind of Relations, do
say and write to one another at every turn, Your Humble Servant, Your most
Obedient Servant, etc. Such wicked Customs have, to the great prejudice of
Souls, accustomed Christians to lie; and to use lying, is now come to be
accounted Civility. O horrid Apostasy! For it is notoriously known, that the
use of these Complements imports not any design of Service, neither are any
such Fools to think so; for if we should put them to it, that say so, they
would not doubt to think, we abused them; and would let us know, they gave us
words in course, and no more. It is strange, that such as pretend to Scripture,
as their Rule, should not be ashamed to use such things; since Elihu, that had
not the Scriptures, could by the Light within them (which these Men think
insufficient) say, Job 32.21, 22. Let me not accept any Man's Person, neither
let me give Flattering Titles unto Men. For I know not. to give Flattering
Titles; in so doing my Maker would soon take me away. This History is reported
by Causabonus, in his Book of Manners and Customs, p. 169. In this last Age, he
is esteemed an uncivil Man, who will not, either to his Inferior or Equal,
subscribe himself Servant. But Suspitius Severus, was heretofore sharply
Reproved by Fa^li^s Bishop o^ N^lo, because, in his Epistle, he had subscribed
his Servant, saying, Beware thou subscribe not thy self his Servant, who is thy
Brother; for Flattery is sinful, not a Testimony of Humility, to give those
Honors to Men, which are only due to the One Lord, Master and GOD.
A certain ancient devout Man, in the Primitive Time, subscribed himself to a
Bishop, Your Humble Servant; wherein, I doubt not, but he was more real, than
our usual Complementers; and yet he was sharply Reproved for it.

But they usually object, to defend themselves, That Luke says, Most Excellent
Theophilus; and Paul, Most Noble Festus.

I answer; Since Luke wrote that by the Dictates of the Infallible Spirit of
God, I think it will not be doubted, but Theophilus did deserve it, as being
really endued with that Virtue: In which case we shall not condemn those that
do it by the same Rule. But it is not proved, that Luke gave Theophilus this
Title, as that which was inherent to him, either by his Father, or by any
Patent Theophilus had obtained from any of the Princes of the Earth; or that he
would have given it him, in case he had not been truly Excellent: And without
this be proved (which never can) there can nothing hence be deduced against us.
Concerning the Title Paul gave to Festus.
The like may be said of that of Paul to Festus, whom he would not have called
such, if he had not been truly Noble; as indeed he was, in that he suffered him
to be heard in his own Cause, and would not give way to the Fury of the Jews
against him; it was not because of any outward Title bestowed upon Festus, that
he so called him, else he would have given the same Compellation to his
Predecessor, Felix, who had the same Office; but being a Covetous Man, we find
he gives him no such Style.

The Singular Number to One Person used in the Latin.
. V. It will not be unfit in this place, to say something concerning the using
of the Singular Number to One Person; of this there is no Controversy in the
Latin. For when we speak to One, we always use the Pronoun, TU, and he that
would do otherwise, would break the Rules of Grammar. For what Boy, learning
his Rudiments, is ignorant, that it is incongruous to say, Vos amas, vos legis,
that is, You love, you read, speaking to One? But the Pride of Man, that
has corrupted many things, refuses also to use this Simplicity of speaking in
the Vulgar Languages. For being puffed up with a vain Opinion of themselves, as
if the Singular Number were not sufficient for them, they will have others
speak to them in the Plural. Hence Luther, in his Plays, reproves and mocks
this manner of speaking, saying, Magister, vos es iratus: Which Corruption
Erasmus sufficiently refutes in his Book of Writing Epistles: Concerning which
likewise James H^wel, in his Epistle to the Nobility of England, before the
French and English Dictionary, takes notice, That both in France, and in other
Nations, the word THOU was used in speaking to One; but by success of Time,
when the Roman Commonwealth grew into an Empire, the Courtiers began to
magnify the Emperor, (as being furnished with Power to confer Dignities and
Offices) using the word You, yea, and deifying him with more remarkable Titles;
concerning which matter, we read in the Epistles of Symmachus to the Emperors
Theodosius and Valentinianus, where he uses these forms of speaking, Vestra
Aeternitas, Your Eternity; How the word You came to be used to a single Person.
Vestrum Numen, Your Godhead; Vestra Serenitas, Your Serenity; Vestra
Clementia, Your Clemency. So that the Word You in the Plural Number, together
with the other Titles and Compellations of Honor, seem to have taken their
rise from Monarchical Government; which afterward, by degrees, came to be
derived to private Persons.

The same is witnessed by John Maresius, of the French Academy, in the Preface
of his Clovis: Let none wonder (says he) that the word Thou is used in this
Work, to Princes and Princesses; for we use the same to God. And of Old the
same was used to Alexanders, Caesar's, Queens and Empresses. The use of the word
You, when One Person is spoken to, was only introduced by these base Flatteries
of Men of latter Ages, to whom it seemed good to use the Plural Number to One
Person, that he may imagine himself alone to be equal to many other, in Dignity
and Worth; from whence at last it came to Persons of lower Quality.

To the same Purpose speaks also M. Godeau, in his Preface to the New
Testament Translation: I had rather (says he) faithfully keep to the express
words of Paul, than exactly follow the polished Style of our Tongue; therefore
I always use that form of calling God in the Singular Number, not in the
Plural; and therefore I say rather Thou than You. I confess indeed, that
Civility and Custom of this World requires him to be honored after that
manner; but it is likewise on the contrary true, That the Original Tongue of
the New Testament has nothing common with such Manners and Civility; so that
not one of these many Old Versions we have, does observe it. Let not Men
believe, that we give not respect enough to God, in that we call him by the
word Thou, The word Thou, a greater Honor to One, than You.
which is nevertheless far otherwise; for I seem to my self (may be by the
effect of Custom) more to honor his Divine Majesty, in calling him after this
manner, than if I should call him after the manners of Men, who are so delicate
in their forms of Speech.

See how clearly and evidently these Men witness, that this Form of Speaking,
and these profane Titles, derive their Origin from the base Flattery of these
last Ages, and from the delicate Haughtiness of Worldly Men who have invented
these Novelties, that thereby they might Honor one another, under I know not
what pretense of Civility and Respect. From whence many of the present
Christians (so accounted) are become so Perverse, in commending most wicked
Men, and wicked Customs, that the Simplicity of the Gospel is wholly lost; so
that the giving of Men and Things their own Names, is not only worn out of
Custom, but the doing thereof is accounted Absurd and Rude, by such kind of
delicate Parasites, who desire to ascribe to this Flattery, and abuse the Name
of Civility. Moreover, that this way of speaking proceeds from a high and proud
Mind, hence appears; because that Men commonly use the Singular Number to
Beggars, and to their Servants; yea, and in their Prayers to God. Thus the
Superior will speak to his Inferior, who yet will not bear, that the
Inferior so speak to him, as judging it a kind of Reproach unto him. So has
the Pride of Men placed God and the Beggar in the same Category. I think I need
not use Arguments, to prove to such as know Congruous Language, that we ought
to use the Singular Number speaking to One; which is the common Dialect of the
whole Scripture, as also the most Interpreters do translate it. Seeing
therefore it is manifest to us, that this Form of speaking to Men in the Plural
Number, does proceed from Pride, as well as that it is in it self a Lie, we
found a necessity upon us, to testify against this Corruption, by using the
Singular equally unto All. And albeit no Reason can be given, why we should be
Persecuted upon this account, especially by Christians, Scripture-Dialect, the
p^ Language.
who profess to follow the Rule of Scripture, whose Dialect this is; yet it
would perhaps seem incredible, if I should relate how much we have suffered for
this thing, and how these proud Ones have fume^, fretted, and gnashed their
Teeth, frequently beating and striking us, when we have spoken to them thus in
the Singular Number: Whereby we are the more Confirmed our Judgment, as seeing
that this Testimony of Truth, which God has given us to bear in all things,
does so vex the Serpentine Nature in the Children of Darkness.

. VI, Secondly; Next unto this of Titles, Bowing to Men, etc.
the other Part of Honor, used among Christians, is the Kneeling, Bowing, and
Uncovering of the Head, to one another. I know nothing our Adversaries have to
plead for them in this matter, save some few Instances of the Old Testament,
and the Custom of the Country.

The first are, such as Abraham's bowing himself to the Children of Heth, and
Lot to the two Angels, etc.

But the Practice of these Patriarchs, related as matter of Fact, are not to be
a Rule to Christians now? Neither are we to imitate them in every Practice,
which has not a particular Reproof added to it: For we find not Abraham
reproved for taking Hagar, etc. And indeed to say, all things were lawful to
us, which they practiced, would produce great Inconveniences, The Custom of the
Nations, no Rule to Christians.
obvious enough to all. And as to the Customs of the Nations, it is a very ill
Argument for a Christian's Practice: We should have a better Rule to walk by,
than the Custom of the Gentiles; the Apostles desire us, not to be conformed to
this World, etc. Romans 12.2.
We see how little they have to say for themselves in this matter. Let it be
observed then, whether our Reasons for laying aside these things, be not
considerable, and weighty enough to uphold us in so doing.

First; We say, That God, who is the Creator of Man, and he to whom he owes
the Dedication both of Soul and Body, is over all to (...) Worshipped and
Adored, and that not only by the Spirit, but also with the Prostration of Body.
Now Kneeling, Bowing, Bowing is Adoring; (...) and i^ only due to God.
and Uncovering of the Head, is the alone outward signification of our
Adoration toward God, and therefore it is not lawful to give it unto Man. He
that kneeleth, or prostrates himself to Man, what does he more to God? He that
boweth, and uncovereth his Head to the Creature, what has he reserved to the
Creator? Now the Apostle shows us, that the un overing of the Head is that,
which God requires of us in our worshipping of him, 1 Cor. 11.4. But if we make
our Address to Men in the same manner, where lies the difference? Not in the
outward Signification, but merely in the Intention; which opens a door for the
Popish Veneration of Images, which hereby is necessarily excluded.

Secondly; Men, being alike by Creation, (though their being stated under their
several Relations, requires from them mutual Services, according to those
respective Relations) owe not Worship to one another, but all equally are to
return it to God: Because it is to him, and his Name alone, that every Knee
must bow, and before whose Throne the four and Twenty Elders prostrate
themselves. Therefore for Men, to take this one from another, is to rob God of
his Glory: Since all the duties of Relations may be performed one to another,
without these kind of Bowings, which therefore are no essential part of our
Duty to Man, but to God. All Men, by an inward instinct, in all Nations, have
been led to prostrate and bow themselves to God. And it is plain, that this
Bowing to Men took place from a slavish fear possessing some, which led them to
set up others as Gods; when also an ambitious proud Spirit got up in those
others, to usurp the place of God, over their Brethren.

Thirdly; We see, that Peter refused it from Cornelius, saying, He was a Man.
Are then the Popes more, or more excellent than Peter, who suffer Men daily to
fall down at their Feet, and kiss them? This Reproof of Peter to Cornelius does
abundantly show, Peter and he Angel ^u^d coming.
that such Manners were not to be admitted among Christians. Yea, we see, that
the Angel twice refused this kind of Bowing from John, Rev. 19.10. and 22.9 for
this Reason, Because I am thy Fellow Servants, and of thy Brethren; abundantly
intimating, that it is not lawful for Fellow Servants, thus to prostrate
themselves one to another: And in this respect all Men are Fellow Servants.

John intended here a Religious Worship, and not a Civil.

John, at that time of the Day, so ill instructed, as not to know, it was
unlawful to worship Angels; only it should seem, because of those great and
mysterious things revealed to him by that Angel, he was willing to signify
some more than ordinary Testimony of Respect, for which he was reproved. These
things being thus considered, it is remitted to the Judgment of such, as are
desirous to be found Christians indeed, whether we be found worthy of blame,
for waving it to Men. Let those then, that will blame us, consider, whether
they might not as well accuse Mordecai of incivility, who was no less singular
than we, To forbear Bowing to Man is no Incivility, nor Pr^de, nor Rudeness.
in this matter. And forasmuch as they accuse us herein of Rudeness and Pride,
though the Testimony of our Consciences, in the fight of God, be a sufficient
Guard against such Calumnies; yet there are of us, known to be Men of such
Education, as forbear not these things for want of that they call good
Breeding; and we should be very void of Reason, to purchase that Pride at so
dear a Rate, as many have done the Exercise of their Conscience in this matter;
many of us having been sorely Beaten and Buffetted; yea, and several Months
Imprisoned, for no other Reason, but because we could not so satisfy the proud
unreasonable Humors of proud Men, as to uncover our Head, and bow our bodies.
Nor does our innocent Practice, in standing still, though upright, not putting off
our Hats, any more than our Shoes, the one being the Covering of our Heads, as
well as the other of our Feet, show so much Rudeness, as their Beating or
Knocking us, etc. because we cannot Bow to them, contrary to our Consciences,
which certainly shows less Meekness and Humility upon their part, than it does
of Rudeness or Pride upon ours. Now, suppose it were our Weakness, and we
really under a Mistake in this thing, since it is not alleged to be the breach
of any Christian Precept; are we not to be indulged, as the Apostle commanded
should be done to such, as scrupled to eat Flesh? And does not Persecuting and
Reviling us upon this account, show them to be more like unto proud Haman, than
the Disciples or Followers of the Meek Self-denying Jesus? And this I can say
boldly, in the sight of God, from my own Experience, and that of many Thousands
more, That however small or so foolish this may seem, yet we behoved to choose
Death, rather than do it, and that for Conscience sake: And that, in its being
so contrary to our Natural Spirits, there are many of us, to whom the forsaking
of these Bowings and Ceremonies, was as Death it self: Which we could never
have left, if we could have enjoyed our Peace with God, in the use of them. Tho
it be far from us to judge all those, to whom God has not shown the evil of
them, under the like hazard; yet nevertheless, we doubt not, but to such as
would prove faithful Witnesses to Christ's Divine Light in their Consciences,
God will also show the Evil of these things.

Apparel, in its Vanity and Superfluity, disallowed.
. VII. The Third thing to be treated of, is the Vanity and Superflaity of
Apparel. In which first, two things are to be considered; the Condition of the
Person, and the Country he lives in. We shall not say, that all Persons are to
be clothed alike, because it will perhaps neither suit their Bodies nor their
Estates. And if a Man be clothed soberly, and without Superfluity, though they
may be finer than that which his Servant is clothed with, we shall not blame
him for it: The abstaining from Superfluities, which his Condition and
Education have accustomed him to, may be in him a greater Act of Mortification,
than the abstaining from finer Clothes in the Servant, who was never accustomed
to them. As to the Country, what it naturally produces, may be no Vanity to the
Inhabitants to use, or what is commonly imparted to them by way of Exchange;
seeing it is without doubt, that the Creation is for the use of Man. So where
Silk abounds, it may be worn, as well as Wool; and were we in those Countries,
or near unto them, where Gold or Silver were as common as Iron or Brass, the
one might be used as well as the other. The Iniquity then lies here, First,
When from a lust of Vanity, and desire to Adorn themselves, Men and Women, not
content with what their Condition can bear, or their Country easily affords, do
stretch to have things, that from their Rarity, and the Price that is put upon
them, seem to be precious; and so feed their Lust the more: And this all sober
Men of all sorts will readily grant to be Evil.

Secondly; When Men are not content to make a true use of the Creation, whether
the things be fine or course, and do not satisfy themselves with what Need and
Convenience call for; but add thereunto things merely superfluous; such as is
the use of Ribbands and Lace, and much more of that kind of stuff, as painting
the Face, plaiting the Hair, which are the Fruits of the first, lustful and
corrupt Nature, and not of the new Creation, as all will acknowledge. And though
sober Men, among all sorts, will say, That it were better these things were
not; yet will they not reckon them unlawful, and therefore do admit the use of
them among their Church Members. But we do account them altogether unlawful,
and unsuitable to Christians, and that for these Reasons.

First; The use of Clothes came originally from the Fall^ If Man had not
fallen, The proper Use of Clothes.
it appear he would not have needed them. But this miserable State made them
necessary in two respects: 1. To cover his Nakedness. 2. To keep them from the
Cold; which are both the proper and principal Use of them. Now for Man to
delight himself in that, which is the fruit of his Iniquity, and the
consequence of Sin, can be no ways lawful for him: So to extend things beyond
their real use, or to superadd things wholly superfluous, is a manifest Abuse
of the Creation, and therefore not lawful to Christians.

Secondly; Those that will needs so adorn themselves in the use of their
Clothes, as to beset them with things having no real use or necessity, but
merely for Ornament's sake, do openly declare, That the End of it is either to
please their Lust, Not to please their Lusts.
(for which end these things are chiefly invented and contrived or otherwise to
gratify a vain, proud and ostentatious Mind; and it is obvious, these are
their general Ends in so doing. Yea, we see, how easily Men are puffed up with
their Garments, and how proud and vain they are, when adorned to their Mind.
Now how far these things are below a true Christian, and how unsuitable, it
needs not great probation. Hereby those that love to be gaudy and superfluous
in their Clothes, show they concern themselves little with Mortification and
Self denial, and that they mind to beautify their Bodies more than their Souls;
which prove their Minds are little upon Mortality, and so certainly are more
nominal, than real Christians.

Thirdly; The Scripture severely (...) such Practices, both commending and
commanding the contrary; Contrary to Scripture.
as Isa. 3. how severely does the Prophet reprove the Daughters of Israel for
their T^kling Ornaments, their Cauls, and their round Tires their Chains and
bracelets, etc? And yet is it not strange to see Christians allow themselves in
these things, from whom a more strict and exemplary Conversation is required?
Christ desires us not to be anxious about our Clothing, Mat. 6.25. and to show
the Vanity of such, as glory in the Splendour of their Clothing, tells them,
That even Solomon, in all his Glory, was not to be compared to the Lilly of the
Field, which to day is, and to morrow is cast into the Oven. But surely, they
make small reckoning of Christ's Words and Doctrine, that are so curious in
their Clothing, and so industrious to deck themselves, and so earnest to
justify it, and so mad when they are reproved for it. The Apostle Paul is very
positive in this respect, 1 Timothy 2.8, 9, 10. I will therefore in like manner
also, that Women adorn themselves in modest Apparel, with shame-facedness and
sobriety; not with broidered Hair, or Gold, or Pearls, or costly Arr^y: But
(which becomes Women professing Godliness) with good Works. To the same
purpose says Peter, (1 Pet. 3.3, 4.) Whose adorning, let it not be that
outward adorning of plaiting the Hair, and wearing of Gold, or of putting on of
Apparel: But let it be the hidden Man of the Heart, in that which is not
corruptible, even the Ornament of a meek and quiet Spirit, etc. Here both the
Apostles do very positively and expressly assert two things, First, That the
adorning of Christian Women (of whom it is particularly spoken, judge, because
that Sex is most naturally inclined to that Vanity; and that it seems, that
Christian Men in those days deserved not, in this respect, so much to be
reproved) ought not to be outward, nor consist in the Apparel. Secondly, That
they ought not to use Plaiting of the Hair, or Ornaments, Plaiting the Hair,
etc.
etc. which was at that time the Custom of the Nations. But is it not strange,
that such as make the Scripture their Rule, and pretend they are guided by it,
should not only be so frequently and ordinarily in the use of these things,
which the Scripture so plainly condemns; but also should allow themselves in so
doing? For the Apostles not only commend the Forbearance of these things, as an
Attainment commendable in Christians, but condemn the use of them as unlawful;
and yet may it not seem more strange, that in Contradiction to the Apostles
Doctrine, as if they had resolved to slight their Testimony, they should
condemn those, that out of Conscience, apply themselves seriously to follow it,
as if in so doing they were singular, proud, or superstitious? This certainly
betokens a sad Apostasy in those, that will be accounted Christians, that they
are so offended with those, that love to follow Christ and his Apostles, in
denying of, and departing from the lying Vanities of this perishing World; and
so does much evidence their Affinity with such, as hate to be reproved, and
neither will enter themselves, nor suffer those that would.

. VIII. Fourthly; Let us consider the use of Games, Sports, Sports etc.
inconsistent with the Gospel.
Comedies, and other such things, commonly and indifferently used by all the
several sorts of Christians, under the Notion of Divertisement and Recreation,
and see whether these things can consist with the Seriousness, Gravity and
Godly Fear, which the Gospel calls for. Let us but view, and look over the
Notions of them, that call themselves Christians, whether Papists or
Protestants, and see if generally there be any difference, save in mere Name
and Profession, from the Heathen? Does not the same Folly, the same Vanity, the
same Abuse of precious and irrevokable Time, abound? The same Gaming, Sporting,
Playing, and from thence Quarreling, Fighting, Swearing, Ranting, Revelling?
Now, how can these things be remedied, so long as the Preachers and Professors,
and those who are the Leaders of the People, do allow these things, and account
them not inconsistent with the Profession of Christianity? And it is strange to
see, that these things are tolerated every where; the Inquisition lays no hold
on them, neither at Rome, nor in Spain, where, in their Masq^erades, all manner
of Obscenity, Folly, yea, and Atheism, is generally practiced in the face of
the World, to the great Scandal of the Christian Name: But if any Man reprove
them in these things, and forsake their Superstitions, and come seriously to
serve God, and Worship him in the Spirit, he is made a Prey, and presently made
liable to cruel Sufferings. Does this bear any proportion to Christianity? Do
these things look any thing like the Churches of the Primitive Christians?
Surely not at all. I shall first cite some few Scripture Testimonies, being
very positive Precepts to Christians, and then see, whether such as obey them,
can admit of these fore mentioned things. The Apostle commands us, That whether
we eat or drink, or whatever we do, we do it all to the Glory of God. But I
judge none will be so impudent, By Sports and Games God is not glorified?
as to affirm, That in the use of these Sports and Games God is glorified: If
any should so say, they would declare, they neither knew God, nor his Glory.
And Experience abundantly proves, that in the Practice of these things, Men
mind nothing less, than the Glory of God; and nothing more, than the
Satisfaction of their own carnal Lusts, Wills and Appetites. The Apostle
desires us, 1 Cor. 7.29, 31. Because the time is short, that they that buy,
should be as though they possessed not: And they that use this World, as not
abusing it, etc. But how can they be found in the Obedience of this Precept,
that plead for the use of these Games and Sports? Who, it seems, think the time
so long, that they cannot find occasion enough to employ it, neither in taking
care for their Souls, nor yet in the necessary care for their Bodies; but
invent these Games and Sports to pass it away, as if they wanted other Work to
serve God, or be useful to the Creation in. The Apostle Peter desires us, To
pass the time of our sojourning here in fear, 1 Pet. 1.17. But will any say,
That such as use Dancing and Comedies, Carding and Dicing, do so much as mind
this Precept in the use of these things? Where there is nothing to be seen, but
Lightness and Vanity, Wantonness and Obscenity contrived, to hinder Men from
Fear, or being Serious; and therefore, no doubt, calculated for the Service of
the Devil. There is no Duty more frequently commanded, nor more incumbent upon
Christians, than the Fear of the Lord, to stand in awe before him, to walk as
in his presence; but if such, as use these Games and Sports, will speak from
their Consciences, they can, (I doubt not) experimentally declare, That this
Fear is forgotten in their Gaming: And if God by his Light secretly touch them,
or mind them of the Vanity of their way, they strive to shut it out, and use
their Gaming, as an Engine to put away from them that troublesome Guest; and
thus make merry over the Just One, whom they have slain and crucified in
themselves. But further, if Christ's Reasoning be to be heeded, who says, Mat.
12.35, 36. That the good Man, out of the good Treasure of the Heart, brings
forth good things; and an evil Man, out of the evil Treasure, brings forth
evil things; And that of every idle word we shall give an account in the Day of
Judgment: It may be easily gathered, from what Treasure these Inventions come;
and it may be easily proved, that it is from the Evil, and not the Good. How
many idle Words do they necessarily produce? Comedies, a studied complex of
idle lying Words.
Yea, what are Comedies but a studied Complex of idle and lying Words? Let Men,
that believe their Souls are Immortal, and that there will be a Day of
Judgment, in which these Words of Christ will be accomplished, answer me, how
all these will make account in that great and terrible Day, of all these idle
Words, that are necessarily made use of, about Dancing, Gaming, Carding, and
Comedies acting? And yet how is it that, by Christians not condemning these
things, but allowing of them, many that are accounted Ch^ take up their whole
Time in them; yea, make it their Trade and Employment? Such as the
Dancing-Masters and Comedians, etc. whose Hellish Conversations do sufficiently
declare, what Master they serve, and to what End these things contribute. And
it cannot be denied, as being obviously manifest by Experience, that such as
are Masters of these Trades, and are most delighted in them, (if they be not
open Atheists and Profligates) are such, at best, as make Religion, or the Care
of their Souls, their least business. Now if these things were discountenanced
by Christians, as inconsistent with their Profession, it would remove these
things; for these Wretches would be necessitated then to betake themselves to
some honest Livelihood, if they were not fed and upholden by these. And as
hereby, a great Scandal and Stumbling Block would be removed from off the
Christian Name; so also would that in part be taken out of the way, which
provokes the Lord to with hold his Blessing, and by occasion of which things
the Minds of many remain chained in Darkness, and drowned in Lust, Sensuality
and Worldly Pleasures, without any sense of God's Fear, or their own Souls
Salvation. Many of those, called Fathers of the Church, and other Serious
Persons, have signified their Regret for these things, and their desires they
might be remedied; of whom many Citations might be alleged, which for
Brevity's sake I have omitted.

That Men's Spirits could not subsist, if they were always intent upon Serious
and Spiritual Matters; and that therefore there is need of some Divertisement
to recreate the mind a little, whereby it being refreshed, is able with greater
Vigor to apply it self to those things.

Intentiveness of Mind, we do not plead; knowing, how impossible it is, so long
as we are clothed with this Tabernacle of Clay. But this will not allow us at
any time so to recede from the Remembrance of God, The Fear of God, the best
Recreation in the World.
and of our Souls chief Concern, as not still to retain a certain sense of his
Fear; which cannot be so much as rationally supposed to be in the use of these
things, which we condemn. Now the necessary Occasions, which all are involved
into, in order to the care and sustentation of the outward Man, are a
Relaxation of the Mind from the more serious Duties; and those are performed in
the Blessing; as the Mind is so leavened with the Love of God, and Sense of his
Presence, that even in doing these things, the Soul carries with it that
Divine Influence and Spiritual Habit, whereby, though these Acts as of Eating,
Drinking, Sleeping, Working, be upon the matter one with what the Wicked do,
yet they are done in another Spirit, and in doing of them we please the Lord,
serve him, and answer our end in the Creation, and so feel, and are sensible of
his Blessing: Whereas the Wicked and Profane, being not come to this place,
are, in whatsoever they do, cursed; and their Plowing, as well as Praying, is
sin. Now if any will plead, that for Relaxation of Mind there may be a Liberty
allowed beyond these things, which are of absolute need to the Sustenance of
the outward Man, I shall not much contend against it; provided these things be
not such as are wholly Superfluous, or in their proper nature and tendency,
lead the Mind into Lust, Vanity and Wantonness, as being chiefly contrived and
framed for that end, or generally experienced to produce these Effects, or
being the common Engines of such, as are so minded to feed one another therein,
and to propagate their Wickedness, to the Impoysoning of others: Seeing there
are other innocent Divertisements, which may sufficiently serve for Relaxation
of the Mind; such as for Friends to visit one another, To hear or read History,
To speak soberly of the present or past Transactions, To follow after
Gardening, Lawful Divertisements.
To use Geometrical and Mathematical Experiments, and such other things of this
Nature. In all which things we are not to forget God, ( in whom we both live,
and are moved, Acts 10.26.) as not to have always some secret reserve to him,
and sense of his Fear and Presence; which also frequently exerts it self in the
midst of these things, by some short Aspiration and Breathings. And that this
may neither seem strange nor troublesome, I shall clear it by one manifest
Instance, answerable to the Experience of all Men. It will not be denied, but
that Men ought to be more in the Love of God, than of any other thing; for we
ought to Love God above all things. Now it is plain, that Men that are taken
with Love, whether it be of Women, or any other thing, if it has taken a deep
place in the Heart, and possess the Mind, it will be hard for the Man, so in
love, to drive out of his Mind the person or thing so loved; yea, in his
Eating, Drinking and Sleeping, his Mind will always have a tendency that way;
and in Business or Recreations, however intent he be in it, there will but a
very short time be permitted to pass, but the Mind will let some Ejaculation
forth toward its Beloved. And albeit such a one must be conversant in those
things, The Love toward its Beloved shuns its Offense.
that the Care of this Body, and such like things call for; yet will he avoid,
as Death it self, to do those things, that may offend the Party so beloved, or
cross his design in obtaining the thing so earnestly desired: Though there may be
some small use in them; the great Design, which is chiefly in his Eye, will so
balance him, that he will easily look over and dispense with such petty
Necessities, rather than endanger the loss of the greater by them. Now that Men
ought to be thus in Love with God, and the Life to come, none will deny; and
the thing is apparent from these Scriptures, Mat. 6.20. But lay up for your
selves Treasures in Heaven. Col. 3.2. Set your Affections on things above, etc.
And that this has been the Experience and Attainment of some, the Scripture
also declares, Psalm 63.1, 8. 2 Cor. 5.4. Sport's and Plays, draw Men from the
Fear of God.


And again, That these Games, Sports, Plays, Dancing Comedies, etc. do
naturally tend to draw Men from God's Fear, to make them forget Heaven, Death
and Judgment, to foster Lust, Vanity and Wantonness; and therefore are most
loved, as well as used, by such kind of Persons, Experience abundantly shows;
and the most Serious and Conscientious among all will scarcely deny: Which if
it be so, the Application is easy.

. X. Fifthly; The use of Swearing is to be considered, which is so frequently
practiced almost among all Christians; not only profane Oaths among the
Profane, in their common Discourses, whereby the Most HOLY NAME of GOD is, in a
horrible manner, daily Blasphemed; but also solemn Oaths, with those that have
some show of Piety, whereof the most part do defend Swearing before the
Magistrate with so great Zeal, that not only they are ready themselves to do it
upon every occasion, but also have stirred up the Magistrates to persecute
those, who, out of Obedience to Christ, their Lord and Master, judge it
unlawful to Swear: Upon which account not a few have suffered Imprisonment, and
the spoiling of their Goods.

But considering these clear words of our Savior, All Swearing is forbidden --
Mat. 5.33, 34. Again, ye have heard that it has been said by them of old
time, Thou shall not forswear thy self, but shall perform unto the Lord thine
Oaths. But I say unto you, SWEAR NOT AT ALL, neither by Heaven, etc. But let
your Communication be Yea, Yea; Nay, Nay: For whatsoever is more than these,
comes of evil. As also the words of the Apostle James 5.12. But above all
things, my Brethren, Swear not, neither by Heaven, neither by the Earth,
neither by any other Oath: But let your Yea, be Yea, and your Nay, Nay; lest ye
fall into Condemnation. I say, considering these clear words, it is admirable
how any one, that professes the Name of Christ, can pronounce any Oath with a
quiet Conscience; far less to persecute other Christians, that dare not Swear,
because of their Master Christ his Authority. For did any one purpose
seriously, and in the most rigid manner, to forbid any thing, comprehended
under any General, can they use a more full and general Prohibition, and that
without any Exception? I think not. For Christ, First, proposes it to us
Negatively, Swear not at all, neither by Heaven, nor by the Earth, nor by
Jerusalem, nor by thy Head, etc. And again, Swear not by Heaven, nor by Earth,
nor by any other Oath. Secondly, he presses it Affirmatively, But let your
Communication be Yea, Yea; and Nay, Nay: For whatsoever is more than these,
comes of evil. And says James, Lest ye fall into Condemnation.

Which words, both all and every one of them, Without Exception.
do make such a full Prohibition, and so free of all Exception, that it is
strange how Men, that boast the Scripture is the Rule of their Faith and Life,
can counterfeit any Exception! Certainly Reason ought to teach every one, that
it is not lawful to make void a general Prohibition, coming from God, by such
opposition; unless the Exception be as clearly and evidently expressed, as the
Prohibition: Neither is it enough, to endeavor to confirm it by Consequences
and Probabilites, which are obscure and uncertain, and not sufficient to bring
quiet to the Conscience. For if they say, that there is therefore an Exception
and Limitation in the words, because there are found Exceptions in the other
general Prohibition of this fifth Chapter, as in the forbidding of Divorcement,
where Christ says, It has been said, Whosoever shall put away his Wife, let
him give her a Writing of Divorcement. But I say unto you, That whosoever shall
put away his Wife saving for the cause of Fornication, causes her to commit
Adultery: If (I say) they plead this, they not only labor in vain, but also
fight against themselves, because they can produce no Exception of this general
Command of not Swearing, expressed by God to any under the New Covenant, after
Christ give this Prohibition, so clear as that, which is made in the
Prohibition it self. Moreover, if Christ would have excepted Oaths, Also Oaths
before a Magistrate
made before Magistrates, certainly he had then expressed, adding, Except in
Judgment, before the Migistrate, or the like; as he did in that of Divorcement,
by these words, Saving for the cause of Fornication: Which being so, it is not
lawful for us to except or distinguish, or (which is all one) make void this
general Prohibition of Christ; it would be far less agreeable to Christian
Holiness, to bring upon our Heads the Crimes of so many Oaths, which by reason
of this Corruption and Exception, are so frequent among Christians.

Neither is it to be omitted, that without doubt, the most Learned Doctors of
each Sect know, that these fore mentioned words were understood by the Ancient
Fathers of the first Three Hundred Years after Christ, to be a Prohibition of
all sorts of Oaths. It is not then without Reason, that we wonder, The
Concurrence of the Ancient Fathers therein.
that the Popish Doctors and Priests, bind themselves by an Oath, to interpret
the Holy Scriptures according to the universal Exposition of the Holy Fathers;
who notwithstanding understood those Controverted Texts quite contrary to what
these modern Doctors do. And from thence also do clearly appear, the vanity and
foolish certainty (so to speak) of Popish Tradition; for if ^y the Writings of
the Fathers, so called, the Faith of the Church of these Ages may be
demonstrated, it is clear, they have departed from the Faith of the Church of
the first Three Ages in the point of Swearing. Moreover, because not only
Papists, but also L^therans and Calvinists and some others, do restrict the
words of Christ and James, I think it needful, to make manifest the vain
Foundation, upon which their Presumption in this matter is built.

First, They Object, That Christ only forbids those Oaths, that are made by
Creatures, and things Created; and they prove it thence, because he numbers
some of these things.

Secondly, All rash and vain Oaths in familiar Discourses; because he says,
Let your Communication be Yea, Yea; and Nay, Nay.

First, That the Law did forbid all Oaths made by the Creatures; as also all
vain and rash Oaths in our common Discourses; commanding, That Men should only
swear by the Name of God, and that neither falsely, nor rashly; for that is to
take his Name in vain.

Secondly; It is most evident, that Christ forbids somewhat that was permitted
under the Law, To Swear by God himself, forbidden by Christ.
to wit, to swear by the Name of God; because it was not lawful for any Man to
swear but by God himself. And because he says, Neither by Heaven, because it
is the Throne of God; therefore he excludes all other Oaths, even those which
are made by God: For he says. Chap. 23. v. 22. He that shall swear by Heaven,
swears by the Throne of God, and by him that sits thereon. Which is also
to be understood of the rest. Ans. 3.


Lastly, That he might put the matter beyond all Controversy, he adds, Neither
by any other Oath: Therefore seeing to swear before the Magistrate by God, is
an Oath, it is here without doubt forbidden.

Secondly, They object, That by these words, Oaths by God's Name cannot be
forbidden, because the Heavenly Father has commanded them; for the Father and
the Son are One, which could not be, if the Son did forbid that which the
Father commanded.

^aths un^er the Old ^ovenant.
which had only a Shadow of good things to come, not the very Substance of
things, until Christ should come, who was the Substance; and by whose coming
all these things vanished, to wit, Sabbaths, Circumcision, the Paschal Lamb:
Men used then Sacrifices, who lived in Controversies with God, and one with
another, which all are abrogated in the coming of the Son, who is the
Substance, Eternal Word, and Essential Oath and Amen, in whom the Promises of
God are Yea and Amen: Who came, that Men might be Redeemed out of Strife, and
might make an end of Controversy.

Thirdly, They object: But all Oaths are not Ceremonies, nor any part of the
Ceremonial Law.

Tithes etc. unlawful ^w.
it withstands not; neither are they of so old an Origin as Tithes, and the
offering of the first Fruits of the Ground, which by Abel and Cain were
offered, long before the Ceremonial Law, or the use of Oaths; which, whatever
may be alleged against it, were no doubt Ceremonies, and therefore no doubt
unlawful now to be practiced.

Fourthly, They object; That to swear by the Name of God, is a Moral Precept,
of continual duration; because it is marked with his Essential and Moral
Worship, Deuteronomy. 6.13. and 10.20. Thou shall fear the Lord thy God, and serve him
alone: Thou shall cleave to him, and swear by his Name.

Moses adds that to all the Precepts and Ceremonies in several places: As Deuteronomy.
10.12, 13. saying, And now Israel, what does the Lord thy God require of thee,
but to fear the Lord thy God, to walk in all his ways, and to love him, and to
serve the Lord thy God with all thy Heart, and with all thy Soul: To keep the
Commandments of the Lord, and his Statutes, which I command thee this day? And
Chap. 14, v. 23. the Fear of the Lord is mentioned together with the Tithes.
And so also Levit. 1^, 2, 3, 6. the Sabbaths, and regard to Parents, are
mentioned with Swearing.

Fifthly; They object; That solemn Oaths, which God commanded, cannot be here
forbidden by Christ; for he says, That they come from evil: But these did not
come from evil; for God never commanded any thing that was evil, or came from
evil.

Good, because commanded; and Evil, because forbidden: Other things are
commanded, because Good; and forbidden, because Evil. As Circumcision and
Oaths, Oaths are Evils, because forbidden.
which were good, when and because they were commanded, and in no other
respect; and again, when and because prohibited under the Gospel, they are evil.

And in all these Jewish Constitutions, however Ceremonial, there was something
of good, to wit, in their season, as prefiguring some Good: As by Circumcision,
the Purifications, and other things, the Holiness of God was typified, and that
the Israelites ought to be Holy, as their God was Holy. In the like manner
Oaths, under the Shadows and Ceremonies, signified the Verity of God, his
Faithfulness and Certainty; and therefore, that we ought in all things to speak
and witness the Truth. Truth was before all Oaths.
But the Witness of Truth was before all Oaths, and remains, when all Oaths are
abolished; and this is the morality of all Oaths, and so long as Men abide
therein, there is no necessity of, nor place for Oaths; as Polybius witnessed,
who said, The Use of Oaths in Judgment was rare among the Ancients; but by the
growing of Perfidiousness, so grew also the use of Oaths. To which agrees
Grottus saying, An Oath is only to be used as a Medicine, in case of necessity:
A solemn Oath is not used, but to supply defect. The lightness of Men, Oaths
supply presupposed Defects of Men's inconstancy.
and their inconsistency begot Diffidence, for which Swearing was sought out as
a remedy. Basil the Great says, That Swearing is the effect of sin. And
Ambrose, That Oaths are only a condescendency for defect. Chrysostom says,
That an Oath entered when Evil grew, when Men exercised their Frauds, when all
Foundations were overturned: That Oaths took their beginning from the want of
Truth. These and the like are witnessed by many others with the forementioned
Authors. But what need of Testimonies, where the Evidence of things speaks it
self? For who will force another to swear, of whom he is certainly persuaded,
that he abhors to Lie in his words? And again, as Chrysostom and others say,
For what end will thou force him to Swear, whom thou believe not, that he
will speak the Truth?

. XII. That then, which was not from the Beginning, which was of no use in the
Beginning, which had not its Beginning first from the Will of God, but from the
Work of the Devil, occasioned from Evil, to wit, from Unfaithfulness, Lying,
Deceit; and which was at first only invented by Man, as a mutual remedy of this
Evil, in which they called upon the names of their Idols; yea, that which (as
Hierom, Chrysostom, and others testify) was given to the Israelites by God, as
unto Children, that they might abstain from the Idolatrous Oaths of the
Heathens, Jer. 12.16. Whatsoever is so, is far from being a Moral and Eternal
Precept. And lastly, whatsoever by its Profanation and Abuse is polluted with
Sin, such as are abundantly the Oaths of these Times, by so often swearing and
forswearing, far differs from any necessary and perpetual Duty of a Christian:
But Oaths are so: Therefore, etc.

Sixthly, They object; That God swore, therefore to swear is good.

Athanasius; Seeing it is certain, it is proper in swearing to swear by
another; thence it appears, that God, to speak properly, did never swear, Athan
in pass. and ^rue Domin.
but only improperly. Whence speaking to Men, he is said to swear; because
those things which he speaks, because of the certainty and immutability of his
Will, are to be esteemed for Oaths. Compare Psalm 110.4. where it is said, The
Lord did swear, and it did not repent him, etc. And I swore (says he) by my
self: And this is not an Oath. God swears not by another, but by himself.
For he did not swear by another, which is the property of an Oath, but by
himself. Therefore God swears not according to the manner of Men, neither can
we be induced from thence to swear; but let us so do and say, and show our
selves such by speaking and acting, that we need not with our Hearers an Oath,
and let our Words of themselves have the Testimony of Truth: For so we shall
plainly imitate God.

Seventhly, They object; Christ did swear, and we ought to imitate him.

Hierom says, All things agree not unto us, who are Servants, Hier. lib. Ep.
part 3. tract. 1. Ep. 2.
that agreed unto our Lord, etc. The Lord swore, as Lord, whom no Man did
forbid to swear: But unto us, that are Servants, it is not lawful to swear,
because we are forbidden by the Law of our Lord. Yet, lest we should suffer
scandal by his Example, he has not sworn, since he commanded us not to swear.

Eighthly, They object; That Paul swore, and that often, Romans 1.9. Phil. 1.8.
saying, For God is my Record. 2 Cor. 11.10. As the Truth of Christ is in me. 2
Cor. 1.23. I call God for a Record upon my Soul. I speak the Truth in Christ, I
lie not, Romans 9.1. Behold, before God I lie not, Gal. 1.20. And so requires
Oaths of others. I obtest you (says he) before God and our Lord Jesus Christ.
1 Thessalonians. 5 2^. I charge you by the Lord, that this Epistle be read to all the
Brethren. But Paul would not have done so, if all manner of Oaths had been
forbidden by Christ, whose Apostle he was.

First; That the using of such forms of speaking are neither Oaths, nor so
esteemed by our Adversaries. For when upon occasion, in matters of great
moment, we have said, We speak the Truth in the Fear of God, and before him,
The Ceremonies of an Oath.
who is our Witness, and the searcher of our Hearts, adding such kind of
serious Attestations, which we never refused in matters of Consequence;
nevertheless an Oath has moreover been required of us with the Ceremony of
putting our Hands upon the Book, the kissing of it, the lifting up of the Hand
or Fingers, together with this common form of Imprecation, So help me God; or,
Let the Lord God Almighty help me. Secondly, This contradicts the Opinion of
our Adversaries, because that Paul was neither before a Magistrate, that was
requiring an Oath of him; nor did he himself administer the Office of a
Magistrate, as offering an Oath to any other. Thirdly, The Question is not,
what Paul or Peter did, but what their and our Master ought to be done; and if
Paul did swear, (which we believe not) he had sinned against the Command of
Christ, even according to their own Opinion; because he swore not before a
Magistrate, but in an Epistle to his Brethren.

Ninthly, They object, Isai. 65.16. where, speaking of the Evangelical Times,
he says, That he who blesses himself in the Earth, shall bless himself in the
God of Truth; and he that swears in the Earth, shall swear by the God of
Truth: Because the former troubles are forgotten, and because they are hid from
men's Eyes. For behold, I create new Heavens, and a new Earth: Therefore in
these times we ought to swear by the Name of the Lord.

Evangelical Times in Mosaical Terms, as appears among others from Jer. 31.38,
39, 40. Ezekiel. 36.25, and 40. and Isa. 45.23. I have sworn by my self, that unto
me every Knee shall bow, every Tongue shall swear. Where the Righteousness of
the New Jerusalem, the Purity of the Gospel, with spiritual Worship, and the
Profession of the Name of Christ, are expressed under forms of speaking used to
the Old Jerusalem, under the Washings of the Law, under the Names of
Ceremonies, the Temple, Services, Sacrifices, Swearing is expressed by
Confessing under the Gospel.
Oaths, etc. Yea, that which the Prophet speaks here of Swearing, the Apostle
Paul interprets it expressly of Confessing, saying, Romans 14.11. For it is
written, As I live, says the Lord, every Knee shall bow to me, and every
Tongue shall confess to God: Which being rightly considered, none can be
ignorant, but these words, which the Prophet writes under the Law, when the
Ceremonial Oaths were in use, to wit, Every Tongue shall swear, were by the
Apostle, being under the Gospel, when those Oaths became abolished, expressed
by, Every Tongue shall confess.

Tenthly; They object; But the Apostle Paul approves Oaths used among Men, when
he writes, Heb. 6.16. For Men verily swear by the greater, and an Oath for
confirmation, is to them an end of all strife. But there are as many Contests,
Fallacies and Differences at this time, as there were ever: Therefore the
necessity of Oaths does yet remain.

had come to Christ, the Truth and Amen of God. Moreover, he only alludes to a
certain Custom usual among Men, that he might express the Firmity of the Divine
Promise, that he might excite in the Saints so much the more confidence in God,
promising to them, not that he might instigate them to swear against the Law of
God, or confirm them in that; no, not at all: For neither does 1 Cor. 9.24.
teach Christians the vain Races, whereby Men oftentimes, even to the
destruction of their Bodies, are wearied to obtain a Corruptible Prize; So
neither does Christ, who is the Prince of Peace, teach his Disciples to Fight,
albeit he takes notice, Luke 14.31. what it behooves such Kings to do, who are
accustomed to Fight, as prudent Warriors therein. Secondly, as to what pertains
to Contest, Perfidies and Diffidences among Men, which our Adversaries affirm
to have grown to such an height, that Swearing is at present as necessary as
ever. That we deny not at all; for we see, and daily Experience teaches us,
Deceit among the False, not the True Christians.
that all manner of Deceit and Malice does increase among worldly Men and false
Christians; but not among true Christians. But because Men cannot trust one
another, and therefore require Oaths one of another, it will not therefore
follow, that true Christians ought to do so, whom Christ has brought to true
Faithfulness and Honesty, as well toward God, as one toward another, and
therefore has delivered them from Contests, Perfidies, and consequently from
Oaths.

Eleventhly, They object; We grant, that among true Christians, there is not
need of Oaths; but by what means shall we infallibly know them? It will follow
then, that Oaths are at present needful, and that it is lawful for Christians
to swear, to wit, that such may be sati^fied, who will not acknowledge this and
the other Man to be a Christian.

Truth was before Oaths.
forbidding him to swear; and on the contrary, commanding him to speak the
Truth in all things, to the Honor of Christ, who called him; that it may
appear, that the Words of his Disciples may be as truly believed, as the Oaths
of all the Worldly Men. Neither is it lawful for them to be unfaithful in this,
that they may please others, for that they may avoid their hurt: For thus the
Primitive Christians for some Ages remained faithful, who being required to
swear, did unanimously answer, I am a Christian, I swear not. What shall I say
of the Heathens, some of whom arrived to that degree? For Tiodorus Siculus
relates, lib. 16. That the giving of the right Hand, was, among the Persians, a
sign of speaking the Truth. And the Scythians, as Qu. Curtius relates, said, in
their Conferences with Alexander the Great, Think not that the Schythians
confirm their Friendship by swearing; they swear by keeping their Promises.
Stobaeus in his third Sermon tells, That Solon said, A good Man ought to be in
that estimation, that he need not an Oath; because it is to be reputed a
lessening of his Honor if he be forced to swear. Pythogoras, in his Oration,
Heathen Testimonies against Oath^
among other things has this Maxim, as that which concerns the Administration
of the Commonwealth: Let no Man call God to witness by an Oath, no not in
Judgment; but let every Man so accustom himself to speak, that he may become
worthy to be trusted even without an Oath. Basil the Great, commends Clinias an
Heathen, That he had rather pay three Talents, which are about three thousand
Pound, than swear. Socrates, as Stobaeus relates, Sermon. 14. had this Sentence,
The Duty of good Men requires, that they show to the World, that their Manners
and Actions are more firm than Oaths: The same was the Judgment of Isocrates.
Plato also stood against Oaths in his Judgments, de Leg. 12. Quintilianus takes
notice, That it was of old a kind of Infamy, if any was desired to swear; but
to require an Oath of a Noble Man, was like an examining him by the Hang man.
Marcus Aurelius Antoninus, the Emperor of Rome, says, in his Description of a
Good Man, Such is his Integrity, that he needs not an Oath. So also some Jews
did witness, as Grotius relates out of Maimonides, It is best for a Man to
abstain from all Oaths. The Esseans, as Philo Judaeus relates, did esteem their
Words more firm than Oaths: and Oaths were esteemed among them as needless
things. And Philo himself, speaking of the Third Commandment, explains his Mind
thus, viz. It were better altogether not to swear, but to be accustomed to
speak the Truth, that naked Words might have the strength of an Oath. And
elsewhere he says, It is more agreeable to Natural Reason, altogether to
abstain from swearing; persuading, That whatsoever a good Man says, may be
equivalent with an Oath.

Oaths abrogated by Christ.
Who then needs further to doubt, but that, since Christ would have his
Disciples attain the highest Pitch of Perfection, he abrogated Oaths, as a
Rudiment of Infirmity, and in place thereof established the use of Truth? Who
can now any more think, that the holy Martyrs and ancient Fathers of the first
Three Hundred Years, and many others since that time, have so opposed
themselves to Oaths, that they might only rebuke vain and rash Oaths by the
Creatures, or Heathen-Idols, which were also prohibited under the Mosaical Law;
and not also Swearing by the True God, in Truth and Righteousness, which was
there commanded? As Polycarpus, Justin Martyr, Apolog. 2. and many Martyrs, as
Eusebius relates. Tertullian in his Apolog. cap. 32. ad Scap. cap. 1. of
Idolatry, cap. 11. Clem^ Alexandrinus, The Testimonies of the Fathers against
Oaths and Swearing.
Strom. lib. 7. Origin. in Mat. Tract. 25. Cyprianus, lib. 3. Athanasius, in
pass. and cruc. Domini Christi. Hilarious in Mat. 5.34. Basilius Magn. in Psalm
14. Greg. Nyssenus in Cant. Orat. 13. Greg. Nazianzenus in dialog. contra
juramenta. Epiphanius adversus haeres. lib. 1. Ambrose, de Virg. lib. 3. Idem
in Mat. 5. Chrysostom in Genes. homil. 15. Idem. homil. in Act. Apost. cap. 3.
Hieronymus Epistol. lib. part 3. Ep. 2. Idem in Z^ch. lib. 2. cap. 8. Idem in
Mat. lib. 1. cap. 5. Augustinus de sermon. Dom. sermon. 28. Cyrillus in Jer. 4.
Theodoretus in Deuteronomy. 6. Isidorus P^lusiota Ep. lib. 1. Epist. 155. Chromatius
in Mat. 5. Johannes Damascenus lib. 3. cap. 16. Cassiodorus in Psalm 94.
Isidorus Hispulensis cap. 31. Antiochus in Pandect. script. hom. 62. Beda in
Jac. 5. Hamio in Apoc. Ambrosius Ausbertus in Apoc. Theophylactus in Mat. 5.
Paschasius Rathertus in Mat. 5. Otho Brunsfelsius in Mat. 5. Druthmarus in Mat.
5. Euthymius Eugubinus Bibliotheca vet. patr. in Mat. 5. Oecumenius in Jac.
cap. 5. v. 12. Anselmus in Mat. 5. Waldenses, Viclevus, Erasmus in Mat. 5. and
in Jac. 5. Who can read these places, and doubt of their Sense in this matter?
And who, believing that they were against all Oaths, can bring so great an
Indignity to the Name of Christ, as to seek to subject against his Followers to
so great an Indignity? Is it not rather time, that all good Men labor to
remove this Abuse and Infamy from Christians?

Lastly, They object; This will bring in Fraud and Confusion; for Impostors
will counterfeit Piety, and under the benefit of this Dispensation, will be
without fear of punishment.

First, Either the Fear of God in his Heart, and love of Truth; for where this
is, there is no need of Oaths to speak the Truth: The Punishment of Ly^rs.
Or, Secondly, The fear of punishment from the Judge. Therefore let there be
the same, or rather greater Punishment appointed to those, who pretend so great
Truth in Words, and so great Simplicity in Heart, that they cannot Lie, and so
great Reverence toward the Law of Christ, that for Conscience sake they deny
to Swear in any wise, if they fail; and so there shall be the same good Order,
yea, greater Security against Deceivers, as if Oaths were continued; and also
by that more severe Punishment, to which these false Dissemblers shall be
liable. Hence wicked Men shall be more terrified, and good Men delivered from
all Oppression, both in their Liberty and Goods: For which Cause, for their
tender Consciences, God has often a regard to Magistrates and their State, as
a thing most acceptable to him. But if any can further doubt of this thing, to
wit, if without Confusion it can be practiced in the Commonwealth, The United
Netherlands instanced.
let him consider the State of the United Netherlands, and he shall see the
good Effect of it. For there, because of the great Number of Merchants, more
than in any other place, there is most frequent occasion for this thing; and
though the number of those, that are of this mind, be considerable, to whom the
States these Hundred Years have condescended, and yet daily condescend; yet
nevertheless, there has nothing of Prejudice followed thereupon to the
Commonwealth, Government, or Good Order; but rather great Advantage to Trade,
and so to the Commonwealth.

. XIII. Sixthly, The last thing to be considered, is Revenge and War, an Evil
as opposite and contrary to the Spirit and Doctrine of Christ, as Light to
Darkness. For, as is manifest by what is said, through contempt of Christ's
Law, the whole World is filled with various Oaths, Revenge and War contrary to
Christ.
Cursings, blasphemous Profanations, and horrid Perjuries; so likewise, through
contempt of the same Law, the World is filled with Violence, Oppression,
Murders, Ravishing of Women and Virgins, Spoilings, Depredations, Burnings,
Devastations, and all manner of Lasciviousness and Cruelty: So that it is
strange that Men, made after the Image of God, should have so much degenerated,
that they rather bear the Image and Nature of Roaring Lions, Tearing Tigers,
Devouring Wolves, and Raging Boars, than Rational Creatures, endued with
Reason. And is it not yet much more admirable, that this horrid Monster should
find place, and be fomented among those Men, that profess themselves Disciples
of our Peaceable Lord and Master Jesus Christ, who by Excellency is called the
Prince of Peace, and has expressly prohibited his Children all Violence; and on
the contrary, commanded them, that according to his Example, they should follow
Patience, Charity, Forbearance, and other Virtues worthy of a Christian?

Hear then what this great Prophet says, whom every Soul is commanded to hear,
under the pain of being cut off, Mat. 5. from Verse 38, to the end of the
Chapter. For thus he says: Ye have heard, that it has been said, An Eye for
an Eye, Revenge forbidden by Christ.
and a Tooth for a Tooth: But I say unto you, That ye resist not evil; but
whosoever shall smite thee on thy right Cheek, turn to him the other also. And
if any Man will sue thee at the Law, and take away thy Coat, let him have thy
Cloak also. And whosoever shall compel thee to go a mile, go with him twain.
Give to him that asks thee; and from him that would Borrow of thee, turn not
thou away. Ye have heard that it has been said, Thou shall love thy Neighbor,
and hate thine Enemy; But I say unto you, Love your Enemies, bless them that
curse you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for them which despitefully
use you, and persecute you: That ye may be the Children of your Father which is
in Heaven. For he makes his Sun to rise on the Evil and on the Good, and
sends Rain on the Just and on the Unjust. For if ye love them which love you,
what Reward have ye? Do not even the Publicans the same? And if ye salute your
Brethren only, what do you more than others? Do not the Publicans so? Be ye
therefore perfect, even as your Father which is in Heaven is perfect.

The Law of Christ more perfect than that of Moses.
These words, with a respect to Revenge, as the former in the case of Swearing,
do forb^d some things, which were formerly lawful to the Jews, considering
their Condition and Dispensation; and Command unto such, as will be the
Disciples of Christ, a more perfect, eminent, and full Signification of
Charity, as also Patience and Suffering, than was required of them in that
Time, State and Dispensation, by the Law of Moses. This is not only the
Judgment of most, if not all, the Ancient Fathers (so called) of the first
Three Hundred Years after Christ, but also of many others; and in general of
all those, who have rightly understood and propagated the Law of Christ
concerning Swearing; as appears from Justin Martyr in Dialog. cum. Tryph.
ejusdemque Apolog. 2. Item. ad Zenam. Tertul. de Corona Militis. Testimonies of
the Fathers against Fighting.
It. Apolog. cap. 21. and 37. It. lib. de Idolol. c. 17, 18, 19. It. ad
Scapulam cap. 1. It. adversus Jud. cap. 7. and 9. It. adv. Ghost. 13. It. ad
Marc. c. 4. It. lib. de Patientia c. 6, 10. Orig. cont. Celsum, lib. 3, 5, 8.
It. in Josuam, hom. 12. cap. 9. It. in Mat. cap. 26. Tract. 36. Cypr. Epist.
56. It. ad Cornel, Lactan, de just. lib. 5. c. 18. lib. 6. c. 20. Ambr. in Luc.
22. Chrysostom. in. Mat. 5. hom. 18. It. in Mat. 26. hom. 85. It. lib. 2. de
Sacerdotio. It. in 1 Cor. 13. Chromat. in Mat. 5. Hieron ad Ocean. It. lib.
Epist. p. 3. Tom. 1. Ep. 2. Athan. de Inc. Verb. Dei. Cyrill. Alex. lib. 11 in
Johan. cap. 25, 26. Yea Augustine, although he vary much in this matter,
notwithstanding in these places he did condemn Fighting, Epist. 158.159.160.
It. ad Judices Epist. 263. It. ad. Darium, and lib. 21. It. ad Faustum, cap.
76. lib. 22. de Cavit. ad Marc. cap. 6. as Sylburgius relates. Euthym, in Mat.
26. and many others of this Age. Erasmus in Luc. cap. 3. and 22. Ludov. Vives
in Introduc. ad Sap. J. Ferus, lib. 4. Comment. in Mat. 7. and Luc. 22.

From hence it appears, The Laws of Christ in the New Testament are
irreconcilable to Persecution Wars and Fighting.
that there is so great a Connection betwixt these two Precepts of Christ, that
as they were uttered and commanded by him at one and the same time; so the same
way they were received by Men of all Ages, not only in the first Promulgation,
by the little number of the Disciples, but also after the Christians increased
in the first Three Hundred Years. Even also in the Apostasy, the one was not
left and rejected without the other; and now again in the Restitution, and
renewed Preaching of the Eternal Gospel, they are acknowledged as Eternal and
Unchangable Laws, properly belonging to the Evangelical State and Perfection
thereof: From which if any withdraw, he falls short of the Perfection of a
Christian Man.

And truly, the words are so clear in themselves, that (in my Judgment) they
need no illustration to explain their Sense: For it is as easy to reconcile
the greatest Contradictions, as these Laws of our Lord Jesus Christ, with the
wicked Practices of Wars; for they are plainly inconsistent. Whoever can
reconcile this, Resist not Evil with, Resist Voilence by Force; again, Give
also thy other Check, with, Strike again; also, Love thine Enemies, with, Spoil
them, make a Prey of them, pursue them with Fire and Sword; or, Pray for those
that persecute you, and those that calumniate you, with, Persecute you by
Fines, Imprisonments, and Death it self; and not only such, as do not persecute
you, but who heartily seek and desire your Eternal and Temporal Welfare:
Whoever, I say, can find a Means to reconcile these things, may be supposed
also to have found a way to reconcile God with the Devil, Christ with
Antichrist. Light with Darkness, and Good with Evil. But if this be impossible,
as indeed it is, so will also the other be impossible; and Men do but deceive
themselves and others, while they boldly adventure to establish such absurd and
impossible things.

. XIV. Nevertheless, because some, perhaps through Inadvertency, and by the
force of Custom and Tradition do transgress this Command of Christ, I shall
briefly show, how much War does contradict this Precept, and how much they are
inconsistent with one another; and consequently, That War is no ways lawful to
such as will be the Disciples of Christ. For,

Mat. 5.43.
First, Christ commands, That we should love our Enemies: But War, on the
contrary, teaches us to hate and destroy them.

Secondly, The Apostle says, That we War not after the Flesh and that we Fight
not with Flesh and Blood: Ephesians. 6.12.
But outward War is according to the Flesh, and against Flesh and Blood; for
the shedding of the one, and destroying of the other.

Thirdly, The Apostle says, That the Weapons of our Warfare are not Carnal but
Spiritual: Cor. 10.4.
But the Weap is of outward Warfare are Carnal, such as Cannon, Muskets,
Spears, Swords, etc. of which there is no mention in the Armor described by
Paul.

Fourthly, Because James testifies, James 4.^.
that Wars and Strifes come from the Lusts which war in the Members of Carnal
Men: But Christians, that is, those that are truly Saints, have crucified the
Flesh, Gal. 5.24.
with its Affections and Lusts: Therefore they cannot indulge them by waging
War.

Fifthly, Because the Prophet Isaiah and Micah, Isai. 2.4. Mic. 4.3.
have expressly prophesied, That in the Mountain of the House of the Lord,
Christ shall judge the Nations; and then they shall beat their Swords into
Plowshares, etc. Primitive Christians most averse from War.
And the Ancient Fathers of the first Three Hundred Years after Christ, did
affirm these Prophecies to be fulfilled in the Christians of their Times, who
were most averse from War; concerning which, Justin Martyr, Tertullian, and
others, may be seen: Which need not seem strange to any, since Philo Judaeus
abundantly testifies of the Essenes, That there was none found among them, that
would make Instruments of War. But how much more did Jesus come, that he might
keep his Followers from Fighting, and might bring them to Patience and Charity?

Sixthly, because the Prophet foretold, Isai. 65.26.
That there shall none hurt nor kill in all the Holy Mountain of the Lord: But
outward War is appointed for killing and destroying.

Seventhly, Because Christ said, John 18.3^.
That his Kingdom is not of this World, and therefore that his Servants shall
not fight: Therefore those that fight are not his Disciples nor Servants.

Eighthly, Because he reproved Peter for the use of the Sword, saying, Mat.
2.52.
Put up again thy Sword into its place: For all they that take the Sword shall
perish with the Sword. Concerning which, Tertullian speaks well, lib. de Idol.
How shall he fight in Peace without a sword, which the Lord did take away? For
although Soldiers came to John, and received a form of Observation; if also the
Centurion believed afterward, he disarmed every Soldier in disarming of Peter.
Idem de ^orn. Mil^ asks, Shall it be lawful to use the Sword, the Lord
saying. That he that uses the Sword, shall perish by the Sword?

Ninthly, Because the Apostle admonishes Christians, Romans 12 19.
That they defend not themselves, neither Revenge by rendering evil for evil;
but give place unto Wrath, because Vengeance is the Lord. Be not overcome of
evil, but overcome evil with good. If thine Enemy hunger, feed him; if he
thirst give him drink: But War throughout teaches and injoyneth the quite
contrary.

Mark 3.34.
Tenthly, Because Christ calls his Children to bear his Cross, not to crucify
or kill others; to Patience, not to Revenge; to Truth and Simplicity, not to
fraudulent Stratagems of War, or to play the Sycophant, which John himself
forbids; to flee the Glory of this World, not to acquire it by Warlike
Endeavors: Therefore War is altogether contrary unto the Law and Spirit of
Christ.

That it is lawful to War, because Abraham did War before the giving of the
Law, and the Israelites after the giving of the Law.

Abraham offered Sacrifices at that time, and Circumcised the Males: Which
nevertheless are not lawful for us under the Gospel.

Israelites going to War ^quired ^h^ Oracle of God.
2. That neither Defensive nor Offensive War was lawful to the Israelites, of
their own Will, or by their own Counsel or Conduct; but they were obliged at
all Times, if they would be successful, first to inquire the Oracle of God.

3. That their Wars, against the Wicked Nations, were a Figure of the Inward W^
of the true Christians against their Spiritual Enemies, in which we overcome
the Devil, the World, and the Flesh.

4. Something is expressly forbidden by Christ, Mat. 5.26. which was granted to
the Jews in their time, because of their hardness; Somethings permitted in the
Old Testament, because of hardness of Heart.
and on the contrary, we are commanded that singular Patience and exercise of
Love, which Moses commanded not to his Disciples. From whence Tertullian says
well against Marc. Christ truly teaches a new Patience, even forbidding the
Revenging of an Injury, which was permitted by the Creator. And lib. de patien.
The Law finds more than is lost, by Christ's saying, Love your Enemies. And in
the time of Clem. Alex. Christians were so far from Wars, that he testified,
that they had no marks or signs of Violence among them, saying, Neither are the
Faces of Idols to be painted, to which so much as to regard is forbidden:
Neither Sword nor Bow to them that follow Peace; nor Cups to them who are
Moderate and Temperate, as Sylvius Disc. de Rev. Belge.

That Defense is of Natural Right, and that Religion destroys not Nature.



That John did not abrogate or condemn War, when the Soldiers came unto him.

John's Doctrine, but Christ's, whose Disciples we are, not John's: For Christ,
and not John, is that Prophet, whom we ought all to hear. And albeit that
Christ said, Luke 7.21.28.
That a greater than John the Baptist was not among Men ^orn of Women; yet he
adds, That the least in the Kingdom of God is greater than he. But what was
John's answer, that we may see, if it can justify the Soldiers, of this time?
For if it be narrowly minded, it will appear, that what he proposes to
Soldiers, does manifestly forbid them, that Employment; for he commands them,
not to do violence to any Man, Luke 3.14.
nor to defraud any Man; but that they be content with their Wages. Consider
then what he discharges to Soldiers, viz. Not to use Violence or Deceit
against any; which being removed, let any tell how Soldiers can War? For is not
Craft, Violence and Injustice, three Properties of War, and the natural
Consequences of Battles?

That Cornelius, and that Centurion, of whom there is mention made, Mat. 8.5.
were Soldiers; and there is no mention, that they laid down their Military
Employments.

Marc. Aurel. Anton. be to be credited, who writes thus: -- I prayed to my
Country Gods; but when I was neglected by them, and observed my self pressed by
the Enemy; considering the fewness of my Forces, I called to one, and entreated
those, who with us are called Christians, Christians instanced, that did not
War.
and I found a great number of them. And I forced them with Threats, which
ought not to have been; because afterward I knew their strength and force.
Therefore they betook themselves neither to the use of Darts nor Trumpets, for
they use not so to do, for the Cause and Name of their God, which they bear in
their Consciences: And this was done about an Hundred and Sixty Years after
Christ. To this add those words, which in Justin Martyr the Christians answer,
(...), that is, We fight not with our Enemies And moreover the answer of Martin
to Julian the Apostate, related by Sulpitius Severus: I am a Soldier of Christ,
therefore I cannot fight; which was Three Hundred Years after Christ. It is not
therefore probable, that they continued in Warlike Employments. How then is
Vincentius Lyrinensis, and the Papists, consistent with their Maxim, That which
always, every where, and by all, was received, etc. And what becomes of the
Priests, with their Oath, That they neither ought, nor will, interpret the
Scripture, but according to the Universal Consent of the Fathers, so called?
For it is as easy to obscure the Sun at Midday, as to deny that the Primitive
Christians renounced all Revenge and War.

And albeit this thing be so much known to all; yet it is as well known, that
all the modern Sects live in the neglect and contempt of this Law of Christ,
and likewise oppress others, who in this agree not with them for Conscience
sake toward God: Persecution for not bearing Arms, and not fasting and praying
for Victory.
Even as we have suffered much in our Country, because We neither could our
selves bear Arms, nor send others in our place, nor give our Money for the
buying of Drums, Standards, and other Military Attire. And lastly, Because we
could not hold our Doors, Windows and Shops close, for Conscience sake, upon
such days as Fasts and prayers were appointed, for to desire a Blessing upon,
and Success for the Arms of the Kingdom or Commonwealth, under which we live;
neither give thanks for the Victories acquired by the effusion of much Blood.
By which forcing of the Conscience, they would have constrained our Brethren,
living in diverse Kingdoms, at War together, to have implored our God for
contrary and contradictory things, and consequently impossible; for it is
impossible, that two Parties fighting together, should both obtain the Victory.
And because we cannot concur with them in this Confusion, therefore we are
subject to Persecution. Yea, and others, who with us do witness, that the use
of Arms is unlawful to Christians, do look asquint upon us: But which of us two
do most faithfully observe this Testimony against Arms? Either they, who at
certain times, at the Magistrate's order, do close up their Shops and Houses,
and meet in their Assembly, praying for the prosperity of their Arms, or giving
thanks for some Victory or other, whereby they make themselves like to those
that approve Wars and and Fighting; Or we, which cannot do these things for the
same Cause of Conscience, lest we should destroy by our Works, what we
establish in Words; We shall leave to the Judgment of all prudent Men.

That Christ, Luke 22.36. speaking to his Disciples, commands them, That he
that then had not a Sword, should sell his Coat, and buy a Sword: Therefore,
say they, Arms are lawful.

Ambrose, who upon this place speaks thus: O Lord! Why command thou me to
buy a Sword, who forbiddest me to smite with it? Why command thou me to have
it, whom thou prohibitest to draw it? Unless perhaps a Defense be prepared, not
necessary Revenge; and that I may seem to have been able to Revenge, but that I
would not. For the Law forbids me to smite again; and therefore perhaps he said
to Peter, offering two Swords, Peter offered two Swords.
[It is enough] as if it had been lawful, until the Gospel times, that in the
Law there might be learning of Equity, but in the Gospel a perfection of
goodness. Others judge Christ to have spoken here mystically, and not according
to the Letter; as Origin upon Mat. 19. saying, If any looking to the Letter,
and not understanding the Will of the Words, shall sell his bodily Garment, and
buy a Sword taking the words of Christ contrary to his will, he shall perish:
But concerning which Sword he speaks, is not proper here to mention. And truly,
when we consider the answer of the Disciples, Master, behold, here are two
Swords; understanding it of outward Swords: And again, Christ's answer, It is
enough; it seems, that Christ would not that the rest, who had not Swords, (for
they had only two Swords) should sell their Coats, and buy an outward Sword.
Who can think, that matters standing thus, he should have said, Two was enough?
But however it is sufficient, that the use of Arms is unlawful under the Gospel.

That the Scriptures and Old Fathers (so called) did only prohibit private
Revenge, not the use of Arms, for the defense of our Country, Body, Wives,
Children and Goods, when the Magistrate commands it; seeing the Magistrate
ought to be obeyed: Therefore albeit it be not lawful for private Men to do it
of themselves, nevertheless they are bound to do it by the command of the
Magistrate.

Christian Magistrates ought to obey the command of their Master Christ.
Love your Enemies, etc. and then he could not command us to kill them: But if
he be not a true Christian, then ought we to obey our Lord and King, Jesus
Christ, to whom he ought also to obey: For in the Kingdom of Christ, all ought
to submit to his Laws, from the highest to the lowest, that is, from the King
to the Beggar, and from Caesar to the Clown. But (alas!) where shall we find
such an Obedience? O deplorable Fall! Concerning which Ludov. Viv. writes well,
lib. de con. vit. Christ. sub. Turc. by relation of Fredericus Sylvius, Disc.
de Revol. Belg. p. 85. The Prince entered into the Church, Lud. Vives against
Arms.
not as a true and plain Christian which had indeed been most happy and
desirable; but he brought in with him his Nobility, his Honor his ARMS, his
Ensigns, his Triumphs, his Haughtiness, his Pride, his Superciliousness; that
is, He came into the House of Christ, accompanied with the Devil; and which
could no ways be done, he would have joined two Houses and two Cities together,
God's and the Devil's, which could not more be done, than Rome and
Constantinople, which are distant by so long a Tract both of Sea and Land.
(What Communion, says Paul, is there betwixt Christ and Belial?) Their Zeal
cooled by degrees, their Faith decreased, their whole Piety degenerated;
instead whereof we make now use of Shadows and Images, and (as he says) I
would we could but retain these: Thus far Vives. But lastly, as to what relates
to this thing, since nothing seems more contrary to Man's Nature, and seeing of
all things the defense of ones self seems most tolerable, as it is most hard to
Men, so it is the most perfect part of the Christian Religion, as that, wherein
the denial of Self, an entire Confidence in God, does most appear; and
therefore Christ and his Apostles left us hereof a most perfect Example.
Concerning the present Magistrates of the Christian World.
As to what relates to the present Magistrates of the Christian World, albeit
we deny them not altogether the name of Christians, because of the public
Profession they make of Christ's Name; yet we may boldly affirm, that they are
far from the Perfection of the Christian Religion: Because in the State in
which they are, (as in many places before I have largely observed) they have
not come to the pure Dispensation of the Gospel. And therefore, while they are
in that Condition, we shall not say, That War, undertaken upon a just occasion,
is altogether unlawful to them. For even as Circumcision, and the other
Ceremonies, were for a season permitted to the Jews, not because they were
either necessary of themselves, or lawful at that time, after the Resurrection
of Christ; but because that Spirit was not yet raised up in them, whereby they
could be delivered from such Rudiments: So the present Confessors of the
Christian Name, who are yet in the mixture, and not in the patient Suffering
Spirit, are not yet fitted for this form of Christianity, and therefore cannot
be undefending themselves, until they attain that Perfection. But for such,
whom Christ has brought hither, it is not lawful to defend themselves by Arms,
but they ought over all to trust to the Lord.

. XVI. But lastly, to conclude, The Conclusion.
If to give and receive Flattering Titles, which are not used because of the
Virtues inherent in the Persons; but are, for the most part, bestowed by wicked
Men upon such as themselves: If to Bow, Scrape and Cringe to one another; If at
every time to call one another Humble Servant, and that most frequently,
without any design of real Service; if this be the Honor that comes from God,
and not the Honor that is from below, then indeed our Adversaries may be said
to be Believers, and we condemned as Proud and Stubborn, in denying all these
things. But if with Mordecai, Esther 3.5. Job 32.21.22.
to refuse to bow to proud Haman; and with Elihu, not to give Flattering Titles
to Men, lest we should be reproved of our Maker; and if, according to Peter's
Example, and the Angel's Advice, to bow only to God, and not to our
Fellow Servants; and if to call no Man Lord nor Master, except under particular
Relations, according to Christ's Command; I say, if these things are not to be
reproved, then are we not blameworthy in so doing. If to be vain and gaudy in
Apparel, if to paint the Face, and plait the Hair; if to be clothed with Gold
and Silver, and precious Stones; and if to be filled with Ribbands and Lace, be
to be clothed in Modest Apparel; and if these be the Ornaments of Christians;
and if that be to be Humble, Meek and Mortified; Then are our Adversaries good
Christians indeed, and we Proud, Singular and Conceited, in contenting our
selves with what Need and Convenience calls for, and condemning what is more,
as Superfluous; but not otherwise. If to use Games, Sports, Plays; if to Card,
Dice and Dance; if to Sing, Fiddle and Pipe; if to use Stage Plays and
Comedies, and to Lie, Counterfeit and Dissemble, be to Fear always; and if that
be to do all things to the Glory of God; and if that be to pass our Sojourning
here in Fear; and if that be to use this World, as if we did not use it; and if
that be not to fashion our selves according to our former Lusts; to be not
conformable to the Spirit and vain Conversation of this World; Then are our
Adversaries, notwithstanding they use these things, and plead for them, very
Good, Sober, Mortified, and Self-denying Christians, and we justly to be blamed
for judging them; but not otherwise. If the Profanation of the Holy Name of
God; if to exact Oaths one from another upon every light occasion; if to call
God to Witness in things of such a Nature, in which no Earthly King would think
himself lawfully and honorably to be a Witness, be the Duties of a Christian
Man, I shall confess that our Adversaries are excellent good Christians, and we
wanting in our Duty: But if the contrary be true, of necessity our obedience to
God in this thing must be acceptable. If to Revenge our selves, or to render
Injury, Evil for Evil, Wound for Wound, to take Eye for Eye, Tooth for Tooth;
if to Fight for outward and perishing things, to go a Warring one against
another, whom we never saw, nor with whom we never had any Contest, nor any
thing to do; being moreover altogether ignorant of the cause of the War, but
only, that the Magistrates of the Nations foment Quarrels one against another,
the Causes whereof are for the most part unknown to the Soldiers that fight, as
well as upon whose side the Right or Wrong is; and yet to be so furious, and
rage one against another, to destroy and spoil all, that this or the other
Worship may be received or abolished; If to do this, and much more of this
kind, be to fulfill the Law of Christ, then are our Adversaries indeed true
Christians, and we miserable Heretics, that suffer our selves to be Spoiled,
Taken, Imprisoned, Banished, Beaten, and evilly Entreated, without any
Resistance, placing our trust only in GOD, that he may defend us, and lead us
by the way of the Cross unto his Kingdom. But if it be other ways, we shall
certainly receive the Reward, which the Lord has promised to those that cleave
to him, and in denying themselves, confide in him.

And to sum up all; If to use all these things, and many more that might be
instanced, be to walk in the strait way that leads to Life, be to take up the
Cross of Christ, be to die with him to the Lusts and perishing Vanities of this
World, and to arise with him in newness of Life, and sit down with him in the
heavenly places; Then our Adversaries may be accounted such; and they need not
fear they are in the Broad Way that leads to destruction; and we are greatly
mistaken, that have laid aside all these things for Christ's sake, to the
crucifying of our own Lusts, and to the procuring to our selves Shame,
Reproach, Hatred and Ill Will from the Men of this World. Not as if by so doing
we judged to merit Heaven; but as knowing, they are contrary to the Will of
him, who redeems his Children from the Love of this World, and its Lusts, and
leads them in the ways of Truth and Holiness, in which they take delight to
walk.

The CONCLUSION.
IF in God's Fear, Candid Reader, thou applyest thy self to consider this
System of Religion, here delivered, with its Consistency and Harmony, as well
in it self, as with the Scriptures of Truth, I doubt not, but thou will say
with me, and many more, That this is the Spiritual Day of Christ's Appearance,
wherein he is again Revealing the Ancient Paths of Truth and Righteousness. For
thou may observe here the Christian Religion, in all its parts, truly
Established and Vindicated, as it is a Living, Inward, Spiritual, Pure and
Substantial Thing; and not a mere Form, Show, Shadow, Notion and Opinion, as
too many have hitherto held it, whose Fruits declare, they wanted that which
they bear the Name of: And yet many of those are so in love with their empty
Forms and Shadows, that they cease not to calumniate us for commending, and
calling them to the Substance; as if we therefore denied or neglected the true
Form and outward Part of Christianity, which indeed is (as God, the Searcher of
Hearts, knows) a very great Slander. Thus, because we have desired People
earnestly to feel after God near, and in themselves, telling them, That their
Notions of God, as he is beyond the Clouds, will little avail them, if they do
not feel him near: Hence they have sought maliciously to infer, that we deny
any God, except that which is within us. Because we tell People, That it is the
Light and the Law within, and not the Letter without, that can truly tell them
their Condition, and lead them out of all Evil: Hence they say, we vilify the
Scriptures, and set up our own Imaginations above them. Because we tell them,
That it is not their talking or believing of Christ's outward Life, Sufferings,
Death and Resurrection, no more than the Jews crying, The Temple of the Lord,
the Temple of the Lord, that will serve their turn, or justify them in the
sight of God; but that they must know Christ in them, whom they have crucified,
to be raised, and to justify them and redeem them from their Iniquities: Hence
they say, We deny the Life, Death and Sufferings of Christ, Justification by
his Blood, and Remission of Sins through him. Because we tell them, while they
are talking and determining about the Resurrection, that they have more need to
know the Just One, whom they have slain, raised in themselves, and to be sure
they are Partakkers of the first Resurrection; and that if this be, they will
be the more capable to judge of the Second: Hence they say, That we deny the
Resurrection of the Body. Because, when we hear them talk foolishly of Heaven
and Hell, and the last Judgment, we exhort them to come out of that Hellish
Condition they are in, and come down to the Judgment of Christ in their own
Hearts, and believe in the Light, and follow it, that so they may come to sit
in the heavenly places, that are in Christ Jesus: Hence they maliciously say,
That we deny any Heaven or Hell, but that which is within us, and that we deny
any general Judgment: Which Slanders, the Lord knows, are foully cast upon us,
whom God has raised for this end, and gathered us, that by us he might
confound the Wisdom of the Wise, and bring to naught the Understanding of the
Prudent; and might, in and by his own Spirit and Power in a despised People,
(that no Flesh might glory in his presence) pull down that dead, dark, corrupt
Image, and mere Shadow and Shell of Christianity, wherewith Antichrist has
deceived the Nations: For which end he has called us to be a First Fruits of
those that serve him, and worship ^im no more in the Oldness of the Letter, but
in the Newness of the Spirit. And though we be few in number, in respect of
others; and weak, as to outward strength, which we also altogether reject; and
foolish* if compared with the wise ones of this World: Yet as God has
prospered us, notwithstanding much Opposition, so will he yet do; that neither
the Art, Wisdom, nor Violence of Men or Devils shall be able to quench that
little Spark that has appeared; but it shall grow, to the consuming of
whatsoever shall stand up to oppose it. The Mouth of the Lord has spoken it!
Yea, He that has arisen in a small Remnant, shall arise, and go on by the same
Arm of Power in his Spiritual Manifestation, until he has conquered all his
Enemies, until all the Kingdoms of the Earth become the Kingdom of Christ Jesus.

Unto him that has begun this Work, not among the Rich or Great Ones, but
among the Poor and Small, and has Revealed it not to the Wise and Learned, but
unto the Poor, unto Babes and Sucklings; even to Him, the only wise and
omnipotent GOD, be Honor, Glory, Thanksgiving and Renown, from henceforth and
for ever. Amen. Hallelu-JAH. A Table of the Authors cited in this Book.
A
ALanus 443 Amandus Polanus 238 Ambrosius Auchertus 555 Ambrosius Mediolanensis
127, 503, 555, 559 Am-sius 23^, 487. Anselmus Bishop of Canterbury 555
Antiochus 555 Apollinarius 139 Athanasius 22, 502, 549, 555, 559 Agustinus
Bakerus 386 Agustinus 21, 50, 82, 96, 149, 193, 194, 223, 256, 262, 443, 446,
555, 558. Author de vocat. Gentium 126
B
Basil the Great 549, 555 Beda 555 Bellarmin 206, 5^1 Bernard 22, 381, 395
Bertius 236 Beza 113, 220, 496 Borbaeus 221, 227 Buchanan 195 Bucerus 221
Bullinger 220
C
Calvin 44, 45, 46, 78, 113, 223, 236, 323, 350, 433, 451, 354, 355, 472, 484,
505, 522 Carolostadius 505 Causab^nus 525 Cassiodorus 555 Castellio 5^5
Catechism of Westminster 242 Chamierus 22^ Chemnitius 223 Christianus
Druthmarus 555 Chro^atius 555, 559 Chrysostom 126, 489, 548, 555, 559 Cicero
191 Claudius Albertus I^n^anus 22^ Clemens Alexandr^us 21, 172, 173, 1^3, 555,
563 Conference of O^enburg^ E^. D. 24^ Confession of (...) 239, 265 Confession
of the French Churches 69 Confession of Faith of the Churches of Holland 69
Confession of the Divines at Westminster 70, 78, 201 Council of Afzansick 2^
Council of Carthage 7^ Council of Florence 56 Council of Laodicea 70 Council of
Trent 107, 238, 5^5 Cyprian 503, 555, 558 Cyrillus Alexandrinus 22, 159, 164,
165, 166, 555, 559
D
Dallaeus 484 Diodorus Sieulus 553
E
Epicte^us ^ Epiphanius 81, 555 Erasmus ^26, 555, 559 Estius 228 Eusebius 5^
Eu^yches 139 Euthymius 555, 559
F
Forbes 22^, 223 Franciscus Lambertus 3^4, 38^ Fredericus Sylvius 563, 567
G
Gelasius 262 Gen^letus 238 Gevardus Vessius 167, 24^, 265 God^a^ 52^ Gregory
the Great 2^ Gregorius Naziarzenus 555 Gregorius N^ss^us ibid
H
Hay^n^ ibid Hierom 21, 80, 81, 85, 261, 503, 523, 549, 555, 559 Hilarious 503,
555 Hildebrand 500 Himelius 228 History of the Council of Trent 505 History of
the Reformation of France 521, 522 Hosius 503 Hugo Grotius 547, 548, 555
I
James Coret 236 James Howel 526 Johannes Damascenus 555 Johannes Ferus 55^
Johannes Floracensis 443, 44^ John Hus 94 Johannes Maresius 547 Isidorus
Hispalensis 555 Isi^d^rus Pelusiota ib. Justin Martyr 173, 192, 193, 555 558,
561, 565
L
Lactantius 191, 192 Lucas Oftander 128, 312 Ludovicus Vives 559, 567 Luther
22, 128, 197, 198, 200, 284, 504, 505, 526
M
Martiaum 503 Martyr 113 Melancthon 23, 221, 265 Musculus 236
N
Nicholas Arnoldus of Franequer 283, 305, 307, 330, 346, 347, 349, 431 445
O
Oecumenus 555 O^gen 24, 314, 555, 558, 567 Otho Brunsfeldius 565
P
Pa^rius Masson 441 Pa^aus 113, 217 Paschasius Rathert^s 555 Paulus Riccius
439, 446 Philo Judaeus 554, 561 Pithaeus 443 Phocylides 192 Piscator 113
Platina 294 Plato 191, 555 Plotinus 192 Polybius 547 Polycarpus 56, 555 Prosper
125, 126 Pythagoras 553
Q
Quintilianus 554 Quintus Curtius 553
R
Reinerius 513 Richard Baxter 228, 238
S
Senechae 161 Smith, Doctor in Cambridge 23 Stobaeus 555 Sulpitius Severus 565
Synod Arelatensian 126, 127 Synod of Dort 69, 112
T
Tertullian 21, 504, 555, 558, 561, 563 Theophylactus 555 Thomas Aquinas 50
Thisius 21^
V
Victor Antiochenus 167 Vincentius Lyrinensis 565
W
Waldenses 555 Wicklef ibid
Z
Zanchius 113, 219, 223, 238 Zwinglius 1^7, 11^, 228
A TABLE Of the Chief Things.
A
ABraham's Faith, 34. Adam, See Man, Sin, Redemption; what Happiness he lost by
the Fall, 96. what Death he died, 97. He retained in his nature no Will or
Light, capable of it self to manifest Spiritual Things, 97. Whether there be
any Relics of the Heavenly Image left in them, 101, 144. Alexander Skein's
Queries proposed to the Preachers, 401, 402. Anabaptists of Great Britain, 57,
373. Anabaptists of Munster, how their mischievious Actings nothing touch the
Quakers, 54 to 58. Anicetus, 56. Anointing; The Anointing teaches all things;
it is and abides for ever, a common Privilege, and sure Rule to all Saints
52, 53. Antichrist is exalted, when the Seed of God is pressed, 145. his work,
318, 319, 320, 425, 326. Antinomians, their Opinion concerning Justification,
209. Apostasy, 293, 315. Apostle, who he is, their number was not limited; and
whether any may be now a days so called, 320, 321, 322.323. Appearances; see
Faith. Arrians; First brought in the Doctrine of Persecution, up on the account
of Religion, 502. Arrius, by what he fell in to Error, 314, 315. Arminans; see
Remonstrants. Assemblings are needful, and what sort. 347, 348, etc. see
Worship; they are not to be forsaken, 364. Astrologer, 64. Aurelia; their ten
Canonicks were burnt, and why, 443, 444.
B
Baptism is one, its definition, 409, 412 to 419. It is the Baptism of Christ,
and of the Spirit; not of Water, 419 to 423. The Baptism of Water which was
John's Baptism, was a Figure of this Baptism, and is not to be continued, 423.
to 445. Baptism with Water does not cleanse the Heart, 413, 425. nor is it a
Badge of Christianity, as was Circumcision to the Jews, 428, 442. That Paul was
not sent to Baptize, is explained, 428 to 431. Concerning what Baptism Christ
speaks. Mat. 28.20. it is explained 432. How the Apostles baptized with water,
is explained, 435. to 439. To Baptize, signifies to Plunge; and how Sprinkling
was brought in, 439, 440. Those of old, that used Water Baptism, were Plunged;
and they that were only Sprinkled were not admitted to an Ecclesiastic
Function, and why 443 Against the use of Water Baptism many heretofore have
testified, 443. Infant Baptism is a mere Human Tradition 409, 444. Bible, The
last Translations always find fault with the first 80. Birth; The Spiritual
Birth, 66. Holy Birth, 368, 669 See Justification. Bishop of Rome, Concerning
his Primacy, 56. How he abused his Authority, and by what he deposed Princes,
and absolveth the People from the Oath of Fidelity, 500, 534. Blood; To abstain
from Blood, and things strangled, 479.480. It has been shed, 456. Blood of
Christ; see Communion. Body; To bow the Body; see Head. Books Canonical and
Apocryphal; see Canon, Scripture. Bonaventure, 351. Bow; To bow the Knee; see
uncover the Head. Bread; The Breaking of Bread among the Jews, was no singular
thing, 466, 471. It is now otherways performed, than it was by Christ. 470.
Whether unleavened or leavened Bread is to be used; also it is hotly disputed
about the manner of taking it, and to whom it is to be given 471.472. See
Communion.
C
Calvinists; see Protestants, they deny Consubstantiation, 56. They maintain
Absolute Reprobation, 56. They think, Grace is a certain Irresistible Power;
and what sort of a Savior they would have, 177, 178. Of the Flesh and Blood of
Christ, 451, 454, 455. They use leavened Bread in the Supper, 471. Canon;
Whether the Scripture, be a filled up Canon, 92. Whether it can be proved by
Scripture that any Book is Canonical, 92, 93. Castellio banished, 505.
Ceremonies; see Superstition Christ; see Communion* Justification, Redemption,
Word: He shows himself daily, revealing the Knowledge of the Father 22.
Without his School, there is nothing learned, but busy talking, 23. He is the
Eternal Word, 26. No Creature has access to God, but by him, 26, 27, 28. He is
the Way, the Truth, and the Life, 28. He is the Mediator between God and Man,
27, 203. He is God, and in time he was made partaker of Man's Nature, 27.
Yesterday to day the same and for ever, 38. The Father believed in him, and
how, ibid. His Sheep hear his Voice, and contemn the Voice of a Stranger, 73,
301, 304. It is the fruit of his Ascension, to send Pastors, 84. He dwells in
the Saints, and how, 138, 139. His coming was necessary, 141. By his Sacrifice
we have Remission of Sins, 141, 183, 184, 203. Whether he be, and how he is in
all Men, is explained, 142. Being formed within, he is the formal Cause of
Justification, 196, 224. By his Life, Death, etc. he has opened a way for
Reconciliation, 226, 227, 228. His Obedience, Righteousness, Death and
Sufferings are ours, and it is explained, that Paul said, He filled up that
which was behind of the Afflictions of Christ in his Flesh, 206. How, we are
partakers of his Suffering, 252, 253, 254. For what end he was manifested, 247,
248. He delivers his own by Suffering, 248. Concerning his outward and
spiritual Body, 448, 449. Concerning his outward and inward Coming, 478.
Christian; How he is a Christian, and when he cease so to be, 19, 25, 42, 43
to 48, 254, 286, 287, 288, 289, 300, 301. The Foundation of his Faith, 64. His
Privilege, 66. When Men are made Christians by Birth, and not by coming
together, 276, 277. They have borrowed many things from Jews and Gentiles, 411,
412. They recoil by little and little, from their first Purity, 476, 568. The
Primitive Christians for some Ages said, We are Christians, we Swear not, 553.
And, We are the Soldiers of Christ, it is not lawful for us to Fight 565.
Christianity is made as an Art, 25. It is not Christianity without the Spirit,
40 to 44, 69, 70. It would be turned into Skepticism, 311. It is placed chiefly
in the renewing of the Heart, 279. Wherein it consists not, 363. What is, and
is not the Mark thereof, 428, 429, 442. Why it is odious to Jews, Turks and
Heathens, 454. What would contribute to its Commendation, 518. Church; Without
which there is no Salvation; what she is: concerning her Members, Visibility,
Profession, Degeneration, Succession, 272 to 298. Whatsoever is done in the
Church, without the instinct of the Holy Spirit, is vain and impious, 304. The
same may be said of her, as was in the Schools of Theseus's Boat, 326. In her
Corrections ought to be exercised and against whom, 488, 489. She is more
corrupted by the accession of Hypocrites 489. The Contentions of the Greek and
Latin Churches, about Unleavened or Leavened Bread in the Supper, 471, The
Lukewarmness of the Church of Laodicea, 287. There are introduced into the
Roman-Church no less Superstitions and Ceremonies, than among Heathens and
Jews, 277. Circumcision, a Seal of the Old Covenant, 439. Clergy, 320, 322,
325, 336, 337, 472. Clothes; That it is not lawful for Christians to use things
superfluous in Clothes, 532 to 536, 569. Comforter; For what end he was sent,
22, 23. Commission; The Commission of the Disciples of Christ, before the Work
was finished, was more Leagal than Evangelical, 306. Communion; The Communion
of the Body and Blood of Christ is a Spiritual and Inward thing, 445. That
Body, that Blood is a Spiritual thing; and that it is that heavenly Seed,
whereby Life and Salvation was of old, and is now, communicated, 446, 447. How
any become partaker thereof, 451 to 453. It is not tied to the Ceremony of
breaking Bread, and drinking Wine, which Christ used with his Disciples; this
was was only a Figure, 446, 453, to 465. Whether that Ceremony be a necessary
part of the New Covenant; and whether it is to be continued 465 to 485.
Spiritual Communion with God, through Christ, is obtained, 97. Community of
Goods is not brought in by the Quakers, 488, 516, 517. Complements; see Titles.
Conscience; see Magistrate: Its definition, what it is; it is distinguished
from the Saving Light, 144, to 148, 487. The good Conscience, and the
Hypocritical, 266. He that acts contrary to his Conscience, sins; and
concerning an erring Conscience, 487. What things appertain to Conscience, 488.
What sort of Liberty of Conscience is defended, ibid. It is the Throne of God,
489. It is free from the Power of all Men, 505. Conversion; What is Man's
therein, is rather a Passion, than an Action, 149. Augustine's saying, ibid.
This is cleared by two Examples, 149, 150. Correction; how and against whom it
ought to be exercised, 488, 489. Covenant; The difference betwixt the New and
Old Covenant-Worship, 50, 346, 347, 375 to 378, 425 to 427. See also Law,
Gospel. Cross; the Sign of the Cross, 442.
D
Dancing; see Plays. Days; Whether any be holy, and concerning the Day,
commonly called, The Lord's Day, 349, 464. Deacons, 474. Death; See Adam,
Redemption; it entered into the World by sin, 105, 106. In the Saints it is
rather a passing from Death to Life, 107. Devil: He cares not at all how much
God be acknowledged with the Mouth, if he be worshipped in the Heart, 24, 25,
180. He can form an outward Sound of words, 35. Haunts among the Wicked, 248.
How he came to be a Minister of the Gospel, 316 to 318. When he can work
nothing, 370, 371. He keeps Men in outward Signs, Shadows and Forms, while they
neglect the Substance, 456, 457. Dispute; The Dispute of the Shoemaker with a
certain Professor, 210.311. Of an Heathen Philosopher with a Bishop in the
Council of Nice, and of the Unlettered Clown, 312. Divinity; School Divinity,
299. How pernicious it is, 313 to 317. Dreams; see Faith, Miracles.
E
Ear; There is a Spiritual, and a Bodily Ear, 22, 36. Easter is celebrated
other ways in the Latin Church, than in the Eastern, 55. The Celebration of it
is grounded upon Tradition, ibid. Elders, 33, 324. Elector of Saxony; the
scandal given by him, 403. Eminency: Your Eminency; see Titles. Enoch walked
with God, 255. Epistle; see James, John, Peter. Esau, 358. Ethics, or Books of
Moral Philosophy, are not needful to Christians, 312. Evangelist; Who he is,
and whether any now adays may be so called, 323. Excellency: Your Excellency;
see Titles. Exorcism, 443.
F
Faith: Its definition, and what its Object is, 33 to 37. How far, and how
Appearances, outward Voices and Dreams, were the Objects of the Saints Faith,
35. That Faith is one, and that the Object of Faith is one, 37. Its foundation,
64. see Revelation, Scripture. Farellus, 472. Father: see Knowledge,
Revelation, 33. Fathers, (so called) they did not agree about some Books of the
Scripture, 70, 81. They affirm, that there are whole Verses taken out of Mark
and Luke, 81. Concerning the Septuagint Interpretation, and the Hebrew Copy,
81. They preached universal Redemption for the first Four Centuries, 125. They
frequently used the Word, [ Merit] in their Doctrine, 237, 239. Concerning the
possibility of not sinning, 261, 262. The possibility of falling from Grace,
265. Many of them did not only contradict one another, but themselves also,
315. Concerning Baptism, and the sign of the Cross, 442. Concerning an Oath.
544. Feet; Concerning the Washing of one another Feet, 467 to 470. Franequer,
331. Freely; The Gospel ought to be preached freely, 330, 331.
G
Games, see Sports, Gifted Brethren, 297. GOD: How he has always manifested
himself, 18. Unless he speak within, the Preacher makes a rustling to no
purpose, 22, 23. None can know him aright, unless be receive it of the Holy
Ghost, ibid. God is be sought within, 23. He is known by Sensation, and not by
mere Speculation and Syllogistick Demonstrations, 23. He is the Fountain, Root
and Beginning of all good Works, and he has made all things by his Eternal
Word, 27. God speaking, is the Object of Faith, 34. Among all, he has his own
Chosen Ones, 20. He delights not in the Death of the Wicked; see Redemption: He
has manifested his Love in sending his Son, 203, 226, 227. See Justification:
He rewards the Good Works of his Children, 238, 239. Whether it be possible to
keep his Commandments, 242, 243. He is the Lord, and the Only Judge of the
Conscience, 486. 489. He will have a free exercise, 497. Gospel; see
Redemption: The Truths of it are, as Lies in the Mouths of profane and carnal
Men, 30, 45, 46. The Nature of it is explained, 49, 50, It is distinguished
from the Law, and is more excellent than it, 50, 73. see Covenant, Law. Whether
any ought to Preach it in this or that place, is not found in Scripture,
297.298. Its Works are distinguished from the Works of the Law, 231. How it is
to be propagated, and of its Propagation, 490. The Worship of it is inward,
427. It is an inward Power, 167, 168. Grace; The Grace of God can be lost
through disobedience, 263. etc. Saving Grace (see Redemption) whch is required
in the calling and qualifying of a Minister; see Minister: In some it works
in a special prevalent manner, that they necessarily obtain Salvation, 150,
151. Your Grace; see Titles.
H
Hai Ebn Yokdan, 193 Hands; Laying on of Hands, 298, 480. Head; Of uncovering
the Head in Salutations, 512, 515, 529 to 532, 568, 569. Heart; The Heart is
deceitful and wicked, 77, 97, 98. Heathens; Albeit they were ignorant of the
History, yet, they were sensible of the Loss by the Fall, 191. Some Heathens
would not swear, 553. Heathenish Ceremonies were brought into the Christian
Religion, 442. Henry IV. King of France, 500. Heresies, whence they proceeded,
363. Heretics, 493. High; see Priest. History of Christ; see Quakers,
Redemption. Holy of Holies, The High Priest entered into it once a Year, 32. But
now all of us, at all times, have access unto God, 51. Holiness, Your Holiness;
see Titles. Honor, see Titles. Hypocrite, 493, 497, 498.
I
Jacob, 358. James the Apostle; there were of old diverse Opinions concerning
his Epistle, 70. Idolatry, 245, 364. Whence it proceeded, 410. Jesting; see
Plays, Games. Jesuits; see Sect Ignation. Jesus, see Christ; What it is to be
saved, and to be assembled in his Name, 184, 201, 354. Jews; Among them there
may be Members of the Church, 273, 274. Their Error concerning the outward
Succession of Abraham, 285. Their Worship is outward, 427. Illiterate; see
Mechanics. Indulgences, 199. Infants; see Sin. Iniquities; Spiritual
Iniquities, or Wickedness, 362. Inquisition, 499. Inspiration; Where that does
not teach, words without do make a noise to no purpose, 21, 22. John the
Apostle, concerning his Second and Third Epistles, and the Revelation, there
were sometime diverse Opinions, 70. John the Baptist did not Miracles, 296. John
Hus is said to have prophesied, 94. John Knox, in what respect he was called
the Apostle of Scotland, 324. Judas fell from his Apostleship, 287. Who was his
Vicar, 104. His Ministry was not purely Evangelical, 306. He was called
immediately of Christ; and who are inferior to him, and plead for him, as
Patron of their Ministry, 307. Justification; The Doctrine thereof is and has
been greatly vitiated among the Papists, and wherein they place it, 197, 199,
200, 226, Luther and the Protestants, with good reason, opposed this Doctrine,
though many of them ran soon into another extreme, and wherein they place it, and
that they agree in one, 200, 201, 207. It comes from the Love of God, 203, 226.
To justify, signifies to make really just; not to repute just, which many
Protestants are forced to acknowledge, 215, 216, 219 to 223. The Revelation of
Christ formed in the Heart, is the formal cause of Justification, not Works (to
speak properly) which are only an effect, and so also many Protestants have
said, 196, 199, to 202, 215 to 237. We are justified in Works, and how, 196,
206, 207, 208, 229 to 2^7. This is so far from being a Popish Doctrine, that
Bellarmine, and others, opposed it, 205, 206, 237, 239.
K
Kingdom of God, 381, 480, 490. Knowledge; the height of Man's Happiness is
placed in the true Knowledge of God, 3. Error in the entrance of this Knowledge
is dangerous, 15. Superstition, Idolatry, and thence Atheism, has proceeded
from the false and feigned Opinion concerning God, and the Knowledge of him,
17. The uncertain Knowledge of God is diverse ways attained; but the true and
certain, only by the Inward and Immediate Revelation of the Holy Spirit, 20. It
has been brought out of use, and by what devises, 24, 25. There is no
Knowledge of the Father, but by the Son; nor of the Son, but by the Spirit, 18,
26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32. The Knowledge of Christ, which is not by the
Revelation of his Spirit in the Heart; is no more that Knowledge of Christ,
than the prattling of a Parrot, which has been taught a few words, may be said
to be the Voice of a Man, 31.
L
Laics, 320, 322. Laity, 325, 327. Lake of Bethesda, 147. Law; The Law is
distinguished from the Gospel, 50, 427. The difference thereof, 50, 252, 253.
see Gospel: Under the Law, the People were not in any doubt, who should be
Priests and Ministers, 281. see Minister of the Law, Worship. Learning; what
true Learning is, 307, 308. Letter; the Letter ki^eth, quickneth not, 253.
Light; the Innate Light is explained by Cicero, 191, 192. Light of Nature; the
Errors of the Socinians and Pelagians, who exalt this Light, are rejected, 95.
Saving Light (see Redemption) is Universal; it is in all, 232. It is a
Spiritual and heavenly Principle, 138. It is a Substance, not an Accident, 139,
140. It is Supernatural and Sufficient, 160, 166. It is the Gospel preached in
every Creature, 167. It is the Word, nigh in the Mouth and in the Heart, 170,
171. It is the Ingrafted Word, able to save the Soul, 176. Testimonies of
Augustine and Buchanan concerning this Light, 194, 195. It is not any part of
Nature, or Relics of the Light remaining in Adam after the Fall, 144. It is
distinguished from the Conscience, 145. It is not a common Gift, as the heat of
the Fire, and outward Light of the Sun, as a certain Preacher said, 182. it may
be resisted, 133, 137, 147, 148, 262, 263. By this Light or Seed, Grace and
Word of God he invites all, and calls them to Salvation, 172, 173, 174. None of
those to whom the History of Christ is preached, are saved but by the Inward
Operation of this Light, 175. to 181. It is small in the first Manifestation,
but it grows, 176. It is slighted by the Calvinists, Papists, Socinians and
Arminians, and why, 177. None can put it to silence, 178. There are and may be
saved by the Operation thereof, who are ignorant of the History of Christ, 109,
110, 134, 141, 142, 173, 181, to 191. An Answer to the Objection, That none can
be saved, but in the Name of Jesus Christ, 184, 185. Literature; Humane
Literature is not at all needful' 308, etc. Liturgy, 351, 373. Logic, 312.
Lord; there is one Lord, 38, 39. Love; of a Love Feast, 475, 477. Lutherans,
(see Protestants) they affirm Consubstantiation, 56. Of the Flesh and Blood of
Christ, 454. They use unleavened. Bread in the Super, 471.
M
Magistrate; concerning his Power in things purely Religious; and that he has
no Authority over the Conscience, 486, to 512. Nor ough^ he to punish according
to Church Censure, 489, 490 Concerning the present Magistrates of the Christian
World, 568, 569. Mahomet prohibited all Discourse and Reason about Religion,
506. He was an Impostor, 146. Majesty, Your Majesty; see Titles. Man, (see
Knowledge) his spirit knows the things of a Man, and not the things of God,
29. The carnal Man esteems the Gospel Truths as Lies, 30. And in that State
he cannot please God, 42. The New Man and the Old, 66 139. The natural Man
cannot discern spiritual things; as to the first Adam he is fallen and
degenerate, 66, 94, 95, 108. His thoughts of God and Divine Things in the
corrupt State, are Evil and Unprofitable; 94, 95. Nothing of Adam's Sin is
imputed to him, until by Evil-doing he commit his own, 97, 105. In the corrupt
State he has no Will or Light, capable of it self to manifest Spiritual
Things, 97 to 103 202. He cannot when he will, procure to himself tenderness of
Heart, 147. Whatsoever he does, while he loath it not by, in, and through the
Power of God, he is not approved of God, 369. How the inward Man is nourished,
448 to 453. How his Understanding cannot be forced by Sufferings; and how his
Understanding is changed, 497 ^98. Merchandise; what it is to ^ake Merchandise
with the Scriptures, 315. Mass, 345, 351, 373, 403. Mathemitician, 64.
Mechanics, 327. They contributed much to the Reformation, ibid. Merit; see
Justification. Metaphysics, 312. Minister of the Gospel, it is not found in
Scripture; if any be called, 74, 75, 298. Teachers are not to go before the
teaching of the Spirit, 84. The Popish and Protestant Errors concerning the
Grace of a Minister are rejected, 95, 103, 104. They are given for the
Perfection of the Saints, etc. 249. Concerning their Call, and wherein it is
placed, 271, 280 to 298. Qualities, 272, 299 to 317. Orders, and Distinction of
Laity and Clergy, 320 to 325. Of separating Men for the Ministry, ibid.
Concerning the Sustentation and Maintenance of Ministers, and their abuse; of
the Idleness, Riot and Cruelty of Ministers, 327 to 340. What kind of Ministry
and Ministers the Quakers are for, and what sort their Adversaries are for, 341
to 343. Minister of the Law; there was no doubtfulness concerning them under
the Law, 281, 305 306. Their Ministry was not purely Spiritual, and while they
performed it, they behoved to be purified from their outward Pollutions, as now
those under the Gospel from their inward, 280, 281, 306. Miracles; whether they
be needful to those, who place their Faith in Objective Revelation, 35, 36,
296. Moses, 190, 375, 378, 410, 447. Munster; see Anabaptists, their
mischievous Actings, 54. Music, 408. Mystery of Iniquity, 320, 380, 381.
N
Name of the Lord, 433. To anoint in the Name of the Lord, 479. Nero, 495, 496.
Noah's Faith had neither the Scripture, nor the Prophecy of those going before
him, 34. It is said of him, that he was a perfect Man, 255. Number; of using
the Singular Number to one Person, 526.
O
Oath; that it is not lawful to Swear, 515, 542 to 556. Obedience is better
than Sacrifice, 75. Object of Faith; see Faith. Ordinance; Sealing Ordinance,
412. Oil; to anoint with Oil, 445, 479, 483.
P
Papists; the Rule of their Faith, 55. they are forced ultimately to recur unto
the Immediate and Inward Revelations of the Holy Spirit, 65. What difference
there is betwixt the cursed Deeds of those of Munster, and theirs, 57 to 61.
They have taken away the Second Commandment in their Catechism, 80. They make
Philosophy the Handmaid of Divinity, 85. They exalt too much the Natural
Power, and what they think of the Saving Light, 177. Their Doctrine concerning
Justification is greatly vindicated, 197. Concerning their Manners and
Ceremonies, 276, 277, 290, 291, 294, 295. Their Literature and Studies, 308. Of
the modern Apostles and Evangelists, 323. Whom they exclude from the Ministry,
327. They must be sure of so much a Year before they preach, 330. They do not
labor, 338. The more Moderate and Sober of them exclaim against the excessive
Revenues of the Clergy, 333. Their Worship can easily be stopped, 373. Albeit
they say, None are saved without Water Baptism, yet they allow an Exception,
421. Of Baptism, 442, 443. Of the Flesh and Blood of Christ, 454, 455. Of an
Oath, 544. Parable of the Talents, 158, 167. Of the Vineyard entrusted, 156,
157. Of the Sower, 166, 170. Of the Tares, 492, 493. Paschal Lamb, the end
thereof, 459. Patriarchs, 449.459. Pelagians, 95. How we differ from them, 148,
443. see Light of Nature. Pelagius denied, that Man gets an Evil Seed from
Adam, and ascribes all to the Will and Nature of Men: He said, that Man could
attain unto a state of not sinning, by his mere Natural Strength, without the
Grace of God, 261, 262. Persecution upon the account of Religion, 502 to 509.
see Magistrate. Perseverance; the Grace of God may be lost through
disobedience, 241, 263 to 266. Yet such a stability may in this Life be
attained, from which there cannot be a total Apostasy, 267 to 270. Peter;
whether he was at Room. 56. He was ignorant of Aristotle's Logic, 85. There
were of old diverse Opinions concerning his Second Epistle, 70. Pharisees, 410,
464. Philosopher; the Heathen Philosopher was brought to the Christian Faith by
an illiterate Rustic. 312. Philosophy, 299, 312. Physics, ibid. Plays;
whether it be lawful to use them, 512, 515, 536 to 542, 570. Polycarpus, the
Disciple of John, 56. Pray; to pray for Remission of Sins, 260. Concerning the
Lord's Prayer, 364. To pray without the Spirit, is to offend God, 369, 540.
Concerning the Prayers of the Will in silence, 380. see Worship. Prayer; the
Prayers of the People were in the Latin Tongue, 309. Preacher; see Minister.
Preaching, what it is termed; the Preaching of the Word, 216, 325, 347, 348. To
preach without the Spirit, is to offend God, 369. see Worship: It is a
permanent Institution, 430. It is learned as another Trade, 325. Predestined;
God has after a special Manner predestined some to Salvation; of whom, if
the places of Scripture, which some abuse, be understood, their Objections are
easily solved, 152, 152. Priest; under the Law God spoke immediately to the
High Priest, 32, 51. Priest; see Minister of the Law, 279, 281, 284, 306, 349.
Profession; an outward Profession is necessary that any be a Member of a
particular Christian Church, 275. Prophecy, and to Prophecy, what it
signifies, 321, 322. Of the Liberty of Prophesying, ibid. Prophets; some
Prophets did not Miracles, 296. Protestants; the Rule of their Faith, 55. They
are forced ultimately to recur unto the Immediate and Inward Revelation of the
Holy Spirit, 65. What difference betwixt the execrable Deeds of those of
Munster, and theirs, 57 to 61. They make Philosophy the handmaid of Divinity,
85. They affirm, John Hus prophesied of the Reformation that was to be, 94.
Whether they did not throw themselves into many Errors, while they were
expecting a greater Light, 131. They opposed the Papists, not without good
cause, in the Doctrine of Justification; but they soon ran into another
Extreme, 200, 201. They say, that the best works of the Saints are defiled,
207. Whether there be any difference between them and the Papists, in
Superstitions and Manners, and what it is, 278, 279, 294, 295. What they think
of the Call of a Minister, 282 to 288. 294 to 299. It Is lamentable, that they
betake them to Judas for a Patron to their Ministers and Ministry, 307. Their
Zeal and Endeavors are praised, 309. Of their School Divinity, 313, 314. Of
the Apostles and Evangelists of this time, 323. Whom they exclude from the
Ministry, 325. That they preach to none, until they be first sure of so much a
Year, 330. The more moderate of them exclaim against the Excessive Revenues of
the Clergy, 333. Though they had forsaken the Bishop of Rome, yet they would not
part with old Benefices, 337. They will not labor, 338. Whether they have made
a perfect Reformation in Worship, 345, 346. Their Worship can easily be
stopped, 373. They have given great scandal to the Reformation, 403. They deny
Water Baptism to be absolutely necessary to Salvation, 421. Of Water Baptism,
441 to 443. Of the Flesh and Blood of Christ, 452 to 455. They use not washing
of Feet, 469. How they did vindicate Liberty of Conscience, 499. Some affirm
that wicked Kings and Magistrates ought to be deposed, yea, killed, 501. How
they meet, when they have not the consent of the Magistrate, 509. Of Oaths and
Swearing, 544, 545. Psalms; Singing of Psalms, 406.
Q
Quakers, i. e. Tremblers, and why so called, 181, 359. They are not Contemners
of the Scriptures, and what they think of them, 67, 71, 72, 82, 83, 84, 85. Nor
of Reason, and what they think of it, 144, 145. They do not say, that all other
secondary means of Knowledge are of no service, 26. They do not compare
themselves to Jesus Christ, as they are falsely accused, 138. Nor do they deny
those things, that are written in the holy Scriptures, concerning Christ, his
Conception, etc. 139, 215. They were raised up of God to show forth the Truth,
131, 132, 179, 194, 316, 317, 360. Their Doctrine of Justification is not
popish, 197, 206, 228, 239. They are not against Meditation, 368. Their Worship
cannot be interrupted, 372. And what they have suffered, 372. to 375. How they
vindicate Liberty of Conscience, 507, 508. They do not persecute others, 511,
512. Their Adversaries confess, that they are found, for the most part, free
from the Abominations which abound among others; yet they count those things
Vices in them, which in themselves they extol as notable Virtues, and make more
noise about the escape of one Quaker, than of an hundred among themselves, 514.
They destroy not the mutual Relation, that is betwixt Prince and People, Master
and Servant, Father and Son; nor do introduce Community of Goods, 516. Nor say,
that one Man may not use the Creation more or less than another, 517.
R
Ranters: The Blasphemy of the Ranters or Libertines saying, That there is no
difference betwixt good and evil, 251. Reason; what need we set up corrupt
Reason, 46, Concerning Reason, 57, 144, 145. Rebekkah, 358. Reconciliation; how
Reconciliation with God is made, 208 to 215. Recreations; see Plays. Redemption
is considered in a twofold respect: First, performed by Christ without us; and
Secondly, wrought in us, 204, 205. It is Universal. God gave his only Begotten
Son, Jesus Christ, for a Light that whosoever believes in him may be saved,
109.160, 161. The Benefit of his Death is not less Universal, than the Seed of
Sin, 108, 109. There is scarce found any Article of the Christian Religion,
that is so expressly confirmed in the Holy Scriptures, 118 to 125, This Doctrine
was preached by the Fathers (so called) of the first six hundred years, and is
proved by the Sayings of some, 125, 126, 127. Those that since the time of the
Reformation, have affirmed it, have not given a clear Testimony, how that
Benefit is communicated to all; nor have sufficiently taught the Truth, because
they have added the absolute necessity of the outward Knowledge of the History
of Christ; yea, they have thereby given the contrary party a stronger Argument
to defend their precise decree of Reprobation; among whom were the Remonstrants
of Holland, 110, 127 to 130. God has now rased up a few Illiterate Men to be
dispensers of this Truth, 131, 132, 180, 181. This Doctrine shows forth the
Mercy and Justice of God, 133, 151, 152. It is the Foundation of Salvation,
133. It answers to the whole Tenor of the Gospel-Promises and Threats, ibid. It
magnifies and commends the Merits and Death of Christ, ibid. It exalts above
all the Grace of God, ibid. Overturns the false Doctrine of the Pelagians,
Semi-pelagians, and others, who exalt the Light of Nature, and the Freedom of
Man's Will 124. It makes the Salvation of Man solely to depend upon God; and
his Condemnation wholly, and in every respect, to be of himself, ibid. It takes
away all ground of Despair, and feeds none in Security, ibid. It commends the
Christian Religion among Infidels, ibid. It shows the Wisdom of God, 135. And
it is established, though not in Words, yet by Deeds even by those Ministers,
that oppose this Doctrine, ibid. It derogated not from the Atonement and
Sacrifice of Jesus Christ, but does magnify and exalt it, 141. There is given
to every one (none excepted) a certain Day and Time of Visitation, in which it
is possible for them to be saved, 132, 153 to 160. The Testimony of Cyrill
concerning this thing, 159. It is explained what is understood, and not
understood by this day, 136.137. To some it may be longer to others shorter,
ibid. Many may outlive their Day of Visitation, after which there is no
possibility of Salvation to them, ibid. Some Examples are alleged, ibid. The
Objections, and those places of Scripture, which others abuse, to prove, That
God incites Men necessarily to sin, are easily solved, if they be applied to
these Men, after the time of their Visitation is past, 137, 152, 153. There is
given to every one a measure of the Light, Seed, Grace, and Word of God,
whereby they can be saved, 132, 133, 152, 153, 166 to 174. which is also
confirmed by the Testimonies of Cyrillus and others, 164 to 173. What that
Light is, see Light: Many though ignorant of the outward History, yet have been
sensible of the Loss that came by Adam, which is confirmed by the Testimonies
of Plato, and others, 191, 192. Many have known Christ within, as a Remedy to
redeem them, though not under that denomination; witness Seneca, Cicero, and
others, 191, 192, 193. yet all are obliged to believe the outward History of
Christ, to whom God brings the Knowledge of it, 142. Reformation; Wherein it
is not placed 282, 283. Mechanic Men have contributed much to it, 327. What
has been pernicious to it, 4^6. Relation; see Quakers. Religion. The Christian
Religion, see Christianity, how it is made odious to Jews, Turks and Heathens,
454. Remonstrants of Holland (see Arminians) Redemption: They deny absolute
Reprobation, 56. How we differ from them, 148. They exalt too much the Natural
Power and free Will of Man, and what they think of the Saving Light, 177. Their
Worship can easily be stopped, 373. Reprobation, see also Redemption: what
absolute Reprobation is, is described, 110, 111. Its Doctrine is horrible,
impious and blasphemous, 111 to 116. It is also so called by Lucas Osiander,
128. It Is new Doctrine, and Augustine laid the first foundation thereof, which
Dominicus, Calvin, and the Synod of Dort, maintained, 112, 128, 129. Also
Luther, whom notwithstanding Lutherans afterward deserted, ibid. It is
injurious to God, and makes him the Author of Sin. Proved by the Sayings of
Calvin, Beza, Zanchius, Paraeus, Martyr, Zwinglius, and Piscator, 113. It makes
the Preaching of the Gospel a mere Mock and Illusion, 115. It makes the coming
of Christ, and his Propitiatory Sacrifice to have been a Testimony of God's
Wrath, ibid. See 116. Revelation; God always manifested himself by the
Revelations of the Spirit, 4, 29, 30, 62. They are made several ways, 4. They
have been always the formal Object of Faith, and so remain, ibid. 32 to 48. And
that not only Subjectively, but also Objectively, 48, 49, 50. They are simply
necessary unto true Faith, 4, 18, 54, 64. They are not uncertain, 52, 53, 54.
Yea it is horrible Sacrilege to accuse them of uncertainty, 44, 45. The
Examples of the Anabaptists of Munster do not a whit weaken this Doctrine, 54,
57, 58, 61. They can never contradict the holy Scripture, nor found Reason, 4,
62, 86. They are evident and clear of themselves, nor need they another's
Testimony, 4, 62, 63. They are the only, sure, certain and unmovable Fountain
of all Christian Faith, 64. Carnal Christians judge them nothing necessary;
yea, they are hissed out by the most part of Men, 19. Of Old none were esteemed
Christians, save those that had the Spirit of Christ; but now adays he is
termed an Heretic, who affirms, that he is led by it, 45. The Testimonies of
some, concerning the necessity of these Revelations, 21 to 24.44, 45. By whose
and what devices they have been brought out of use, 131. Revenge; see War, 556,
557, 558. Rule of Faith and Manners; see Scripture. Rustic; the poor Rustick's
Answer to the proud Prelate, 293. He brought a Philosopher unto the Christian
Faith, 312.
S
Sabbath, 349, 350. Sacraments; of their Number, Nature, etc. how much
Contention there has been; and that the word Sacrament is not found in
Scripture, but borrowed from the Heathens, 411, 442. Its definition will agree
to many other things, 412. Whether they confer Grace, 483. Salvation; without
the Church there is no Salvation, 273. Samaria; the Woman of Samaria, 460.
Sanctification, see Justification. Saxony; the Elector of Saxony, of the
Scandal he gave to the Reformation, by being present at the Mass, 403.
Sceptick, 311. School; without the School of Christ nothing is learned, but
mere Talk, and a Shadow of Knowledge, 21, 22, 23. Whether public Schools be
necessary, 309. Scripures of Truth, whence they proceeded, and what they
contain, 67, 68. They are a declaration of the Fountain, and not the Fountain
it self, ibid. They are not to be esteemed the adequate primary Rule of Faith
and Manners, but a secondary, and subordinate to the Holy Spirit, and why, 67
to 94, 297. Their Certainty is only known by the Spirit, 67, 68, 275. They
testify, that the Spirit is given to the Saints for a Guide, 67, 81, 82, 87,
to 93. Their Authority depends not upon the Church, or Council, nor upon their
Intrinsic Virtue, but upon the Spirit; nor is it subjected to the corrupt
Reason of Men but to the Spirit, 67, 84. The Testimonies of Calvin, the French
Churches, the Synod of Dort, and the Divines of Great Britain at Westminster,
concerning this Thing, 69, 70. The Contentions of those, that seek the
certainty of the Scriptures from something else than the Spirit, ibid. Diverse
Opinions of the Fathers (so called) concerning some Books, ibid. Concerning the
taking away, and the corruption of some places; the Translation, Transcription,
and various Lections of the Hebrew Character, and of the Greek Books, the
interpretation of the Septuagint, concerning the Hebrew Books, and of admitting
or rejecting some Books, 80, 81, 82. Of the difficulty in their Explanation,
85, 86. Augustine's judgment concerning the Authors of the Canonick Books, and
concerning the Transcription and Interpretation, 82, 83. The use of them is
very profitable and comfortable, 71, 85. The unlearned and unstable abuse them,
85. There is no necessity of Believing the Scripture to be a filled up Canon,
92. Many Canonick Books, through the injury of time, lost, ibid. Whether it can
be proved, by Scripture, that any Book is Canonical, 92, 93. They were sometime
as a sealed Book, 309. To understand them, there is need of the help and
revelation of the holy Spirit, 21, 22, 23. No Man can make himself a Doctor of
them, but the holy Spirit, ibid. Sect; the Ignatian Sect loves Literature,
310. They call those that are sent unto India, Apostles, 324. Seed of
Righteousness, 367. the Seed of Sin; see Sin Redemption. Self denial, 366.
Semi-pelagians, their axiom, Facienti quod in se est Deus non denega^ gratiam,
127. Servant; whether it be lawful to say, I am your Humble Servant, 524.
Servetus, 505. Shoemaker, he disputes with the Professor, 310, 311. Silence,
see Worship. Simon Magus, 331. Sin, see Adam, Justification; it shall not have
Dominion over the Saints, 73. The Seed of Sin is transmitted from Adam unto all
Men; but it is imputed to none, no not to Infants, except they actually join
with it by sinning, 94, 95, 103 to 106. And this Seed is often called Death,
108. Original Sin, of this phrase the Scripture makes no mention, ibid. By
virtue of the Sacrifice of Christ we have Remission of Sins, 141, 203.
Forgiveness of Sins among the Papists, 199. A freedom from actual Sin is
obtained, both when, and how, and that many have attained unto it, 241 to 262.
Every sin weakens a Man in his Spiritual Condition, but does not destroy him
altogether, 243. It is one thing not to sin, another thing not to have sin,
256, 257. Whatsoever is not done through the Power of God is sin, 309. Singing
of Psalms, 400 Socinians, see Natural (...), their Rashness is reproved, 41.
They think Reason is the chief Rule and Guide of Faith, ibid. 55. Albeit many
have abused Reason, yet they do not say, that any ought not to use it; and how
ill they argue against the Inward and Immediate Revelations of the Holy Spirit,
54 to 57. Yet they are forced ultimately to recur unto them, 65. They exalt too
much their Natural Power, and what they think of the Saving Light, 177. Their
Worship can easily be stopped, 373. Son of God; see Christ, Knowledge,
Revelation. Soul; the Soul has its Senses, as well as the Body, 23. By what it
is strengthened and fed, 369, 457. Spirit, the Holy Spirit; see Knowledge,
Communion, Revelation, Scriptures; unless the Spirit sit upon the Heart of the
Hearer, in vain is the Discourse of the Doctor, 22, 36. The Spirit of God
knows the things of God, 29. Without the Spirit, none can say, that Jesus is
the Lord, 22, 29, 30. He rested upon the Seventy El^s and others, 33. He
abides with us for ever, 38, 39. He teaches, and brings all things to
remembrance, and leads into all Truth, 40, 41, 47, 48, 49, 67, 68. He differs
from the Scriptures, 40, 41. He is God, ibid. He dwells in the Saints, 41, to
47. Without the Spirit Christianity is no Christianity, 42, 55, 70. Whatsoever
is to be desired in the Christian Faith, is ascribed to him, 43. By this Spirit
we are turned unto God, and we triumph in the midst of Persecutions, 43. He
quickens, etc. 43. An observable Testimony of Calvin, concerning the Spirit,
44, 45, 46, 69. It is the Fountain and Origin of all Truth and right Reason,
62. It gives the Belief of the Scriptures, which may satisfy our Consciences,
69. His Testimony is more excellent than all Reason, 69. He is the chief and
principal Guide, 79. He reasons with, and striveth in Men, 154. Those that
are led by the Spirit, love the Scriptures, 83, 275. He is, as it were, the
Soul of the Church; and what is done without him, is vain and impious, 310. He
is the Spirit of Order, and not of Disorder, 318, Such as the Spirit sets apart
to the Ministry, are heard of their Brethren, 320. It is the Earnest of our
Inheritance. 78. Spiritual Iniquities, 362. Spiritual Discerning, 493 Stephen
spoke by the Spirit, 43. Suffering; how Paul filled up that which was behind of
the Afflictions of Christ; how any are made partakers of the Sufferings of
Christ, and conformable to his Death, 254. Superstition, 344, 345. Whence
Superstitions sprung, 363, 410, 442. Supper; see Communion, Bread; it was of
old administered even to little Children and Infants, 484.
T
Tables, 474. Talent; one Talent is not at all insufficient of it self; the
Parable of the Talents, 158, 167. Those that improve their Talents well, are
called Good and Faithful Servants, 230. He that improved well his two Talents,
was nothing less accepted, than he that improved his five, 243. Talk; see
Plays. Taulerus was instructed by the poor Laick, 300. He tasted of the Love of
God, 351. Testimony; see Spirit. Theseus his Boat, 326. Thomas of Kempis, 351.
Tithes were assigned to the Levites, but not to the Ministers of this day, 329.
Titles; it is not at all lawful for Christians to use those Titles of Honor,
Majesty, etc. 515, 519 to 529, Tongue; the knowledge of Tongues is laudable,
308, 309. Tradition, how insufficient it is to decide, 56. It is not a
sufficient ground for Faith, 483. Translations; see Bible. Truth; there is a
difference betwixt what one says of the Truth, and that which the Truth it
self, interpreting it self, says, 21. Truth is not hard to be arrived at, but
is most nigh, 21. Turks, among them there may be Members of the Church, 273,
274.
V
Vespers, 351. Voices, outward Voices; see Faith, Miracles.
W
War; that it is not lawful for Christians to resist Evil, nor wage War, 515,
556, to 569. Washing of Feet, 468, 469. William Barclay, 501. Woman; a Woman
can preach, 320, 328. Luther also, 284. Word; the Eternal Word is the Son: It
was in the beginning with God, and was God: It is Jesus Christ, by whom God
created all things, 27, 139. What Augustine read in the Writings of the
Platonists concerning this Word, 193. Works are either of the Law, or of the
Gospel, 231. see Justification. Worship; What the true and acceptable Worship
to God is, and how it is offered, and what the superstitious and abominable is,
343, etc. The true Worship was soon corrupted and lost, 345. Concerning the
Worship done in the time of the Apostasy, 350, 395. Of what Worship is here
handled, and of the difference of the Worship of the old and new Covenant, 346,
347, 375, 376, 377. The true Worship is neither limited to times, places, nor
persons, and it is explained, how this is to be understood, 347, 348, 382, 383,
384, 393, 394, 395, 426, 427. Concerning the Lord's Day, and the Days upon
which Worship is performed, 349, 350. Of the public and silent Worship, and
its Excellency, 351 to 385. Of Preaching, 385 to 392. Of Prayer, 392 to 406. Of
Singing of Psalms, and Music, 406, 408. What sort of Worship the Quakers are
for, and what sort their Adversaries, 408, 409.
Passages of Scripture occuring in this Book.
Genesis. Nehemiah. Proverbs. Chap. Verse. Page Chap. Verse. Page Chap. Verse.
Page 1 2 32 9 20, 30 33 1 20, etc. 192 2 17 96 Esther. 24, 25, 26 157, 263 3 24
97 3 5 569 8 9, 34 192 4 6, 7 153 Job. 15 29 409 7 226 1 8 255 17 15 218, 250 5
22, 24 255 2 13 385 18 10 374, 433 6 3 154 8 13 240 20 22 361 5 97 9 20 218 21
4 369 9 255 24 13 188 27 17 383 Exodus. 27 5 218 28 9 398 13 8, 9 459 28 28 317
30 6 94 23 7 218 32 21, 22 525, 569 Canticles. 34 6 154 37 22 521 1 3 433
Leviticus. 38 2 314 Isaiah. 19 2, 3, 6 547 Psalms. 1 13 409 Numbers. 14 3 99
16, 17 382 11 25, 29 33 17 14 123 2 4 561 14 18 154 21 5 521 10 521
Deuteronomy. 25 3 361 3 534 4 2 94 27 14 ibid 5 2, 4 156 6 13 546 29 4 521 23
218 10 12, 13, 20 ibid 37 7, 9, 34 361 8 20 87 13 5, 9 493, 494 51 11, 12 33 10
20 354 14 23 547 53 2 99 13 11 123 I Samuel. 54 3 433 24 14 521 2 30 523 63 1,
8 521, 542 26 3 354 10 12 357 86 15 154 10 521 I Kings. 96 6 521 30 18 154, 361
8 46 257 110 3 492 40 31 361 19 18 274 4 549 42 23 ibid I Chronicles. 118 22
179 45 23 551 29 11 521 119 11 258 48 16 33 Ezra. 139 7 33 49 6 184 9 4 385 55
4 171 Chap. Verse. Page Chap. Verse. Page Chap. Verse. Page 56 11 331, 343 Daniel.
23 512 59 2 209, 244 4 30 521 11 27 27 21 49 Hosea. 30 254 64 6 135 4 9 279 12
35, 36 538 65 16 550 12 6 361 48 185 25 561 Amos. 13 166 66 3 409 2 13 143 14
258 Jeremiah. 5 18 164 18, 19 132 2 13 46 Micah. 31, 32 170 3 11 218 3 5, 11
341 38 to 41 492 14 274 5 333 15 6, 9 410 7 4 290 4 3 561 13 512 10 3 512 6 8
169 16 27 243 14 12 409 Zachariah. 18 7 123 14, 15 341 3 8 361 20 383, 384 15
15 154 Wisdom. 32, 34 157 17 9 98 2 159 19 567 18 9, 10 157 Matthew. 20 25, 26,
27 342 23 6 205 3 8 239 21 33 156 21 341 11 415 42 179 29 171 15 431 23 5, 6, 7
342 30, 31, etc. 342 5 230 8, 9, 10 ibid 32 343 33, 34 542 22 545 27 15 341 38
to 48 557 37 157 31 33 50 43 560 24 27 148 38, 39, 40 551 48 552 42 361, 396
Lamentations. 6 20, 25 535, 541 25 167 3 25 361 7 12, 13 486 13 361 Ezekiel. 16
100 15 132 14 1 385 21 226 21, 23 230 16 6 204 29 486 26 158 18 20 105 8 5 564
30 230 32 108 9 13 429 26 26 459, 466 20 1 385 10 1, 5 341 41 361, 370 33 11
108, 114, 122 5, 6 306 52 561 8 271, 342 28 436 12 to 18 260 14 335 18 4^^ 34
2, 3, 8 343 16 490 19 424 36 25, 40 551 20 341, 387 Chap. Verse. Page Chap.
Verse. Page Chap. Verse. Page Mark. 21 36 370, 393 10 1 282 3 33, 34 285 396 12
19 123 4 166 22 19 459, 466 63 163 1 387 36 566 40 158 12 158 John 47 122 8 34
562 1 449 8 3, 4, etc. 467 12 1 156 1, 2, 3 27 14 445 10 179 7 171 17 229, 252
13 11 341, 387 9 160 14 6 27 33 370, 396 12 449 16 39 33, 35, 37 361 3 3 175 17
ibid. 14 22 459, 466 5 440 123 38 396 8 148 26 46 16 15 118 16, 17 108, 122 15
1 to 6 293 Luke. 18 210 5 300 1 6 255 18, 19 263 18, 19 123 2 10 118 20 179 16
8 66 52 243 30 409, 423 13 46, 67 3 14 564 34 431 17 3 3 7 26 263 4 2 424 14
123 8 10 158 14 460 18 20 ibid 11 166 23, 24 377, 408 36 376, 561 9 55 491 5 39
87 Acts. 55, 56 486 44 512 1 4 361 1 22 27 6 27, 32, etc. 446, 447 4, 5 416 29
218 25 287 12 12 341, 387 35 447, 449 2 1 385 48 167 35 451 4 43, 341 13 3 210
45 79 17 328 34, etc. 157 53 452 41 434 14 31 552 55 451 42 473 16 15 218 56,
57 452 46 474 17 10 330 60 450 3 17 190 20, 21 176 63 43 4 11 179 18 1 176 66
450 6 2 474 19 41, 42 157 7 7 123 10 43 42 137 48, 49 16 7 48 379 20 9 156 8 26
123 51 363 17 197 9 31 409 8 Chap. Verse. Page Chap. Verse. Page Chap. Verse. Page
8 12 434 25 208 23 465, 487 16 ibid 4 15 104 I Corinthians. 22 405 5 107 1 2
294 9 4 510 10 224 14 428 18 434 12 94, 105 17 341, 409, 25 510 13 104 428 10
26 512 15 94 21 124 34 187 18 183 2 2 143 47, 48 434, 438 6 1, 2 261 3, 4, 5,
13 341, 389 48 ibid 2, etc. 252, 252 3, 4, 5 ibid 11 16 416 3, 4 421 5 429 13
38 434 4 409 8 190 46 156, 263 14 73 9, 10, 12, 14 29 15 20 445 16 245 9, 10 43
29 479 7 12, 14 100 12 124 16 15 434 19, 24 258 13 390 17 11 89 8 1, etc. 42 14
100 18 8 434 2 73 3 4 to 9 430 19 5 ibid 3 252 16 145 20 7 475 9 19 4 15 435 31
363 13 210, 266 18 342 32 73 14 19, 67 5 18 445 33, 34, 35 342 16 36, 78 6 2
124 21 9 328 26, 27 396 11 196, 215 23, etc. 483 30 220 12 448 26 18 162 38 269
19 42 23 26 158 10 8 170 7 19 229, 252 Romans. 8 73 29, 31 537 1 9 549 14, 15,
18 170 9 11, etc. 329 11 435 18 132 15 332 16 167 11 274 18 ibid 17, 28 137 12
2 529 24 552 18 263 6, 7, 8 76, 321 27 268 2 4 155 19 562 10 3, 4 450 9, 19,
11, 13 189 13 495 16 461 3 10 99 14 6 464 16, 17 445 20 231 11 551 17 452 24
226 17 480 21 452 Chap. Verse. Page Chap. Verse. Page Chap. Verse. Page 11 4 530 9
10 549 179 17, 20, 21 476 13 3 298 25, 26, 27 2^9 22, 23 477 5 77, 181, 225 6
12 560 23, etc. 466 18 397 26 459 11 252 Philippians. 26, 27 462 Galatians. 1 6
266 12 76 1, etc. 232 8 549 3 397 16 29 21 107 4 319 20 549 2 13 235 4, 5, 6 38
2 8 235 3 10 205 7 109, 132 20 234, 254 14 262 8, 9, 10, 13 44 3 27 409 15 506
9, 10, 11 41 4 236 Colossians. 13 301, 302 19 225 1 13 162 27, 29 320 5 12, 20
496 1 15, 16 27 13 2 341 24 561 23 132, 167 14 14, 15 398 6 6 329 24 206 30 390
14 124 27, 28 225 30, 31, 39 322, 323 Ephesians. 28 118 34 328 1 13 270 2 6,
16, 20 480, 481 16 13 361 14 413 8 112 II Corinthians. 2 103 12 409 1 22 270,
413 4, 5, 6 255 15 376 23 549 5 224 19 291 24 490 8 300 3 1 478 2 17 315 15 204
2 542 3 6 281 3 9 27 16 207 4 10, 11 224 4 11 319 4 2 362 5 11 280 5 37, 409 12
25^ 4 542 7, 11, 16 301 I Thessalonians. 16, 17 175 11 249, 319 2 5 32^ 18, 19,
21 212, 213 23 355 2 12 239 19 203 23, 24 226 3 13 250 6 14 245, 451 24 254 5 5
162 14, 15, 16 214 30 413 6 36^ 16 143 5 8 162 12, 13 32^ 14, 17, 18 291 11 512
17 39^ 10 4 560 13 132, 146 19, 20 32^ Chap. Verse. Page Chap. Verse. Page Chap.
Verse. Page 21 506 7 26 213 2 1, 2, 3 341 23 25^ 8 10, 11 5^ 3 315 27 550 9 9
253 1, 3, 14, 15 343 II Thessalonians. 10 482 20 124 1 5, 8 239 10 24 384 3 9
122 2 11, 12 263 11 37 15 155 I Timothy. 6 210 I John. 1 19 265 7 33, 34 1 1
308 2 1, 3, 4, 6 120 12 14 229 7 161 3 114 16, 17 137 8 256 8, 9, 10 535 22, 23
255 2 1, 2 123 11, 12 328 13 7, 8 38 2 to 6 252 3 2 3^3 17 324 15 124 2, 3, 4,
5, 6 341 James. 27 52 15 29^ 1 21 166 3 1 124 5 16 329 25 369 2 to 10 252 17
324 27 124 4 259 6 5, 6, etc. 341 2 24 229 5, 8 247 7, 8, 9, 10 334 3 9, 10 256
3, 9 244 8 342 4 1 561 7, 20 226 20 313 5 6 196 4 4, 5 114 II Timothy. 12 542,
543 9 121 8 2 341 14 445, 479 10 204 15, 16, 17 83 I Peter. 13 63, 78 17 250 1
5 266 5 3 254 4 5 361 14 512 6 63, 79 7 270 17 537 14 39^ Titus. 23 176 19 124
1, etc. 303 2 5 306 Jude. 7, 8, 9 341 21 142 16 342 10, 11 343 22 213 20, 25
397, 521 15 145 22, 24 204 Revelation. ^ 11 182, 3^ 3 3^4 535 2 9 290 14 205,
247 18 204 20 496 ^ 5 233 20 154 ^ 12 262, 269 7 219 21 409 16 287 10 486 4 7
361, 370 20 29, 463 Hebrews. 10, 11 302, 341 14 1 to 5 255 1 3 521 5 5 324 19
10 531 2 9 121 II Peter. 22 9 ibid 3 14 266 1 4 206, 244 14 229 4 12, 13 170 10
77, 269 18 93 5 4 305, 341 12, 13 84 6 16 551 16 521

FINIS.

