TYPOGRAPHIA. AN ODE, ON PRINTING.

Inscribed to the Honorable WILLIAM GOOCH, Esquire His Majesty's
Lieutenant Governor, and Commander in Chief of the Colony of VIRGINIA.

(...) sapientum v^ces, plena Exem'^rum vetustas; qu^e jacerent in Tenebris
omnia, nisi ^^terarum Lumen accederet.

Cic. Orat. pro Archia. WILLIAMSBURG: Printed by WILLIAM PARKS. M, DCC, XXX.

To the Honorable WILLIAM GOOCH, Esquire His Majesty's Lieutenant Governor, and
Commander in Chief of the Colony of VIRGINIA.
SIR,
THE following Piece, occasioned by the setting up a Printing-Press in
Williamsburg, justly claims a Title to some Share of Your Protection, as the
Subject Matter of it, the Art of PRINTING, owes to You its Patronage and
Encouragement; whence, by a natural Deduction, this ought as necessarily to
follow the Fate and Fortune of that, as Effects do their Causes.

IF upon the Prospect of a great many Advantages beyond-peradventure likely to
accrue to this Colony, from an ART so long wanting among us, I have not been
able to restrain my own Inclinations to write the ensuing Trifle, (the first
Essay of this Kind attempted here,) I hope this at least will make it the less
inexcusable, that I have said nothing herein, which, I am confident, will not
be readily assented to, by all who have the Happiness to live under the present
Administration, in this Colony: Unless, perhaps, this Exception be taken, that
where a disinterested and unprejudiced PATRIOTISM, (for I will not be ashamed
of the Word) of a Governor to his People, and a reciprocal Affection and
Obedience of them to Him is to be described, the Author of this Piece may have
wanted a Scale of Thought and Comprehension equal to the Height of the Merits
(...) the One, or the cordial Duty of the other; and that on such a Subject it
were better to be silent, than to say too little. I must confess there is some
Weight in the Argument; but I seek not to palliate my Imperfections of that
Nature, lest I should be answered with the same sarcastic Question as Albinus,
a Roman Author, was by Cato, on the same Occasion, Whether any one had
compelled me to write?

BUT, to obviate this Objection, I would only have Recourse to the Sense of
this whole Colony, so often and so heartily expressed in their several
Addresses; which I hope will freely remit me to the Moderation of ONE, whose
Judgment, though it must censure the Weakness, whose Modesty, though it must tax
the Boldness, yet His Candor will excuse the Endeavors of so humble a Talent
as mine, who could propose no other to myself by this present Undertaking, than
to manifest with what Sincerity of Observance and (...) to be thought,

SIR, Your Honor's Most Obedient, Humble Servant, J. MARKLAND.

TYPOGRAPHIA. AN ODE, ON PRINTING.
I.
YE NYMPHS, who over Castalian Springs,
With joint Command preside,
Who trill the Lyre's sonorous Strings,
Record the great and glorious Things,
Of Godlike Rulers, matchless Kings,
And poetic Numbers guide;
Daughters of eternal Jove,
Gently to my Assistance move:
Whether on Pindus' lofty Top you play,
Or, with Heav'n-kindled Fire,
M^ouian Notes inspire,
And show another Ilium's fatal Day;
Or, if upon the Elian Plain
You sing the Victor's glorious Deeds,
Where ^in^ar lashed his fiery-footed Steed*
His fiery-footed Steeds impatient of the Rein
II.
Or if your more exalted Will
To those sweet Seats of blissful Quiet leads,
Where gentle CAME the slow'ry Mead.
With genial Moisture overflows;
Or, where the Silver ISIS, smooth and still.
Does, like a bashful Bride,
Into the Arms of amorous THEM
Without a Murmur glide:
Hence ADDISON, the British Maro, rose,
Thence DRYDEN soared the highest Pitch of Fame:
Leave, leave awhile those blessed Abodes,
To view a new-arising Land,
A Land, whose fertile Plains,
And peaceful shady Woods,
May well demand
Your sweetest Notes, and loftiest Strains,
Where, with supreme Command, your own AUGUSTUS reigns.
III.
AUGUSTUS reigns;
His far-extended Sway,
Nor Length of boundless Land restrains,
Nor separating Sea.
But oh! much more extended is the Power,
Than over the Length of boundless Land,
Or over the Sea's remotest Strand,
Where Goodness and paternal Care
The Sovereign's native Virtues are,
And Subjects Hearts with Loialty run over:
Where envious Thoughts abortive die,
Nor Malice rowls her lowering Eye:
Where, with contending Zeal,
The Prince and People strive,
The Prince to make his People thrive,
Their Grievances to heal;
And all their good and adverse Fortune shares;
They, in Return to Him,
Pay mutual Reverence and Esteem,
And all his Power, his Honor, Happiness, is theirs.
IV.
Such BRITAIN is, -- "Oh happy envied Isle,
"Sea-wall'd Commander of EUROPA's Trade,
(Mournful VIRGINIA, sighing said)
"Placed in thy Sovereign's Smile,
"Whose Presence, like the enlivening Sun,
("Who, where his genial Rays appear,
"Productive of a fruitful Year.
"The laboring Hind's most greedy Hopes does bless)
"Does a diffusive Course of Goodness run,
"And ripens all thy Hopes into Success.
"Whilst I -- and yet thy eldest Forei^^ Care --
"Am numbed with Winters cold and bare,
"And toilsome Summers fruitless Harvests share.
"O happy were my Lot,
"Would that kind Sun dispense
"On me a nearer Ray of his mild Influence!
"I see his Light, I guess his Warmth, -- I feel it not.
V.
She said, she sighed, -- AUGUSTUS heard;
And straight, with willing Mind,
For her Relief prepared,
Her Sufferings to remove;
He knew the MAN designed
To be VIRGINIA's future Boast and Love;
He knew His native Virtue and His Worth;
Nor long He staid,
But all Things ready made,
With eager Haste He sent Him forth.
VI.
He came, He saw, and was beloved;
Like Lightning, quick, but strong,
An universal Gladness moved
Throughout the admiring Throng.
No sooner was He seen,
His calm, yet awful Look,
Majestic, yet serene,
The very Power of Prejudice removed,
And even His Silence spoke.
But when His graceful Tongue,
Copious of Reason, did display
To Happiness, our nearest, surest Way,
Even Party-Rancour died away,
And private Spleen.
We found whence Britain is so blessed*
Which had so much our Envy bore,
We found -- and grieved we found it not before --
We found, that when by Love and Peace,
A Prince has fixed his Throne
In every Subject's loial Breast,
No wonder Factions end, and Murmurs cease, --
Since now, what GEORGE is there, GOOCH here has amply shown.
VII.
Great REPRESENTATIVE!
What Thanks shall we return? What Honors show?
To whom our Staple does its Being owe,
By whom our Hopes revive:
By whom all Arts recov'ring live,
That erst like drooping Plants had dropped their Head*
And once again, with native Vigor thrive:
From whom VIRGINIA's Laws, that lay
In blotted Manuscripts obscured,
By vulgar Eyes unread,
Which whilome scarce the Light endured,
Begin to view again the Day,
As rising from the Dead.
For this the careful Artist wakes,
And over his countless Brood he stands,
His numerous Hoards,
Of speechless Letters, unformed Words,
Unjointed Questions, and unmeaning Breaks,
Which into Order rise, and Form, at his Commands.
VIII.
At his Commands they rise,
And cloth themselves with Sense,
Whether an ancient Law that dormant lies,
The sage judicious FIVE revise,
(Great is your Care, your Pains be blessed,
In all you undertake or do,
Ye separated FEW
(...) Genius of the rest*)
Or where the newer Acts commence:
Or where, on solemn Subjects to enlarge,
In more harmonious Word* they shine;
New Beauties crowding every Line
Come forth their Patron's CHARGE.
There, PARKS, thy Pains are lost -- We find
The Eloquence employs the Mind,
The Artist lags behind.
HIS laboring Thoughts with Wisdom teem,
And struggle with the mighty Birth;
Thy Art does like Lucina seem,
And only helps to send the ^^^fect Embrio forth.
IX.
Yet fair befall His Fame,
And may his Memory long
In latest Annals live,
Who first contrived the wondrous Frame,
That to dead Types supplied a Tongue,
And Speech to lifeless Characters could give.
O well was he employed the while,
And happy was the venurous Toil!
His Breast had compassed some great Thought,
Though formless yet, and void,
His busy Faculties were all employed,
How future Ages might be surest taught,
By old Examples, long since done,
What Paths to follow, what to shun,
How Virtue even in Death befriends,
And how Ambition ends,
How Socrates instructed, Caesar fought;
Long Time, his swelling Breast
The great Idea had oppressed,
'Till, fixed at Length, be in a Rapture bid,
Come up a glorious, great Design, -- And so it did.
X.
With less Expense of Care and Thought
Did the ancient Sage surmise
The Frame, (thus Epicurus taught)
And Order of the Earth to rise;
And first he told the Dance
Of Atoms through the expanded Vast,
With Accidents endu'd,
Of Figure, Gravity, and Magnitude;
By whose Cohesion fast,
As each to other did advance,
The homogeneous Parts allied,
Were in the strictest Closure tied,
And Matter hence arose*
Directed thence by sightless Chance,
The jumbled Mass fortuitous was hurled,
Where Hap a beauteous Fabric did compose,
And made an accidental World.
XI.
Thus sung Neocles' unenlighten'd Son,
When Nature, not improved by Grace,
But dimly on her Vot'ries shone,
And half concealed her Face:
Foolish Wisemen! Nor was their Sense
Acuter to perceive a Providence.
To Us, a surer Doctrine's shown,
Which Truth it self has spoke;
And faithful TYPES, by Time unbroke,
Through many Ages have continued down
The mighty Works to Them unknown
In Clouds of wilful Ignorance They erred,
Peccant in wild Conjectures of their own,
And each his own preferred.
Hence some the World eternal Thought.
To Discord some its Origin assigned,
Others a perfect Harmony could find,
Destructive of that Scheme;
All with delusive Fancies fraught,
Dreamt idle Whims -- Creation only was no Dream.
XII.
Happy the Art, by which we learn
The Gloss of Errors to detect,
The Vice of Habits to correct,
And sacred Truths, from Falsehood to discern!
By which we take a far-stretch'd View*
And learn our Fathers Virtues to pursue,
Their Follies to eschew.
And may that Art to latest Times proclaim
Its PATRON's Honorable Name.
As some Sybillin Book of old,
Had Sybils known the Times to come,
Wrapped in Futurity's dark Womb,
Would thus these happy Days have told:
"Revolving Ages hence,
"In Climates now unknown,
"A Ruler's gentle Influence
"Shall over his Land be shown;
" Saturnian Reigns shall be renewed,
"Truth, Justice, Virtue, be pursued,
"Arts flourish, Peace shall crown the Plains,
"Where ^OOCH administers, AUGUSTUS reigns.
FINIS.

