A SERMON AGAINST THE Dangerous and sinful Practice OF Inoculation.

Preached at St. Andrew's Holborn, On Sunday, July the 8th, 1722.

By EDMUND MASSEY, M. A. Lecturer of St. Alban Woodstreet.

From The Third Edition.

LONDON, Printed. Reprinted at BOSTON, for Benjamin Indicott, at his Shop No.
10 on the Town Dock. 1730.

A SERMON AGAINST THE Dangerous and sinful Practice OF INOCULATION, etc.
Job II. vii. So went Satan forth from the Presence of the Lord, and smote Job
with sore Boils, from the sole of his Foot unto his Crown.


WHEN the Enemy of Mankind was first permitted to tempt the Faith and Patience
of holy Job, his Estate and Family only were made liable to his Power, with an
express Command not to touch his Person.

This I look upon to have been almost as great a Temptation as the spoiling of
his Substance, or the slaughter of his Children, forasmuch as the common
Opinion of Mankind has usually esteemed the survival of any great Misfortune,
to be the greater Unhappiness of the two.

Under such Afflictions it is very hard for a Man to moderate his Passion; for
Grief is natural, and the excess of it easily run into: But to restrain and
curb it, and not suffer it to exceed its just Limits, to feel Sorrow as a Man,
and to assuage it from proper Considerations as a wise Man, is a strain above
Nature, and properly constitutes that passive Virtue, which we call Patience.

Thus our Hero, being plundered of his Estate, and bereaved of his Children,
reduced from Affluence to Beggary, and in danger that his Name, in the present
Generation famous, should in the next be clean put out Psalm. 109. 12.
after showing a just Resentment of these severe Dispensations, by rending his
Clothes, and other his Country Tokens of Distress; looking up to the Hand that
smote him, resolves all into the good Pleasure of that Providence, which was
about to resume what it had hitherto lent; and dutifully resigns what he had
thankfully received, and wisely used as a Steward only, without arrogating to
himself the Right of a Proprietor. Naked, says he, came I out of my Mother's
Womb, and naked shall I return thither: The Lord gave, and the Lord has taken
away, blessed be the Name of the Lord Job 1. 21.
!

The sudden Fall of this great Man may serve to show us, how unable all human
Means are of themselves to support us, when it shall please God to withdraw the
Blessing of his Protection: That we cannot be secure against the Changes and
Chances of this Mortal Life, in any Acquisition of Power, or Riches, or
Reputation, no not in keeping Innocence, and taking heed to the thing that is
right, without the Concurrence of Divine Providence: That God many times may
afflict without forsaking his Servants. And when it shall seem good to him to
call us forth, into the rough Paths of Suffering; if He shall please to minish
and bring us low Psalm. 107. 39.
; the Example of our Text will teach us, not to behave unseemly, or charge God
foolishly Job 2. 22.
, but with Patience and Meekness, and Resignation, and Contentedness, take what
He lays upon us, whose is the Kingdom and the Power, and to whom for that very
Reason we should give, even in such Circumstances, Glory.

The first Attempt of the Devil being thus baffled, and the Sincerity of the
Holy Man found to be established upon more solid Foundations, than what the
Accuser had urged to his own, as well as Job his Disadvantage; he next
insinuates that Job was a Man of so mean a Spirit, as to be glad of Life upon
any Terms; and so prevailing was this Passion in him above all other, that it
was the only Consideration that kept him in his Duty to God; for fear of being
cut off from the Land of the Living: Put forth now, says he, thine Hand, and
touch his Bone, and his Flesh, and he will curse thee to thy Face Job 2. 5.
. That is, afflict him in his Body, let some painful, some acute Distemper make
his Life burdensome, without any hope of Recovery, and his Hypocrisy will
display it self, and you will find he will throw off all the Regard he pretends
to have for God, and will openly arraign and blaspheme his Providence.

Upon this Insinuation, the Devil obtains Permission a second Time to try our
Man of Fortitude, what Impression bodily Pain, and loss of Health would make
upon him, whose Virtue under the Losses he had lately sustained, stood still
fixed and impregnable.

Indeed his Malice was limited, and the good Man's Life was to be secured, but
that was more than Job knew: So that the Adversary had all the real Advantages
against him, that he could possibly desire.

According to his usual Way, after being once defeated, he returns to the
Assault, with fresh Vigor and additional Strength. Temptations like Waves
break in upon us, one upon the neck of another, and commonly the last is the
biggest, and goes the farthest. 'Twas hard upon Job to be deprived of his
worldly Goods, harder to be bereaved of his Children, hardest of all when these
were gone, to be yet worse handled, buried as it were alive, turned into
Corruption before his Time, by the Infliction of a sore noisome Distemper,
which excluded him the Society of Mankind, and even then his Reputation, the
only uninfected thing left, as inhumanly treated as his Body. And so we are
come to the Words of our Text, So went Satan forth from the Presence of the
Lord, and smote Job with sore Boils, from the sole of his Foot unto his Crown.

The Silence of Scripture has given Interpreters Occasion of guessing at the
Distemper which the Devil here inflicted upon Job: But among them all, it
appears not certainly what it was. I will therefore desire to give an Opinion,
equally I think true, with any that has yet been taken Notice of: It is this,
That the Devil by some venomous Infusion into the Body of Job, might raise his
Blood to such a Ferment, as threw out a Confluence of inflammatory Pustules all
over him from Head to Foot: That is, his Distemper might be what is now
incident to most Men, and perhaps conveyed to him by some such Way as that of
Inoculation.

I do not at present see what can be advanced to invalidate this Supposition,
which I look upon to be as tenable as any that is extant about this Matter:
Having this additional Advantage, that the Scene of Action lies in those parts
of the World, whence this Practice is confessedly derived.

The Tempter's Aim was still the same as before; to make his Patient let go his
Integrity, throw off his Dependence upon Almighty God, and renounce that
Allegiance which is justly due to him, as Creator and Governor of the World:
To persuade him, that if any thing, he was the worse for his constant Obedience
to God, who made him so severe Returns for his faithful Services; and so by
Consequence, comparing his past Deserts and present Treatment together, to
infer, that God was a hard Master, or that he neglected to superintend human
Affairs; on rather to ask Pharaoh's Question, Who is the Lord? and so, lay in
his Misfortune a Foundation for Infidelity.

How in all these Designs the Devil was disappointed, it may be well worth our
Pains to enquire: In order to do this, it is not at all improbable to suppose
that the holy Man might duly consider these two Points.

First, For what Causes Diseases are sent amongst Mankind.

Secondly, Who it is that has the Power of inflicting them.

Let us then accompany him in the first Place, in finding out the Causes why
Diseases are sent amongst Mankind.

I take them to be principally two: Either for the Trial of our Faith, or for
the Punishment of our Sins.

There is nothing, generally speaking, that a Man is (...) ignorant of as
himself, nor so apt to be deceived in: His Love and Aversion are chiefly
complexional, and not so often as they should be grounded upon rational
Motives: I believe I may venture to affirm, that the Religion of the greatest
part of Mankind is perfectly accidental, according to the Country they happen
to be born in: Men carry their religious Profession as the Children of Ephraim
did Bows and Arrows Psalm. 78. 9.
, which they knew not how to use in the Day of Battle. The Day of Battle, in a
religious Sense, is, when any Afflictions overtake us, which in the most
ordinary Way come upon us in diverse Diseases and sundry kinds of Death. When
God thus pleases to vivit a sincere Professor, he marks him out for an Example
for the rest of Mankind to imitate; He sets him like a lighted Beacon on a
Hill, to alarm, to let his Light so shine before Men, that they may see his
good Works, and glorify their Father which is in Heaven Mat. 5. 16.
for him. Besides, since the Heart, as the Scripture says, is deceitful above
all Things Jer. 17. 9.
; it follows, that the best Men cannot be sure of themselves until they have
been proved; many Corruptions may remain unpurged, many Vices may lie
co^e^ealed in them, as well as many rewardable Virtues unpractised: For these
and the like Reasons, the Apostle bids us count it all Joy, when we fall into
diverse Temptations James 1. 2.
, as having so many Opportunities put into our Hands of mortifying all our evil
and corrupt Affections, and daily proceeding in all Virtue and Godliness of
living Office for Baptism.
. To see a good Man acting upon Principle under all Disadvantages, to see him
with Joseph esteem a Jayl no Evil, in comparison of committing a Sin against
God Genesis 39. 20.
; or with Daniel, account being devoured alive no Evil, in comparison of living
without God in the World for thirty Days Dan. 6 16.
; or with Job, holding a dreadful Disease no Evil, in comparison of letting go
his Integrity, are noble Trials and Instances of that saving, that justifying
Faith, which works by Love, and are recorded to show how greatly our Nature
is capable of being exalted in this Life, although common Humanity reaches not
so high.

Secondly, Diseases are sent, if not for the Trial of our Faith, for the
Punishment of our Sins.

Bad as the World is, it would still be worse, if the Wickedness of Mankind
should be so successful as to meet with no more Rebuke than it would willingly
suffer. But Sin, as it is always the deserving, so it is often the procuring
Cause of Afflictions in this Life, as appears from our Savior's Admonition to
the Man in St. John, whom he had lately healed; Sin no more (says he) lest a
worse Thing come unto thee John 5. 14.
: And he had already been punished with a bodily Infirmity thirty eight Years
together. St. Paul also gives the profane Behavior of his Corinthians as a
Reason why many of them were weak and sickly 1 Cor. 11. 30.
. After these Patterns our Chnrch advises those who languish upon the Bed of
Sickness, to examine themselves for what Cause this Evil is come upon them;
whether (as before has been urged) it be to try their Patience, and that their
Faith may be found in the Day of the Lord, laudable, glorious and honorable,
to the increase of Glory and endless Felicity: Or whether it be sent to them to
correct and amend whatsoever does offend the Eyes of their Heavenly Father
Office for visiting the Sick.
. For, if as the Scripture asserts, God does not afflict willingly, nor grieve
the Children of Men Lam. 3. 33.
; that is, afflict Men merely for the sake of correcting them, nor take
Pleasure in their Sufferings as such; it will follow, that to one of our
aforementioned Reasons, viz. either the Trial of our Faith, or Punishment of
our Sins, all his Visitations are to be attributed.

Some Sins it pleases God to strike immediately in a more remarkable Manner, as
he did Herod Acts 12. 23.
; while others do naturally and by degrees, advance to the Punishment they
deserve: Thus habitual Drunkenness and Adultery, will ruin Health, and impair
Estates, and induce a distempered old Age as the natural Consequence of a
riotous youthful one. This also gives us to consider, that Diseases are not
only judicially inflicted for past Offenses, but graciously also designed to
prevent future: And a little Recollection will tell a Man, whether he has not
often been kept Virtuous through fear of the Consequences, even when
Inclination has gotten the better of his Duty. Hence some are made Honest for
fear of a Prison; others continue Chaste for fear of Infection; a great many
are Just for fear of losing their Character; and no doubt several are Religious
more out of fear of going to Hell, than any thing else. So that we see the
worst of evils have their Use, and in this Sense, and by proper Reflections, we
may make a Moral of the Devil himself.

Should all Restraints of this Sort be taken away, were there no fear of
Punishment in this Life, nor belief of any in the next; should Iniquity and
Reputation be joined together, and Health be Handmaid to Uncleanness; we may
conjecture from present Disorders, how mightily they would increase, and
irremoveably be established; so that we have good Reason to bless and praise
Almighty God for the wholesome Severities ordained for Offenders, without
which, the World would be a much more uncomfortable Place to live in, than it
is at present. And this brings me to the second Consideration, which is,

Secondly, Who it is that has the Power of inflicting Diseases upon us.

Our Text indeed ascribes Job's Distemper to the Power of the Devil; but the
foregoing Verse shows that Power to have been deligated to him, and limited by
Almighty God, who alone being Omnipotent, the Powers that be, whether Natural
or Political), must all be derived from him. It Is true, he has communicated
several Parts of his Sovereignty to the Sons of Men, but still the Exercise of
it will ultimately be resolved into his Permission. And it is as true, that
there are several Branches of Authority, which he has reserved to himself, in
displaying of which, he acts upon Prerogative, and without human Intervention.
I choose to Instance in the Infliction of Diseases, which I will attempt to
prove are utterly unlawful to be inflicted by any who profess themselves
Christians. Indeed where the Doctrines of Salvation are not known, and a
regular Dependence upon Providence is postponed to the absurd belief of a
Fatality; there it is no wonder to see Men give into impious or unreasonable
Practices: But in a Country where better Principles are established, where
God's Government of the World is for the most Part undisputed, and slavish
implicit Belief happily superseded by rational Enquiries; in such a Place,
methinks, Men cannot easily be reconciled to a Practice, which abuses their
Understanding, as well as insults their Religion; and if the received Notions
of God's Providence be just, has its Foundation in Ignorance, and must be
maintained (if at all) by Presumption.

The Holy Scriptures give us frequent Instances of God's giving Power unto Men
to heal Diseases; and by his Blessing a Power is still continued: But that one
was ever granted to inflict Diseases, will I think hardly appear; unless in the
Case of Moses with the Egyptians Exodus 9. 10.
, and Elisha with his Servant Gehazi 2 King. 5. 27.
But both these Cases were miraculous, and of God's own immediate Appointment,
to vindicate the Honor of his Servants the Prophets, and for the Punishment of
Sacrilege and Idolatry, and cannot be drawn into Precedent by any not invested
with the same Character and Authority. Men may, and have invented Wracks and
Tortures for each other, but no Man, let his Crimes be what they will, was ever
yet condemned to an immediate Sickness, or sentenced to lie languishing in a
Fever, for want of a sufficient Authority, which no body but a present Set of
adventurous Practitioners have of late pretended to assume.

It will easily be granted, therefore, that such a Procedure, for want of a
competent Authority, is unlawful: That if Diseases, as beforementioned, are
sent unto us for the Trial of our Faith, or the Punishment of our Sins; He
alone to whom our Faith must approve it self, and our Sins are manifest, has
properly the Power of inflicting them.

Remembering then our Text, I shall not scruple to call that a Diabolical
Operation, which usurps an Authority founded neither in the Laws of Nature or
Religion, which tends in this Case to anticipate and banish Providence out of
the World, and promotes the increase of Vice and Immorality.

That a modern Practice has a direct tendency to all this, I offer the
following Considerations to evince.

1. A Natural or Physical Power does not always infer a Moral one: That is to
say, a Man cannot lawfully do every Thing that is in his Power to do. Thus we
abstain from Acts of Injustice and Oppression, although they may be gainful to
our selves, out of regard to Morals, notwithstanding they lie within the
Compass of our Abilities. Thus the Apostle advises us, Not to let our Good be
evil spoken of Romans 14. 16.
; that is, not to do any unwarrantable Action, for the sake of any subsequent
Benefit: Because the end, however good intentionally, can never justify in Law,
nor sanctify in Religion, the use of Means that are bad, to come at it: But on
the contrary, the use of bad Means designedly, corrupts the Morality of the
intended Good: For to make an Action Good, it is necessary that all its Parts,
be Lawful, Innocent, and Good also; whereas the Depravity of any One, is
sufficient to denominate that whole Action, Evil: Now the Apostle forbids us to
do Evil, though Good should come of it Romans 3. 8.
, upon Pain of Damnation, which absolutely prohibits all unjustifiable Arts and
Practices, be the Event never so beneficial and desirable; so that although we
have a Power to give a Man a Disease, that is, though we know the Way how it may
be done; since a bare Power or Knowledge, does not infer the Morality of so
doing; 'till that is ascertained, we ought to forbear all Experiments of that
sort: For even Uncertainty and Doubting in moral or religious Cases, lays a
positive, or at least a prudent Restraint upon Practice, because, as the
Apostle says, Whatsoever is not of Faith, is Sin Romans 14. ult.
. The Patient of our Text, at the Verse but one following, refuses to procure a
Good to himself at the price of a Sin. Had he followed the Advice there given
him, it might perhaps have eased him of his present Pain, and freed him from
future Apprehensions, but still the Remedy would have been worse than the
Disease, and what the foolish Prescriber would have given for good Physic, the
unhappy Patient would have found miserable Divinity.

2. The Good of Mankind, the seeking whereof is one of the Fundamental Laws of
Nature, is, I know, pleaded in Defense of the Practice I contend against: But I
must profess my self at a Loss, to find or understand, how that has been, or
can be promoted hereby: For if by Good be meant the Preservation of Life, it is
in the first Place a Question, Whether Life be a Good, or not? But if it be,
the Preservation of it will be found as little beholden to this Practice, as
any other Invention whatsoever. The confessed Miscarriages in this new Method,
are more than have happened in the ordinary Way: And if this be our Case now,
how much worse must it needs prove, if God for our Presumption, and
contemptuous distrust of his good Providence, should suffer this Delusion to
gain Ground, and these Physicians of no Value, these forgers of Lies, (as Job
expresses it Job 13. 4.
) to obtain and grow into Credit among us: Such I fear they may be accounted,
who so confidently tell us, what is impossible for them to know; namely, that
they who undergo their Experiment, are for ever thereby secured from any future
Danger and Infection: This is a bold Assertion indeed, and if such Experiment
were lawful, and consistent with the Rules of Christian Practice, I could wish
to God it were true also: But if neither of these be the Case, if the two
Requisites, Prevention, and Lawfulness be wanting; I believe I may venture to
affirm, that the most learned and judicious among the Professors of Physic
will never give into so destructive a Scheme. And I hope the Time is coming,
that these Venefici, these Spreaders of Infection, will be distinguished from
those of the Faculty, who deserve Honor, and not permitted to mingle with
them, as the Devil among the Sons of God Job 2. 1.
, lest like the Disease-Giving Practitioner, the Harlot whom Solomon describes,
they entice us, till a Dart strike through our Liver, and we haste to their
Snare, not knowing that it is for our Life Prove. 7. 23.
. Besides, I cannot apprehend how it conduces to the Preservation of Mankind,
to force a dangerous Distemper upon them, which possibly may never happen unto
them, and if it should, may probably be attended with very little, if any
Inconvenience; and as before has been hinted, is no Sucurity against future
Contagion. This is unequally to stake a Substance against a Shadow, to make Men
run into a real Danger, lest they should happen to fall into an accidental One,
and contributes no more to the Preservation of Mankind, than it would redound
to the Honor of a well provided City, to invite the Enemy and surrender now,
for fear lest sometime hence, they should possibly be surprised and taken. If
we now Thirdly,

5. Will weigh this Matter in a religious Balance, it will certainly be found
wanting, and deceitful upon the Weights. I look upon this Matter to be
forbidden by the sixth Commandment, as lascivious Thoughts are by the Seventh.
For it is always to be supposed, that a Law which forbids a great Evil, forbids
also every Thing that has a Tendency thereto. For which Reason, the very next
Chapter forbids all voluntary and causeless Wounding, Mutilation Exodus 21.
, etc. Because these Things go often farther than they are designed, even to
the taking away of Life: When this happens, they are to be considered, as no
other than a Breach of the Commandment: And it is but reasonable to imagine,
that when God forbad to take away Life, He forbad also the Commission of any
Violence, whereby Loss of Life might probably ensue. Though the Homicide be
casual, yet if the Cause of it be criminal, surely it will be no Excuse for it,
for it is observed, That although the Effect which follows (if mortal) is
beside the Intention, yet the Cause of it being not so, is sufficient to make a
Man guilty before God: Men being justly chargeable with those Effects, which
are the natural Results of those inordinate Actions, from whence they proceed.

It is written, Thou shall not tempt the Lord thy God Deuteronomy. 6, 16.
: This was our Savior's Answer to the Devil, when he would have persuaded him
to the Commission of a presumptuous Action. There are Angels, says the Tempter,
to take Care of you, so that you cannot possibly come to any Harm, then make
the Experiment, and cast thy self down. Now there is no great Difference
between this of the Devil and the Temptation which lies before us; both
intimate the Safety of the Practice, and both pretend the Blessing of God: Our
Lord's Reproof then will serve them both: No, says he, we must not presume upon
God's Protection, to expose our selves to any unnecessary Danger or Difficulty.
If Trials overtake us, he to whom we pray not to lead us into Temptation, will
make a Way for us to escape, that we may be able to bear them 1 Cor. 10. 13.
: But if we overtake them, if we seek for a Disease, and so lead our selves
into Temptation, we can have no rational Dependence upon God's Blessing: It is
with Difficulty we can sanctify our Afflictions in the Course of Providence, in
the Way of our Duty, and it is odds but we miscarry under them, when we bring
them upon our selves: If God's Blessing be withdrawn, it must unavoidably be
so; and such Circumstances wherein we have no Reason to expect his Blessing,
are, I think, by no means to be run into.

There is also a Tempting of the Lord our God, when Men rely too much upon
themselves, and put their Trust in one another, without calling upon God for
his Assistance, or praying to him to guide and direct them: Under these two
Temptations the Practice I condemn is fairly to be ranked. In the former, we
throw our selves off the Pinnacle; in the latter, we lean upon a Broken Reed,
which will go into our Hand and pierce it Isa. 36. 6.
: And it is but just in Almighty God, when we presume too far, to punish our
Rashness, when ' we misplace our Confidence to visit for our Idolatry.

The Honor due to a Physician, which the Son of Syrach Ecclus. 38. 1.
advises us to pay him, arises from his being an Instrument in the Hand of
Providenee, to restore Health, and to prolong Life: This he does by Virtue of a
wonderful Insight into the Nature of the Mineral and Vegetable World, by which,
it is probable, the Life of Man was spun out to so great a Length before the
Flood: It may be this was that Tree of Life which Adam, our first Physician, as
well as first Parent, was dispossessed of for his Sin; the Want of which,
together with the Destruction of the Virtues of Plants wrought by the Deluge,
may also be a Reason why Life is now so short and precarious. But we are still
to remember, that how great or extensive soever his Knowledge be, it is all the
Gift of God, and like all good Gifts, comes from above James 1. 17.
; and under this Reflection, he himself ought always to make Use of, and apply
it. There is a Time, says the same wise Man, when in his Hands there is good
Success Ecclus. 38 v. 13, 14.
: For, continues he, he shall pray unto the Lord that he would prosper that
which he gives for Ease, and to prolong Life. The Time of Success was thought
to be when the Physician should pray for a Blessing upon his Prescription. So
that formerly, we find that the Patient was prayed for, before his Case was
thought to be desperate. Now praying for a Blessing upon our Undertaking, must
suppose the Use of lawful Means, otherwise it is better to let it alone. And
although we live in an Age, wherein Forms of Grace are for the most part set
aside, and Usages of Piety run out of Countenance, yet I will venture to
recommend this old Practice, and affirm that the Lives of Mankind would be no
less secure, if all the Guardians of Health should speak Peace to our Houses
when they enter them, and pray for (I don't say with) all those committed to
their Charge; and to this Course of private Devotion add a little more
Attendance on the Public. But this by the Way.

It remains now in the last Place, to speak of this modern Practice, as it
tends to promote Vice and Immorality; I believe it will be readily granted me,
that there is no one Thing so universally dreaded, as the Disease, which this
strange Method of Practice pretends to elude. But there is this of Good
attending, that the Fear of it is an happy Restraint upon many People, who seem
not so sensible of superior Obligations, to keep themselves in Temperance and
Sobriety, and want no other Encouragement to give a Loose to their
Inclinations, than to be free from Apprehensions of this uncertain Visitor.
Most Men's Acquaintance, I am apt to think, will furnish them with Instances of
Persons who would gladly give into the Extravagance of these licentious Cities,
to the apparent hazard of Reputation and Fortune; did not this providential
Obstruction, like the Angel of the Lord to Balaam, stop them in the Way Number.
22. 31.
, or keep them at a safe Distance, in Health, Wealth, and Innocence. However
ugly Sin may be in it self, rightly considered, it is the fear of some such
Consequence as this, that frequently hinders the Commission of it, in spite of
all the prevailing Invitations of Fashion, Place and Opportunity. We ought then
to look upon this, and all other Discouragements to Sin, with a thankful Eye,
and bless that wise Providence which has mercifully set such Checks upon
Iniquity, that we may not run smoothly on unadmonished to our Ruin. Could then
these bold Practitioners lessen the Severity of this Disease; could they
entirely secure Men from Danger under it, could they say to the Distemper, as
Almighty God does to the proud Waves of the Sea, Hitherto shall thou come, but
no farther Job 38. 11.
; could they, I say, do all this, I do not see what Good Mankind would get in
the main; they would, it is true, have one Danger less to fear, but that would
be no real Kindness; forasmuch as it would be the Occasion of their running
into a great many more, and if they should happen to be more healthy, it is a
great Chance but they would be less Righteous.

If Security would make Men more diligent in their Callings, more just and
honest in their Dealings; or if they would look upon it as a Mercy, and be
thankful to God for the Enjoyment of it; I could wish the Generations of the
World were more healthy and strong; But the Negligence of Men in these
Particulars, even with all their Infirmities about them, makes it evident to
Demonstration, that these good Effects would not follow: If Danger should be
removed, we should be the less upon our Guard, and lie more open to other
Assaults of the Tempter, and give more easily into the Commission of many Sins,
which then would also more easily beset us. In a confirmed State of Health, we
are not so apt to consider our latter End: Or if we do, the Consideration does
not so much affect, because of its supposed Distance: But when we find it by
any Indisposition, or the fear of any, making nearer Approaches, when the
Pleasures of Health are abated, and human Enjoyments have lost their Relish,
when a Man's Spirits begin to sink, and his Body decay; this awakening Call is
much more persuasive than the Voice of Eloquence, or Force of Reason, to make a
Man improve the Thoughts of his Dissolution to the best Advantage. I have
before observed, that Life it self may not always be a Blessing: For that
depends entirely on the good Use that is made of it: It had been better for
them, if some Men had never been born; if others had died in their Infancy. No
Doubt but Providence has a good and beneficial Design in all those Deaths,
which we improperly call untimely; either the Good is taken to his Reward, or
the Wicked hindered from increasing his Punishment. What Reason then for this
saving, this anti-providential Project, this pretended Art of Preserving, which
thus tends in a great Measure to prevent that religious Watchfulness, which
Christianity, as a Warfare, requires? Should we not rather, with the same Mind,
endure our present Estate, whatsoever it be, as we pass through a hard Winter,
or a Time of foul Weather, taking it for seasonable and fit, because the wise
Author of Nature has so ordered and appointed it?

And now upon the whole, what is all this Discourse, but a Persuasive to depend
upon the good Pleasure of an all-wise God, rather than throw our selves into
the presumptuous Hands of foolish and unskilful Men; and with David to say, Let
us now fall into the Hand of the Lord, for his Mercies are great, and let us
not fall into the Hand of Man 2 Samuel 24. 14.
. If we believe that he who made the World does still guide and govern it, and
sees and knows every Action of our Lives; if we believe with the Apostle, who
says, God cares for us 1 Pet. 5. 7.
; or our blessed Savior, who assures us, that the very Hairs of our Head are
all numbered Mat. 10. 30.
; that is, the most minute Circumstances of Life happen not unto us, without
God's Permission or Appointment: If we believe this, the Sense of living under
such a kind and watchful Government, should give us a suitable Awe of it, a
reverential Regard for it, and a firm and steady Dependence upon it. Let me ask
the Apostle's Question: Do we provoke the Lord to Jealousy? or are we stronger
than he 1 Cor. 10. 22.
? Shall we presume to rival him in any Instance of Providence, find Fault with
his Administration, take the Work out of his Hands, and manage for our selves?
A dangerous Experiment this! and not to be made with Impunity, unless as we
thus pretend to be wiser, we prove our selves mightier than he. But let us not
be deceived with vain Expectations; he who perfectly knows our Frame, knows
what is fittest for us to endure: He who knows our Virtues; knows the properest
Time to try them; and he who knows our Sin, knows also the best Manner how to
punish us for it. Nothing becomes us like Submission, which if it be voluntary
will be graciously accepted, and rewarded as a Virtue; if involuntary, it will
become our Sin, and even at last we must submit.

Let the Atheist then, and the Scoffer, the Heathen and Unbeliever, disclaim a
Dependence upon Providence, dispute the Wisdom of God's Government, and deny
Obedience to his Laws: Let them Inoculate, and be Inoculated, whose Hope is
only in, and for this Life! But let us, who are better instructed, look higher
for Security, and seek principally there for Succor, where we acknowledge
Omnipotence: Let us not sinfully endeavor to alter the Course of Nature by any
presumptuous Interposition: Let us bless God for the Afflictions which he sends
upon us, and the Chastisements wherewith he intends to try or amend us;
beseeching him to grant us Patience under them, and in his good Time a happy
Deliverance from them Let us remember, that with him alone are the Issues of
Life and Death, Health and Sickness: Let the Ignorant and the Transgressor
place their Confidence elsewhere, but let us evermore believe, and practice as
if we believed, That the Salvation of the Righteous comes of the Lord, who if
also their Strength in the Time of Trouble: That the Lord shall stand by them
and save them, that He shall deliver them out of the Hand of the Ungodly (and
Unskilful) and shall save them, because they put their Trust in him Psalm. 37.
40, 41.
.

Now to God the Father, etc.

FINIS.
THE Reader will observe, that I meddle not in this Matter otherwise than as it
seems to me to be Irreligious. If he would be satisfied of the Danger and
Uncertainty of it in a Physical Way, let him consult Dr. Wagstaffe's admirable
Letter to Dr. Friend, and I dare promise him ample Satisfaction.




