Mr. Colman's Lecture SERMON upon the Arrival of His Excellency the GOVERNOR.
13 august 1730

GOVERNMENT the Pillar of the Earth. A SERMON Preached at the Lecture in
BOSTON, Before His EXCELLENCY JONATHAN BELCHER, Esquire Captain General and
Commander in Chief, etc. August 13th 1730.

By Benjamin Colman.

Isai. xxxiii. 6. Wisdom and Knowledge shall be the Stability of thy Times, and
strength of Salvation. BOSTON, in New England: Printed for T. Hancock, at the
Bible and Three Crowns near the Town-Dock. 1730.

GOVERNMENT the Pillar of the Earth.
1. Sam. ii. 8. -- FOR the Pillars of the Earth are the LORD's, and He has set
the World upon them.
THE Words are part of a raptrous and heavenly Song, uttered by a devout,
inspired and transported Mother in Israel, upon a great and joyful Occasion. If
the DIVINE ETERNAL SPIRIT please to inspire and speak by a gracious Woman, it
is the same thing to us, and requires our reverend Attention as much, as if he
raise up a Moses or an Elias, or make His Revelations by a Paul or John.

Samuel, the rare and wonderful Son of inspired Hannah, never outspake his
lovely Mother in any of his Prayers or Acts of Praise. Eli would have sat at
her Feet, and laid himself in the Dust, at the hearing of this flowing Torrent
of fervent Devotion from her beauteous Lips; And Saints through all Ages hang on
the heavenly Music of her Tongue.

Great things are here said of GOD, and of His Government, in the Families and
Kingdoms of Men; and such wise and just Observations are made, as are worthy of
deep Contemplation by the greatest and best of Men. Had She like Deborah been
the Princess of the Tribes of Israel, She could not have spoken with more
Loftiness and Majesty, with more Authority and Command; nor better have
addressed the Nobles and Rulers, the Captains and the Mighty Men; to humble and
lay 'em low before GOD.

She celebrates the LORD GOD of Israel Henry in loc.
, his unspotted Purity, his Almighty Power, his unsearchable Wisdom, and his
unerring Justice:

In the Praises of These She joys and triumphs, her Heart was exalted and her
Mouth enlarged.

She adores the DIVINE SOVEREIGNTY in its Disposals of the Affairs of the
Children of Men; in the strange and sudden Turns given to them; in the Rise and
Fall of Persons, Families and Countries.

She observes how the Strong are soon weakened, and the Weak are soon
strengthened, when GOD pleases: How the Rich are soon impoverished, and the Poor
enriched on a sudden: How empty Families are replenished, and numerous Families
diminished: All this is of the LORD; He makes poor and makes rich, He
brings low and lifts up: He raises up the poor out of Dust, and lifts up
the Beggar from the Dunghill; to set them among Princes, and make them inherit
the Throne of Glory; "For the Pillars of the Earth are the LORD's, and He has
set the World upon them.

Thus my Text is introduced as a Reason for those Dispensations of GOD toward
a Person, a Family, or a People, which at any time are to us most surprising
and admirable.

1. The things spoken of are great and mighty; The Pillars of the Earth. The
Earth is a vast Fabric* and in Proportion to its mighty Bulk must its Pillars
be.

The Metaphor is plainly taken from Architecture; as in stately, spacious and
magnificent Structures we often see Rows of Pillars, to sustain the Roof and
lofty Towers. But whether we apply this manner of Expression to the natural or
moral Earth, it is figurative and not literal.

The natural Earth has no Pillar. The Will and Word of GOD is its only Basis.
It seems to us who dwell on it fixed and immovable in the Air. It keeps it is
Place and Line there, as if it were set on some lasting solid Pillars, and
never moved at all.

We darkly Philosophise upon the Point, and talk of the Poles of Heaven; which
are more unintelligible to a common Audience than the Pillars of it. We speak
obscurely of the Earth's being fixed on it is own Center. And we discourse more
intelligibly of the secret Power of Magnetism which is in Matter; whereby
Bodies mutually attract or gravitate toward each other; By which the mighty
Globes of the Universe preserve their Distance, Motion and Order.

This seems to be the only natural Pillar of the Earth: The amazing Work and
Power of GOD. And the Planets which roll in the same Circle with us, have all
of 'em the same Pillars. That is to say, "All Bodies through the whole Solar
System attract or gravitate toward each other, with Forces according to their
Quantities of Matter.

But after all this fine Doctrine in our New Philosophy, concerning the
Centripetal Forces of the Sun and Planets; a plain Christian is much more
edified by the simple and vulgar Account which the sacred Pages give us of this
mysterious Thing Job xxvi. 7. Psalm xxiv. 2.
: "He stretches out the North over the empty space, and hangs the Earth upon
nothing! He has founded it upon the Seas, and established it upon the Floods.
Which is to say, "No Man knows how or where, this vast material Frame finds
it is Basis and Station.

Let us hear GOD again on the point, and say no more upon it; Job xxxviii. Who
is this that darkneth Counsel by Words without Knowledge? Gird up now thy Loins
like a Man; for I will demand of thee, and answer thou Me. Where wast thou when
I laid the Foundations of the Earth? Declare if thou have Understanding. Who
has laid the Measures thereof, if thou know? Or who has stretched the Line
upon it? Whereupon are the Foundations thereof fastened? or who laid the
Cornerstone thereof?

We see then that the natural Earth has no Pillars, in any proper Sense;
Neither has the moral Earth, ( i. e. The Inhabitants of it) any, but in a
Metaphorical Sense: And so the Princes and Rulers of it are called it is
Pillars; because the Affairs of the World ly upon their Shoulders, and turn
upon their Conduct and Management, in a very great Degree.

And thus the Text explains it self, and is to be interpreted from the scope of
our Context; which speaks of the Bows of the mighty Men, and of the Thrones of
Princes, and then adds -- the Pillars of the Earth. So that by PILLARS we are
to understand Governors and Rulers among Men; but not the Persons that bear
Rule, so much as the Order it self, Government and Magistracy. For the Persons
may be weak and slender Reeds, little able of themselves to bear up any thing;
and here and there they may fall; but the Order stands and does indeed uphold
the World.

2. The things said of these Pillars of the Earth are also very great: "They
are the LORD's, and "He has set the World upon them. That is to say, The Order
and Happiness of this lower World, the Peace and Weal of it, depend on the
Civil Government which GOD has ordained in it. All this is very elegant and
rhetorical, a high and noble Strain of Speech, upon the highest Subject that
belongs to this our Earth.

DOCT. THE Great GOD has made the Governments and Rulers of the Earth it is
Pillars, and has set the World upon them.
1. The Governments and Rulers of the Earth are it is Pillars. 2. These Pillars
of the Earth are the LORD's. 3. He has set the World upon them.
I. The Governments and Rulers of the Earth are it is Pillars.
The Pillar is a Part of great Use and Honor in the Building: So is Magistracy
in the World. One Style in Scripture for it is, Foundations and Corner-stones.
Where we read of the Chief Judges xx. 2.
of the People, in the Hebrew it is the Corners. We read also of the Psalm.
lxxxii.
Foundations of the Earth being out of Course. The meaning is, the Government
of it was so. Kings bear up and support the Inferior Pillars of Government, and
a righteous Administration restores a dissolving State: Psalm. lxxv. 3. The
Earth and all the Inhabitants thereof are dissolved: I bear up the 'Pillars of
it.

In like manner, Wise and faithful Ministers are Pillars in the Church: Which
is built on the Prophets and Apostles, JESUS CHRIST being the chief
Cornerstone, Ephesians. ii. 20. The Prophet Jeremiah was made by GOD an Iron Pillar:
And of Peter, James and John we read, that they seemed to be Pillars: Gal. ii.
9. They were deservedly so reputed, and truly so in the Church of CHRIST.
Famous are the LORD's Words to Peter, Matthew. xvi. 18. Thou art PETER, and on
this Rock will I build my Church. And when John had the Vision of the
New-Jerusalem, descending out of Heaven from GOD, it is said that the Wall of
the City had twelve Foundations, and in them the Names of the twelve Apostles
of the Lamb.

Now the Design and Use of Pillars in a Building is one of these two, or both
together: 1. For Strength to uphold it, or 2. For Beauty to adorn it.

1. The Governments and Rulers of the Earth are its Pillars in respect of
Strength to uphold and support the Virtue, Order and Peace of it. Pillars
should be made strong, and commonly are so; of Stone and Marble, Iron and
Brass. And it had need be a strong Rod to be a Scepter to Rule, Ezekiel. xix. 14.
Magistrates need be strong, for Government is a great Weight; and it is laid
upon their Shoulders. Moses felt the Weight and said, I am not able to bear
this People alone.

2. The Governments and Rulers of the Earth are it is Pillars for Ornament, to
adorn it. Pillars in a fine Building are made as beautiful as may be; They are
plan'd and polished, wrought and carved with much Art and Cost, painted and
gilded, for Sight* as well as Use. As the Legs are to a Body, comely in it is
goings: Such are Pillars in a stately Structure for Beauty to the Eye. It is
the allusion of the Spouse, recounting the Beauties of her BELOVED, Cant. v.
15. His Legs are as Pillars of Marble, set upon Sockets of fine Gold. A bold
and elegant Comparison, becoming the Pen of Solomon, who had built the Temple
of GOD with all it is Pillars. They represented the Strength of CHRIST and his
Stability, to bear the Weight of the Government laid upon Him; and also the
Magnificence of the Goings of GOD our King in the Sanctuary: Likewise the
Steadiness of the Divine Administration. So Those in power and Magistracy are
to be supposed, Men adorned with superior Gifts, Powers and Beauties of Mind:
Men that adorn the World wherein they Live, and the Offices which they sustain.
And then their Office adorns them also, and sets them in conspicuous Places,
where what is great and good in them is seen of all. -- To be sure, Government
and Magistracy adorn the World as well as preserve it.

1. Magistrates uphold and adorn the World, as Pillars do a Fabric, by
employing their superior Wisdom and Knowledge, Skill and Prudence, Discretion
and Judgment for the public Good. These Accomplishments are to be supposed in
the Civil Order, and they render 'em the Pillars of the Earth.

Wisdom is both Strength and Beauty, a Defense and Ornament. So Solomon shines
among Kings, for the Wisdom of GOD was in Him. GOD gave him Wisdom and
Knowledge exceeding much, and Largeness of Heart even as the Sand upon the
Seashore. Angels excel in Strength, and Rulers should be wise as the Angels of
GOD. The Government is laid on CHRIST because in Him are hid all the Treasures
of Wisdom and Knowledge. He is the Wisdom of GOD and the Power of GOD. As GOD
at first founded the Earth by his Wisdom, and by his Understanding established
the Heavens; so by the Communication of Wisdom and Understanding to some, He
preserves the Order and Happiness of Others on it. What is said of a House is
true of a State, "Through Wisdom it is builded, and by Understanding it is
established, and by Knowledge shall the Chambers be filled with all precious
and pleasant Riches: A wise Man is strong, yea a Man of Knowledge increases
Strength Prove. xxiv 3, 4, 5. 1 Cor. i. 24. Col. ii 3. 2 Samuel xiv.
.

But then, Is the Pillar for Ornament? What is more beautiful than Knowledge
and Wisdom? What more adorns a Man, a Place, a Country? The Queen of Sheba came
far to hear the Wisdom of Solomon, and Huram was as much struck as she was: 2 Chronicles. ii. 12. Blessed be the LORD GOD of Israel, who has given to David the
King a wise Son, endued with Prudence and Understanding, who may build a House
for the LORD, and an House for the Kingdom.

2. Integrity, Uprightness, Faithfulness added to Knowledge and Wisdom, makes
Men strong and beautiful Pillars, whether in Church or State. Every Man is
ready to pretend to a Competency of Wisdom, and as ready to proclaim his own
Goodness; but a faithful Man who can find? Prove. xx. 6. He is a rare and
beauteous Spectacle, as Moses, Joshua, Samuel, Jehojada, Hezekiah and Nehemiah,
in their Times, and to the End of Time. All that rule over Men should be like
to These, just Men Ruling in the Fear of the LORD; and then they are to the
World as the Light and Rain, without which the Earth must perish. As Darkness
vanishes before the Light, so a King that sits upon the Throne of Judgment
scatters away all Evil with his Eyes. DAVID, that Pillar of Israel, came into
the Government with that noble Purpose and Resolution, Psalm. lxxv. 3. When I
shall receive the Congregation, I will judge uprightly. So he fed Them in the
Integrity of his Heart, and led them by the Skilfulness of his Hands. GOD's
Righteousness and Faithfulness, Justice and Judgment, are the Foundation of His
everlasting Government, the Habitation of His Throne. See the Pillars of the
Divine Government, Psalm. xxxvi. 5, 6. Thy Faithfulness reaches to the Clouds,
thy Righteousness is as the great Mountains. Nor can the Kingdoms and Provinces
on the Earth stand, but on the like Basis of a just and righteous Humane
Government. Psalm. lxxii. 3. The Mountains shall bring Peace to the People, and
the little Hills by Righteousness. Both the Superior and Inferior Magistrates
shall minister abundantly to the Stability and Tranquillity of the State.

3. A public and enlarged Spirit for the common Weal and a single Regard
thereunto, without suffering our selves to be misled by private and selfish
Views: This renders Men Pillars to the World, in the Places wherein Providence
sets 'em. And so,

4. A Spirit of Peace and Love, Meekness and Humility, Candor and Gentleness;
whereby Persons are ready to unite their Counsels, and act in Concert with one
another; paying a just Deference one to another and preferring one another in
Honor; glad to receive Light from any one, and well pleased to reflect it from
them; all pursuing one End, as the many Pillars in a great House stand quietly
near to one another, and all help to bear it up: This Spirit of Power, and of
Love, and of a sound Mind, render men strong and beautiful Pillars of the
Earth. But if the Peace of GOD rule not in Men's Hearts; if their Passions shake
'em and they clash with one another; the House totters, the high Arches above
cleave asunder, and the Roof falls in; as when Sampson bowed the Pillars of
Dagons House, and buried the lewd assembly in one vast Ruin.

5. A Pillar implies Fortitude and Patience; Resolution, Firmness and Strength
of Mind, under Weight and Burden: Not to be soon shaken in Mind, nor moved away
from what is right and just; but giving our Reason in the Meekness of Wisdom,
and hearing the Reasons of others in the same Spirit of Meekness, to form an
impartial Judgment, and abide by it; But yet with Submission to the public
Judgment and Determination. The unstable are as Water, and more fitly likened
to the Waves of the Sea, then to a Pillar on Shore. And the irresolute,
discouraged and sinking Mind is at best but a Pillar built upon the Sand; which
falls when the Wind blows and the Storm beats upon it, because of its weak
Foundation.

There is a Passive Courage, ever necessary in an accomplished Ruler, as much
it may be as an Active. The Pillar stands regardless through the Weather beat on
it, or though Dirt be cast on it. True it will wear under the Injuries of Time,
but it looks still great, and stands while it wears away. The wise, the meek
and strong Moses stood as many Shocks, as ever Man did from an impatient,
murmuring, ungrateful People.

But this for the first Head; The Governments and Rulers of the Earth are its
Pillars.

II. These Pillars of the Earth are the LORD's.
The Earth is the LORD's and the Fullness thereof; the World and they that dwell
therein. All are GOD's rightful Propriety and Dominion. The Shields of the
Earth belong to Him. These are the same with the Pillars of it.

1. The LORD makes these Pillars, forms fashions 'em, polishes and adorns 'em.
He gifts, qualifies and furnishes all whom He calls out to public Service. He
makes the more plain and rough, and He orders the carved Work and Gilding in
his House. He, the Father of Light and Glory, gives Men their natural Powers
and Excellencies; and all their acquired Gifts are from Him. He looks upon
all the Inhabitants of the Earth, He fashioneth their Hearts alike, He
considers all their Works. In the Hearts of all that are wise-hearted He
puts Wisdom. Both Wisdom and Might are His: Counsel is His and sound Wisdom;
He is Understanding, He is Strength; by Him Kings rule and Princes decree
Judgment James i. 17. Psalm xxxiii. 15. Exodus xxxi. 3. Dan. ii. 20. Prove. viii.
14.
. He gave to David Integrity, and to Solomon Wisdom; and both were Pillars of
His framing.

2. Both the Order and the Persons are of the LORD's ordering, constituting and
appointing. Civil Government is of Divine Institution, and GOD commissions and
entrusts with the Administration whom He pleases. The great King of the World
has ordered a Government in it, and He raises up Governors, supreme and
subordinate. There is no Power but of GOD; the Powers that be are ordained of
Him. He puts the Scepter into the Hand, and the Spirit of Government into the
Heart.

3. The Pillars are the LORD's, for He disposes of them as he pleases; places
and fixes them where He will; rears 'em when He sees fit; and when He will
removes, or takes 'em down: Or if He has no Pleasure in them, breaks 'em to
pieces and throws 'em away. He removes Kings, and sets up Kings: For
Promotion comes neither from the East, nor from the West, nor from the South:
But GOD is the Judge; He puts down one and sets up another: He leads
Counselors away spoiled and makes the Judges fools: He loses the Bond of
Kings, and girdeth their Loins with a Girdle: He leads Princes away spoiled,
and overthrows the Mighty Dan ii, 21. Psalm. lxxv. 6, 7. Job xii. 17, 18.
.

Thus the Sovereign GOD forms the Pillars of the Earth, prepares 'em, sets 'em
up, ordains the Places and Times of their standing; takes 'em down and puts
others in their Room. He calls and uses whom He will, inclines and spirits how
He will, and improves to what Degree He will. They are His therefore, and His
is the Greatness and the Glory and the Majesty! And to Him it must be ascribed
both by the Persons endowed and raised by Him, and by Others interested in
Them: 1 Chronicles. xxix. 12, 13. Both Riches and Honor come of Thee, and in thy
Hand is Power and Might, and in thy Hand it is to make Great; and to give
Strength unto all: Now therefore, our GOD, we praise Thee, and bless thy Name
for ever and ever.

But to do the utmost Honor to the Civil Order among Men, and to give yet
greater Glory to GOD, let us come to the third and last Part of our Text.

III. GOD has set the World upon the Governments and Rulers, whom He has made
the Pillars of it.
The natural World is in the Hand of GOD, and is upheld in it is Being and Order
by his Power. The moral World is most upon his Heart, and governed in a Way and
Manner suited to the Nature and present State of Man. And as He governs the
Spirits of Men when He pleases by immediate Impressions on them; so as more
proper to the present Order and Happiness of Mankind, He has appointed the
Government of Men to be by Men. So the Peace, Tranquillity and Flourishing of
Places are made to depend on the Wisdom and Fidelity of their Rulers, in the
good Administration of the Government. While the utmost Misery and Confusion
befalls those Places where the Government is ill administered. The Reason is
given in the Text, "GOD has set the World on this Foot; it cannot stand on any
other Bottom. 'The Virtue and Religion of a People, their Riches and Trade,
their Power, Honor and Reputation; and the Favor of GOD toward them, with his
Blessing on them; do greatly depend on the pious, righteous and faithful
Government which they are under.

GOD has set: As well in the Nature of Things, as in his Word. Government is
not a Creature of Man's Lust and Will, but of Divine Constitution, and from a
Necessity in the Nature of things. The very Being and Weal of Society depends
thereon.

Government was not in the Original of it assumed or usurped by any one Man.
For Instance, Not by Lamech before the Flood, nor by Nimrod after it. Indeed
the Spirit of Tyranny, and the Lust of Dominion, seem to have began in them;
but Order and Rule was before them. Mankind naturally went into That, and These
were the Men who made the first Breaches on it; the One being of the Race of
Cain, the other of Ham; who have had some of their Likeness in every Place, and
through all Generations; that would turn the World upside down, and overthrow the
Foundations which GOD has laid.

In a word, Magistracy, like the other Ordinances of Heaven, stands by the
Power and Blessing of GOD; who effectually owns it and works by it, establishes
the Earth and it abides. He has graven it deep in he Hearts of Men, even as
the Desire of Happiness and Self-preservation. He has as much ordained, that
while the Earth remains Civil Order and Government shall not cease; as He had
sworn that Seed Time and Harvest, Cold and Heat, Summer and Winter, Day and
Night, shall not. Both the One and the Other equally continue to the World's
End, absolutely necessary to the Life, Comfort and Welfare of Mankind.

USE. I shall now make a few Reflections, by way of practical Inference and
Improvement.
1. See the Divine Wisdom and Goodness in Ordaining and Establishing a
Magistracy and Government in the World. It is one of the many great Instances,
wherein the SUPREME GOVERNOR of the World has taken Care for the universal and
perpetual Weal of it. And they that would be lawless and ungoverned, despising
Dominion and speaking Evil of Dignity, Distinction, Authority and Rule among
Men, act as madly and mischievously as one would do, that should go into a
House and sap the Foundation of it, till it fall upon him and crush him to
Death.

It is one evident Mark of the Romish Imposture, and of the Spirit of
Antichrist, that it has invaded, usurped upon and subverted the Authority of
Kings and Princes, Governments and States, over their Subjects. The Popes Claim
of Supremacy transfers the Allegiance of Subjects to a foreign Power, and
absolves 'em from their Oaths. This alone is a sufficient Mark of the Beast and
of the Man of Sin. What Confusion and Vexation has the World suffered from this
insolent and monstrous Doctrine! And how strange is it that so many Kingdoms
and Nations of Europe should so long wander after it, to their infinite Misrule
and Distraction! But the Word and dreadful Judgment of GOD must be fulfilled on
a wicked World.

The Reformed Churches took early Care to protest against this Doctrine of
Devils. They declared for a "conscientious Subjection and Obedience to the Laws
and Magistrates under which they lived, and by whom they were protected and
defended in their just Rights and Liberties.

Every Kind of Magistracy (say the Helvetian Churches) is instituted by GOD,
for the Peace and Happiness of Man, and all Subjects should own the Goodness of
GOD in the Institution of a Magistrate, by honoring Him as the Minister of
GOD.

These are some of the just and true Principles of the Protestant Religion,
according to the Oracles of GOD in this Matter: Romans xiii. 1, -- 5. Let every
Soul be subject unto the higher Powers: For there is no Power but of GOD; the
Powers that be are ordained of GOD: Whosoever therefore resists the Power,
resists the Ordinance of GOD. -- Wherefore ye must needs be subject, not only
for Wrath (or fear of Punishment) but also for Conscience sake. Render
therefore unto all their Dues, Tribute to whom Tribute is due, Custom to whom
Custom, Fear to whom Fear, and Honor to whom Honor. Tit. iii. 1. Put them in
mind to be subject to Principalities and Powers, to obey Magistrates. 1 Pet.
ii. 13, 14, 15, 16, 16, 17. Submit your selves to every Ordinance of Man for
the LORD's sake; whether it be to the King as supreme, or unto Governors as
unto them that are sent by Him: For so is the Will of GOD. Let us very
gratefully observe these Precepts, for they are very graciously given us for
the Good of the World.

2. Are Magistrates the Pillars of the Earth? Are they the LORD's? and has He
set the World upon them? Let us then devoutly observe the Governing Providence
of GOD in disposing of Persons and Offices, both with respect unto our Selves
and Others.

As to our Selves, let GOD lead, and Providence open our Way, and let us follow
humbly and obediently. Let us think soberly of our selves, and not vainly pine
after Honor and Power, or wickedly push for it like Absalom. But neither need
we hide our selves like Saul, when the Divine Call is plain, nor insist on
Excuses like the meek and accomplished Moses. Or if again Providence lays us
by, why should we not retire with Samuel's Humility and Greatness of Soul.

And then as to Others, Let us not think our selves neglected or overlooked, be
envious and discontent, if GOD prefer them. Suffer the MOST HIGH to rule in the
Kingdoms of Men, and to give the Provinces that belong to 'em to whomsoever He
will. Let us know and keep our own Place, and do our Duty to Those whom GOD
sets over us.

Let People reverence and honor their worthy Rulers, and let the Highest among
Men be very humble before GOD. They are Pillars, but of the Earth. The Earth
and its Pillars are dissolving together. Government abides, in a Succession of
Men, while the Earth endures, but the Persons, however good and great, must die
like other Men. We must not look too much at the Loftiness of any, nor lean too
much on any earthly Pillar: Put not your Trust in Princes, nor in the Son of
Man in whom there is no Help: His Breath goes forth, he returns to his Dust.
Nor may the Highest among Mortals behold themselves with Elation and Security,
as the vain King of Babylon once; but let them fear and tremble before the GOD
of Heaven, who inherits all Nations, and stands in the Congregation of the
Mighty, and judges among the Gods.

3. Are Rulers the Pillars of the Earth; are They the LORD's? and has He set
the World upon 'em? Let all that are in Public Offices consider their
Obligation s to be PILLARS, in the Places wherein Providence has set 'em.

Let Rulers consider what they owe to GOD, who has reared and set 'em up; and
to the Public which GOD has set upon them. Let 'em seek Wisdom and Strength,
Grace and Conduct from GOD, that they may answer the Title given 'em in my
Text. Let 'em stand, and bear, and act for GOD; whose they are, and who has set
'em where they are. Let the public Good be their just Care; that it may be
seen that GOD has set the World in their Heart, as well as laid it on their
Shoulders. Let 'em act uprightly, that they may stand secure and strong. Let
'em fear GOD, and rule by his Word, that they may be approved by GOD, and
accepted always by Men with all Thankfulness.

As Government is the Pillar of the Earth, so Religion is the Pillar of
Government. Take away the Fear of GOD's Government and Judgment, and humane
Rule utterly falls, or corrupts into Tyranny. But if Religion rule in the
Hearts and Lives of Rulers, GOD will have Glory, and the People be made happy.

FATHERS of our Country, let me freely say to You, That the Devotion and Virtue
of our humble, but illustrious ANCESTORS, (The first Planters of New England,)
laid the Foundation of our Greatness among the Provinces: And it is This that
must continue and establish it under the Divine Favor and Blessing. Emulate
their Piety and Godliness, and generous Regards to the Public, and be
acknowledged the Pillars, the Strength and Ornament of your Country!

But let me move You by a greater Argument, even a far more exceeding and
eternal Weight of Glory, which the HOLY GHOST has set before you in a most
illustrious Promise; Rev. iii. 12. Him that over comes will I make a PILLAR in
the Temple of my GOD, and he shall go no more out: And I will write upon Him
the Name of my GOD, and the Name of the CITY of my GOD, which is NEW-JERUSALEM;
which comes down out of Heaven from my GOD: And I will write upon Him my
NEW-NAME.

CHRIST will erect a Monumental Pillar, that shall stand for ever, in Honor of
all Them who in their Station here, be they high or low, faithfully endeavor
to uphold His Church and Kingdom.

It is a triumphant Promise taken from the Roman manner of Pillars reared to
the Memory of Illustrious Persons and PATRIOTS, on which were inscribed their
Names and worthy Deeds; together with that of the Empire, City or Province,
which they were so happy as to serve and help to save.

Infinitely more Glory and Honor shall be done to Him who serves the Lord
CHRIST, his Kingdom, People and Interest, in his Life here on Earth: When he
comes into his Temple above he shall have a Pillar of Celestial Glory reared to
eternize his Name; And on it shall be written (O Divine Honor!) "THIS WAS A
FAITHFUL SERVANT OF HIS GOD, AND SAVIOR, AND OF THE CHURCH ON EARTH.

There let Him stand for ever, "A Monument of free Grace, never to be defaced
or removed." While the Names of famous Emperors, Kings and Generals, graven in
Brass or cut in Marble, on stately Pillars and triumphant Arches, shall moulder
into Dust.

"So the Pillars in Solomon's Porch were broken down, and carried away by the
Chaldeans: But He that is made a Pillar in the Celestial Temple shall go no
more out. Yea the Pillars of the literal Earth and Heavens will shortly
tremble, and be shaken out of their Place; but He that believes in CHRIST, and
has His Glorious Name written on Him, shall remain unshaken and immovable; and
remain, like his living SAVIOR, steadfast for ever.

This infinite and eternal GLORY we wish to all in this worshipping Assembly,
the greater and the less, high and low, rich and poor together: As in the Act
of Worship, we are all on a Level before the THRONE of GOD. And the lowest in
outward Condition may be the Highest in Grace, and in the Honors that come
from above.

But in a more especial manner we wish this Mercy and Blessing of our GOD and
KING, out of His House to YOUR EXCELLENCY our GOVERNOR: Whose Return to your
Country, and your Advancement to the Government of it, we cannot but
Congratulate in the most public manner, with Hearts full of Joy, and sincere
Thankfulness to GOD.

The LORD GOD of our Fathers, who has spread our Heavens, and laid the
Foundations of our Earth, make You a PILLAR to Us both in the State and Church.

As it has pleased HIM to choose, adorn and set You up; so may He please to fix
and establish You, and long continue You a FATHER, and illustrious Blessing to
Your People.

And may the Name of CHRIST, and of these Churches of our LORD JESUS, be graven
deep upon Your Heart: And Your faithful Services to Them be an Everlasting Name
to You, which shall not be cut off.

So, not only erect Your Self a Pillar in every pious and grateful Heart, that
loves our Civil and Religious Liberties; and let their Prayers and Blessings
come upon You; but also lay a good Foundation against the World to come, for
everlasting Fame and Renown, and to be called GREAT in the Kingdom of Heaven.

FINIS.
APPENDIX.
Boston, August 12. Being the Day before this Sermon was preached, the Reverend
Associated PASTORS of the Town waited on His Excellency the GOVERNOR, with the
following Address.
SIR,
WIth Hearts full of Joy, and sincere Thankfulness to GOD, we Congratulate Your
Excellency's Return to Your Country, and Your Advancement to the Government of
it. The KING could not have chosen any One of it is Sons, more worthy to
represent His Royal Person, nor more accepted of the Multitude of Your Brethren.

When we first heard of His Majesty's Grace and Favor to Us, in Naming Your
Excellency our Governor, we were like Men that dream: The Cloud that hung over
us scattered in a moment, and as the Sun breaks out in a dark Day, so was the
Face of GOD, and the Light of the KING's Countenance upon Us. We render back to
the THRONE our dutiful and fervent Prayers, for His MAJESTY's long Life, and
happy Reign over Us.

According to the good Hand of our GOD upon Your Excellency, so has the KING
granted to You both now and heretofore: GOD helped You then to do us singular
Benefits, and now He has rewarded You in an extraordinary manner. We adore the
WISE PROVIDENCE that has led in every step to so great an Event, and to GOD be
all the Glory.

We believe, SIR, That You are come full of Benevolence to Your Country, to our
Churches and to the College; and will always have the most tender Solicitude
for their Welfare and Prosperity. And we bow our Knees with You to the GOD of
all Wisdom and Grace, for all those Supplies of both, which You will
continually need in the Administration of the Government.

His Excellency was pleased to take kindly this dutiful and affectionate
Address, and to make the following Answer.
GENTLEMEN,
I Am Extremely pleased with the Respect and Duty you Express to His Majesty,
and am Obliged for the Honor you do Me. -- I do assure you it has not been
from any Self interested Views, That I have sought His Majesty's Favor in the
Station He has been pleased to place Me; but from a Hope of Advancing His
Majesty's Service, and the Interest and Prosperity of this Country. -- The
College and Churches always were and are very dear to Me, and you may assure
Your Selves Nothing will be wanting in Me to promote their Weal and Prosperity.
-- And I desire You to join Your Prayers to Mine, That GOD would give me an
Understanding Heart to discern between good and bad: That I may at all times go
out and come in before this People to the Honor of GOD, to the Good of this
Country, and to the Applause of my own Conscience.

THE END.

