THE MARYLAND MUSE.

CONTAINING
I. The History of Colonel NATHANIEL BACON'S Rebellion in VIRGINIA. Done into
Hudibrastick Verse, from an old MS. II. The SOTWEED FACTOR, or Voyage to
MARYLAND.
The Third EDITION, Corrected and Amended.

By E. COOK, Gent.

Let Critics that shall discommend it,
-- mend it.
ANNAPOLIS: Printed in the Year M,DCC,XXXL

To the AUTHOR.
Old Poet,

AS You may remember,
You told me sometime in September,
Your pleasant Muse was idly sitting,
Longing for some now Subject fitting
For this Meridian, and her Inditing,
Worth Praise and P^^^^ for Pains in Writing.
I therefore (thinking it great Pity
A Muse should pine, that is so witty)
Have sent an old, authentic Book,
For Her in Doggrel Verse to Cook;
For since it never was in Print,
(Though wondrous Truths are written in it)
It may be worthy Clio's Rhimes,
To hand it down to future Times.
YOU know what never-fading Glory,
Old Saluft got by Catlin's Story;
The Fame Hyde gained, I need not tell y'ou,
By's History of the Grand Rebellion:
You know how Butler's witty Lays
Procured for him immortal Praise:
I Will add no more -- But if you please, Sir,
Attempt the same for Ebenezer,
Which you may gain, or I Am mistaken,
If you can nicely Cook this BACON.
H. J. BACON's Rebellion, etc.
CANTO I.
This CANTO gives you a Narration
Of Col'nel BACON's Provocation;
And shows, in what rebellious Manner
He ventured to display his Banner.
I SING those dire BACONIAN Wars,
Which, like the Oliverian Jars;
Long since broke out in Smoke and Fire,
'Twixt testy Knight, and waspish 'Squire:
The First of which, (as Authors tell)
Governed VIRGINIA very well,
'Till little Not, presumptuous Hector,
(Aspiring, like the Lord Protector)
Over the Atlantic Ocean came,
And put the People in a Flame;
Set Folks together by the Ears,
Who lived in Friendship many Years,
And in a Snare-drew headstrong Rabble,
Who too much listened to his Babble.
BUT ever the Plot grew ripe for Action,
That was begun by Bacon's Faction,
Fame led the Van with hot Alarms,
Of Ab-origines in Arms,
Who far and near did then resort,
(...) Haste to Susquebanna Fort,
int on Thoughts of Massacree.
(Inspired by their accursed Oaks)
Combining in their Hellish Anger,
To cut off every MARYLANDER
Thus Devils, in the Shape of Men,
Secured themselves in moated Den,
Which often the Planters tried to take,
But still in vain Attempts did make.
THE Indians making such (...)
Caused English Foe to seek Assistance,
Who thought it fit, without Delay,
To sound their Neighbors down the Day,
And try how Gov'nor BERELEY stood
Affected to the Common Good;
(Praying VIRGINIA to stand
In Time of Need by MARYLAND;)
Who, out of Christian Compassion
To Neighboring Friends of his own Nation
Sent Washington, (with Vet'ran (...)
Armed at all Points with Leaden Doses.
And double Rounds of Cannon Powder,
To make their Pop-Guns found the louder
For MARYLAND, to aid poor (...)
That were attacked by (...)
With whom a sharp Dispute began,
Wherein was killed both Horse and Man;
Some Prisoners were, some Cripples made,
By Indian Scouts in Ambuscade;
(Who never in vain at Friend or Foe,
A Trigger draw, or bend their Bow,
As able Archers, and as good,
As Little John and Robin Hood)
Others were left on Foot to trudge it,
(With Carbine slung, like Tinkers Budget)
That to the Combat did advance, Sir,
Mounted on Skeletonian Prancer,
Whose down-cast Looks seemed to foretell
Their certain Fate, in Battle fell:
Whilst many were to Slaughter led
By Salvages, on Horseflesh fed,
Which from the English Camp, in Fight,
They carried off, or stole by Night,
To satisfy the greedy Maws
Of such as scarce could stir their Jaws,
But lay as if they had been dead,
Stretched out on Honor's Truckle-Bed,
Almost with Hunger famished.
THUS the beleaguered in their Hive,
By Carrion were preserved alive,
'Till glutted with such Trojan Diet,
And willing to depart in Quiet,
Six Captains (famous in Report)
To sue for Peace rush from the Fort;
Whom the Besiegers, with small Pains,
To Pluto sent, without their Brains:
Which treacherous Act (by all Relations
Against the Law of Arms and Nations)
Provoked the Infidels with Ire
And Indignation to retire.
SO in the Night they lest their Cell,
(Resemblance of a future Hell)
And to their Subterfuges went,
On bloody Vengeance fully bent,
Leaving the English (struck with Wonder)
Their empty Citadel to plunder;
Who pelted at the Demons Nest,
With Courage not to be expressed;
Whilst the Delinquents, in their Flight,
In Morpheus' Arms slew Ten outright
Of the Besiegers, whom they found
Extended on the Mossy Ground;
And to complete their surious Anger,
(With Tomahawke instead of Hanger)
They made the Number up Threescore,
Leaving them welt'ring in their Gore,
Whose harmless Lives (like bloody Hounds)
They had let out by mortal Wounds.
THEN, to extenuate the Act,
(Which wilful Murder was, in Fact)
They to VIRGINIA's CHIEF complain,
"Their Heroes by the English slain,
"Were Messengers of Peace sent out,
"To put a Period to the Rout;
"So should have been to Council led,
"And not (like Dogs) knocked on the Head
"By Sentinels, to them inferior,
"Although in Number much superior;
"Wherefore they ask for Satisfaction
"For Damages sustained in Action:
"And further, they desired to know
"Why BERKLEY was so much their Foe,
"As to assist the MARYLANDERS,
"With valiant Soldiers and Commanders;
"Which brought their Indian warlike Nation
"To Pover'ty and Tribulation?
"Telling how Popps and Squaws lay dead,
"(Like rotten Sheep) for want of Bread:
"That in Revenge, they thought it fit,
"That Ten for One should pay for it:
"That if he would the Peace renew,
"He must Compassion to them show;
"Recall forthwith his Sons of Thunder,
"Who proved their Courage to a Wonder,
"By making Salvages knock under:
"Or else, resolved they were each Man,
"To fight it out, kill as kill can.
THIS free Remonstrance of their Case,
Rebellion carried in its Face;
And was rejected, with Derision,
By Persons of the best Condition,
Whose Interest leaned the other Way;
Such as, for Honor or for Pay,
Made Sword and Pistol their Vocation,
And held it an Abomination,
And base Dishonor to their Station,
On any Terms t'accept a Peace
From Infidels; that, like wild Geese,
Beyond the Western Mountains roam,
And rarely can be found at Home.
THIS raised the Indians mortal Rage,
Which naught but Death of Foes could 'swage,
Who to their Aid (to share the Spoil,
And bear a Bobb in Martial Toil)
The neighboring Salvages soon call,
And draw to Battle great and small,
That to the English Tribute paid;
On whom they fresh Incursions made,
And often did use their Scalping Trade.
GREAT was the Slaughter, great the Cries,
(Throughout the English Colonies)
Of Murders, Rapines, Conflagrations,
Committed by outrag'ous Nations;
Like ancient Picts of monstrous Size,
And Aspect frightful to the Eyes:
Though false, and Cowards in their Natures,
Yet terrible and fierce as Satyrs;
As many found it to their Cost,
Who dearest Friends, and Substance lost;
With plenteous Crops, and Herds and Flocks,
Being forced to fly to Woods and Rocks;
Wandering like Pilgrims, Lord knows whither,
Exposed to Wind and stormy Weather;
This raging Calenture to shun,
Or by the Heathen be undone.
THUS was VIRGINIA's prospr'ous State
Disturbed at first, by adverse Fate;
With Indian Wars, and various Rumors,
Which ended with intestine Tumors;
That Minds, to dire Rebellion bent,
Raised to disturb the Government;
Beyond WILL's Power to prevent.
FOR Fortune, that is ever fickle,
And always has some Rods in Pickle,
To plague the Governor much more
Than she had done some Years before,
Raised civil Discords in the People,
Who, chatt'ring like Jack-daws in Steeple,
Against Sir William; chose this Bacon
Their Champion; whom at first I spoke on;
A Man respected by the Mob,
As a fit Fool to do their Jobb;
Who, Sword in Hand, would rescue Cattle,
And give the Indians bloody Battle;
That had from MAR'LAND taken Flight,
Dreading with Bonnett New to fight,
Who well they knew (as Scotch Highlander)
Was hot, as fiery Salamander.
WRAPPED in their little God of Strife,
Who was (to draw him to the Life)
From Head to Foot scarce Nine-pin high,
Nor half so thick as Magogg's Thigh,
The Malcontents with one Consent,
Brave Not with Praises compliment;
Then to Sir William recommend him,
As qualified, would he send him
With Force their Gen'ralissimo,
Against their Ocanackeean Foe:
But WILL, that better knew than they,
The Indian Game he had to play,
Would not on any Motives yield,
To let Not govern in the Field;
And in Derision bid them nim'ly
"Go smoke their Bacon in the Chimney.
NOW as these Matters were debating,
(At Council Board scarce worth relating)
News came, that much disturbed Nat's Quiet,
Of an unlawful Indian Riot,
Committed by a Generation
Of Vipers, rifling his Plantation;
Who, not content the same to plunder,
Had Overseer cut in sunder.
WHEREFORE, at this unhappy Season,
Without consulting first his Reason,
(Like unadvised Politician)
He readily accepts Commission,
From furious Mobb, who give their Hand,
By him in greatest Streights to stand.
THUS, great as Noll, as Quixot stout,
At Head of Planters he rid out,
The Woods of Salvages to clear,
Pursued by BERKLEY in the Rear;
Who (being obliged by his Station)
Had sallied forth from Midd Plantation,
With Lifeguard, resolutely bent
Impending Mischiefs to prevent;
Make Lilliputian Cavilero,
(At great in Thought as Spanish Hero)
On bended Hams Peccavi cry;
Or Bacon hang on Gibbet high,
For daring contumaciously,
To levy War on Enemy,
Without the general Assent
Of Governor and Parliament;
Who of the Public Good to treat,
Were then at James-Town called to meet.
WHITHER, disbanding Volunteers,
Sir WILLIAM went t'advise w'his Peers;
Obliged the Wild-Goose Chase to quit,
Not knowing how the Way to hit;
That Not had in his Rambles took,
When he Domestic Cares forsook;
And rashly followed empty Fame,
But gained a Trayter's odious Name,
And Blots, whose vile Characteristicks,
You Will plainly see in the following Tristicks.
An Order's made Traitor to seize on,
For Bacon (not without good Reason,
Was judged, as tainted with High Treason:
So that by BERKLEY'S Proclamation,
He got a pitchlike Defamation
Sticking to him and's Generation,
As in the Sequel of the Story
Appears; eclipsing Bacon's Glory.
WHO, after he had put to Flight
The Ab-origenes in Fight,
Retired with great Precipitation
To visit Country Habitation;
Where presently, in County Squabble,
He was elected by the Rabble,
To serve as Burgess, though unfit
In House of Burgesses to sit;
As having been (e're in Disgrace)
By WILL advanced to higher Place,
Who Bacon raised, (from a Shote)
In Upper House to give his Vote.
HOWEVER, Not (resolved to see
If there he might admitted be)
With Forty Men and Mack'rel Gale
For the Metropolis set sail:
When dropping Anchor, 'twas their Fate,
To be made Prisoners of State;
And then by Gardener fore'd on Board,
Whose Ship before the Town was moar'd:
Whither in Spite of all Denial,
The Rebels were conveyed for Trial,
By Order of the higher Powers,
(Huzza'd by Mobb from Oaken Bowers)
Where instantly they were acquitted;
And Bacon once again admitted,
At Council Board to take his Post,
By BERKLEY, Ruler of the Roast;
Who also promis d (though not hearty)
To make him General of a Party;
Intended by the Government,
Against the Indians to be sent.
BUT, Promises are scarce worth minding,
And (as Civilians say) not binding,
Grounded on mental Reservation;
Or made without Consideration,
As Not experienced to his Cost,
When he (by adverse Fortune crossed)
Imaginary Honors lost.
FOR, when the Rabble were withdrawn,
And promised Day had passed it is Dawn,
For putting Bacon in Commission,
WILL, like a crafty Politician,
Refused to sign the Instrument,
Drawn up in Form, for that Intent;
Under Pretense, that Col'nel Bacon
Had other private Measures taken.
NOT (thus deluded) thought it best,
To let his hot Resentment rest;
And patiently pretend to endure,
What (whilst in Town) he could not cure,
With Hopes he should a Method find,
To pay Sir WILLIAM in his Kind;
Which soon came int' his frantic Brain,
Nor did the Project prove in vain.
FOR, as the Council sat at Table,
(You may believe me, it is no Fable)
A Letter was to Bacon brought,
With melancholy Tidings fraught;
Importing, that his loving Wife
Lay ready to depart this Life:
As Not informed the Governor;
Desiring Leave (unlucky Cur)
To visit his betrothed Spouse,
Who never had broke her nuptial Vows:
To which his Excellence replied,
The Motion could not be denied:
So, since he made such Moan for's Dear,
The Gov'nor bid him, go and see her;
Against the Advice of faithful Friends,
Who guessed at Bacon's wicked Ends:
For knowing well the Tricks of Not,
They in the Letter smelt a Rat;
Which (when too late to be detected)
Was found (as rightly was suspected)
To come from Party disaffected;
That, loving Bacon very heart'ly,
Had managed Matters very smartly;
Informing Not, "That Mob was ready,
"And in their Resolutions steady,
"That when he would give the Sign to rise,
"They Would cut all Bacon's Enemies,
"As small as Meat is mine'd for Pies,
"In Case WILL would not, with Submission,
"Put Bacon in a blank Commission:
This said the Letter: Now let us see
How BERKLEY'S blind Credulity,
By the Imposter was rewarded,
As it in Story stands recorded.
NOT having played this cunning Trick,
Instead of visiting the Sick,
Before black Messenger rid Post,
(As if the De'el had drove) to the Host;
To head a factious, stubborn Crew,
(As e're over Seas for Refuge flew)
Of Servants, Slaves, and Overseers,
At least Five Hundred Mutineers;
That to insult the Government,
(By Bacon's Preincouragement)
At Nat's Approach began (...) bluster,
And Hurley-burley soon did muster,
Like Tumble-T -- ds got in a Cluster.
WITH these new listed Sons of Plunder,
Not entered Town, to BERKLEY'S Wonder;
Who, when required to make good
His Promise, like a Statue stood:
Not threatening to give no Quarter,
But burn poor WILL like Smithfield Martyr;
Swearing, that if he lost his Aim,
He Would put the City in a Flame.
AT this the House, through Fear, divide,
And BERKLEY'S take, or Bacon's Side;
In whose Behalf (to save the Hive)
'Twas carried in the Affirmative,
"That Not should General be sent,
"Intestine Quarrels to prevent;"
Who, with his new created Power,
(Extorted in an evil Hour
By Force of Arms) rid from his Dwelling,
Like Oliver, a Colonelling.
FIRST then, he settles Ways and Means,
For proper Posture of Defense;
Then fits his Troops, then makes Drums rattle
For March, to give the Indians Battle.
NOW b'ing advanced to Out-plantations
Searching for Foes of Indian Nations;
News comes of BERKLEY'S Preparations:
Which puts the Rebels to their Trumps,
And makes them look in doleful Dumps,
Like Withrington, upon his Stumps.
HOWEVER the Bully re-advances,
To Midd-Plantation, since by Francis,
Called Williamsburg; makes Replication,
To BERKLEY'S second Proclamation:
Then by each other, One and All,
The Rebels swear to stand or fall;
And sign the League, which you may see,
Drawn up at large, in Beverley:
Which put Sir WILLIAM in a Fright,
Who with his Friends took hasty Flight,
Across the Bay to Accomack;
But thence was quickly hurried back,
In Time to oppose this grand Rebellion:
That Is all, this CANTO is to tell y'on.
CANTO II.
This CANTO tells of Gov'nor WILL
Being routed by Not Bacon' s Skill:
Of Stafford Folks with Treason sullied;
And Glo'ster Men from' Leigiance bullied:
Here too, you will find, to make you merry all,
Accounts of Bacon' s Death and Burial.
NEXT I describe t'you Bacon's Army,
You need not fear, they will not harm ye;
Although they were (whilst under Not)
Like Kentish Rebels, led by Watt;
A thoughtless, giddy Multitude,
From Newgate, and from Bridewell spewed,
As Straw, or Kett, or Wyat, rude,
B'ing Bullies, Ruffians, Debauchees,
Cheats, Gamesters, Pimps, and Raparees.
WITH these undaunted mean Rascallions
Poor Shabberoon Tatterdemallions;
(The small Remains of those Battalions,)
Not on the Frontiers turned a Drift,
Amongst the Planting Herd to shift;
Through pathless Woods his Way he made,
To turn the Town into Blockade;
Which BERKLEY, whom the Mob detested,
In Bacon's Absence had in vested;
Transporting from the Eastern Shore
(T'augment the Force he had before)
Of Arms and Ammunition Store,
And Men, who fought for ready Pay,
Twelve Pence a Head, for every Day;
With Plunder of all that had taken
Rebellious Oath to Col'nel Bacon.
WHO, on the Banks of Powhatan,
Before the intended Siege began,
First crammed his Army, every Man,
With Hommony and Pone, and got,
Sufficient Progg for Pan and Pot,
With Drams enough of Aquae vitae,
To make his Men like Devils fight ye.
BUT ever he could the Siege commence,
He needed Trenches for Defense;
Which thus he made: First, out he sent
Some Horse and Foot, with an Intent
To seize the Wives of Loial Party,
And all that were not to him hearty;
These taken, sitting at their Dinners,
They dressed with Aprons, Bibbs and Pinners;
And ranged them on their Works, in View
Of Citadel and Cannon too:
So that no Loialist durst fire,
To make Baconians retire,
Lest, with his Foes, his Wife or Daughter
Might first be slain in common Slaughter.
SO, thus by Petticoats protected,
He raised the Works he had projected,
In Order to reduce the Town,
Taking at Night these Life-guards down,
Who trembling, in the Day time stood
Like Virgins bound to Stumps of Wood,
That were ordained by Fate's Decree,
To Hydra's Jaws to be a Prey;
As Authors tell us in the Story,
So were these Women, to their Glory,
On Martial Bank obliged to stand,
Like Mourning Captives, Hand in Hand;
Leaving behind their Linen Geer,
When Phaebis in his hot Career,
Forsook the Western Hemisphere,
Stuck artificially on Poles,
Which made their Husbands think, poor Souls,
They had done Duty all the Night,
Appearing still dressed up in White,
To open View, as Sol begun
His Oriential Course to run:
But where they slept, it is hard to say,
Till Phosper ushered in the Day;
Unless with Not, a Nap they took
In Tent, as black as Chimney Nook.
NOW, having well secured his Men,
In Trenches deep (like Pigs in Pen)
He Female Pioneers dismissed,
To take their Rambles where they list;
Declaring they had done more Good
For him, whilst on the Ditch they stood,
Then e're their Husbands would perform,
For BERKLEY, whom he meant to storm.
WHO, b'ing informed the Fair were got,
Beyond the Reach of Cannon Shot,
Resolves with Bacon not to dally,
But boldly venture on a Sally;
And Storm Nat's Hold, though at the Expense
Of a few Men; to drive him thence.
BESIDES his mercenary Troops,
Confined on Board (like Geese in Coops)
Might get the Scurvy (as he thought)
In Case to Shore they were not brought.
OF these, WILL sends a Party strong,
That did to Accomack belong,
Commanded by one Huber Farrell,
More used t'attack a Cider Barrel
Than face a Toe upon old Sorrel.
THE Ships forthwith began to play,
And with their Shot clear Farrell's Way,
By Order of the Governor:
But all in vain, Not would not stir;
'Till lucky Chance did on him smile,
And rendered fruitless, Huber's Toil:
Who (though he had but little Skill)
In's Thoughts did vie with Machiavel:
Wherefore, resolved with Not to cope,
Strutting at Head of Forlorn-hope,
(Sent out to drive Not from his Trenches,
Well lined with Men, and stroling Wenches)
He bids his Bands, in Martial Paces,
By stooping down, to save their Faces
From Shot; (thus Woodcocks hide their Snout,
In Bush, but leave their Bodies out)
When once they saw him this to do,
He ordered them, to do so too.
THEN marching on, a Ball from Not
Laid Farrell on his Belly flat;
Which b'ing observed by Farrell's Bands,
They all fall flat upon the Sands,
Thinking he did it, as the Token,
Of what he just before had spoken:
Whereby a Body of Foot Soldiers,
Composed of Servants and Freeholders,
That followed Farrell in the Rear,
Were forced to halt when they drew near;
Which made a Troop of Horse, behind,
Toward the Marsh about to wind,
To see what should be the Occasion
Of unexpected Retardation;
Who looking over toward the Main,
Thought all their Forlorn-hope were slain.
So Wheeling suddenly about,
They put their own Reserves to the Rout;
Which made them all retire for Shelter,
In great Confusion, Helter-skelter,
Excepting such as Bacon's Shot
Imbargo'd dead upon the Spot,
And One or Two that in Retreat
Were trod in the Water under Feet.
HAD Not now followed them to Town,
No Doubt the Day had been his own;
When Cowards (brought from Accomack)
With Threats came out, with Fears ran back.
But Bacon thought his Forces were
Inserior to WILL'S Numbers far;
Which made him not pursue the Rabble,
And get so little in this Squabble:
In which Encounter some were wounded,
And Eight or Ten were killed or drowned.
Whereas each Man of Bacon's Party,
Were still alive, and brisk and hearty.
NEXT Day, the General was relieved,
With Reinforcements he received,
(Under Command of Major Whaley,
Who had assisted Bacon daily)
With Pieces Three of heavy Cannon,
As good as ever flung Shot over Shannon;
Which Bacon mounted on the Trench,
In Order soon the Siege to clench;
And try, with this his fresh Assistance,
To drive the Ships to greater Distance;
Which (though as yet they would done no Harm)
Might Neighbors prove, for him too warm.
THE Governor, at this sad News,
Did soon resolve, no Time to loose;
But, summoning both Old and Young,
He strait persuades the trembling Throng,
Like Men, to save themselves, retreating,
And not (like Dogs) run Risque of Beating.
So, Bag and Baggage, they by Night
To Accornack again take Flight.
THE Birds b'ing fled, Not thought it best,
In Ashes to consume their Nest:
So, soon as WILL with Gang retired,
In Brutish Rage, the Town he fired.
THEN, that he might Examples make,
Of all that BERKLEY'S Side should take,
To show that he would prove impartial,
He calls together a Court Martial,
Condemns and shoots, before departing,
A poor Lieutenant, for Deserting,
Who fought for BERKLEY; though he would taken
The Oaths before to Col'nel Bacon.
THUS, having BERKLEY put to Rout,
For Green-Spring next he sac'd about.
Thence, with his Army, into Glo'ster,
At Tindall's- Point he boldly crossed, Sir:
Where Bacon scarce Two Days had staid,
At Col'nel Warner's, (as it is said)
Before a Letter, by a Post,
(Which did not much disturb his Host)
Informs him that one Col'nel Brent
Had lest Pattowmack, with Intent
In WILL'S Behalf to give Not Battle,
And make his Bones in's Skin to rattle,
With Men, a Thousand and Two Hundred,
As nimble Rogues as ever plundered,
( Stassordians, Indians, and new Negroes)
Destruction threatening to Besiegers.
SURPRISED hereat, as well he might,
Not having Men such Odds to fight,
To Camp Not comes, in mighty Heat,
Commanding first his Drums to beat.
Then to his Soldiers, in close Order,
Now under Colors, (like Recorder)
He ope's the Letter, Gutheridge sent,
And pumps, to find his Soldiers Bent,
Pretending Love to Government,
And King, and Country, though rebellious:
(Thus did old Noll, and Rumpish Fellows.)
Then Soldiers swear, by all the Gods,
They Would fight Brent's Men, at Tripple Odds,
And under Not would singe their Codds.
FROM thence to Gloucester Courthouse strait,
In Rank and File they marched; where Fate
Decreed the Fields should be their Quarters
That Night; but as they were true Starters,
For Col'nel Smith's, near Purton, they
Began their March at Break of Day;
Where News was brought, by quick Express,
That Brent was lest in great Distress,
His Men intending to desert,
And (most) to take the Traytor's Part,
Consid'ring should they follow Brent,
They might perhaps too late repent,
The Day they Bacon-hunting went.
THUS Cowards of a timorous Heart,
At their own Shadows often start,
Quit those that most in them confide,
And basely take the strongest Side.
So they, that most to Brent pretend,
In The Lurch do leave him in the End,
Adoring here the Rising Sun,
As in the East, they say, it is done.
THESE happy Tidings brought to Bacon,
Who by the Ear wrong Sow had taken,
Did providentially prevent
A bloody War'twixt him and Brent.
NOW Not to'th' Courthouse does repair,
To meet the Gloucester Gentry there,
According to his Invitation,
Not for the Sake of Recreation,
But to seduce them to his Measures,
And gain their helping Hand and Treasures,
Which always chiefest Sinews are
Alike, of just and unjust War.
WHO mounting Steeds, the Hero met,
On Propositions vile to treat,
Whom Not with Flat'ry and Caresses,
With artful Rhetoric Addresses:
He tells them, smiling, Cap in Hand,
"That he from Friends did understand,
"They never had signed the Covenant,
Then says, "He hopes they will partake on,
"The common Cause, with Patriot Bacon."
TO which the Gentlemen replied,
"They would not join with either Side;
"For as they could not take the Oath,
"So to oppose him they were loath".
TO which the General sternly said,
"They would be damned (be was afraid)
"With basest Villains, who expected
"The just Man's Peace, but Works neglected"
AT this a certain Officer,
Applied to's Honor, saying, Sir,
"You Have spoke to'th' Horse but not the Foot,
"'It Is ten to one, but they will do it".
Quoth Not, "You miss my Speech's Force,
"I spoke to the Men, and not the Horse,
"Though 'twas scarce worth my whil to harangue'em,
"They Are such obdurate Rascals, hang 'em;
"Pray you go speak t'your Brother Creatures,
"Asses best know the Horses Natures".
HOWEVER, at a second Meeting,
At Warner's House, for farther Treating,
The Gloucester Men, the Engagement signed,
And willingly with Bacon joined.
MEANWHILE there came a Letter over,
Inviting Not to the Eastern Shore;
Humbly requesting, "That he would,
"Come there, to rescue Public Good,
"From Governor, who seized Provision,
"With Horses, Men, and Ammunition
"And would not pay late Expedition;
"When they at James-Town ran away,
"Fighting, per Poll, Twelve Pence a Day;
"Which Eastern Shore Men did not like,
"And made them take against WILL a Pique;
"Pray Bacon's Party to assist 'em;
"For if they would come, none should resist 'em'.
The Letter too, "In Bacon's Power,
"Proposed to put the Governor,
"And of his Loial Party three,
" Ludwell, and Cole, and Beverly":
Which Friends the Gov'nor most respected,
His Cause by them b'ing most protected:
So probably to human Thinking,
BERKLEYAN Intr'est was just Sinking:
But Providence now intervened,
And to Nat's Life, soon put an End;
Who on a sudden being pent
By dangerous Illness up, intent,
One Bremington, against Indian sent;
Intending when he did recover,
To Eastern Shore to hurry over.
ON these Designs was Bacon harping,
At BERKLEY'S Conduct often carping;
When Death at's Chamber door came rapping,
As Moss caught Mare, took Bacon napping.
BUT e're he was by Death arrested,
With his Commission he invested,
One Johnson (alias) called Ingram,
To head the Rebellious Army (trinctram;)
As Richard Cromwell, wise and brave,
Like Quixot's Sancho, Fool and Knave.
BUT Hero now confined to Bed, Sir,
By Flux and Fever (as it is said, Sir)
By Lice was eaten up alive,
That crawled thro's Skin (as Bees from Hive)
From Maggots hatched in hot Brain,
Where Passage out they sought in vain,
Through brazen Front; so down they went,
And through his Pores found easy vent;
Where marching out in numerous Armies,
They seized 'Squire Bacon, vi and Armis;
So Vermin slew this Public Evil,
That feared not GOD, nor Man, nor Devil.
THE General thus (as Herring dead)
Was wrapped in Winding Sheet of Leed,
And sunk into an Arm of the Ocean,
Because his fearful Friends had Notion,
That if his Carcass should be found,
By adverse Party under Ground,
To rot on Gibbet, Bones of Not,
Like Bones of Noll would have the Fate:
So they secured them in the Water,
From Foes, Indignities, and Laughter.
SATAN of old, possessing Swine,
Pickled his Pork in Neptune's Brine;
In which sad Pickle for his Kitchins,
It Is feared he 'as sows'd poor Bacon's Flitchins.
He died of the Murrain (that is true)
Though Carron, yet De'll takes his Due:
At smallest Game, he will take a Bout,
Rather than unconcerned stand out:
Thus when he had no Fish to fry,
How Pork would do, he longed to try:
He driving Hogs, need run, ('it is said)
Though brought to Market never so bad.
NOW though the Creepers spoilt their Bacon,
For which at first, they sadly take on;
Yet Bacon's Friends (I say it in Jest)
Of their bad market, made the best,
Which brought their Minds some little Rest:
For though they could not save their Bacon,
They saved his Bones from being taken.
Who Is born for Hanging (Proverb says)
Never needs fear Drowning in the Seas;
So, vice versa, 'stead of Tree,
The Fates ordained Not to the Sea;
Who justly merited the Halter,
But naught the Fates Decrees will alter;
Though t'had been better, had he swung,
Such Bacon being best well hung.
BUT, now beneath the restless Billow,
He rests, who never had Rest on Pillow.
The Year that Not set Sail for Styx,
Was Sixteen Hundred Sev'enty Six,
In The Month October, the 18th Day:
So I Have no more of him to say.
CANTO III.
This CANTO shows, how WILL came 'ore,
To chase the Malcontents, once more:
Who, under Ingram (as their Head)
Were to deserved Destruction led:
'Till at the last, these Rebels sell,
And that is all I have to tell.
THE News, that Bacon was departed,
Made BERKIEY once again light-hearted.
BUT, though Nat's dead, yet sad Distraction,
Springs from the Root of Bacon's Faction:
The Rebels for the good old Cause,
Persist against Governor and Laws,
Who Might and Main, intended still,
With bloody Rods, to Whip poor WILL,
By Fighting under Ingram's Banners,
And Whaley's; whose rebellious Manners,
(Like Lambert and like Fleetwood bold)
Provoked Sir WILLIAM, now grown old,
To try if he could stem the Tide,
Of Treason, and ambitious Pride,
That like a sudden Inundation,
Had drove him from his Habitation.
HE then conceived, the surest Way
To quash the Rebels over the Bay,
Was now to strike, whilst Iron's hot,
And so make Traitors go to Pot;
Before they could their Courage rally,
So now he thought not fit to dally.
THUS, at Noll's Death (as Stories tell us)
WILL dockt the Rump of the Rebellious;
Of civil Wars, first clipped the Pinions,
Proclaiming Charles in his Dominions.
FOR of VIRGINIAN Territory,
It Is said to their immortal Glory,
This Ancient Colony most Loial,
Stuck longest firm to Party Royal;
And having last against Cromwell stood,
Did first restore the Common Good;
Being of all the English reckoned,
The First that dare own CHARLES the Second.
ALL this was done (as we are told)
Under Sir WILLIAM, Wise and Bold;
Who now to save his youthful Praise,
In his declining aged Days,
Did bravely rouse his drooping Sprits,
And (to augment his former Merits)
For Good of King and Colony,
Resolves to Conquer, or to Dye.
THE Scene thus changed, it was not long
Before he sent a Party strong,
In Sloop or Shallop (which please)
From Accomack, Nat's Friends to seize;
That on York-Banks, the Coast to guard,
At Auborn's House kept Watch and Ward:
Where Col'nel Hansford, with some others,
Who, in Rebellion, were sworn Brothers;
Was after some Resistance made,
Was after some Resistance made,
By Auborn's wanton Wife betrayed;
And thence across the Bay conveyed,
And hanged at Accomack, it is said.
THIS Expedition being over,
WILL (who with Friends did live in Clover)
Of whom the Mob did vilely talk,
Resolved the Matter not to baulk:
And so Embarks without Delay,
Then for York-River plows the Bay.
Where having Wind, which proved a Flanker,
At Tindall's Point he soon cast Anchor:
From whence, he sends forth Men Six Score,
Bold hardy Soldiers (less or more)
Marching in Ranks, of different Size,
Few Scatterlopers to surprise,
Of Malcontents, and beardless Boys,
That scarce had left their childish Toys;
Who at a House not far from thence,
In Arms were mustered, on Pretense
Of standing in their own Defense;
Commanded by the aforesaid Whaley,
As great a Rogue, as Water Baily.
BUT, lest his Soldiers should prove tardy,
He sent some Friends, both bold and hardy,
(As faithful Ludwell,) with Intent,
To give the more Encouragement;
Lest Hubert, who Commander went,
Should fail again in his Descent;
Who of the Wound, was now quite well,
He got, when he at James-Town fell.
THESE now at Piny-point safe landed
By Hu (as said before) commanded;
Their Heads do first together lay,
To study out the safest Way,
Without much Loss, to win the Day;
On which they did not long consult,
Before they came to this Result,
That is: If Centry should demand
Who Is there, or order them to stand,
To seize and gagg him; the Pell-mell,
To enter into Rebels Cell;
Which had no Barricades by Chance,
So they the easier might advance,
And take the House in Dusk of Night,
Without the Risque of bloody Fight.
BUT, pray behold the bad Conclusion,
Of this well grounded Resolution:
For 'stead of this to Centry's Call,
They made Reply with Musket Ball.
So they by Centry were betrayed,
Who, when they Shot, loud Hollw'ing made,
To give Alarm to those in the House,
Who scarce awake, half drunk soon rouse
To Arms, and headlong fal'ing out,
Put Farrell and his Men to Rout;
Who dropping instantly a Stern,
Secured themselves behind a Barn,
To which in the Dark, they quickly got,
To screen themselves from Rebels Shot:
Where long they pelted at each other,
Though none was killed in all this Pother,
Excepting Hubert, who in the Chase,
Fell once again upon his Face;
When pop came Ball, from Musket Barrel,
That through the Back shot Hubert Farrell.
THUS stoutest Braggadochio must
At last lay's Honor in the Dust:
So Pitcher now, you see is broke,
At James Town cracked, by Random Stroke
From Not; as I before have spoke.
HIS Men observing him to fall,
Not by the Sword, as did King Saul,
A board their Vessel, have in Hurry,
TO avoid the Danger of the Florry;
Through thick and thin, through Mire and Sands,
One Pair of Heels, worth Two of Hands;
Happy the Man, that first can get
To Shallop, though like drowned Rat wet,
Higgledy Piggledy Malpas shot,
Heels over Heads, away they trot,
'Till safe unto their Boat they got:
Even those that others Legs did use,
In getting out (to save their Shoes)
Run on their own Legs now, to choose.
WHEN Hubert's missed, straight four or five,
Resolve to find him dead or'live,
Who for their Valor dearly paid,
Being by Whaley Prisoner made.
NOW, though Sir WILLIAM lost the Day,
By Hubert basely given away;
Yet Gloucester Men, full Thirty Score,
With Middlesexians many more.
B'ing raised, he is brisker than before.
BUT, see the Turns of Fate; for soon,
His Matters go but badly on;
For Ingram had no sooner heard
That all this Force for WILL appeared,
But straight he sent Lieutenant Walkett,
To Middlesex, to try to baulk it;
Who marched with thirty able Horse,
The choicest of the Rebels Force;
And kept the Fort from Major Smith,
A Friend of BERRLEY'S (spite of's Teeth)
For all he had Five Hundred Men,
So Smith soon marches back again
To Dwelling House of Mr. Pate,
Where Matters were in dismal State.
FOR, Ingram having Information,
That Smith had left Pate's Habitation,
Whips in between the House and Major,
And swore like Tinker in his Rage, Sir;
"That'less the Garr'son would surrender
"On Terms that he should please to tender,
"He Would Shoot, or Burn, or Hang, or Kill,
"Each Person that declared for WILL":
Which naughty Words, of wicked Whoreson,
Did so affright poor Captain Parson,
Whom Smith had left to guard the House,
(In Peace a Man, in War a Mouse)
That, not accustomed to such Sport,
He forthwith gives him up the Fort,
Resolving now to mind his Church,
And never more leave her in the Lurch;
But stick to's Text, and mind his Book,
Since Mars had such a dismal Look;
Never fight again, with temp'ral Sword,
But fight the Battle of the Lord;
And never use a Sword at all,
Besides the Sword that is spirit'al.
INGRAM, obtaining this Rendition,
Found Store of Arms and Ammunition,
With Provender for Man and Beast,
Which was laid in for Captain Priest:
On which he feasts, yet had the Sense
To keep in Posture of Defense;
Lest Major Smith should in the Center,
Of all his Jollity re-enter;
And spoil his Stomach, by insisting
On Satisfaction, for such Twisting
Of Ducks and Capons (well worth praising)
And Roasters not of his own raising.
SMITH, like a Lion to his Den,
Was now returned, to Pate's again;
Where much against his Expectation,
He Ingram found in Warlike Station,
Which proved to him a sad Vexation:
It made him Mad; but yet not quite
Enough to make him Ingram Fight;
Having more Wit in this his Anger,
Than to fall foul on this great Stranger.
WHILST Ingram, on the other Hand,
Did but on Part Defensive stand.
Each feared the Dance first to begin,
So Curs at one another grin.
Thus they continue Scolding, Bawling,
Like Cats in Cockloft Caterwawling:
Though some of the Rebels were for Blows,
Being half starved, for want of Clothes,
Who env'ing Spruce BERKLIIAN'S Bravery,
Longed for their Clothes, to cloak their Knavery;
Whilst other Ingramites thought best,
Though naked, in whole Skins to rest;
Who on the Belly fully bent,
With Meat and Drink were well content.
BUT now lets us take a Turn, and see
How Major Smith, and's Men agree.
He and some Glocestrian Gentry,
Were into Pate's for forcing Entry;
Who bold and zealous were for Battle,
To Life or Limb though never so fatal.
OTHERS (by far the better Christians)
Wanted Retreat to greater Distance;
Who thought to spill Man's Blood was heinous;
Saying, the Guilt of Blood shall not stain us.
A MIDDLE Sort, I now must mention,
That had a kind of mixed Intention;
Who wisely minded, that there are
Most bloody Accidents in War;
But that on the other Hand to fly,
Would brand them with black Infamy.
THIS Sort propose Capitulation,
To save their Lives and Reputation.
In this Tripartite Strife, at last
The light heel'd Gentry to others cast.
THEN each Man down his Arms does lay,
And winged with Fear, all run away;
Who, though they save their Hides and Clothes,
Yet thus their Arms and Honor lose;
Nay spoil their Coat, with Blot of Coward,
Says Herald, under Marshal Howard.
LIKE harmless Lambs, they are now become,
Who bluster'd at first Noise of Drum,
And roared like Phalaris's Bull,
With Rage and windy Courage full,
A mighty Cry, but little Wool.
LIKE Lewis, Smith with many Men
Marched out, and then run back again.
NOW comes the Trick of Captain Grantham,
Which some think base; but I think handsome:
He long had traded in the Parts,
Knew Planters Tempers and their Hearts;
And had great Infl'ence far and near,
Either for Interest, Love, or Fear;
As many worthy Traders have,
Who in their Hands still keep the Staff;
By keeping Planters Egg in Nest,
Pray don't be Mad, it is but a Jest.
THIS Captain, cut out for the Work,
In The Nick of Time arrived in York;
And privately on WILL attending,
Got Management o'th Cause depending;
For WILL and he together lay
Their Heads, the Traitors to betray.
WHEN under Rose, they had agreed,
To Ingram, Grantham goes with Speed,
To try what could be done by Skill,
Since Arms had failed in the Cause of WILL.
GRANTHAM, a natural Rhetorician,
A Merchant, Tar, and Politician,
Did try with Words, as smooth as Oil,
If he could stubborn Ingram foil,
And Walkett, both to Reason bring;
'Who taking Arms against the King,
'Had Lives and Fortunes forfeited,
'And were in Law already dead:
'As Grantham told them; adding further,
'He really thought it wilful Murder
'To kill poor Subjects, on Pretense
'Of standing in their own Defense;
'Which could not be, since (as he heard)
'They by Nat's Compass blindly steered;
'So if their Course they would not alter,
'They'd soon be moar'd to Tree, by Halter:
'So begged them well to weigh the Case,
'And Mercy by all Means embrace,
'Whilst certain Mercy could be found,
'Before the Men of War struck Ground,
'With Men 'tixt Decks, and Arms in the Hold,
'Chuck-full, like Grecian Horse of Old'.
Thus he advised them to submit
To Government, if they thought fit.
AT this, they both began to look
As if they had been Thunderstruck,
Which Sligo saw; and then said he,
'Since you dead-hearted seem to be,
'I will with BERKLEY stand your Friend,
'Who to request may condescend,
'(Perhaps) a piteous Ear to lend:
'If you surrender to his Mercy,
'He'll pardon (I believe by Hearsay:)
'Besides, some Time with him I spent,
'Before I last to England went;
'And then to me he seemed inclined
'To be compassionate and kind:
'So knowing him, and knowing you,
'I'll tell you what you would best to do;
'And if you will do as I would have you,
'I dare believe, that I can save you'.
THIS friendly cordial Advice,
Made both the Wolves, as quank as Mice;
Both condescending for to take
The Terms that he should for them make:
The Terms agreed, he does propose
That they their Minds must not disclose,
Nor let their Army know what he
With both their Honors did agree;
But in their Noddles private keep all,
'Till he had fathomed the People.
THIS done, the Captain tacks about,
And next addressed the Rebel-Rout;
But with these Folks, sly Grantham found
That he should gain but little Ground,
Unless with Wheedles he could nick 'em,
And so into a Halter trick 'em;
Well knowing that he had to do
With Runaways and Freemen too.
At length he says; 'Good Gentlemen,
'You know, that I long Time have been
'A Trader here, where I have got
'A deal to help to boil my Pot;
'But now (I tell you to my Cost)
'My Trade is likely to be lost,
'Whilst you bear Arms in this your Post;
'Poor Crops are made, Tobacco low;
'What I shall do, I do not know,
'For whilst you here are nothing doing,
'Merchant and Planter run to Ruin;
'You have been all, says he (good Sirs)
'My Friends, Acquaintance, Customers;
'And often have had Room to try
'My Kindness to the Colony;
'B'ing bound in Interest and Honor,
'To love and value such a Donor;
'But you 'bove all (and then he swore)
'Who have been Dealers at my Store:
'Excuse me therefore, if I be
'For your own Good, too frank and free:
'I left a Fleet moar'd in the Downs,
'Freighted with Redcoats, Bloody Hounds:
'That CHARLES has sent to aid Sir WILLIAM,
'To seize the Rebels, and to kill 'em.
AT this they glibly swallow Bait,
And for Advice impatient wait;
Which they request, that he would give 'em,
And at this ticklish Point relieve 'em.
He soon replied, 'I'll go and try,
To sound Sir WILLIAM, by and by;
'I dare believe his Heart is tender:
'And he will forgive, if you surrender
'On Terms like these: As first suppose,
'There was Indemnity for those
'That Freemen are and good Freeholders;
'And then for all the listed Soldiers,
'Suppose for them I get their Pay,
'And get the Servants freed, what say y'?
TO this they soon unan'mously
With Thanks and Joy did all agree:
But yet before with them he parted,
Thinking the Generals hollow-hearted,
He bid them not let Ingram know
What they had thus contrived to do;
Lest he and Walkett should prevent,
What was their Interest and Intent.
This done, they parted, Grantham went
Down to his Ship, they to the Tent.
BUT 'twas not long e're Grantham brought
The Pardon, which the Rebels sought;
Which being drawn in ample Manner,
Induced them soon to strick their Banner.
NEXT Day a board a Sloop they are stowed.
And down to Tindal's- point are towed,
Their Arms b'ing first secured with Care,
Lest they should still persist in War.
OH how WILL treats them with good Cheer:
With Pork, and Beef, and Drams, and Beer
Then after mutal Compliment,
Each to their Habitation went.
WITH joyful Hearts the Planters set
To Work, with Ax and Hough, to get
Their Bread, which each had often wanted,
Since last they would Corn and 'Tatoes planted;
Resolving never more to enter,
Nor Corpse in civil Wars to venture.
NOW Readers you must understand,
You are arrived in Sight of Land;
As said Diogenes of old,
When One a tedious Story told.
FOR finding the Conclusion near,
There Is Land (says he) brave Boys! don't fear.
Thus you may know by this Allusion,
My Story's almost at Conclusion.
FOR now Sir WILLIAM'S got ashore,
And safe arrived at Home once more,
His House by Friends b'ing now retaken
From Garrison, put there by Bacon:
Whence Goods and Prog were took, but Drummond
And poor French Valet, paid for some on it,
Who almost starved and famished found,
Were soon trussed up, Twelve Foot from Ground.
AND now each Party seemed at Ease,
Supposing naught could break their Peace,
When Council and Assembly thought,
That some o'th archest Rebels ought,
By Death to make some Satisfaction,
For all the Ills of late Distraction,
To frighten Folks from trayt'rous Action.
THEN here and there did Rebel swing,
On Limbs of Trees, like Dogs in String.
To put the Saddle on right Horse,
The vilest hangs in Chains in Course;
So 'Tony Arnold, who kept Ferry,
Was thus preferred to Charon's Wherry.
THUS often the Villains Offspring find
Just Vengeance, when a like inclined
To do the same, as Dad had done,
And into Punishment will run.
MAY all such Rebels to the State,
For Arnold's Crimes have Arnold's Fate,
Which basest Rebel did atone,
For Hundreds, who less Harm had done.
NOW, having told of the greatest Villain,
You cannot expect me to go still on;
And other Rebels Names bespatter,
So Mum's the Word about this Matter.
I Have said enough, I really think;
The more it is stirred, the more 'twill stink.
SO much for Hanging and for Killing,
Enough (I hope) for half Five Shillings;
For I v'e no more of this to tell,
'Ere you read Sotweed rest a Spell,
So for the present, Sirs, Farewell.
FINIS.
The Sotweed Factor, etc.
CONDEMNED by Fate, to wayward Curse,
Of Friends unkind, and empty Purse,
Plagues worse than sill'd Pandora's Box,
I took my Leave of Albion's Rocks,
With heavy Heart, concerned that I
Was forced my native Soil to fly,
And the old World must bid Good-b'ye:
But Heaven ordained it should be so,
And to repine is vain, we know.
FREIGHTED with Fools, from Plymouth Sound,
To MARYLAND our Ship was bound;
Where we arrived, in dreadful Pain,
Shocked by the Terrors of the Main;
For full Three Months our wavering Boat
Did through the surly Ocean float,
And furious Storms and threatening Blasts,
Both split our Sails, and sprung our Masts:
Wearied, yet pleased we did escape
Such Ills, we achor'd at the Cape;
But weighing soon, we plowed the Bay,
To cove it in Piscataway.
INTENDING there to open Store,
I put myself and Goods on Shore,
Where soon repaired a numerous Crew,
In Shirts and Draw'rs, of Scotch-cloth blew,
With neither Stocking, Hat, nor Shoe:
These Sotweed Planters crowd the Shore,
In Hew as tawny as a Moor;
Figures, so strange, no GOD designed
To be a Part of Human-kind:
But wanton Nature, void of Rest,
Molded the brittle Clay in Jest.
AT last, a Fancy very odd,
Took me, This was The Land of Nod,
Planted at first when Vagrant Cain
His Brother had unjustly slain;
Then, conscious of the Crime he would done,
From Vengeance dire hither run,
And in a Hut supinely dwelt,
The first in Furrs and Sotweed dealt:
And ever since that Time, this Place
Has harbored a detested Race,
Who, when they could not thrive at Home,
For Refuge to these Worlds did roam,
In Hopes by Flight they might prevent
The Devil, and his fell Intent,
Obtain from Tripple-Tree Reprieve,
And Heaven and Hell alike deceive:
But e're their Manners I display,
I think it fit I open lay
My Entertainment by the Way,
That Strangers well may be aware on
What homely Diet they must fare on;
To see that Shore where no good sense is found,
But Conversation's lost, and Manners drowned.
I crossed unto the other Side
A River, whose impetuous Tide,
Those Salvage Borders do divide,
In such a swimming odd Invension,
I scarce can give it is due Dimension,
The Indians call this watery Wagon,
Canoe, a Vessel none can brag on,
Cut from a Poplar Tree, or Pine,
And fashioned like a Trough for Swine:
In this most noble Fishing-boat,
I boldly put my self afloat,
Standing erect, with Legs stretched wide,
We paddled to the other Side;
Where being landed safe by Hap,
(As Sol fell into Thetis' Lap)
A ravenous Gang, bent on the Strowl,
Of Wolves for Prey, began to howl:
This put me in a pannick Fright,
Lest I should be devoured quite:
But as I there a Musing stood,
And quite benighted in the Wood,
A Female Voice pierced through my Ears,
Crying, You Rogue drive home the Steers:
I listened that attractive Sound,
And straight a Herd of Cattle found,
Drove by a Youth, and homeward bound.
Cheered with the Sight, I straight thought fit
To ask, Where I a Bed might get?
The surly Peasant bid me stay,
And asked, From whom I Would run away?
Surprised at such a saucy Word,
I instantly lugg'd out my Sword,
Swearing I was no Fugitive,
But from Great Britain did arrive,
In hopes I here might better thrive.
To which he mildly made Reply,
I beg your Pardon, Sir, that I
Should talk to you unmannerly:
But if you please to go with me,
To yonder House you will welcome be.
ENCOUNTERING soon the smoaky Seat,
The Planter old did thus me greet,
Whether You're come from Goal, or College,
You're Welcome, to my certain Knowledge,
And if You Will please all Night to stay,
My Son shall put You in the Way:
Which Offer I most kindly took,
And for a Seat did round me look,
When presently among the rest
He placed his unknown English Guest,
Who found 'em drinking, for a Whet,
A Cask of Sider on the Fret:
'Till Supper came upon the Table,
On which I fed whilst I was able;
So after hearty Entertainment,
Of drink and Victuals, without Payment,
For Planters Tables, you must know
Are free for all that come and go,
Whilst Pone, with Milk and Mush well stored,
In wooden Dishes graced the Board,
With Hominy and Sider-Pap,
Which scarce an English Dog would lap,
Well stuffed with Fat from Bacon fried,
And with Melasses dulcified.
Then out our Landlord pulls his Pouch,
As greasy as the Leather Couch
On which he sat, and straight begun
To load with Weed his Indian Gun,
In Length scarce longer than one's Finger,
Or that for which the Ladies linger.
His Pipe smoked out, with awful Grace,
With Aspect grave and solemn Pace,
The Reverend Sir, walks to a Chest,
Of all his Furniture the best,
Closely confined within a Room,
Which seldom felt the Weight of Broom:
From thence he lugs a Cagg of Rum,
And nodding to me, thus begun:
I find, says he, you don't much care
For this our Indian Country Fare;
But let me tell you, Friend of mine,
You may be glad of it in Time,
Though now you're Stomach is so fine;
And if within this Land you stay,
You Will find it true what I do say:
This said, the Rundlet up he threw,
And bending backwards strongly drew;
I plucked as stoutly, for my Part,
Although it made me sick at Heart,
And got so soon into my Head,
I scarce could find my Way to Bed;
Where I was instantly conveyed,
By one that passed for Chambermaid,
Though by her loose and sluttish Dress,
She rather seemed a Bedlam-Bess.
Curious to know from whence she came,
I pressed her to declare her Name?
She blushing, seemed to hide her Eyes,
And thus in civil Terms replies:
In better Times, over to this Land
I was unhappily trepanned,
Perchance as well I did appear,
As any Gentlewoman here,
Not then a Slave for Twice Two Year;
My Clothes were fashionably new,
Nor were my Shifts of Scotch Cloth blew:
But Things are changed: Now at the Hoe
I daily work, and barefoot go,
In weeding Corn, and feeding Swine,
I spend my melancholy Time;
Kidnapp'd and fooled, I hither fled,
To shun a hated Nuptial Bed;
And, to my Grief, already find
Worse Plagues than those I left behind.
WHATEVER the Wanderer did profess,
Good faith I could not choose but guess
The Cause which brought her to this Place,
Was Supping e're the Priest said Grace:
Quick as my Thoughts the Slave was fled,
Her Candle left to show my Bed,
Which, made of Feathers soft and good,
Close in the Chimney-corner stood:
I laid me down, expecting Rest,
To be in Golden Slumbers blessed;
But soon a Noise disturbed my Quiet,
And plagued me with Nocturnal Riot:
A Puss, which in the Ashes lay,
With grunting Pig, began a Fray,
And prudent Dog, that Feuds might cease,
Most sharply barked, to keep the Peace:
This Quarrel scarcely was decided
By Stick, that ready lay provided,
But Reynard, arch and cunning Loon,
Crept into my Apartment soon,
In hot Pursuit of Ducks and Geese,
With full Intent the same to seize;
Their cackling Plaints with strange Surprise
Chased Sleep's thick Vapors from my Eyes;
Raging, I jumped upon the Floor,
And like a drunken Sailor swore,
With Sword I fiercely laid about,
And soon dispersed the feathered Rout,
The Poultry out of Window flew,
And Reynard cautiously withdrew;
The Dogs who this Encounter heard,
Fiercely themselves to aid me reared,
And to the Place of Combat run,
Exactly as the Field was won,
Fretting and hot as roasted Capon,
And greasy as a Flitch of Bacon.
I to the Orchard did repair,
To breathe the cool and open Air,
Impatient waiting for bright Day,
Extended on a Bank I lay;
But Fortune here, that sawey Whore,
Disturbed me worse, and plagued me more
Than she had done the Night before;
Hoarse croaking Frogs did round me ring,
Such Peals the Dead to Life would bring,
A Noise might move their Wooden King:
I stuffed my Ears with Cotton white,
And cursed the melancholy Night,
For fear of being deaf outright:
But soon my Vows I did recant,
And Hearing as a Blessing grant,
When a confounded Rattle-Snake
With Hissing made my Heart to ach,
Not knowing how to fly the Foe,
Or whither in the dark to go,
By strange good Luck I took a Tree,
Prepared by Fate to set me free,
Where, riding on a Limb astride,
Night and the Branches did me hide,
And I the De'el and Snake defied.
Not yet from Plagues exempted quite,
The cursed Muschetoes did me bite;
'Til rising Morn, and blushing Day,
Drove both my Fears and Ills away,
And from Night's Terrors set me free,
Discharged from hospitable Tree.
I did to Planter's Booth repair,
And there at Breakfast nobly fare,
On Rasher broiled, of infant Bear:
I thought the Cubb delicious Meat,
Which never did ought but Chestnuts eat,
Nor was young Orson's Flesh the worse,
Because he sucked a Pagan Nurse:
Our Breakfast done, the Planter stout,
Handed a Glass of Rum about.
PLEASED with the Treatment I did find,
I took my Leave of Host so kind,
Who, to oblige me, did provide
His eldest Son to be my Guide;
And lent me Horses of his own,
A skittish Colt and aged Roan,
The four legged Prop of his Wife Joan.
Steering our Course in Trott or Pace,
We sailed directly for a Place,
In MARYLAND of high Renown;
Known by the Name of Battle-Town:
To view the Crowds did there resort,
Which Justice made, and Law, their Sport,
In their Sagacious County Court:
Scarce had we entered on the Way,
Which through the Woods and Marshes lay,
But Indian strange did soon appear
In hot Pursuit of wounded Deer;
No mortal Creature can express
His wild fantastic Air and Dress;
His painted Skin, in Colors died,
His sable Hair, in Satchel tied,
Showed Salvages not free from Pride:
His tawny Thinghs and Bosom bare,
Disdained an useless Coat to wear,
Scorned Summers Heat and Winters Air;
His manly Shoulders, such as please
Widows and Wives, were bathed with Grease,
Of Cub and Bear, whose supple Oil,
Prepared his Limbs in Heat and Toil.
THUS naked Pict in Battle fought,
Or undisguis'd his Mistress sought;
And knowing well his Ware was good,
Refused to skreen it with a Hood:
His Visage Dun, and Chin that near
Did Razor feel, nor Scissars bear,
Or know the Ornament of Hair,
Looked sternly grim; supriz'd with Fear,
I spurred my Horse as he drew near;
But Roan, who better knew than I,
The little Cause I had to fly,
Seemed by his solemn Steps and Pace,
Resolved I should the Spector face,
Nor faster moved, though spurred and pricked,
Than Balam's Ass by Prophet kicked;
Kekicnatop, the Heathen cried,
How is it Tom, my Friend replied;
Judging from thence, the Brute was civil,
I boldly faced the courteous Devil,
And lugging out a Dram of Rum,
I gave his tawny Worship some;
Who in his Language as I guess,
My Guide informing me no less,
Implored the Devil me to bless:
I thanked him for his good Intent,
And forward on my Journey went;
Discoursing as along I rode,
Whether this Race was framed of GOD,
Or whether some malignant Power,
Had framed them in an evil Hour,
And from his own infernal Look,
Their dusky Form and Image took.
FROM hence we fell to Argument
Whence peopled was this Continent?
My Friend supposed Tartarians wild,
Or Chinese, from their home exiled,
Wandering through Mountains hid with Snow,
And Rills that in the Valleys flow,
Far to the South of Mexico,
Broke through the Bars which Nature cast,
And wide unbeaten Regions past;
'Till near those Streams the human Deluge rolled,
Which sparkling shined with glittering Sands of Gold;
And fetched Pisarro from the Iberian Shore
To rob the Indians of their native Store.
I smiled to hear my young Logician,
Thus reason like a Politician;
Who never by Father's Pains and Earning,
Had got, at Mother, Cambridge Learning;
Where lubber Youth just free from Birch,
Most stoutly drink to prop the Church;
Nor with gray Coat had taken Pains
To purge his Head, and cleanse his Reins;
And in Obedience to the College,
Had pleased himself with carnal Knowledge;
And though I liked the Younster's Wit,
I judged the Truth he had not hit;
And could not choose but smile to think,
What they could do for Meat and Drink,
Who over so many Deserts ran,
With Brats and Wives in Carravan;
Unless perchance they would got a Trick,
To eat no more than Porker sick,
Or could with well-contented Maws,
Quarter like Bears upon their Paws:
Thinking his Reason to confute,
I gravely thus commenced Dispute;
And urged, that though a Chinese Host
Might penetrate this Indian Coast,
Yet this was certainly most true,
They never could the Isles subdue;
For knowing not to steer a Boat,
They could not on the Ocean float,
Or plant their Sunburned Colonies,
In Regions parted by the Seas:
I thence inferred, Phoenicians old
Discovered first, with Vessels bold,
These Western Shores, and planted here,
Returning once or twice a Year,
With Naval Stores, and Lasses kind,
To comfort those were left behind;
'Till by the Winds and Tempests tore,
From their intended golden Shore,
They suffered Shipwreck, or were drowned,
And lost the World so newly found:
But after long and learned Contention,
We could not finish our Dissension;
And when that both had talked their Fill,
We had the self same Notion still.
THUS Parson Grave well read, and Sage,
Does in Dispute with Priest engage,
The one protests they are not wise,
Who judge by Sense, and trust their Eyes,
And vows he would burn for it at Stake,
That Man may GOD his Maker make;
The other smiles at his Religion,
And vows he is but a learned Widgeon,
And when they have emptied all their Store,
From Books and Father, are not more
Convinced, or wiser than before.
SCARCE had we finished serious Story,
But I espied the Town before me;
And roaring Planters on the Ground,
Drinking of Healths, in Circle round;
Dismounting Steed with friendly Guide,
Our Horses to a Tree we tied,
And forward passed amongst the Rout,
To choose convenient Quarters out;
But being none were to be found,
We sat like others on the Ground,
Carousing Punch in open Air,
'Till Crier did the Court declare:
The planting Rabble being met,
Their drunken Worships likewise fat,
Crier proclaims the Noise should cease,
And straight the Lawyers broke the Peace,
Wrangling for Plantiff and Defendant,
I thought they never would make an End on it,
With Nonsense, Stuff, and false Quotations,
With brazen Lies, and Allegations;
And in the Splitting of the Cause,
Used such strange Motions with their Paws,
As showed their Zeal was rather bent
In Blows to end the Argument.
A Reverend Judge, who to the Shame,
Of all the Bench, could write his Name,
At Petty-Fogger took Offense,
And wondered at his Impudence:
My Neighbor Dash, with Scorn replies,
And in the Face of Justice flies;
The Bench in Fury straight divide,
And Scribles take on Judge's Side;
The Jury, Lawyers, and their Clients,
Contending, fight, like Earth-born Giants,
'Till Sh'riff that slily lay perdue,
Hoping Indictments would ensue;
And when --
A Hat or Wig fell in the Way,
He seized 'em for the Queen, as Stray;
The Court adjourned in usual Manner,
In Battle, Blood, and fractious Clamor.
I thought it proper to provide.
A Lodging for my self and Guide;
So to our Inn we marched away,
Which at a little Distance lay;
Where all Things were in such Consusion,
I thought the World at it is Conclusion;
A Heard of Planters on the Ground,
Overwhelmed with Punch, dead Drunk we found;
Others were fighting and contending,
Some burned their Clothes, to save the mending;
A few whose Heads, by frequent Use,
Could better bear the potent Juice,
Gravely debated State Affairs,
Whilst I most nimbly tripp'd up Stairs,
Leaving my Friend discoursing oddly,
And mixing Things Profane and Godly;
Just then beginning to be drunk,
As from the Company I slunk:
To every Room and Nook I crept,
In hopes I might have somewhere slept;
But all the Beding was possessed,
By one or other drunken Guest;
But after looking long about,
I found an ancient Corn-loft out;
Glad that I might in Quiet sleep,
And there my Bones unfractur'd keep:
I laid me down secured from Fray,
And soundly snor'd 'till break o'Day;
When waking fresh, I sat upright,
And found my Shoes were vanished quite,
Hat, Wig, and Stockings, all were fled,
From this extended Indian Bed:
Vexed at the Loss of Goods and Chattle,
I swore I Would give the Rascal Battle,
Who had abused me in this Sort,
And Merchant-Stranger made his Sport:
I furiously descended Ladder,
No Hare in March was ever madder,
And did with Host and Servants quarrel,
But all in vain, for my Apparel;
For one whose Mind did much aspire
To Mischief, threw them in the Fire.
Equipped with neither Hat nor Shoe,
I did my coming hither rue,
And doubtful thoughts what I should do:
When looking round I saw my Friend,
Lie naked on a Table's End,
A Sight so dismal to behold,
One would have thought him dead and cold,
There ready laid, to be next Day
On Shoulders Four conveyed away:
'Till wringing of his bloody Nose,
By fighting got, we may suppose,
I found him not so fast asleep,
Might give his Friends some cause to weep:
Rise Oronoko, rise, said I,
And from this Hell and Bedlam fly:
My Guide starts up, and in a Maze,
With Bloodshot Eyes did round him gaze,
At Lenth with many Sigh and Groan,
He went in search of aged Roan;
But Roan who seldom used to falter,
Had fairly this Time slipped his Halter,
And not content all Night to stay,
Tied up from Fodder, run away;
After my Guide to catch him ran,
And so I lost both Horse and Man;
Which Disappointment though so great,
Did only Jest and Mirth create:
'Till one more civil than the rest,
In Conversation far the best,
Observing that for want of Roan,
I should be left to walk alone,
Most readily did me entreat,
To take a Bottle at his Seat,
A Favor at that Time so great,
I blessed my kind propitious Fate;
And finding soon a fresh Supply
Of Clothes, from Storehouse kept hard by,
I mounted straight on such a Steed,
Did rather Curb than Whipping need;
And straining at the usual Rate,
With Spur of Punch which lies in Pate,
Ever long we lighted at the Gate;
Where in an ancient Cedar-House,
Dwelt my new Friend, a Cockerouse,
Whose Fabric, though 'twas built of Wood,
Had many Springs and Winters stood:
When sturdy Oaks and lofty Pines,
Were levelled with Musk-Melon-Vines,
And Plants eradicated were,
By Hurricans drove in the Air:
There with good Punch and Apple Juice,
We spent our Time without Abuse,
'Till Midnight in her sable Vest,
Persuaded Gods and Men to rest;
And with a pleasing kind Surprise,
Indulged soft Slumber to my Eyes.
FIERCE Aethon, Courser of the Sun,
Had half his Race exactly Run,
And breathed on me a furious Ray,
Darting hot Beams the following Day,
When Rug in Blanket white, I lay;
But Heat and Chinces raised the Sinner,
Most opportunely to his Dinner;
Wild Fowl and Fish delicious Meats,
As good as Neptune's Doxy eats,
Began our hospitable Cheer,
Fat Venison followed in the Rear,
And Turkeys wild, luxurious Fare:
But what the Feast did most commend,
Was hearty Welcome from my Friend.
THUS having made a noble Feast,
I eat as well as pampered Priest;
Madera strong in flowing Bowls,
Filled with extreme Delight our Souls;
'Till wearied with a purple Flood,
Of generous Wine, the Giants Blood,
As Poets feign, away I made
For some refreshing verdant Shade;
Where musing on my Rambles strange,
And Fortune, which so often did change,
In midst of various Contemplations,
Of Fancies odd and Meditations,
I slumber'd long, --
'Till airy Night and noxious Dews,
Did Sleep's unwholesome Fetters loose,
With Vapors cold and misty Air,
To Fireside I did repair;
Near which a jolly Female Crew,
Were deep engaged at Lanterloo,
In Nightrails white, with dirty Mien,
Such Sights are scarce in England seen;
I thought them first some Witches, bent
On black Designs, in dire Convent;
'Till one who with affected Air,
Had nicely learned to Curse and Swear,
Cried, Dealing's lost, it is but a Flam,
And vowed by G -- she would have her Pam:
When Dealing through the Board had run,
They asked me kindly, to make one:
Not staying often to be bid,
I sat me down as others did;
We scarce had played a Round about,
But that those Indian Frows fell out:
D -- m you, says one, though now so Brave,
I knew you late a Four Years Slave,
What, if for Planter's Wife you go,
Nature designed you for the Hoe:
Rot you, replies the other straight,
The Captain kissed you for his Freight;
And if the Truth was known aright,
And how you walked the Streets by Night,
You Would blush, if one could blush for Shame,
Who from Bridewell and Newgate came.
From Words they fairly fell to Blows,
And being loath to interpose,
Or meddle in the Wars of Punk,
Away to Bed in Haste I slunk:
Waking next Day with aching Head,
And Thirst that made me quit the Bed,
I rigged my self and soon got up,
To cool my Liver with a Cup
Of Succahanah fresh and clear,
Not half so good as English Beer,
Which ready stood in Kitchen Pail,
And was, in Fact, but Adam's Ale.
FOR Planters Cellars, you must know,
Seldom with good October flow,
But Perry, Quince, and Apple Juice,
Spout from the Tap, like any Sluice,
Until the Cask grows low and stale,
They Are forced again to Goard and Pail,
The soothing Draught scarce down my Throat,
Enough to set a Ship on float,
With Cockerouse as I was sitting
I felt a Fever intermitting,
A fiery Pulse beat in my Veins,
From cold I felt resembling Pains;
This cursed Seasoning I remember,
Lasted from March 'till cold December;
Nor could it then it is Quarter shift,
Until by Carduus turned adrift:
And had my Doct'ress wanted Skill,
Or Kitchin-Phisick at her Will,
My Father's Son had lost his Lands,
And never seen the Goodwin Sands:
But Thanks to Fortune, and a Nurse,
Whose Care depended on my Purse,
I saw my self in good Condition,
Without the Help of a Phisician:
At length the shivering Ill relieved
My Heart and Head, which long had grieved.
I then began to think with Care,
How I might sell my British Ware;
That with my Freight I might comply,
Did on my Charter-Party lie:
To this Intent, with Guide before,
I tript it to the Eastern Shore;
Where riding near a Sandy Bay,
I met a Planter in my Way,
A pious, conscientious Rogue,
As e're wore Bonnet, Hat, or Brogue,
Who neither swore, nor kept his Word,
But cheated in the Fear of the Lord;
And when his Debts he could not pay,
From trusting Fools he would run away.
WITH this sly Zealot, soon I struck
A Bargain, for my English Truck,
Agreeing for Ten Thousand Weight
Of Sotweed good, and fit for Freight:
Broad Oronoko, bright and sound,
The Growth and Product of his Ground;
In Cask, that should contain complete
Five Hundred of Tobacco neat.
THE Contract thus betwixt us made,
Not well acquainted with the Trade,
My Goods I trusted to the Cheat,
Whose Crop was then o'board the Fleet;
And going to receive my own,
I found the Bird was newly flown:
Cursing this execrable Slave,
This damned pretended Godly Knave,
On due Revenge and Justice bent,
I instantly to Council went;
Unto an ambodexter Quack,
Who learnedly had got the Knack
Of giving Clysters, making Pills,
Of filling Bonds, and forging Wills;
And with a Stock of Impudence,
Supplied his want of Wit and Sense,
With Looks demure, amazing People,
No wiser than a Daw on Steeple
My Anger flushing in my Face,
I stated the preceding Case,
And of my Money was so free
That he would have poisoned you or me,
And hanged his Father on a Tree,
For such another tempting Fee.
SMILING, said he, the Cause is clear,
I Will manage him, you need not fear,
The Case is judged, good Sir, but look
In Galen, no, in my Lord Cook,
I vow to G-d, I was mistook:
I Will take out a Provincial Writ,
And trownce him for his knavish Wit,
Upon my Life, I Will win the Cause,
With as much Ease I cure the Yaws:
Resolved to plague the Holy Brother,
I set one Rogue to catch another.
TO try the Cause then fully bent,
Up to Annapolis I went,
A City situate on a Plain,
This Account of Annapolis was given Twenty Years ago, and does not resemble
it is present State.
Where scarce a House will keep out Rain;
The Buildings framed with Cypress rare,
Resembles much our Southwark-Fair;
But Strangers there will scarcely meet,
With Market Place, Exchange, or Street;
And if the Truth I may report,
It Is not so large as Tottenham-Court.
St. Mary's once was in Repute,
Now Here the Judges try the Suit,
And Lawyers twice a Year dispute.
As often the Bench most gravely meet,
Some to get drink, and some to eat
A swinging Share of Country Treat:
But as for Justice write or wrong,
Not one amongst the numerous Throng
Knows what it means, or has the Heart,
To vindicate a Stranger's Part.
NOW, Court being called by beat of Drum,
The Judges left their Punch and Rum;
When Pettifogging Doctor draws
His Papers forth, and opens Cause;
And lest I should the Better get,
Bribed Quack suppressed his knavish Wit:
So Maid upon the downy Field,
Pretends a Rape, and fights to yield:
The biased Court without Delay,
Adjudg'd my Debt in Country Pay,
In Pipe Staves,-Corn, or Flesh of Boar,
Rare Cargo for the English Shore.
Raging with Grief, full Speed I ran,
To join the Fleet at Kickatan:
And while I waited for a Wind,
This Wish proceeded from my Mind,
IF any Youngster cross the Ocean,
To sell his Wares -- may he with Caution
Before he pays, receive each Hogshead,
Lest he be cheated by some Dogshead,
Both of his Goods and his Tobacco;
And then like me, be shall not lack-woe.
AND may that Land where Hospitality,
Is every Planter's darling Quality,
Be by each Trader kindly used,
And may no Trader be abused;
Then each of them shall deal with Pleasure,
And each increase the other's Treasure.
N B. The Author of these POEMS intending to publish his Works Annually, under
the same Title, hopes The Second Part (when ready for the Press) will meet with
the like Encouragement from his Friends and Benefactors.


