AN Excellent Sermon Upon the GREAT SALVATION.

By that pious and worthy Servant of JESUS CHRIST, Mr. Andrew Gray, Late
Minister of the Gospel in the City of Glasgow.

BOSTON, Printed for Benjamin Gray, No. 2. at the Head of the Town-Dock. 1731.

TO THE READER.
THis excellent Sermon comes to you upon the most important Errand that can
possibly be, even to persuade you to embrace the great Salvation offered to you
in the Gospel, by a glorious Redeemer: One would think few Arguments might
persuade People to embrace a Blessing so much to their Pleasure, Profit and
Advantage; but sad it is to see that the most inexpressibly glorious Things of
the heavenly World are so slighted, neglected and despised by almost all the
sinful Race of fallen apostate Man: And how much more strange that so many
Arguments must be used and that to so little Purpose, to persuade Men to accept
of such glorious Things as in the Word of God we are assured are prepared for,
and shall certainly be given to the Embracers of this great Salvation. The
Author who is now reaping the happy Fruits and Effects thereof, and beholding
and enjoying the Blessings that does accompany the same, has so sweetly and
earnestly persuaded to the Embracement thereof, that I shall say no more, but
look up to the God of all Grace for his Blessing upon the delightful,
awakening, Soul comforting Discourse,

A SERMON Concerning the Great Salvation.
HEB. II. 3. How shall we escape if we neglect so great Salvation, which at the
first began to be spoken by the Lord, and was confirmed unto us by them that
heard him.


THERE are two great and most ordinary Complaints in these days. 1. There are
many who complain, that their Estates and Persons are in Bondage, and that they
are sold for slaves to the Hands of Strangers: But, O that we could also turn
over the Complaint to this, that our Souls are in Bondage, and that we are yet
in the Gall of Bitterness, and in the Bond of Iniquity, that so we might be
provoked to long for the great Salvation that is in our Offer. 2. There are
many complaining (and not without much cause) that there is now such a
toleration of Errors: But O will thou complain also of this, that within thy
Heart there is a Tolleration of Lusts; is there not an Act of Tolleration
concluded within thy Breast, that the Devil and all his Company may reign in
thee at Pleasure: Oh have ye not need of the great Salvation? Shall I tell you,
that Christ is courting you to embrace it, and that he puts all his most
glorious Robes upon you, and manifests himself unto you, as a Suitor making
offer of himself and of his great Salvation O tell me, Have ye seen him? Or do
ye think to see him this Day? What Robes had he on? There are five glorious
Robes wherewith he clothes himself when he condescendeth to manifest himself to
his people. First he comes to his own with the Garments of Salvation,
according to that Word, Zech. 9.9. Rejoice O Daughter of Sion greatly, shout O
Daughter of Jerusalem: for behold, thy King comes unto thee, he is just, and
having Salvation; ay, your King is come here to day, and will ye not fall in
love with him when he is clothed with the Garments of Salvation, can ye ever
have a more conquering Sight of Christ, then when he is clothed with such an
excellent Robe, and offering you Salvation. Secondly, He appears to his own
in Garments died in Blood, according to that Word, Isai. 63.1, 2. Who is this
that comes up from Edom with ^^ed Garments in Blood, as one that treads the
Wine fat. And now I say to thee that will not look to Christ, when he appears
in the Garments of Salvation, have ye a Heart to refuse him that has fought
such a Combat for you, who has trod the Wine Press alone, and has stained
all his Garments with the Blood of thy Enemies; or is there any here who dare
refuse his Salvation, when they see how he treads his Enemies in Anger, and
trampleth them in Fury, and thus sprinkleth their Blood upon his Garments. O
tremble at this Sight, and seek Quarter from him in time, or he shall die his
Garments with the Blood of thy immortal Soul. Thirdly, Christ appears unto
his own, being clothed with these humble Robes of Condescendency, when he came
in the similitude of sinful Flesh: O what a Sight was that, to behold the
Prince of Heaven clothed with our Nature; What a Sight was that to behold him
that was clothed with Light as with a Garment, to be clothed with our
Infirmities, yet he condescended to cloth himself thus, that we might have
access unto him, and be partakers of his Gifts: O can we refuse him, when love
has thus pressed him to put on the beggarly Weed that he might say to Worms,
ye are my Brethren and my Sisters. Fourthly, Christ sometimes manifests
himself, being clothed with the Garments of Beauty, and ravishing Majesty;
such was the Sight that the Spouse got of Christ, Cant. 2.3. As the Apple tree
among the Trees of the Wood, so is my Beloved among the Sons. And 5.10. when
she saw him, White and rudy, and the standard bearer of ten thousand, and when
such was the joyful Sight of him, when his Garments were as Light, and white as
the Snow, which he had at the Transfiguration, when these glorified ones did
come (as it were) Ambassadors from that higher House to make him a Visit. And
fifthly, Christ he sometimes appears to his own in Robes of dreadful Majesty,
and terrible Highness and Loftiness, when the Soul upon the first Sight of him
remains dead, and there remains no more Life in them: Such was the Sight Daniel
got in his 10. Chapter. And such was the Sight that John got of Christ, Rev.
1.17. And I would ask at all that are here, what a Sight have ye gotten of
Christ to day, in which of all these Robes have ye seen him: It is true, we are
not now to look for the extraordinary Sights of him; but yet if ever thou have
seen him in any of his woing Robes, surely he has appeared Matchless, and how
shall ye then refuse him.

But now to come to the Words I was speaking unto you of; The first thing in
the Words, viz.

That there are many who live under the Offer of this great Salvation that do
slight it, and do not embrace it. And now, I shall only add a few things
further unto you.

1. Let me propose a few Considerations to persuade you to embrace the great
Salvation. God forbid we go away before we embrace this Gospel-Salvation: And
therefore, I charge you in his Name, (...) not away before ye embrace it. And
(...) press it home upon you, there are th^^^ eight or nine Properties of this
great Salvation, that is offered unto you this Day.

And first, It is a free Salvation, ye have no more ado, but to put forth your
Hand and take it: O come and take it: Christ has fought for this Salvation,
and there is no more required of you, but to come and reap the Fruits of his
Victory: Whoever will let him come, there is nothing that should move you to
stay away, O Captives, Bond slaves to Satan, O Prisoners of Hope, will ye come
and partake of the great Salvation, what holds you from coming away and
partaking of it, it is freely offered unto you: ay, believe it, Christ requires
no more of you, but that ye should come and take it out of his Hand; if ye
consent to obey, the Bargain is ended* Ye shall eat the good of the Land, Isai.
1.

Secondly, This great Salvation, is a complete Salvation, that is offered unto
you to day; this is clear, Luke 1. ^1. That we might be saved from our Enemies,
and from the Hand of all that hate us. There is not any Enemy that is in thy
Way, but if thou will come and partake of the great Salvation, thou may have
Victory over it, so complete a Salvation is it that is in your Offer this Day.
O shall we pass away, and not embrace it: O shall our cursed Hearts undervalue
complete at Salvation that is come to your Door, believe (...) Salvation is
near unto you, if ye will take (...)

Thirdly, It is a wonderful Salvation, it is such a Salvation as to pry into
it, and it is such a Salvation that all the Prophets desired to pry into it; It
is almost six thousand Years since all the Angels in Heaven fell into a Sea of
Wonder at this great Salvation: It is almost six thousand Years since Abel fell
into a Sea of Wonder at this great Salvation: And what think ye is his Exercise
this Day? He is even wondering at this great Salvation: Would ye ask at all the
Angels in Heaven, would they not all say, O embrace the great Salvation? Would
ye ask at all the Saints that are above, would they not advise you to embrace
the great Salvation? Would ye ask at Adam, would he not say, O embrace the
great Salvation? Could ye ask at Abel, Would he not say, O embrace the great
Salvation? And would not all the Patriarchs say unto you, O embrace the great
Salvation? And do not all that have tasted of the Sweetness of it, (...) out
unto you, Come and embrace the great Salvation.

The fourth Property of his Salvation is, that it was bought at an exceeding
dear Rate, it is a dear Salvation. Would ye know the Difference between
Christ's coming to this Salvation, and your coming to it, it is this: Christ
was forced to travel through all the Armies of the Justice of God: He was
forced to drink of the Cup of the Wrath of God, before he could come to
purchase this great Salvation; and now what is required of you to obtain this,
we may say no more, but put out your Hands and take it: Will ye look to the
Price that was laid down for this Salvation, there is not a Wound in the Body
of Christ, but it is said, This is a dear Salvation. There is not a Reproach
Christ met with, but it says, O is not this a dear Salvation! There is not a
buffeting Christ met with, but it says, O is not this a dear Salvation! There
is not a Necessity that he was put into, but it says, Is not this a great and
dear Salvation? O Sirs, will ye not come and take this great Salvation, this
dear Salvation. What must I give for it say ye? I say, ye must give nothing for
it, come and take it without Money, and without Price; it was dear unto Christ,
but it shall be cheap unto you. O is it not cheap to you, I assure you, if ye
will come to the Market to buy the great Salvation, there is none of you that
needs to stand for the Price of it. O come and take, and have it, and there
shall be no more prigging.

Fifthly, It is an everlasting Salvation, that ye shall enjoy the Fruits of
throughout Eternity, as is clear, Heb. 9.13. He became the Author of eternal
Redemption unto us. It is a Salvation that the Devil can never be able to take
out of your Hand, if ye take it, ye shall never be robbed of it again. O come
and partake of this great Salvation, whereby the Gates of Hell shall never
prevail against you.

Sixthly, It is a noble and honorable Salvation, it is not to be taken out of
one Slavery to another, but it is to be taken out of Prison that we may reign:
Luke 1.71. compared with Verse 74. it is That we being saved, may serve him
without Fear in Holiness and Righteousness, all the Days of our Life. I say,
Come, come, and partake of this great Salvation, that your Glory may be
increased, and that ye may be exalted above the Kings of the Earth.

Seventhly, It is a most advantageous Salvation What are the Advantages of any
Salvation that are not to be found in this? Is there not Peace to be found
through this Salvation? Is there not Liberty to be found through this
Salvation? Is there not eternal Enjoyment of God to be found in this Salvation?
Yea, all Salvations are in this one Salvation.

Lastly, It is a royal Salvation, for it comes to us from and through the Son
of God. Christ is the Author of it, and we conceive, Christ may be said to be
the Author of this Salvation, in these Respects, 1. He is the meritorious Cause
that did procure it, it was the Price of his Blood that was laid down for to
purchase this great Salvation. 2. He is the Fountain from whence it flows,
according to that Word which we have cited, Heb. 5.9. He is the Author of
eternal Salvation. 3. He is the Person that fitteth our Spirits for partaking
of it, and it is he that removes Mountains out of the Way, that we may have
fair Access unto the great Salvation. 4. It is he that must persuade our Hearts
to embrace and to take hold of it. He stands without, and cries in to the
Heart, to embrace the great Salvation; And he stands within, making the Heart
cry out; Content, I will embrace the great Salvation: He is indeed the Person
that commends, and does point forth this great Salvation unto us, he is the
noble Minister of it, it began first to be preached by him.

Now, Is there any of you that have fallen in love with the great Salvation?
That ye may try your selves, I shall give you some Evidences of the Persons
that are near unto this great Salvation, 1. Is thy Estimation of the great
Salvation increased, beyond what it was in the morning when thou came hither?
Is thy Estimation of the great Gospel-Salvation a Foot higher than it was in
the morning, I say unto thee, thou art not far from the great Salvation: Come
away. 2. Is thy desire after the great Salvation increased beyond what it was
in the morning? Have thou stronger Desires after the great Salvation than
before thou came hither? That is an Evidence thou art not far from it. 3. Is
thy Thoughts of thy Necessity of the great Salvation greater than they were?
Think thou that thou have more need of the great Salvation than ever thou
thoughtest before. And is thy Opinion and Thoughts of saving thy self less than
they were before thou came hither? Art thou forced to cry out, None but
Christ can save me? I say thou art not far from the great Salvation, Will thou
come away? O that ye would once seal this Conclusion with much
Heart-Perswasion, I am undone without Christ, I am undone without Christ, who
is the Author of the great Salvation: Are there any of you that are sensible
that ye are in the Fetters of Sin, and in the Bonds of Iniquity? Are ye brought
to the Conviction of this, that ye are in the Gall of Bitterness? I say, if
thou be brought to this Length, to be sensible of thy Bonds, and art crying
out, O Redeemer, hasten and come away! I say, if thou be sensible of thy Bonds
and Imprisonment, and crying out, O thou that was anointed from Eternity, to
proclaim Liberty to the Captives, and the opening of the Prison to them that
are bound. O hasten and come away, and redeem me, even poor me, sinking,
sinning, perishing, self-destroying me, thou art not far from the great
Salvation. 4. Art thou a Person who begins to weep because thou have been so
long a Stranger to Christ, and the great Salvation? Old Men that are here, how
long have ye been Strangers to the great Salvation, and to the Author of it?
Now will ye shed one Tear for your Estrangement, and cry out, Woe is me that
Christ and I have been so long asunder? I say, if thou have: come to that
Length, thou art not far from the great Salvation, Come away: O pity your
selves, make haste and come away.

But now in the third Place, Let me give you some Evidences by which ye may
know more clearly whether or no ye have embraced this great Salvation, that ye
may know your selves, and that ye walk not down to the Grave with a Lie in your
right hand. The first Evidence of a Person that has embraced the great
Salvation, is, that he will have a high Esteem of the Savior and Author of the
great Salvation: Have thou a matchless Esteem of matchless Christ the Savior
of the World, that is a speaking Evidence unto thee, thou art a Partaker of the
great Salvation: Art thou come to this Length that thou criest out, None but
Christ, None but Christ? It is a speaking Evidence that thou art come to be a
Partaker of the great Salvation, when thou can cry out th^^ Word, Exodus 15.2.
The Lord is my Strength and my Song, he alone is become my Salvation. If Christ
has become thy Salvation then it is like he has become thy Song. I would ask
this of you, were ye ever brought this Length, that ye durst not adventure to
praise Christ alone, but was forced to call in all the Creatures, and say, O
magnify the Lord with me, O that is an Evidence that ye have embraced his
Salvation.

Secondly, Those who have embraced the great Salvation will study to maintain
and keep their Hold of it, they will study to hold fast so precious a Jewel,
this is pressed, Gal. 5.1. Stand fast in the Liberty wherewith Christ has made
us free. Yea, they will study to walk suitably to to this noble Mercy, at least
they will strive and endeavor to do it, as is also pressed in that same Verse.
I say, if thou have been made a Partaker of the Gospel of Salvation, thou will
strive to keep thy self from the Power of these Things that once triumphed over
thee.

Thirdly, A Person that is a Partaker of the great Salvation will have a high
Esteem of this Mercy and Salvation; so Paul when he speaks of it here, he
cannot but put some Note of Excellency to it, calling it, the great Salvation.
Therefore, I say, if thou have embraced the great Salvation, thou will have so
high Esteem of it, not to be subjected to it as thou should, or to be in
Subjection to the Power of thy Lust in any Measure, will be his Burden and
Affliction; the Man will be sorry when he is brought forth from the House of
his Bondage, unto the Red Sea; he will be sorry, that when he should have Songs
of Triumph over his Idols put into his Mouth, that they should sing Songs of
Triumph over him.

Fourthly. A Person that has embraced the great Salvation, he will be longing
sometimes for the Day when this Salvation shall be complete, when he shall sing
that Song, with that numberous Multitude which cannot be numbered, Rev. 7.9. O
what a Day shall it be, when thou shall begin to sing that Song: After this
(says he) I beheld, and lo, a great Multitude of all People, which no Man
could number, of all People, Nations and Languages stood before the Throne, and
before the Lamb, clothed with white Robes, and Palms in their Hands, and they
cried; and how cried they? They cried with a loud Voice: they would not mutter
the Song, nor sing silently, but cried with a loud Voice: and what did they
cry? they cried with a loud Voice, Salvation unto our God, who sits upon the
Throne, and to the Lamb. I would only ask at you that are Partakers of the
great Salvation, What Songs shall be put into thy Mouth, when the Waters of
Jordan shall divide themselves, that the ransomed of the Lord might pass
through? when thou shall sing that Song, Psalm. 115.1. Not unto us, not unto us,
but unto thee belongs the Glory of our Salvation. O what a Day shall that be,
when that excellent Song shall be put in thy Mouth; yea, what a Day shall it
be, when thou shall be clothed with these excellent Garments that are made
mention of, Isai. 6.10. for he has clothed thee with the Garments of
Salvation, and he has covered thee with the Robe of Righteousness O what Robes
are these? Did ye ever see such excellent Robes as these must be? I think we
shall not know our selves; O do you not think we shall not know our selves,
when we shall put on these excellent Robes? Now therefore, is the Bargain
closed; or will ye go away before ye take this great Salvation? Dare ye go out
at these Doors and neglect the great Salvation? I would ask this of you, Think
ye it will not be most sad, that Christ should tell this in Heaven of you to
night, I was preached to a pack of Stones, that none of them would love me?
Will ye not be afraid that this Report shall be carried back to Heaven of you?
For what Report can Christ carry back but this? Now is the Cord of this great
Salvation let down unto you, is there none of you that will take a hold of it,
O will ye seek after it, will ye make this a rejoicing Day in Heaven, that is a
fasting Day unto you, and the Way to make it so, is to embrace the great
Salvation. Now what say ye to it old Men? Let me speak to you, and ask your
Thoughts of the great Salvation, Gray Hairs should be a Crown of Glory, if it
be found in the Way of Righteousness, old Men speak your Minds, that young Men
may not have your bad Example: What say ye of this Salvation? Is it not a most
glorious Salvation, is it not a most excellent Salvation that is in your Offer?
I entreat you speak your Minds, tell Christ ye are content to take the great
Salvation; otherwise, whoever he be that will not partake of this Gospel
Salvation; I in the Name and Authority of Christ our Master, denounce eternal
and irrevocable War against him. Put on your Harness, ye shall not boast when
ye put it off again, the Wrath and Fury of God shall come upon you to the
uttermost if ye embrace not this great Salvation: other Wars are but for a
time: the greatest Captains that ever the Earth did carry, are now laid down in
the sides of the Pit, and their Swords broken under their Heads. Armies of ten
hundred thousand, a hundred Years Time have laid them all in their Graves, and
ended all their Contests, but there is no Discharge of his War that shall be
concluded betwixt Christ and you, it shall become an eternal and most terrible
War, which shall be but beginning when Time is ended: Now Peace or War, which
of them will ye choose? Dare ye send a Charge to Christ, and say ye will defy
him? I am afraid there will be two Things that many of us shall report to day.
First, I am afraid there will be many that will give Pharaoh's Report to the
offer of the great Salvation, and say, Who is the Lord that I should obey him?
I tell you who he is, He is glorious in Holiness, fearful in Praises, doing
Wonders. O embrace him before he go hence, and give not Pharaoh's Report, lest
ye be drowned in the Sea of his Wrath, whence there shall be no Recovery.

Secondly, I fear there will be many here to day that will give Demas's Report
to this precious Offer: I will go and forsake Christ, and embrace this present
World: O bad Exchange! cursed be he that shall make it, will ye be of Demas's
Humor? I fear there has been many of that Humor of a long time: but I
entreat you once to be wise before ye die. I confess that Proverb old Fools,
are twice Fools; I think old Men that will not embrace the great Salvation, I
think ye are triple Fools? What wait ye for? Is there any thing can afford you
any Satisfaction but this great Salvation? Now are ye convinced old Men, that
Christ is waiting for your Answer? I entreat you before ye go hence, speak your
minds, what ye think of the great Salvation; Is it not a lovely Salvation, is
it not lovely now? What say ye to it? I am to go away, and the Offer is to be
taken up at this time, and it is hard to say if ever ye shall have an Offer
again. I would only say this to you, and be sure of it, though I should never
be a Partaker of this great Salvation, yet I shall be a Witness against you
that are not Partakers of it; I tell and declare unto you, I shall be a Witness
against you if ye embrace not the great Salvation: Now old Men are ye persuaded
to embrace it, Let me obtest you by the Beauty of Christ, come and partake of
the great Salvation, ye that are traveling upon the Borders of Eternity. Now
if ye will give no more, give this, will ye go home and think upon it; I shall
not be uncharitable, nor enter to judge your Thoughts: I fear there shall be
many declared and found Guilty among us, that we declared unto Heaven we will
not embrace the great Salvation, but have trod the Blood of the Son of God
under Foot. Now I entreat you, every one of you ask at your selves if ye be the
Persons that will presume in your Hearts to do so. Now I shall leave it with
you, let it not be a Witness against you. I shall leave it with this. O come
away, old Men, young Men, old Women, and Maids, come and embrace this precious
Gospel Salvation. Ye may say, ye bid us come; but we cannot come. I desire no
more of you, but to come with this; Lord I am content to come, but I cannot
come. Come once to that, for if once ye be content to receive it, it will not
be long before ye be able to receive it: Now shall Christ depart, and will none
of you say ye are content to take him? Will ye charge your own Consciences with
this, am I content to take Christ and the great Salvation. O blessed, blessed,
blessed, be he that is the Author of the great Salvation, and blessed be he that
gets any of the Ends of the Cord of the great Salvation, that we sink not under
the Wrath and Fury of the Lord; Come and embrace this great Salvation, and
again I say, come and embrace it: For what can ye want if ye have it? I shall
say no more, but close with that Word, Isai. 62.21. Behold, the Lord has
proclaimed to the Ends of the World, to those that are far off: what has he
proclaimed? Say ye to the Daughter of Sion, behold thy Salvation comes, behold
it comes. I say to you that are the Ends of the World, Salvation is brought
near unto you: Stout-hearted and far from Righteousness, the great Salvation is
brought near unto you, and will ye send it away? O consider what ye are doing.
And to him that can persuade you to embrace the great salvation, we desire to
give praise.

Four Hyms by another Hand. Suited to the holy Sabbath, and to be sung in
Families
WHEN I ascend the lofty Throne
Where God my great Creator stands,
I must admire, I must adore,
The God who made both Sea and Land;
And when the glorious Host I see
With veiled Faces round the Throne,
With the innumerable Saints,
Before his Feet I cast my Crown.
O who is there that can conceive
How the eternal God should move
On Wings of Mercy, Love and Grace,
In his Eternity of Love!
O how secure his Counsel stands,
To our apostate fallen Race,
In his sweet Bowels of Peace and Love,
From the Eternity of Days.
Before the Mountains were brought forth,
Or he had formed the Sea or Land,
His Love was flowing forth to us
Apostate Sons in foreign Land,
According to his blessed Decree,
The lovely Lord Redeemer came,
And by him Life to us was given,
Even by the Lamb that once was slain.
HYMN II.
AWake my Soul, wake up and rise,
Behold the breaking rending Skies,
Proclaim our glorious Christ is near,
With every Scourge, and Wound and Scar.
We Are not come forth this Day to see
A Reed that is shaken like a Tree,
With every blast of Wind or Storm,
That can so weak a Thing alarm:
But here the great Redeemer stands,
With pierced Side and wounded Arms,
With wounded Hands, and wounded Feet,
With bloody Agonies and Sweat,
Inviting all now to receive
This precious Christ, this God of Love,
Hark O my Soul! how loud he cries,
Enough to rend the Azure Skies,
Behold me now your dying Lord,
Welcome the Joys I now afford,
Justice aloud for Blood did cry,
The Debt is paid your Lord did die.
Behold me now, even me once more,
So what for you I did endure,
And all your lovely Christ demands
Is kind Acceptance at your Hands.
HYMN III.
THE Lord of Life in bright array
Now in his Glory stands,
His Word gives light unto the Day,
And shines through distant Lands:
The Time, the blessed Time is come,
When pleasant Birds shall sing,
When tuneful Notes of Turtle-Dove,
Proclaim the blissful Spring:
The pleasant Harvest now is come,
When lovely Fields appear
With all their Blades filled full and ripe,
To crown the passing Year.
In Luster does the Gospel shine,
Dark Clouds are passed away,
The Glories of a lovely Christ
Proclaim him every Day.
His Word, that golden Word of his,
Now in it is Luster shines,
And Grace and Mercy, Peace and Love,
Fills all it is passing Lines;
And what remains but that we look
Soon from Mount Sion's Hill,
A glorious Christ in Might will come,
Not silent be nor still.
A mighty Fire with his Breath,
Enkindled shall flame,
And quite consume out of his Sight,
Proud Antichrist his Name.
His precious Jewels he will take,
And bind them up secure,
Till he destroys proud Antichrist
And quite consumes the Whore.
An HYMN of Praise to the glorious REDEEMER.
THOU lovely art my dearest Lord,
And art adored by all above,
Who sing the Glories of thy Name,
And Wonders of redeeming Love.
There Is none in Heaven that can compare,
There Is none or Earth like to our King
To thee our blessed dearest Lord,
A tribute now of Thanks we bring.
My dearest Lord, What Is here on Earth?
My lovely Christ, What Is there in Heaven?
But what thy blessed Word has made,
And boundless Mercy freely given.
If all the Universe should count,
And Figures join till Time should End,
They could not set the Glories forth,
Of my sweet Jesus, my dear Friend.
To Father, Son and Holy Ghost,
The great Eternal God of Host,
Be Honor, Praise and Glory given,
By all on Earth, and all in Heaven.
FINIS.

