Mr. Prince's Funeral SERMON ON The HONORABLE Judge Sewall.

A SERMON AT The Public Lecture in BOSTON Jan. viii. 1729, 30.

UPON The Death of The HONORABLE Samuel Sewall, Esquire LATE Chief Justice of the
Circuits AND One of His Majesty's Council for the Province WHO Deceased at his
House in BOSTON on the 1st of the same Month and in the 78th Year of his Age.

By THOMAS PRINCE, M. A. One of the Pastors of the South Church.

Isa. iii.1, -- 3. For behold, the LORD, the LORD of Hosts, does take away from
JERUSALEM and from JUDAH, The Judge -- and the Prudent, and the Ancient -- and
the Honorable Man -- and the Councillor.

BOSTON in NEW ENGLAND: Printed by B. Green, 1730.

A Funeral Sermon.
1 Samuel vii.15. -- e. AND SAMUEL judged ISRAEL all the Days of his Life: And He
went from Year to Year in Circuit to Bethel and Gilgal and Mispeh, and judged
ISRAEL in all those Places: And his Return was to Ramah, for there was his
House, and there He judged ISRAEL, and there He built an Altar to the LORD.


I PRESUME the larger Part of this great Assembly are met here this Day, with
an Expectation and Desire to make some Improvement, both of the Death and Life
of that honorable and aged Person, who has sat so long among us a great Part
of our Beauty and Joy, and whose late Decease now puts us into universal
Mourning. And as I have often though it that He in many respects, both in his
Birth, his Education, his Office, Life and Character, resembled the Scripture
SAMUEL: I could not but apply myself on this Occasion, to make a few
Reflections on the Words before us; wherein every Hearer sees a clear
Description of our own deceased.

AND here are these four things to be considered, -- 1. THE Person spoken of,
2. HIS peculiar Office, 3. HIS faithful Discharge of it, 4. and lastly, HIS
shining Piety.


I. THE Person spoken of; and this is SAMUEL.

NOW SAMUEL, we know, was one of the most eminent and happy of the JUDGES,
which the GOD of Israel was pleased to raise up among his People in the early
times of their Declension; to save them from Oppression and preserve them in a
strict Adherence to the inspired Religion of their Fathers.

HIS immediate Descent was from Parents of exemplary Piety. While many turned
away to the Superstitious Inventions of the neighboring Nations; this happy
Couple persevered in the zealous Practice and Profession of the pure Religion,
as it was revealed immediately from GOD Himself.

HIS Father strictly followed his great and pious Leader JOSHUA in his
Resolution, that both He and his House would serve the LORD. He constantly went
up with all his Family from his own Habitation in Ramah to the Tabernacle and
Ark in Shiloh at the appointed Seasons: and there He gave his devout attendance
to the sacred Institutions of divine appointment; there He presented his
public Sacrifices of Prayer and Praise, and worshipped the LORD.

AND his Mother will be for ever famous, for the Prayer of Faith whereby she
obtained this her first born Son, and for the grateful Sacrifice of Praise
wherewith she came and returned Him freely to the divine Bestower. In a
particular manner He was the Son of her Vows: For she solemnly resolved before
she had Him, to give Him up to GOD; And as soon as she weaned Him, she
cheerfully performed her Promise. She brought Him up to the TEMPLE in Shiloh,
as the Ark and Tabernacle are expressly called in the first Chapter at the 9th
Verse: And there she presents her Child with her Thank-offering and joyful
Song, and resigns Him to the LORD as long as He lived.

HERE she therefore leaves Him: and Here in his tender Years He is, under the
Instruction and Care of the High Priest ELI, trained up in the Knowledge of the
inspired Writings and in the sacred Service of the Sanctuary, to which He had
been thus devoted. In the 2d Chapter at the 11th Verse, it is said, that the
Child did minister to the LORD before ELI the Priest: and in the 18th Verse,
again, that SAMUEL ministered before the LORD, being a Child.

IN these two Places He is called a Child, even while He ministered: He
ministered before or to the LORD -- To signify the pious Inclination and
Employment of his tender Age: And He is said to minister before ELI the Priest;
which seems to intimate, that ELI took Him into his special Care, kept Him
always under his Eye, descern'd his Hopefulness and delighted in Him. And by
the general Air of the sacred History, it seems as if there quickly grew a very
great and mutual Fondness between the venerable Master and the young Desciple.
While SAMUEL grows in filial Reverence and Concern to obey and please the aged
Father; ELI also grows in a paternal Tenderness and Affection for Him.

UNDER the Tuition of this ancient and pious Minister, who was no doubt Himself
a learned Man in the Laws of GOD, such a Child as SAMUEL must needs improve in
Goodness. And in Verse 26th we read, that the Child SAMUEL grew on, and was in
Favor, both with the LORD, and also with Men. As He advanced in Years and
Knowledge, He must therefore also have grown in Grace and Wisdom, even in his
early Youth; so as to rise in the Notice and Esteem of all about Him, as well
as to have this destinguishing Honor done Him as to intimate, that He grew in
the Favor of GOD Himself.

YEA to such an eminent Highth of Piety did He quickly rise; that while He was
no more than a Child, GOD was pleased to single Him out above all the Priests
and People of ISRAEL, to endue Him with the Spirit of Prophecy. And indeed, He
seems to be the youngest Prophet that ever was in the World.

IT was in a time of far advanced Apostasy, when the provoked Spirit of GOD had
greatly left them; the Word of the LORD, i. e. The Word of Prophecy, was become
very precious; and there was no open Vision, i. e. no known or public Prophet
favored with Inspirations. In such a Time as this it was, and while the Child
SAMUEL ministered to the LORD before ELI; that the Word of the LORD was revealed
to SAMUEL, as we have an account in the 3d Chapter.

BUT a Child -- a Prophet! -- How is it possible that humane Nature in so
extremely light and vain an Age, should in a suitable manner bare the
destinguishing Dignity of being a Prophet, above the rest of the World? The
great Apostle PAUL, though in the hight of manly Power and Wisdom, a full grown
Christian, and surrounded with great numbers of inspired Persons, yet
represents himself in the utmost danger of being exalted above measure for his
abundant Revelations; and to save Him from it, both a Thorn in the Flesh was
given Him, and a Messenger from Satan sent to buffet Him, and keep Him low. But
little SAMUEL bares the Dignity alone in so lowly a manner, that He still gets
up in the Morning to attend on his inferior Office of opening the Doors of the
House of the LORD, and goes on to conceal his Revelations, till ELI obliges Him
to discover them. -- His Humility under them is a far greater Wonder than his
having the Spirit of Prophesy.

NONE can be so much prepared for the Revelations of the mind of GOD, or
Converse with Him, as the most Humble Soul: none so much become or recommend
them when they are bestowed: and none are so much prepared for signal
Exaltations. With such the Blessed GOD delights to dwell: And no wonder then we
read in the three last Verses of this third Chapter, and the first of the next,
-- That SAMUEL grew, and the LORD was with him, and let none of his Words fall
to the Ground: and all ISRAEL even from Dan to Beersheba, knew that SAMUEL was
established to be a Prophet of the LORD: and the LORD appeared again in Shiloh:
for the LORD revealed Himself to SAMUEL in Shiloh, by the Word of the LORD: and
the Word of SAMUEL came to all ISRAEL.

AND now it seems, we read no more of this growing Youth for above Twenty
Years, when we find Him clothed suddenly with a Judicial Character, and some
how or other removed from Shiloh to Ramah. We therefore come to consider,

II. THE peculiar Office of a Public JUDGE, wherein the Text describes Him.

BUT long before He arrives at this, his uncommon Graces must be extremely
tried and exercised. He must bare the Yoke in his early Days* and even while a
Youth, it seems, as if his own awful Prophecies became a most affecting History.

FOR now comes on a time of great Affliction and Confusion in the Land of
ISRAEL. The Philistine Armies came up and killed Four thousand Men: In a second
Fight, slew Thirty thousand Footmen: The Two Sons of ELI, who had carried the
ARK into the Field of Battle were slain: That sacred Sign of GOD's gracious
Covenant and Presence was taken by their insulting Enemies: Upon the dreadful
Tidings, the High Priest Himself, who was also their sovereign Judge, falls off
his Seat and dies: and the ARK OF GOD is carried into the House of Dagon.

A most dark and dismal Day was this to ISRAEL: as we have it described in
those moving Colors, Psalm. lxxviii.58, -- 64. For they provoked Him to Anger
with their High Places, and moved Him to Jealousy with their graven Images:
When GOD heard this, He was wroth, and greatly abhorred ISRAEL: So that he
forsook the Tabernacle of Shiloh, the Tent which He placed among Men; and
delivered his Strength into Captivity, and his Glory into the Enemies hand: He
gave his People over also to the Sword, and was wroth with his Inheritance: the
Fire consumed their young Men, and their Maidens were not given to Marriage:
their Priests fell by the Sword, and their Widows had no Opportunity to make
their funeral Lamentations.

WITHIN Eight Months after, indeed, the Philistines were forced by the
distinguishing Judgments of GOD upon them, to return the ARK to the Borders of
Israel: But no sooner was that most sacred Token of the Divine Presence arrived
at Bethshemesh, than Fifty thousand and Seventy of the People flocking round it
from every Quarter, were slain, by a Divine Plague, for their irreverent
Treatment of it 1 Samuel vi 19. I am sensible, that to soften the History, both
the SYRIAK and ARABAK render it 70 Men and 5 thousand Men, and BOCHART would
have it 70 out of 50 thousand who were there present; because He thinks it not
agreeable to the Divine Mercy. But the Hebrew words are 70 Men 50 thousand Men;
which both the SEPTUAGINT and the CHALDEE PARAPHRAST retain, and is most
agreeable to what is said in the following verse, that GOD had smitten them with
a GREAT SLAUGHTER. And it seems strange to me that any Thoughtful Mind should
make the Objection. For though this high Irreverence of GOD might be the Public,
contemporary and last Occasion of this Destruction; yet we must consider, that
Mankind are commonly if not always so guilty and exposed to the Vengeance of
Heaven, that it cannot be inconsistent with the Divine Mercy, almost at any time
to bring a Plague among a numerous People which shall destroy as many and more
than those: and it consists with Wisdom* to choose the Time when they have been
openly and conjunctly guilty of the same Sin, that He might appear to bare His
dreadful Testimony both against the Sin it self and the Public and United
Commission of it.
. And their victorious Enemies seeing them still in ill Terms with Heaven, seem
to have improved their advantage, and extending their Arms, to keep them under
sore Oppression for Twenty Years.

BUT what became of the Ark, the Tabernacle, and the Public Worship, for this
tedious Interval?

AS for the Ark and Tabernacle -- They were kept asunder all this Time, and a
long while after. Upon the great Destruction of the People at Bethshemesh, the
Ark was carried to Kirjathjearim, i. e. in English, the Field of the Wood,
whereof we read in Psalm. cxxxii.6. and was in the Tribe of JUDAH, and there it
rested. But the Tabernacle seemed to continue all this while at Shiloh, which
was in the Tribe of EPHRAIM, as we may show hereafter.

AND as for the Public Worship during this Twenty Years Oppression, -- the Ark
and Tabernacle thus remaining separate, the Sanctuary Service seemed to be in a
great measure interrupted, neglected and dissolved. And this the more, since
it is very likely that their jealous and vigilant Oppressors would never suffer
them in great numbers to resort together, as all their Males were by their Law
obliged three times a Year, at the Tabernacle of the Congregation. By this
means Religion further languished, and many more through the Arts and Influence
of the neighbor Nations and their Commerce with them, turned aside to other
Worship.

BUT in this long Scene of Trouble, where was our hopeful SAMUEL, and how does
he employ himself?

IN this state of public Dissolution, ELI and his two elder Sons being Dead,
and there being little to be done at Shiloh; the Philistines keeping a watchful
eye on that Place of Concourse and on the surviving Family of ELI the late High
Priest and Judge; Shiloh seems to have lain in a very solitary State and almost
deserted: And it is therefore likely that SAMUEL either lived a retired Life
There, or rather returned to his paternal Inheritance at Ramah.

HOWEVER, He was neither unconcerned with the lamentable State of ISRAEL, nor
unactive in his Endeavors to Restore it. And the Third and Fourth Verses of
this Seventh Chapter, seem to be a brief Epitome of this obscure Part of his
rising Life. For there we read, that while the House of ISRAEL were lamenting
after the LORD: SAMUEL spoke to all the House of ISRAEL saying; If ye do return
to the LORD with all your Hearts, then put away the strange Gods and Ashtaroth
from among you, and prepare your Hearts to the LORD and serve Him only; and He
will deliver you out of the hand of the PHILISTINES. By this it seems that
either the People, and especially the Chief of ISRAEL repaired to SAMUEL for
Council; or rather, to prevent the Umbrage of their Enemies, He traveled about
from Tribe to Tribe to teach them; Laboring to show them their provoking Sins,
to make them sensible that all these Sufferings were Corrections for them, and
to bring them on to a general and sincere Repentance and Reformation.

AND herein he wrought with great Success, as the following Verse informs us.
For at the End of the Twenty Years, and when He seems to be about Thirty Years
of Age, they appear prepared to return to the LORD. And then upon his Advice we
find them in the two following verses, gathering together at MIZPEH, their
ancient Place of Concourse, that there they might unite in Fasting, Praying and
Returning to the GOD of their Fathers: and THEN and THERE it is first said, HE
JUDGED THEM.

BUT why did not one of the Princes of the Tribes assume this Office? How came
SAMUEL invested in it; when he was neither the Son of such a Public Ruler, nor
a Man of War, nor did his Genius seem to turn so much to the Arts of civil
Policy as plain Religion, to the Service of which He had been from his Infancy
designed?

FOR the Resolution of these Enquiries, we may consider; That upon the early
notice of the Divine Familiarity with him, the Eyes of ISRAEL must needs be
turned toward him as their decisive Oracle: and as they grew in their Knowledge
of him, and saw more and more of his extraordinary Piety and Wisdom and
Acquaintance with the Mind of GOD, his Authority no doubt increased with his
Age, and the numbers yearly grew of those who applied to him for his Advice and
Judgment, and referred their causes to his wise Decision. Who could therefore
be so fit to Judge and Rule them? Who could have so great Authority and
Influence? In Whom could they so well confide or be united? And therefore now
they wisely and openly receive and honor him as their PUBLIC JUDGE, whom GOD
had been so signally Preparing for this high Employment.

AND now at this Assembly of the Tribes of ISRAEL, the Character of this Great
and Pious Man arises to the highest pitch that we can well conceive. For now it
seems as if the extraordinary Powers both of a Sovereign Prophet, Priest and
Judge, were on this occasion united in him: which seems to be a superior
Honor bestowed on SAMUEL, above all others of the mere Sons of Men, either
before or since. For, as a Prophet intimate with Heaven, he alone declares the
Mind of GOD to the attentive People; as their High Priest, he offers Public
Sacrifice and Prayers for them; and as their Sovereign Judge, they all appear
to have their Eyes on his Authority and to be entirely subject to his
Direction. -- Who among the mighty of the Earth may be compared to him!

BUT in what consisted this Peculiar Office?

NOW the original and chief Intention of it seems to be -- a Public Savior of
a People either from foreign or domestic Oppression. The first occasion is
precisely given us in Judge. ii.^ -- 19. And the Sum is this, -- That when the
children of ISRAEL forsook the LORD and followed other Gods of the People round
about them; the Anger of the LORD grew hot against them, and He delivered them
into the hand of Spoilers that spoiled them, and they were greatly oppressed:
Nevertheless the LORD raised up JUDGES, which delivered them out of the hand of
those that spoiled them* and when He raised up such Judges; then He was with
the Judge, and delivered them out of the hand of their Enemies all the Days of
the Judge: for it repented the LORD, because of their Groanings by reason of
those that oppressed them and vexed them.

BUT then there was no necessity, that these Public Judges should be Men of
the Sword, or have any hand in the immediate Conduct of their Armies. It was
sufficient, that they were Persons of great Reputation and Authority among the
People, for Justice, Wisdom, Piety, Integrity and a public Spirit: in whom
their several Tribes could readily unite and trust, and be directed by in
weighty Cases both of a foreign and domestic Nature. So the High Priest ELI
judged Israel Forty Years, even while He remained at Shiloh, and superintended
the Service of the Ark and Tabernacle.

SO SAMUEL likewise Judged their Tribes, both before and after SAUL was raised
to the royal Dignity. And when He first became their (...), He saved them, not
by Leading out their Armies, or ordering their Battles, which He left to those
who were trained to War; But by employing his great Sway and Authority in
wisely directing their civil and religious Affairs at Home, promoting a
Reformation among the People, doing what lay in his Power to bring them back
and reconcile them to GOD, and improving his Interest in Heaven by offering
Sacrifice and earnest Intercessions for them. -- This is the right Way of
saving a People both from intestine and foreign Violence: And He that helps to
reform them, helps to deliver them.

AND then a public Judge is to go on and persevere in the same great Design of
preserving a People from Apostasy, and the natural Consequence thereof --
Oppression. He is to set a bright Example of universal Righteousness and
Goodness; and not only Do the things which are Right and Good Himself, but
likewise See that others do so too: In the most public manner to
discountenance all Iniquity in every corner of the Land, to encourage Obedience
to the Laws of GOD, To be a constant Terror to Evildoers, and a Joy and Praise
among the Righteous.

FOR these great Ends is SAMUEL raised up to this high Employment, when ISRAEL
was brought very low, and had been languishing under hard Oppression for their
Departure from the GOD of their Fathers.

AND now we go on to see in the

III. place, HIS faithful DISCHARGE of this superior Office.

HAVING Begun an happy Reformation, He was as zealous to Preserve it. And being
owned their public Judge, He carefully employed his Power, to keep down all
Iniquity, and promote a constant Reign of Righteousness and Goodness through the
Land.

AND here are these Three things to be observed, 1 THE great Pains He took for
the Public Good, 2. HIS strict Integrity, And, 3. HIS steadfast Perseverance.


1. THE great Pains He took for the Public Good. -- " He went from Year to
Year in Circuit, to Bethel and Gilgal and Mizpeh, and Judged ISRAEL in all
those Places: and his Return was to Ramah, for there was his House, and there
He judged ISRAEL.

THAT we may have a clearer View of his Judicial Circuit, I shall endeavor a
Scripture and brief Description of ISRAEL.

AT the Head of the Mediterranean Sea, about Five thousand five hundred Miles
to the East-north-eastward from us -- There lies the Land of CANAAN: Having the
Sea on this side, with the Philistine Cities bordering on it, and on the East
side, the River Jordan, issuing out of the Lake of Galiilee, called also
Tiberias, and running down into the Lake of Sodom. On the other side Jordan,
were the Tribes of Reuben, Gad and the half of Manasseh, ranging along to the
Northward: and beyond them, MOAB and AMMON Eastward; and Southward MIDIAN and
the great ARABIAN WILDERNESS. About the midst of the Land, from Jordan, across
almost to the Western Sea, lay the Tribe of Benjamin: having Juda^ Southward,
and Dan and Simeon to the South-westward: and to the South of these three lay
EDOM and EGYPT. On the North of Benjamin, lay the Tribes of Ephraim and the
other half of Manasseh, Issacher, Zebulon, and Asher Westward abreast with
Naphthali, along in their order.

AND, for the Circuit of SAMUEL --

RAMAH now appears to be the Place of his Abode; the reason of which we
observed before. But there being several Towns of the same Name, especially one
in Benjamin and another in Ephraim, it has been disputed by Geographers, which
of these was the Seat of SAMUEL. However, to me it seems to be decided plainly
by Scripture. For this must needs be the same RAMAH, where his Father had his
House, as we read in the 1st Chapter at the 19th Verse, and in the 2d Chapter,
Verse the 11th. In the former Text it is said of both his Parents, That they
Returned and came to their House in RAMAH: and who should heir this House of
theirs but their first born SAMUEL? or whither should He repair from Shiloh but
to the Place of his Kindred from whence He came? Agreeable to the same
Expression, HIS Return is here said to be also to RAMAH, for there was HIS
House: And the Name of the Place is also the same, viz. Ramatha, in all these
Texts, both in the Hebrew and Chaldee Paraphrast The Hebrew may indeed be read
A^matha^^ and so the Septuagint Authors seem to have read it: For they render
it Armathaim in all those Places. (Vid. Bib. Polig.) And both Jerome and
Eusebius say, it was the same which the four Evangelists call A^^mat^ea, the
Dwelling Place of Joseph, who begged of Pilate the Body of our LORD. (Vide
Reland.)
.

BUT the RAMAH where SAMUEL'S Father dwelt is also expressly called, in the 1st
Chapter at the 1st Verse, RAMATHAIM-ZOPHIM of Mount Ephraim. (1) RAMATHAIM --
in the dual Number: i. e. either as Dr. Lightfoot renders it. One of the Two
Ramahs; or rather as Tremelius, Junius and Malvenda -- the D^uble Ramah, there
being four or five Ramahs in the Land of Israel, and as Jerusalem is called
Jerusalaim, because it consisted of two Cities joined together. M^lvenda in Pol
Synops.
And (2) Ramathaim-ZOPHIM of Mount Ephraim; because it was the Ramah which was
situate on that Part of Mount Ephraim which was called Zophim. By which we may
see that Ramatha and Ramathaim-Zophim are the same* and that SAMUEL'S Ramah was
in the Tribe of Ephraim And to this both Suidas and Josephus agree. (Vid.
Rel^^d)
.

NOW Zophim it seems lay North of Jerusalem, and signifies a Prospect. The
SYRIACK therefore renders it, -- The Hill of Prospects, and the ARABACK -- The
Hill of Discovery: Bib. Poliglot.
And Dr. Lightfoot tells us, that behind a Valley stretched out from Zion
northward, the Land swelled into an Hill at the Place which thence was called
ZOPHIM; because from thence there was a Prospect of the Country round about,
and especially toward Jerusalem, which here 1st appeared to view from that
Quarter of Israel. Here therefore seems to begin a Region (...) Hills called
ZOPHIM running Northward into the mountainous Tribe of Ephraim; upon one of
which stood RAMAH, the Abode of SAMUEL.

BUT the Region rather seems to take it is Name from ZUPH or ZOPH one of his own
Ancestors, of whom we read in the same Verse with Ramathaim-Zophim, and who is
also called ZOPHAI in 1 Chronicles. vi.26. Junius and Tremelius therefore render it
-- The Double Ramah of the ZOPHITES; Because consisting of two contiguous
Cities and in the Land of the Sons of ZUPH. And agreably we find in the Chapter
but one after our Text, that when Saul had passed through the Land of the
Benjamites, He came to the Land of ZUPH and therein the City where SAMUEL
lived; By the 11th. v. that it stood upon a Hill; By the 12th, that there was
an high Place or great Altar there which was under his Direction; by the 13th
and six following Verses, that there were therein either two several Hills or
one Part of the same ascending above the other; And by the 16th, that this was
out of the Land of Benjamin.

BUT the punctual Situation of RAMAH seems to be now uncertain. Some of the
Ancients indeed tell us that it lay in the neighborhood of Lydda; and many
Moderns imagine it to be the same with Ramola, a little South-Westward of Lydda
and within a dozen Miles of the Sea. But Ramola lies near North West from
Jerusalem; and the Learned R^land also says is a modern City and in a very
plain Country, which is not agreeable to the Character of the Seat of SAMUEL.
Vide R^LAND De Arim^^hea, Ramola, Ramathaim-Tzophim, Ramatha, and Regione
Thamnitica.
It therefore rather seems that RAMAH lay further Eastward in the Hilly Part of
Ephraim: and on this account the better served for the yearly Concourse of the
Northern Tribes for Judgment.

FROM hence it seems He Began his Circuit, and first went Eastward, which is
across the Land, to BETHEL.

NOW BETHEL signifies the House of the mighty GOD: and so therefore Junius and
Tremelius here translate it* and think by BETHEL is not here intended the
proper Name of a City, but the City Kirjathjearim, where was now the House of
the Ark of the mighty GOD of JACOB: and that SAMUEL chose this Place, because
of the Advantage of the annual Congress of the Tribes of ISRAEL thither,
according to the Law in Exodus xxiii.17.

BUT this is very unlikely: Because the Tabernacle appears to be the Place of
these Conventions* where were both the Altars and other Conveniences for
Public Sacrifice and Entertainment of the Congregation, and where the High
Priests with their inferior Orders constantly resided. And then the Historian
plainly here recites the proper Names of the other Cities whither SAMUEL went:
and there being a famous City named BETHEL, He must needs intend the Name in
the same proper sense as He did the others.

NOW, BETHEL was situate to the West of Hai; having a Mountain between them,
whereon ABRAHAM pitched his Tent and built an Altar, before He went down to
Egypt Genesis xii.8.
. It lay South of Shiloh Judge xxi 10.
, upon a Hill G^n xxxv 8 Josh. xvi 1 1 Sa^* x^ ii.2. and 2 Kings xxiii.^^
, and was called Luz at first: But JACOB having there a Divine Vision, when He
fled from the Face of Esau; He gave it the Name of BETHEL, i. e. The House, or
rather the Place of GOD R^land*
There He set up a Stone Pillar for a lasting Memorial of it Genesis xxviii 1^.
: and from hence the City became renowned among his Offspring. In the Days of
JOSHUA it was the Seat of one of the Kings of Canaan, who is reckoned among the
Number of those who were smitten by JOSHUA and the Children of ISRAEL ^
. Though it seems as if the City were not taken till after JOSHUA'S Death ^
.

IN Josh. xvi.1. It Is said, The Lot of the Sons of Joseph fell from Jordan by
Jericho to the Wilderness which goes up from Jericho throughout MOUNT BETHEL; In
Chap. xviii.13, that the Border of Benjamin came to the South side of it; and
in the 22d Verse, it is reckoned among the Cities allotted to Benjamin. But in
Judges 1.22, -- 25. we read, that the House of Joseph went up and smote it with
the Edge of the Sword; and in 1 Chro. vii.28. That it was the Habitation and
Possession of the Sons of Ephraim.

BY this we see that BETHEL was a City in the Borders between the Tribes of
Benjamin and Ephraim: And as it is likely that the Border-Cities were to be
possessed by those of either neighboring Tribe that would first go up and take
them from the Canaanites; the Tribe of Ephraim first went up and seized BETHEL,
and made it theirs.

BUT by the Situation of it, about the midst of the Land every way* we see how
well it served for the Concourse of the midland People, on either side, to
SAMUEL for Judgment.

FROM hence, He made his further Progress Eastward still, to GILGAL.

NOW GILGAL was a very famous Place which lay on the East of Jericho near
Jordan. There the Israelites first encamped upon their coming out of Jordan and
entering the Land of Canaan, which was on the 10th Day of the first Month,
Josh. iv.19.
being Forty Years from their leaving Egypt. There they set up the Twelve
Stones they took from the midst of the River, as a lasting Monument of their
passing through it on dry Ground Verse 2^, -- 24
. There on the Day following, all their Males were Circumcised which had been
born in the Wilderness for the 40 Years they had been journeying through it, and
the Reproach of EGYPT rolled away; on which account the Place received the Name
of GILGAL, i. e. Rolling away Josh v.9.
. There on the 14th Day of the same Month they first kept the Passover in the
Land of Canaan: and by their Uncircumcision it seems as if they had not kept
one for Forty Years before: Exodus xii.43. -- 49.
and in Two or Three Days after, the Manna ceased Josh. v.10* -- 12.
. There they kept their Camp for several Years together For 5 or 6 at least,
Josh. xiv.6, -- 15.
: from thence went out their Armies to fight the Canaanites; and thither they
returned with Spoils and Victories. Josh. x.


IN fine, There the Tabernacle rested till the Land was for the most part
conquered and divided, when 'twas reared up at Shiloh Josh xviii.1
in the Tribe of Ephraim. However GILGAL yet appears in the Days of SAMUEL, to
be a Place of great Resort for public Sacrifice and Worship; 1 Samuel* xiii.4 7
-- 12. and xv.12, -- 33.
which SAMUEL therefore chose to assemble the People to, when He publicly
invested Saul with the Royal Dignity 1 Samuel x.8 and xi.14, 15.
. And by the Situation of it on the Eastern Borders of the Land of Canaan, it
appears to be a Place convenient for the Tribes of ISRAEL on the other side of
Jordan to repair for Judgment.

FROM hence He seems to have turned about and traveled Westward, across the
Land, to MIZPEH

NOW MIZPEH signifies an High Place or Place of Speculation: By which we may
suppose it on a high Hill of a very fair Prospect round it: And of several
mentioned in Scripture, there are Two especially remarkable.

THE first in Gilead beyond Jordan and in the Tribe of Gad; where Laban
overtaking Jacob, they set up a Pile of Stones as as a public Witness of the
League between them. Genesis xxxi.49. Here the Israelites assembled themselves
together and encamped against the Ammonites, who dwelt on their Eastern
Borders, Judge. x.17. And here they made Jeptha their Head and Judge, who had
his Residence in the same City, Judge. xi.8, -- 11, and 34.

BUT the most famous MIZPEH seems to be on the Western Border of Benjamin and
Judah. And it being a Border City may possibly be ascribed to them both, As in
Judges xv.38. and xviii.36. It lay in a Place convenient for the General
Assembly both of these and of the other Tribes, and has been renowned for their
frequent Congress on great Occasions. For there they gathered together as one
Man before the LORD, to go up against the Benjamites of Gibeah, Judges xx.1.
Thither SAMUEL also called them, when He brought them to a Public Reformation,
and entered on his Judicial Office, as we observed before: and there He again
assembled them, to find out by Let the Man whom GOD would have to be their
King; and Saul being discovered was there first Proclaimed. 1 Samuel x.17 -- 24.

Hither SAMUEL made his yearly Journies to Judge them: and by the Situation of
the Place between Jerusalem and the Sea, it appears to lie convenient for the
Concourse of the South-western People of ISRAEL to meet Him.

AND thus having visited the principal Cities which were then in the Land; He
finished his Circuit, and returned to RAMAH: For there was his House: And yet
even there, He did not give up Himself to an indolent or supine Life; But there
He still continued to receive their Appeals and Judge them.

THUS He seems to have Chosen the most convenient Cities, for the easier
Confluence of the People to Him, from every Quarter. He minded not his own
Advantage or Ease so much as theirs: and least they should lose too much
Expense or Time in coming to his House at Ramah, He travels about, and carries
them Public Justice. And herein he neither regarded the Inclemencies of the
Weather, nor Inconvenience of Inns or Roads in those Hilly Countries, nor
spared his Pains for the Good of the People.

TO all these Places He constantly went, and Judged them. The Syriak seems well
to render it -- He judged ISRAEL and all those Regions, i. e. not only those
principal Cities, but all the Countries round them. In them He exercised his
Judicial Power for the Public Interest: In them He yearly held his Courts of
Justice: And there He received their Appeals from the Inferior Judges, He
patiently heard their Pleas, and decided their Controversies. There He also
doubtless enquired into the Manners of the People round about: He restrained
and corrected the Vicious, He gave forth righteous Decisions: And in them He
always displayed his superior Wisdom, Goodness, Equity, and strict regard to
the Good of the Public and the Laws of GOD.

AND to all these Places He went in Circuit from Year to Year, or at least so
long as his Age permitted, and never allowed his own Affairs to hinder Him.

2. WE are now to observe his strict Integrity.

FOR though this be not so expressly mentioned in the Text, it is plainly couched
and implied. For the Words must needs be meant as an historical Recommendation
of Him in the exemplary Character of a Public Judge; and his Uprightness is
also intimated in the great Pains He took and the Fatigues He endured, in the
Execution of this high Office: The like to which we read not of any other Judge
before Him.

BUT to illustrate this, I shall only cite -- That most open and solemn Appeal
He made both to GOD Himself and the whole Congregation of ISRAEL in Gilgal,
with the united Voice of all the Tribes in his Applause; when He was much
advanced in Years, and was laying down a great Part of the weight of
Government, upon READINESS Accession to the Kingdom, 1 Samuel xii.1, -- 5. And
SAMUEL said to all ISRAEL -- Behold, I have hearkened to your voice in all that
ye said unto me, and have made a King over you: And now behold, the King walks
before you, and I am old and grey-headed, and behold my Sons are with you, and
I have walked before you from my Childhood to this Day: Behold, Here I am;
witness against me before the LORD, and before his ANOINTED: Whose Ox have I
taken? or whose Ass have I taken? or whom have I defrauded? whom have I
oppressed? or of whose hand have I received a Bribe to blind mine Eyes
therewith? and I will restore it to you. And they said; Thou have not
defrauded, neither have Thou taken ought of any man's hand. And He said to
them, The LORD is Witness against you, and his ANOINTED is Witness this Day,
that ye have not found ought in my hand: And they answered, He is Witness.

HOW free and open, how unanimous and strong is this repeated Public Testimony
of all the Tribes of ISRAEL, to SAMUEL'S perfect Uprightness throughout his whole
and long Administration!

BUT,

3. WE must now observe His steadfast Perseverance in this laborious Office. --
And SAMUEL judged ISRAEL all the Days of his Life.

IN Chap. viii.1. He is said to be Old, before He called his Sons to help Him
in the Judicial Office. Now a Man can scarce be styled Old till he be Sixty
Years of Age: nor can we well suppose his Sons were grown to a sufficient
Gravity and Wisdom for such a weighty, serious and superior Employment* till
they were arrived at Forty* which will also raise their Father to at least
Threescore Years.

SOMETIME after, when the Elders of ISRAEL gathered themselves together and
came to ask Him for a King, they began their Speech with saying, Behold, Thou
art old, etc. which it was not likely they would say to SAMUEL'S Face unless
his Age were far advanced indeed, and his natural Powers of Judging or at least
of Traveling were very visibly declined through Age; and therefore was alleged
as one great Reason of their asking for a King to Judge them.

AND after this at READINESS establishment at Gilgal, SAMUEL says of Himself, in
Chap. xii.2. Behold I am old and grey-headed, etc. And yet it seems He still
went on in this great Employment to the Day of his Death, which was many Years,
some think fifteen or sixteen after; and from Acts xiii.20, 21. compared with
the History of the Judges, that in the whole He judged ISRAEL for Forty Years.

WITH his hoary Head, to be sure, He sat on the Judgment Seat: He There desired
to spend his Life in the Public Service. And There -- what a pleasing
Reverence must strike the Soul, to see this great and aged Man, with the
flowing and silver Locks of his unshaven Head, as He had been a pure Nazarite
from the Birth, and his Face grown shining with Maturity of Sanctity and
Wisdom! Even his humble Mind could not but know the Veneration of the People
for Him, their Delight to see Him, and that his mere Appearance in their
Assemblies could not but raise their Minds into an Esteem of Piety.

BUT how could He Judge ISRAEL all the Days of his Life, when SAUL was made
their King to Rule and Judge them?

TO this I answer -- That the Heads of ISRAEL seem to ask for a King to Judge
them, not to lay SAMUEL by while He was capable to discharge the Office, nor
indeed ever to supply his Place in the Courts of Judicature; But partly to
relieve Him of the Burden of Civil Government, as He grew through Age unable,
and partly to head their Armies: though chiefly indeed, from a weak Affectation
of worldly Pomp and Grandeur, which they liked better than the plain and simple
way of Government they had been used to, that they might have one among them in
the Power, State and Splendour of a King, like the Kings of other Nations. Chap.
viii.11, -- 20.

SAUL was therefore chiefly employed in martial Affairs all his Days. And
besides He knew that SAMUEL had a vastly greater Skill in civil Matters, the
People were entirely satisfied with SAMUEL'S Presidence in their Courts of
Justice: and SAUL could never presume to control so divine a Person, to
interfere with Him, or deprive the People of so great a Benefit. And even SAUL
Himself in the Highth of Power appears afraid of the more awful Prophet: and
SAMUEL on all Occasions appears superior to Him when they come together. For
SAMUEL more than once severely reproves and threatens Him: He also sent the
King to destroy Amalek; and when SAUL had spared Agag, contrary to the Law of
GOD, Samuel went to SAUL, brought Him to confess his Sin, to ask even SAMUEL'S
Pardon, and to entreat of SAMUEL to honor Him before the People with his
Presence: And then SAMUEL commands King Agag to be brought before Him, slew Him
before READINESS Eyes, and returned to his House at Ramah, Chap. xiii. and xv.

SAMUEL therefore still retains his great Authority, especially in civil
Matters, and continues in the Exercise thereof till sometime before his Death,
when He took his final Leave of SAUL; and then seems to be grown too Old to go
the Circuits, and retires to his House at Ramah. However, There, no doubt He
still employed his remaining Life in Judging all that repaired to Him, till He
wholly resigned the public Business, and composed Himself to Die.

BUT we must hasten to consider

IV. and lastly, HIS shining PIETY. -- And His Return was to RAMAH, for there
was his House, and there He Judged ISRAEL; and there HE BUILT AN ALTAR TO THE
LORD.

THIS latter Clause, at the first view indeed, may only seem an Instance of his
Family Religion: But when we come to enquire into the Use of ALTARS, we shall
clearly see it reaches to every Branch of Piety.

NOW there were Three sorts of ALTARS mentioned in Scripture (1) An Altar of
WITNESS -- As was the Altar built on the Eastern side of Jordan by the Two
Tribes and half there seated, upon their Parting from the other and Returning
to their Possessions, Josh. xxii.10, -- 34. But this was a mere Monument of
Piety, as Deodate terms it: And one would think, without either Grates to
support the Offerings or Air-Vents to fan the Fire, as the other had. (2) An
Altar of INCENSE, which was ordered to be overlaid with pure Gold, and made
only for the Burning of the sweetest Spice and Frankincense, every Morning and
Evening, in the Holy Place of the Tabernacle and Temple; and was peculiar to
them, Exodus xxx.1, -- 10, 34, -- e. and xxxvii.25, -- e. (3) And lastly, An
Altar for SACRIFICE: which was this of SAMUEL'S as we may see in the 9th
Chapter of this History.

THOUGH Cain and Abel brought their Offerings to the LORD; yet NOAH was the first
we read of who built an Altar, and this for Sacrifice; which was upon his
coming out of the Ark on Mount Ararat, at the ceasing of the Deluge, Genesis
viii.20. The next was ABRAHAM, who built Four Altars at so many several Places
in the Land of CANAAN: And then Isaac, Jacob, Moses, Joshua, Gideon, Man^ah,
and the Eleven Tribes, in others: And now comes SAMUEL, and builds an Altar to
the LORD at Ramah.

THE Use of this kind of Altars, was for Offering Sacrifice, both of Atonement
and Thanksgiving: and their Design was to show the Necessity of Satisfaction to
be made to the Justice of GOD for the Sins of Men, in order to obtain Peace and
Favor with Him; and to lead the Mind to the great Sacrifice of CHRIST, as the
only sufficient Purchase of every Mercy.

A Sacrifice of Atonement was for the Expiation of Sin, for averting the Anger
and Judgments of GOD both f^lt and feared, and for obtaining his Favor and
Blessing. So JACOB offered Sacrifice, on Mount Gilead, as He was going to meet
his Brother ESAU. Genesis xxxi.54.
and at Beersheba, as He was going down to EGYPT Gen xlvi.1.
. So GIDEON built an Altar in Ophra, and offered Sacrifice for Deliverance from
the Midianites Judges vi.24, -- 26.
. So the ELEVEN TRIBES at Shiloh, for Success against the Benjamites Judges
xx.26.
. And so SAMUEL at Mizpeh, in the Beginning of the War with the Philistines, as
we have observed before.

AND a Sacrifice of Joy and Praise -- To express their Thankfulness to GOD for
Mercies, and to give Him publicly the Glory of them. So NOAH -- for his
Deliverance from a Twelve Month's universal Flood: And so ABRAHAM Genesis xii.7
and xiii.18.
, ISAAC Genesis xxvi.23, ^ 25
, JACOB Genesis xxxv 1, -- 7
, and MANOAH Judges xiii 20.
, built their Altars, upon the destinguishing Appearances of GOD to them: So
MOSES for the Victory over the Amalakites at Rephedim Exodus xv i 15 16.
: And JOSHUA upon his Entrance into the Land of Canaan Josh. viii.30, 31.
.

IN fine, Both ABRAHAM built an Altar on a Mountain between Hai and Bethel Gen
xii.8.
* JACOB, at Shalem Genesis xxxiii.18, -- 20.
; and MOSES, under Sinai Exodus xxiv.4, -- 6
, where they severally pitched their Tents, as a constant Means of Religious
Worship, both in Sacrifices of Expiation and Thanksgiving.

SAMUEL'S Altar then, was a continual Instrument both of Family and Public
Worship, and a standing Sign of his eminent Devotion -- That He took Care to
Live in good Terms with GOD, to implore Him constantly for needful Favors, and
to return Him grateful Praises for the Bestowment of them.

BUT when SAMUEL had wrested Israel out of the oppressive Hands of the
Philistines -- Why did He not restore the ARK to the TABERNACLE at Shiloh? Why
did He not himself return to that sacred Place and Service, according to his
early Dedication? Why did He not attend the Worship there as well as ELI, who
Judged ISRAEL notwithstanding? Or, though He lived at Ramah, Why did He not from
time to time repair to the Altar before the Sanctuary, according to the Law in,
Exodus xxix.36, -- e. and Deuteronomy. xii.17, -- 27?

NOW the Reasons of this Conduct may be such as these --

IN Psalm lxxviii.60. We read, that upon the ARK'S being carried from Shiloh by
the Sons of ELI, the LORD forsook the TABERNACLE of Shiloh; v.67, that He
refused the Tabernacle of Joseph, and chose not the Tribe of Ephraim; and v.68,
but chose the Tribe of JUDAH, the Mount ZION which He loved. This might well be
revealed to SAMUEL, and He in time communicate the same to DAVID, who it seems
were very intimate and agreed together about the several Orders of the Priests
and Levites in the House of GOD 1 Samuel xiii.14.xv.28.xvi.1.13. compared with
Chap xix 18 -- 24, and 1 Chr. ix.10, -- 22. etc.
. And this might be one great Reason why as soon as DAVID came to the Throne of
Israel, the very first thing He did was to take Jerusalem from the Jebusites
and dispossess them of Mount ZION; and when He had fortified and adorned the
Mountain, He removed the ARK into a Tabernacle He had there prepared for it.

HOWEVER, It seems that by a Divine Interposition, the Ark and Tabernacle of
MOSES were never allowed to come together in SAMUEL'S Days.

FOR the ARK remained at Kirjathjearim, unless when 'twas carried to the Army
on some Occasions, and then returned thither, till King DAVID translated it to
Zion. And the TABERNACLE seemed to rest at Shiloh, to the Reign of SAUL; who
it is likely, that both the Tabernacle and Conventions of the People might be
nearer to Him, ordered it with ELI'S Family, to NOE, in his own Tribe of
Benjamin: As it is probable that JOSHUA for the same Reason, removed it before,
from Gilgal to Shiloh in his Tribe of Ephraim. Mr. A Jackson on 1 Samuel xxi.1.
But on the Ruin of NOE by SAUL, even before SAMUEL died, the Tabernacle seems
to be sent to GIBEON in the same Tribe, where it rested to the Reign of DAVID.
For when He had transported the ARK to Zion, and left ASAPH with his Brethren
to serve before it constantly as every Days work required; He at the same time
left ZADOK the Priest with his Brethren the Priests, before the TABERNACLE of
the LORD at GIBEON, to offer burnt Offerings to the LORD on the Altar of the
burnt Offering continually, Morning and Evening, and to do according to all
that was written in the Law of the LORD, etc: 1 Chronicles. xvi.37, -- 42.
And Here it still continued as the most public Seat of Sacrifice and Worship,
under ZADOK, 1 Kings iii.4. compared with 2 Chronicles. i.3, -- 6.
till King SOLOMON removed IT with all it is Vessels, as well as the ARK, into
the TEMPLE 1 Kings viii.1, -- 4. and 2 Chro. v.5.
. And thus at length they met together in the same House, in about One hundred
and thirty Years from their Separation.

BUT to Return -- In such a dissolved State of the Sanctuary Worship, SAMUEL
seems to have a special, divine Allowance, both to leave the
Tabernacle-Service, and to apply Himself entirely to Judge and Govern Israel,
grown much more large and populous than in E^^'S Days, and required the whole
of his Strength and Time -- as also to Reside at RAMAH as a proper Place, and
there to Build an Altar -- ready at hand upon all Occasions.

UNDER this head of Piety, we might here observe, His high Regard for the
Public Worship, his Dependence on the Great GOD for the Conduct and Success of
his Affairs, his constant solemn Applications to HIM, and his Grateful Care to
return HIM all the Glory -- of which this ALTAR was a continual Witness.

BUT of all these I shall only single out One Instance -- which was his
Eminence for the Spirit and Duty of PRAYER. -- He delighted in it; He set much
by it; He professed and practiced it in the most open manner.

WHEN He first directs the Tribes to Assemble, He does it in such Terms as
these -- Gather all Israel to Mizpeh, and I WILL PRAY FOR YOU to the LORD. When
they were met together, He turns the Day into a Day of Prayer and Fasting: And
no doubt He led and bore a chief Part in the Public Supplications of that vast
Assembly. And when the Day was over, and the Lords of the Philistines came up
against them; the Children of Israel were afraid -- and said to SAMUEL -- Cease
not to CRY to the LORD our GOD for us, that He will save us, etc. -- They had a
greater Confidence in the earnest Prayers of SAMUEL, than in all their Forces.

AND we quickly see their mighty Efficacy. For the History goes on to tell us
-- That SAMUEL took a sucking Lamb, and offered it for a Burnt Offering wholly
to the LORD; and SAMUEL Cried to the LORD for Israel, and the LORD heard Him --
and thundered with a great Thunder on that Day upon the Philistines and
discomfited them, and they were smitten before Israel. And then to ascribe the
Honor of all to GOD, He sets up There a Pillar of Stone, and calls it
EBENEZER, saying, Hitherto has the LORD helped us -- as a lasting and public
Monument of Praise to the GOD of Israel. And upon this we read -- That the
Philistines were subdued, and they came no more into the Coasts of Israel: And
the hand of the LORD was against the Philistines all the Days of SAMUEL: and
the Cities which the Philistines had taken from Israel were restored, etc.
Chap. vii.

WHAT a great Blessing was this one Man, by his earnest Intercessions, to that
whole People! Of which they were all so sensible that in a Time of the most
fearful Tokens of the Divine Displeasure, they apply to Him as their powerful
Advocate with Heaven; Chap. xii.19. And all the People said to SAMUEL, Pray for
thy Servants to the LORD thy GOD that we Die not, etc. To which He nobly
Answers, ver. 23. -- GOD forbid that I should Sin against the LORD, in ceasing
to Pray for you, etc. His extraordinary Prevalence in Prayer, was therefore
after celebrated in such Terms as these, Psalm. xcix.6. Moses and Aaron among
his Priests; and SAMUEL among them that Call upon his Name: They called on the
LORD, and He answered them. And in Jer. xv.1. SAMUEL is joined with MOSES, as
Two of the most prevailing Men in Prayer with GOD, that ever were, to save a
sinful People.

I might also mention several other Instances of his excelling Virtues* and the
signal Honors done Him both by GOD and Israel: But the time would fail me -- I
shall only say, -- That far from Ruling in an Imperious manner, Behold his
great Indulgence, as a tender Father, even to the displeasing Humors of the
People. Chap. xii.1. And SAMUEL said to all Israel; Behold, I have hearkened to
your Voice in all that ye said to me, etc. And yet what a mixture of Majesty
was there in his Administration? ^or when for a private Reason, He went to
Sacrifice at Bethlehem, we read in Chap. xvi.4. The elders of the Town trembled
at his coming. The Son of Sirach well observes, Chap. xlvi.14. By the LAW of
the LORD He Judged the Congregation. And the Apostle PAUL in^olls Him among the
Prime Examples of Faith and Righteousness.

BUT we must come to observe, That at length this great and aged Pattern of
Integrity and a Public Spirit* of Zeal for GOD, and the Cause of Pi^ty --
Resigns his Life -- But he dies in the midst of universal Lamentations. The
Tidings quickly fly all over the Land, and strike every Heart with Grief. The
Tribes are all in motion, to see his last Remains, and attend them to the
Grave. And perhaps there never was so great a Funeral in the World as SAMUEL'S
For of Him alone of all the Judges and Kings of ISRAEL, we read in 1 Samuel
xxv.1. That when He Died, ALL THE ISRAELITES were Gathered together, and
Lamented, and Buried Him in his House at RAMAH. And both his Death and their
universal Confluence and Mourning at his Funeral are remarked again in Chap.
xxviii.3. Now SAMUEL was Dead, and ALL ISRAEL had Lamented Him, and Buried Him
in Ramah, even in his own City.

NOR their having a KING, nor SAMUEL'S advanced Years, nor his Decays of Nature
prevented their extraordinary Sorrow. But they mourn the Loss of a PUBLIC
FATHER, who greatly Loved them, had spent his Life to serve them, and from the
Days of his Youth had arose and shone an admired Example of Piety, Justice,
Goodness, and every Public Virtue that could make a People Easy and Happy; and
a whole Nation assembles to unite in Mourning, and take their Leave at his
Grave.

AND thus -- I have endeavored some Description of the extraordinary Life and
Virtues of this ancient and most venerable Judge of ISRAEL. They are recorded
in the sacred Volumns for the Admiration of every Age. Which puts me in mind of
what the Learned Reland tells from Jerome, of the destinguishing Honors paid to
SAMUEL by the Christian Greeks and Romans above Fourteen Hundred Years after
his Death. For it seems, ARCADIUS a Christian Emperor of the East Who reigned
about 400 Years after the Birth of CHRIST.
, transported SAMUEL'S Bones from Ramah into Thrace: And as they were carried
along, the People received them with so great a Joy, as if they had seen the
Prophet present and alive among them; And the whole Land from Canaan to
Chalcedon on the Shore of the Bosphorus over against Byzantium, which was about
a Thousand Miles, seemed to be covered with continued Crowds of People, with
one Voice ringing forth aloud the Praise of our GREAT REDEEMER, whose lively
Type and faithful Servant SAMUEL was Et tanta Laetiti^, quasi praesentem
vive^temque Prophetam cerneren^, susce^erunt* ut de PALESTINA usque CHALCEDONEM
junger enter Populorum Examina, and in CHRISTI Lauds una voce resonarent*
.

AND a Part of his Life, as the Time allowed, has now been set before us, that
We might also in this distant Place and Age admire the Grace of GOD in CHRIST
which bestows such Gifts and Honors on the Sons of Men, and that we may be
moved to aspire after them.

AND for the same Reason as He first raised up SAMUEL, and then described Him
in perpetual Records; He is pleased still in successive Ages, to raise up
others in their measures like Him; that He might give his People of every
Generation a visible Evidence of what He is willing as well as able to do, and
a living Example to charm them with the Beauty of Piety.

IT would therefore be to conceal his Grace, and withold his Honor; not to
observe the same kind of his Goodness among our selves, nor Praise Him for it.

HEREIN, Let us then admire the eminent Gifts and Graces of GOD, which have for
so many Lustres of Years appeared in His late deceased Servant: Let our Minds
rise up to the bounteous AUTHOR: Let us gratefully return Him the whole Glory
of them: And let us now review them, that we may see our past Advantage and
mourn our present Loss, and be moved to trace his bright Example.

LET the very CHILDREN first come along with me, and look through the Glass of
his Life, and see his Early Piety. Look O Children, and see, How quiet and
modest our Young Samuel sits at the Feet of his pious Parents; how full of
Reverence and Affection to them, how ready and dutiful in all his Carriage: and
how full of the Fear of GOD, how afraid of sinning against Him, how careful to
read the Scriptures, and to Pray in Secret in his early Days!

LOOK into the School, and see, How submissively He behaves Himself; how full
of Veneration and Love to his Master The Reverend and Aged Mr* THOMAS PARKER*
Pastor of the Church in Newbury: Who was a Person of Great Learning, and so
zealous for the Propagation of it, that with his Ministerial Office, He kept a
Grammar School in his House as long as He lived, which was till He was about
Fourscore and two Years old, even many Years after He lost the Sight of his
Eyes; and would bring up Children for nothing provided their Parents or
Guardians would go on and send them to College. He was Seventy Years of Age
when our young Scholar was under his Care, who would always mention Him with
extraordinary Reverence and Affection.
, how mindful of every Instruction, how diligent in Learning his Books and
improving in Knowledge: behold how pleased his Master is to observe it, and how
greatly loves Him. There you may see the hopeful Bloom of his future
Usefulness: And do you O Children, Learn to follow Him.

LET the RISING YOUTH now view Him in his growing Endowments. How careful He
is of preserving his Purity, Innocence and unblemished Character, both in the
Town, School, College, and every Company. See how He aspires after higher
Degrees of Piety: how He inclines his Ear to Wisdom, and applies his Heart to
Understanding; How he cries after Knowledge, seeks her as Silver, and searches
for her as for hidden Treasure; and how He more and more understands the Fear
of the LORD, finds more and more of the Knowledge of GOD, and grows in Wisdom.

SEE, How He carefully shuns the Society of the Vain and Frothy; How He esteems
and honors the Pious and Learned, how He values their Love and gets into their
familiar Acquaintance; how He constantly keeps and delights in their Company,
how He daily grows in their Esteem and Affection: and how He improves in every
kind of Accomplishment to appear on the public Stage with Honor and Do Good
in the World.

AND now, Let us ALL lift up our Eyes and behold, with what Approbation and
Pleasure The GOD of Heaven looks down upon Him in all his lovely Advances of
Life* And how the kind Decrees brake forth and show what He has a mind to do
for the Youth that Honors Him.

THOUGH at first designed and trained up for the Service of the Christian
Tabernacle; yet being by the call of Providence diverted from it, He is put
into the early Possession of secular Wealth and Dignity: Nor this as into a
Snare to ruin his Soul, or make an empty show in the World, but as into a
larger Sphere and Power of employing his Talents for the Glory of GOD, and the
Advantage of Men.

BEING in a great Measure adorned with the early Endowments of SAMUEL,
especially cordial Love to his Country, eminent Knowledge of the Laws of GOD,
Zeal to observe them, and promote their Observance in others, Humility,
Prudence and a blameless Life; He is about the same Age, advanced by Heaven and
the Choice of the People, as He, to be a Principal Councillour, Judge and Ruler
among them It may be observed that the GOVERNOR and ASSISTANTS under our
former Charter were our Superior Judges: And He was chosen ASSISTANT in 1684,
when He was in the 33d Year of his Age*
.

AND now, Let us see how He rises and moves in this exalted Orb: How his humble
Mind remains the same, and therein shows it self superior to sublunary
Greatness, but his Piety, Goodness and Wisdom, not only continue but grow,
until He gains a destinguishing Crown of Glory, as the wise Man styles it, to
his Hoary Head, in the Course of Righteousness.

LET us look into the COUNCIL CHAMBER; and see his great Concern for the Honor
of GOD; the Reputation of Government* and the Welfare of his Country, in their
continued Liberty, Learning, Peace, good Order, Religion; and especially their
perpetual Adherence to the inspired Scriptures, as the perfect Rule of Faith of
Life and Worship, and the Fundamental Purpose of this Plantation. -- And there,
behold his Thoughtfulness, Moderation, Prudence, Caution, Faithfulness, and
Zeal and Courage on proper Occasions, though his Constitution chiefly inclined
Him to great Gentleness.

AS He goes out to the GATE through the City, when He prepares his Seat in the
Street, both the young and the aged arise and stand up. He puts on
Righteousness and it clothes Him: His Judgment is as a Robe and Diadem. He is
Eyes to the Blind, and Feet to the Lame: a Father to the Poor, -- to the Poor
Indians I might especially say, for whom He has the tenderest Compassions* and
the Cause which He knows not He searches out: He brakes the Jaws of the Wicked,
and plucks the Spoil out of their Teeth.

LET us enter into the COURTS OF JUSTICE; and see Him solemn, patient, grave
and fixed in his Attachment to the Laws of GOD; a Terror to the Children of
Belial; Defending the Poor and the Fatherless, doing Justice to the afflicted
and needy; delivering the Poor and the needy, and ridding them out of the Hand
of the Wicked. And while with an awful Brow He condemns the flagitious Criminal
to Bodily Pains; his Bowels yearn and his Lips speak Life to the precious Soul.

SEE how his Appearance raises in every Mind an Expectation of Justice: and his
snowy Locks like SAMUEL'S adorn the Bench, attract every Eye to look on the
more venerable Face they Crown, and make us wish his Place might never miss Him.

LET us go into the RELIGIOUS ASSEMBLIES; and there we see his Seat constantly
filled, with the Bible before Him to try every Doctrine. See how He admires and
delights in the Beauty of every Divine Institution. And there let us view and
be like Him, in his reverent and careful Attention, his humble and devout
Behavior, and the gentle Fervor of his pious Soul within raising up a silent
Light in his Countenance.

LET us visit his FAMILY; and there behold the strict and still Religion, the
grave and comely Order. How every Sabbath is kept from Evening to Evening in a
sacred manner; and every Day Morning and Evening the Scriptures read, and his
Prayers with his Household go up as Incense to Heaven. How He instructs and
councils those under his Care, and makes them easy and wise together. How free
his Table to the learned and pious; How welcome is every Minister as an
Ambassador of CHRIST; every Scholar treated with learned and entertaining
Conversation, especially on the Holy Scriptures in their Originals; every Comer
with Freedom and Courtesy; and every Poor with wise Advice and Alms.

LET us follow Him into EVERY PLACE and COMPANY* and there admire and imitate
the same continual Vein of unaffected Piety, of condescending Kindness, of
innocent and decent Alacrity; and of such engaging Meekness and Freedom of
Speech, as make his Presence the Satisfaction of all about Him, the Loveliness
of Piety visible, and the Ways thereof appear to be the ways of Wisdom and
Pleasantness.

LET us now behold Him gently Descending the Stage of Life; as his Age grows on
Him, first contracting his Circuit, then laying down one Public Office after
another, and at length retiring to his House like SAMUEL; that He might be
gradually loosened from his earthly Cares, and have the greater Leisure to
entertain Himself with the opening Views of that glorious Life which begins to
dawn and rise upon Him, and will never decline.

Lastly, LET us attend on his DEATH-BED-side; and view his exemplary Patience,
Submission, Resignation, Faith; and the same humble, heavenly and unruffled
Calmness of Mind as were usual with Him in the Days of his Health. How precious
were the Tho'ts and Discourse of the REDEEMER still to Him: How He composes
Himself to Die, as if He were only to sleep or rest in His gracious Arms. And
when his Eyes were closed and his Speech had failed Him, his Hands yet
constantly rising at every devout Meditation, till his Soul retires by
undescernible Degrees from every Organ of Life, that it might take it is Flight
to the Blessed Abodes: And then with what wonderful Ease and Gentleness it
leaves them without so much as a parting Groan or the least Intimation of
Sorrow.

THUS lived and died this venerable Judge of our Country, whom the GOD of our
Fathers was pleased to raise up and continue to the present Generation, as a
memorable Instance of our primitive Glory.

AND now, Let us be Thankful to HIM for preserving his destinguishing Course so
long and conspicuous with us: And yet let us mourn the Loss of his Life and
continual Prayers. Let us all take Care that this great Example may not rise up
against us in the future Judgment to condemn or ashame us. Let us earnestly
strive to follow Him in every Virtue. Let us encourage our selves with this --
That the same Spirit which dwelt so brightly in Him, remains with GOD in an
infinite measure; and there is not the least of us all, but He can make as
eminent in every Grace. And let us earnestly Pray, that the SPIRIT from on high
may be poured out abundantly on all Orders and Ages among us --

-- THAT He may raise up of our Sons for Prophets and of our Young Men for
Nazarites and Rulers: that we may still have Judges as at the first, and
Councillors as at the beginning: that we may be styled a Place of Piety, and
may know that the LORD, the mighty one of JACOB, is our Redeemer. That our
Officers may all be Peace, and our Exactors Righteousness: that Violence may
not be heard in our Land, nor Wasting or Destruction within our Borders; but
our Walls may be called Salvation, and our Gates, i. e. Our Council-Chambers
and Courts of Justice, Praise. That the People may all be Righteous, and
inherit the Land for ever: that the Sun may go down no more among us, nor the
Moon withdraw Her shining, but the LORD may be our everlasting Light, the Days
of Mourning ended, and our GOD our GLORY.

FINIS.
AN ACCOUNT of the Deceased FROM THE Weekly News-Letter, No. 158. CORRECTED.
BOSTON, January 8. 1729, 30.
ON the first of this Instant, at half an hour past Five in the Morning, after
about a Month's Languishment, Died at his House here, the Honorable SAMUEL
SEWALL, Esquire in the 78th Year of his Age; who has for above Forty Years appeared
a great Ornament of this Town and Country.

His Great Grandfather, HENRY SEWALL; Esquire was a Linnen-Draper in the City of
Coventry in Great Britain, acquired a considerable Estate, was a very prudent
Man, and more than once chosen Mayor of that ancient City. HENRY the eldest Son
out of Dislike to the English Hierarchy, sent over his only Son HENRY then a
Young Man to New England in 1634, with neat Cattle and Provisions suitable for
a new Plantation, who made his Pitch at Newbury, whither his Father soon
followed. And on March 25. 1646, that his Son Married Mrs. JANE, the eldest
Child of Mr STEPHEN and Mrs. ALICE DUMMER, who likewise then dwelt there under
the Ministry of the Rev. Mr. THOMAS PARKER and Mr. JAMES NO^ES.

But this Climate being not agreeable to Mr. DUMMER and Consort, they returned
to England the Winter following, and their Son and Daughter SEWALL with them*
who dwelt a while at Warwick, and then removed to Bishop-Stoke in Hampshire;
where on Lord's Day March 28. 1652, this their eldest Son SAMUEL was Born, and
baptized in Stoke Church, May 4th following, by the Rev. Mr. RASHLY, who was
once a Member of the old Church in Boston, afterward one of the ejected
Ministers. Some Months after, the Family removed to Badsly in the same County,
where another Son, the late Maj. STEPHEN SEWALL of Salem was Born, Aug. 19th
1657: And at Rumsey a neighboring Market Town, their said eldest Son was first
educated in the Grammar School, of which Mr. Figes was Master. But the Father
returning to New England in 1659, sent for his Family to come over to him; who
arrived at Boston, Lord's Day July 6th 1661, with this their Son, then nine
Years of Age.

Upon his going up to Newbury then the Place of his Father's Residence, he was
sent to School to the Revd. and Excellent Mr. PARKER* under whom He made a
laudable Proficiency till the Commencement in Aug. 166^, when He was admitted
into HARVARD COLLEGE by the very learned and pious Mr. CHARLES CHAUNCY, who
also gave Him his first Degree in 1671, being one of the last Classis which
received Degrees from that famous President.

In 1674, He took his Degree of Master of Arts from President HOAR; and was
early chosen a Tutor and Fellow in that House. But did not reside long there:
for on February 28. 1675, 6. He was Married to Mrs. HANNAH the sole Daughter
and Heir to the Honorable JOHN HULL, Esquire* of Boston, with whom He had a
plentiful Estate: Upon which He settled here, and lived and died an honorable
Member of the SOUTH CHURCH, of which He had the satisfaction to see one of his
own Sons become a worthy Pastor.

In 1684, He, was chosen a Magistrate of the Massachusetts Colony. In the
disorderly time of Sir Edmond's Government, toward the end of 1688, He went a
Voyage to England: Upon his landing there, met the surprising News of the happy
REVOLUTION: and returned hither in the following Year. In 1692, He was
appointed by King WILLIAM and Queen MARY in their Royal CHARTER, one of the
first Council for their Majesty's in this Province, into which He was annually
chosen and sat till 1725, when He resigned his Election, having out lived all
the others nominated in that Fundamental Constitution. In 1692 He was made one
of the Judges, and in 1718, Chief Justice of our Superior Courts of Judicature
through the Province, in which He sat till 1728, when his Infirmities growing on
Him, He resigned that Place also. In 1715, He was made Judge of Probates for
this County of Suffolk, and continued in that Office till 1728, when He laid it
down: it being the last Public Post wherein He served and honored his Country.

For his CHARACTER -- I shall sum it up in this Epitome -- That He was
universally and greatly reverenced, esteemed, and beloved among us for his
eminent Piety, Learning and Wisdom; his grave and venerable Aspect and
Carriage; his instructive, a^^able and cheerful Conversation; his strict
Integrity and regard to Justice; his extraordinary tender and compassionate
Heart; his neglect of the World; his abundant liberality; his catholic and
public Spirit* his critical Acquaintance with the Latin, Greek and Hebrew
Languages, the Latin Poets, and above all the Holy Scriptures in their inspired
Originals; his Zeal for the Purity of instituted Worship; his constant,
diligent and reverent Attendance on it, both in the Church and Family; his Love
for the Churches, People and Ministers, the civil and religious Interests of
this Country; his tender Concern for the aboriginal Natives; and as the Crown
of all, His Moderation, Peaceableness* and Humility; which being all united in
the same Person, and in an high Degree and Station, rendered Him one of the
most shining Lights and Honors of the Age and Land wherein He lived, and
worthy of a very distinguishing regard in the New English Histories.

He lived happily with the Wife of his Youth for about Forty three Years, who
left him a sorrowful Widower, October 19. 1717. He afterward Married two other
virtuous and worthy Consorts, viz. Mrs. ABIGAIL TILLY, and Mrs. MARY GIBBS who
is now his Mourning Widow. He had Issue only by the first; by whom He had seven
Sons and seven Daughters: two of the former and one of the latter only Survive
Him. His Understanding continued with Him to his last Hours: He Died in Peace:
And was yesterday honorably Interred.

The END.

