A SERIOUS CALL IN Christian LOVE To all PEOPLE, To turn to the Spirit of
Christ In THEMSELVES, That they may come to have a right Understanding of the
Things of GOD, and be enabled thereby to serve him acceptably: With some
Observations on the following Heads;

CONCERNING,

1. The Universality of God's LOVE in sending his SON to die for all Men.

2. The Holy Scriptures.

3. Worship.

4. Baptism.

5. The Supper.

6. Perfection.

7. The Resurrection.

8. The Conclusion.

Prove all Things, and hold fast that which is good; because that which may be
known of God, is manifest in them,

1 Thessalonians. v. 21. Romans i. 19. The Third Edition, Revised,

By BENJAMIN HOLME.

LONDON Printed: Reprinted and Sold by ANDREW BRADFORD, at the Sign of the
BIBLE in Second-Street, Philadelphia. MDCCXXXII.

THE PREFACE.
Friendly Reader,
WHAT is here presented to thy View, is written in great Love; and I desire
that the Lord, by his Holy Spirit, may give thee a right Understanding of the
Truths herein laid down. Our Principles and Doctrine has been very much
misrepresented, and many of our Friends Words and Writings have been wrested
and mis-construed by many, who wanted Charity which is the Bond of Perfection:
The Apostle has excellently described it, in his first Epistle to the
Corinthians, he says, Charity suffers long, 1 Cor 13, 4, 5, 6.
and is kind; Charity envieth not; Charity vaunteth not it self, is not puffed
up, does not behave it self unseemly, seeks not her own, is not easily
provoked, thinks no Evil, rejoiceth not in Iniquity, but rejoiceth in the
Truth, Oh, that it might prevail amongst the Children of Men universally, that
so there might be no envying one another! Charity is so far from speaking Evil,
or doing Evil, that it thinks no Evil: Although, says the Apostle, 1 Cor.
13. 3.
I bestow all my Goods to feed the Poor, and give my Body to be burned, and
have not Charity, it profits me not. It is greatly to be desired, that all
might endeavor to excel therein, that so there might be a holy Harmony
amongst the Children of Men. This Treatise being small, may come into many
Hands, where some larger Books, that give a more full and particular Account of
our Doctrine and Principles, may not come; and if the Observations that are
made on the several Heads touched upon, may have the good Effect to remove
Prejudice, and open the Understanding of the Religious and well-minded, it will
very much answer the Desire of him, who wishes well to Thee, and all Men;

BENJAMIN HOLME.
N. Style, Amsterdam the 18th of the 10th Month, 1723
A SERIOUS CALL IN CHRISTIAN LOVE To all PEOPLE, etc.
AS the Lord has been so wonderful gracious and kind to the Children of Men,
who were gone astray from him, Gal. 4. 6.
that he has sent the Spirit of his Son into their Hearts, to be a Guide and
Teacher to them; it is greatly to be desired, they might all take Heed unto it,
that thereby they may be enabled to withstand and resist the Enemy of their
Souls, in all his Temptations and Assaults; for it is certain, as Christ said,
without me you can do nothing; we are not able without the Help of his Spirit,
to resist the least Temptation; for in that Divine Light, which lights every
Man that comes into the World, John 1. 9.
giving Men and Women a Sight and Discovery of that which is evil, there is
Power to enable them to withstand and resist the Enemy in all his Temptations,
as they take Heed to it; but many People are Strangers to this Divine Light,
though the Apostle Paul tells us, how Men may know it, he says, All Things that
are reproved, Ephesians. 5. 13.
are made manifest by the Light; for whatsoever does make manifest is Light. It
is no Sin to be tempted, Mat. 4. 1.
if Men shut out the Temptation as soon as it is presented; for we read that
Christ was tempted several Ways, but he overcame the Tempter by resisting of
him; the Apostle James says, resist the Devil and he will flee, James 4. 7, 8.
and draw nigh to God, and he will draw nigh to you. It is to this holy Light
and Spirit, that lets People see the Evil, when it is presented, that we
endeavor to turn the Minds of the Children of Men, that thereby they may be
enabled to withstand the Enemy in all his Temptations; we read that the Nations
of them which are saved, Rev. 21. 23, 24 1 John 1. 7.
must walk in the Light of the Lamb: If we walk in the Light, says John, as he
is in the Light, then have we Fellowship one with another, and the Blood of
Jesus Christ his Son, cleanses us from all Sin. If all that profess, to be the
Followers of the Lord Jesus Christ, did but walk in this Holy Light as they
ought to do, then they would show forth Christianity in the Purity of it, and
adorn the Doctrine of God our Savior, by their Good and Holy Living; we read,
the Light shined in Darkness, and the Darkness comprehended it not. John 1. 5.
How many that are Strangers to this Holy Light which God has caused to shine
in Men's dark Hearts, have spoke Evil of it; and also of many that have born
Testimony to it, we read that the Apostle Paul, was sent to turn Men from
Darkness to Light, and from the Power of Satan unto God. And this is the great
Labor now of them that are truly the Ministers of Christ, to turn the Children
of Men to that true Light, which we read, John 1. 9.
lights every Man that comes into the World. This Divine Light ought not to
be rejected, nor the true Way of worshipping God, despised; because they may be
evilly spoken of by many that are ignorant of them: The Way in which the
Apostle Paul worshipped God, some that were Strangers to it, counted it Heresy,
and the Believers, Acts 24. 14. Acts 28. 22. John 7. 48, 49.
a Sect every where spoken against; and it was said concerning Christ, have any
of the Rulers, or Pharisees, believed on him, but this People, who know not the
Law are accursed. They were so ignorant, that they counted them that believed
in Christ accursed. Many of the Children of God have been evilly spoken of, by
them that were Strangers to the Lord, Behold, says John, 1 John 3. 1, 2.
what Manner of Love the Father has bestowed upon us, that we should be called
the Sons of God; therefore the World knows us not, because it knew him not.
He assigns the Reason, why the World knew them not, because, says he, it knew
him not: While Saul was ignorant of God, he persecuted his People; all his
Learning and Scholarship did not give him the Knowledge of God, nor yet the
Knowledge of his People; Acts 9. 1, 2, 3, 5.
and Saul yet breathing out Threatenings and Slaughter against the Disciples of
the Lord, went unto the High Priest, and desired of him Letters to Damascus,
that if he found any of this Way, whether they were Men or Women, he might
bring them bound to Jerusalem; and as he was journeying to Damascus, suddenly
there shined round about him a Light from Heaven, and he heard a Voice saying,
Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? And he said, who art thou Lord? And the
Lord said, I am Jesus whom thou persecutest, it is hard for thee to kick
against the Pricks. It is to be feared, that many do not know that it is the
Lord by his Spirit, that inwardly pricks them when they do amiss. Now here is
the Ground of Persecution, when Men know not God, nor them that are truly his
People, they persecute the true Worshippers of God as Heretics: How many of
the Martyrs in Queen Mary's Days, were persecuted, and put to Death as
Heretics, by them that were ignorant of God, and how many of our Friends have
been persecuted unto Death by them that were Strangers to the Lord, and his
People; but as it was of old, so it is now, he that is born after the Flesh,
persecutes him that is born after the Spirit; we read how Christ said to his
Followers, If the World hate you, ye know that it hated me before it hated you:
If ye were of the World, John 15. 18, 19, 20.
the World would love his own, but because ye are not of the World, but I have
chosen you out of the World, therefore the World hates you: Remember the Word
that I said unto you, the Servant is not greater than the Lord; if they have
persecuted me, they will also persecute you. It has often been the Lot of many
of the Followers of Christ, to be persecuted and reviled, and evilly spoken of;
but our Savior, to encourage his Disciples to bear Persecution and the
Reproaches and Revilings of Men, says, Mat. 5. 11, 12.
Blessed are ye when Men shall revile you, and persecute you, and shall say all
Manner of Evil against you, falsely for my Sake, rejoice and be exceeding glad,
for great is your Reward in Heaven, for so persecuted they the Prophets which
were before you. Although they that believed in Christ, were accounted accursed
by some, it was happy for them who did believe in, and receive him, Joh. 1. 12.
to them he gave Power to become the Sons of God. This is the great Blessing
which they have, that receive Christ by his Spirit into their Hearts. As they
are subject to him, they do not only receive Power to conquer their Lusts and
Passions, but also to do the Will of God, and keep his Commands. But how many
that are Strangers to the inward Appearance of the Lord Jesus Christ, by his
Light and Spirit in Men's Hearts, have looked upon it as strange Doctrine to
preach Christ within, this is the Mystery, Col. 1. 26, 27.
which has been hid from Ages, and from Generations, but now is made manifest
to his Saints, to whom God would make known, what is the Riches of the Glory of
this Mystery among the Gentiles, which is Christ in you the Hope of Glory. And
when some of our Friends have born Testimony to that Divine Light which
lights every Man that comes into the World, John 1. 9.
many have made a Wonder of it, how the Light could be in Men; and have spoken
slightly of the Spirit, although we read, as many as are led by the Spirit of
God, Romans 8. 14. Romans 8. 9.
they are the Sons of God. If any Man, says the Apostle, has not the Spirit
of Christ, he is none of his. If Men have not this Spirit for their Guide, they
cannot be Christians, nor Members of Christ's Church, although they may be
strict in observing of a great many outward Observations, for we read, that in
Christ Jesus, Gal. 6. 15.
neither Circumcision, nor Uncircumcision avails any Thing, but a new
Creature. It is as Men come to be born of the Divine Nature, being created a
new in Christ Jesus, unto good Works, that they come to have a right
Understanding of the Things of God; I thank thee, Mat. 18. 25, 26.
O Father, says Christ, Lord of Heaven and Earth, because thou have hid these
Things from the Wise and Prudent, and have revealed them unto Babes, even so
Father, for it seemed good in thy Sight. He that is truly a Child of God, and
born of his Spirit, has more true and sensible Knowledge of God; and also of
the Mysteries of his Kingdom, than Men in their natural and unconverted State
can attain unto, by all their Wisdom and Parts; for we read, 1 Cor. 2. 14.
that the natural Man receives not the Things of the Spirit of God, for they
are Foolishness unto him, neither can he know them, because they are
spiritually discerned. They are beyond his Reach and Comprehension, 1 Thessalonians. 5.
21.
the Apostle says, prove all Things, and hold fast that which is Good. Now the
Way for Men to have a right and clear Discovery of the Truth, is to come to
that Divine Light, which God has caused to shine in Men's Hearts; 2 Cor. 4. 6.
the Apostle says, God, who commanded the Light to shine out of Darkness, has
shined in our Hearts, to give the Light of the Knowledge of the Glory of God,
in the Face of Jesus Christ.

And as the Lord by his Light, gives thee a Sight and Discovery of the Truth, I
desire that thou may embrace it, and join with It; the Lord, says the
Prophet, has, own to thee, O Man, what is good, and what he requires of thee,
to do justly, love Mercy, and walk humbly with thy God. Now the Lord by his
Holy Light does not only show Men that which is good, and what he requires of
them; but he is near to show them that which is Evil, in its very first
Appearance, he that ^^ews to Man his Thoughts, says the Prophet, the Lord of
Hosts is his Name; the Apostle says, whatsoever makes manifest, is Light, and
whatsoever is reproved, is made manifest by the Light. Now this Holy Light
which gives Men a Sight and Discovery of that which is Evil, when it is
presented, is the great Touchstone that we desire all may come to. If Men do
not take heed to this, they may soon err in Judgment, and receive and embrace
false Doctrine, and wrong Principles. And Men's receiving false and worng
Opinions, does very much open a Door for wrong Practices. If Men once entertain
a Belief, that there is no Possibility of their conquering and overcoming their
Corruptions while here, what Encouragement is there for them to war against
them; or if they believe that there is a Purgatory, or a Place in which they
may be cleansed from their Sins after Death, it is no Wonder, if they live to
fulfill and gratify their own carnal Desires and Inclinations. But it is his
Work, that was a Liar from the Beginning, to persuade Men to believe this; we
do not read, that the rich Man, that we have an Account of in Luke, met with
any Place of cleansing after Death. And if Men entertain a Belief, that God has
before ordained a great part of Mankind to perish, and the rest to be saved,
and that the Numbers are so fixed, that none can be diminished from them, that
are to perish or any added to the Number of them that are to be saved, what
need any Body take any Care about another World: This Doctrine does very much
destroy Religion and Christianity. I believe some have been so darkened in their
Understandings, that they have not stuck to say, that God has fore-ordain'd
whatever comes to pass; that he has appointed the Murderer to murder, and the
Thief to steal, that so they might consequently perish. How contrary is this
Doctrine to what we read in the Holy Scripture, where the Lord has said, Ezekiel.
33. 11.
as he lives, he has no Pleasure in the Death of a Sinner, Jer. 7. 31.
but rather that he should return and live: and although we read, that they
have built the high Places of Tophet, which is in the Valley of the Son of
Hinnom, to burn their Sons and Daughters in the Fire, yet says the Lord, I
commanded them not, neither came it into my Heart. Although this came to pass,
the Lord was so far from ordaining of it, that speaking after the Manner of
Men, he said, it came not into his Heart: It would be abominable to say, that
God ordains all the wicked Things which come to pass. I wish that all would be
careful how they are imposed upon, to receive any Doctrines, which are
repugnant to the Doctrine of Christ, and the primitive Christians, recorded in
the Holy Scriptures; and that People would compare their Doctrine with the
Doctrine there laid down, and see how they correspond. It has pleased God to
raise up a People to preach the same Doctrine, and bear the same Testimony,
that the Apostles and primitive Christians bore; John says, we are of God, he
that knows God, 1 John 4. 6.
hears us, he that is not of God, hears not us. I desire that none may
reject the Truth, because it may be held forth by a People that are despised,
by many that do not rightly know them, for you see your Calling, Brethren, 1
Cor. 1. 26, 27, 28, 29.
how that not many wise Men after the Flesh, not many Mighty, not many Noble,
are called, but God has chosen the foolish Things of the World to confound the
Wise, and God has chosen the weak Things of the World to confound Things that
are Mighty, and base Things of the World, and Things which are despised, has
God chosen; yea, and Things which are not, to bring to naught Things that are,
that no Flesh may glory in his Sight. Although the most of them that believed
in, and received the Lord Jesus Christ, were not the Wise and Mighty and Noble;
yet we may conclude safely, that some of the Wise, and c. did believe in him;
and although the Generality of them, that are now come to believe in, and
receive the Lord Jesus Christ in his Spiritual Appearance, are not of the Wise
and Noble; yet blessed be the Lord, some such are come to believe in, and
receive Christ by his Spirit into their Hearts; and that all may thus receive
him, is my sincere Desire.

1. The Universality of God's Love in sending his Son to die for all Men.
WE freely own, that it is the Duty of the Children of Men to believe in
Christ, as he did outwardly appear; and we hold it to be absolutely needful,
that they believe in his Death and Sufferings, and what he has done for them,
without them, where it has pleased God to afford them the Benefit of the Holy
Scriptures, that declare thereof; yet we believe this outward Knowledge is not
so absolutely essential to Salvation, but that Men may be saved by the Lord
Jesus Christ, that suffered upon the Cross for them, if they are subject to his
Spirit in their Hearts, although their Lots may be cast in such remote Parts of
the World, that are deprived of the Benefit of the Holy Scriptures, and may
know nothing of the Coming of Christ in the Flesh, for the Apostle Paul in the
5th of the Romans says, as by the Offense of One, Judgment came upon all Men
to Condemnation, even so by the Righteousness of One, the free Gift came upon
all Men to Justification of Life; for as all Men partake of the Fruit of Adam's
Fall, by Reason of that evil Seed, which through him is communicated unto them,
which inclines them unto Evil, although many Thousands of them never heard of
the Fall of Adam, nor of his Eating of the forbidden Fruit; so we believe many
may, and do receive Benefit by the Lord Jesus Christ, as they take Heed to that
divine Light and Grace, which is communicated to Mankind universally, through
him, although they may know nothing of his Coming in the Flesh. Now though we
hold it absolutely needful, that Men believe in the Death and Sufferings of
Christ, where they have the Benefit of the Holy Scriptures, that declare
thereof, as is before observed; yet all this Knowledge will not entitle to a
Part in the Kingdom of God, without they know him that died for them, to save
them out of those Things that unfit them for that Holy Kingdom, into which
nothing that is unclean can enter.

But because we bear Testimony to the inward Appearance of the Lord Jesus
Christ, John 1 9.
by his Light and Spirit in Men's (...), some have been so unkind and unju^^
(...) that they have not stuck to say, that we (...) the Lord Jesus Christ,
that suffered without the Gates of Jerusalem for us, which is a very great
Abuse upon us, for we firmly believe in him, that was born of the Virgin Mary,
that suffered upon the Cross for the Redemption of Mankind universally; and we
are so far from denying him that died for us, and rose again, and ascended into
Heaven, and is come again by his Spirit into our Hearts, that we hold forth his
Death and Sufferings in a far more extensive Manner, than many others do; for a
great many will have it, that Christ only died for the Believers, and a Part of
Mankind, but are believe according to the Scripture, that he tasted Death for
every Man, but we see Jesus, Heb. ^. ^.
who was made a little lower than the Angels, crowned with Glory and Honor,
that he by the Grace of God should taste Death for every Man. My little
Children, 1 John 2. 1, 2.
these Things write I unto you, that ye sin not; and if any Man sin, we have an
Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the Righteous: And he is the
Propitiation for our Sins, and not for ours only, but also for the Sins of the
whole World. Here is the wonderful Love of God set forth to Mankind
universally, therefore, as by the Offense of one, Judgment came upon all to
Condemnation; Romans 5. 17.
even so by the Righteousness of one, the free Gift came upon all Men to
Justification of Life: So that the Plaster is as broad as the Sore. Now
although we believe, that Christ has by his offering up of himself once for
all, cleared the Score, so far upon the Account of Mankind in general, that no
Man will perish because of the Sin of Adam; yet we do not believe that the
Death and Sufferings of Christ without the Gates of Jerusalem, will render Men
justified, and acceptable in the Sight of God; except they know him that died
for them, to redeem them out of actual Sinning, and from those Things that
(...) them for the Kingdom of God. Know ye not says the Apostle, that the
Unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of God, 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10, 11.
be not deceived; neither Fornicators, nor Idolators, nor Adulterers, nor
Effemmatt, nor Abusers of themselves with Mankind, nor Thieves, nor Covetous,
nor Drunkards, nor Revilers, nor Extortioners, shall inherit the Kingdom of
God; and such were some of you, but ye are (...), but ^are sanctified, but ye
are justified in the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ, and by the Spirit of our
God. Here the Apostle has clearly set forth how Men are justified. Now this is
what we are concerned for, that all People may come to know the Lord to work a
Change in their Hearts, and wash them by his Spirit, he has saved us by the
washing of Regeneration, Titus 3. 5, 6
and the Renewing of the Holy Ghost, which he has (...) on us abundantly
through Jesus Christ our Savior. Now here is Salvation and Justification by
Christ, upon a true and right Foundation, Mat. 1. 21.
and she shall bring forth a Son, and thou shall call his Name Jesus, for he
shall save his People from their Sins. Mark that Salvation from Sin, is the Way
for Men to be saved by Christ, from the Wrath to come; Romans 1 9. 8. 1.
for we read, that Tribulation and Anguish will be upon every Soul of Man that
does Evil, first upon the Jew, and also upon the Gentile; there is therefore
now, no Condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus, who walk not after the
(...), but after the Spirit. As Men come to witness a being washed and
sanctified, and brought into Christ, and know their abiding to be in him, they
are redeemed out of those Things that bring Condemnation.

If any Man be in Christ, he is a new Creature, whosoever abides in him,
sins not: 1 John 3. 6. 1 John 5. 18.
We know, that whosoever is (...) of God; sins not, but he keeps himself,
and that wicked one touches him not: 1 John 5. 10.
He that believes on the Son of God, has the Witness in himself. This is the
Sum of all, for Men so to live, that they have the Witness in themselves, that
they please God; we read concerning (...), that before he was translated, he
had this Testimony, that he pleased God. If our Heart condemn us, God is
greater and knows all Things; 1 John 3. 20, 21.
if our Heart condemn us not then have we Confidence toward God. Friendly
Reader, whoever thou art that art condemned and reproved in thy self, for that
which is Evil, I tenderly desire, thou may turn to that Holy Spirit, which
does inwardly reprove thee for it, if I go not away, the Comforter will not
come unto you, but if I depart, I will find him unto you, John 14. 7, 8.
and when he is come, he will reprove the World of Sin. The same Holy Spirit
that reproves Men for Sin, will not only give them Power over those Things that
they are overcome with, which are evil, if they take heed unto it; but as they
come out of those Things, they are reproved for, it will be a Divine Comforter
to them, and they will be inwardly justified in themselves. We read, that the
Grace of God, Tit. 2. 11. 12, 13.
that brings Salvation, has appeared unto all Men, teaching us, that denying
Ungodliness, and worldly Lusts, we should live soberly, righteously, and godly
in this present World, looking for that blessed hope, and the glorious
appearing of the great God, and our Savior Jesus Christ, who gave himself for
us, that he might redeem us from all Iniquity, and purify unto himself a
peculiar People, zealous of good Works. Now although the Apostle has here so
excellently born Testimoney to the Sufficiency and Universality of the Grace of
God; many are so narrow, that they are not willing to own, that Christ has died
for all, nor will they allow, that saving Grace is given to all although we read,
that a Manifestation of the Spirit is given to every Man, to profit withal. And
in the Parable of the Sower, that went forth to sow, the Seed fell on all the
four Sorts of Ground, but it did not bring forth Fruit to Perfection, save only
in the good Ground; and the unprofitable Servant had a Talent committed to him,
which was sufficient for him if he had but improved it; it is plain that the
Fault was in himself, so that if any Man perish, he is the Cause of his own
Destruction, as it was said of Israel, Oh Israel, thou have destroyed thy self,
but thy Help is in me! God gave them of his Spirit to instruct them, Neh. 9.
20, 26.
but they rebelled against him. Many for want of a right Understanding, have
made a very wrong Use of Paul's Words in the 9th of the Romans, for the
Children being not yet born, neither having done Good or Evil, Romans 9. 11, 12,
13.
that the Purpose of God according to Election might stand, not of Works, but
of him that calls, it was said unto her, the Elder shall serve the Younger;
as it is written, Jacob have I loved, but Esau have I hated. Now the Apostle
does not say, that before the Children were born, it was said, Jacob have I
loved, and Esau have I hated, but that the Elder shall serve the Younger; and
as it is written, Jacob have I loved, and Esau have I hated. He has Reference to
what is written: read Obadiah, for thy Violence against thy Brother Jacob,
shame shall cover thee, Obad. 1. 10
and thou shall be cut off for ever. If God had hated Esau, and ordained
Pharaoh to perish before they were born, he would have been a Respecter of
Persons, which is contrary to the Apostle Peter's Testimony, Acts 10. 34 35.
I perceive of a Truth, said he, that God is no Respecter of Persons, but in
every Nation he that fears him, and works Righteousness, is accepted with
him. Here are the Conditions laid down, upon which all People may be accepted
of God, for we believe, as it is the Will of God, that all Men should be saved,
he gives to every Man a Day of Visitation, in which he inwardly strives with
them, by his Holy Spirit to reclaim them, he strove long with the People in the
old World, and the Lord said, Genesis 6. 3.
my Spirit shall not always strive with Man, because he is also Flesh. There
was a Time, in which they might have been saved, but they would not be
reclaimed, from those Things that were displeasing to him, therefore he cut
them off in his Wrath; and there was also a Time in which the Inhabitants of
Jerusalem might have been gathered, but they would not; and our Savior wept
over them, and said, Oh Jerusalem! Jerusalem, Thou that killest the Prophets,
Mat. 23. 37, 38.
and stonest them which are sent unto thee, how often would I have gathered thy
Children together, even as a Hen gathers her Chickens under her Wings, and ye
would not? Behold, your House is left unto you desolate. Christ did not say,
they could not be gathered, but said, thou would not; so that the Reason why
they were not gathered, was not in the Lord, but in themselves; but if God by a
secret Decree had before hand determined their Destruction, why should he have
sent his Servants to them, in order that they might be gathered; and what will
People make of our Savior's weeping over them; if they were before ordained
inevitably to perish. I wish all may consider these Things seriously, the
Apostle says, what if God, willing to show his Wrath, and make his Power
known, Romans 9. 22.
endured with much long-suffering the Vessels of Wrath fitted to Destruction;
and why is this long-suffering, but in order that they may be gained upon, why
was the long-suffering of God which waited in the Days of Noah, 1 Pet 3. 20.
while the Ark was preparing, but that they might be reclaimed from their wrong
Doings: When Pharaoh had refused to let Israel go, and said, who is the Lord,
that I should obey his Voice, Exodus 5. 2.
to let Israel go? I know not, said he, the Lord, neither will I let Israel go;
then we read that the Lord said, Exed. 7. 3.
I will harden Pharaoh's Heart, and multiply my Signs, and my Wonders in the
Land of Egypt; and the Lord showed his Power in his Destruction, Exodus 14. 23.
as he did in the Destruction of the old World; but let it be considered, that
they brought this upon themselves, by their rebelling against him, for why
should the Lord have striven with the old World, if he had determined their
Destruction beforehand. Friendly Reader, I desire the Lord may open thy
Understanding by his holy Spirit, that thou may have a right discerning of
these Things, Peter says, account that the long-suffering of our Lord is
Salvation, 2 Pet. 3. 15, 16.
even as our beloved Brother Paul also, according to the Wisdom given unto him,
has written unto you, as also in all his Epistles, speaking in them of these
Things, in which are some Things hard to be understood, which they that are
unlearned, and unstable, wrest, as they do also the other Scriptures, unto
their own Destruction. If Peter had meant, that it was them that were outwardly
unlearned, that wrested Paul's Words, we read, that he and John were both said
to be unlearned and ignorant Men, Acts 4. 13.
now when they saw the Boldness of Peter and John, and perceived that they were
unlearned and ignorant Men, they marvelled, and they took Knowledge of them,
that they had been with Jesus. It was they then, and it is such now, as are
unlearned in the School of Christ, that did, and do wrest Paul's Words; and if
People do not come to learn of Christ, it is no wonder if they put wrong and
gross Constructions upon many Places of the Holy Scriptures; but although this
Place has been made very ill use of by many, the Apostle Paul does give ample
and full Testimony of the good Will of God to Mankind, 1 Timothy 2. 1, 2, 3, 4.
I exhort, says he, therefore, that first of all, Supplications, Prayers,
Intercessions, and giving of Thanks, be made for all Men; for Kings, and for
all that are in Authority, that we may lead a quiet and peaceable Life, in all
Godliness and Honesty; for this is good and acceptable in the Sight of God our
Savior, who will have all Men to be saved, and to come unto the Knowledge of
the Truth. If the Apostle had believed, that a Part of Mankind were ordained to
perish, before they were born, he would not have advised Timothy to pray for
all Men, and told him, that it was the Will of God, that all Men should be
saved; so that if any Man perish, as is before observed, the Fault is in
himself, say unto them, as I live, says the Lord God, I have no Pleasure in
the Death of the Wicked, but that the Wicked turn from his Way and live. (...).
33 11. 13, 14, 15.
When I shall say to the Righteous, that he shall (...) live; if he trust to
his own Righteousness, and commit Iniquity, all his Righteousness all not be
remembered, but for his Iniquity that he has committed, he shall die for it.
Again, when I say unto the Wicked, thou shall surely die; if he turn from his
Sin, and do that which is lawful and right, if the Wicked restore the Pledge,
give again that he has robbed, walk in the Statutes of late, without
committing iniquity, he shall surely live, he shall not die. I wish that all
might seriously consider this, and that all who think they stand, and are
secure, may take heed lest they fall; and that they who have gone into evil
Things, may be encouraged to return to the Lord, by true Repentance and
Amendment of Life, that they may find Mercy at his Hand, as the Prophet says,
Isa. 4. 7.
let the Wicked for sake his Way, and the unrighteous Man has Thoughts, and
return to the Lord, and he will have Mercy, and to our God, and he will
abundantly pardon. We are not of their Mind, that say, once in Grace, and ever
in Grace, or that the least Degree of truth and saving Grace cannot be fallen
from; but we believe Men may now, as some of old did, make Shipwreck of Faith
and a good Conscience, and from what is before said, it is plain, that a
righteous Man may turn from his Righteousness, therefore it is good for all to
be watchful: What I say to you, said Christ, to his Followers, I say to all,
watch. No Man is longer safe than he is upon his watch. It was when David and
Peter were off their watch that they fell, and the Miscarriages that are
amongst the Children of Men, are owing to their Unwatchfulness; not but that we
believe, the Grace and good Spirit of God is sufficient to keep Men from
falling and sinning, and out of all evil and hurtful Things, as they take heed
unto it; unto which Grace, Friendly Reader, I commend thee for Safety and
Preservation.

2. Concerning the Holy Scriptures.
ALTHOUGH some have misrepresented us, as though we undervalued or dis-esteem'd the
Holy Scriptures, of the Old and New Testament; yet we do bless the Lord, and
have great Cause so to do, that the excellent Counsel therein contained, which
proceeded from the Spirit of God, is preserved upon Record unto this Day, and
it is a great Favor, that we live under such a Government, that we have the
Liberty to read them, this being a Privilege that many called Christians are
deprived of, in some other Countries, and I wish that all would be frequent in
reading of them: The Apostle Paul commended Timothy, in that from a Child he
had known the Holy Scriptures, 2 Timothy 3. 15, 16, 17.
which, says he, are able to make thee wise unto Salvation, through Faith, which
is in Christ Jesus. All Scripture given by Inspiration of God, is profitable
for Doctrine, for Reproof, for Correction, for Instruction in Righteousness,
that the Man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good Works.
John 5. 39, 40.
Ye search the Scriptures, said Christ, for in them ye think ye have Eternal
Life, and they are they which testify of me, and ye will not come to me, that
ye might have Life. They are greatly to be valued, in that they testify of
Christ, in whom there is Power to give Men Victory over their Corruptions and
Passions, and enable them to do the Will of God; we read, John 1. 11. 12.
that Christ came unto his own, and his own received him not; but as many as
received him, to them gave he Power to become the Sons of God. They that
receive Christ by his Spirit into their Hearts, they receive Power; for
Christ's Spirit is a Christian's Strength: I can do all Things, says the
Apostle, through Christ which strengthens me; Phil. 4. 13. 2 Pet. 1. 20. 21.
we read that no Prophesy of the Scripture is of any private interpretation;
for the Prophesy came not in the old Time by the Will of Man, but holy Men of
God, spoke as they were moved by the Holy Ghost.

Now we say, the most true Interpreter of the Holy Scriptures, is the Holy
Ghost, or Spirit from which they did proceed; we read that the natural Man
receives not the Things of the Spirit of God, neither can he know them, says
the Text, and there is a strong Reason laid down for it, because they are
spiritually discerned; they are beyond his Reach and Comprehension, 1 Cor. 2.
11.
for what Man knows the Things of a Man, save the Spirit of a Man which is in
him; even so the Things of God knows no Man, but the Spirit of God. This is
the Key which opens the Mysteries of the Kingdom of God to Men. I take this to
be the great Reason why there are such great Mistakes about Religion, and why
many put such gross Constructions upon many Parts of the Holy Scriptures, as
they do, because they do not come to that Divine Spirit which gives a right and
true Understanding, as Elihu said, there is a Spirit in Man, Joh 32. 8.
and the Inspiration of the Almighty gives them Understanding. Till Men come
to the Holy Spirit of God in themselves, they can neither know God, nor the
Things of God; for we read, Mat. 11. 27.
that no Man knows the Father save the Son, and he, to whom soever the Son
will reveal him. Now if Revelation were ceased, as some do imagine it is, what
a sad Condition would Mankind be in? For we read, the World by Wisdom knows not
God, there is no Knowledge of God but by the Revelation of his Son; and it is
as Men come to have an inward Knowledge of God, that they come to have a right
Understanding of the Holy Scriptures, which proceeded from the good Spirit of
God, wherefore we highly value them, though it is to be feared, some called
Christians, do dis-believe many of the great Truths therein contained, for I
believe, that a Man through often rebelling against the Holy Spirit of God in
himself, may arrive to such a Degree of Wickedness, that he may reject the
Scriptures, and count them but Fables; and that he may be so far from owning of
any Thing of God in Man, that he may come to deny the Holy Three that bear
Record in Heaven, 1 John 5. 7.
there are Three that bear Record in Heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy
Ghost, and these Three are One. It must be very deplorable, if a Man come to be
so wicked, as to deny the Lord that bought him, and to say, as it is written,
Psalm. 14. 1.
the Fool has said in his Heart, there is no God. It is the Work of the Enemy
of all Righteousness, to persuade Men to believe that there is no God, and that
the Scriptures are but a Fiction, and that Men are not accountable for their
Words and Actions, and that there are no future Rewards and Punishments; that
they might walk at large, and take their full swing in Wickedness. It is
greatly to be desired, if there be any such now living, whose Day of Mercy is
not wholly over, that have arrived to such a degree of Hardness and Wickedness
as this is, they may be brought to a Sense of their Iniquity and Error, and be
so truly humbled in Soul because thereof, that if possible, they might find
Mercy at the Lord's Hand. The better Christian that any Man is, the more true
and real Value he has for the Holy Scriptures.

3. Concerning Worship.
WE live in a Time, in which there is great Difference, even amongst them
called Christians about Religion and the Worship of God. Difference about
Religion and the Worship of God, John 4. 9.
is no new Thing, the Jews and Samaritans differed to such a great Degree, that
it seems they did not deal with one another. It is very much amiss, where
Religion sowers People, and makes them rigid, and bitter one against another.
Christianity is Love, and he that is a Christian in his Heart, is full of Pity
and good Will to them that are under a Mistake in Matters of Religion; and the
worst that he wishes for all such, is, that the Lord may direct them right; for
they that have the Mind of Christ, would not have any Soul to err, neither in
Faith nor Practice. Our Savior in his Discourse with the Woman of Samaria, has
clearly described the true and spiritual Worship, but the Hour comes, John 4.
23 24.
and now is, when the true Worshippers shall worship the Father in Spirit and
in Truth; for the Father seeks such to worship him. God is a Spirit, and they
that worship him, must worship him in Spirit and in Truth. Now we believe, that
as God is a Spirit, that he may be truly worshipped, as we are gathered in his
Spirit, if there be not a Word outwardly spoken amongst us, Mat. 18. 20.
as Christ said, for where two or three are gathred together in my Name, there
am I in the midst of them; and the Holy Prophet says, they that wait upon the
Lord, Isa. 11. 31.
shall renew their Strength, and mount up with Wings as Eagles; they shall run,
and not be weary, and they shall walk and not faint. Although I believe a great
many pious good Christians can say, as they have waited humbly upon the Lord,
in the true Silence of all Flesh, with their Minds truly staid upon him, they
have enjoyed that divine Comfort which has been beyond what they could express
in Words; yet this of silent waiting, is a great Mystery to many People. There
is a Divine Teacher near Men, even in their own Hearts, which is sufficient to
teach them, as they take heed thereto. It is to be feared, that many People too
much depend upon the Teachings of Men, and neglect the Divine Teacher in
themselves, 1 John 2. 27.
but the Anointing which ye have received of him, abides in you, and ye need
not that any Man teach you, but as the same Anointing teaches you, of all
Things, which is Truth, and no Lic, and even as it has taught you, ye shall
abide in him.

Now we understand the Holy Man here, to speak in a large Sense. He told them
that they needed not that any Man taught them, but as the same Anointing taught
them, etc. We do very much own outward Preaching and Praying, where it proceeds
from this Divine Anointing. If it please God to speak by this through any
Instruments, whether Male or Female, we believe there should be Liberty amongst
us, for every one to speak as he requires it of them; for ye may all prophesy
one by one, 1 Cor. 14. 31. 32.
that all may learn, and all may be comforted, Acts 2. 4.
and the Spirits of the Prophets are subject to the Prophets. And they were all
filled with the Holy Ghost, and began to speak with other Tongues, as the
Spirit gave them Utterance. We believe the true Preaching and Praying is that
which proceeds from the Holy Spirit, Romans 8. 26.
we know not what we should pray for as we ought, but the Spirit itself makes
Intercession for us, with Groanings which cannot be uttered. I will pray with
the Spirit, and I will pray with the Understanding also, 1 Cor. 14. 15.
and I will sing with the Understanding.

This is the Preaching and Praying, and Singing, which we own, that is, by the
Direction and Assistance of the holy Spirit. Now some, 1 Cor. 14. 34, 35.
from what the Apostle says, let your Women keep silence in the Churches, for
it is not permitted unto them to speak, but they are commanded to be under
Obedience, as also says the Law, and if they will learn any Thing, let them
ask their Husbands at Home, for it is a Shame for Women to speak in the Church.
Let the Woman learn in Silence, 1 Timothy 2. 11, 12.
with all Subjection, but I suffer not a Woman to teach, nor to usurp Authority
over the Man, but to be in Silence. We do not take this to be a prohibiting of
Holy Women to speak, whom the Lord calls thereto; and I think it would be very
much amiss, to say that the Apostle Paul was against holy Women speaking, that
God called to speak; but such troublesome and unruly Women, as disturbed the
Church by their Questions, and usurped Authority over the Man. Such Women as
these, which he was against, we are against. If the Apostle Paul had been
against holy Women praying and Prophesying, why should he lay down a Rule how
they ought to behave themselves when they pray or prophesy, 1 Cor. 11. 5.
but every Woman that Prays or Prophesyeth with her Head uncovered,
dishonors her Head And he commends to the Believers diverse good Women, Romans
16. 1, to 13.
I commend unto you Phoebe our Sister, which is a Servant of the Church. All
good Ministers of Jesus Christ, are Servants to the Church. And he advised his
true Yokefellow, to help those Women, which labored with him in the Gospel; so
that he was an Encourager of holy Women that labored in the Gosple; we read,
that Anna spoke in the Temple, Luke 2. 37, 38.
and she was a Widow of about fourscore and four Years, which departed not from
the Temple, but served God with Fastings and Prayers, Night and Day; and she
coming in that instant, gave Thanks likewise unto the Lord, and spoke of him,
to them that looked for Redemption in Jerusalem. And we read, that Philip the
Evangelist had four Daughters, Virgins, and they did all prophesy. And Joel
also prophesied that God would pour forth of his Spirit, etc. But this is that,
says Peter, Acts 2. 16, 17.
which was spoken by the Prophet Joel, and it shall come to pass in the last
Days, says God, I will pour out of my Spirit upon all (...), and your Sons and
Daughters shall prophesy, and your young Men shall see Visions, and your old
Men shall dream Dreams, and on my Servants, and on my Handmaidens, I will pour
out in those Days of my Spirit, and they shall prophesy. Now although
Prophesying is several Times taken in the Scripture for foretelling Things to
come, Jer. 21.
read Jeremiah, and several other Prophecies of the Prophets. It is also taken
for edifying the Church, but he that prophesies, 1 Cor. 12. 3. 4.
speaks unto Men to Edification, and Exhortation, and Comfort. He that
speaks in an unknown Tongue, edifieth himself, but he that prophesies,
edifieth the Church. Mary was sent by Christ to declare of his Resurrection,
Jesus says unto her, John 20. 17.
touch me not, for I am not yet ascended to my Father; but go to my Brethren,
and say unto them, I ascend unto my Father, and your Father, and to my God, and
your God. And the Woman of Samaria was instrumental to bring many of her
Neighbors to believe in Christ, she said, John 4. 29. 39.
Come see a Man that has told me all Things that ever I did, is not this the
Christ? And many of the Samaritans of that City believed on him, for the Saying
of the Woman, which testified, he told me all that ever I did. Now it is to
Christ as he inwardly appears in Men's Hearts, by his Light and Spirit, that we
desire all may come. It is he that shows Men when they do amiss. Col. 1. 27.
Christ within, which is the Hope of the Saints Glory, is a great Mystery to
many People, when it pleased God, Gal. 1. 16.
says the Apostle Paul, to reveal his Son in me, that I might preach him among
the Heathen, I conferred not with Flesh and Blood. Here was the Son of God
revealed in him. Now that all may have a right Understanding of the Things of
God, we desire that they may come to him that has the Key of David, that opens
the Mysteries of the Kingdom of God to Men.

4. Concerning Baptism.
BECAUSE of our Disuse of Water Baptism, and Bread and Wine, we have been very
hardly spoken of, as though we denied the Ordinances of Jesus Christ, when as
there is no People that I know of, that do more truly own the Necessity of
believing and being baptized, than we do, but we do not understand it to be
only a Historical Belief of the Conception and Birth, and Life and Miracles,
and also of the Death and Sufferings, and Resurrection and Ascension of Christ,
or a being outwardly baptized with Water, that will entitle Men to Salvation;
for we read, that Simon the Sorcerer believed, Acts 8. 13, 23.
and was baptized; and yet he was so far from being in a State of Salvation,
that Peter says to him, I perceive thou art in the Gall of Bitterness, and in
the Bond of Iniquity. But lest any should be under a Mistake, and take the
Baptism of Water, to be the one essential and saving Baptism, hear the Apostle
Peter, when once the long-suffering of God, waited in the Days of Noah, 1 Pet.
3. 20. 21.
while the Ark was preparing, wherein few, that is, eight Souls were saved by
Water, the Antitype wereunto even Baptism now saves us, not the putting away
of the Filth of the Flesh (mark that) but the Answer of a good Conscience
toward God, by the Resurrection of Jesus Christ. Now it is the Baptism of
Christ by his Spirit, that brings Men to that, for it is plain, from the
Instance of Simon before-noted, that a Man may believe, and be baptized with
Water, and be so far from having the Answer of a good Conscience, that he may
be in the Gall of Bitterness, and in the Bond of Iniquity, which is the very
Reverse of Christianity. A great many take the Commission in the 28th of
Matthew, to be a Commission for Water Baptism, Mat. 28. 19.
go ye therefore, and teach all Nations, baptizing them in the Name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. Now here is no mention of Water.
Is it not reasonable to suppose, that if our dear Lord had intended that they
should baptize with Water, that he would have expressly mentioned it; although the
Apostle Paul was not inferior to the chief of the Apostles, 1 Cor. 1. 14, 15,
16, 17.
he says, I thank God, that I baptized none of you, but Crispus and Gaius,
least any should say, I baptized in mine own Name; and I baptized also the
Household of Stephanus, besides, I know not whether I baptized any other; for
Christ sent me NOT to baptize, but to preach the Gospel: So that, what he did
in that Case, was by way of Condescension, as in the Case of circumcising
Timothy, Acts 16. 3, 21, 26.
and going into the Temple, and purifying himself. It would be a weak Thing to
plead for these things now, because the Apostle practiced them. Does it
therefore follow, that Water Baptism should be practiced now, because the
Apostle Paul, by way of Condescension, practiced it? For if he had took that
Commission, Mat. 28. 19. to be a Commission for him to baptize with outward
Water, we may safely conclude, that he would not have thanked God that he had
done him so little Service. We do not deny, but that some other of the
Apostles, did also by way of Condescension, practice Water Baptism; but that
they were commanded to baptize with Water in that Commission, Mat. 28. 19.
I think, will be too hard for any body to prove. It is possible some may be
ready to say, it must needs be meant of Water; because say they no Man can
baptize with the Spirit, or into the Power and Spirit of Christ. We freely own,
that no Man, as he is a Man, by his own Power can do this; neither can any Man
by his own Power, as he is a Man, heal the Sick, cleanse the Lepers, raise the
Dead, cast out Devils, Mat. 10. 8.
and yet we find the Disciples were commanded to do these Things. And by the
same Power, by which they did cast out many Devils, and healed the Sick, etc.
they were instrumental to baptize Men into the Name and Power of Christ. And as
I began to speak, says Peter, the Holy Ghost fell on them as on us in the
Beginning. Acts 3. 16. Acts 11. 15, 16.
Then remembered I the Word of the Lord, that John truly baptized with Water,
but ye shall be baptized with the Holy Ghost. At that great Meeting we read of
in the 2d of Acts, verse the 4th, says, and they were all filled with the Holy
Ghost, and began to speak with other Tongues, as the Spirit gave them
Utterance; yet some of the Multitude mocked, and were so ignorant of the
Operation of the Holy Ghost, that they said, verse. 5, 13. these Men are full of
new Wine; but Peter standing up with the Eleven, lift up his Voice, and said
unto them, ye Men of Judah, and all ye that dwell at Jerusalem, be this known
unto you, and hearken to my Words, for these are not drunken, as ye suppose,
seeing it is but the third Hour of the Day, but this is that which was spoken
by the Prophet Joel, etc. It is hard to make Men sensible of the Operation of
the Holy Ghost, and of the spiritual Baptism, while they are Strangers to the
Spirit in themselves; but if it could be proved, that the Disciples in that
Commission, Mat. 28. 19, 20.
were commanded to baptize with, or in Water, which I believe cannot be done;
how will they that are for the sprinkling of Infants, prove their Practice from
that Commission, go teach all Nations, Acts 16. 33.
etc. for they are not capable of being taught. As to what is urged of the
Jailor, and all his, and of whole Families being baptized; there is no Account
that there was any Infants baptized in any of them. There is abundance of
Families now (as we may reasonably suppose) there were then, in which there are
no little Children. As to that of our Savior, where he says, suffer little
Children to come unto me and forbid it not, for of such is the Kingdom; it
cannot be proved from the Scripture, that he baptized any of them in, or with
Water. But as to this Practice of sprinkling Infants, it is so much without
Foundation in the Scripture, that a great many People who are not of our
Society, do not hold it nor own it. The Way rightly to understand this
Commission, is to come to that Spirit, by which it was given forth. Many urge,
that our Savior was baptized of John, he was also circumcised, does it
therefore follow, Luke 2. 21.
that we must be circumcised, because he was circumcised; for as he was born
under the Law, he fulfilled the Law, and he is the End of Law, for
Righteousness Sake, to all them that believe. When Christ came to John to be
baptized of him, John forbad him, saying, I have need to be baptized of thee.
Mat. 3. 13. 14.
Here John the Baptist, who was the Administrator of Water Baptism, was
sensible that he had need to be baptized of Christ, with the Baptism of the
Holy Ghost: Suffer it to be so now, Verse. 15.
said Christ; for thus it becomes us to fulfill all Righteousness: So that he
fulfilled the Righteousness of John's Dispensation. John has very clearly and
excellently distinguished his Baptism with Water, from the Baptism of Christ,
with the Holy Ghost, I indeed baptize you with Water, Mat. 3. 11, 12.
unto Repentance; but he that comes after me, is mightier than I, whose Shoes
I am not worthy to bear; he shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost and Fire;
whose Fan is in his Hand, and he will thoroughly purge his Floor, and gather his
Wheat into the Garner but he will burn up the Chaff with unquencheable Fire.
This is the Messenger of the Covenant, the Prophet speaks of, Mal. 3. 1, 2.
and the Lord whom ye seek, shall suddenly come to his Temple, even the
Messenger of the Covenant, whom ye delight in; behold, he shall come, says the
Lord of Hosts, but who may abide the Day of his Coming, and who shall stand
when he appears: for he is like a Refiner's Fire, and like Fuller's Soap: And
he shall sit as a Refiner and Purifier of Silver: and he shall purify the Sons
of Levi, and purge them as Gold and Silver, that they may offer unto the Lord
an Offering in Righteousness. For this End the Lord Jesus Christ is come into
the Hearts of Men, by his Spirit, to purge them from their Dross, and wash them
from their Uncleanness, that so they may be fitted for that Kingdom, into which
nothing that is unclean can enter; this is the Washing which will avail, for
Men to know their Hearts to be washed from Wickedness; as it was said to
Jerusalem, wash thy Heart from Wickedness: The Apostle Paul in his Epistle to
the Ephesians, Ephesians. 4. 5.
says, that there is one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism. John, as is before
observed, has distinguished very plainly between his Baptism with Water, and
the Baptism of Christ with the Holy Ghost. Now, what we desire is, that all
might come to the Baptism of the Spirit, which the Apostles and primitive
Christians witnessed, that could say, by one Spirit, we are all baptized into
one Body, 1 Cor. 12. 13.
whether we be Jews or Gentiles, bond or free; and have all been made to drink
into one Spirit, for as many as have been baptized into Christ, Gal. 3. 27.
have put on Christ, Now this is the Sum of all, for Men to put on the Lord
Jesus Christ, the new and heavenly Man, then they will witness inward Communion
with the Lord.

But why are many of our sober Neighbors so strenuous for Water Baptism, and
neglect to wash one another's Feet, when as we read, John 13. and ver. 14. that
our Savior washed the Disciples Feet, and he told them, that he had given them
an Example, that as he had done to them, so they should do to one another: Now
here is both Example and Precept for this; and if we ask many sober People, why
they are not in the Practice of this? I presume many would be ready to answer,
that they look upon it to be but an outward and visible Sign, by which our
Savior showed his Followers, that they ought to serve one another, and be
ready to do the meanest Offices of Love if need require: and that they do not
hold the ceremonious Part of washing one another Feet, to be obligatory upon
them, as long as they come to the spiritual Part of what was thereby signified;
although we find that this was practiced by our Savior, now, why they should
lay such Stress upon Water Baptism, which we cannot find was ever practiced by
our Savior, and drop this, deserves their serious Consideration; although as
we disuse Water Baptism, so we do also disuse the ceremonious Part of washing
one another's Feet, being sensible that they that are come to the spiritual
Part of what was thereby signified, are come to the End of the outward and
visible Signs.

5. Concerning the Supper.
ALTHOUGH we disuse the outward Bread and Wine, we do very truly own the
spiritual Supper of the Lord, which is spoken of in the Revelations, behold, I
stand at the Door and knock; Rev. 3. 20.
if any Man hear my Voice, and open the Door, I will come into him, and will
sup with him, and he with me. It is what we desire, that all religious well
minded People, who conscientiously receive the outward Bread and Wine, may open
the Door of their Hearts, and receive the Lord Jesus Christ by his Spirit, that
so they may know an inward Supping with him, in his Kingdom; for we read the
Kingdom of God comes not with Observation, Luke 17. 20, 21.
neither shall they say, to here, or to there, for behold the Kingdom of God is
within you. I will not leave you comfortless (says Christ our Lord) I will
come to you; John 16. 18.
but I say unto you, I will not drink henceforth of this Fruit of the Vine,
Mat. 26. 29.
until that Day, when I drink it new with you in my Father's Kingdom.

He dwells with you, and shall be in you. And in that excellent Prayer, he
says to his Father, John 17. 23.
I in them, and thou in me, that they may be made perfect in one, and that the
World may know thou have sent me, and have loved them, as thou have loved me.
We bear Testimony to the Coming of Christ, by his Spirit, into Men's Hearts;
and they that have known him to wash them thoroughly by the Water of
Regeneration, will know inward Communion with the Lord, as the good Christians
of old knew; That which we have seen, 1 John 1. 3.
and heard, declare we unto you, that ye also may have Fellowship with us; and
truly, our Fellowship is with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ. They
were People of blessed Experience, and it is what we desire, that the Children
of Men might come to witness this in themselves; for they that are come to have
Fellowship with the Father, and with the Son, are come to the End of the
outward Bread and Wine, even to the Glory of the GospelDispensation, which is a
Dispensation of Enjoyment, for as Men are inwardly reconciled, and brought into
Favor with God, they come to know a feeding of that divine and living Bread
which comes down from Heaven; John 6. 51.
I am (said Christ) the living Bread which came down from Heaven; if any Man
eat of this Bread, he shall live for ever; and the Bread that I will give, is
my Flesh, which I will give for the Life of the World. He that eats my Flesh,
and drinks my Blood, dwells in me, and I in him. It is as Men witness this,
that they can speak from their own Experience, what a blessed Thing it is to
have inward Communion with Christ. It is the great Blessing of Wisdom's
Children, that she brings them to the Substance; I Wisdom lead in the Way of
Righteousness, Prove. 8. 20, 21.
in the midst of the Paths of Judgment, that I may cause them that love me, to
inherit Substance; and I will fill their Treasures. Reader, this is what is
desired for thee, that thou may come to the Substance, that so thou may
know a Feeding of that divine and spiritual Bread which can only satisfy the
Soul, and a Drinking of the Wine of the Kingdom; but it is hard to make the
natural Man sensible of these Things; they are beyond his Reach and
Comprehension. When our Savior told Nichodemus, that except a Man be born
again, John 3. 3, 4.
he cannot see the Kingdom of God; Nichodemus says unto him, how can a Man be
born when he is old; can he enter the second Time into his Mother's Womb, and
be born. Notwithstanding that he was a Ruler of the Jews, he argues very
grossly, and how many, when we have born Testimony to the inward Appearance of
the Lord Jesus Christ, by his Light and Spirit in Men's Hearts, have made very
strange of it, and been ready to say, how can this be? And when we have spoken
of Men's having inward Fellowship with the Father, and with his Son, while they
are upon the Earth, many cannot understand how this can be, although the
primitive Christians had it in their own Experience, as is before observed.

The Apostle says, Gal. 6. 15.
neither Circumcision or Uncircumcision, avails any Thing, but a new
Creature. It does not avail in the Sight of God, whether a Man be baptized with
Water, or he is not baptized; or whether he receives the Bread and Wine, or he
does not receive it, if he be not a new Creature; we read; if any Man be in
Christ, 2 Cor. 5. 17.
he is a new Creature, and as is before observed, except a Man be born again,
he cannot see the Kingdom of God; we greatly desire, that all People might have
this in their own Experience, that so they might walk as becomes the Children
of God, and manifest themselves to be the Followers and Disciples of Christ, by
their living agreeable to his Doctrine; for I count that is the greatest
outward visible Sign that any Man can give, that he is truly a Christian, and a
Member of Christ's Church, for him to live agreeable to the Doctrine of Christ;
by this, said our Savior, shall all Men know, that ye are my Disciples, if you
love one another. Now for Men to love one another, and to love their Enemies,
and do good for Evil, and to forgive Injuries, and to be just and merciful, and
walk humbly, as Christians ought to do, these are good outward visible Signs;
but we believe no outward Observations will make Men Christians, Ephesians. 5. 27.
and Members of that pure Church which Christ came to present to God, without
Spot or Wrinkle, or any such Thing; but that it should be holy and without
Blemish: If they do not know the Lord to work a Change in their Hearts, and
redeem them out of those things which unfit them for his holy Kingdom; the
Apostle says, he is not a Jew that is one outwardly, Rom, 2. 28, 29.
neither is that Circumcision, which is outward in the Flesh, but he is a Jew,
that is one inwardly; and Circumcision is that of the Heart, in the Spirit, and
not in the Letter, whose Praise is not of Men, but of God. As a Man's being
outwardly circumcised, and observing a great many Jewish Rights and Ceremonies,
did not make him a true and real Jew, if he was not one in his Heart; so it may
be truly said, he is not a Christian, that is only one outwardly, although he
has been outwardly baptized, and received the Bread and Wine, and observed a
great many outward Observations. If he is not one in his Heart, all his outward
Observations will not render him acceptable in the Sight of God. What availed
all the Jew's outward Observations, while they lived in those Things that
displeased the Lord; he that kills an Ox, is as if he slew a Man; Isa. 66. 3.
4.
he that sacrisiceth a Lamb, as if he cut off a Dog's neck, he that offers an
Oblation, as if he offered Swines Blood; he that burns Incense, as if he
blessed an Idol: Yea, they have chosen their Abominations. I also will choose
their Delusions, and will bring their Fears upon them; because when I called,
none did answer; when I spoke they did not bear; but they did Evil before mine
Eyes, and chose that, in which I delighted not. Here is the Reason laid down,
why the Lord was angry with them. These Things afford great Instruction and
caution, and I desire that all may learn from what such brought upon
themselves, through their choosing their own Ways, and delighting in their
Abominations, to beware of doing the like; but they that are Christ's, and
Christians in reality, are crucified to the World, with the Affections and
Lusts thereof; and we desire that all who are called Christians, may
demonstrate themselves to be such, by their so doing, that they may witness the
spiritual Communion and Supper here spoken of. There are many religious People,
particularly in Holland, who do not propose to be of our Society, though they
do not clearly see beyond the Use of Water Baptism, and Bread and Wine, do join
with us in opposing Swearing upon any Account; because they are convinced, that
all Swearing is forbidden by Christ, but I say unto you, Swear not at all;
neither by Heaven, for it is God's Throne, nor by the Earth, for it is his
Footstool, Mat. 5. 34, 35.
neither by Jerusalem, for it is the City of the great King, neither shall thou
swear by thy Head, because thou can not make one Hair white or black, but let
your Communication be yea, Ver. 37.
yea, and nay, nay, for whatsoever is more, comes of Evil. And the Apostle
James says, but above all Things, my Brethren, swear not; Jam. 5. 12.
neither by Heaven, neither by the Earth, neither by any other Oath; but let
your yea be yea, and your nay nay, least you fall into Condemnation. They are
also one with us in opposing Fighting, because they look upon it to be contrary
to his Doctrine, that taught his Followers to love their Enemies; but I say
unto you, Mat. 5. 44.
love your Enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate you,
and pray for them which despitefully use you, and persecute you. They are of
our Minds, that the Ministry should be free; for they look upon it to be
contrary to Christ's Doctrine, for Men to preach for Hire, and worldly Ends,
who said to his Ministers, Mat. 10. 8.
freely you have received, freely give; and they are likewise one with us, in
holding forth the universal Love of God to all Men. Now although there be many
that are purely Conscientious for the Use of Water Baptism, and Bread and Wine,
we have a great deal of Charity for all such; for many that are now joined in
Society with us, were once as much for the Use of these Things, as many
well-minded People now are, and as the Lord has mercifully brought many of us,
in a good Degree, to witness the spiritual Baptism and Supper, we desire that
others might be brought to the Experience thereof in themselves; and he that
witnesses the Substance of what many allow, the Water Baptism, and Bread and
Wine to be but outward and visible Signs of, he is come to the End of the
Signs; for I hope, I may be fate in saying, all Signs end in their Substance.
Now as we have Charity for all them, who do conscienciously use these Things,
we think they ought to have Charity for us, if we disuse them; because we
believe they are ceased in Point of Obligation; and we read, Romans 14. 23.
that whatsoever is not of Faith is Sin.

6. Concerning Perfection.
THIS Doctrine of Perfection seems very strange and novel to many that witness
but little Victory in themselves, over their Lusts and Passions; and the Enemy
of Man's Happiness, has persuaded many People to believe, that there is no
Possibility of overcoming their Corruptions and Sins, while they are here upon
the Earth, that so they may be quiet and easy in them, or of doing God's Will,
and keeping his Commands, that so they may not endeavor for it. Ez. 18. 25.
Now we believe, that God's Ways are equal; is not my Way, says the Lord,
equal. God is just in all his Doings, and requires no more of Men, than he
gives them Ability to perform. If God did require that of Men, which they were
not able, neither of themselves, nor by any Grace received to perform, then it
might be said, that his Ways were unequal, and that he was a hard Master; but
that would be abominable to charge upon the Almighty, who is full of Justice
and Equity. The Wise man says, Eecl. 12. 13.
fear God, and keep his Commandments, for this is the whole Duty of Man. Now if
God require this of Men, as to be sure he does, then there is a Possibility of
it, or else, as is before observed, his Ways are unequal; but it is far from
the Children of God, to charge him with Injustice: The Disobedient and
rebellious People of Israel said, that the way of the Lord was not equal, Ezekiel.
18. 29, 30.
yet says the House of Israel, the Way of the Lord is not equal: O House of
Israel, are not my Ways equal, therefore I will judge you, O House of Israel,
every Man according to his Ways, says the Lord; repent, and turn yourselves
from all your Transgressions so Iniquity shall not be your Ruin. Now Reader,
from this thou may gather what Sort of People they were, that said the Way of
the Lord was not equal, and we read in the Parable of the Talents, that it was
the unprofitable Servant that complained of his Lord; then he which had
received the one Talent, Mat. 25. 24.
came and said, Lord, I knew thee, that thou art an hard Man, reaping where
thou have not sown, and gathering where thou have not strawed.

Now we do not read, that the good Servants, that had improved the Talents,
complained of their Lord. But we freely own, that no mere Man of himself, by
his own Power, as he is a Man, can do the Will of God, and keep his Commands;
yet we believe there is Power in that divine Grace, that the Apostle says, has
appeared to all Men, to enable them to overcome those Things which are evil,
and to do that which is well pleasing to God; for the Grace of God, that
brings Salvation, has appeared to all Men, Tit 2. 11.
teaching us that denying Ungodliness and worldly Lusts, we should live
soberly, righteously and godly in this present World. Here is both the
Universallity and Sufficiency of it, excellently set forth by the Apostle, my
Grace, says the Lord to the Apostle, is sufficient for thee; although we
freely own, that we are weak of our selves, as Men, and cannot by our own Power
do any Thing that is good, as Christ said, will out me you can do nothing; yet
we say, there is Power and Sufficiency in the Grace of God, to enable Men to do
his Will, and keep his Commands, as they take Heed unto it, I am able says the
Apostle, through Christ, who strengthens me, to do all Things.

It does not consist with the Wisdom of the Holy Ghost, that those gracious
Promises, which are made conditionally, upon Men's overcoming and doing the
Commands of God, should be made, if there was no Possibility of it; Rev. 21. 7.
as he that overcomes, shall inherit all Things, and I will be his God, and he
shall be my Son. He that overcomes, Rev. ^. ^.
the same shall be clothed in white Raiment and I will not blot out his Name
out of the Book of Life, but I will confess him before my Father, and before
his Angels. Him that overcomes, Rev. 3. 12.
will I make a Pillar in the Temple of my God, and he shall go no more out; and
I will write upon him the Name of my God, and the Name of the City of my God,
which is new Jerusalem, which comes down out of Heaven from my God; and I will
write upon (...) my new Name. Rev. 2. 17.
He that overcomes shall eat of the hidden Manna, and I will give him a white
Stone, and in the Stone a new Name written, which no Man knows saving he that
receives it. He that overcomes, Rev. 2. 13.
shall not be hurt of the second Death. Blessed are they that do his
Commandments, that they may have Right to the Tree of Life, Rev. 22. 14.
and may enter in through the Gates into the City. To him that overcomes, will
I grant to sit with me on my Throne, Rev. 3. 2^.
even as I have overcome and am set down with my Father in his Throne. He that
overcomes, shall enter in through the Gate into the Holy City. And hereby we
do know, that we know him, if we keep his Commandments. 1 John 2. 3.
He that says, I know him; and keeps not his Commandments, is a Liar and the
Truth is not in him; 1 John 2. 5.
but whosoever keeps his word, in him, verily is the Love of God perfected,
hereby know we, that we are in him; Verse 6.
and he that says, he abides in him, ought also to walk even as he walked. O
that Christians so called, would consider how they ought to walk. It is very
unjustifiable to deny Perfection, for we read, that Christ came to present the
Church to God without Spot or wrinkle, Ephesians. 4. 11, 12, 13.
or any such Thing, but that it should be holy, and without blame. And he gave
some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some Pastors, and
Teachers, for the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry, for
the edifying of the Body of Christ, till we all come in the Unity of the Faith,
and of the Knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect Man, unto the Measure of
the Stature of the Fullness of Christ. 2 Timothy 3. 16, 17.
And the Scriptures are for the making of the Man of God perfect, through Faith
in Christ Jesus. All Scripture is given by Inspiration of God, and is
profitable for Doctrine, for Correction, for Instruction in Righteousness, that
the Man of God may be thoroughly furnished unto all good works. And the Apostles
labored to persent Men perfect; Col. 1. 28.
speaking of Christ within the Hope of Glory, he says, whom we preach, warning
every Man, and teaching every Man in all wisdom, that we may present every Man
perfect in Christ Jesus. Why should they teach and preach for this End, if
there was no Possibility of attaining it. Yet many have born hard upon us, for
the asserting the same, although it be the Doctrine of Christ, if it be but
well considered, I think they hold Perfection to a great Degree, that are
called Godfathers and Godmothers, that do promise and vow three Things in the
Name of a Child when it is sprinkled, viz. that it shall forsake the Devil and
all his Works, the Pomps and Vanities of this World, with all the sinful Lusts
of the Flesh; and that it shall do God's Holy Will, and keep his Commandments,
and walk in the same all the Days of its Life. See the Church of England's
Catechism.
I wish they themselves may be found in the Practice of what they here promise
for another. It is certain, Christians ought to be as like Christ, as it is
possible for Men and Women to be, and walk even as he walked, as far as they
are capable.

He was holy, humble, meek and merciful, but how much the Reverse are too many
that profess to be his Followers. Many who are for Imperfection, and say, there
is no Victory over Sin while here, do urge that of the Apostle Paul, where he
says, for I know that in me, Romans 7. 18.
that is, in my Flesh, dwells no good Thing; for to will is present with me,
but how to perform that which is good, I find not; for the Good that I would,
that I do not; but the Evil which I would not, Romans ^. 21. 22, 23, 24.
that I do. And ver. 21. he says, I find then a Law, that when I would do
Good, Evil is present with me; for I delight in the Law of God, after the
inward Man; but I see another Law in my Members, warring against the Law of my
Mind, and bringing me into Captivity to the Law of Sin, which is in my Members:
O wretched Man that I am, who shall deliver me from the Body of this Death. If
the Reader please, he may read the whole Chapter through for his own
Satisfaction; but we may not reasonably suppose this to be the Apostles present
State, but rather personating the carnal State of others, or himself before
Conversion, when he says, ver. 14. but I am carnal, sold under Sin; for we
believe he was in a happy State and Condition, when he wrote that Epistle; as
he says in the sixth Chapter, verse 2. how shall we that are dead to Sin, live
any longer therein. And in the eighth Chapter, ver. 1. there is now therefore
no Condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus, who walk not after the
Flesh, but after the Spirit, for the Law of the Spirit of Life in Christ Jesus,
has made me free from the Law of Sin and Death: I wish that all might come to
experience these Things in themselves. Now Reader, if thou will observe,
although many say, that there is no Freedom from Sin on this Side of the Grave,
the Apostle says in the sixth of the same Epistle, verse 22. to the believing
Romans, but now being made free from Sin, and become Servants to God, ye have
your Fruit unto Holiness, and the End everlasting Life. And John says in his
first Epistle, 1 John 2. 14.
I have written unto you young Men, because you are strong, and the Word of God
abides in you, and ye have overcome the wicked one. May all come to the
Experience of this in themselves, the Apostle Paul says to the believing
Colossians, Col. 2. 10.
that they were complete in him, which is the Head of all Principality and
Power. The Apostle Peter told the Believers, that they were a chosen
Generation, 1 Pet. 2. 9.
a royal Priesthood, an holy Nation, a peculiar People, that they might slew
forth the Praises of him who had called them out of Darkness into his
mavelous Light. To be sure these did not break the Commands of God daily, in
Thought, Word and Deed. We know that the Son of God is come, 1 John 5. 20.
and has given us an Understanding, that we may know him that is true; and that
we are in him, that is true, even in his Son Jesus Christ, this is the true God
and eternal Life: Behold what manner of Love the Father has bestowed upon us,
1 John 3. 1. 2.
that we should be called the Sons of God; therefore the World knows us not,
because it know him not.

Beloved, now are we the Sons of God, and it does not yet appear, Ver. 3.
what we shall be; but we know that when he shall appear, we shall be like him,
for we shall see him as he is, and every Man that has this Hope in him,
purisieth himself, even as he is pure: John says, 1 John 3. 6. 9.
whosoever abides in him, sins not; whosoever is born of God, does not
commit Sin; for his Seed remains in him, and he cannot sin; because he is
born of God. It Contrary to the Divine Nature to sin; and as Men are born of
it, they will not only know a ceasing from Sin, but it will be their Pleasure
and Delight to do the Will of God: except a Man be born again, he cannot see
the Kingdom of God. Unless Men are born of the Divine and Heavenly Nature, they
can never come to do the Will of God, nor keep his Commands, for it is
impossible for Men, while they are in the fallen and degenerate State, to do
God's Will, and walk in his Way; we read That Enoch walked with God, and before
he was translated, the Text says, he had this Testimony, that he pleased God,
Heb. 11. 5. and concerning Zacharias and his Wife Elizabeth, the Text says Luke
1. 6. They were both righteous before God, walking in all the Commandments and
Ordinances of the Lord, Blameless; and that all might take such heed to that
Divine Grace and good Spirit, which God has graciously sent into their Hearts,
that they might walk in all well-pleasing before him; and in the End have an
Inheritance amongst them that are sanctified, is my sincere Desire.

7. Concerning the Resurrection.
BECAUSE we do not hold with a great many People, in their gross Conceptions
concerning the Resurrection, therefore some have not stuck to say we deny it;
but we believe firmly, Rev. 20. 12, 13. 1 Cor. 15. 35, 36.
that there will be a Resurrection of the Just and Unjust, and that God will
give to every Man a Reward according to his Works, whether they be good or
Evil; but says the Apostle Paul, some Men will say, how are the Dead raised
up, and with what Body do they come; he says to such a curious Enquirer, thou
Fool, that which thou sowest is not quickened, 1 Cor 15. 37, 38, 39, 40.
except it die; and that which thou sowest, thou sowest not that Body, that
shall be, but bare grain, it (...) of Wheat, or some other Grain, but (...) it
a Body, as it has pleased him, (...) every Seed his own Body.

(...) Flesh is not the same Flesh, but there is one Kind of Flesh of Men,
another Flesh of Beasts, Verse 41. 42, 43.
another of Fishes, and another of Birds; there are also Celestial Bodies, and
Bodies Terrestrial; but the Glory of the Celestial is one, and the Glory of the
Terrestrial is another. There is one Glory of the Sun, and another Glory of the
Moon, and another Glory of the Stars; for one Star differs from another Star
in Glory, so also is the Resurrection of the Dead, it is sown in Corruption, it
is raised in Incorruption, it is sown in Dishonor, it is raised in Glory, it
is sown in Weakness, it is raised in Power. It is sown a natural Body, it is
raised a spiritual Body. There is a Natural Body, and there is a Spiritual
Body. We believe, if we saithfully serve the Lord while we are here, we shall
have such glorified Bodies hereafter, as He, in His Wisdom sees fit, and that
satisfies us: but the Apostle says, Verse the 50th, 1 Cor. 15. 50.
that Flesh and Blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God, neither does
Corruption inherit Incorruption: Now what we desire is, that all may know a
Part in the first Resurrection, Rev. 20. 6.
Blessed and holy is he that has Part in the First Resurrection, on such the
second Death has no Power.

The true Christians knew, that they were past from Death to Life, 1 John 3.
14, 15.
because they loved the Brethren: He (says the Text) that loves not his
Brother, abides in Death, he that hates his Brother, we read, is a Murderer,
and no Murderer, says John, has eternal Life abiding in him; 1 Timothy 5. 6.
and she that lives in Pleasure, is dead while she lives. While Men and Women
remain in a State of Death and Alienation from the Lord, they are full of Envy
and Wrath one against another; and they live to gratify the Lustful Desires of
the Flesh, we read, that whosoever does not Righteousness, 1 John 3. 10.
is not of God, neither he that loves not his Brother. O that all would
seriously consider of these Things, for it is greatly to be lamented, how wide
many of the Professors of Christianity live from the Doctrine of Christ and the
Primitive Christians, it is as Men come to know the second Adam, the Lord from
Heaven, the quickening Spirit, to quicken them, and make them alive, that they
come to love one another as Christians ought to do, and if all did but live in
the Spirit and Doctrine of Christ, they would not only be full of Love and good
Will to one another, but would also bring forth other holy and good Fruits, and
they whose Fruits are unto Holiness, their End will be everlasting Life. As Men
sow in this World, so they may expect to reap in the next, we read, that he
that sows to the Spirit, shall of the Spirit reap Life everlasting, and he that
sows to the Flesh, shall of the Flesh reap Corruption. Men are not only
accountable for gross Sins, but we are told by Christ our Lord, that a Man must
give an Account in the Day of Judgment for every idle word he speaks, and the
Wiseman says, God will bring every Work to Judgment, with every secret Thing,
whether it be good or evil. Now we think it not safe for any to be too
inquisitive how the Dead shall be raised, and with what Bodies they shall come,
least that Reproof of the Apostle, thou Fool, should belong to them; but let us
all endeavor to live as becomes the Children of God, that when we leave this
World, we may have the comfortable Answer, of well done, enter into the Kingdom
prepared for you from the Foundation of the World, and all such will know a
glorious Resurrection.

8. The Conclusion.
HAVING made the foregoing Observations, which are left to the Reader's serious
Consideration; what I greatly desire, is, that all may come to the practical
Part of true Religion and Christianity; for although a Man may believe, according
to the Scripture, that there are three that bear Record in Heaven, 1 John 5. 7.
the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost; and that these Three are One: And
also believe, that Christ was conceived by the holy Ghost, born of the Virgin
Mary, and that he wrought many wonderful Miracles, and suffered Death upon the
Cross, as he was Man (for he could not die as he was God) and that he was dead
and buried, and rose again, and ascended up to Heaven; and that he is also come
again by his Spirit into Men's Hearts; although a Man may believe all these
great Truths, and all the Articles of the Christian Faith; all this will not
entitle him to a Part in the Kingdom of God, unless he come to live an Holy
Life, for we read, Heb. 12. 14.
that without Holiness, no Man shall see the Lord. Thou believe, Jam 2. 19.
20.
says the Apostle, there is one God, thou do well, the Devils also believe
and tremble; but will thou know, Ver. 26.
O vain Man, that Faith without Works is dead; for as the Body without the
Spirit is dead, so Faith without Works is dead; Ver. 18.
he says, show me thy Faith without thy Works, and I will show thee my Faith
by my Works. The Saints Faith gave them Victory, and wrought by Love, to the
purifying of their Hearts. The practical part of Christianity, is too much
wanting amongst many of them, that profess to be Followers of Christ. Jam. 1.
27.
To visit the Widow and Fatherless in their Affliction, and to keep themselves
unspotted from the World, is the Religion which will (...) Men in a dying Hour.
It is very good for those unto whom the Lord has opened his Hand wide, and
blessed with a plentiful Share of these low Things, to be full of Bowels of
Compassion toward them that are in Want, and Distress, and to stand up for the
Right of the Widow and Fatherless, this is one part of true Christianity; but
to wrong and oppress the Widow and Fatherless, is the Reverse of Christianity;
many not only amongst us, and I hope, also amongst other Societies, have so
much of the Fear of God, that they hate this; the Scripture says, that the
Fear of God is to hate Pride and Arrogance, and the evil Way. The more Men live
in the Fear of God, there is the greater Hatred in their Hearts against ill
Things, but many for want of this, have fallen into very bad Company, and evil
Things, whereby they have brought great Ruin and Contempt upon themselves. Bad
Company has been the Overthrow of many; my Son, says the wise Man, if Sinners
entice thee, consent not. The Enemy of Man's Happiness, does often make Use of
ill Instruments to draw People into ill Things; and as many have been drawn
into very wrong and ill Things, by keeping of loose and bad Company; so I
believe many have been greatly corrupted, through reading of corrupt and ill
Books; so that some from reading of Atheistical Books, have arrived to a great
Degree of Atheism. But it is very profitable to read the Holy Scriptures, which
proceeded from the good Spirit of God; as People read them in the same Spirit
from which they did proceed; and there are also a great many other good Books
that are written by such as did fear God, which do greatly tend to promote
Piety and Virtue, and are very profitable to be read.

Great Controversies have been, and yet are amongst the Professors of
Christianity, about Religion, one says one Thing, and another another, so that
I believe, many well-minded People are at a very great stand to know which is
the right Way: Now the Apostle Peter, by the Direction of the Holy Ghost, Acts
10. 35.
has told us, that God is no Respecter of Persons; but in every Nation, he that
fears God and works Righteousness is accepted with him. Now here are the Terms
and Conditions clearly laid down, upon which Acceptance with God stands: and
this is what we desire, all People may come to be found in the Practice of,
that so all Bitterness and envy one against another, about Religion, might
cease and come to an End, that Truth and Righteousness may flourish in the
Earth.

If all did but truly live in the Fear of God as they ought to do, there would
be a holy Harmony amongst the Children of Men, and Love, Peace, Mercy, Truth,
Justice and Equity, would abound amongst them, but for want of this, how does
Strife, Envy, Injustice and Oppression, abound even amongst many of them, who
prosess to be the Disciples and Followers of Christ. O that the Children of Men
had it but in their own Experience, what great Reward and Peace there is in
living in the Fear of God, and in keeping of his Commands, then they would
serve him with Pleasure; for there is Peace and Comfort in obeying and serving
the Lord, beyond what any are sensible of, except those that have it in their
own Experience; so that I believe many pious good People are thankful beyond
what they can express in Words, that they were prevailed upon to serve him.

And such are concerned in Heart, that others might also be gained upon to
serve the Lord, that so they might be truly happy; it is for this End, that
many of our Religious good Friends, have traveled from one Land and Country to
another, in Hazard of their Lives; it is also upon this Account, that many have
appeared in Print, that if possible, they might be instrumental to gain upon
the Children of Men, to fear and serve the Lord, for if Men observe a thousand
outward Observations, if they do not obey the Lord, they will not all render
them acceptable in his Sight: Samuel told Saul, that Obedience was better than
Sacrifice, and to hearken to the Voice of God, was better than the Fat of Rams.

When it pleased God to reach to the Apostle Paul, and bring him to partake of
his Love and Goodness, how did his Bowels yern for his Relations and Kinds
folks after the Flesh, that they might be gained upon to serve the Lord: And
his Love did not only reach to them, but to Mankind universally, for in his
first Epistle to Timothy, he says, I exhort that Prayers and Intercessions, 2
Cor. 5. 20.
etc. be made for all Men; and the Apostle labored, as in Christ's Stead, that
Men might be reconciled to God: O what could a true Christian, that has the
Mind of Christ go through, that Men might be won upon to serve God truly, that
so they might experience the Love and Goodness of God in themselves; for the
Nature of the Love of God is such, that when it prevails in Men's Hearts, that
they desire that others might come to share thereof with them, as the good Man
of old said, Come, Taste and see that the Lord is good. It is when Men are
truly revealed upon, by the Power of Divine Love, that they come to be in Love
with God, and to run the Ways of his Commands with Cheerfulness; for if there
were no future Rewards and Punishments, that Peace and Comfort which they
enjoy, who truly serve the Lord is very encouraging to them therein. Friendly
Reader, if thou believe in the Death and Sufferings of the Lord Jesus Christ,
who was crucified without the Gates of Jerusalem, according as the Holy
Scriptures relate, let not this satisfy thee, but be concerned that thou may
know the Lord to bear rule, and set up his Kingdom in thy Heart, then will it
be easy for thee to do the Will of God, and keep his Commands. And if thou have
a Value and Esteem for the holy Scriptures, do not satisfy thy self with only
reading the Experiences of the holy Men of God, that spoke what they were
Witnesses of, who knew a being washed by the Water of Regeneration; but seek
that thou may also come to the Experience thereof in thy self. And if thou art
conscientious for the outward Water Baptism, and Bread and Wine, be careful
thou do not rest in the outward Observations, short of that inward and
spiritual Baptism and Communion which the good Christians of old witnessed:
That through the Enjoyment thereof, thou may grow beyond the Use of the
outward and visible Signs: And as thou finds that some of old knew an
Overcoming of the Enemy of their Souls, and received Power to become the Sons
of God, consider what Victory thou has gotten over the Enemy in thy self. And
as some People have been too inquisitive how the Dead should be raised, and
with what Bodies they should come, let it be thy great Concern to know thou art
raised out of the Grave of Sin and Iniquity, that thou may walk with the Lord
in newness of Life, and live to his Praise and Glory, whilst thou have a Being
here, that so thou may attain to the Resurrection of the Just hereafter.

As the Lord in his wonderful Love and Mercy, has sent the Son of his dear
Love, the Lord Jesus Christ, to die for the Children of Men, whilst they were
Enemies to him; I tenderly desire that all may consider the great Love of God
to them therein; and as he is the Fountain and Author of all the Good that we
receive, it is greatly to be desired, that his long-forbearance, great
Goodness, and manifold Mercies extended to the Children of Men, might engage
them to Care and Watchfulness, 1 Pet. 3. 20.
we read that the Long-suffering of God waited in the Days of Noah, while the
Ark was preparing; Geref. 6. 3.
and when the Lord had long striven with them by his Spirit, and they would not
be gained upon, then he destroyed them all, Ver. 21, 22.
save only eight Persons that were (...) the Ark. It is not long since the
Pestilence did very much prevail in France, by which many Thousands were swept
away. Now as the Lord has mercifully spared the People of these Countries, and
the British Isles adjacent, in lengthning a Day of Mercy to them; I desire that
his great Goodness and long forbearance, may lead them to Repentance and
Amendment of Life; for the Lord, as a tender Father, seeks to endear the
Children of Men to himself, by his Kindness and Love.

And Friendly Reader, that thou, and all Men may be prevailed upon, to walk
humbly with God, and live such pious and holy Lives, that the great and good
End for which the Lord has made Man, and given him a Being upon the Earth, to
show forth his Praise and Glory, may be answered, that thou, and they may be
happy to all Eternity, is the sincere Desire of one of the People called
Quakers,

BENJAMIN HOLME.

If the Reader desire a more full and particular Account of our Principles,
there is an Apology written by ROBERT BARCLAY, which has been printed in
English and Latin, and in High and Low Dutch, and also in French, to which he
is referred.

FINIS.

