Mr. Peabody's SERMON Preached to the Artillery-Company, In Boston, June 5.
1732.

An Essay to revive and encourage Military Exercises, Skill and Valor among
the Sons of God's People in New England. A SERMON Preached before the
Honorable Artillery-Company In Boston, June 5th. 1732. Being the Day of their
Election of Officers; And now made Public at their Request, and at the Desire
of many Others.

By Oliver Peabody, A. M. Pastor of the Church in Natick.

Genesis 14.14. And when Abraham heard that his Brother was taken Captive, he
armed his trained SOLDIERS, born in his own House, three hundred and eighteen,
and pursued them unto Dan

Cant. 3 7, 8. Behold his Bed, which is Solomon's, threescore valiant Men are
about it, of the valiant of Israel. They all hold Swords, being expert in War,
every Man has his Sword upon his Thigh, because of Fear in the Night.

BOSTON: Printed by T. Fleet, for J Eliot at the South End, and J. Phillips
near the Town Dock. 1732.

AN ESSAY To revive Military Exercises, Skill and Valor.
2 SAMUEL I. 18. Also he had them teach the Children of Judah the Use of the Bow.


IN the latter part of this Chapter, we have a mournful and yet manly Poem,
which was composed by David; who was not only a mighty valiant Man, a man of
War, but also the sweet Psalmist of Israel, an accomplished Poet, and one that
could play well on an Instrument.

HE wrote this Military Elegy, on the mournful Occasion of the overthrow and
daughter of some of the People of the Lord, and particularly the tragical Death
of Saul King of Israel, and his beloved Jonathan the King's Son. --

There was War between the Philistines, who were a valiant warlike People, and
the Children of Israel.

Saul the King, (as becomes a brave General) led forth his Armies himself to
the War: He marched and (as we may suppose) fought at the head of his armed
Soldiers: He also took his Sons with him into the Camp and Field of Battle, and
met the Forces of the Philistines.

There ensued a bloody Battle between these gallant Armies: and alas! the Race
is not to the swift, nor the Battle to the strong.

The Armies of the uncircumcised prevailed and got the Day, and Israel fled
before them, and fell down slain on the Mountains of Gilboa. 1 Samuel 31. begin.

The Philistines well knowing how to pursue an Advantage, followed after
Israel, and slew the valiant and worthy Sons of the King, even Jonathan,
Abinadab, and Malchishua; and they wounded Saul the Lord's anointed with an
Arrow.

Now when Saul saw the downfall of his heroic Sons, and many of his valiant
Soldiers, the overthrow of his Armies, and himself wounded, and had in vain,
asked his Armor-bearer to put an end to his Life, and so to his Anguish and
Misery, he fell on his own Sword and died, as if he had not been anointed with
Oil 1 Samuel 31 4.5. and 11. v. of the Context.
.

When the News of this was brought to David in Zicklag, by a young Amalekite,
David and the Men that were with him rent their Cloths, and they mourned and
wept and fasted until evening, for Saul and for Jonathan his Son, and for the
People of the Lord, and for the House of Israel, because they were fallen by
the Sword. Verse 11 and 12 of our Context.

And when David had done Justice on the Amalekite, and was retired, he gave
further Vent to his noble Passions, in this mournful and yet sublime Funeral
Song, at the beginning of which stand the Words of our Text.

In which he celebrates the Military Accomplishments and Achievements of these
Heroes, and laments their Death.

The Elegy is entirely Military, as one observes Rev. Mr. Symmes, in his Level
lamented.
, and it is plain the design of it was, to fire the Ambition of the Militia of
Judah, and stir up in them a Martial Spirit, to quicken them by Military
Exercises, to endeavor to excel in warlike Skill and Accomplishments; that
they might equal and excel the Skill and Valor of those Worthies, and rise up
in their stead, and boldly carry on the War against their Enemies, and avenge
the Death of their King, his Sons, and the other valiant Soldiers that fell
with them; and retrieve the Honor and Credit they had lost by this overthrow.

Agreably,

In the Text, he bad them teach the Children of Judah the Use of the Bow.

This, as Junius observes, expresses the Design of David, that this Song might
excite and provoke them to addict themselves to Martial Exercises, and to
acquire Skill in the use of the Bow, which is here put for all warlike Weapons
then in Fashion.

And for the same Reason and with the same View he tells them, that good
Soldiers are the Beauty of Israel; he minds them of the Valor, of the Honor
and Success of Saul and Jonathan, and mentions other things in the Elegy.

David was now upon the Death of Saul, not only Generalissimo of the Forces of
Israel, and Captain of the Lord's Hosts, but the King of Israel, though not yet
in possession of the Throne by the Act of Coronation.

And notwithstanding his Mourning, he was not forgetful of his Duty, nor
unmindful of the Safety and Felicity, the Honor and Reputation of his Kingdom
and People.

But at the same time that he publishes this Song, he sends forth this wise and
proper Order and Command, or publishes this Law (as one calls it) therewith, to
the Officers of the Troops and trained Bands, and to all others concerned in
those Affairs in the Tribe of Judah; (as I may have occasion to observe
hereafter) that they should take care that the Soldiers should be taught the
Art, Skill and Practice of War, the Use of Martial Weapons.

He that writes this History mentions this Order, as he enters on the
Recitation of the Song, to the Honor of this great King.

And I think our Text may well be understood in this Sense, both because of the
Connection and Design of this Story and Elegy, and because of the Idiom and
Phrase of the Hebrew, (as far as I can judge of it) though there are great Men
that suppose this Expression, He bad them teach the Children of Judah the Bow,
means, he bad them teach them this Song, to which he prefixes the Title,
Kasheth, or the Bow.

I cannot satisfy my self with that Exposition; but allowing it, yet even the
Patrons of it, allow the Poem to have the same View and Design, and so the
former Sense is still good; and having good Authority on my side, I may be
allowed to take my Text in that Sense.

And understanding it so, we may observe here,

1. First, Who it was, and what Character he sustained, who issued out this
Order or Command.

Now 'twas the valiant and expert David, (who as was said) though taken from the
Sheepfolds of his Father in Bethlehem 1 Samuel 16.11. and 2 Samuel 7.8.
, was yet a very brave courageous and skilful Soldier; he had approved himself
such an one, not only in the celebrated Action of slaying Goliath, the Champion
of the Philistines, who was a man of war from his Youth, when David was but a
stripling 1 Samuel 17 chap.
, but also in bringing in two hundred Foreskins of the Philistines at another
Time 1 Samuel 18.22.
, and now in the Slaughter of the Amalekites 1 Samuel 30 chap.
, and many other noble Exploits which he had done.

And he was now the Captain General of the standing Forces of Israel, and the
King instead of Saul. It was this great Master of the Art of War, and chief
Commander, that gave forth his Command to teach his Soldiers, his Subjects, the
Military Art.

And with what Propriety and Authority a Command comes from such an one! how
cheerfully will it be received and obeyed by Officers and Soldiers!

Generals and Captains should be good Soldiers.

2. Secondly, Observe here, to whom this Order was sent.

And it plainly appears that it was not primarily to Common Soldiers; but it
was either to the Magistrates of Judah, in whose power it was, by the King's
Approbation, to make and execute the Martial Laws;

Or to such Parents as had Sons capable of learning the Art of War, and able to
go forth to War: Or rather to the Officers of the Armies, the Colonels,
Captains, Lieutenants, and the like. vid. Poli Synop. in loc.
Praefecti rei Militaris, says a Critic; the Officers, or those that had the
oversight of Military Affairs.

These were presumed to be able to teach others, and received Orders agreably.

3. Thirdly, Observe in the Text, the Persons to be taught, viz. the Children
of Judah, the Sons of Judah, as in the Original: The young and effective Men,
who were suitable to be taught this Art.

Judah was the Tribe to which David belonged; and his chief Dependence was upon
them for Martial Exploits, and for Constancy and Fidelity to their Prince: They
were also a professing and religious People.

They must then be first taught the Art of War; not that the other Tribes were
to be neglected; a General will have his own Company good Soldiers.

4. Fourthly, Observe here, the Order, Command or Law it self; Teach them the
Bow, or, the Use of the Bow. Some, though not all Expositors, think this well
supplied in our Translation, by adding the Words the Use of, and the Bow was a
Martial Weapon, much used in those Days. Jonathan is celebrated in this Poem
for his Skill in the use of it, and the Exploits he had done by it. He had
before this, his Artillery and Bow. 1 Samuel 20.40.

David himself doubtless well understood it; and the Philistines were very
expert and successful in the use of it. By this they gained the Victory just
before mentioned over Israel: With the Bow they slew Saul and his Sons.

It Is possible Archery was not so much in use now among the Children of Israel
as it had been; partly because of the glorious Victory David had lately
obtained over Goliath with a Sling and Stone, and partly because Slings were
cheaper.

But this was not out of Use; for some of them who came to David to Zicklag,
who were mighty Men, and helpers of the War, were armed with Bows as well as
Slings, 1 Chronicles. 12.1, 2.

But on this Occasion, that they might not be inferior to their Enemies in any
part of Military Skill, or the use of any Weapon, and that they might fight and
overcome the Enemies with their own Weapons, they were to be taught a more
exact and perfect Skill in the use of the Bow.

Or as is generally thought, by Bow here is meant all Military Instruments, and
so the Command is in general, teach them all the Art of War, and the use of
every warlike Weapon, but especially such as will be of most Advantage to fight
against the bloody Philistines, and enable them to avenge the Death of their
King, and the other brave Soldiers that fell with him.

This experienced King and Commander knew very well of how much Importance it
was to have a well disciplined Army, of such as were expert and skilful in the
use of all Martial Weapons, to meet, fight and vanquish an Enemy that was such.

And it is not impossible but some defect of Discipline and Skill among the
Soldiers of Judah, or some dejection of Spirits on this Overthrow, might excite
him the more at this Time to give out this Command.

And what was then reasonable, honorable and beautiful among a People, is so
now. If valiant and accomplished Soldiers were the Beauty and Safety of a
People then, they are so in our Days.

In further speaking to these Words, I shall (by Divine Help) briefly consider
these three Things, (which naturally offer themselves to our Thoughts) viz.

First, It is very desirable, and what God's People ought to take care of, that
their Sons be taught and trained up in the Military Art and Skill; or that they
be expert, accomplished and valiant Soldiers.

Secondly, I shall consider what Influence the Example in our Text may have on
those who have (in our Days) the Command of the Militia. And

Thirdly, That it is desirable that a People be taught that Manner of warring,
and Skill in using those Weapons of War, which may be of most Service against
the Enemies they have most Apprehensions from.

First, I am to consider, that it is very desirable, and what God's People ought
to take care of, that their Sons be taught and trained up in the Military Art
and Skill; or, that they be expert, accomplished and valiant Soldiers.

We see this was one of the very first things this wise and prudent King took
care of, after he became King, to give Orders that his Subjects should bring up
their Sons in Military Exercises, that they should teach them the Martial Art,
and the use of warlike Weapons. He would have their young Men early taught it,
and all grow more dexterous at it.

And he puts into their Hands at the same Time this Poem, not only to eternise
the Memory of his Heroes, but to fire their martial Courage, and stir them up
to Emulation, and to fill them with desires of acquiring the Honor and Glory
which belongs to skilful and brave Soldiers.

Agreably he gives this Command, as we may suppose, not only to Soldiers and
Field-Officers, but to the Civil Rulers, and to those Parents that had Sons fit
to be educated therein, as I have above observed.

And there is as much Reason why our Sons at this Day should be taught this
Skill and Art, as there was in the Days of David.

We have seen and felt by unhappy Experience, that a People's Enjoyment of
Gospel Privileges, is no effectual Security against Enemies and Wars: The Time
is not (we may fear) yet come, when Men may beat their Swords into Plow shares,
and their Spears into Pruning Hooks; that Nation shall not lift up Sword
against Nation, neither shall they learn War any more Isa. 2.4. Mica. 4.3. 110
Psalm.
. Nor may we expect it will, till Men will be effectually persuaded in the day
of Christ's Power, to lay down the Weapons of their Rebellion against the Lord
of Hosts, and list cheerfully under the Banner of Christ, the great Captain of
our Salvation Heb. 2.10.
; and become his obedient and loyal Subjects, and good Soldiers.

Neither is the Profession of Religion in the least inconsistent with a
Military Spirit, and the Art of War: The most holy and wise of all Men have
practiced War, and have been famous for their Valor and Achievements therein,
as Abraham, Moses, Joshua, David and others; and this Command was given to
Judah, God's own People. Further, the Life of a Christian is compared to a
Warfare, and we are commanded to put on the Armor of God Ephesians. 6 11.
, and to be good Soldiers of Christ 2 Timothy 2, 3.
.

Neither is this unseasonable at this Day; although through the abundant Goodness
of GOD, by his Blessing on the wise Counsels and well ordered Negotiations of
the best of Kings, our renowned and most rightful and gracious Sovereign
GEORGE, there is now Peace in Europe, for which we bless GOD with all our
Hearts.

Nor because, by the Blessing of God on the wise Administrations and prudent
Managements of the Honorable Legislature of this Province, we have Peace in
our Borders at present, and some prospect of its continuance. Solomon had, and
took care to have, Men of War, trained expert and valiant Soldiers, even in his
peaceful Reign. 1 King. 9.22. Cant. 3.7, 8.

And who can tell what Changes there are in the right Hand of the Most High? or
how soon we may again hear the Alarm of War, and be called forth to the Field
of Battle?

If we consider our Backslidings from, and our provoking Sins against God, we
shall see but little Reason to hope for a long series of Peace and Prosperity.
And if we view the Actions and warlike Preparations of a Nation, who seem to
make Peace only to gain Time to prepare for War; if we see what they are doing
even within the Limits of our own Province (as is supposed) and then consider
the Principles that act them with respect to us, whom they call Heretics, though
falsely, and the Incendiaries which are among them, I believe all will allow,
that this is not a Time to let the Military Spirit and Skill entirely die and
come to nothing among us; to let our Swords rust in their Scabbords, and our
Guns grow unfit for Service, and be entirely incapable on any Occasion to take
up Arms, or have no Men that know how to handle or use Arms.

And I hope that an ESSAY to revive Martial Exercises, Skill and Valor among
us, will not be thought unseasonable, nor be unacceptable, (though coming from
the most unqualified of Christ's Ministers) since I am called to such a Service
on this Occasion.

It appears then, that even in our Days and Land, God's People ought to take
care to have their Sons taught the Military Art.

And perhaps there is as much need that such a Command as our Text should be
given to the Field Officers and to the Parents of New England, as ever there
was to any People: For where ever was the Martial Spirit and Skill, and
Military Exercises at a lower Ebb, than among us? and where ever was there a
People that appeared less concerned about their own Defense and Safety, than we
in general are? Unless it were the Men of Laish, who became an easy Prey to
their Enemies. Judge. 18.27.

And where ever was there a People more envied and maligned by other Nations
than we are, except Israel?

It would be a most beautiful and desirable thing, to see a Military Spirit
revive among us; and how necessary this may be found we know not, but may be
too late convinced by the unhappy Consequents of the want of it. How delightful
and desirable it is to have our Sons, Sons of Valor and Renown, expert and
brave Soldiers, our Officers becoming their Posts, and honored in them. And as
our Security gives Vigor and Courage to our Enemies, this would curb their
Pride and damp their Spirits, and the Terror of our Arms might force them to be
at Peace with us. We have seen something of this, by the happy Consequents of
the valiant and heroic Exploits of our late brave Captain LOVEWELL, and his
worthy Company, whose Death we still lament, and whose Memory is precious, and
ought to be immortal.

Our Sons then should be acquainted with Military Exercises, and learn the Art
of War; their Hands should be taught to War, and their Fingers to fight. Psalm.
144.1. They should know how to use the Sword, the Spear, the Gun, and all other
Martial Weapons. They should learn to keep Rank, to March, to face to their
Leaders, and make good their Ground. They should be taught how to handle their
Arms, and be expert at it: They should know the Words of Command, and
understand well the Martial Beat of the Drum, and the reviving and animating
Sound of the shrill Trumpet: They should be taught Obedience to their
Commanders, and also when to charge on their Enemies with Advantage; what
Ground to choose, when to advance, and when to retreat; how also to Encamp, and
how to defend themselves by Intrenchments; how to Fortify our Castles, Forts
and Garrisons, and how to besiege those of our Enemies, and batter down their
Walls, and break their Ramparts, and how to pursue an Advantage once gained,
and all other proper Stratagems of War.

They should be instructed how to furbish their Swords, and keep all their Arms
fit for Service; and how to endure Hardness as good Soldiers.

Once more, their Martial Fire should be kindled and blown up, and they should
learn to be cautious of running into needless Dangers, but yet when there is
need, to despise Danger, and face their Enemies without Fear or Cowardice, and
boldly to jeopard their Lives unto the Death, (like Deborah's Soldiers, Judges,
Chap. 5.) in the high places of the Field, when called to fight the Battles of
the LORD, to fight for their Lives, Liberties, Religion, and Cities and People
of their GOD. But

I am not here to teach the Art of War, nor to enumerate the several parts of
it, but to show that Soldiers are to be taught all the parts thereof; and this
is what a People ought to take care to see accomplished. -- And I shall say but
few Words for the proof of this, and that principally agreeable to my Text and
Context.

1 st Reason And first, A People should do this, because such Soldiers are the
Beauty of a People.

King David begins this Martial Song with this, the Beauty of Israel is slain
upon the high places, v. 19 of our Context. The Beauty of Israel, i. e. the
expert and valiant Soldiers of Israel* Good Soldiers, as one Mr. Symmes.
hence observes, are no small part of the Beauty of God's Israel. Such Soldiers
are beautiful in themselves, valuable, honorable, and highly to be esteemed.
How mean and despicable does a Nation appear, without a disciplined and
courageous Soldiery? What a Figure did Laish make, compared with the Armies of
Israel? And how awful was the Time in Israel, when there was War in the Gates,
and yet not a Sword nor Spear seen among forty thousand! and if there had, yet
perhaps not one that could use them. Judge 5.8. Though an Army with Banners, which
implies Skill and Order, is terrible to Enemies, yet it is beautiful and
pleasant to those for whose Defense and Safety it is engaged.

Now undoubtedly it becomes a People to countenance and encourage what is
beautiful and honorable among them.

2 d. Reason. The Safety and Happiness of a People, under God, depends very
much on a skilful, valiant and disciplined Militia.

Although David trusted not in his Bow nor Sword Psalm. 44.6.
, but on God for Safety, yet under God he trusted to his Armies, his skilful
and valiant Soldiers. What can an unskilful and cowardly People do, if an Enemy
come against them well disciplined and armed? Though our Hope must be in God, and
our Dependence on him for Salvation, yet we must make use of the best and most
proper and probable Means: And it may be truly said, that our Lives, our
Liberties, our Religion, and the safety of our Wives and Children, and all that
is dear to us, in a great measure depends on skilful and valiant Soldiers. Such
a Militia often prevents Wars; but if it does not prevent them, yet it keeps
the Enemies in fear, and at a Distance, and it must be owned to be of
unspeakable Service in a Day of Battle: Surely it is then desirable, and what
any People should think themselves concerned in, to have such a Soldiery among
them.

Further to confirm this, I may add, were this not desirable, King David would
not have taken so much Care and Pains to encourage it; neither would the Holy
Ghost have left his Example on Record in sacred Writ for our Imitation. Neither
further, would good Soldiers have been mentioned with such distinguishing Marks
of Honor through the whole Scriptures.

Further, this is evident, in that God himself is pleased to take the Titles
of, A Man of War Exodus 15.3. Psalm. 24.
, the Lord of Hosts, and the Lord God strong and mighty, the Lord mighty in
Battle: And also to claim the Honor of teaching this Art, Psalm. 144.1.
forecited; and in that our Savior appears in the Form of a glorious Captain of
the Lord's Host, Josh. 5.13, 14. and 6.2. and at another Time on a red Horse in
his Martial Glory, Zech. 1.8. But this is so evident in it self, and has been
so fully and elaborately proved by such as have stood here before me on like
Occasions, that I need say no more under this general Head.

Secondly, I proceed now Secondly to consider, as I proposed, What Influence
the Example in our Text may have on those who have (in our Day) the Command of
the Militia.

And our Text seems to have a double Aspect.

1. First, The King's Example may refer to such as are honored by God, so as
to be placed at the head of the Militia.

And as to them I may humbly say, Will they not be pleased to use their
Influence and Authority to encourage Military Exercises, and so to revive a
Martial Spirit and Skill in the Art of War, among the Children of God's People?

By honoring and countenancing such Exercises with their Presence, as they see
meet; by endeavoring that good Laws be made and provided for the Militia, and
properly executed. And

By advancing such Persons to the Honor of bearing Commissions under Them, as
are every way qualified and accomplished therefore: Men that will honor God and
the King, and maintain the Dignity and Authority of their Posts, and have a due
regard to Order and Discipline; and Men that are able to teach others the Art
of War, and the Use of Martial Weapons.: Men of a public and generous Spirit,
of known Probity and Faithfulness, and of exemplary Temperance and Sobriety,
who will endeavor to promote Order, Temperance and Virtue, as well as Military
Skill and Valor among their Soldiers. Psalm. 101.6. Doubtless David's Eyes were
on such to dwell with him in the Camp, as well as Court; and this will have an
happy Influence on the advancement of Virtue and Religion, as well as the Art
and Skill of War.

Secondly, But the Example in our Text also respects such as are honored with
Commissions under the CAPTAIN GENERAL and Chief Commander.

The Command in the Text may be supposed to be given particularly to them; and
if it be incumbent on the chief Officers and the Legislature to give them
Orders, Commands and Laws for the Militia, surely they should pay a due Honor
and Regard to them.

I may therefore with due deference say, this Matter belongs also to the other
Commanders of the Armies of this our Israel; to the Captains of Thousands, and
the Captains of Hundreds; or in the Language of the present Day, to the
Colonels, to the Majors, to the Captains, etc. every one that bears a
Commission in the Field, is to use his Endeavor to revive and encourage
Military Exercises, and the Martial Spirit, Art and Courage among us.

And in order hereto, to labor to excel in warlike Skill, and make himself an
accomplished Soldier, and Master of the Art of War, which he is to teach
others; to take care to fill up and honor the Office he sustains, and maintain
the Dignity and Authority of it.

If there be any Honor in your Commissions, as surely Sirs there is; then do
not lose it, nor let it suffer, and be brought into Contempt, by slighting and
despising it your selves, and suffering others, or giving them Occasion to
trample on it.

I may say further, such are to endeavor to instruct their Soldiers in the Art
of War, and the Use of warlike Weapons, and make them expert therein: And in
order hereto, to attend with dure Care, and in the proper Seasons, on Military
Exercies on Days of Troopings, Trainings, etc. and this for the true and noble
End thereof; not for Sport and Mirth, nor to give magnificent Treats to your
Soldiers, which is so destructive to Martial Skill and Valor, and so often
frustrates the great Ends of Trainings; but for the advancement of Military Art
and Skill, and to fit your Soldiers for Actual Service.

I may say further, our Text may be conceived to concern Parents and Masters,
they are to send their Children and Servants to Trainings, and by all proper
Means endeavor to train them up in Military Exercises and Skill.

And this Art and these Exercises are too noble, manly and honorable, to be
below or unbecoming the Dignity of the greatest. The excellent Example of our
Father Abraham, who trained up all his Servants in the Affairs of War, Genesis
14.14. should excite us hereunto.

And all Soldiers ought conscientiously to attend their Duty herein: If they
are to be taught, then they must endeavor to learn War. They are not to
slight, nor carelessly neglect to attend, much less designedly avoid the
Exercises prescribed by Law, for their Education in this manly and necessary
Art. They are not to come to the Field to mock and deride their Officers, nor
merely for Sport and Diversion; but with hearty desires and sincere endeavors
to acquaint themselves with all the Exercises, and every part of the Art of War.

But it is time I proceed to the third and last Thing I proposed for clearing
the Text, viz.

Thirdly, That it is desirable that a People should be taught that Manner of
warring, and the Use of those Martial Weapons which may be of most Service
against those Enemies that they are most likely to have War with.

The Philistines were an Enemy that the King and People of Israel at that time
most feared; they had long been a Scourge to them; and they had a well trained
Army, skilful in the Art, and expert in the Use and handling of the Weapons of
War; bold in adventuring, and courageous in fighting.

Now a great part of their Strength lay in their Dexterity and Skill in the use
of the Bow; they were expert Archers, as we learn from the Account of the
Battle with Saul and his Armies, forecited 1 Samuel 31. and as has been above
noted.

And now being flushed with the late Victory, they were like to be undaunted in
another Onset, and therefore David would have his Soldiers now taught the use
of the Bow; (but not so as to neglect the use of other Weapons) that they might
meet their Enemies with the same Weapon, and excel them therein, and vanquish
them therewith.

And this shows how proper and commendable it is for God's People to teach their
Soldiers, if not the very same Weapons that their Enemies use, yet at least
such as are of most Service to fight against them with.

Our Sons are then not only to be taught the Art of War in general, but that
manner of fighting and carrying on a War in particular, and the use of those
Weapons which are most likely to succeed in prosecuting a War, (if ever there
be Occasion, which God grant there never may) against the Enemies we have most
Reason to fear that we may have War with. And the Case may be so with a People,
that they may have Occasion and Need to have their Soldiers acquainted with all
sorts of warring, all manner of fighting, and the use of all kinds of Military
Weapons; they may have Occasion to acquaint themselves not only with the
Weapons and Manner of War with one, and that a neighboring Nation, but with
different and distant People: and may it not be so within this Land?

And he will be a finished Soldier, that can find, fight and conquer his
Enemies in the Thicket of the Woods; and immediately fall into a marshalled and
regular Army, or into a disciplined Troop, and fight and overcome in open
Field; and also excel again on the mighty Deep, and understand the best Manner
of fighting on the Sea. And Soldiers should not only learn to handle their
Arms, and use their Weapons, but it becomes them to study their Enemies, to
know the Weapons of War they use, and in which they are most expert; to know
where their Strength lies, and so how they may with the greatest Ease defend
themselves, and annoy and vanquish their Enemies.

In this lies a very considerable part of the Accomplishments of a Soldier.

The same Weapons, the same Manner of fighting that the disciplined Armies of
Europe use and practice to Advantage, would not be so serviceable against the
Enemies that have most troubled New England. And so on the contrary.

And since we are not sure but we may again be molested by them, or others like
them; and since it is not impossible that we may be invaded by more regular
Armies from beyond the Seas, and be called to fight with valiant and marshalled
Armies, and disciplined Troops in the open Field; I would here (as my Text
leads me) humbly offer to Consideration, whether it is not desirable, and
would not be prudent in this People of the LORD, and that even now though in a
Time of Peace,

1st. That some of the young and valiant Sons of New England, should be trained
up in the way of fighting, and the use of those warlike Instruments that would
be of most Service in a War against the Salvages of the Wilderness and their
Confederates It Is with singular Satisfaction to me, that His EXCELLENCY has in
his great Wisdom and Paternal Concern and Care for the lasting Peace and
Prosperity of this Province, recommended the same Thing that I have here humbly
offered, to the Honorable General Assembly, as I find in his Speech to the
Honorable Court, on the 1st of June 1732. which I was not so happy as to see,
till after the delivery of this Discourse, it being printed the same Day.
?

Might it not be of unspeakable Service to this Land, if some of our brave,
hardy and intrepid Youths, and others in our Frontier Towns and elsewhere,
might be encouraged by some Means to acquaint themselves more perfectly with
the Woods, and that even in the Land of those that have been our Enemies, and
find out the Hants and lurking Places of those who have done us most hurt; that
if ever they should be called forth, they may know where and how to find out
our Enemies, and fight and conquer them even when they are at home. That they
inure themselves to Travel, and learn to endure Hardness; learn to travel in
the Woods and Swamps, in which there is a great Art; and to know the Hills,
Mountains and Rivers; that they may not be any where at a loss; and also to
make themselves perfect in the use of those Weapons which are most adapted to
such Services.

We have seen something of the Advantages of this; and it is much to be wished,
that we might not be dejected, nor let such a Spirit die among us for want of
Countenance and Encouragement: And that although some such mighty and valiant
Soldiers viz. The expert and valiant Capt. Lovewell, Robbins, Frye, Harwood,
Fullam, and several others.
have fallen gloriously fighting for us in the Fields of the Woods.

And would it not also be of great Service to us, if Troops, which have been
such a Terror to these Enemies, and such a Safeguard to us in former Days,
might be encouraged? and that a proper Proportion of our Soldiers might by
suitably Exercises be made expert and skilful in every part of the Art of
managing of and fighting with the Horse? of which we have that Character given
Job 39.19. and on.

The Advantage hereof might be unspeakable. If it were known among those
Nations, that we are every way prepared with expert and valiant Troopers and
other Soldiers, this might happily prevent much Bloodshed, and perhaps prevent
there ever being another War. But if there should be nothing of this Nature, we
may well fear that they who have seldom or never been at Peace with us, but
because they feared our Forces, or to serve themselves of us, will (when they
see us careless) again get Heart and Courage, and molest us.

And may we not think, that some of the Nations of the Indians have been (by
God) left to prove us by, that we might know and to teach us War, as some of
the Nations of Canaan were? Judges 3. begin. And ought we not to endeavor to
answer God's just Expectations from us herein?

I would just say, Is it not to be wished, that our Frontiers might be settled
in a more defensive Posture? and that our Forts and Garrisons might be always
kept in due Repair? stored with good Arms and Ammunition, and manned with
expert effective and valiant Commanders and Soldiers?

But after all, will it not be allowed in me, if I take this Opportunity
unexpectedly put into my Hands by God, to say thus publicly, Is there not yet
a more excellent Way? I mean to overcome and win over to us the Indian Tribes,
by observing strict Justice in our Commerce with them, and by not allowing them
large Quantities of spirituous Drink, which is so destructive to most of that
People? and by using all possible Means and Methods to instruct them in and win
them over to, the true and holy Protestant Religion?

From what I know of that People, I am fully persuaded that such Wisdom would
be much better than Weapons of War with them, and more effectually subdue them
under us.

And it may be well worthy Consideration and Enquiry, Whether we as a People,
have done all that God expects of us in this respect? and whether God has not
formerly suffered them to be Pricks in our Eyes, and Thorns in our Sides, to
excite us to a greater Care and Concern for their precious and immortal Souls?

It is a lamentable Truth I say this, because I know it by unhappy Experience.
, that the English do much to debauch them, and in a dreadful degree (by bad
Counsel, and by giving and selling them inebriating Liquors, notwithstanding
the Laws of God, and the good Laws of this Land against so sinful and
destructive a Practice) prevent the Efficacy that it might be hoped the Gospel
might otherwise have upon them, where they enjoy it. And should we not, as a
People, do as much to save their ^mmortal Souls, as particular Persons do to
ruin and destroy them?

And will it not be pleasing to God, and profitable even to us, if there be
some effectual Way found, to have proper and well qualified Missionaries sent
among them? and that there be such Encouragement given by those who have the
Management of this Affair put into their Hands by God, as would be effectual in
some good measure, to excite such among the Sons of the Prophets in our Land,
who are Men well qualified with natural Strength of Body, and accomplished with
the Endowments of good Literature and proper Dispositions and Graces, to
undertake a Service which will try the Powers and Graces of the greatest Men?
Though this be a Digression, yet I hope my immediate Concern for some of that
Nation, will be esteemed a sufficient Excuse for me Here again I cannot forbear
(with the greatest Gratitude to God) to express my very great Joy, to find in
His EXCELLENCY's late Speech beforementioned, a Paragraph, wherein the
Encouragement and Support of Missionaries among the Eastern Indians is
recommended to the Honorable General Court. It Is with Admiration and Praise to
God, that I read and hear what pious and generous Persons have done and are
doing in England and Scotland, for the Advancement of pure Religion among the
Indians here: And I cannot but ardently wish and pray, that this Province may
join (agreeable to the pious Proposal of his Excellency) and do all that is
proper for the Advancement of that glorious Design, wherein the Honor of God
and our own Felicity is so much concerned.
.

I proceed to say,

2dly. Is it not very desirable, and will it not be very honorable and
profitable, that others be taught those Military Exercises, and the use of
those Weapons that may be most suitable to encounter Regular Troops and
disciplined Armies in the open Field?

Indeed it is proper that all Soldiers should be taught this; and particularly
those that inhabit the Seacoasts, and are most exposed to the Invasion of any
foreign Prince or Power. Such should be exercised and skilled in the Manner of
fighting, and the use of those Instruments and that Armor which are most used
among the warlike Nations round about. This is also of very great Importance,
and it is pity it should ever be discountenanced, discouraged or come to nothing.

And I cannot be pleased with the Reasoning of such as argue, that because this
honorable Artillery Company are not taught the Manner of fighting used by the
Salvages in the Wilderness, so much as the more noble and manly Exercises of
the more polished and civilized Nations; and because they are not called forth
to fight in the Woods; that therefore they and their Exercises are to be
slighted and discountenanced; and that it is too great an Honor done to them
annually, to keep up the Solemnities of this Day.

Surely our honored Fathers in the Civil Government and the Ministry did not
think so: And if these Things were entirely laid aside, it is much to be feared
that in time our Case would be like that of Laish beforementioned. I cannot
think but these Things have and may have an happy Influence on the Military
Affairs of the Province, as long as they have the Smiles and Countenance of our
honorable Legislature, and of the venerable Ministry of the Province.

I may just add thirdly and lastly,

3dly. Is it not proper and desirable, that some among this People should be
taught the Methods and the use of Instruments proper for Sea Fight?

Valiant and expert Admirals and Sea-Captains are as honorable and useful as
Officers in the Field; and gallant Soldiers on the Seas are Men highly to be
esteemed.

The English Navy, and the unequalled Soldiers in the British Fleet, have been
no small part of the Glory and Safety of the Realm for a long Time; and it is
pity we should ever lose the Command of the Seas.

Would it not then be well, if our Sailors and those of our Brethren who are
called to do Business on the mighty Waters, might be made expert Soldiers also?

Thus I have (as God has enabled me) considered this part of the holy
Scriptures; and I think I have advanced nothing but what (without Force) flowed
from it, in the Sense I have understood it, and what is agreeable to the Analogy
of Faith, and in some measure applicable to the Occasion of this Day.

The Application shall be in few Words.

And in general, Let what has been offered, serve to excite all the Lord's
People to endeavor to revive a Martial Spirit among the Children of
New England; and do what they can to encourage the teaching and acquiring the
Military Art, Skill and Valor.

This was the chief Design of our Text, and of this Elegy, (as all agree) even
to stir up a warlike Spirit, Emulation and Valor, and quicken to teach and
learn the Art of War among the Sons of Judah, as was before observed.

And my Design has been in this Discourse, to advance the Glory of God in
promoting the same good End; and I shall think I have been Instrumental in
doing good Service for God and this his People, if this imperfect Discourse may
be blessed and made Serviceable to promote these Things.

And will every one be entreated and prevailed with to do what is proper in his
Place, to promote Skill and Valor among our Soldiers?

And the noble Example of this valorous and renowned General and King, is with
Submission, humbly proposed to Your EXCELLENCY.

And we trust that the honorable General Court will be entreated to join
herein, if not by making new Laws, even such as might more effectually compel
those that are not to be drawn by a sense of Honor and Duty to it, to
endeavor to acquire Military Skill, by increasing the Fines on Delinquents.

Or if this be not thought proper, yet that there be some effectual Care taken,
that the good Laws already provided may be duly executed; and not shamefully
slighted, neglected or evaded by Officers or common Soldiers.

Again, will such of whom it is expected that they make a Presentation of the
Names of those who may be set at the Head of particular Companies, (as
Captains, etc.) be exhorted to take due Care therein, that they present such as
are every way qualified and accomplished.

We would hope, that none will do any thing of that Importance for Favor or
Partiality, much less for the sake of Gain: if they do, they must in a very
great measure answer for the Defects of such Officers, and bear the Reproach of
it.

For it is morally impossible for one Man personally to know the Character of
every Man in such a Province as this is.

Further, Let all who have or may have the Honor to bear Commissions under the
King in the Militia, be exhorted to honor your Posts, whether higher or lower,
and faithfully perform the Duties of them: Endeavor to be expert, accomplished
and most valiant Soldiers your selves.

And here I would propose, Would it not be of Advantage in order hereto, if
more of the Officers of the Militia would be pleased to list into the
ARTILLERY-COMPANY?

This Honorable Company was undoubtedly designed in its Original, to be a sort
of COLLEGE, to train up and Educate the Sons of this People in Military Skill,
and make them expert and valiant Soldiers See the Charter of this honorable
Company, dated April 24. 1638. Thus careful were our Fathers to promote every
thing that might be for the future Peace and Happiness of their Posterity.
.

And many of the Commission-Officers, the

Colonels, Majors, Captains, etc. of the adjacent and some of distant Regiments
and Companies formerly (as I am told) did belong to it; so that it was a
Seminary of expert Commanders, and was of extensive Serviceableness; and it is
pity it should not be so still. Will then the Officers be entreated to join
themselves to it, and by this and other Means accomplish themselves more and
more for the Offices they sustain, and the Services expected from them.

And then carefully and seasonably attend Military Exercises, Days of Training,
and the proper Business thereof; observe the Laws of the Militia, and endeavor
to teach those under you the Art of War: Maintain the Honor and Authority of
your Posts, and suffer not your Selves and Offices to fall into Contempt. Be
known in your Offices, at least in the Field.

And beware of every thing that may in the least blemish your Character as Men
of Honor and as Christians. Once more, be persuaded to do what in you lies, by
your Examples, Instructions and Authority, to keep your Soldiers from
Intemperance and Disorders on the Days set apart for Military Exercises, and on
the Evenings following.

And let the Ministers of Christ do what is proper for them in their Place to
encourage these Things.

And let Parents and Masters also join herein; and let us not bring up our
Children so tenderly and delicately, that they shall be unable to endure
Hardness on any Occasion.

Finally, let all Soldiers be excited hence, duly, seriously and
conscientiously to attend Trainings, and all the Exercises in order to become
good Soldiers: Don't slight nor shun them, nor attend them only for Diversion,
but make a Business of them in their Season; and endeavor to make your selves
Masters of the Art of War. And O keep your selves from Effeminacy and
Intemperance, which has been the ruin of so many Soldiers.

All that now remains, is a more particular Application of these Things to the
very ancient and honorable Company who have called me to speak to them in the
Name of the LORD this Day.

Honored and much Esteemed,

What has been now said, has a singular Reference, and may (I think) with great
Propriety be applied to You.

Your Profession as Soldiers is truly Honorable, and much to be esteemed; and
also to be encouraged by all God's People in their several Stations and
Relations: and your Exercises and Endeavors to make your selves accomplished
Soldiers are laudable, and to be smiled upon, countenanced and encouraged.

And as this Company was many Years since erected, and very much honored by
the Magistrates of that Day, and favored and countenanced by the Ministry; so
it may be still, if it be not in some measure owing to your selves.

The Honorable General Court put great Honor upon this Company in the
beginning In the Privileges granted to it, and some Lands given to defray the
Charges.
, and since; and they have lately put singular Marks of Respect on you; nor are
the Ambassadors of Christ wanting in showing you all that Regard that is proper
for Men of our Character.

GOD himself has also honored your Profession, not only in the great Regards
shown to expert and valiant Soldiers in the Sacred Oracles, but by taking to
himself the Name of a Man of War, the Lord of Hosts, the God of Armies, the
Lord mighty in Battle, and the like.

And hence it may be said to you, undoubtedly God and Man expect something
singular and extraordinary in and from you: You are to be skilful, expert and
valiant Soldiers: it is expected that you be expert in the use of the Bow, or
all Martial Weapons; that you labor to revive these Exercises, and the Art of
War; and if a warlike Spirit decays every where else, we would hope to find it
in the Artillery.

We lament every thing in this Company, that looks like a drawing back from
that Martial Spirit Skill and Valor that was once your Glory.

And it is much to be wished, that more of the Commission-Officers of the
Regiments and Companies in the Country did belong to your Company, that they
might be well (and they cannot be too well) qualified and accomplished for the
Posts they sustain, and the Service they are called to.

And is not a Military Spirit, and a Love and Regard to the warlike Exercises
and Art very much decayed even in this Company? Are not your Days of Training
very much disregarded, and thinly attended? have you not very many Delinquents?

And have all that do attend, a due regard to promote Expertness in the
Military Art in themselves and others?

Sirs, Consider, you are Volunteers herein, and you have Power by your Charter
in some measure to regulate these Things.

You will then (I trust) suffer me to say, Will it not be for the Honor of
GOD, and of your Company, and help to revive and promote Military Skill, which
is the professed Design of this Honorable Company, for you to take care that
you admit not any to the Honors and Privileges of your Company, but such as
appear truly desirous to learn War, and are effective Men, Men of known
Loyalty, Virtue and Temperance?

And when you choose your Officers, that you elect those that are Men of a
Marshal and valiant Spirit, such as you will willingly fight under if called to
it; Men that are able to teach you the Art of War, and will do it; and such as
you may think can and will march before you, and lead you into the Field of
Battle, and fight at the Head of your Company, and teach you Courage, and
inspire you with Valor by their own Example?

And such as may be chosen, are to labor to be well qualified for what is
justly expected from them in such Posts and Stations.

Further, as Endeavors to gain Dexterity and Expertness in the Art of War are
truly laudable, so you are all to be exhorted, with Diligence to attend every
Opportunity put into your Hands for the Advancement thereof.

It Is really dishonorable for any of this Company to be Delinquents, when it
may be helped.

You may make Laws in a great measure for governing your selves; and it is in
your Power to augment the Fines: and might it not be well to do it, if you
shall find that a sense of Honor and a love to these Exercises, and a desire
of the Glory of being expert and brave Soldiers, prove Motives too weak to fill
up your Ranks and Files?

You are also in the Name of GOD to be exhorted, to pursue these Things for
right Ends; even for the Glory of GOD, and that you may be better qualified and
accomplished (if called thereto) to fight the Battles of the LORD, and play the
Men for the Lives, Liberties, Religion, and the Cities of God. You ought to
have this in your View, to qualify your selves for actual Service.

And you ought to consider, whether you can answer it, if you have no higher
Views than to beat the Air with your Weapons, and to make your Days of
Exercise, Days of Sport and Diversion; since the Divine Aids are so solemnly
implored for you, and the Divine Blessing upon you, (at your desire at least)
once a Year; and you come into the House of God, that you and these Exercises
may be sanctified by the Word and Prayer.

Lastly, and above all,

List under the Banner of the glorious Captain of your Salvation: study your
Spiritual Warfare: prove your Spiritual Armor: put on the whole Armor of God;
and be expert in the Use of every Weapon therein; and your Weapons in this are
not Carnal but Spiritual, and mighty through God, for the pulling down of strong
holds. Again, study your Enemies, and be not ignorant of their Devices. Learn
how to meet and how to vanquish them. And be of good Courage herein; play the
Man for your precious Souls; never give Ground, nor cowardly quit the Field: be
always on your Guard, and completely armed: Face to your glorious Leader,
looking to JESUS, who always rides forth in his Royalty at the Head of his
Armies, with his Banners displayed, and he will give them the Victory.

Your Calling should mind you of this Warfare, and it may greatly serve you in
it: And to be an expert and valiant Soldier in other Wars, and unskil'd and
cowardly in this, is inexcusable.

And here though you fight against Principalities and Powers, and though all the
Forces and gloomy Regiments of the Prince of the power of the Air are set in
Battle array against you, yet be not dismayed, but trust in your Captain; who
has spoiled Principalities and Powers, and made a show of them openly. And if
you study and become Masters of the Art of this War, and do not shamefully fly
your Colors, nor desert the Service of your Captain, but prove your selves
expert, valiant and loyal Soldiers; and if you hold out to the End, you shall
be more than Conquerors through Christ who has loved you.

And this part of the Exhortation belongs to all.

Every one, Male and Female, must list Volunteers in this War; and we must
herein fight; fight manfully, or die eternally. Let every one then so manage
this Spiritual Warfare now, wherein you must fight, not as one that beats the
Air, but very courageously, and be always in actual Service, and take the
Kingdom of Heaven by a holy Violence; that you may, when encountering Death, the
King of Terrors, the last Enemy, be able to say joyfully and triumphantly, with
him 1 Timothy 4.7, 8. I have fought a good Fight, I have finished my Course, I
have kept the Faith; henceforth there is laid up for me a Crown of
Righteousness, which the LORD the righteous Judge shall give me at that Day.

Laus Deo. Amen.
FINIS.

