A CONFERENCE of His Excellency Jonathan Belcher, Esquire
Captain General and Governor in Chief of His Majesty's Province of the
Massachusetts Bay in New England, with Edewakenk Chief Sachem of the Penobscut
Tribe, Loron one of the Chief Captains of the same Tribe, Toxus Chief Sachem of
the Norridgewock Tribe, Adiawando Chief Sachem of the Pigwacket Tribe, and
Medaganesset Chief Sachem of the Amerescoggin Tribe, with other Chief Men of
the said Indian Tribes, at Falmouth in Casco-Bay, July 1732. Annoque Regni
Regis GEORGIJ, Secundi, Magnae Britanniae, etc. Sexto.
Falmouth, Monday, July 24, 1732.
HIS Excellency (who arrived here the 17th Instant in His Majesty's Ship
Scarboro' Capt. Thomas Durrel Commander and waited the coming up of the
Indians) being attended by a Quorum of His Majesty's Council, and a Number of
the Members of the House of Representatives and other Gentlemen, this Day
received the Sachems and other Indians of the Eastern Tribes under a large Tent
erected for this Occasion.

And after the Indiana had paid the proper Respects and Salutations to His
Excellency,

Capt. John Gyles, Capt. Samuel Jordan, Mr. Joseph Bane, and Mr. Abraham
Johnson Interpreters of the Indian Language, were sworn to the faithful
Performance of that Service.

And then the Conference began.

Governor, My good Friends and Brethren, I give praise to GOD the great
Governor of the World, that He has brought us together at this Time to see one
another in Health and Safety.

I now meet you with sincere Joy and Satisfaction to renew and establish the
Peace and Friendship that has been made between us.

I am now come at the Desire of the Chiefs of the Tribes to hear what they have
to offer to me.


Toxus, It is GOD who has the over ruling Power over all things, that has
brought us together at this Time.

The Reason of our coming now is our hearty desire of Love and Friendship.

The Reason of our coming in so great a Number is to see your Excellency; and
it is the Will of GOD to give us an Opportunity to wait on you.

As a Token of our being glad to see your Excellency, I shake Hands, and offer
this as our Money. (Laid down some Furs.)


Arexis, We have heard what your Excellency has offered us, and we rejoice from
our Hearts.

It is the greatest Motive to Friendship and Love, that we should openly see
one another.

It is the ordering of Providence that we have now the Opportunity of seeing
one another.

As your Excellency sees me, it is all one as if our Chief had waited on you;
and this is a Pledge of it. (Laid down some Furs.)


Govern. The Penobscot Men told me when they first came to see me, that it was
a busy Time, and therefore there could not come any more of them to this Place;
I shall therefore be ready to give you all the Dispatch that you desire, that
so you may return to your Homes as soon as you shall think fit; and I shall
give you a Signal when you shall see me here again. I would not hurry you into
any thing, for I am glad of your Company: But I shall be ready to hear what you
have to say when you are ready, that so you may not be detained longer than you
desire.


Arexis. We are not in haste, but desire longer Time to discourse with your
Excellency.


Govern. I desire you may consider of every thing that may tend to lengthen out
the Peace and Tranquillity between us.

Whenever you have a mind to speak with the Governor, if you will send to me,
I will give the Signal to call the Tribes together, which will be the Firing a
Gun from the Man of War, and hoisting the King's Jack on the Main Top-Mast-Head.

I will give you King GEORGE's Colors to be carried in the Head of such Canooe
as you shall agree on in Token of your Subjection to His Majesty; It is such a
Flag as I carry in my own Boat


A Motion being made by the Indians that a Doctor should be ordered to look
after one of their People that was Sick; The Governor directed Dr. Noyes to
take Care of him; and acquainted them, that if any other of them were Sick,
they should be a^ well taken Care of as himself, if he were Sick.

And the Indians then took their Leave.

Tuesday, July 25. 1732.
THE Signal being given by His Excellency's Order for the Indians coming over
to the Conference, they came from Hog-Island with French Colors in two of
their Canoes, and without the English Flag which the Governor give them. Upon
which His Excellency sent a Message to them to signify his Displeasure on this
Occasion, and to let them know, that he would not see them To Day, and to order
their immediate Return, and to give them a strict Charge to come over at all
Times with the English Colors, and not presume to wear the French. Whereupon
they returned to their Camp at Hog-Island.

Wednesday, July 26. 1732.
THE Indians sent a Message this Morning to the Governor to apologize for
their not wearing the English Colors, and wearing the French, alleging that
they were generally ignorant of the English Flag being delivered, and to
promise Obedience to His Excellency's Order in this Matter for the future.

Post Meridiem.

The Indians, upon the Signal given, came ashore with the English Flag, and
without French Colors, according to Order.

Govern. I am glad that you are arrived safe and in Health. (To the Chief of
the Penobscut Tribe, and others lately arrived.)

I hope GOD smiles upon this Interview, since he orders his Sun to shine
gloriously upon us, which I trust is a happy Presage of the good Success of
this Affair.

When I saw you last, I told you that I was ready to hear what you had to offer
to me, and that I should be glad to join with you in every thing that tends to
a happy Peace.


Loron. Brother, As you pleased to mention the Almighty, who has the Care over
all things, and whom it has pleased, that we should see one another; All the
Tribes are come with a good Design, and we hope that GOD will strengthen the
Peace and Unity.


Wiwurna. He that spoke last, spoke the Minds of all the Tribes; all, both old
and young, rejoice to hear your Excellency speak of Peace and Friendship. GOD
alone is the Giver of all these Blessings.

It shall be mentioned over the whole Continent, that your Excellency is a
Lover of Peace.


Gov. The great GOD is the Giver of Love and Peace: when JESUS CHRIST, the
great Savior of the World, came down among Men, He said, Blessed are the
Peacemakers. I hope Peace and Friendship will continue among the English and
Indians to the Children that are unborn.


Wahway. I am well pleased to hear your Excellency mention GOD's Name, who is
the Giver and Orderer of Peace. It is GOD's Will and Pleasure that we have the
Opportunity at this Time to see one another. We rejoice that your Excellency
mentions the Continuance of Friendship from one Generation to another; and we
all, old Men and young, join in that Wish.

I put this as a Pledge to ty Hand in Hand the Peace that is made, from one
Generation to another. ( Laid down some Furs.)

I lay this over as a Shade that nothing may fall upon the Peace, but that we
may walk under it as a Shelter, that nothing may molest us or our Children
after us. (Laid down more Furs.)


Loron. As your Excellency was pleased to mention GOD's Overruling Hand and to
desire that there might be a lasting Peace; It is like wife our Desire that it
may be so.

And if any thing of Difference should happen, we desire that Methods may be
taken to decide things, for we are all one. All the Body of Indians salute your
Excellency as a Confirmation of this.


Govern. I have been Sixteen Days from Boston, and have been waiting for the
Indians eight Days. If you have any thing to offer, I should be glad to hear it
Now or Tomorrow, or at any other Time. If you have any thing to offer for
making the Trade more advantageous I should be glad to hear it. I hope you are
treated with Justice and Kindness at the Trading Houses.


Loron. If your Excellency has any thing to offer to us, we Desire you to
mention it.


Govern. I came here at the Desire of your Chief, Capt. Loron and others of the
Penobscot Tribe, who sent me a Letter which was signed at the Fort at St.
George's.


Loron. We could not desire your Excellency to give your self the Trouble to
come to this Place; but when I heard last Winter, that you were coming this
Way, we told your Excellency that as many of us as could, would meet you here.


Govern. How many of the Penobscot Tribe are present here


Loron. We cannot tell, not having counted them.


Govern. How many have you last behind?


Loron. When we have counted these, we shall know how many are left: The whole
are about 100 Men.


Govern I have Complaints from the Fathers that the English fell the Indians
Rhum, and that they abuse them with it; and I shall be glad to hear from you
what Means may be used for preventing this Mischief for the future.


Loron. As a Peace is concluded, there is nothing of any great Moment to be
discoursed of, but such Things as will take up but little Time.


Govern. What I say to you is a serious Thing: You profess to Worship GOD and
JESUS CHRIST, and while you get Drunk, you mock Him, and wrong your selves for
this World and that to come. When the Rhum prevails, you are like Bevers,
Bears and Otters, and don't show your selves after the Image of GOD in which
you were made; and if there were no World to come, where you are to answer for
this Wickedness, you hurt your selves with Rhum, as to your Interest in this
World; and Ill Men cheat you when you are Drunk with it, and make you give two
Skins for one. This is a serious Matter, and deserves Consideration.


Loron. We will think of what your Excellency mentions to us.


Govern. I have more things to mention.

I have been to St. George's, according to my Duty to King GEORGE, to view the
King's Fort and the Land there, to consider what may be the most advantageous
to the KING and to His People, to be done in that River.

I have been to Brunswick and Richmond, to see the King's Forts there; and at
Cushnock and other Places on Kennebeck River, to see the King's Lands there,
and I would have gone further, even to Norridgewock and Penobscot, if any of
the Tribes had been there to accompany me. And as I went into your Country, I
should be glad to see you at Boston. Brothers and Friends should visit one
another at their several Houses. It was in confidence of your sincere
Disposition to Peace, that I traveled into those Parts.

I hope you find the Trading Houses commodious for you, and that you are
supplied cheaper there, than by the French at Canada.

The Government takes Care that you be supplied cheaper than their own People:
And I hope the more you are acquainted with the English at Falmouth, and other
Towns in these (...), you will find these Settlements commodious and beneficial
to you.

And as Loron said, If there should be any Cloud hanging over the Peace, you
will take Care that we be informed timely of it.

Your coming hither to meet the Governor will not be such a Proof of your
Friendship as your giving Notice of these things, and practicing Friendship
with us.

I have no doubt but the more you are acquainted with the English, the more you
will love them.

It shall be so much my Care to seek your Interest and Advantage, as I doubt
not will oblige you to sincere Friendship.

The Government here have settled a Minister at St. George's, and there will be
another at Richmond. They will be always ready to instruct you in the
Principles of the Christian Religion, and teach your Children to Read and
Write, which shall be without any Cost to you.

If you are willing to send your Children to Boston, they shall be brought up
to Learning at the College, that so they may officiate as Fathers among you,
and teach you the true Religion, and their Education shall cost you nothing.

Though you have learnt Religion of the French, which you may apprehend to be a
good one, yet you should not be averse to look into another. Before you knew
the French Religion, you though it the Pagan Religion to be a good one, but when
you were taught the French Religion, you though it that better. And so when you are
instructed in the English Religion, you may think that still better than the
French.

If you have a mind to understand the true English Religion, it shall cost you
nothing; and when you understand it you will certainly know, that you are
cheated, when your Sins are pretended to be pardoned for Skins: This is all a
Cheat and Deceit: None can pardon Sins but JESUS CHRIST; and He does it freely,
without Money and without Price. All that the Priests make you pay, they put in
their own Pockets.

I would have you seriously to consider this, and not to be so much prejudiced
as not to desire to know further.

If you don't remember what I have now said to you, it shall be written down,
that you may carry it with you.


Loron. We will consider of what your Excellency has said.


Govern. I have nothing further to say now, but we will Drink King GEORGE's
Health.


Wahway. We desire the Favor of a House to shelter us, at the Trading-House on
Saco River.


Govern. I Will take Care of it.


Wahway. As your Excellency said, that any thing that was prejudicial to us
should be mentioned; I would acquaint you, that the English young Men hunt the
Bever among us, whereby there is danger of a Misunderstanding.


Govern. Fishing, Fowling and Hunting are free to King GEORGE's Subjects in his
Lands; and you have free Liberty to use that Privilege any where in the King's
Lands. You are King GEORGE's Subjects and so are we: You have acknowledged your
Allegiance to Him, a great while ago. We are Brothers, and should hunt and live
together.

I have been to Cushnock, to pitch upon a Place for Building a good Town for
the English and Indians to live together, that they may have a Church there,
and a Father to teach them the true Religion and the Way to Heaven.


Thursday, July 27. 1732.
Toxus. THE Penobscot Tribe only is to speak, and what they say, the others
join with them in it.


Loron. Friend, We have been thinking of what your Excellency said to us
yesterday; and we will now make Answer to it: As to the Lands, which you said
are yours what we shall say will not be new, but what has been formerly said.
Your Excellency will go on in the Way that former Governors have gone in;
which are the Articles of Peace made between us; which are to be observed.

As to Prayers, It was mentioned in the Treaty, that there should be no Dispute
about Religion. It would be a light Proceeding in us, to answer what you have
said on that Affair; We are too few to enter into this Dispute, which is a
weighty Matter: There are other Tribes to be discoursed with; and when we know
their Mind we shall be better able to Answer: We had the Advice of the other
Tribes about the Peace; and therefore we think it proper, to have their Advice
in this Affair.

As to what was said of our Children, we are not qualified to answer as to the
Proposal for their Education, we being but few here, and the other Tribes being
concerned in it.


Govern. I am glad you find the Road so plain to walk in. This Government will
strictly observe the Articles of Peace, by which we are bound to each other. I
meet you further to strengthen the Articles of Peace, and should be glad from
Time to Time to hear from you what will further promote it.

As to the Settlement of the Lands and the making of Towns in King GEORGE's
Lands, it shall always be according to the Treaties. I did not mention the
Matter of Religion to make any Jar between us, but offered it as an Instance of
my brotherly Love; and because I am perfectly satisfied, it is the best way to
your Interest in this World, and in the World to come. GOD has given you Reason
to examine into the Matters of Religion. It will do you no Hurt to examine into
the English Religion, for then you can choose that which you shall judge is the
best. The Government is willing to instruct you on free Cost. I have nothing to
do with the foreign Nations; You have said, you are free Men and you are my
Brethren. When you received the Popish Priest, it was at your own Election.


Loron. We did not intend the French, but the other Tribes of Indians, when we
talked of advising.


Govern. This is a great and serious Affair, and I desire you would consider of
it; for we shall willingly send Ministers to instruct you in Religion, and
Schoolmasters to teach you to read and write: And if at any Time, you will
send your Children among us to be educated, they shall be treated with that
Kindness, as if they were our own Children.

Nothing can be more for your Interest than to have the Trade under good
Regulation, and especially that the private Traders should be discountenanced,
for I have Complaints from the Priests and others, that they abuse you by
selling you Rhum and making you Drunk.


Loron. Your Excellency is in the Right: There is much mischief, by their
selling us so much Rhum.


Govern. There is no Way to prevent this, but by your not Trading with the
private Traders, but at the Truck-Houses only.


Loron. It is much to our Advantage to have all other Goods but Rhum brought
near us, but it is hurtful to us to bring Rhum among us.

St. George's is a great way from us, the Traders bring Goods near us; but it
would be well if we could have their Goods at a cheaper Rate.


Govern. The Price of Goods at the Truck-Houses is stated by the Government;
and the Truck-Masters cannot impose upon you; but the Government cannot restrain
the private Traders as to their Price. This is what I offer in Friendship to
you; for the private Traders do you so much Mischief with their Rhum, that it
is as bad as if they should shoot you.


Loron. We only mention it to your Excellency; we don't suppose that the
private Traders can be forced to sell at a Price, but we should be glad it
might be; and that they might be rest^^ined from selling Rhum.

There is not a prudent Care as to the giving out of Liquor at St. George's,
they give the Indians too much Rhum, which makes them Drunk; and we desire
therefore that Care may be taken to pre^ent it.


Govern I will give effectual Orders that you shall not be abused by the Issuing
of Rhum at the Truck-Houses.

By the Articles of Peace King GEORGE has Power to settle Towns on His Lands;
and I purpose to settle a Town at Cushnock, and then the Trade will be nearer
to you.

When I pro^ose any thing, and you don't object, I suppose you consent. If
there should be a Town, you shall have Lands there, and live with the English.
In the Southern Parts of this Province, the Indians have Towns, and live and
dress as the English do.


Loron. It is not our Way to give a sudden Answer to what is proposed.


Govern. This Proposal I made to you Yesterday.

You told me yesterday, that there was not much Business, the Peace being
already concluded; this Interview was only to see one another. I have been a
great while from Boston, and the King's Business requires my speedy return
thither. I shall be glad, if you have any thing to offer, you would mention it
this Afternoon: For I purpose you shall dine with me Tomorrow, in order to
dismiss you the Day after.

In all things we should be frank and open, and no Body should be here that are
afraid to be known. This I say, because I hear there are two French Men
present; and I should not Care if their Master was here too. I will always do
Justice to you; but I will support King GEORGE's Honor, who is Lord and
Sovereign here; and the French shall know it.

How many French Men are here?


Loron. This Morning we happened to see some Strangers; but they came in a
Vessel on their own Affairs.

It is true, that we are to speak freely to one another; for by the Articles of
Peace we are to use this Freedom; and we shall be very open with your
Excellency as to what concerns us.


Govern. My Heart is much engaged to prevent the Mischief of the private Trade;
the Government receives no Damage by it; but there is Danger that it will make
a Misunderstanding between us: For by this Means you have had such Injustice
done you, as the Government cannot set to rights: but these Abuses will not be
offered you at the public Truck-House.


Loron. We are to speak every thing that is true, and hide nothing: As to the
Trade, it was agreed, that we should have the Goods as cheap as at Boston; and
the Governor told us that Goods would be governed by the foreign Markets,
sometimes cheaper and sometimes dearer; but the Goods have always risen in
their Price.


Govern. You have the Goods as the Market governs, and at as cheap a Race as
you can buy any where else, and cheaper than our own People can have them at
the Truck Houses.


Wiwurna. As you are pleased to mention a Trading House, at Cushnock it is too
weighty for me to lift, but we will consider of it, and return an Answer to it.
There are many Persons interested in it, if it were all my own Land, I would
say you should be welcome to it Brother; but if I should say so, without the
Consent of the other Owners, I should make my self a Jest among them.


Govern. You all agreed that the Penobscot Tribe should speak for all. And I
was pleased to find that my Design of Building a Town at Cushnock was so
agreeable to your thoughts, for they said the nearer the Trade was the better;
and from the Building of this Town, you would reap that immediate Advantage.


Wiwurna. Our Armourer at Richmond is dead, and we are at a Loss for mending
our Arms.


Govern. I will take Care to send you an Armourer when I get Home. It is now
Dinner Time, and I will send you some Refreshment, and meet you again at Three
a Clock.


Wahway. I speak for the Amerescoggin Indians. We should be glad to have a
Trading House near us: As your Excellency said we should speak of any Grievance
as to the Trade; Adiawando and his People are dissatisfied that a Negro has the
Ordering of the Trade at Saco-River. We did not know that King GEORGE was
served by Negroes.


Govern. That Negro is a Servant to the Truck-Master, and he must have some
Body to manage the Trade in his Absence; he is a very honest Man. GOD made us
of different Colors, the Negros black, the Indians not so black, and the
English white; and I don't despise the Indians because they are not so white as
the English, for they are as GOD made them.

As to the Proposal of a Trading House for the Amerescoggin Indians* I will
consider of it, and give you an Answer in the Afternoon.


Loron. The Smith at St. George's does not take proper Care to mend our Arms,
but does it negligently.


Govern. I will take Care to have this Matter also rectified.

Post Meridiem.


Govern. I have considered what has been moved as to a TruckHouse for the
Amerescoggin Indians. And I find the Amerescoggins and Pigwackets are all one
Tribe, that the Pigwackets are seated near the Truck-House on Saco River, and
the Amerescoggins are near Richmond Truck-House; that it is a great Charge to
the Government to keep a Truck-House; as they are at Saco on one side, and
Richmond on the other, I don't doubt but they may be well accommodated.


Loron. Brother, You have not given us any answer as to the Rhum that is given
out at George's Truck-House.


Govern. I will give special Direction that for the future it shall be given
out in a prudent manner, that it shall not be hurtful to you.


Loron. I have something to offer further: Your Excellency was pleased to say
we should speak plainly. As to the distant Tribes, we think there is something
yet wanting. As there is Friendship, we wonder that Powder should be wanting
for us to fire a little with. It was mentioned at the Treaty, that Powder
should be given to each Tribe. If the Present should be given, those that are
at a Distance would think that there is Love between us; and we are of Opinion
that when other Tribes see (...), they would think there is hearty Love between
us.


Govern. What do you mean by what you say of Powder?


Loron. We mean a Present of Powder and Shot, which was mentioned in the
Treaty. As to the Sloop that comes a Trading to Penobscot, we don't desire they
should be forbid, because it is profitable to us, but only we are willing they
should be forbid bringing Rhum.


Govern. I am glad it lies much upon your Mind to have the Trade of Rhum
prevented. There is no such effectual Way to prevent your being drowned with
Rhum, as your not having to do with private Traders. If there be Convenience
for a Sloops coming Spring and Fall to Penobscot River, I will endeavor that
the Government shall send a Sloop at those Seasons, to bring them every thing
but Rhum; and I hope you will not be discontented, if I order my People not to
Trade with you in that Article.

As to what you mention about Powder, I will consider of it, and I doubt not
but you will be gratisied in that Particular; and it shall rest upon my Mind,
and I will not forget to endeavor that it be done.


Loron. We have another small Matter to say: When we come to St. George's, we
have not Liberty to ly in any of the Houses, but are exposed to ly abroad in
the Rain and bad Weather; we therefore desire a House to lodge in.


Govern. I will take Care that you have a House to lodge in.


Wiwurna. I will tell your Excellency of something that happened this Summer:
Your Excellency's Young Men and ours met at Brunswick, and there was a
Difference, and the English Man wounded the Indian very much, though he never
offered to strike him again; and if each Party don't take Care to avoid
Quarrels, it will endanger a Misunderstanding between the English and Indians.


Govern. It Is the first Time I have heard of it. I will give Order to my
Captains to see that you be treated with Justice and Kindness. I am afraid the
Rhum was the occasion of this Difference, which shows the Necessity of your
being restrained from that Liquor. I am now told that this Difference arose
from some of the Indians first insulting Lieut. Jaques.


Wiwurna. We desire that Capt. Bane may be continued Interpreter at Richmond,
because it is a great Help to us as to our Language.


Govern. When I was in Kennebeck River, I had Complaints from the Inhabitants
that they could keep no Sheep for the Indian Dogs: By the Treaty you are
obliged to muzzle them. It may seem a light Matter to you, to keep your Dogs
loose, but it is a great Discouragement to the English. As I shall strictly
observe every Article of the Peace, so I expect you should, and therefore you
must take Care to keep your Dogs from doing this Mischief to the English
Inhabitants.

I have a Complaint against one of the young Men of the Norridgewock Tribe from
one Samuel Harden, that they killed five of his Horses at Hunnawell's Point, to
the Value of Forty Pounds, for which he has had no Satisfaction. Taking away
Men's Estates is like taking away their Lives; and their denying it will not
Excuse them. All the Articles of the Peace are made in the Presence of GOD, who
observes these things; and I expect Satisfaction for this Injury. I observe
your Young Men smile at this; but it is a serious Matter; if you are in want,
you must tell us of it. These things will endanger a War. You will think it
very hard, if our Young Men should steal your Skins. I believe one of those
Young Men is here now; and I would have him come and tell me why he killed
those Horses.


Packahumbanoit. I know nothing more of the Matter, than that the Man that
killed the Horses is gone to Canada. I would not deny it if I were guilty.


Govern. It adds to the Guilt to deny the Fact. And I suppose your Father does
not teach you to do such Things and then deny it. You should follow such
Instructions as are good from your Father.


Packah. I had some of the Meat, but I did not kill the Horses.


Govern. I have reason to think you did it; and if you go on in such Practices,
it will bring on great Inconvenience. If you can take GOD and CHRIST to witness
that you did not shoot at those Horses, I shall believe you.


Packah. I call GOD to Witness, that I did not kill those Horses; it was a
Canada Indian: I saw him shoot at them, and I ate of the Meat.


Govern. When my People complain to me of such Injuries, it is my Duty as their
Father to see that they be righted. These Things will be of evil Consequence;
and I hope both Old Men and Young will take Care to prevent them for the future.


Quenois. As to the Norridgewock Young Men, they never did any Harm to the
English in their River, but we have heard of the Matter, and the Thing was done
by Canada Indians.


Govern. I have a Complaint from Mr. Vaughan of your Killing his Cattle at
Mantinicus six Years ago, for which he has had no Satisfaction from you, though
he has often demanded it; The Value was l. 30: He complains also of your
killing an Ox two Years ago in the same Place.


Lewis. As to what was killed fix Years ago, it could not cost that Money; but
we have often urged the Indians to pay the Damage, but we could not persuade
them.


Govern. I have Capt. Jobs and A^an^uid's Note for 32 lb. of Bever to satisfy
for this last Damage.

It is a great Dishonor to the whole Tribe, and to Counselors and Captains
not to have a Regard to their Words. King GEORGE brings his Captains and
Counselors into Disgrace if they don't regard their Promises; and they are put
in Prison till they are made Honest.


Lewis. We were desired by Capt. Lane to go and kill these Creatures, and he
gave us Powder and Shot for that purpose.


Govern. But you killed Two instead of One.


Pierpeau. It is true, there was Two; but it was by Mistake that Two were
killed.


Govern. You had the Flesh of One, and have not paid for it. When do you intend
to pay the 32 lb. of Bever, for which you have given your Note?


Pierpeau. We will think of it, and pay the Debt in the Fall of the Year.


Govern. If you will promise before your Chiefs, that you will pay this in the
Fall of the Year, and then do it, it will be to Satisfaction.


Indians. We promise it.


Govern. How do you propose to give Mr. Vaughan Satisfaction for the Cattle
that were killed Six Years ago.


Indians. We have promised to make Satisfaction, and shall endeavor to make it.


Govern. I don't mention this to make any Jarring between us, but to prevent
it. What I say is to establish and lengthen out our good Peace. We must be very
careful to be Honest and Just to one another. I could upon these Occasions do
Justice to King GEORGE's Men, by punishing those that make such Breaches on the
Peace; but I choose this Method to show my Respect to you, and to prevent these
Miscarriages for the future; and I hope they will take Care that Mr. Vaughan
has Justice done him. This Matter is over for the present.


Loron. Two of our Dogs were killed at St. George's (which we value at l. 10 a
piece,) for nothing but barking at a Cow; but we should not have spoke of this
Matter, if your Excellency had not mentioned the Cattle the Indians killed.


Govern. I am glad that you mention it; and if you can tell who killed the
Dogs, you shall have Satisfaction, for I am sensible they are very necessary to
you.


Loron. We made so light of the Matter, that we did not think it proper to
mention it to Capt. Gyles, and should not now speak of it, but for what has
been said of our killing the Cattle; which cannot amount to near l. 30.


Govern. I shall not see you Tomorrow, being obliged to dine out of Town; but I
design you shall dine with me on Saturday at Twelve a Clock at furthest, the
next Day being the Lord's Day, and therefore I must part with you before the
Evening comes on.


Loron. We desire Mr. Wainwright may come to Trade with us as usual.

We pray that the Country's Sloop may be allowed to carry those back that have
no Canoes.


Govern. The Sloop shall carry you all back if you please.


Wahway. We pray that we may have a House at Saco to shelter us.


Govern. I intend you shall have it.


Wahway. And that we may have a small Bridge there.


Govern. I shall view that Truck-House, and then I shall think of the Matter.


Loron. Here is a French Man that desires the favor of a Pass, that he may go
where his Business is.


Govern. I shall consider of it. He belongs to Mount Desert which is in the
Government of Nova Scotia.


Frenchman. I belong to Nova Scotia, but I desire a Passport to come into this
Government.


Govern. If you will take the Oaths of Fidelity to King GEORGE, you will
doubtless have a Passport from this Government, to go into any Part of the
King's Dominions.


Saturday, July 29. 1732.
Toxus, FRiend, I have one thing to say to your Excelleney which I am not so
well pleased with, i. e. that the Price of the Fall Bever is so low, it will not
come to Ten Shillings till Christmas. Bever is grown so scarce, that what one
Man can get till Winter, will hardly procure a Pair of Stockings. There were
formerly several Things taken from the Jesuits at Norridgewock; which if they
were brought again to Richmond, we should be glad to pay for them, especially a
Writing we saw at North-Yarmouth.


Govern. In whose Hands was it?


Toxus. One Drinkwater's. Capt. Woodside of Maquoit has taken good Care of us
when we are cold and wanted any Thing; and we desire that what has been said
about him, may go no further.


Govern. It is with Pleasure that I hear what you have to say to me; and I hope
what passes between us will make the Peace stronger.

It is best in Time to remove every Difficulty, or else by neglect it may grow
greater. There is a great Difference as you know well between Spring and Fall
Bever: The Market in England will always govern the Price here; and as great
Quantities of Bever are carried there from other Places besides this, that will
have an Influence upon the Price here, whether you get much or little: I shall
be glad when the Market will allow of a greater Price, which I shall let you
know of; and you may depend on it in all Cases to have strict Justice done you:
We take Care that the Trade be governed as much to your Advantage as may be.
You are supplied cheaper from us than from the French, which is plain, because
they buy of us to sell to you.

It is a great while since the Affair happened at Norridgewock, and I should be
glad you had mentioned that Matter before, and then it would have been easier
to have recovered those Things than now: Maj Moulton is here, who can tell you
that the Plunder taken at Norridgewock, was divided among the Soldiers, Capt.
Parker has got the Paper you mention, and will be ready to deliver it upon your
paying the Price of it: I should be glad you could have any other Things
returned; but our People made but little Account of them, and I believe the
most of them are lost.

I am well pleased that Capt. Woodside of Maquoit is kind to you, and I shall
be glad every Body else would be so too. When Capt. Woodside does what is good,
it is praiseworthy in him; but if he breaks the Laws of the Province, he must
be punished for it.


Joby. We mentioned the same Difficulties as to Trade, when we were at Boston,
especially about Mr. Noyes's Conduct; and you said, the Thing was too far off
to be seen, but you would enquire into it.


Govern. I have heard no further Complaints of these Things: Mr. Noyes deals
fairly and justly by you; It is no Interest of his to take your Bever at a low
Price: But you may be sure you will have Justice done you.


Joby. When we were at Boston, you said to Capt. Gyles and Capt. Heath, we were
so far off, you could not tell whether or no things were done as they were
represented.

Sometimes Mr. Noyes will push us out of Doors, and he don't treat us kindly.


Govern. If you keep your selves sober, and act like Men, Mr. Noyes, nor any
Body else, will or shall push you out of Doors. I must repeat what I said
Yesterday, that the Devil Rhum makes you do what you should not do. You may
remember in the Course of your Lives, that when you are sober, you are ashamed
of what you do in Drink: And from these Occasions you should resolve against
Drinking Rhum.


Toxus. I have something to say concerning Liquor; Our young Men are very
craving after Drink, when they have done Hunting; and I desire they may have no
more than a Quart at a Time allowed them.


Govern. I will take Care that they shall have no more. You should follow the
Example of that old Man, who has not drank any Rhum these Twenty Years, having
seen the Evil of it.


Toxus. There are many People that settle on Sheepscot River, which is my Land:
I desire that they may be good Men; and if they should be cross and morose, I
shall complain of them that so they may be removed.


Loron. I speak in behalf of the Pigwackets and Amerescoggins; As your
Excellency was pleased to tell them, that the English and they should hunt
together, and both be benefited by the Hunting and Fishing; we desire that the
English may not have the sole Advantage, for by their setting their Nets, it
prevents the Fish running up the River, for the Use of the Indians. We desire
that both English and Indians may have the Benefit of the Fish. We should be
glad that Goods may be lodged at Brunswick Fort for the Indian Trade. At times
when Capt. Smith has not been at Saco, we pay his Negro, and then Capt. Smith
demands it again, so that we have often Paid twice for the same things.


Govern. I should be glad you would give an Instance of this.


Waramanfoot. Capt. Smith trusted me, and I paid the Negro in his Absence; and
after that, Capt. Smith made me Pay the same again. I borrowed Eight Shillings
of Capt. Smith, and paid the Negro, and afterward Capt. Smith took Eight
Shillings more, so that I Paid Sixteen Shillings. And at another time, I left
Skins in the Negro's hands, which I was to take out in Rhum, and yet the Negro
made me Pay for the Rhum.

Capt. Smith denied the Charge, and referred to his Account, and said that upon
this Indians being dissatisfied, he had several Times Paid him twice for the
same Things, to make him easy.


Govern. This thing is of Two Years standing, and you have had an Opportunity
to complain of it before, when Adiawando was at Boston; and it is very hard now
to come at the Truth.


Waramanfoot. When Adiawando went to Boston, there was nothing consulted; had
any other Person gone, it would have been mentioned then.


Govern. When Capt. Smith goes to his Truck House, if he cannot satisfy and
convince you that he has Paid you, he shall Pay you then.


The Indian expressed himself satisfied.

Govern. The Truck Masters are chosen by the whole Government, who take Care to
choose sober, honest Men: The Price of every thing is stated to the Truck
Masters, and the Government Pay them Yearly for their Service, so that they can
have no Interest in Cheating you. And I am afraid that the Envy and Interest of
Private Traders and others, is often the Foundation of your Complaints against
the Truck Masters; but if you can make out any Complaints against them, I will
take Care that you have Justice done you.


Lewis. I have nothing to say against the Truck Master at St. George's; But
only that a Quantity of sour Meal, and damnified Tobacco, was Sold out to us:
It was in Mr. Wainwright's Time, but he was then absent.


Govern. Why would the Indians have a Truck House at Brunswick rather than
Richmond?


Loron. This is what I was desired to say.


Govern. I cannot give an Answer till I know the Reason of this Request.


Loron. The Amerescoggin's must Answer for themselves, for I cannot tell the
Reason.


Govern. As to what was said about stopping the Fish in Amerescoggin and Saco
Rivers; I told you the last Time that Fishing was free to King GEORGE's
Subjects: If the English use Nets, so may you, and be furnished with them at
the Truck Houses; some of you have already bespoke such Nets, and Capt. Smith
has them ready for you.


Loron. As to the Captain at St. George's, we have found nothing amiss in him,
but like him very well, more especially for his Knowledge of our Language.


Govern. If the Sachem of the Amerescoggin Indians will (now he is come) give
me a Reason for having the Truck House removed from Richmond to Brunswick, I
will hear him.


Adiawando. The Reason is, that in the Winter we cannot Travel so far as
Richmond without great Inconvenience.


Govern. Is it better to have the Truck House nearer, than further off?


Loron. I have nothing to say as to other Places; we are satisfied with the
Truck House at St. George's; It is near enough for the Penobscot Indians.


Govern. The Truck House at Richmond, is nearer to the Amerescoggin Indians,
than that at St. George's to the Penobscots.


Lewis. I have had no Answer as to the Meal.


Govern. I answered it before; it was in another TruckMasters time: It is hard
now to find out who delivered the Meal and Tobacco: I should be glad when any
thing is bad, that you would not take it, for you are not obliged to take it.

The English are now at Peace with all Nations, with the Dutch, French and
Spaniards, and there is no likelihood of War. When any thing looks like a War,
I shall give you Notice of it, and expect the same from you as good Friends and
Brothers.

And if any such thing as a War should happen among the Nations in Europe, that
need not affect us; but we may still be good Friends and Neighbors; and I hope
in such Case you will not be decoyed to your Hurt.

When you have any Grievance, I invite you to come to Boston seasonably, that
so you may be redressed before the Thing is grown too old to make it clear, and
to find out those that have done you any Wrong.

Capt. Loron has desired of me some English Carpenters, to Build him a House;
and I have ordered Capt. Gyles to send him Men for that Work, who will take
Care that he shall not be imposed upon in the Price: And if any other Persons
desire Houses to be Built, they shall also be assisted in it.

The Sun grows low: To Morrow will be the Lord's Day; If you have any thing
further to say, I shall willingly hear you. If not, I shall deliver you the
Bounty of the Government, as a Token of Our sincere Desire to maintain the
Peace: And when that is done, we will Drink King GEORGE's Health; and then I
shall wish you a good Journey to your several Homes.


The Indians said they had done.

And then the Presents were delivered.

BOSTON: Printed by B. Green, Printer to His Excellency the GOVERNOR and
COUNCIL. 1732.

ERRATA.
PAge 12, line 29, read, that Negro is a very honest Man. Page 13, line 7, for
at Saco, read, near Saco. Ibid. line 11, read, that it shall for the future be
given out. line 12, for that it shall not, read, so as not to. line 4th and 5th
from the bottom, read, If it will be a Convenience for a Sloop to come. Page
15, line 7, f. you will, read, you would. Page 18, line 16, f. we are, read, we
were. Page 19, line 6, f. the Paper, read, the Writing. Ibid. line 6th from the
bottom, read, neither Mr. Noyes. and in the next line, read, the Devil of Rhum.

