SUDNRY Rules and Directions FOR Drawing up a REGIMENT, Posting the OFFICERS,
etc. Taken from the Best and Latest Authority; for the Use and Benefit of the
First REGIMENT in the County of Middlesex.

By WILLIAM BRATTLE, MAJOR of said Regiment.

BOSTON: Printed and Sold by S. KNEELAND and T. GREEN in Queenstreet. 1733.

To draw up a Regiment and form a Battalion.
THE Companies being in the Field, let the Signal for marching be this; the
front Rank of the Colonel's Company advance eight or ten paces and fire; upon
which all the Companies instantly are to be upon the March, and fall into the
Rear of the Colonel's Company, as their Posts will be after the Battalion is
formed, i. e. the Major's Company falling into the Rear of the Colonel's; the
Company that carries two Spots or Balls in their Colors in the Rear of the
Major's; all the Companies that carry the even Spots in their Colors falling
in immediately one after another; then the Companies whose Colors carry the
odd Spots or Balls fall in beginning with the highest number; the Company
carrying but one Ball falling in immediately before the Lieut. Colonel's
Company, which Company brings up the Rear.

They all March to the Ground on which the Battalion is to be formed: After
which they are to keep their Facing till the Word is given to Form the
Battalion, which is done by Wheeling the Divisions; but before this Word is
given, and that they may be exact in performing the same observe to close your
Ranks of each Division to close order, then measure the length of your Ranks
and the distance between your Divisions, and proportion the same.

Immediately upon the Battalions being Formed, the Lieutenants, must place
themselves on the Right of their Captains, the Ensigns on their Left toward
the Flanks of the Companies.

The Sergeants are to form themselves in the Rear of the Rear Rank four paces
distant.

The Drummers are to March thirty paces in the Front, when the Drum-major is to
form them into a Rank entire opposite to the Center and Facing the Battalion,
in which Position the whole is to remain till the Major orders the Officers to
their Posts.

OFFICERS Posts in Review.
THE Word of Command being given, Officers take your Posts in Battalion. The
eldest Captain is to place himself on the Right of the Battalion; the second
Captain on the Left, the third Captain on the Left of the eldest; and so it is
with the Lieutenants according to the date of their Commission to the Right and
Left; the Ensigns with Colors they govern themselves according to their
Companies and not Commissions, all forming a Rank entire about two good paces
before the Front Rank of Men, and to divide the Ground equally between them so
as to cover the Front of the Battalion. There must be a Sergeant placed on the
Right and Left Flank of each Rank, who are to dress them as often as occasion
serves.

The rest of the Sergeants continuing in the Rear are to Range themselves about
four paces from the Rear Rank of Men.

Drummers Post. The Drummers are to be divided into three Divisions, the first
upon the Right of the Colonel's Company, the second on the left of the
Lieutenant Colonel's Company, and both to dress in a Line with the Front Rank;
the third division of Drummers are to Post themselves in the Rear of the
Ensigns in the Center.

The Colonel's Post. When the Battalion is drawn up, the Colonel's Post is in
the Center, and about four paces before the Ensigns with Colors.

Lieutenant Colonel's Post. The Lieutenant Colonel's Post is a little to the
Left of the Colonel's, and about three paces from the Rank of Officers. When
there is no General to Review, the Colonel does not take his Post at the Head
of the Battalion, but remains in the Front without taking his Half Pike in his
Hand, to give the Major the necessary Orders about the Exercise, etc. In this
case, the Lieutenant Colonel is to Post himself at the Head of the Battalion
with his Half Pike in his Hand: but if the Colonel is Absent, He is then in
every Article to Personate the Colonel, the sole Command devolving on Him.
Immediately upon notice given that the General is a coming, the Major is to
order the Soldiers to Shoulder their Arms, from which Position they are always
to Rest their Arms when the Compliment is to be paid, and as soon as He
approaches near the Right Flank, the Major is to order the Soldiers to Rest
their Arms, by the following Word of Command.

To the Front Present your Arms.

At the performing the last Motion of the above command, all the Drummers are
to beat a March, and the Major is immediately to take his Post on the Right of
the Battalion, and the Adjutant on the Left of the Battalion, dressing in a
Line with the Rank of Officers. As the General passes along the Front, the
Officers are to Salute Him with their Half Pikes or Partisans, and to time it
in such a manner, that each may just finish his Salute and pull off his Hat,
when the General comes opposite to him.

The Ensigns are to drop their Colors, bringing the spear pretty near the
Ground, just when the Colonel drops the point of his Half Pike, pulling off
their Hats at the same time, and not to raise the Colors till the General has
passed them.

The Major and Adjutant being on Horseback are to Salute with their Swords, and
when the Major has finished his Salute, He is to repair opposite to the Center
of the Regiment, that he may be ready to order the Men to Face when the General
goes round the Battalion. And when the General comes to either outward Angle,
the Drums are to cease Beating, otherwise the Major would not be heard when the
Word was given for Facing.

The Sergeants in the Rear are to pull off their Hats without bowing their
Heads when the General passes them, holding their Halberd in their Hand, as the
Officers do their Half Pikes without bowing their Heads.

When the Battalion is ordered to Face, the Officers, Sergeants and Drummers
are to do the same: and all to remain at their Posts, without going through the
Battalion to the Rear, when the General passes along, or Salute Him any more
than once standing: Indeed there should never be but two Salutes paid to the
same Person in one Day, viz. a Standing and Marching one.

OFFICERS Posts in Exercise.
AS soon as the Ceremony of Viewing the Regiment is over, the General then
acquaints the Colonel what he would have performed. And the General for the
most part orders the Manual Exercise to be performed; then to go through some
part of the Firings, and lastly to March by Him either in grand division,
sub-divisions or single Company's.

In time of Exercise, all the Commission Officers, as also the Lieutenant
Colonel's Post, is in the Rear of the Battalion, the Officers eight Paces in
the Rear of the Sergeants, the Lieutenant Colonel four paces behind them, the
Sergeants on the Flanks are to March in a direct Line to the Front, and as soon
as the two Sergeants who were placed on the Flanks of the Front Rank have
Marched forty paces, they are to stand; on which the other Sergeants are to do
the same: the Sergeants must take care to divide the Ground on the Flanks
equally amongst them The Drummers are to March and form themselves into a Rank
entire behind the Major. The method of performing this is, in the following
manner, first, The Major is to direct the orderly Drummer to beat a Ruff to
give the Officers notice, after that a Flam or double Stroke upon which the
Lieutenant Colonel, and the rest of the Officers face to the Right about on
their left Heels.

At the second Flam they are to advance their Half Pikes, and the Sergeants
their Halberds. At the third Flam, the Officers, Sergeants, and the three
Division of Drummers are all to March to their Posts, beginning with the Left
feet. The Officers are to March through the Battalions to their Posts before
mentioned and to stand: When the Major finds that all are in their proper Posts
of Exercise, he is to order to another Flam to be beat, at which the Officers
and Drummers are to face to the Left about on their Left Heels.

The Sergeants on the Right Flank are to face to the Left on their Left Heels.
The Sergeants on the Left Flank are to face to the Right on their Right Heels.
As soon as they have faced the Officers are to plant their Half Pikes, the
Ensigns their Colors, and the Sergeants their Halberds on their Right, in
which Position they are to remain till they are ordered to their former Post
after the Exercise is over. The Drummers are to have their Drums always braced
and slung during the whole time the Battalion is under hands.

As soon as the Exercise is over, the Officers, Sergeants and Drummers are to
be ordered to their Posts in the following manner: First a ruff of Drum to warn
them, then a Flam at which the Officers advance their Half Pikes, the Ensigns
their Colors, and the Sergeants their Halberds: After which the Sergeants on
the Right Flank are to face to the Left on their Left Heels, and the Sergeants
on the Left are to face to the Right on their Left Heels: At the second Flam
they are all to March to their former Posts, and as soon as they have got there
the Major orders a third Flam to be beat, at which the Officers plant Half
Pikes, and the Ensigns their Colors, and the Sergeants and Drummers are to
face to the Left about on their right Heels: After which the Sergeants plant
their Halberds.

Observe, when the Officers are ordered to take their Posts of Exercise which
is in the Rear, the Colonel is not to go to the Rear, but to March strait
forward and place himself by the General, with his Half Pike in his Hand during
the Exercise; and as soon as the Officers are ordered to the Front he is to
take his Post. When the Command falls to the Major by the absence of the
Colonel or Lieut. Colonel, although he is to take the Colonel's Post at the Head
of the Regiment, and salute with his half Pike, yet when the Regiment is to
perform the Exercise he is always to do it on Horseback, even the Command of a
Regiment not being sufficient to excuse him from that part of his duty before a
General.

In the absence of the Field Officers the Eldest Captain takes the Command, and
acts in every respect as the Colonel would have done were he present.

OFFICERS to your Platoons.
IN dividing the Battalion into Platoons, they should be composed of an equal
number of Files, or at least not above one File stronger than another, and
those should be on the Flanks and Color Platoons. As soon as the Platoons are
told off there must be an Officer appointed to each to command them, taking an
equal proportion of Captains and Lieutenants and Ensigns if any there be that
carry half Pikes, for the purpose. The Lieut. Colonel with the remaining part
of the Officers are to March and Post themselves in the Rear of the Battalion,
in the same manner as they do at Exercise; the Captain, Lieutenant and Ensign
with Half Pikes that have not Platoons drawing up into one Rank in the Rear of
the Sergeants, and the Lieut Colonel in the Rear of the Officers, and opposite
to the Color Platoon. The Sergeants should be divided to the several Platoons,
and Posted in the Rear of the same. The Colonel and the Ensigns with the
Colors remain in their former Posts at the head of the Battalion.

There are many reasons for there being some Officers Posted in the Rear, I
shall mention only two. They are of great Service in leading the Battalion off
in order when they are commanded to retire. Again, should there be no Officers
in the Rear when the Battalion is ordered to the Right about, the Men would be
apt to March off too fast, and by that means break their Ranks, and fall into
Confusion, or not halt in due time; which inconveniences are prevented by
Officers being there.

The Battalion being prepared to Fire by Platoons, the Officers that command
them are to place themselves to the Right and Left of their Platoons facing
toward the Colors thus; the Officers to the Right of the Colors are to place
themselves to the Right of their Platoons, and the Officers to the Left on the
Left of their Platoons, being only advanced a short pace toward the Front Rank
of Men.

Posting Drummers. The two Division of Drummers on the Right and Left are to
Post themselves on the Flanks and dress in a Line with the Front Rank of Men,
and the Center Division of Drummers are to be Posted before the Color
Platoons, which Drummers are to move to the Right and Left when those Platoons
Fire. After they have Fired and Loaded then they are to return as they were, at
the same time the Colonel Colors and Haut boys (if any there be) are to move
to the Right and Left, and as soon as the Color Platoons have Fired, are to
return to their former Posts; but when the Battalion Fires together, the
Colors must then fall into the Intervals on the Right and Left of the Color
Platoon; supposing there be but two or three Colors to a Regiment, as is the
case in the Regiments abroad; but since in the Regiments among us there is a
Color to each Company; for the same reason that in the Regiments abroad, when
the Battalion Fires together, the Colors are to fall into the Intervals on the
Right and Left of the Color Platoon; Why may not our Colors fall into the
Intervals on the Right and Left of the other Platoons, as well as the Color
Platoons?

The last part of the Ceremony of Reviewing, is, that of Marching by the
General, either by Grand division, Sub divisions, or single Company's.

When a Battalion is divided into three equal Parts each Division is then
called a Grand division: Sub-divisions are sormed by dividing each
Grand-division into three, four or five equal parts, according to the number of
Files in each Grand division, the Regiment being three deep, the Sub-divisions
then form Platoons.

By Companies, is the Marching each Company by it self, with its own Officers,
Sergeants and Drummers.

Before the Regiment Marches off, the Files are to be Closed either to the
Right, Left or Center; after which the Ranks are to the Closed to close order,
and then ordered to Wheel by Grand or Sub division. Upon the Ranks being
Closed, the Officers are to fall back on the heads of their several Divisions.

When they are to March by Grand Divisions they are to March in the followiog
order, 1. The Company of Granadiers with their own Officers at their Head. 2.
The Hatchet Men of the Battalion formed into Ranks. 3. The Staff Officers, viz
Chaplain, Adjutant, Quartermaster, Surgeon and Mate. 4. The Haut-boys in a
Rank. 5. The Colonel alone.


And in those Regiments that have not the before mentioned Officers and Men, as
is the case with us in New England. 1. Here the Colonel leads. 2. All the
Captains on the Right on the Head of the first Grand division. 3. All the
Lieutenants on the Right in the Rear of said Division. 4. All the Ensigns on
the Head of the Center Grand-division. 5. All the Lieutenants on the Left on
the head of the Rear Grand-division. 6. All the Captains on the Left in the
Rear of said Grand-division. 7. The Lieutenant Colonel alone in the Rear of the
Captains.
The Sergeants are to be divided equally to three Grand-divisions, and to March
on the Right and Left Flanks, if the Regiment is three deep the Drummers are to
fall in between the first and second of each Grand-division; If the Regiment is
six deep, then the Drummers are to fall in between the third and fourth Rank of
each Grand-division. The Battalion in Marching off are to open to their former
distance four paces, for which end the Rear Ranks are not to move till those in
their Front have got to their proper distance. In Marching, the Major is to
Salute on Horseback, unless he commands the Regiment, which if he does, he is
to March on Foot, and in the Colonel's Post, and Salute with his Half-Pike.

Paying the Salute. The Officers are to March with their Half Pikes downwards,
and when they come within twenty Paces of the General, they are to bring them
to their Shoulders, and to time their Salutes so as to finish and pull off
their Hats a little before they come opposite to him. All the Officers who
March in the same Rank are to be very exact in performing their Motions
together; the Motions may be taken from the Officer that Marches on the Right.
After the Officers have Saluted, they are not to Bow their Heads in passing by
the General, but to March with their Hats off, till they have passed him about
eight paces, and then to put them on; and when they have got twenty paces from
the General, they are to reduce their Pike. The Ensigns are to carry the
Colors advanced, and to drop thein when the other Ensigns drop the Spears of
their Half Pikes, supposing there be such to the Regiment thus Marching, and to
March with the Colors down till they have passed the General about six or
eight paces. They are to pull off their Hats when they drop their Colors, and
not put them on till they have Marched eight paces. The Sergeants are to March
with their Halberds on their left Shoulder, holding the Spears in their Left
Hands, and in passing by the General only to pull off their Hats not Bowing.

The Grand Divisions being subdivided, if the Battalion is to March by
Subdivisions, the Officers March as follows. After the Colonel, all the
Captains on the Right Wing at the Head of the first Sub-division the
Lieutenants of that Wing, are to be divided on and to lead, the remaining
Sub-divisions of the first Grand Division: The Ensigns (if any there be that
carry Half-Pikes) are to be divided on, and lead the Sub-divisions of the
Center Grand-division, the Ensigns with Colors being Posted at the Head of the
Center Sub division: The Lieutenants on the Left Wing are to be divided on and
to lead the Sub-divisions of the Left Grand-division. The Captains on the Left,
are to March in the Rear of the last Sub-division, then the Lieutenant Colonel;
the Sergeants are to be divided equally on the Subdivisions.

The Drum-major with the first Division of Drummers are to March with the first
Sub-division, the Center-division of Drummers with the Color Sub-division, and
the second Division of Drummers with the last, or left Sub-division falling in
between the third and fourth Rank if six deep, if three deep, between the first
and second Ranks.

REVIEWING by Companies.
COmpanies always March off by Companies, and Wheel after they have Marched
about ten or twelve paces in the Front. The Order they are to March in, is as
follows, 1. The Captain. 2. The Lieutenants and Ensigns in a Rank four Paces in
the Rear of the Captains. 3. The Sergeants in a Rank four Paces in the Rear of
the Subalterns with their Halberds advanced as Pikes used to be. 4. The
Drummers in a Rank four Paces in the Rear of the Sergeants. 5. The Corporals
and Private Sentinels four in a Rank.
The Field Officers are to March at the Head of their own Company's as
Captains. The Staff Officers and Hautboysal ways to March before the Colonel's
Company. The Hatchet Men may fall into their Ranks or March before the
Captains. After you have Marched to the Ground on which you intend to draw up
and have actually so done, the Colonel gives Orders to lodge the Colors, and
dismiss the Battalion; the Colors are Lodged in the following manner; but as
it may not be unacceptable to give an account of the method observed in
Regiments Abroad of bringing the Colors to the Regiment. I shall first give an
account of that.

The Officers having taken their Posts in the Front of the Battalion, the Major
is to order one of the Granadiers to beat the Drummer's Call, upon which the
Ensigns who are to carry the Colors and the Drum major, with one half or two
thirds of the Drummers are to repair to the Head of the Company of Granadiers,
where the Drummers are to be formed into Ranks in the Rear of the Ensigns
facing outward. A Lieutenant, two Sergeants and twenty four Granadiers are to
March with the Ensigns and Guard, the Colors to the Regiment who are generally
taken from the Left of the Company, and March with their Firelocks rested on
their left Arm and without fixing their Bayonets till they receive their
Colors.

The word of Command to the Granadiers are as follows, 1. Poise your Firelocks;
Rest your Firelocks on your left Arms. When this is done the Lieutenant places
himself two paces before the Ensigns and Marches to the Colonel's Quarters, or
place where the Colors are lodged. The Drummers with the Drum major at their
Head marching in the Rear of the Ensigns, beat the Throop, and the Granadiers
four in Rank march immediately after the Drummers, one Sergeant marches on the
Right Flank of the Guard and the other in the rear of the Rear Rank with their
Halberds advanced. Note, on sending for the Colors the Compliment then paid by
the Battalion is that of Shouldered Arms; but when the Colors are brought to
the Regiment they are received with rested Arms, and the Drummers who remain
beat a March, which is the reason that one third of the Drummers at least
remain with the Battalion. The same Compliment is paid to the Colors when they
are sent from the Battalion; but when the Ensigns go for the Colors and return
without them the Battalion is only to be Shouldered. As soon as the Lieutenant
comes to the place where the Colors are lodged, he is to draw up his
Detachment three deep, and then order the Granadiers to fix their Bayonets, as
follows: Poise your Firelocks; Rest on your Arms; Draw your Bayonets; Fix your
Bayonets; Recover your Arms; Rest your Firelocks on your left Arm. After these
Motions are performed the Ensigns are to take the Colors, and the Lieutenant
marches back to the Battalion, in the same order that he came from it, the
Ensigns carrying their Colors advanced and letting them fly.

As soon as the Lieutenant comes to the Battalion, he must draw up his
Detachment on the Right or Left Flank (according to which Flank he comes to
first) and halt his Men; but the Ensigns with the Colors followed with the
Drummers are to move on till they have advanced a little before the Officers of
the Battalion, and then Wheel to the Right or Left inward according to the
Flank they are on, and March along the Front of the Officers till they come to
their Posts in the Center, which they are to fall into. When the Ensigns fall
into their Posts, the Drum major is to Wheel the Drummers to the Front and
March them about ten paces forward, then Halt, and after he has ordered them to
cease Beating, he is to send them to their respective Posts.

When the Ensigns with the Colors, and the Drummers have wheeled inwards, in
order to March to the Center, the Lieutenant is to order the Granadiers to Face
to the Right (if they are drawn on the Left of the Battalion) and march along
the Ranks to their former ground; the Lieutenant with the Front Rank of
Granadiers marching between the Officers and Front Rank of the Battalion; but
if they are drawn up on the Right of the Granadier Company, he is then to face
his Detachment to the Left and march it along the Front of the Granadiers only,
and as soon as they come on their former Ground, he is to order them to Halt
and immediately proceed to unfix the Bayonets.

After this the Major is to order the Battalion to Shoulder their Arms. As soon
as the Colors are sent back, as the Military phrase is, the Drummers Call is
to be beat at the Head of the Granadiers; on which the Ensigns with the
Colors, and the Drum-major with the same number of Drummers are to repair
thither immediately, and draw up as before. The Lieutenant of Granadiers are to
order the same Detachment, or an equal number of Granadiers to fix their
Bayonets and rest them on their left Arms; and as soon as the Major has ordered
the Battalion to Present their Arms, he is to March back the Colors to the
place where they are to be Lodged, the Drummers Beating the Troop as before.
The Ensigns are to carry the Colors back in the same manner they brought them,
that is, advanced and flying; and as soon as they arrive at the place, and the
Detachment is drawn up, they are to furl their Colors and lodge them. When
this is done, the Lieutenant is to order the Granadiers to unfix and return
their Bayonets, and rest their Firelocks on their left Arms; after which he is
to March back in the same manner he carried the Colors to the Battalion,
unless he is ordered to dismiss his Men as soon as the Colors are lodged; in
which case when the Bayonets are returned in stead of presenting, he is to
order them to rest their Firelocks, then Club and dismiss them with the Ruff of
a Drum.

PErhaps it may not be amiss to give some General Rules respecting the several
Distances of Ranks in drawing up a Regiment, etc.

The several Distances of Ranks in drawing up a Regiment for Exercise or a
Review, the Ranks are to be four ordinary Paces distance from one another, When
they are to Fire, the Ranks are to be moved up to half distance which is two
paces.

In all Wheelings, the Ranks are to be closed forward to close Order; which is
to one pace distance.

Distances of Files.

When a Regiment is to be Reviewed or Exercised, the distance between each
File, is to be one pace, or the length of an out stretched Arm, When they are
to Fire, they are to be at half a pace distance; in Marching or Wheeling, they
must almost touch one another. The opening of Files may be by the following
words of command, To the left open your Files; at this both the Officers and
Soldiers face nimbly to the Left on the right Heels, with this exception, that
the File on the Right of the Battalion, and the eldest Captain are to stand
still, the whole are to remain thus faced, Officers, Sergeants, Drummers and
private Sentinels, till the Word is given, March; upon which the Division of
Drummers on the left, lift up their right Feet together, and march very slow,
without opening their distance from one another, in a direct line to the Left.
The Sergeants carrying their Halberds with both Hands before them, the Spear
upwards. The Officers are to carry their Half Pikes downwards, and the Ensigns
to advance their Colors. No Officer is to move till the File opposite to him
does. As soon as the second File on the Right of the Battalion, which is the
last to open, steps forward, the Major is to proceed to the following Word of
Command, Halt, Immediately, upon which the whole is to Face to the Right on
their Right Heels: And as soon as they have faced the Ranks and Files are to be
dressed.

Directions for Forming the SQUARE.
SUpposing there is four Platoons of Granadiers, and sixteen other Platoons,
that constitute the Battalion: the Square may be formed by three Words of
Command. 1. Form the Square. 2. March. 3. Face Square.
At the first word of Command the two inward Platoons of Granadiers, and the
six Platoons on the Right, the six Platoons on the Left, Face all to the Right
about on their left Heels, the Officers in the Front and Rear of those Platoons
doing the same, as also the Sergeants who are posted in the Rear of those
Platoons. The two outward Platoons of Granadiers with their Officers, as also
the two division of Drummers on the Flanks, face to the Right and Left inwards.
The four Platoons in the Center keep their proper Front. At the second word of
Command, March. The Platoons which faced to the Right about, Wheel inward, and
as soon as the Platoons which form the Right, Face, and those that compose the
Left, Face, have Wheeled a Quarter of the Circle, they are to stand. Put the
two Platoons on the Right of the Battalion and the two on the Left, being to
compose the Rear Face, are to continue Wheeling, inwards, another Quarter of
the Circle, by which the Right and Left Platoons of the Battalion join in the
Center of the Rear Face.

The two Platoons of Granadiers which Faced to the Right about, Wheel at the
same time with the Platoons of the Battalion, but instead of Wheeling on the
extremity of the Flanks, they may incline inward, till the Granadiers in the
Right come opposite to the interval between the second and third, and the
Granadiers on the left till they come opposite to the Interval between the
fourteenth and fifteenth Platoon, and then to Wheel and March directly in the
Rear of those Platoons, so that those Platoons of Granadiers will be on the
Rear Angles, which they are to cover the two Platoons of Granadiers which faced
to the Right and Left inwards are at the same time to March in a direct line,
to the Right and Left Flanks of the four Center Platoons, which stood, and when
they come to the Flanks of those Platoons, they are to stand, being to form on
the Front Angles. The Officers and Sergeants Face as the Platoons do, on which
they are posted.

At the third word of Command, Face Square, They all Face outward, the Right,
Left and Rear Faces of the Square, and the two inward Platoons of Granadiers
going to the left about on the left Heels, the two outward Platoons of
Granadiers Face to their proper Front; after which, the four Platoons of
Granadiers Wheel-back immediately and form on the Angles.

As soon as the Men have Faced Square, the Colonel, Major, Ensigns with the
Colors, Adjutant and Drummers, March into the Square; and the Drummers are to
be divided into four Divisions, placing one in the Rear of each Face, which the
Drum major is to perform.

The Field Officers can have no fixed Post assigned them.

The Ensigns with their Colors, are to post themselves in the Center of the
Square

The Officers who Command the Platoons remain in the Front of them, without the
Square; and rose who are posted in the Rear, remain with the Square in the Rear
of the severa Platoons, and when any of the Officers in the lont are Killed or
Wounded, the Officers in the sear of those Platoons, are to move out immedtely,
and take the Command.

Here are two very Material Advantages arisin from this Method of Forming the
Square, 1. You preserve a Front of the four Center Platoons, wh do not move,
which will secure you till the Squre is Formed. 2. The Square in this manne may
be formed in less than a Minute, their beig no alteration required in the
disposition of Ofcers, from that of the Battalion drawn up for Adon, or any New
telling off Platoons.


How the SQUARE is to be Reduced.
THe Square may be Reduced into a Battalion with as much Ease, and in as short
a Space of Time, as it was Formed in; for the performing of which there are
only three Words of Command.

I. From the Square, Form the Battalion. II. March. III. Halt.
At the first Word of Command, From the Square, Form the Battabon, the two
Platoons, of Granadiers, covering the Front Angles, Wheel toward the Front
till they dress in a Line with the Front Face, and then face to the Right and
Left outward, and stand.

The two Platoons of Granadiers, covering the Rear Angles, Wheel 'till they
come in a Line with the Right and Left Faces of the Square, and then stand.

At the second Word of Command, March, the Platoons of the Rear Face Wheel from
the Center the Right and Left outward, and as soon as they (...) in a Line
with the Right and Left Faces, those Fac are to Wheel along with them toward
the Front.

The Platoons of Granadiers of the Rear Atles are to move at the same time; but
in Marching they are to incline outward 'till they come to the E^^remity of
the Flanks of the Platoons, and there to Wheel up with them on their Flanks.

The two Platoons of Granadiers of the Front ^ngles, who had Wheeled up and
Faced outward, arto March to the Right and Left outward in a dict Line from the
Flanks of the Front Face, and when they have Marched far enough for the
Platoons of the Battalion, and the Granadiers (who were Wh^^^ing up) to form
between them and the Front Face, they are to Stand.

The Colonel, Major, Ensigns with the Colors and Adjutant are to March at the
same time into the Front and the Drummers to repair to their former Posts.

As soon as the Platoons, which are Wheeling up come in a Line with the Front
Face, the Major is to proceed to the third Word of Command.

Halt. At this the Platoons which composed the Right, Left, and Rear Faces, and
the Granadiers of the Rear Angles, Stand, and the Granadiers of the Front
Angles, who face from the Flanks, face to their proper Front; by which the
Square is reduced, and the Battalion formed as before, without moving the
Officers from their Platoons, either in the Front or Rear, in the Forming or
Reducing the Square.

N. B. When the directions for the Ensigns with Colors, timing their Satures
is given in Page 4, it supposes there are at most but three Colors to a
Regiment; when there are six or eight Colors to a Regiment, the Ensigns may
drop their Colors when the General comes opposite to the Ensign upon the Right.

FINIS.

