AN ADDRESS TO Young People, OR Warning to them From One among them, Yet may be
called Warning from the Dead, Given by Mercy Wheeler of Plainfield, A Person
confined to a Bed of languishing for more than Five Years together.

Eccl. xii.1. Remember Now thy Creator, in the days of thy Youth, while the
evil days come not, nor the years draw nigh, when then shall say, I have no
pleasure in them.

BOSTON: Printed and Sold at the Printing House in Newbury-Street, 1733.

To the READER.
PErhaps the Reader unacquainted with the Person who sends these few Lines to
our Young People; will desire some Information concerning her and her
Circumstances; they being very peculiar and uncommon: I shall in Answer to the
Request of diverse of her near Relatives, give the Reader an Account of the
same, as follows: Viz.

THis Young Woman (which I think I may without Vanity call a Young Saint) is
the Daughter of Mr. Isaac Wheeler and Sarah his Wife, originally of Concord in
the Massachusetts Bay in N. E. who with their Family removed from thence unto
the Town of Plainfield in Connecticut in the Year 1704, and it has pleased GOD
to bless these Parents with a numerous Offspring, three Sons and ten
Daughters; of which ten our young Author is the fourth; being born in the Year
1706: was a Child very remarkable for Health and Agillity of Body, until the
Twentieth Year of her Age; and then was taken Sick of the burning Ague in the
latter end of the Summer 1726, and has never since enjoyed one Days health;
she was in the Summer following brought so low, as that she was wholly Confined
to her Bed, (which Confinement continues to this Day) and reduced to such
exceeding low Circumstances, as that every Day, for many Days and Months
together, was expected by all about her, would have been her last.

Her Strength was so entirely gone as she could not move her Head, Hand or Foot
so as to help her self in the least; and her Speech wholly failed; so that she
has not been able to speak by whispering so as to be heard by any, but those of
the Family, much used to her; and they guessing more by the motion of her Lips
than by any Voice which could be heard. Her Flesh is much consumed: Her
Appetite to Food is so gone, that it is admirable to think how she has been
sustained; her digestive Faculty so weak, that she has not been able to Eat
either Bread of Flesh of any sort, for the space of Five Years and more;
supported only (as to outward Means) by some thin, liquid Food, put into her
Mouth with a Spoon; who will say but that the Power and Goodness of GOD is very
remarkable in sustaining her so long time by such slender and inconsiderable
Means.

No Care or Cost, has been wanting on her behalf; Physicians far and near, have
been consulted and improved (to great Expense) for her. Nor have her Parents
neglected to seek to GOD for a Blessing on their Endeavors of this Nature:
Diverse Days of Fasting and Prayer have been attended in her Father's House,
with the Assistance of the Pastor of the Church here, and other christian
Friends, and also the Pastors of diverse of the neighboring Churches; and
several Sermons adapted to the Occasion, have been Preached in her hearing;
which by the Lines she now sends abroad (I believe) you will think GOD has
Sanctified to her for saving good. For I think, Reader, if you shall want
Charity for her, you fall under another great Want, and want the one thing
needful for your self.

She still remains weak and low, but (thanks be to GOD) she is under some
revivings. Most remarkably the last April it pleased GOD to open her Lips and
her Mouth does show forth his Praise: she was on a sudden enabled to speak with
a Voice so loud as to be heard into another Room in the House, to the surprise
of the whole Family; this reviving, and power of Speech she seems greatly
affected with, and blesses GOD for the same; it being an Answer of her request
to GOD that so she might declare what He had done for her Soul; and also apply
her self to Young People as in the following pages.

I think indeed she seems to be under the powerful Impressions of the Spirit of
GOD, and touched with a sense of the prevailing Sins of the present Times,
laments the decay of the Power of Godliness amongst us.

In one of my last Conferences with her, I could not but take peculiar Notice
of a sad surprise she seemed to be in from her being informed of some Families
which lived in the Neglect of Family Prayer; so affected was she in her
Meditation on it, that she versify'd upon it; and rehearst to me several of the
Verses she had composed: one of which I will here Record; hoping that it may
jog some of 'em that ly snoaring in such a shameful Omission; and it runs after
this manner,

Poor, wretched and vile Sinners all
Ranked with the heathen Nation,
Who unto GOD never Pray nor Call,
For Pardon and Salvation.
( I Will add another and say,)

What dreadful Threats, O direful Wrath!
Such Families fall under,
Who will tread that forbidden Path
Full showed with Bolts of Thunder.
You Will find in her Address to young People, a Caution against such vile
Omissions.

God grant that the same blessed SPIRIT which influenced her in such manner to
apply her self to our young People; may also influence us all, young and old,
to make an agreeable Improvement of the same!

The Reader acquainted with sacred Writ, will remember, that it is intimated to
us by our Savior in his Parable concerning the rich Man and Lazarus, that the
doleful Inhabitants of the Place of Torment, do imagine, that if one were sent
to their Fellow Sinners on Earth from the Dead they would repent.

Behold here we have Warning given to our young People; which may in some sense
be called Warning from the Dead: though not absolutely so, yet the Person who
gives it, has been numbered among the Dead, in our Expectation, for a long
Time, until now she experiences what we may call, a sort of Resurrection. The
Instance we have in her, is very uncommon, and I think what she now offers is
worthy of Observation from us all.

I will but add one word by way of Apology for my self, in presuming to gratify
her, in granting her the use of my Pen; possibly some among our young People
may have arrived to that height of Profanity as to make a Ridicule and a Scoff
at what I have here performed; to such I answer in short, I value not their
Scoff a rush, only would say to such, as Paul to the Jailer, Do thy self no
harm.

But perhaps the Aged, Sober and judicious Reader will admire at my presumption
herein; to such I would with all imaginable Humility say, I am ready to admire
with you too: But when I was so often invited to it not only by the Young Author,
but diverse others; and seriously considered the Matter, I dare not deny to
undertake the Task, least I should render my self to my fellow Creatures more
churlish than the unjust Judge, who neither feared GOD nor regarded Man. Or
least I should hide my one poor Talent in a Napkin, when I should have improved
it for my Lord's use.

I hope I can truly say, I have been much concerned for the Interest of
Religion among us; and tho'tful what I in particular may do that may any way
tend to revive the too, too visible Decays of it: When this Invitation was
urged upon me, I dare not wholly reject it, least I should let slip an
Opportunity of being some way serviceable to the Interest of Religion, and the
good of Souls.

And this is the grand prevailing Motive with me; the Hope I have that GOD who
has so deeply Impre^^ her Mind by His Holy Spirit, has also designed to make
what is by the young Female-Author offered, of saving Advantage (at least) to
some Souls. And if so what I have done by the Power and Goodness of GOD shall
be made an Offering to the Tabernacle, though performed by him, who is an
unworthy Servant for the Table of the Lord.

Plainfield, July 10. 1732. Samuel Stearns.

AN Address to young People, BY Mercy Wheeler Of Plainfield, June 8. 1732.
MY dear Friends, Relatives and Neighbors, who are now in your Youth, and come
to that Time of Life, which is called the Flower of the Age. It is well known
to many of you, that the great and sovereign Jehovah, who does whatsoever He
pleases in Heaven, Earth, Sea and all deep Places, has been very signal and
remarkable in his dispensations toward me.

He has laid me upon a Bed of Languishing, for the Space of more than Five
Years past already, the greatest part of which time I have been reduced to such
low Circumstances that I have not been able to speak with an audible Voice:
until now of late it has pleased GOD of his abundant goodness to grant me such
reviving, as to be able to speak with an audible, though a low Voice.

And now GOD has given me ability, I think it my Duty to you O young People, to
address my self to you, by way of Advise, Counsel and Caution: to you which are
near to me in the bonds of Nature, in an especial manner; yea and to all the
whole Neighborhood, and whomsoever are or shall be acquainted with my
Circumstances.

O young People! you that are of my own Generation; who are in the Prime and
Flower of your Days, I must tell you that I think you have in me, I mean in
what GOD has done unto me, a very loud Lecture preached to you: and O that you,
all of you may be such Persons of Wisdom as to hear the rod and Him that has
appointed it!

Remember! Oh young People, remember that Childhood and Youth is Vanity. What
shall I say to you to persuade you to be serious? How shall I order my Speech
to you, so as to prevail with you to hearken to me now, that so GOD may hearken
to you another Day?

I must tell you, that though Youth be indeed the Flower of the Age, yet it is
the most dangerous Season of the Mind. I have found it so, and you will see it
to be so ere-long, when your Eyes are open to see things as indeed they are.

My advise to you is, Oh labor to see and apprehend your danger; least you
fall into foolish and hurtful Lusts which drown Men and Women in Destruction
and Perdition.

O flee youthful Lusts, beware, be warned by the Harms and Falls of others,
remember Death is hastening; it is appointed for Man once to Die, and after
that the Judgment.

Remember me, you that know me, and are acquainted with me: O how suddenly has
GOD blasted my youthful Vigor, and laid me upon a Bed of pining Sickness to
this Day. In the Spring of my Days, or before the Spring was fully advanced, it
is become Autumn with me; the Leaves fall apace, as if the Winter of Death were
just approaching upon, that I may say with sick Hezekiah, I am deprived of the
residue of my Days, and shall see Man no more, with the Inhabitants of the
World. And how soon it may be your Case you know not; nor are you sure (if GOD
shall give so much Warning, and not snatch you away by some sudden accidental
and violent Death) that GOD will afford to you the Mercy He has vouchsafed to
me; it may be you may be deprived of the Use of your Reason, (as is frequently
the Case of the visited with Mortal distempers) and then how impossible will it
be for you to do your great Work, when you cannot so much as apprehend what
Work you have to do. O my friends, believe me, believe me, the Time of Health
is the very best Time for you to prepare for Death in.

I deny not but that GOD does sometimes magnify his sovereign Grace to Sinners;
by sanctifying long and tedious Sickness for saving Good to their Souls, I hope
he has done it for me (and I adore his Grace for ever on the Account whereof.
But I must tell you, it was indeed hard Work to bear the Pains of Body, which
my disease laid me under, and at the same: Time to grapple with the wracking
Terrors of a wounded Spirit which indeed who can bear. And I do sadly, and
greatly lament my Sin and Folly in neglecting to improve my Health, while GOD
was pleased to afford it to me: and so will you if you neglect to improve yours.

The best that you can possibly imagine (if you continue to delay to make your
Peace with GOD now in the time of Health and Prosperity) is, I say, the best
you can possibly imagine is, you make sad Work for a most bitter Repentance
here-after.

And if this be the best you can possibly Hope for, (and that at the utmost
Hazard too,) What may the Worst be, if GOD in Justice say, because I have
called and ye have refused, therefore I will laugh at your Calamity, and (...)
Fear comes, when your Fear comes us Desolation, and your Destruction comes
as Whirlwind, (...) distress and anguish comes upon you then a great Ransom
cannot deliver you.

If once it comes to this: that by your quenching and grieving the Holy Spirit
of GOD, you so provoke him as to take his final farewell of your forsaken
Souls, and GOD (...) are in his Wrath you shall never enter into his rest: and
for ought you or I know, if you still delay, this may be the direful and
dreadful consequence of your delaying in this most important Affair.

And if at last this should be your dreadful Doom, then no Tongue of Man or
Angel can express the Horror that may justly, and will most certainly, sooner
later, seize upon you.

O then! Let me Address my self to you with the greatest importunity I am
capable of: Advising you to delay no longer; make haste, flee to the City of
Refuge, before the Avenger of Blood overtake you.

Secure to your selves a part in CHRIST the only Refuge of Souls, Now, before
it be too late: From whence shall I fetch the Weapons of Spiritual Armor, my
Arrows (while I draw my Bow at a venture) which GOD shall so direct as that
they shall reach your Hearts, the Mark I aim at.

They must be fetched from the quiver of the Word of GOD, that great Store house
of Spiritual Armor.

I will recommend to you that wise and sage Advice, given by the wisest of all
mee^ Men, the Royal and Renowned Preacher King Solomon, divinely inspired;
which Advice is given for the Conduct of Youth in all succeeding Generations to
the World's end; recorded in Eccl. xii.1. Remember Now thy Creator, in the days
of thy Youth, while the evil days come not, nor the years draw nigh, when thou
shall say, I have no pleasure in them. This is Counsel given us by GOD himself;
inserted in his Oracles for your Conduct and mine.

O let not you or I forget GOD that made us, nor be unmindful of the Rock of
our Salvation.

Let us remember our Creator, and we shall remember our Sins, by which we have
broken his Laws, and exposed our selves to the Curse threatened to the breakers
of it.

Remember your Creator and you will remember the Redeemer, and labor to obtain an
Interest in him; which is the One Thing needful; and Woe to us if we obtain it
not.

This is the Sum of all I have to say to you; O my Friends, my Brothers, my
Sisters, and Relatives, near to me, or more remote and further off; Neighbors
and all who may be Entertained with these Lines; I assure you all, that this is
all my Desire on your behalf; and it will be all your Salvation, if you obtain
the same, even a part in the lovely JESUS. O do but get your Eyes open to see
and behold the incomparable Beauty of the ever-blessed Jesus, and I am sure you
will be enamoured with Him, and say with me, and all Christ-prizers; He is the
chiefest of ten Thousand, He is altogether Lovely.

Oh that I could, (though but in some poor broken Expressions) set before you the
Beauty and Excellency of the lovely and all-beautiful Jesus! I Hope I can truly
say, that GOD of his abundant Grace has made him Precious, most Precious to
me; I can say, I Prize him above all other Good whatsoever. Mountains of Gold
and Pearls, are not to be compared with him. But what do I attempt to represent
to you, an infinite Good, by the Words of a poor finite nothing Creature, and
have not the Tongue of the Learned neither; which if I had, Words would fail,
and the most raised humane Though It would fall infinitely short of a true and full
Representation of him, who is the brightness of the Fathers Glory, and the
express Image of his Person, and upholds all things by the Word of his Power;
Who when he had by himself purged our Sins, sat down at the Right Hand of the
Majesty on high. Who can by searching find out this GOD-Man; none can find out
this Almighty Redeemer to Perfection.

By these Expressions and Words which want form, you may conceive something of
the Esteem, which I desire always to maintain of my ever-blessed Redeemer: Will
you Oh young People learn to Adore Him with me Now; that so we may enjoy Him
together forever hereafter; when his Redeemed Ones shall have a more full and
transforming View of him, for then we shall see Him as He is.

One Arrow more I must draw out of the divine Quiver, and it shall be that most
important Question propounded to us by the Redeemer himself, a much greater
than King Solomon, and spoke as never Man spoke: Which grand Inquiry of his we
have in the Gospel of S. Mat.16.26. What is a Man profited, if he shall gain
the whole World and lose his own Soul, or what will a Man give in Exchange for
his soul?

By these words of our Savior we may apprehend something of the Value which is
put upon a Soul by Him who alone knew the true Worth of a Soul, He and He only
paid the Ransom of Souls, therefore He knew full well what the Price of a Soul
must be set at.

The whole World is a Price too mean and low to set an immortal Soul at. This
we are assured (...) by Him who is Wisdom it self and Truth it self, and
therefore it is impossible He should deceive us in the Matter. O then let us
believe him! O young People believe him! Oh Value your Souls at a high rate;
prize 'em above Worlds; do not trifle with your Souls, nor about the great
Concerns of them:

We must all acknowledge that our Souls are lost (...) first Adam: And we our
selves persona^^^ (...) forfeited the Happiness of our Souls (...) Divine
Justice. But though our Souls (...) first, they may be found and saved (...)
Adam, the Lord Jesus Christ. Oh blessed Name, which I cannot mention but with
Reverence and Adoration, admiring the unsearchable Riches of divine Wisdom and
Grace, that ever there should be such a Name given under Heaven among Men
whereby we may be saved.

This brings me again to what I told you before is all my Desire concerning
you: that a part in this great Savior, and the great Salvation procured by Him
for us Sinners, may be your Portion: Let me urge it upon you to labor to
obtain it, with all your might; delay not; dally not; trifle not in this most
great and important Business. I know not how to leave off urging you, or let
you go, till you cry out, None but Christ, None but Christ! and I hear you say,
Give me Christ, or else I die.

Are you desirous of a Christ? Do you see your perishing Condition without him,
and that a part in him is absolutely necessary for you? My Advice to you all is
this:

O prize the Gospel, and Gospel Ordinances. O my Friends, I long to enjoy
Public Ordinances; I think I desire Health for nothing more, than to be able
to come to the Public Ordinances of GOD's House; especially that I may
Commemorate the Dying Love of my Redeemer in that High and Holy Ordinance of
the Supper: To come to that Gospel Feast; which if GOD in his sovereignty shall
deny me ability for, I hope he will accept the Will for the Deed: As for you
that are in Health prize and improve it, it is the ordinary Means of Salvation.
O have a care you do not put a slight upon the Gospel dispensation of the Word
of Life; and beware you do not entertain any prejudice against any clear Gospel
Truths; or against any of the faithful dispensers of the same. Mind well what
the great King and Savior of the Church has with his own Mouth said in this
Matter, He that despises you, despises me, etc. What a dreadful thing is it
to despise Christ?

Go as constantly as you can to hear what GOD will speak to you; don't suffer
Trifles to divert you; let not a little Cold, wet or dull Weather, keep you at
Home, when you are in Health; and may go to the House of GOD, if you will.

And don't neglect private, or secret Opportunities for Communion with GOD:
Make Conscience of secret Prayer daily; and attend constantly Family Worship
you that have the Advantage of it.

And Oh, let no young Couple come together in Marriage, and dare to live in the
horrible Omission of Family Prayer. I am amazed to think that ever such
Gospellers as we in New England are, should any of us dare to live without
Family Prayer. What says Dr. Mather of such Houses? The roaring Lion (says he)
does ramp and rage there without control: And how does the weeping Prophet
Jeremiah imprecate the divine Vengeance, on such such Familys, Chap. 10.25. Yea
how does GOD himself threaten them, saying, I will pour out my Fury upon the
Heathen that know me not, and on the Families that call not upon my Name. Oh
let none indulge themselves in such a fearful Omission. Oh young People! I
could fill my Mouth with Arguments to persuade you to become truly pious; Fear
of Evil on the one Hand; and hope and expectation of Good on the other, are two
great swaying Considerations with rational Agents: I have already said
something of the great Danger of Delays.

I shall now add a Word as to the great Good that will acrue to you, if you
will now comply and in good earnest set your selves to seek and serve God with
perfect Hearts and willing Minds, you will then be in the way to all manner of
Good, to have the Blessings of the upper and nether Springs, of God's Throne
and of his Footstool conferred upon you. -- Will Profit allure you? truly
there is no Gold, or worldly Gain, that is worthy to be compared with the Gold
tried in the Fire, which Christ counsels us to buy of him, Rev. 3.18. -- Will
Pleasure invite you? There is no Pleasure which the Things of Time and Sense
afford us, worthy to be named the same Day with the Pleasure that is to be
enjoyed in Communion with God, and walking in the Ways of Wisdom; all whose
Ways are Ways of pleasantness, and whose Paths are Peace. -- Will Honor sway
with you? There Is no Honor like that which come from God only, or the Honor
which Christ will one day put upon them that Love and Honor him. -- Is Peace a
thing desirable with you? There is no Peace with our Fellow Creatures, to be
compared to the Peace which Believers have with God, through our Lord Jesus
Christ, which verily passes all understanding. -- Once more, Will Joys or
Songs charm you? Sure I am, that there is no Joy like the Joy of the Lord,
which is our Strength, who have secured to our selves a part in a glorious
Christ. No carnal Mirth or Gladness which is comparable to that of the Ransomed
of the Lord, who shall return and come to Zion with Songs of everlasting Joy
upon their Heads, and shall obtain Joy and Gladness, and Sorrow shall flee
away, Isa.35.10.

What shall I say more, My Strength of Body is small; and it is hard for me to
speak: I am willing to spend all the Strength I have, were it much more than it
is, for your Good; might I be any way Instrumental of any saving Good to your
Souls; or any one Soul. May God bless what you see in me, and what you now hear
from me, for saving Good to you, I shall never repent the Pains I now take.

O my Friends, Do you do your part, that what you have seen of God's Dealings
with me, and what you now hear from me, may not rise up in Judgment against you
in the great Day of Account.

THUS, Friends, (whose Souls are of very great Value with me) I have by the
help of God, and the use of a borrowed Pen, done and accomplished what I have
long desired to do. I leave these Lines with you as being the best Advice I can
possible give to you, if I knew I should never see any of you more in the
World, or if I should yet have further Opportunities to Converse with you.

I entreat you for your Soul's sake, Give ear to what I have now said to you;
so out of the Mouth of a Babe and Suckling, God shall ordain Strength and
perfect his own Praise.

And now, Whether it shall please God to continue me with you still, under my
present Circumstances, or otherwise, (that Matter I desire to leave with God,
and would entirely resign to his holy and blessed Will and Pleasure therein) I
assure you my Kinsfolk according to the Flesh, and all others, to whom I have
directed these Lines, (and the Penman does doubtless join with me,) My Hearts
Desire and Prayer to GOD for you is, that your Souls may be eternally saved.

AMEN.

