Every Man his own Doctor: OR, The Poor Planter's Physician.

Prescribing Plain and Easy Means for Persons to cure themselves of all, or
most of the Distempers, incident to this Climate, and with very little Charge,
the Medicines being chiefly of the Growth and Production of this Country.

-- But many Shapes
Of DEATH, and many are the Ways that lead
To his grim Cave* all dismal, yet to Sense
More terrible at the Entrance than within.
Some, as thou s^w'st, by violent Stroke shall dye,
By Fire, Flood, Famine* by Intemperance more.
In Meats and Drinks, which on the Earth shall bring
Diseases dire.
Paradise lost, Book XI. The Second EDITION.

Printed and Sold by WILLIAM PARKS, at his Print^^g O^fice^ in Williamsburg,
and Annapolis, 1734.

Price, One Shilling.

Every Man his own Doctor: OR, The Poor Planter's Physician.
THE most acceptable Service we can render to GOD, is BENEFICENCE to Man. There
are Three Ways of benefitting our Fellow Creatures. We may be useful to their
Souls, by good Instruction, and good Example. We may be helpful to their
Bodies, by feeding the Hungry, clothing the Naked, and prescribing easy
Remedies to the Sick: We can aid them in their Fortunes, by encouraging of
Industry, by relieving the Distressed, and doing all the kind Offices we are
able, to our Neighbors. These are the several Ways of improving the Talents
our Maker has entrusted us with; and we must every one expect, hereafter to
give an Account, how we have employed them.

I WISH it were in my Power, to serve Mankind, more than I do, in each of these
Particulars; but the gracious Acceptance of the Widow's Offering, encourages me
also to cast my MITE into the Treasury. I publish this short Treatise, to lead
the Poorer Sort into the pleasant Paths of Health; and when they have the
Misfortune to be sick, to show them the cheapest and easiest Ways of getting
well again.

OUR Country is unhappily subject to several very sharp Distempers. The
Multitude of Marshes, Swamps, and great Waters, send forth so many Fogs, and
Exhalations, that the Air is continually damp with them: This, in Spite of our
Precautions, is apt to shut up the Pores all at once, and hinder insensible
Perspiration. From hence proceed FEVERS, COUGHS, QUINSIES, PLEURISIES, and
CONSUMPTIONS, with a dismal Train of other Diseases, which make as fatal Havoc
here, in Proportion to our Number, as the PLAGUE does in the Eastern Parts of
the World.

IN the mean Time, this is a cruel Check to the Growth of an Infant Colony,
which otherwise, by the Fruitfulness of our Women, and the great Number of
Recruits, sent from our Mother Country, would, in a few Years, grow populous,
and consequently considerable.

IT is impossible to see these Calamities return every Year, without the
tenderest Commiseration. Certainly nothing can be more melancholy, than to
have so many poor People perish, purely for want of using timely Means for
their Preservation. One Mischief is, most of our Inhabitants have such an
unreasonable Aversion to Physic, (even where they may have it from their
charitable Neighbors for nothing,) that they neglect to take any, 'til their
Case is grown desperate, and Death begins to glare them in the Face. They
consider not, that a moderate Skill may recover a Patient in the Beginning of a
Distemper, while he has Strength to go through all the necessary Operations, when
the whole College would not be able to save him, after his Spirits are sunk,
and all the Principles of Life very near extinguished.

THIS unhappy Temper occasions a great deal of Mortality: And what makes the
Misfortune the greater, is, that it falls heaviest on the Younger Sort, who are
most liable to hurrying Distempers. Indeed, some would be glad of Assistance,
if they did not think the Remedy near as bad as the Disease: For our Doctors
are commonly so exorbitant in their Fees, whether they kill or cure, that the
poor Patient had rather trust to his Constitution, than run the Risque of
beggaring his Family.

THESE Considerations made me account it a Work of great Charity and Public
Spirit, to communicate to the poor Inhabitants of this Colony, a safe Method of
curing themselves, when they shall be so unhappy as to fall into any of our
common Maladies. And for their greater Encouragement, the Remedies I shall
prescribe, may be procured with little Trouble and Expense, being, for the most
Part, such as grow at their own Doors, or may be easily propagated.

PROVIDENCE has been so good, as to furnish almost every Country with Medicines
proper for the Distempers incident to the Climate; and such Domestic Remedies
are always sufficient for the Poor, who live upon homely Fare, and for the
Temperate, who make a right Use of GOD's Blessings. Their Cases are seldom
complicated, and proceed, for the most Part, from Cold, or some slight
Transgression. In such Ailments, the Symptoms cannot easily be mistaken, nor is
the Cure difficult; all the Secret (...) in taking the Distemper in Time: And
this will be the more necessary, because most Diseases that happen from Cold,
are excedingly violent, and call aloud for speedy Assistance.

I MUST therefore conjure my dear Country folks, to begin with themselves as
soon as they can distinguish what Sickness they have, while Nature is strong,
and able to cooperate with the Medicines they take. Nor can we hope, that
Heaven will assist us in our Calamities, unless we endeavor, at the same Time,
to assist ourselves.

IN setting down the following Prescriptions, I have been cautions of talking
like an Apothecary; that is, of using hard Words, that perhaps neither my
Patient, nor my self understand. Nor have I taken them lightly upon Trust; but
am able to recommend most of them upon more than Twenty Years Experience; and
for the rest, I have credible Authority. In the mean Time, I hope, none will
object, like Naaman, the Syrian, to the Easiness of any of these Remedies; but
rather rejoice, that they can have the greatest of all Blessings so very cheap.
And in Truth, People must love Difficulty extremely, to slight Health, as they
would a Mistress, for being gained with little Trouble.

BEFORE I mention the Cure, I shall endeavor to describe the Symptoms of each
Distemper, in so plain a Manner, that any Person may be Master of his own Case,
if he will but attend carefully to what he feels; otherwise he might mistake
his Illness, and apply an improper Remedy. I shall also recommend the Diet
fittest to be used in each Case; which often contributes more to the Patient's
Recovery, than his Physic: At the same Time, he shall have my best Advice, to
prevent every particular Ailment; which will be happier for him, than to know
how to cure it.

I SHALL begin with the most fatal of all our Distempers, Pleurisy.
a PLEURISY; which discovers it self by a brisk Fever, and sharp* Pain, pretty
low in one of the Sides, shooting now and then into the Breast, and sometimes
quite back into the Shoulder-Blades: It is uneasy every Time the Patient draws
his Breath, and more so when he coughs; which is generally the Case in this
Disease.

THE Moment any Person finds these Tokens upon him, he must, without Loss of
Time, take away 10 Ounces of Blood, and repeat the same three or four Days
successively, if the Pain go not away before. On the third Day, he may vomit
with 80 Grains of Indian Physic, (Ipecacuania,) and every Night, drink 7
Spoonfuls of Pennyroyal Water, or the Decoction of it* moderately sweetened. In
the mean Time, let him, every three Hours, take Half a Spoonful of Honey and
Linseed Oil, mixed together. He should also strew Indian Pepper, upon Pennyroyal
Plaster, and apply it very hot to the Place where the Pain lies, and be sure
to keep himself warm, and abstain from cold Water: Though it the Distemper should
prove obstinate, you must apply a Blister to his Neck, and one to each Arm, on
the fleshy Part above the Elbow.

THE Patient's Diet should be light, and cooling; and his constant Drink,
either Linseed or Bawm Tea, a little sweetened.

THE best Way to prevent this Distemper, will be, to bleed in the Beginning of
any great Hoarseness, or Cough, which are often the Forerunners of it; and also
to forbear swilling great Quantities of Water, or Small Beer, in ordinary Life.

SOMETHING akin to this, Fever, Pain in the Head, Breast, Eye, or Ear.
is a FEVER, and PAIN IN THE HEAD, OR BREAST, or both; and now and then, an
Inflammation, and Pain in the EYE, or EAR. In these Cases, you must, without
Loss of Time, bleed 10 Ounces. The next Day, purge with the Decoction of
Mallows, and 3 Spoonfuls of Syrup of Peach Blossoms. If the Pain should
continue, you must bleed again the third Day, and the Morrow following repeat
the Purge: And if the Pain be still obstinate, you must renew both Bleeding and
Purging a third Time. In the very Beginning, apply the following Poultis to the
Part where the Pain lies: Boil the Leaves of Sage, Wormwood, and Rue together,
and having beat them soft, grate Nutmeg thick upon them, and bind them on warm,
renewing the same Night and Morning: And in Case the Disease hold out against
all this, your last Refuge must be a Blister.

YOUR Diet should be moist, and cooling, such as Thin Hominy, Chicken-Breth, or
Water Gruel; and your Drink, Linseed, or Ground Ivy Tea, moderately sweetened.

THIS Disease will be also best prevented by Bleeding in any violent Cold.

ANOTHER Distemper, Quinsey.
consequent to a Cold, is a QUINSEY, known by a Fever, with an Inflammation of
the Glands about the Throat, and of the Uvula, to that Degree as to render all
Swallowing difficult, and painful. For this, bleed immediately 10 Ounces,
rather in the Jugular Vein, than in the Arm; and if the Case be urgent, apply a
Blister to the Neck. If the Inflammation should continue, bleed again next Day.
The Morning after, take a Purge of the Decoction of Mallows, with Syrup of
Peach Blossoms, repeating the same 3 several Times, resting one Day between.
From the Beginning, gargle with Dr. Papa's Liquor hereafter described; and if
the Uvula be much relaxed, drink Half a Pint of the same, Night and Morning,
when you don't purge.

BUT in Case it prove no more than a common SORE THROAT, Sore-Throat.
purge only once, and gargle with Papa's Liquor.

IN both Cases, your Diet ought to be moist and cooling; and your Drink,
Cinquefoil Tea.

IN order to prevent these Complaints, remember to wash your Neck, and behind
your Ears, every Morning, in cold Water; nor muffle up your self too warm,
either Night or Day.

NEXT follows a CONSUMPTION, Consumption.
a Distemper flow and sure, that is lately grown very common amongst us. Here
Young People are more in Danger than their Elders, because more liable to
Inflammations. It is ushered in by a Cough of long Continuance, which by
Degrees inflames and ulcerates the Lungs, brings on a Hectic Fever, with a
Spitting of bloody and corrupted Matter, and is generally attended with a
Hoarseness, and Night-Sweats. In the mean Time, the Patient will waste in
Strength, and in Flesh, while perhaps he may eat rather more than he used to do
when he was well.

AFTER the Ulcer comes to be formed in the Lungs, it will be difficult for
inward Remedies to reach it. They may before that, perhaps, cool the
Inflammation, as well as sweeten and diminish the sharp Defluxion, so as to
prevent an Ulcer, but can rarely heal it. So likewise, Blisters and Issues may
revulse the Humor, and prevent the Mischief, if seasonably made use of.

THEREFORE, all the Good we can hope for, in this melancholy Case, must be
done while the Consumption is apprehended only, and not actually begun. I would
then recommend Bleeding 2 or 3 Ounces every third Day, with a constant Riding
about on Horseback, and Change of Air. This will help Nature to throw off the
Evil that threatens her, by calming the Blood, opening the Pores, and promoting
insensible Perspiration. It may also enable her to make a vigorous Effort, by
Means of a seasonable Boil, or Imposthume, on the outward Parts of the Body.
For that Intention, I would also advise the Patient, to shave under the Arms,
and apply Poultises, in order to draw the Mischief, if possible, that Way. And
for inward Medicines, let him only chew Sassafras Root every Morning fasting. I
would likewise entreat him, before he goes to Bed, to take 3 Pills, made of
Turpentine and Deers Dung, in equal Quantities: And, besides these, let him
once a Week take a Purge of Mallows, and Syrup of Peach Blossoms.

LET his Diet be without Meat, and mixed with abundance of Turnips, roasted
Apples, Raisins, and Liquorice; and let his Drink be, Beer brewed with
Ground Ivy; avoiding strong Liquors of every Sort, as he would Poison.

THE Way to prevent this wasting Disease, is never to suffer a Cough to dwell
upon you; but bleed in Time, and purge gently once a Week. In the mean while,
eat not one Morsel of Meat, nor drink any Thing stronger than a little sound
Cider: And, to make the Game sure, ride every fair Day, and breath as much as
possible in the open Air.

ANOTHER mischievous Distemper, Bloody Flux.
is the BLOODY FLUX; the Signs of which are, a small Fever, and grievous
Griping. The Patient will also void slimy Excrements, streaked with Blood; and
at the same Time, be cruelly tormented in his Bowels.

UPON the first Appearance of these Symptoms, part with 8 Ounces of Blood. The
next Day take 80 Grains of Indian Physic, by Way of Vomit, and work it well
with 2 Quarts of warm Water. The third Day, take 70 Grains of the same Indian
Physic, in hot Broth, made pretty salt; and then 'twill go off by Way of
Stool, and strengthen the Bowels.

IN the mean Time, let the Food he takes, be either poach'd Eggs, Mutton, or
Chicken-Broth, and his constant Drink, a Decoction of calcined Deers Horn, with
a Plantain Leaf boiled in it.

TO prevent this Disease, avoid sleeping on the cold Ground, and wading in the
cold Water: Never eat immoderately of any Sort of Fruit, nor venture to drink
new or foul Cider, by any Means.

AND because some People, by fancying this Distemper catching, are fearful of
going near those unhappy Persons that have it, by which they often want the
Assistance that is necessary; I may venture to assure them, their Apprehensions
are groundless; and the Reason this Disease goes sometimes round a Family, is,
because they live on the same Diet, and breath in the same Air; and then no
Wonder if they fall into the same Disorders, one after another, without any
Manner of Infection.

THERE is also a Kind of WHITE-FLUX, White-Flux.
that will hurry a strong Man out of his Life in a short Time. In this Case,
the Stools are frequent, without Gripes, or Blood, but flowing from the Patient
like Water, and having a small Fever attending it.

LOSE no Time in this hasty Disease, but vomit with Indian Physic, and purge
the next Day with the same. In the mean while, you will do well to wear some
Skin girt tight on your Stomach and Belly, with the Furr next you, or else a
Piece of soft Flannel.

LET your Food be Hasty-Pudding, Panada, or Broth thickened with Flower, and
grate Nutmeg into every Thing you eat; and let your Drink be, a Decoction of
Deers Horn, made with a Leaf of Plaintain.

IN order to prevent this Disorder, avoid Walking and Riding in the Night Air,
guzzling huge Draughts of cold Water, and devouring unreasonable Quantities of
Fruit, especially of that which is not ripe.

A COMMON LOOSENESS needs no Description; L^^seness.
and may be easily stopped in the Beginning; though some People husband it so
well, as to keep it running for many Years: So that all the Humors of the Body
taking that Turn, make it difficult to cure.

THEREFORE, to check this Ailment in Time, you must vomit with Indian Physic;
then live three or four Days upon new Milk, boiled thick with Flower, or
Tuckaho, and drink the abovementioned Deers Horn Decoction.

THEN, to prevent it, eat not intemperately; nor drink windy, or soul Liquors,
or too much cold Water.

BUT in Case of an ordinary GRIPING in the Belly, or WIND in the Stomach, drink
a Gallon of warm Whey, and if that cannot be had, a Gallon of warm Water, as
fast as you can well swallow it: And afterward purge with Mallows, and Syrup
of Peach Blossoms, once or twice.

FOR a few Days, content your self with a moderate and easy Diet; and let your
Drink be Bawm Tea.

IT may be prevented, by keeping your Backdoor open, abstaining from windy
Meats, and fermented Drinks, and being always careful not to overload your
Stomach.

THE COLIC is lately grown a very common Distemper, Colic.
and begins, generally, with a grievous Pain in the Bowels; and, by being
neglected, fixes at length in the Pit of the Stomach, where it seems to bore
like an Augre: The Patient frequently vomits every Thing he swallows, and can
hardly go to Stool, even with the Help of purging Medicines.

PEOPLE thus afflicted, are apt to fly to Drams for Relief; but with lamentable
Success. These may ease a Fit sometimes; but are sure to add Fuel to the Fire,
and make the Disease return with more Violence. Besides, these Cordials have
another bad Consequence; they are apt to make People, soberly enough inclcin'd,
by Degrees, grow too fond of their Physic. To cure all which bad Effects at
once, I would recommend this certain and easy Remedy: Let him leave off all
strong, windy, and fermented Liquors, and drink nothing but Water, enriched
with a very brown Toast.

BUT if this Remedy should be esteemed worse than the Disease, I would,
however, for the easing a particular Fit, recommend 2 or 3 Quarts of warm
Water. And to force a Passage, you must take 2 or 3 Spoonfuls of Bears Oil,
which will seldom fail* or else drink a Quarter of a Pint of the Decoction of
Peach Leaves, with 2 Spoonfuls of Syrup of Peach Blossoms: And this Purge you
ought to repeat 2 or 3 Times, to carry off all Remains. But if you would root
out the Distemper for ever, take the same Medicines every full Moon; and drink
every Morning, for some Time, Sassafras Tea; and at Night, take as much
Snakeroot Powder as will lie upon a Sixpence, in Mint-Water, or Decoction.

THE Food proper in this Distemper, is, Chicken, or Mutton Broth; and the
Drink, Bawm Tea, sweetened with Syrup of Mallows.

AND, to prevent it, eat spearingly, forbearing every Thing that is salt, and
windy; and never drink Spirits, one Drop of Green Tea, or brewed Liquor of any
Kind.

THE DRY GRIPES are now (blessed be God, Dry Gripes.
) grown much rarer than formerly. This is the cruellest Kind of Colic, called
in Europe, the Colic of Poitiers; though here it might be called the Caribbee
Colic, because very common in those Islands: And I wish we may not have
derived it from thence, by too liberal a Use of their Commodities.

IT makes it self known by a most tormenting Pain in the Pit of the Stomach,
and the adjacent Parts. The Guts feel as if they were twisted, and all Motion
downward is interrupted: By this Misfortune, the unhappy Patient is inclined to
vomit up every Thing; insomuch, that sometimes his very Excrements are cast out
at his Mouth. In the first Place, a Thoroughfare must by all Means be
attempted, by 3 Spoonfuls of Bears Oil, or by the Decoction of Peach Leaves,
above mentioned. If these Remedies should fail, you must submit to a Tobacco
Glister, performed by blowing the Smoke through a Pipe into the Fundament. And
if the first Operation should happen to fail, it must be repeated. At the same
Time, make a strong Infusion of Tobacco, and therewith anoint the lower Region
of the Belly.

AFTER the Passage is perfectly cleared, your Diet, for some Days, ought to be
either Mutton, or Chicken Broth, in which Mallows have been boiled; and your
Drink, Pawm Tea.

SOME have unadvisedly, in this Distemper, ventured also to drink Rum, and
other Spirits, to ease their Pains; but this has cost them dear, by taking away
the Use of their Hands; and other Paralytick Misfortunes; to cure which, the
same Remedies must be used, as are prescribed hereafter for the PALSY.

THE best Way to prevent the DRY-GRIPES, is, to get rid of Agues, and Colicks,
as soon as you can; to eat sparingly of Fruit, and forbear all foul and windy
Liquors; nor meddle with Rum, or other Spirit, after it has been poisoned with
foul Sugar, and Lime-juice.

A PALSY comes suddenly upon us, with dreadful Symptoms, Palsy.
not easy to be mistaken. We are bereft of Sense, and Motion, either in one, or
more Parts of the Body; or at least, we find them numbed and disabled: And
where the Disease is extreme, one Side is taken quite motionless, and
insensible.

AT the first Appearance of these melancholy Tokens, purge with Indian Physic
every other Day, for 3 Times. The Mornings you don't purge, cause your self to
be plunged over Head and Ears into cold Water; and this should be repeated
thrice every Week, for 3 Months together. You are also to mix equal Quantities
of Spirit of Scurvy Grass, and Hungary Water, and dipping a stiff Comb-brush
therein, cause your Head, being close shaved, to be well brushed with it
several Times a Day: Likewise let the Palms of your Hands, the Soles of your
Feet, and Nape of your Neck, be often rubbed with the same Mixture. After this
has put some Sense and Motion into your Limbs, beat Rosemary in a Mortar, and
make a little Ball of it, which you must roll and work about in your Hands
continually, renewing the same every Day: Now and then too, put Tobacco up your
Nostrils, letting it lie there for some Time, in order to derive the clammy
Plegm from your Brain. These easy Remedies will, by the Grace of GOD, do great
good in the Beginning of this Disease, by restoring the Nerves to their natural
Tone, and giving new Vigor to the Animal Spirits, which have been clogged and
obstructed.

THE Patient's Food should be dry, and of easy Digestion, with Mustard and
Horseradish mixed with it; and let Sage, or Bawm Tea, be his constant Drink.

TO prevent this Distemper, feed seldom on salt, or high seasoned Dishes; nor
eat much Milk, or other phlegmatic Food: Never sleep in the dangerous Dew, or
on the moist Ground, or continue long in a Cellar, or other damp Situation. Use
much Exercise, and let your Motion be always nimble, in order to quicken the
Circulation, and frisk your sluggish Spirits.

ANOTHER Disease of the Head, Epilepsy.
is, an EPILEPSY, or FALLING SICKNESS, not unusual in this Country. It
discovers it self by very terrible Symptoms: The unhappy Person falls down
suddenly, deprived of all Sense and Understanding. No sooner is he fallen, but
he is immediately shaken with strong Convulsions, grinds his Teeth, rolls his
Eye Balls, and foams at the Mouth in a most frightful Manner. So soon as the
Fit is over, his Senses return, but commonly a Pain in the Head, and great
Depression of the Spirits, remain upon him for some Time after. The Return of
these melancholy Fits is uncertain, though, for the most Part, they come near
the Full, or change of the Moon.

IN the first Place, Care should be taken, to calm the Spirits of the Patient,
and keep them from running Riot in this unhappy Manner. For that Intention,
bleed him, and then burn Feathers often under his Nose, or else Leather, or the
Hoofs of any Animal.

FOUR Days before the Full Moon, let him take a Vomit of Indian Physic; and 4
Days after the Full Moon, let him take a Purge of the same; and be sure to do
the like again, before and after the Change: And this must be repeated for
Seven Months together. On the Mornings when he takes no Physic, he must
swallow as much Powder of Misleto, as will lie upon a Shilling, in a Spoonful
of the Decoction of Pennyroyal.

FOR this Purpose, the Leaves and tender Twigs of Misleto must be gathered in
January, (being then in its Prime,) dried over an Oven moderately warm, and
kept all the Year for the Use above mentioned.

LET the Patient's Head be shaved, and a Plaster made of the Juice of Rue,
Sage, and Pennyroyal, worn on the back Part of it.

LET him often put Tobacco up one of his Nostrils, keeping it there as long as
it has any Strength, to clear the Head of cold and clammy Phlegm. And let him
now and then, besides, chew a Stick of Misleto, and swallow the Juice.

THESE Directions must be pursued Seven Months, or more, to cure any Person
entirely of this Distemper; and, if it be taken in Time, there will be great
Probability of Success, at least in young People.

LET his Victuals be sparing, and easy of Digestion; and his constant Drink,
either Sage, or Bawm Tea.

AS People commonly fall first into this Misfortune while they are Children,
so, in order to prevent it, Care should be taken, never to fright, or strike
them violently on the Head, Backbone, or Nape of the Neck.

A FEVER, Fever, with violent Purging and Vomiting*
WITH VIOLENT PURGING AND VOMITING, cannot easily be mistaken. The Stools,
though frequent, are with great Pain, and Difficulty: Both the Stomach and
Bowels feel exceedingly uneasy, and the whole Frame is in universal Disorder.

AS this Disease will hurry a Man soon to his long Home, without speedy Help,
you must forthwith make 2 Gallons of thin Broth, either of Half a Fowl, or a
small Chicken, and drink it all in the Space of 2 or 3 Hours: Some of this will
come up, and some go down, and cleanse your Stomach and Bowels in such a
Manner, as to make you well before you expect it.

ONLY be careful to live some Days upon light and innocent Fare, boiling Mint
in every Thing you eat, and grating Nutmeg into all your Drink.

WOULD you prevent this boistrous Illness, forbear all Kind of Surfeiting and
Excess, never exposing your self to be wet to the Skin, if possible.

I MUST not omit a FEVER AND AGUE, Fever and Ague.
which is an Epidemick Distemper in this moist and variable Climate. It Is true,
it seldom kills now a Days; but if neglected too long, corrupts all the Juices
of the Body, and ends either in a Jaundice, Dropsy, Dry Grypes, or Cachexy:
Therefore I conjure all my good Patients, as they tender their Health, and
their Looks, to dispossess this Devil as soon as they can.

AN AGUE returns either every Day, Ague.
every third, or every fourth Day; and the Way to know which of these any
Person has, is, only to abide 2 Fits. If it come every Day, it will be often
accompanied with a Pain in the Head: In which Case, after the second Fit, you
must bleed S Ounces. The next Day, purge with Indian Physic, and 2 Days after
that, repeat the same again. This must be followed, by taking, every Morning
and Evening, 20 Grains of the Powder of Sassafras-root, mixed with 10 Grains of
Snake-root, in 2 Spoonfuls of the Decoction of Wormwood.

IF the Fit return every third Day, omit Bleeding, in Case there be no Pain.
After the second Fit, vomit one Day with Indian Physic, and purge with the
same the next. If these should not master the Distemper, you must complete the
Cure with the Powders of Sassafras, and Snakeroot, taken in the Manner
aforesaid.

BUT in Case the Return should be every fourth Day, you must, after the Vomit
and Purge, take a Cold-Water Sweat: That is, so soon as the cold Fit is off,
and the Fever begins to come on, go into naked Bed, and drink a Pint of cold
Water: Then cover your self up, and in a little Time, the Disease will be
driven all out at your Pores. However, take the Powders after this Operation
for some Time, that you may make sure Work of it.

YOUR Diet should be moist, and temperate; and Drink, Cinquefoil Tea.

IT would be difficult to prescribe Rules to prevent a Distemper, to which our
Situation is so unhappily subject: However, Prudence may be useful, even in
this Case. Ride therefore a great deal in the hot Months, to sweat out all ill
digested Humors; and don't chill your Bowels too much with cold Water. Avoid,
as much as may be, being abroad in the Rain, or in the Dews of the Night. Be
cautious too, of sleeping on the Ground, or with your Windows, or Doors open,
to let the Wind blow upon you.

IN Case of a CONTINUAL FEVER, Continual Fever.
bleed immediately 10 Ounces. The Day following, vomit with Indian Physic; and
the Morning after, purge with the same. And if you should be light headed, be
convulsed, or incline too much to Sleep, lay a large Blister to the Neck, and
to the fleshy Parts of each Arm; and take a Glister every Night, of Mallows,
and Syrup of Peach Blossoms, to abate the Heat of the Distemger.

IT matters not how little People eat in one of these Fevers, because the
Spirits requisite for Digestion, are employed in struggling with the Disease:
But what little Sustenance they do take, should be moist, and cooling; and
their Drink, a Decoction of Cinquefoil.

TO prevent this furious Malady, avoid all Excesses of strong Drink, especially
of Spirits, which inflame the Blood, at the same Time that they vitiate the
Ferment of the Stomach; upon which all Digestion, and consequently all Health,
depends.

BUT there is a SLOW FEVER, Slow Fever.
more difficult to manage than all the rest, which is the true SCORBUTIC
FEVER. The Signs of it are, a low, but quick Pulse, a constant Thirst, a
Falling away of the Flesh, and a sallow Complexion. There will be sometimes
too, a hard Swelling on one Side of the Belly, that seems to move about.

AS this lurking Disorder comes by a long Course of ill Management, so it will
need some Time to root it out. For that End, take a Vomit of Indian Physic,
and the next Morning, a Purge of the same; which Purge ought to be repeated
once a Week, for 6 Times at least. The Mornings you don't take Physic, drink
constantly a Quarter of a Pint of Sassafras Tea, fasting; and every Night, as
much Powder of Snakeroot as will lie upon a Shilling, in 3 Spoonfuls of
Decoction of Dittany. And if you should be costive, take a Glister every other
Day, of Decoction of Mallows, with Syrup of Peach Blossoms. This Method,
faithfully pursued, for 2 Months, with moderate Riding, and a proper Diet, will
go near to finish the Cure.

IN the mean Time, eat no Milk, nor any Thing salt, or hard of Digestion: But
let your Sauce be Mustard, Garden Cresses, and Horseradish in abundance; and
your best Drink will be, found Cider, with a hot Iron quenched in it, or Beer
brewed with Sorrel Tree Leaves.

THEN, to prevent this Illness, you must indulge no sloathful Inclination; but
stir about your Business briskly, and ride as often as you can: Never drink
more than a Pint of Water, or other Drink, in 24 Hours. Breath as much as
possible in the open Air, in the Day Time, and avoid it in the Night.

THERE is besides, Worm-Fever.
another Kind of FEVER, hard to be distinguished, especially among children;
and that is a WORM-FEVER. There will be a quick Pulse, and often a Pain in the
Side, in the Stomach, or Bowels, and all occasioned by Worms. Now and then too,
there will be the Symptoms of the Flux, and even Convulsions; so that, like the
Devil, it appears in all Manner of Shapes. The only Way I know, of discerning
it, is, by a swelled Belly, a tainted Breath, or a greedy Appetite, beyond what
is usual in other feverish Disorders.

GIVE a Vomit of Indian Physic one Day, and a Purge of the same the next. Beat
the Seed of Jerusalem Oak, and take a Spoonful of it, mixed with the Juice of
Rue, or Wormwood, for 3 Mornings. From the Beginning, soak a cured Leaf of
Tobacco in Vinegar, and apply it warm to the Stomach, or Belly; and it will
make the Worms much sicker than it does the Patient.

LET his Food be seasoned with a great deal of Salt; and his Drink, Beer brewed
pretty bitter, with Wormwood instead of Hops.

IT is difficult to hinder Worms from hatching, and harboring in our Bodies,
because we swallow their Eggs almost with every Thing we eat; especially such
as live much upon Pulse, and Indian Corn, will be full of them. So that I may
venture to say, Three Fourths of the Children that die in these Parts of the
World, die of Worms.

THE best Way to prevent them, is, to make use of a great deal of Pepper and
Salt with your daily Food, and as little Vinegar as possible, which is full of
small Insects, not to be seen without a Glass.

I TOOK Notice, Cachexy.
that a CACHEXY was one of the Consequences of letting a Fever and Ague
continue too long; though the same is produced likewise by an unwholesome Diet,
by a sloathful Habit, and drinking abundance of cold Water. The Signs of it
are, a slow Fever, of the Hectic Kind, a continual Thirst, a Shortness of
Breath, and very cadaverous Complexion.

FOR the Cure of this lazy Distemper, you must proceed in the same Method as is
directed in the Case of slow Fevers: Only I would advise the Patient, over and
above, to take every Day, at 10 in the Morning, and 4 in the Afternoon, a Dram
of Rum, wherein the Flowers and Tops of Centory have been infused; and, during
the whole Course of the Cure, the Patient must by all Means, shake off his lazy
Disposition, rise early in a Morning, and stir about as briskly as his Strength
and Breath will permit.

HIS Food should be fresh, and easy of Digestion; and his Drink. Beer brewed
with Wormwood, and the Leaves of the Sorrel Tree.

TO prevent falling into it, never suffer Agues, or slow Fevers, to taint your
Blood; be nimble in your Motion, and drench not your self with cold Water,
between Meals.

ANOTHER bad Effect of keeping an Ague too long, Yellow-Jaundice.
is, the YELLOW JAUNDICE. This discovers it self by the yellow Hue of the Face,
and other Parts of the Body: Nay, the Whites of the Eyes, and Urine, will be
also tinged with it.

FOR this Illness, take a Purge of Indian Physic, and repeat it the third Day
again. After that, drink every Morning, and Evening, for 6 Weeks, a Quarter of
a Pint of Decoction of the inner Bark of Elder, and the Root of Sassafras, in
Equal Quantities. In the mean Time, force your self to stir about, and ride on
Horseback every fair Day.

LET all your Victuals be light, and temperate; and your Drink, Beer brewed
with Sorrel Leaves, Pine ^ops, Root of Ash, and a little old Iron.

TO ward off this ungracious Disease, cure your Agues in the Beginning,
lingering Fevers as soon as possible, and use Agility in your Motion.

BUT the most fatal Consequence of keeping an Ague, or Jaundice too long, is, a
DROPSY. This dire Calamity befalls ancient People sometimes, by Means of natural
Decay; and sometimes, those that are young, when they have made too bold with
their Constitution. It Is also apt to follow too great a Loss of Blood, or too
long a Familiarity with Opiats.

A DROPSY first shows it self, Dropsy.
by the Swelling of the Legs about the Ancles, in such a Manner as to retain
the Impression of your Finger. The Swelling appears most at Night, and is
usually attended with a Shortness and Difficulty of Breath, ever most
troublesome when the Patient lies down.

HE must therefore resolve upon proper Remedies, before the Waters rise high
enough to drown him: And, if he have but the Gift of Self-denial, he may, by
God's Help, get the better of this mortal Enemy; provided there be no universal
Decay, no Depravation of the Liver, or other Organs, necessary for Blood-making.

NOW I cannot recommend the Remedies for this Disease better, than by giving
Three remarkable Instances, of Persons of an advanced Age, who have been
perfectly cured by them.

THE First was, Sir Thomas Millington, an eminent Physician, who fell into a
Dropsy, at near 70 Years of Age. After draining the Water, by 2 or 3 smart
Purges, he performed the rest of the Cure by a resolute Self-denial. He eat
nothing but what was light, and nourishing; and for his Drink, confined himself
rigorously to a Quarter of a Pint of Rhenish Wine in 24 Hours: (And hard Cider
would have done the Business as well.) The first Week, his Thirst was hardly to
be endured; but after that, grew more tolerable. He contined this Course for 2
Months, and recovered completely.

THE Second, was the late Ear^ of Orford, who had this Distemper in his (...)
C^^macterick. He purged 2 or 3 Times, drank sparingly of Canary and Water,
thickened with the Yolk of a new-laid Egg; and all his Victuals besides were
cooked with abundance of Garlic, and Horseradish. This Method was pursued
with great Constancy for 3 Months, and blessed with entire Success.

THE Last Instance, is an Ancient Gentleman, who trusted to the Remedies of our
own Country, with the like happy Effect. He drank the Decoction of Sassafras,
as soon as he got up, and chewed the Root of it all the rest of the Morning,
'til Dinner; then observed a light, and nourishing Diet; and drank moderately
of clear found Cider, wherein a hot Iron had been plentifully quenched.

OF these several Remedies, you may please to take your choice: Or, instead of
Sassafras, you may hold the Seeds of Pellitary of Spain in your Mouth, which
will salivate still more powerfully.

THE rest of the Cure must be completed with restorative Meats, and a very
short Allowance of Drink. For your Diet, I would recommend Poach'd Eggs, Thin
Hominy, Hoggs Feet, Cow Heel, and Jelly Broth: all which will renew, and enrich
the Blood, without provoking too much Thirst: And for Drink, use none, but
Sorrel Beer, or sound Cider, wherein a hot Iron has been quenched several Times.

TO guard your self against this wretched Distemper, be cautious of scorching
your Liver, with Spirits, or Excess of other strong Drink. In Case you be
troubled with Bleeding, stop it as soon as you can. By no means accustom your
self to Opiats, or suffer an Ague, the Jaundice, or lingering Fevers, to dwell
long upon you.

BECAUSE I mentioned Loss of Blood to be one Cause of the Dropsy, I will hint
at some Means to stanch those BLEEDINGS that threaten the most Danger.

IN Men, Bleeding-Piles.
the excessive FLUX OF THE BLEEDING PILES sometimes ends in a Dropsy, if not
stopped in Time. In that Case, purge with Indian Physic 2 or 3 Times; and the
Mornings you do'nt do that, drink the Expressed Liquor of fresh Ass-dung,
sweetened with Syrup of Quinces, to be repeated 3 Times. In the mean while,
take an Ounce of Conserve of Roses, twice or thrice a Day; and after every
Stool, wash your Fundament clean with Decoction of Comfry Leaves, made very
warm.

LIVE all the Time upon a cooling Diet, without Meat; and only drink Burnet, or
Yarrow Tea, sweetened with Syrup of Quinces.

THOSE that are liable to this, or the like Infirmities, should avoid heating
themselves with strong Drink, or too boistrous Motion; nor must they fall into
violent Passions, either of Love or Anger.

IN Women, Flooding.
a Dropsy is often caused by FLOODING, OR THE IMMODERATE FLOWING OF THEIR
COURSES. Let them for this, in the first Place, take away 8 Ounces of Blood,
and then proceed as in the foregoing Case; only they must inject the Decoction
of Comfry Leaves, and govern their Passions, if they can; nor must any Part of
them, not so much as their Tongue, be allowed to have too much Motion.

THE BLEEDING AT THE NOSE, Bleeding at the nose
must be treated just in the same Manner, except, the Decoction of Comfry
Leaves should be often snufft up the Nose, and a Tent soaked in the same
frequently thrust into the Nostrils: And if a little Allom were dissolved in
the Decoction, it would be so much the better.

THEN, Spitting, or Pissing of Blood.
for SPITTING, or PISSING OF BLOOD, bleed ^ Ounces. The next Morning, purge
with Indian Physic; and drink nothing but Tea, made of Comfry-Leaves, and
sweetened with Syrup of Quinces. But whenever a Fever produces Loss of Blood,
the Heat of that must be taken off by cooling Medicines, before the Bleeding
will cease.

IN the WHITES too, Whites.
I won'd recommend Bleeding in the Beginning; and Purging 2 or 3 Times, with
Indian Physic. When the don't purge, let her, Night and Morning, drink Half a
Pint of Papa's Liquor, with an Ounce of Conserve of Roses dissolved in it; and
often inject the same. For the rest, she must use the same Diet, the same
Drink, the same moderate Motion, and Freedom from Passion, as are mentioned
before.

A GLEET, Gleet.
or RUNNING OF THE REINS, in Men, must be treated in all Respects as the
foregoing Weakness in the other Sex; provided always, it be not Venereal.

There Is no Disease puzzles Physicians more than the VAPORS, and HYSTERIC
FITS. These Complaints are produced by so many Causes, and appear in so many
various Shapes, that it is no easy Matter to describe them. However, some of the
Symptoms are, a Thumping at the Heart, a Croaking of the Guts, and a Fullness of
the Stomach, which the Patient endeavors to ease, as much as she can, by
Belching: Every now and then too, something seems to rise up to her Throat,
that almost stops her Breath: She has moreover, a great Heaviness, and
Dejection of Spirit, and a Cloud seems to hang upon all her Senses. In one
Word, she has no Relish for any thing, but is continually out of Humor, she
knows not why, and out of Order, she knows not where.

THIS is certainly a miserable Condition, how much soever it may be ridiculed,
as whimsical and imaginary; and it is the more so, because the Weakness of the
Nerves makes the Cure exceeding difficult.

BECAUSE the Stomach is suspected to be much in Fault, I would have That
cleans'd in the first Place, with a Vomit of Indian Physic: The next Day,
purify the Bowels, by a Purge of the same; which must be repeated 2 Days after.
The rest of the Cure must be performed by the exact Observation of the
following Rules. Endeavor to preserve a cheerful Spirit, putting the best
Construction upon every body's Words, and Behavior: Plunge, 3 Mornings every
Week, into cold Water, over Head and Ears; or if you have no Convenience for
that, it will have the same Effect, if you suffer your self to be whipped with
smart little Rods. It cannot be imagined how this will brace the Nerves, and
rouse the sluggish Spirits, (as some grave Gentlemen find, when they try it for
a merrier Purpose.) Observe a strict Regularity and Temperance in your Diet;
and ride, every fair Day, small Journeys, on Horseback. Stir nimbly about your
Affairs, quick Motion being as necessary for Health of Body, as for Dispatch of
Business. In the mean while, I absolutely forbid all sorts of Drams, which will
raise the Spirits only to sink them lower; nor do I allow her one Pinch of
Snuff, or one Drop of Bohea-Tea, though it were to save her Longing.

HER Food must be fresh; and easy of Digestion, neither salt, nor windy; nor
may she eat one Morsel of Beef, which affords a gross Nourishment, and inclines
People, too much, to hang themselves. And for her Drink, she must forbear Beer,
with all windy and fermented Liquors; and stick to Bawm-Tea entirely.

TO escape this Disorder, she must suffer none of the idle Disturbances, or
Disappointments of an empty World, to prey upon her Mind, or ruffle her sweet
Temper. Let her use just Exercise enough to give a gentle Spring to her
Spirits, without Wasting them; and let her be cheerful, in Spite of a churlish
Husband, or cloudy Weather.

NOW I am upon Female Infirmities, Suppression of the Courses.
it will not be unseasonable to touch upon a common Complaint among unmarry'd
Women, namely, THE SUPPRESSION OF THE COURSES. This don't only disparage their
Complexions, but fills them, besides, with sundry Disorders. For this
Misfortune, you must purge with Highland F^agg, (commonly called Belly-ach
Root) a Week before you expect to be out of Order; and repeat the same 2 Days
after: The next Morning, drink a Quarter of a Pint of Pennyroyal Water, or
Decoction, with 12 Drops of Spirits of Hartshorn, and as much again at Night,
when you go to Bed. Continue this, 9 Days running; and after Resting 3 Days, go
on with it for 9 more. Ride out every fair Day, stir nimbly about your Affairs,
and breath as much as possible in the open Air.

YOU must feed upon a warm and cordial Diet, enriched with a great deal of
Mustard, Nutmeg, Horse-raddish, and Garden-Cresses; at the same time avoiding
every thing that is astringent, phlegmatic, and windy. And let your Drink be
Beer, brewed with Sorrel-Leaves, or else Ground-Ivy-Tea.

TO prevent this Complaint, young Women must shake off Sloth, and make Use of
their Legs, as well as their Hands* They should be cautious of taking Opiats
too often, or Jesuits-Bark, except in Cases of great Necessity; nor must they
long for pretty Fellows, or any other Trash, whatsoever.

HEAVEN be praised, Stone in the Bladder.
there is little Occasion to say any thing of the STONE IN THE BLADDER, there
being few Instances of it in this Colony. Among the Gentry, the Madeira Wine,
which has but little Tartar in it, and the Molosses Beer, being soft and
cleansing, are happy Defenses against this Scourge of Luxury and Laziness: And
then, for the common Planters, their Pone, and other Preparations of Indian
Corn, being smooth and slippery, are likewise excellent Preservatives.

NEVERTHELESS, Gravel.
some few of us by sitting too long either at our Book, or our Bottle, have,
now and then, some Touches of the GRAVEL, or STONE IN THE KIDNEYS. This makes
it self known, by a Pain across the Loins, by Urine tinged with Blood, and
mixed with Sand and jagged little Stones: The Stomach too is sometimes
affected, and inclined to vomit.

WHEN you find these concurring Symptoms, drink 3 or 4 Quarts of Whey, as fast
as you can, wherein the Root of Prickley Pear has been boiled. When that has
all past, squeeze the Juice of Wild Garlic into clean found Cider, and drink a
moderate Glass of it Night and Morning, for 6 or 7 Days.

IN the mean Time, let your Food be thin Hominy, or Broth, with a few Mallows
boiled in it; and your Drink, a Decoction of Mallows, sweetened with Syrup of
Violets.

AND the Way to ward off this painful Disease, is to be temperate in all your
Enjoyments, to eat a great deal of Milk, and Meats made of Indian Corn; but
above all Things, be cautious of sitting still too much.

A COMMON Consequence of the Gravel, Suppression of Urine.
is, a SUPPRESSION OF URINE, occasioned, sometimes, by small Stones lodging in
the narrow Passages, that lead from the Kidneys to the Bladder. The Signs of
this Complaint are too plain to any one who has his Feeling; and, to cure it,
you must proceed in much the same Method as for the Gravel^ only you should add
Parsley-Tea to you Drink, sweetened with Syrup of Violets.

BUT if the Suppression arise from an Ulcer, or Inflammation in the Neck of the
Bladder, then the Symptoms are, a great Heat, and Pain in that Part, with an
urgent Pain to make Water, but a Disability to do it at all, or, at most, not
faster than Drop by Drop.

FOR this, boil one Part of Oil, with two Parts of good Cider, and (...)
swallow a Spoonful, Night and Morning.

LET your Diet all the while be cooling, and easy of Digestion; and your Drink,
Parsley Tea, or Cider, with a Plantain Leaf boiled in it.

TO prevent this Ailment, eat seldom of peppered, or high-season'd Meats; and
drink moderately of hot Liquors: Though above all Things, you must forbear
using artificial Provocatives, to recommend you to the delightful Sex; but, for
that, let Nature be your only Prompter.

THE Symptoms of the BLIND PILES, Blind Piles.
are, little painful Swellings, appearing just without the Fundament. They are
occasioned by the slowing of corrupted Blood into the Vessels thereabouts,
which sometimes creates so much Anguish, as to put the Patient into a Fever,
and render every Posture uneasy.

FOR this Complaint, take every Morning fasting, in the Yolk of a new laid Egg,
12 Grains of Brimstone, finely powdered; and wash it down with a small Draught
of Decoction of Mallows. And to assuage the Pain, make Use of this outward
Application: Stamp a roasted Onion, with a little Ointment of James-Town Weed;
which must be laid on warm, and renewed twice a Day.

IN the mean time, the afflicted Person's Diet ought to be moderate and
cooling, without Meat of any Kind; and his constant Drink, Milk and Water.

BUT, in order to prevent this Affliction, and root it out for ever, use the
following Remedy. Boil a Handful of Mullein Leaves in a Pint of new Milk, and
sweeten it with Syrup of Violets. Drink this every Night, for 6 Weeks together,
just before you go to Rest.

A RUPTURE is a common Misfortune, Rupture.
especially among Children. The Tokens of it are, a painful Swelling and
Inflammation in the Codds, occasioned by a Fall, or other Violence, that forces
down the Guts into that Part, and is most painful when the Accident first
happens.

FOR this, let the Patient immediately have a Truss made, that may hold the
Part suspended. Then apply fresh Cow Dung, which must be renewed Night and
Morning, till the Pains are assuaged. After that, put on another Poultis, made
of the Roots of Swamp-Lillies, and Sumack Berries, boiled, and beat well
together; which must also be refreshed twice a Day, till the Swelling
disappears. From the Beginning, let him gird a Belt tight about his Loins, and
wear it continually, 'til the Bowels are drawn up to their natural Situation.

Let his Diet be cooling, and easy of Digestion; and his constant Drink, a
Decoction of Garden-Cresses, sweetened with Syrup of Quinces.

IN order to prevent this Disaster, Care must be taken, never to over-strain
your self, use too violent Motion, or fall in such a Manner as to injure your
self in those sensible and tender Parts.

THE YAWS, Yaws*
or COUNTRY DISTEMPER, is very hard to cure perfectly, especially when grown
inveterate. This is the highest Kind of Scurvey; and the Symptoms of it are,
eating Ulcers in the Throat, or Palate, and filthy Sores in other Parts of the
Body, having near Resemblance to those of the Pox.

THIS unclean Disease often yields to Dr. Papa's Remedy; or, at least, may be
kept under by it.

TAKE. 1 Ounce of the Bark of Sumac Root, 1 Ounce of the inner Bark of Pine,
and 2 Ounces of the inner Bark of Spanish Oak; boil these together in 2 Quarts
of Water, 'til the Decoction be very strong. Of this Liquor drink a full Pint,
Milk-warm, and immediately after it, Half a Pint, quite cold; and it will give
you a powerful Vomit.

THE next Morning, take Half a Pint of the same Drink warm, and the same
Quantity again in the Evening; and continue so doing, for 6 Weeks, or 2 Months;
only the Vomit must be repeated every seventh Day. In the mean Time, gargle
your Throat, and wash all your Sores, and Ulcers with the same warm Liquor,
which ought to be made fresh every 2 Days. Besides all this, you must chew the
Sumac Root very often, and swallow the healing Juice.

EVERY Night, before you go to Rest, take 2 Pills, made of Turpentine, and
Deers Dung, in equal Quantities.

THE Pox may be cured exactly in the same Manner: Pox.
And, because the Symptoms are much the same, it is very probable, the one was
a Graft of the other. The pious Spaniards caught it from their Negro
Mistresses in the West Indies, and had the Honor of propagating it from thence
to all the rest of the World.

IN both Cases, confine your self altogether from eating Flesh, from strong
Drink, and be very careful of catching Cold.

TO avoid these Misfortunes, eat seldom of fresh Pork, which breeds very gross
Humors; live not too near a Swamp; nor ever venture upon strange Women,
especially upon Ethiopians.

ANOTHER woeful Case, is, a CANCER, which some despairingly imagine to be
incurable; though, blessed be GOD, there have been some Instances of Success, by
the Method hereafter mentioned. In the mean Time, it usually begins with little
hard Lumps, or Swellings, in the Breast, Lip, or other glandulous Part of the
Body. These afterward break into painful Sores, which eat farther and farther,
'til at last, they reach some large Vessel, or mortal Part.

IN this Case, the Patient must submit, in the first Place, to have the hard
Lump cut clean out, so soon as he is convinced it is a Cancer. And, for curing
the Wound, he cannot do better than make Use of the following B^lsam: He must
boil 6 Ounces of Sassafras Root, and as much Dogwood Root, in a Gallon of
Water, 'til it be wasted to a Pint, and having strained it off, must drench a
Pledget therein, and apply it warm to the Sore, renewing it every Day: And if
he will have the Patience to continue this for some Time, I can assure him, he
will not be the first that has been blessed with Success.

LET him drink Sassafras Tea every Morning, live temperately, upon light and
innocent Food; and abstain entirely from strong Liquor.

THE Way to prevent this Calamity, is, to be very sparing in eating Pork, to
forbear all salt, and high seasoned Meats, and live chiefly upon the Garden,
the Orchard, and the Hen-house.

I SHALL close this black List of Diseases with the GOUY, Gouy.
which I observe with Pleasure, to be grown less frequent in the Country, than
in the Time of our Fathers. It makes it self known with a Vengeance, by a
painful Inflammation in some of the Joints; especially of the Hands and Feet.

IT would be great Presumption, after so many vain Attempts, for me to
recommend any other Remedy for this obstinate Distemper, than a strict and
severe Temperance, both in Eating, and Drinking. Nevertheless, I am not so
hard-hearted, as to deny my Patient any Kind of fresh and plain Food, that
agrees with his Stomach: All I entreat of him, is, to confine himself
religiously to a moderate Quantity. Nor can he do better, than to follow the
Example of Cornaro, a noble Venetian, who tied himself down to 12 Ounces of
Eatables, including Bread, and 14 Ounces of Drink, in the 24 Hours. He stuck
close to this short Allowance, using moderate Exercise; and, from being a
Cripple by the Gout, recovered his Health, and his Strength, to a Wonder: And
having found so much Benefit by these Rules, pursued them strictly to the End
of a very long, and happy Life.

NOR are these Weights so scanty as they may seem to be, to some keen Stomachs;
but, upon a fair Trial, they will be sound sufficient, to give Strength to the
Body, Cheerfulness to the Heart, and Vigor to all the Faculties of the Soul.
And, besides these happy Effects, they will do more: They will place you above
the Influence of the Stars; and make you able to subdue your Pas sions, to the
Empire of a cool, and unclouded Understanding.

THE same Temperance that cures this Distemper, will certainly not fail to
prevent it; make you live a great while, and very easy while you do live.

THUS I have run through most of the common Complaints, to which the
inhabitants of this Colony are subject; and prescribed such innocent Cures, as
will generally succeed, if timely made Use of; yet am far from pretending, that
any of them are infallible: We all know, that Death strikes so home in some
Cases, that all Physic will be vain. There are many Instances too, where the
Diseases of our Climate have a little Dash of the Pox, the Scurvy, or the Gout;
and then they need a RATCLIFF, or a FRIEND, to get the better of them.

IN the mean Time, it may seem strange, that, among the Remedies I have
prescribed, no Mention is made of Mercury, Opium, or the Peruvian Bark, which
have almost obtained the Reputation of Specificks. I acknowledge the powerful
Effects of these Medicines; but am persuaded, they ought to be administered with
the greatest Skill, and Discernment. And, as I write only for the Service of
the Poor, who are wholly left to judge for themselves, I was fearful of putting
such dangerous Weapons into their Hands.

IF those of better Circumstances find any Thing here, that may in any Manner
deserve their Attention, I should be exceedingly glad: Though I own, these
Directions were not designed for such as are in Condition to purchase more
learned Advice. It was only to those whom Fortune has placed below the Regard
of our Doctors, that I address this short Essay: And if one single Person shall
be recovered thereby, or receive the least Relief, I shall account my Pains
happily bestowed.

IN the mean Time, there is no Question, but some of my Brother Quacks will
make themselves merry with these Prescriptions. Let them shoot their ^armle^s
Bolts. I by no means envy those Gentlemen the only Way they have of appearing
wiser than their Neighbors. Though after all, it is not impossible, but they may
do by some of these, just as the good People of England do by the French
Fashions, laugh at them first, and then have the Humility to follow them.

An INDEX of Diseases mentioned in this Book.
AGue, 27 Bleeding at the Nose, 4^ Bleeding Piles, 38 Blind Piles, 47 Bloody
Flux, 14 Cachexy, 33 Cancer, 52 Colic, 18 Consumption, 12 Dropsy, 35 Dry
Gripes, 20 Falling Sickness, or Epilepsy, 23 Fever Continual, 29 Flooding, 39
Flux immoderate of the Courses, 39 Gleet, or Running of the Reins, 41 Gout, 53
Gravel, 45 Griping, 17 Hysteric Fits, or Vapors, 41 Looseness, 17 Pain in the
Head, Breast, Eye, or Ear, 10 Palsy, 22 Pissing of Blood, 40 Pleurisy, 9 Pox,
51 Purging, and Vomiting, 26 Quinsey, 11 Running of the Reins, or Gleet, 41
Rapture, 49 Slow Fever, 3^ Sore Throat, 12 S^itting of blood, 40 Stone in the
Kidneys, 45 Str^ngury, 47 Suppression of the Courses, 43 Suppression of Urine,
45 Vapors, or Hysteric Fits, 41 Vomiting, and Purging, 26 Whites, 40 White
Flux, 16 Worm Fever, 31 Yaws, 50 Yellow Jaundice. 34
THE foregoing Distempers are the most (...), and troublesome, we are (...)
with in this Country. There are other little Disororders, which being rather
Complaints, than Diseases, I have omitted, lest I might lose the Benefit of the
(...), which says, The (...). The (...) I have prescribed, are almost all of
our own Growth, there being no more than 5 or 6 foreign Me^^ci^es, and they so
(...) I happen not to (...) Patient, I am sure I (...) And surely, no Man can
s^y he dies very unfairly, when there is so little to pay, either to the
Doctor, or the Apothecary. Besides, I have another Thing to recommend me, that
I don't cram my Patients with too much Physic. My Prescriptions are generally
single, and not compounded, like a Spanish Ole^, of all Sorts of Ingredients,
which must certainly confound and defeat the Virtues of each other. Neither do
I ransack the Universe for outlandish Drugs, which must waste and decay in
along Voyage; nor import the Sweepings of the Shops, which I am sure are
decayed; but am content to do all my Execution with the Weapons of our own
Country.

An INDEX of Ingredients made Use of.
ALlom, 40 Ash-root, 35 Ass-dung, 39 Bawm, 10, 18, 19, 21, 23, 26, 43 Bears
oil, 19, 20. Brim^^^ne, 48 (...), 39 Centory, 33 Comfry, 39, 40 Cow dung, 49
Cresses, 31, 44, 49. Cinquefoil, 12, 28, 30 Deers-dung, 14, 51 (...) horn, 15,
16, 17, 44 Dittany, 31 Dogwood, 52 Elder, 34 Garlic, 37, 45 Ground ivy, or
Aloff, ^^, 14, 44 Highland-flagg, or Be^^^ ach root, 44 Honey, 9 Horse-raddish,
23, 31, 37, 44 Hungary-water, 22 (...)-town weed, 48* (...) oak, 32 Indian
P^^sick, 9, 15, 16, 17, 22, ^^, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 32, 34, 38, 40, 42 Indian
Pepper, 9 Iron, 31, 35, 37, 38 Linseed, 10, 11 Linseed-oyl, 9 Liquorice, 14
Mallows, 10, 11, 14, 18, 19, 21, 29, 31, 46, 48 Mint, 19, 27 Misleto, 24, 25
Mullein, 48 Mustard, 23, 31, 44 Nutmeg, 10, 16, 27, 44 Oil, 46, 47 Onion, 48
Parsley, 46, 47 Peach-blossoms, 10, 11, 14, 18, 19, 29, 31 Peach-leaves, 19, 20
Pennyroyal, 9, 25, 44 Pine, 11, 35, 40, 50 Pelletary of Spain, 37 Plantain, 15,
16, 47 Prickley-pear, 45 Quince, 39, 40, 49 Raisins, 14 Roses, 39, 40 Rosemary,
22 Rue, 10, 25, 32 Sage, 10, 23, 25, 26 (...)

