EXPLANATORY LECTURES ON THE ORRERY, Armillary Sphere, Globes and other
Machines, Instruments, and Schemes made use of by ASTRONOMERS: Accompanied With
a great Variety of PHYSICAL EXPERIMENTS and CURIOUS REMARKS.

By ISAAC GREENWOOD, A. M. HOLLISIAN Professor of Philosophy and Mathematics.

Boston: Printed in the Year, 1734.

THESE ASTRONOMICAL LECTURES TREAT, Very Particularly,
I. Of the Sun and Earth; and their proper Motions.
UNDER which Head may be expected, in the first Lecture, what ASTRONOMERS say
of the Substance, Figure, Measures, Disposition of the Surfaces and Motion of
the Sun and Earth in different Periods of Time, on their respective Axis (which
is termed their Diurnal Motion) with the Phenomenon i. e. Apparent Effects,
consequent thereupon: all which is intermixed with many uncommon Remarks, and
illustrated with several very curious Experiments.

The Annual Motion of the Earth; it is Proof and Vindication from Objections;
the Nature, Dimensions, Inclination of the Line it moves in (which is called
it is Orbit) and the Phenomenon consequent upon such a Revolution round the Sun,
will be the Subject of another Lecture.

II. Of the Doctrine of the SPHERE.
Here, the Occasion, Definition and Use of such Circles and T^^ms of A^t, as
arise from the Imaginary Rest, or Real Diurnal and Annual Motion of the Earth,
will be explained on the Armillary Sphere, Globes, and Orrery; and the Method
and Use of delineating them, in Plano, shown, on a Variety of Maps and
Plani-Spheres.

The Audience will be entertained, in the Two former Lectures of this Article,
with a new and admirable Method of (...) of the Nature and easily retaining the
Memory of all ASTRONOMICAL Circles, and the Terms arising from them; without
any Confusion or Obscurity.

And as the Definition and Impression of Terms on their Memory is the least
delightful Part of this Course, the Author has, occasionally, interspersed a
great Variety of Physical Learning, a propos; which is a new Ornament to this
Subject.

In the two following Lectures, the Uses of the Armillary-Sphere, Globes,
Mapps, and Plani-spheres are shown.

III. Of the Solar System; Planetary and Cometary: and of the World of Stars
around it.
This Part consists of two Lectures; in which, a very particular Account will
be given of the Names, Astronomical Characters, Substance, Measures, Motions,
Orbits, Eccentricities, Apparent Diameters, and of the Planets Primary and
Secondary; from the latest Observations and most accurate Tables: And of the
Astronomy of the Comets and Fixed Stars. All which will be made level to the
meanest Capacities, by means of some very curious Machines.

IV. Of the Discovery and Proof of the foregoing Account of the Solar System
and Fixed Stars.
Where it is necessary to consider,

1. Of the Use of Optics in Astronomy. Here, in One Lecture, the Organ of
seeing will be described and dissected; and the manner of judging of Distances,
Magnitudes and Motions, largely explained, by means of a curious Apparatus for
that purpose.

In another, the Helps and Improvements of Vision by Glasses will be the
Subject: where, the Nature, Properties, and manner of combining Lenses (as all
Optical Glasses are called) in all sorts of Telescopes, etc. will be
considered: and the Use of such Instruments shown by Actual Observation.

2. Of the Use of Mechanics in Astronomy: or, of the Construction and Use of
the Micro-meter; Astrolabe, Quadrants and other Instruments for the measuring
Distances, forming Meridian Lines, or the Computation of Time Here, if it is
desired, Observations will be made of the Altitude, Azimuth etc. of some
Astronomical Body; of the Elevation of the Pol^ etc.

3 Of the Progress of Astronomy; and the AUTHORS of the most notable
Discoveries therein: where, may be expected an Account of the Ancient State of
this most valuable Science, and of (...) and present best Proof of the modern
Improvements.

N. B. (...) who will attend at proper Seasons will be sh^wn, during the
Course, the Spots of the Sun, (if such should (...) Face and Mountains of the
Moon -- (...) and the Eclipse of some of them -- the great Number of Stars in
the (...) Stars -- Some Nebulous (...) Constellations, etc. through a very good
Telescope.

V. Of the Phenomenon and Consequences of such a System of the Planets, Comets
and Fixed Stars: and of the Theory and Practice of Astronomical Calculations;
for any Time past or future.
These PHENOMENON and CONSEQUENCES are of different kinds, which will be the
Subject of the remaining Lectures.

1. Some are purely ASTRONOMICAL; which are considered in two Lectures. The
first, of the Aspects, Phases, Stations etc. of the Planets and Comets. The
next, contains an Elaborate Explanation of the Doctrine of Eclipses,
Occultations, Transits of Venus and Mercury over the Sun's Disk, etc. which the
ORRERY very beautifully represents: and, accordingly, Schemes of the most
remarkables Eclipses, Lunar and Solar that have happened in the World; and
Projections of all the Solars visible in Boston, for Fifty Years yet to come,
with an Account of the Transits, will be shown to the Spectators; who may have
the Pleasure of seeing any One of them, that they desire, represented on the
ORRERY. Some Account, also, will be given of the celebrated CHALDEAN SAROS, as
the invaluable Dr. HALLEY calls, the most remarkable Period for the Revolution
of New and Full-Moons, and Eclipses; which, he has recovered from the Obscurity
of Antique Copies; and, which Pliny says, in his days, was accounted to be of
223 Synodical Months, or, 6580 Days.

2. Others are the Foundation of CHRONOLOGY, or the Computation of Time.

3. A few give the Theory of DIALLING, and the Arts of observing and dividing
Time.

4. Some are of a PHYSICAL Nature.

5. Many give the Occasion of a Fanciful; and, some Few, of a Real ASTROLOGY.

6. All lead to an invincible Faith of the Existence and Perfections of GOD.

These Lectures are in Number, Sixteen, and will continue about an Hour and a
Quarter, each.

The Charge of going through this Course is Pounds; Shillings to be paid at the
Time of Subscription, and the remainder, during the Course. And this Course
begins on the Day of 17 at of the Clock in the noon at Mr.


