By his Excellency William Cosby, Captain General and Governor in Chief of the
Provinces of New York, New Jersey, and Territories thereon depending, in
America, Vice Admiral of the same, and Colonel in His Majesty's Army.
A PROCLAMATION.
WHereas by the Contrivance of some evil Disposed and Disaffected Persons,
diverse Journals or Printed News Papers, (entitled, The New York Weekly Journal,
containing the freshest Advices, Foreign and Domestic) have been caused to be
Printed and Published by John Peter Zenger, in many of which Journals or
Printed Newspapers (but more particularly these Numbered 7, 47, 48, 49) are
contained diverse Scandalous, Virulent, False and Seditious Reflections, not
only upon the whole Legislature, in general, and upon the most considerable
Persons in the most distinguished Stations in this Province, but also upon His
Majesty's lawful and rightful Government, and just Prerogative. Which said
Reflections seem contrived by the wicked Authors of them, not only to create
Jealousies, Discontents and Animosities in the Minds of his Majesty's Liege
People of this Province, to the Subversion of the Peace and Tranquillity
thereof, but to alienate their Affections from the best of Kings, and raise
Factions, Tumults and Sedition among them. Wherefore I have thought fit, by and
with the Advice of His Majesty's Council, to issue this Proclamation, hereby
Promising a Reward of Fifty Pounds to such Person or Persons who shall discover
the Author or Authors of the said Scandalous, Virulent and Seditious
Reflections contained in the said Journals or Printed Newspapers, to be paid
to the Person or Persons discovering the same, (...) as such Author or Authors
shall be Convicted of having been the Author or Authors thereof.

GIVEN under My Hand and Seal at Fort-George in New York this Sixth Day of
November, in the Eighth year of the Reign of Our Sovereign Lord GEORGE the
Second, by the Grace of GOD, of Great Britain, France and Ireland, KING
Defender of the Faith, etc. and in the Year of Our LORD 1734

W. COSBY
By his Excellency's Command, (...) Morris, D. Cl. Conc.

GOD Save the KING.

