THE CONSTITUTIONS OF THE FREE-MASONS. CONTAINING THE History, Charges,
Regulations, etc. of that most Ancient and Right Worshipful FRATERNITY.

For the Use of the LODGES.

LONDON Printed; Anno 5723. Reprinted in Philadelphia by special Order, for
the Use of the Brethren in NORTH AMERICA. In the Year of Masonry 5734, Anno
Domini 1734.

TO His GRACE the DUKE of MONTAGU.
My Lord,
BY Order of his Grace the DUKE of WHARTON, the present Right Worshipful
GRAND-MASTER of the Free-Masons; and, as his Deputy, I humbly dedicate this
Book of the Constitutions of our ancient Fraternity to your Grace, in Testimony
of your honorable, prudent, and vigilant Discharge of the Office of our
GRAND-MASTER last Year.

I need not tell your Grace what Pains our learned Author has taken in
compiling and digesting this Book from the old Records, and how accurately he
has compared and made every thing agreeable to History and Chronology, so as to
render these NEW CONSTITUTIONS a just and exact Account of Masonry from the
Beginning of the World to your Grace's Mastership, still preserving all that
was truly ancient and authentic in the old ones: For every Brother will be
pleased with the Performance, that knows it had your Grace's Perusal and
Approbation, and that it is now printed for the Use of the Lodges, after it was
approved by the Grand Lodge, when your Grace was GRAND-MASTER. All the
Brotherhood will ever remember the Honor your Grace has done them, and your
Care for their Peace, Harmony, and lasting Friendship: Which none is more duly
sensible of than,

My LORD, Your GRACE's most obliged, and most obedient Servant, and Faithful
Brother, J. T. DESAGULIERS, Deputy Grand-Master.

THE CONSTITUTION, History, Laws, Charges, Orders, Regulations, and Usages, OF
THE Right Worshipful FRATERNITY OF ACCEPTED Free-Masons; Collected from their
general RECORDS, and their faithful TRADITIONS of many Ages.
TO BE READ At the Admission of a NEW BROTHER, when the Master or Warden shall
begin, or order some other Brother to read as follows:
ADAM, our first Parent, created after the Image of God, the great Architect of
the Universe, must have had the Liberal Sciences, particularly Geometry, Year
of the World 1. 4003 before Christ
written on his Heart; for even since the Fall, we find the Principles of it in
the Hearts of his Offspring, and which, in process of time, have been drawn
forth into a convenient Method of Propositions, by observing the Laws of
Proportion taken from Mechanism: So that as the Mechanical Arts gave Occasion
to the Learned to reduce the Elements of Geometry into Method, this noble
Science thus reduced, is the Foundation of all those Arts, (particularly of
Masonry and Architecture) and the Rule by which they are conducted and
performed.

No doubt Adam taught his Sons Geometry, and the use of it, in the serveral
Arts and Crafts convenient, at least for those early Times; for CAIN, we find,
built a City, which he called CONSECRATED, or DEDICATED, after the Name of his
eldest Son ENOCH; and becoming the Prince of the one Half of Mankind, his
Posterity would imitate his royal Example in improving both the noble Science
and the useful Art. As other Arts were also improved by them, viz. working in
Metal by TUBAL CAIN, Music by JUBAL, Pastorage and Tent-Making by JABAL; which
last is good Architecture.


Nor can we suppose that SETH was less instructed, who being the Prince of the
other Half of Mankind, and also the prime Cultivator of Astronomy, would take
equal care to teach Geometry and Masonry to his Offspring, who had also the
mighty Advantage of Adam's living among them. For by some Vestices of Antiquity
c^^ fird one of 'em, godly ENOCH (who ^^d^ot, bu^ was translated alive to
Heaven, proph^e^ing of the final Conflagration at the Day of Judgment as St
Jude tells us) and likewise of the General Deluge for the Punishment of the
World: Upon which he erected his two large Pillars, the some es^ribe them to
Seth) the one of Stone, and the other of Brick, whereon were engraven the
Liberal Sciences, etc. And that the Stone Pillar remained in S^^la until the
(...) Vespasian the Emperor.


But without regarding uncertain Accounts, we may safely conclude the old
World, that lasted 1656 Years, could not be ignorant of Masonry; and that both
the Familles of Seth and Cain erected many curious Works, until at length NOAH,
the ninth from Seth, was commanded and directed of God to build the great Ark,
which, though of Wood, was certainly fabricated by Geometry, and according to the
Rules of Masonry.

NOAH, and his three Sons, JAPHET, SHEM, and HAM, all Masons true, brought with
them over the Flood the Traditions and Arts of the Ante-deluvians, Anno Mundi
1757. 2247. Ante Chr.
and amply communicated them to their growing Offspring; for about 101 Years
after the Flood we find a vast Number of 'em, if not the whole Race of Noah, in
the Vale of Shinar, employed in building a City and large Tower, in order to
make to themselves a Name, and to prevent their Dispersion. And though they
carried on the Work to a monstrous Height, and by their Vanity provoked God to
confound their Devices, by confounding their Speech, which occasioned their
Dispersion; A. M 1810. 2194. Ante Chr.
yet their Skill in Masonry is not the less to be celebrated, having spent
above 53 Years in that prodigious Work, and upon their Dispersion carried the
mighty Knowledge with them into distant Parts, where they sound the good Use of
it in the Settlement of their Kingdoms, Commonwealths, and Dynasties. And though
afterward it was lost in most Parts of the Earth, it was especially preserved
in Shinar and Assyria, where NIMROD, NIMROD, which signifies a Rebel, was the
Name given him by the holy Family^ and by Moses; but among his Friends in
Chaldea, his proper Name was BELUS, which signifies LORD; and afterward was
worshipped as a God by many Nations, under the Name of Bell or Baal, and became
the Bacchus of the Ancients, or Bar Chus, the Son of CHUS.
the Founder of that Monarchy, after the Dispersion, built many splendid
Cities, as Ereck, Accad, and Calneh, in SHINAR; from whence afterward he went
forth into ASSYRIA, and built ^iniveh, Rehoboth, Caleh, and Rhesin.

In these Parts, upon the Tygris and Euphrates, afterward flourished many
learned Priests and Mathematicians, known by the Names of CHALDEES and MAGI,
who preserved the good Science, Geometry, as the KINGS and great Men encouraged
the Royal Art. But it is not expe^^^ent to speak more plain of the Premises,
except in a formed Lodge.

From hence, therefore, the Science and Art were both transmitted to latter
Ages and distant Climes, notwithstanding the Consusion of Languages or
Dialects, which though it might help to give Rise to the Masons Faculty and
ancient universal Practice of conversing without speaking, and of knowing each
other at a Distance, yet hindered not the Improvement of Masonry in each Colony
and their Communication in their distinct National Dialect.

And, no doubt, the Royal Art was brought down to Egypt by MITZRAIM, the second
Son of Ham, about six Years after the Confusion at Babel, A. M. 1816. 2188.
Ante Chr.
and after the Flood 160 Years, when he led thither his Colony; (for Egypt is
Mitzraim in Hebrew) because we find the River Nile's overflowing its Banks,
soon caused an Improvement in Geometry, which consequently brought Masonry much
in request: For the ancient noble Cities, with the other magnificent Edifices
of that Country, and particularly the famous PYRAMIDS, demonstrate the early
Taste and Genius of that ancient Kingdom. Nay, one of those Egyptian PYRAMIDS
The Marble Stones, brought a vast way from the Quarries of Arabia, were most of
'em 30 Foot long; and its Foundation covered the Ground 700 Foot on each Side,
or 2800 Foot in Compass, and 481 in perpendecular Height. And in porjecting it
were employed every Day, for 20 whole Years, 360,000 Men, by some ancient
Egyptian King long before the Israelites were a People, for the Honor of his
Empire, and at last to become his Tomb.
is reckoned the First of the Seven Wonders of the World, the Account of which,
by Historians and Travelers, is almost incredible.

The Sacred Records inform us well that the eleven great Sons of CANAAN (the
youngest Son of Ham) soon fortified themselves in strong Holds, and stately
walled Cities, and erecred most beautiful Temples and Mansions; for when the
Israetites, under the great Joshua, invaded their Country, they found it so
regularly fenced, that without the immediate Intervention of God in behalf of
his peculiar People, the Canaanites were impregnable and invincible. Nor can we
suppose less of the other Sons of Ham, viz. Cush, his eldest, in South Arabia,
and Phut, or Phuts, (now called Fez) in West Africa.

And surely the fair and gallant Posterity of JAPHET, (the eldest Son of Noah)
even such as traveled into the Isles of the Gentiles, must have been equally
skilled in Geometry and Masonry; though we know little of their Transactions and
mighty Works, until their original Knowledge was almost lost by the Havoc of
War, and by not maintaining a due Correspondence with the polite and learned
Nations; for when that Correspondence was opened in After-Ages, we find they
began to be most curious Architects.

The Posterity of SHEM had also equal Opportunities of cultivating the useful
Art, even those of 'em that planted their Colonies in the South and East of
Asia; much more those of 'em, that in the great Assyrian Empire, lived in a
separate State, or were blended with other Families: Nay, that holy Branch of
SHEM (of whom, as concerning the Flesh, CHRIST came) could not be unskilful in
the learned Arts of Assyria; A. M. 2078. 1926. Ante Chr.
for ABRAM, after the Confusion at Babel about 268 Years, was called out of Ur
of the Chaldees, where he learned Geometry, and the Arts that are performed by
it, which he would carefully transmit to Ishmael, to Isaac, and to his Sons by
Keturah; and by Isaac, to Esau, and Jacob, and the twelve Patriarchs: Nay, the
Jews believe that ABRAM also instructed the Egyptians in the Assyrian Learning.

Indeed the select Family long used Military Architecture only, as they were
Sojourners among Strangers; out before the ^30 Years of their Peregrination
were expired, A. M. 2427. 1577. Ante Chr.
even about 86 Years before their Exodus, the Kings of Egypt forced most of
them to lay down their Sheperds Instruments, and Warlike Accoutrements, and
trained them (...) another sort of Architecture in Stone and Brick, as holy
Writ, and other Histories, acquaint us; which God did wisely overruled, in
order to make them good Masons before they possessed the promised Land, then
famous for most curious Masonry.

And while marching to Canaan through Arabia, under Moses, God was pleased to
inspire BEZALEEL, of the Tribe of Judah, and AHOLIAB, of the Tribe of Dan, A.
M. 2514. 1490. Ante Chr.
with Wisdom of Heart for erecting that most glorious Tent, or Tabernacle,
wherein the SHECHINAH resided; which, though not of Stone or Brick, was framed by
Geometry, a most beautiful Piece of Architecture, (and proved afterward the
Model of Solomon's Temple) according to the Pattern that God had shown to MOSES
in the Mount; who therefore became the GENERAL MASTER-MASON, as well as King of
Jessurun, being well skilled in all the Egyptian Learning, and divinely
inspired with more sublime Knowledge in Masonry.

So that the Israelites, at their leaving Egypt, were a whole Kingdom of
Masons, well instructed, under the Conduct of their GRAND MASTER MOSES, who
often marshalled them into a regular and general Lodge, while in the
Wilderness, and gave them wise Charges, Orders, etc had they been well
observed! But no more of the Premises must be mentioned.

And after they were possessed of Canaan, the Israelites came not short of the
old Inhabitants in Masonry, A. M. 25^^. 1^50. Ante Chr.
but rather vastly improved it, by the special Direction of Heaven; they
fortified better, and improved their City-Houses and the Palaces of their
Chiefs, and only fell short in sacred Architecture while the Tabernacle stood,
but no longer; for the sinest sacred Building of the Canaanites was the Temple
of Dagon in Gaza of the Philistines, very magnificent, and capacious enough to
receive 5000 People under its Roof, that was artfully supported by two main
Columns By which the glorious SAMPSON pulled it down upon the Lords of the
Philistines, A. M. 2893. 1111 Ante Chr.
and was also entangled in the same Death which he drew upon his Enenues for
putting out his Eyes, after he had revealed his Secrets to his Wife, that
betrayed him into their Hands; for which Weakness he never had the Honor to be
numbered among Masons: But it is not convenient to write more of this.
; and was a wonderful Discovery of their mighty Skill in true Masonry, as must
be owned.

But Dagon's Temple, and the finest Structures of Tire and Sidon, could not be
compared with the ETERNAL God's Temple at Jerusalem, begun and finished, to the
Amazement of all the World, in the short space of seven Years and six Months,
by that wisest Man and most glorious King of Israel, the Prince of Peace and
Architecture, SOLOMON (the Son of David, who was refused that Honor for being
a Man of Blood) by divine Direction, without the Noise of Work-mens Tools,
though there were employed about it no less than 3600 Princes, In: Kings v. 16.
they are called Harodim, Rulers or Provosts assisting King Solomon, who were
set over the Work, and their Number there is only 3. 300: But 2 Chronicles ii. 18.
they are called Menatzchim, Overseers and Comforters of the People in Working,
and in Number 3,600; because either 300 might be more curions Ar^^sts, and the
Overseers of the said 3,300; or rather, not so excellent, and only Deputy
Mathers, to supply their Places in case of Death or Absence, that so there
might be always 3,300 acting Masters complete; or else they might be the
Oversee^ of the 70,000 Ish Sabbal, Men of Burden or Laborers, who were not
Masons but served the 80,000 Ish Chotzeb, Alen of Hewing, called also Ghiblim,
Stone Cutters and Soulpturers; and also Bonai, Builders in Stone, part of which
^^^^ng'd to Solomon, and part to Hiram, King of Tire, 1 Kings v. 18.
or Master-Masons, to conduct the Work according to Solomon's Directions, with
80,000 Hewers of Stone in the Mountain, or Fellow Craftsmen, and 70,000
Laborers, in all 153,600 besides the Levy under Adoniram, to work in the
Mountains of Lebanon by turns with the Sidonians, viz. 30,000 -- being in all
183,600 for which great Number of ingenious Masons, Solomon was much obliged to
HIRAM, or Huram, King of Type, who sent his Masons and Carpenters to Jerusalem,
and the Firs and Cedars of Lebanon to Joppa the next Seaport.

But above all, he sent his Namesake HIRAM, or Huram, the most accomplished
Mason upon Earth. We read (2 Chronicles. ii. 13.) HIRAM King of Tire (called there
Huram) in his Letter to King SOLOMON, says, I have sent a cunning Man, le Huram
Abhi, not to be translated according to the vulgar Greek and Latin, Huram my
Father, as if this Architect was King HIRAM's Father; for his Description, ver.
14. refutes it, and the Original plainly imports, Huram of my Father's, viz.
the Chief Master-Mason of my Father, King ABIBALUS; (who enlarged and
beautified the City of Tire, as ancient Histories inform us, whereby the
Tyrians at this time were most expert in Masonry) though some think HIRAM the
King might call Hiram the Archttect Father, as learned and skilful Men were
wont to be called of old Times, or as Joseph was called the Father of Pharaoh;
and as the same Hiram is called Solomon's FATHER, (2 Chronicles. iv. 16.) where it is
said Shelomoh lammelech Abhif Churam ghuasah, Did Huram, his Father, make to
King Solomon.

But the Difficulty is over at once, by allowing the Word Abif to be the
Surname of Hiram the Mason, called also (chap. ii. 13.) Hiram Abi, as here
Hiram Abif; for being so amply described, (chap. ii. 14.) we may easily suppose
his Surname would not be concealed: And this Reading makes the Sense plain and
complete, viz. that HIRAM, King of Tire, sent to King Solomon, his Namesake
HIRAM ABIF, the Prince of Architects, described (1 Kings vii. 14.) to he a
Widow's Son of the Tribe of Naphthali; and in 1 Chronicles. ii. 14. the said King of
Tire calls him the Son of a Woman of the Daughters of Dan; and in both Places,
that his Father was a Man of Tire; which Difficulty is removed, by supposing
his Mother was either of the Tribe of Dan, or of the Daughters of the City
called Dan in the Tribe of Naphthali, and his deceased Father had been a
Naphthalite, whence his Mother was called a Widow of Naphthali; for his Fathers
is not called a Tytia^ by Desoent, but a Man of Tire by Habitation; as Obed
Edom the Levite (...) c^ll'd a Gittite by living among the Gittites, and the
Apostle Paul a Man of T^^us. But supposing a Mistake in Transcrihers, and that
his Father was really (...) T^rian by Blood, and his Mother only of the Tribe
either of Dan or of Naphthali, that can be no Bar against ^^lo^^ing of his vast
Capacity; for as his Father was a Worker a Brass, so he h^^self was filled with
Wisdom and Understanding, and Cunning to work all Works in Brass: And as King
SOLOMON sent for him, so King HIRAM, in his Letter to Solomon, says, And now I
have sent a cunning Man, endued with Understanding, skilful to work in Gold,
Silver, Brass, Iron, Stone, Timber, Purple, Blue, fine Linen and Crimson, also
to grave any manner of Graving, and to find out every Device which shall be put
to him, with thy cunning Men, and with the cunning Men of my Lord David thy
Father. This divinely inspired Workman maintained this Character in erecting
the Temple, and in working the Utensils thereof, far beyond the Performances of
Aholiab and Bezaleel, being also universaily capable of all sorts of Masonry.




And the prodigious Expense of it also enhaunceth its Exeellency; for besides
King David's vast Preparations, his richer Son SOLOMON, and all the wealthy
Israelites, and the Nobles of all the neighboring Kingdoms, largely
contributed toward it in Gold, Silver, and rich Jewels, that amounted to a Sum
almost incredible.

Nor do we read of any thing in Canaan so large, the Wall that enclosed it
being 7700 Foot in Compass; far less any holy Structure fit to be named with
it, for exactly proportioned and beautiful Dimensions, from the magnificent
Porch on the East, to the glorious and reverend Sanctum Sanctorum on the West,
with most lovely and convenient Apartments for the Kings and Princes, Priests
and Levites, Israelites, and Gentiles also; it being an House of Prayer for all
Nations, and capable of receiving in the Temple proper, and in all its Courts
and Apartments together, no less than 300,000 People, by a modest Calculation,
allowing a square Cubit to each Person.

And if we consider the 1453 Columns of Parian Marble, with twice as many
Pollasters, both having glorious Capitals of several Orders, and about 2246
Windows, besides those in the Pavement, with the unspeakable and costly
Decorations of it within; (and much more might be said) we must conclude its
Prospect to transcend our Imagination; and that it was justly esteemed by far
the finest Piece of Masonry upon Earth before or since, A. M. 3000. 1004. Ante
Chr..
and the chief Wonder of the World; and was dedicated, or consecrated, in the
most solemn manner, by King SOLOMON.

But leaving what must not, and indeed cannot, be communicated by Writing, we
may warrantably affirm that however ambitious the Heathen were in cultivating
of the Royal Art, it was never perfected, until God condescended to instruct
his peculiar People in rearing the abovementioned stately Tent, and in
building at length this gorgeous House, fit for the special Resulgence of his
Glory, where he dwelt between the Cherubims on the Mercy-Seat, and from thence
gave them frequent oraculous Responses.

This most sumptuous, splendid, beautiful and glorious Edifice, attracted soon
the inquisitive Artists of all Nations to spend some time at Jerusalem, and
survey its peculiar Excellencies, as much as was allowed to the Gentiles;
whereby they soon discovered, that all the World, with their joint Skill, came
far short of the Israelites, in the Wisdom and Dexterity of Architecture, when
the wise King SOLOMON was GRAND MASTER of the Lodge at Jerusalem, and the
learned King HIRAM was GRAND MASTER of the Lodge at Tire, and the inspired
HIRAM ABIF was Master of Work, and Masonry was under the immediate Care and
Direction of Heaven, when the Noble and the Wise thought it their Honor to be
assisting to the ingenious Masters and Craftsmen, and when the Temple of the
TRUE GOD became the Wonder of all Travelers, by which, as by the most perfect
Pattern, they corrected the Architecture of their own Country upon their Return.

So that after the Erection of Solomon's Temple, Masonry was improved in all
the neighboring Nations; for the many Artists employed about it, under Hiram
Abif, after it was finished, dispersed themselves into Syria, Mesopotamia,
Assyria, Chaldea, Babylonia, Media, Persia, Arabia, Africa, Lesser Asia,
Greece, and other Paris of Europe, where they taught this liberal Art to the
free born Sons of eminent Persons, by whose Dexterity the Kings, Princes, and
Potentates, built many glorious Piles, and became the GRAND MASTERS, earch in
his own Territory, and were emulous or excelling in this Royal Art; nay, even
in INDIA, where the Correspondence was open, we may conclude the same: But none
of the Nations, nor all together, could rival the Israelites, far less excel
them, in Masonry; and their Temple remained the constant Pattern. For though the
Temple of Diana at Ephesus is supposed to have been first built by some of
Japhet's Posterity, that made a Settlement in Jonia about the Time of Moses;
yet it was often demolished, and then rebuilt for the sake of Improvements in
Masonry; and we cannot compute the Period of its last glorious Erection (that
became another of the Seven Wonders of the World) to be prior to that of
Solomon's Temple; but that long afterward the Kings of Lesser Asia joined, for
220 Years, in finishing it, with 107 Columns of the finest Marble, and many of
'em with most exquisite Sculpture (each at the Expense of a King, by the
Master-Masons DRESIPHON and ARCHIPHRON) to support the planked Cieling and Roof
of pure Cedar, as the Doors and Linings were of Cypress: A. M. 3648. 356. Ante
Chr.
Whereby it became the Mistress of Lesser Asia, in Lengch 425 Foot, and in
Breadth 220 Foot; Nay, so admirable a Fabric, that XERXES left it standing
when be burnt all the other Temples in his Way to Greece; though at last it was
set on Fire and burnt down by a vile Fellow, only for the Lust of being talked
of, on the very Day that ALEXANDER the Great was born.


Nay, the GRAND MONARCH NEBUCHADNEZAR could never, with all his unspeakable
Advantages, carry up his Masonry to the Beautiful Strength and Magnificence of
the Temple Work, which he had, A. M. 3416. 588. Ante Chr.
in warlike Rage, burnt down, after it had remained in Splendour 416 Years from
it Consecration. For after his Wars were over, and general Peace proclaimed, he
set his Heart on Architecture, and became the GRAND MASTER-MASON; and having
before led captive the ingenious Artists of Judea, and other conquered
Countries, he raised indeed the largest Work upon Earth, even the Walls In
Thickness 87 Foot, in Height; 50 Foot, and in Compass 480 Furlongs, or 60
British Miles in an exact Square of 15 Miles a Side, built of large Bricks,
cemented with the hard Bitumen of that old Vale of Shinar, with 100 Gates of
Brass, or 25 a-side, and 250 Towers ten Foot higher than the Walls. From the
said 25 Gates in each Side went 25 Streets in strait Lines, or in all 50
Streets each 15 Miles long, with four half Streets, next the Walls, each 200
Foot broad: And so the whole City was thus cut out into 676 Squares, each being
2 Miles and quarter in Compass; round which were the Houses built three or four
Stories high, well adorned, and accommodated with Yards, Gardens etc. A Branch
of the Euphrates run through the Middle of it, from North to South ^^er which, in
the Heart of the City, was built a stately Bridge, in length a Furlong, and
thirty Foot in Breadth, by wonderful Art, for supplying the Want of a
Foundation in the River. At the two Ends of this Bridge were two magnificent
Palaces, the Old Palace, the Seat of ancient Kings at the East End, upon the
Ground of four Squares; and the New Palace at the West End, built by
Nebuchadnezzar, upon the Ground of nine Squares, with Hanging-Gardens (so much
celebrated by the Greeks) where the loftiest Trees could grow as in the Fields,
erected in a Square of 400 Foot on each Side, carried up by Terraces, and
sustained by vast Arches built upon Arches, until the highest Terrace equaled
the Height of the City-Walls, with a curious Aqueduct to water the whole
Gardens. Old Babel improved, stood on the East Side of the River, and the New
Town on the West Side, much larger than the Old, and built in order to make
this Capital exceed old Ninivch, though it never had so many Inhabitants by one
Half. The River was begirt with Banks of Brick, as thick as the City Walls, in
Length twenty Miles, viz. fifteen Miles within the City, and two Miles and a
half above and below it, to keep (...) Water within its Channel; and each
Street that crossed the River had a brase^ (...) reading down to the Water on
both Banks; and West of the City was a prodigious Lake, in Compass 160 Miles,
with a C^nal from the River into it, to prevent Inundations in the Summer.

In the Old Town was the Old Tower of BABEL, at the Foundation a Square of half
a Mile in Compass, consisting of eight square Towers built over each other,
with Stairs on the outside round it, going up to the Observatory on the Top,
600 Foot high, which is 19 Foot higher than the highest Pyramid) whereby they
became the first Astronomers. And in the Rooms of the Grand Tower, with arched
Ro^ss, supported (...) Pillars 75 Foot high, the idolatrous Worship of their
God BELUS was performed till now, that this mighty Mason and Monarch erected
round this ancient Pile a Temple of two Furlongs on every Side, or a Mile in
compass; where he lodged the so^^d Troph^^s of SOLOMON's Temple, and the golden
Image 90 Foot high, that he had consecrated in the Plains of Lura, as were
formerly in the Tower lodged man, other golden Images, and many precious
things, that were afterward all seized by XERXES, and amounted to above 21
Millions Sterling.

And when all was finished King NEBUCHADNEZZAR walking in State in his
Hanging-Gardens, and from thence taking a Review of the whole City, proudly
boasted of this his mighty Work saying, Is not this Great Babylon, that I have
built for the House of the Kingdom, by the Might of my Power, and for the
Honor of my Majesty? but had his Pride immediately rebuked a Voice from
Heaven, and punished by brutal Madnes's for seven Years, until he gave Glory to
the God of Heaven, the Omnipotent Architect of the Universe, which he published
by a Decree through all his Empire, and died next Year, before his GREAT BABYLON
was little more than half inhabited (though he had led many Nations captive for
that purpose); nor was it ever fully peopled; for in 25 Years after his Death,
the GRANDCYRUS conquered it, and removed the Throne to Shushan in PERSIA.


and City, the Palaces and Hanging-Gardens, the Bridge and Temple of BABYLON,
the Third of the Seven Wonders of the World, though vastly inferior, in the
sublime Perfection of Masonry, to the holy, charming, lovely Temple of GOD. But
as the Jewish Captives were of special use to NEBUCHADNEZAR in his glorious
Buildings, so being thus kept at work, they retained their great Skill in
Masonry, and continued very capable of rebuilding the holy Temple and City of
SALEM upon its old Foundations, A. M. 3468. 536. Ante Chr.
which was ordered by the Edict or Decree of the GRAND CYRUS, according to
God's Word, that had foretold his Exaltation and this Decree: And CYRUS having
constituted ZERUBBABEL, the Son of Salathiel (of the Seed of David by Nathan,
the Brother of Solomon, whose Royal Family was now extinct) the Head, or Prince
of the Captivity, and the Leader of the Jews and Israelites returning to
Jerusalem, they began to lay the Foundation of the SECOND TEMPLE, and would
have soon finished it, if CYRUS had lived; A. M. 3489. 515. Aute Chr.
but at length they put on the Cape-Stone, in the 6th Year of DARIUS, the
Persian Monarch, when it was dedicated with Joy, and many great Sacrifices, by
ZERUBBABEL the Prince and General Master-Mason of the Jews, about 20 Years
after the Decree of the Grand Cyrus, And though this Temple of ZERUBBABEL came
far short of Solomon's Temple, was not so richly adorned with Gold and
Diamonds, and all manner of precious Stones, nor had the Shechina and the holy
Relics of Moses in it, etc. yet being raised exactly upon Solomon's
Foundation, and according to his Model, it was still the most regular,
symmetrical, and glorious Edifice in the whole World, as the Enemies of the
Jews have often testified and acknowledged.

At length the ROYAL ART was carried into Greece, whose Inhabitants have left
us no Evidence of such Improvements in Masonry, prior to Solomon's Temple; The
Grecians having been long degenerated into Barbarity, forgetting their original
Skill in Masonry, (which their Forefathers brought from Assyria) by their
frequent Mixtures with other barbarouswith other barbarous Nations, their
mutual Invasions, and wasting bloody Wars; until by traveling and
corresponding with the Asiaticks and Egyptians, they revived their Knowledge in
Geometry and Masonry both, though few of the Grecians had the Honor to own it.
for their most ancient Buildings, as the Citadel of Athens, with the
Parthenion, or Temple of Minerva, the Temples also of Theseus, of Jupiter
Olympius, etc. their Porticos also, and Forums, their Theaters and Gymnasiums,
their public Halls, curious Bridges, regular Fortifications, stout Ships of
War, and stately Palaces, were all erected after the Temple of Solomon, and
most of them even after the Temple of Zerubbabel.

Nor do we find the GRECIANS arrived to any considerable Knowledge in Geometry,
before the Great Thales Milesius, A. M. 3457. 547. Ante Chr.
the Philosopher, who died in the Reign of Bellshazzar, and the Time of the
Jewish Captivity. But his Scholar, the Greater PYTAHGORAS, proved the Author of
the 47th Proposition of Euclid's first Book, which, if duly observed, is the
Foundation of all Masonry, sa^^ed, civil, and Military. PYTHAGORAS traveled
into Egypt the Year that Thales died, and living there among the Priests 22
Years became expert in Geometry and in all the Egyptian Learning, A. M. 3479.
525. Ante Chr.
until he was captivated by Cambyses King of Persia, and sent to Babylon, where
he was much conversant with the Chaldean MAGI, and the learned Babylonish JEWS,
from whom he borrowed great Knowledge, A. M. 3498. 506. Ante Chr.
that rendered him very famous in Greece and Italy, where afterward he
flourished and died; when Mordecai was the prime Minister of State to Ahasuerus
King of Persia, and ten Years after ZERUBBABEL's Temple was finished.


The People of Lesser Asia about this Time gave large Encouragement to Masons
for erecting all sorts of sumptuous Buildings, one of which must not be forgot,
being usually reckoned the Fourth of the Seven Wonders of the World, viz. the
Mausoleum, or Tomb of Mausolus King of Caria, between Lycia and Jonia, at
Halicarnassus, on the Side of Mount Taurus in that Kingdom, at the Command of
ARTEMISIA his mournful Widow, as the splendid Testimony of her Love to him,
built of the most curious Marble, in Circuit 411 Foot, in Height 25 Cubits,
surrounded with 26 Columns of the most famous Sculpture, and the whole opened
on all Sides, with Arches 73 Foot wide, A. M. 3652. 352. Ante Chr.
performed by the four principal Master-Masons and Engravers of those Times,
viz. the East Side by Scopas, the West by Leochares, the North by Briax, and
the South by Timotheus.

But after PYTHAGORAS, Geometry became the darling Study of Greece, where many
learned Philosophers arose, some of whom invented sundry Propositions, or
Elements of Geometry, and reduced them to the use of the mechanical Arts. Or
borrowed from other Nations their pretended Inventions, as Anaxagoras,
Oenopides, Briso, Antipho, Democritus, Hippocrates, and Theodorus Cyrenaeus,
the Master of the divine PLATO, who amplify'd Geometry, and published the Art
Analytic; from whose Academy came forth a vast Number, that soon dispersed
their Knowledge to distant Parts, as Leodamus, Theaetetus, Archyras, Leon,
Eudoxus, Menaichmus, and Xenocrates, the Master of Aristotle, from whose
Academy also came forth Eudemus, Theophrastus, Artstaeus, Isidorus, Hypsicles,
and many others.
Nor need we doubt that Masonry kept pace with Geometry; or rather, always
followed it in proportioned gradual Improvements, until the wonderful EUCLID of
Tire flourished at Alexandria; A. M. 3700. 304. Ante Chr.
who gathering up the scattered Elements of Geometry, digested them into a
Method that was never yet mended, (and for which his Name will be ever
celebrated) under the Patronage of PTOLOMEUS, the Son of Lagus King of Egypt,
one of the immediate Successors of Alexander the Great.

And as the noble Science came to be more methodically taught, the Royal Art
was the more generally esteemed and improved among the Grecians, who at length
arrived to the same Skill and Magnificence in it with their Teachers the
Asiatics and Egyptians.

The next King of Egypt, PTOLOMEUS PHILADELPHUS, that great Improver of the
liberal Arts, and of all useful Knowledge, who gathered the greatest Library
upon Earth, and had the Old Testament (at least the Pentateuch) first
translated into Greek, became an excellent Architect, A. M. 3748. 256. Ante Chr.
and GENERAL MASTER-MASON, having among his other great Buildings, erected the
famous TOWER of PHAROS, On an Island near Alexandria, at one of the Mouths of
the Nile, of wonderful Height and most cunning Workmanship, and all of the
finest Marble; and it cost 800 Talents, or about 480,000 Crowns. The Master of
Work, under the King, was Sistratus, a most ingenious Mason; and it was
afterward much admired by Julius Caesar, who was a good Judge of most Things,
though chiefly conversant in Wars and Politics. It was intended as a
Light-House for the Harbor of Alexandria, from which the Light-Houses in the
Mediterranean were often called Pharos. Though some, instead of (...) mention
as the Fifth Wonder, the great OBELISK of Semiramis, 150 Foot high, and 24 Foot
square at Bottom, or 90 Foot in Circuit at the Ground, all one entire S^ore,
rising pyramidically, brought from Armenia to Babylon about the Time of the
S^ege of Troy, if we may believe the History of SEMIRAMIS.
the Fisth of the Seven Wonders of the World.

We may readily believe, that the African Nations, even to the Atlantic Shore,
did soon imitate Egypt in such Improvements; though History fails, and there
are no Travelers encouraged to discover the valuable Remains in Masonry of
those once renowned Nations.

Nor should we forget the learned Island of SICILY, where the prodigious
Geometrician ARCHIMEDES did flourish, A. M. 3792. 212. Ante Chr.
While ERATOSTHENES and CONON flourished in Greece who were succeeded by the
exellent APOLLONIUS of Perga, and many more before the Birth of Christ, who,
though not working Masons, yet were good Surveyors; or, at least, cultivated
Geometry, which is the solid Basis of true Masonry, and its Rule.
and was unhappily slain when Syracuse was taken by Marcellus the Roman
General: For from Sicily, as well as from Greece, Egypt, and Asia, the ancient
Romans learnt both the SCIENCE and the ART, what they knew before being either
mean or irregular; but as they subdued the Nations, they made mighty
Discoveries in both; and like wise Men, led captive, not the Body of the
People, but the Arts and Sciences, with the most eminent Professors and
Practitioners, to Rome; which thus became the Center of Learning, as well as of
imperial Power, until they advanced to their Zenith of Glory, under AUGUSTUS
CAESAR, A. M. 4004.
(in whose Reign was born God's MESSIAH, the great Architect of the Church) who
having laid the World quiet, by proclaiming universal Peace, highly encouraged
those dexterous Artists that had been bred in the Roman Liberty, and their
learned Scholars and Pupils; but particularly the great VITRUVIUS, the Father
of all true Architects to this Day.

Therefore it is rationally believed, that the glorious AUGUSTUS became the
Grand-Master of the Lodge at Rome, having, besides his patronizing Vitruvius,
much promoted the Welfare of the Fellow-Craftsmen, as appears by the many
magnificent Buildings of his Reign, the Remains of which are the Pattern and
Standard of true Masonry in all future Times, as they are indeed an Epitome of
the Asiatic, Egyptian, Grecian and Sicilian Architecture, which we often
express by the Name of the AUGUSTAN STYLE, and which we are now only
endeavoring to imitate, and have not yet arrived to its Perfection.

The old Records of Masons afford large Hints of their Lodges, from the
Beginning of the World, in the polite Nations, especially in Times of Peace,
and when the Civil Powers, ab^orring Tyranny and Slavery, gave due Scope to the
bright and free Genius of their happy Subjects; for then always Masons, above
all other Artists, were the Favorites of the Eminent, and became necessary for
their grand Undertakings in any sort of Materials, not only in Stone, Brick,
Timber, Plaster; but even in Cloth or Skins, or whatever was used for Tents,
and for the various sorts of Architecture.

Nor should it be forgot, that Painters also, and Statuaries, For it was not
without good Reason, the Ancients thought that the Rules of the beautiful
Proportions in Building were copied, or taken from the Proportions of the Body
natural: Hence PHIDIAS is reckoned in the Number of ancient Masons for erecting
the Statue of the Goddess Nemesis at Rhamnus, 10 Cubits high; and that of
Minerva at Athens, 26 Cubits high; and that of JUPITER OLYMPIUS, sitting in his
Temple in Achaia, between the Cities of Elis and Pisa, made of innumerable
small Pieces of Porphyry, so exceeding grand and proportioned, that it was
reckoned one of the Seven Wonders, as the famous COLOSSUS at Rhodes was
another, and the greatest Statue that ever was erected, made of Metal, and
dedicated to the SUN, 70 Cubits high, like a great Tower at a distance, at the
Entry of an Harbor, striding wide enough for the largest Ships under sail,
built in 12 Years by CARES a famous Mason and Statuary of Sicyon, and Scholar
to the great Lysippus of the same Fraternity This mighty COLOSSUS, after
standing 56 Years, fell by an Earthquake, and lay in Ruins, the Wonder of the
World, till Anno Dom. 600, when the Sultan of Egypt carried off its Relics,
which loaded 900 Camels.
were always reckoned good Masons, as much as Builders, Stone-cutters,
Bricklayers, Carpenters, Joiners, Upholders or Tent-Makers, and a vast many
other Craftsmen that could be named, who perform according to Geometry, and the
Rules of Building; though none since HIRAM ABIF has been renowned for Cunning
in all parts of Masonry: And of this enough.

But among the Heathen, while the noble Science Geometry By Menelaus, Claudius,
Ptolomeus, (who was also the Prince of Astronomers) Plutarch, Eutocius (who
recites the Inventions of Philo, Diocles, Nicomedes, Sphorus, and Heron the
learned Mechanic) Kresibius also, the Inventer of Pumps (celebrated by
Vitruvius, Proclus, Pliny, and Athenaeus) and Geminus, also equaled by some to
Euclid; so Diophantus, Nicomachus, Serenus, Proclus, Pappus, Theon, etc. all
Geometricians, and the illustrious Cultivaters of the mechanical Arts.
was duly cultivated, both before and after the Reign of Augustus, even till
the Fifth Century of the Christian Era, Masonry was had in great Esteem and
Veneration: And while the Roman Empire continued in its Glory, the Royal Art
was carefully propagated, even to the ULTIMA THULE, and a Lodge erected in
almost every Roman Garrison; whereby they generously communicated their Cunning
to the northern and western Parts of Europe, which had grown barbarous before
the Roman Conquest, though we known not certainly how long; because some think
there are a few Remains of good Masonry before that Period in some Parts of
Europe, raised by the original Skill that the first Colonies brought with them,
as the Celtic Edifices, erected by the ancient Gauls, and by the ancient
Britains too, who were a Colony of the Celtes, long before the Romans invaded
this Island. The Natives within the Roman Colonies might be first instructed in
building of Citadels and Bridges, and other Fortifications necessary; and
afterward when their Settlement produced Peace, and Liberty, and Plenty, the
Aborigines did soon imitate their learaed and polite Conquerors in Masonry,
having then Leisure and a Disposition to raise magnificent Structures. Nay,
even the Ingenious of the Neighboring Nations not conquered, learnt much from
the Roman Garrisons in Times of Peace and open Correspondence, when they became
emulous of the Roman Glory, and thankful that their being Conquered was the
means of recovering them from ancient Ignorance and Prejud^es, when they began
to delight in the Royal Art.


But when the GOTHS and VANDALS, that had never been conquered by the Romans,
like a general Deluge, overran the ROMAN EMPIRE, with warlike Rage and gross
Ignorance they utterly destroyed many of the finest Edifices, and defaced
others, very few escaping; as the Asiatic and African Nations fell under the
same Calamity by the Conquests of the MAHOMETANS, whose grand Design is only to
convert the World by Fire and Sword, instead of cultivating the Arts and
Sciences.

Thus, upon the Declension of the Roman Empire, Ann. D. 448
when the British Garrisons were drained, the ANGLES and other lower SAXONS,
invited by the ancient BRITONS to come over and help them against the SCOTS and
PICTS, at length subdued the South Part of this Island, which they called
England, or Land of the Angles; who being akin to the Goths, or rather a sort
of Vandals, of the same warlike Disposition, and as ignorant Heathens,
encouraged nothing but War, till they became Christians; and then too late
lamented the Ignorance of their Fathers in the great Loss of Roman Masonry, but
knew not how to repair it.

Yet becoming a free People (as the old Saxon Laws testify) and having a
Disposition for Masonry, they soon began No doubt several Saxon and Scottish
Kings with many of the Nobility, great Gentry, and eminent Clergy, became the
Grand Masters of those early Lodges, from a mighty Zeal then prevalent for
building magnificent Christian Temples; which would also prompt them to enquire
after the Laws, Charges, Regulations, Customs, and Usages, of the ancient
Lodges, many of which might be preserved by Tradition, and all of them very
likely in those Parts of the British Islands that were not subdued by the
Saxons, from whence in time they might be brought, and which the Saxons were
more fond of, than careful to revive Geometry and Roman Masonry; as many in all
Ages have been more curious a careful about the Laws, Forms, and Usages of
their respective Societies, than about the ARTS and SCIENCES thereof.

But neither what was conveyed, nor the Manner how, can be communicated by
waiting; as no Man indeed can understand it without the Key of a Fellow Craft.


to imitate the Asiatics, Grecians, and Romans, in erecting of Lodges and
encouraging of Masons; being taught, not only from the faithful Traditions and
valuable Remains of the BRITONS, but even by foreign Princes, in whose
Dominions the Royal Art had been preserved much from Gothic Ruins, particularly
by CHARLES MARTELL King of France, An. Dom. 141. He died.
who according to the old Records of Masons, sent over several expert Craftsmen
and learned Architects into England, at the Desire of the Saxon Kings: So that
during the Heptarchy, the Gothic Architecture was much encouraged here as in
other Christian Lands.

And though the many Invasions of the DANES occasioned the Loss of many
Records, An. Dom. 832.
yet in Times of Trace or Peace they did not hinder much the good Work, though
not performed according to the Augustan Style; nay, the vast Expense laid out
upon it, with the curious Inventions of the Artists to supply the Roman Skill,
doing the best they could, demonstrate their Esteem and Love for the Royal Art,
and have rendered the GOTHIC BUILDINGS venerable, though not imitable by those
that relish the ancient Architecture.

And after the Saxons and Danes were conquered by the NORMANS, An. Dom. 1066.
as soon as the Wars ended and Peace was proclaimed, the Gothic Masonry was
encouraged, even in the Reign of the Conqueror, William the Conqueror built the
Tower of LONDON, and many strong Castles in the Country, with several religious
Edifices, whose Example was followed by the Nobility and Clergy, particularly
by Roger de Montgomery Earl of Arundel, the Archbishop of York, the Bishop of
Durham, and GUNDULPH Bishop of Rochester, a mighty Architect.
and of his Son King WILLIAM Rufus, who built Westminster Hall, minster-Hall,
the largest one Room perhaps in the Earth.

Nor did the Barons Wars, nor the many bloody Wars of the subsequent Norman
Kings, and their contending Branches, much hinder the most sumptuous and lofty
Buildings of those Times, raised by the great Clergy, (who enjoying large
Revenues, could well bear the Expense) and even by the CROWN too; for we read
King EDWARD III. had an Officer called the King's Free-Mason, or
General-Surveyor of his Buildings, whose Name was HENRY YEVELE, employed by
that King to build several Abbeys, About An. Dom. 1362.
and St. STEPHEN's CHAPEL at Westminster, where the House of Commons now sit
in Parliament.

But for the surther Instruction of Candidates and younger Brethren, a certain
Record of Free-Masons, About An. Dom. 1475.
written in the Reign of King EDWARD IV. of the Norman Line, gives the
following Account, viz.

That though the ancient Records of the Brotherhood in England were many of
them destroyed or lost in the Wars of the Saxons and Danes, yet King ATHELSTAN,
( the Grandson of King ALFRED the Great, a mighty Arch^tect) the first anointed
King of England, About An. Dom. 930.
and who translated the Holy Bible into the Saxon Tongue, when he had brought
the Land into Rest and Peace, built many great Works, and encouraged many
Masons from France, who were appointed Overseers thereof, and brought with them
the Charges and Regulations of the Lodges preserved since the Roman Times, who
also prevailed with the King to improve the CONSTITUTION of the English Lodges
according to the foreign Model, and to increase the Wages of working Masons.

That the said King's youngest Son, Prince EDWIN, being taught Masonry, and
taking upon him the Charges of a MASTER-MASON, for the Love he had to the said
Craft, and the honorable Principles whereon it is grounded, purchased a free
Charter of King Athelstan his Father, for the Masons having a Correction among
themselves, (as it was anciently expressed) or a Freedom and Power to regulate
themselves, to amend what might happen amiss, and to hold a yearly
Communication and General Assembly.

That accordingly Prince EDWIN summoned all the Masons in the Realm to meet him
in a Congregation at York, who came and composed a General Lodge, of which he
was GRAND MASTER; and having brought with them all the Writings and Records
extant, some in Greek, some in Latin, some in French, and other Languages, from
the Contents thereof that Assembly did frame the CONSTITUTION and Charges of an
English Lodge, made a Law to preserve and observe the same in all time coming,
and ordained good Pay for working Masons, etc.

That in process of time, when Lodges were more frequent, the Right Worshipful
the Master and Fellows, with the Consent of the LORDS of the Realm, (for most
great Men were then Masons) ordained, that for the future, at the Making or
Admission of a Brother, the CONSTITUTION should be read, and the Charges
hereunto annexed, by the Master or Warden; and that such as were to be admitted
Master-Masons, (...) Masters of Work, should be examined whether they be able
of Cunning to serve their respective Lords, as well the Lowest as the Highest,
to the Honor and Worship of the aforesaid Art, and to the Profit of their
Lords? for they be their Lords that employ and pay them for their Service and
Travel.

And besides many other things, the said Record adds, That those Charges and
Laws of FREE-MASONS have been seen and perused by our late Sovereign King Henry
VI. and by the Lords of his honorable Council, who have allowed them, and said
that they be right good and reasonable to be holden, as they have been drawn
out and collected from the Records of ancient Times. In another Manuscript more
ancient, we read: That when the Master and Wardens meet in a Lodge, if need be,
the Sheriff of the County, or the Mayor of the City, or Alderman of the Town,
in which the Congregation is held, should be made Fellow and Sociate to the
Master, in help of him against Rebels, and for upbearing the Rights of the
Realm.

That entered Prentices at their making were charged not to be Thieves, or
Thieves Maintainers; that they should travel honestly for their pay, and love
their Fellows as themselves, and be true to the King of England, and to the
Realm, and to the Lodge.

That at such Congregations it shall be inquired, whether any Master or Fellow
has broke any of the Articles agreed to. And if the Offender, being duly cited
to appear; prove Rebel, and will not attend, then the Lodge shall determine
against him that he shall forswear (or renounce) his Masonry, and shall no more
use this Craft; the which if he presume for to do, the Sheriff of the County
shall prison him, and take all his Goods into the King's Hands, till his Grace
be granted him and issued: For this Cause principally have these Congregations
been ordained, that as well the lowest as the highest should be well and truly
served in this Art foresaid throughout all the Kingdom of England.

Amen, so more it be.




Now though in the third Year of the said King Henry VI. while an Infant of
about four Years old, the Parliament made an Act, that affected only the
working Masons, who had, contrary to the Statutes for Laborers, confederated
not to work but at their own Price and Wages; and because such Agreements were
supposed to be made at the General Lodges, called in the Act CHAPTERS and
CONGREGATIONS of MASONS, it was then thought expedient to level the said Act
against the said Congregations Tertio Henrici Sexti, Chap. I. An Them. 1425.

Title. Masons shall not cofederate themselves in Chapters and Congregations.

WHEREAS by yearly Congregations and Confederacies, made by the Masons in their
General Assemblies, the good Course and Effect of the Statutes for Laborers be
openly violated and broken, in Subversion of the Law, and to the great Damage
of all the Commons, our said Sovereign Lord the King, willing in this Case to
provide a Remedy, by the Advice and Assent aforesaid, and at the special
Requesi of the Commons, has ordained and established, that such Chapters and
Congregations shall not be heveafter holden; and if any such be made, they that
cause such Chapters and Congregations to be assembled and holden, if they
thereof be convict, shall be judged for Felons, and that the other Masons that
come to such Chapters and Congregations be punished by Imprisonment of their
Bodies, and make ^ine and Ransom at the King's Will.

Co. Inst. 3. p. 99.
: Yet when the said King Henry VI. arrived to Man's Estate; the Masons laid
before him and his Lords the abovementioned Records and Charges, who, it is
plain, reviewed them, and solemnly approved of them as good and reasonable to
be holden: Nay, the said King and his Lords must have been incorporated with
the Free-Masons, before they could make such Review of the Records; and in this
Reign, before King Henry's Troubles, Masons were much encouraged. Nor is there
any Instance of executing that Act in that, or in any other Reign since, and
the Masons never neglected their Lodges for it, nor ever thought it worth while
to employ their noble and eminent Brethren to have it repealed; because the
working Masons, that are free of the Lodge, scorn to be guilty of such
Combinations; and the other free Masons have no Concern in Trespasses against
the Statutes for Laborers. That Act was made in ignorant Times, when true
Learning was a Crime, and Geometry condemned for Conjurnation; but it cannot
derogate in the least Degree from the Honor of the ancient Fraternity, who to
be sure would never encourage any such Confederacy of their working Brethren.
But by Tradition it is believed, that the Parliament Men were then too much
influen^'d by the illiterate Clergy, who were not accepted Masons, nor
understood Architecture (as the Clergy of some former Ages) and generally
thought unworthy of this Brotherhood; yet thinking they had an indefeasible
Right to know all Secrets, by virtue of amicular Confession, and the Masons
never confessing any thing thereof, the f^nd Clergy were highly offended, and
at first suspecting them of Wickedness, represented them as dangerous to the
State during that Minority, and soon influenced the Parliament Men to lay hold
of such supposed Agreements of the working Masons, for making an Act that might
seem to reflect Dishonor upon even the whole worshipful Fraternity, in whose
Favor several Acts had been both before and after ^^at Per^d. made.


The Kings of SCOTLAND very much encouraged the Royal Art, from the earliest
Times down to the Union of the Crowns, as appears by the Remains of glorious
Buildings in that ancient Kingdom, and by the Lodges there kept up without
Interruption many hundred Years, the Records and Traditions of which testify
the great Respect of those Kings to this honorable Fraternity, who gave always
pregnant Evidence of their Love and Loyalty, from whence sprung the old Toast
among the Scots Masons, viz. GOD BLESS THE KING AND THE CRAFT.

Nor was the Royal Example neglected by the Nobility, Gentry, and Clergy of
SCOTLAND, who joined in every thing for the good of the Crast and Brotherhood,
the Kings being often the Grand Masters, until, among other things, the Masons
of SCOTLAND were empowered to have a certain and fixed Grand-Master and Grand
Warden, who had a Salary from the Crown, and also an Acknowledgment from every
New Brother in the Kingdom at Entrance, whose Business was not only to regulate
what might happen amiss in the Brotherhood, but also to hear and finally
determine all Controversies between Mason and Lord, to punish the Mason, if he
deserved it, and to oblige both to equitable Terms: At which Hearings, if the
Grand Master was absent (who was always nobly born) the Grand Warden presided.
This Privilege remained till King becomes a Mason, because it Union of the
Kingdoms.

Yet the great Care that the SCOTS took of true Masonry, proved afterward very
useful to ENGLAND; for the learned and magnanimous Queen ELIZABETH, who
encouraged other Arts, discouraged this; because, being a Woman, she could not
be made a Mason, though as other great Women, she might have much employed
Masons, like Semiramis and Artemisia. ELIZABETH being jealous of any Assemblies
of her Subjects, whose Business she was not duly appriz'd of, attempted to
break up the unnual Communication of Masons, as dangerous to her Government:
But, as old Masons have transmited it by Tradition, when the noble Persons her
Majesty had commissioned, and brought a sufficient Posse with them at York on
St. John's Day, were o^^^ admitted into the Hodge, they made no use of Arms,
and returned the Queen a most honorable Account of the ancient Fraternity,
when by her poli^^al Fears and Doubts were dispe^^d, and she let ^em alone, as
a People much respected by the Noble and the Wise and all the polite Nations,
but ^^glected the Art all her Reign.


But upon her Demise, King JAMES VI. of SCOTLAND succeeding to the Crown of
ENGLAND, being a Mason King, revived the English Lodges; and as he was the
First King of GREAT BRITAIN, he was also the First Prince in the World that
recovered the Roman Architecture from the Ruins of Gothic Ignorance: For after
many dark or illiterate Ages, as soon as all Parts of Learning revived, and
Geometry recovered its Ground, the polite Nations began to discover the
Confusion and Impropriety of the Gothic Buildings; and in the Fisteenth and
Sixteenth Centuries the AUGUSTAN STYLE was raised from its Rubbish in Italy, by
PRAMANTE, BARBARO, SANSOVINO, SANGALLO, MICHAEL ANGELO, RAPHAEL URBIN, JULIO
ROMANO, SERGLIO, LABACO, SCAMOZI, VIGNOLA, and many other bright Architects:
but above all, by the Great PALLADIO, who has not yet been duly imitated in
Italy, though justly rivaled in England by our great Master-Mason, INIGO JONES.

But though all true Masons honor the Memories of those Italian Architects, is
must be owned, that the Augustan Style was not revived by any crowned Head,
before King JAMES the Sixth of SCOTLAND, and First of ENGLAND, patronized the
said glorious Inigo Jones, whom he employed to build his Royal Palace of
WHITE HALL, and in his Reign over all Great Britain. the BANQUETING HOUSE, as
the first piece of it, was only raised, which is the finest one Room upon
Earth; and the Ingenious Mr. Nicholas Stone performed as Master-Mason under the
Architect JONES.

Upon his Demise, his Son King CHARLES I. being also a Mason, patronized Mr.
Jones too, and firmly intended to have carried on his Royal Father's Design of
WHITE HALL, according to Mr. Jones's Style; but was unhappily diverted by the
Civil Wars. The Plan and Prospect of that glorious Design being still
preserved, it is estrem'd by skillful Architects to excel that of any other
Palace in the known Earth, for the Symmetry, Firmness, Beauty and Convenience
of Architecture; as indeed all Master JONES's Designs and Erections are
Originals, and (...) first View discover him to be the Architect: Nay, his
mighty Genius prevailed with the Nobility and Gentry of all Britain, (for he
was as much honored in Scotland as in England) to affect and revive the
ancient Style of MASONRY, too long neglected; as appears by the many corious
Fa^^^^ks of those Times, on^ of which shall be now mentioned, the least, and
perhaps one of the fin^st, the GATE of the Physic Garden at OXFORD, raised by
HENRY DANVEKS EARL OF DANBY, which cost his Lordship many hundred ^ounds, and
is as curious a little piece of Masonry as ever was built there le^cre or
since, with the following Inscription on the Front of it, viz.

GLORY DEI OPTIMI MAXIMI, HONORI CAROLI REGIS, IN ^^UM ACADEMIAE E^
REIPUBLICAE, ANNO 1632.

HENRIOUS COMES DANBY.


After the Wars were over, and the Royal Family restored, true Masonry was
likewise restored; especially upon the unhappy Occasion of the Burning of
LONDON, An. 1666; for then the City-Houses were rebuilt more after the Roman
Style, when King CHARLES II. sounded the present St. PAUL's Cathedral in
London, (the old Gothic Fabric being burnt down) much after the Style of St.
PETER's at Rome, conducted by the ingenious Architect, Sir CHRISTOPHER WREN.
That King sounded also his royal Palace at GREENWICH, according to Mr. Inigo
Jones's Design (which he drew before he died) conducted by his Son-in-Law Mr.
WEB: It is now turned into an Hospital for Seamen. He founded also
Chelsea-College, an Hospital for Soldiers; and at EDINBURGH he both founded and
finished his royal Palace of HALY-ROOD-HOUSE, by the Design and Conduct of Sir
WILLIAM BRUCE Bart. the Master of the Royal Works in SCOTLAND It was an ancient
Royal Palace, and rebuilt after the Augustan Style, so neat, that, by competent
Judges, it has been esteemed the finest House belonging to the Crown: And
though it is not very large, it is both magnificent and convenient, both (...)
and Outside, with good Gardens, and a very large Park; and all other adjacent
^ccomodations.
: So that besides the Tradition of old Masons now alive, which may be relied
on, we have much reason to believe that King CHARLES II. was an Accepted
Free-Mason, as every one allows he was a great Encourager of the Craftsmen.

But in the Reign of his Brother King JAMES II. though some Roman Buildings
were carried on, the Lodges of Free-Masons in London much dwindled into
Ignorance, by not being duly frequented and cultivated. But by the royal
Example of his Brother King Charles II. the City of LONDON erected the famous
Monument, where the Great Fire began, all of solid Stone, 202 foot high from
the Ground, a Pillar of the Dorick Order, 15 Fo^t diameter, with a curious
Stair Case in the Middle of black Marble, and an i^^^ Balcony on the Top (not
unlike those of Trajan and Antoninus at ROME from whence the City and Suburbs
may be viewed; and it is the highest Column we know upon Earth. Its Pedestal is
21 Foot square, and 40 Foot high, the Fr^^^ of which is adorned with most
ingenious Emblems in Basso Relieve, w^^^ght by that famous Sculptor, Mr.
Gabriel Cibber, with large La^in ^nscriptions on the Sed^s of it; founded Anno
16^^, (...) finished Anno 1677.

(...) his Time also the Society ^^^^^RCHANT ADVENTURER^ re^^^^^^ (...) ^O^AL
EXCHANGE of London (the (...) desire^'d by the (...) the (...) Style, the (...)
of that Use in Eu^^^^, with the King's Statu^ to the Life, of white Marble,
(...) of the (...) the famous Moster-Carv^^ and Statuary, (...). GRINLIN
G^^BONS, who ^^as justly ad^^^^^ ^il over Europe, (...) rivalling, of (...)
surpassing, (...) most same Italian Masters) on the Pedestal of which is the
following Inscription viz.

CAROLO II. CAESARI BRITANNICO CCCC JAM PROPE ANNOS

TO CHARLES II EMPEROR OF BRITAIN CCCC YEARS

Nor should we forget the famous THEATER of OXFORD, built by Archbishop
SHELDON, at his sole Cost, in th^^^ King's Time, which, among ^i^ other fine
Works, was designed and conducted also by Sir Christopher Wren the king's
Architect; for it is justly admired by the curious; and the MUSAEUM adjoining
to it, a fine Building raild at the Charge of that illustrious UNIVE^SITY,
where there have been since erected several more Roman Buildings, as
Trinity-College Chapel, Allhallows Church in High Street, Peckwater-Square in
Christ-Church College, the n^w Printing House, and the whole of Queen's-College
rebuilt, etc. by the liboral Donations of (...) eminent Benefactors, and by the
public Spirit, Vigilaney, and Fidelity of the Heads of Colleges, who generally
have had a true Taste of Rom^^ Architecture.

The learned UNIVERSITY of CAMBRIDGE (...) having had the Management of such
liberal Donations, have not so many fin^ Structures, but they have two of the
most curious and excellent in Grea^-Britain of their kind, the one a Gothic
Building, KING's COLLEGE CHAPEL (unless you except King Henry VII's Chapel in
Westminster-Abbey); and the other a Roman Building, TRINITY COLLEGE LIBRARY.


But after the Revolution, Anno 1688, KING WILLIAM, though a warlike Prince,
having a good Taste of Achitecture, carried on the aforesaid two famous
Hospitals of Greenwich and Chelsea, built the fine part of his royal Palace of
HAMPTON COURT, and founded and finished his incomparable Palace at LOO in
HOLLAND, etc. And the bright Example of that glorious Prince, (who by most is
reckoned a Free-Mason) did influence the Nobility, the Gentry, the Wealthy and
the Learned of GREAT BRITAIN, to affect much the Augustan Style; as appears by
a vast Number of most curious Edifices erected since throughout the Kingdom:
For when in the Ninth Year of the Reign of our late Sovereign QUEEN ANNE, her
Majesty and the Parliament concurred in an Act for erecting 50 new
Parish-Churches in London, Wesiminster, and Suburbs; and the QUEEN had granted
a Commission to several of the Ministers of State, the principal Nobility,
great Gentry, and eminent Citizens, the two Archbishops, with several other
Bishops and dignified Clergymen, to put the Act in execution; they ordered the
said New Churches to be raised according to the ancient Roman Style, as appears
by those that are already raised; and the present honorable Commissioners
having the same good Judgment of Architecture, are carrying on the same
laudable grand Design, and are reviving the ancient Style, by the Order,
Countenance, and Encouragement of his present Majesty KING GEORGE, who was also
graciously pleased to lay the first Stone in the Foundation of his Parish
Church of St. MARTIN's in Campis, on the South-East Corner (by his Majesty's
Proxy for the time, the present Bishop of Salisbury) which is now rebuilding,
strong, large, and beautiful, at the Cost of the Parishioners. The Bishop of
Salisbury went in an orderly Procession, duly attended, and having levelled the
first Stone, gave it two or three Knocks with a Mallet, upon which, the
Trumpets sounded, and a vast Multitude made loud Acolamations of Joy; when his
Lordship laid upon the Stone a Purse of 100 Guineas, as a Present from his
Majesty for the use of the Graftsmen. The following Inscription was cut in the
Foundation Stone, and a Sheet of Lead put upon it, viz.

D. S. 19 ANNO DOM. 1721.

SACRED TO GOD. 19th OF MARCH ANNO DOMINI 1721




In short, it would require many large Volumes to contain the many splendid
Instances of the mighty Influence of Masonry from the Creation, in every Age,
and in every Nation, as could be collected from Historians and Travelers: But
especially in those Parts of the World where the Europeans correspond and
trade, such Remains of ancient, large, curious, and magnificent Colonading,
have been discovered by the Inquisitive, that they cannot enough lament the
general Devastations of the Goths and Mahometans; and must conclude, that no
Art was ever so much encouraged as this; as indeed none other is so extensively
useful to Mankind. It were endless to recount and describe the many curious
Roman Buildings in Great Britain alone, erected since the Revival of Roman
Masonry; of which a few may be here mentioned, besides those already spoken of,
viz.

The QUEEN's House at Greenwich, Belonging to the Crown. The great Gallery in
Somerset-Gardens, The Crown. Gunnersbury-House near Brentford, Middlesex,
Possessed by the Duke of Queensbury. Lindsay-House in Lincoln's-Inn-Fields,
Duke of Auc. sler. York-Stairs at the Thames in York-Buildings. St.
Paul's-Church in Covent Garden, with its glorious Porti^o. The Building and
Piazza of Covent Garden, Duke of Bedford. Wilton Castle in Wiltshire, Earl of
Pembroke. Castle-Ashby in Northamptonshire, Earl of Strassord. Stoke-Park in
ditto, Arundel Esquire Wing-House in Bedfordshire, Hon. William Stanhope, Esquire
Chevening-House in Kent, Earl Stanhope. Ambrose Bury in Wiltshire, Lord
Carleton.
All designed by the incomparble INIGO JONES, and most of them conducted by
^irn, or by his Son-in-Law Mr. Web, according ot Mr. Jones's Designs.

Besides many more condncted by other Arebitocts, in fluendd by the same happy
Gerins; such as, Bov. Church Steeple in Cheapside. Built by Sir Chri Wren.
Hothim-House in Beverly, Yorkshire, Sir Chales Hothum Bart Melvin Houle in
Fief, Earl of Levin Longleate-House in Wiltshire, Viscount Weymouth.
Chesterlee-street-House in Durham Couunty John Hedworth, Esquire, Montague-House in
Bloomsbury, London, Duke of Montagu. Drumlanrig Castle in Nithisdaleshire,
Dukeof Queensbury. Castle-Howard in Yorkshire, Earl of Carlisle.
Stainborough-House in ditto, Earl of Strafford. Hopton-Castle in
Linlithgowshire, Earl of Hopton. Bleheim-castle at Woodstlock, Oxfordshire,
Duke of Marlborough. Chaswoth-Castle in Derbyshire, Duke of Devonshire. Palace
of Hammilton in Clysdaleshire, Duke of Hammiltton. Wanstead House in
Epping-Forest, Essex, Lord Castlemain. Duncomb-Park in Yorkshire, Thomas Ducomb
Esquire Mereworth Castle in Kent, Hon. John Fane Esquire Sterling-House near
Sterling-castle, Duke of Argyle. Kinross-House in Kinorssshire, Sir William
Bruce Bart. Stourton-castle in Wiltshire, Henry Hoar Esquire Willbury-House in
ditto, William Benson Esquire Bute Castle in Isle of Bute, Earl of Bute.
Walpole-House near Lin Regis, Norsolk, Hon. Rob. Walpole Esquire Burlington-House
in Pickadilly, St. James's Westminster, Earl of Burlington. Dormitory of King's
School, Westminster, The Grown. Tottenham-Park in Wiltshire, Lord Bruce.


These three last are designed and conducted by the Earl of BURLINGTON, alo
bids fair to be the best Architect of Britain, [if be is not so aheady] and we
tear his Lordship intends to publish the valuable Remains of Mr. inigo Jones,
or the Improvement of other Architects.

Besides more of the same Roman Style, and yet many mere in Imitation of it,
which though they cannot be teduc'd to any certain Style, are stately,
beantiful, and convenient Strutlura notauaso stavding the Mistakes of their
several Architects: And besides the sumptuons and venerable Gothic Enthings,
past reckoning, as Cachedrals; P^sish-Chushope, Chapels, Bridges, old Palaces
of the Kings, of the Nobillry, psithe Bjshlops, ^^d the Gentry; known well to
Travelers, and to such as peruse the Histories of Counties, and the ancient
Monuments of great Famdies, etc. as many Erection; of the Roman Style may be
reviewed in Mr. Campbell the Architect's ingenious Book, called VITRUVIUS
BRTTANNICUS: And if the Disposition for truee ancient Masonry prevails, for
some time, with N^lemn, ^^memen, and learned men, (as it is likely it will)
this ISLANI) will beroms the MISTRESS of ^the) Earth, Ifor Desiening, Doawing,
and Counductaw, and capable to instruct alb other Nations in all things
reloting to the ROYALART.


Nay, if it were expedient, it could be made appear, that from this ancient
Fraternity, the Societies or Orders of the Warlike KNIGHTS, and of the
Religious too, in process of time, did borrow many solemn Usages; for none of
them were better instituted, more decently installed, or did more sacredly
observe their Laws and Charges than the Accepted Masons have done, who in all
Ages, and in every Nation, have maintained and propagated their Concernments in
a way peculiar to themselves, which the most Cunning and the most Learned
cannot penetrate into, though it has been often attempted; while They know and
love one another, even without the Help of Speech, or when of different
Languages.

And now the Freeborn BRITISH NATIONS, disintangled from foreign and civil
Wars, and enjoying the good Fruits of Peace and Liberty, having of late much
indulged their happy Genius for Masonry of every sort, and revived the drooping
Lodges of London, this fair Metropolis flourishes, as well as other Parts,
with several worthy particular Lodges, that have a quarterly Communication, and
an annual grand Assembly, wherein the Forms and Usages of the most ancient and
worshipful Fraternity are wisely propagated, and the Royal Art duly cultivated,
and the Cement of the Brotherhood preserved; so that the whole Body resembles a
well built Arch; several Noblemen and Gentlemen of the best Rank, with
Clergymen and learned Scholars of most Professions and Denominations, having
frankly joined and submitted to take the Charges, and to wear the Badges of a
Free and Accepted Mason, under our present worthy Grand-Master, the most noble
PRINCE John Duke of MONTAGUE.

THE CHARGES Of a FREE-MASON, Extracted from the ancient RECORDS of Lodges
beyond Sea, and of those in England, Scotland, and Ireland, for the Use of the
Lodges in London: To be read at the making of New Brethren, or when the Master
shall order it.
The GENERAL HEADS, viz.
I. OF GOD and RELIGION. II. Of the CIVIL MAGISTRATE supreme and subordinate.
III. Of LODGES. IV. Of MASTERS, Wardens, Fellows, and Apprentices. V. Of the
Management of the Craft in working. VI. Of BEHAVIOR, viz. 1. In the Lodge
while constituted. 2. After the Lodge is over and the Brethren not gone. 3.
When Brethren meet without Strangers, but not in a Lodge. 4. In Presence of
Strangers not Masons. 5. At Home, and in the Neighborhood. 6. Toward a
strange Brother.


I. Concerning GOD and RELIGION.
A Mason is obliged, by his Tenure, to obey the moral Law; and if he rightly
understands the Art, he will never be a stupid Atheist, nor an irreligious
Libertine. But though in ancient Times Masons were charged in every Country to
be of the Religion of that Country or Nation, whatever it was, yet it is now
thought more expedient only to oblige them to that Religion in which all Men
agree, leaving their particular Opinions to themselves; that is, to be good Men
and true, or Men of Honor and Honesty, by whatever Denominations or
Persuasions they may distinguished; whereby Masonry becomes the Center of
Union, and the Means of conciliating true Friendship among Persons that must
else have remained at a perpetual Distance.

II. Of the CIVIL MAGISTRATE supreme and Jubordinate.
A Mason is a peaceable Subject to the Civil Powers, wherever he resides or
works, and is never to be concerned in Plots and Conspiracies against the Peace
and Welfare of the Nation, nor to behave himself undutiful to inferior
Magistrates: for as Masonry has been always injured by War, Bloodshed, and
Confusion, so ancient Kings and Princes have been much disposed to encourage
the Craftsmen, because of their Peaceableness and Loyalty, whereby they
practically answered the Cavils of their Adversaries, and promoted the Honor
of the Fraternity, who ever flourished in Times of Peace. So that if a Brother
should be a Rebel against the State, he is not to be countenanced in his
Rebellion, however he may be pitied as an unhappy Man; and if convicted of no
other Crime, though the loyal Brotherhood must and ought to disown his
Rebellion, and give no Umbrage or Ground of political Jealousy to the
Government for the time being; they cannot expel him from the Lodge, and his
Relation to it remains indeseasible.

III. Of LODGES.
A LODGE is a Place where Masons assemble and work: Hence that Assembly, or
duly organized Society of Masons, is called a LODGE, and every Brother ought to
belong to one, and to be subject to its Bylaws and the GENERAL REGULATIONS. It
is either particular or general, and will be best undestood by attending it,
and by the Regulations of the General or Grand Lodge hereunto annexed. In
ancient Times no Master or Fellow could be absent from it, especially when
warned to appear at it, without incurring a severe Censure, until it appear to
the Master and Wardens, that pure Necessity hindered him.

The Persons admitted Members of a Lodge must be good and true Men, freeborn,
and of mature and discreet Age, no Bondmen, no Women, no immoral or scandalous
Men, but of good Report.

IV. Of MASTERS, WARDENS, Fellows, and Apprentices.
All Preserment among Masons is grounded upon real Worth and personal Merit
only; that so the Lords may be well served, the Brethren not put to Shame, nor
the Royal Craft des^^'d: Therefore no Master or Warden i^ chosen by ^e^ority,
but for his Merit. It (...) imposing (...) these things in writing, and every
Brother must attend in his Place, and learn them in a way pecullar to this
Fraternity: Only Candidates may know, that no Master should take an Apprentice,
unless he has sufficient Employment for him, and unless he be a perfect Youth,
having no Maim or Defect in his Body, that may render him incapable of learning
the Art, of serving his Master's LORD, and of being made a Brother, and then a
Fellow-Craft in due time, even after he has served such a Term of Years as the
Custom of the Country directs; and that he should be descended of honest
Parents; that so, when otherwise qualified, he may arrive to the Honor of
being the WARDEN, and then the Master of the Lodge, the Grand Warden, and at
length the GRAND-MASTER of all the Lodges, according to his Merit.

No Brother can be a WARDEN until he has passed the part of a Fellow-Crast; nor
a MASTER until he has acted as a Warden, nor GRAND-WARDEN until he has been
Master of a Lodge, nor GRAND MASTER unless he has been a Fellow-Craft before
his Election, who is also to be nobly born, or a Gentleman of the best Fashion,
or some eminent Scholar, or some curious Architect, or other Artist, descended
of honest Parents, and who is of singular great merit in the Opinion of the
Lodges. And for the better, and easier, and more honorable Discharge of his
Office, the Grand-Master has a Power to choose his own DEPUTY GRAND-MASTER, who
must be then, or must have been formerly, the Master of a particular Lodge, and
has the Privilege of acting whatever the GRAND-MASTER, his Principal, should
act, unless the said Principal be present, or interpose his Authority by a
Letter.

These Rulers and Governors, supreme and subordinate, of the ancient Lodge, are
to be obeyed in their respective Stations by all the Brethren, according to the
old Charges and Regulations, with all Humility, Reverence, Love, and Alacrity.

V. Of the Management of the CRAFT in working.
All Masons shall work honestly on working Days, that they may live creditably
on holy Days; and the time appointed by the Law of the Land, or confirmed by
Custom, shall be observed.

The most expert of the Fellow-Craftsmen shall be chosen or appointed the
Master, or Overseer of the Lord's Work; who is to be called MASTER by those
that work under him. The Craftsmen are to avoid all ill Language, and to call
each other by no disobliging Name, but Brother or Fellow; and to behave
themselves courteously within and without the Lodge.

The Master, knowing himself to be able of Cunning, shall undertake the Lord's
Work as reasonably as possible, and truly dispend his Goods as if they were his
own; nor to give more Wages to any Brother or Apprentice than he really may
deserve.

Both the MASTER and the Masons receiving their Wages justly, shall be faithful
to the Lord, and honestly finish their Work, whether Task or Journey. Nor put
the Work to Task that has been accustomed to Journey.

None shall discover Envy at the Prosperity of a Brother, nor supplant him or
put him out of his Work, if he be capable to finish the same; for no Man can
finish another's Work so much to the Lord's Profit, unless he be thoroughly
acquainted with the Design and Draughts of him that began it.

When a Fellow-Craftsman is chosen Warden of the Work under the Master, he
shall be true both to Master and Fellows, shall carefully oversee the Work in
the Master's Absence to the Lord's Profit; and his Brethren shall obey him.

All Masons employed, shall meekly receive their Wages without Murmuring or
Mutiny, and not desert the Master till the Work is finished.

A younger Brother shall be instructed in working, to prevent spoiling the
Materials for want of Judgment, and for increasing and continuing of Brotherly
Love.

All the Tools used in working shall be approved by the Grand Lodge.

No Labourer shall be employed in the proper Work of Masonry; nor shall
Free-Masons work with those that are not free, without an urgent Necessity; nor
shall they teach Laborers and unaccepted Masons, as they should teach a
Brother or Fellow.

VI. Of BEHAVIOR, viz.
1. In the LODGE while CONSTITUTED.
You are not to hold private Committees, or separate Conversation, without
Leave from the Master, nor to talk of any thing impertinent or unseemly, nor
interrupt the Master or Wardens, or any Brother speaking to the Master: Nor
behave yourself ludicrously or jestingly while the Lodge is engaged in what is
serious and solemn; nor use any unbecoming Language upon any Pretense
whatsoever; but to pay due Reverence to your Master, Wardens, and Fellows, and
put them to worship.

If any Complaint be brought, the Brother found guilty shall stand to the Award
and Determination of the Lodge, who are the proper and competent Judges of all
such Controversies, (unless you carry it by Appeal to the GRAND LODGE) and to
whom they ought to be referred, unless a Lord's Work be hindered the mean
while, in which Case a particular Reference may be made; but you must never go
to Law about what concerns Masonry, without an absolute Necessity apparent to
the Lodge.

2. BEHAVIOR after the LODGE is over and the BRETHREN not gone.
You may enjoy yourselves with innocent Mirth, treating one another according
to Ability, but avoiding all Excess, or forcing any Brother to eat or drink
beyond his Inclination, or hindering him from going when his Occasions call
him, or doing or saying any thing offensive, or that may forbid an easy and
free Conversation; for that would blast our Harmony, and defeat our laudable
Purposes. Therefore no private Piques or Quarrels must be brought within the
Door of the Lodge, far less any Quarrels about Religion, or Nations, or
State Policy, we being only, as Masons, of the Catholic Religion
abovementioned; we are also of all Nations, Tongues, Kindreds, and Languages,
and are resolved against all Politics, as what never yet conduced to the
Welfare of the Lodge, nor ever will. This Charge has been always strictly
enjoined and observed; but especially ever since the Reformation in BRITAIN, or
the Dissent and Secession of these Nations from the Communion of ROME.

3. BEHAVIOR when Brethren meet without Strangers, but not in a LODGE formed.
You are to salute one another in a courteous Manner, as you will be
instructed, calling each other Brother, freely giving mutual Instruction as
shall be thought expedient, without being overseen or overheard, and without
encroaching upon each other, or derogating from that Respect which is due to
any Brother, were he not a Mason: For though all Masons are as Brethren upon
the same Level, yet Masonry takes no Honor from a Man that he had before; nay
rather it adds to his Honor, especially if he has deserved well of the
Brotherhood, who must give Honor to whom it is due, and avoid ill Manners.

4. BEHAVIOR in the Presence of STRANGERS not MASONS.
You shall be cautious in your Words and Carriage, that the most penetrating
Stranger shall not be able to discover or find out what is not proper to be
intimated; and sometimes you shall divert a Discourse, and manage it prudently
for the Honor of the worshipful Fraternity.

5. BEHAVIOR at HOME, and in your NEIGHBORHOOD.
You are to act as becomes a moral and wise Man; particularly, not to let your
Family, Friends, and Neighbors know the Concerns of the Lodge, etc. but wisely
to consult your own Honor, and that of the ancient Brotherhood, for Reasons
not to be mentioned here. You must also consult your Health, by not continuing
together too late, or too long from home, after Lodge Hours are past; and by
avoiding of Gluttony or Drunkenness, that your Families be not neglected or
injured, nor you disabled from working.

6. BEHAVIOR toward a strange BROTHER.
You are cautiously to examine him, in such a Method as Prudence shall direct
you, that you may not be imposed upon by an ignorant false Pretender, whom you
are to reject with Contempt and Derision, and beware of giving him any Hints of
Knowledge.

But if you discover him to be a true and genuine Brother, you are to respect
him accordingly; and if he is in want, you must relieve him if you can, or else
direct him how he may be relieved: You must employ him some Days, or else
recommend him to be employed. But you are not charged to do beyond your
Ability, only to prefer a poor Brother, that is a good Man and true, before any
other poor People in the same Circumstances.

FINALLY, All these CHARGES you are to observe, and also those that shall be
communicated to you in another way; cultivating BROTHERLY-LOVE, the Foundation
and Cape-stone, the Cement and Glory of this ancient Fraternity, avoiding all
Wrangling and Quarelling, all Slander and Backbiting, nor permitting others to
slander any honest Brother, but defending his Character, and doing him all good
Offices, as far as is consistent with your Honor and Safety, and no farther.
And if any of them do you Injury, you must apply to your own or his Lodge; and
from thence you may appeal to the GRAND LODGE at the Quarterly Communication,
and from thence to the annual GRAND LODGE, as has been the ancient laudable
Conduct of our Forefathers in every Nation; never taking a legal Course but
when the Case cannot be otherwise decided, and patiently listening to the honest
and friendly Advice of Master and Fellows, when they would prevent your going
to Law with Strangers, or would excite you to put a speedy Period to all
Lawsuits, that so you may mind the Affair of MASONRY with the more Alacrity
and Success; but with respect to Brothers or Fellows at Law, the Master and
Brethren should kindly offer their Mediation, which ought to be thankfully
submitted to by the contending Brethren; and if that Submission is
impracticable, they must however carry on their Process or Lawsuit without
Wrath and Rancor (not in the common way) saying or doing nothing which may
hinder Brotherly Love, and good Offices to be renewed and continued; that all
may see the benign Influence of MASONRY, as all true Masons have done from the
Beginning of the World, and will do to the End of Time.

AMEN SO MOTE IT BE.
POSTSCRIPT.
A Worthy BROTHER, learned in the Law, has communicated to the Author (while
this Sheet was printing) the Opinion of the Great Judge COKE upon the Act
against Masons, 3 Hen. VI. Chap. I. which is Printed in this Book, Page 34, and
which Quotation the Author has compared with the Original, viz.

COKE's Institutes, third Part, Fol. 99.

The CAUSE wherefore this Offense was made Felony, is, for that the good Course
and Effect of the Statutes of Laborers were thereby violated and broken. Now (
says my Lord COKE) all the Statutes concerning Laborers, before this Act, and
whereunto this Act does refer, are repealed by the Statute of 5 Eliz. Chap. 4.
whereby the Cause and End of the making of this Act is taken away; and
consequently this Act is become of no Force or Effect; for, cessante ratione
Legis, cessat ipsa Lex: And the Indictment of Felony upon this Statute must
contain, that those Chaprers and Congregations were to the violating and
breaking of the good Course and Effect of the Statutes of Laborers; which now
cannot be so alleged, because these Statutes be repealed. Therefore this would
be put out of the Charge of Justices of Peace, written by Master LAMBERT, page
227.

This Quotation confirms the Tradition of old Masons, that this most learned
JUDGE really belonged to the ancient Lodge, and was a faithful Brother.

GENERAL REGULATIONS, Compiled first by Mr. GEORGE PAIN, Anno 1720, when he
was GRAND-MASTER, and approved by the GRAND-LODGE on St. John Baptist's Day,
Anno 1721, at Stationer's-Hall, LONDON; when the most noble PRINCE John Duke of
MONTAGU was unanimously chosen our GRAND-MASTER for the Year ensuing; who chose
JOHN BEAL, M. D. his Deputy Grand-Master; and Mr. Josiah Villeneau Mr. Tho.
Morris, jun. were chosen by the Lodge GRAND-WARDENS. And now, by the Command of
our said Right Worshipful GRAND-MASTER MONTAGU, the Author of this Book has
compared them with, and reduced them to the ancient Records and immemorial
Usages of the Fraternity, and digested them into this new Method, with several
proper Explications, for the Use of the Lodges in and about London and
Westminster.
I. THE GRAND-MASTER, or his DEPUTY, has Authority and Right, not only to be
present in any true Lodge, but also to preside wherever he is, with the
Master of the Lodge on his Left Hand, and to order his Grand-Wardens to attend
him, who are not to act in particular Lodges as Wardens, but in his Presence,
and at his Command; because there the GRAND-MASTER may command the Wardens of
that Lodge, or any other Brethren he pleases, to attend and act as his Wardens
pro tempore.

II. The MASTER of a particular Lodge has the Right and Authority of
congregating the Members of his Lodge into a Chapter at pleasure, upon any
Emergency or Occurrence, as well as to appoint the time and place of their
usual forming: And in case of Sickness, Death, or necessary Absence of the
Master, the senior Warden shall act as Master pro tempore, if no Brother is
present who has been Master of that Lodge before; for in that Case the absent
Master's Authority reverts to the last Master then present; though he cannot
act until the said senior Warden has once congregated the Lodge, or in his
Absence the junior Warden.

III. The Master of each particular Lodge, or one of the Wardens, or some other
Brother by his Order, shall ^^ep a Book containing their Bylaws, the Names of
their Members, with a List of all the Lodges in Town, and the usual Times and
Places of their forming, and all their Transactions that are proper to be
written.

IV. No Lodge shall make more than FIVE new Brethren as one Time, nor any Man
under the Age of Twenty-five, who must be also his own Master; unless by a
Dispensation from the Grand-Master or his Deputy.

V. No Man can be made or admitted a Member of a particular Lodge, without
previous notice one Month before given to the said Lodge, in order to make due
Enquiry into the Reputation and Capacity of the Candidate; unless by the
Dispensation aforesaid.

VI. But no Man can be entered a Brother in any particular Lodge, or admitted
to be a Member thereof, without the unonimous Consent of all the Members of
that Lodge then present when the Candidate is proposed, and their Coment is
formally asked by the Master; and they are to signify their Consent or Dissent
in their own prudent way, either virtually or in form, but with Unanimity: Nor
is this inherent Privilege subject to a Dispensation; because the Members of a
particular Lodge are the best Judges of it; and if a fractious Member should be
imposed on them, it might spoil their Harmony, or hinder their Freedom; or even
break and disperse the Lodge; which ought to be avoided by all good and true
Brethren.

VII. Every new Brother at his making is decently to cloth the Lodge, that is,
all the Brethren present, and to deposite something for the Relief of indigent
and decayed Brethren, as the Candidate shall think fit to bestow, over and
above the small Allowance stated by the Bylaws of that particular Lodge; which
Charity shall be lodged with the Master or Wardens, or the Cashier, if the
Members think fit to choose one.

And the Candidate shall also solemnly promise to submit to the Constitutions,
the Charges, and Regulations, and to such other good Usages as shall be
intimated to them in Time and Place convenient.

VIII. No Set or Number of Brethren shall withdraw or separate themselves from
the Lodge in which they were made Brethren, or were afterward admitted
Members, unless the Lodge becomes too numerous; nor even then, without a
Dispensation from the Grand-Master or his Deputy: And when they are thus
separated, they must either immediately join themselves to such other Lodge as
they shall like best, with the unanimous Consent of that other Lodge to which
they go (as above regulated) or else they must obtain the Grand-Master's
Warrant to join in sorming a new Lodge.

If any Set or Number of Masons shall take upon themselves to form a Lodge
without the Grand-Master's Warrant, the regular Lodges are not to countenance
them, nor own them as fair Brethren and duly formed, nor approve of their Acts
and Deeds; but must treat them as Rebels, until they humble themselves, as the
Grand-Master shall in his Prudence direct, and until he approve of them by his
Warrant, which must be signified to the other Lodges, as the Custom is when a
new Lodge is to be registered in the List of Lodges.

IX. But if any Brother so far misbehave himself as to render his Lodge uneasy,
he shall be twice duly admonished by the Master or Wardens in a formed Lodge;
and if he will not refrain his Imprudence, and obediently submit to the Advice
of the Brethren, and reform what gives them Offense, he shall be dealt with
according to the Bylaws of that particular Lodge, or else in such a manner as
the Quarterly Communication shall in their great Prudence think fit; for which
a new Regulation may be afterward made.

X. The Majority of every particular Lodge, when congregated, shall have the
Privilege of giving Instructions to their Master and Wardens, before the
assembling of the Grand Chapter, or Lodge at the three Quarterly Communications
hereafter mentioned, and of the Annual Grand Lodge too; because their Master
and Wardens are their Representatives, and are supposed to speak their Mind.

XI. All particular Lodges are to observe the same Usages as much as possible;
in order to which, and for cultivating a good Understanding among Free-Masons,
some Members out of every Lodge shall be deputed to visit the other Lodges as
often as shall be thought convenient.

XII. The GRAND-Lodge consists of, and is formed by the Masters and Wardens of
all the regular particular Lodges upon Record, with the GRAND-MASTER at their
Head, and his Deputy on his Left Hand, and the Grand-Wardens in their proper
Places; and must have a QUARTERLY COMMUNICATION about Michaelmas, Christmas,
and Lady Day, in some convenient Place, as the Grand-Master shall appoint,
where no Brother shall, be present, who is not at that time a Member thereof,
without a Dispensation; and while he stays, he shall not be allowed to vote,
nor even give his Opinion, without Leave of the Grand-Lodge asked and given, or
unless it be duly asked by the said Lodge.

All Matters are to be determined in the Grand-Lodge by a Majority of Votes,
each Member having one Vote, and the Grand-Master having two Votes, unless the
said Lodge leave any particular thing to the Determination of the Grand-Master,
for the sake of Expedition.

XIII. At the said Quarterly Communication, all Matters that concern the
Fraternity in general, or particular Lodges, or single Brethren, are quietly,
sedately, and maturely to be discoursed of and transacted: Apprentices must be
admitted Masters and Fellow-Craft only here, unless by a Dispensation. Here
also all Differences, that cannot be made up and accommodated privately, nor by
a particular Lodge, are to be seriously considered and decided: And if any
Brother thinks himself aggrieved by the Decision of this Board, he may appeal
to the annual Grand-Lodge next ensuing, and leave his Appeal in Writing, with
the Grand-Master, or his Deputy, or the Grand-Wardens.

Here also the Master or the Wardens of each particular Lodge shall bring and
produce a List of such Members as have been made, or even admitted in their
particular Lodges since the last Communication of the Grand-Lodge: And there
shall be a Book kept by the Grand-Master, or his Deputy, or rather by some
Brother whom the Grand-Lodge shall appoint for SECRETARY, wherein shall be
recorded all the Lodges, with their usual Times and Places of forming, and the
Names of all the Members of each Lodge; and all the Affairs of the Grand-Lodge
that are proper to be written.

They shall also consider of the most prudent and effectual Methods of
collecting and disposing of what Money shall be given to, or lodged with them
in Charity, toward the Relief only of any true Brother fallen into Poverty or
Decay, but of none else: But every particular Lodge shall dispose of their own
Charity for poor Brethren, according to their own Bylaws, until ir be agreed
by all the Lodges (in a new Regulation) to carry in the Charity collected by
them to the GRAND-LODGE, at the Quarterly or Annual Communication, in order to
make a common Stock of it, for the more handsome Relief of poor Brethren.

They shall also appoint a Treasurer, a Brother of good worldly Substance, who
shall be a Member of the Grand-Lodge by virtue of his Office, and shall be
always present, and have Power to move to the Grand-Lodge any thing, especially
what concerns his Office. To him shall be committed all Money raised for
Charity, or for any other Use of the Grand-Lodge, which he shall write down in
a Book, with the respective Ends and Uses for which the several Sums are
intended; and shall expend or disburse the same by such a certain Order signed,
as the Grand-Lodge shall afterward agree to in a new Regulation: But he shall
not vote in choosing a Grand-Master or Wardens, though in every other
Transaction. As in like manner the Secretary shall be a Member of the
Grand-Lodge by virtue of his Office, and vote in every thing except in choosing
a Grand-Master or Wardens.

The Treasurer and Secretary shall have each a Clerk, who must be a Brother and
Fellow-Craft, but never must be a Member of the Grand-Lodge, nor speak without
being allowed or desired.

The Grand-Master, or his Deputy, shall always command the Treasurer and
Secretary, with their Clerks and Books, in order to see how Matters go on, and
to know what is expedient to be done upon any emergent Occasion.

Another Brother (who must be a Fellow-Craft) should be appointed to look after
the Door of the Grand-Lodge; but shall be no Member of it.

But these Offices may be farther explained by a new Regulation, when the
Necessity and Expediency of them may more appear than at present to the
Fraternity.

XIV. If at any GRAND-LODGE, stated or occasional, quarterly or annual, the
GRAND-MASTER and his Deputy should be both absent, then the present Master of a
Lodge, that has been the longest a Free-Mason, shall take the Chair, and
preside as Grand-Master pro tempore; and shall be vested with all his Power and
Honor for the time; provided there is no Brother present that has been
Grand-Master formerly, or Deputy Grand-Master; for the last Grand-Master
present, or else the last Deputy present, should always of right take place in
the Absence of the present Grand-Master and his Deputy.

XV. In the GRAND-LODGE none can act as Wardens but the Grand-Wardens
themselves, if present; and if absent, the Grand-Master, or the Person who
presides in his Place, shall order private Wardens to act as Grand-Wardens pro
tempore, whose Places are to be supplied by two Fellow-Craft of the same Lodge,
called forth to act, or sent thither by the particular Master thereof; or if by
him omitted, then they shall be called by the Grand-Master, that so the
Grand-Lodge may be always complete.

XVI. The GRAND-WARDENS, or any others, are first to advise with the Deputy
about the Affairs of the Lodge or of the Brethren, and not to apply to the
Grand-Master without the Knowledge of the Deputy, unless he refuse his
Concurrence in any certain necessary Affair; in which Case, or in case of any
Difference between the Deputy, an^ ^he Grand-Wardens, or other Brethren, both
Parties are to go by Concert to the Grand-Master, who can easily decide the
Controversy and make up the Difference by virtue of his great Authority.

The Grand-Master should receive no Intimation of Business concerning Masonry,
but from his Deputy first, except in such certain Cases as his Worship can well
judge of; for if the Application to the Grand-Master be irregular, he can
easily order the Grand-Wardens, or any other Brethren thus applying, to wait
upon his Deputy, who is to prepare the Business speedily, and to lay it orderly
before his Worship.

XVII. No GRAND-MASTER, Deputy Grand-Master, Grand-Wardens, Treasurer,
Secretary, or whoever acts for them, or in their stead pro tempore, can at the
same time be the Master or Warden of a particular Lodge; but as soon as any of
them has honorably discharged his Grand Office, he returns to that Post or
Station in his particular Lodge, from which he was called to officiate above.

XVIII. If the DEPUTY GRAND-MASTER be sick, or necessarily absent, the
Grand-Master may choose any Fellow-Craft he pleases to be his Deputy pro
tempore: But he that is chosen Deputy at the Grand-Lodge, and the Grand-Wardens
too, cannot be discharged without the Cause fairly appear to the Majority of
the Grand-Lodge; and the GRAND-MASTER, if he is uneasy, may call a GRAND-LODGE
on purpose to lay the Cause before them, and to have their Advice and
Concurrence: In which case, the Majority of the Grand-Lodge, if they cannot
reconcile the MASTER and his Deputy or his Wardens, are to concur in allowing
the MASTER to discharge his said Deputy or his said Wardens, and to choose
another Deputy immediately; and the said Grand-Lodge shall choose other Wardens
in that Case, that Harmony and Peace may be preserved.

XIX. If the GRAND-MASTER should abuse his Power, and render himself unworthy
of the Obedience and Subjection of the Lodges, he shall be treated in a way and
manner to be agreed upon in a new Regulation; because hitherto the ancient
Fraternity have had no occasion for it, their former GRAND-MASTERS having all
behaved themselves worthy of that honorable Office.

XX. The GRAND-MASTER, with his Deputy and Wardens, shall (at least once) go
round and visit all the Lodges about Town during his Mastership.

XXI. If the GRAND-MASTER die during his Mastership, or by Sickness, or by
being beyond Sea, or any other way should be rendered incapable of discharging
his Office, the DEPUTY, or in his Absence, the Senior GRAND-WARDEN, or in his
Absence the Junior, or in his Absence any three present Masters of Lodges,
shall join to congregate the GRAND-LODGE immediately, to advise together upon
that Emergency, and to send two of their Number to invite the last GRAND-MASTER
to resume his Office, which now in course reverts to him; or if he refuse, then
the next last, and so backward: But if no former Grand-Master can be found,
then the Deputy shall act as Principal, until another is chosen; or if there be
no Deputy, then the oldest Master.

XXII. The BRETHREN of all the Lodges in and about London and Westminster,
shall meet at an ANNUAL COMMUNICATION and Feast, in some convenient Place, on
St. JOHN Baptist's Day, or else on St. JOHN Evangelist's Day, as the
Grand-Lodge shall think fit by a new Regulation, having of late Years met on
St. John Baptist's Day: Provided,

The Majority of the Masters and Wardens, with the Grand-Master, his Deputy and
Wardens, agree at their Quarterly Communication, three Months before, that
there shall be a Feast, and a General Communication of all the Brethren: For if
either the Grand-Master, or the Majority of the particular Masters, are against
it, it must be dropped for that Time.

But whether there shall be a Feast for all the Brethren, or not, yet the
GRAND-LODGE must meet in some convenient Place annually on St. JOHN's Day; or
if it be Sunday, then on the next Day, in order to choose every Year a new
GRAND-MASTER, Deputy, and Wardens.

XXIII. If it be thought expedient, and the GRAND-MASTER, with the Majority of
the Masters and Wardens, agree to hold a GRAND FEAST, according to the ancient
laudable Custom of Masons, then the GRAND-WARDENS shall have the Care of
preparing the Tickets, sealed with the Grand-Master's Seal, of disposing of the
Tickets, of receiving the Money for the Tickets, of baying the Materials on the
Feast, of finding out a proper and convenient Place to feast in; and of every
other Thing that concerns the Entertainment.

But that the Work may not be too burdensome to the two Grand-Wardens, and
that all Matters may be expeditiously and safely managed, the Grand-Master, or
his Deputy, shall have Power to nominate and appoint a certain Number of
Stewards, as his Worship shall think fit, to act in Concert with the two
Grand-Wardens; all Things relating to the Feast being decided amongst them by a
Majority of Voices; except the Grand-Master or his Deputy interpose by a
particular Direction of Appointment.

XXIV. The Wardens and Stewards shall, in due time, wait upon the Grand-Master,
or his Deputy, for Directions and Orders about the Premises; but if his
Worship and his Deputy are sick, or necessarily absent, they shall call
together the Masters and Wardens of Lodgea to meet on purpose for their Advice
and Orders; or else they may take the Matter wholly upon themselves, and do the
best they can.

The Grand-Wardens and the Stewards are to account for all the Money they
receive, or expend, to the Grand-Lodge, after Dinner, or when the Grand-Lodge
shall think fit to receive their Accounts.

If the Grand-Master pleases, he may in due time summon all the Masters and
Wardens of Lodges to consult with them about ordering the Grand-Feast, and
about any Emergency or accidental Thing relating thereunto, that may require
Advice; or else to take it upon himself altogether.

XXV. The Masters of Lodges shall each appoint one experienced and discreet
Fellow-Crast of his Lodge, to compose a Committee, consisting of one from every
Lodge, who shall meet to receive, in a convenient A pactment, every Person that
brings a Ticket, and shall have Power to discourse him, if they think fit, in
orde^ to admit him, or debar him, as they shall see cause: Provided they send
no Man away before they have acquainted all the Brethren within Doors with the
Reasons thereof, to avoid Mistakes; that so no true B^other may be debarred,
nor a false Brother or mere Pretender, admitted. This Committee must meet very
early on St. John's Day, at the Place, even before any Persons come with
Tickets.

XXVI. The Grand-Master shall appoint two or more trusty Brethren to be
Porters, or Door-keepers, who are also to be early at the Place for some good
Reasons; and who a^^ to be at the Command of the Committee.

XXVII. The Grand-Wardens, or the Stewards, shall appoint beforehand such a
Number of Brethren to serve at Table as they think fit and proper for that
Work; and they may advise with the Masters and Wardens of Lodges about the most
proper Persons, if they please, or may take in such by their Recommendation;
for none are to serve that Day; but free and accepted Masons, that the
Communication may be free and harmonious.

XXVIII. All the Members of the Grand-Lodge must be at the Place long before
Dinner, with the Grand-Master, or his Deputy at their Head, who shall retire,
and form themselves. And this is done in order, 1. To receive any Appeals duly
lodged, as above regulated, that the Appellant may be heard, and the Affair may
be amicably decided before Dinner, if possible; but if it cannot, it must be
delayed till after the new Grand-Master is elected; and if it cannot be decided
after Dinner, it may be delayed, and referred to a particular Committee, that
shall quietly adjust it, and make Report to the next Quarterly Communication,
that Brotherly-Love may be preserved. 2. To prevent any Difference or Disgust
which may be feared to arise that Day; that no Interruption may be given to the
Harmony and Pleasure of the GRAND FEAST. 3. To consult about whatever concerns
the Decency and Decorum of the Grand-Assembly, and to prevent all Indecency and
ill Manners, the Assembly being promiscuous. 4. To receive and consider of any
good Motion or any momentous and important Affair, that shall be brought from
the particular Lodges, by their Representatives, the several Masters and
Wardens.


XXIX. After these things are discussed, the GRAND-MASTER and his Deputy, the
Grand-Wardens, or the Stewards, the Secretary, the Treasurer, the Clerks, and
every other Person, shall withdraw, and leave the Masters and Wardens of the
particular Lodges alone, in order to consult amicably about electing a NEW
GRAND-MASTER, or continuing the present, if they have not done it the Day
before; and if they are unanimous for continuing the present Grand-Master, his
Worship shall be called in, and humbly desired to do the Fraternity the Honor
of ruling them for the Year ensuing: And after Dinner it will be known whether
he accepts of it or not; For it should not be discovered but by the Election it
self.

XXX. Then the Masters and Wardens, and all the Brethren, may converse
promiscuously, or as they please to sort together, until the Dinner is coming
in, when every Brother takes his Seat at Table.

XXXI. Some time after Dinner the GRAND-LODGE is formed, not in Retirement, but
in the Presence of all the Brethren, who yet are not Members of it, and must
not therefore speak until they are desired and allowed.

XXXII. If the GRAND-MASTER of last Year has consented with the Masters and
Wardens in private, before Dinner, to continue for the Year ensuing; then one
of the Grand-Lodge, deputed for that purpose, shall represent to all the
Brethren his Worship's good Government, etc. And turning to him, shall, in the
name of the Grand Lodge, humbly request him to do the FRATERNITY the great
Honor (if nobly born, if not, the great Kindness) of continuing to be their
Grand Master for the Year ensuing. And his Worship declaring his Consent by a
Bow or a Speech, as he pleases, the said deputed Member of the Grand-Lodge
shall proclaim him GRAND-MASTER, and all the Members of the Lodge shall salute
him in due Form. And all the Brethren shall for a few Minutes have leave to
declare their Satisfaction, Pleasure and Congratulation.

XXXIII. But if either the Master and Wardens have not in private, this Day
before Dinner, nor the Day before, desired the last Grand-Master to continue in
the Mastership another Year; or if he, when desired, has not consented: Then,
The last Grand-Master shall nominate his Successor for the Year ensuing, who if
unanimously approved by the Grand-Lodge, and if there present, shall be
proclaimed, saluted, and congratulated the New Grand Master as above hinted,
and immediately installed by the last Grand-Master, according to Usage.

XXXIV. But if that Nomination is not unanimously approved, the new
Grand-Master shall be chosen immediately by Ballot, every Master and Warden
writing his Man's Name, and the last Grand-Master writing his Man's Name too;
and the Man, whose Name the last Grand Master shall first take out, casually or
by chance, shall be GRAND-MASTER for the Year ensuing; and if present, he shall
be proclaimed, saluted, and congratulated, as above hinted, and forthwith
installed by the last Grand-Master according to Usage.

XXXV. The last Grand-Master thus continued, or the new Grand-Master thus
installed, shall next nominate and appoint his Deputy Grand-Master, either the
last or a new one, who shall be also declared, saluted and congratulated, as
above hinted.

The GRAND-MASTER shall also nominate the new GRAND-WARDENS, and if unanimously
approved by the Grand-Lodge, shall be declared, saluted, and congratulated as
above hinted; but if not, they shall be chosen by Ballot, in the same way as
the Grand-Master: As the Wardens of private Lodges are also to be chosen by
Ballot in each Lodge, if the Members thereof do not agree to their Master's
Nomination.

XXXVI. But if the BROTHER, whom the present Grand-Master shall nominate for
his Successor, or whom the Majority of the Grand-Lodge shall happen to choose by
Ballot, is, by Sickness or other necessary Occasion, absent from the
Grand-Feast, he cannot be proclaimed the NEW GRAND-MASTER, unless the old
Grand-Master, or some of the Masters and Wardens of the GRAND-LODGE can vouch,
upon the Honor of a Brother, that the said Person, so nominated or chosen,
will readily accept of the said Office; in which case the old GRAND-MASTER
shall act as Proxy, and shall nominate the Deputy and Wardens in his Name, and
in his Name also receive the usual Honors, Homage, and Congratulation.

XXXVII. Then the GRAND-MASTER shall allow any Brother, Fellow-Craft, or
Apprentice to speak, directing his Discourse to his Worship; or to make any
Motion for the good of the Fraternity, which shall be either immediately
considered and finished, or else referred to the Consideration of the
GRAND-LODGE at their next Communication, stated or occasional. When that is
over,

XXXVIII. The GRAND-MASTER or his Deputy, or some Brother appointed by him,
shall harangue all the Brethren, and give them good Advice: And lastly, after
some other Transactions, that cannot be written in any Language, the Brethren
may go away or stay longer, as they please.

XXXIX. Every Annual GRAND-LODGE has an inherent Power and Authority to make
new Regulations, or to alter these, for the real Benefit of this ancient
Fraternity: Provided always that the old LANDMARKS be carefully preserved, and
that such Alterations and new Regulations be proposed and agreed to at the
third Quarterly Communication preceding the Annual Grand Feast; and that they
be offered also to the Perusal of all the Brethren before Dinner, in writing,
even of the youngest Apprentice; the Approbation and Consent of the Majority of
all the Brethren present being absolutely necessary to make the same binding
and obligatory; which must, after Dinner, and after the new GRAND-MASTER is
installed, be solemnly desired; as it was desired and obtained for these
REGULATIONS, when proposed by the GRAND-LODGE, to about 150 Brethren, on St,
John Baptist's Day, 1721.

POSTSCRIPT.
Here follows the Manner of constituting a NEW LODGE, as practiced by his Grace
the DUKE of WHARTON, the present Right Worshipful GRAND-MASTER, according to
the ancient Usages of MASONS.
A NEW LODGE, for avoiding many irregularities, should be solemnly constituted
by the Grand-Master, with his Deputy and Wardens; or in the Grand-Master's
Absence, the Deputy shall act for his Worship, and shall choose some Master of a
Lodge to assist him; or in case the Deputy is absent, the Grand-Master shall
call forth some Master of a Lodge to act as Deputy pro tempore.

The Candidates, or the new Master and Wardens, being yet among the
Fellow-Craft, the GRAND-MASTER shall ask his Deputy if he has examined them,
and finds the Candidate Master well skilled in the noble Science and the royal
Art, and duly instructed in our Mysteries, etc.

And the Deputy answering in the affirmative, he shall (by the Grand-Master's
Order) take the Candidate from among his Fellows, and present him to the
Grand-Master; saying, Right worshipful Grand-Master, the Brethren here desire
to be formed into a new Lodge; and I present this my worthy Brother to be their
Master, whom I know to be of good Morals and great Skill, true and trusty, and
a Lover of the whole Fraternity, wheresoever dispersed over the Face of the
Earth.

Then the GRAND-MASTER, placing the Candidate on his lest Hand, having asked
and obtained the unanimous Consent of all the Brethren, shail say, I constitute
and form these good Brethren into a new Lodge, and appoint you the Master of
it, not doubting of your Capacity and Care to preserve the Cement of the Lodge,
etc. with some other Expressions that are proper and usual on that Occasion,
but not proper to be written.

Upon this the Deputy shall rehearse the Charges of a Master, and the
GRAND-MASTER shall ask the Candidate, saying, Do you submit to these Charges as
Masters have done in all Ages? And the Candidate signifying his cordial
Submission thereunto, the Grand-Master shall, by certain significant Ceremonies
and ancient Usages, install him, and present him with the Constitutions, the
Lodge-Book, and the Instruments of his Office, not all together, but one after
another; and after each of them, the Grand-Master or his Deputy, shall rehearse
the short and pithy Charge that is suitable to the Thing presented.

After this, the Members of this new Lodge, bowing all together to the
Grand-Master, shall return his Worship Thanks, and immediately do their Homage
to their new Master, and signify their Promise of Subjection and Obedience to
him by the usual Congratulation.

The Deputy and the Grand-Wardens, and any other Brethren present, that are not
Members of this new Lodge, shall next congratulate the new Master; and he shall
return his becoming Acknowledgements to the Grand-Master first, and to the rest
in their Order.

Then the Grand-Master desires the new Master to enter immediately upon the
Exercise of his Office, in choosing his Wardens: And the new Master, calling
forth two Fellow-Craft, presents them to the Grand-Master for his Approbation,
and to the new Lodge for their Consent. And that being granted,

The senior or junior Grand-Warden, or some other Brother for him, shall
rehearse the Charges of Wardens; and the Candidates being solemnly asked by the
new Master, shall signify their Submission thereunto.

Upon which the new Master, presenting them with the Instruments of their
Office, shall in due Form, install them in their proper Places; and the
Brethren of that new Lodge shall signify their Obedience to the new Wardens by
the usual Congratulation.

And this LODGE being thus completely constituted, shall be registered in the
Grand-Master's Book, and by his Order notified to the other Lodges.

APPROBATION.
WHEREAS by the Confusions occasioned in the Saxon, Danish, and Norman Wars,
the Records of Masons have been much vitiated, the Free-Masons of England twice
thought it necessary to correct their Constitutions, Charges, and Regulations;
first in the Reign of king Athelstan the Saxon, and long after in the Reign of
King Edward IV. the Norman: And whereas the old Constitutions in England have
been much interpolated, mangled, and miserably corrupted, not only with false
Spelling, but even with many false Facts and gross Errors in History and
Chronology, through Length of Time, and the Ignorance of Transcribers, in the
dark illiterate Ages, before the Revival of Geometry and ancient Architecture,
to the great Offense of all the learned and judicious Brethren, whereby also
the Ignorant have been deceived.

And our late worthy Grand-Master, his Grace the Duke of MONTAGU, having
ordered the Author to peruse, correct, and digest into a new and better Method,
the History, Charges, and Regulations of the ancient Fraternity; He has
accordingly examined several Copies from Italy and Scotland, and sundry Parts
of England, and from thence, (though in many things erroneous) and from several
other ancient Records of Masons, he has drawn forth the above-written new
Constitutions, with the Charges and General Regulations. And the Author having
submitted the whole to the Perusal and Corrections of the late and present
Deputy Grand-Masters, and of other learned Brethren; and also of the Masters
and Wardens of particular Lodges at their Quarterly Communication; he did
regularly deliver them to the late Grand-Master himself, the said DUKE of
MONTAGU^ for his Examination, Correction, and Approbation; and his Grace, by
the Advice of several Brethren, ordered the same to be handsomely printed for
the use of the Lodges, though they were not quite ready for the Press during his
Mastership.

THEREFORE We, the present Graud-Master of the Right Worshipful and most
ancient Fraternity of Free and Accepted Masons, the Deputy Grand-Master, the
Grand-Wardens, the Masters and Wardens of particular Lodges (with the Consent
of the Brethren and Fellows in and about the Cities of London and West minster)
having also perused this Performance, Do join our laudable Predecessors in our
solemn Approbation thereof, as what We believe will fully answer the End
proposed; all the valuable Things of the old Records being retained, the Errors
in History and Chronology corrected, the false Facts and the improper Words
omitted, and the whole digested in a new and better Method.

And we ordain that these be received in every particular Lodge under our
Cognizance, as the ONLY CONSTITUTIONS of Free and Accepted Masons amongst us,
to be read at the making of new Brethren, or when the Master shall think fit;
and which the new Brethren should peruse before they are made.

PHILIP Duke of WHARTON, Grand-Master, J. T. DESAGULIERS, L. L. D. and F. R. S.
DEPUTY Grand-Master, JOSHUA TIMSON, Grand-Warden. WILLIAM HAWKINS,
Grand-Warden.
And the Masters and Wardens of particular Lodges, viz.

I. THOMAS MORRIS, sen. Master John Brislow Warden. Abrabam Abbot Warden.
II RICHARD HALL, Master. Philip Wolverston Warden John Doyer Warden.
III. JOHN TURNER, Master. Anthony Sayer Warden. Edward Cale Warden.
IV. Mr. GEORGE PAIN, Mass. Stephen Hall, M. D. Warden. Francis Sorell, Esquire
Warden.
V. Mr. M^BIRKHEAD Master. Francis Bailey Warden. Ni^holas Abraham Warden.
VI. WILLIAM READ, Master. John Gloo^^ Warden. Robert Cordell Warden.
VII. HENRY BRANSON, Master. Henry ^ug Warden. John Townsend Warden.
VIII. (...) Master. Jonat^an Sisson Warden. John Skipton Warden.
IX. GEO^OWEN, M. D. Master. Eman Bowen Warden. John Heath Warden.
X. (...) Master. John Lubton Warden. Richard Smith Warden.
XI. FRANCIS Earl of Dalkeith, Mr. Capt. Andrew Robinson Warden. Col. Thomas
Inwood Warden.
XII. JOHN BEAL, M. D. and F. R. S. Master. Edward Pawlet; Esquire Warden. Charles
Moro, Esquire Warden.
XIII. THO MORRIS, jun, Master. Joseph Ridler Warden. John. Clark Warden.
XIV. THO ROB, Esquire Master. Thomas Gra^^ Warden. Bray Lane Warden.
XV. JOHN SHEPHERD, Master. John Senex Warden. John Bucler Warden.
XVI. J. GEORGES, Esquire Master. Robert Gray, Esquire Warden. Charles Grymes, Esquire
Warden.
XVII. JA. ANDEKSON, A. M. and Author of this Book, Master Gwin Vaughan, Esquire
Warden Walter Greenwood, Esquire Warden
XVIII. THO HARBIN, Master. William Attley Warden. John Saxon Warden.
XIX. ROBERT CAPELL, Master. Isaac Mansfield Warden. William Bly Warden.
XX. JOHN GORMAN, Master. Charles Garey Warden. Edward Morphey Warden.

THE Master's SONG. OR THE HISTORY of MASONRY.
To be sung with a Chorus, when the MASTER shall give Leave (no Brother being
present to whom Singing is disagreeable) either one Part only, or all together,
as he pleases.
PART I.
I.
ADAM, the first of humane Kind,
Created with GEOMETRY
Imprinted on his Royal Mind,
Instructed soon his Progeny
CAIN and SETH, who then improved
The liberal Science in the Art
Of Architecture, which they loved,
And to their Offspring did impart.
II.
CAIN a City fair and strong
First built, and called it Consecrate,
From Enoch's Name, his eldest Son,
Which all his Race did imitate:
But godly ENOCH, of Seth's Loins,
Two Columns raised with mighty Skill:
And all his Family enjoins
True Colonading to fulfill.
III.
Our Father NOAH next appeared
A Mason too divinely taught;
And by divine Command uprear'd
The ARK, that held a goodly Fraught:
'Twas built by true Geometry,
A Plece of Architecture fine;
Helped by his Sons, in number THREE,
Concuning in the grand Design.
IV.
So from the general Deluge none
Were fav'd, but Masons and their Wives;
And all Mankind from them alone
Descending, Architecture thrives;
For they, when multiplied amain,
Fir to disperse and fill the Earth,
In SHINAR's large and lovely Plain
To MASONRY gave second Birth
V.
For most of Mankind were employed,
To build the City and the Tow^r;
The General Lodge was overjoyed,
In such Effects of Masons Power;
'Till vain Ambition did provoke
Their Maker to confound their Plot;
Yet though with Tongues confused they spoke,
The learned Art they never forgot.
CHORUS.
Who can unfold the Royal Art?
Or sing its Secrets in a Song?
They Are safely kept in Masons HEART
And to the ancient Lodge belong.
[Stop here to drink the present GRAND MASTER's Health. PART II.
I.
THUS when from BABEL they disperse
In Colonies to distanr Climes,
All Masons true, who could rehearse
Their Works to those of after Times;
King NIMROD fortified his Realm,
By Castles, Towers, and Cities fair;
MITZRA'M, who ruled at Egypt's Helm,
Built Pyramids stupendous there.
II.
Nor JAPHET, and his gallant Breed,
Did less in Masonry prevail;
Nor SHEM, and those that did succeed
To promised Blessings by Entail;
For Father ABRAM brought from UR
Geometry, the Science good;
Which he revealed, without demur,
To all descending from his Blood.
III.
Nay JACOB's Race at length were taught,
To lay aside the Shepherd's Crook,
To use Geometry were brought,
Whilst under Phar'ob's cruel Yoke,
'Till MOSES Master-Mason rose,
And led the HOLY LODGE from thence,
All Masons trained, to whom he chose,
His curious Learning to dispense.
IV.
AHOLIAB and BEZALEEL,
Inspired Men, the TENT uprear'd;
Where the Shechinah chose to dwell,
And Geometrick Skill appeared:
And when these valiant Masons filled
Canaan, the learned PHENICIANS knew
The Tribes of Israel better skilled
In Architecture firm and true.
V.
For DAGON's House in Gaza Town,
Artfully propt by COLUMNS two;
By SAMSON's mighty Arms pulled down
On Lords Philistian, whom it slew;
Though 'twas the finest Fabric raised
By Canaan's Sons, could not compare
With the Creator's Temple praised,
For glorious Strength and Structure fair.
VI.
But here we stop a while to toast
Our MASTER's Health and Wardens both;
And warn you all to shun the Coast
Of Samson's Shipwrackt Fame and Troth;
His Secrets once to WIFE disclosed
His Strength was fled, his Courage tamed
To cruel Foes he was exposed,
And never was a Mason named.
CHORUS.
Who can unfold the Royal Art?
Or sing its Secrets in a Song?
They Are safely kept in Masons HEART,
And to the ancient Lodge belong.
[Stop here to drink the Health of the Master and Wardens of this particular
Lodge. PART III.
I.
WE sing of MASONS ancient Fame
When fourscore Thousand Craftsmen stood,
Under the MASTERS of great Name
Three Thousand and six Hundred good,
Employed by SOLOMON the Sire
And General MASTER MASON too;
As HIRAM was in stately Tire,
Like Salem built by Masons true.
II.
The Royal Art was then divine,
The Craftsmen counseled from above,
The Temple did all Works outshine,
The wondering World did all approve,
Ingenious Men, from every Place,
Came to survey the glorious Pile;
And ^^hen returned, began to trace,
And imitate its lofty Style.
III.
At length the GRECIANS came to know
Geometry, and learnt the Art,
Which great PYTHAGORAS did show,
And Glorious EUCLID did impart;
The amazing ARCHIMEDES too,
And many other Scholars good;
'Till Ancient ROMANS did review
The Art, and Science understood.
IV.
But when proud ASIA they had quelled,
And GREECE and EGYPT overcome,
In Architecture they excelled,
And brought the Learning all to ROME;
Where wise VITRUVIUS, Master prime
Of Architects, the Art improved,
In Great AUGUSTUS peaceful Time,
When Arts and Artists were beloved
V.
They brought the Knowledge from the East;
And as they made the Nations yield,
They spread it through the North and West,
And taught the World the Art to bund,
Witness their Ci^adels and Towers.
To fortify the^r Legions fine.
Their Temples, Palaces, and Bowers,
That spoke the Masons GRAND LESIGN
VI.
Thus mighty Eastern Kings, and some
Of Abram's Race, and Mona^ch^ good.
Of Egypt, Syria, Greece, and Rame,
True Architecture unde Rood
No wonder then if Mason^ j^^n,
To celebrate those Mason Kings,
With solemn Note and flowing Wine,
Whilst every Brother jointly sings,
CHORUS.
Who can unfold the Royal Art?
Or sing its Secrets in a Song?
They Are safely kept in Mason's Heart,
And to the ancient Lodge belong.
[Stop here to drink to the glorious Memory of Emperors, Kings, Princes,
Nobles, Gentry, Clergy, and learned Scholars that ever propagated the Art. PART
IV.
I.
OH! glorious Days for Masons wise,
Over all the Roman Empire when
Their Fame, resounding to the Skies,
Proclaimed them good and useful Men;
For many Ages thus employed,
Until the Goths with warlike Rage,
And brutal Ignorance, destroyed
The Toil of many a learned Age.
II
But when the conquering Goths were brought
To Embrace the Christian Faith, they found
The Folly that their Fathers wrought,
In loss of Architecture sound.
At length their Zeal for stately Fanes,
And wealthy Grandeur, when at Peace,
Made them exert their utmost Pains,
Their Gothic Buildings to up-raise
III.
Thus many a sumptuous lofty Pile
Was raised in every Christian Land,
Though no^ conform to Roman Style,
Yet which did Reverence command.
The King and Cr^st agreeing still,
In well formed Lodges to supply
The mournful Want of Roman Skill
With their new sort of Masonry.
IV.
For many Ages this prevails,
Their Work is Architecture deemed;
In England, Scotland, Ireland, Wales,
The Craftsmen highly are esteemed,
By Kings, as Masters of the Lodge,
By many a wealthy noble Peer,
By Lord and Lord, by Priest and Judge,
By all the People every where
V.
So Masons ancient Records tell,
King At^elstan, of Saxon Blood,
Gave them a Charter free to dwell
In Losty Lodge, with Orders good,
Drawn from old Writings by his Son,
Prince Edwin, General Master bright,
Who met at York the Brethren soon,
And to that Lodge did all recite.
VI.
Thence were their Laws and Charges fine
In every Reign observed with Care,
Of Saxon, Danish, Norman Line,
Till British Crowns united were:
The Monarch First of this whole Isle
Was learned James a Mason King,
Who first of Kings revived the Styl^
Of great Augustus: therefore sing.
CHORUS
Who can unfold the Royal A^^?
Or sing its Secrets in a Song?
They Are safely kept in Mason's ^eart,
And to the ancient Lodge belong.
[Stop here to drink to the happy Memory of all the Revivers of the ancient
Augustan Style. PART V.
I.
THUS though in Italy the Art
From Gothic Rubbish first was raised;
And great Palladio did impart
A Style by Masons justly praised:
Yet here his mighty Rival Jones,
Of British Architects the prime,
Did build such glorious Heaps of Stones,
As never were matched since Caesar's Time.
II.
King Charles the first, a Mason too,
With several Peers and wealthy Men,
Employed him and his Craftsmen true,
'Till wretched Civil Wars began.
But after Peace and Crown restored,
Though London was in Ashes laid,
By Masons Art and good Accord,
A finer London reared its Head.
III.
King Charles the second raised the^^
The finest Column upon Earth,
Founded St. Paul's, that stately Fane,
And Royal Change, with Joy and Mirth:
But afterward the Lodges failed;
Till great Nassau the Taste revived,
Whose brigh^ Example so prevailed
That ever since the Art has thrived
IV.
Let other Nations boast at will,
Great Britain now will yield to none,
For true Geometry and Skill,
In building Timber, Brick and Stone,
For Architecture of each sort,
For curious Lodges, where we find
The Noble and the Wise resort,
And drink with Craftsmen true and kind
V.
Then let good Brethren all rejoice,
And fill their Glass with cheerful Heart.
Let them express with grateful Voice
The Praises of the wondrous Art
Let every Brother's Health go round,
Not Fool or Knave but Mason tru^,
And let our Master's Fame resound,
The noble Duke of MONTAGU.
CHORUS.
Who can unfold the Royal Art?
Or sing its Secrets in a Song?
They Are safely kept in Mason's Heart,
And to the ancient Lodge belong.
THE Warden's Song; OR ANOTHER HISTORY of MASONRY. COMPOSED Since the most
noble Prince PHILIP Duke of WHARTON was chosen GRAND-MASTER.
To be sung and played at the Quarterly Communication.
I.
WHEN ever we are alone,
And every Stranger gone,
In Summer, Autumn, Winter, Spring,
Begin to play, begin to sing,
The mighty Genius of the lofty Lodge,
In every Age,
That did engage
And well inspired the Prince, the Priest, the Judge,
The Noble and the Wise to join
In rearing Mesons Grand Design.
II.
The Grand Design to rear,
Was ever Mason's Care,
From Adam down before the Flood,
Whose Art old No^th understood,
And did impart to Joplet, S^em and Ham,
Who taught their Race
To build apace
Proud Babel's Town and Tower, until it came
To be admired too much, and then
Dispeised were the Sons of M^n.
III.
But though their Tongues consus'd
In distant Climes they used,
They brought from Shinar Orders good,
To rear the Art they understood:
Therefore sing first the Princes of the Isles;
Next Belus great,
Who fixed his Seat
In old Assyria, building stately Piles;
And Mitzraim's Pyramids among
The other Subjects of our Song.
IV.
And S^em, who did instill
The useful wondrous Skill
Into the Minds of Nations great:
And Abram next, who did relate
The Assyrian Learning to his Sons, that when
In Egypt's Land,
By Pharoah's Hand,
Were roughly taught to be most skilful Men;
Till their Grand-Master Moses rose
And them delivered from their Foes.
V.
But who can sing his Praise,
Who did the Tent upraise?
Then sing his Workmen true as Steel,
Aholiah and Bezaleel;
Sing Tire and Sydon, and Phenicians old.
But Samson's Blot
Is never forgot:
He blabb'd his Secrets to his Wife, that sold
Her Husband, who at last pulled down
The House on all in Gaza Town.
VI.
But Solomon the King
With solemn Note we sing,
Who reared at length the Grand Design,
By Wealth, and Power, and Art divine;
Helped by the learned Hiram Tyrian Prince,
By Crastsmen good,
That understood
Wise Hiram Abif's charming Influence:
He aided Jewish Masters bright,
Whose curious Works none can recite
VII.
These glorious Mason Kings
Each thankful Brother sings,
Who to its Zenith raised the Art,
And to all Nations did impart
The useful Skill: For from the Temple fine,
To every Land,
And foreign Strand,
The Crastsmen marched, and taught the Grand Desion;
Of which the Kings, with mighty Peers,
And learned Men, were Overseers.
VIII.
Diana's Temple next,
In Lesser Asia fixed;
And Babylon's proud Walls, the Seat
Of Nebuchadnezar the Great;
The Tomb of Mausolus, the Carian King
Which many a Pile
Of lofty Style
In Africa and Greater Asia, sing,
In Greece, in Sicily, and Rome,
That had those Nations overcome.
IX.
Then sing Augustus too,
The General Master true,
Who by Vitruvius did refine
And spread the Masons Grand Design
Through North and West; till ancient Britons chose
The Royal Art
In every Part,
And Roman Architecture could disclose;
Until the Saxons warlike Raye
Destroyed the Skill of many an Age.
X.
At length the Gothi^k S^^le
Prevailed in Britain's Isle,
When Masens Grand Design ^eviv'd,
And in their well formed Lodpes thrived,
Though not as formerly in Roman Days:
Yet sing the Fanes
Of Saxons, Danes,
Of S^ots, Welsh, Irish; but sing first the Praise
Of Athelstan and Edwin Prince,
Our Master of great Influence.
XI.
And eke the Norman Kings
The British Mason sings:
Till Roman Style revived there,
And British Crowns united were
In learned James, a Mason King, who raised
Fine Heaps of Stones
By Inigo Jones,
That rivaled wise Palladio, justly praised
In Italy, and Britain too,
For Architecture firm and true.
XII.
And thence in every Reign
Did Masonry obtain
With Kings, the Noble and the Wise,
Whose Fame resounding to the Skies,
Excites the present Age in Lodge to join,
And Aprons wear,
With Skill and Care,
To r^ise the Masons ancient Grand Design,
And to revive the Augustan Style
In many an artful glorious Pile.
XIII.
From henceforth ever sing
The Craftsman and the King,
With Poetry and Music sweet
Resound their Harmony complete?
And with Geometry in skilful Hand,
Due Homage pay,
Without Delay,
To Wharton's noble Duke our Master Grand
He rules the Freeborn Sons of Art,
By Love and Friendship, Hand and Heart.
CHORUS.
Who can rehearse the Praise,
In soft Poetic Lays,
Or solid Prose, of Masons true,
Whose Art transcends the common View?
Their Secrets, never to Strangers yet exposed,
Preserved shall be
By Masons Free,
And only to the ancient Lodge disclosed;
Because they are kept in Masons Heart
By Brethren of the Royal Art.
To fill up this Page, it is thought not amiss to insert here a Paragraph from
an old Record of Ma^^ns, viz. The Company of Masons, being otherwise termed
Free Masons, of an^^ent Staunding and cood Reckoning, by means of affable and
kind Meetings diverse Tym^^, and as a loving Brotherhood should use to do, did
frequent this mutual Assembly in the Tym^ of King Henry V. the 12th Year of his
most gracious Reign And the said Record describing a Cont of Arms, much the
same with That of the LONDON COMPANY of Freemen Masons, it is generally
believed that the said Company is descended of the ancient Fraternity; and that
in former Times no Man was made free of that Company until he was installed in
some Lodge of Free and Accepted Masons, as a necessary Qualification. But that
laudable Practiss seems to have been long in Dissuetude. The Brethren in
foreign Parts have also dis^over'd that several noble and ancient Societies and
Orders of Men have derived their Charges and Regulations from the Free-Masons,
(which are now the most ancient Order upon Earth) and perhaps were originally
all Members too of the said ancient and worshipful Fraternity. But this will
more fully appear in due Time.

THE FELLOW-CRAFTS SONG:
By our Brother CHARLES DELAFAYE, Esquire
To be sung and played at the GRAND FEAST.
I.
HAIL Masonry! thou Craft di ^ue!
Glory of Earth, from Heav^^ ^^eve^^^^
Which do with Jewels precious shi^^^,
From all but Musons Eyes concealed.
CHORUS.
Thy Praises due who can rehearse
In nervous Pros^^^^or flowing Verse?
II.
As Men from Brutes distinguished are,
A ^^san other Men excels;
For what is in Knowledge choice and rare
But in his Breast securely dwells?
CHORUS
His silent Breast and saithful Heart
Priserve the Secrets of the Art.
III.
From scorching Hear, and piercing Cold;
From Beasts, whose Roar the Forest r^nds;
From the Assaults of Warriors bold
The Masons Art Mankind defends.
CHORUS.
Be to this Art due Honor paid,
From which Mankind receives such Aid.
IV.
Ensigns of State, that s^^^ ^word ^^ide,
Distinctions tro^^leso^^^ ^^d v^in!
By Masons true are (...) a^r^^:
^^^rt, s^^^^orn Son. s^^^^ Toes (...);
CHORU^.
Ennobled by the ^ame they (...);
Disingaisht by the Badge they wear.
V.
Sweet Fel^^^^ship, from (...) ^^e!
Friendly C^^^^veiso of B^or^;
The Le^^^ls (...) Cern it be^^^^
Whi^^ (...) for Ages firmi^ (...)
CHORUS
A Lodge, ^^us b^i^^. Yes (...)
Has lasted, (...) ever (...)
VI.
Then in our S^n^^ be (...) done
To thos^ who have enri^^^d the Art,
From John down to Burl (...)
And let ^^ch brother b^^^^ Part.
CHORUS.
Let noble Masons Heal^^s^^o round
Their Praise in lesty Lod^^e resound.
THE Entered 'PRENTICES SONG.
By our late BROTHER Mr. MATTHEW BIRKHEAD, deceased.
To be sung when all grave Business is over, and with the MASTER's Leave.
I.
COME let us prepare,
We Brothers that are
Assembled on merry Occasion:
Let Us drink, laugh, and sing;
Our Wine has a Spring:
Here Is a Health to an Accepted Mason.
II.
The World is in pain
Our Secrets to gain,
And still let them wonder and gaze on;
They never can divine
The Word or the Sign
Of a Free and an Accepted Mason.
III.
It Is This, and it is That,
They cannot tell What,
Why so many Great Men of the Nation
Should Aprons put on,
To make themselves one
With a Free and an Accepted Mason.
IV.
Great Kings, Dukes, and Lords,
Have laid by their Swords,
Our Mystery to put a good Grace on,
And never been ashamed
To hear themselves named
With a Free and an Accepted Mason.
V.
Antiquity's Pride
We have on our side,
And it makes Men just in their Station:
There Is naught but what is good
To be understood
By a Free and an Accepted Mason.
VI.
Then join Hand in H^nd,
T'each each other n^^^ stand,
Let Us be merry, and put a brigh Face on:
What Mortal can bo^^t
So NOBLE A TOAST,
As a Free and an Accepted Mason.
A New SONG.
I.
WHAT though they call us Masons Fools,
We prove by Geometry and Rules,
We Have Arts are taught in all our Schools;
They charge us falsely then.
We make it plainly to appear,
By our Behavior every where
That where you meet a Mason, there
You meet a Gentleman.
II.
It Is true we once have charged been
With Disobedience to our Queen;
But after Monarchs plain have seen,
The Secrets they have sought.
We hatch no Plots against the State,
Nor against great Men in Power prate
But all that is generous, good and great
Is daily by us taught.
III.
What noble Structures do we see
By ancient Brethren raised be!
The World's surpised, and shall not we
Then honor Masonry?
Let those that do despise the Art
Live in a Cave in some Desert,
And herd with beasts from Men apart,
For their Stupidity.
IV.
View but those Savage Nations, where
No Masonry did ever appear,
What strange unpolished Brutes they are
Then honor Masonry.
It makes us courteous, easy, free,
Generous, honorable, and gay;
What other Art the like can say?
Here Is a Health to Masonry.
LONDON, this 17th Day of January, 1722, 3.

AT the Quarterly Communication, This Book, which was undertaken at the Command
of His GRACE the DUKE of MONTAGU, our late Grand-Master, having been regularly
approved in Manuscript by the Grand-Lodge, was this Day produced here in Print,
and approved by the SOCIETY: Wherefore we do hereby Order the same to be
Published, and recommend it for the Use of the LODGES.

PHILIP DUKE of WHARTON, Grand-Master. J. T. DESAGULIERS, Deputy Grand-Master.


FINIS.

