Solemn Warning TO THE Secure World, FROM The GOD of terrible Majesty. OR, The
Presumptuous Sinner Detected, his Pleas Considered, and his Doom Displayed.
Being an ESSAY, in which the strong Proneness of Mankind to entertain a false
Confidence is proved; The Causes and Foundations of this Delusion opened and
considered in a great Variety of Particulars; The Folly, Sinfulness and
dangerous Consequences of such a presumptuous Hope exposed, and Directions
proposed how to obtain that Scriptural and Rational Hope, which makes not
ashamed. In a DISCOURSE from DEUTERONOMY. xxix. 19, 20, 21.

By Gilbert Tennent, M. A. Minister of the Gospel a$ N. Brunswick N. Jersey.

Incidit in Scyllam cupiens vitare Charybdin.

Joel ii. 1. Blow ye the Trumpet in Zion, sound an Alarm in my holy Mountain:
Let all the Inhabitants of the Land tremble.

BOSTON, N.E. Printed by S. KNEELAND and T. GREEN, for D. HENCHMAN in Cornhill,
MDCCXXXV.

THE PREFACE.
Candid Reader,
I Am sensible that the Subject insisted on in the following Sheets, is none of
the most grateful and pleasing to corrupt and degenerate Nature, and therefore,
if I have aimed at my own Honor, I have pursued a wrong Method to attain or
secure it, in choosing this so grating and disgusting a Subject, and in treating
upon it in such a po$$ed Style: But, if it is not the most pleasing, I dare be
bold to assert that it is one of the most suitable, necessary and profitable;
considering the general and lamentable Security that prevails so exceedingly
among the Children of this Generation.

Although the unjust Censures of ungodly People, are oftentimes so far from
being afflictive to me, that they afford Matter of Consolation, Mat. 5.12. They
cannot please me better, than by giving me the Honor of an unjust Abuse; except
they turn to the blessed JESUS. On the contrary their Praises make me
suspicious (with one of the Ancients) that I have done something amiss; yet, as
to the Detracters and Aspersers themselves, I cannot but be sorrowful for the
Sin they coutract, and the Danger they inour, by their unjust Reproaches! To
prevent both which, I thought it needful to propose an Answer to some general
Objections, which, I foresaw, would (according to humane Probability) be
levelled against the following Composura.

And

1. Perhaps some may object against the Matter of it, as well as against the
pointed Manner of Expression, that both are too terrible.

A. What I have advanced, I think I have prev'd by plain Scripture Evidence. I
hope the Objector will have more Modesty than to find Fault with the sacred
Oracles, because they don't suit his Plate; but if waving that antiquated, though
graceful Virtue, he will fall soul on the holy Scriptures, I wonder not that he
censures me; and as I wonder not at his Reflections against my self, so I mind
them not any otherwise, than so as to esteem them, as a Pearl in my Crown, as a
Badge of Honor, and a Cause of Triumph. But more particularly, the Truth is,
Such be the Miseries of presumptuous and impenitent Sinners, in this, and
especially in the next World, that what I have offered comes far short of an
equal, much less of an excessive Description of them. It is a just and received
Maxim that Heaven and Hell don't admit a Hyperbole. Indeed a Cherub's Tongue or
Quill could scarce expand or display them sufficiently. Conceive of GOD
perfectly, and then you may perfectly conceive of and describe his Anger. But
this is impossible for a finite Understanding, as Zophar informs us, Job 11.7,
8, 9. Can thou by searching find out God? Can thou find out the Almighty
unto Perfection? It is high as Heaven what can thou do? Deeper than Hell,
what can thou know? The Measure thereof is longer than the Earth, and broader
than the Sea! Friend, thou shall know by Experience, either by a sound
Conviction here, or by a dreadful Condemnation hereafter, that I have nor
equaled, much less exceeded the Sorrows and Pains of the damned State, in the
Description I have given of them.

As to the sharpness of the Style, I shall only offer this brief Apology, that
the Nature of the Subject treated of, and the Security of the World require it,
and instead of retracting it, I could wish it were much more pointed, it falls
so far short of my Desire this Way; and though I freely acknowledge that planting
and watering are nothing to Purpose, that the most solemn Matter, and acrid
Style, will not avail without the divine Benediction; yet in the mean time, I
believe that God ordinarily uses Instruments, most suited to the Work he designs
to accomplish: Blunt Instruments (in my Opinion) are not suited to pierce hard
Hearts, or alarm secure Souls.

But to give a satisfactory Reply, to this Objection complexly considered, if
possible, I shall offer to your Consideration the Sentiments of some great
Lights of the Protestant Church upon this Head, with some of the Reasons they
advance to confirm them by. Dr. Stillingfleet in one of his Sermons upon that
Text, 2 Cor. 6.11. Knowing the Terror of the Lord, we persuade Men; has these
Words, That if this "Reason does not persuade Men, there is no Reason to expect
any other should, if almighty Power cannot awaken us, if infinite Justice cannot
affright us, if a Judgment to come cannot make us tremble, and eternal Misery
leave no Impression upon us, what Arguments or Methods can we imagine would
reclaim us from our Sins?

Bishop Hopkins in his Sermon upon Heb 10.30. has these very memorable
Expressions, page 367, 8. There are "two principal Attributes of God, which the
Scripture propounds to us as the most powerful and efficacious Motives to
restrain us from Sin; and they are his Mercy and his Justice: Mercy though it be
a soft yet it is a strong Argument to encourage us to Purity and Holiness, Romans
2.4. He that can encourage himself in his Wickedness, upon the Consideration of
the infinite free Grace of God, does spurn these very Bowels that yern toward
him, and strikes at God with his golden Scepter, yea tears abroad those Wounds
that were at first opened for him, and casts the Blood of his Savior back
again in his Face. But because Ingenuity is perished from off the Earth, and
Men are more generally apt to be wrought upon by Arguments drawn from Fear,
than Love, therefore the Scripture propounds to us the dreadful Consideration
of the Justice of God, arrayed in all the Terrible Circumstances of it, that if
Mercy will not allure us, Justice may affright us from our Sins. As those who are
to travel through Wildernesses and Deserts, carry Fire with them to terrify
wild and ravenous Beasts, to secure themselves from their Assaults, so does the
great God who has to deal with brutish Men, Men more savage than the wild
Beasts; he kindles a Fire about him, and appears to them all in Flames and
Fury, that so he might fright them from their hold Attempts, who otherwise
would be ready to run upon his Neck, and the thick Bosses of his Buckler, Job
15.26. There is a strange Dullness and Stupor seized us that we can no longer
keep waking then we are shook, and therefore as we use to apply Fire and
burning Coals to Lethargick Persons to awaken them, so we have need to heap
Coals of Fire upon Men's Heads, to speak with fiery Tongues, and thunder Woe and
Wrath, and Judgments against them, that we may rouse the secure and stupid
World, and scorch them into Life and Sense.

Learned Mr. Boil has these Expressions, in his Treatise upon the Torments of
Hell, page 255. That the forethoughts "of future Punishments are the most
likely Means to excite our Endeavors to prevent it.

He adds a weighty pungent Reason to confirm his Sentiments. For (says he) this
is an Argument suited to one "of the strongest Passions of humane Nature, our
Fears. Nay it is almost the only Argument that sensual and secure Sinners seem
at first capable of being affected and moved by. If we endeavor to reclaim
them to their Duty, by setting before them the endearing Obligations of divine
Love: This is an Argument that may indeed touch an ingenuous Mind, but it is
likely to make little Impression upon an unthankful and stupid Heart. If we
would entice them to the Paths of Holiness, by proposing to them the spiritual
Joys that attend them, alas, they neither understand nor relish them. If we
would win and attract them by displaying the Glories of Heaven before their
Eyes; the Objects are too Sublime and Spiritual for their gross Affections to
aspire to: So that we have no Argument so proper as this, to set before them
the Torments of Hell. For these are the most easily understood and conceived,
and if seriously believed and considered, they carry the most irresistible
Force to awaken the Consciences of the most stupid Sinners, and convince them
of the Necessity of flying from the Wrath to come. For who can dwell with
devouring Fire? Who can dwell with everlasting Burnings? This is an Argument
that reaches the Principle of Self-Preservation, so deeply rooted in our
Natures, that strongly prompts us to flee with all possible Speed, from what we
apprehend to be the greatest and most certain Evil. So that if any Argument can
make Impression on an obdurate Sinner, it must be this drawn from the Prospect
of the eternal Vengeance, as hardest Metals are soonest melted by the Fire.

I might easily add a Number more of great Names and Arguments, but to avoid
Prolixity, and also because this Objection is afterward considered, I shall
proceed to another Objection which is this.

Possibly some may object against the Method, that it is perplexed and consus'd.

I answer, That perhaps the Prolixity of the Discourse, and the Numerousness of
the Heads contained in it, makes is appear more so than it really is, when the
whole Frame, and Relation of the several Parts to each other is complexly
considered. Again, I confess that my Design was rather to profit a plainer
Order of Men, than to please Critics and curious Persons, whose most notable
Talent is to condemn all, but what they do themselves. If I know any thing of
my own Heart, my Scope was rather to wound the Heart, than to tickle the Fancy.

If any should object against the Prolixity of the following Discourse, I
answer, That the Matter treated of is various, though the main Scope and
principle Subject is but one; and many of the Heads are succinctly and briefly
handled, so that I hope the well inclined Reader will be rather diverted by a
grateful Variety, than surfeited and tired by a tedious Prolixity; and that the
principal Points treated of may be found with more Ease and Expedition, I have
annexed an Index, by consulting which the Reader may turn to what suits his
Inclination best.

If any should again object, that considering the Meanness of the whole
Composure, that it is but a piece of Pride and Presumption (in so critical and
censorious an Age) to expose so young a Production to public Light; I desire
those Gentlemen to consider, whether they are not too bold and precipitant in
passing such a hasty Judgment upon the secret Springs of another's Actions,
which it is God's Prerogative and his only (who is Cardiognostos, the Searcher
of the Hearts) to know immediately and infaliibly? And pray let them consider,
that all Men have not the same Taste, Trahit sua quemq; Voluptas: Men's Fancies
as their Features are various, and Fancy through our sad Degeneracy has too
much the Ascendant over our Judgment: Others may admire what you disdain. Pro
Captu Lectoris habent sua Fata Libelli. Books have their different Fates
according to their Readers Fancies.

Further, Is it not necessary that every Member of Christ's mystical Body,
should labor to advance the Interest of his Kingdom, according to their
Capacity and Opportunity? But more especially those of a public Character? The
Widow's Mite was kindly accepted and put into the Treasury, though very small,
and the Donor commended, Mark 12.42, 43 We don't find that those poor People
who could not bring Gold and Silver, and Purple, if they did but bring Goats
Hair, and Badgers Skins, for the Service of the Temple; I say, we don't find
that such, and their Offerings were rejected, no, but on the contrary, they
were accepted, Exodus 35.5, 6, 23. If so, then perhaps a melanoholy Prospect of
the dangerous Security, that the Generality of Mankind are involved in, with an
earnest Desire after their Conviction, Conversion and Salvation, will be found
at the general Judgment to be the principal Occasion of the Composure and
Publication of the following Sheets. I profess that when I preached at Amboy
the Substance of this Tract, in the same Order and Diction, that it now appears
in to public View, I had no Thoughts of ever letting it see a brighter Light,
than the Audience that first heard it, but that it should sink with others of
the like Tendency, I had preached there, and in other Places which I am
pastorally related to, in a dark Obscurity and silent Oblivion. But some
Opposition being made against some Things I had delivered, and being desired to
give a Copy of what I had preached, while I was transcribing the original
Paper, the Sutableness of the Subject, to the present secure State of the most
of the gospeliz'd World, presenting it self to my Mind, had some Influence upon
me; I was inclined to think, that were these Heads already proposed, further
enlarged upon, with the Addition of some others, they might be serviceable in
the Hand of Christ, to awaken and direct some weaker People, who were destitute
of better Helps Now after having enlarged the Discourse, I was induced by the
Importunity of some Friends, to permit it is Publication, and the rather by this
Consideration, that if it should please Almighty God to call me off the
fleeting Stage of Time, by Death, I might leave a small, a poor Man's Legacy,
to my Hearers at Amboy, N Brunswick, and other Places, either to convince or
condemn the Impenitent, and to support and direct such as had learned of the
Father, to know the Truth as it is in Jesus.

I am not insensible that those very Persons, for whose Good and Benefit this
Tract was principally composed, and to whom it is especially directed, are like
to be most displeased with the Matters contained in it; for many Men are so in
Love with their delusive Ease, that they are willing and fond to purchase it at
the dearest Rate, even at the Cost of their present and future Happiness; and
as they are willingly ignorant of their present Danger, and future Misery; so
they hate and oppose the most direct and awakening Methods to correct the one,
and prevent the other; and the$efore I would carnestly b$g these few Requests,
of the Christless and presumptuous Reader, for Chrisi's sake, and for his own
Soul's sake, (1.) That he would read the whole before he condemn a Part. (2.)
That he would weigh the Composure, and it is several Parts, not in the Scales of
Fancy, or Prejudice, but in the Balances of Scripture, and right Reason. And
(3.) That he be earnest with God by humble Supplication, for Light and
Direction. But I know not how to finish this prefatory Discourse, without the
Addition of a particular Address to those of my Hearers, that are yet in a
State of Sin and Security.

Beloved Brethren, You have often heard your Danger described, you have had
many a Call, by the Word, and Providence of God, as well as by your own
Consciences, and are you not awakened yet? O strange! O mournful! Others have
been (through Grace) convinced and changed effectually by the Means you enjoy,
and will not these be a Witness against you at the Tribunal of Christ? What will
you be able to say in your own Vindication? Then will not Blushing and Confusion
cover you, and guilty Silence be your Answer? What, does the Word prove a
Savor of Life unto Life to others, and of Death unto Death to you? O dreadful!
What do you intend to do dear Brethren? Will you sleep for ever? Will you sleep
till Death and Hell awake you? Or do you think that you may go to Heaven in
this Slumber of carnal Security? If you do you shall find your selves miserably
mistaken! as is fully proved in the following Tract. Be not d$ceiv'd Brethren,
The Kingdom of Heaven suffers Violence, and the violent (and they only) take it
by Force, Matthew. 11.12. Let me address you as the Prophet Elijah did the People
of Israel, 1 Kings 18.21. How long halt ye between two Opinions? If the Lord be
God follow him: but if Baal then follow him. Or as the Shipmaster to Jonah, who
was fast asleep in the midst of a great Tempest, Jonah 1.5. What meanest thou,
O Sleeper? Arise, call upon thy God, if so be he will think upon us that we
perish not, Verse 6. It Is a just and pertinent Note of Mr. Henry, upon this
Passage of Scripture, That those who sleep in a Storm may "well be asked what
they mean? Brethren, You sleep in a greater Storm then Jonah did; that only
concerned the B$die, but this the precious Soul; that a temporal, but this an
eternal Death. Y$u are (whether you know it or not sensibly) every Moment ready
to be swallowed up by the boisterous Billows of God's justly incensed Ire, and
the Vessel of your Souls like to be broken by a dreadful Inundation of kis
vindictive Fury and Revenge: Deuteronomy. 32.41, 35. Romans 12.19 And yet will you
sleep, what Metal are you "made of? What God do you fear? Or are you deal to
all the Menaces of Heaven? Will not the Terrors of an eternal God, and an
eternal Hell make you afraid? What mean you? Are you yet wholly lost to Sense,
to Reason, and to Conscience? Are you degenerated into Beasts? Or petrified
into Stones? Are you covered with the Leviathan's Scales that no Arrow from the
Bow of God will pierce you! May Not the Example of Jonas's Fellow Mariners make
you ashamed? Jonah 1.5. Then the Mariners were afraid, and cried every Man to
his God, and cast forth the Wares that were in the Ship, into the Sea, to
lighten it of them. But perhaps you mock at Fear, and are not affrighted,
though the Heavens look black, and God's Lightnings and Thunders, from blazing,
trembling Sinai, flash and groan, and rore hideously! Though God's Law condemn
you, and your own Consciences tell you, that you shall surely perish, if ye die
in the same State you are now in, yet you holdly, or rather shall I say
impudently, or stupidly brave it out in the Face of an angry Heaven! And run
upon the thick Bosses of God's Bucklers, and are not afraid when God's great
Ordnance is levelled at your naked Bosom. You will not be persuaded by any
Importunity to cast these Goods out of the Ship, (as the Mariners did) which
will if retained sink it in Death. I mean your darling Lusts which you must
forsake or perish. Mat. 5.29. Again, the affrighted Mariners cried every one to
his God, Ver. 5. Why don't you awake poor Souls, and cry every one of you to
God, with the utmost Vehemence, as the Disciples of Christ did in a Storm, when
the Waves were like to overwhelm the Vessel, Lord, save us we perish! Mat.
8.25. Or as Peter's Hearers, Acts 2.37. Men and Brethren, What shall we do to
be saved? Sirs, Suffer me to acost you in the Language of Paul to the
Ephesians, Chap. 5.14. Awake thou that sleep, and arise from the Dead, and
Christ shall give thee Light; for the Time past of our Life may suffice us, to
have wrought the Will of the Gentiles. 1 Pet. 4.3. Awake to Righteousness and
sin not: for some have not the Knowledge of God: $word$ speak this to your
Shame. 1 Cor. 15.34. And especially knowing the Time, that now it is high Time
to awake out of Sleep. But I cannot in Regard of you add the Apostle's Reason,
Romans 13.11. For now is your Salvation nearer than when ye believed. No
Brethren! I am obliged in Faithfulness to God, and Love to you, to tell that
inasmuch as you did not, and now do not believe, that your Damnation is nearer
than when ye first heard the Gospel of Christ, and Salvation by his Blood;
because of your unbelieving Obstinacy and presumptuous Security.

Awake, Awake Sinners, stand up and lock where you are hastening, least you
drink of the Hand of the Lord, the Dregs of the Cup of his Fury; the Cup of
trembling, and wring them out, Isai. 51.17. Awake ye Drunkards, and weep and
howl, Joel 1.5. For what can ye expect (so continuing) but to drink of that Cup
of Trembling I but now mentioned.

Awake ye profane Swearers, and remember ye will not get a drop of Water to
cool your cursing cursed Tongues in Hell, when they and you shall flame in the
broad burning Lake, Luke 16.24. God has said he will not hold you Guiltless,
that take his Name in vain, Exodus 20.7.

Awake ye unclean Adulterers, and Whoremongers, and remember that without a
speedy Repentance, your dismal abode shall be ever with unclean Devils, the
Soul of a God shall be avenged upon you, Jer. 5.8, 29.

Awake ye Sabbath Breakers, and reform; or God will break you upon the Wheels
of his Vengeance, and torture you eternally upon the Rack of his Justice,
Nehem. 13.16, 17, 18.

And let all other sorts of profane Sinners be entreated to awake out of Sleep
and consider their Danger.

Awake ye covetous griping Nabals, and read what the Apostle James says to you,
Chap 5.1 to 6. Go to now, ye rich Men, weep and howl for the Miseries that
shall come upon you. The Rust of your Gold and Silver shall be a Witness
against you. Ye have lived in Pleasure upon Earth, and been wanton, you have
nourished your Hearts as in a Day of Slaughter. Here we may Note by the Way,
that those who live like Beasts here, and will not be induced by any Persuasive
to repent, reform and act like Men, shall howl like Beasts hereafter, without
being heard or pitied 1 Cor. 16.13. Prove. 1.26.

Awake ye secure Moralists, and lifeless, sapless Formalists, who are Strangers
to the Power of experimental Raligion: Remember your shadowy Appearances, cannot
deceive the Rein trying God, Gal. 6.7. Nor your dry Leaves of h$$$ky spiritless
Duties, secure your guilty Souls, from an astonishing overwhelmning Inundation
of his high and terrible Displeasure, Mat. 5.20.

Awake ye base backsliding Hypocrites, and cruel Apostates, who once made a
Profession of Religion, then better Things were expected of you, but ye have
wickedly deceived our Expectation, and ye will in the End as miserably deceive
your own, if ye yet foolishly entertain any Hopes of Heaven, in the State and
Course you are now in; Remember the Blackness of Darkness is reserved for such
cowardly traitorous Runasadoes and Deserters, seeing you are ashamed of Christ,
and of his Words, in this adulterous and sinful Generation, of you also shall
the Son of Man be ashamed, when he comes in the Glory of his Father with the
holy Angels, Mark 8.38 Hypocrites must be cut asunder. Mat 24.51. Backsliders
shall eat of the Fruit of their own Ways (their wicked Ways, and bitter, bitter
Fruits they would b$) and they shall be filled with their own Devices, d'ceiv'd and
damned by them, Prove. 14.14 Mat 14.44, 45. 2 Pet 2.21, 22. For if they have
escaped the Pollutions of the World, through the Knowledge of the Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ, they are again entangled therein and overcome, the latter
end is worse with them than the beginning: It had been better for them not to
have known the Way of Righteousness, than after they have known it, to turn
from the holy Commandment delivered unto them. But it is happened unto them,
according to the true Proverb, the Dog is turned to his own Vomit again, and
the Sow that was washed to her wallowing in the Mire. Such Apostates for all
their specious Shows and Shams, were but wasnen Dogs and Swine at best; that
is, their Hearts were not changed effectually, they had and do yet retain base
Qualities, like those bruit Creatures, but now mentioned: Such Backsliders do
jour Contempt on Christ, and the Gospel of his Grace, by bringing a bad Report
upon them, they do as it were by turning their Backs upon Religion, profess to
the World, that they have found some Evil in God's Ways: By this the venerable
Name of God is dishonored, his Ways reproached, his People grieved, and the
Hand of his Enemies, the Wicked, strengthened. 1 Timothy 6 1. Rom 2.24. Psalm 25.3.
Thus seeing your Sin is a complicated Evil, you must expect an aggravated
Punishment. Heb. 10.26, 27, 28. If we sin wilfully after we have received the
Knowledge of the Truth, there remains no more Sacrifice for Sin, but a
certain fearful looking for of Judgment, and the fiery Indignation of God to
consume the Adversaries. Here you may observe that enlightened Persons are they
only, that are like to commit the Sin against the Holy Ghost, a Sin which shall
not be pardoned in this, nor in the next World Heb. 6.4, 5, 6. Neither ignorant
Persons, nor gracious Persons are capable of committing the unpardonable Sin,
not the first, because it must be committed against Light and Knowledge, which
they want, Heb. 10.26. Nor the second, for it must be attended with Malice,
Heb. 10.29. Which they are secured against, 1 John 3.9. and 5.18. Isai. 59.21.
Jer. 32.40. In short, a voluntary Desertion of the Profession of Religion, is a
terrible Step toward the unpardonable Sin. O! Let such consider with trembling
Hearts, if it is not too late, the Scriptures I have mentioned under this Head,
as also these that follow. But if any Man draw back, my Soul shall have no
Pleasure in him: But we are not of them that draw back unto Perdition. Luke
9.62. No Man having put his Hand to the Plow, and looking back, is fit for the
Kingdom of God. And if they be not fit for the Kingdom of God they must be fit
for the Kingdom of the Devil. O terrible Portion! Therefore repent and do your
first Works. O remember whence you are fallen! and where you are a falling!
Otherwise Christ will come against you quickly, in a Way of just Judgment, and
fight against you with the Sword of his Mouth. Rev. 2.5, 16. With the Sword of
his Wrath. Prove. 29.1.

Awake every of you that are yet in a Christless unconvinced State! Are you not
ashamed to sleep all the Day in Sloth, while some are trembling, troubled and
distressed about their Souls, who are not greater Sinners than your selves?
Nay, perhaps not near so great; what sleep? while others are crying Night and
Day with Tears, and heavy Groans to God, for pardoning Mercy, who have no more
precious Souls than you. Sleep! While others are laboring hard and taking
Heaven by Storm! What sleep! While some are traveling fast to the heavenly
Jerusalem, and rejoicing in the Way with Joy unspeakable and glorious. What
will ye draw the Curtains of a carnal Security, and false Hope about you, and
sleep to Death and Hell, even when the meridian Sun of the Gospel shines full
in your Face, and Life and Immortality is brought to Light, and God, and
Christ, his Ministers, Word, Providence, and your own Consciences, are ringing
a loud Alarm, a Peal of Thunder in your Ears to awake you! That you may
consider your Ways, and turn your Feet to God's Testimonies. Will you sleep
with Fire in your Bosoms? (the unpardoned Guilt of Sin) with the Curse of God
upon your Souls, the Heavens frowning upon you, and shut against you, the
burdened Earth traveling under you, and Hell yauning wide to devour and
consume you! May Not I say to you as Moses to Israel, Deuteronomy. 29.4. Yet the Lord
has not given you a Heart to perceive, and Eyes to see, and Ears to hear, unto
this Day. O! Is it not to be feared that God in Justice has lest you to a
Spirit of Slumber? Because you shut your Eyes against the Light, John 3. That
you should sleep and never awake. Jer. 51.57. And I will make drunk her
Princes, and her wise Men, and her Rulers, and her mighty Men; and they shall
sleep a perpetual Sleep, and not awake, says the King, whose Name is the Lord
of Hosts. Prove. 6.9. How long will thou sleep, O Sluggard? when will thou arise
out of thy Sleep?

O Sinners! If ye would but take Warning in Time, and turn to God, how pleasing
would this be to the Heart of Christ? Luke 15.5. How pleasing to the great God?
Jer. 31.19, 20. Luke 15.20. To the holy Angels? Luke 15.10. To the Bridegroom's
Friends? Either pious Ministers or private Christians. Luke 15.24 As the
Conversion of Sinners is the Joy and Crown of godly Ministers, 1 These. 2.19. So
their cruel Obstinacy and Stupidity, cannot on the contrary, but be their Grief
and Sorrow. O! This makes them go with aching Hearts, and cry, and moan to God
and Man, Who has believed our Report, and to whom is the Arm of the Lord
revealed, Isai. 53.1. Woe is me! I am as those that gather the Summer Fruits, as
the Grape gleanings of the Vintage: There is no Cluster to eat, my Soul desired
the first ripe Fruit. The good Man is perished out of the Earth; and there is
none upright among Men, Mic. 7.1, 2. Pity your poor mourning Ministers, and
pity your own Souls, by endeavoring to turn to God speedily. If there be any
Consolation in Christ, if any Comfort of Love; if any Fellowship of the Spirit,
if any Bowels and Mercies, fulfill ye my Joy. But it would introduce the
greatest Comfort into your own Souls, Gal. 6.16. Then God would rejoice over
thee with Joy: He will rest in his Love, and joy over thee with Singing, Zeph.
3.17. Now that you and others may be awakened out of your Security and directed
to Christ, I have composed the following Discourse, which I now commit into
your Hands, earnestly praying that you would read it attentively, consider it
solemnly, and pray over it earnestly, that it may be blessed to you: I leave
this with you as a Warning from the great God, to convince or condemn you, as a
Testimony for Truth, a Witness for or against you, as you improve it. May the
God of Mercy and Power, direct the Truths contained in it, to your Hearts, and
seal them on your Consciences; by them convince you of your Danger, and turn
you to himself But let no pious experienced Christian needlessly terrify
themselves by applying another's Portion. The Miseries hereaster described are
the proper Possession and Inheritance of graceless presumptuous Sinners; they
do not belong to you poor Lambs of Jesus, who have been so far convinced of the
malignant Nature, and dreadful Consequences of Sin both in Heart and Life, that
ye have unreservedly and resolutely closed with Christ, and do afterward bring
forth Fruits meet for Repentance, such as crowns your Profession and
Experiences. Is not your principal Care and Sorrow exercised about your Souls?
If it be so, there is another Portion prepared for you, by your heavenly
Father, a Portion of numerous and everlasting Blessings, Pardon, Peace, Joy,
Glory, which I have given a short Description of in a Use of Consolation in the
following Discourse. If any get good by this Treatise, I beg that they would
remember me when they are near God especially, implore Heaven that I may be
made through Mercy, faithful and fruitful to Christ, to the Death. Now that
some poor Souls may be deeply convinced of their lost Condition, and guided to
Jesus, by the following Discourse, in the earnest Desire and Prayer of

Your Servant for CHRIST's sake, Gilb. Tennent,
N. Brunswick, June 10. 1734

Just Reprinted, And to be Sold by Daniel Henchman in Cornhill.
THE Sincere Convert: Discovering the small Number of true Believers and the
great Difficulty of saving Conversion. Newly Corrected and Amended. By THOMAS
SHEPARD, sometime of Emanuel College in Cambridge, since Minister of the Gospel
in New England.

A Guide to CHRIST: Or the Way of directing Souls that are under the Work of
Conversion. Compiled for the Help of young Ministers: And may be serviceable to
private Christians, who are inquiring the Way to Zion. By SOLOMON STODDARD, A.
M. Pastor of the Church in Northampt n. With an Epistle prefixed, by the Rev.
Dr. INCREASE MATHER.

The Presumer Detected, AND His Doom Displayed.
DEUTERONOMY. XXIX. 19, 20, 21. And it come to pass when he hears the Words of this
Curse, that he bless himself in his Heart, saying, I shall have Peace, though I
walk in the Imagination of mine Heart, to add Drunkenness to thirst: The Lord
will not spare hini, but then the Anger of the Lord, and his Jealousy shall
smoke against that Man, and all the Curses that are written in this Book shall
lie upon him, and the Lord shall blot out his Name from under Heaven. And the
Lord shall separate him unto Evil, out of all the Tribes of Israel according to
all the Curses of the Covenant, that are written in this Book of the Law.


FORASMUCH as a great Part of Mankind securely sleep in Sin, and betray
themselves into irreparable and endless Ruin, by vain and presumptuous Hopes of
Mercy. I thought it my Duty to essay a corrosive Remedy to correct (if it shall
please the most high God to crown so feeble an Endeavor with his successful
Smiles) the Malignity of this flagrant and pernicious Evil, by detecting he
general Grounds, and exposing the numerous Dangers of such fatal Delusions and
destructive Mistakes.

To this End I have chosen the Text now mentioned, in which we have the$e three
Particulars.

1. The Wickedness of the presumptuous Sinner detected, he walk after the
Imagination of his Heart, and adds Drunkenness to Thirst. 2. His confident
Security notwithstanding described, he blesses himself in his Heart, saying,
he shall have Peace. 3. His dreadful Doom from the righteous GOD displayed, in
the 20 and 21 Verses.
And first we have a summary Detection, or a Discovery of his Wickedness in two
Particulars.

1. He walks after the Imagination of his Heart, he follows the pernicious
Swing of his corrupt Affections and labors to gratify his vain and sinful
Humors and vile Desires. This Charge is more general.

2. He adds Drunkenness to Thirst: This is more particular. Presumptuous
Sinners not only pursue the inordinate Gratification of their sensitive
Appetites and brutish Passions in the General, but they are also under (for the
most part) the Dominion and Tyranny of some darling Lust in particular, which
they against Light and Knowledge pay a peculiar Veneration to. Ephesians. 2.2, 3. Rom
2.3. The presumptuous Sinner adds Drunkenness to Thirst. That is, says Mr.
Pool, Not only to satisfy his Thirst, his Concupiscence "and Inclination to
Wickedness, but even to exceed it, as Drunkards out of mere Wantonness, or
Inclination to get drunk; and as filthy Persons commit Lewdness with others
more than their natural Inclination desires, and their Strength can well bear;
merely from a wicked Mind and contempt of GOD, and because they will do so. Or
the Words may be rendered, says he, to add Thirst to Drunkenness, and so the
Sense may be this, that when he has multiplied his Sins, and made himself as
it were drunk with them, yet he is not satisfied therewith, but still whets his
Appetite and provokes his Thirst after more. In short, the Words plainly denote
a course of Sin: A presumptuous Sinner adds Sin to Sin, goes on in a Course of
Wickedness of one kind or other, either open or secret Lest any be mistaken, it
must be acknowleged that all presumptuous Persons are not guilty of
Prophanen$ss or Immorality, no, no; some of them make a fair Show in the Flesh,
are regular in their external Conduct, and have the strict Form of Godliness,
though they are destitute of the Power of it: Witness the foolish Virgins,
whose Profession and Behavior had such an Appearance of Goodness, that the
wise were much mistaken in their Opinion concerning them. Mat. 25.

3. His confident Security; he blesses himself in his Heart, even when he
hears the Words of the Curse. Psalm. 36.2. He flattereth himself in his own Eyes
until his Iniquity be found to be hateful. Though God curses him, yet he
blesses himself. O Madness without Peer or Parallel! Have thou an Arm like
God, or can thou thunder with a Voice like him, Job 40.9. He blesses himself
in his Hearts he flatters himself against all Scripture and Reason with the
Hopes of Impunity, though he persists in his Impiety in his Heart; no wonder,
seeing that the Heart of every natural Man is as foolish as false; as deceitful
as wicked, Rom, 1.21. Jer. 17.9. Perhaps the Word Heart here may sighify the
Privacy as well as Stability and Firmness of his false Confidence.

1. The Privacy, if he does not say in Words, yet he believes it in his Heart,
that he shall escape God's Vengeance: But indeed some are arrived at that
Degree of shameless Impudence, that they confine not their foolish and false
Confidence to their vain Imaginations, but express it in Speech and Action.

2. The Stability of it; their false Hope has deep rooted Residence in their
Hearts, they love their Delusions, and would as soon part with their Hearts, as
part with them, Jer. 8.5. Job 18.14. Though he hears the Words of the Curse, and
so cannot plead Ignorance, although God's faithful Servants, frequently and
plainly discover the false Foundations of his Hope; and solemnly denounce the
Judgments of God, both in Time and Eternity, against him, yet in the Face of
the most glaring Light, his false Confidence continues firm and unshaken; and
he is no more moved than the Earth under him; he vainly imagines that the
Almighty is not so strict and severe as he is represented to be according to
his Word by godly Ministers, and therefore concludes be shall have Peace, and
be finally secured from the Arrests of God's flaming Jealousy, and be
introduced into a State of Peace and Pleasure. But

3. Let us look into the dreadful Doom of this sinful and secure Person, as
it is displayed or described in our Text: A Doom suited to the greatness of his
Impiety, who so boldly affronts the Almighty as to call in Question his
Veracity, and give the Lie to eternal Truth, Gen 3.4. And as the Sin is great,
so there is scarce a more dreadful Threatening in all the Book of GOD denounced
against such as are guilty of it, nay, is it not a compendious Epitome of all
the rest that are dispersed through every minatory Vein and Page of sacred
Scripture. O! methinks it might like the Hand writing on the Wall, strike every
presumptuous Sinner that reads or hears it, into Belshazzar's Fit, make their
Faces gather Blackness, their Ears tingle, their Hearts quiver in their Bodies,
and their trembling Knees smite each other.

But more particularly, there are these horrible Ingredients included in the
Bowels of it.

1. The Lord shall not spare him: The Time of his Probation and Reprieve which
he so prodigally wastes, and disingenuously abuses, shall be contracted, and
no Mixture of Mercy extended in Judgment. Isai. 27.11. Though he spares himself
and will not suffer the Thoughts of that Damnation which be is with much Labor
and Travel working out to disturb his carnal Ease, yet the righteous God won's
spare him, but his whole Vengeance shall light upon that Man, he shall drink
the Dregs of the Cup of his Indignation, Psalm. 75.8. The Almighty will deal
with him in strict Justice, without remitting a Grain Weight of the Punishment
his Sins deserve. An awful Example of God's righteous Severity against
obstinate and presumptuous Offenders we have in the Dispersion and other
unhappy Circumstances of the jewish Nation, which the Apostle admonishes the
Gentiles to take Warning by. Romans 11.21, 22. For if God spared not the natural
Branches, take heed lest he also spare not thee.

2. The Anger of the Lord and his Jealousy (which is his fiercest Anger) shall
smoke against him as the Smoke of a Furnace. This shows the Blackness of
Darkness, the Horrors of that Damnation these presumptuous Wretches shall be
ingulphed in.

2. His Jealousy shall smoke against that Man. Jealousy is one of God's
glorious Properties, in the second Commandment of his Law; he calls himself a
jealous God, visiting the Iniquity of the Fathers upon the Children to the
third and fourth Generation. The Nature of Jealousy is described, Prove. 6.34,
35. For Jealousy is the Rage of a Man, therefore he will not spare in the Day
of his Vengeance, he will not regard any Ransom, neither will he rest content,
though thou give many Gists. And further, in Cant. 8.6. Jealousy is cruel as
the Grave, the Coals thereof, are Coals of Fire, which have a most vehement
Flame. Again, the Prophet Nahum speaks excellently concerning it, Chap. 1. ver.
2. God is jealous, and the Lord revengeth, and is furious, the Lord will take
vengeance on his Adversaries, and he reserveth wrath for his Enemies. God's
jealousy (first) supposes a wrong offered to his Majesty by the presumers Sin.

And,

2. Includes his Resolution to repair and revenge it, by inflicting such
Punishments as are adequate to the heinous nature of the Offense. Isai. 1.24.
Ah! I will ease me of mine Adversaries, I will avenge me of mine Enemies.

3. The exercise (to speak after the manner of Men) of his Glorious Attributes
to that awful end. Solomon informs us, Prove. 6.34. that jealousy inflames Men's
anger, and thereby excites their power to exert it is utmost efforts. Now when
this passion is ascribed to God, we may rationally infer something so like this
as will consist with the persection of his Nature, viz. That all his Attributes
will be engaged and concerned in completing the misery and Damnation of
presumptuous and impenitent Sinners: His Wisdom in projecting it; His Power in
inflicting it; and His Unchangeableness in continuing it.

O Sinner! think how horrible will thy Case be, when all that is in God will be
stirred up against thee, Isal 42.13. The Lord shall stir up his jealousy like a
Man of War; He shall cry, yea roar; He shall prevail against his Enemies. If
but a few drops of God's Anger was so piercing that it made patient Job utter
the most dolorous Complaints, yea, even curse the day of his Birth, Job 6.2, 3,
4. Oh that my Grief were thoroughly weighed, and my Calamity laid in the
Balances together! For now it would be heavier than the sand of the Sea:
therefore my words are swallowed up: For the Arrows of the Almighty are within
me, the Poison whereof drinks up my Spirit. The Terrors of God do set
themselves in Array against me. How will thou bear the fiery Showers of it?
Can thou endure that Wrath that makes even the very Devils tremble and rore
and cry out, torment us not before the Time. James 2.19. Matthew. 8.29.

3. All the Curses that are written in the Book of God: The Curses of God, the
Curses of Christ, the Curses of the Law, the Curses of the Gospel, the Curses
of Time and Eternity, shall lie upon him, not only light on him to terrify him,
but abide on him, to sink him into the Lake of Fire, to lanch his wretched
Soul, gripe and gnaw his guilty Conscience, and prey on his damned Body
throughout endless Ages, if he continue in that State and Course. Mark 9.44.
Gal. 3.10. Mat. 23. and 25.41. These Words in our Text, viz. That Man, carry an
Emphasis with them, and seem to signify, that the presumptuous Sinner shall be
made the Object of God's peculiar Displeasure. The Mark and Butt of his
vindictive Fury, and amazing Severity; he shall be made a Spectacle of Shame
and Horror, a Magor Missabib, a Terror to himself and others. Jer. 20.4. Job
18.14. That Man though he hid himself in this World under false Guises and
Pretexts, and would not apply the Threats of God to himself, he shall be
pointed out, and pointed at in the next, like a Monster as he is, by the Hand
of Justice, and made a Monument of Wrath, a Vessel of Vengeance and a Burnt
Sacrifice to the divine Indignation Romans 9.22. Luke 19.27. But those mine
Enemies which would not that I should reign over them, bring them hither and
slay them before me. O Horrors! Horrors! Horrors!

4. His Name shall be blotted out. The Memory of the Righteous, blossoms in the
Dust, they shall be had in everlasting Remembrance, Psalm. 112.6. But the Name
of the Wicked quickly rots and perishes in a silent Oblivion, or is remembered
with Disdain and Abhorrence.

5. He shall be separated unto Evil, both moral and pen$l.

1. Moral. Having opposed and quenched the Motions of the blessed Spirit, and
abused the Means of Grace which were used to reform and reclaim him, God will
judicially give him up to the Government of his vile Affections, that he may
(being freed from former Restraints) work all Uncleanness with Greediness, Rom
1.24, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32. And say to him as in Rev. 22.11. Let him that is
filthy be filthy still; he that is unjust let him be unjust still. And

2. Having thus filled up the Measure of his Iniquity, he shall be given up to
penal Evil, the Reward of his Impiety; He shall eat the Fruits of his own Ways,
and be filled with his own Devices, Prove. 1.31.

He shall be cut off from all Happiness and from the very least Hopes of
attaining it, and marked out for inexpressible and endless Misery without any
Hopes of a Remedy for ever. And

Lastly, All this according to the Curses of the Covenant of Grace, which are
the most terrible.

But what is to be understood by the Curses in general? And why are the Curses
of the Gospel the must terrible in particular? I answer, The Curse includes all
the Punishments which divine Justice has annexed to the Violation of the divine
Law. The Forfeiture of all the Mercies, which are the peculiar Lot of God's
chosen, and the Possession of all the Miseries of an absent God, both in Body
and Mind, which are but begun upon the Wicked here, but shall be consummated in
Hell. Now the Curses of the Gospel are the most terrible for these two Reasons,

1. Because that from the Gospel there is no Appeal: From the Law we may appeal
to the Gospel, but when we abuse the Remedy, our Case is desperate. Acts 4.12.
2. The Curses of the Gospel are Judgments proportioned to the heinous Quality
and crimson Hue of that Offense which pours Contempt upon the most beautiful
and bright Appearances of divine Goodness and Philanthropy that ever the humane
Nature was honored with: That Sin surely can admit no parallel, which flights
the Love that justly astonished all the angelick Hosts, and excited them to
express their grateful Resentments with cheerful Hosannah's. Luke 2.14. Now if
that Sin be without a Rival, must not the Punishment grasped in the Curse be
suited to it is Nature? For will not the Judge of all the Earth do right? How
terrible therefore will be the Case of all those m$serable Souls, who shall
finally fall under the Rebukes and Revenges of abused Love? See Heb. 10. from
27, to 32. That Almighty gracious God that now sits enthroned on a Seat of
Mercy, holding out the Scepter of Salvation will by his unbare Arm, and Iron
Rod crush the presumptuous Abusers of his condescending Grace into Powder Mat.
21.44. Luke 20.18. The Kings Arrows shall be glutted with your Blood. Psalm
2.12. Kiss the Son lest he be angry, and ye perish from the Way, when his Wrath
is kindled but a little: blessed are all they that put their Trust in him. What
think thou of this, O presumptuous Sinner! Is not every Word of this divine
Text big with Horror! Look here you bold Rebel, here is the glittering
brandishing Sword of the terrible God held before thee, which, if thou turn not
speedily, shall stab thee through with eternal Death.
O presumptuous secure Sinners, hear, hear, hear your dreadful and eternal
Doom! Be affected with the Thoughts of it, and fly for Refuge before it is too
late, too late!

If it should be inquired, what is the Reason that the Sin and Punishment of
presumptuous Souls is proposed in the singular Number in this Text? I answer,

1. Negatively, That it is not with any Design to signify that they are small
in Number; for this would contradict a Multitude of plain Scriptures. Rev.
3.17. Prove. 30.12. There is a Generation which are pure in their own Eyes, and
yet are not cleans'd from their Filthiness. But

2. Positively. for this Reason; that what is expressed may be more
particularly applied, for Generalia non pungunt, Generals don't pierce or
sting. Thus the Commands are expressed in the singular Number, that every one
that reads or hears, may attend to, and apply them to himself particularly, as
if directed to him by Name.

From the Words of our Text complexly considered, we may observe the following
Position or Doctrinal Conclusion; which seems to grasp their principal Scope.
Viz.

That those who go on in a Course of Sin, and yet expect Peace, are foolish,
miserable and cursed Creatures.

In treating upon which, I would propose the following Order.

1. Show what it is to go on in a Course of Sin. 2. Prove that some who are
guilty of this do notwithstanding expect Peace. 3 Discover some of the Grounds
of that false Hope or Expectation 4. Discover the Folly, Miseries and cursed
Estate of such foolish and deceived Souls.
THE FIRST GENERAL HEAD.
I return to the first general Head, which was to show what it is to go on in a
Course of Sin. In Order to explain this more clearly, let me consider it both
negatively and positively And

First, Negatively. By it I don't understand those Infirmities which are
unavoidable by humane Nature in its corrupt and degenerate State; viz such as
these following 1. The. Stirrings of inward Corruptions, not indulged, Rom 7 I
have a Law in my Members warring against the Law of my Mind. 2. Defects in the
Degrees of Christian Graces, either in Respect of Habit or Act A Person may
have true, and yet but weak Faith: Lord, I believe, help my Unbelief, Mark
9.24. 3. In the Duties of Religion; Coldness, Deadness, Wanderings of Heart in
Prayer, Praises, involuntary and lamented, For all our Righteousness is as
filthy Rags, Isai. 64.6. Very imperfect and so unable to bear the Quest and
Judgment of a holy and righteous God. Nor 4. Every Fall into gross Sins against
Light, if this be (first) against the general Bias of the Heart, Romans 7 Or
(secondly) through strong Temptations, as David's awful Fall. Or, (Thirdly) through
Surprise, as it was in Peter's Case, when he denied his Lord. Nor 5. Though the
same Sin be sometimes repeated, Heb. 12.1. Psalm 85.8. and 65.3. Jer. 3.1. But
this ought to be understood with the following Cautions. 1. That then a
Christian is under great Decays. Rev. 2.4. Or 2. Under strong Temptations, as I
proved before. And 3. That their Hopes are much shattered and their Comforts
removed Psalm 51.8, 11, 12. They are as a Bone broken or dis-jointed, as in a
Compass well touched with a Loadstone, the Flower-de-luce bends freely and
steadily toward the North Pole, and if it be forced to another Point of the
Compass contrary to it is natural and general Bias, it trembles and quivers
till it comes to it is wonted Place again, and then rests. The Case is even so
with a gracious Soul, when through the Violence of Temptation, they have sinned
against their God. O how do your Hearts tremble and never rest until they
re-obtain the Smiles of their Father's Face, and a Sense of his pardoning Love.
4. Their Mourning is great when recovered as David, Psalm 51. And Peter, who is
said to weep bitterly, Mat. 26.75. 5. Their Care is increased about Holiness
afterward. Enlarge my Heart, and then will I run the Ways of thy Commandments,
Psalm 119.32.



2. Positively. It supposes Heart Love to, and implies the general Practice of
some Sin or other. It will be much the same as to their Confusion and
Condemnation (without intervening Repentance and Reformation) whither it be
secret or open, whither a worldly, carnal, or ambitious Lust. The most in Youth
indulge some unclean Lust, which being long practiced against Light, hardens
the Heart, grieves the Holy Spirit, and strengthens the Devil's Possession of
the Soul: This I believe is one great Reason why so many are Gospel proof, and
sit like so many Stocks and Stones unconcerned in hearing the most awful
Truths; nay, some by this unclean Course of Living, are come to that Prodigy of
Madness and Effrontery as to out do the Devils, to laugh at those Things at
which the Devils tremble. They have a Whores Forehead that refuses to be
ashamed, Jer. 3.3. The Apostle Peter long ago prophesied of this Crew of hardy
Mortals that are thus madded against God and their own Souls. 2 Pet. 3.3. So
that their brutish Wickedness, though it shall (without Repentance) compass their
Damnation, yet does it in the mean time confirm the Truth of the Scriptures. 2
Pet. 2.9, 10. But when married many choose another Master, they serve the World
with much Fidelity and Care; and under the Pretense of providing for their
Families, loose the Opportunities of Mercy, and so starve and damn their Souls.

But I proceed to consider the second Thing proposed, which was, To prove that
some who are guilty of a Course of sinning, do notwithstanding expect Peace
Both Scripture and Reason prove this, our Text is a plain Evidence of this
terrible Truth. And further, John 8.33. We be Abraham's Seed. But I may answer
this in the Words of Christ, Ver. 39 If ye were Abraham's Children, ye would do
the Works of Abraham. We be not born of Fornication; we have one Father even
God, Ver. 41. But I may say to you, as the Lord Jesus did to them, Ver. 44. Ye
are of your Father the Devil, and the Lusts of your Father ye will do. 1 Cor.
6.9. Be not deceived, neither Fornicators, nor Idolaters, nor Adulterers, nor
Effeminate, nor Abusers of themselves with Mankind, nor Thieves, nor Covetous,
nor Drunkards, nor Revilers, nor Extortioners shall inherit the Kingdom of God.

The Apostle's Caution against Deceit, Be not deceived, plainly supposes, that
these vile Persons that were guilty of the unworthy Actions and Villainies
mentioned, yet notwithstanding expected Salvation; which false and foolish
Conceit he labors, not only in this, but in several other Places of his
Writings, to tear up by the Roots; as particularly, Gal. 6.7, 8 Be not
deceived, God is not mocked, for whatsoever a Man sows, that shall he also
reap, For he that sows to his Flesh, shall of his Flesh reap Corruption.
These Words suppose this, that though Men sow to the Flesh, yet that they are
prone to expect another kind of Harvest, viz A spiritual and eternal This
Expectation the Apostle asserts to be not only false and unreasonable, but a
downright mocking of the great God, Mat. 7.21, 22, 23. Not every one that
says unto me Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven; but he that
does the Will of my Father which is in Heaven. Many will say to me in that
Day, Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied in thy Name? and in thy Name cast out
Devils? and in thy Name done many wonderful Works? And then will I profess unto
them, I never knew you: Depart from me ye that work Iniquity. By these Verses
we are instructed that many wicked People, will not only retain their false
Hopes in this World, but even have the Impudence to plead their wretched
Performances with Christ himself in the next, but to very little Purpose. Joh.
9.40. Are we blind also? said the Pharisees to Christ, and yet many of them
were very wicked, neglected the weightier Matters of the Law, Judgment,
Righteousness, Mercy; and for a Pretense made long Prayers, to prey upon the
poor Widows, for which our Lord told them they should receive the greater
Damnation, Mat. 23.14. So many lifeless Formalists, if they have a pretty deal
of Knowledge, and are advanced in Years, especially disdain to have the
Goodness of their State questioned; they are apt to say with the proud
Pharisees, Are we blind also? To such I would return Christ's Answer, If ye
were blind, ye should have no Sin: but now ye say, We see; therefore your Sin
remains. If you saw your Blindness, your Sins would not be so great, you
would be in the Way to get them pardoned, and your dangerous State changed. You
know the foolish Virgins had a strong, though false Hope, which they held to the
Death: Now though they were outwardly well polished, yet it is reasonable to
suppose that they indulged some secret Wickedness; for as Mr. Shepard says, As
"every Dog has his Kennel, and every Swine has his Swill, so every
unconverted Man has his Lust. Bloody Ahab and Balaam the Conjurer could call
God their God. The Prophet Amos in the 6th Chapter of his Book, 1, 3, 4, and 5.
Verses, shows that there were some that put the evil Day far off, and caused
the Seat of Violence to come near, that fared sumptuously, and lived merrily,
that eat Calves out of the Stall, and chanted to the sound of the Viol; these
he says, were at Ease in Zion, and from whence could this false Ease flow, but
from their false Hope; therefore the Prophet pronounces a Curse upon them, Woe
to them that are at Ease in Zion.

2. Reason and Experience prove this. Look over the World and into thy own
Heart, and see if Congregations be not made up of the following sorts of
Persons.

1. Fleshly People that serve their unclean Lusts, and walk after the Flesh. 2.
Worldly: Such as make it their principal Business to get and secure the World;
their Thoughts and Affections, Speeches and Actions, are most about the Earth.
3. Profane Drunkards, Whoremongers, Swearers, Sabbath Breakers, Cheats. 4.
Sluggards and careless Galeo's. Now han't these Men and Women the Plague sore
upon them? I mean the Brand of God's Curse and Condemnation, plain and visible
Signs of a damnable State. For he that is in Christ has crucified the Flesh,
with it is Affections and Lusts, Gal. 5.24. He that loves the World, the Love of
the Father is not in him, 1 John 2.15. If we say we have Fellowship with him,
and walk in Darkness, we lie, and do not the Truth, 1 John 1.6. and 3.6. He
that commits Sin is of the Devil. So then, because thou art neither hot nor
cold, I will spue thee out of any Mouth, Rev. 3.16. And yet notwithstanding all
God's Threats, the most of these People are easy going on very merrily in these
Paths of Death, to the dark and gloomy Chambers of an eternal Hell. From whence
should this Stillness flow? but that they hope to be saved, whatever God has
said to the contrary: The World are going on rejoicing, as if they were all
assured of their Salvation. Ask them whether they hope to be saved, and they
will tell you, Yes: And the far greater Part can give no scriptural Reason of
this Hope; the most foul mouthed Russian will profess his Hopes of Salvation. O
merciful God and Father, convince the secure deceived World, of their Folly and
Danger, in entertaining Hopes of Happiness, without any scriptural Foundation.
I proceed to consider the third general Head, which was To inquire into the
Grounds of their Expectation of Peace and Impunity. And

1. Ignorance is one Cause or Ground, which is fourfold.

1. They are ignorant of God. They have unjust Conceptions of his Attributes,
his Justice, Mercy, Truth. I hope I shall be saved says one, for God is a
merciful God. Answer, It Is true he is so, beyond the Conception or Expression
of any Man or Angel: But he may be so, and you damned for your Impenitence
notwithstanding God's Mercy though it be great, yet it is vouchsafed according to
the Truth of his Word, and the Holiness of his Nature. If God extended special
Mercy to an impenitent unconverted Soul, so continuing he would deny his Truth
and wrong his Justice, and so cease to be God. Behold O Christless Creature!
Thy Hopes of Heaven are bottomed on Blasphemy: Thou think that God i$ such a
one as thy self, but he will reprove thee, and set thy Sins in Order before
thine Eyes. Psalm 50.21, 22. Thou have heard of God by the hearing of the Ear,
but thine Eye never saw what a holy, just and jealous God he is: Otherwise thy
false Hopes would be soon shaken, and thou would loath thy self in Dust and
Ashes. Job 42.5, 6.

2. They are ignorant of themselves. Some will say they have a good Heart, though
they be not so precise in their Practice as others, if they happen to do any
unworthy base Action, why they will say they don't mean any Harm, they are no
Hypocrites. I would not desire a better Evidence, of a Man's graceless and
damnable State than this, Jer. 2.25. For it discovers gross Ignorance of
themselves, had they a Discovery of their own Hearts, they would rather speak
in the Language of Jeremiah, Chap. 17.9. That their Hearts are deceitful and
desperately wicked. Or of Paul, Romans 7.24. O wretched Man that I am, who shall
deliver me from this Body of Sin and Death? This is the Language of enlightened
Souls, they are apt to think that there is none in the World who have so bad
Hearts as they.

3. Of the Law in it is spiritual Extent. Thy Commands, said the Psalmist, are
exceeding broad, Psalm 119, 96. They take chief Notice of their overt Actions;
whereas it is the special Care of a Child of God to watch the inward Motions of
his Soul, and to labor after Conformity to the law of God in them, Romans 7.22.

4. They are ignorant of the Evil of Sin. Many have very mean and unjust
Conceptions of the vile and detestable Nature of Sin, not at all proportioned
to its Heinousness; they are apt to think that there is no great Evil in it,
because many commit it with confident Hopes of Impunity, and why may not they
escape as well as others? They see a great many as bad as themselves and worse
(as they imagine) live securely. Surely think they, God is not so unmerciful as
to condemn such vast Numbers of Mankind! But must God be esteemed unmerciful
because he only extends Mercy in a Way that is worthy of his Nature? Or because
he punishes the Dispisers of it? Concerning the Evil of Sin, let me propose
these few Particulars following to your Consideration.

1. Is there no Evil in that which transgresses such a holy righteous Law,
which is the Transcript of the divine Nature, and exactly suited to the
Condition of our Being? So being duly observed, it does really advance all the
true Interests of particular Persons or Communities, Romans 6.12. 1 John 3.4. 2.
Is there not a great Evil in that which offends such a gracious God, which (to
speak after the Manner of Men) is an oppressing Burden to him? Isai. 43.24 Thou
have made me to serve with thy Sins, thou have wearied me with thine
Iniquities. Amos 2.13. Behold I am pressed under you as a Cart is pressed that
is full of Sheaves. Is there not a Cont$ariety in it is Nature to all the
Perfections of God, a Wrong to his Justice, an Offense to Holiness, a Contempt
of his Authority, an Affront to his Sovereignty, a Provocation of his Power,
and an Abuse of his Mercy? Is not that an infinite Evil, which is opposed to
such an infinite Good? By Sin the Creature neglects the Homage, and rejects the
Allegiance, which is due by all the Laws of Nature and Reason, to his Creator,
Preserver, and Benefactor by Sin. By Sin haughty Dust flies in the Face of God;
defies his awful Sovereignty, tramples upon his Goodness and Mercy, and spurns
against the Bowels of condescending Grace and Pity. What a horrid Spawn of the
most infandous Impieties is grasped in the Bowels of this Monster; Rebellion,
Madness, Ingratitude and a Train of other Evils' too tedious to be here
enumerated. 3. Is there little Evil in that which ruins such a precious Soul as
Men possess? Ezekiel 16.6. Rev. 3.17. Romans 6.23. The Wages of Sin is Death. The
just Recompense of the least Offense is eternal Death: Can that be a small Evil
which deserves such an infinite Punishment? Will not the Judge of all the Earth
do right? Genesis 18.2$. Can that Evil be little which nothing else could make
Satisfaction for, but the Blood of the Son of God? Romans 5.22. The unspeakable
Anguish our Lord Jesus bear, both in his Body and Soul, in the Garden, and on
the Cross, are sufficient Evidences of the great Evil of Sin. Can that Evil be
little which is the Fountain and bitter original of all the Calamities, Pains
and Pressures we either feel or fear? Neither does the Number of Transgressors
lessen the Offense, but rather augment it, Jer. 5.7 9. The Truth and Justice of
God are free from the least Shadow of Change or Blemish, James 1.17. Deuteronomy.
32.4. He is a Rock, his Work is perfect: for all his Ways are Judgment, a God
of Truth, and without Iniquity, just and right is he O secure presumptuous
Sinner! did thou but see the holy dreadful God enraged against thee, thy
Heart and Life full of noisome Abominations, and the Curses of God's violated
Law as Flashes of Lightning shot from the Heavens ready to scorch thy guilty
perishing Soul, and the fierce Vengeance of an angry God like a fiery slaming
Thunderbolt ready to smite thee dead; it would make thy Heart tremble in thy
Breast, and cause thee to cry out with the most dolorous Lamentations, O
wretched lost Soul that I am, What shall I do to be saved? Acts 2.37. Smite
these Men and Women holy Lord of Hosts, and let them see their damnable Estate,
come almighty Spirit and breathe Life into these dead: Bow the Heavens O God,
and let the Blind see thy Justice and thy Grace, that the Lame may leap as a
Heart, and the Tongue of the Dumb sing. In the Wilderness let Waters break out,
and Streams in the Desert, Isai. 35.
2. Negligence. Want of Examination of their State, or Partiality in it. Some
Men being doubtful of the Badness of their State, because of their wicked
Actions, do not care to look into their Bosoms, for Fear of some present
Uneasiness, but will trust that it is good without Trial They would not do so
in receiving Money, though it were but a small Sum, they would view a fourteen
penny Bill carefully to see whither it had the Signers Names, before they would
accept it: We may see by this what a small Price many put upon their Souls. Or
they are partial in the Examination of themselves, come prepossessed to the
Work, having passed Judgment that their State is good before Trial, and to
confirm this hasty and erroneous Judgment, they will bring the Signs of Grace in
the Word, somewhat lower than they are, and advance their Experiences something
higher, and thus they will make them meet one Way or other. Or they will try
themselves only, by some of the lowest Signs of Grace, (and that but laxly too)
and pass by others; and these Men are so conceited of and confident in their
own Judgment, that they don't care to call in the Help of experienced
Ministers, in this arduous Affair, as the primitive Christians did, Acts 2.$7.
Ay but Friends, If you had a just Value for your Souls, and your Understandings
were opened as theirs were, you would be afraid of being mistaken in a Matter
of such vast Concern and Importance. Distrustful of your own Judgment as they
were, apply your self for Direction to some faithful Minister, or judicious and
experienced Christian. You Will bring your Deeds for Land to the Lawyers to be
searched by them, for Fear of some Flaw or Defect that you cannot discover; and
why don't you take as much Care about your Souls, as you do about your Estates.
Open your Case as it really is to an honest Soul searching-Minister this would
be very pleasing to them, and it may be very profitable to you. It Is a common
Maxim (and a very true one) that Men are apt to be partial in their own Case.
This is as applicable to the Concerns of the Soul, as of the Body. It Is a pity
that Men who are so curious in their Searches after the Knowledge of other
Things, should be so willingly ignorant of themselves, which is indeed the most
necessary and profitable Knowledge; without it we cannot obtain the saving
Knowledge of God, or an Interest in his Love, Jer. 2.19, 22. Thou that boastest
of thy Knowledge of Tongues and Arts, pray remember the Heathen Proves, Gnosthe
Seauton, Know thy self; which thou can not obtain without impartial
Self-Examination.

4. Self-Love. Men by Nature are Lovers of themselves, more than Lovers of God.

Now this Self-Love excites them to think the best of themselves. They know
there is some Difficulty in coming to Christ, therefore they are inclined to
hope this is over on the Account of their Ease; but Friends, seeing that your
Conceit cannot make your State good, if it be bad, is it not better to endure
some present necessary and temporary Trouble, while there is Hopes of getting
your State remedied, than to endure eternal Pains wihout Hope or Possibility of
Recovery? But this is the Condemnation, that Light is come into the World, and
Men love Darkness rather than Light, because their Deeds are Evil. For every
one that does Evil hates the Light, neither comes to the Light, lest his
Deeds should be reproved, John 3.19, 20.

4. Inconsideration. Thoughtlesness about themselves as to their State toward
God and Eternity. Though the most of People are very earnest and thoughtful in
the Pursuit of their carnal Pleasures, and temporary Gain; yet they are very
indolent and careless about the Affairs of their eternal Happiness. They are so
hurried about the Honors, Profits and Pleasures of the World, that they have
no Time to seek and Interest in an endless Life. O strange Madness, unworthy of
the rational Nature! but remember, O inconsiderate Soul that awful Threat of
the terrible God! Psalm 50.22. And may it be to thee, as the Handwriting on
the Wall to Belshazzer. What Matter of Lamentation is it that Men who have so
noble Powers of Reason and Reflection, should exercise them mostly on Things of
Light and temporary Moment and Consequence! Blessed Lord Jesus, alarm these
Thoghtless and unconcerned Creatures, incline them to bend their Minds upon
eternal Things.

Consideration is undoubtedly the beaten Road to Renovation, it exalts Reason
to it is due Pre-eminence, sets it upon the Throne of the Soul, and makes it
wield the golden Scepter over the Senses, and so checks the furious Course of
the unbridled Passions to Sin. By this Reason is excited to shake it self like
a fettered Samson, and tear in Pieces the Cords of Sensuality wherewith it was
bound. Consideration has three Things especially in it. (1.) Knowledge and
Understanding, when one in receiving a Message from God, understands both who
speaks and what is spoken: It Is the same with that, Psalm 94.8. (2.) Serious
Deliberation, concerning the Weight and Importance of God's Messages, the
Benefit obtained by obeying them, and the Danger incurred by slighting them.
Genesis 39.9. Job 31.14. Isai. 44.19. (3.) Submission and Obedience. Ezekiel. 18.28.

5. Pride. Natural Men are of the Humor of Simon the Sorceror, Acts 8.9. He
gave out that himself was some great one. So unconverted People (though some of
them have the Wit not to speak it in Words) yet this is the Language of their
Carriage and Behavior, that they are great ones; this is what they would give
you to understand, that they are no mean Persons; nay so far from that, that
they are even Wonders in the World; Every one as excellent Calvin observes,
"carries a Kingdom in his Breast". There is this or that excellent Property,
Attainment, or Achievement, which they imagine they possess in a Degree
superior to almost any other: This makes them swell like Toads with Pride:
Hence they become impatient of Reproof or control; when God's faithful
Servants tell them of their Wickedness, they reject it with Disdain. as Hazael
did Elisha's Message, 2 Kings 8.13. What is thy Servant a Dog? He could not
believe that he was so mean and vile as the Prophet informed him: Thus it is
with many graceless People; there be such high Tho'ts and carnal Reasonings in
them, which nothing but God's Power can subdue, 2 Cor. 10.5. Hence it is so
difficult to persuade Men of their damnable State, Rev. 3.17. Thou think
thou art rich and increased in Goods, and know not that thou art poor,
blind, miserable, and naked. Luke 18.11. The Pharisee stood and prayed thus
with himself. God I thank thee, I am not as other Men are, Extortioners,
Unjust, Adulterers, or even as this Publican. If any Body had told this
conceited Blade nothing but the very Truth, viz. That he was in a lost
perishing State, would he not have huffed them and scorned their Words? Yes no
Doubt, as much as some of his Stamp do at this Day, reject the Counsel of God
against themselves, Luke 7.50. But if na$$al Men have Keenness of natural Wit
and acquired Le$$ning this exceedingly increases their Pride, and strengthens
their false Confidence. But let them know that the Strength of one's Confidence
does not prove the Truth of it. I would beg of such People in the Name of God,
this one Favor, that they would read and consider the following Scriptures,
Mat. 25.8, 11, 12. John 8.54, 55. 1 Cor. 1.20, 21, 26, 27. And 3.18.

6. Prosperity. Some imagine that because they are increased in Wealth, their
Labors attended with Successes, therefore God loves them, and their State is
good. Thus Ephraim, Hos. 12.8. Yet I am become Rich, I have found me out
Substance, in all my Labors, they shall find no Iniquity in me. As if he
should say, it cannot be that there is Iniquity in my Way, since I am so
blessed and succeeded in my Labors. But let such remember the Words of
Solomon, Eccl. 9.1. That no Man knows Love or Hatred, by all that is before
him. That is, no Man can know whether he is the Object of God's Love or Hatred
by his outward Circumstances. The common Blessings of Providence are
promiscuously conferred, Mat. 5.45. For he makes his Sun to rise on the Evil,
and on the Good, and sends Rain on the Just and on the Unjust. Oftentimes the
worst of Men enjoy the most of these temporary and fading Possessions. Psalm
73.6, $, and 3.4. Pride compasses them about as a Chain, and Violence $overeth
them as a Ga$meant, their Eyes stand out with Fatness, they have more than Heart
could wish. Job 21.7, -- 13. Wherefore do the Wicked live, become$ old? Yea, are
mighty in Power? Their seed is established in their Sight with them. Their
Houses are safe from Fear, neither is the Rod of God upon them. They send forth
their little ones like a Flock, and their Children dance. They take up the
Trimbr$l and Harp, and rejoice at the Sound of the Organ. If many prosperous
Persons would be so kind to themselves as to inquire how they came by their
Wealth, and what Effects it has had upon them it might perhaps check their
boasting, and convince them that it is not the Fruit of God's Love, but of his
Anger? Mal. 2.2. Isai. 1.5. Why should ye be stricken any more, ye will revolt
more and more. Is not a Person in a desperate Case, when he is given up by
skilful Physicians, who having tried many Medicines, to no Purpose, forbear
giving any more physical Prescriptions, but leave him as Hopeless to follow the
Guidance of his diseased Appetite? Is not this the very Case of many prosperous
People? Pray consider the following Particulars. Is not Wealth given in God's
Anger?

1. When it is acquired by fraudulent Measures, Zech. 5.4. Or 2. When it does
not come in answer to Prayer, Matthew. 6.11. Or 3. When it has not these Effects
upon the Possessors.
1. When it does not make them humble, Genesis 32.10. 1. Chron. 17.16. Nor 2.
Thankful, Psalm 116.2. Nor 3. Charitable, 1. Chron. 29.13, 14. Luke 19.8. 1 Timothy 6.17, 18. But on the contrary Proud, Sensual, Penurious. Jer. 2.31.
Wherefore say my People, We are lords, we will come no more unto thee. Deuteronomy.
32.15. Hab. 1.15, 16. Jam. 2.13. He shall have Judgment without Mercy, that
has showed no Mercy.
7. False and erroneous Conceits of all the christian Graces, Affections,
Privileges, Performances; and particularly,

1. Of Conviction. Some take it to be only a Conviction of the Judgment, or
Assent of the Mind, to the doctrinal Truths of Religion. So they will confess
we are born in a bad State by Nature, but they will not own that they are in a bad
and damnable State at present, and that thou must be sensible of before you
come to Christ savingly, Luke 15.17. And I perish with Hunger. Or

2. That it consists in some Qualms of Conscience. Some Trouble and Fear about
some gross actual Offenses, which like a Sea Sickness soon goes over, and wears
off by Degrees, then they are Easy; and some of them will wallow in the same
Lusts again, like a Dog licking up his Vomit, a Pet. 2.21, 22. But true
Conviction must be of the State and Heart Corruptions, as well as of actual
Sins, occasioning great Perplexity and Distress; What shall I do? As a Man
stabbed with a Spear asks for a Remedy. Acts. 2.37. "Those that have been
often convicted, have never been convicted, says Mr. S$oddard.

3. Conversion: Which many take to be only some Trouble of Conscience, and an
outward Reformation following it, both which may be without a Spark of saving
and converting Grace. Acts 24.25. 2 Pet. 2.20. Romans 2.17, 18, 19, 20.
Conversion is a universal efficacious and internal Change, which spreads
through all the Powers and Passions of the Soul; the Understanding is
illuminated with a Beam of heavenly Light, Acts 26.18. What high Thoughts of
God, what sweet Meditations of Christ, what humble Thoughts of themselves, have
these inlighten'd Souls? Genesis 18.27. Phil. 3.8. What Pliableness in their Wills
to the Will of God. He will make his People willing in the Day of his Power,
Psalm 110.3. Lord, What will thou have me to do? said convinced Saul. What
strong Proneness in their Affections toward God and Heaven, Psalm 73.25. How
tender are their Consciences, easily sensible of the least Offense, as the Eye
is of the smallest Dust. Heb. 9.14. How holy and heavenly their Lives! Romans
6.14. Col. 3.1, 2, 3.

4. Of Repentance: Which many take to be a legal Sorrow, with some Care after
Reformation. But had not Judas and Ahab a slavish mercenary Sorrow? Some People
think that if they do but mourn (whatever Principle it be from) when they have
committed some gross Crime, and take some Care afterward for a while to avoid
it, that they are true Penitents; but O Friend, this is far from true
Repentance! thy mourning must be from Love. Psalm 51. Thy Hatred must be
universal and implacable, 2. Cor. 7.11. And there must be a through Reformation
after it. For it is he that confesses and forsakes Sin, that shall find
Me$cy. Without this you may go on sinning and repenting alternately, or by
turns, and notwithstanding be damned at last eternally, Rev. 21.8. and 22.15.

Of Faith: Which some understand to be an historical Assent to the Truths of
Christianity, or a believing that they shall be saved by the Mercy of God. But
if one should ask them these three Questions concerning their Faith.

1. How they got it? 2. How they keep it? 3. What Effects it has upon their
Hearts and Lives? They would be like the Man without the Wedding Garment,
Speechless, or speak nothing to the Purpose; they have got it they don't know
how; may be in a Night Dream; they don't know when they were without it, they
keep it without Difficulty, they are strong Believers about their Souls; but as
to their Bodies and Estates, they dare not trust without the greatest Anxiety,
even the Provision of a few Weeks; they still go on in the old Course as
worldly and carnal as ever: To such I would say in the Words of the Apostle,
James 2.19. Thou believe that there is one God, thou do well, the Devils
believe also and tremble. If your Faith don't work by Love, and overcome the
World, it is but a Fiction of your own Brain, or a Delusion of the Devil. Obj.
Though he slay me, ye will I trust in him, Job 13.15. I trust in God, I shall
be saved through Christ. How know you that you trust in God? What, trust with a
whole Heart and a wicked Life, that you shall be saved? This is trusting in the
Devil: Christ has said that such unrenewed Creatures as you are, shall not
enter into his Kingdom, John 3.3, 5. But the Devil says you shall Now you trust
in the Devil, that he will prove faithful, and Christ false; trusting that you
shall be saved without complying with the Terms of the Gospel is notorious
Blasphemy, as shall afterward be made appear. What will you trust upon? Will
you build your trust upon the Word of a damned Fiend? I am sure you have no
Word of Promise in all the Scripture to trust upon, while you are in a carnal
State. All the Promises are you, and Amen, in Christ Jesus, 2 Cor. 1.20. Ephesians.
2.12. Obj. It Is true, I have no Righteousness of my own, but Christ has died to
save Sinners: He has so, but what sort of Sinners? Not such hardened Rebels,
profane Esau's, so$ssing Ishma$l's, or churlish griping Nabal's, as you are,
without a Reformation: No, no, it is the penitent Prodigals, humble distressed
sinking Souls. He came to seek and save the lost Sheep of the House of Israel,
such as see themselves so. He invites the heavy laden Soul to him, Mat. 11.28.
Whatever Christ has done or suffered shall never avail to the Salvation of
impenitent Persons as such. Exc$pt ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish,
Luke 13.3, 5. You do but profane the Savior's Blood who pretend to an
Interest in it, and yet go on in a Course of Sin, for you do declare to the
World that their is no Power in his Death to slay Sin. Hear ye deceived Souls
what the Author to the Hebrews speaks to you, Chapt. 10.28 -- 32.
6. Sanctification. Some unconverted People imagine they are sanctified because
of the inward Combat they have with Sin, that Struggle which is between their
Conscience and their Lusts, they conceive to be the Contests between the Flesh
and Spirit, which the Apostle speaks of, Romans 7. But to correct this frequent
but fatal Mistake; pray observe, that there is a great Difference between them,
especially in these four Particulars. Namely, Their Causes, Matter, Manner and
Consequences.

And

1. In their Causes. The Contest of a natural Man is occasioned by one or other
of the following Particulars.

1. By the Light of Nature, which represents the Danger of Sin in some Measure,
and so restrains from the Commission of it, Rom 2.14, 15. 2. A pious Education,
which strengthens Reason's Influence, by insinuating into the concupiscible
Passions a Love to Piety. 3. By the common Illuminations of the Holy Spirit,
which give additional Force to the Former, by affording a clearer View of the
penal Fruits of Sin, 2 Pet. 2. 4. By the natural Temperament of the Body, which
creates an Aversion to some particular Evils; as for Instance, Some are
naturally of a mild Disposition; now this strengthens their Aversion to a
Contest with the Sin of rash Anger. 5. By the natural Discord there is between
different Vices. i. e. Covetousness opposes Prodigality, and gives directly
contrary Injunctions. The Graces of the Spirit are all harmonious, but
different Lusts are jarring and discordant, every of them labors for Mastery
and Dominion, and therefore oppose each other in Quest of it, as really as they
unitedly oppose the Grace of Jesus, as their common Enemy. 6. Not only by the
servile Fear of Punishment from the righteous God, Genesis 20.34. But also by the
Fear of the Penalties of humane Laws, which are without doubt a Restraint upon
some.
But the spiritual Combat of God's Children against Sin arises from the New
Nature in them, which is carried forth with an unconstrained steady Proneness
toward those Things that are Evil, as such, Gal. 5.16, 17. Romans 7.22. 2 Cor
7.11.

2. In the Matter of the Conflict, which in the Ungodly is gross or scandalous
Evils, such as are condemned by the Law of Nature, such as are like to wound
their Character. Exodus 1.17. Rom 2.14, 15. Or such as cross their Custom or
Temperament. Is it not common for some ungodly People to lash out Anathema's
against those Sins in others, which they themselves have little or no
inclination to commit, while in the mean time, they indulge others as bad or
worse, Rom 2.3. But the Combat of regenerate Persons is against all Sins
whatsoever; internal as well as external, small as well as great; those that
are fashionable as well as such as are more scandalous. The gracious Soul not
only hates all Sin in general, and every Tendency to it, but his darling Lusts
in particular, is the Object of his special Abhorrence. Psalm 119.104. 1 These.
5.22. Psalm 18.23.

3. In the Manner, respecting unconverted People the Combat is between
different Faculties; as for Example, between Conscience and the corrupt
Inclinations of the Will, or between Reason and Passion. 1 Kings 21.2, 4, 6.
Mat. 7.22, 23, 24. But the Combat of converted Persons is between the different
Parts of the same Power or Faculty, viz The renewed against the unrenewed, Gal
5.17. The gracious Soul with Joseph opposes Sin with Love Arguments; how shall
I do this Sin and great Wickedness against God, Genesis 39.9. But the unrenewed
Soul opposes it with Arguments arising from slavish Fear; if I do this I shall
be damned, lose my Credit, and hurt my Estate. The natural Man seeks only the
Restraint of Sin, Genesis 20.6. But the spiritual Man seeks the utter Destruction
of it in Heart as well as in Practice, in Habit and Act, Root and Fruits, Romans
6.6.

4. In the Consequences. The Contest of natural Men often consists with a
Course of Sin, Rom 2.15. And 1.21, 22, 24, 28. compared. But that of gracious
Souls always effects this, that though they be guilty of Sins of Infirmity, yet
the Course and Tenor of their Lives is pious and holy, 1 John 3.9. They are
upright in their Aims, earnest in their Desires, and uniform in their
Endeavors after a universal Conformity to all the Precepts of the divine Law.
Prove. 11.3. Psalm 119.6, 8, 20, 24. The spiritual Conflict for the most part
prevents gross Acts of Sin, Psalm 18.23. which the other admits, Matthew
23.23.24. Again, the spiritual Conflict hinders the Consummation of Sin, mars
the precious Consultation, the present Complacency, and the consequent
Obstinacy. Gal. 5.17. Matthew. 26.75. Whereas the other admits them all, 2 Pet.
3.5. O presumptuous Sinner $word$ if thou did but impartially compare thy
self with what has been offered under this Head (should God's Spirit concur)
thou might see as clear as the Day thy deceived and undone State, and that thy
strivings against Sin, are but the Work of a natural Conscience; armed perhaps
with a good Education and external Revelation, the common Commotions of the
Holy Spirit, and selfish Motives. Is it possible that Sin should thus govern
over thee, if you had the indwelling Presence of the Holy Spirit? No, no. Romans
6.14. It Is a Delusion to think so, and a very destructive one too. 1 John 1.6.
How can thou imagine thou art sanctified when you neither make Advances in
Holiness, nor $curn for the want of it? Are not such in the Gall of Bitterness?
Psalm 84.7. Acts 8.23.

6. Of Love: Both to God and his People. And

1. Of Love to God. They think they always loved God ever since they can
remember; if we ask them, Did you ever hate God? No, say they; this shows
plainly that they are blind, Rev 3.17. For there is great Malice and Rancour in
the Heart of every natural Man against the most High God, which they must see
and bewail if their Eyes were opened, Rom 7.8. If they loved God they would
love his Laws, his Image, the Duties of his Worship, John 14.15. 1 John 5.3.
And concerning their hating of God, pray read, Exodus 20.5. Numb. 10.35. Deuteronomy.
7.10. and 32.41. Job 15.25, 26. Psalm 29.8. and 68 1 and 81.15. and 139.21.
Prove. 8.36. John 15.18, 23, 24 Romans 1.30. and 8.7.

2 As to the People of God: Some by the Force of a religious Education, and
enlightened Conscience, have a fearful Respect to good Men; this King Herod,
though a great Man and not very good, expressed to a faithful Minister, John the
Baptist, who had reproved him sharply, Mark 6.20. He heard him gladly, though he
was a Boanerges: This was a great deal better than the Practice of our haughty
Rakes, who fly from the Light, because their Deeds are evil. Wicked People may
love good Men because of their Relation to them, or for their Eloquence,
Candor, Courtesy, Honesty, when they don't in the mean time heartily relish
their strict Holiness; but that Love to the People of God, which is genuine and
sincere, is chiefly for their Holiness, and is universal to all pious Persons
whatever Denomination they bear, and gradually increases in Degrees,
proportionable to the Degrees of Piety we see in Persons.

7. Hope. They think that every Body is obliged to hope he shall be saved,
whether he has Reason or not; this their Lips and Lives compared, too sadly
verify; but this Hope has Blasphemy and Devil Worship in it, as I shall prove
under the fourth Head.

8. Sincerity. They say, if one does but pray sincerely he shall be accepted.
It is true, if the Sincerity be of the right Kind. Sincerity is twofold, moral
and spiritual. The first flows from selfish Nature, seeking it is own
Preservation or Benefit, acted either by slavish Fear or mercenary Love. The
second from Grace, from the new Nature, transcendent Love to God for himself,
and Aims at his Glory.

If thou have never seen thy Hypocrisy and bewailed over it, and yet, if you
don't watch against it, thou art a cursed Hypocrite this very Moment: A great
many blinded Souls will talk of Sincerity that know nothing of it.

9. Charity. This they think consists in hoping that all shall be saved, or the
most part of People under the Gospel, though God says the contrary expressly.
Strait is the Gate, and narrow is the Way that leads to Life, and sew there be
that find it, Mat. 7.14. When our Lord was asked whither there are few that be
saved, he gave this Answer, Many shall seek to enter in, and shall not be able,
Luke 13.24. Many are called but few chosen, Mat. 12.16. In the Parable of the
Sower, but one in four received the Word savingly. Now is it Charity to believe
that God is a Liar? O Shame! But I Will tell you what your pretended Charity
flows from, viz. Gross Ignorance of the holy Scriptures, and a Work of God's
Grace upon your own Souls: Want of unfeigned Love to Mankind, Sloth, Cowardice:
One or all of these are the Fountains of your Charity. If you had ever felt the
Pangs of the New Birth in your selves, you would not judge of others so
lightly; but it is natural for Men to weigh others in the same Scales they do
themselves. If the Love of God and Souls burned in your Breasts, would you
suffer People to go securely to Damnation, and never tell them their Danger? If
we should pity and help our Neighbors Ox in distress, much more their precious
Souls: How can true Love dwell in those Men that do not?

Obj. 1. I have no Business with them, says one, let every Tub stand on his own
Bottom. Vile Man, thou speak in the Language of bloody Cain, Genesis 4.9. Am I
my Brother's Keeper? and proves thy self to be as void of Grace as he.

Obj. 2. This is the Minister's Work, says another, to reprove and detect Men.
It is so I confess peculiarly, and woe to them if they do it not; but every
Christian is a Member of Christ's mystical Body, and therefore should seek
after the good of the whole, as they have Opportunity and Capacity. 1 Cor.
12.25, 26, 27.

Obj. 3. I hope the most of People are pious; Ay, and what is the Reason, if you
thought otherwise you would condemn your self? But Friend, thou speak in the
Language of cursed Corah, All the Congregation are holy, every one of them,
Numb 16 3.

Obj. 4. But we must not judge. It Is true we must not judge rashly, we should
not judge any Man's State to be either good or bad without good Grounds from
their Speech or Actions; neither are we to judge of People's final State by
their present, though a Person be in a bad State at present he may he changed
before Death, by the earnest Use of appointed Means. This is the rash Judgment
the holy Scriptures forbids, and all unreasonable groundless Jealousies among
Christians on the Account of their different Sentiments about the
circumstantial Points, or smaller Matters of Religion. But the Lord Jesus has
given us Liberty to judge the Tree by the Fruit, Mat. 12.33. Again, By their
Fruits we are told, we shall know them, Mat. 7.20. And he also reproves the
Pharisees for omitting the weightier Matters of the Law, Judgment, Mercy,
Faith, Mat. 23.23. The Apostle John confirms this, in these Words, We know that
we are passed from Death to Life, 1 John 3.14. And that the whole World lies
in Wickedness, 1 John 5.19. You must not judge, you must not judge; this is all
the Shield that some Hypocrites have to screen themselves from the Arrows of a
just Reproof: But what is the Reason that the worst of Men should thus disclaim
against a scriptural and rational Judgment? Why it is this, they themselves are
guilty, they have built on a rotten sandy Foundation, and therefore don't care
to be searched, for fear it should disturb their pleasant Dream. They are
therefore as much afraid of being discovered, as a Thief is of having his House
searched when he has stolen Goods in it. Stand off, let them alone, they will
shift for themselves; this is the Language of their Carriage: But O Sinner, if
ever God convinces thee of thy Hypocrisy, thou will like such faithful Dealing.

2. Wrong Conceptions of, or a false Dependence on the Motions of the
Affections. Let us speak a few Words of these three, viz. Fear, Desire,
Delight. And

1. Have thou trembled at the Word of God? So did heathen Felix.

2. Have thou Desire after the Bread that came down from Heaven? So had the
carnal Jews, John 6.54.

3. Have thou Delight in serving God? So had those Hypocrites mentioned, Isai.
58.1, 2. Read, Heb. 6.4. and tremble to think what awful Advances a Christless
Person may make toward Christianity, and yet for ever perish. That Fear which
is saving must be filial and effectual to restrain from a Course of Sinning.

The Desire must be transcendent above all other Things, Psalm. 73.25. The
Delight must be genuine, for the sake of Religion it self, and not the outward
Benefits that may attend it.

But because too many (it is to be feared) rest upon this feeble Foundation. let
it be considered, that there may be strange but ineffectual Commotions excited
among the inferior Passions of the Soul by the following Causes.

1. By the common Operations of the Holy Spirit, which many do partake of who
perish everlastingly. These alarm the Conscience and move transient Affections,
Heb. 6.4, 5, 6. Hos. 6.4. O Ephraim, what shall I do unto thee? O Judah, what
shall I do unto thee? For your Goodness is as the morning Cloud, and as the
early Dew it goes away. 2. By the Instructions and Rebukes of a natural
Conscience, representing the base Nature, damning and dreadful Fruits of Sin.
Romans 2.14, 15. and 6.21. What Fruit had ye then in those Things of which ye are
now ashamed, for the End of those Things is Death. 3. By the Solemnity or
Novelty of the Subjects treated of. New Things tickle the curious Fancy, and so
raise a short lived Pleasure, which is either much lessened or totally
extinguished by Custom. So grave and solemn Subjects, either of Love or Terror,
when they are handled with justness of Thought, and energy of Expression, how
can they but excite agreeable Commotions when the blessed God is represented in
Paints of Light, agreeable to the Greatness and Goodness of his Nature, and the
Instances of his condescending Compassion to Mankind, as enthroned on Love, and
holding forth the Scepter of Salvation; when the Lord Jesus who is the Rose of
Sharon, the Beauty of Heaven, the Wonder and Delight of the Angels, is
represented in his personal and mediatorial Excellencies, how can even gracele.
Persons keep from sending forth some Salies of Desire? So I may say of Piety,
when the Scene of practical Religion is opened with all it is radiam Beauty and
solemn Majesty, when its Conformity to the Perfections of the Deity, and to the
Law of Nature and Reason is discovered, as well as it is Subserviency to promote
our truest and greatest Interests, both in this and the future World: What Soul
is so sordid and sunk into Brutality, as not to feel the Impressions of it? But
especially when the painful Passions of a bleeding God for rebellious Dust, are
discoursed of with a decent Pathos and Concern: Will Not this affect, at least in
a natural Way, any Men that are not wholly lost to all Sense of Humanity; but
alas! what is this to Salvation? Does not any. Tragedy sooth and strike the
tenderest Passions?

4. By the Speaker's Eloquence, which is apt to open the Springs of Passion,
when he delivers divine Mysteries with Sublimity of Sentiment, beautiful
Diction and graceful Action, with what gentle Violence do such Discourses
insinuate themselves into the Affections; but these natural Commotions are as
transient as ineffectual. John 5.35. He was a burning and a shining Light, and
ye were willing for a Season to rejoice in his Light. Many of Ezekiel's Hearers
were pleased with his Eloquence, but not reformed, Ezekiel. 33.32. And lo, thou
art to them as a very lovely Song of one that has a very pleasant Voice, and
can play well on an Instrument: For they hear thy Words, but they do them not.
5. By carnal Apprehensions of divine Mysteries, as though they suited our corrupt
Inclinations, John 4.15. and 6 34. 6. By remarkable Appearances of God, either
in Judgment or Mercy, by his Word or Rod. So we are informed, that when God
stew Israel, then they sought him, Psalm 78.34. While the wasting Hand of God
was upon them, they made suit to his Majesty with an Appearance of Devotion;
but it was only a Show and Pretense, as the following Verses assert, 36, 37.
Nevertheless, they did flatter him with their Mouths, and lied unto him with
their Tongues, for their Heart was not right with him, neither were they
steadfast in his Covenant. When Jehovah appeared on Sinai's Mount, attended with
all the Ensigns of astonishing Majesty and awful Glory, it had very
considerable Impressions on the People of Israel; they quickly sent divine
Moses on an Embassy to the Almighty to enquire after Directions concerning
their future Conduct, which they expressed a Resolution to observe; but failed
in the Performance of it. Exodus 20.18. Deuteronomy. 5.24, -- 29. O Sinner be warned by
what has been now offered, not to trust to, and confide in these fading Flowers
of floating fleeting Passions, which produce not the solid Fruits of
Righteousness.
3. Of the Privileges of Christians, such as these following.

1. Good Parentage. But alas! this is a poor Egyptian Reed to lean upon. The
pious Examples of good Parents will increase your Confusion and Damnation
without you improve them. A Heathen could say, and that very justly, Quae avi
et proavi, et quae non fecimus, ipsi vix ea nostra voco. What our Ancestors
worthily have done,
It Is mean and sordid to call them our own.
I don't call those Things ours, said he, which our Forefathers have done. 2.
Good Education. Though this may excite People to have some Love to Religion;
Train up a Child in the Way he shall go, and when he is old, he will not depart
from it. But alas! this is a poor Religion, and yet it is all that some have;
these Men had they been born in Turkey would doubtless have embraced the
Mohammedan System with equal Ease; but true Christians are not born of Blood,
nor of the Will of the Flesh, nor of the Will of Man, but of God, John 1.13. 3.
Baptism and the Lord's Supper. Some are so unwise as to think they are
regenerated by Baptism, when their Lives prove the contrary. But the Case is so
with some, that if they cannot find it there, they don't know where else to seek
for it, it must have been wrought then upon them they think, for they don't
know of any other Time when any such Work was wrought in them: Ay, this would
be an easy Way of Regeneration indeed; but we are informed by the Apostle to
the Galatians, That neither Circumcision, nor Uncircumcision avails any
thing, but the new Creature, Gal. 6.15. Some will plead in the Day of Christ's
appearing that they have eaten and drunk in his Presence, and that he has
taught in their Streets, but to no avail, Luke 13.26, 27. 4 Some rest upon the
good Opinion of others, because they have a good Name among the living, are in
Esteem and Reputation with the godly. Alas! this is no sure Ground to bottom
your Confidence upon, for many have a Name to live that are dead, Rev. 3.1.
It Is much safer to observe the Apostle's Injunction, Gal. 6.4. But let every
Man prive his own Work and then he shall have rejoicing in himself, and not in
another.
4. Some depend upon their Performances, or Righteousness, Negative, Positive,
Comparative. And

1. Their negative Righteousness: Their abstaining from gross and open
Immoralities, Luke 18.11. Or

2. If they be defective in this, they rest perhaps upon their positive
Righteousness: Some Virtue or other which they think they excel in: As for
Instance, may be that of Honesty; some will say, that are otherwise loose in
their Conversation, that they have never wronged a Man of a penny in their Life:
This is well so far, if it is true, for indeed there are too few that are free
from open or covert Fraud; but is it sufficient? Mat. 5.20. Nay, some are so
blind and vain as to think and say, they do all they can in God's Service: O
what a shameless Falsehood is this? What! Do you read and hear God's Word, pray,
meditate, speak of divine Things as often as you can, or ought? Do ye all the
Duties of Justice, Mercy, Charity that you owe to your Neighbors Souls and
Bodies? Do you endeavor to keep your Hearts continually from vain and vile
Tho'ts? Your Lips from all indecent Speeches? And your Lives from all forbidden
Actions? Surely your Consciences, if you have any lest, will witness the
contrary, James 3.2. Your Blindness and gross Ignorance of your selves proves
the Badness of your present State, Rev. 3.17, 18. Thou think thou art rich,
and increased in Goods, and know not that thou art poor, and blind, and
miserable, and naked.

3. Some are more refined Hypocrites, and do depend upon their comparative
Righteousness, with the Pharisee, I thank thee that I am not as other Men are,
Extortioners, Unjust, A. dulterers, or even as this Publican, Luke 18.11. Other
Men's Lives are not the Standard or Scale by which we shall be weighed, but the
divine Law. You may be better than thousands, and yet be damned for all. Except
your Righteousness exceed the Righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, ye
shall not enter into the Kingdom of God, Mat. 5.20.

But because Dependence upon our own Righteousness is an Error of pernicious
Consequence, a Defect in the ground Work; For no other Foundation can any Man
lay, save that which is laid, which is Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 3.11. And also
because it is an Error very difficultly discovered; many that are guilty of it
in Fact, will deny it in Words; therefore I think it highly necessary before I
proceed any further to essay an Answer to this Question; How may we know
whether we rest in our own Righteousness, or not?

Ans. 1. Those rest in their own Righteousness, who being yet in a State of
Nature, unacquainted with a saving Change of Heart, believe that their
Performances or religious Privileges interests them in the divine Promises,
Phil 3.7, 8. Those Things, meaning his Performances and Privileges, which he
had before mentioned, which he formerly counted Gain, thought thereby to gain
Happiness, while he was unconverted, now since he knew Christ, he counts them
Loss; knowing that if he continued resting on them for Salvation by Way of
Purchase, he should have perished for ever, been a lost Man to all Eternity. He
therefore renounces in point of Dependence his former Duties and Privileges,
esteems them Dung and Dross; cleaves to, and relies upon a naked Jesus, 1 Cor.
1.30.

2. All such as have not been slain Dead by the La$, rest on their own
Righteousness, Romans 7.9, 10. Such as have never been made thoroughly sensible of
their forlorn helpless State by Nature, Matthew. 5.3. Acts 2.37. Such as have but
a Semi-Conviction, they see that their Course of Life wants Amendment; this
they endeavor to accomplish in their own Strength, and having obtained some
more freedom from the gross Pollutions of the World, there they rest contented,
though they be ignorant of experimental Religion. 2 Pet. 2.20. Romans 5.4, 5. John
8.54, 55. Of whom ye say, He is your God, and yet ye hame not known him.

3. Such as never were sensible of their own Dependence upon their Duties and
Privileges, and of the great Difficulty of quitting that destructive
Dependence. If one should ask some Formalists, whether ever they rested on
their Duties, they would answer, no; God forbid that they should believe any
such Doctrine, as the Merits of Works. What do you think them Papists, they
scorn your Words. Or perhaps some would reply thus; that they neither have, nor
do depend upon any thing they have done, for they know, that when they have
done all, they are but unprofitable Servants, Luke 17.10. O unhappy deceived
Souls! this is a plain Evidence that ye are yet in Darkness and Death, Romans
10.3. For they being ignorant of God's Righteousness, and going about to
establish their own Righteousness, did not submit themselves to the
Righteousness of God. That is, being ignorant (at least as to their own Souls
feeling Experience) of the absolute Necessity and Sufficiency of the Mediator's
Righteousness, called the Righteousness of God, because it is of his
Contrivance, Ordination and Acceptance, and laboring to obtain Justification
by the Deeds of the Law, or upon the Account of their civil, moral and
religious Actions; they did not submit themselves to the Righteousness of God,
did not yield to the Terms of the Gospel, and accept the Offer of Justification
by Faith in Christ Jesus, but rebelliously stood it out against the Tenders of
God's pure and rich Grace. O! it is a great Stoop to a proud haughty Sinner, and
such we are all by Nature, to come to Christ as a helpless, hunger-starved
Beggar, and to sue for an Alms of mere Mercy: The Truth is, it is so much
against the Grain, that thousands will rather be damned than do it. What should
Persons of their Worth and Character lay aside (as to Dependence) all the many
Duties they have done, be contented to be stripped naked and bare of them, and
be entirely beholden to free Grace in the Matter of Justification? No, that is
below them, they will rather run the risk of Damnation upon their own Bottom, and
beggarly Stock. All those Persons that would most sacrilegiously halve their
Justification and Salvation between Christ and themselves, are Rebels against
God's Righteousness, they submit not themselves to it, as the Apostle
expresses it. What is more common among some People than that Saying, If we do
our Part, God will certainly do his: O stupid Ignorance, horrid Arrogance, and
base Blasphemy! Is not this a sharing and halving with a Witness, the Honors
and Purchase of our Happiness between Christ and our selves? How contrary is
this perverse Doctrine and Practice to the current of the holy Scriptures? Ephesians.
2.8. Romans 9.16. Tit. 3.5. Romans 3.23, 24, 28. And 4 5.

But there be other graceless Persons that having had the Privilege of a
religious Education, can chatter by Rote more orthodoxly about this Matter,
though their State toward God be not a whit better. If they are asked, Whether
they have rested upon their own Righteousness? They can tell you, Yes; all by
Nature rest on their Works; they have learned so from their Parents, and heard
others talk so, or read it in good Books: But what avails all this? We must not
only renounce the Merits of Works in Doctrine, but in Practice, by actually
going out of our selves and our own Righteousness to Christ, Phil. 3.7, 8.
which is not to be effected without an antecedent preparatory Sense of our Self
Dependence, Mat. 16.24. Mark 8, 34 Luke 15.17. Acts 2.37.

4. Such as are contented with the very Performance of religious Duties,
without obtaining the Presence of Christ in them. A gracious Soul w$$l not be
contented with the Duty done, without Fellowship with Jesus in it, this is his
Mark. One Thing have I $esired of the Lord, (says the Psalmist) that will I
seek after, that I may dwell in the House of the Lord all the Days of my Life,
to behold the Beauty of the Lord, and to inquire in his Temple, Psalm 27.4.
Cant. 3.1, -- 6. Psalm 63.8. Cant. 5.4, -- 7.

5. Such as labor not to get their whole Heart fixed upon God in the Duties of
Piety, rest in them; such as take not special Notice of their inward Coldness,
Stupidity and Wanderings of Heart, and are not grieved for such Indispositions,
for this is surely the Plaint and Practice of the Godly, Rom 7. Psalm 119.10.
With my whole Heart have I sought thee, O let me not wander from thy
Commandments. Psalm 86.11. Unite my Heart to fear thy Name Psalm 80.18 and 119
25, 37, 40, 50.

6. Such Persons as are emboldened in Sin by the Duties of Religion, rest in
them; and this I fear is the Case of many: Otherwise how could Persons that are
but very broken in their Lives, go on with such Courage and Confidence in their
Way, notwithstanding what may be said to them of the Danger of it. This
doubtless is the Cause when Conscience chides and checks them for the Breach of
any of God's Laws, they take a Vomit of Prayer, (lik. a sick Dog) confess their
Fault, mourn over it, and resolve to do so no more, and perhaps for a little
Spurt take more Pains to avoid it in Practice; then the Storm is over, all is
clear again in their Notion; they imagine their Sin is pardoned; surely God
will not be so cruel as to condemn such sincere Penitents as they, just for a few
Frailties, seeing every one has his Failings; N$no sine Crimine vivit. What
do thou conceit O Hypocrite! that one may have Communion with God in Duties,
and live such a sensual, carnal, worldly Life as thou do? Thou art strangely
mistaken if thou do: Hear what the Apostle John tells thee, 1 John 1.6. If we
say we have Fellowship with him, and walk in Darkness, we lie, and do not the
Truth. James 1.26. He that bridles not his Tongue, his Religion is vain.

7. Such as cannot appeal to God concerning their Sincerity in divine Worship:
Romans 1.9. God is my Witness, whom I serve with my Spirit in the Gospel of his
Son.

8. Such as get no Strength by them to resist Sin with Magnanimity and Success,
and to endure Affliction with Composure and Calmness, rest in them. Isai.
40.31. But they that wait on the Lord shall renew their Strength, they shall
mount up with Wings as Eagles, they shall run and not be weary, and walk and
not faint. Genesis 39.9. James 1.2, 3. Luke 21.19. I have insisted the longer on
this Head, because a Mistake here is of dreadful Importance, Debile Fundamentum
fallit Opus, a rotten Foundation ruins the Fabric: And thus it is when we
build upon any thing that is ours, Isai. 64.6. James 3.2 and 2.10. Gal. 3.10.
Acts 4.12. Dan. 9.18.

8. Some on false Reasonings and Pretexts, such as these following, 1. There Is
none of you all Perfect. It Is true a Perfection of Degrees cannot be attained
in this Life, so that all sinful Inclinations or Motions should be entirely
eradicated out of the Soul, not as though already attained, Phil. 3.12. But
notwithstanding a Perfection of Parts is attainable; we may through Grace get
every Part of the Soul in some measure changed, and the Frame of all the
Christian Graces infused, the Dominion of Sin broken, both in Heart and Life,
in Love and Practice, Romans 6.14. and advance by the growth of these Graces,
nearer and nearer to Perfection. Grow in Grace (says the Apostle) and in the
Knowledge of the Lord Jesus, 2 Pet. 3.18. Now these Things, O Hypocrite, you
want, and therefore that Plea cannot excuse thee or hide thy Shame. 2. But all
are Sinners: yes, but all are not unconverted Sinners. Some through the
Goodness of God are Penitent; now there is as great a Difference between these
two, as between Heaven and Hell, for they are doomed by the great Judge of
Heaven to these two very distant Places of Abode. 3. All have their Failings:
Yes, but do you call your gross Wickedness Failings? Your Covetousness,
Carnality, habitual Passion etc. Friend, you may palliate your Crimes as you
please, but remember, if you go on in a Course of any known Sin, you are at
present in a State of Death, 1 John 3.8. And by and by you shall appear before
an impartial God, who will judge according to Truth, and sentence you to that
Damnation you deserve, without sincere Repentance prevent, Rev. 21. 4. But I
don't justify my Faults: ay and yet commit them; why then you condemn your
selves and sign your own Mittimus, and own the Justice of God, in your
Destruction, Romans 2.3. And think thou this, O Man, that judge them that do
such Things, and do the same, that thou shall escape the Judgment of God?
And if thou do justify them against thy Conscience, thou fightest against the
God that made thee, wages War with Heaven and thy own Mind, and therefore art
damned already, Romans 14.23.


Obj. 5. There Is no Body certain of Salvation.

Ans. This is a great Falsehood, as may appear by these Considerations following.

1. If Certainty or Assurance of Salvation were unattainable, to what Purpose
then should we be enjoined by God to give Diligence to make our Calling and
Election sure, 2 Pet. 1.10. And

2. To what Purpose should so many Signs and Characters of saving Grace be laid
down in the Word, and we commanded to examine our selves, and prove our selves?
1 Cor. 11, 28. But the Apostle Paul thought strange of the contrary Opinion,
Know ye not, says he, that Christ is in you, except ye be Reprobates, 2 Cor.
13.5. As if he should say, It Is a strange Thing indeed, if you don't know your
gracious State.

3. To what $urpose then is the Spirit of Adoption which testifies with our
Spirits that we are the Sons of God? Romans 8.16. The new Name, the hidden Manna,
which none knows but him that has it, Rev. 2.17. But he that has it knows
it.

4 How came the ancient Christians to obtain it, if it be not attainable, and
to call the contrary the Spirit of the World? 1 Cor. 2.12. It Is well known by
Men of any Letters that this, the Body of the Protestant Churches have given
their unanimous Suffrage to, and that the contrary is the darling Notion of the
Antichristian Romish Church. But what is the Reason you so strenuously oppose
the Doctrine of Assurance? Possibly it is this, thou art a Stranger to a Work of
God's Grace in thy own Soul, and to preserve thy false Peace, thou think
that every Body is like thy self; this is some of thy Charity, who art apt to
accuse others as censorious Judges: but how can we know? How can we know? I
cannot see: Friend, it is no Wonder you cannot see, when you are blind, 1 Cor.
2.14. Rev 3.17. But whether you can or not, others through Grace can, as
clearly as ever they saw the Sun in his meridian Bloom and Beauty, without an
intercepting Cloud: The Sun remains no less bright and orient, though some Batts
or Moles should reproach him and say, he wants Light. But if you want to know
how these Things can be, get coverting Grace; it is to little Purpose to attempt
to paint the beautiful Colors of the Morning to a Man born blind. You don't
know that you have Grace, how do you know that which is not, you are so humble
as to question your State, sometimes when you are forced to it by the Gnawings
of a guilty Mind, perhaps for some gross Offenses; but your Humility must lead
you further before ever your Heart be changed, even to condemn your present
State as Christless, Luke 15.24.

6. Well if our State be bad, we cannot change it our selves. It Is true, we
cannot; but we can seek a Change after some sort, and if we do not we perish
deservedly; from him th$t has not shall be taken away even that he has; that
is, he that improveth not the Gifts that God has given him, shall be condemned.
This the Parable of the Talents confirms; if the impotent Man had not continued
at the Pool, it is probable he would have missed Healing.

7. But we must wait God's Time: yes, but in God's Way, otherwise you wait for
the Devil instead of God: There Is no Promise in all the Book of God without
sincere asking.

8. I design to turn to God afterward. This is the rotten Plumb with which
many stop the Mouths of their accusing Conscience, and so sleep in Death, and
dream of Happiness, while they are possessed by Satan, and led Captive by him
at his Will, in those Paths which lead to the Ch$mbers of Hell, Ephesians. 2.2. But
Friend, thy promising to turn to God afterward, supposes that you imagine you
have Power to repent when you think fit, which is very False and Groundless.
Art thou certain, O Sinner, that thou shall live one Day longer! May be God
will say to thee, as to the rich Man in the Gospel, This Night thy Soul shall
he required of thee: What Horrors would possess thy guilty unprepared Soul, if
the pale ghastly Messenger should Arrest thee, and deliver his awful Summons
that you must appear immediately before the great and holy God, to give an
Account of thy Stewardship! Would not the Frame of thy present Projects be
broken, and you sunk in inexpressible Amazement? While thy Soul sat trembling
on thy livid Lips, going to leap it knows not where, like that Pagan, Dubious
morior quo vada$ nescio; thy Eye strings breaking, and thy Blood chilling in
thy frozen Veins: Many have been thus surpised, and why may not thou among
the rest? However, Time to come thou know is uncertain, and will thou lay
the Weight of thy Salvation upon an Uncertainty? You would not do so about thy
temporal Affairs. But suppose you should have a longer Time, and you wilfully
abuse this is there any Promise that God will give you the Grace of Repentance
then? No, but Threatenings to the contrary, Prove. 29.1. And Chap. 1.22, to 29.
Thy resolving afterward and not now is Hypocrisy, 1 Pet. 4.3. And you know
their Doom. By this Delaying you are guilty of Rebellion against God, by
disobeying his positive Commands, Heb. 3.15. 2 Cor. 6.2. And preferring the
Devil and thy Lusts before him, by serving them first. By this thou harden'st
thine own Heart, strengthen'st the Devil's Possession, and grievest the Holy
Ghost, Heb. 3.15, 16. And 4.7. Acts 8.23. Prove. 3.28

9. If one ask some People concerning the Reasons of their Hope, they will say,
they have no Learning, they cannot express their Minds as they would, but they
have good Thoughts; so you may Friend, and have very bad Actions, through the
general Course of your Life; it is not by thinking well, but doing well that
you can reasonably expect Happiness, 1 John 3.7, 8. Heb. 12.14. Balaam the
Wizard had good Thoughts and Wishes as well as you, and remained a Wizard
still. But you have no Learning you say, more is the Pity, if you had
Opportunities to obtain it; but it is not School learning that I ask thee
about, but that which Christ teaches every believing Soul. Your Answer, Friend,
supposes that you believe that all the difference between godly Ministers and
graceless People consists in naked, barren Speculations: I confess indeed there
have been and yet are too many such lifeless Ministers who preach like the old
Pharisees their Predecessors without Authority, and without Effect, their cold
Sermons that freeze and languish on their Lips, are like a Parrot's Prattle;
but Christ will preserve (let Earth and Hell do their worst) a Number of
faithful Soul-searching Ministers in his Church to the End of Time, who know
the Truth as it is in Jesus, and speak to others out of the Treasures of their
Souls Experience, and who find their Speeches blessed by the promised Presence
of the Lord Christ to the Conviction and Conversion of precious Souls: what
though you see some Hirelings seeking with eager and impatient Haste their Gain
from their Quarter, looking after the Fleece as their principal Mark,
notwithstanding all their specious Pretenses, yet it is cruel and unjust to
charge the whole with the Faults of some. If there was a saving Work of God's
Spirit in thee, you would be able to speak something of it, if your Gifts be so
mean, why can you talk so freely about other Things.

10. But some will further plead that they have but poor Memories: What then do
you think that all a Christian's Skill in discoursing about experimental
Christianity lies in the Strength of his Memory? If you do, you are mistaken,
for every one that comes to Christ is learned of the Father, John 6.45. Now as
the Instructions of God are more powerful and refreshing, so they are more
permanent and abiding than the Lessons of any Man or Angel, John 5.25. Jer.
15.16. God's Word was sweeter to the Psalm. mist than Honey, and more precious
than refined Gold, Psalm 19.10. And 119. Verses 103, 127. Again he informs us,
that God's Commands made him wiser than his Enemies, for they were ever with
him, Psalm 119.98. The Instructions of Creatures are transient, like the
Impressions of a Seal upon Water? but God's Teachings are durable, like the
Impressions of a Seal upon Wax, or like the Engravings of a Signet, or
Sculptures on Marble, Exodus 18.11. H$g. 2.23. O Man, if thou had ever felt the
Power of converting Grace, all thy Knowledge of Religion would not consist in
barren Speculations attained by the Force of thy natural Understanding, and
retained by the Strength of thy Memory, but there would be some indelible
Impressions writ on the Tables of thine Heart, 2 Cor. 2.3.

11. If I thought much on these Things you tell me, I should grow Crazy.
Friend, thou art much mistaken; I persuade thee to walk in the Paths of true
Wisdom. Is not the Fountain of Wisdom, the blessed God, the best Judge in this
and all other Cases? He informs us that his Fear is the beginning of Wisdom,
and that those have a good Understanding who depart from Evil, Job 28.28. With
what Front can you talk of your Fear of being distracted, when ye are so
already, Luke 15.17. And when he came to himself; which supposes that he was
without the Exercise of his Reason before his Conviction of Sin, and Conversion
to God. Prove. 1.22 How long ye simple ones, will ye love Simplicity, and the
Scorners delight in their Shorning, and Fools hate Knowledge? Would you not
count him a mad Man who would drink Poison in Sport, or knowingly rush his
naked Bosom upon the sharp Point of a drawn Sword? This you do daily. Fools
make a Mo$k at Sin, Prove. 14.9. Would you not reckon him a mad Man, who being
justly condemned by the supreme Magistr$te to be burnt for Murder or Treas$n
that would $$$gh or dance all the Way to the Stake and Faggots, as if he was
going to a Wedding or to receive a Crown? This is the Practice of thousands of
graceless Sinners, they rejoice all the Way to Hell.

A wise Man (1.) proposes such an End in the Enjoyment of which he may be
happy. (2.) Pursues proper Measures to attain it. (3.) Improves the right
Season of using these Means.


But you Christless Souls either, 1. Propose such an End as cannot make you
happy in it is Enjoyment: Such as the airy Honors, brutish Pleasures, or
transient Profirs of Time and Sense, the Trinity which the presumptuous World
court, caress and adore. Or

2. If you propose God to be your last End, as you pretend, yet you do not use
proper Means to come to the Enjoyment of him, you walk not in the Way of
Holiness, which is the only Path to eternal Happiness, Heb. 12.14.

And

3. You foolishly neglect the present most seasonable Opportunities of
improving Means to secure that End, which deserves your most earnest Labor,
and highest Love and Esteem; contrary to the Prophet's Advice, Isal 55.6. Seek
ye the Lord, while he may be found, call upon him while he is near. The brute
Creatures may shame thee of thy fordid Neglect, Jer. 8.7, 8, 9. Yea the Stork
in the Heaven knows her appointed Times, and the Turtle, and the Crane, and
the Swallow observe the Time of their coming, but my People know not the
Judgment of the Lord. How do ye say, We are wise? Jer. 8.8. You are commanded
to learn Wisdom of the Ant, Prove. 6.6. and 30.25. who in the Summer Season with
great Industry prepares Food for the approaching Winter; but alas! too many are
like the indolent Grasshopper, who spend the Summer Season in singing, which the
Ant busily improves in gathering to it is Winter Store: They spend their Days in
Jollity and Merriment, which others improve to better Purposes; and so are
found unprepared for that Eternity which puts a final Period to their
groundless Mirth, and turns it into everlasting Sorrow.

But what if some foolish ignorant Enemies of God and Righteousness should call
you a crazy Person, for your necessary Concern about your Salvation, which they
are apt to do, because of their Blindness and Blockishness in such Matters, 1
Cor. 2.14. and their Spite against God's Image, Romans 8.7. Is it not better to
be called a Fool, than to be one? Are not the Hopes of an eternal Weight of
Glory and Crown of Life, able to support you under such frothy Sufferings by
unreasonable Men? If with the Camelion you will change your Colors for this,
and bend with the Willow to every adverse Blast, thou art an hypocritical
Time-server, unfit to be a Disciple of the holy Jesus, Mat 10.37, 38, 39.

12. If I should pore so much on these melancholy Matters, I should certainly
fall into Despair. Did not you hear of such and such that fell into this
dreadful Gulf, God keep me from that terrible Sin? Answer. But pray, Friend,
what makes thee so mighty zealous against this Sin, more than the contrary
Extreme, Presumption? which is more than equally fatal: O Despair! God keep me,
is a terrible Sin. What Despair! have Mercy upon us! But Friend, without such
Flame and Heat, let us talk a little soberly of the Matter, and inquire into
the Reasons of thy great Aversion against this Evil.

Don't it proceed from Love to thy own Ease, more than Zeal for God's Honor?
Yes it does; and if ever thou come to know thy self, thou will confess it: My
Reason is this? If it was only upon the Account of the Sin you had this great
Aversion, you would equally abhor Presumption, because it is equally Derogatory
to the divine Honors, as will appear under the fourth Head. But why say
thou that you should certainly fall into Despair, if you thought much on these
Things? Why some have dispaired by thinking upon them: Well, what though some
ignorant Persons through the violent Temptation of the Devil have dispaired, does
this necessarily infer that thou shall also?

2. It Is their Sins that occasions their Despair, not their Sorrow for Sin, and
religious Meditation.

3. What though some did Miscarry, is this enough to beat thee off from all
Endeavors after Repentance and Holiness? Some have dispair'd about the World,
for the Sorrow of the World works Death, 2 Cor. 7.10. Will you therefore
quite forsake all Care about the World upon this Account? I suppose not. Why
then will you do it in a Matter of greater Weight and Concern? Are not many
Vessels lost at Sea, and yet the Merchants will not leave trading.

I seel a shivering in me when I read or hear such Sermons as this, now if I
did not put away such melancholy Thoughts, my Uneasiness would increase, and I
should certainly sink into Despair! O deceived Soul! What you call melancholy
Thoughts are the Motions and Convictions of the Holy Spirit, John 16.8, 9. the
Calls of Christ which thou labourest to quench and murder. If these were
improved and increased by Meditation and Supplication, the Issue (in all
Probability) would be thy Conversion and Salvation, Joel 2.13, 14. But the Way
thou take, however Right it may seem in thine own Eyes, ends in Death. For
there is a Way which seems right to a Man, but the End thereof are the Ways of
Death, Prove. 14.12. Yea some Formalists are so blind in this Matter, that
having conceived (though without a Foundation) a good Opinion of their present
State, mistake the Convictions of the Holy Spirit, for the Temptation of the
Devil, and so under a Notion of opposing the Devil, they fight against God:
When God and their own Consciences tells them the Truth, viz. That their State
is damnable, because they want a sound Conviction, and the Experiences of God's
special Love. They look upon it to be an Insinuation of the Devil, and so
oppose it, and thereby ruin themselves.

But how know thou, O Sinner! that thou should certainly fall into
Despair, by thinking solemnly about thy Soul's State? Which of the three
thousand that were convicted by Peter's Sermon fell into Despair? Nay, it is so
far from this, that a necessary Sorrow for Sin, and Concern for thy Salvation
is the Way to prevent a final and fatal Despair, as being a Compliance with the
positive Commands of God. Plow up the fallow Ground of your Hearts, Jer. 4.3.
Rent your Hearts and not your Garments, Joel 2.13. Be afflicted, and mourn, and
weep, let your Laughter be turned into Mourning, and your Joy into Heaviness,
Jam 4.9. A necessary Preparative for Conversion and Salvation. Luke 15. Acts 2.
Romans 7. But by putting the evil Day far off, thou preparest the Way for endless
Despair, by grieving the Holy Spirit, Heb. 10.26. Hos. 6.1, 3. The Reason why
thou art so much afraid of Despair, is because it is so painful to Nature, and
Presumption so Easy, a sweet Poison: O poor Sinner! be informed that on this
very Account thou art in much more Danger of being ruined by Presumption than
Despair. The holy Scriptures that afford us an historical Account of above four
thousand Years, yet inform us of but two that perished by Despair, viz Cain and
Judas. Now if thou believe and considerest that but the smallest Number are
saved, how many Millions must have perished in that Time by Presumption.

While many labor to avoid one extreme, they split upon another, Incidis in
Scyllam cupions vitare Charybdin: He that Charybdis pointed Cliffs would fly,
Does often by the Scylla wounded lie.


I have been the longer upon this Head, because it is so commonly made use of
by wicked People to guard themselves against all necessary Sorrow for Sin: That
ravenous Lion the Devil, makes great use of this to betray Souls into
remediless Ruin.

13 But I must serve God with a cheatful Heart, must not I? Yes, yes, Friend;
you may rejoice when you have Reason for it; when your Peace is made with God,
Eccl. 9.7. Go thy Way, eat thy Bread with Joy, and drink thy Wine with a merry
Heart, for God now accepts thy Works. When thou art reconciled to God, and
thy religious Services are accepted, then may thou eat thy Bread with Joy,
but before this you have no Reason to rejoice, but on the contrary, great Cause
of Sorrow and Mourning, Hos. 9.1. Rejoice not, O Israel, for Joy, as other
People: For thou have gone a whoring from thy God. Before you taste the
Sweetness of redeeming Grace, and pardoning Love, what Reason of Rejoicing? You
may say with Solomon, of Laughter, it is mad, and of Mirth what does it? Eccl.
2.2.

"Your taking Comfort to your selves, or a Minister's speaking Comfort to you
before you are soundly convinced and effectually changed, is like sowing the
Ground before it is plowed. As Bishop Brownrig has justly observed.

But has not pious People the most Reason to rejoice? Yes they have, but what
is that to thee, till thou be such thy self? Light is sown for the Righteous,
and Gladness for the upright in Heart, Psalm 97.11. Though they have not always a
present Harvest, for those Sins of Infirmity will blast their Evidences, which
thou pass$st lightly over. Why art thou cast down, O my Soul, and why art thou
disquieted in me? Psalm 42.5.

O secure Sinner, consider I beseech thee in the Name of that God who made
thee, that awful Threat of the Son of God, Woe to you that laugh now, for ye
shall mourn and weep, Luke 6.25. O Man or Woman whosoever thou art, who go on
in a Course of carnal Mirth and Jollity, before thy Peace is made with God,
remember thou art under the heavy Curse of the Lord Jesus Christ, which shall
be by and by consummated in thy utter Ruin, except thou repent and reform For
while you say, Peace, Peace, sudden Destruction shall come upon you like
travail upon a Woman with Child. It would be a much wiser Course for you to
labor to sow in Tears that you may reap in Joy, Psalm 126.5.

But if thou will contrary to all Reason and Scripture, obstinately persist in
thy Course of groundless Mirth, and Jollity; then let me address you in the
Words of Solomon, Eccl. 11.9. Rejoice O young Man in thy Youth, and let thy
Heart cheer thee in the Days of thy Youth, and walk in the Ways of thy Heart,
and in the Sight of thine Eyes: but know thou that for all these Things God
will bring thee into Judgment. Pursue the corrupt Dictates of thy vain
Imaginations, and gratify thy sensitive Appetite to the utmost. Quicquid libet
licet. Swim in Pleasures and dream of Happiness; but know as from God that this
Course (without Repentance) will prove thy Ruin. Thou have to do with a God
that will not let thy Wickedness go unpunished.

There are many People who if you begin to talk of Religion, especially that
which is experimental (they can bear with doctrinal and polemical Matters
pretty well) are immediately struck dumb, like the Man without the Wedding
Garment, they lose the Use of their Tongues for a Season, but when the Subject
of Discourse is changed, and some political or worldly Affair comes upon the
Board, then the Creatures are mightily refreshed, then they begin to understand
what is spoken, and breathe in their own Element, they find the Use of their
Tongues immediately, and begin to be so warm and zealous, that partly out of
sincere Affection to the Subject of Discourse, or Desire to show their Wit and
Eloquence, that they hardly give another Time to speak. This Man has a bright
Notion, and that Woman has a pert Turn, which they travail in great Pain to
bring to the Birth, but cannot get opportunity: Is this thy Ease, O Man! then
thou art a Stranger to the living God, Matthew. 12.35.

14. But I pray to God often, and God has promised to hear those that ask in
his Son's Name; ask and ye shall receive, knock and it shall be opened. In
Answer to this, I pray thee in the Name of that God who made thee, and who will
by and by judge thee in Righteousness, that you would solemnly consider the
following Particulars: viz. That your Prayers and other Duties are cursed. I
know you are apt to gnash your Teeth at this, and to say, as some of your own
Mould did long ago, away with such a Fellow from the Earth, that speaks after
this Manner, Acts 22.22. Or complain with that unhappy Man that was bereaved of
his Ephod, They have taken away my gods, and what have I more? Judges 18.24.
Miserable and deceived Souls! you make a Christ of your graceless Prayers as
the carnal Jews did of old, Romans 10.3. For they being ignorant of God's
Righteousness and going about to establish their own, they did not submit
themselves to the Righteousness of God. But this Reed of Egypt will not support
your sinking Souls from endless Ruin. Now, to understand what I have advanced,
consider that there are two Things, of which all Duties are constituted, the
Matter and the Manner: The Matter is the Substance of the Duty, the Manner is
the Way of Performance, the Principles from which, the End or Design for which,
the Manner in which a Person acts. As for Example, in charitable Gifts; when
one gives seasonably to proper Objects, the Matter of this Duty is good,
because it is commanded, but the Manner may be and often is at the same time
very Evil and Wicked; instead of Love to God, Desire of Obedience to his
Command and the Illustration of his Glory, Compassion to the Indigent; Pride
and Ostentation, or a natural Greatness of Mind, Generosity of Disposition, or
a mercenary View to compensate some Crimson Guilt they have contracted, and
ingratiate themselves into the divine Favor, are the corrupt Fountains from
which this gilded Action glides: But indeed the Spirit of the World possesses
the Children of this Generation to that Degree of Baseness that they are in no
great Danger (many of them) of being Guilty of performing this Duty in a wrong
Manner; for they lay aside both Matter and Manner.

But to prove that their Prayers are cursed, besides what has been spoken,
consider these following Particulars.

1. That the Prayers of the Wicked are an Abomination to the Lord, Prove. 15.8.
Is not he that hates God wicked? But every unconverted Soul does so, though the
most of them will not acknowledge it, Rom 8.7. John 3.6. Now is not Abomination a
high Degree of Hatred, and what is God's Hatred but his Curse? 2. Whatsoever is
without Faith is Sin, Romans 14.23. But no unconverted Sinner has saving Faith, 2
These. 3.2. It Is impossible to have this radical Grace, and yet be unconverted,
for Faith works by Lov$ Gal. 5.6. Therefore their Prayers are Sin, at least in
the Manner of Performance: Now is not Sin the Object of God's Hatred, the
procuring Cause of his Curse and Vengeance? Hab. 1.13. 3. Our Lord Jesus
informs us, Luke 6.43. That a corrupt Tree brings not forth good Fruit. Then
it must needs bring forth bad, there is no Medium; this is explained in the
following Verses. Now is not every unconverted Man a corrupt Tree, in a
metaphorical Sense? John 3.6. All their good Actions, little else but the Show
of Goodness, "Splendid Sins," as Austin of old justly observed; until a Man be
severed by the Sword of the Law and Spirit in a sound Conviction from the wild
Olive, the first Adam, and implanted by Faith in the second Adam, all their
Fruits are but wild Grapes; their Vine is of the Vine of Sodom, and of the
Fields of Gomorrah, their Grapes are the Grapes of Gall, their Clusters are
bitter; their Wine is the Poison of Dragons, and the cruel Venom of Asps, Deuteronomy.
32.32, 33. It Is true, there is such an Appearance of Goodness in these
Performances of Unbelievers, that they often deceive themselves with these
lifeless Husks, but God who is a pure Spirit will accept of to Worship but that
which is suited to his Nature, John 4.24. God is a Spirit, and they that worship
him must worship him in Spirit and in Truth. 4. The Prophet Isaiah in the first
Chapter of his Book, Verses 11, 12, 13, 14. confirms beyond reasonable
Contradiction what I have advanced under this Head; he shows that these
religious Services which were even of divine Institution under the jewish
Economy were notwithstanding abominable and loathsome to God, because of the
People's Wickedness that performed them, as the Verses before cited, with that
which immediately follows, do make evident. 5. The Prayers of unconverted
People are Idolatry, when they pretend to worship God, they worship themselves:
that which is the last End of a Worshiper is his chiefest Good, for the last
End and the chief Good are convertible Terms. Now Christless People aim at
their own Interest, as their last End in divine Worship, the main Springs of
their religious Services are mercenary and selfish; Self bears the Ascendant in
their Breasts above the Glory of God: Phil. 2.21. For all seek their own, not
the Things which are Jesus Christ's. When our Lord informs us that we must deny
our selves, and take up his Cross in Order to be his Disciples, Matthew. 16.24
Mark 8.34. Luke 9.23. This necessarily presupposes that Self governs unrenewed
Persons. Are not the terrible Execrations grasped in our Text directed like a
pointed Thunderbolt against such guilty idolatrous Creatures? 6 Mockery. Hof.
7.14. And they have not cried unto me with their Heart, when they howled upon
their Beds. It is pertinently observed by Mr. Henry on this Text, That " Moses
is said to cry to God when he spoke not a Word, only his Heart prayed with
Faith and Fervency, Exodus 14.15. But those made a great Noise and said much,
and yet did not cry to God, because their Heart was not right with him, not
subjected to his Will, devoted to his Honor, or employed in his Service. Hence
the same excellent Person observes, "That those do not "pray to God at all,
that do not pray in the Spirit. The Expression shows how displeasing to God
their Prays were, like to the Howlings of Dogs or Wolves to us, for to these
Creatures it is probable the Expression alludes: It Is very likely that Saul
prayed thousands of times when he was a Pharisee, but not Notice was taken of
those Prayers; but so soon as he was convicted, Ananias was commanded to go to
him; Go to Saul of Tarsus, for behold he prays, Acts 9.2. Yes, yes, he prayed
now after another Manner than when he was a secure Pharisee; I Will warrant you,
his Heart quiver'd in his Body, and the Tears trickled down his Cheeks amain.
If he was such a weeping Preacher afterward as he informs us, Acts 20.31. no
doubt these crystal Fountains were opened then at his Conviction. 7. Again. I
might add that the Prayers of the Wicked are like Offering of strange Fire, for
which God severely punished the Sons of Aaron with sudden and awful Death, Lev.
10.1, 2. If there be any Warmth in your Devotion, it proceeds not from the
Coals of God's Altar, but Sparks of your own kindling, Isai. 50.11. O thou
unconverted Man or Woman, God might justly strike thee dead immediately with
the Spear of his Vengeance as he did Nadah and Abihu, for thy Offering of
strange Fire before the Lord in these graceless Prayers which you think so much
of and rest upon! And now what do you think O Man! Will such Prayers, or other
religious Duties as these are entitle you to any Promise of Mercy? No surely.
8. But we are expressly informed that natural Men and Women are excluded from
having (at present) any interest in the Promises of the New Covenant. Ephesians.
2.12. 2 Cor. 1.20. Reason also confirms what the Scripture vouches: The
Promises give a claim of right to the Benefits of the Covenant. Now in any
conditional Contract, how can the Party contracting have an interest in the
benefits of the Contract until he complies with the terms upon which these
benefits are suspended? But supposing an unconverted Man by the improvement of
his Powers to the highest Pitch (which I believe was never done by any of them)
could on that account lay claim to the Promises of Salvation, then these
Consequences must necessarily follow, 1 That Salvation is of Works, contrary to
the tenor of the holy Scriptures, Ephesians. 2.8. We are saved through Grace, and that
not of our selves, it is the gift of God: through his Mercy has be saved us, and
not by works of Righteousness which we have done. Tit. 2.5. Not of Works lest
any man should boast. Romans 3.27, 28 Who has made thee to differ from another?
1 Cor. 4.7. So then it is not of him that wills, nor of him that runs, but
of God that shows mercy. The Covenant of Grace would be nothing else but the
Old Covenant of Works, new vamp'd and furbish'd. 2. The spotless Sovereignty of
God stained, his Will dependant on the fickle Creatures Nod. 3. The fullness and
perfection of christ's Satisfaction marred, and the orient beauties of
redeeming. Grace veiled, and the Creature have cause of boasting and thanking
himself for his Salvation, more than his Redeemer.

Again, Would it not be a shrewd reflection upon the untainted Holiness of the
blessed God to annex the Promises of Happiness to the deformed and wretched
performances of his Enemies, which are so far from being able to bear their own
weight in the Court of Justice, that they are (because of the corrupt manner of
performance) the objects of his infinite abhorrence? If the Church's
Righteousness is called filthy Rags, Pillars of Smoke, Isai. 64.6. Cant. 6.3.
though they proceed from faith and love, how vile and base then are the
performances of such who are void of these two noble and necessary Graces, and
possessed of two very opposite qualities, viz unbelief and hatred, 2 These. 3.2.
Romans 8.7. How can thou therefore, O Man! apply to thy self these Promises?
Ask, and thou shale receive etc. what sort of asking and seeking is there
meant? is it not by Faith? and from Love? and a new Nature? Yes surely, for it
is not every one that says, Lord, Lord, that shall enter into the kingdom of
Heaven. Many shall seek to enter, but shall not be able, Mat. 7.21. Luke 13.24.
Now how can thou ask with Faith, or from Love, and a new Nature, who art dead
in Sin? Ephesians. 2.1. and whilst destitute of these noble and necessary Graces? I
would not have thee to conceit that thy earnestness flowing from Self-love
(which thou vainly call Sincerity) will entitle thee to the Promises of
Salvation; there is no Warrant for this in all the Book of God, as I have
proved before; but alas! I fear thousands rest on this sandy Foundation, being
born under a Covenant of Works. They still reatin a tincture of it, and expect
Justification by it: That Covenant was written on the tables of Man's Heart,
whereas the Coventant of Grace is entirely owing to divine Revelation; not the
least Signature of it on the Hearts of graceless Men, not the feast Glimpse be
wrayed by the Law of Nature, therefore they cannot understand it till they be
enlightened by the Holy Ghost, and therefore according to the Proves, Ignoti
aulla Cupido, There is no Desire after an unknown Thing. But it may be objected
it this be the Case, why then out Prayers signify nothing at all. I deny the
Consequence, and indeed by thy Objection if you speak as you think, you prove
your self to be a mercenary graceless Person: May not your Prayers be useful
and necessary, though not meritorious? If they entitled thee to Happiness, they
would include a Merit of Congruity; for Shame, would a Protestant plead for the
Merits of Works? The Duties of an unconvereted Person, if earnestly and
perseveringly performed, do lay them under a Probability of Mercy, Joel 2.14. 2 Timothy 2.25. Acts 8.22. This peradventure is a sufficient Motive of Action in a
Matter of such Weight as our eternal Happiness is: Are not Men moved by a mere
probability of obtaining what they seek, to earnest Labors in Matters of
infinitely smaller Moment and Consequence? The Farmer willingly endures great
Fatigue in cultivating his Land, and after all he is not sure of a Crop: The
Matiner exposes himself to infinite Toil and Hazard, in traversing the foaming
Deep, for that perishing Gain which he is not sure of obtaining; and so it is
in other Occupations. It not the Wisdom of God exceedingly displayed in
annexing but a Peradventure of Mercy to the religious Performances of
Christless People in the following Consideration. Our Way to the heavenly
Jerusalem lies between these two dangerous Rocks, viz Presumption and Despair;
the first on the right hand, and the other on the lest; one of which we are in
great Danger of being ruined by; now to preserve us from Presumption on the one
hand, and prepare us by a necessary Poverty of Spirit, for the Mediator's
Righteousness, there is but a Probability attending the Endeavors of
Unbelievers, and to preserve from Dispait on the other, and excite necessary
Motion, there is a probability, for hope is the Spring of Motion: When all Hope
expires, motion ceases, but awful fear is a very necessary Companion of
conditional Hope in graceless People, in order to humble them, and strip them
of their own Righteousness, and so to prepare them as objects of Mercy for the
Righteousness of the Lord Jesus, Phil. 3.9. Mat. 5.3. The Church of England
confirms what I have offered under this Head in her 13th Article.

15. Pretext. If one is speaking about the necessity of a found and deep
Conviction, in order to obtain the New Birth and Eternal Salvation; Some
Hypocrites will immediately reply, that the Spirit has different ways of
working, and produce that text, Joh. 3.8. That the Wind blows where it
lists, etc Hence they inser, though falsely, that they themselves are in a good
State, though they can give no account how they came by it; and thus they
securely rest in a damnable Condition. In answer to this, it is confessed,

1. That God has a variety of Seasons in which:

2. Various Instruments by which he works upon Sinners Hearts, Psalm 110.3. 1
Cor. 3.5. And

3. That different Persons seel Pains under Conviction, different both in
Measure and Duration. But what then? God's Work is substantially the same in
all, as God is One, Ezekiel. 11.19. Every one must see so much of the Evil, and
seel so much of the Bitterness of Sin, and the Insufficiency of his own
Righteousness, as to be heartily willing to forsake them, and actually embrace
a naked Jesus, Romans 5.20. John 1.12. They must see and seel so much of the
Misery of their lost and undone State as will make them restless and distressed
until they obtain Pardon, Romans 8.15. Are not the Terms of Mercy equal and
uniform? Where is there any Exception mentioned in the Scriptures, that any one
who comes not up to them shall be saved? Is not the blessed God consistent with
himself? Now this may show thy Falsehood and Hypocrisy in pretending to true
Christianity, when thou have never been struck dead by the Law, Rom 7.9, 10,
11, never experienced a powerful and universal Change of Heart and Life, which
every one must feel or be damned eternally; that Hope which makes not ashamed,
is built upon Experience, and is attended with a Sense of Christ's Love; and
the sanctifying Influences of the Spirit, Romans 5.4, 5. 1 Pet. 1.3. Has
begotten us again to a lively Hope. 1 John 3.3. And every Man that has this
Hope in him, purifieth himself even as he is pure. Neither does that Text
before alleged, viz. John 3.8. enervate but rather establish what I have
offered; that the Holy Spirit in the Conversion of the Elect works

1. Arbitrarily, as an absolute Sovereign and free Agent, both as to the
Persons to whom he grants his blessed Influences, as well as in Respect of the
Season and Measure of them, 1 Cor. 12.11. The Wind blows where is lists.

And

2. Mysteriously, as to the manner of his Operations. Hence it is said, Ye know
not whence it comes, or whether it goes: Thus he that experienceth a work of
Conversion is not able to declare or express with words fully to another what
he feels in himself, either as to the Order or Degree of the Spirit's
Operations; yet this very Scripture asserts that the Holy Spirit works
powerfully and sensibly; we can feel the Wind, and hear the sound of it: though
the Causes of Conversion be hid, its Effects are patent and evident: When the
Soul is made to grieve for Sin, and groan under a burden of Corruption, to pant
and gasp after Christ, and cry, Abba, Father; then we hear the sound of the
Spirit, and know he is at work. But,

9. Presumptuous Sinners offer many pretexts to palliate their Sins, both of
Commission and Neglect, by which their native horrors are lessened in their
apprehension, and their false hopes confirmed; as particualrly,

1. For Drunkenness: Though this be a very monstrous Evil, that sinks a Man
beneath his Species, by divesting him of, and dethroning his reason: and thereby
levelling him with the Brute Creation. I say, though it breaks the Constitution,
wastes the Estate, wounds the Conscience, makes a Man an easy prey to his
greatest Enemies, the Devil and his lusts; though it be as contrary to our
temporal as eternal Interest, equally opposite to the Law of Nature and of God:
A Sin which is the Shame and reproach of humane Nature, bereaving it of its
native grandeur and dignity, making Men worse Fools than Brutes or Idiots,
because their folly is the effect of their vicious Choice; whereas the other
was the lot of their Creation. Prove. 20.1. Luke 21.34. Ephesians. 5.18. Yet alas!
this monstrous Evil is too frequent and flagrant in this part of the World at
this Day. But if notwithstanding all the Warnings God gives you by his Word and
Rod, you will still continue in your shameless Vomit, adding Drunkenness to
T$$g$, and yet e$p$ct P$$ce: Remember that all the Curses that are written in
this Book will be upon you, and your Names shall be blotted out from under
Heaven. God will make you drunk with the Wins of his Wrath, and cause you to
staggar and reel into Hell: He will make you spue and fall that you shall never
rise again. Jer. 25.27, 28. 2 Cor. 6.9, 10. Hear ye Sons of Shame and Death,
what the great God says to you, Psalm. 75.8. For in the hand of the Lord there
is a Cup and the Wine is red, it is full of mixture, he pours out of the
same, but the dregs thereof all the wicked of the Earth shall wring them out
and drink them. Deuteronomy. 32.42. I will make mine Arrows drunk with Blood. But
notwithstanding the sordid nature, destructive and damning Consequences of this
Sin, daring Sinners have the front to advance some Pleas to paliate it, and
thereby they strengthen their false Confidence.

1. Some will allege, that they have Wealth sufficient to bear out such
Expense, and therefore why may not they enjoy their own? they don't wrong any
body.

Answ. You wrong your selves, and that in your dearest Interests, your Souls,
Honors, Bodies, Estates; you prodigally exhaust your Substance, blemish your
Character, mar your Reason, the grand Characteristick of the humane Nature, by
which we are distinguished from, and advanced above the brutal Herds; sear your
Consciences, and weaken your Constitutions: And is not this very base and
heinous? Hos. 7.11. 2 Timothy 3.13. And is not thy Prodigality as great a wrong to
thy near Relatives? who have an Interest in thy Substance, as thy Wickedness in
it is their Grief and Vexation? And is it not a wrong to the Poor and Needy,
who have ( in soro poli, in the sight of God) a right to some part of thy
Estate? What, does the Bulk of thy Estates (which can add no real or intrinsic
Worth to the Possessor) give thee a Letter of License to violate the Laws of
God and Nature, as well as thy own Constitution? Will Reason vouch such a claim
of Right, and prove the Patron of Rebellion and Suicide or Self-Murder, on such
a Foundation, which is a strong excitement to the contrary Virtues: does not
increase of Wealth (being, God's free Gift) increase our Obligations to God?
And can that which augments our Obligations to God and his Service, utterly
dissolve them? And is this reasonable? Accurate Mr. Flavel in his Treatise of
Personal Reformation proposes this Question to such Persons, which I believe
you will not easily answer: Whether you think "that spending the r$$uncancy or
overplus of your Estates in Excess and Drunkenness be the very End that God
aimed at in bestowing such Things upon you with such a bountiful Hand, and
whether the Expense of it this way will please Him, $s well as if you sed the
Hungry, and clothed the Naked with it? and brought the Blessing of those that
are ready to perish upon you and your Families?

2. Others will allege that it was Trouble occasioned their first falling into
this Course being Melancholy and oppressed with Grief upon the account of
their Spiritual or Worldly Concerns; they drunk excessively to support their
drooping Spirits; this being frequently repeated, induced a habit which they
cannot break.

Ans. This method as to the Soul, is Murder, and in regard of temporal Trouble,
it is Madness.

1. I say, in respect of the Soul, it is Murder, for thereby God's Authority is
contemned, and the Motions of his Spirit quenched; which its both our Duty and
Interest to comply with and observe. 2 These 5.19. Quench not the Spirit. The
Metaphor alluded to in this Place of Scripture is that of Fire, to which God's
Spirit is frequently compared in the sacred Oracles, because of the analogical
or like Effects he produces in the Hearts of his own, as a Fire does upon gross
Bodies, dissolving their native Hardness into ingenuous Sorrow for Sin, Psalm
51.4, 17. consuming their Corruption, Isai. 44 and enflaming their Affections
with the pure and chaste Flame of divine Love, Cant. 2.5. Now as Fire may be
quenched two Ways, either by neglecting it, or casting Water upon it; so may
the common Motions of the Holy Ghost be quenched, either by neglecting to
comply with them, and so slighting them, contrary to that Direction, Isai.
55.6. or positive Acts of Sin against them which is a piece of the most
effronted Wickedness, and God daring Impiety: To such we may apply the Words of
devour S$$phen to the obstinate Jews, Acts 7.51. Ye stiffn$cked and
uncircumcised in H$art and Ears, ye do always r$sist the Holy Ghost, as your
Fathers did, so do ye. If those t$at r$sist a lawful M$gistrate in the just
Ex$cution of h$s Office, shall receive to themselves Damnation, Romans 13. Will Not
a double Damnation be your Portion (so con$$nuing) who resist the King of Kings
and Lord of Lor$s, off ring Salvation to you in the most $$$descending Manner
possible? Isai. 30.18. Rev. 3.20. Heb 10.28, 29. Is it not the most hor$ible
Mu$$er thus to destroy your own Souls? But miserable Man! this Method you take
for a Cure, does but increase the Disease and render it worse; your Case will
be as bad as that of Ephraim, Hos 5.3. When Ephraim saw his Sickn$s$, and Judah
his Wou$l, then went Ephraim to the Assyrians, and sent to King Jareb, yet he
would not cure you, nor heal you of your Wound. Instead of going to the
Creator, they applied to, and confided in the Creature; but to no Purpose. Hear
and tremble at the Judgment that the righteous holy God threatened to inflict
upon that wicked People for flying to wrong Physicians in their Distress, in
the following Verse, For I will be to Ephraim as a Lion, and as a young Lion to
the House of Ju$ah; I, even I, will tear and go away, and none shall resoue
him. Remember Sinner, it will take thee a great deal of Pains to get thy
Conscience murdered, and thereby obtain complete Furniture for Hell and the
Devil. For the Way of Transgressors is hard, Prove. 13.15. And is not that a
fine Portion, worthy of thy Sweat and Labor? Perhaps before thou gett'st thy
Conscience feared, even by this Course, that it will scare thee so with it is
ghastly Groans, that you will be obliged to choke it with a Halter, as thy great
Grandfather Judas did before thee: But alas! this will but open it is Mouth the
wider in the other World to thy eternal Grief and Anguish.

2. As to temporal Concerns, it is Madness, because instead of curing the
Disease, it makes it more desperate by increasing it is Cause. It Is true, it
gives some present Ease by unbending and relaxing the laboring Mind from it is
Burden of anxious Cares for a very little time, by intoxicating and clouding
the rational Powers, and giving the Ascendant to the inferior and brutish
Passions, but as soon as this Paroxsym or Fit of Madness is over, the Force and
Fumes of the Liquor exhausted and settled, and Reason again enthroned, and
freed from the tyrannical Encroachments and rebellious Mutinies of Sense; the
Disease returns with double Violence, for the Cause of their Misery is
augmented by a needless Diminution of their Substance, and Addition of new
Guilt; so that like Paul's Vessel they are between two Waves in great Danger of
being sunk and shipwrecked, Acts 27.41. Poor Souls! if you went to God in your
Troubles and humbled your selves before him, confessing your Sins as the
meritorious Cause of your Sufferings, peradventure he would pity and pardon
you, Joel 2.12, 13, 14. This would be a blessed Issue of your Troubles indeed?
Believe it Friend, God's Love can sweeten the bitterest Cups of Calamity and
Affliction, and keep the Soul calm and serene in the midst of the greatest
Disasters and Difficulties, Psalm 46.2, 3. Application to Good in Trouble is
what he justly expects of you, Hos. 5.15. And it is often his gracious Design in
sending them to alarm you out of your enchanted Slumbers, and drive you to
himself. Does he not send Afflictions as Physic to purge away your Filth? As a
Fan to winnow away your Chaff? As a Furnace to consume your Dross? Isai. 27.9.
And is not Application to God in Affliction the surest and speediest Way to
find Relief. Psalm 37.5. Commit thy Way unto the Lord, trust also in him, and
he shall bring it to pass. Psalm 91.1, 1. He that dwells in the secret Place of
the most High, shall abide under the shadow of the Almighty. He shall cover
thee with his Feathers, and under his Wings shall thou trust. But alas! What a
sad Infatuation has Sin $rought upon Men's Understandings! That though they
retain a natural Desire after Happiness, Who will show $s any Good? Psalm 4.6.
Yet the most concert and pursue wrong Measures, to attain it, they forsake God
the Center of the Soul, and wander endlesly in vain Pursuits after empty
Creatures, Jer. 2. When one is found by Experience defective, they grasp after
another; thus they travel in mazy Labyrinths to no Purpose: The best of
Creatures have but a limited Goodness, and so can never satisfy the expanded
Wishes of a rational immortal Spirit: None but the bl$ssed God himself who is
an Ocean of all desirable Perfections and Excellencies can give it a Fullness
of Rest and Delight. Psalm 116.7. Hos. 2.7. The Soul can find no more
Satisfaction over all the flowery Fields of sensitive Delights, than Noah's Dove
upon the deluge Waters; but Christ is an Ark in which wearied Doves may rest.
Mat. 11.28.

As to what you object about the habitualness of your Sin, and therefore your
Inability to abstain from it; I answer, That though contracted Habits be hard
to be broken, yet they may by the mere Strength of Nature; they may incline but
cannot so$c$ the Will. The Jews had a very vicious Habit of Idolatry, yet after
the babylonish Captivity they reformed from that darling Lust, though in the mean
time they indulged other Wickednesses, Romans 2.

3. If any should allege (though there are but few so Vulgar as to speak it,
whatever they think) that they find so much Pleasure in this Practice that they
don't know how to leave it. Answer, What true Pleasure can there be in Excess,
which creates an unnatural Ferm$nt, and thereby oppresses Nature, and induces a
Train of noisome and destructive Diseases, which often occasions Pain and puts a
fatal Period to human Life? If there be any Pleasure in such Excesses, it is a
very inconsiderable, transient, irrational and delusive One, only the
Gratification of a vicious diseased Appetite, by which the Distemper is
increased, and God offended. But pray compare your pretended Pleasures with the
manly Delights of Temperance, which taste sweetest, and last longest, because
they preserve Nature in it is just Elevation and Element; and compare those
imaginary Pleasures with the real Pains of Body and Mind here, and the endless
Sorrows of the next State, which that Practice occasions, and see whether they
will balance them.

4. Some plead that it is not so much Love to the Liquor as to good Company and
Conversation that makes them go to such Places; as also that their Business
calls them there. Answer, Is good Company no where else to be found but in
Taverns? I doubt these are not the proper Places to find such as are truly
good, for those will endeavor to avoid Places of Temptation as much as
possible, 1 Thessalonians. 5.22. To pray that we may not be led into Temptation, as we
are directed, Matthew. 6.13. and yet to run afterward unnecessarily into it, is
not this $word$ put a Jest upon the Almighty, and endanger our own Safety? Does
not Joseph and Jehosaphat witness this? As to the Pretense of Business, it is
but a Pretense with the most; Business for the most part may be done elsewhere,
but if some Business requires thy Presence in a Tavert, is Drunkenness a
necessary Qualification to manage $word$ with Discretion?

5. Some may advance this Excuse, that they are obliged to resort to such
Places sometimes, and drink an extraordinary Glass, lest they should incur the
odious Charge of Phanatism. This is just what ancient Salvian says of the
People of his Time, Coguntur esse mali$ne viles habantur, "They are forced to
be wicked, lest they be esteemed mean and vile. The Rev. Mr. Flavel gives a
very good Answer to this Excuse in the following Words: "Gentlemen I assure
you, says he, that Phanaticks (as you call them) have Reason to thank you for
the Honor and Justice you have done them, in acknowleging them to be none of
the Men of your hellish Society, but Persons of a more sober and honorable
Character: And I appeal to your Reason, says he, Whether it, would not be more
for your Honor to wear the unjust Title of a Phanatick, than the just Censure
of a drunken Sot.

2. For Worldly mindedness: They Will immediately trump up that text of Scripture,
1 Timothy 5.8. that if any provide not for those of his own House, he is worse
than on Infidel. They deal with pious Ministers, and private Christians, who
meddle with them about this matter, as the Devil did with our Savior, that
damned Fiend came with a "Bible under his Arm, and Scripture in his Mouth; as
Mr. Burket expresses it; and tells our Lord it is written; Mat. 4.6. The
Passage refet'd to by the Devil, is that of the Psalmist, Psalm 91.11 For he
shall give his Angels charge ever thee, to keep thee in all thy ways. The scope
of which is only to show; that God by the ministration of Angels, would afford
Protection to his People in all lawful ways; but the Devil extended, and
applied this falsely to all unlawful and presumptous ways; therefore he advised
our Savior to cast himself down from the Pinnacle, and yet expect the Angelick
Protection. So these Misers, following their black Master's example; do pervert
that sacred Scripture before mentioned, which only requires a moderate careless
Care for their own and their Families Support; yet this Text they will rack on the
Tenter's, in order to Patronize their idolatrous anxiety about the World,
they's faithful drudgery to Mammon, which is to that degree, that it often
interrupts their Family and Closet Devotion. These Nahals get up early to
Worship their God; I mean the World: they have no time to Worship the God of
Heaven in their Families; no, no, that might give some interruption to their
more weighty Affai$s, which is to get a large Estate: Therefore the Service of
Jehovah must bend and bow to their Friend Mammon, whom they most heartily
affect. Through the Day their Brains are racked with a vast variety of Proj$cts,
how to put every thing to the best Advantage; the Feet of many are tired with
motion, and their Hands with action in their Lord's Service; however in the
mean time one thing they don't forget, unless a great hurry of Business
prevent, which is to fill their Bellies at proper Seasons, and that perhaps
without sear, Jade ver. 14 When the Even comes on the Laboring Men repair to
their Beds, and the Gentry to their Bottles for Refreshment, so that the
Service of God is miserably neglected; One is too much fatigued, and the
other's Head is filled with Matters of greater Concern, he w$n$s to tell a
merry, or profane Story $word$ his Friends for their Edification; and some are
so zealous in this Affair that they cannot sleep in the proper Season, but
imitate their Brethren the Bats, by waking in those dark times, when others
take their rest according to stated order of Nature, and after their midnight
Revels are snooring in deep Sleep, when Phoebus has blessed the Earth with his
benign Rays, and run a cousiderable part of his diurnal Circuit; I say, they
are Sleeping when honest Men are about their necessary Labors; but Darkness is
the fittest vail to shreen those brutish Actions which would blush before the
Light, and the Day.

2. But I have a large Family, I must provide for them: Well who hinders thee;
but pray do this in God's way. Seek first the Kingdom of God, Mat. 6.33. Let
your care be moderate; be careful for nothing, Phil. 4.6. I must provide for my
Family; and will you under this pretense lose the Opportunities of Mercy? and
so damn your Souls in order to get a Snare, I mean a large Estate for your
Children. You have a better prospect of getting nec$ssary Sustenance for your
Family, secured in God's way, than in any other; for Godliness has the Promise
of this Life, as well as the Bl$ssing of the next, 1 Timothy 4.8. The Successes of
all our Projects and Labors are the issues of a wise and all-governing
Providence; it is God's Blessing that makes Rich, Prove 10.22. Without this the
most blooming Attempts prove abortive: If the Lord watch not the City, the
Watchers watch in vain, Psalm. 127.1. It Is in vain without the Smiles of
Providence to tise up early, or to sit up late, or eat the bread of
Carefulness. Psalm. 127.2. For the Race is not to the Swift, nor the Battle to
the Strong, Eccl. 9.11. If all Events be thus under the direction of
Providence, then surely the most easy and certain Method to Advancement is to
get an Interest in the lasting Favor and Friendship of that God who sits at
the Helm of Government, and rowls the unerring Wheels of Providence, so as to
illustrate his Glory, and advance his People's Happiness. Non caeco impetu
volvuntur rotae: The Wheels of Providence are not governed by a blind Fortune,
or Chance. You must provide for your Families; who has ever heard you say, you
must provide for your Souls? Is not that Provision a matter of infinitely
greater importance? O! that you were as sensible of your Souls wants as you are
of your Bodies, it would be happy for you. But if you had a necessary, rational
and parental Aff$ction to the Souls of your Children, you would express it
otherwise by Instructing them in the knowledge of the great Principles of
Christianity, exciting and entreating them to practical Piety, and confirming
your seasonable Instructions by pious Examples. Children have Eyes as well as
Ears, to see what you do, as well as hear what you say: If they don't hear you
Pray and Read God's Word in your Families; in short, unless they see you Pious
in the course of your Conversation, how can they think you are any other wise
then in Jest when you speak to them about Religion, when they see you make a
Jest of it your selves. Some Men are like Nebuchadnezar's Image, whose Head was
of Gold, but its Feet, partly of Iron and partly of Clay; they hold perhaps
found Opinions respecting Religion, but have a base Earthly Practice, Dan. 232,
33. It Is an awful Expression of famous Hopkin's That some "Men talk as if
Angels sat on their Tongues, but in their Lives they are Devils.

You that are Heads of Families, if after your own Conversion to God, you might
be a mean (through Grace) by your good Instruction and Example, of their
Spiritual Life, to whom you have been an Instrument of a Natural Life, would
not this be better than $o provide them an Estate, at the Expense of your own,
and their Salvation". But alas! it is matter of great Lament$tion! that many
Parents are worse to their Children than the Sea Monsters: These irrational
Animals by an instinct of Nature, draw out their Breasts to their Young, Lam.
4.3. But you who have Reason and Revelation, besides that natural tenderness,
do not feed your Children out of the Breasts of both Testaments: You give them
Learning, you say, and what should you do more? There is much more to be done,
than just to learn them to Read, and then leave them to themselves, like the
cruel Ostrich, as I have shown before.

Pretext 3. But I get an Estate that I may do good with it in the World: Ay,
this is a gilded Pretext. But what Good do you do now with what you have?
Little or nothing perhaps, some insignificant trifles not worth mentioning, no
ways proportioned to your Ability; But you will say, you have not it to spare; ay,
and you would have less to spare if your Possessions were ten times greater,
for your greedy Desires would increase more than in Proportion to the Increase
of your Wealth; you would be but a Beggar then: For as Seneca well observes,
Compare the "richest Misers Possessions with his Desires, and he is a Beggar.
Remember the poor Widow's Mite, and be ashamed of thy Hypocrisy. But shall I
tell thee thy View in laboring to get a large Estate? Pride is one Motive, you
want to be a little demi god in the World, a sort of an independent Being, by
having many depending on thee, courting thy Smiles, and trembling at thy
Frowns, caressing thee by all the humble Arts of Endearment, hanging on thy
Lips, and listening to thy Haughty, and perhaps but Shallow Discourses, with the
profoundest Silence, as to Apollo's Oracles. A second is Luxury, that you may
live with more Ease, Gaiety and Voluptuousness, in order to compass a
comparative Happiness here, a sort of Turks Paradise. And would you have a
Happiness in this World? Well thought of indeed; for if you don't get it in
this, you are not like to get it in the next by your present Course, 1 John
2.25.

4. Pretext. I am in debt, and must not I labor to pay my Debts? Yes, yes,
Friend, there is no doubt of it, but in the mean time, you should consider that
you are in debt to the great God, both to his Mercy and Justice. Does not your
Life and Being, and all your Supports in both freely flow from the forfeited
Springs of his unmerited Goodness? And are you not in debt to his Justice, by
breaking his Law, and slighting his Gospel, affronting his Majesty and abusing
his Mercy? You are perhaps afraid of the Sheriff or other civil Officers
siezing of you, and putting you in a temporal Prison; but miserable Soul,
unless you get your Debts discharged, the Judgment that is past against you
reversed by the meritorious Passion of Jesus, unless you get reconciled to your
Adversary, the Almighty God, while you are in the Way, quickly the grim
Serjcant Death will arrest you, and you shall be cast into the Prison of Hell,
where you shall not come out till you pay the uttermost Farthing, Matthew. 5.25,
26. O Friend! Is there not more Reason to be afraid of being bound in these
heavy Chains of Darkness and Death, than any other Confinement. You who through
eager Desire and Labor to secure this World, neglect the Concerns of another,
are like the Dog in the Fable, who having a piece of Beef "in his Mouth, and
seeing the Shadow of it in the Water, dropped the piece that was in his Jaws, and
caught at the Shadow.

5. Pretext. Say what you will, I must mind the main Chance. Ay! is this World
then the main Chance, the chief Business we should pursue and esteem? Why then
hug it, and make much of it, scrape and gnaw your Dog's Bone as much as you
will; I believe no Child of God (when he is himself) will begrudge you your
Portion.

6. Pretext. I only seek a moderate Support, says another, Ay, I suppose you will
say so: There Is hardly any Body worldly minded, if their Sayings were worthy of
Credit, but their Actions gives their Lips the Lie. It Is as impossible to
persuade a Worldling that he is such a One (without preventing Grace) as to
wash an Ethiopian white. But pray Friend, if your worldly Care is so m$derate,
why do you run so fast, why are you so prodigiously vexed at small
Disappointments, and complain more $b$ut the Scarcity of Money than about the
Absence of Christ, and the decayed State of Religion? Why do you sometimes
neglect the Duties of Piety in your Haste? Why are you as hot as Fire when your
temporal Interest is touched, but as cold as a Stone about the Interest of
Christ's Kingdom? According to those awful Prophesies, Phil. 2.21 That in the
latter Days, Men shall be Lovers of themselves, more than Lovers of God. And 2 Timothy 3.2. For Men shall be Lovers of their own selves, Covetous, Boasters,
Proud, Unthankful, Unholy.

3. For their Carnality, Presumers allege David's Fall: In answer to this, it
ought to be considered, 1. That was through strong Temptation. 2. Not repeated.
3. That his Repentance was very great, Psalm 51. 4. That the Judgments of God
pursued him for it.


A gracious Person honestly labors against all Filthiness of the Flesh and
Spirit, 2 Cor. 7.1. As a living Spring will not long continue mudied, but is
still working out the impure Mixtures that defile it. Christ is the Pattern
which a devout Soul copies after, him he follows though it be haud passibus
Aequis, at a distance. 1 John 2.3. He that says he abides in him, ought
himself so to walk, even as he walked. Heb. 12.12. He will not follow any
others, any further than they followed Christ, 1 Cor. 1.1. 1 Pet. 221. But the
presumptuous Sinner copies after the Blots of pious People; Noah, Lot, David,
Solomon, Peter, did so and so, and yet were saved, and therefore why should I
doubt the goodness of my present State, or future Happiness, though I be guilty
of this or that Failing, Drunkenness, Whoredom, Covetousness, habitual Passion,
etc. I would not desire a plainer Sign of a presumptuous Sinner doomed to
D$ath, and posting to H$ll, than this. 2 Pet. 2.10. These shall be especially
punished, who walk after the Flesh, in the Lust of Uncleanness. We are expressly
told that neither Fornicators, nor Alulterers, nor Effeminate, nor Abusers of
themselves with Man$ind, shall inherit the Kingdom of God, 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. Gal.
5.19, 20, 21. That such God will judge, that is condemn or damn, for so the
Word crinei is sometimes rendered, 1 Cor. 11.29. Heb. 13.4. Is it not lamentable
that these Falls of God's People which were recorded for the Support of
distressed disponding Penitents in their Return to God, and as Beacons and
Warnings to excite us to avoid the like Offenses, should be abused and
perverted to a very contrary Design, as Enducements to Sin, and Supports to a
false Confidence. But if you must needs cut your " Throats because others have
cut their Fingers, who can help you? Many can fall with pious People, but they
cannot rise with them by Repentance and Reformation.

Excuse 2. It Is but a trick of Youth, a Foible, to kiss a pretty Maid. Answer,
It Is the common Practice of wicked People to transser the Names of Virtue, and
put them upon Vice, in order to lessen it is Horror, lest their guilty
Consciences should be shocked, and so mar the Pleasure of their brutish
Enjoyments, by beholding it in it is native Dress: In like manner do they
represent Virtue under the odious Characters of Vice, that being thus arrayed
in a Fools or Knaves Coat, they may with the greater Liberty point the Arrows
of their Anger and Disdain against it; but these artful Guises are as far from
altering their distant and opposite Natures, as they will be from securing the
Contriver and Users of them, from the punishment their Crimes, and the
Extenuation of them demerits. He that hides his Sins shall not prosper. Prove.
28.13.

But to show that Uncleanness is no Foible, but a very notorious abominable and
destructive Evil, pray consider these following Particulars, viz. That it
emasculates and darkens the Mind, emaciates and dishonours the Body, hardens
the Heart, and sears the Conscience, wastes the Substance, wounds the
Reputation, and damus the Soul. Prove. 6.32, 33. But whose commits Adultery
lacks understanding; he that does it, destroys his own Soul, a wound and
deshonour shall he get, and his reproach shall not be wiped away. 2 Cor. 6.18.
He that commits Fornication sins against his own Body. Read those Places
of Scripture, Jer. 5.8 9, 23, 29 E$h. 5 $, -- 7. Prove. 5.5, -- 12. Prove. 2 16,
2$ Jud. 7. N$$$h. 25 1, 4. Prev. $.32, 33.

Excuse 3. It Is what almost all practice, and especially People of the best
Sense and Fashion. Answ Though it must be confessed that there is too great
reason to fear that this Sin is too common and flagrant in this perverse Age;
yet there is reason to hope that a considerable Number are preserved from the
Infection. As to what you offer further that the People of Sense and Fashion
practice this. I answer, That it is to be feared the Assertion has too much
Truth in it, viz. That many of those who make a gay and great Appearance and
splendid Figure in the World, who would be esteemed indeed the only Men of
Sense (as if their Judgment must of necessity be proportioned to the bulk of
their Estates, the height of their Imaginations, or the lostiness of their
Looks) are guilty of it. But supposing them to be possessed of a large Stock of
natural Wit and acquired Learning, as it is confessed some of the Devil's
Children have; but not so much as many of them conceit neither: Some of Satan's
Brats are mere Dunces, though they would all be esteemed Solomon's: I say, do
they show their Wit in rejecting the Government of Reason, and the Laws of God,
in the pursuit of brutish Pleasures? But what patronage can you get from them?
Must not every Man answer for his own Sins? Ezekiel. 18.4. Dan. 12.13. If they
have much Wit and Knowledge, and live in defiance of it, does it not heighten
their Sin? and will not, it their Condemnation? Joh. 3.19. Can the commonness of
any Vice lessen it is malignant qualities? Can it be imagined that respect of
Persons will be shown to People according to their Civil Distinctions here, at
the General Judgment? No surely, the most of the great Ones will be in a most
woeful plight in that Day. See Romans 6.15, 16. Their Rank and Quality does not
free them from the common Vicissitudes of Fortune in this World, Sickness and
Death shows no respect to their Greatness; and when entered the Grave the Worms
feed as freely on their Hearts, as the Heart of a Beggar; and then People are
as free with their (mostly) infamous Characters, as the Worms are with their
pampered Bodies. Now if their Creatness cannot help them in this World in the
foresaid respects, how much less in the next?

Excuse 4 Some will pretend that they are induced to this Sin by a kind of
Necessity, for they are not able they say to maintain a Wife credibly, but when
they get their Substance increased by Trading, then they intend to marry and
reform. In answer to this, I would propose these Six Queries.

Quer. 1. If those Remedies which God has appointed, and which if faithfully
used might prove sufficient preventives of this Vice, such as Fasting, Prayer,
Temperance in Earing and Drinking, Diligence in the Business of our particular
Calling, and the avoiding all the Incentives to this Vice, such as lewd
Company, profane Books, wanton Pictures, etc have not been tried; is it not
mere sham and notorious Hypocrisy to pretend Necessity in such a Case? But
remember God will not be mocked.

Quer. 2. Seeing all our Successes are under the Divine Direction; is the
affronting of God's Majesty and the Violation of his Laws a right Method to
obtain his Successful Smiles? But if any should obtain Success in such a way,
it is attended with the Curse of God, Mal. 2.2. Now is it not better to want
such success, than have it? However you may dream at present, I Am sure you will
think so in the issue

Quer. 3 Is not a little with Peace of Conscience in God's appointed way of
Marriage, better than a great abundance in his Wrath, attended with inward
disquiet? The Psalmist answers this Question in the Affirmative, Psalm. 37.16.

Quer. 4 Is not the Practice of Wickedness the way to D$s$redit and Shame? 1 Samuel 2.30. For them that honor me, I will honor, and they that despise me,
shall be lightly esteemed. Romans 6.21. What fruit had you then in those things
whereof ye are now ashamed? for the end of those things is Death.

Quer. 5. Is it not highly probable that a habit of Uncleanness before Marriage
will ensnare you after it, to your own, and your Family's ruin and dishonor?
Prove. 2.18, 19. For there is no bounds to Lust, but Grace and the Grave.

Quer. 6. Is it not very likely that if you persist wilfully in any known Sin,
that God will forsake you, desist striving with you, and deny you in Justice,
that Grace without which you cannot reform Rev. 22.11.

4. In behalf of Sweating: Some will allege these following Pleas,

1. They Swear to the Truth. What then, one may Swear vainly to confirm what is
true, and that they do when they Swear unnecessarily and customarily, in common
Discourse: This customary Swearing gradually wears off the dread of God's
Majesty, and inse$$$$ly leads to Falsehood and Perjury; an Evil that makes those
Monsters that commit it ridiculous, for who would not suspect him that suspects
himself. Was there ever a greater Monster in Nature, than the rash Sweater? A
Man that perhaps professes much Wit, and Penetration, one that thinks
(probably) that all the sober part of the World are Fools, in compatison of his
Wisdom; and yet in one of his witty Flights, he sells his Soul to the Devil for
nothing, for a Sin that is neither attended by Pleasure or Profit, and is very
desious that Beelzebub should have his Bargain immediately, which he expresses
in his strange Acts of Devotion, praying that God would damn (horesco refrens)
him, or the Devil take him: Friend, you need not be so earnest with God to damn
you; without Doubt his Holiness, his Justice, his Truth will oblige him to
grant you your Petition without much Importunity; you need not fear but he will
seal your Mittimus for Tophet, and cast such Vermin as you are among the
Devils your Companions; there you shall have cursing enough, and be obliged to
gnaw your Tongues for Pain; those wretched Instruments by which you have
reflected so much Dishonor upon the God that made you: One would think your
other Wickedness would be enough to procure you that Portion, without much
other Labor, and is this your great Wisdom! Is Hell such a comfortable Place?
And is the Devil such a beneficent Master and pleasant Companion? I believe if
you felt but one single Gripe of the Damned's Torments, if "GOD and the Devil
had a Blow a piece at you; as Hopkin's expresses it, you would not think so It
affords Matter of the greatest Surprise, and decpest Sorrow, to consider that
some who go under the Name of Christians should outdo the very Pagans, those
Devil-worshipers, in this horrible Heaven daring, God-provoking, Soul-damning
Wickedness! As I am informed, the Indians about us have no swearing Words in
their Language: But some silly Creatures, when they get a little worldly Pelf,
a fashionable Coat, a bob Wig, and a Banjan, the Devil himself can scarcely
outdo some of them in Pride; with these Accoutrements, they not only huff and
strutt it over their Fellow Creatures, some of whom are perhaps in all valuable
respects their Superiors, but even enter the Lasts with Omnipotence! and defy
their Maker; they disgorge the soam of their envenomed Malice against the most
high God! by gracing (as they foolishly imagine) their smutty Speeches with
horrid Imprecations! They are no mean Mortals: When they have got such
extraordinary Trappings, the Laws of Nature and Religion (in their notion if
their Lives may be allowed to interpret their Sentiments) are beneath their
soaring Fancies, which are busied with Matters of greater Importance, viz.
Catching of Flies; as it is storied of a Roman Emperor: No, no, they leave the
Restraints of Religion (which they count Shackles) to Persons of a vulgar
Mould. Thus as the Wise Man observes, The Prosperity of Fools destroy them,
Prove. 1.32.

Plea 2. But perhaps some may plead, that they don't Swear, only attest what
they say by their Faith and Truth. I answer, This includes not only prophase
Sweating, but Idolatry also in its bosom: If a necess$$$ lawful Oath be a part
of God's Worship, as it certainly is. Deuteronomy. 6.13. Isai. 45.23. Jer. 12.16.2.
Cor. 1.23. Heb. 6.16. Rev. 10.6. Then it is Idolatry to give this part of divine
Worship to the Creature, which is due only to the Creator. The design of an
Oath is an appeal to God, concerning the Truth of what we speak: Now when this
is done with Solemnity, God is glorified; for by this appeal we acknowledge the
Perfections of his Nature, particularly, his Omniscience, Omnipresence,
Justice. Now when any Swear by a Creature (which Faith and Truth are) we
ascribe to Creatures the Attributes of God; this the Lord highly resents, Jer.
5.7. How shall I pardon thee for this? Thy Children have forsaken me, and sworn
by those that are no God's. Consider O Sinner! God will not hold them guiltless
that take his Name in vain: The Curse shall enter into the Swearers House, and
there rest, Zech. 5.4.

Plea 3. Some will say they mean no harm, it is only a Custom they have got,
which they cannot easily leave. Answer, Whatever they mean, they do harm by
breaking God's positive Law, contemning his Authority, and exposing themselves
thereby to his Curse and Vengeance, for he has said, he will not hold them
guiltless that take his Name in vain; and surely he will make good his Word to
their Confusion, except they repent. As for the Pretext of Custom, it is so far
from lessening, that it very much heightens their Wickedness. If a Man
convicted of Felony, and arraigned at the Bar, should plead in his own Defense
that he was so used to Thieving, he could not help it; would this alleviate his
Crime? or save his Neck from the Halter? No certainly, the Judge would be apt
to answer, as it is storied of one, that if he, meaning the "Criminal, was
accustomed to Stealing, he himself had a custom of Condemning such, and that
therefore he must Dye. Vicious Habits are acquired by frequent Acts, and
therefore do exceed single Facts, as much in heinousness as in the number of
Acts of which they are formed; a Fountain exceeds all the Streams that flow
from it. To conclude this Head, it is very surprising! that Men who pretend to
Manners should offer such an incivility in Conversation as to treat with
dishonor and contempt the Name of One whom all the sober part of Mankind
esteen and revere, and therefore cannot but suffer by the insolent Affronts that
are cast upon him; such a Practice is no less than an unmannerly and cruel
'Persecution of those we Converse with; if they be not Men quite abandoned to
all sense of honestly and honor.

5. For Sabbath Breaking, some will allege that the strict Observation of the
Sabbath is Ceremonial. Aye! it is Ceremonial I suppose in your esteem or opinion
to keep from talking Worldly Discourse on the Lord's Day: O carnal Creature!
consider that awful Speech of the Great God by his Prophet Isaiah, Isai. 58.13.
which will either convince thee, or condemn thee: Is it not moral and rational
that the whole of that Day which is set apart for the Worship of God should be
spent in it? It Is true the Works of Necessity and Mercy are lawful to be done
on Sabbath Days; but is thy chattering Worldly, or worse Discourse, either of
them? But I suppose when you are kept a pretty while in hearing of a Sermon,
and other parts of Divine Worship, from your darling the World; you are out of
your Element, like a Fish out of the Water panting for breath; and may be you
gave several gasps in the Meeting House, to setch your breath, which was almost
spent. I mean that your greedy hearts went several times after your
Covetousness while you presented your Bodies before God, Ezekiel. 33.31. But as
soon as ever you come out of the Church Door, and may be before it, there must
be a word of Refreshment about your God Mammon, then it goes pleasantly: Ha!
you breathe in your own Air, but if you are kept from speaking your own
Language, what a Weariness is it. Mal. 1.13. Ye said also what a weariness is
it, and ye have snuffed at it, says the Lord. You esteem that Day a Burden,
which is the Queen of Days to others; "So Ignatius styles it in his Epistle to
the Magnesians." How highly did the Psalmist value a Day in God's Courts, even
above a thousand elsewhere Psalm. 84.10 But O! how few are of this Divine Temper
at this Day! It Is matter sufficient to alarm all our Mourning Powers! and make
our sostest Passions bleed! to see how horribly the Sabbath is profaned in
this Part of the Land! and especially by such whose Duty it is to show a better
Example: This Day which should be spent in a faithful attendance upon the
Duties of Divine Worship, is spent by some in traveling about Worldly
Business, or Visiting, or Walking for Diversion: Will Not the jealous God revenge
such Heaven daring Impieties? Ezekiel. 20.13, 16, 24. Lam. 1.7. Ezekiel. 22.8, 14.
But to render those inexcusable who wilfully persist in this perverse practice,
let me add a few Words more under this Head to prove the Morality of the
Sabbath. And

1. The Command concerning it, is put among the Moral Precepts, and confirmed
by such Reasons as are Moral and perpetually binding. 2. It Is essentially
necessary at all times to promote the public Worship of God; as the very
Opponents of this Truth confess. 3. It was engraven on Tables of Stone, to show
its perpetual duration. 4. Instead of being abolished, it is confirmed in the
New Testament, Mat. 17.18, 19. 5. A Sabbath was instituted from the Creation of
the World, Genesis 2.2, 3. H$b. 4.34. 6. A Sabbath was observed after the Fall
before the Law was given upon Mount Sinai, Exodus 16.19. to the 31st verse.
6. As to the neglect of Family Worship, some will rather question the
Divinity, or necessity of that Duty, than their own Carnality, and Hypocrisy;
which is very unreasonable: as will appear by the following Particulars. That
this Duty is a part of Instituted Worship is evident,

1. From the Examples of pious Familles: Adam after the Fall Sacrificing and
prescribing Sacrifices to his Children, Cain and Abeb. Of Noah Sacrificing
after the Flood. Of Abraham teaching his Posterity, Genesis 17.19. Of the Jailer,
Acts 16.31, 33. Of Cornelius, Act. 10.2. Of Joshua, 24th Chapter of his Book
and 15th verse. Of Daniel, Dan 6.10. This was shadowed forth by the Morning and
Evening Sacrifice, which was under the Jewish EOconomy continually offered to
God.

2. By Precept: When we are commanded to say, Our Father, Mat. 6.9. which
Prayer being plural in the manner of expression, supposes more than one
present. We are commanded to pray with all Prayer, Ephesians. 6.18. But this is one
kind of Prayer. Hence it was that the Families of Christians were called
Churches, or Churches in their Houses, Romans 16.5. Phil. 4.22. 1. Cor. 16.19.
Col. 4.15. We are commanded to pray without ceasing, 1. These. 5.17. The
Servants of Solomon are said to stand continually before him, though it was only
at stated times. David's comfortable Speech to Mephibosheth, that he should eat
bread at his table continually, 2. Sam. 9.7. signifies only his eating there at
set times, otherwise his Speech would have been big with terror and punishment
instead of comfort. So Jehoiachin King of Judah is said to eat bread
continually in the presence of the King of Babylon all the days of his Life,
Jer. 52.33. Sure no body can be so vain as to imagine that he are every minute;
then indeed his Life would not have lasted long at that rate of gormandizing.
So then this Command of God concerning Praying without ceasing, at least
signifies our being always in a praying Frame, and more especially our punctual
observance of the stated Seasons of Prayer.

3. By the Divine Threatening for the neglect of it. Jer. 10.25. I will pour out
my fury upon the Heathen that know me not, and upon the Families that call not
on my Name. Observe here the dangerous Condition of Prayerless Families, they
are the Objects of God's Indignation: Pour out thy fury upon the Heathen.

2. The neglect of this Duty is a Pagan Practice: Upon the Heathen. Truly it is
worse than that of the Mehomitans, for they Pray five times a Day.

3. The neglect of Family Religion is a plain Evidence of gross Ignorance, and
want of acquaintance with God. We may without breach of Charity under the
patronage of this precious Scripture call those People Heathens, who neglect
this Duty; and indeed they are so in fact, though perhaps they are Christians in
Name, who neglect this Duty totally or frequently, and yet have had Opportunity
of being instructed concerning its necessity and usefulness. Where we have a
Tent God should have an Altar, upon which should be offered spiritual
Sacrifices.

4. Don't Reason confirm what I have advanced on this Head? Is there no Family
Sins to be confessed, no Family Mercies to be implored and acknowleged? Is not
this Practice of excellent Tendency, not only to your selves, but also to your
Children and Servants? Therefore we are bid to train up a Child in the Way he
should go, and when he is old, he will not depart from it, Prove. 22.6. How will
you be able to give an Account of the Charge committed to you before the great
God, who neglect to instruct, admonish and pray with your Children and
Servants: If they perish through your neglect of Instruction, either by Precept
or Practice, are you not guilty of their Blood? O Friends! consider if in that
great Day of God, when you shall appear before the flaming Tribunal of the Lord
Jesus, would it not be terrible to hear some of your Children and Servants
accusing and cursing you, as the Instruments of their Ruin, through your vile
Neglect of this Duty, and other wicked Practices? And this indeed is likely
enough to be your Case, if you don't alter your Course.

If it be objected, 1. That such a Course of praying would be formal: I answer,
It Is your own Fault if it be so. I am sure that praying frequently, if with
necessary Caution and Solemnity is the appointed Way and Mean to obtain vital
Religion, Matthew. 7.7. Luke 11.9. I suppose indeed that this Duty is coldly and
superficially performed by some carnal People, and no better can be expected of
them while they remain in that State, unless it be some Sparks of their own
kindling, Isai. 50.11. And sometimes under the bidings of Christ's Face, true
Christians may languish in their Devotion, which Sloth may much increase: By
Night on my Bed I sought him, Cant. 3.1. which is much to be lamented! But does
this make the Duty, in it self considered, the less worthy of the Esteem of
conscientious Persons? This Argument militates as much against stated hearing
of the Word, reading the Scriptures, spiritual Conferences, which are commanded
Duties, Heb. 10.25 Romans 10.14, 15. John 5.39. Isai. 8.20. Acts 17.11. Mal.
3.16. We don't undervalue natural Food because we partake of it frequently, or
because others abuse it.

Object. 2. I pray now and then when I am in a good Frame. O Hypocrite! I doubt
thy Frame is little worth; that which don't come in God's Way, (I mean in the
Way of earnest Seeking) it is generally either a Delusion of the Devil, or at
best some transient Sorrow, occasioned by the gnawing of thy natural Conscience
for some Wickedness thou have committed, such as the Pagans have as well as
thou, Romans 2.

Object. 3. If any should object that he wants Ability; let him ask Wisdom of
God, who gives liberally and upbraids not, and it shall be given him, James 1.5.

Object. 4. But if any should allege that their Families are so imbarrass'd
with Difficulties that they cannot perform it with Convenience. I answer, That
he who observes the Wind shall not sow, Eccl. 11.4. Through many Tribulations
we must enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, Acts 14.22. while there is a tempting
Devil, and an alluring wicked World, there will be Hindrances in the Way of
Duty, and Furtherances to Evil; he that will not endure Difficulties and Death
it self for Truth and Duty, is no Disciple of Christ Jesus.

Object. 5. I should be scoffed at, if I should carry on Family Religion. And
what then, that is but a light Suffering for the precious Jesus; if your Head
was to be laid on the Block for this Practice, which is much more, you would
run the Risk of it, if you were a Child of God. Remember Daniel: If you profess
not Christ before Men, how do you think he will profess you before his Father
and the holy Angels?

7. For neglecting to hear the Word of God, some will offer the following Pleas.

1. The Minister is an odd sort of a Man, he speaks of nothing but Hell and
Damnation. Answer, Was not John the Baptist a terrible Preacher? Behold the Ax
is laid to the Root of the Tree, every Tree, says he, that brings not forth
good Fruit shall be $own down and cast into the Fire, Mat. 3.10. O Generation
of Vipers. Mat. 12.34. Was not Christ himself an awful Preacher? It Is true he
pronounced Blessings upon his Disciples, and so do his faithful Ministers, Mat.
5. But how many bitter Curses did he thunder out against the Pharisees, that
self righteous Generation, that built upon their own Works? Mat. 23.13, -- 17
In the Compass of four Verses, he denounces sour Curses upon them. With what
Solemnity and Frequency did our blessed Lord inculcare the grizly Horrors and
endless Pains of the damned World! Mat. 8.12. Was not this the Practice of the
Apostles? Knowing the Terrors of the Lord, we persuade Men, 2 Cor. 5.11. Upon
which Text, learned Stillingfleet justly observes, That if the Terrors of God
and Eternity will not persuade Men to forsake their vicious Courses, nothing
else will. The great Necessity of using Terror appears from the following
Considerations.

1. The Holy Spirit begins with Conviction John 16.8, 9. Now should not
Ministers follow the Order of the Holy Spirit's Operations on the Soul? Does
not natural Reason teach this, and Men's Practice in other Affairs? In
Buildings, don't Men dig deep, and lay the Foundation first? For that ancient
Proverb is most just, Stabit Opus melius$st been fixa Basis, The Superstructure
will stand the better if the Foundation be well laid. To preach Comfort to Men
before a sound Conviction, is as ridiculous as if a Mason should pretend to
erect a fair Fabric in the airy Regions. Do not Men plow the Ground before
they sow it? This Similitude the Holy Spirit uses in the Word, Jer. 4.3. Plow
up the fallow Ground of your Hearts, and sow not among Thorns. Would it not be
very ridiculous for a Husbandman to sow his Ground before he plowed it, or to
cast Seed upon a flinty Rock? It Is every whit as ridiculous for Ministers to
preach Comfort to unconvinced Souls. There is no Peace says my God to the
Wicked, Isai. 48.22.

2. Unconverted People have a clearer Notion of Pain, both bodily and mental,
than of the Pleasures and Comforts of a pious Life, for they have had the
Experience of the one, but not of the other; they have no just Notion of the
ravishing Sweets of Religion, either in this Life or that to come; for a
Stranger does not intermeddle with those Joys, Prove. 14.10. Now is not a Person
more apt to be affected with those Things he knows, than with the Things he
knows not?

3. Unconverted People are governed by selfish Principles, filled with Hatred
against the good God; as I proved before. How then can it be reasonably
expected that such Persons will be much moved by Love Arguments when they are
without that noble generous Passion in any Degree of Eminence toward God? Is
not Love Loves Load$ stone? A Man never loves God truly and transcendently
until he feels the warm Beams of God's Love glowing in his Breast: We love him
because he first loved us, 1 John 4.19. As the Sun shining upon Glass has it is
Rays reflected or retorted, so a Believer's Love to Christ is nothing but his
own reflected. It Is true, ungodly People may have some transient Motion of the
Affections when they hear a Love Subject passionately handled, but these
Affections are like the morning Cloud and early Dew, Hos. 6.14. and 13.3.

Object. 2. But such a Minister is uncivil in his public Discourses, he does
not treat Mankind with Manners and Discretion. In answer to this, Let me crave
leave to inform you, that one can hardly call a wicked Man out of his Name:
Will Not you allow us the Liberty to learn Manners in Christ's School? Is not his
Word the best Directory for the Manners of Christians? I hope you will not have
such a hardy Front as to call Christ and his Apostles unmannerly Persons, and
why should you any that follow their Examples? Pray read and consider what
Epithets of Shama and Ignominy our Lord and his Servants gave those Men; Christ
called wicked Persons, blind Guides, Fools and Blind, Mat. 23.16, 17.
Hypocrites, 23. Serpents, and a Generation of Vipers, 33. Foxes, Luke 13.32.
Whited Walls, Acts 23.3. The Apostles called them Dogs, Phil. 3.2. Beware of
Dogs, beware of evil Workers, Rev. 22.15. For without are Dogs, and Sorcerers,
and Whoremongers, and Murderers, and Idolaters, and whosoever loves and makes
a Lie. Yea Beasts, 1 Cor. 15.32. The Ox and the Ass is preserr'd before you in
some Respects, Isai. 1.3.

Object. 3. Ministers should endeavor to draw People by Degrees by a mild
winning Way, they should offer Milk to Babes: Yes, yes, this is the Way to gain
them to themselves, but not to Christ. Your Advice Friend, is the old Story
over again, pray hear what God says of it, Isai. 30.9, 10 That this is a
rebellious People; lying Children that will not hear the Law of the Lord, which
say to the Seers, See not, and to the Prophets, Prophesy not unto us right
Things; speak unto us smooth Things, prophesy Deceits Is it proper think you
for a Physician to act according to the Humor and Advice of a distempered
Patient? If one that is in a Lethargy, a little before he falls into his Fits
should advise his Physician, that whatever he did, besure to give him easy
Medicines; do you think that a Man of any Sense or Conscience would follow that
Direction? I think not. Thus Christless Persons are all of them before their
Conviction in this lethargick Sleep, which they don't care to be roused out of,
because of the Pain occasioned by such an Alarm. Suppose a Man were sleeping
securely and dreaming pleasantly, while the House was a Fire over his Head,
would it not be a Deed of Mercy, to awake such a Person? Yes, I suppose you will
allow this. Now suppose you your selves endeavored by a sudden Alarm to rouse
that Man (for I charitably presume you would allow the Exercise of some Zeal to
save a Man's Life from the devouring Flames) you would not surely go to whisper
in his Ear some soft round about Discourse, that his House was you feared not
in the best Condition possible, it might perhaps take Damage if suitable Care
were not taken to prevent it. I say would you go thus about the Bush with the
poor Man in a Time of such Danger? No, I believe not: I fancy you would take a
rougher Method, without Ceremony or Grimace. Now what if this Man should return
your Courtesy and Kindness to him in Distress with a Blow on your Face, while
the poor Creature was but half awaked out of his sweet Sleep, being ignorant of
his good Design: The Case applies it self. This truly is much the Condition and
Carriage of a secure Christless World. If a Person that was cachextick or under
a bad Habit of Body, should advise the Physician to give him Elixirs and
Cordials continually, because he had a natural Aversion against Physic, either
Emetick or Cathartick; should the Physician observe this Direction, and would
it effect a Cure? If one that had an old Ulcer, or a mortified Leg or Arm,
would pray the Chyrurgeon to lay by his Probe and Saw, for he could not bear to
see those Instruments, they always terrified him, but if he must show them at
any Time, to let the World know that he had a good Set of Tools, and thereby
establish his Character, that he would entreat him that this should be but
seldom, and that he would keep them at a due Distance, and in the mean time,
use emolient lenitive Medicines; would it be proper to observe these Directions
think you, to avoid the groundless Charge of Cruelty, and incur deservedly that
of Murder or Fraud?

Object 4. But you will object, that Milk should be offered to Babes: Yes, yes, by
all Means, I have nothing against it, but I hope you don't think any are Babes
before they are born; I dare be bold to say, if you were regenerated by the
Holy Ghost, and so Babes in Christ, you would love the Doctrines of Conversion,
Faith, Repentance, as the Child the Breast, for these are the first and great
Principles of practical Religion. But how can you think you are Babes when you
are unacquainted with the Pangs of the New Birth. Nay, perhaps instead of the
experimental Knowledge of this great and noble Change, you are apt to question
whether such a Thing be attainable; whether the Notions of People about it
don't consist very much, if not altogether in Fancy, Melancholy or Enthusiasm;
and may be in your great Wisdom you are apt to fleer or smile at the mentioning
of such a Change; and yet in the mean time, you pretend to believe that Christ
speaks of Truth, John 3.9. I pray you reconcile your Faith and your Wisdom
together if you can, and see if the one be not Fiction and the other Madness
and Malice. But is there not Children in another Sense? Yes, yes, there be
Babes in Knowledge, and such are you for all your Conceit; otherwise you would
not slight and disgust those Doctrines and Methods of Application, which have
the directest Tendency to promote your Happiness. But suppose we should humor
you for Gain, and tell you pleasant and smooth Stories, and if we spoke any
Terror to the Wicked now and then by the by, we should immediately upon the
Heels of it, before the Wound was half opened, apply a healing Plaster, and so
daub with untempered Mortar, Ezekiel. 13.10, 11. Because, even because they have
seduced my People, saying Peace, and there was no Peace. And one built up a
Wall, and others daub it with untempered Mortar, say unto them that daub with
untempered Mortar; that it shall not stand. I say, if we should sow Pillows
under every Arm-Hole, ver. 18. by a short, general and undistinct Application
of our public Discourses, contrary to Paul's Direction to Timothy, 2 Timothy
2.15. And labor to heal the Wounds of the Daughter of Zion slightly, Jer. 6.4.
and 8.11. They have healed also the Hurt of the Daughter of my People slightly,
saying, Peace, Peace, when there is no Peace, for Fear any poor Souls should be
convicted and saved from the Wrath to come. You would be apt to say, O that is
a fine Minister indeed, he is not always thundering about Hell and Damnation, he
is a Man of Sense and Learning, I believe he shows the Way to Heaven with
Moderation, he does not lead People into a Wilderness, and there leave them;
you would court such a Man's Conversation which you would find according to
your Hearts Desire, worldly and vain, may be a little Religion spoken of by
Chance, and that of the doctrinal and controversial Parts (not the
experimental, they will take care to avoid that) of Religion, and that offered
with haughty, or light Air, which leaves no lasting Impression on the Audience;
these are the fine Men that the World is blessed with, Hosannah, Hosannah! O
the Blindness and Madness of an infatuated World! Such Soul Murderers, and dry
Nurses are the only Men fit to be esteemed and caressed! You would fly the
Company of a faithful Minister, as you would do a Lion; because his pious
Discourses gall you, and you are afraid poor Souls of being converted. But I
say, suppose we should tell you such pleasant Tales, would this alter the
Nature of Things? No I believe not, the Nature of God and divine Truth remain
invariable; for all our Notions this Method would only expose us to the awful
Charge of Blood-guiltiness, and you and us both, to an unexpected and therefore
aggravated Dammation, Ezekiel 33.8.

Object. 5. Perhaps some will say, that it is dangerous to hear such Men that
preach Terror: Why what Danger I pray; is there Danger of your $$ing convicted
of your damnable State, and your being converted to God? Are you afraid of
this? if you are, you are Fools for your Pains.

Object. 6. No, I am not afraid of that, but I am afraid of being drove into
Despair; such a Time when I was in the Meeting, the Sermon struck me with such
Terror that my very Blood chilled in my Veins; I could hardly keep from
trembling. Very well Friend, I am glad to hear that the Word of God had reached
you; I wish you had trembled thoroughtly, and improved it for your Salvation,
Isai. 66.2. Friend, you need not be so much afraid of being drove into Despair;
you are in much more Danger of the contrary Extreme, Presumption, as I have
shown before in another Part of this Discourse.

Object. 7. I am not so much afraid my self, I don't much mind such Fellows (
Acts 17.18. what will this Babbler say?) as some poor weak People; they are in
great Danger of being hurt by such Men: Ha, you are a charitable Man then as
you suppose! but it is the backward Way, a blind, bloody Charity. Some now a
days are like the Pharisees of old, who would neither enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven themselves, nor suffer those that are entering to enter, Mat. 23.13. But
pray remember the Words of Solomon, Prove. 26.12. See thou a Man that is wise
in his own Conceit, there is more Hope of a Fool than of him.

Object. 8. Such a Way of preaching Terror, Terror, I am sure will never do any
Good. I answer, that a blind Man cannot judge of Colors well; stay till you be
brought home to Christ your self, and be the Means under God of bringing others
to him, and then you will have other Thoughts of this Matter. The Apostle informs
us that by the Foolishness of preaching God saves them that believes, 1 Cor.
1.21. By that way of preaching which is judged Foolishness by a carnal World;
for in the Wisdom of God, says the Apostle in the forecited Place, the World by
Wisdom knew not God.

Object. 9. He Is a weak Man say some: Well be it so, though in the mean time, the
most of People are but poor Judges of ministerial Accomplishments, which is too
evident from the sudden Admiration and Applause some Quacks and Petty-Forgers
in Divinity, that have neither Grace nor Learning, have gained from the
unthinking Populace: I say, suppose they are weak in Gifts, yet if they are
sincere, and preach the sound Truths of Christ, though not with such bright
Eloquence and rhetorical Diction (which Varnish perhaps they designedly
conceal) as some others, they should not be despised; wholesome Food is not to
be slighted for the want of curious Sauce; it is a Sign of a distempered
vitiated Palate when the Sauce is liked better than the Meat.

Object 10. But some Men preach new and strange Doctrine, that Men must be
convicted and converted, or new born! Ay, Is this new Doctrine? It is as old as
Alam, he after his woeful Fall was convicted; when God came into the Garden in
the cool of the Day, he heard his Voice and was afraid, and strove to hide him,
being ashamed of his Nakedness, and therefore endeavored to cover it with (but
sorry Vail) Fig Leaves: This is the very Practice of a convinced Soul at this
Day; Alam's Posterity follow their degenerate Parent's Footsteps, when they
hear God's Voice by his Word they are afraid; for his Word is like a sharp
two-edged Sword, which pierces to the dividing of Joints and Marrow, Heb 4.12.
This Sword goes out of Christ's Mouth, Rev. 1.16. and 19.15. God's Word is as a
Hammer and as Fire, which break the Rock in pieces, Jer. 23.29. I say, when
this is brought home to Sinners Hearts, it cannot but create Fear and Pain; then
does the convinced Soul fly from God as Adam, instead of flying to him: Some
endeavor to drown the Voice of God and Conscience with a Harry and Noise of
worldly Business, as Cain labored to divert the Reflections of his guilty Mind
by building of Cities: Some fly to Diversions, as troubled Soul to his Fiddle,
to drive away those Ghosts which damp their Mirth and appale their Jollity;
some drink away their Troubles; I fear too many get their Wounds skinned over by
these Methods, I now mentioned: so that they go on in their merry jovial Course
again: But if these Expedients don't prevail, but still their Wretchedness is
discovered, then they will endeavor with all Speed to patch and sew together the
Fig Leaves of their Prayers, and Charity, good Thoughts, and Hinesly to hide
their Shame. But if God has designed Mercy for you, he will show you the
Insufficiency of such poor Props to lean a sinking Soul upon. What, are these
strange and new Doctrines that have been inculcated from the earliest Times,
and are urged all over the Book of God? Deuteronomy. 30.10. Jer. 4.3, 4, 14. Joel
2.13. Acts 2.37. John 3.3. and a thousand more Places of Scripture I might
mention to the same Purpose, if there was any Necessity.

Object 11. But a great many understanding People speak against this way. What
then; so it ever has been, and will be, Act. 28.22. Gal. 4.29. 2 Timothy 3.12. 1
Cor. 1.26, 27. Is Truth to be weighed by the multitude or paucity of its
Friends, or Opponents? or in the Sanctuary's Scales, and Balances of right
Reason? If you believe this or that because the generality do so, especially
the Men of Figure and Fashion, your Faith is but Historical and Humane, and of
no avail; for as we should not follow a multitude to do Evil, Exodus 23.2. So we
should not follow a multitude to believe lies, or with the blinded Papists, pin
our Faith upon another's Sleeve. It becomes a wise Man to search impartially
into the grounds of his Faith, and having found them sufficient, he should
stand as a Rock, impregnable, against the furious incursion of all the Waves
that may assay I him.

Object. 12. But I doubt like that Minister at all. May be it is because he
disturbs your false Peace, and tells you your Wickedness. There is one Micajah
by whom we may inquire of the Lord; but I hate him, for he does not prophecy
good concerning me, but evil, 2 Kin. 22.8. My Friends, if you consulted your
own Interest, you would not suffer Fancy, or a groundless Prejudice, to turn
the Scale of your Judgment. If he is a faithful Man, you should not slight him
for that which deserves your esteem; I mean his Warmth and Fidelity in his
Master's Service. Pray remember the words of the Lord Jesus, He that despises
you, despises me, Luke 10.16. But if you will persist in this unreasonable
Practice, it will in the issue turn to your loss and his gain. But if he is a
Time server, a Flatterer, a carnal Worldly Man, he is not worthy of your love,
Joh. 10.5.

Object. 13. But I can read at Home, I have very good Books. Have you so; then
you have reason to be thankful for that Privilege; but is there no other times
to read these good Books but the time of public Worship? Should one Duty
prevent another? If it may suffice to stay at Home and read good Books, than
why are public stated Meetings enjoined? Heh. 10.25. and to what purpose was a
Ministry appointed? which is to continue to the end of Time, Ephesians. 4.11, 12, 13.
Mat. 28.19. If we might ordinarily obtain Happiness without a Gospel Ministry,
would not this inser an unworthy Reflection upon the Wisdom of Christ the
Legislator, that he has appointed an unnecessary Order of Men? Why are we
informed (if reading is sufficient) in the 10th of the R$$ns, ver. 14.15. That
Faith somes by Hearing? and that we cannot hear without a Preacher; and that he
cannot Preach without he be sent Why did the blessed God direct Cornelius by his
Angel to send to Joppa for Peter, and learn Instruction of him? Acts 10.5, 6.
Could not the Lord have Instructed him by an Angel? Yes surely; but it was his
Pleasure (for our Instruction) to do otherwise, to which we should without
murmuring submit. Did not the Lord also send Ananias to Saul to teach him the
things that concerned his Happiness? Act. 9.11. Could not the Almighty have
instructed him after the same miraculous manner he convinced him? Yes
doubtless, but it was his Pleasure to do otherwise, 1 Cor. 1.21. Those that
will not seek Happiness in the stated Gospel Order which God has established, he
is not like to find it. 2 Cor. 10.5. Prove. 29.18. Small trifling Excuses will
keep some from hearing the Word: A little Rain, or Cold: But these petty
Difficulties would not hinder them from traveling much further to a Fair, or
Market, or Vendue, to secure a good Bargain: What did I say, a had Bargain it
is surely, when you barter Truth and Conscience for unjust Gain, striving at
the Cost of your Salvation to get things below their real worth.

Object. 14 I took Physic that Day, and so I could not come. Answ. Why did you
take the prophylactick or preventing Physic on the Sabbath, rather than on any
other Day? Could you not have delayed Bleeding, and taking of Physic till
Monday with Safety? (I except immergent Cases) yes you might; but was it not to
save this method; and so prevented your selves of an Opportunity of Hearing the
Word. Is not this a pretty Contrivance now? a sensible notion! Ay, I suppose
those that it, think so; for they have fav'd one Day for their Friend Mammon,
which would otherwise have been lost in going to Meeting. Some People think
it is all clear Gain that they can by hook and by crook scrape off the Lord's
Time or Worship: but will they (cunning Fellows!) think so at last? When they
lose their Souls by the Bargain. For are not they guilty of Rebellion, and
Theft? by profanely breaking the positive Law of God; and hypocritically
stealing the Time dedicated to his sacred Service, and appropriating of it most
sacrilegiously to their civil Business? Don't such a practice argue that we
value the Business and carnal Comfort of this transitory Life, above the
Service of, or Communion with God? and if so, how can ye expect to enjoy the
God, whose Authority and Love ye thus disdain.

Object. 15. Some Friends came to see me, whom I was under Obligation to, and
whom therefore I could not in civility leave. Answ. The Pretext is plausible,
the poisonous Pill is gilded, and will suit a distempered Palate well; but
consider in answer to it the following Queries.

Quer 1. Are those Friends, who keep you from seeking God's Favor and
Friendship in his appointed time and way? Quer. 2. Are you under such
Obligations to any Mortal, as you are to God? Should not you therefore be more
afraid of displeasing him, and damning your own Souls, than of disobliging an
unreasonable Creature?

Quer. 3. Why cannot you take your Friends with you to Meeting, if they will go?
if not, is it not better to leave them, than to go to Hell with them out of
Compliment?

Quer. 4. Is not more regard and reverence due to God, than to any Creature?
Therefore is it not the best Manners to serve Him first? Quer. 5. Is Feasting
and carnal Merriment a proper Means to prepare the Soul, for fellowship with
God here, or hereaster? Quer. 6. Do you think in your own Conscience, that your
excuse will be accepted by a holy and righteous God.

Object 16. I Am ashamed to go in such poor Clothes as I have. Answ. 1. This
shows Pride, (for you have no reason to be ashamed of any thing but Sin, and
will one Sin excuse another? 2. Will the badness of your Coat or Cap, or Gown,
hinder your profiting by the Word and Ordinances, if you attend? no surely; a
bad Heart is more like to do that Heb. 4.2.3. May you not be carried off by
Death before you get new Clothes? 4. Does God regard Apparel? Jam. 2.1, 2, 3.
How can you think then that such a pretext will excuse you? 5. If you are Poor
in this World in Purse, and Apparel, should not you the rather seek God in his
appointed way, that you may obtain Spiritual and Eternal Robes and Riches, that
you ben't Poor in both Worlds?

Object. 17. The Meeting is far off. Answ. Don't you go as far about Business,
or Diversion in the Week time? And is not the Salvation of your Souls a matter
of greater Consequence, than any Worldly Business? deserving greater Pains,
Travel, and Labor to secure it?

Object. 18. I must stay at Home one part of the Day, at least, to take a nap,
for I am used to it. Answ. Quer. 1. Is Sleeping the way to keep the Sabbath
holy? Then Sluggards are well off, they must needs be very pious People. Prove.
26.14. Quer. 2. Is it a natural or spiritual Rest that God principally requires
in the Fourth Command? If the Sanctification of the Sabbath consists chiefly in
a natural Rest or Cessation from Labor, then your Ox or Ass can keep it as
well as you, Quer. 3. Whither such Indolence don't show a manifest and
notorious disregard to God's Authority, as well as to your own Happiness. Quer.
4. Cannot you watch a few Hours upon a Lord's Day for your poor Souls? If you
will not, Sleep on; and take your Rest, till Death and Holl awake you. Mat. 26.45.
Quer. 5. Will your custom in Sloth, alter or lessen its vile and heinous Nature?

Now your indifferency about hearing God's Word, proves to your Faces that you
are the Sons of Death; for those that are born of God hunger after the Word, as
a Child after the Breast. 1 Pet. 2.2. How amiable are thy Tabernacles, O Lord
of Hosts; my Soul longs; yea even sainteth for the Courts of the Lord, Psalm.
84.1, 2. But if you chance to be there, which is perhaps but seldom; your Soul
longs, and even saints to get out again, that you may get Home to pay some
Devotion to your Bellies, I mean to swill them with warm Food, and seed your
hungring Souls with some zealous, worldly or idle Discourse. What a different
frame is this from that of the Psalmist; and yet you are fine Christians in
your own notion: I warrant you would storm, and huff, and fret, and grind your
Teeth with anger and disdain, if any body would be so faithful as to tell you
the Truth, viz that you are in a damnable Condition: but O remember the holy
Lord Jesus will revenge your slighting of his precious Word and poor Servants;
you may think as light of this as you please, when your Bellies are full, and
Death and Sickness seems afar off, and you among your graceless jolly
Companions: But by and by you will see things with other Paints of Light, a
fable Scene will open (if you continue in your old course) that shall fill your
Souls with everlasting horror and confusion, without hopes of remedy. Remember
you haughty Wretches, the jealous God will grind you to Powder, except ye
repent and reform, Luke 13.

8. For Passion: Some will plead (1.) that text, Ephesians. 4.26. this is borrowed
(says Mr. Henry) from the Septuagent "Translation of Psalm. 4.4. where we render
it, Stand in awe and sin not: Here is an easy Concession, says he, for as
such, we should consider it rather than as a Command; If we would be angry and
Sin not, we must be angry at nothing but Sin: But if our Spirits have been
rufled by insolent Affronts, they should be quickly calmed, for Anger only
rests in the bosom of Fools, Ecc$. 7.3. Anger is sinful, (1.) When it is
without just provocation given, either for no Cause, or for no good or great
and profitable Cause. Some will be all in Flames and Fury for the least
trifling Offense, and perhaps for none at all, but what their own brooding
jealous Minds groundlesly project, like the Clouds (as Hopkins very "justly
represent it) that break into Thunder and Lightning, when all the Fire and
Sulphur is bred only in their own Bowels. (2.) When it exceeds due Bounds,
either as to Degree or Duration, when it comes to be outrageous and revengeful,
seeking the Hurt of those we are offended with, this is Murder, Mat 5.22, 23.
and 15.19. Such Persons tread the Steps of bloody Cain; their raging Anger is
kindled from the Gulf beneath, Jam. 3.6. Also it is sinful when it continues
long: Hence we are commanded not to let the Sun go down on our Wrath, Ephesians.
4.26. for then it degenerates into Malice and Rancour. (3.) When it is without
any good Design, meetly to show an arbitrary Authority and gratify an arrogant
brutish Passion, then it is base and criminal: For one that is lawfully angry
seeks to reclaim the Offender, and clear himself, 2 Cor. 7.11. Though I confess
somewhat is to be allowed on the Account of Men's Temperaments, yet it is
certain that powerful Christianity alters Men's wolfish, swinish and Lion
Qualities, and makes them like those of the Lamb and Dove, John 21.15. Cant.
2.14. Why should not the Power of sinful Anger be broken by converting Grace,
as well as of Uncleanness, and other base Affections? Surely he that is in
Christ has crucified the Flesh with the Affections and Lusts, Gal 5.24 Romans
6.14. Neither will the Instance of Jonah's foolish and peevish Passion, which
was but once that we read of, and that doubtless bitterly bewailed, paliate or
excuse your Course of Passionateness. That Man or Woman who is ordinarily
guilty of this Wickedness upon almost every Temptation, is in a State of Sin
and Death, whatever Pretenses they have to Religion it matters not, for no evil
Habit of any Kind whatsoever is consi$$ent with true Grace and divine Life, 1
John 3.6. He that is soon angry deals foolishly, Prove. 14.17. They have never
been in the School of J$$$$, otherwise they would have learned Meekness of him,
Mat. 11.29 Can it be thought that the Dove of Heaven, the Bird of Paradise,
will dwell in an angry Bosom? How soon will some Men be angry, blaze and foam,
when any trifling Business respecting their Family concerns, is out of Order,
by the Neglect of any of the Servants, who at other Times perhaps, can hear the
great God dishonored with Temper and Calmness? Is not this a plain Evidence of
their hypocrify and damnable Condition? Seneca calls rash Anger a short Phrensy
or "Madness, and indeed it is so; it is such a Phrensy as rends the Nerves of
civil Society and taints all it is Sweets with Marah's Waters. The Instances of
some of the Pagans Moderation may serve to shame many pretended Christians, and
confound their salse Hopes: When Socrates "was provoked by one of his Servants,
he said, Sirrah, I would beat you if I were not angry. Remarkable is that also
of Philip King of Macedon when the Athenians sent their Ambassadors to him,
they were received with this Complement, Tell me Gentlemen, said King Philip,
what I shall do to oblige the Athenians? Demochares one of the Ambassadors told
him, that he would take it for a great Obligation if he would be pleased to
hang himself; while the Standers by were filled with Indignation, the King sent
the Ambassadors back with this Message; that it is worse to speak such Things
than to hear and forgive them.

Object 2. Such a Man has wronged me, and does not ask Forgiveness. What then,
you ought to forgive him nevertheless; otherwise how can you pray the Lord's
Prayer, Forgive us our Trespasses as we forgive them that trespass against us;
you pray for God's Vengeance upon you in this Petition, if you still retain
some Rancour and Enmity against your Neighbor? Again, Forgiveness is necessary
to obtain Pardon of God, Mat. 6.14, 15. and 18.35. Indeed there is some
difference between Forgiveness and full Reconciliation; though we should bear
no angry Resentments against an Offender, but on the contrary Thoughts of
Peace, Love and Benevolence: If thine Enemy thirst give him drink. Overcome
Evil with Good, Romans 12.20, 21. Yet it is against the Law of Prudence to receive
him suddenly into wonted Familiarity. The prudent Man foresees Evil and hid$s
himself. Prove. 22.3.

9. The next Particular that I would speak of, is that of Charity; but before I
propose the Pleas of some graceless People about the Neglect of this Duty, let
me offer a Word concerning it is Necessity and Excellency, which al$ though it be
a Digression, is nevertheless a necessary one.

And

$word$. To make charitable Distributions of the good Thing$ of Providence
which we enjoy, for the Relief of the Po$$ and Indigent, is necessary by the
positive Law of God; To do good and to communicate forget not, for with such
Sacrisices God is well pleased, Heb. 13.16. Cast thy Bread upon the water,
Eccles, 11.1. Cast your Seed upon low Places;" so some understand it, alluding
to the Husbandman "(says Mr. H$nry) who spares some of the Bread-Corn he has
for his Family to sow his Land, knowing that without this he can have no
Harvest another Year. This Text certainly imports our giving to such who are
not able to requite us. This for that, is rather a Truck "than a Benefit," says
Seneca; we should send our Gifts a Venture, as Merchants do that trade by Sea,
they will not sink entirely in the Waters: Indeed the Conscience of giving with a
good Design, is a present Recompense.

2. By the Nature of God: Which is our Honor, our Duty and Interest to
imitate. God is love, 1 John 4.8. both essentially and communicatively; his
Being is Love, and his Ways of Providence express much Goodness and Beneficence
to Mankind in general, and to his People in particular; He makes his Sun to
rise upon the Evil and the Good, and sends Rain on the Just and Unjust, Mat.
5.45. Acts 4.17. Psalm 103.13.

3. By the Law of Nature and Humanity. That Men by the Constitution of their
Nature are framed for Society, appears beyond Controversy, from their natural
Propensity to communicate their Notions and Ideas to one another, the Necessity
they labor under of mutual Solace and Support, also from their common Wants
and Fears. Now that Offices of mutual Love and Beneficence are the Cement of
Society, the Bands and Sinews by which it is preserved is as evident,

4. By the Example of Jesus in that peerless and transcendent Prodigy of his
dying Affection to a lost World, Col. 3.12, 13.

5. This Duty is excellent in it is Nature, 1 Cor. 13.1. Though I speak with the
Tongues of Men and Angels, and have not Charity, I am become as sounding Brass,
or a tinkling Cymbal; all my Pretenses are vain.

6. It Is excellent in it is Effects and Rewards; this is the Way to invite
Strangers to fall in Love with Christianity. The ancient Christians were very
famous for this Practice, and saw the blessed Fruits of it. Also it is an
Excitement to others to show us the like Courtesy in our Necessity. It Is
pleasing to God: when sutably performed; for what is done to the least of
Christ's Members, he takes it as done to himself, Mat. 25.40. It introduces
Peace (that Hour of all the Blessings of Life) into our Breast here, and us
into the Kingdom of Peace and endless Life hereafter; hence we are bid to make
Friends of the Mammon of Unrighteousness, that when we fail, they may receive
us into everlasting Habitations, Luke 16.9. Blessed are the merciful, for they
shall obtain Mercy, Mat. 5.7. and on the contrary, He that will not show Pity to
others in Distress, shall cry himself and not be $eard, Prove. 21.13. Mat.
18.23, $word$ 3$. But notwithstanding what has been advanced, some will frame
the $ollowing Excuses.

Excuse 1. What I have is my own, and I have it for my own Use, Shall I take my
Bread and my Flesh, and give it to I know not who? This is Nabal's Plea, 1 Samuel
25.11. Hold Friend, you are mistaken; though you have a civil Right to what you
possess, yet the original and sovereign Claim of Right belongs to God, whose
Tennant and Steward thou art, and to whom you must quickly be accountable for
the Use thou have made of those Talents the great Lord of the Universe
entrusted thee with, whether thou have brought forth Fruits unto thy self or
him? Luke 16.2. Whether thou have used thy Estate to feed thy own and thy
Childrens Pride and Luxury, or to refresh the Bowels of the Poor and Needy? O
Man! if those Bottles of the Heavens, I mean the Clouds, had their Waters for
themselves, the Earth would soon be as Iron, and thou perish for want of Bread!
but thou feast how they refresh the parched Earth with their balmy Dews and
refreshing Show$rs: Are the Heavens thus indulgent to the laboring Earth, and
shall thy Bowels be as Brass, void of compassionate Relentings toward the
Indigent, who are Bone of thy Bone, Genesis 29.14. What does the Sun get by
traveling his steady Circuit round the Globe?

Excuse 3. But I am Poor: What then? the less is required indeed, but yet
something is necessary to be given to the distressed, in Propertion to what God
has given thee; the poor Widow gave her two Mites, Mark 12.42.

Excuse 3. I should be despised if I did not give as much as others. Friend,
Remember it is to God you must approve your self, 2 Timothy 2.15. The Judgment of
one God and one Conscience in our Favor is infinitely better than the Applause
of the whole Earth, and will make the Mind firm and impregnable amidst all the
Storms of Reproach and Ignominy; if you will not suffer with Christ, you shall
not reign with him: No Cross, no Crown.

Excuse 4 My Children may want it, I must buy Lands for them; I have Taxes to
pay, and a great many Things to do with the little I have. Friend, your feeding
the Hungry, and clothing the Naked, instead of hindering your making necessary
Provision for your Children, will secure their Support, by bringing the
Blessing of Heaven upon your Labors, for what you give to the Poor you lend to
the Lord, Prove. 19.17. which he will repay with Interest. But further, let me
tell you in the Words of the wise Man, Eccl. 11.4. He that observes the Wind
shall not sow, and he that regards the Clouds shall not reap. If we stand
"magnifying every little Difficulty and seeming Danger, we shall never do the
Work God requires of us; if the Husbandman should decline sowing for every
flying Cloud, and reaping for the sake of every blast of Wind, he would make
but a poor Account of his Husbandry at the Years end. Now the Duty of Charity
is as necessary as that of Sowing and Reaping, and attended with infinitely
greater Advantages; and those Discouragements from selfish Nature, which
obstruct the Performance of it, are like flying Clouds, or passing Blasts,
which a resolute Mind will easily encounter and Surmount.

Excuse 5. I am in Debt, how can I be charitable?

1. It Is to be seared that many run themselves into Debt by taking Money at
Interest in order to purchase great Estates for their Children, they join House
to House, and Farm to Farm, Isai. 5.8. and like the Horse Leach are never
satisfied; they with eager and impatient Haste seek great Things, contrary to
the Prophet's Advice to Barak, Jer. 45.5. Embarass themselves in Difficulties
at present to obtain that End; now while they are under these Emergencies which
they have unnecessarily involved themselves in, they think they are free from
the Obligations to charitable Actions, as if one Sin would excuse another.

2. Perhaps thy Debts are inconsiderable compared with thy Estate: There be
scare any Men of Business and Trade in the World, but what are in Debt, less or
more, and perhaps continue so during Life; for as soon as one Debt is paid,
another is contracted: So that at this rate you will never find a time for
Charity. This is a vile deceit, but God will not be mocked: but if thou art really
Poor and in Debt, and know not well how to pay it, do Justice, love Mercy,
Mich. 6.8. Hos. 12.6. The blessed God will not have Robbery for a Burnt Offering;
where there is a willing mind, God accepts according to what a Man has, and
not according to what he has not, 2 Cor. 8.12. Because David had it in his
Heart to build the Temple, though he did not put his Design in Execution for want
of Opportunity, yet it was accepted as done, 1 Kin 8.18. But it must be in the
mean time confessed, that having the absolutely necessary Supports of Life, we
should venture the Abridgement of the accessory and addtional Comforts of it,
much more the extravagancies of pompous Apparel and delicious Meats and Drinks,
by supplying the Wants of our indigent Brethren, by supporting humane Nature in
distress.

Excuse 6. But this Man, or that Woman is not an Object of Charity, a great
many go about that are meet Cheats. Answ. A greedy Mind will always have an
Excuse ready to protect the Purse. But more particularly, I confess that wise
Caution is necessary in the choice of the Object; and a special regard should
be shown in our charitable Donations to Pious Persons: We should express
respect to all, but especially to those that are of the Household of Faith, Gal
6.10. But you should consult more with the Divine Oracles in such Cases than
with your Convetous Hearts; otherwise you will never do much Good in the World.
What though you happen to miss the right Object after necessary Examination,
you will not miss the Reward, if your design be Pious. Mar. 10.42. There be a
number of Professors in this Age, that carry large Lamps, but there is little of
the Oil of Charity in them; in regard of the talking, praying parts of
Religion, they make a blazing appearance; they are very ready in these Duties,
for they are cheap, and touch not the Pocket, but tell them there is this or
that to be done for the poor Saints, or Church of God, and their Hearts sink
within them, like their great Grandfath: 1 Nabal's, 1 Samuel 2.5. their Zeal
languishes like an expiring Candle in the Socket, they begin to grow sorrowful,
like the Young Man in the Gospel, Mit 19.22. Then they hycocritically with they
could do any thing, but --. Now with what Face can these Men talk of Religion,
or imagine they have any true Grace in their Hearts, if this be customary. Jam.
2.14, 15, 20. Jam. 1.27. O thou Earth-Worm! thou discoverest thy rottenness and
hypocrisy in this, for all thy pretended Devotion; thy Faith has not overcome
the World, 1 John 5.4. Hear and consider, O Deceiver! what the Great God speaks
to thee in those Scriptures, Jam 2.13. He shall have Judgment without Mercy,
that has showed no Mercy. Prove. 21.13. Matthew. 45. ver. 41. to the end.

If some warm Blades give two Pence, or a Groat, or Six Pence to a poor
Christian, they think they have discharged a good Conscience: I believe they
have indeed banished it, and given it a Bill of Divorce. If they were not
stone-blind, could they imagine that that was sufficient Charity which was not
at all proportioned, neither to the ability of the Giver, or the wants of the
Receiver; may be fifty times as much would be counted little, if spent upon
their own, or their Childrens Lusts or Superfluities. I believe, since the
Creation of the Earth, there never was a more merciless, selfish Age than this,
but thereby the Scripture is verified, as I have before made evident.

10. Another cause of the Security and false Hope of wicked People, is the
Devil; the God of this World has blinded the eyes of those that believe not,
lest the light of the glorious Gospel should shine unto them, and they should
be saved, 2 Cor. 4.4. The Devil has many artful and politic Methods to compass
the ruin of Mankind, and among others, this one of very fatal tendency, viz
that he endeavors by all the sly and subtle Measures of Insinuation to
strengthen the groundless hopes of secure Souls: This method he used with our
grand Parent, Eve, Genesis 3.4. and found it woefully successful, even to the total
overthrow of Man's innocence and happiness: And the Serpent said unto the
Woman, Ye shall not surely die: The same Path that crafty and malicious Enemy
of Mankind travels with almost equal Success as to Individuals, and less
difficulty in his dealings with Adam's degenerate Posterity. When God's
faithful Servants tell wicked People, that if they continue impenitent, they
must expect nothing but God's fierce Vengeance; Satan insinuates a very
contrary Lesson: You shall not perish; God is merciful: Christ has died for
Sinners; what, an't you Christians? Believers? Baptized Persons? Don't believe
these precise Fellows. Now when the solemn enclosure of the penalty is removed
from the Precept, Sin, which is transgression of it, becomes less formidable,
and thereby Sinners are induced to make bold with it, to their Cost, as Flies
that sport themselves with their wanton Flights about a Candle, till they drop
down dead.

11. Another cause of the delusive hopes of many, is the bad Advice of wicked
People: Some of whom are busy, and successful Factors for the Devil, in helping
him to accomplish his bloody Designs against themselvesandothers: Some like the
perverse Pharisees of old, will neither enter into the Kingdom of Heaven
themselves, nor suffer those that are entering to enter; Matthew. 23.13. Woe unto
you Scribes and Pharisees, Hypocrites. The Psalmist David was very sensible of
the bad influence of wicked Society, and therefore he abandons them with the
utmost Indignation; Depart from me ye workers of Iniquity, for I will keep the
Commandments of my God, Psalm. 119.115.

Some wicked Wretches will endeavur to jeer and laugh Men out of their
Salvation, but there be none that have common Sense would be thus fooled out of
an Estate. If some Imps of the Devil see any concerned about their Salvation,
they will give them such a Salutation as this; What are you beginning to be
precise too? There Is no need of so much pains and bustle to get to Heaven.
Cant. 5.9. God is very merciful; I though it you was a Man of more Judgment, than
to be bewitched by such People: Away with such melancholy Whims, you will be fit
for Bedlam by and by if you go on at this rate; Drink a Glass of Wine, Brother,
and serve God with a cheerful Heart: What do you think none will be saved but a
pack of such canting precise Fellows? God help the World then indeed, what will
become of the most of your honest Neighbors, and the greatest part of the
Earth at this Rate? What needs all this Sorrow, you have never wronged any
Body, or committed Murder or Treason: You know there is no Body of Sense that
minds those fantastical Enthusiasts Answ. O Murderer! I may say to thee as the
Apostle to Elimas, Acts 13.10. O full of all Subtilty, and all Mischief, thou
Child of the Devil, thou Enemy of all Righteousness; will thou not cease to
pervert the right Ways of the Lord? Consider, as thou will answer it to the
great God, these few Queries in Answe to thy pernicious, though crafty Harangue.

1. If we should not be precise, as thou scoffingly terms Christian
Circumspection and strict Holiness; why are we commanded to walk circumspectly,
Ephesians. 5.15. Does not the original Word Acriboos signify strictly, or precisely?
Wherefore are we commanded to be holy as God is holy, perfect as he is perfect?
1 Pet. 1.15.16. Mat. 5.48.

2. If there be no need of so much Pains about Religion, why are we commanded
to fight? 2 Timothy 6.12. to run? Heb. 12.1. to wrestle? Ephesians 6.12. to strive? Luke
13.24. in order to obrain Happiness? Do not these Metaphors import the utmost
Intenseness? Why are we informed that the Kingdom of Heaven suffers Violence,
and the Violent take it by Force? Mat. 11.12. and that many shall seek to enter
and shall not be able, Luke 13.24.

3. Is Conformity to the Will of a wise God the Way to Folly? Then white is
black, and black is white: And is not this the Will of God, even our
Sanctification? 1 These.4.3. Is it Folly to secure the greatest Good by the
seasonable and earnest Use of appointed Means? Then God grant, I ever may be
such a Fool! I know you have a great Conceit of your Wisdom! All ungodly Men
have some of the Devil's Pride; and perhaps the Father don't much outdo some of
his Children in this; but remember those Words of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 3.19. For
the Wisdom of the World is Foolishness with God: For it is written, He takes
the wise in their own Crafriness

4. As to the Paucity of the saved, it has been before considered; the holy
Scriptures do evidently declare that the far greater Part of Mankind, nay of
those that live under the Gospel, shall be damned eternally; neither does this
eclipse the Mercy of God, as some carnal People imagine no, but on the
contrary, the distinguishing Nature of God's Mercy magnifies it exceedingly in
the Thoughts of the redeemed, as many thousands have experienced. God might
have passed by the fallen Race of Man, as he did by the fallen Angels, and
damned them to eternal Pains for the Rebellion of their pro parent and soederal
Head, Adam, and made his righteous Severity triumph in their endless Woes;
therefore it is wondrous Grace (which does indeed astonish all the Heavens!)
that any of Adam's guilty Race should be saved from Hell and Death!

5. Thy calling the Work of God's Spirit in changing and renewing the Heart,
Enthusiasm, is the Fruit either of thy Ignorance or Malice, or of both
complexly, contrary to the tenor of the holy Scriptures, which expressly assert
such a Change to be absolutely necessary, as I have proved before, as well as
contrary to the united Testimony of the protestant Churches; in this Speech
thou belchest forth thy serpentine Venom against the Apostles and all the
faithful in every Age, both before and after Christ's coming, for all of them
experienced this Work of God which thou ignorantly or invidiously call
Enthusiasm; and the Reason why thou ascribest to the Devil the Work of the
Spirit of God, is because it detects thy Hypocrisy, scorches and pains thee
with it is Warmth. But O Man! are you not afraid of blaspheming the Holy Ghost
after this Manner, lest thy Sins never be forgiven thee either in this World,
or that to come, Heb. 10.26.

6. What though this or that Person has never been guilty of Overt Fraud, Murder
or Treason; supposing they had never been guilty of any gross Immorality; what
does not that Fountain of Iniquity, that Spawn of Sin, that Body of Death, that
Seed Plot of Corruption which we are born with, afford sufficient Cause for the
deepest Sorrow? Yes it does; and if ever thy Understanding be enlightened, thou will feel this Truth, John 3.6. Psalm 51.5. Job. 14.4. Isai. 48.8. Romans 7.24
and 3.9. Are there not many who have not committed the Crimes mentioned
externally, who are yet guilty of them in a spiritual Sense? Has not every
unconverted Sinner (of adult Years) wronged himself, been guilty of
Soul-Murder, by not improving the Opportunities of Salvation? Also are they not
all guilty of Rebellion against the King of Heaven by disobeying his Laws? and
don't those Sins require great Sorrow?

As to the last Particular of the Charge; consider these Places of Scripture,
John 7.48, 49. Have any of the Rulers or of the Pharisees believed on him? but
this People who know not the Law are cursed. 1 Cor. 1.26, 27. Not many wise Men
after the Flesh, not many mighty, not many noble are called, but God has
chosen the foolish to confound the wise, the weak to confound the mighty. Acts
28.22. But as concerning this Sect, we know that it is every where spok $
against. The People of God are called the Congregation of the Poor, Psalm
84.19. But to proceed, ungodly People will further object against those that
have the Life of Christianity, in order to seduce convinced Souls, and
prejudice others against Piety, either

1. That they are imprudent or immoderate in their Zeal: Graceless People are
for much Moderation, as they miscall it, in the Cause of God and Religion; but
as to their worldly Interest, which they like much better, they will drive like
Jehu; their pretended M.deration in religious Affairs, is nothing alse in plain
English, but that Lukswarmness which God hates, Rev. 3.16. Let it be considered
that Prudence is twofold, carnal or spiritual: Carnal Prudence aims at
Self-interest as it is principal Mark: and forms it is whole Scheme so as to
advance it; that it is always imprudent in those People's Esteem, which
indangers their Honor or worldly Interest, James 3.15. Phil. 3.19. 2.
Spiritual Prudence has for it is main Mark, the Glory of God, and the Interest
of his Church; which the Person that is possessed of this noble Quality, eyes
and pursues in all his Transactions, whatever becomes of his own Honor, and
worldly Interest. A sincere Soul will venture that, and stand for Christ's
Interest in all Weathers. Acts 21.13. When the Apostle Paul is said to become
all Things to all M$n, to gain some;$ I suppose his Compliance was not in any
Thing really criminal, or with a covert View, to gain them to his own Interest,
but to Christ's. I suppose every one that believes the Scriptures will own that
this Apostle excelled in the Virtue of Prudence to a great degree of Eminence,
and yet he could not keep the People still and quiet where he preached: There
was generally an Uproar and Tumult among the People, where he declared his
Master's Truths. Acts 13.45, 50.14.4, 5, 19 and 16.20. and 17.2, 5, 6. and
18.6. and 19.8, 9, 29. I suppose there is the same Rancour and Malice in
natural Men's Hearts against God and his Truths now that there was then, only
that it is under some Restraint in some by their Education, but Education does
not change the Heart. Can it be imagined but that graceless Persons, when the
Word is closely, powerfully and successfully spoken, will growl (many of them)
and show their Teeth, if they don't bite; for Christ did not come to send Peace
on Earth, but a Sword, Mat. 10.34, 35, 36. Luke 12.51 to 54 But there be some
so prudent in our Age, that they have found out a new Way to Heaven, a Way
which Christ and his Apostles never trod; for they pretend to go there without
bearing the Cross of Christ; but except they lay aside this perverse shifting
off the sweet and precious Cross of Jesus, tacking about with every blast,
they will never come into the Haven of the blessed; For he that lives godly in
Christ Jesus shall suffer Persecution, 2 Timothy 3.12.

The Prudence of many is nothing else, but that carnal selfish Craft which God
disdains, 1 Cor. 3.19, 20. It Is better I think to act so as to have the
Apostle's Testimony. That in Simplicity and godly Sincerity, not in fl$shly
Wisdom, we have had our Conversation in the World, 2 Cor. 1.12. Or

2. To draw away People from vital Christianity, they will say, that such as
are pious are foolish, as Festus said of Paul, Acts 26.24. Paul thou art beside
thy self; much Learning does make thee mad. So the Wicked treated the Prophets
of the old Testament to prejudice People against them: Wherefore came this mad
Fellow unto thee; said the Captains of the Host to Jehu, concerning the
Prophet, 2 Kings 9.11. Also Hos. 9.7. The Prophet is a Fool, the spiritual Man
is mad, for the Multitude of thine Iniquities, and the great Hatred. Which of
the Prophets, said dying Stephen, have not your Fathers persecuted? Acts 7.52.
And was not the blessed Jesus deemed foolish, not only by the malicious
Pharisees, but by his own Relations? John 10.20. And many of them said, He has
a Devil, and is mad, why hear ye him? Mark 3.21. And when his Friends heard of
it, they went out to lay hold on him, for they said, He is beside himself.
Wicked People are apt to say of pious. Christians, I believe some of them are
sincere, they mean well, but they are weak: But if one of your own Crew that
has no Learning, and hardly common Sense, that is pretty well rigged with
fashionable Apparel, begins to squirt some petty Puns and pert Squibs against
living Religion, O that is a Man of Sense and Learning! a pretty, a very pretty
Fellow. Your Concession that some Christians are sincere is extorted from your
galled Consciences by the shining Holiness of their Lives, Mark 6.20. The
latter flows freely from your stupid Ignorance, or serpentine Malice. 1 Cor.
2.14. The natural Man cannot understand the Things of the Spirit of God, for
they are Foolishness to him, neither can he know them, because they are
spiritually discerned. Genesis 3.15. Romans 8.7. O conceited Hypocrite! Hear thy
Doom from God, Isai 5.21. Woe unto them that are wise in their own Eyes, and
prudent in their own Sight. Verse 20. Woe unto them that call Evil Good, and
Good Evil, that put Darkness for Light, and Light for Darkness; that put Bitter
for Sweet, and Sweet for Bitter. Or

3. They Will object, that they are Hypocrites, and endeavor to prove this Charge
by their Weeping in divine Service, and strict and sober Life. O! the malicious
Madness of the ungodly World, who would make those Things to be Signs of
Hypocrisy, which are the great Evidences of Sincerity! By this Method they
would make Christ an Hypocrite; for he was a Man of Sorrows and acquainted with
Grief; he mourned and wept often; but never laughed, that we read of, Luke
19.41. Also the mourning Prophet Jeremiah, O that my Head were Waters, and mine
Eyes a Fountain of Tears, Jer. 9.1. And the Apostle Paul, Acts 20.31, 19.
Therefore watch. Remember that by the space of three Years I ceased not to warn
every one Day and Night with Tears. Yea and all true Penitents are bid to turn
unto God with Fasting, and with Weeping, and with Mourning, Joel 2.12. We are
informed that all Tears shall be wiped away, Rev. 7.17. For the Lamb which is
in the midst of the Throne shall feed them, and shall lead them unto living
Fountains of Waters, and God shall wipe away all Tears from their Eyes. But
pray, how shall Tears be wiped away from the dry Eyes of those that have not
wept? What will those hard hearted dry eyed Christians do with God's Book and
Bottle, Psalm 56.8. Put thou my Tears into thy Bottle; Are they not all in thy
Book? However you slight the Tears of poor Penitents, the great God takes
notice of them; 2 Kings 20.5. I have heard thy Prayer, I have seenthy Tears;
behold I will heal thee! Jer. 31.18. I have heard Ephraim bemoaning himself. We
are informed how wrestling Jacob prevailed with his God, Hos. 12.4. He wept and
made Supplication unto him. Holy Paul was not of your grumbling Temper and
Disposition, as to the Tears of others; no, he was pleased with and mindful of
Timothy's Tears, 2 Timothy 1.4. Greatly desiring to see thee, being mindful of thy
Tears, that I may be filled with Joy.

You Will say perhaps, what cannot they be sincere without Weeping in public, I
weep my self sometimes in private: O Pharisee! I believe that is but seldom, and
that when you are under the gnawings of a guilty Conscience, or some worldly
Trouble; but pray Friend, are your Tears thus at your Beck, that you can open
and shut those Fountains when you please? Then indeed they are Crocodile Tears,
little worth, and your selves very Hypocrites, for all your pretended
Sincerity. Or

4. They Will object thus, I don't like those People that weep so in the Worship
of God; it looks very childish and effeminate. Answ. The Reflection is hardy
and profane, for by this you would represent Christ, his Prophets and
Apostles, as a mean spirited dastardly Company, void of a generous Greatness of
Mind. King David was a Man of a brave and gallant Spirit, as appears by his
martial and heroic Exploits recorded in sacred Scripture; and yet how often did
he weep and mourn for Sin. Psalm 42.3. His Tears were his Meat. But what is the
Reason thou do not like those that weep in divine Service? You Will say perhaps,
that it hinders their Elocution, or that it seems hypocritical; no, no, it does
not hinder but help their Speech. As to the second Particular, I have before
considered it, only let me add one Word; Though I confess it is our Duty to
conceal from others Observance as much as is possible our Brokenness, yet we
must not quench the inward Motions of the Holy Spirit; when the blessed God is
thawing our frozen Hearts by his Word and Spirit, should we suppress his Work,
oppose his Love Motions for Fear some carnal People should call us Hypocrites,
and so be guilty of real Murder and fighting against God to avoid the
groundless Charge of Hypocrisy, and incur the awful Displeasure of an holy and
almighty God, to evite the Scoffs and Taunts of silly blind Worms?

But sh$ll I venture to tell you the true Reason of your Disgust at such
Things, why it is this; thou art a hardened Sinner thy self, thy stony Heart was
never removed, and a Heart of Flesh given thee, according to that new Covenant
Promise, Ezekiel. 36.26. Thou know a Stone is dry, insensible, impenetrable,
but Flesh is tender, soft and flexible, easily susceptive of the least
Impressions. Now because thou want the Heart of Flesh thy self, and see
others broken in the Service of God, it pains thee by detecting thy Stupidity;
this Pain you like not, and therefore to prevent the Effect, you reflect
against the Cause. When a short Discourse upon Morality is preached with
swelling Diction, and graceful Cadence (Jude Verse 16. Their Mouth speaks
great swelling Words, having Men's Persons in Admiration because of Advantage)
without any Life or Energy: O then you will say, that is a fine Sermon indeed,
because it has scorched thy guilty Conscience no more than a painted Fire would
thy Body! O hard hearted Hypocrite! If thou knew the soul-ravishing Sweets
which the Children of God enjoy in their Meltings of Heart by the Presence of
their Master and Father, thou would not snuffle and fret at their
Contrition, Psalm 51.17. but bewail thy own Obstinacy; they have more Comfort in
their Tears, than thou have in all thy carnal Mirth and Jollity.

As to what you object about the Strictness of their Lives, consider the Words
of the Apostle Peter, 1 Epist. 4.4. Wherein they think it strange that you run
not with them to the same Excess of Riot, speaking Evil of you. I suppose you
find your selves so guilty of gross Wickedness, that through the Greatness of
your Charity and Virtue which you boast of (though groundlesly) you are apt to
think that these that do appear more reformed, do but appear to be so. Or

4. Some will charitably allege to forward the foresaid Design, that they are
all Knaves in their Hearts; this Man will tell one Story, and the other
another; I had some Dealings with such a Man, one of the Saints, and he bit me;
another tells an awful Story of the Fraud, or other Wickedness of one of the
Newborn; then they all laugh, ha! ha! ha! I thought so, I believe they are all
alike if they were but discovered, a pack of Rogues; ho! is this your large
Charity that would grasp in the Heathens in it is Bosom? Yes, yes, you will extend
your Charity to all the Sons of Belial, for like rejoices in like: But remember
the Word of God mentioned by the wise Man, Prove. 24.24. He that says to the
Wicked thou art righteous, him shall the People curse; Nations shall abhor him.
None are excluded from your blind and graceless Charity; but the proper Objects
of true Charity, viz. pious People, them you don't like, especially if they are
very strict, holy and faithful, you watch for their halting, Jer. 20.10. as the
Cat does for poor Mouse; you search their Practice as narrowly as Laban did
Jacob's Stuff, and when you find any Thing that will bear a Reflection, then
you rejoice and spread it abroad among your Kindred, (2 Samuel 1.20. Tell it not
in Gath, publish it not in the Streets of Askelon, lest the Daughters of the
uncircumcised triumph.) But what are the Reasons of this Joy?

1. Malice; that old Enmity God put between the Seed of the Woman, and the Seed
of the Serpent, Gen 3.15. A Man that bears Malice against another rejoices in
his Disgrace.

2. Another is this, it gives Ease to your guilty Consciences which were galled
by their just Reproofs, or holy Life. But to answer your Charge more fully.

3. It must be confessed, that as there always has been, so there will be
Hypocrites in the visible Church to the End of Time, chaff mixed with the Wheat
till the last winnowing Season comes, and the Son of Man takes the Fan of
Judgment in his Hand, and makes a thorough and final Separation: But what then?
Is it not unjust to infer a general or universal, from a particular? Is it not
contrary to the Laws both of Reason and Religion? Ex particulari non licet
sylogizari Prove. 17.15. He that justifies the Wicked and he that condemns
the Just, even they both are an Abomination to the Lord. But it is thy
unhappiness, Friend, to be under that Curse of the Almighty, mentioned Isai.
5.20. Woe unto them that call Evil Good, and Good Evil, that put Darkness for
Light, and Light for Darkness, that put Bitter for Sweet, and Sweet for Bitter.
Ver. 23. Which justify the Wicked $or $eward, and take away the Righteousness
of the Righteous from him. But you show your foolish, though envenomed Spite, by
charging the whole Body of Christians because of the Enormities of some
Hypocrites; because there was a Judas among the Apostles, were they therefore
all Judases? But we need not wonder at thy Folly, when we consider that as it
was of old, so it is now, he that was born after the Flesh, persecuted him that
was born after the Spirit, Gal. 4.25. Cain's Club will not be left altogether
unoccupied while any of his cruel Brood are on this side Hell.

2. Some pious Persons through Unwatchfulness, or Negligence, are sometimes
betrayed by Surprise into those Failings, which they bitterly bewail; but they
may, and do obtain pardon of a gracious and merciful God, of those unindulged
and involuntary Defects and Infirmities upon the Exercise of true Repentance,
Jer. 3.1. Though God may visit their Transgressions with the Rod, and their
Iniquity with Stripes: Nevertheless his Lovingkindness he will not utterly take
away, or suffer his Faithfulness to fall, Psalm 89.31 to 35. Isai. 54.7, 8.
John 10.27, 28. Romans 11.29. Yet they will never obtain pardon of a merciless
World; The Moon though it be a bright Body, is not without her Spots; these
Blemishes wicked People represent in an unjust and glaring Light, after the
Example of their Father, who was a Liar and a Murderer from the beginning, and
abode not in the Truth, John 8.44. But is it their Failings you detest? No, no,
unless it were in something that concerned your worldly Interest; it is their
Piety that you are offended with, and shoot at with your barbed Arrows of
Reproach, under the specious Pretext of this or that Fault, real or imaginary,
which you charge them with, 1 John 3.12. Not as Cain, who was of that wicked
one, and slew his Brother: And wherefore slew he him? but because his own Works
were evil, and his Brother's righteous. Indeed you are angry because they are
not worse than they are; if it were their Sins you only found fault with, as
you pretend, why don't you find fault with your own Crew who are ten times
worse? No, no, these are your Brethren in Iniquity, Children of the same Father
and Family, these must be spared and an Apology framed to palliate, the$$
$$$nson Guilts, and Bear Skins put upon Christians (as $$thcient. Times by the
Pagans) that the Dogs may bark at them, bait, and worry them; but because some
pious People "break their Shins, as Mr. Banter observes, will you break your
Necks? And does this look like Prudence in such wise Men as you imagine your
selves to be?

3. Wicked People will class among the Pious, such as they will not own, and
then accuse them with their Faults, which is very unjust and deceitful, Psalm
37.12. The Wicked plotteth against the Just, and gnasheth upon him with his
Teeth. And

4. Sometimes the Sons of Belial do devise notorious Falsehoods against God's
People in order to blacken their Character, Jer. 18.18. Come and let us devise
Devises against Jeremiah.

The 12th Particular. Another Cause of the false Hope of many is the daubing of
unconverted Ministers.

1. By their false Preaching, or by their preaching those erroneous, nature
soothing, but Soul damning Doctrines of Free Will, universal Grace, and
universal Redemption, by which ignorant self conceited graceless Sinners are
held fast in the Chains of the Devil, and excited to erect a Babel on their own
Bottom and Foundation which may rea$$ the Heavens. O! astonishing Madness, can
such a sandy Fabric bear the Shocks of God's impartial Judgment? May the holy
God confound the Language of those arrogant Mortals, which is so directly
contrary to the Language of his sacred Oracles, and of his People's repeated
Experiences. Ephesians. 2.1, 8, 9. Romans 5.6. Romans 1.16. 2 Cor. 3.5 Matthew. 11.25, 26.
Acts 13.48. John 10.26. and 17.9, 11 24. Romans 8.29, 30. and 9.11, 12, 13. Ephesians.
1.3, 4, 11 1 Pet. 1.2. Jude ver. 4. Romans 7.18. Or,

2. By concealing the contrary Truths of Christ, although they say they believe
them, through vain Pretexts; what is this but holding the Truth in
Unrighteousness, Romans 1.18. Perhaps they will object that the preaching of such
(generally) despised Truths, would do more hurt than good. What is "this but to
impeach the Wisdom of God, and arraign it at our Bar, and preser our Craft
before it, as the reverend and learned Calvin well observes in his
Institutions. To what Purpose were these Truths indicted by the Holy Ghost, if
not to be preached and made known; yea and insisting on such Subjects, whatever
is muttered to the contrary, is sometimes crowned with remarkable Successes.
Let me crave leave to insert a Passage here to this Purpose, which I heard of
the reverend and pious Mr. Moody of York in New England; He told me, That
famous Mr. Stoddard "of Northampton, after some considerable Time of Coldness
and Unsuccessfulness in his public Labors, hose that Text, John 10.26. But ye
believe not, because ye are not of my Sheep. From which Words he raised this
Observation, That one Reason of Men's not receiving the Lord Jesus Christ, was
their non Election. This Sermon he informed me (though upon so grating and
displeasing a Subject) was followed with a very remarkable out pouring of the
Holy Spirit, to the Conviction of many. What though the Fan of Christ's Word
separate some light Chaff from the Wheat, is the Wheat any thing the worse for
that? Though some Men of corrupt Minds, loose or formal Lives be offended and
leave our Assemblies, is this any other Treatment than Christ himself met with?
His Doctrine was so severe that many disgusted it, and forsook him, John 6.65,
66, 67 From that Time many of his Disciples went back and walked no more with
him. Matthew. 15.12, 13. Then came his Disciples and said unto him, Know thou
that the Pharisees were offended? But he answered and said, Every Plant which
my heavenly Father has not plan$$ shall be rooted up. John 6.60. This is an
hard saying, Who can bear it? 2 Timothy 3.5. Having a Form of Godliness, but
denying the Power of it, from such turn away. Luke 13.17 Whose Fan is in his
Hand, and he will thoroughly surge his Floor, and will gather the Wheat into his
Garner, but the Chaff he will burn with unquenchable Fire. 2 Timothy 4.3, 4. For
the Time will come, when they will not endure sound Doctrine, and they shall
turn away their Ears from the Truth, and be turned to Fables. And must Christ's
Ministers desist preaching Truth, in order to humor the People, I think not.
Gal. 1.10. Or do I seek to please Men, for if I yet please Men, I should not be
the Servant of Christ. Jer. 5.30, 31. A wonderful and a horrible Thing is
committed in the Land, the Prophets prophesy falsely, and the Priests bear rule
by their Means, and my People love to have it so, and what will ye do in the
end thereof?

If any should again object, that treating upon such Truths in the Infancy of
Churches, is unseasonable: In answer to this, I would propose the following
Queries.

Query 1. Did not Christ and his Apostles preach them in the Infancy of the
Gospel Church? Query 2. Are they not fundamental or principal Truths of
Christianity? And do not Artificers first lay the Foundation? Query 3. Are they
not a part of God's Counsel? And should not Ministers deliver the whole Counsel
of God, as they have Ability and Opportunity? Query 4. Does it not look like a
shuffling of Christ's Cross, a slavish mercenary Fear of incurring the People's
Anger, for a Minister who statedly labors in a Place, to conceal those Truths
of God for many Years standing? Query 5 Has not the Practice of delaying and
consulting with Flesh and Blood in such Matters a visible Tendency to eradicate
those Truths out of the Christian Church in process of Time, when the People
know not whether their Ministers believe them or not?
3 By their soft and smooth Way of Preaching; some Ministers being what God
witnesses of the false Prophets of old; Foxes in the Deserts, Ezekiel. 13.4.
Crafty and covetous Creatures; they know the Way to insinuate themselves into
the People's Affections, and thereby obtain Honor and Gain of them, is to suit
their Sermons to their Humors; now the general Inclinations of poor ignorant
graceless People, is to hear of nothing but Love, Peace, Promises, Comforts,
Isai. 30.18 Speak to us smooth Things. They want Preachers only to scratch the
I$ch of their Curiosity with quaint Notions, and smooth Stories, 2 Timothy 4.3. And
such Chapmen they too often meet with through the Iniquity of the Times, (O
Tempora, O Mores) who by seigned Words make Merchandise of them; there has been
too many such in all Ages, Ezekiel 13.10, to 17. Those Prophets that Jehovah
complains of in the Places of Scripture now quoted, with so solemn an Emphasis,
They "gave out, Lana Vaticinia et Verba Lactis, comfortable Words and milky
Words, as Mr. Greenhill terms it in his Paraphrase; They cried Peace, Peace;
the downy Pillows of the false Prophetesses were soft enough to make Sinners
sleep in utramvis Aurem, on both sides of the Head. But will not the jealous
holy God tear down such deceitful Daubings, with their Authors and Abettors, by
the Storms of his inflamed Vengeance!

Were not God's Prophets of old (and is there not as much need of it now? he is
stone blind that sees it not) bid to cry out and not to spare, to show God's
People their Transgressions, and the House of Jacob their Sins? Are not
Ministers called the Salt of the Earth? Has not Salt a biting, painful Quality?
I cannot but believe that much of that Salt is turned into Sugar (in our Times)
Job 33.23. Matthew. 7.22, 23. and 5.13. Ye are the Salt of the Earth, but if the
Salt have lost his Savor wherewith shall it be salted? It is thenceforth good
for nothing, but to be cast out and to be trodden under Foot of Men. Is not the
Word (when duly preached and blessed) quick and powerful, sharper than any two
edged Sword, piercing even to the dividing asunder Soul and Spirit, Joints and
Marrow, Heb. 4.12. Acts 2.37.

4. By their general and undistinguishing way of Preaching. In the Application
of their Discourses some will often class their Audience into one common mass,
which Proteus like, often changes Shapes; for perhaps in one and the same
Sermon, they will speak to them as if they were all Converted People;andall of a
sudden again, may be but a few moments after, they will address them as
Unconverted; and if they happen to drop a few awakning Expressions against some
gross Immoralities, immediately (as though they were afraid poor Sinners would be
convinced of their undone state) they advance a daub of untempered Mortar in
great haste, I mean misapplied Comfort; and so they plaster and smooth it over
to make all easy again, Ezekiel. 13.22. They strengthen the Hands of the Wicked
that he should not return from his wicked way, by promising him Life.

What does this perverse dealing mean? Is it fear of convicting themselves, or
of the People's Anger? or ignorance, that makes these Men go on at this bloody
rate? How solemnly does the Great God speak against the false Prophetesses that
labored to deceive the Jewish Nation, Ezekiel. 13.18, 19, 20. Woe to the Women
that sow Pillows to all Arm holes: And will ye pollute me among my People for
handfuls of Barley and pieces of Bread, to slay the Souls that should not die,
and to save the Souls that should not live. If they make any particular
Application at all, perhaps it is to make the Hearts of the righteous sad, and
strengthen the Hands of the Wicked, Ezekiel. 13.22. especially if they have
offended them, and that may be by telling them nothing but the very truth. Have
there not been such in the World that have bit with their Teeth, and cried
Peace, and prepared War against such as did not put into their Mouths, Mic. 3
5. Ministers may preach till they are gray headed, nay to Doomsday, before ever
they be the means of bringing one Soul to Christ, at this rate.

Should not those that serve at God's Altar follow hi^$ directions in dividing
the Word of Truth aright? 2 Timothy 2.15. in giving every one his Portion in
Season, Luke 12.42. Showing difference between the clean and unclean? Ezekiel.
22.26. Lev. 10.10. Ezekiel. 44.23.

2. By their Lives, (1.) Light or loose Carriage, frothy, chaffy, jocose
Discourse. Zeph. 3.4. Her Prophets are light and treacherous Persons. Ephesians. 5.4.
Should not those that bear the Vessels of the Lord be clean? Isai. 52.11.

(2.) Through the neglect of that precious Duty of Examination, or enquiring
into the State of their Flocks. Prove. 27.23. Be thou diligent to know the state
of thy Flocks, and look well to thy Herds. Act. 20.20. And how I have kept back
nothing that was profitable unto you, but have showed you, and have taught you
publicly and from house to house. Too few it is to be seared use the necessary
plainness of Nathan to David, Thou art the Man, 2 Samuel 12.7. or of John the
Baptist to Herod concerning his Herodias.

O! that God would excite Ministers to be more painful in this part of their
Work: Some through Grace have found this Method attended with rich Successes.
It Is true, the Practice is imbarrass'd with many Difficulties and
Discouragements; but what then, God will support his faithful Servants in their
Work, and sweeten their Labors by his presence here, and afterward more fully
recompense them in the uninterrupted enjoyment of his Majesty: If Souls are
worth Christ Blood, they are well worth our Pains. What though we should be
requited with hatred and reproach by some, is the Disciple above his Master, or
the Servant above his Lord? Are these trifling Sufferings to be compared with
the eternal Weight of Glory? 2 Cor. 4.17. Blessed be God that the faithful
Servants of Jehovah, who turn many to Righteousness, however they are traduced
and flighted here, will shine as the Brightness of the Firmament, and as the
Stars for ever and ever, Dan. 12.3.

(3.) By a groundless and cruel Charity, either fondly believing that such
Persons are true Christians, who only have the form of Christianity, but are
strangers to experimental Religion. 2 Timothy 3.5. Romans 5.4, 5. which
(notwithstanding of it is fair face) has a very pernicious tendency, because it
deprives them of the opportunity of laboring by private Conversation to detect
and convince Such Men of their damnable Estate: but on the contrary makes them
the unhappy Instruments, probably by discourse, of confirming People in their
delusions; Or 2. by carrying themselves toward such by Speech and Practice, as
though they did believe it, when they do not, through a mercenary love to them, for
what they get of them, or slavish fear of incurring their displeasure, if they
told them the truth, which is much worse than the former; because by it they
counter-act their own Consciences; the former may be the fruit of ignorance,
but this of selfish craft and sordid meanness of Spirit.

(4) By their lax and promiscuous admission of unworthy Guests to the Holy
Sacrament, by which the Ordinance is profaned. Mat. 7.6. Give not that which
is holy to Dogs; precious Souls endangered and deceived, 1 Cor. 11.29. Perhaps
the People have a high opinion of their Minister's Judgment, and therefore they
think themselves safe if they have it in their favor, which they will doubtless
conclude when they are admitted to such a sacred Ordinance by him: Let these
Ministers preach as plainly and pungently about unconverted People as they can,
will such People apply it to themselves, no, they will imagine he means others.

But I hasten to

The 13th Particular, that strengthens the false hopes of some wicked People,
and confirms them in their wicked Courses, is the wicked Examples and Customs
of the greatest Number where they dwell, and especially of the Grandees; those
that are famous for their Wit, Learning, or Wealth. Many unthinking irreligious
People are altogether for the Religion that is in fashion, be it what it will;
they square their Conduct according to the Customs of the Places they live in;
according to that Proverbial saying, Cum sueris Rome, Romano vivito more. Cum
su$ris alibi vivito more Loci. When we are at Rome, we must do as the Romans do
When they are in a Place where Religion is honored, then they put on a
religious Cloak for gain; follow Christ in Profession and outward Performances,
for the Loaves; but when they happen to be in a Place where Piety is
discountenanced, especially by the Men of Figure and Distinction; as alas! it
is in too many at this Day; then they are apt to say of it, as the cruel Jews
of Jesus, away with it, away with it, crucify it, crucify it. Poor Wretches!
they will not stand one brunt for Christ, his precious Cross they fly from as a
Scare crow, and therefore cannot be his Disciples, Luke 14.27. But if ever they
have felt the power of Piety, or the Sweetness of Christ's Love, they would not
thus twist with every Wind, and sail with the Tide, though it were to Tophet's
Culph, and turn with the Times; as that Chancellor in England, who being asked
how he had kept in favor, during such different Reigns; he replied, Natus sum
ex salice non ex quercu: I am of the pliable Willow, not of the stubborn Oak;
no, they would rather fall as Victims to the Rage of Men, or be sent up as
Holocausts or Burnt Offerings to God, than forsake any known Truth or Duty of
Religion: True Piety would inspire them with the brave and generous Resolution
of magnanimous Joshua, Josh. 24.15. And if it seem evil unto you to serve the
Lord, choose you this Day whom you will serve: But as for me and my House we
will serve the Lord. I am determined in this Matter, cost me what it will;
whether you will concur with me or not. O that God would effectually persuade
us to entertain such a Resolution and Temper of Mind; it is such a purpose and
practice as well becomes a great Mind: It shows a sneeking Meanness and
Baseness of Spirit to follow the Customs of Places blindfold whether good or
bad; and to come into mercenary and servile Compliances, is unworthy of the
rational Nature; but if you will be damned for Fashion sake, or Company sake,
who can help you? Pray read and consider what Seneca speaks on this Head; Let
us not follow like Beasts, "said he, but rather govern our selves by Reason
than Example. It fares with us in humane Life as in a routed Army, one stumbles
first, and then another falls upon him, and so they follow one upon the Neck of
another, till the whole Field become one Heap of Miscarriages, and the Mystery
is, that the Number of the Multitude carries it against Truth and Justice, so
that, says he, we must leave the Crowd if we would be happy; for the Question
of a happy Life is not to be decided by Vote; nay, so far from this, that the
Plurality of Voices is still an Argument of the wrong Side: The common People,
says he, content themselves with what is usual, never examining whether it be
good or not; by the common People is intended the Man of Title, as well as the
clouted Shoe, for I do not distinguish them, said he, by the Eye, but by the
Mind.

But I proceed to consider the fourth General proposed, which was to show the
Folly, Misery and cursed State of such deceived Persons. And

1. More generally: Are not those who trust in their own Hearts, Fools? Yes
surely. Prove. 28.26. He that trusts in his own Heart is a Fool, yea a cursed
Fool, Jer. 17.7. Now do not all presumpruous Persons trust in their own Hearts?
Prove. 12.15. The Way of a Fool is right in his own Eyes; but he that hearkneth
to Counsel is wise. Also, Prove. 14.12. and 16.25. and 21.2. Presumptuous
Persons have nothing else to trust to but their deceived Hearts; for both
Scripture and Reason opposes their groundless Confidence.

2. Is it not a Folly to believe Lies, and expect Protection by them? This is
the very Case of presumptuous Souls, Isai. 28.15. For we have made Lies our
Refuge, and under Falsehood have hid our selves. Pray read and consider what God
says in the 17. Verse, Judgment also will I lay to the Line, and Righteousness
to the Plumet, and the Hail shall sweep away the Refuge of Lies, and the Waters
shall overflow the hiding Place. The Prophet informs them that this tottering
Fabric would fall and bury the Builder in it is Ruins, the Waters should
overflow it; every other Refuge but Christ shall be overwhelm $word$; as every
thing else beside the Ark was in the Flood of Noah, even the highest Mountains
were covered, the Ark rested on lofty Ararat.

It is strange to consider what a prodigious pitch of Security and Presumption
Sinners may arrive at. Isai. 28.15. We have made a Covenant with Death, and
with Hell are we at Agreement, when the overflowing Scourge shall pass through,
it shall not come unto us. See they are as secure and unconcerned about the
Approaches of Death, as though they had made an Agreement with it upon a valuable
Consideration, that it should not come till they sent for it, and as little
afraid are they of Hell: What is the Reason of this? Why, they made Lies their
Refuge, they trusted to and depended upon these false and sandy Props, which
the faithful Servants of God told them would deceive them, but which they
themselves and their soothing false Prophets looked upon as $$$tantial Fences:
But what was the Issue of this vain Confidence and foolish Dependence, I have
before considerd.

3. Is it not a Folly to pretend to feed upon Ashes? This presumptuous Sinners
do, Isai. 44.20. They put a grand Cheat upon themselves by pretending to feed
their precious Souls with their delusive Hopes, which can no more nourish or
support them than Ashes the Body; and yet they will fully persist in this
Self-deceit, and will not be undeceived, or say, Is there not a Lie in my right
hand? They will not be persuaded, many of them, so much as to suspect the
Goodness of their present Condition, by the most rational and passionate
Addresses of God's Servants! but hold fast their Delusions in their right hand,
with a strong and eager Gripe, as their chief Good! and he that would assume
the Boldness for their Benefit, to strike them on the Fingers to make them quit
their Hold, would perhaps get their Fist in his Face as the Reward of his
Labors, which they would call Impertinency, Pride, or some other Nickname;
but surely Self suspicion is the first Step to Conversion: Is there not a Lie
in my right hand?

4. Is it not a Folly to entertain that with Complacency, which instead of
doing us any real Service, will do us the greatest Injury possible; if your
false Hopes would save you, I would neither trouble you nor my self in telling
you the Danger of them; but instead of this, they will six you more in the
Snare of the Devil, heighten your Sin, secure and aggravate your Damnation,
while you say, Peace, Peace, sudden Destruction shall come upon you, as travail
upon a Woman with Child, 1 These. 5.3. Your false Hopes indeed may put you out
of Fear, but they increase your Danger, by making you unapprehensive of it,
unconcerned about it, and so negligent of the earnest Use of those Means which
are necessary to obtain an Escape. Zech. 1.11. Amos 6.1. They keep you from a
sound and deep Conviction of your lost Estate, which is absolutely necessary to
a saving Conversion, Luke 15.17. Acts 2.37. The whole need no Physician (in
their own Imagination) but the Sick, Matthew. 9.12. Mark 2.17. Luke 5.31. The
Lord Jesus came not to call the Righteous (self-righteous Pharisees, whole
hearted People) but Sinners, Sin sick, broken hearted Penitents, Mark 2.17.
Psalm 5.17. I know it is hard for you, poor Souls, to quit your sweet Delusions
and to come under the Blows of God's Hammer, Jer. 23.29. Job 11.20. But the
Eyes of the wicked shall fail, and they shall not escape, and their Hope shall
be as the giving up of the Ghost. When a Godless Sinner is dying, it is with
great Reluctance and Regret, he quits his Life; his Soul is torn away from him
against his Will; indeed it is so only with such as are awakned, as for others,
they die like Lambs, though they are damned as Wolves, Psalm 49.14. They go off
quietly to their own Place, and never awake till they get beyond all Hope among
the damned Spirits. But though it be hard, yet it is absolutely necesslary, as I
proved before; What Folly is it to trust to that which will fail us in
Eternity. Job 8.11, 12, 13, 14. So are the Paths of all that forget God, and
the Hypocrites Hope shall perish, whose Hope shall be cut off, and whose Hope
shall be a Spider's Web: Can the Rush grow without Mire? Can the Flag grow
without Water? In these Verses Bildad compares the Hope of Hypocrites to a Rush
and a Spider's Web: Now to illustrate the Folly and Unprofitableness of
entertaining presumptuous Hopes, I shall a little inquire into the Reasons of
these Similitudes. And

1. A Rush$ resembles a Hypocrite's Hopes in these three Things.

1. As the Rush grows up out of the Mire and Water, so the presumptuous
Sinner's Hopes springs from unworthy Conceptions of God, false Apprehensions of
himself, and other base Originals before mentioned, and is generally attended
with an earthly or unclean Practice. 2. Though the Rush has a beautiful
Appearance, yet it is hollow and good for nothing; Hence the Proverb of any
Thing that is insignificant, Not worth a Rush: So the Hypocrite, though he has a
fair Outside, yet he has a hollow Heart, and an unprofitable Practice: In
short, He is a worthless Creature, fit for little else but to cumber the Ground
in this World, and to serve for Fuel in the next, and his Hope is as
insignificant as himself. 3. Though it looks green and gay, it soon withers,
sooner than the Grass: So your Confidence, though it seems strong at present,
will quickly vanish and leave you bereaved. And
2. A Spiders Web resembles a Hypocrite's Hope in four Particulars, 1. In
respect of its Original: As the Spider weaves her Web out of her own Bowels; so
the Hypocrite builds his Hope upon those frames of Heart which are but Sparks
of his own kindling, those Performances, which are the fruits of his own power,
those Conceptions of the Almighty which are the birth of his corrupt fancy.
Thus you see he weaves his hope out of his own Bowels; it is a Creature of his
own coining and framing: Whereas the true Christian, as Mr. Henry observes, "is
like the laborious Be, he fetches in all his Comforts from the heavenly dew
of God's Word. 2. In respect of the Pleasure he takes in it: The Spider is
pleased with it is Web, flies to it as a House of Defense, as well as sports in
it as a place of Pleasure; and do not presumptuous Sinners flatter and please
themselves with the hopes of Heaven, and fly to their false Confidence, as a
secure refuge? 3. In respect of the use he makes of it: Does not the crasty
Spider make use of it is Web as an ensnaring Engine to catch any suitable Prey
which comes within it is reach? and thus do not presumptuous Hypocrites cheat
and impos$ upon many with their specious pretenses? 4. In respect of it is
weakness: The Spider's Web though it is artfully woven, and consists of a great
many Threads, it is extremely weak; so is the Presumer's hope, notwithstanding
the conceit he has of it, it is as insufficient to bear the winnowing of
Christ's Fan, as the Spider's Web is to bear the Strokes of a Broom; their
hopes shall certainly fail and perish, and they with them, when they expect the
most comfort from them.


But the sinfulness and folly of indulging and retaining presumptuous Hopes
will appear more fully by the following Particulars, 1. It Is Mockery: Be not
deceived, God is not mocked, for what a man sows, that shall be also reap, Gal.
6.7. What madness and impudent effontry is it to mock such an Omnipotent God,
who can in a moment speak you dead or damned, who can immediately blow you with
the breath of his Indignation as light Chaff to Hell, and burn you with
unquenchable Flames. Job 4.9. By the blast of God they perish, and by the
breath of his nostrils are they consumed. 2. Blasphemy. Rev. 2.9. By denying
God's veracity; though the Almighty has told them that such who commit the
Wickedness they are guilty of (so continuing) shall perish everlastingly. 1
Cor. 6.9. Gal. 5.19, 20, 21. yet they believe they shall be saved, though God has
expressly revealed that without the New Birth there is no Salvation; that no
duty or privilege, opinion or practice will avail without it, John 3.3, 5.
Gal. 6.15. Yet they expect Happiness though they are Strangers to this Work, and
indeed seek not earnestly after it; what is this but confronting the Almighty!
Flying in the Face of God, challenging him to do his Worst, by calling him,
implicitly, a Liar! Will Not God's revenging Severity burn against those bold
Blasphemers, his Jealousy smoke agains them, and all the Curses of his Book be
upon them, and their Name be blotted out from under Heaven? If God will not
hold them $uiltless that take his Name in vain, Exodus 20.7. And that be will by
no means clear the Guilty, Exodus 34.7. What will the holy God do to those that
wound, rend and tear his Being, by denying one of his glorious Attributes!
Remember O Sinner, Is is a fearful Thing to fall into the Hands of the living
God! Thou had better be under the united Rage of all the Devils in Hell, and
Men on Earth, than seel the Iron Gripes of one GOD, for their Power and Anger
is finite, but God's is infinite and eternal! Heb. 10.30, 31. But may be you will
say, I don't deny God's Truth, or expect to be saved without Conversion.
Answer, Perhaps thy Falsehood and Fraud would appear, if I should but ask thee
two Questions; as first, Whether your Peace be made with God? May be after much
Reasoning, you would confess the Truth, that it was not. And yet if I should
ask you another Question; Do you think that you should be saved if God carried
you off by Death in this State? Yes you would say, you hope so, through God's
Mercy. O Hypocrite! thou have belched forth Blasphemy and Idolatry in this one
Sentence: You hope that through the Mercy of God, he will prove a Liar, and
falsify his Trust; this is the Meaning of thy Speech, O Sinner! it is big with
Horror and insandous Baseness! Art thou not afraid that God will stab thee dead
immediately with the Spear of his Vengeance! Or cause the Earth to open it is
Mouth and swallow thee up quick, as it did proud rebellious Corah and Company,
Numb 16.32. Again, there is Idolatry in thy Speech; thou have unjust
Apprehensions of God's Mercy, as if he would make it triumph in the Ruin of his
Truth. Psalm 50.21. 3. Devil Worship. I suppose that when you speak of the
Pagans worshipping the Devil, you little think your selvas are guilty of the
same horrible Wickedness. The Truth of this Charge appears by the following
Consideration, viz. That Faith, as all confess is an Act of Worship, but you
believe the Devil the Father of Lies and Deceit, rather than the faithful God
who is Truth it self. When God tells you in his Word, which shall stand, when
the Heavens and the Earth shall shake, that if you continue in this State and
Course, you shall be damned. And the Devil tells you, you shall not; now you
believe Satan the Enemy of your Souls, and discredit the God that made you by
his Power, fed and preserved you by his kind Providence. Thus you worship the
Devil, O miserable Souls! how great is your Sin and Folly? And how complete and
horrible will be your Misery, when you shall be sent to enjoy the gloomy gods
you adore? Matthew. 25.41. 4. Hypocrisy; by professing Christ in Word, and in
Works deny him; you bow the Knee in Pretense as the Jews did of old, and then
crucify him in Practice; you salute him with a hail Master, as Judas your
Predecessor in Impiety, and then betray his Interest; you come to God with your
Lips; while your Hearts are far from him, Matthew. 15.8. and 27.29. and 26.49. I
know the profane Herd of Mankind imagine themselves to be far from Hypocrisy,
because they say, they show what they are; they do so indeed demonstrate
themselves to be the genuine Children of their Father the Devil, John 8.44. But
at the same Time they declare their Wickedness as Sodom without Shame or
Blushing, Isai. 3.9. The show of their Countenance does witness against them;
and they declare their Sin as Sodom, they bide it not: Woe unto their Souls.
Jer. 6.15. Were they ashamed when they had committed Abomination? nay, they
were not at all ashamed, neither could they blush: therefore they shall fall
among those that sall, at the Time that I visit them, they shall be cast down,
says the Lord. Jer. 8.12, 13. I say at the same Time, they declare their
Wickedness, they profess Christianity, and expect Salvation by it, and yet
while they are Christians in Pretense and Profession, they are incarnate Devils
in Practice: Now is not this notorious Hypocrisy, to profess one Thing and do
another, to look one Way and row another, to pretend Friendship to Christ and
at the same Time stab his Interest, dishonor his Name, and discredit his Truth
by your impious Speeches, and b$$tish Lives. And besides what has been offered
under this Head, it ought to be considered, that all who want spiritual
Sincerity must needs be Hypocrites: I confess indeed that profane Sinners are
not of the most polished Kind. However though these seem to be at Variance, yet
they are Children of the same Father and Family, and like to inherit the same
Portion. Hear your Doom from God ye Hypocrites! Matthew. 24. last. And shall cut
him asunder, and shall appoint him his Portion with Hypocrites, where shall be
weeping and gnashing of Teeth. Hear you deceitful rotten hearted Professors,
who despise weeping here for Sin, remember (that so continuing) ye shall weep
in Hell, where there is no Hope: Here penitential Tears for Sin attended with a
Reformation from it, probably would be a mean of obtaining Pardon, Joel 2.12,
14. But there, poor Souls, your Tears will be like Esau's shed in vain! there
you will gnash your Teeth, i. e when you are shut up in the Gulf of
everlasting Misery, then you will be filled with Self-revenge and Indignation
against your own Madness in hypocritically slighting such a Happiness as was
tendered to you by the Son of God, that you would even tear your selves in
pieces if you could. Can you without shivering think upon that awful Scripture?
Matthew 22.12, 13. Then said the King to his Servants, bind him Hand and Foot,
and take him away, and cast him into utter Darkness. 5. Murder. 1. You murder
your own Souls, through the Misapplication of the Portions of God's Word, as
particularly by applying the Promises when you should apply the Threatenings.
You snatch at the Children's Bread, when you have no right to it. Now as a
R$medy misapplied hurts rather than heals, so it is in this Case, you turn
those Means of Grace which were designed for the Salvation of Men, into a
Savor of Death unto Death, and to be a Means of your Damnation, 2 Cor. 2.16.
Thus you imbrue your Hands in your own Blood; God will by no Means clear such
barbarous Butchers, so continuing. But 2 They also murder others, partly
perhaps, by neglecting the seasonable Instruction of such as they are under a
Relation to, Prove. 22.6. And partly by their contradictory Practice; Jo$b's
Voice with the Hands of Esau, a Saint abroad, at Home a Devil. May not this be
a great Stumbling Block to those that know their perverse Pranks. Perhaps such
a Stumbling Block as some of their own Relations may fall over, and never $i$e
again. O if these Men had any true Love to God, their own Souls, or the Souls
of their Relatives, would they not either lay down their Lamps or reform their
Lives.
6. Infidelity. They do not believe whatever they pretend. God's holy Word, the
Lord Jehovah, points out their Condition as plainly as the Nose upon a Man's
Face, and yet they will not believe, consider and apply it. Jer. 8.6. I hearkened
and heard, but they spoke not right, no Man repented him of his Wickedness,
saying, What have I done? Every one tu$ne$h to his Course, as the Horse rus$eth
into the Ba$$$. Heb. 4.2. But the Word preached did not profit them, not b$ing
mixed with Faith in them that heard it$$ The Eye that sees others, sees not
itself. Hear presum$tuous Sinners what God speaks to thee, Mark 16.16. He that
beli veth not shall be damned And 1 John 5.10. He that believes not, has made
him a Liar. 7. Fraud. O presumptuous Sinners! you are guilty of Self deceit, of
Soul deceit: To cheat another in any temporal Matter is a villainous and very
criminal Evil, justly exposing the nocent Person to Shame and Contempt, as well
as to the Lash of the civil Law; it is a Sin which is the Dishonor of
Humanity, extremely prejudicial to all the Interests of Society; yet as bad as
it is, it is not so monstrous and unnatural as to cheat our selves, and that in
a Matter of infinitely greater Moment: Our Neighbor's Loss is temporary and
reparable, but this is irreparable and eternal. As Suicide, or Self murder is
justly accounted more unnatuaal and monstrous than the Murder of another, so is
this Self deceit, which though it affords some present false Ease, yet persisted
in, introduces the Soul into a Labyrinth of endless Anguish, Luke 6.25.
Remember, O Deceiver! that God's Curse is upon you, Mal. 1.14. Cursed be the
Deceiver. 8. A Confederacy with the Devil. Those Spirits having broken the Law
of their Creation, are now justly deprived of the Happiness they were once
instated in, and reserved in Chains of Darkness for the Judgment of the great
Day, 2 Pet. 2.4. Knowing their Doom to be irrevocable, and that some of the
lapsed and degenerate Race of Adam are advanced to that height of Happiness
they had forfeited by Sin: They are filled with Rage and Malice against God,
which not being able to execute upon him immediately, they therefore labor to
displease him mediately by seducing that darling Creature, whom he has been
pleased to honor, with such distinguished, as well as undeserved Love. This is
the grand Design these malicious Spirits are in pursuit of and employ all their
Power and Policy about, 1 Pet. 5.8. 2 Cor. 2.11. Now when Men embrace their
false, though subtle Insinuations against their own Souls, believing their
Suggestions concerning the Goodness of their present State, or the Certainty of
their future Happiness against the plain Testimony of the holy Scriptures, as
the presumptuous Sinner does: Is not this a notorious Confederacy with these
infernal Ghosts against God, and his own Soul. 9. By this you not only secure
but heighten your Damnation; it may indeed help you to some present Ease, but
alas! this transitory Delight will soon expire in easeless and endless Pain.
Your presumptuous Hopes makes you thoughtless of the Misery you are making fast
Approaches to. Now the less you expect such a Portion, the greater will be your
Pain; for Surprisals, as Dr. Stillingfleet well "observes, confound Men's
Thoughts, daunt their Spirits, and betrays the Succor that Reason offers. What
a great Disappointment, think you, was it to the foolish Virgins, who had such
strong Hopes of Happiness, as Death it self could not shake, to have the
Marriage Chamberdoor shut against them, Matthew. 25.12. Instead of ascending the
flowery Hills of Paradise, to be sunk into the Depths of Hell; and would not the
same Disappointment strike you with the same Surprise? For God's sake,
consider, that the Strength of your Hopes does not prove their Truth or
Goodness: This you may learn from the sad Instance of the foolish Virgins; but
alas! how difficult is it to persuade deceived Souls, to quit their false
Confidence; when they are with Ephraim settled on their Lees, like Wine which
has done working, in which there is little or no Motion, Jer. 48.11. One may as
well pull a Bear by the Tooth as meddle with some of them. It is as easy
without sovereign Grace intercept, to shock the Earth of it is Foundations, as
to overthrow their vain Confidence. They have often heard Threatenings, and
therefore are used to them, and hardened by them. All the Thunders from Sinai,
and Curses from Mount Ebal, are no more to them than the Cracks of Children's
Squibs or Potguns; no, no: they have heard of these Things long ago; now the
Frequency of hearing the most awful Truths, lessens their Terror; Custom
deadens and stupifies the Passions, or makes their Motion more faint and
languid; like Mariners at "Sea, they are much afraid of Storms at first, but
afterward they grow more hardened and unconcerned, as one expresses it. Gospel
Sinners will in process of Time grow hardy and fearless, under the most
awakening Sermons; like the Smith's Dog, that will lie and take his Rest near
the Anvil, when the glowing Sparks are flying about like Hail: What should such
Men as they begin their Religion now, no they scorn it; it is proper only for
weak, silly Peoplethat know no better to be frighted by Terror, but it is
beneath men of their Sense to be startled at such Trifles, as God's fierce
Vengeance and an everlasting Hell; ah! but for all your Haughtiness, if but one
Curse, or the Guilt of one Sin was brought home in it is native Weight and
Terror to your Conscience, it would make you tremble like a Leaf shaken with
the Wind. Prove. 18.14 A wounded Spirit who can bear? Guilty Gaal thought the
Shadows of the Mountains were Men, Judges 9.36. But none besides the Almighty
can persuade presumptuous Sinners to forsake their pleasant, though pernicious
Dreams and Delusions. Grant gracious God, that poor bewildred, benumbed and
deceived Souls may be convinced of their Sin, Folly and Misery, in entertaining
groundless Confidences about their present and future State.


Having before considered the Folly and Sinfulness of the presumptuous Sinner's
Hope and Practice; let us now inquire into the Miseries of his Estate and
Condition, while under those Delusions. These for Order's sake may be
distinguished into two Kinds, viz. Privative and Positive; His privative
Miseries are principally these two, viz. Loss of the Image of God, and
Communion with God.

As to the first of these, Every presumptuous Sinner is deprived of the Image
of God, which is the greatest Beauty, the highest Excellency and Ornament of
the humane Nature; because the nearest Resemblance of the Divine. Those moral
Excellencies that once the humane Soul possessed, it is now bereaved of, until
it be sanctified by the Holy Spirit, and made nigh by the Blood of Jesus, Ephesians.
2.12, 13. Eccles. 7.29. But to understand more fully the Extent of this Loss,
let me propose a few Particulars concerning the Nature of that Image, innocent
Man was honored with: What was it but the Conformity of Man to God, or the
Resemblance he bare in his Measure of the divine Excellencies and Perfections?
This Resemblance appeared in three Things.

1. In the Nature and Essence of the Soul, for it is Spirituality, Invisibility,
Immortality and Simplicity, are faint Emblems of such like Properties and
Perfections, which shine with a superior Luster in the divine Nature, Acts
17.28, 29. This may be called the natural Image of God in Man, which cannot be
lost while the Soul endures; but there is little Reason to glory in that,
because the Devils possess it as well as wicked Men. 2. In the Faculties of the
Soul, in the Conformity of all i'ts Powers and Passions to the Nature and Will
of God, in those divine Gifts and Excellencies with which the Soul was
clothed, such as Wisdom in the Understanding, or a perfect Knowledge of Things
divine and humane, Col. 3.10. which appeared in Adam's giving Names to all the
Creatures, suited to their different Natures; without this he would have been
unfit to manage and sustain the Government of the inferior Creatures which he
was advanced to. Sanctity in the Will; by which it is inclined to love and
pursue after God and Goodness, to hate and avoid Evil, and the Appearance of
it: Not only to perform with Delight and Pleasure the Homage due to God, but
also the Duties of Justice and Mercy due to Man, Ephesians. 4.24. capable to perceive
what was true, and inclinable to embrace what was good.

Order and Harmony amongst the Affections; both as to the Nature of their
Objects, and their Degrees of Intenseness, their silent and steady Submission
to the superior Powers, without that Reluctance or Discord which Sin has since
introduced, this may be called the moral Image of God.

3. There was also this accessory Part of God's Image, viz. The Power of
Government over the inferior Creatures, wherewith our first Parents were
invested by God, Genesis 1.26. which may be called the civil or political Image of
God; as being a Representation and Shadow of this glorious Sovereignty; Adam
was as it were God's Vice Roy upon Earth; but this Privilege as well as the
moral Image is lost by Sin; the Beasts revolt from their wonted Subjection, and
want to avenge their Maker's quarrel with Mankind. To conclude this Head, let
me mention a few Expressions of the learned and elequent Dr. Bates in his
Harmony: He enjoyed, says he, (speaking of Adam in "his innocent State) Nature
in it is original Purity, crowned with the Benediction of God before it was
blasted with the Curse, the World was all Harmony and Beauty, becoming the
Goodness of the Creator; the Earth was liberal to Adam of all it is Treasures;
the Heavens of their Light and sweetest Influences; he was seated in Eden, a
Place of so great Beauty and Delight, that it represented the celestial
Paradise, which is refreshed with Rivers of Pleasure. But his supreme Happiness
consisted in the Exercise of his most noble Faculties on proper Objects. See
what we have lost by Sin! If we could with Niobe weep incessantly; nay, could
we shed crystal Seas of Grief; if all our moisture were spent in the bitterest
Lamentations; Were our Heads Waters and our Eyes Fountains of Tears; nay, were
our Tears turned into Blood; it were too little to bewail our fatal, fatal
Less! Woe is us, the Crown, the sparkling Diadem is fallen is fallen from our
Heads; our Hearts, and we are justly left bereaved of our primitive Innocence,
Happiness and Beauty; and were it not that the God of Pardons and Compassions
had opened a Scene of redeeming Love in JESUS! to restore apostate Man to some
degree of his primitive Honor and Excellency, we should have had a whole
Eternity to spend in fruitless Esau like Complaints, without the very least
Glimpse of Hope to allay their Bitterness: But you presumptuous Sinners not
having embraced JESUS the Angel of the Covenant, nor experienced the Power of
converting Grace, are still languishing under the Ruins of Adam's Apostasy,
destitute of the Image of the holy God, without which you can never enjoy him,
who is infinite in Purity and glorious in Holiness, Heb. 2.14. Isai. 6.3. Exodus
15.11. While you want God's Image, are not you deprived of your greatest
Honor, your highest Excellency, and sweetest Enjoyment? What greater Honor
than to be like the pure and holy God, and what greater Happiness than by this
Conformity, to enjoy the refreshing Smiles of his reconciled Face? Is it not a
sinful Want, because occasioned through our own Default? Adam being the
Representative and federal Head of his whole Posterity; the Covenant being not
only made with him personally, but with us in him; his Actions being of a
public Nature and Concern, we sinned in him, and fell with him in his first
Transgression, Rom 5.12, 18, 19.
O Sinner! all the other Wants thou complainest so much about are
inconsiderable and trifling, when compared with this! they are but temporary
and momentous, but the Consequences of this are durable and eternal: Many of
these are but imaginary, or not so necessary, but that you may live, and
perhaps comfortably without having them supplied: But this Want is not only
real, but of absolute Necessity to be remedied; otherwise your Persons and
Services will never be accepted, Heb 12.14. Isai 1. You are apt to be deeply
sensible of, and much affected with other Wants, and perhaps make great
Complaints about small Matters; but alas! Friends, these are but Summer Brooks,
when compared with this immense Ocean. This! this! deserves your most manly
Thoughts and Reflections, your greatest Care and your deepest Sorrows. Think
upon, and apply to thy guilty Conscience that solemn Threatening of the holy
God, Ezekiel. 16.23. And it come to pass after all thy Wickedness, Woe, Woe, unto
thee says the Lord God.

2 Presumptuous Sinners are deprived of Fellowship and Communion with God:
alas! miserable Souls, you know not what it means experimentally: I confess if
you have Learning, you may talk something about it by Rote, coldly and by
guess, as the blind Man shoots at the Mark; but you do not know feelingly what
it is to receive the Emanations of God's special Love into your Bosoms; the
pure and precious, and Soul ravishing Streams of those Waters of Life, that
gently flow from the Throne of God and the Lamb, descending into and satiating
of your longing panting Souls, and flowing in you as a Well of Waters,
springing up to eternal Life, John 4.14. Psalm 23.2. And exciting the most
flamy passionate Commotions of Love, Desire, Delight and Gratitude. Cant. 2.5.
and 8.6. and 5.5, 6. and 2.3. and 5.16. You know not unhappy Souls, what it is
to drink of the divine Nector, and living Waters, or to feed upon the hidden
Manna, and ambrosial Sweets, that attend the presence of the descending God.

For

1. How should you have Communion who yet retain your Enmity against him? Amos
3.3. Can two walk together except they be agreed? There can be no Communion
without Reconciliation, if ever the Friendship was broken, which is the present
Case; and though you are not willing to allow this Charge, your Practice proves
it, your quarreling with God's Image, viz. strict Holiness, shows your Disgust
at the Original or Prototype, your slighting of, and contending with God's
Children, shows you hate their Father, 1 John 4.20.

2. Where there is Communion, there is also a Communication of such Things that
are peculiar to one, as if common to both; this appeared eminently among the
primitive Christians, Acts 2.44, 45. As the blessed God freely communicates his
precious and permanent Love to his People, Jer. 31.3. So his People are willing
to spend and be spent for him; they take joyfully the spoiling of their Goods,
knowing that in Heaven they have a better and an enduring Substance, Heb.
10.34. And count not their Lives dear that they may win Christ; defend and
promote his Interest, Acts 20.24.

3. Where there is Communion, there is also a friendly and familiar Conference;
Christ speaks to his People by his Word and Spirit, and they know and hear his
Voice with great Desire and longing, Cant. 5.2. and 4 5, 6. and follow him,
John 10.4.5. And they speak their Hearts to him, by Sighs, Tears, Groans,
Prayer and Praise, Ez$k 9.4. Isai 35.10 Psalm 42.3. Isai. 38.5. Psalm 38.9.
Romans 8.26. Job 22.26, 27. Psalm 22.23. They cry to him with a Child like Love,
and humble Boldness, Abba, Father, Father, dear Father, Romans 8.15. But O how
far are you from this, instead of the Suffering Death, may be you are not
willing to suffer Reproach for his Truth, but will rather truckle and shift,
and come into carnal Compliances. Perhaps instead of Willingness to suffer the
Loss of your Goods by Persecution (which Loss is indeed the greatest Gain) that
you count it all lost that you give to a poor diftressed Member of Christ's
Body mystical; you part as difficultly with a small Matter out of your Purses,
or Pocket-Books for charitable and pious Uses, as with the Blood out of your
Veins. Is it likely that such Earthworms should have Communion with the
Almighty? As to that familiar Converse with God I but now mentioned; you are
perhaps such Strangers to it your selves, that if any made use of it in your
Hearing you would, may be, suspect them, quarrel with them, and condemn them
under the gilded Pretext of making too bold with the Almighty; as if Children
might not speak in their own Language, O strange! It appears also that you are
destitute of Communion with God, because you want Conformity to God in Heart
and Practice, 1 John 1.6. 2 Cor. 6.14, 15. Now how great is this Misery,
unhappy Sinner! whilst thou live in a State of Estrangement from God who is
the Fountain of Happiness, the God of Consolation, with him is the Fountain of
Life, Psalm 36.9. Yea his Lovingkindness is better than Life, Psalm 63.3. All
our Springs are in God, Psalm 87.7. So that in keeping at a Distance from him,
thou dwell far from thy own Life and Happiness.

Now in Order to get thy Heart affected with this woeful Want, Defect and Loss,
consider solemnly these following Particulars.

1. Thou have no true Comfort in Difficulties, no Covenant God to go to, thou
must bear thy Burden alone; is not thy State doleful? Can you be contented in
such a Condition? But on the contrary, what a blessed Privilege is it to have
such a compassionate Friend to make our Moan to in all our Distresses, and with
the strongest Assurances of obtaining Succor from him, Psalm 12.5. Isai.
65.24. Hab. 2.3. 2. Can those that want Communion with God here, reasonably
expect to enjoy him hereaster? No surely. If Strangers had not Admittance into
the jewish Temple, Number. 1.51. which was but an obscure Type of Heaven how much
less will they be introduced into Heaven it self? 3. It Is a Resemblance of the
Punishment of the damned Angels, and damined Souls, for these abandoned
wretched Spirits have no Enjoyment of God's gracious Presence, in that burning
Lake, wherein they are ingulphed. Indeed thy outward sensual Enjoyments blunt
the Edge of thy present Misery, but quickly thou will be stripped bare of all thy
earnal Comforts, for ever bereaved of the Bones and Husks, in which thou
confided and triumphed, and thy naked Soul shall feel the Fierceness of his
Revenge; the unallayed Horrors of an ever absent God, unless thou repentest.
Does not universal Nature mourn, when the Sun has hid his rosy Face, but for a
small Time in an Eclipse, and appears in a funeral Dress? What then think you,
must the Mourning of the damned be, who are shut up in thick Darkness, and
deprived of all Hopes of ever enjoying God? 4. How awful will be the Appearance
or Approach of Death to you while you remain in such a Condition? Will Not pale
Death terrify your secure Consciences, and put you in great Disorder? What can
ye expect but that fearful and amazing Sentence, Depart from me ye cursed, into
everlasting Fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels, I know you not, Matthew.
25.41. and 7 23.
Is not the gracious Presence of God the Quintessence of all desirable
Comforts? O! what inexpressible Misery is it to be without God! (who as he is
the best Friend at all Times, so he is the only Friend at some Times) it is bad
in Life, worse at Death, and worst of all in Hell. Ephesians. 2.12. But

I proceed to consider the posi$ive Miseries of presumptuous Sinners.

1. You are under the Power of Sin, Ephesians 2.2, 3. Romans 3.9. John; 6 Romans 6.20.
For when ye were the Servants of Sin, ye were free from Righteousness. In their
unconverted Estate, the Apostle informs them, that they were Drudges to Sin,
and free from Righteousness, not by a Liberty given, but taken, Romans 8.12. For
the Law of the Spirit of Life which is in Christ Jesus has made me free from
the Law of Sin and Death. Here he asserts his present Freedom through the
Covenant of Grace in Jesus, from the Guilt and Power of Sin, which necessarily
supposes his former Bondage to both, while in a State of Nature. While Men
remain in this sad and doleful Condition, they are by repeated Transgressions
against Light and Love, contracting new Guilt, and thereby aggravating their
Damnation, Romans 2.4, 5. Or despisest thou the Riches of his Goodness and
Forbearance, not knowing that the Goodness of God leads thee to Repentance,
but after thy Hardness and impenitent Heart treasurest up unto thy self Wrath
against the Day of Wrath, and Revelation of the righteous Judgment of God. But
your whole Lives and all your Actions, are not only rainted with, and under the
Dominion of Sin, but your Souls in all their Faculties are corrupted and
governed by it; your Minds are darkened and alienated from the Life of God
through Ignorance, Acts 26.18. Ephesians. 4.18 and 5.8. The bright and beauteous
Morning Star never felt (in a saving Way) the warming and enlightening Beams of
the Sun of Righteousness, ushering the joyful Dawn of an everlasting Day into
the glooming Hemisphere of their beclouded Souls: And is not this dark
Condition a State of extreme Danger, and awful Horror? John 12.35. He that
walks in Darkness knows not whither he goes. Let there be never so many
Dangers in the Way, they cannot be discerned in the dark; they are like to be
felt before they are seared; Is not this the Reason of the great
unconcernedness and presumptuous Security of the ungodly World, they see not,
alas! they see not their Danger, that the pale Horse is just at their Back with
Death upon him, and Hell following after him, Rev. 6.8. Otherwise they would
weep rather than laugh, mourn rather than rejoice, tremble and cry out
wherever they are, rather than sing and be jovial, according to the common
Course of this World, Ephesians. 2.2. Eccles. 2.2. O Man! Can thou be easy in this
dark and doleful Condition, which is so exceeding dangerous, that thou know
not but that the next Hour (or in a few Hours at least) thou may be in Hell,
past all Hope; thou know not but that this Day or Night, Sickness and Death
may snap the feeble Thread of thy momentary Life, trip up the He$ls of thy
false Hope, and sink thy wretched Soul among the Devils? Is it not dangerous to
have the Guide and Leader among the Faculties blinded and veiled with a Muffler
of Ignorance and Darkness? If the Blind lead the Blind, are they not like to
fall both together into the Ditch, Luke 6.39.

2. A State of Darkness is a State of awful Horror, the Horrors of Death! The
Horrors of Hell! The Horrors of Sir! and the Curse environ you! and not the
least Grain of solid Comfort, or Glimpse of sure Hope while you so remain, Ephesians.
2.12. to support your sinking Souls.

I assure you Friends, if God should open your Eyes, you would be astonished at
your past and present Stupidity! O Man! thou art in a worse Condition than the
poor Egyptians, when they were encompassed with thick Darkness; for that
Darkness was but temporary, external, palpable; but thine is internal,
insensible to thee, and will prove eternal, unless Repentance opens a brighter
Seen: Their's lasted but three Days, but perhaps thine has lasted twenty,
thirty, sorty, fisty or sixty Years: They were afflicted with their's, Enod.
10.16. But perhaps you are contented with thine; thy Case is worse than that of
Paul and his Fellow-Mariners, when they were almost shipwrecked, Acts 27.20.
and neither Sun or Stars appeared in many Days.

1. Their Danger and Distress only respected the temporal Life, but thine, the
eternal.

2. They were very apprehensive of their Danger, Verse 20. All Hopes we should
be saved was then taken away; but may be your false Hopes were never shocked at
the Foundation yet. Isai. 57.10. Thou art wearied in the Greatness of thy Way,
yet saidest thou not, there is no Hope, thou have sound the Life of thy Hand,
therefore thou wast not grieved. So, many Persons now a Days, if their
Conscience checks them, they can soon cure themselves by their Prayers, they
find the Life of their Hand, they depend upon their Doings for Justification
and Salvation, this strengthens their false Hope, and keeps them from being
sufficiently grieved; but the Fig leaves of a Man's own Righteousness, will be
found to be a very defective Robe, Isai. 27.20. For the Bed is shorter than
that a Man can stretch himself on it, and the covering narrower, than that he
can wrap himself in it.

3. They used with Earnestness, proper Means to obtain Relief, Acts 27.16, 17,
18. but you sleep in Sloth in infinitely greater Danger.

4. The Continuance of their Danger was but for a few Days, but thine is like
to last to Eternity at the Rate thou go on.

5. Though the Vessel was tossed like a Tennis-Ball by the impetuous Winds and
Waves, much as the Psalmist describes that Case, Psalm 107. and 26.7. Yet they
had Anchors to cast out in their Distress, Verse 29. They cast sour Anchors out
of the Stern, and wished for the Day. But though thou be in the Sea of God's
Wrath, and ready to be blown every Moment by the furious Gusts of his,
Indignation into Hell, thou have not one Anchor to cast out in thy Distress; no
true Hope fixed within the Vail, Heb. 6.19. Epb. 2.12. The Anchor thou trustest
to (I mean thy false Hope) is hollow, drossy and brickle, it will not hold thy
Stormstead Soul during one Blast of the breath of God's Indignation: Surely all
his Billows shall go over thee, except thou gettest another Anchor of sound
Metal, Psalm 42.7. Job 18.14. His Confidence shall be rooted out of his
Tabernacle: and it shall bring him to the King of Terrors I

6. Those distressed Mariners wished for the Day, but may be you are so far
from wishing the Daybreak of Conviction, that you put away the evil Day far
off, and fly from the Light because your Deeds are evil, Amos 6.3. John 3.19,
20.

7. Those People were so distressed about their Danger and Misery, not only
because of the Storm, but also because the Lights of Heaven were blown out, and
that they wanted the Sun's Warmth, and the Direction of the Stars (for they had
not then found out the Virtue of the Lodestone, that they eat nothing (no
stated Meals) for fourteen Days together, Verse 33. And thou perhaps have
hardly ever fasted one Day, or may be scarce missed a Meal about thy Soul
Concerns, though thou have continued in the Valley of the Shadow of Death these
many Years; never having felt one Heart changing, Life giving Ray from the Son
of God the Sun of Righteousness; or never beheld by an Eye of Faith the
Morning Star of Salvation: O shame! See Joel 1.14, and 2.5. Matthew. 9.15. Luke
5.35.

More particularly, the Mind is darkened and blinded in it is Apprehension of
Things, Ephesians. 4.18. as well as erroneous in it is Judgment concerning them. Isai.
5.20. Woe to them that call evil good, and good evil.

3. It Is Reasonings are frequently false and carnal, though often crafty and
subtle, 2 Cor. 10.5. Luke 16.8.

4. It Is Designs and numerous Projects, selfish, mean and mercenary, 2 Timothy
3.2, 4. James 3.15.

5. The Thoughts vain and vicious, Jer. 4.14. They are continually Evil, either
as to Matter or Manner, Genesis 8.21. Presumptuous Sinners do vainly imagine that
God does not take such strict Notice of their Actions, nor is so severe in
punishing them; as his faithful Servants represent him to be. Psalm 34.7, 10,
11. Jer. 4.4. Psalm 50.21. These Things thou have done and I kept Silence; thou
thoughtest that I was altogather such a one as thy self, but I will reprove
thee, and set them in order before thine Eyes Let such Sinners remember the
Text that I am speaking from, If you walk after the Imaginations of your Heart,
and yet expect Peace; all the Gurses that are written in the Book of God shall
lie upon you.

6. The Memory is corrupted, forgetful of Good, and retentive of Evil, Jer.
4.14.

7. The Conscience is woefully depraved, Tit. 1.15 Unto the Pure all Things are
pure, but to the defiled and unbelieving is nothing pure. Mat. 6.22. The Light
of the Body is the Eye, if thine Eye be evil, thy whole Body is full of
Darkness, if theresore the Light that is in thee be Darkness, how great is that
Darkness? But

2. As your Understandings are filled with Ignorance and Darkness, so your
Wills are possessed of Obstinacy and Frowardness in Evil, John 5.40. Amos 6.10.
and Aversion to God, Psalm 14.34. Isai. 48.4. Because I know thou art
obstinate, thy Neck an Iron Sinew, and thy Brow Brass. The Wills of
presumptuous Sinners have a strong Proneness to Sin, and a great Aversion
against that Law by which it is restrained and condemned, Rom 5.7. and 7.11.
Mal. 3.14. In short the Will is

1. Perverse in it is Inclinations, Zech. 7.11. But they refused to hearken, and
pulled away the Shoulder, and stopped their Ears that they should not hear. Hos
11.7. And my People are bent to backsliding from me, though they called them to
the most High, none at all would exalt him.

2. As the Will is perverse in it is Inclinations, so it is obstinate in it is
Designs, Jer. 8.5, 6. I hearkened and heard but they spoke not aright; no Man
repented him of his Wickedness, saying, what have I done? Every one turns to
his Course, as the Horse rusheth into the Battle. They hold fast Deceit, they
refuse to return. Also Jer. 2.25. I have loved Strangers and after them will I
go.

3. Foolish in it is Choice: choosing either real Evil, or but apparent Good,
Jer. 2.12, 13. Be astonished, O ye Heavens at this, and be horribly afraid, be
ye very desolate, says the Lord. For my People have committed two Evils, they
have forsaken the Fountain of living Waters and hewn out unto themselves
Cisterns, broken Cistorns, that can hold no Water,

4. Inordinately eager in it is Enjoyments, Ephesians. 4.11. Who being past feeling
have given themselves to work all Uncleanness with Greedivess.

3. The Affections are wholly averse to the Pursuit of God and divine Things,
Isai. 30.10. 2 Timothy 4.3, Job. 21.14. Averse to the Law of God and Obedience to
it, Romans 8.7. Jer. 6.17. and 7.26. And on the contrary fixed on sensitive
Delights, Gal 5.24. 1 Timothy 5.6.

4. The Life is framed according to the Customs of the World, the corrupt
Desires of the Heart, and Examples of Predecessors, Romans 12.2. Ephesians 2.2. 2 Pet.
2.12. Jer. 16.12. Zech. 1.4. John 8.33. But in the mean time, lest any be
mistaken, know. that all unconverted and presumptuous Sinners are not equally
guilty of outward Abominations, no, no, there are some who by Reason of their
mild Temper, good Education, and the common Motions of the Holy Spirit, make a
more gilded Appearance, and faiter show in the Flesh than others, and yet are
in the same woeful State with the Profane, Romans 2.17, 18, 19, 20. Rev. 3.17.
Some presumptuous Sinners are visibly dead, others seem to themselves and
others to live, John 9.40, 41. Matthew. 25.2, to 8. See Friends what a lamentable
Disorder Sin has brought into the Soul's Faculties, how has it clouded the
Mind, and hardened the Heart, Ezekiel. 36.26. seared and stupify'd the Conscience,
2 Timothy 4.2. Is not your Case lamentable, who dwell under the Dominion of such a
Tyrant, who is worse than the very Devil himself? For is it not Sin that made
him who was once a glorious Angel, a deformed Devil? Is it not Sin that has
clothed him with all his hellish Qualities of Rage and Spite, against God and
all Goodness? Does not the Tyrant Sin enslave? Tit. 3.3. pollute? Prove. 13.5.
poison? James 3.8. Deuteronomy. 32.33. wound? Isai. 1.6. infatuate? Luke 15.17.
plague? 1 Kings 8.38. And will it not destroy and damn your precious Souls for
ever, unless Repentance intervene and prevent the fatal Blow? Luke 13.3. O
therefore confess it with David, Psalm 51.7. Behold I was shapen in Iniquity,
and in Sin did my Mother conceive me. Mourn over it, with holy Paul, Romans 7.24.
O wretched Man that I am, who shall deliver me from this Body of Sin and Death!
Without this hereditary and contagious Corruption, the bitter Fountain from
which all our actual Evils proceed, the Enemy could not have so much Power over
us to entice and seduce us, Matthew 4.10. Therefore we have Reason to ascribe our
actual Sin and Ruin, not so much to Satan, and the Allurements of the World, as
to this Sin that dwells in us, Romans 7.20.

And now, Friends, Can you imagine that such unclean Creatures, even pieces of
Pollution as you are, over whose Hearts and Lives, Sin, both original and
actual, reigns and governs, who are covered with Bruises and putrefying Sores,
from the Crown of your Heads to the Soles of your Feet, Isai. 1.5, 6. can
possibly be admitted to the immediate and eternal Embraces of an infinitely
pure and holy God, in the State and Case you are in; no poor Sinners, Be not
deceived, God is not mocked, Gal. 5.6. Without Holiness no Man shall see the
Lord, Heb. 12.14. Hab. 1.3. Thou art of purer Eyes than to behold Evil.

2. You are in the Possession of Satan. It Is true, the Devil is not your Lord
or Master, de Jure, or by lawful Right, but he is de Facto, in Fact, he has
usurped the Possession of your Souls, and obtained it partly by your own
Consent, and partly by God's judicial Tradition; While the strong Man armed
keeps his Palace, his Goods are in Peace, Luke 11.21. Mr. Henry observes upon
this Place of Scripture, That the Heart of every unconverted Sinner is the
"Devil's Palace where he resides and rules. Ephesians. 2.2. That all the Faculties of
the Soul are his Goods, being employed by him in the Service of Sin, that there
is a kind of Peace in an unconverted Soul, while the Devil as a strong Man
keeps it; the Sinner, says he, has a good Opinion of himself, is very
secure and merry, has no doubt concerning the Goodness of his State, nor any
dread of the Judgment to come; he flatters himself in his own Eyes, and cries
Peace to himself. Before Christ came, all was in Peace, because all went one
Way, but the Preaching of the Gospel disturbed the Peace of the Devil's Palace,
Mat. 10.34. Romans 7.9. For I was alive without the Law once, but when the
Commandment came, Sin revived and I died. The Apostle here shows, that while he
was unconvinced, he was in a deep Slumber, indulging a false Hope, and
retaining a false Peace, but when the Commandment came, when the Law was
brought home to his Soul and Conscience, by the almighty Power of the Holy
Spirit, Sin revived in his View and Apprehension, and he died, lost that false
Peace, and false Hope he before indulged, Romans 7.11. Is not this a lamentable
Confideration! that the Devil thus erects his Throne in all presumptuous
unconverted Sinners Hearts, and there sways his wicked Scepter! and has all the
Powers and Passions of the Soul to lacque to his Nod, and observe the least
Intimations of his Pleasure, with the prosoundest Submission and Alacrity, like
the Centurions Servants; that he should be thus strongly entrenched in this
Garrison, with all the Bulwarks and Barriers, of Ignorance, Ambition,
Presumption and Prejudice, Rev. 3.17.2. Cor. 10.5. John 5.40. So that none but
the Lord Jesus Christ can dispossess him, and spoil him of his Armor; and this
he does by Storm, Luke 11.22. firing the great Guns of his broken Law, and the
dreadful Curses of his slighted Gospel, from Sinal and Mount Ebal; For the Law
was a Schoolmaster to bring us to Christ, Gal. 3.24. The Devil will not quit an
inch of Ground, with his Will, he will not leave the Fort totally, till it be all
in a Flame about his Ears. It is true, he may make a voluntary Retreat (having
lest strong Guards behind) for a little Season, only with Design to lead the
Sinner into a dangerous Ambush; and obtain a stronger Possession by changing
his Coat, or Color of black into white; instead of a black he becomes a white
Devil; that is, he suffers his deluded Slaves and Vassals to quit the
Pollutions of the World, and rest in a Form of Piety, then the Room is
garnished, Luke 11.24, 25, 26. How woeful must the Case of such possessed Souls
be, considering their King and Commander, the Devil, is a powerful, politic,
malicious and deceitful Enemy?

1. Powerful. It is in respect of this, that he is called a strong Man armed;
Principalities, Powers, and Rulers of the Darkness of this World, that is of
darkened People in it, Ephesians. 6.12.

2. Politic. In Regard of his Policy, he is called a Serpent, the old Serpent,
Rev. 12.9. Hence we read of his Devices, Ephesians. 6.11. which are many indeed, and
deceive the whole World, Rev. 12.9.

3. In regard of his Malice: He is called the great Dragon, Rev. 12.9. a
roaring Lion, going about seeking whom he may devour, 1 Pet. 5.8. Rev. 12.12.
Woe to the inhabitants of the Earth and of the Sea, for the Devil is come down,
having great Wrath, because he knows he has but a short time. These once
glorious, but now miserable, miserable Spirits, having lost, through Sin, their
primitive innocence and happiness, and all hopes of being reinstated into the
divine Favor, are possessed of a settled rancour against the blessed God; and
they having, no sufficient power to make him feel the effects of their revenge,
He being infinitely exalted above the reach of their rage; they therefore,
endeavor to glut, or rather gratify their Malice and excite his Displeasure,
by laboring to betray that race of Creatures which it pleased God to advance
above themselves. 2 Pet. 2.4. Jude. ver. 6. 1 Pet. 5.8. The malicious Devil is
a more cruel Task Master than the Egyptian Pharoab: His Service is the basest
Slavery, he has no pity upon his Drudges, gives them no rest, hurries them
sometimes to such dishonorable Actions, as shorten their Lives, and makes
their Death unlamented; There Name is blotted out from under Heaven; either
quite extinct and forgot, of remembered with abhorrence.

4 A deceitful Enemy. Rev. 12.9. He makes it his business to cheat and deceive:
He promises fine things to his Votaries, but never performs; for he was a Liar
and a Murderer from the beginning, and abode not in the Truth, Joh. 8.44. The
Devil's Baits are all a Shame: Was it not so in his tempting of our Lord?
Matthew. 4. He showed him all the Kingdoms of the World, and said unto him, All
these things will I give thee, if thou will fall down and worship me. O Hell
hatched Impudence! and deceit! fit for none but him that expressed it. What!
the Creator to worship a Creature! and that of the vilest M$uld; by a sinful
Degeneracy! for Corruption optimi, est, pessima. The best things being
corrupted, grow the worst: And what was his offer of Satan, but a mere Shadow,
a Phantasm? For its very probable he showed Christ only an airy Map of the
World's Splendour and Gaiety, laboring thereby to strike the sancy; for it
cannot be reasonably imagined that any Mountain is so high as to afford a
prospect of all the numerous and spacious Kingdoms of the Universe; and what
humane sight could extend so far at one View? It Is likely there was a juggle
and cheat in the Offer, and such are Satan's Baits generally. O! that we could
imitate the Lord Jesus in rejecting his Temptations with abhorrence! sending
him away in haste, and shutting our Ears against his falacious Charms, Matthew.
4.10. Get thee hence Satan. All you unconverted presumptuous Sinners, that are
here present before God, are possessed with the Devil: May be you would be
afraid to see the Devil in any bodily shape; but alas! poor Souls, you have him
Night and Day in your Hearts! O! allpowerful and most compassionate Lord J$sus,
who came from thy Father's Bofom to destroy the Works of the Devil. eject by
thy Word and Spirit these Devils out of these possessed Souls, that are now in
thy House of Prayer.

3. You are under the Guilt of Sin; which is thy liableness to punishment upon
the account of the Law thou have broken. Joh. 3.18. He that believes not is
condemned already; which signifies, says Mr. Henry,

1. " A certain Condemnation; they are as sure to be condemned in the Judgment
of the Great Day, as if they were condemned already.

2 "A present Condemnation: The Curse has already seized them; the Wrath of God
is now sastned upon them

3 "A Condemnation grounded upon former Guilt. He is condemned already; for he
lies open to the Law for all his Sins, the condemning power of the Law stands
in full force against all presumptuous Sinners, because they have no interest
in the Provision made by the Gospel; not having complied with its Terms. Romans
3.19. For we know that whatsoever the Law says, it says to those that are
under the Law, that every mouth may be stopped, and the whole World may become
guilty before God. Consider, O Sinner! how many Sins have thou committed, in
Thought, Word and Action! Are not thy Sins in number as the Stars in the
Firmament? The Drops of Water in the Ocean? the Sands upon the Sea-shoar? the
Hairs upon thy Head? Sins against the Law and Gospel; Sins against Knowledge,
against Mercy, against Vows, Purposes, Promises, Warnings and repeated
Engagements; and that not one of them Pardoned, or ever shall, 'till thou quit
thy presumptuous Hope, and get thy Heart changed: Consider seriously, how many
thy Sins in Thought must be, when they keep pace with the winged Moments, and
every of them evil, till you be converted to God. Not only thy vain, vile and
presumptuous Thoughts are evil, Jer 4.14. O Jerusalem! wash thy Heart from
wickedness; how long shall vain Tho'ts lodge within thee, Matthew. 15.19, 20. but
also thy Thoughts upon God, and Christ, and Piety, are sinful as to the manner,
and in strict Justice deserve eternal Damnation, Luke 6.43. For a good Tree
brings not forth corrupt Fruit, weither does a corrupt Tree bring forth good
Fruit, Matthew. 7.17, 18 And God saw that the Wickedness of Man was great on the
Earth, and that every Imagination of the Tho'ts of his Heart was only evil
continually, Genesis 6.5. And remember the Wages of Sin is Death. Romans 6.23. How
many are thy Sins of Neglect and Omission, which are base and damnable; for he
that knows to do good, and deeth it not, to him it is Sin, Jam. 4.17. Sin
with a witness, heinous, highly aggravated Sin. Matthew. 25.25, 26. Oh! how
numerous are thy Sins of Commission. Search your past Lives, and see with
horror and regret the vile Abominations you have committed! Don't you remember
Sinner, this and that time you broke the Laws of God? You finn'd
presumptuously. Jer. 8.9. They were as fed Horses in the morning, every one
neighed after his weighbours Wife. Shall I not visit for these things, says
the Lord? and shall not any Soul be avenged on such a Nation as this! Gal 5.19,
20, 21. Romans 1.28, 29, 30, 31, 32. And remember that for Sins of Presumption,
there was no Sacrifice to be offered under the Law, Deuteronomy. 17.12. Numb 15.30,
31. Hear and tremble! at what the jealous God speaks by the Prophet Ezekiel,
the 24th. Chapter of his Book, 12, 13, and 14 verses. She has wearied her self
with lies, and her great scum went not forth out of her; her scum shall be in
the Fire. In thy filthiness is lewdness: because I have purged thee, and thou
wast not purged, thou shall not be purged from thy filthiness any more, till I
have caused my fury to rest upon thee. I the Lord have spoken $word$, it shall
come to pass, and I will do it, I will not go back, neither will I spare,
neither will I repent; according to thy ways, and according to thy doings shall
they judge thee, says the Lord God.

Observe,

1. She had wearied her self with Lies; trusted to, and depended upon false
props, such as failed her in extremity; and she had wearied God with her false
and ineffectual purposes of Amendment and Reformation, like Felix.

2. She was unreformed by the methods of Cure. God had used means to reclaim
her, but neither the Word or Rod, Food or Physic, had any saving influence;
Her Scum, i.e. her Wickedness was not removed, she was not thoroughly purged,
notwithstanding all the means used with her; but in her filthiness was
lewdness; she was obstinate and impudent, abused the good Prophets, and
despised their Warnings and Threats, hut hugged the Daubers in her bosom, who
prophesied Peace, Peace, and Plenty, much Wine and Strong Drink, as honest Mr.
Cradacet observes. Math. 23.37. O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, that killest the
Prophets, and stonest them that are sent unto thee, how often would I have
gathered thy Children together, even as a Hen gathers her Chick us under her
wings, and ye would not. How were Jeremiah and Mic$j$h abused, Jer. 20 2, 10. 1
Kin. 22 8, 24. 1 Kin 17.3 and 19 2. Luke 11.49, 50, 51. While in the mean time,
the filthy though numerous gang of Baal's Priests were caressed and honored. And
as the Jewish Nation were thus abusive to the true Prophets, so were they
hardened,

(...) "than reformed by Afflictions, they growl'd and snarl'd at the Stone,
gnawed and bit the Chain wherewith they were bound, like a mad Dog; murmured
against, and quarreled with the Almighty and one another, but especially with
the faithful Servants of God, that were frequently a sounding with an
ungrateful knell, Death and Destruction in their Ears. Now because they were
obstinate in Sin, God gives them up to Destruction, ceas$th striving with them,
and causes his fury to rest upon them: Thou shall not be purged any more, till
I cause my fury to rest on thee. This Sentence he ratifies by his Truth.
Whether this be not the Wickedness that many now a days under the Gospel
commit; I leave it to God and your own Consciences to judge and determine: And
if this be your Sin, why you should not expect the same Punishment, I can see
no reason, seeing the Nature of God and Moral Evil remains the same invariably
and eternally. O Sinner, thou have not only broke the blessed Law of God by
innumerable Transgressions, but has slighted the precious Gospel of the Son of
God, in which are the highest triumphs of pure Grace and pardoning Love, that a
God could express, or a Creature receive. Not only wounded thy self by Sin, but
rejected the remedy for Sin; a Balsom provided by infinite Cost, and Expense of
the rich Treasures of amazing Mercy and condescending Majesty! Joh. 5.40. and
3.20. Ephesians. 3.18, 19. Joh 1.14. Will not your abused Privileges hasten and
heighten your Damnation? Rom 2.8, 9. Indignation and Wrath upon every Soul of
Man that does evil, of the Jew first, and also of the Gentile. You have not
only perhaps abused Afflictive but also comforting and prosperous Providence,
instead of being led by the Goodness of God to Repentance and Reformation, as
it is both your Duty and Interest; you have despised it; and after the hardness
of your impenitent Heart treasured up to your selves Wrath against the Day of
Wrath, and the revelation of the righteous Judgment of God, Romans 2.4.7. I say,
instead of being led by God's Goodness to Repentance, Gratitude and
Reformation; you have been led perhaps to Pride, Luxury, Obstinacy and
Self-dependance. Deuteronomy. 32.15. But Jeshurun waxed fat and kicked; thou art waxen
fat, thou art grown thick: Then he forsook God which made him and lightly
esteemed the r$ck of his Salvation Some translate the word Jeshurun, --
Upright. It seems this People had the Name of Piety before their Prosperity,
but then they justly lost it, their inside was turned outward, then they showed
in Act, what they had in Heart before, viz. Sensuality, Pride, etc. The Rattle
Snake in the Winter time, keeps very still and harmless; but when he begins to
feel the warm beams of the Sun, he shows his speckled Skin, and makes a
terrible rattle with his Tail, artfully moving his horrible Head that is
environed with his Body, ready to give any Body that would molest him a mortal
gripe with his envenomed Tusks. Observe what is asserted of Jeshurun.

1. They waxed fat and thick, big and unwelldy, unfit for business, and
unconcerned about it; stupid and indolent, indulging themselves in the
inordinate use of sensual gratifications, as if they had no other God to adore
and serve, but their Bellies: Thus the Prosperity of Fools destroy them, Prove.
1.22.

2. They kicked; grew insolent and arrogant, listing up the heel against God
himself, when he, checked them, either by his Prophets or Providence, as an
untamed Heifer or Bullock unaccustomed to the Yoke, Jer. 31. When a poor Horse
that has hardly any thing but Skin and Bones, is put into a rank Pasture, by
and by he begins to be fat and wanton, and capers about at an unaccountable
rate, worse a great deal than Horses that have always been kept in pretty good
Case, quite forgetting former Poverty, one cannot come near them to put the
Bridle on them, but he is ready to get his Heels in his Face; he is in danger of
his Life or Limbs that would come close to such Creatures; they leer and kick
so strangely. Is not this a just Emblem of the Carriage of some Men in their
Prosperity. Prove. 19.29 and 9, 12. Isai 29.20 Prove 4.9. But such as kick at
Instruction and Reproof, should remember that they kick against the Pricks, Act
9.5. Prove. 29.1. and that their fading grandeur will not be able to protect them
from the arrests of Vengeance.

But may be some will frame Evasions to p$liate their Guilt, or utterly deny
the Charge. Such I would answer in the words of God by Jeremiah, Chap. 2 ver.
22, 23. For though thou wash thee with nitre, and take thee much soap, yet
thine Iniquity is marked before me, says the Lord God See thy way in the
valley, Know what thou have done? Your Iniquities are sealed up among God's
treasures; as Indictments are put up in a Bag in a civil Court of Judicature,
to be opened at the Grand Assize, Deuteronomy. 32.34. Joh 21.19. And all your Pleas
will never he able to justify your Conduct; no, for your Sin is written with a
pen of Iron, and with the point of a Diamond, both in the Book of God's
Remembrance, and in the Book of your Conscience, with such indelible Characters
as nothing but the Blood of Jesus can extinguish and deface. Hearken unto me ye
stour hearted that are far from Righteousness, Isai. 46.12. Is not the Case so
as I have described it? Have you not been long under the Hammer, and not yet
broken? Long in the Furnace, and not yet melted and refined? Under the milder
Aspects and more indulgent Smiles of Providence, have you not been elated with
Pride; or emerg'd in carnal Security, and pernicious obstinacy against Advice
and Counsel? And perhaps in the mean time paying your Devotion to your own
Ingenuity and Industry, as the Authors of the Successes that attended your
essays. Hab. 1.16. Therefore they sacrifice to their Net, and burn incense to
their Drag. And perhaps instead of relieving the Poor, grinding their Faces,
gathering all you can into your Drag, and rejoicing in your unjust Gain. Hah.
1.15. Jer. 1.15. The Apostle gives a doleful description of the Wickedness of
Unconverted and Presumptuous Sinners. Romans 3. from the 10th to the 19th. ver.
There is none righteous, no not one: There is none that understandoth, there is
none that seeks after God They are all gone out of the way, they are together
become unprofitable, there is none that does good, no not one. Their throat is
an open sepulcher; with their tongues they have used deceit; the poison of asps
is under their lips: Whose mouth is full of cursing and bitterness. Their feet
are swist to shod blood. Destruction and misery are in their ways, and the way
of peace they have not known. There is no fear of God before their eyes. But
besides these Sins mentioned, let me tell thee, O presumptuous Sinner! that thy
natural Actions are all of them sinful and abominable: I mean, thy eating,
drinking, sleeping; because not done with a design to honor God, 1 Cor. 10.31.
Also thy civil Actions, the labors of thy particular Calling: for the support
of thy Self and Family. Prove. 21.4. A high Look, and a proud Heart, and the
Plowing of the Wicked is Sin. Their Labors are good and necessary as to the
Matter, but sinful in the Manner, because not done with a view to God's honor;
and also thy religious Services, as I have before designedly proved in this
Discourse.

But let me mention in the last place, Original Sin, the hereditary Leprosy,
Pollution, and Deformity of thy Nature, which is more awful (though least
considered by thee, because of thy blindness) than all the Evils before spoken
of, because it is the corrupt Fountain from which they all issue and proceed.
Now as the Spring is more than all the Streams that flow from it, so is this
greater than all actual Transgressions. Rom 7.24. O wretched man that I am, who
shall deliver me from this body of Sin and Death! What say thou to all this
Charge! O Man, do not thou feel yet, and groan under thy Misery! Why the
guilt of innumerable Sins lie like Mountains of Lead upon thy wretched Soul, a
weight enough to sink all the Angels of Heaven into the depths of Hell, if
imputed to them, and laid on them: And yet do thou not tremble! Remember that
the Wages of Sin is Death, Romans 6.23. The Guilt contracted by one vain Thought,
is infinite, because the Sin is committed against an infinite God, and
therefore cannot be removed but by an infinite Atonement; -- Should thou
Pray, were it possible, a Million of Years, Weep an Ocean of Tears, and wear
thy self to a Skeleton by Fasting, and other mortifying Duties, it would not
compensate the wrong offered to God by that vain Thought, for Justice requires
an exact proportion between the Guilt contracted and Satisfaction paid; Ten
Thousand Rivers of Oil will not do, nor the first Fruits of thy Body for the
Sin of thy Soul, Mich. 6.7. If it be so, then what shall become of thee, who
has committed so many Abominations! The Lives of all the Angels in Heaven, and
all the Men on Earth, would not be sufficient to repair the injury thou have
offered to the Divine Majesty, for the reason before mentioned. O do thou not
feel thy misery yet! I suppose not, for cast a Mountain upon a dead Man, and he
feels it not! O Gracious God! Smite in Mercy the guilty Consciences of these
secure Sinners, let them be distressed, blessed Jesus, with a sense of their
Guilt and Sin, until they find the sweetness of thy pardoning Love, and atoning
Blood.

4. Presumptuous Sinners are under the Wrath of God, Ephesians. 2.2, 3. We are by
Nature Children of Wrath. It is the dreadful Portion and Inheritance you are
born to, until you be new Born, John 3.3, 6, 36. He that believes not the Son,
shall not see Life, but the Wrath of God abides on him. O Friends, consider,
it is not the Wrath of Men, which (though they are never so potent) is but
trifling comparatively, but the Wrath of a God, whose Wisdom is unsearchable,
whose Power is infinite, and whose Existence is unchangeable and eternal; it is
not a transient, fading, fleeting Passion, but permanent and abiding Wrath; and
that not at a Distance, but upon you. It Is true, you feel but little of the
Effects of it now, but you shall very quickly; Except ye repent ye shall all
likewise perish, Luke 13.3, 5 You shall not see Life, you shall not have a
Prospect of that Life Christ has putchased by his Death, unless it be to
aggravate your Loss of it; all that Wrath you made your selves liable to by the
Violation of the Law, if not removed by the Grace of the Gospel, is bound upon
you: Old Debts lie undischarged, and new ones contracted; something done almost
continually to fill up the Measure; and nothing to empty it; thus the Wrath of
God abides; for it is treasured up against the Day of Wrath, Romans 2.5. The
Psalmist informs us that God is angry with the Wicked every Day, Psalm 7.11.
And who are wicked, if presumptuous unconverted Sinners are not? As God's
Mercies are fresh and new every morning to his People, so his Anger is renewed
and impregnated every morning against the Wicked, because of their repeated
Provocations; God hates and loathes them in their greatest Bloom of Honors and
prosperous Successes, when they are caressed by a mercenary, flattering and
sycophantick Crew, that have a Dependence on them, and make Merchandise of
them; and to that End pay their cringing Devotions, not so much to their
Persons, as to their Bags or Bills; I say God loathes them even in the Time of
their greatest Gaiety, Advancement and superficial Devotion, Prove. 13.5. Zech.
11.8. But to awake you out of your deep and dead Sleep, consider, O Sinners!
that the Wrath of God which you are under and exposed to, has these following
Qualities, viz. It Is incomprehensible, terrible, unavoidable, intolerable and
eternal.

1. It Is incomprehensible. It is utterly impossible for the Mind of Man to
conceive it, or his Tongue to express it: Who knows the Power of thine Anger?
even according to thy Fear, so is thy Wrath, Psalm 90.11. It is impossible for
the most winged, soaring Fancy in its utmost Flight and Projection, to reach
the Extent of God's Anger, it is as incomprehensible, as its Cause efficient:
God himself, our God is a consuming Fire to the Workers of Iniquity, Heb.
12.29. Damned Sinners really seel in Hell, more than they feared on Earth; the
strongest, brightest and boldest Images which are used in Scripture to convey
to our Minds the damned's Torments, fall exceeding short of the Horrors of that
infernal Furnace; even as all the Scriptural, or any other Metaphors that can
be formed to represent the Happiness of Heaven, do faint and languish before
the Beauty and Brightness of that celestial Paradise, in this World; because it
is a Time of Trial and Probation; there be but small Effusions of God's Anger;
hence Men entertain mean Thoughts of it, and the more indulge their vicious
Courses, Eccl. 8.11. Because Sentence against an evil Work is not executed
speedily, therefore the Heart of the Sons of Men is fully set in them to do
evil. This Abuse of God's Goodness and Patience, is surely the basest
Ingratitude, the most prodigious Madness, for thereby they treasure up to
themselves Wrath against the Day of Wrath, Romans 2.5. Austin's Observation upon
this Head is very excellent; "If no Sin were punished here, says he, no
Providence would be believed, if all Sins were punished here, no future
Judgment would be expected.

2. God's Wrath, which thou art exposed to, O presumptuous Sinner! is severe
and terrible. Lam. 1.12. Isai. 13.9. Behold the Day of the Lord comes, cruel
both with Wrath and fierce Anger. Therefore they were bid to howl because the
Day of God was at Hand, Verse 6. With the froward God will show himself
froward, Psalm 18.26. As Sinners have a Day now which they mispend and abuse,
thinking to carry all before them; so God has a Day in which he will avenge all
those Injuries and Affronts; the great God laughs at your foolish Confidence;
for he knows that his Day is coming, Psalm 37.3 a Day in which his severe
Justice will have a solemn Triumph. God's Wrath has a consuming Fierceness, it
makes an easy Prey of guilty and impenitent Sinners as the burning Flame does
of dry Stubble. The Word Jealousy in our Text, imports God's fiercest Anger,
his revenging Severity; his Jealousy shall smoke against that Man. He that duly
considers that God being wronged by the Creatures Sin is bound by his Justice
and Truth to vindicate his own Honor, and the Authority of his Laws, by
inflicting the Punishments annexed to the Violation of them; Punishments
exactly proportioned to the Delinquents Crimes, both in Regard of their
Multitude and Heinousness: For inflexible Justice and inviolable Truth, will
not loose one Grain Weight of a full Compensation paid by the Sinner,
personally, or a Surety in his Room and Stead; now presumptuous Sinners not
having complied with Christ's Terms, those Conditions of Self-denial, and
taking up his Cross, Matthew. 16.24. upon which redeeming Love and Grace is
offered, can have no Interest in or saving Benefit by the great Sacrifice of
Christ's Blood, while they continue in this State, therefore full Satisfaction
will be required of them personally. I say, he that considers the Multitude and
Aggravations of his own Sins of Neglect and Commission, original and actual,
against Love and Light, Purposes and Promises, and the Exactness of divine
Justice suiting the Penalty according to the Number and Quality of the
Offenses, must needs confess that God's Wrath is exceeding terrible. O Sinner!
Sinner! for Christ's sake consider! that it is the Wrath of an infinite, just,
jealous and tremendous God, who is clothed with irresistible Power and stern
Majesty and Wrath, that shall fully avenge the Quarrel of abusel Mercies. Zech.
7.11, 12, 13. Yea, they made their Hearts as an Adamant Stone, lest they should
hear the Law, and the Words which the Lord has sent in his Spirit by the
former Prophets, therefore came great Wrath from the Lord of Hosts. Therefore
it came to pass, that as he cried, and they would not hear; so I would not
hear, says the Lord of Hosts. It is observable here, that as those unhappy
People gave a deaf Ear to God's Entreaties by his Servants, so the Almighty
suited their Punishment to their Sin: He gave a deaf Ear to their Prayers; they
hardened their Hearts as an Adamant Stone, as a Diamond, which is said to be the
hardest of Stones to be wrought upon; what is so inflexible as a presumptuous
Sinner's Heart, for by going on in an impenitent Course, they add to a natural,
which is common to all Unbelievers, Ezekiel. 36.26. an acquired Hardness. Can the
Ethiopian change his Skin, or the Leopard his Spots, then may ye also do good
that are accustomed to do evil? Jer. 13.23. And thereby provoke the righteous
God to inflict a judicial and penal Hardness, which is a most tremendous
Judgment, Isai. 6.9, 10. And he said, Go and tell this People, hear ye indeed,
but understand not, and see ye indeed, but perceive not; make the Heart of this
People sat, and their Ears heavy, and shut their Eyes, lest they see with their
Eyes, and hear with their Ears, and understand with their Hearts, and convert
and be healed. Hof. 4.17. Ephraim is joined to Idols. This Man and that Woman
obstinately cleaves to their Lusts, after frequent Warnings and Entreaties, let
them alone to my Curse and Vengeance; let them go on in their Sin and Security,
I will use no more means to reclaim them, Prove. 29.1. He that being often
reproved, hardneth his Neck, shall sudd$nly he destroyed and that without
Remedy. Rev. 22.11. He that is unjust, let him be unjust still, he that is
filthy, let him he filthy, still For God's Spirit shall not always strive with
Man, Genesis 6.3. Woe unto thee Sinner, if thou be thus forsaken of God, it had
been better for thee if thou had never been born! It may indeed seem easy at
present to be left without Control to the pernicious Swing of thy corrupt
Desires, as it seems pleasant to the Ox to he Stall-fed, or to be put into a
fat Pasture, little dreaming of the Knife that shall quickly terminate his
Delights: But alas! unhappy Souls, it will be bitter and fatal in the Issue,
when the jealous God will smite you dead eternally with the Ax of his flaming
Wrath, Matthew. 3.10. Then you shall eat of the bitter Fruit of your own Ways,
and be filled with your own Devices, Prove. 1.31.

3. It is unavoidable Wrath, if ye continue in your presumptuous Impiety; you
cannot fly from it, but by flying to Jesus, the City of Refuge, the precious
Zoar, by the Wings of a sincere Desire and strong Affection. Indeed there is a
safe Shelter for poor storm-stead, moneyless Sinners, under the balmy Wing of
our redeeming God Immanuel! Isai 55.1. Matthew. 1$.28. Mal 4.2. But unto you that
fear my Name, shall the Son of Righteousness arise with Healing under his
Wings, and ye shall go forth, and grow up as Calves of the Stall. In and
through the blessed Lamb of God, the fatherless may find Mercy, and the weary
rest. Hos. 14.3, 4. Matthew. 12.21. In the Shadow of this almighty Jesus,
penitent returning Prodigals may find a secure and refreshing Protection from
all the burning drops of God's stormy Vengeance. Isai. 32.2. and 33.16. Psalm
36.7, 8, 9 and 91.7. But such as neglect this Salvation, how can they, how
should they escape the Wrath of a jealous and justly enraged God? Heb. 2.3.
Heb. 10.28, 29. If those that despised Moses Law died without Mercy, of how
much sorer Punishment think ye shall he be thought worthy of, who has trodden
under Foot the Son of God? God will surely render Vengeance to such guilty
Rebels: Has he not sworn that they shall not enter into his Rest, Psalm 95.10,
11 They shall no more escape the just Wrath of the Almighty, without the
Condition before mentioned, than a travailing Woman her Pains. 1 Thessalonians 5.3. For
when they shall say, Peace, Peace and Satety, then sudden Destruction comes
upon them, as travail upon a Woman with Child, and they shall not escape. Which
Way can they avoid Jehovah's Anger!

1. Not by Flight, for God is omnipresent: If they should take the Wings of the
morning, and flee to the utmost Ends of the Earth or Sea. If we ascend to the
height of Heaven, or descend into the depths of Hell, there his right arm
would find us, Psalm 139.7, 8. Nor

2. By Frauds. The most dark and obscure Recesses cannot screen us from the
Cognizance of that God who is all Eye, Panopthalmos, to whom Darkness is as the
Light, and Midnight as the Noonday; All Things are naked and open to the Eyes
of him with whom we have to do, Heb. 4.13. O presumptuous Sinner! the Thoughts
of this might justly strike thee with the utmost Horror, Shame and Confusion!
when thou art a going about thy Closet curtain Wickedness, that the holy God is
looking on thee during the whole Scene of thy brutish Uncleanness, with the
utmost Hatred and Abhorrence, Hab. 1. that thy own Conscience keeps the black
Records of thy Villainies which shall be opened before the holy Trinity, Father,
Son and Holy Ghost, before the vast Assembly of holy Angels and Saints, wicked
Men and Devils, to thy Confusion and Damnation. Then shall the secret Things of
Darkness be brought to light, Romans 2.16. 2 Pet. 2.10. Neither will Lies and
Deceit secure thee, because God is infinite in Knowledge: Who can by searching
find out God, or know the Almighty to Perfection? Job 11.7. Nor

3. By Power; for he is omnipotent, infinite in Strength. Have thou an Arm like
God, or can thou thunder with a Voice like him, Job 40.9. Isai. 42.13. The
Lord shall go forth as a mighty Man, he shall stir up Jealousy like a Man of
War, he shall cry, yea roar, he shall prevail against his Enemies, he is wise
in Heart, and mighty in Strength: Who has hardened himself against him, and
prospered? Which removes the Mountains, and they know it not, which
overturneth them in his Anger, which shakes the Earth out of her Place, and
the Pillars thereof tremble, which commands the Sun and it rises not, and
seals up the Stars: Which alone spreads out the Heavens, and treads on
the Waves of the Sea, Job 9.4, -- 8. The most potent and crafty Men that ever
the Earth bore are infinitely unequal to contend with God, either by Dispute or
Combat: The Lord Jehovah acts both in the Kingdoms of Nature and Providence
with absolute Sovereignty, according to the Counsel of his good Pleasure, Ephesians.
1.11. When it pleased the all powerful God, the Heavens and the Earth must
start out of their native nothing, and appear in their present Frame and Order;
an incontestible Proof of the Infinity of his Wisdom, and Almightiness of his
Power; indeed these divine Perfections are written in very legible Characters
upon every Leaf of the great Volume of Creation, the Heavens, and Earth, and
Sea, and all the different Ranks of Beings they contain, during the divine good
Pleasure; the inanimate Parts of the Creation, observe and keep their stated
Order; the Earth rests on its Axis, the Sun and Moon run their wonted Ciroles;
but by the least beck of his Will, Nature's Laws are broken and reversed; the
massy ponderous Globe of Earth totters at its deep Foundations, and the
overlasting Mountains are scattered. Hab. 3.6. The Sun is veiled with Sable,
and forgets to shed his beamy Light and Warmth, or stands still in the midst of
Heaven, and all the Creation groan and mourn, and appear in a funeral Array, as
in the Time of our Lord's Crucifixion; and in Joshua's Time, did not the Sun
still? Josh. 10.12, 13. Sun, stand thou still upon Gibeon, and thou Moon, in
the Valley of Ajolon. O Sinner! How can thou stand it out with this God, who
has all the Powers in Heaven and Earth at his Back!

4. The Wrath of God is intolerable, such as cannot be endured without the most
exquisite Anguish, such as would soon indeed consume the Sinner, and reduce him
to nothing, were it not that the righteous God supports and continues their
Being to lengthen out their Pains, that his Justice may receive Satisfaction:
Were it not that God upholds them with one Hand, while he scourges them with
the other, they would soon cease to be; the Wrath of God when it touches the
Conscience but lightly in this World, makes Men rage like Madmen, and roar like
Bulls in a Net, Isai. 51.20. Was it not so with both the Spira's, and John
Child? What will it be when all their false Hopes and carnal Comforts are
entirely removed, and they shut up in endless Despair and Horror. If we cannot
bear a wounded Spirit, Prove. 18.14. How shall we bear to be broken in the Place
of Dragons? Psalm 44.19. If you cannot bear the light touches of God's Finger,
in a short Fit of Sickness, how will you endure the Weight of his unbeared Arm,
the fierce Lashes of his iron Rod? If the gentle. Whip daunts and appalls you,
will not being scourged with Scorpions confound you! Can your Heart endure or your
Hands be strong in the Day that God shall deal with you? Ezak. 22.14. Who among
us shall dwell with the devouring Fire? Who among us shall dwell with
everlasting Burnings, Isai. 33.14. The Prophet Nahum gives a very elegant.
Description of the Fierceness and Intolerableness of God's Anger toward the
Wicked, in the first Chapter of his Book, from the second to the seventh Verse,
pray read those Verses: In them we have a very beautiful and magnificent
Display of God's glorious, though terrible Majesty, his inflexible Justice,
irresistible Power, and awful Severity to the damned World.

5. God's Wrath is eternal to such presumptuous Sinners as sin away the Seasons
of Grace. It lasts as long as God endures, Matthew. 25.41, 46. Rev. 14.11. And
the smoke of their Torment ascends up for ever and ever, and they have no
Rest, Day nor Night. When millions of Years are elapsed, their Torments are but
a beginning! O if there were any Hopes of being freed from those inexpressible
Pains, when as many thousands of Years are spent as there be Grains of Sand by
the Seashore, or Drops of Water in the great Ocean, it would give a sensible
Allay to their Torments; this would be a dreadful Portion, the very Thoughts of
it is sufficient to make ones Heart tremble an their Body, and their Blood
chill in their Veins! but even this! even this! cannot be obtained from an
inexorable provoked God; no these damned Wretches, shall never, never, never
come out of their burning Brimstone Vaults. And

6. In all this boundless Space of infinite Duration, not one Moment's Ease or
Intermission! O awful! O terrible! Eternity! Eternity! Eternity! our Thoughts
are lost in Obscurity and Darkness, when we think of thee. What finite
Understanding can grasp thee? Secure presumptuous Sinners, what say you to
this? Can you stand the Shocks of the Almighty's Fury? Can you endure the
burning Vials of God's Wrath to be poured forth into the Vessels of your Souls
throughout a never ending Eternity? Why don't you, poor Souls, tremble and
quake, and cry mightily to God for pardoning and converting Grace? For as sure
as your Souls are in your Bodies, so sure shall you burn and fry as Brands and
Faggots in those everlasting Flames of God's Wrath and Jealousy, unless you
quit your false Hopes, and get a Change of Heart and Life!

O Man! if thou art but under a small fit of bodily Sickness, how slowly do the
Minutes roll, one Night seems to be as long as a Week, and a Week as long as a
Month; Time seems to fleet with such a heavy Wing, even though thou have thy
Friends weeping over thee, or sympathizing with thee, a Physician to attend
thee to project and pursue thy Cure, and some refreshment in $word$ and Drinks,
and among other Comforts, this is none of the least, that thou have hope of
freedom from thy present Malady, that thy Pain will expire, and you enjoy
succeeding Health and Ease: This! This! supports thy Spirits, and abates the
sharpness of thy Pain. But, O Friend! how much more tedious will the Day of
Eternity be, when instead of pity, which is a cheap and universal "Lenitive to
Persons in Misery. Solamen est miseris -- God, Angels, and Saints will laugh at
thee, and rejoice in thy Damnation. Prove. 1. That God, who now offers you
Pardon and Pity with the most condescending importunity; that Jesus who now
courts you by the most endearing Methods to embrace his Love, and thereby
obtain your own Life and Happiness, will then laugh at the deserved ruin thou
have brought upon thy self, by thy obstinate refusal of his Mercy, and a course
of Impiety. Isai. 30.18, Rev. 3.10. Prove 1.26. And Saints and Angels will see
such justice and impartiality in God's proceedings against you, that they cannot
but approve and seal his damnatory Sentence against you, and rejoice that his
Justice has so bright a display in your Destruction. 1 Cor. 6.2. For do ye not
know that the Saints shall judge the World. You shall have no Friend in Heaven
or in Earth, and as few in Hell; instead of those Comforts and Refreshments I
mentioned, to have the ministration of malicious Devils using all their power
and craft to increase your Pain; and instead of Hope, to be racked with black
Despair; knowing certainly that your Pains will never have a Period. Good God!
is not this solemn and terrible! O! how can unhappy Souls who are yet in a
presumptuous unconverted state pretend to believe this, and yet live in
Security? You would do a great deal to prevent being burnt alive in this World;
I Am persuaded you would serve (as a bond slave) a severe Master, your whole
Life, to escapthis Death! O! will not you do that which is much less to escape the
fiery Oven of God's Vengeance, which will burn to Eternity? whereas the other
flame will soon expire, viz. Will you not serve Jehovah from your Hearts? who
is indeed a beneficent Master, and most indulgent Father, whose Service is real
Liberty, Joh 8.36. But besides what has been offered concerning the awful
qualities of God's Wrath, in order to awaken, if it be possible, secure
Sinners, let me propose the five following Particulars, which serve to heighten
our Conceptions of the terrors of it. And,

1. God's Wrath is terrible because of his Highness and tremendous Majesty.
Job. 13.11. Shall not his excellency make you afraid, and his dread fall upon
you? And Job 31.23. Destruction from God was a terror to me, and by reason of
his highness I could not endure. Is not Men's anger feared according to their
Degree and Character? Thus we are informed by Solomon, Prove. 16.14. That the
wrath of a King is as Messengers of Death. The eminent Dignity of his
displeasure, than of the anger of such who are of an inserious Order, and less
distinguished Figure. Now if the Wrath of a temporal King be as a messenger of
Death, how much more terrible is the Wrath of him who is King of Kings, and
Lord of Lords, the high and lofty One that inhabiteth Eternity, whose Name is
holy, Isai. 57.15. For as much as there is none like unto thee, O Lord, thou
art great and thy Name is great in Might, who would not fear thee, O King of
Nations, Jer. 10.6, 7. Men's Wrath is trivial and of short Duration, it must
needs expire with their fleeting Breath, though they may possibly wish an
immortal Revenge, yet their transitory fading Life will not admit such a
malicious Prosecution; but the Wrath of God is permanent and eternal. Jer.
10.10. But the Lord he is the true God, he is the living God, an$ an
everlasting King, at his Wrath the Earth shall tremble, and the Nations shall
not be able to abide his Indignation. So terrible will be the Majesty of God to
Man, at the general Judgment, that all Nature will faint before him, Rev 20.11.
And I saw a great white Throne, and him that sat on it, from whose Face the
Earth and Heaven fled away. And,

2. Because of his Holiness and spotless Purity, Exodus 15.11. He cannot look on
Sin with any Complacency and Delight, but with the utmost Abhorrence and
intenss Hatred. Hah. 1.13. How will then the presumptuous and ungodly Sinner
stand before this Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God of Hosts? Isai. 6.3. 1 Samuel 6.20
Pasl. 1.5. Therefore the ungodly shall not stand in the Judgment, nor Sinners
in the Congregation of the Righteous: Surely the Wind of his Indignation shall
hurl them into the burning fiery Lake. Psalm. 1.4. Matt. 25.26. Rev. 20.14.

3. Because of the depth of his Wisdom, whereby he perlectly knows the Nature,
Number, and Aggravations of your Sins, and how to proportion Punishments
according to their Guilt and Heinousness Psalm. 44.20, 21. Cannot his infinite
Understanding project, as easily as his Power compass, such Methods and
Measures, such Tortures as will keep you in an inexpressibly exquisite and
eternal Rack?

4. Because of the infinity of his Power and Sovereignty. Job 9.4. He is wise
in heart, and mighty in Strength. The most high God is the absolute Sovereign
of the Universe, He has the whole Creation under his control, He manages the
Globe with utmost easeandpleasure, andbrings about all those Revolutions in the
Kingdoms of Nature, Grace and Providence, which yield both surprise and delight
to the inquiring Mind. A very ample confirmation thereof, the Psalmist gives in
the 29th Psalm; in it we have a very beautiful and poetical description of
God's Power, ver. 4. The Voice of the Lord is powerful, the Voice of the Lord
is full of majesty, it breaks the Cedars, and makes Lebanon and Sirion skip
like a young Unicorn; divides the flames of fire, and shakes the wilderness of
Kad$sh. Thunderbolts and Earthquakes cause very terrible Convulsions in the
frame of Nature, tares Trees; levels their proud and lofty Tops, and $osses the
Earth of it is Axis, makes it reel and stagger like a drunken Man, so that Men's
fixed Estates enter into the Lift of their Movables. Men often want power to
inake others feel their angry Resentments, otherwise their anger would be much
more formidable than it is; but God's Power is of equal extent with his Wisdom,
infinite, and incomprehensible, Psalm. 62.11. He can speedily issue all the
Counsels of his Mind, maugre the fiercest opposition of Men and Devils. Isai
46.10. My Counsel shall stand, and I will do all my Pleasure. And

5. The Sufferings that the Lord Jesus bore, show the intolerableness and
severity of God's Anger: Did it not extort a crimson Shower from all the pores
of his blessed Body! in the Garden of Gethsemane? Luke 22.44. and a grievous
outcry on the Cross! enough to rend the Earth and Heavens! Eli, Eli, lama
sabachthani: My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? Matthew. 27.46. Now if
God did not spare his own Son, when he only stood in a Sinner's room or stead,
being personally spotless and innocent, Heb 7.26. How much less will he spare
you who continue in Sin and sl$ght his love? If God's anger extorted Tears and
Blood from Christ's Body, and heavy Groans from his oppressed Heart; My Soul,
said he, is Sorrouful, even to Death. Mat. 26.38. though he was guiltless and
supported by his Divine Nature; how will it prey upon you, who shall be filled
with Guilt and covered with Shame! Persons of such a feeble frame and texture,
and utterly destitute of all Succor! O! think solemnly of this before it is
too late! before the Sun of Mercy sets, and an everlasting Evening spreads its
sable. Wings over you, and hide you in utter Darkness, and eternal Death, where
you shall never enjoy the least glimpse, or dawn of Light and Day. Rev. 14.10.
2 Pet. 2.17. But

5. Presumptuous Sinners are in a state of Death; though they be naturally alive,
and perhaps very cheerful and jovial, Amos 6.3, 4, 5. yet they are dead Men and
Women: not only dead, legally, Joh. 3.18. doomed by the Law to eternal Death,
or an everlasting Separation of their Souls and Bodies from the gracious
presence of God, Psalm. 9.17. Joh. 3.36. but spiritually dead, void of a
principle of divine Life, Ephesians. 4.18. being alienated from the Life of God. Ephesians.
4.2, 8 Col 1.21. Say what you will against this great and awful Truth, you have
the Signs and Characters of Death upon you; which having a tendency by the
blessing of God to convince you of, and humble you for your present Misery, I
shall endeavor to insist upon them a little particularly. And

1. A dead Man is without Sense or feeling. So are you without the necessary
sense, and apprehension of your danger: So our Text affirms; They expect Peace,
though they walk after the imaginations of their Hearts. Would you not conclude
one to be Dead naturally, if a Person beat upon him with a Hammer, or stabbed
him with a Sword, and yet he felt it not! This alas! Dear Friend is thy very
Case: How often has the threats of God's Law, which as Fire and a Hammer breaks
the rocky Hearts of God's Elect in pieces, Jer. 23.29. been denounced in thy
hearing, without any saving effect? thy Heart remaining whole within thy iron
Breast! How often has the two-edged Sword of God's Word been pointed at thy
Bosom, and yet thou remainest unconcerned, almost as a Stone: If there was the
least spark of Life in thee, would thou endure such a weight of Guilt, as is
enough, if it were imputed to them, to sink Thousands into Hell, and yet go so
lightly under it, as if nothing ailed thee! As if thou did not bear one single
grain weight; no, no, Sinner: as sure, as God lives, thou art D$ad: If thine
Eyes which are shut with blindness and sealed with Death, were but opened, thou
would soon feel the Sword of God in thy Heart, and c$y out wit$ the most
dolorous and heavy Groans. What shall I do to be saved? Act. 2.37. O poor lost
Sinner that I am where shall I fly for rest and refuge? Merciful and Gracious
God, pity, pity, and pardon me.

2. Without Breath. Where there is any natural Life, there is Breath, Psalm.
104.29. Ezekiel. 37.5. So where there is any spiritual Life, there is longing and
breathing after God. Lam. 3.56. Hide not thine Ear at my breathing, at my cry,
after Righteousness, Matthew. 5.6. after Christ, Cant. 5.6. My Soul failed when
he spoke: I sought him, but I could not find him Also the 4th and 5th verses.
My beloved put in his Hand by the hole of the Door, and my bowels were moved
for him; I rose up to open to my Beloved, and my Hands dropped with myrrh, and
my Fingers with sweet smelling myrrh upon the handles of the Locks. But thou
art without transcendant and effectual desires after Christ and Heaven, Job
21.12, 13, 14. Rev. 3.16: Thou can not speak (and have truth on thy side) in
the Language of devout Asaph, Psalm. 73.25. Whom have I in Heaven but thee, and
there is none on Earth that I desire besides thee. No, thy religious desires,
if thou have any, are but lazy, inconstant, ineffectual, Balaam like wishes,
Numb. 23.10. Let me dye the Death of the Righteous, and let my last End be like
his. Yes, yes, he wanted to dye their Death, because he knew it was a
transition to endless Joys, and never fading Pleasures; but not to live their
Life, because of the Difficulties that attend it, through the Corruption of
Nature. Are not presumptous Sinners the very brood of Balaam, his faithful
Followers in this absurd and fruitless practice?

3. Without Strength. Can a dead Man move or act? So unregenerate Sinners are
in a helpless forlorn State, Romans 5.6. as unable to remedy their Misery, as
they are insensible of it, 2 Cor. 3.5. Thou can no more change thy self,
than a dead Man can raise himself out of his Grave; you are like the dry Bones
the Prophet speaks of, Ezekiel. 37.4. in respect of Ghostliness, Insensibility,
Impotency: Could these Bones put Sinews and Flesh upon themselves? No, it was
God only, that by his Word and Spirit could put a Shaking among them, and
Breath into them. So it is God alone that can convince thee soundly of thy
Misery, and breathe divine Life into thy Soul. Miserable Man! thou lieft
polluted in thy Blood and Gore, in a helpless and loathsome State, and there you
must lie and perish eternally. No Man, no nor Angel can help thee, unless the
God that made thee, whose Law thou have broken, and whose Love thou have so
disingenuously abused, pities thee, and says to thee in thy Blood, Live, Ezekiel.
16.6. O Sinner! Sinner! Sinner! What a woeful State is this? to be miserable and
yet insensible of it! to be miserable and unable to remedy it! or so much as
aright to desire an Escape. Let all the Patrons of Free Will, those Painters of
degenerate Nature, talk to Eternity, they will never be able to invalidate this
solemn Truth.

4. A dead Man is without Motion. Life is the Spring of Motion; Life and Motion
are inseparable, both in Grace and Nature; in him we live and move, Acts 17.28.
Col. 2.1. Indeed graceless Persons may move about the outward Duties of
Religion, but not spiritually from right Principles, and for right Ends, viz.
Supreme Love to Christ and the Glory of God. Deceive not thy self, O Man! with
Sparks of thy own kindling in this Matter, lest thou lie down in eternal
Sorrow, Isai. 50.11. I mean, with mercenary, selfish, slavish, lanquid Motions
of the Soul toward Christ: Motions chiefly occasioned through the Desire of
Happiness, or Fear of Misery.

5. A dead Man is destitute of Sight; he sees not, his Eye-strings are broke,
his Eyelids closed. Thus it is with thee, O presumptuous Sinner! Rev 3.17. 1
Cor. 2.14. Thou have Eyes but see not, Isai. 43.8. Bring the most beautiful
and orient Colors to a dead Man, and will he be affected with them? No, no;
how should he? he sees them not. So it is with you, when God's Servants
endeavor to paint before you the fair Flowers of the celestial Paradise, the
blooming Beauties of the heavenly Eden, with a scriptural Pencil, why are you
no more affected with them than in hearing a Romance, perhaps not so much? And
has not the Description of Hell's Horrors as little Influence on your Fear, as
the other on your Love? Is it possible, O Sinner! that you should sit so
unconcerned in hearing such Truths that are of eternal Weight and infinite
Moment, if you had a just Apprehension of their Nature and Consequences? No
surely. I may say to thee as the blessed Jusus to the Woman of Samaria, John
4.10. If thou knew the Gift of God (which is Christ) thou would have
asked, and he would have given thee living Water.

6 Hearing. Cry as land as you will in the Ears of the Dead, and can they hear?
No, that almighty Voice (and no other) which raised a dead Lazarus can awake
them; and thus it is with presumptuous $nconver$ed Sinners, Isai. 6.$.10. They
are like the deaf Adder that will not listen to the Charmer's Voice, charming
never so wisely, Psalm 58.5. But when the Day of God's Power comes, then the
Dead hear the Voice of the Son of God, and those that hear shall live. Psalm
110.3. John 5.25. and 10.27, 28. If it were not for the Hopes of this almighty
Power going with the Word, the Ambassadors of Christ could have no more Hopes
of persuading Sinners to embrace the Son of God, than of persuading those that
are naturally dead to arise and quit the Graves in which they lie entombed.

7. A dead Man has no Taste. So poor presumptuous Sinners, you have no abiding
Relish for the heavenly Manna; you taste not the Sweetness of Christ and divine
Things, for you are soon weary of, or but indifferent about the Use of those
Means whereby they are obtained; such as hearing of the Word, Prayer,
Meditation, pious Conferences. Or you rest securely in the Husk, or outside of
these Duties, Rom 2.17, -- 20. Ay, but living gracious Persons taste the
Sweetness of them, and of the precious Promises, 1 Pet 2.3, 7. 2 Cor. 7.1. 2
Pet. 1.4. They are ravished with the dear Love of the Lord Jesus, his very Name
yields balsamic Sweetness to their Hearts, Cant. 2.3. and 1.3.

8. A dead Man is void of Beauty. O what a sudden and strange Alteration does
Death make on the most comely and beautiful, their ruby Cheeks and Lips soon
turn pale and livid; and that Face that charmed the Beholders, now strikes them
with a ghastly Horror. It is pertinently observed by Mr. Flavel on this
Subject, That although " Abraham had a very tender Respect to his Wife Sarah
when alive, yet when dead, he wanted her to be bu$ed out of his Sight, Genesis
23.4. She then wanted her wonted Charms, whatever, natural, civil or religious
Accomplishments: Unbelievers have (as it is confessed some of them make a
fairer Show in the Flesh, than some others that are far better than they in
other Respects; they are mild, affable, candid, courteous, just and regular in
their external Conduct, and observant of the outward Duties of Religion) yet
for the Want of good internal Principles they are loathsome, both to God and
good Men, Deuteronomy. 32.19. Zech. 11.8. Psalm 15.4. "These Ornaments, as accurate
Mr. Flavel observes, are but just like. Roses to adorn a dead Corpse. As to your
outward Performances and Seize which you rest in and are proud of, pray
remember those two Places of Scripture, and may the Almighty grant that they
may be as a Sword in your Bowels, making you continually uneasy, until your
Sins be pardoned, and your Hearts changed, they are these following, Gal. 6.15
Matthew. 5.20. Read and consider them, and pray over them.

9. Void of Fear. Hang a dead Man over the most terrible Precipice and flaming
Furnace, he fears not, let the Danger be never so great and imminent; whereas
one that had any Life, or Sense, would shiver to see these Things at a
Distance. Now are not many presumptuous Sinners as void of Fear, though they
are exposed to vastly greater Dangers: It may be justly said of many of them,
as Job speaks of a fierce Horse in the Time of Battle, Job 39.22, 23. He
mocketh at Pear, and is not affrighted, neither turns he his Back from the
Sword, the Quiver rattleth against him, the glittering Spear and the Shield, he
swallows up the Ground with Fierceness and Rage, neither believes he that it
is the sound of the Trumpet. Some obstinate Sinners are carried with such
vehement Passion in Pursuit of their beloved Lusts, and are so hardened by them,
that though God's Servants, and their own Consciences represent the Wormwood and
the Gall, the Pain and Anguish, the Possession of every abhorred Evil, and the
Loss of all desirable Good, their Sins will cost and produce, let them hang up
the dreadful Sword of God, and blow the terrible Trumpet of his Judgments,
describing the fatal Issue that will certainly succeed such Practices continued
in; yet these Sinners will not believe or desist the Pursuit of their impious
and impenitent Courses, but rather mock at Fear, and slight the rattling of the
Quiver, Spear and Shield; and thereby act more foolishly than Balaam's Ass.
What remains for such of$ronted Rebels, but to leave them to seel what they
will not fear, Prove. 29.1.

10 Speechless So presumptuous Sinners cannot speak the Language of Canaan,
unless it be by rote; they are indeed generally very awkward in this Matter; It
is true, they may learn to speak something at the second Hand, by reading
practical Books, and hearing others talk about Religion; but these Lessons not
being learned by the Holy Spirit, they are apt to forget them, and so to be
$word$ Loss; or if they don't, their Speeches are but cold like themselves,
when they would pronounce Shibboleth, they are apt to mince it and say
Sibboleth. And it is admirably strange to see how they will discover themselves
sometimes, or the Badness of their State to a judicious Christian by that very
Discourse by which they would appear to be religious, or obtain their
favorable Opinion of their Piety. Prove. 20.5. If we may not have a
satisfactory, though sallible, Knowledge of the present State of those we converse
withal, how shall we exercise a special Regard to such that are true
Christians, as we are enjoined? Is not the spiritual Man said to judge all
Things, 1 Cor. 2.15.

11. Dead Men neither hunger nor thirst; neither do presumptuous Sinners hunger
after Christ and Holiness; but on the contrary, hate them whatever they
pretend: How can they love Christ who slight and abuse his poor Members. Saul,
Saul, why persecutest thou me? Acts 9.4. How is it possible that those should
truly love Holiness, who undervalue and scoff at such in whom it shines, and
seek to quarrel with them; the more holy and zealous a Man is, the less they
like him; is this like hungring after Righteousness? Moderate Men, that is
lukewarm People, they like very well, because they are of the same Mould with
themselves, but it is the Property of living and gracious Persons to hunger
after Righteousness, Matthew. 5.6. and after the Lord Jesus, Psalm 42.1, 2. and
63.1, 2, 8. and 84.2.

12. Dead Men are gnawed by Worms: So wicked Men are stung and gripped by their
guilty Consciences a little here, but what are these gentle murmurings (which
yet they don't like to hear, and therefore use all the Arts of Diversion to
extinguish) to its loud roarings, stinging gripes, and fierce scourges, whereby
it will lash and torture the Soul in the World of Spirits, where all the opium
of Stupidity, Atheism, and all sensitive Delights, which give some allay and
diversion to its Censures here, will be for ever removed. And now presumptuous
and secure Sinners; let me address you in the Language of Paul to the
Ephesians, Chap. 5.14. Awake thou that sleep, and arise from the Dead, that
Christ may give thee light. O will you sleep the sleep of eternal Death! Will
you continue in Sin and Security, till you awake in Flames! Horrible! Fierce!
Devouring! Consuming! Suffocating! and Everlasting Flames! Endless! Easeless!
remediless Torments! O Holy and blessed Jesus! Seize these stupid, breathless
Souls by thine Almighty Power; Open their Eyes that are shut with blindness,
and sealed with Ignorance; Open their Hearts that are locked with unbelief and
prejudice: Speak to them, Gracious God, by thy Word and Spirit, as thou once
did to a dead Lazarus, that they may hear and live: Merciful Father, thy poor
Messengers cannot persuade the Dead to live, they will be deaf to all our
entreaties, and still abide in Death, notwithstanding our utmost Importunities,
unless thou concur; but Gracious God, though they are too hard for us, they are
not for thee; thy glorious Power and rich Grace can make a speedy and saving
alteration on them; Turn them! turn them! Almighty and most dear Father! and
give them divine Life.

6. Under the Curse. O! Presumptuous Sinner! thou art under the Curse of that
Law which thou have broken. Gal. 3.10. Cursed is every one that continues not
in all things that are written in the Book of the Law to do them. You are under
the Curse of that Gospel you have slighted. Joh. 3.18. He that believes not is
condemned already. Mar. 16.16. He that believes not shall be damned. God the
Father, and the Lord Jesus in whom you pretend to trust, Curse you: Our Text
asserts, that all the Curses that are written in the Book of God, shall lie
upon you, and that you are cursed, according to all the Curses of the Covenant:
And 1 Cor. 16.22. If any Man love not the Lord Jesus Christ let him be Anathema
Maran atha; accursed till that Jesus whom they slight, comes in his own and his
Father's Glory, to publish their contempt of his Ways, Truths, Servants. In the
23d. Chapter of Matthew you may read what Curses Christ himself pronounced upon
presumptuous Sinners.

But in order to awaken secure Souls, give me leave to be more particular under
this Head.

1. O Presumptuous Sinner! thou art under a Universal Curse in Body and Soul,
in the Gists of Nature and Providence, in thy Privileges and Performances: And
first, thy Body in all its Parts is Cursed, Deuteronomy. 28.15, 16, 17, 18. Cursed are
thy Eyes, which are Windows to let in Temptations to Sin: Cursed is thy Heart
which burns with base and filthy Lusts; Cursed are thy Hands which are polluted
with Wickedness, perhaps with Bribery and Cruelty; Cursed are thy Feet which
are swift to carry thee forwards in wicked Courses; Cursed is thy Tongue, which
has used deceit, both with God and Man, the Poison of Asps is under thy Lips.
Read Romans 3. from ver. 11, to 20.

2. Thy Soul is Cursed in all its Powers and Passions. Isai. 3.9. The show of
their Countenance does witness against them, and they declare their Sin as
Sodom, they hide it not. Woe to their Souls, for they have rewarded Evil unto
themselves. More particularly,

Thy Understanding is Cursed, Isai. 5.20, 21. Art thou Ignorant in a Land of
Light, in the midst of Opportunities of obtaining Knowledge; this heightens thy
Guilt, Isai. 27.11 This is a People of no understanding; therefore he that made
them will not have mercy on them, and he that formed them will show them no
favor. And 2 These. 1.7, 8, 9. When the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from
Heaven with his mighty Angels in flaming Fire, taking Vengeance on them that
know not God, and that obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ; who shall
be punished with everlasting Destruction from the presence of the Lord, and
from the glory of his power. Joh. 3.19, 20 And this is the Condemnation that
Light is come into the World, and Men loved Darkness rather than Light, because
their Deeds were Evil; for every one that does Evil hates the Light, neither
comes to the Light, lest his D$eds should be reproved

Have thou Knowledge? why thy Knowledge abused will increase thy Damnation, Luk
12, 47. And that Servans which know his Lord's will, and prepared not himself,
neither did according to his Will, shall be beaten with many strices. Jam.
4.17. Therefore to him that knows to do good, and does it not, to him it is
Sin. Sin exceedingly aggravated Thy Knowledge thus abused, makes thee but more
like the Devil, thy Master; who is an intelligent, but wicked Spirit: thy
Subtilty is under the crafty Serpent's Curse, whose Seed thou art; upon thy
Belly thou go$st, and carest of the Dust, and feedest on Ashes; for a de$ei$full
Heart b$th turned thee aside, and thou know not that there is a Lie in thy
right Hand, Isai 44.20 Thou think st thou art rich and increased in Goods; and
know n$t that thou art p$or, and blind, and miserable and naked, Rev. 3.17.
Thou art wise to do Evil, but to do Good thou have no knowledge, J$r. 4.22. Thy
Will is under the Curse of Obstinacy, Joh 5.40. Thou have been as the deaf
Adder under all the Thunders of the Law, and Charms of the Gospel; thou have
been as little affected (to any purpose) when the beautiful Landscape of Heaven,
and the flaming Tophet has been opened to thee, as a blind Mole would be, if a
curious Picture was held before it: but have contented thy self with Bal$am's
wishes, or Judas's fortows, without any saving closure with Jesus Christ, Joh
1.11.

Thy Cons$i$nce is Cursed with blindness and pollution. Tit. 1.15 But unto them
that are defiled and unbelieving is nothing pure, but even their Mind and
Conscience is defiled. It is not yet purged from dead Works to serve the living
God. Heb. 9.14. Is not thy Love accursed, which has been more set upon the
momentary Enjoyments of Sin and Sense, than upon the blessed Jesus? 1 Cor.
16.12. Cursed is thy Desire, which has been more for Earth than Heaven. Psalm.
4.6. There be many that say, who shall show us any good. Cursed is thy Delight;
which has been taken up with the practice of wickedness, while the Duties of
Piety have been wearisom to thee, Ephesians. 4.15. Mal. 1.13 Cursed is thy Hatred;
which instead of being fixed upon Sin and Impiety, has been terminate upon God
and his People, and the practice of Holiness, Rom 8.7. Prove. 29.27. An unjust
man is an abomination to the just, and he that is upright in the way is an
abomination to the wicked. Isai. 59.15. Yea truth fails, and he that
departs from evil makes himself a prey Cursed is thy Sorrow: which is either
that Worldly grief about temporal Losses and Difficulties, which works Death, 2
Cor. 7.10 Or if spiritual, as to its object, namely, upon the account of Sin,
its ineffectual to reform thee from it in Heart and Life; it is like the sorrow
of Cain, Judas, Esau, Ahab. Cursed is thy Shame: which wanders from its right
object; thou art ashamed to own the despised Truths and Ways of Christ and
Piety in religious Places, or before irreligious Persons, that are great in
Wealth and Power; but thou art not ashamed perhaps in the mean time, to declare
thy Sin as Sodom: Thus thou gloriest in thy Shame, and art ashamed of thy
Glory, Phil. 3.19. Cursed is thy Fear; which is more concerned about the
displeasure of Man, whose breath is in his Nostrils, whose foundation is in the
Dust, who are crushed before the Moth, Isai 2.22. Job 4.19. than the
displeasure of a great and dreadful God, whose Power is equal to his Anger,
Dan. 9.4. Psalm. 62.11. More occupied about those things which are seen and
temporal, than about those things which are unseen and eternal, namely the
Bread that perishes, than that which endures for ever, John 6. The loss of
worldly Possessions in this, more than the loss of an everlasting Crown in the
next Life; contrary to the directions of the Lord Jesus, Mat. 10.28. Mat. 6.24,
25, 26, 32.

3. The Gists of Nature, are accursed to thee; as Beauty, Health, Strength,
Wit, Knowledge; because abused to Sin.

And 1. What avails the external Beauty of the Body, without the internal
splendour of Holiness upon the Soul, is it not very vain and momentary. Psalm.
39.11. Despised by God, 1 Samuel 16.7. Do not even some Beasts, as well as the
most wicked Men, excel in it; does it not allure thee to Unchastity, or Pride,
Prove 13.30. and is it not therefore accursed to thee. Many People that dote
upon their Beauty, either real or imaginary, are like a loathsome Carrion in
the account of an Holy God. 2. Does not your Health beget carnal Security,
suppress pious Meditation, obstruct your Repentance and Conversion, by exciting
you to put the evil Day far off, Amos 6.3, 4, 5. And therefore is not your
Health accursed to you? What avails Health of Body, while the Soul is Sick unto
Death, Ephesians. 4.18. This is your woeful Case.

3. Your Strength is what God regards not. Job 36.19. Psalm. 147.10. It Is common
to Beasts, and unable to sustain you in distress, Psalm. 33.16. It gives
occasion to vain Glory, and is spent by you in the Service of Sin. Ephesians. 4.19. 1
Job. 2.16. and is therefore accursed to you.

Your Gifts of Mind, whether natural or acquired, pregnant natural Wit, or
Learning, stir up your Pride and Self confidence, and thereby obstruct your
embracing Jesus, and the Truth as it is in him, 1 Cor. 8.1. 1 Cor. 1.22, 23,
26. 2 Cor. 10.5. and therefore are accursed to you.

4. The Gists of Providence: Riches, Honors, Pleasures, Authority, are
accursed to you. Mal. 2.2. If ye will not hear, and if ye will not lay it to
heart, to give Glory unto my Name, says the Lord of Hosts. I will even send a
Curse upon you, and I will curse your Blessings, yea I have cursed them
already, because you do not lay it to heart. This includes all the gists of
Nature and Providence which I have mentioned. Psalm. 11.6. Upon the Wicked he
shall rain Snares, Fire and Brimstone, and a horrible Tempest shall be the
portion of their Cup. So that whatever their Condition be in this World, it is
a snare to their Souls; their Prosperity lifts them up, and makes them contemn
God, Job 21. Their Adversity makes them murmur against him, Jer. 8.21. Are ye
Rich? Cursed are ye in the City and in the Field. Cursed is your Baskes and
your Store, the fruits of your Body, and the fruits of your Land, the increase
of your Kine, and the flocks of your Sheep, Deuteronomy. 28.16, 17, 18. In the fullness
of thy sufficiency thou shall be in want, Job 20.22. Thy Table is a snare and a
trap to thy Soul; every Morsel thou eatest is cursed, Psalm. 69.22. Is not thy
Wealth food for thy proud and sensual Lusts? Is it not the Devil's Bait, by
which he leads thee captive to Sin, the thorn by which he torments thy earthly
anxious Soul? It Is strange to see Men growing proudes and prouder as their
Debts increase: yet alas! it is too common; for the most do not behave
themselves as Stewards for, and Tennants under God, in the management of their
Substance; but as absolute Lords of what they possess, as if no Account were to
be given of their Disbursements: But if any imagine so, they will find
themselves under a grand mistake. Luke 16.1, 2 But let the ungodly know that
their Prosperity thus abused and perverted, serves but to fatten them for the
Slaughtering Knife of God's Vengeance. Isai. 34.2. Jer. 12.3. Prove 1.32, Art
thou honored by Men? Alas! what is this! while the Soul of a God hates and
abhors thee! Psalm. 11.5. and 10.3. Rev. 3.16 His Sword shall be bathed in
Heaven, and it shall come down upon the People of his Curse to Judgment, Isai
34.5. Art thou in Authority, vested with a Civil Power of governing others, and
yet governest not thy self? Remember the abuse of your Authority will expose
you to the greater Vengeance. Job 12.19, 21. Your Honor and Authority serve
but to lift you upon a higher Pinnacle, that you may get a greater and more
fatal fall: Quo altiora eveuntur Lapsa graviore ruunt. Are you Afflicted? it is
a doleful presage of your Damnation; a small drop of that scalding Ocean of
Wrath which shall burn your Souls to Eternity in that dismal Gulf, where the
Worm of your accusing, upbraiding and condemning Consciences shall never dye;
and the Fire with which you shall be covered as with a Sheet of Lightning,
shall never be quenched. Mark 9.44 unless you repent and reform. Psalm. 7.12,
13. If ye turn not, he will whet his Sword, he has bent his how and made it
ready. Do thou Rejoice? Woe to thee, thou shall mourn by and by without hope,
and grind and gnash thy Teeth with Devils without End. Luke 6.24, 25 But woe
unto you that are Rich, for ye have received your Consolation: Woe unto you that
are full, for ye shall hunger: Woe unto you that laugh now, for ye shall mourn
and weep. Art thou Secure? thy sinful Slumber shall end in awful roarings, if
not mercifully prevented by convincing and converting Grace, 1 These. 5.3.

5. Your religious Privileges are also accursed to you by your abuse of them.
Matthew 11.21, 22. Woe unto thee Chorazin, woe unto thee Bethsaida; it shall be
more tolerable for Tire and Sidon in the day of Judgment than for you. The Word
is a savor of Death unto Death to you, 2 Cor. 2.16. and the Sacraments Seals
of Damnation, 1 Cor, 11.29.

That the Performances of presumptuous Sinners are accursed, I have proved
before in this Discourse by several Reasons, which I shall not now resume. And to
conclude this Head, let me aduce a few Scriptures more to confirm what has been
offered under it, concerning the Universality of that Curse which rests upon
unconverted presumptuous Sinners. Deuteronomy. 27.28. Chapters. Mat. 23. Rev. 8.13.
Amos 6.1. Heb. 6.8. Isai 3.9, 11. Ezekiel. 16.23. Isai. 30.1. Isai. 45.9. Mich
2.1. Jud. 11. Hab. 2.6. Jer. 11.3. and 17.5. Psalm. 119.21. Jer. 48.10. Job
24.8. Mal. 3.9.

2. Without intervening Repentance, you shall be under a judicial Curse. Matthew.
25.41. What sorrow and astonishment shall possess presumptuous Sinners! when
Zion's King, the exalted Lord Jesus shall arise from the Seat of Beauty and
Throne of Majesty, which he now adorns, and where he is now admired and adored
with the highest Honors, deepest Reverence and strongest Affections by all the
Hosts above, and descend visibly with a shout from the Third Heavens (attended
with all the State and Grandeur of a God, appearing in his own, and in his
Father's Glory, encompassed with Millions of Saints and Angels) to the middle
Regions of the Air, and there be enthroned on a body of blazing Light. Rev.
1.7. Behold he comes with Clouds, and every eye shall see him, and they also
which pierced him, and all the Kindreds of the Earth shall wai$ because of him.
Luke 9.26. For whosoever shall be ashamed of me, and of my words, of him shall
the Son of Man be ashamed when he shall come in his own Glory, and in his
Fathers, and of the Holy Angels. 1 These. 4.16. For the Lord himself shall
descend from Heaven with a Shout, with the Voice of the Arch Angel, and with
the Trump of God. And 2 These. 1.7, 8, 9 When the Lord Jesus shall be revealed
from Heaven with his mighty Angels in flaming Fire, taking Vengeance on them
that know not God, and that obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, who
shall be punished with everlasting Destruction from the presence of the Lord,
and from the glory of his power.

What inexpressible Anguish must possess the Wicked, when being raised out of
their Graves, and their wretched Bodies and Souls shall be united, not to enjoy
their former lawless Delights, but to feel the Doom they have thereby deserved!
With what Reluctance shall these miserable Caitiffs be dragged by the Devils to
the dread Tribunal, to receive their final Sentence from the Judge of the whole
Earth? They shall call to the Hills and Mountains to cover them, but in vain,
nothing shall be able to hide them from the Face of the Lamb that sits upon the
Throne, Rev 6.16. What Fear must needs possess their Hearts, what Shame cover
their Countenances when they shall look on that Lord Jesus whom they have so
affronted and offended, arrayed with infinite Power, great Glory and stern
Majesty? What a magnificent and solemn Description does the Prophet Daniel give
of the Judge's Appearance, and the judicial Process, Dan. 9.10 I beheld till
the Thrones were cast down, and the ancient of Days did sit, whose Garment was
white as Snow, and the Hairs of his Head like the pure Wool, his Throne was
like the fiery Flame, and his Wheels like burning Fire, a fiery Stream issued
and came forth from before him; thousand thousands ministered unto him, and ten
thousand times ten thousand stood before him, the Judgment was set and the
Books were opened; viz. of God's Precepts, Remembrance, and their own
Consciences, in which will be found nothing but what was in Ezekiel's Roll,
Mourning and Lamentation and Woe, Ezekiel. 2.10. It is probable the Apostle John
alludes to this in the first Chapter of his Revelations, Verses 13, 14, 15, 16.
In the midst of the seven Candlesticks, one like unto the Son of Man, clothed
with a Garment down to the Foot, and girt about the Paps with a golden Girdle;
his Head and his Fairs were white like Wool, as white as Snow, and his Eyes
were as a Flame of Fire, and his Feet like unto fine Brass, as if they burned
in a Furnace, and his Voice as the sound of many Waters, and he had in his
right hand seven Stars, and his Countenance was as the Sun shines in his
Strength. Yea, so terrible will be the Majesty of the incarnate God, that
universal Nature shall languish in his Presence, the Heavens and Earth shall
flee from his Face. Rev. 20.11. And I saw a great white Throne, and him that
sat on it, from whose Face the Earth and Heaven fled away. How shall ungodly
Sinners then stand before him in Judgment, and hear their secret Wickedness
openly exposed, 1 Cor. 4.5. and their Persons publicly sentenced and cursed,
Matthew. 25.41. Go ye cursed into everlasting Burnings, prepared for the Devil
and his Angels. What Words can be conceived more full of Horror than these?
They were wont in their life time to bid God depart from them, Job 21.14, 15.
Therefore now they shall be commanded to depart from God, and all their
unseasonable Pleas for Acceptance will be fruitless, Matthew. 7.22, 23. As they
loved Cursing, so it shall come upon them; for they must depart with a Curse
into Fire! prepared Fire! Isai. 30.33. Everlasting Fire! to dwell with the
Devil and his Angels, their sworn Enemies! procurers of their present Misery,
who will doubtless triumph in their Pains, and use all their hellish Art to
aggravate them after the fatal Sentence is pronounced, which will extort
piteous Groans and loud Laments from all the damned's inmost Bosoms; then will
succeed the universal Conflagration, which will put the whole Frame of Nature
into the utmost Confusion and Disorder. Some learned Mon, particularly, Dr.
Stilling fleet, and Mr. Burnet, have observed, "That it is highly probable
there will be a great Analogy between the two Deluges, that which has been by
Water, and that which will be by Fire: And so doubtless there will: As to the
former the Windows of Heaven were opened above, and the Abyss below, which
concurring, occasioned the Inundation of the Earth; so that the Conflagration
Showers of liquid Fire shall be rained down upon the Earth, as God did once
upon Sodom and Gomorrah, Zeboim and Admah, and the sulphurous Matter which is
hid in the Heart of the Earth; these Fountains of of Fire which have fed Etna
and Vesuvius being opened and enflamed, will set the whole Earth and visible
Heavens on Fire: What a rueful Plight must the damned be in then? How will they
yell and roar after they have received their dreadful Doom, when such a Scene
of Horror is opened before them, and they shall see the World breaking forth
into Flames every where around them, and feel it trembling underneath them? For
the Vapors that are confined in it is Bowels seeking vent, and meeting with
Obstructions, will cause the whole Globe (it is probable) to reel and stagger
like a drunken Man; what a melancholy Prospect must it be for these undone
Creatures to hear the great Ocean roar with the most hideous Murmurs, to see
the Lights of Heaven veiled with Darkness, and in the mean time the Air to
blaze with portendous Comets? Think solemnly, O presumptuous Sinners, how shall
you endure to hear the loud and terrible Blast of the Arch-Angel's Trumpet,
which shall reach the utmost Ends of the Earth and Sea, and pierce the silent
Recesses of the darksom Grave, and alarm it is sleeping Inhabitants out of their
iron Slumbers? Will not the horrible Cracks and Thunders of the groaning
dissolving Heavens, the astonishing Convulsions of the trembling burning Earth,
returning to it is original Chaos, the roarings of millions of damned Men and
Women, hopeless of Escape from that Wrath with which they shall be clad, as
with a Coat of flaming Sulphur, daunt your Spirits, confound your Confidence,
and sink your abandoned Souls into the dreadful Gulf of endless Desperation?

3. Extreme and terrible; especially in the next Life: Then this Curse shall be
more bitter to thee, than the Jealousy Water to the adulterous Woman, which
made her Belly to swell, and her Thigh to rot; so that she became a Curse among
her People: It shall come into thy Bowels like Water, and like Oil into thy
Bones; it shall cover thee as a Garment, and gripe thee as a Girdle, Numb.
5.27. Psalm 109.18, 19. For then ye shall be deprived of that personal Beauty,
and moral Excellency, which the People of God shall then be adorned with When
the Lord appeared upon the Mount of Transfiguration, his Countenance shone as
the Sun, and his Garment was bright as the Light, Matthew. 17.2. What an amazing
Splendour then and dazzling Brightness, must proceed from the Bodies of the
glorified, which shall be conformed to the Body of Jesus, Phil. 3.21. And what
superior Beauty must shine in their Souls, when their Graces are perfected,
and the most excellent Dispositions continually excited toward God and
Goodness. But instead of these, it is highly probable, that those whom God
curses shall be covered with a Deformity suitable to their Abject and most
wretched State; having their corrupt Dispositions much increased and enraged,
and their moral Varnish quite removed: they shall appear like Devils incarnate,
Matthew. 25.28, 29.

2. Damned Souls shall be bereaved of the gracious Presence of the blessed God,
whose Loving kindness is better than Life, Psalm 63.3. And all the delightful
Enjoyments of the heavenly World; which the brightest Images in the whole
System of Nature, are not able to convey adequate Ideas of to our
Understandings, in this embodied State; for here we see darkly as through a
Glass, 1 Cor. 13.12. Eye has not seen, nor Ear heard, neither has is entered
into the Heart of Man to conceive what God has laid up for those that love
him, 1 Cor. 2.9. The Believer's beholding of the various and transcendent
Perfections of the glorious God, and the blessed Jesus, eternally engaged to
advance his Happiness, must necessarily create an agreeable Wonder and rapturous
Pleasure; when all the dark Scenes of Providence shall be opened, and the
Beauties of redeeming Grace displayed, must not every pious Breast be filled
with a joyous Transport? What reciprocal Motions of a strong and steady
Affection to God must needs result from the uninterrupted Communications of
divine Love? but alas! these unhappy Souls whose woeful Fate it shall be to be
cursed by Christ judicially at the grand Assize, shall be plunged into the
Damnation of Hell, and there eternally bereaved of the aforesaid Enjoyments,
and perpetually racked with very contrary and tormenting Passions; such as
Sorrow, Hatred, Despair, Horror. The Understandings of the Wicked will be
enlarged, many of their former Mistakes shall be corrected by sad Experience,
their Minds being freed from the Obstructions of gross Bodies, will doubtless
be more keen in their Operations and Conceptions of the height of that
Happiness they have forfeited, and the depths of that Misery they have
incurred: Now proportionable to their Apprehensions of the Greatness of their
Misery, will be their bitter Reflections upon the procuring Causes of it. Your
Consciences which now for the most part sleep in your sinful and secure Bosoms,
shall then be awakened with a Vengeance against you, whose Rebukes will indeed
be hard to be endured, but impossible to be avoided: In this World they had
many Arts to extinguish it is just Reflections, worldly Projects and Labors,
sensitive Pleasures, carnal Counsel, and a false Confidence, which they
industriously improved for that End, and perhaps attained it to their content;
the Amusements of this life, or the Hopes of a better (though against all
Scripture and Reason) made them easy and unconcerned, though in the midst of
Danger; but now when all these carnal Comforts and groundless Hopes are for
ever, and at once removed, the Soul stripped naked of those Dependencies in
which it used to trust and triumph, how will it sink into the depths of Sorrow,
the Horrors of Despair Especially

1. When the Memory suggests the Greatness of that Glory they have lost; some
Beginnings of which they have seen at the general Judgment, when the Persons of
the Righteous were honored with the most joyful Congratulations, and their
Bodies ad$$$$'d with the brightest Splendors, shining like so many Stars about
the Son of Righteousness, advanced to the greatest State and Magnificence,
seated on resplendent Thrones near the Son of God, the great Judge of the whole
Earth, Luke 15.28 Then shall you see Abraham. Isaac and Jacob in the Kingdom of
God, and you your selves shut out.

2. When the Memory suggests the frequent Offers of that Happiness they enjoyed
under the Gospel of Christ, and the importunate Entreaties of God himself, and
his faithful Servants, that they would accept of them, Hos. 11.8. How shall I
give thee up, Ephraim? How shall I deliver thee, Israel? How shall I make thee
as Admah? How shall I set thee as Zeboim? Mine Heart is turned within me, my
Repentings are kindled together. As also the frequent Warnings they had, both
by the Word and the Rod, of the Danger that would ensue their Refusal; How
shall we escape?

And (3) That contrary to all the Laws of Reason and Gratitude, they
obstinately refused the offers of Life, abused the Opportunities of Mercy,
embraced their own Ruin with open Arms, sondly sought after naked Destruction,
and were laborious in the pursuit. Will not these Considerations aggravate the
Misery of the Damned? and awake all their painful Passions? As Particularly,

1. Their Sorrow: When the damned consider, and are forced to confess that they
perish deservedly, and that their Destruction is just, being but the natural
and necessary Consequence of their own voluntary and vicious Choice: Will not
Grief in all it is awful Forms fill all the darksome Regions of the Damned with
heavy Groans and dolorous Complaints? O wretched Soul that I am, who have been
deaf to Instruction, and despised Reproof, who have courted Destruction, and
made a League with Death! Cursed be the Day that ever I was born! Once Mercy
was in my Offer, but I slighted my own Happiness, and bartered it away for
Trifles of no Moment or Duration, like Judas and Esau, and now it is gone, gone
for ever! The Sun of Salvation is set, and never will rise more, and I am lest
in Darkness and in Death, justly bereaved of that Mercy I despised! When
unfortunate Esau missed but a temporal Blessing of his Father, He cried out
with an exceeding great and bitter Cry, Bless me, even me, O my Father, Genesis
27.38. Now what extreme Agonies do you think will possess you (continuing
impenitent) when instead of a Blessing you shall have a bitter Curse, and all
your petitioning shall be as vain as Esau's.

The Causes of Sorrow, as Dr. Bate's justly observes, "is the Loss of some
valued Good, or the Sense of some present Evil. Now proportioned to the
Greatness of the Causes must be their Effects. How deep then must be the Sorrow
of the Damned, who are deprived of the greater Good, God himself, and exposed
to the greatest penal Evil, his Anger and highest Displeasure?

2. Your Shame: Is not the Cause of Shame, the knowledge of ones faults, and
their folly and degeneracy in them. Tacita sudent precordia culpa; "The Guilt
which from unseen Pollution springs,
"Pale sweating horror in their Bosom brings.
and the more publicly your Crimes are exposed to others observance, does it
not sharpen the piercing stings of your shameful reflections? What shame then
must cover the Faces, and perplex the Hearts, of presumptuous Sinners? when
they appear before the flaming, and severe Tribunal of a holy, jealous God? and
hear the whole Series of their past Wickedness which they here labored to
conceal, (and were easy if they could accomplish that design) there opened in
all its aggravated Circumstances to the hatred and contempt of a vast Assembly
of Spirits. Shall not the Damned retain some sense of this throughout Eternity?

3. Their hatred and self revenge; when they remember the condescending Methods
that Mercy used with them, the court the Great God made to them for their
Salvation, which they by their cruel and presumptuous Obstinacy rendered
ineffectual, they will be ready to tear out their own Hearts, or dig out their
bowels, if they could effect it.

4. Their Fear: They shall not only be tormented with the remembrance of past
Mercies abused, and with the sense of present Pains, but with the fears of
future Miseries, for they shall have a sure Prospect of the Eternal and
uninterrupted duration of their present Torments. Rev. 14.10, 11. The same
shall drink of the Wine of the Wrath of God, which is poured out without
mixture, into the cup of his Indignation, and be shall be tormented with Fire
and Brimstone, in the presence of the holy Angels, and in the presence of the
Lamb: and the smoke of their Torments ascends up forever and ever: and they
have no rest day nor night. All the Afflictions of this Life are allayed and
tempered with some Mercies, and desirable Enjoyments; but in Hell, which is the
proper center of Misery, there will be Misery without any mixture of pity or
Mercy: All the groans of the Damned cannot incline the Compassions of a justly
offended and inexorable God Isai. 37.11. Then farewell Hope and Happiness, and
all Good for ever! Another additional ingredient or circumstance of the
Damned's Torments, will be the Place where they are inflicted, a Place where
the thickest darkest and intensest Heat for ever reign, a Place where not the
least dawn of Light is allowed those forlorn Wretches, unless what serves to
discover the Instruments of their Pain, a Place where damned Men and Devils are
blended together in one promiscuous Throng, and the former perpetually exposed
to the cruel Tyranny of the latter; Who among us shall dwell with devouring
Fire? Who among us shall dwell with everlasting Burnings?

4. The Curse will be irrevocable and eternal, except they repent: Go on a
little longer in your vicious Courses, in slighting God's Love, breaking his
Law, and quenching the Motions of his blessed Spirit, and your Case will be
past Remedy; for God's Spirit shall not always strive with Men, Gen 6.3. Hence
we are bid to call upon him while he is near, to seck him while he may be
found, Isai. 55.6. which intimates plainly that if he be not sought while he is
near, while he strives with us by his Spirit, he may be sought afterward but
in vain; though his Mercy wait long, yet it will not wait always, his abused
Patience will have a Period, and perhaps quickly with thee.

O presumptuous Sinner! if thou perfistest any longer in thy Impiety, thou
may expect that Christ will give thee that final Curse, which he gave the
Fig-free, Mark 11.13, 14, 20, 21. Let never Fruit grow on thee more. And say to
thee as to Ephraim of old, Ephraim is joined to Idols, let him alone, Hos.
4.17. And to those mentioned, Rev. 22.11. Let him that is filthy be filthy
still. Because I have purged them, and they were not purged, therefore I will
not purge them any more, till I cause my Fury to rest on them, Ezekiel. 24.13. If
this happens to be thy Case, then woe to thee that ever thou wast born! Pray
consider that the Time of God's gracious Visitation (wherein he offers Mercy)
does not always last so long as a Man's Life, nay that it frequently through
their Obstinacy expires before it. The longest Period of Patience that we find
afforded to any, was that which the old World was made the Subject of, which
contained the Space of one hundred and twenty Years, Gen 6.3$ 1 Pet. 3.19, 20.
Yet this was not the sixth Part of the Time they usually lived before the
Flood; ten or twelve Years are longer to us, than one hundred and twenty was to
them, compating the different Ages Men ordinarily lived to then, and now. Now
if the Curse may be rendered through Men's Obstinacy irrevocable in this World,
it will surely be eternal in the next; this the holy Scriptures are very full
and express in asserting. See Isai 33.14. Dan. 12.2. Mark 18.8. 2 Thessalonians. 1.9.
Heb. 6.2. Mark 9.43, 44. Jude 13. Rev. 14.11. If it be objected, that the Words
Eternity, or, ever and ever, only signifies a limited Space of Time: It is
true, they do so in some Places of Scripture; but it is as true that in many
other Places they signify an endless: Duration, as where Eternity is ascribed
to God, Psalm 9.7. and 29.10. and 146.10. and eternal Happiness to pious
Persons. It would be as ridiculous as blasphemous, to say, that God shall live
but for a few Ages, and is absurd to imagine that the Godly should be happy but
for the same Space. Now in the narrow Compass of one Verse, we find the same
Eternity ascribed to the Torments of the Damned, as to the Happiness of the
saved; These shall go away into everlasting Punishment, but the righteous into
Life eternal, Matthew 25.46. which not only the Identity of Expression, but the
Antithesis, or Law of contraries obliges us to believe is of the same Extent:
If we may limit the Duration of the one, we may with equal Reason the other.
But it is objected, that it is contrary to the Justice and Goodness of God to
inflict an infinite Punishment for a finite Offense: In answer to this, let the
following Particulars be considered.

1. That though Sin be finite subjectively in respect of the Person, by which,
and the Time in which it is committed, yet it is infinite in regard of it is
Object, for it is committed against an infinite God, an Affront to infinite
Sovereignty, a Disparagement of infinite Wisdom, and an Abuse of infinite Love,
and therefore deserves in Justice an infinite Punishment. In short, Sin is a
most pregnant and complicated Evil, containing in it a direct Contradiction to,
and vile Reflection upon all the Perfections of the Deity, an unnatural Revolt
from his Government, which we are bound to obey by the strongest Ties of Reason
and Gratitude, because of his creating, preserving, providing and redeeming
Love, and that upon the meanest Existments, the shadowy Honors and perishing
Profits of a vain World, and the brutish Pleasures of Sense. Is it not a Maxim
in all Courts of Judicature, that the Offense increases in its Heinousness in
proportion to the Dignity of the Person offended; for if no Distinction of
Persons be allowed respecting the civil Authority with which they are invested,
then all Order and Government is destroyed, and a Babylonish Anarchy introduced
in its Room. "If it be thought just and lawful among Men (as Mr. Stackhouse
observes) for very great and outrageous Crimes to inflict such Punishments upon
Offenders that the civil Government may be preserved, as shall affect the whole
Duration of their Lives, (which is all of their Beings we have any Power over)
it cannot sure be thought unjust in God to inflict such Punishments upon Sinners
as shall affect the whole Duration of their Beings, because there is manifestly
in this Case as great a Difference in their Crimes, as in the Duration of their
Punishments.

2. It is rational and agreeable to the divine Wisdom that such Penalties should
be annexed to the Breach of the divine Laws, as do over balance all Incentives
to Vice, that the Subject's Obedience may be effectually secured, the
Sovereign's Honor inviolably maintained, and the Ends of Government obtained.
But temporary Punishments are not sufficient to procure this Obedience,
therefore the Denounciation of eternal is necessary.

The second Proposition which only needs Proof, may be thus confirmed: If
through the obstinate Pravity of Men's Natures, and the numberless Enticements
to Sin, the Denounciation of eternal Punishments has but little Influence on
the most; how much less would a Punishment of a vastly shorter Duration. It is
a just Observation of Dr. Tillotson and Mr. Jenkins, That if the Law "be good
and necessary, and cannot so effectually be obeyed without a severe Punishment
to enforce it, the Severity of the Punishment is so far from being a Cruelty,
that it is a just and wise Provision to secure Obedience to the Law, and to
procure the Benefit designed by it is Institution.

3. Men have brought into their Natures a Disposition to sin eternally. It is
very probable, that were they allowed to live here for ever, they would act as
perversely as they do at present (unless the Almighty changed them by that Grace
which they had forfeited, by their sinful Obstinacy) nay worse, if worse can
be, than the Pitch some have come to; if they knew they should be indulged with
so long a Duration here; for then all the Restraints which are drawn from the
Brevity and Uncertainty of their Time, as well as from the Terrors of Death,
and that State of Rewards which immediately ensues it, (which gives some Check
to the most) would be entirely removed. The Saying of Gregory upon this Head is
remarkable, Ir "becomes the Justice of our Judge (says he) that they who in
this Life would never be without Sin, should in the next never be without
Punishment.

4. God does but deal with Men in this Case according to their Choice. Is it
not reasonable that the Almighty having made Creatures that are capable of
moral Service, should give them a Law to direct them in it, enfore'd by such
Rewards and Punishments, as are suitable to excite to the Obedience of it, or
deter them from Disobedience? Now if the Penalty be no greater in weight or
duration than the Reward, who can with any reason find fault? especially
considering that none shall be obliged to endure it, but such as voluntarily
choose the way that leads to it; if you don't like the Wages of Sin, pray avoid
the Work; but if you will choose your own ruin, who can you blame but your
selves? It Is but equal, that those who slight an endless Life, should be
punished with an endless Death.

5. It Is necessary for the preservation of the divine Honor, and agreeable to
the Order God has established of communicating his Favors, that Criminals who
expect his Mercy, should sue for it, repent of, and reform from their
Wickedness; but the Damned are so far from this, that they will perpetually
increase their Abominations; for their Enmity against God, which is now in a
great measure concealed, shall be then enflamed by the severity of their
Torments; their impatience to endure them, and inability to avoid them. This
will excite them to belch forth bold Blasphemies against the blessed God, with
the most fierce and furious transports of implacable, though impotent Malice;
that if their power were equal to their desire, they would tear him from his
Throne Rev. 16.10, 11. They gnawed their Tongues for pain, and blasphemed the
God of Heaven, because of their pains and sores, and repented not of their
Deeds. In Hell, we are told by the Lord Jesus, will be weeping and gnashing of
teeth, Mat. 8.12. Intense Indignation, as well as great Sorrow. Now if the
wickedness of the Damned continue, will not God's irrefragable Justice incline
him to continue their deserved Punishment?

7 Thy Case is extremely dangerous, though thou art not sensible of it: Thou are
like a Man sleeping on the top of a Mast in the miast of the Sea, Prove. 23.34.
Every moment in danger of Death. Would it not make your Heart ache, and your
Bowels bleed to see a poor Creature securely slumbering on the Round top of a
Vessel in the time of a Storm, when the Sea being vexed with the Winds, rowls
Mountains high? or would you not be affected with the sight of one hanging over
a burning Furnace by a small Thread? or walking fearlesly on the brink of a
fatal Precipice without the least discovery of the neighboring danger? every
step ready to tumble into a violent and cruel Death? O Friend, this is thy very
case! Thou art every moment in danger of being sunk in the Sea of God's Wrath!
and if wallowed up with the Billows of his Indignation! Though thou art secure
and unconcerned, thou hangest over the Gulf of Hell by the slender Thread of
thy Life, yea thou fearlesly walk upon the narrow Line of Life, just by the
brink of the eternal Furnace: The terrible Sword of God's Justice hangs over
thy Head, as it were by a Hair, ready to pierce thy Bowels, and bathe it self
in thy Gore. Is this a case to Sleep in? to Laugh in? and to take thy Ease?
Amos 6.1. Woe to those that are at ease in Zion. Come Friend, in the Name of the
Great God my Lord and Master, let me tell thee a little more of thy danger and
misery. The Holy God hates thee, as thou do a Toad. Psalm. 7.11. Jer. 12.8.
The whole Trinity is against thee, while thou continuest in this State: God the
Father, for thy slighting the mavelous Projects of his Grace and Love in the
Lord Jesus. Heb. 10.26, -- 32. God the Son, for your making light of the
Blessings he bought with his Blood. Mat. 22.3, 7. And God the Holy Ghost, for
your resisting and quenching his good motions. Act 7.51. All God's Attributes
are engaged to Damn you, so continuing. If there is Power, or Truth, or Justice
in God, ye shall perish except ye repent. Luke 13.3. Mat. 22.13. Then said the
King to the Servants, bind him hand and foot, and cast him into utter darkness,
there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. Matthew. 13.30. Gather together the
Tares, and bind them in bundles to burn them. All the Hosts of God, whether in
Heaven or on Earth are against thee: The very Stars in their Courses fought
against Sisera, Judge. 5.20 The holy Angels must needs resent the dishonours
offered to their offended Master, and therefore they are sometimes the
Executioners of his righteous Judgments against the Wicked. 2 King. 19.35. 1 Chronicles. 21.30. Psalm. 35.5. The Earth groans under thee, while thou art a
stranger to God. Romans 8.22. The very bruit Creatures revolt from their
subjection to sinning Man, and thereby avenge the quarrel of their injured
Lord. Poor presumptuous Sinner! thou have no Friend in Heaven or Earth that is
able to stand by thee and succor thee in thy distress? You can look no where,
but where there is occasion of fear and sorrow: If ye look backwards, there is
a doleful Landscape opens to your view, of a Life spent in vain, a Life spent in
offending the Author of it, and thereby procuring an endless Death: If ye look
forward, what can be more terrible than to behold your gradual advances to a
Place of inexpressible Misery: If you look upward, Heaven is shut and sealed
against you; behold a flaming Cherub ( viz the Justice of an incensed God)
guards that Celestial Eden from such Intruders: If ye look down-ward, Hell from
beneath is moved to meet you at your coming, Isai. 14.9. If you look inward,
what can you see but Sin and Security? The dreadful Presages of your endless
Misery! Whatever conceit you have of your Wit, or Wealth, you are nevertheless
wret head, poor, blind, miserable and naked, Rev. 3.17. Brethren, if ye had all
the Mines of Peru and Mexico, and yet wanted the Graces of the Spirit, that
tried Gold, you are wretchedly Poor. May Not a Man be justly called Poor that
has no Bread to eat, or House to cover him, no Shelder to throud from the Rain?
This is thy Case; thou have no Interest in the Bread of Life, the Heavenly
Manna, Prove. 14.10 Rev. 2.17. no Interest in the House not made with Hands,
eternal in the Heavens, whose builder and maker is God, Heb. 11.10 Blind
without any saving knowledge of God or your Selves, or the Truth as it is in
Jesus. Ephesians. 4.21. 2 Cor 11.10. 1 Cor 2.14 and sentenced to all Evil, as out
Text asserts: N$ked, without any right to the precious Robe of the Redeemer's
Righteousness, Isai 61.10 without any Shelier to protect you from the storms of
God's Indignation, Psalm 69.24. Heb 10.27. Without God and without Christ,
without Hope, without the Covenants of Promise, Ephesians. 2.12. Every leaf in the
Bible spits Fire and Venom in thy Face, for there is not a Promise in all the
Book of God for you, so continuing, 2 Cor. 1.20.

Object. I hope I shall be saved for all your threats, though I ben't Converted,
and so precise as you talk of.

Ans. My threats; they are not mine, but the threatenings of the God that made
you. If you are saved without Conversion, then the Truth of God must fail, Joh.
3.3. Gal. 6.15. But if in the face of Light you will obstinately hold your
false Confidence, then remember, Rebel, that all the Curses that are in this
Book, shall lie upon thee; as our Text affirms. God's Anger and Jealousy shall
smoke against you, and your Names shall be blotted out from under Heaven!

Object. 2. I cannot believe these hard things.

Why then you are an Infidel, you will give your Maker the Lie, when you will not
believe his Word: But your unbelief will not render the Faith of God without
effect, Romans 3.3. If you will not believe, you must be put to the expense of
having your wilful Mistakes corrected by sad and hopeless Experience, by
feeling what you would not credit, accomplished in your Destruction. But I
don't wonder you will not believe that which tends to distrub the false Ease you
so inordinately affect, and as greedily, as foolishly labor to retain to your
cost.

Again, the Devil your Father is as unwilling you should believe these threats,
as you are your selves; for he knows that if you were sensible of your danger,
you would labor more to escape it than you do at present, and so be in a more
likely way to get out of his Clutches.

The IMPROVEMENT.
USE. I. Of Consolation to the People of God, who have good scriptural
Evidences of their Hope, who have been brought to Christ by a sound Conviction,
and Conversion of the whole Soul, and whose course of Life is Holy and
Heavenly; blessed are ye of the Lord, rejoice and be exceeding glad, for ye are
delivered from those Curses I mentioned, and invested with the contrary
Blessings and Benefits, by Christ's being made a Curse for you; and thus has
delivered you from the Curse of the Law, Gal. 3.13. Sing O Heavens! and be
joyful O Earth! and break forth into singing, O Mountains! for the Lord has
comforted his People, and will have Mercy upon his offlicted, Isai 49.13. There
is no Condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus, Romans 8.1. Sin shall not
have dominion over you, for ye are not under the Law, but under Grace, Romans
6.14. Ye are brought from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan to
God, that ye might receive forgiveness of Sins, and an Inheritance among them
that are sanctified, Act. 26.18 For God who commanded the Light to shine cut of
darkness, has shined in your Hearts, to give the light of the knowledge of the
glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ, 2 Cor. 4.6. As a thick Cloud God has
blotted out your transgressions for his own Names sake, Isai. 44.22. To them
that fear God's Name has the Sun of Righteousness arisen with healing under his
Wings. Mal. 4.2. O how should ye love and serve that Holy Jesus, that has
purchased so great things for you at so dear a rate. Remember precious Souls to
your eternal Comfort,

1. That you are under a universal Benediction: Blessed are you in Body and in
Soul, and in all their Parts and Powers; blessed are your Eyes, for they see,
and your Ears for they hear, and your Heart, for it understands, and loves the
things that belong to your Peace: Blessed are your Bowels that are filled with
compassionate relentings toward the poor and needy; your Hands which are open
to supply the Indigent, and your Feet that freely and frequently carry you to
the beds of Spices (the Assemblies of the faithful) where you may meet and
serve your Jesus. Blessed are your Minds with beams of Divine Light, in that
you see the Holiness, and other Perfections of God, the amiableness of
Religion, the beauty of Jesus, the horrors of Sin and Hell, the necessity and
excellency of Holiness and eternal Happiness affectionately and effectually.
Blessed are you who know the Truth as it is in Jesus, who know these things and
do them. Joh. 13.17. Blessed are your Wills that have heartily, unreservedly,
deliberately, and resolvedly closed with Christ. Joh 1.12. Luk 9.23, 24.
Blessed are your tender Consciences that so readily smite you for the least
Offenses. Blessed are your Affections that flow with an easy and eager
proneness toward Christ and Holiness. Blessed is your Love, in that you can
say with Peter, Lord Jesus thou know all things, thou know that I love
thee, Joh 21.17. Your Desires; that you can say with Asaph, Whom have I in
Heaven but thee, or on Earth that I desire besides thee Psalm. 73.25. Your
Delights; that you can say with David, One Day in thy Courts is worth a
thousand elsewhere, Psalm 84.10 Blessed is your Hatred, which is fixed upon it is
right Object, Sin; and your Dislike, that it is placed on wicked People, though
never so great and prosperous. Psalm. 15.4. Do not I hate them that hate thee.
Blessed are you in your Enjoyments, for they come through the Gracious
Covenant, swiming in the Ocean of Christ's Blood, and are sanctified to you by
the Holy Spirit.

Your God spreads a Table for you in the Wilderness before the face of your
Enemies: Let your Conversation be without Coveteousness, and be content with
such things as ye have; for he has said, he will never heave thee nor forsake
thee, Heb. 13.5. Your God will supply all your need, Phil. 4.19. All God's
Providence are blessed to you, Romans 8.28. Are you Afflicted? It Is a fatherly
Chastisement, Heb. 12.6, 7. Are you Prosperous? It Is a presage of your endless
Happiness: All things are yours, whether Prosperity, Poverty, Life, Death,
things present or things to come; and ye are Christ's, and Christ is God's, 1
Cor. 3.22, 23. Every thing shall work together to advance your Happiness; Paul
and Apollos is yours: The Word is a favor of Life unto you, and the
Sacraments Seals of Salvation, Romans 8.28. Thus all your Enjoyments and
Privileges are blessed; and if God is for you, who shall be against you, Romans
8.31. Your Performances also meet with a gracious acceptance; for though they are
in themselves but Pillars of Smoke, they are nevertheless persum'd with Myrrh
and Frankincense, and all the Powders of the Merchant, Cant. 3.6. Do you mourn,
poor Souls? blessed of Christ are you, for you shall by and by rejoice world
without end, Mat. 5.4. Light is sown for the Righteous, and joy for the upright
in Heart, Psalm. 97.11. As your Blessings are universal, so,

2. They shall be final and perpetual. Though your Husband may hide his Face from
you for a moment, because of your miscarriages, yet he will return with
everlasting loving kindness, Isai. 54.7, 8. Psalm 89.32, 33.

3. Your Blessings shall be as public and solemn as they are lasting and
durable. Ye shall be honored with that glorious Benediction mentioned by the
Evangelist, Math. 25. Come ye blessed of my Father etc. before the face of God
and Angels; and Men and Devils, reprobate and damned Angels, will be filled
with Indignation at your joyful and solemn reception, but shall not be able by all
the efforts of their malice, to make your Crown twinkle, for your state of
Happiness shall be Eternal, it shall last as long as God endures. Mat. 25.46.
And,

4. Exquisitely sweet and ravishing; being received by your dearest Jesus with
the tenderest Congratulations, the sweetest Smiles, and most joyful Triumphs,
you shall ascend into $word$ Seat of the blessed, the Imperial City of the most
high God, after the general Judgment, when you have seen with pleasure (because
God's Justice is thereby honored) all the damned Hosts of Angels and Men
justly sentenced to their cursed Tophet, then shall you ascend the high and
holy Hills of the Heavenly Paradise, with God the Father, Son and Spirit, and
his holy Myriads of triumphing Angels, with Hearts brim full of joy and
gladness, and your Lips breathing forth sweet and continual Hosannah's: the
loud and harmonious Accents of which shall strike the Concave of the Heavens,
when your joyous Squadrons, having the mighty God for their Guide and General,
shall with august Port and regular Array advance to, and arrive at the Regions
of the blessed; the golden pearly Gates of that celestial City of the great
King will open of their own accord to give easy access to that blessed throng
of Angels and Elect Persons, when the redeemed of God shall come with Crowns on
their Heads to Zion, that Paradise of Pleasure, where sorrow and sighing shall
fly away: Their pace thither will doubtless be very speedy, having such an
eager Wing as Love and Joy will form. It Is highly probable that the very sight
of the New Jerusalem at a distance will fill their Hearts with the most
pleasing Sensations; as when the Italians came within sight of their native
Shore, they made the Heavens ring with Shouts and joyful Acclamations, crying
out aloud, Italy, Italy, Italiam, Italiam Leto clamore Salutant. But when you
are come to your happy Mansions, what Seraph's Tongue can describe the
Pleasures that shall then possess your Souls, when you shall have a safe and
secure retreat from all the boisterous Winds and Waves of Sin and Sorrow which
beat upon you, and rolled over you in this tempestuous and troubled Ocean: and
shall on the contrary be unspeakably ravished with the uninterrupted views and
enjoyments of the blessed God, and the dear and transcendently lovely Lord
Jesus; when your Love and Joy shall be perfected, and your Souls eternally
satisfied with the continual Emanations of the Divine Affection, the
Conversation and Social Worship of holy Angels and blessed Saints throughout
Eternity.

USE. II. Of Exhortation. But I turn me to offer a Word more to those
Presumptuous Souls that have no Interest in this Happiness Friends, I hope I
may say with Moses, that I have this Day (according to my capacity) set Death
and Life before you, the Blessing and the Curse: What do you think, will you or
will you not, pluck out your right Eye, and cut off your right Arm? If you will
still delay, or deceive your selves, then Hear O Heavens! and give Ear, O
Earth! let all the Creation blush and be ashamed at your obstinacy! He that
has an Ear to hear, let him hear! O Earth! Earth! Earth! Hear the Word of the
Lord, Jer. 22.29. I call God the Father, Son and Holy Ghost to witness against
you: I call the Sun in the Firmament to witness your bold and vile affront
offered to God and his Christ; would not even that obedient and glorious
Creature shrowed his brighter beauty with a blushing Vail at the fight of your
perverseness and obstinacy, if he could be made sensible of it I call the Elect
Angels that are in this Meeting House, to appear before Christ in the Day of
his coming to Judgment, and witness your Murderous neglect of Christ and your
Souls: I charge your Consciences to bear witness of this against your selves,
and against one another. I need not call the Devils, for they will readily
enough accuse you before Christ, when he shall be seated on his starry Throne,
and you arraigned at his dread Tribunal. Hear me, O Presumptuous Sinners! I
adjure you by the most high God! that ye persist no longer in these Paths of
Death: Hate me, and abuse me as much as you please, I don't mind your
Reproaches, they are a Pleasure to me in this Life, and they will add to my
Crown in the next: Only pity your own Souls. O ye Sons and Daughters of Shame
and Death, bear with my Importunity a little longer, for by and by the Sun of
Mercy will set upon you, and you will hear nothing but the loud roarings of the
Devils, and the hideous Shrieks and Groans of the Damned, instead of Ministers:
You Worldly minded Fleshly People; you Profane Rebels; you Heathen Moralists,
and Pharisaical lifeless Formalists; consider I beseech you, that it is dreadful
to fall under the Curses of the Law, but more terrible to be exposed to the
Curses of the Gospel. It Is awful to be Cursed by your Creator, but it is more so
to be Cursed by your Redeemer O Sinners! will you Sleep quietly on the
Battlements of Hell? on the brim of the Eternal Furnace? Prithy lay your Ear to
that Pit of Dragons, and hear how heavily the Damned groan, how piteously do
they lament and moan over their former Presumption, which is now turned into
endless Despair: Hear how loudly they roar, how frightfully they screech and
yell; see how they rage and soam, and gnash their teeth with desperate madness;
and look how the malicious Devils torment and rack those forlorn damned
Caitiffs; many of which had the same Privileges which thou now enjoyest, and
doubtless had as strong hopes of escaping this misery as thou have at present;
how soon! how soon! may thou be amongst them?

Consider, O Sinner! what a variety of Methods the gracious God has used with
you to reduce you to your Duty and Allegiance; to reclaim you from your Sin and
Ruin; and how ineffectual they have been through your obstinacy and
pres$$ption! How many Mercies has the good God heaped upon you? which instead
of drawing you to Repentance (as according to the Laws of Reason and Grati$ude
they should, Romans 2.4) have been abused by you to the increase of your former
Wickedness; thereby treasuring up to your selves Wrath against the Day of
Wrath, and Revelation of the righteous Judgment of God, Romans 2.5. How often has
the Word of the living God been spoken to you, but in vain, Isai. 53. Isai.
65.2. Think on these following Scriptures, and tremble under the just and sad
apprehensions of thy Sin and Danger. Prove. 1.21, 24, 25, 26. 2 Cor. 4.3, 4. But
if our Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are lost, in whom the God of this
World has blinded the minds of them which believe not, lest the light of the
glorious Gospel of Christ, who is the image of God should should shine upon
them. Isai. 6.2, 10. Go and tell this 'People, hear ye indeed, but understand
not, and see ye indeed, but perceive not; make the Heart of this People fat,
and make their Ears heavy, and shut their Eyes, lest they see with their Eyes,
and hear with their Ears, and understand with their Hearts, and convert and be
healed.

The Entreaties of a God and Savior have had little or no Power upon you; what
wretched Shifts did ye use to keep those Soul alluring and Heart melting
Addresses of the condescending God, and wooing Redeemer from piercing your very
Souls, and captivating your hard Hearts to the Obedience of Christ? Must you
not have iron Bowels, and Hearts of Steel and Adamant, that can withstand such
passionate Entreaties as these following? Ezekiel. 33.11. Say unto them, As I
live, says the Lord God, I have no Pleasure in the Death of the Wicked, but
that the Wicked turn from his Way and live: Turn ye, turn ye, from your evil
Ways; for why will ye die, O House of Israel? Deuteronomy. 32.29. O that they were
wise, that they understood this, that they would consider their latter end.
Deuteronomy 5.29. O that there were such an Heart in them, that they would sear me,
and keep all my Commandments always, that it might be well with them and their
Children for ever. Ezekiel. 18.30. Repent and turn your selves from your
Transgressions, so Iniquity shall not be your Ruin. Micah 6.3. O my 'People,
What have I done unto thee, and wherein have I wearied thee? Testify against
me. What Reluctance does the gracious God express in giving up with a sinful
People, Hos. 11.7, 8. My 'People are bent to backsliding from me, though they
called them to the most high, none at all would exalt him. How shall I give
thee up, Ephraim? How shall I deliver thee, Israel? How shall I make thee as
Admah? How shall I set thee as Zeboim? Mine Heart is turned within me, my
Repentings are kindled together. How affectionately also are the Entreaties and
Complaints of the Lord Jesus, Matthew. 11.28. John 7.37. If any Man thirst let
him come unto me and drink. Matthew. 23.37. O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that
killest the Prophets, and stonest them which are sent unto thee: How often
would I have gathered thy Children together, as a Hen gathers her Chickens
under her Wings and ye would not. John 5.40. Ye will not come unto me that ye
might have Life, Luke 19.41, 42. And when he was come near it, he behold the
City and wept over it, saying, If thou had known in this thy Day, the Things
which belong unto thy 'Peace, but now they are hid from thine Byes. How long
have you kept the Lord Jesus pleading for Admission, Rev. 3.20. without the
Doors of your worthless sinful Hearts, even till his blessed Head was wet with
the Dew, and his Locks with the Drops of the Night, Cant. 5.2. While in the
mean time, you readily embraced his and your own Enemies; his Tears, his
Groans, his Wounds, his Blood, (which are great Arguments to love with an
ingenuous Spirit, Quot Vulnera tot Ora) has not effectually softened your stony
Hearts; may not he say in Justice concerning you, But those mine Enemies which
would not that I should reign over them, bring them hither and slay them before
me, Luke 19.27. How often have the Ministers of Christ entreated you with Tears
in their Eyes, and Sorrow in their Hearts: Now then we are Ambassadors for
Christ, as though God did beseech you by us: We pray you in Christ's stead, be
ye reconciled to God, 2 Cor. 5.20. I beseech you therefore. Brethren, by the
Mercies of God, that ye present your Bodies a living Sacrifice, holy and
acceptable unto God, which is your reasonable Service, Romans 12.1. If there be
therefore any Conselation in Christ, if any Comfort of Love, if any Fellowship
of the Spirit, if any Bowels and Mercies, fulfill ye my Joy, Phil. 2.1, 2. We
then as workers together with him, beseech you also that ye receive not the
Grace of God (the Gospel of Grace) in vain. For behold, now is the accepted
Time, behold now is the Day of Salvation, 2 Cor. 6.1, 2. But has not these
Entreaties been in vain to you? Have you not almost broke their Hearts with
your presumptuous Obstinacy on this Account? They are obliged to complain with
Isaiah, that they labor in vain, and spend their Strength for m$ght, Isai,
49.4. And with Mi$all, Woe is me, for I am as when they have gathered the Summer
Fruits, as the Grape gleanings of the Vintage, there is no Cluster to eat; my
Soul desired the first ripe Fruit. The good Man is perished out of the Earth,
and there is none upright among Men, Micah 7.1, 2. All the Affl$ctions of the
World are not so heavy on the Hearts of faithful Ministers, as this, that they
travail and are in Pain, and yet bring forth nothing but Wind, Isai 26.18. And
has not the Denounciation of God's Threatenings had as little Effect upon your
Fear, Security and false Confidence, as the other upon your Love. When you have
heard the Words of the Curse, have you not said in your Hearts, if not with
your Lips, that you shall have Peace notwithstanding? For God's sake apply to
your Consciences the latter part of our Text: But has the Rod of God reformed
you? No, the Lord has stricken them, but they have not grieved, thou have
consumed them, but they have refused to receive Correction, they have made
their Faces harder than a Rock, they have refused to return, Isai. 3 I charge
and beseech you before God, and his eb$ct Angels! by all the Curses of the
broken Law, and despised Gospel! by all the Threats of an angry God! by all the
Agonies of a crucified Christ! by all the Blossings purchased by his dying
P$ssion; that you quit your presumptuous Confidence, which will fail you in
your Extremity, Job 11.20. But the Eyes of the Wicked shall fail, and they
shall not escape, and their H$p$ shall be as the giving up of the Ghost. And
that you labor to take to Heart the Concerns of your poor Souls before it be
too late, too late; and fly to Christ for R fuge.

If any ask for Directions to know how they may comply with the foresaid
Entreaty? I would offer these following.

1. Examine and search into your present State, see what is the Course of your
Lise, and the Grounds of your Hope To persuade you to the performance of this
Dury, consider 1. It is the positive Command of God. 2 Cor 13.5. Z$ph 1.1, 2.
2. It is the first S$$p toward Conversion and Salvation, Jir. 3.13. Luke
15.17. 3. Without it we shall be mistaken about our State, and the Consequences
of such a Mistake are very dangerous and damning, as I have before exp$$$$'d in
the doctrinal Part of this Discourse. Is not this sufficient to excite any
confiderate Person to make a solemn and impartid Inquiry into his State and
Actions? While a Person is unacquainged with himself, he is fixed in a State of
Death, and there remains no Probability of his Conversion and Salvation. It is
easier to bring the openly profane to Repentance than such Pharisaical and
deceived Sinners, Matthew. 21.31. Rev. 3.15. O let not the blessed God have cause
to complain of us, as of the obstinate Jews, Why then is this People of
Jerusalem sliden back, by a perpetual Backsliding? They hold fast Deceit, they
refuse to return. I bearkened and heard, but they spoke not aright: no Man
repented him of his Wickedness, saying, What have I done? Every $word$ turned
to his Course, as the Horse rusheth into the $word$ Jer. 8.5, 6.


Having found upon Inquiry that your present $$$te is bad, the Grounds of your
Hope to be one or other of these sandy Foundations I mentioned before. Then

2. Judge your selves, that ye not judged, 1 Cor. 11.31. Condemn your present
State, as Graceless, Christless, and Damnable, Luke 15.17. See thy Way in the
Valley, Know what thou have done, Jer. 2.23. Then

3. Endeavor to obtain a deep Sense of your present Misery; This is frequently
recommended in the holy Scriptures, Jer. 4.3, 4. Jeel 2.12, 13. Jam. 4.8, 9.
Psalm 34.19. and 51.17. and 38.4, 5, 6. All that are savingly changed do once
at least feel the Spirit of Bondage to fear, Romans 8.15. and 7.9, 10. Acts 9.6.
and 16.29. and 2.37. And indeed this is many Ways necessary

1. To make us willing to forsake Sin (which separates between Christ and us)
by discovering it is Danger and causing us to taste of it is Bitterness. 2. To
embrace Christ. Until a Man has this Sight and Sense of the vile Nature and
horrible Consequences of Sin, he will never deny himself, nor heartily forsake
his Darling Lusts, and hasten to Christ, as the only Door of Hope, and Rock of
Refuge, with vehement desire and labor; and so esteem every thing as dross and
dung in comparison of him; all which is absolutely necessary to Salvation, Luke
3.23. Gal. 5.24. Isai. 32.2. Isai. 26.4. Isai 55.1, 2. Rev 22.17 Mitth. 11.28.
Act 14.27. This sense of your Sin and Misery which I would urge you to labor
for, contains these things in it, 1. An affecting apprehension of Sin, actual
and original; as also of the Misery of your present State in four Particulars,
viz. the Certainty, Severity, E$$$pity and Equity of it. 2. Fear of Punishment.
3. Sorrow for Sin. 4. Despair pair of Help in your Selves, or any other besides
Christ. 5. Shame because of your Impieties. 6. Hatred against Sin.

These I design to treat of, in the order now proposed, and I entreat you for
Christ's sake to Examine your selves by them, conscienciously, and impartially,
as in the Presence of the Great GOD.

But I return to consider the first Particular proposed, Every Person that is
savingly convinced, has an affecting Apprehension,

1. Of the Sins of his Life, both as to the Malignity of their Nature, and
their damning Effects. An enlightened Soul sees more Deformity in Sin, than in
any Punishment due for it. O how odious and loathsome does it appear in their
View, that they think no Words sufficient to express the Baseness of it is
Nature? Sin becomes by the Commandment exceeding sinful, Rom 7.13. i. e. the
Law being applied to the Conscience, by the Holy Spirit, feelingly, discovers
the odious Nature of Sin, 1 Timothy 1.13. Genesis 34.30.

2. The Pollutions of his Nature; that corrupt and unclean Original, from which
all actual Evils proceed, Psalm 51.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Unconvinced and presumptuous
Sinners take little Notice of their Heart Corruptions, they are apt to think
that their Hearts are indifferent good, their principal Concern is to get and
keep the outside clean, if they could but get that managed, they are apt to
think they would be pretty well off, Psalm 36.2. O but when God enlightens the
Mind, their Sentiments are quickly altered, they are made to behold with
Surprise and Confusion, innumerable Iniquities in their Hearts, which lay
before hid and concealed from their Observance: Not only their actual Sins
appear in their Scarlet Dress, and hideous Aggravations; as ranged in Batallia
against them to condemn and confound them, Psalm 50.21. But their original
Corruption stands ready like a Lion rampant, with open Mouth to devour them,
Ephesians. 2.2, 3. It astonishes them to see so many Evils in their Hearts, which
they as little dreamed were there before God enlightened them, as Hazael, that
he should commit those Barbarities the Prophet Elisha foretold, 2 Kings 8.13.
And Hazach said, But what is why Servant a Dog that he should do this great
Thing? And as it astonishes them, so it afflicts them exceedingly, and makes
them cry out, O! what a Wretch, a Monster in Sin am I! Never was there such a
Creature on God's Earth before, 1 Timothy 1.15. This is a faithful Saying, and
worthy of all Acceptance, that Christ Jesus came inco the World to save
Sinners, of whom I am chief. Observe, not was but am chief. At present I see I
am one of the greatest of Sinners. How will such convinced Souls complain of
their Hearts, which before they used to applaud; O my Heart! my Heart! never
Man or Woman had such a Heart as mine, they would he willing to change Hearts
with any Body, were it possible to be done, for they are apt to think that
there is some peculiar Wickedness, and mystery of Iniquity in their Hearts,
which is not in any others; this makes them complain to God in the Language of
the inspired Apostle, in his Epistle to the Romans, Chap 7.23, 24. O wretched
Man that I am, who shall deliver me from this Body of Death. You know one may
see many Motes, or Atoms by a Sun Beam shining through a Crevice into a House,
which they cannot perceive by the light of a Candle, now the Light of a natural
Conscience which is all the inward Illumination, that many unconverted People
have abiding in them, is no more in comparison of the special inlightening
Influences of the Holy Ghost, than the Light of a Candle to the Sun.

3. Of his lost, undone, and miserable State at present. Luke 15.17. It is not
enough to say, we are all in a lost State by Nature, alas! no it will not do,
it will not do! You must see that you are this Moment in an undone Condition.
Luke 15.24. This my Son was dead and is alive again, was lost, and is sound. He
was not only lost really, but he saw that he was lost, and was much affected
with his doleful Condition, before he was found by his Father; and it is such
only that Christ came to seek and save, Matthew. 15.24. Luke 15.4, 6. Matthew.
18.11. comp-Luke 18.10, to 15. It is such only whom Jesus carries on his
Shoulder to the Sheepfold, and lavs in his Arms. Luke 15.4, 5. Isai 40.11. He
shall feed his Flock like a Sheep-herd: He shall gather the Lambs with his Arm,
and carry them in his Bosom, and shall gently lead those that are with young.
Matthew 11.28. Come unto me all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will
give you rest. It is not said. Come unto me you vain, airy, high minded, hard
hearted People, and I will give you rest; no, they must be in another
Condition, before they be prepared for it: have their Wills bowed, their Hearts
broken and distressed for Sin. Particularly,

1. They must have a Sight of the Certainty of their Misery, if they die in the
State they are in at present. A convinced Sinner sees and knows that if he is
removed by Death, in his present Condition, he shall as surely die as God
lives, as surely die eternally, as he at present lives naturally, as certainly
be separated from God's gracious Presence in Eternity, by the judicial Curse of
Christ, as his Soul shall be separated from his Body in Time, by the stroke of
Death. While People are in a State of Blindness and Security, they are apt to
ftatter themselves with the Hopes of Mercy, though they keep the old Heart, and
go on in the old Course, as that bold profane Rebel in our Text, I shall have
Peace though -- But true Peace and Safety was not a whit the nearer him,
because he dreamed of it, and groundlesly expected it; nor Destruction the
further from him, because he as foolishly as impiously disdained it. Too many,
I fear follow this Man's Practice, and think, if they don't say, though I be
not so precise in my Life, and have not got such a Change of Heart as some
Saints pretend to, yet I hope to be saved as well as any of them; this is
natural to unconvinced Sinners, and those unhappy Creatures will labor to prop
up their false Hope, by all means possible. As particularly,

1. By a false Application of the Promises; like Wasps they draw Poison out of
the sweetest Flowers. And

2. They encourage themselves by the Falls of pious People, and by many other
Methods before mentioned. If one convinces some People by the dint of Scripture
and Reason, that the most of Mankind are in a bad State at present, and does
but say, that if they die in that State they shall be damned, they are
presently surptiz'd, and imagine you to be a strange sort of a rash unmerciful
Creature, and quickly reply with much comnpassionate Zeal for the good of
Mankind! You must not judge, God is merciful; you cannot tell what he will do
with such People. Ans Poor silly Souls, your are rather Objects of Pity than
Anger! you seem to have Zeal, but alas, it is without Knowledge! Romans 10.2.
Instead of it is being for God, it is against him; this general groundless
Charity, has a direct Tendency to strengthen your own and others false Hopes,
and keep the World in a dangerous Security; and this is privately the Reason,
at least as to your selves, why it is so wide. In short, your Speech is either
the Speech of an Ignoramus, a Fool, or an Infidel, either of one that does not
know the plain Current and dirst of the Scriptures, or of one that cannot know
through the Defect of a natural Understanding, or of one that will not believe
through Prejudice. Your must not judge. Ans. But may not we mention God's own
Judgment as it is plainly revealed to us in his Word, if we may not, then we
may shut up our Bibles. God is merciful. Ans. He is so, but will he show mercy
contrary to his Word? If so, then what will become of his Truth? O the
Blindness of the ungodly World! But it is again objected, Your don't know what
God will do. Ans. Yes in this Particular we do, for he has told us, in as plain
a Manner as can be expressed in his Word, what he will do; that without we
believe, and are born again, and live a holy Life, we shall be damned, Mark
16.16. John 3.3, 5. Heh 12.14. And must we not believe God's Word? I assure you
it $word$ the Devil's Cause you are defending, by your painted Antiscriptural
Chariy. The Truth is, by your Way of arguing, your prove your selves to be in a
State of Blindness and Death, Rev. 3.17. But on the contrary, such as are truly
convinced, are obliged to cast away all the Rubbish upon which they built their
Hopes before; their Mouths are shut, and all their old carnal Pleas are
silenced by which they were wont to extenuate their Sins, or justify their
State, Rom 7.8, 9, 11, 13. and 3.19.

2. Of the Severity of it: That it is Misery unallayed with the least mixture
of Ease, or Intermission. The Severity of the Damned's Misery is set forth to
us by several very dreadful similitudes in the Scriptures. Such as

1. That of a Worm gnawing upon a Body, Isai. 66.24. Mark 9.44 comp which
signifies the biting Reproaches of the Sinner's guilty Conscience, which will
cleave to " and prey upon the damned Soul, as Worms upon a dead Body: This Worm
never dies, the Soul that is it is Food is immortal, and the Worm is bred in it,
and one with it. Damned Sinners will be for ever accusing, condemning and
upbraiding themselves with their own Folly, in resecting the Happiness offered
them to Eternity.

2. By that of a Furnace, Matthew. 13.42. And shall cast them into a Furnace of
Fire; there shall he wailing and gnashing of Teeth. Let us consider a little
the Analogy, and Disagreement, between a Furnace and Hell.

1. A Furnace is a Place prepared for Torment, Dan 36. So Tophet is ordained of
old, yea for the King it is prepared; he has made it deep and large, and the
Pile there of is Fire and much Wood, the Breath of the Lord like a Stream of
Brimstone does kindle it, Isai 30.33. Rev 21.8.

2. A Furnace heated very hot, as Nebuchadnezzar's was, in very terrible to
such as are to be cast into it, for their Wickedness: But alas!
Nebuchadnezzar's Furance heated seven Times, nay seventy times seven were it
possible, in but an obscure Figure of the Damned's Tormenzs, in that Lake which
burns with Fire and Brimstone, which is the second Death! Rev. 21.8. For an
earthly Furnace, though terrible, soon puts a Period to the Lives of the
Patients, and consequently to their Sufferings, which must needs expire with
their Life; but the Damned's Torments shall never terminate, though they are
always dying, yet they shall never die. Miserable Souls they are, unconceivably
tormented with a dying Life, and a living Death. Again, an earthly Furnace does
but affect the Body, and is subject to Decays, it may be either quenched, or
will abate through want of Fuel; but Hell's Furnace affects both Soul and Body
and all it is Parts and Powers, and that without Intermission or End, Rev.
14.11. And how can there be want of Fuel seeing the Breath of a God kindles the
Flames, Isai. 30.33. Nay, God himself is the Fuel that shall torment the Damned
most. Hence it is said to be a fearful Thing to fall into the Hands of the
living God, Heb. 10.31.

3. By Darkness, utter Darkness, Blackness of Darkness for ever, Matthew. 8.12.
Jude 5, 15. Natural Darkness is uncomfortable, but it has and End, and is
succeeded with Light; so it was in Egypt; and also they may enjoy some Comforts
in the Time of it; but this is without Comfort, and without End; they shall
never see Light more, neither natural, spiritual, nor artificial.

2. Men may be in spiritual Darkness and saved for all, Isai. 50.10. But the
Gulf of Hell excludes all Light and Hope. Now convinced Sinners have an awful
Apprehension of this, their Rest is broken by it, Sleep departs from their
Eyes, and Slumber from their Eyelids, in a great Measure; and even that little
they have is very much disturbed, with frightful Visions of a dreadful God, and
an eternal Hell. Job complains of this in the seventh Chapter of his Book,
Verse 14. Thou scarest me with Dreams, and terrifiest me through Visions. Even
in the Day time their waking Thoughts present horrible Images of the burning
fiery Furnace, and of those damned Creatures, that are rolling there on flaming
Beds, and roaring hideously through the Acuteness of painful Anguish! Sometimes
bewailing their own Madness, and sometimes disgorging their impotent Rage
against God!

3. The convinced Sinner has an affecting Apprehension of the Eternity of his
Misery, that it will never, never End! O this heightens the Severity of it, and
makes it intolerable, terrible, incomparable, unconceivable, inexpressible, and
miserable Misery! How can a Person that has a Sight of this keep from crying
out with the most doleful Accent, Great and good God! what shall I do to be
saved? Men and Brethren, What shall I do to be saved? Acts 2.37. Most holy Lord
God! My Heart and Flesh trembles because of thee, and I am afraid of thy
Judgments. Psalm 119.120. Whither, blessed God, shall I hasten for Relief and
Succor?

4. They have a Sight of the Equity of their Misery; that it takes it is Rise
from their Sins, and is but the just Wages and Reward of their Iniquities; that
they have brought it upon themselves, by their wilful Obstinacy against Light;
they know in their own Consciences, that they were not forced to sin as they
have done, that they have neglected those Duties of Religion, they might have
performed, that God may justly take up the ancient Complaint against them, O
Israel thou have destroyed thy self, Hos. 13.9. What could I have done more to
my Vineyard, that I have not done? respecting outward Means: And yet when I
looked for Grapes, behold wild Grapes! Isai. 5. In short, every thing seems to
condemn such a Soul; when they look to the Trees or Flowers, or brutal Herds,
these Creatures they see, though void of the Conduct of Reason, yet by a
natural Instinct, answer the Designs of their Being; but they themselves,
though endowed with rational Powers, have lived in Opposition to theirs. In
short, there is nothing within the whole Verge of Nature, the Heavens, Earth
and Sea, but what when considered, serves to increase their Pains! The Sun runs
his appointed Circle without the least Variation; the proud angry Ocean keeps
within his stated Bounds, and observes his stated Ebbs and Flows; the blustering
Winds and pregnant Clouds follow divine Direction, Psalm 135.7. He causes the
Vapors to ascend to the Ends of the Earth, he makes Lightnings for the Rain,
he brings the Wind out of his Treasuries. Psalm 148. There is an agreeable
Harmony and ready Submission to the divine Pleasure, in all the Works of God;
Men and Devils only excepted! from whom only the most could be reasonably
expected: but if they turn their Eye from the Book of Nature, the Works of God,
to the Book of Scripture, the Word of God, they can find no Comfort there for
them, but almost every Page wounds them deeper, pricks them like a Nail, Eccl.
12.11. stabe them like a two-edged Sword, Heb. 4.12. Rev. 1.16. bruises them
like a Hammer, Jer. 23.29. scorches them like Fire, Jer. 20.9. and frights them
as Claps of Thunder and sudden Flashes of Lightning does the timorous, Luke
10.18. But I proceed to consider a

2. Particular included in that Concern I would urge you to attain, which is
Fear; a necessary Consequent of the former: A convinced Sinner is exceedingly
afraid least the fierce Anger of God overtake and consume him, because of his
many and multiplied Transgressions! Isai 6.5. Then said I, woe is me, because I
am a Man of unclean Lips, for mine Eyes have seen the King, the Lord of Hosts.
Psalm 119.120. My Flesh trembles for Fear of thee, and I am afraid of thy
Judgments. Romans 7.24. O wretched Man that I am, who shall deliver me from the
Body of this Death! O Sinner! if such holy Men of God, as I have now mentioned,
were seized with such Fear and Anguish upon the Account of their Sins of
Infirmity, what Reason have thou to cry out, because of all thy base
Abominations, thy presumptuous and crimson Iniquities Suppose one that had
slain a Man at a Venture, under the legal O Economy, saw the Avenger of Blood
close at his Heels, ready to slay him, would he not flee with Fear and great
Haste to the City of Refuge in order to save his Life? Is it not much more so
think ye with a convinced Sinner, for the Life of his Soul, his poor precious
Soul lies at Stake; when he is made to see that he is guilty of Soul Murder,
and beholds the destroying Angel of God's Vengeance, ready to give him the
fatal Blow, when he beholds the Bow of Justice bent, armed with the pointed
Arrows of Death ready to pierce his unarmed, shelterless Soul, and make it
bleed to eternal Death? Will Not he labor with more Fear and Haste, to obtain an
Escape?

3. Sorrow for Sin, and it is threatened Punishment, 2 Samuel, 24.10. This Sorrow
must be 1. A great Sorrow, such as breaks the Heart for, and from Sin, Zech.
12.10. Joel 2.12, 13. Isai. 66.2. 2. A Gospel Sorrow for Sin, as it is contrary
to God, Psalm 51.4. Against thee, thee only have I sinned. He had sinned
against Uriah and Bathshebe, against his own Soul, his Body, his Family, his
Kingdom, and against the Church of God; every of these Considerations, no
doubt, swelled the Tide of his Grief; but the principal Accent of his Sorrow,
was that he had offended a gracious God A true penitent mourns over Sin, more
because of it is vile Nature, and the Wrong thereby offered against a great and
good God; then the Punishment which follow it, either in this or the next Life.
Cain and Judas were grieved for the penal Fruits of Sin. In the mean time, I
freely confess, that a legal Sorrow, or a Sorrow principally flowing from
slavish Fear, is much better than none at all, because as I showed before, it
is a necessary Preparative for Conversion to God. Before the Fire begins to
burn brightly, there is much Smoke, but where there is much Smoke, there is
some Sign of Fire. 3. A sorrowing Sorrow. The true Penitent mourns that he can
mourn no more; when he considers the Number and heinousness of his Sins, he is
afflicted that his Grief is so small, his Tears so few, he wishes with the
mourning Prophet Jeremiah, that his Head were Waters, and his Eyes a Fountain
of Tears.


4 An effectual Sorrow. Such as 1. Imbitters Sin, makes those Lusts which were
once sweet to the Taste, as Gall and Wormwood, Jer. 2.19. 2. Such as restrains
from Sin. I kept my self from mine Iniquity, Psalm 18.23. It is not like that
of Pharaoh and Saul, who were somewhat grieved for Sin, for a little time; but
their Sorrow was as the morning Cloud, soon passed over, wore away speedily,
and they returned again to Folly, Exodus 9.27, 28. compared with 34, 35. 1 Samuel
26.21. 3. Such as is frequently renewed, for Sins of Infirmity; when the
Penitent contrary to the general Bias of his Heart, by the Force of
Temptation, or surprise, falls into Sin, his Sorrow is renewed for it; he
hastens with an aching Heart, and weeping Eyes, to the Blood of Sprinkling for
Relief, and is not satisfied until he get a Sense of God's pardoning Mercy.
Psalm 38.17, 18. My Sorrow is continually before me. I will declare mine
Iniquity, I will be sorry for my Sin. That the Penitent's Sorrow is daily
renewed for Sin, the Pattern of Prayer our Lord has left to guide us in that
Duty, fully confirms: there we are directed to make daily Confessions of Sin.
This necessarily supposes 1. That there will be daily Sins to confess. 2. It
inforces the Necessity of confessing them. If we must confess them, why not
mourn over them? But I hasten to the
4. Particular which is, Despair of Help in our selves, or any other besides
Christ. Luke 15. Acts 2.37. Men and Brethren. What shall we do? These are the
Words of Men under the greatest Anxiety, and reduced to a great Loss and
Strait! 1. They saw something must be done, What shall we do? 2. They were
willing to do any thing to obtain Peace and Pardon, and that immediately; they
were not for adjourning their Convictions, to a more convenient Season, with
Felix, no, they saw their Compliance must be now or never. Unconvinced Sinners
will stand halting and halving between two Opinions; they are apt to think the
Terms of the Gospel are hard forsooth! they are not willing to pluck out their
right Eye, or cut off their right Arm: Aye, but when God opens a Sinner's Eyes,
and lays as it were his Neck on the Block, then he will buckle to any Terms;
much more to these easy and rational ones, proposed to us in the Gospel. Psalm
110.3. Acts 9.6. And he trembling and astonished, said, Lord, What will thou
have me to do? 3. They were at a Loss what to do! They were even at their Wits
end; in the greatest Plunge and Maze! like Persons lost in a pathless howling
Wilderness, among the most savage Beasts of Prey, Lions, Bears, Tigers,
Vultures, and that knew not which way to travel to obtain an escape? and
therefore they asked direction with the most anxious Importunity, Men and
Brethren, What shall we do? Their Query is much like that of a Mariner, or
Passenger, in the time of a violent Storm, in the dead of the Night, when the
Sea being vexed with tempestuous Winds, rolls Mountains high, so that he can
hear nothing but the noise of the boisterous Winds, and angry Waves; in the
mean time the Heavens are black with Clouds, and no Star appears; and the
laboring Vessel springs a Leak, present Death presents it self, in all it is
hideous Shapes; the disturbed Deep opens it is murmuring Mouth, to swallow him
up quick, and bury him alive in a warrey Grave; and he can sue at present no
way of escape: With what agony of the most sensible Passion, would such a Man
implore relief? O! what shall I do? Or it is like that of a Man, that is
mortally stabbed; or one that has drunk deadly Poison, and feels it working in
his bowels, how would such Persons cry out with the utmost yehemence to a
Physician, what shall I do? But perhaps some may object, that was in old times,
when People were very ignorant, but now Men of Sense and good Education, know
their Duty, that there is no need now of applying to others for direction, in
such matters, and making a great phus and ado about Conversion; that it looks
silly, and hypocritical to do so; indeed some weak ignorant People, may apply
themselves to Ministers, if they will; but as for my self, I know my Duty, no
Priest can pardon my Sins. Take an answer to thy Objection in the following
Queries.



Quer. 1. Are we not now in these Gospel times born in a state of spiritual
Blindness and Death, as well as those that lived in the days of Methuselab, or
in the times of the Apostles?

Quer. 2. Will a good Education enlighten any Person in the saving knowledge of
divine Truths, without the special concurrence of the Holy Spirit? I think not.
How did Moses complain over Israel, that notwithstanding their peculiar
Privileges, they were void of saving knowledge? Deuteronomy. 29.4. Yet the Lord has
not given you a Heart to perceive, and Eyes to see, and Ears to hear, unto this
day And is not that as awful a Speech of the Lord Jesus, Matthew. 13.14, 15. And
in them is fulfilled the prophesy of Isaias, which says, by hearing ye shall
hear, and shall not understand: and seeing ye shall see, and not perceive. For
this people's Heart is waxed gross, and their Ears are dull of hearing, and
their Eyes they have closed; lest at any time they should see with their Eyes,
and hear with their Ears, and understand with their Hearts, and should be
converted, and I should heal them. O it is to be feared! many of this Generation
are under that dreadful Judgment of a penal obduracy, and judicial blindness!
and it is well if the present Objector be not in the same woeful Condition. 2
Cor. 4.3, 4 But if our Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are lost; in whom
the god of this World has blinded the minds of them which believe not, lest
the light of the glorious Gospel of Christ, who is the image of God, should
shine unto them.

Well, but we are instructed by the Means of Grace we enjoy, that we should
believe and repent; this some that heard the Apostles did not know, before they
heard their advice.

Answ. It Is true, I confess, that good Education, and Gospel Privileges,
deserves our esteem, and demands improvement, upon the greatest peril for
neglect; they are serviceable in their Place, but not saving, without the
special blessing of Christ. Gal. 6.15. 1 Cor. 3.6, 8.

Quer. 3. Though natural People have the advantage of hearing of Faith and
Repentance, can they Believe or Repent now savingly because of that, by their
own power, more than in the Apostles times? the Scriptures declare the
contrary, in Cor. 3.5. Phil. 2.13. Job 1.13. Act. 5.31. Ezekiel. 36.26. Joh. 15.5.

Quer. 4. Is not Conviction and Conversion the same in substance now, that it
was of old? if they be not, you must prove how, and where, the terms of
Salvation were altered, which I don't see how you can do, without producing a
new Bible.

Quer. 5. What use would you make of that memorable instance of Peter's
Hearers, who were so deeply concerned about their Souls, and made such earnest
application for direction? Was not what was written aforetime written for our
learning, Romans 15.4.

But you will say, there is no need of such a stir and phus about Conversion, that
it looks silly and hypocritical.

Answ Miserable Souls! it is true, you don't see the need of it. Cant. 5.9.
otherwise you would not live so unconcerned as you do. But blessed be God there
are some who see it. If there be not a necessity of earnest labor, then,

Quer. 6 Why are we commanded to Strive to enter in at the strait Gate? Luke
13.24. To give all diligence to make our Calling and Election sure to us, and
informed, that the Kingdom of Heaven suffers violence, and that the violent
take it by force? 2 Pet. 1.5. Matthew. 11.12.

As to what you object against making a phus, or stir, I Answer, That such who
are truly convinced will, and do endeavor as much as they can, to conceal
their concern from such scornful, graceless Creatures as you are, for they know
you are unacquainted with such things, and therefore disgust the very
appearance of them; but is it not natural for a sick Man to complain of his
Maladies, and seek direction and relief of such from whom he can with reason
expect it? Truly, convinced Sinners make no more stir then needs must: Pray
consider, they are upon a Rack of most exquisite pain. Whosoever thou art that
complains of them, thou would make as great, if not greater moan, thy self, if
thy Soul were in their Soul's stead: for all thy pride and stoutness, and thy
present unjust reflections against God's People, would be an addition to thy
pain.

But you object, that it looks silly and hypocritical $$$$is leads me to the
next Query,

Quer. 7. Whether this bold Censure does not flow from ignorance of a special
Work of God's Spirit in thy self, and enmity against God and his People? But
you will allow that weak, ignorant People, may make application to others for
direction, then

Quer. 8. Whither by your own rule, you should not come among the first? seeing
that great Pride is a sign of great Ignorance, both of God, and a Man's self.
Does not Solomon that mirror of Wisdom, inform us, that a Fool is wiser in his
own conceit, than seven Men that can render a reason.

Quer. 9. Whether Self denial be not a term of Christianity? and whether the
denial of our own Wisdom (in point of dependence) be not a necessary part of
it? The Scripture vouches both. Mar. 8.34. 1 Cor. 3.18.

But you will object, that a Priest cannot pardon Sin.

I answer, Truths may be spoken with a disdainful Air, and a bad design. It Is
true, neither a Priest nor a Friar can pardon Sin, but in the mean time, its as
true that they may counsel Sinners for their good, though they cannot convert
them; and it is equally certain, 1. That they are commanded to inquire into the
state of their Flocks; as I Have proved before. 2. That the People are commanded
to make application to them, Matthew 8.4. Mal. 2.7. And 3. That this is confirmed
by the ever memorable and harmonious example of three Thousand at once, who did
not talk after your saucy petulent manner; and what was the principal reason of
this? why they were pricked at the Heart, that was the reason; and thy whole
$eartedness, Sinner, is the cause of thy impudence!


Quer. 10. Is not your aversion to this duty, owing to one or other, or all of
the following Causes? as, 1. Slavish fear, through Guilt: Be not you afraid
(speak truly) that a Godly Minister, or private Christian, if you opened your
Case to them, would disturb your Peace; your false Peace I mean: I doubt this
is the case; if so, you are just like a Person that has got an old Ulcer, he is
afraid of the Surgeon's Incision Knife or Lancet. Or, 2. Pride; that you think
it below you, to stoop so far, as to open your Soul's case, to a godly
Minister, or private Christian, and ask their advice: If this be your case, you
are no Disciples of Jesus, otherwise you would have learned the lesson of
Humility of him. Matthew. 11.29. Surely if you had been under the Hammer of
Conviction, a found and special Conviction, your haughty Hearts would have been
humbled. Or, 3. Indifferency and unconcernedness about your Souls O! if you had
but a sight of your Soul's danger, and preciousness, you would spare no pains
to find relief. 1. You would pray to God, with tears, and gr$ans, that cannot be
uttered. Ananias was commanded by God to go to Saul of Tarsus, and this reason
is given for it, Behold be prays, Act. 9.11. Mr. Henry's Note upon this is
very pertinent, "It Is not said, he says his Prayers, but he Prays." Aye with
many tears, and heavy groans, no doubt. Psalm. 6.6.42.3. Romans 8.26. That order
of Men which he was now to be a Member of, are commanded to weep between the
Porch and the Altar, Joel 2.17. This direction blessed Paul observed aftewards,
as he himself relates, Act 20. and no doubt he begun it now: He did not pray
after the cold Pharisaical manner he used to do, no, there is no notice taken of
these dry, dead Prayers; but when he is convinced, then we hear of Saul, and
that from God himself, Behold be Prays! 2. You would confer with pious People
about divine things. Mal. 3.16, 17. You would resort to them. Act. 4.23. And
perform the Duties of Social Worship with them Cant. 6.1. Those that are now a
terror to you, because of their strictness, whose Conversation you are shy of,
would be the desire of your Eyes, and the delight of your Heart; yea you would
court their Company, which is now so wearisome to you. Psalm 16.3. 3 Instead of
being afraid of too much Trouble, which is your present miserable case, you
would be afraid your Trouble was too little; afraid the Wound was not deep
enough; and that your Troubles would go over before you got to Christ. -- But
as to your indifference, pray consider for Christ's sake, that dreadful passage
of Scripture, Rev. 3.15, 16. I know thy works, that thou art neither cold nor
hot: I would thou were cold or hot: So then because thou art lukewarm, and
neither cold nor hot; I will spue thee out of my mouth. How long halt ye
between two opinions? if the Lord be God follow him, but if Baal then follow
him.



And now having removed an Objection which lay in the way, I return to consider
further of the nature of Despair, that Self despair, I mean, which is necessary
to Conversion and Salvation; which contains these two things especially in it,
1. A Heart affecting apprehension of our own inability to help our selves out
of that complicated Misery, which Sin has brought Mankind into, by any means
whatsoever that we can use; whether Prayers, Tears, or any other Performances
Phil. 3.9. A Person that is convinced, flies to his Duties directly, hoping for
succor; and if he gets rest in them, without Communion with Jesus, he turns
Formalist, which it is to be feared too many do, and so perish! These are the
fine Christians, the World admire most! But if God has a design of Mercy for
the convinced Person, he will show him the defects of his Duties; and that they
cannot entitle him to any Promise of God; then he begins to be Sick of them, and
loathes both himself and them. 2. They have an affecting view of the emptiness,
impotency, and insufficiency of all other Creatures, to help them; whether in
Heaven, or Earth, or in Hell. Now when a Sinner is stripped of all these
Dependencies, he is exceedingly bereaved, and distressed! Affectionate Mr.
Doolittel expresses the frame of such a disconsolate Soul, (I think
inimitably,) in his Body of Practical Divinity, Page 191, 193. in these words,
Woe is me, a sinful Sinner, a miserable "Sinner, a lost undone Sinner, a
wretched condemned Sinner! What shall I do? The holy God condemns me$$$; his
righteous Law condemns me; the Angels in Heaven condemn me; the Devil's in Hell
condemn me; and woe is me that ever I was born! My own Conscience my bosom
Friend condemns me? Whither shall I go? What shall I do, that I may be
delivered from my Misery? Act. 16.30. O my Soul, what a Case am I in? In
Misery, and cannot help my self? In Misery, and cannot all the Creation help me?
What shall I do, I am miserable, and must I be miserable? Is there no Hope? is
there no Help? for a poor distressed Sinner! O all ye Angels of God, behold
what a miserable Man I am! thou Sun and Moon, and all ye Stars of Heaven, to
what a miserable Creature do you communicate your Light and Influence? How is
it that the Earth does not cleave asunder and swallow me alive, to let me down
to the Damned, as my deserved and proper Place? Let all the Creation look and
see, if I ben't a forlorn and a miserable Sinner. I have added what I judged
further necessary to be mentioned concerning the nature of this Despair under
the fifth direction, to which I refer the Reader.


5. Shame. A convinced Sinner is covered with shame as a Garment, because of
his spiritual Nakedness: H$ sees himself void of real good, stripped of original
Righteousness, and possessed of all manner of evil; Rev. 3.17. Rom 7.18. And
therefore he is humbled in the dust, blushes, and mourns with penitent Ephraim,
Jer. 31.19. Surely after that I was turned, I repented, and after that I was
instructed, I smote upon my thigh, I was ashamed, yea even confounded; because
I did bear the reproach of my Youth. With Ezra, Chap. 9.6. O my God, I am
ashamed, and blush to list up my face to thee my God, for our Iniquities have
in$reased over our Heads, and our trespasses grown up unto the Heavens. With
Daniel, Chap. 9.7. O Lord, Righteousness belongs unto thee, but unto us
confusion of faces, as it is this day. With the Publican, who stood afar off,
and would not so much as list up his Eyes to Heaven, but smote upon his Breast
saying, God be merciful to me a Sinner, Luke 18.13. With the Prodigal, Luk
15.18 Father I have sinned against Heaven, and before thee, and am no more
worthy to be called thy Son: make me as one of thy hired Servants. With Mary,
who in the sense of her Sin, being ashamed to come before Jesus, stood behind
him weeping, Luke 7.38. With Job, they abhor themselves in dust and ashes. Job.
42.6. I have heard of thee by the hearing of the Ear: but now mine eye sees
thee. Wherefore I abhor my self, and repent in dust and ashes. It Is observable
here, that while Job was at a distance from God, under no immediate impressions
of his Purity and Majesty, he pleaded hard in his own vindication, but when he
came to have a near view of God, in that Glass he saw himself, and that with
loathing and abhorrence. So the Prophet, Isai. 6.5. Ezekiel. 6.9.

6. Hatred against Sin, and that,

1. Universally. Psalm. 119.104. Habitual and prevailing love to any Sin, is
inconsistent with the truth of Grace. The Hypocrite speaks of some beloved Sin,
as Naaman the Syrian, 2 King. 5.18. In this thing the Lord pardon thy Servant:
But the true Penitent in the language of Joseph the Israelite, Genesis 39.9. How
can I do this great Wickedness, and Sin against God.

2. Implacably and constantly. Those who hate Sin but by fits, mock God,
deceive themselves, and give the Devil the stronger possession of their Souls.
Matthew. 12.43, 44, 45. If you ask what means you should use to obtain the
aforesaid sense of your Misery?

1. Read the Holy Scriptures, which give you a dreadful Map of it; and that
frequently and considerately, having first implored divine direction and
assistance.

2. Read pious Writings, and such especially as are most searching and
awakening. I would recommend in a special manner to your perusal, Mr.
Shepherd's Sound Believer, Mr. Mead's Almost Christian, Mr. Dyke upon the
Deceitfulness of the Heart, Mr. Flavel's Saint indeed, Mr. Isaac Ambrose upon
Hell's Horrors, Mr. Samuel Moodey on the Doleful State of the Damned, and Mr.
Alleine's Alarm.

3. Hear faithful Ministers; for Daubers and Time servers are not like to
profit you. Jer. 23.9, 21, 22, 32. 'Twas the observation of a worthy writer,
that our first "Parents lost Paradise by hearing a Sermon, but it was from the
Devil.

Now in order to get your Consciences awakened, and your Hearts changed by
hearing the preached Word, take these Directions.

1. Be busy with God in the Morning upon your bended Knees before you go to
hear, cry mightily to Jehovah that he would direct the Speaker to your Case,
and that he would seal it by his Power: Beg of God that he would give you a
hungring Heart after the Bread of Life offered to Sinners by the preached Word,
Psalm 42.1, 2. Spend the Sabbath Morning in Prayer, Reading, Meditation, and
keep sending Groans to God all the Way you are going to his House; this would
make the Word sweeter to you than Honey from the Comb, and more precious than
refined Gold.

2. In the Time of Hearing, hearken to what is spoken with Attention and
Reverence, Acts 16.14. It is hard to hit a Bird on the Wing, so it is difficult
to strike a wandering Hearer.

3. Hear with Faith, Heb. 4.2. We should receive what is agreeable to the holy
Scriptures as a Message from God, Psalm 89.15. John 10.4. 1 These. 2.13.

4. With Application; and take care that ye apply a right Portion; otherwise
the Word will hurt you rather than help you; instead of Physic or Food, it
will become Poison. You have no Interest in the Promises or Comforts of the
Gospel, till you comply with the Terms of it, therefore apply them not, they
are Children's Bread, they are Food for Christ's harmless Lambs, and chaste
Doves, not for unclean Goats, crafty Foxes, or cruel. Wolves: Apply the
Threatenings to your selves, for they are your Portion while you remain in this
State; this is the Way to be awakened out of your deep Sleep.

5. With Submission and Obedience, Jam. 1.22, 24 Again, in the Time of Hearing
it would be serviceable, I think, to send up to God some sudden ejaculatory
Petitions for Light and Help. But

3. After Hearing, pray don't talk of this or that Person's Clothes, or any
worldly Matters, but talk of Jesus, as the Disciples did when they were going
to Emmaus, and it is probable you will find the Benefit of it as they did. The
Sheep chews it is Cud, but the Wolf, the Fox and Swine, do not. Meditate on what
you have heard, and confer about it with others, this would be both a
profitable and pleasant Way of spending sacred Time; it would bring to your
Remembrance Things you had forgot, and fix what you retained the deeper in your
Memory, and so prevent the Devil (that grand Bird of Prey) stealing all the
Seed of the Word from you; unless we digest the Meat we eat, it is not like to
nourish us; and when you get Home to your Houses, go into your Closets, and cry
to the Father of Mercies for a Blessing on what you have heard, that the Truths
of God, may abide in the Imagination of the Thoughts of your Hearts, and appear
in the Fruits thereof in your Practice, to the Honor of the most high God,
your present Peace and future Happiness.

4. Direct. If you are under any Convictions about the Badness of your State in
general, or of any of your Actions in particular, Hold not the Truth in
Unrighteousness, strangle not your Convictions by Delays, or any other of those
Methods before mentioned, lest you feel the Force of divine Vengeance, Romans
1.18. O consider! that this Practice of quenching the Spirit is, 1. An
ungrateful Practice. Is this the Way you requite Jehovah for his unmerited and
forfeited Goodness, in offering Salvation to you, and inviting you to accept of
it? That instead of accepting his Love motions, you labor to strangle and
murder them, O monstrous Ingratitude! Do ye thus requite the Lord, O foolish
People and unwise? Is not he thy Father that has bought thee? Has he not made
thee and established thee? Deuteronomy. 32.6. 2. A rebellious Practice. It is a bold
breach of God's positive Precept, 1 Thessalonians. 5.19 and that against the kindest
Expressions of Love and Mercy; when the great King of Heaven, whom you have
offended by innumerable Transgressons, comes and offers you a free Pardon, and
works Inclinations in your Hearts to receive it; you by this Practice do as it
were maliciously fly in the Face of God, and insolently kick against his Bowels
of Pity; O abhorred Wickedness! 3. A mad Practice. For by this you enter the
Lists with the almighty Jehovah; you fight with the sovereign Majesty of Heaven
and Earth! And what think you is like to be the Fruit of this unequal Contest?
Isai. 27.4. Who would set the Briars and Thorns against me in Battle? I would
go through them, I would burn them together. Is it not the Perfection of
Madness to contend with one that is infinitely stronger than your selves? Isai.
45.9. Woe unto him that striveth with his Maker: let the Potsherd strive with
the Potsherds of the Earth. 4. A murderous Practice. It is Murder, Soul Murder,
wilful Soul Murder; when you stifle and quench these Convictions about the
Danger of your State, or Wickedness of your Actions, which the good God with
much Labor and Love has kindled in your Consciences, Ezekiel. 32.8, 9. and 33.11.
One may be guilty of Murder by preventing Life, as well as by destroying it
when formed. Thus those Women who expel their Conceptions by unjust Methods,
lest their Wickedness should be brought to light, are undoubtedly guilty of
Murder in the Sight of God; and much more those who suppress the beginning.
Convictions of Sin. O! will ye be guilty of this inhumane and unpa alell'd
Barbarity against the blessed God, against your selves, against your poor
Souls? Will you imbrue your Hands in your own Blood? Will Not this cry from the
Earth to God against you? Genesis 4.10. 5. A Practice grieving to God. Ephesians. 4.30.
O do not cause him to withdraw his gracious Presence, by your unkind Neglect
of, or Opposition to his Love motions, or by refusing to hearken to his
Counsels, and rebelling against his Government! 6. Destructive to your selves.
Prove. 1.21, -- 33 and 29 1. It destroys your Peace both in Health and Sickness,
in Life, at Death, and in Eternity Isai. 57.20, 21. But the Wicked are like the
troubled Sea, when it cannot rest, whose Waters cast up Mire and Dirt. There is
no Peace says my God unto the Wicked. Your oppre$$$d Consciences will trouble
you in Health, according to the Scripture now mentioned, but at Death probably
much more, then will they give you (in all likelihood) ghastly Gripes for your
bloody barbarous Wickedness, in strangling their repeated Cries, and thereby
murdering your own Souls, but if not on Earth, they will in Hell repay you the
Wages of your Blood guiltiness. Isai 3.11. Woe unto the Wicked, it shall be ill
with him: for the Reward of his Hands shall be given him. Matthew. 8.12. and
13.42, 50. By opposing the Convictions of the Spirit, you will cause him to
withdraw, and that for ever, Genesis 6.3. Now without his Help you can neither
perform the Duties of Religion to Acceptance, or conquer the Corruptions of
your Nature, and resist the Temptations of Satan to purpose; all which is
necessary to Salvation, Romans 8.13. 7. Pleasing to your mortal Adversaries. Nay,
it is no less than a cruel Conspiracy with Satan the grand Enemy of your Souls,
for thereby you consent to and conceal his Intreagues, and so show that you
love Death, Prove. 8.36. 8. But if on the contrary you cherished the Motions of
the Holy Spirit, the Issue would probably be your Conversion and Salvation.
Isai. 55.7. But notwithstanding these Arguments, some are so cruel as to labor
to extinguish Soul-troubles, by indirect and unlawful Methods. What may be the
Causes of this abhorred God provoking, Soul damning Wickedness?


1. One Reason is this, the Fire is too hot for some, it scorches and pains
them, and therefore they endeavor to get rid of it as soon as they can; like
Felix who when he was brought into a Fit of Trembling by Paul's preaching, he
wanted to hear no more of it at present, but said he, when I have a more
convenient Time, I will call for thee, Acts 24.25.

2. Some through fear of Discredit, or loss of worldly Goods, 2 Timothy 4.10.

3. Some out of Love to present Ease, or other Lusts. "As Men put out the Fire
when they have a Mind to go to Bed, as Mr. Keach observes. Do not Men (says the
same Author) quench the Fire when the Pot boils over; even so when the Fire of
the Spirit is so hot and strong, that it is like to boil out a beloved Lust,
which they prized for it is profitableness, like a right Hand, or for Pleasures,
like a right Eye, then they hasten to lessen the Fire, and like Judas think
there need not be so much waste, 'Now what a vile thing (says Mr. Pol-whole) is
this, to quench the Fire of the Spirit, rather than the Scum and Filthiness of
Sin should be worked and boiled out thereby. See how God threatens such, Ezekiel.
24.6, 11, 13. But on the contrary,

5. Labor to increase them by considering in the most folemn Manner, the
following Particulars.

1. The Curse, the Indignation of God which you are exposed to, Gal. 3.10. John
3. And all your other Miseries which I before described. Consider this, ye that
forget God, lost I tear you in Pieces, and there be none to deliver you, Psalm
50. 2. Think upon the Offers you have of Redemption from them in the Gospel of
Christ. 3. O think upon their short Duration and uncertain Continuance; our
Time and golden Opportunities are soon elapsed, and impossible to be recalled,
Front capellata post est Occasio calva. What is our Life, but as a Vapor
which appears but for a little time, and then vanishes away? James 4.14.
Therefore be entreated poor unconverted Sinners to call upon God while he is
near, and seek him while he may be found, Isai. 55.6. For behold, now is the
accepted Time, behold, now is the Day of Salvation, 2 Cor. 6 2. 4. O think, and
think again, upon the Vastness of that Eternity of Pain and inexpressible
Misery, which infallibly ensues your vile Abuse of Time! O Eternity! Eternity!
thou infinite Abyss of unconceivable and endless Time, what humane
Understanding can grasp thee! Our very Thoughts in their most aspiring Flights
are mazed and lost in conceiving of thee! 5. Dwell upon the Thoughts of the
unsatisfactory and fading Nature of all temporal Things. The Fashion of this
World p$sseth away, says the Apostle, James 1.11. They cannot help thee in thy
greatest Extremity. As 1. Under deep Convictions of Conscience offer a Man
Money to be easy, and it would increase his Pain. O! it is just like offering a
hungry Man Stones instead of Bread. 2. At Death. How little Comfort can a Man
take of his Poss$ssions, which he is going to bid an eternal Farewell to, and
which cannot any whit mitigate or allay his Pain; will it be a Comfort then for
a Man to think that he has been such a trusty Drudge to Mammon, or other Lusts?
I believe not. And 3. What Comfort will such Things yield at the general
Judgment? At these three Periods all the Sinner's Floods of earthly Waters
fail, and cannot yield one drop of Comfort to the thirsly Soul. O but the
Springs of Grace yield Sweets, their crystal Streams not only follow and
refresh us here, in all the Difficulties we are exposed to in this parched
Desert, but do accompany us to the eternal World, and there yield a more full
and lasting Delight. Rev. 22.1. And he showed me a pure River of Water of Life,
clear as Crystal, proceeding out of the Throne of God and of the Lamb.
6. Consider seriously the dreadful Danger of Apostasy from any good Beginnings
you have; as it is expressed in those awful Places of Scripture, Matthew. 12.43,
44, 45. Heb 10.26, 38, 39. 2 Pet. 2.18, 19. Jude 12. Luke 9.62. Remember Lot's
Wife.
Direct. 6. You must despair wholly; not of God, as if he either could not, or
would not help you, for he is great in Power, and rich in Mercy, Jer. 32.17, 18
Psalm 43.5. Exodus 34.6, 7. nor of the Mediator, as if he were not sufficient to
relieve and save you; for he is the Wisdom and Power of God, 1 Cor. 1.24. In
him are Treasures of Wisdom, and a Fullness of Power, even the Fullness of the
Godhead bodily, Col. 1.19. Ephesians. 1.7. Col. 2.9. But of your selves. And
particularly, 1. Of your own Wisdom. Hence it is said, that we must become
Fools, that we may be wise, 1 Cor. 3.18. i. e. we must be sensible of our
Inability to direct or guide our Steps in the Way to Life, and therefore feel
the Want of Christ as a Prophet, to instruct and teach us those Things that
belong to our Peace and Salvation, Lord, What will thou have me to do? said
convinced Paul, Acts 9.6. Whosoever has heard and learned of the Father comes
unto Jesus, and those only, John 6.45. 2. Of your own Power. Because without
Christ ye can do nothing, John 15.4, 5. While you are in your unrenewed State,
ye are dead in Sin, Ephesians. 2.1, 3, 5. unable so much as to think a good Thought,
2 Cor. 3.5. It is God that works both to will and to do in any, and that of his
own good Pleasure, Phil 2.13. 3. Of your own Righteousness; whether natural,
civil, moral, religious, privative or positive; as utterly insufficient to
purchase and procure your Redemption: you are more than ten thousand Talents
indebted to divine Justice, and you have not one single Mite to pay it with,
Matthew. 18.24, 25. Your own Privileges and Performances which you formerly
counted Gain, you must now count no better than Loss and Dung, Phil. 3.5, -- 9.
4 And of all Things else, besides God and the only Mediator, 1 Timothy 2.5.
without whom there is no Salvation, Acts 4.12. John 14.6. 5. You should so
despair of all those Things mentioned, as to condemn your selves, 1 Cor. 11.31.
I have sinned against Heaven and before thee, and am no more worthy to be
called thy Son, Luke 15.17, 18, 19. 6. And rest satisfied with any, even the
most abject Condition in which it shall please God to place you. Ver. 19. Make
me as one of thy hired Servants. This Despair which I have mentioned, is many
Ways necessary, in as much as on the one hand, God will not grant us Pardon
without it, Gal. 5.4. Romans 10.3. And on the other hand, without it we are not
willing to seek Salvation only with God and the Mediator; for it is natural to
us to seek it rather any way else than in Christ where it is only to be. found,
until we be stormed out of all our false Refuges, Hos. 5.13. Luke 15.14, -- 17.
But more particularly, 1. It is honorable to God and the Mediator, when we
seek all from God, and ascribe all the Glory to him, 1 Cor. 15.10. Psalm 115.1.
and nothing to our selves, 2 Cor. 3.5. It is reasonable that the blessed Jesus
should consult his own Honor, as well as his People's Happiness in his
Dealings with them: Now this is the most effectual Method to secure it, which
at once removes all Cause of Boasting from the Creature, and puts the Crown of
our Happiness upon the Head of free Grace. 2. Profitable to us. As it is highly
conducive to illustrate the divine Honors, so to subserve our great Interests,
it checks aspiring Arrogance, excites us to almost an invincible Patience, and
inspires us with the most ingenuous Gratitude, 2 Cor. 5.7. Luke 15.19. Psalm
116.34. Romans 7.24 Now that you may obtain this salutary Despair, which is so
contrary to your former Presumption, and so necessary to your eternal
Salvation; think with your selves that you are universally corrupted and
depraved; He that is born of the Flesh is Flesh, John 3.6. That in you, that is
in your Flesh, there dwells no good, Romans 7.18. That you are dead in Sin,
possessed with, and governed by the Devil, under God's Curse and Wrath, Ezekiel
37.2, 3. Ephesians. 1.1, 2. Acts 26.18. John 6.70. and 3.3. That you can do nothing
that is spiritual, good and acceptable to God, nothing by which ye can lay
claim to Happiness, either by a Merit of Congruity or Condignity, i. e. either
by the intrinsic Worth of your Work, or by Virtue of any Promise of God, Romans
5.6. Ephesians. 2.12. As more particularly, you can no more believe savingly, than
you can toss the Earth off from it is Axis, or raise the Dead; for saving Faith
is the Gift of God, Ephesians 2.8. the Fruit of the Spirit, Gal. 5.22. only given to
the Elect, and wrought in them by the Power that raised the Dead, Tit. 1.1. 2 Thessalonians. 3.2. Ephesians. 1.19, 20.



2. You cannot repent savingly: You have a Heart which you can no more break
than you can draw Waters out of a Flint: Repentance is Christ's Gift, Acts
5.31. It is God's Prerogative, and his only to give an Heart of Flesh, Ezekiel
36.26. You will say, then why does God require these Things of us? I answer,
that though you have lost your Power of obeying through your own Default, and
voluntary Apostasy; yet God has not lost his Power of commanding the Creatures;
Sin cannot invalidate the Creator's Claim of Right: But what if you could do
much more than indeed you can, what could this do toward your Salvation,
seeing all your Performances are imperfect? Isai. 64.7. James 3.2. Matthew. 25.5.
And that the Law requires an absolute and perfect Obedience, both extensive and
intensive, in Thought, Word and Action, and curses for the least Failute, Gal.
3.10. Matthew. 22.37.

Obj. But such as enjoy the Gospel are not under the Law, but under Grace. Ans.
The Assertion, if taken universally, is false: It is not the enjoying Gospel
Privileges, but a Compliance with Gospel Terms that frees any from the Curse of
the Law, Rom 8.1 and 6.14, 17.

Again consider, that if you could perform commanded Duties perfectly, which in
this Life is unattainable, is not this a Debt you owe to God as your Creator,
Preserver and Benefactor? Now how can the Payment of one Debt discharge
another: How can this remove the Guilt of your original Trespass? Genesis 2.17.
Romans 5.12.

Direct 7. Be not hasty and impatient in laboring to get rid of your Troubles;
any how, right or wrong. If a Woman should endeavor to provoke her
Travail-Pains before the proper Season, she would be in great Danger of
destroying both the Child and her self: Wait God's appointed Time, in his
appointed Way. Consider, God has waited long upon you, for that which was
nothing but your Duty: And is it not reasonable that you should wait upon him
without Grudging for that which is pure Mercy, for that which you can no Ways
merit? If ever you obtain an Interest in God's pardoning Love, you will not think
much of your Labor in seeking it: The Harvest will sufficiently recompense all
the Pains you have been at, if they had been ten thousands times more.

Direct 8. Try carefully the Comforts you get by the Word; if they don't excite
you to Humility, Thankfulness, Holiness in Heart, and Heavenliness in
Conversation and Practice; trust them not; and particularly, beware ye mistake
not, in taking a natural Ease for a spiritual: Some People when they are in
Troubles, will weep much, which gives Vent to their Grief; and this alas! the
poor Souls foolishly imagine to be spiritual Consolations!

Direct. 9. Don't be satisfied with the bare Performance of Duties, unless ye
find Christ in them, for these are the Way to Rest, and not the resting Place
it self. Beware of being satisfied with your own Resolves, to be, and do
better; rest not upon them, which it is to be feared, many do, and so perish,
Acts 24.25.

Direct. 10. Shun the Company of ungodly People; I mean unnecessary
Conversation with them: Forsake the foolish and live, and walk in the way of
understanding. Prove 9.6. Remember and imitate the memorable Pattern of the
Psalmist's practice, Depart from me ye evil doers, for I will keep the
commandments of my God, Psalm. 119.115. Bad Company has been the ruin of
Thousands, of whom once better things were expected. Prove. 13.20.

Direct. 11. Associate your selves with pious Persons: For as Solomon observes,
Prove. 13.20. He that walks with wise men shall be wise, but a companion of
fools shall be destroyed. And if you are under Troubles, open your Case to
them, or to some godly Minister. Act. 2.37. Be not ashamed to do this: It Is
your Duty, and your Honor; and as it will be pleasing to them, so it is likely
it will be very profitable to you. Alas! many poor Souls through bashfulness, and
the Temptations of the Devil together, do themselves great injury, deprive
themselves of much comfort, and necessary direction, by concealing the
distressed Circumstances of their present Condition from the Friends of God; a
little Spark is like to be blown up to a Flame if it had vent; whereas on the
contrary, if it be confined entirely to their own bosoms, it is in danger of
being smothered: but in the mean time, least you be misguided, see that these
Persons you open your Hearts to, have the evident signs of powerful and
experimental Christianity; and pray examine the Directions they give you by the
written Word.

Direct. 12. Open your Case to God by fervent and importunate Supplication: Cry
to him Day and Night for pity and pardon: Change me, O God, and I shall be
changed, Draw me, and I will run after thee, Cant. 1.4. Confess your Sins with
shame and sorrow, in the Prodigal's and Publican's Language, and the demerit of
them: I confess "most high God! thou might have honored thy Justice in my
Destruction, long ago, and have sent me quick to Hell: How strange and
astonishing is thy Patience! O that it might lead me to Repentance! Confess
your impotency to help your selves, and bewail over the multiplied defects of
all your sacred Services, and plead with God for Mercy to this effect: Gracious
Jehovah, thou "have been found of those that fought thee not; O! will thou not
be found of those that endeavor to seek thee? I confess, most Holy God! that I
deserve to be for ever separated from thy gracious Presence, and that I can do
nothing to merit thy Favor; but I beg for Mercy through the Redeemer's Blood:
Lord if thou will thou can make me clean: O make me an Iustance of thy free
Grace, a Monument of thy Mercy to all Eternity. Plead the Encouragements that
Christ has given to the weary and heavy laden Soul, and to such as see
themselves in a lost state, if thou art in such a condition:

To conclude; I shall only add two Motives to excite your Compliance with the
Exhortation and Directions, viz. The Necessity of it, and the Advantages you
are like to get by it.

1. The Necessity; which is absolute. 2. The Advantages; which are great.
1. The Necessity is absolute both in respect of the command and mean. Jer.
8.7. for without it you shall perish in your delusions. Isai 44.20. Job 11.20.
Without it God will tear you in Pieces. Hos. 13.7. I will be unto them as a
Lion, as a Leopard by the way will I observe them: I will meet them as a Bear
bereaved of her Whelps, and I will rent the Caul of their Heart. A Lion is a
terrible, majestical, strong, just, and generous Creature: When the Lion roars
the Beasts of the Forest tremble, Amos 3.8. He triumphs over his Prey, as if he
challenged any to attempt it is rescue; and none indeed dare pretend to it, he
being the King of Beasts; so with God is terrible Majesty, Job 37.22. and
everlasting Strength, Psalm. 96.6. Honor and Majesty are before him: Strength
and Beauty are in his Sanctuary, Job 9.19. and Job 12, 13, 14, 16. Psalm. 29.4.
The Voice of the Lord is powerful, the Voice of the Lord is full of majesty.
Joel 3.16. The Lord also shall roar our of Zion, and utter his Voice from
Jerusalem, and the Heaven; and Earth shall shake. When Jehovah speaks the Earth
trembles, and it is deep Foundations move; when he is wroth all Nature is in the
utmost disorder, Psalm. 18.7, 15. He bows the Heavens and comes down, makes
Darkness, Clouds and Cherubs, his Pavilion; rides swiftly upon the wings of the
Wind, and easily dissipates his Enemies; by shooting barbed Arrows, burning
Thunderbolts, and blazing Lightnings (at them Psalm. 18.13, 14 The Hills melt
like Wax at the presence of the Lord, of the Lord of the whole Earth, Psalm.
97.5. When God but touches the Mountains they smoke, Psalm. 144.5. The
everlasting Mountains are scatterred, and the perpetual Hills do bow, Hab. 3.6.
Yea he weighs the Mountains in Scales, and the Hills in a Balance! Gasps the
great Ocean in the hollow of his Hand! and meets out the Heavens with a Span,
Isai. 40.12. The Pillars of Heaven tremble and are astonished at his reproof,
Job 26.11. Who then can stand before this great and dreadful God? Dan 9.5. Who
shall take the Prey from him? whose Strength is infinite and everlasting! Hos.
5.14. For I will be unto Ephraim as a Lion: and as a young Lion to the House of
Judah: I, even I, will tear and go away, I will take away and none shall rescue
him.

It Is observed of the Lion that he will not fall upon any Creature unless he be
much provoked, and that he will not destroy those that submit to his mercy. So
indeed God's Patience is great, otherwise the World would soon become a
terrible Theater, an Acaldema, a Field of Blood, a Scene of Desolation and
Horror; but being abused, it will have a dreadful Period, abused Mercy will
turn into inflamed Severity; Wrath will break forth upon you suddenly, unless
you in time submit to mercy. Luke 12.39, 40. 2 Pet. 3.10. And as a Leopard by
the way will I observe them. A Leopard is a very quick sighted (Lynx Visu)
swift, and subtle Creature, Hab. 1.8. He waits by the Road, and as some say
hides his Head that he may the more securely and suddenly seize his Prey: Thus
if you persist in a sinful Security, you may expect that God will employ his
Wisdom as well as his Power against you to hasten and heighten your deserved
ruin; he will watch over you for evil, and not for good, Jer 44.27 Catch you,
and seize you by the way, with the gripe of his Justice, when you are going
fearlesly and securely on, little dreaming of such a blow; so he did Pharcoh
that haughty Monarch, in all his martial Pomp and bravery, and suddently
entombed all his Honors in the deep. I will meet them as a Bear bereaved of
her Whelps. A Bear is naturally a fierce Creature, 2 King. 2.24. But being
bereaved of her Young whom she greatly affects, 2 Samuel 17.8. she is exceedingly
enraged, Prove. 17.12. which shows with what enflamed severity God will meet the
impenitent and presumptuous Sinner, as a roaring Lion, and as a be$eaved Bear,
and he will make you feel (so continuing) with a witness the fruits of his
Wrath, for he will rent the Caul of your Heart. To awake you and excite you, if
possible, to comply with the Exhortation and Directions, I shall attempt to
open and explain what is contained in this terrible Phrase of rending the Caul
from the Heart, and what is importted by it. The expression is most awful and
solemn! It informs us,

1. That God will slay his Enemies, Luk 19.27. Isai. 1.24. The Heart being a
vital and one of the most noble Parts, a violent Death must needs ensue its
Separation; for it is in the Body of Man, like the main Spring in a Watch, when
that is removed all it is motion ceases.

2. Tear them in Pieces. Hos. 5.14 For I will be to Ephraim as a Lion; and as a
young Lion to the house of Judah: I even I will tear and go away; I will take
away and none shall rescue him. Psalm. 50.22. Now consider this ye that forget
God (which all presumptuous Sinners do) least I tear you in pieces, and there
be none to deliver.

3. That God will pluck out their Hearts: This is necessary in order to
separate the Caul from them.

4. By this expression of rending the Heart, some understand the spiritual
Plagues and Judgments God inflicts upon his Enemies. So Mr. Henry, He will send
such Judgments "upon them as shall prey upon their Spirits, and consume their
Vitals, such as will fill the Soul with confusion and tear it in pieces. And to
this purpose speaks Arius, Montanus, and Mr. Burroughts. Luther thus glosseth
upon the words, The Lord will do as a Lion "does; He more immediately will
strike out their Hearts with spiritual Plagues; and as for their Estates, and
Bodies, he will leave them to other Beasts: Their Hearts were grown fat, they
had a film about their Hearts; and Instruction could not get to their Hearts;
but God will tear that Caul, that Film from off their Hearts. So that the
expression seems to import,

1. The removal of their presumptuous Stupidity; that hardness and
insensibility which Presumers have contracted by a long course of sinning,
shall then be speedily, totally, and eternally removed: the Caul shall be rent
from the Heart; those who are now past feeling, Ephesians. 4.19. whom all the threats
of a God will not pierce, or alarm, but still they sit like stupid Blocks, and
unconcerned Stones, in hearing the most dr$adful menaces, shall be filled with
the most exquisite Pain! when those Threatenings they now despise shall be put
in execution! for then Sinners! presuming Sinners! the Caul shall be rent from
your Hearts, and all your painful Passions which are now frozen and congealed,
shall then be set in a perpetual commotion. Mat 8.12. Chap. 22.13.24.51 Chap
25.30 Luke 13.28.

2. The suddenness of those Judgments God inflicts upon presuming, ungrateful,
impenitent Sinners; as a Garment is suddenly rent in the Hands of a strong Man:
How secure soever you are in your own imagination, yet surely you are set in
slippery Places from which except ye turn speedily, you shall have a certain,
sudden, and eternal downfall, among Devils and Damned Spirits! Psalm. 73.18, 19,
20. Surely thou did set them in slippery places: thou castedst them down into
destruction. How are they brought into desolation, as in a moment; they are
utterly consumed with terror; as a dream when one awaketh; so O Lord, when thou
awakest thou shall despise their image. Upon this last verse learned M$sculus
thus glosseth, page 535.

" Uritus similitudine omnium aptissima, somnii, viz. Dormientis; and imaginis:
ita ut similitudine sominii depingat, quam sit inanis impiorum feli citas,
quibus inhac Vita instar dormientium tantisper been est, dum veluti in vanitate
sua, et felicitatis opinione dormiunt, et inter somniendum imaginem quandam
felicitatis imperitis ac carnalibus hominibus, non ifsam felicitatem objiciunt,
quam illi pro tempore quidem suspi$iunt and admirantur: verum mox soluto vane
felicita it is s$mnio, solvi qu$q; ceperit inanae illius spectrum, non possu$$
aliud, quam ut quos antea suscipibant tum incipiant in cord contemnere.

The Psalmist uses the mostapt similitude of sleep, and an image: in order to
represent the vanity of the ungodly's happiness, with whom it is only well for
a little time, in this Life, like People asleep, while they slumber in their
vanity and conceit of happiness; and in their sleep carry before them but a
certain image, or shadow of happiness, to amuse the ignorant and ungodly; which
they for a time behold, and admire, but the dream of happiness being broke and
it is image vanished, they cannot bt contemn those whom they before admired

Hear you Presumers what God says to you, Deuteronomy. 32.35. To me belongs
Vengeance, and Recomp$$se, their Foot shall slide in due Time, for the Day of
their Calamity is at Hand, and the Things that shall come uponthem make haste.
Jer. 32.12. Wherefore their Way shall be unto them as slippery Ways i$
Darkness, they shall be driven on all fall therein, for I will bring Evil upon
them. Con$$$ider O Presumer, that provoked Justice $ies in Ambush to give thee
a sudden and therefore a terrible Surprise! Jer. 44.27. Dan. 9.14.

3. The Irresistibility of them, or their$ uncontrolled Force and Violence. O
Sinner! thou can no more withstand the Execution of God's Justice, "than a
Lamb can make it is Part good against a Lion, no more than a feeble Rag is able
to prevent its being torn, when in the Hands of an enraged Giant.

4. The Acuteness of the Pain ocasioned by them. Would it not cause intolerable
Pain to have one of your Arms broke and crushed to pieces, and while the Bones
jarred and $isped against each other, to have it pulled off by the Shoulder
Blade, to have not only the Bones dijoynted and broken, the fleshy Parts torn
in pieces, but the sinewy, those most sensible Parts rent asunder; but yet it
is more terrible to be wounded at the Heart, for a Stab there is mortal! But is
it not still more dreadful to have the Breast dug and opened, and the Heart
that Seat of Life, and Spring of Motion, violently tore out of it, having first
broke all these vital, bleeding Chords, by which it was united to the Body, and
then to have the Pericordium (or Skin that covers it) fleed off and the Caul
rent from it? But be assured Brethren, that this though a bo$$$ and very
terrible Image, is but an obscure Resemblance of the Almighty's Jealousy, and
the Pains produced by it, in the miserable Subjects of his Indignation; for it
infinitely surpasses any finite Mind, in it is utmost Stretch of Thought to
frame adequate or equal Ideas of it. Psalm 90.11. Who knows the Power of thine
Anger? according to thy Fear, so is thy Wrath. The Damned must be always
scorched with Flames that shall never expire! The Damned must be always griped
with a Worm that shall never die. The Damned must ever ever drink "the rankest
Venom that can be squeezed out of all the Curses ever God denounced; as I
proved before. But I proceed to consider the second Motive.

2. Motive, Which should excite your Compliance with the former Exhortation and
Directions, viz. The Advantages you are like to obtain thereby. And

1. By $word$ you may obtain Pardon, Jer. 31.18, 19, 20. Luke 15.17, -- 25.
Isai. 61.1, 2, 3. and 44.3. and 55.1. John 6.37. And is not this a great
Privilege? How just is the Psalmist's Observation concerning it, Psalm 32.1.
Blessed is he whose Transgression is forgiven, whose Sin is covered. It he not
blessed in Body and Soul, in Time and for ever after it.

2. By this you may obtain Peace, which is the natural Consequent of the
former, a valuable and precious Benefit, upon which the Comforts of humane Life
very much depend, Romans 2.10. and 8.6. Prove. 3.17. And

3. The divine Benediction upon all your Enjoyments here; which makes rich,
and adds no Sorrow with it, Prove. 10.22. And finally, a Crown in the next Life,
which fades not away: Which may God grant us the Privilege of enjoying for
Christ's sake. Amen.

FINIS.
An INDEX, Or an Account of the Order of the Principal Heads contained in the
preceding Discourse.
THE Introduction. Page 1 Division pa. 2 Explication. pa. 2 to 8 Doctrine. pa.
8 Method. pa. 8 First General Head, whrein is showed both Negatively and
Positively, what it is to go on in a Course of Sin, in 7 Particulars. pa. 8 to
10 Second General Head, which proves that some who go on a course of Sin do
notwithstanding expect Peace. pa. 10 Third General Head, which enquires into
the Grounds of their Expectation of Peace and Impunity, and 1. Ignorance is one
Ground, which is fourfold, 1. Of God. 2. Of themselves. 3. Of the Law in it is
spiritual Extent. 4. Of the Evil of Sin, which is opened in Three Particulars.
pa. 12. to 14 2. Negligence 3. Self Love 4. Inconsideration. pa. 15, 16 Under
which Head is shown the Nature of it is opposite, viz. Inconsideration in Three
Particulars, with some of it is advantageous Consequences. pa. 16, 17 5. Pride.
6. Prosperity. Three Signs of Wealth given in Wrath. 7. False and erroneous
Conceits of these Four Particulars, viz. The Christian's Graces, Affections,
Privileges, Performances; and First, of the Christian Graces in these Nine
Instances following 1. Conviction. 2. Conversion. 3. Of Repentance. 4. Of
Faith. 5. Of Sanctification. Under which Head the difference between the Combat
with Sin that is in the Regenerate and Unregenerate is opened in Four
Particulars. 6 Of Love. 7. Of Hope. 8. Sincerity. 9. Charity. Four Objections
against the Scriptural notion of Charity answered. pa 17 to 26 2. Of the
Affections in Three Particulars, Fear, Desire, Delight. Six Causes among the
Affections opened. p. 26 to 28 3. Of the Privileges of Christians in four
Particulars. pa. 29 4. Of their Performances or Righteousness, Negative,
Positive, Comparative. Eight Signs of dependence upon our own Righteousness
proposed. pa. 30 to 34 8. Some depend upon false Reasonings or Pretexts. Such
as these Fifteen following, 1. There Is none of you all perfect. 2 All are
Sinners. 3 All have their Failings. 4. I don't justify my self. 5. There Is no
Body certain of Salvation. Four Considerations proposed to invalidate this
Pretext. 6. If our state be bad we cannot change it 7. We must wait God's time.
8. I design to turn to God afterward. 9. I have no learning. 10. I have a bad
Memory. 11. If I thought much on such melancholy matters I should grow Crazy.
Ungodly Sinners proved to be Fools from. Three Considerations. 12. If I should
pore much on these Things, I should certainly fall into Despair. 13. But I must
serve God has promised to hear those that ask in his Son's Name. In answer to
this the sinfulness of Presumers Prayers is opened in 8 Particulars. Three bad
Consequences of that opinion, viz. that the Prayers of ungodly People entitle
them to the Promises proposed; and the reasonableness of the contrary Doctrine
opened. 15. The Spirit has different ways of working. All these Pretexts are
answered. pa. 34 to 50 9. Presumptuous Sinners offer many Excuses and Pretexts
to paliate their Sins. And 1. For Drunkenness 5. 2. For Worldly-mindedness 6.
3. For Carnality 4. 4. For Swearing 3. 5. For Sabbath breaking 1. Under which
Head the Morality of the Sabbath is proved by six Reasons. 6. For the Neglect
of Family Worship 5. The necessity of this Practice confirmed by four
Considerations. 7. For neglecting to hear the Word 18. 8. For Passion 2. Under
this Head the nature of sinful Anger is explained in three Particulars. 9. For
the neglect of Charity 6. Under this Head is shown the excellency of Charity in
six Particulars. pa. 50 to 87 10. Another Cause of the Security and false Hope
of wicked People is the Devil. pa. 87 11. The bad Advice of wicked People.
Their common Objections answered in many Particulars. pa. 87 to 97 12. The
daubing of unconverted Ministers; their fraud and fallacy exposed, in many
Particulars. pa. 97 to 102 13. Bad Examples. pa. 102, 103 Fourth General Head,
wherein is showed the Folly, Misery, and Cursed Estate of Presumptuous Sinners.
1. The Presumer's folly is discovered in four Particulars. The Resemblance of
their Hope to a Rush in three Particulars: To a Spider's Web in four,
explained. 2. The sinfulness of their Hope exposed in 9 Particulars. 3. Their
Miseries opened in 9 Particulars, Two Privative, and Seven Positive: The
Privative Miseries of Presumptuous Sinners are, 1. Loss of the Image of God;
the nature of that Image explained in three Particulars. 2. Loss of Communion
with God. Three Signs of Communion with God proposed, and four Particulars of
the Misery of those who want it explained. Their Positive Miseries, 1. They are
under the power of Sin; the spread of Sin over all the Faculties of the Soul
explained, and the horrors and dangers of this State described in many
Particulars. 2. In the Possession of Satan, the qualities of this Enemy
explained in four Particulars. 3. Under the Guilt of Sin, the heinous qualities
of the Presumer's Sins exposed, as also the nature of his Condemnation
therefore, explained in three Particulars. 4. Under the Wrath of God. The
qualities of this described in six Particulars, viz. that it is, 1.
Incomgrehensible. 2. Terrible. 3. Unavoidable, either by slight, force, fraud.
4. Intolerable. 5. Eternal. 6. Continual. The dreadful Nature of God's Wrath
further Illustrated by 5. Considerations, 1. By that of his highness and
tremendous Majesty. 2. Of his Holiness, and spotless Purity. 3. By the depth of
his Wisdom. 4. The Infinity of his Power. 5. The weight of Christ's Sufferings.
5. In a state of Death. This Truth confirmed illustrated, by the description of
12 Resemblances between Presumptuous Sinners and Dead Men. 6 Under the Curse.
Four Properties of this described, viz. that it is, 1. Universal. 2. Judicial.
3. Extreme and terrible. 4. Irrevocable and Eternal. The Eternity of the
Damned's Torments proved by five Arguments. 7. In extreme Danger, in many
respects. pa. 103 to 167
The IMPROVEMENT.
USE. I. Of Consolation; wherein is showed the happy State of gracious Persons.
Particularly that their Blessings are and shall be, 1 Universal. 2. Perpetual.
3. Exquisitely sweet and ravishing. pa. 167 to 170 USE. II. Of Exhortation. p.
170 to 174 Twelve Directions proposed to alarm, and guide Secure Sinners to
Christ. The first Direction urges the necessity of Self-Examination, by three
Arguments. The second the necessity of Self-judging. The third the necessity of
endeavoring after a deep sense of their Misery; by two reasons. The qualities
of this sense of Sin described, or the nature of Conviction opened, in six
Particulars, viz. That it includes, 1. An affecting apprehension of Sin, 1.
Actual. 2. Original. 3. Of the misery of their present State, in four
Particulars, viz. 1. The Certainty of it. 2. The Severity of it. 3. The
Eternity of it. 4. The Equity of it. 2. Fear of Punishment. 3. Sorrow for Sin;
it is qualities described, in four Particulars. 4. Self Despair; it is nature
succinctly opened; and an Objection against Application to godly Ministers
under Soul distress answered by 10 Queries. 5. Shame. 6. Harred against Sin,
it is qualities described in two Particulars. The third Direction also shows how
to attain that Sense or Conviction of Sin. The right manner of hearing the Word
opened, in 5 Particulars, The fourth Direction disswades from strangling
Convictions, by 8 Arguments, and discovers three of the general. Causes of this
Practice. The fifth Direction excites to labor after the increase and
augmentation of Convictions by six Considerations. The sixth Direction urges
the Necessity of Self-Despair by two Reasons, and explains it is nature in six
Particulars. The seventh Direction disswades from impatient Haste, in laboring
to get rid of Soul troubles. The eighth Direction excites to a strict
Examination of the Comforts convinced Persons obtain. The ninth Direction
disswades from $esting upon the bare performance of Duty. The tenth Direction
disswades from unnecessary Conversation with ungodly People. The eleventh
Direction and advises to associate with pious People. The twelfch Direction
advises to open your Case to God. Two Motives to excite Compliance, viz. 1. The
necessity of it. 2. The Advantages obtained by it pa. 174 to the end.
THE Nature of Regeneration OPENED, And it is Absolute Necessity, In Order to
SALVATION, Demonstrated, IN A SERMON From JOH. III. 3. ALSO The Nature of
Adoption, With its Consequent Privileges, Explained. IN A SERMON From 1 JOHN
III. 1.

By the Reverend Mr. John Lennent, Late Minister of the Gospel in Freehold, New
Jersey.

An Expostulatory ADDRESS to Saints and Sinners. Added as an APPENDIX, to the
first of these Discourses: By GILBERT TENNENT, A. M. Minister of the Gospel at
New-Brunswick, in New Jersey

Isai. 1.18. Come now and let us reason together, says the Lord; though your
Sins he as Scarlet, they shall be as white as Snow; though they be red like
Crimson, they shall he as Wool.

Ephesians. v. 1. Be ye followers of God, as dear Children, and walk in love.

BOSTON: N. E. Printed in the Year. 1735.

A prefatory Discourse to the following Sermons, with a Relation of some
Memoirs of their Author's Conversion and Character.
PARDON me, candid Reader, if notwithstanding the Nearness of my Relation to
the Author of the following Sermons, for the Honor of the most hight GOD, and
the Glory of his free Grace, I do his Memory the Justice, and the World the
Service, (I mean such as were nto personally acquainted with him) as to attempt
without the Paint of Flattery, a modest Description of his real Characer.

I am aware that Relatives are apt to be suspected of Partiality, in the
Relations they give of those they are bound to by thy Ties of Nature; because
through the Strength of their natural Affection, their Judgment is apt to be
biased, and their biased Judgment as apt to misguide their Tongue, or Pen,
into hyperbolical Mistakes in their Narratives.

I freely confess there is some Reason for this Suspicion in the general; but
is it not possible for a Relative to get his Mind freed from those partial
Bias$s, so as to observe plain Matters of Fact, with Modesty and Impartiality.
Or must their Reason and Senses be rendered wholly and inviolably Useless, in
such Matters as concern those they are related to. Sure I am, they have an
Advantage above Strangers in this, that they can with more Ease inspect into
the secret and more retired Passages of their Relations Lives, not to say that
it has been the Practice of some great Men (whose Example those of a m$aner
Order are apt to follow pro Viribus) to favor the World with an Account of
their Relations Lives and Characters; whose Names, if it were needful, I could
mention.

I confess I am unequal to the Task I am engaging in, but a Regard to God's
Honor, and the good of Mankind, invite me to attempt it.

Once more, to remove the former Suspicion, I can with the utmost Solemnity
assure the Reader, that what I shall offer, shall be much below what I might in
Justice assert.

But to proceed,

The Reverend Author of the following Sermons, was blessed by God (from whom
every good Donation flows) with a quickness of Apprehension, copiousness of
Fancy, and fluency of Expression. As to acquired Parts, he made no contemptible
Progress in the Knowledge of the learned Languages; as also in philosophical and
theological Studies, considering his Years and Opportunities; which those
Reverend Gentlemen, before whom he passed his Trials, gave honorable Testimony
to, by such an Approbation of his public Performances, as was suited to his
distinguished Merit. But particularly, he excelled in the polemical and
casuistical Parts of Divinity; he was well known to be$a keen Disputant, and an
expert Cassuist. But that which crowned his other Attainents, and made them
appear with Beauty and Luster, in the Eyes of all judicious Beholders, was his
undisguised and eminent Christianity It pleased the God of all Grace some
considerable. Time before his Entrance into the public Ministry, to work a
special Work of his pure Grace in his Heart, which in Concurrence with his
peculiar natural and acquired Endowments, rendered him a prepared and polished
Shast, for the ministerial Work. Give me leave, candid Reader, to relate a few
Passages concerning the Manner of his Conversi$n to God.

His Conviction of Sin, and the State of Danger and Misery he was brought into
by it, was the most violent in Degree, of any that ever I saw: For several Days
and Nights together, he was made to cry out in a most dolorous and affecting
Manner, almost every Mement; the Words that he frequently used in his
Soul-Agony were these, O my poor Soul! O my bloody lost Soul! What "shall I do?
Have Mercy upon me, O God, for Christ's sake! Sometimes he was brought to the
very Brink of Despair, and would conclude, surely God would never have Mercy
upon such a great Sinner as he was; and yet in the mean time, observe Reader!
that his Life was unstained with those scandalous. Extravagancies, which too
many (alas for it!) in the Bloom of their Youth are ensnared by. His natural
Predominant was the Sin of Passion, or rash Anger, and the worst I ever knew
him guilty of, was some indecent Heats this Way; which afterward he was
exceedingly humbled for and watchful against; his Passionateness cost him many
a deep Sob, heavy Groan and salt Tear, and after it pleased the blessed God to
confer his free Grace upon him, he was remarkably altered in this Particular,
and gained in a great Measure, the ascendant over it. Now, Reader, considering
that the Manner of his Life before his Conve$sion was such, as to be free from
gross Enormities, the depth of his Distress under his Conviction, and that in
young Years, is the more remarkable, and serves to confute that vain Notion, of
some carnal People, that if Persons have not been profane in their Lives, then
they say there no need of deep Convictions, and grea$ Anguish of Soul, in order
to a true Closure with Christ. Indeed his Distress was such, as forced him to
make an open Confession of his Sins, to almost all that came near him; as also
to beg their Prayers at God's Throne in his Behalf; and this he did in such a
piteous Manner, with such a dejected frighted Countenance, like that of a Man
going to be put on a Rack, or Gibbet, or having his Head upon a Block in order
to be chopped off; and with such dolorous Groans, and vehement Importunity, did
he implore Heaven for Relief and Pardon, that even some Strangers who came to
see him, were much affected therewith; the Tears trickling down their Cheeks
like Hail. At the beginning of his Conviction, I endeavored to heighten it, by
representing to him the particular and heinous Aggravations of those Sins, I
knew or supected him to be guilty of, in a Dress of Horror; least his
Conviction should languish, and he relapse into a dangerous Security. But when
I perceived that it increased to a great Degree, and was attended with vehement
longing after Christ, and a Willingness to forsake all for him; I altered the
former Method.

I think I had sufficient Evidence of the depth of his Humiliation and Strength
of his Desire after Christ, in the following Instances, and many others that
might be mentioned, did I not design Brevity. He professed with an "Agony of
Passion that he was willing to bear the Torments of Hell, if so he might but
get a Sight of Christ, and an Interest in him; be earnestly and frequently
begged of God, that he would humble him to the Dust, yea below the Dust.

One Morning about the break of Day, after great Wrestling through the Night
and Day preceding, he took occasion from the Time of the Day, to speak as
surprizingly as ever I heard any Mortal about the Morning- Star, longing and
praying. that the blessed Jesus, the "true, the bright, the beautiful Morning
Star, who had introduced the Light and the Day, into a dark World, would appear
in Mercy to his poor distressed Soul; and thus he improved the Time about the
Sun's rising, "begging that the Sun of Righteousness would shine upon his
disconsolate, dejected, wretched Soul with Beams of Mercy and Salvation. And
thus he improved many other Occurrences every of which were they here
mentioned, would-swell this Paper to too large a Bulk. But to be brief, his
Heart seemed to be sick, sore sick with panting after Christ, ready to burst in
preces. I have (Glory to God) through the Riches of free Grace, been honored
with the Sight of many a convinced Sinner, but never did I behold besides
himself, any in such a Rack of acute and continued Anguish, under the dismal
Apprehensions of a holy, just, jealous and provoked Deity, impending Ruin and
endless Misery.

Now when I perceived such plain Signs of a deep Comviction, great Humiliation,
and earn$st Desire, I altered the former Method as I hinted before, and offered
all the encouraging Supports I could gather from every promisory Part of the
sacred Scriptures, that I thought related to his Case, that I might minister
Comfort to his sick Soul, but in vain. Sometimes after having offered a
promisory Scripture, and labored to persuade him that he had an Interest in
it, because the Conditions on which the promised Blessings were suspended, were
wrought in him; this would have sometimes so much Influence upon him, that it
would prevent his crying out for a few Minutes, (just like a Man drowning in
troubled Waters, a small Twig may support for a sow Moments, but the next Surge
that comes will beat him off) and then immediately the Torrent of his Grief
would break forth, in the most doleful Accents, complaining that neither that
nor any other "Promise in the whole Bock of God belonged to him; that the
Conditions annexed to them were not wrought in him. The Truth is, his Wound was
so deep, that none but God's own Arm could heal it. But it pleased the
Almighty, after four Days and four Nights, enduring the utmost Agony of Soul
Distress, in which space he cried out almost every Moment, after the Manner
before described, to make his Consolations as conspicuous and eminent as his
Conviction has been. But by the Way, observe Reader, that for some Time before
it pleased the Almighty to shed abroad the Beams of Mercy and Love into his
Soul, he was much exercised with sorrowful and piercing Reflections upon his
conceived Hypocrisy; he judged and condemned himself to be a Pharisee, a
Hypocrite, for crying out as he had done, and yet the biting of his Conscience,
the Sharpness of his inward Pain, and Weight of his Grief was such, that he
could not prevent it, therefore he would have all People out of the Room, that
he might pray and mourn alone.

One Morning when I went in to see him, I perceived a great Alteration in his
Countenance; he that but about an Hour before, looked like a condemned Man,
going to be put to some cruel Death, looked upon me with a cheerful gladsome
Countenance, (so as if a Person oppressed with Poverty, had the most valuable
Diadems, and opulent Kingdoms the Earth affords or contains, conferred upon h$m
would look) and spoke to me in these Words, O "Brother! the Lord J$sus has come
in Mercy to my Soul, I was begging for a Crumb of Mercy, with the Dogs, and
Christ has told me he would give a Crumb. Then he desired me to thank God by
Prayer, which I did more than once. He also requested me to praise God by
singing Part of a Psalm, which I complied with, and sung the thirty-fourth. And
was it not strange and surprising Reader, to hear this Person, of whom I have
been treating, singing the Praises of God with more Joy, Energy and Clearness,
than any of the Spectators, who crowded in upon so extraordinary and solemn and
Occasion, especially considering the Time when this happened, viz. between ten
and eleven of the Clock in the Forenoon, and that aboat three of the Clock the
same Morning he was Speechless for some Minutes, and in the Judgment of all the
Spectators, expiring, in the Pangs of Death. Yea the Consolations of God had
such a mighty Influence upon him, that about an Hour or two after he went
thirty-two Rods upon his own Feet, with but a very little Help to see his
Brother, the Reverend Mr. William Tennent, who was then extremely sick, nigh
unto Death, deemed by the most, past all humane Probability of Recovery; for he
said, he must see his Brother, in order to tell him, what "God had done for his
Soul, that he might praise God upon his Account, before he died: And indeed
when he came to the upper Room where his Brother lay (who is yet through Mercy
alive, and who has been and is like to be further serviceable to advance the
Kingdom of Jesus, in the Hearts fo Sinners) I having him by one Hand, and Mr.
Court Van Varhes by the other he had almost sprung out of our Hands, when he
came near the H$ad of the Stairs, the Joy of God became so his Strength and
Song! When he came to his Brother, he addressed him in these Words, O Brother!
the Lord has looked in "Pity upon my Soul, let the Heavens, Earth and Sea, and
all that in them is, praise God! -- But being exposed too soon to the cold Air,
he sell into a Fever, and then in some few Hours questioned that eminent
Discovery of God's Love; but was in a little time aster comforted, and
thenceforward the Course of his Conversation was altered; he had many after
Sealings of God's Covenant-Love, but in the Intervals was frequently dejected,
and distressed with doubtful Thoughts about his State. Don't expect Reader,
that I should relate what aff$cting Impressions these extraordinary Occurrences
had upon the Hearers and Spectators; only one particular I must not conceal
with a Vail of Silence, viz That a certain Person of Distinction, who in
Respect of practical Religion was but Galeo-like, being present when my
Reverend Brother received these Consolations mentioned, was forced to confess,
That the Sight of these Things, was enough to convince an Atheist of the
Reality of Religion".

But to proceed, after these satisfactory Discoveries of the Love of God in
Jesus, he became a conscientious Performer of the Duti$s of Religon, both
negative, positive and relative. He was cautious in avoiding all incentives to
Vice, as being sensible of his own Weakness, and the Force of Temptations.

He was painful in the Performance of such Duties especially, as were most
contrary to Nature's Ease, such as constant secret Devotion, and frequent
Fasting, the last of which is almost wholly neglected, by the greatest Part of
the present Generation, both young and old, which is for a Lamentation!

He was a tender hearted, kind and courteous Relative, of a very sympathetick
Spirit, and particularly his dutiful Respects to his reverend and aged Father,
his honored and affectionate Mather, (of whose early Kindnesses he still
retained a grateful Sense) merits honorable Mention and cheerful Imitation His
great Soul disdained any thing that was mean and trivial, and inclined him to
the most noble and generous Actions that were within the Verge of his Power.
But not to insist here,

I proceed to consider his Seize in the christian Graces or Virtues: Now
there are these three, viz. Humility, Love to Christ, and Zeal for his Kingdom,
in which it pleased God to give him considerable Advances, each of which I
shall speak a little of. And

1. He was wont to express himself in the most abasing Strains, viz "That he
thought himself, one of the worst of Creatures ever the Creation bore!" Give me
leave to mention but a few Instances of his Humility and Modesty.

Was not this a remarkable Evidence of the abasing Sense he had of his own
Unworthiness, that, the earnestly upon his dving Bed, desired his Relations, to
forbear any " Funeral-Encomiums upon him when he was gone; for he asserted with
some Degree of Passion, that he deserved none. But this was an Instance of his
Modesty and Humility, yet we cannot but think, that we should obey God rather
than Man, by laboring to convey the Memoirs of God's peculiar Goodness,
expressed to his Servant, to the latest Posterity.

Another Instance was this, when he was admitted to the ministerial Office, in
his private Studies, he often took the Bible in his Hand, and walked up and
down the Room weeping and mourning over it, because although there was such a
Treasury of precious Truths contained in that blessed Book, that he understood
so little (as he thought) of them. A Sense of the Greatness of the ministerial.
Work, and of his own Ignorance and Unfitness for it, (as he conceived) was
often a very oppressive Burden to his Spirits.

Again, It was long, even after it pleased God to succeed his Labors, before
he could be persuaded to believe that the sovereign Majesty of Heaven, would
bless the Endeavors of a Person every Way so mean and unworthy, as he reckoned
himself to be; and therefore when Reports were brought to him, of Persons
convinced by his Sermons, he could not think for a Time that they were real and
speacial, until further Matter of Conviction was offered him, by a Variety of
bright and incontestable Evidences,

As to his Love to the Lord Jesus, it is necessary I should offer one Word: It
may be asserted with Truth and Justice: that he had an affectionate Affection
to the King of Saints; which he expressed to the surprise and satisfaction of
such devout Souls, who had the advantage of hearing his eloquent, and earnest
Prayers. Christ and him crucified, was the mark of his Pursuits, the sacred
Center, to which the various Lines of his Life run, with a delightful proness;
of his supreme Love, and highest Admiration! Of Him he would often speak, in
the rethorical and rapturous Strains, of Love Language! Upon this most
excellent, precious, and delightful Subject, his Tongue was sometimes as the
Pen of a ready Writer.

He had also a very flaming Zeal for the promotion and establishament of the
Messiah's Kingdom; it was often, often his Petition to God; a Request, which he
usually offered, with much Vehemence! Namely, that it would please "the
Gracious God, to make him serviceable to his Church in the World; and that he
would not suffer him to live only to devour the Alms of it, but rather remove
him to himself, before he became useless, and unprofitable: Which Request the
Almighty granted, for he was carried off in a throng of Labor and Success;
when his Heart was much set upon the Work of God, and his People's Love upon
him.

It we consider him in his public Character: It pleased that God in whose
hands the Hearts of all Men are, and who can turn them, as he does the Streams
of Water, in the South; to stir up in him earnest Longings after the Service of
God and his Church in the Ministerial Office; a Station which the Fountain of
Gifts, and Father of Spirits, had in a peculiar manner qualified him for; a
Station in which he thought he might more eminently dedicate and devote all his
Parts and Powers to the Glorious God; in laboring to illustrate his Honor,
and advance his People's Interest: With these Desires and Designs, after having
passed the usual Trials, with uncommon Approbation, he came into the Ministry;
in which he labored as a Workman, that needed not to be ashamed.

His Ministerial Administrations, were attended with three notable qualities,
viz Prudence, Pains, and Success.

He behaved himself in all respects, with such decent caution, but yet attended
with such Christian plainness, and manly boldness; that those of his People who
loved him not (though indeed there were but few such) seared him.

As to his Pains in the Ministerial Work, the Truth is, his labor was great!
though his Time was short, his Race was swift and vehement! His Heart was so
fixed upon the Work of God, that there was no persuading him to desist, in the
progress of his public Labors, even then when his Body was much emaciated and
weakened by a Consumptive Illness; when it was judged by skilful Physicians,
very prejudical to his broken and languishing Constitution. He often preached
to his dear People, while he was under the power and influence of a burning
Fever; which plainly showed the flame and servor of his Zeal, and that he had
but little regard to his Body; compared with the precious Souls of Men, for
whom he was willing to spend and be spent.

In his public Discourses, not to mention the justness of his Method, beauty
of Style, and fluency of Expression, by which he chained his not unwilling
Hearers to his Lips; he was very awakning and terrible (to Unbelievers) in
denouncing and describing, with the most vehement pathos and awful solemnity!
the terrors of an offended Deity; the threats of a broken Law, the miseries of
a sinful State; and this Subject in the Course of his Ministry, he insifted
much upon; because he found it by experience, (with many others) the most
effectual and successful mean to alarm secure Sinners: And observe, Reader, he
used a close distinguishing and detecting method in the Application of his
Sermons, which with his pungent mode of Expression, was very piercing and
solemn. but as Dr. Watts observes in his Funeral Elegy upon Mr. Gouge, so I may
truly say of him, that he knew the pity of Emanuel's Heart, sas well "as the
terrors of Jehouvah's Hand. He was as tender and compassionate in his addresses
to gracious Souls, as he was awful and awakening to others; he knew as well how
to open and apply the Gospel Balsom to silk Souls, as to brandish and apply the
Law's Lancet to the Secure; and he was as willing to do the one, as the other.
But indeed he was very cautious of misapplying the different Portions of the
Word to his Hearers, or of setting before them only a common Miss (as he manner
of some is) and leaving it to them to divide it among themselves, as their
fancy and humor directed them; for he knew well that that was the bane of
preaching.

Once more, He was a very successful Minister. When he was under Trials in
order to the Ministry, he was much exercised with doubts, difficulties and
distresses, about his Call to that great and awful Trust: but it pleased the
good God to dissipate these Clouds, and afford to his perplexed anxious mind,
abundant Satisfaction respecting this matter, by the numerous Seals which
crowned his pubsick Labors; (for as samous Rutherford observes, "it is not
probable "that God will Seal a Blank) so that it may be truly said of him, that
the gained more poor Sinners to Christ in that little compass of time which he
had to improve in the Ministerial Work, which was but about Three Years and an
half, than many in the space of Twenty, Thirty, Forty or Fisty Years. Many
Souls have, and will have, reason to bless God to Eternity, that ever they saw
him: But though he was thus honored with the smiles of Heaven, upon his Labors;
with the kind regards of a loving, and generous People; who had it been
possible, could have plucked out their Eyes, and given them to him, Gal. 4.15.
A People, who showed as much respectful regard, and sympathy, as ever any
before them did to a Minister! Yet was he far from being exalted in his own
Mind, but through Grace, still retained a just, grateful, and humble Sense of
God's distinguishing goodness, and his own unworthiness.

But I must hasten to consider the melancholy concluding Period, of this
labourious, and successful Scene of Action.

As he drew nearer to his End, his Love to, and Concern for, his People
increased; he would often express himself to his Brother, with many tears, in
these Words! I am " grieved for my poor People! for I fear they will be lest to
wander, as Sheep without a Shepherd, or get one that will pull down, what I
have poorly endeavored to build up. Yea his his Brother (who lay by him) has
frequently overheard him, in deep silence of the Night, wrestling with God by
Prayer, with sobs and tears (as he understood) for his People! even then when
so reduced, by the Consumption, that he could scarce walk alone; the wasting
pains of which lingering and tedious Distemper, he bore with unbucken Patience,
and silent Submission to his Father's Pleasure; until it pleased God to open a
door of escape to his captive Soul, through the ruins of his decayed Frame.

On Saturday Evening, the last Evening of his Life, he was seized with a
violent [pang] of Death, which was thought by the Standers by, to be his last;
of which, unexpectedly reviving, and observing a disorder among them, he
addressed one of them thus, whom he saw uncommonly affected, with a cheerful
Countenance; I would not "have you think the worse of the ways of Holiness,
because you see me in such Agonies of Distress, for I know there is a Crown of
Glory in Heaven for me, which I shall shortly wear. Afterward many times in
the Night, he earnestly prayed in these words, Come Lord "Jesus, Come Lord
Jesus! O Jesus! why do thou linger. Sometime before Day, after a little
Pause, he expressed with a humble Confidence, the last words of the sweet
Psalmist of Israel, 2 Samuel 23.5. Although my "House be not so with God, yet
has he made with me an everlasting Covenant, ordered in all things and sure:
for this is all my salvation, and all my desire. About the break of Day, he
called his Brother William to Prayer; and earnestly desired him, to implore
Heaven for his speedy removal; for the said, "He longed to be gone." About
Eight or Nine of the Clock, on the Morning of the Sabbath, (the Season which he
used to improve in the most earnest and winged Supplications to the divine
Majesty, for his Blessing upon the Church in general, and particularly for that
Branch of it, he presided over; it pleased his Master to translate him, to that
Great Assembly to the Just, the Church of the first born, there to celebrate an
eternal Sabbatism, in Praises and Songs of Triumph! instead of his former
painful Employments.) A few Minutes before he expired, he broke out into the
following rapturous Expressions (having his Brother William by the Hand)
Farewell "my Brethren, Farewell Father and Mother, Farewell World, with all thy
vain Delights: Welcome God and Father, Welcome sweet Lord Jesus: Welcome Death,
Welcome Eternity, Amen. A little after he only mentioned with a low Voice (the
strength of Nature being broken) these words, "Come Lord Jesus, Come Lord
Jesus!" and so he fell asleep in Christ. and obtained an abundant Emrance into
the Everlasting Kingdom of his God and Savior; and has left us to mourn! the
Loss the Church of Christ has sustained in general, by the dismal gloom of an
angry Heaven, in the removal of so prevailing an Intercessor, and faithful
Watchman (who could well found an alarm) and his own Congregation and Relations
in particular! by the absence of such a painful Pastor, and passionate Friend.
What a doleful presage is it to a Land, of impending, apptoaching Calamities,
when the Great God looks up such Jewels in his Cabinet! Isai. 57.1.

He has left us to mourn our own, and the public Loss; by the removal of such
a Guide from us, and Guard from others, in the passionate Language of Elisha,
over a departed Elijab, 2 Kin. 9.12. And Elisha saw it, and he cried, My
Father, my Father! the Chariot of Israel, and the Horsemen thereof: and he took
hold of his Clothes and rent them in two pieces.

He is gone to the Rest of God, and left us behind him in this doleful Desert;
to travel and mourn, and hang our Harps on Willows; while he drinks the Joys of
Angels, in that Seat of perfect Pleasure, where all tears are wiped away. For

Jam procul a patria mesti Babylonis ad oras.
Fluminis ad Liquidas mesti Sedemus aquas.
By Babel's Borders sorrowful we sit.
Far from the Country where we Love we wait.
He has left us to mourn, but blessed be God not without Hope, a rational and
Scriptural Hope, of meeting in a better Country, where there will be no need of
parting any more, and where they happy Inhabitants are perfectly freed from
Sorrow, Strise, and Sin. A Country of which a poor Indian could say,

Illic vera quies, illic sine fine, voluptas;
Gaudia et humani, non referenda sonis.
There Joy unbounded, infinitely glides,
There Is Rest and Pleasure, blooming too besides.
Thus did this faithful Servant of God, live, and thus did he die.

Sic Mihi contingat vivere, sicq; more.
Thus let me Live, thus let me Die, O God!
Thus let me triumph, on the shining Road.
It may be with Justice observed, concerning him, that he lived much desired,
and died much lamented. His Funeral Hearse was well environed by thronging
Crowds, and well bedewed with ornamental tributary Tears.

The Reverend and Ingenious Ms Dickinson of Ellsabeth-Town, composed the
following, Elogy, to be Inscribed on his Tomb Stone; which is indeed a just and
genuine Description of his Character.

Here lies what was Mortal of the Reverend Mr. John Tennent, Not. Nov. 12th.
1707. Obije April 23.1732.

Who quick grew Old, in Learning, Virtue, Grace;
Quick finished well, yielded to Death's Embrace,
Whose moulder'd Dust, this Cabinet contains,
Whose Soul triumphant, with bright Seraph's reigns.
Waiting the time, till Heaven's bright Conclave flame,
And the last Trump, repairs his ruined frame.
Cur prematuram mortem, queramur acerbam.
Mors matura V$$it, cum bona vita suit.
But I proceed to speak something of the following Sermons, and this I must
crave leave to say of them, that though they are bereaved of their Author's
finishing Hand, which doubtless would have helped them to appear with more
beauty and luster, yet as they are, I cannot but hope that they will be grateful
to all devout and intelligent Persons, and accepted of as Specimens of their
Author's Ingenuity and Piety.

The Subjects treated of in them are weighty and momentous: The first treats of
Regeneration which is the foundation of practical Religion, the Soul that
animates it, without which it is but a dead Carcass; the Source from which it
springs. Secondarily, in this Sermon you have the nature of this Change
plainly, and succinctly opened, it is absolute necessity in order to Salvation
incontestibly demonstrated, and it is inseparable Characters agreably and justly
displayed. In the second you have the Nature of Adoption, the necessary
consequent of Regeneration, with its peculiar and noble Privileges, solidly
though briefly discussed.

I made choice of these Sermons, not because I deemed them the best of his
Composure, but because best suited to the Subject before treated of.

I beseech the Reader, that he would read them with attention and reflection,
and ask the Divine Direction and Benediction upon his pains; for this is the
way in which only he has rational encouragement of meeting with saving good and
edification.

Courteous Reader, I have added an Expostulatory Addres, to, and Lamentation
over unconverted Sinners, with some Directions to those that are truly
gracious, by Way of Appendix to the first of these Sermons of my Brother's,
partly because the Discourse concluded abruptly, and principally because I
wanted to express a little of the Thoughts, Sorrows and Desires of my Soul,
upon that so necessary and precious a Subject; that I might essay to allure the
Sinner's Love, as I had attempted in the first Discourse, to strike their Fear;
that so by any Means, if it were the good Pleasure of God, I might be an
Instrument in his Hand, of gaining some to Christ. I cannot say I have come up
to the Dignity and Weight of the Subject; but I can say, I have desired and
attempted it. Pray Reader, Be entreated to weigh the Arguments in thy Mind
impartially, and then judge if they are not rational? And I beseech thee to
remember, for Christ's Sake, that in this World only (which is a State of
Probation) there is Time to work out your Salvation in: The Damned in Hell are
for ever past it, the Blessed in Heaven are in the perfect Enjoyment of it;
therefore call upon God while he is near, seck him while he may be found, Isai.
55.6. Let not unconverted Sinners encourage themselves in Sin, because God
delays the Execution of his Justice, for the longer abused Patience waits, the
more enflamed and terrible will be the Executions of provoked Anger at last;
when Men have filled up the Measure of their Impieties, and thereby ripened
themselves for the Strokes of it. Genesis 15.16. Jer. 51.13. Isai 42.14 I have a
long Time holden my Peace, I have been still and refrained my self, now will I
cry like a travailing Woman, I will destroy and devour at once.

And let not the Saint think his Work is over, because he is converted; this is
just as if the Israelites when they had passed through the Red sea, had
imagined themselves to be got into Canaan, but they afterward found an $owling
Wilderness to travel through, full of Dangers, Difficulries and Enemies, which
they must grapple with, before they get to Canaan, and so will you. When the
Ship is built, and rigged, and launched, and loaded, and beginning to move to
her Port, the Voyage is but just begun; the Mariners must expect to meet with
Storms and hard Labor, before they get to their intended Harbor: Thus it is
with you my dear Brethren, Conversion but leads you into that narrow Way, in
which you must expect Travel and Labor, and Difficulties of different Kinds.
But in the mean time, I confess that Conversion gives you an habitual Fitness
to perform the one and sustain the other. Beware of being ensnared by the
Amusements of this vain World; remember you will pay dear for all stolen
Sweets. Beware of forgetting your first Love. Beware of a covsetous, slothful
or ambitious Spirit, each of which will prove very prejudicial to your
Progress, if indulged. Live within Sight of your own Country. O! bring forth
Fruits for Christ; for what do you stand in the Vineyard but for this? What is
the Design of all the Waterings of the Word, and prunings of Providence, but to
make you fruitful? Read Isai. 5. Remember the Dignity to which you are
advanced, and act worthy of it; you are the Sons of a King, disdain and avoid
base sneaking Actions, as unsuitable to your exalted Character. Hasten, Hasten,
Hasten, upon the Wings of Faith, and Feet of Love, to your Rest. Watch ye,
stand fast in the Faith, quit you like Men, be strong. 1 Cor. 16.13. I commit
you to God and to the Word of his Grace, which is able to make you perfect,
stablish, strengthen, settle you, and to give you an Inkeritance among them
that are sanctified, Acts 20.32. 1 Pet. 5.10.

And remain Yours In the Dear LORD JESUS, Gilbert Tennent.

New-Brunswick, July 19th. 1734.

POSTSCRIPT.
IF any ungodly Men with effronted Impudence, will deride the foregoing broken
Memoirs, I have given of my Brother's Conversion and Character, it being
natural for the Sons of Pride, to laugh at that which through their Blindness
and blockish Jgnorance they cannot, or through their Malice and Prejudice
against God and Religion, they will not understand; Remember that by your Scoffs,
you make your own Bonds and Fetters strong, Isai. 28.22. You cannot by your
Virulence hurt the venerable Dead: He is got beyond the Reach of your Rage; and
as for my self, I look upon your groundless and envenomed Calumnies, among my
greatest Honors; but if ye desire a further Answer, take it in the Words of
Dr. WATTS, in one of his Lyrick Poems.

'Laugh ye Profane, and swell, and burst,
'with bold Impiety,
'Yet ye shall live, for ever cursed,
'and wish in Vain to die.
Farewell, G.T.

Regeneration Opened.
JOHN III. 3. JESUS answered and said unto him, Verily, verily, I say unto
thee, Except a Man be born again, be cannot see the Kingdom of GOD.


THESE Words are Part of a remarkable Dialogue between Christ and Nicodemus; in
which Nicodemus his Fear, Ignorance, and Willingness to be taught, are
principally bewrayed; he was one of the Pharisees, as we are informed from the
first Verse of this Chapter, who in General were stated Enemies against Christ,
and his Gospel; these Pharisees were proud Separatists, who upon the Opinion of
their own Righteousness despised all others.

As to his Station, he was a Ruler, as the Word Archoon signifies; this Man
being in a high and eminent Station, through Fear of incurring the Anger or
Displeasure of the Jewish Sanedrim, by openly professing Christ, came to him by
Night, Verse 2. Thus we see what Clogs, Hindrances, and Impediments, Honor,
Grandeur, and Greatness are, in the Way of the Profession and Practice of Truth
and Holiness; yet it is evident from the Words of Nicodemus, in the second ver.
notwithstanding his Fears to acknowledge openly the Truth of Christ's Mission
from the Father, that be had a well grounded Persuasion of it, $$om the
Miracles the blesses Jesus had wrought; Rabbi, we know that thou art a Teacher
come from God: for no Man can do those Miracles that thou do$st, except God be
with him. But certainly it is of vast Consequence and Importance, that the
gross Ignorance and strange Stupidity of this learned Man, a Teacher in Israel,
concerning the vital Part of Piety, -- are so perspicuously detected in our
Text and Context. Jesus answered and said unto him, Verily --. In the Words are
three Things remarkable, 1. A Proposition. 2. An Asseveration. 3. The implicit
Occasion of them both.


1. The Proposition in these Words, Except a Man be born again, he cannot see
the Kingdom of God. In it there be two Things, 1. The Subject, a Man. 2. The
Predicate, or that which is spoken concerning the Subject, be born again.


1. As to the Subject, a Man. This indefinite Expression (the Matter so
requiring as the present Case is) is equipollent, or equivalent to a universal.
It is as much as if he had said every Man, of whatsoever Order, or Character,
or Age, or Nation, Great or Small, Rich or Poor, Noble or Ignoble, Learned or
Unlearned, Young or Old, Jew or Gentile, Bond or Free, Male or Female, must be
born again, or they cannot see the Kingdom o God. Gal. 6; 15. Heb. 12.14. 1 Pet
1.23. 2 John 1.13. John 3.7. 1 John 2.29. and 3.9. and 5.4.

2. The Predicate; which being complex treats of two Things, viz. (1.) Of
Happiness under that Term the Kingdom of God. (2.) The Qualification
universally necessary to obtain it, which is being born again; ean me it is
gennesthe anwthen. The Greek Word anwthen is generally rendered superne, from
above, but the Tenor of our Context, especially Nicodemus his Answer to Christ,
How can a Man enter the second Time --? Verse 4. sufficiently proves that if
signifies as much here as deuteron, or again, our dunatai idein, ton basi$cian
tu theou; be cannot see the Kingdom of God; by seeing here I understand
possessing, according to that Phrase of the Romans, Hereditatem cernere. A
Proof of this we have in our Lord's Sermon on the Mount, Matthew 5.8. Blessed are
the Pure in Heart: for they shall see God; i. e. they shall see him to their
Comfort, see him so as to enjoy him, see him as a Friend and Father, and
possess him as a satisfying Portion. Cannot, an unregenerate Man is under a
threefold Impotency, in Regard of the Enjoyment of God's Kingdom.


1. Natural. He must take this Kingdom by main Force out of the Hands of a just
and infinite GOD, if he gets it at all, while he remains in this State. Now
what Power has a guilty Worm to do this? Whose Foundation is in the Dust, and
who is crushed before the Moth, Job 4.19.

2. Moral. He is a Subject utterly unqualified for the pure Pleasures that
Kingdom affords, being universally corrupt, and subject to the Government of
Sin and Sense.

3. Judicial. He is disseized of, and separated from this Inheritance, by the
Sentence of Christ the Judge of Quick and Dead; which no Power in Heaven or
Earth can reverse: For He that lives and was dead, carries the Keys of Hell
and Death at his Girdle, Rev. 1.18.

An Unregenerate Person, as such, neither can, nor shall see the Kingdom of
Heaven, so as to inherit lit, if there be Power enough in God and Christ to
keep him out; for this Christ gives his Word in pawn, which he will surely
accomplish. Now there is a threefold Kingdom made mention of in the Holy
Scriptures.

1. A Kingdom of God's Providence, established upon the Basis of God's
uncontrollable Power, and unsearchable Wisdom, 1 Chronicles. 29.11. Jacob's God has
the reins of Covernment on his Shoulders, He weilds the Eternal Scepter, and
sits at the sacred Helm.

2. The Kingdom of God's Grace in the Church; built upon Christ the Golden
Foundation, the chief Corner Stone: This Kingdom is given to the Branch by God
the Father, as the inspired Evangelist testifies, Luke 1.32.

3. A Kingdom of Glory and Blessedness: Matthew. 25.34. Come ye blessed of my
Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you -- This last mentioned I take to
be the Kingdom designed by Jesus in the Text, viz. that triumphant Quire in
which the Saints and Angels sing Eternal Hallelujah's, to the Everlasting King.
Heaven is called a Kingdom, because in it God rules his Sons and Subjects.
God's Kingdom is where he reigns: Now he reigns in Righteousness, Heb. 1.8. Thy
Throne O God is for ever and ever! a Scepter of Righteousness, is the Scepter
of thy Kingdom.

2. The Asseveration, Verily, Verily. This Asseveration is a conspicuous
Confirmation of the Truth of the Proposition, tending clearly to manifest the
great Momentousness and Importance of it. There be two Things in the
Asseveration which serve to establish inviolably the Vetacity or Truth of the
Proposition, viz. (1.) The Repetition of the Particle Amen. (2.) The Dignity of
the Speaker. The Word Amen, rendered Verily in the Text, is twosold, either
Prefixed or affixed; when it is prefixed or put before a Proposition, it is the
Note of a certain and earnest Affirmation, as in the Words of our Text, Verily,
verily. When it is affixed or subsequent to a Proposition, it notes two Things:
Either (1.) The Assent of the Mind, Will, Affections, as at the Conclusion of
the Creed and the Lord's Praver. Or (2.) An Asseveration, or certain
Affirmation, as the Word Amen, at the End of the Lord's Prayer, signifies not
only our Assent to, but Assurance of the Reality and Certainty of the Things
therein contained; now the Repetition of this Particle in our Text, like the
redoubling of Pharach's Dream, Genesis 41.32. shows us at once the undeniable
Certainty and great Weight of the Thing spoken of.



2. The Dignity of the Speaker: Who is it that speaks thus? The blessed and
holy Jesus, as our Text informs us; which Name some derive from Temi mitto, a
Word that signifies to send, because the Lord Jesus is the bright Angel, the
faithful Messenger of the everlasting Covenant; Mal. 3.1. Heb. 3.2. Others from
jaw sano, a Word that signifies to heal, because our Lord Jesus was the true
Physician, Math. 9.12. Mark 2.17. Basil and Cyril among the Ancients are of
this Opinion.

But the Angel explains the true Derivation of it, Mat. 1.21. And thou shall
call his Name Jesus, for he shall save his People from their Sins. And that not
only typically, as M$ses and J$shua, and others, but really and truly. Nor (2)
only temporally, as those before mentioned, just from bodily Miseries, but from
spiritual and eternal, from Sin and Death, Heb. 2.14. 1 Cor. 15.55, 56, 57. 1
John 3.8. (3.) Neither did he only free his People from Misery, as M$ses did
Israel out of Egypt,; no, but as his Type Joshua led Israel into Canaan; so
does the blessed jesus the Antitype, introduce his People into a State of
endless, uninterrupted, and unspeakably ravishing Delight, in the Imperial
Paradise, of which the earthly Canaan was but a dark Figure. Now I say, the
Dignity of the Person speaking in our Text, gives great Weight and Confirmation
to the Truth spoken. Will he who is Truth it self lie? Will he who is the great
Prophet of his People, coequal and co eternal with his Father, the Brightness
of his Glory, the Express Image of his Person, Heb 13.4.8. deceive us? I say
unto you: I who am the Alpha and Omega, the first and the last; the King of
kings, and Lord of lords, and Prince of the Kings of the Earth.

As to the third Particular, the Ground or Occasion of the Words of our Text,
implied in that Phrase, Jesus answered. It is difficult to find out what were
the Words Nicodemus spoke, to which Jesus gave answer, there is a Diversity of
Opinions about it. Some think that Christ's Words, are a direct Answer to those
Words of Nicodemus mentioned in the second Verse; As if Christ had said, Thou
look upon me as a Prophet only, thou can do no otherwise, unless thou
were regenerated. Others think, and that more probably, that from the good
Opinion Nicodemus had of Christ, he asked the Way to Salvation; and that our
Text is an Answer to that Question.

From the Words thus briefly explained, there arises these two doctrinal
Observations, the one implied, and the other expressed.

Obser. I. That Man from his very Birth is depraved.

Obser. II. That Regeneration is absolutely necessary in Order to obtain
eternal Salvation.

As to the first of these which is this, That Man from his very Birth is
depraved.

The Method I design to follow in prosecuting this Doctrine is 1. To prove the
Truth of it. 2. Explain the Nature of it. 3. To improve it. And


1. I am to consider the Truth of the Doctrine. This is plain from the Text,
for if the first Birth was not vitiated, what need would there be of a second.
The royal Prophet Isaiah upbraids Israel with this, And was called a
Transgressor from the Womb, Isai. 48.8. The Psalmist gives Testimony to the
same Truth, Psalm 51.5. I was shapen in Sin, not only corrupted with Sin as
soon as born, but before, even in our Formation. Job confirms this in the 14th.
Chapter of his Book, 4. Verse. Who can bring a clean Thing out of an unclean?
not one. Yea, the blessed Jesus makes this the Ground of the Necessity of a
Change, in the 7. Verse of our Context, That which is born of the Flesh is
Flesh: As if Christ should say, You need not wonder, Nicodemus, at my
Inculcation of the Necessity of this inward Change or New Birth; because Men
are corrupted from their first Birth. This original Depravity is conveyed to
all the Sons of Adam by Generation, unless prevented by a Miracle, as in
Christ. The Sickness and Death of Infants are a plain and umanswerable Proof of
this: For the Wages of Sin is Death, Romans 6.23. Also the baptismal Laver shows
this hereditary Contagion and Infection. But

2. I am to explain the Nature of this Depravity. which consists chiefly in
these three Things, viz.

1. In a Privation of Good. 2. In an Antipathy to God. 3. In a Propensity to
Evil.
1. Then, In every Unregenerate Soul, there is a privation of all good: There
is no Spark or signature of that pristine beautiful Image engraven at first on
the Soul by God; no relics of Man's primitive Righteousness, neither in habit
or in act, in inclination or motion, that is spiritually good, Romans 7.18 In my
flesh, i. e. in my Nature considered as corrupted, there dwells no good thing.
The Soul is deprived of it is ancient Ornaments and Furniture; it is left poor
without spiritual riches, blind without saving knowledge, naked without
spiritual raiment. Rev. 3.17.

And,

2. There is an antipathy to God, his Ways, his People, his Image, Rom 8.7. The
carnal mind is enmity to God. This is evident from the Speech and Practice of
wicked People, their embittered jeers, and satirical invectives against God's
People. A Cain hated an Abel, and an Ishmael an Isaac, and an Bsou a Jacob; and
that because of Joh. 3.12. Now this hellish spite is to be found in all natural
unregenerate People, till removed by the supernatural Change, of which I design
to speak afterward. I now proceed to the

3. Patticular contained in this depravity; which is the Propensity that is in
all Unconverted People to every Evil. Prove. 22.15. Foclishnessis bound in the
heart of a Child. Indeed there is not an equal propensity in all, to every Sin;
no, for some by reason of their natural Temperament, manner of Education, or
custom, are inclined to one Sin more than some others; yet all Men by Nature
are virtually disposed to every Sin; for we are prone to Evil as the Sparks fly
upward, Job 5.7. Every Sin is formed in our Nature; they want only time,
opportunity, temptation, and the removal of restraining Grace, to bring them
forth into action.

USE. Hence we are informed (I.) of Man's miserable and deplorable state by
Nature, which affords us sufficient matter for the deepest Humiliation, and
most doleful Lamentation! It Is on this account that we are rendered obnoxious to
the vindictive Justice of a terrible and holy God. Ephesians. 2.3. This it that makes
our Lives so corrupted, and all our religious Services so defective and
depraved.

2. This informs us of the absolute necessity of a universal Change, of Heart
as well as Practice, in order to obtain Fellowship and Communion with a holy
sin hating God here, 1 John 1.6. or the more full Enjoyment of him in the Life
to come. How can there be a sweet Communion, and full Enjoyment, without Love?
and how can there be Love without Likeness? and pray what Likeness or
Resemblance is there between an infinitely pure God, and an Unconverted Sinner,
who is a very mass of Pollution and Defilement? How can that God who is
glorious in Holiness fix his complacential Love upon that which is the object
of his eternal abhorrence? And how can an unrenewed Sinner, who is filled with
enmity against God, Romans 8.7. fix his highest Love upon one he hates with an
implacable hatred. All which considered, complexly shows us the absolute
necessity of a $universal Change. Which naturally leads me to the second
Observation, which is,

That Regeneration is absolutely necessary in order to obtain Eternal
Salvation.

This is evident from the words of our Text, Except a Man be born again, he
cannot see the Kingdom of God. Also from Gal. 6.15. For in Christ Jesus neither
circumcision nor uncircumcision avails any thing, but the new Creature.
Therefore if any Man be in Christ Jesus he is a new Creature, old things are
passed away, and all things are become new. Heb. 12.14. Without Holiness no man
shall see the Lord. Rev. 21.27. And there shall in no ways enter into it, any
thing that defiles, neither whatsoev$r works abomination, or makes a lie,
but they which are written in the Lamb's book of Life.

In prosecuting this Doctrine, I shall endeavor to observe the following
method.

1. Show Negatively what Regeneration is not. 2. Positively show what it is. 3.
Propose those Reasons that urge the necessity of it. 4. Improve it.
As to the first proposed, which was to show what Regemeration is not. And,

1. It is not what Nicodemus grossly conceived, a re$entry into the Womb of our
Mother. It is surprising that a Man of so polite Literature, as we have reason
to believe Nicodemus was: A Master, a Teacher in Israel! acquainted with the
Law and Word of God, where doubtless he had read frequently such passages as
those, Ezekiel. 36.26 should have such gross conceptions of this Work of God; but
hereby are these sayings of God verified, 1. Cor 1.21. and 2.14 For in the
wisdom of God the World by wisdom knew not God; but the natural man receives
not the things of the Spirit of God, for they are foolishness unto him; neither
can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned Such is the inherent
hereditary Contagion of our apostatized Nature, that were we born a thousand
times in a natural way, it woul not remedy that Malady: This the blessed and
holy Jesus plainly and clearly confirms in the 6th. ver. of our Context, That
which is born of the flesh. is fl$sh, i.e. it is corrupted and contaminated.

Hence it appears to be a prodigy of incomparable folly for any to boast of and
glory in, the grandeur of their Descent and Lineage, seeing that whatsoever is
born of the flesh is flesh, and without outward Cultivation, and inward
Renovation, must be the Subjects of indelible misety. Neither

2. Is Regeneration a change of the Essence, or being of the Soul: (haec semper
eadem phisicae manner) The Soul is not made new as to it is being or substance
aut quo ad esse phisicum) other ways a new Soul must be in$$$used, which we
read not of; but as to it is qualities (aut quo ad esse morale) new qualities or
principles of Action are infused into the Soul by God, by which it is inclined,
and swayed after another manner, and to another scope, than formerly. Some do
talk strangely of this affair, that the substance of the Soul is changed, as
Flaccus Fliricus, Gregory Nazianzene, and others, "that People are Goded into
God, and Christed "into Christ, as their Expressions Theopoiein Christopoiein
import. It Is true, the Scripture calls this gracious Change, a participation of
the Divine Nature, 2 Pet. 1.4. But this is only to show (1) the reality and
fixedness of this work of Grace, that it is no notion or fancy, but a solid
reality. (2) the resemblance it bears to the Divine Perfections. Such Persons
are renewed after God's Image In Knowledge, Righteousess, and Holiness; they
have a divine temper and disposition of Soul; the principal by as of their
Hearts is toward God and his Service. But though they are thus born after God
and of God, yet they are not thereby made God. That which is by way of
substance or essence in him, is only by way of accident in us. Neither

3. Does it consist in an outward Profession of Christ, or his Ways. The
foolish Virgins had large Lamps, but no Oil, Matthew. 25. A Man may be reformed
from Paganism or Popery, to the Profession of true Christianity, and yet be a
stranger to this Work of God. Nor

4. In the enjoyment of outward Privileges; such as Baptism, the Lord's
Supper, and others of the like nature. The Jews of old depended upon these
outward Privileges and Prerogatives, Jer. 1.4. Romans 10.3. And so do many of
the Gospellized World now; but the divinely insipi$ed Jeremiah pungently
inculcates the invalidity of outward Ordinances, without the thing signified by
them, to obtain bliss and glory; therefore he puts the circumcised Jews, who
were uncircumsised in Heat, in a parallel Case Yea Christ himself had a
Controversy with the Jews upon the same account, he endeavored to destroy
their fond hopes of Heaven grounded upon their outward Privileges, and for his
plain dealing he received abusive treatment, Joh. 8. The Apostle Paul very
plainly shows the insufficiency of these things without an inward renovation,
Gal. 6.15. Neither

5. Does it consist in an external conformity to the Law of God: For this is
something inward, the Workmanship of God in the Heart. A Man may pray, read,
hear outwardly, keep the Sabbath, be faithful to his Word, and just in his
Dealings, and yet be a stranger to this Work of God in the Soul: For such were
some of the Pharisees of old, Phil. 3.6. Mar. 10.20. and yet our ascended Lord
and Savior positively avers, that unless our Righteousness exceed the
Righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, we shall in no wise enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven, Mat. 5.20. Nor

6. In a restraint of the Old Man. God restrains many whom he never renews: So
he did Abimelech a Heathen,, Gen 20.6. One that is not renewed may avoid gross
sins, through fear, shame, or the absence of opportunities, and temptations; or
through the influence of Nature's light, the Precepts of Morality, the
Doctrines of the Gospel, and the Cill Laws of the Land. The Apostle Peter
speaks of some that had escaped the Pollutions of the World through the
knowledge of the Lord Christ, and yet were again entangled in them, 2 Pet.
2.20, 23. Restraining Grace keeps only from the outward acts of Sin, through
slavish fear, or some selfish motives; but saving Grace subdues Sin at the
root, and raises an irreconcilable hatred in the Soul against it. 2 Cor. 7.11.
Nor

7. In common Gifes or motions of the Holy Spirit, which are without
distinction conferred on both the Elect and Reprobate: It is not a Gist of
Prayer, Tongues, Utterance, or a faculty of unfolding Scripture Difficulties:
Judas had all or most of these, yet was he not born again, but a Son of
Perdition, Joh. 17.12. It is not with Men as "with Trees (as one observes) for
every bud, blossom, or leaf, argues some life in the Tree, but every ability to
Preach or to Pray, does not prove this supernatural Life in us. Neither does it
confist in the common motions of the Holy Spirit, such as some sight of Sin,
some grief for it, and wishes after Amendment; personal Afflictions, a prospect
of Eternity in Sickness, or other such alarming Occurrences, may cause such
like workings. Herod delighted to hear John the Baptist, Mark 6.20. Felix
trembled when he heard Paul preach, Acts 24.25. And Agrippa was almost
persuaded, ex eligo, which compared with Paul's answer, ver. 29. Acts 26.28.
may be justly rendered all to a little: and even wicked Balaam could wish for a
happy Death, though he did not so well relish a holy Life, Numb. 23.10. Le me die
the Death of the Righ$eous, and let my last End be like his. 2 Pet. 2.15.

Nor

8. Does Regeneration consist in a partial Change of the Soul, or of some of
it is Faculties only; but it is a total Change of the Soul in all its Powers.
There may be strange Changes in some of the Faculties, and yet no true
Conversion to God; as particularly, (1) There may be great light and knowledge
of divine Truths, with an assent to, and persuasion of their veracity, in the
mind. 1 Cor. 13.2. And though I have the gift of prophesy, and understand all
mysteries, and all knowledge; and though I have all faith, so that I could
remove mountains, and have no Charity (or Love, fo rso the word agape
signifies) I am nothing. Also Heb. 6.4. For it is impossible for those who were
once enlightened -- Romans 2.17, 18. Here we see the Understanding the directive
Power may be so illuminated by the Spirit of God, as to perceive divine Truths
with a more clear and affecting view than before, without a saving Change. Also
the Will which is a cardinal Faculty of Man's Soul; may be much bowed, and
almost persuaded in some of the Unregenerate, Act. 26.28. Again, the
Conscience, another Power, or as some say, a reflex act of of the Mind, may be
much awakened by the terror of God upon the account of Sin, Genesis 4.13, 14. Act.
24.25. Also the Passions may be in some measute changed in the Unregenerate:
They may have great Sorrow for Sin, 1 Kin. 21.27. Mat. 27.4.5. Joy and delight
from divine Objects; Heb. 6.4. Mat. 13.20. and in attendance upon divine
Ordinances, Joh. 5.35. Isai. 58.2. Desires after Christ, Mal. 3.2. Joh. 6.34.
after Grace, Mat. 25.8. after Heaven, Numb. 23.10 some hatred against Sin, Romans
2.22. 2 Kin. 10.26, 27, 28. some purposes to forsake it, Numb. 22.17, 18. some
Love, to God, Jer. 2.2. Deuteronomy. 9.6, 24. compared to Christ, Mat. 10.37. to the
People of God in general: This the Parable of the wise and foolish Virgins
proves, Mat. 25. for it is probable that the foolish would not have associated
and dwelt with the wise so as they did, unless they had loved them, Gal 4.7. to
faithful, Soul searching Ministers in particular, Mark 6.20. some fear of God,
Jam. 2.19. Jonah 1.10.16. some zeal for God, 2 Kin. 10.6. Phil. 3.6. Romans 10.2.
some faith in God, Act. 8.13. Joh. 2.23, 24 some dependence and reliance upon
God, Mich. 3.11. 2 Chronicles from ver. 5. to 13 and. 18. compared with Deuteronomy. 9.6
24. and 1 Kin. 15.3. some confident persuasion of their interest in his special
favor and friendship, Mat. 25.7, 11. Joh. 8.33. 2 Chronicles. 13.10 Numb. 22.18.
All these things I have mentioned under this Head, People may have, and yet
want regenerating Grace, and so be damned at last. But I proceed to consider the

2. Thing proposed, which was to show positively what Regeneration is. And

1. More generally, it may be said to be a restoration of God's defaced Image
in Man, to some degree of it is primitive beauty and luster. Our first Parents
were made after God's Image, in Knowledge, Righteousness and true Holiness,
with dominion over the Creatures, Eccl. 7.29. Genesis 1.27. Psalm. 8.5. This Image
of God consisted in a universal rectitude of the whole Soul, with all its
Faculties, Powers and Affections; the Understanding being the guide and
governor of the Soul's Faculties, had clear Perceptions of the mind and will
of God; the Will was subject to the Understanding's directions, having an
inherent inclination to will that which the Mind by it is native light, showed
to be good. The whole train of Passions freely followed the guidance of these
superior Powers, without the least reluctance: Thus there was a universal
harmony at first among all the Soul's Faculties established by the God of
order, but Sin has introduced a confusion and Chaos among these Faculties, it
has darkened the Understanding, rendered the Will obstinate, and misplaced the
Affections upon diametrically opposite Objects, hardened the Heart, stupefied
the Conscience: Now the blind Will which was before a Subject, usurps the
Empire, and hurries the other Powers to a compliance, with its inordinate
dictantes. Now Regeneration is a renewing that gracious Image of God in us
which we have lost; for by it the blind Understanding is in some measure
enlightened, Act. 26.18. the stony Heart mollify'd, Ezekiel. 36.26. the disordered
Affections rectified and fixed upon the most suitable and noble Objects, God
himself as their chief Good and last End.

But more particularly,

A Law Work generally preceeds this Change: Hence the Law is said to be a
Schoolmaster to load us to Christ, Gal. 3.24. which I apprehend is wrought in
the following manner.

1. There is a discovery of Sin, which the Lord effects by the Law and by the
Spirit. Romans 7.7. I had not known Sin, but by the Law. Before this Christless
Sinners are secure, like Peter sleeping in this Chains, Acts 12.6. The Spirit
of God concurs with the Law. This is one of his first Works with Unconverted
Sinners; as is evident from Joh. 16.8. Before he convinces them of
Righteousness, he convinces them of Sin; their Eyes are opened, Act. 26.18. Now
they see Sin in its loathsome nature, deplorable circumstances, and dreadful
consequences; they begin to see the holiness of God, the spiritual latitude of
his Law, and their own corrupt nature; then are they apt to cry out, Who can
stand before this great and dreadful God! Now, though this discovery of Sin
begins at a particular Evil, as with the Jews, Act 2.37. yet is proceeds to
more; as Ezekiel was led to diverse parts of the Temple to see greater and
greater abominations, Ezekiel. 8.6 -- 12, 13.

2. There is an application of the meric of Sin: God convinces the Sinner that
all the threatenings belong to him; yea he particularly applits them to himself,
as Nathan his parabolical Discourse to David, 2 Samuel 12.7. I am the man, that
these Curses are directed against: He hears his Condemnation founded by the
Trumpet of the Word; he lees and feels that he is in the utmost distress,
environed with dangers, and can at present see no way of escape opened, Luke
15.17. He is in the case of the afflicted pursued Israelites at the Red Sea,
Exodus 14.14, 15. This is that Spirit of Bondage to sear, which ordinarily
preceeds the Spirit of Adoption, Romans 8.15.

3. Compunction, or sharp anguish for Sin. The fight of Sin and Wrath wound the
Soul, as though it were stabbed with a Sword, Act. 2.37. They have such acute
Pains as if a sharp Spear lanc'd their Hearts: it is elsewhere called the
rending of the Heart, Joel 2.13. When we are greatly grieved in Soul for Sin,
so that it even cuts us to the Heart to think how we have dishonored God, and
disparaged our selves by it; when we conceive an eversion to Sin, and earnestly
desire and endeavor to get clear of the principles of it, and never to return
to the practice of it, then we rend our Hearts for it, and then will God rend
the Heavens, and come down to us with Mercy. Also this Compunction I am
treating of is called breaking up of the fallaw Ground, Jer 4.3. Break up your
sallow ground, and sow not among therns: Which represents both the necessity
and difficulty of it. An unconvinced Heart, says one, is like "fallow Ground,
until'd, unfenc'd, unfruitful of any thing besides Thorns, which is the natural
produce of the Soil; which we are bound to get plowed up by the Word of God,
H$b 4.12. otherwise they will choke our attempts, and blast our hopes. Hos.
10.11. It Is also compared to a taking away the foreskin of the Heart, Jer.
4.4. Circumcise your selves to the Lord, and take away the fore skins of your
Heart, ye men of Judah, and Inhabitants of Jerusalem: lest my fury come forth
like fire, and burn that none can quench it, because of the evil of your
doings. i.e. says Mr. Pool, take away that brawniness and obstinacy that "is
upon your Hearts, having to do with God that has respect unto the Heart. Deuteronomy.
10.16. Ezekiel 44.9. Act. 7.51. least you proceed so far in your obstinacy, that I
will not be appeased Jer. 21.12. Ames 5.6.

4. Enquity: When the Apostle Peter's preaching accompanied with divine energy,
had wounded the Jews, this was the necessary effect of it; What shall we do?
Act. 2.37.

Thus I thought it necessary to prevent mistakes, to speak first of the which
is previous and preparatory to this Change. Now I come to speak somewhat
briefly of the Change it self in the several Faculties of Man's Soul, And

1. The Understanding is renewed in it is several Powers or Acts, a Light from
on high shines into it, whereby it is natural Darkness is in some Measure
dissipated, so that it has new Apprehensions of Things. As natural Light was
one of the first Things produced in the old Creation, Genesis 1.3. And God said,
let there be Light, and there was Light: so spiritual Light is one of the first
in the new, 2. Cor. 4.6. Fromerly the Face of Christ was veiled from the Soul,
as the Face of Meses from the Israelites, but now he sees something of his
peerless Beauty, and transcendent Excellency. Christ is to him as the Apple
Tree among the Trees of the Woods, as the Rose of Sharon, and the Lilie of the
Valley, Cant. 2.1, 2, 3. His very Name is as fragrant Ointment poured forth,
and aromatic Spices, Cant. 1.3. All other Enjoyments are as Dross in
comparison of him, in the enlightened Sinner's Esteem, Phil. 3.8. Now he sees,
the loathsome and abominable Nature of Sin, Romans 7.13. Now he sees and
experience tells him, that there is no true Solace, Contentment or Satisfaction
to be had in any sublunary Trisles, he sees that such earthly Enjoyments are
empty of solid Good, transient, unsatisfying, and bewitching; contrary to his
former Apprehension, Isai. 55.2. 1 Cor. 7.31. Psalm 6. 1 Timothy 6.9, 10. They can
find no more Nourishment in them for their hungring Souls, than a starving Man
would to in Gravel Stones, Wind, Husks, Ashes, Prove. 20.17. Hos. 12. 1. Luke
15.16. Isai 44.20. That Heart Holiness and Circumspection of Life, which he was
apt formerly to ridicule and deride, as needless Preciseness, affected and
foolish Singularity, Cant. 5.9. 1 Pet. 4.4. He sees not only necessary, but
desirable and lovely, Cant. 6.1. Zech. 8.23. Mal. 3.16, 17. Now he sees
clearly that that good Heart, those good Words, good Deeds, good Meanings, for
which he thought God would spare and reward him, deserves nothing less than the
revengeful Strokes of God's direful Justice, Isai. 64.6. Phil. 3.7.

2. He has a new Assent, his Understanding being enlightened to perceive the
precious Truths of Christ. he assents to them with a kind of Plerophory, in
alively, sensible Manner, Luke 1.1. His Assent is not grounded upon Opinion,
Conjecture, or historical Credit, as formerly; and therefore is not light and
superficial, but firm and real; the natural Atheism of his Heart, is in some
Measure cured; so that he does not so staggeringly assent to divine Truths as
before.

3. His Judgment is changed. Formerly it was an absurd Paradox to him, if he
had all the Honors, Profits, Pleasures his Heart could Desire, that he should
not be happy then; but now he judges by Experience, that these Things can no
more satisfy an enlightened Soul, than an Adamant Stone, or a Puff of Wind,
would satisfy a hungry Person, Formerly he used to think that the New Birth was
but a Fancy, a Whim, a Fiction, introduced by some hypocondrick, fully, precise
People, that imposed upon themselves and others, with Dreams and Notions, the
Effects of melancholy Blood, a sickly Constitution, or a disordered Brain; but
now he sees and feels an absolute Necessity of it, and that he must be damned
without he obtains it, according to the solemn redoubled Asseveration of the
Lord Christ, in our Text. In short, He used to judge of Things by their
Appearance, by now he judges of them according to what they are in Realigy.

4. His Estimate to Things is changed. He was wont to think highly of the World
and the Things of it, however contrarily he might speak, these had the Throne
of his Heart; but now he prefers even the Reproach of Christ before them, Heb.
11.26. Thus his Estimate is changed in Respect of Honors, Pleasures,
Companions, Gifts, Parts, Privileges, Performances, which would take up more
Time than can be well spared at present to explain and illustrate. I proceed
therefore to another Particular.

5. His Purposes are changed, he has vastly different Designs from those he was
wont to entertain and indulge before his New Birth; while he was in a State of
Security, his principal Scope was to get the World, if possible; to this End he
would be frequently, almost continually framing the most artful and suitable
Schemes, I and if these did not answer as he would have them, then perhaps his
Sleep would be broken, and his Thoughts disturbed, and he put upon a Rack of
impatient Pain. In short, His Purposes were for Sin and Self, but now they are
for God and his Soul, now he strives as much daily to get his Heart and
Affections deadned to the World, as he did before to secure and advance his
Interest in it. Now his anxious Mind is often contriving, what Measures he
should take to glorify the blessed God, to subdue abominable Sin, and advance
the despised Interest of his dear Lord Jesus.

6. His Reasonings are changed. He was wont in his State of Sin and Security,
to argue for Sin and the World, against Christ and Holiness; from the Mercy and
Goodness of God to Liberty, (so called, but it is really the basest Bondage) in
sinning against him, but now it is the greatest Motive to Holiness, and
Circumspection

2. The Will is changed. It has got a new Bias and Center of it is Actings; in
his unconverted State, himself or the World was the Center, in Reality
(notwithstanding his fair and false Flams and Flourishes of empty Talk to the
contrary) to which he moved, for which he acted with a furious natural
Proneness, Psalm 4.6. 2 Timothy 3.2. But now God in Christ is the Center to which
all his Actions, whither natural, civil, or sacred, do bend and terminate. He
aims at God's Glory in all his Actions universally, and singly, the
Inclinations of his Will bend toward God freely from an inward and powerful
Principle of Life. 1 Cor. 10.31. Grace is in him as a Well of Water springing
up to eternal Life, John 4.14. His Will has an unconstrained Motion. Some under
the Views of a vast Eternity, or some afflictive Dispensation, have weak
Motions of Heart toward God, Psalm 78.34. But when the Prospect of Danger is
removed; the Motions cease, Psalm 78.57. like the Motion of a Clock, when the
Spring is removed, but the Motions of a Believer's Heart are constant, even
when outward Enforcements are taken away, Psalm 119.112. because they flow from
an inward and vital Cause.

Furthermore, His Will has new Enjoyments: in his State of Unregeneracy, his
Life was only a vexatious Wandering from Vanity to Vanity, all the Contentment
he had was in some worldly Accommodations, or outward Performances, Psalm 46.
Amos 6.1, 3, 4, 5, 6. Romans 10.3. But now they are as Husks to him, he cannot be
satisfied without the Childrens Bread Psalm 119.37. and 106.4. It was an
observable Saying of Augustine, Tu secisti Cor "nostrum, et Irrequietum est
donec ad te revertatur, i. e. Thou have made our Heart, and it is Restless till
it returns to thee The Sinner in his Security would be contented with the Hu$k
and Shell of Duties, but now nothing will satisfy him, but the Presence of
Jesus in them; a Sight of the King's Face, a Sense of his special Love. But the
cardinal Acts of the Will, are Assent and Dissent, these are the very Hinges
upon which it exerts its receptive and ex$lusive Faculties, suitable to it is
Love or Dislike to the Object proposed, John 1.12. and 5.40. When Christ is
offered to the Soul apended to the Pole of the Gospel, on his own Terms of Self
denial, and taking up the Cross, the new Born Person is willing to want all
than he may have him, to loose all that he may gain him.

3. The Affections of the Soul are changed; such as Desire, Delight, Fear,
Hatred, Joy, Love. Newborn Persons have frequent and vehement Desires after
Communion with, and Conformity to God in Christ here, and the full Enjoyment of
him hereaster; arising from a Sight of his Beauty and Excellency, Psalm 42.1,
2. As the Heart pants after the Water Brooks, so pants my Soul after thee,
O God. My Soul thirsts for God, for the living God; when shall I come and
appear before God. Psalm 63.1, 2, 3, 8. My Flesh longs for thee in a ary and
thirsty Land where no Water is; To see thy Power and thy Glory, -- Because thy
Lovingkindness is better than Life, -- my Soul follows hard after thee. Psalm
84.1, 2. How amiable are thy Tabernacles, O Lord of Hosts! My Soul longs,
yea, even sainteth for the Courts of the Lord: My Heart and my Flesh cries out
for the living God. Cant. 1.2. Let him kiss me with the Kisses of his Mouth:
For thy Love is better than Wine Psalm $3.25. Whom have I in Heaven but thee?
and there is $on$ upon Earth that I desire besides thee. Psalm 119 $word$, 174.
O that my Ways were directed to keep thy Statutes! I have longed for thy
salvation, O Lord: and thy Law is my Delight. Rev. 22.20. He which testifies
these Things, says, surely I come quickly. Amen, even so, come Lord Jesus. And
as their Desires are after Christ, so their Delight is in him. Cant. 1.4. The
King has brought me into his Chambers: We will be glad and rejoice in thee, we
will remember thy Love more than Wine. Cant. 1.13. A bundle of Myrrbe is my
well beloved unto me; be shall lie all Night betwixt my Breasts. Cant 2.3. As
the Apple Tree among the Trees of the Wood, so is my beloved among the Sons. I
sat down under his Shadow with great Delight, and his Fruit was sweet to my
Taste. Cant. 5.16. His Mouth is most sweet; (i.e. the Communications of his
Love by his Word are most Delightful,) yea, he is altogether lovely. This is my
beloved, and this is my Friend, O Daughters of Jerusalem. And as they delight
in him, so they fear to offend him, and that even in the least Things, 1 Thessalonians
5.22 They are apt to cry out when they are tempted, as Joseph, How shall do
this great Wickedness and Sin against God, Genesis 39.9. They see the Baseness and
feel the Bitterness of Sin, and therefore fear it. Lam 3. Having in Remembrance
the Wormwood and the Gall. They seel a Sense of the divine Goodness, and
therefore fear sinning against it; Hos. 3.5. Asterward shall the Children of
Israel return, and seck the Lord their God, and shall fear the Lord and his
Goodness in the latter Days. Romans 2.4. And as they fear Sin, so they hate it
universally and irreconcileably. Psalm 119.104. and cannot at any Time sall in
Love with it as formerly, 1 John 3.3, -- 10. Again the Objects of their Love
are changed, God's People, his Laws, his Image, his Ordinances, are the Objects
to which their Affections freely flow; now the New born Person Loves sincerely
and fervently, those whom he once despised, and pities those whom he once loved
and admired, and disdains their Society, their Scoffs and Threatenings, as well
as their destructive Gains and perishing insipid Pleasures, Psalm 15.4. and
119.115. 2 Kings 3.14. Psalm 2.1, 4. and 52.6, 7. Isai. 33.15. Psalm 141.4.
H$b. 11.24. Now he sees that the People of God are the most excellent Persons
on Earth, as much preferrable to others as Jewels, the Sons of a Crown,
refined Gold, a royal Diadem, is to common Pebbles, Dross and Rubbish. Mah.
3.17. Zech. 9.16. Lam. 4.2. Isai 62.3. Psalm 16.3. As much excelling others, as
Wheat does Chaff, Matthew. 13.30. Psalm 1.4. Light, Darkness, Matthew. 5.14. Ephesians.
5.8. Cedars and Myrtle trees, the Tares and Thor$s, Psalm 92.12. Isai. 55.13
Matthew. 13.38 Cant. 2.2. As much as the most potent Kings, the basest Slaves,
Rev. 1.6. Acts 8.23. Isai. 61.1. As much as Lambs, and Doves are preferrable in
their Qualities to Goats, S$ine, Dogs and Foxes, Hos 4.14. Matthew 10.16.and
25.33.and 7.6. 2 Pet. 2.22. Luke 13.32. and Vipers, Matthew 3.7. Therefore the
Newborn Person resorts to God's People, covers their Company (which he before
shunned) that with them he may seek Jesus, Acts 4.23. Cant. 1.7. and 6.1. When
the blinded Jailer came to have his Eyes opened, he soon washed the Wounds he
had made before, by many and cruel Stripes, Acts 16.23, 33. Their Love is fixed
on God in Jesus, as their highest Good, and last End; as their complete,
satisfying and everlasting Portion, La$. 5.24. Psalm 16.5. and 73.26 which
shows it in lively, warm, vigorous Actings, so that the whole Soul feels
sometimes the sweet Pains, and refreshful Qualms of a Love sickness after
Christ, Cant. 5.8. All the Waters of Affliction cannot quench this Love, but
makes it burn more brightly, as Oil cast into the Fire; Cant 8.6. Set me as a
Seal upon thine Heart, as a Seal upon thine Arm: For Love is strong as Death.
-- Their Sorrow is also changed as to its Objects; they were wont in their
carnal and secure State, to mourn principally about worldly Losses, and
Disappointments, Psalm 4.6. 2 Cor. 7.10. that either they could not amass and
obtain, or retain such a Quantity of worldly Pelf, as their greedy Desires
longed for, or their Trouble principally centered upon the Loss of their
Relations or Friends, or their Credit and worldly Comfort, Genesis 27.38. 1 Samuel
15.30. But now they mourn chiefly over their Sins against God, Psalm 51.4. that
they are so many, so heinous, that they have continued in Sin so long, Rom
6.21. that they are so inwardly and universally corrupted by it, Romans 7.24 and
they do not only grieve that they themselves have sinned against such a good
God, but that others also do grievously reproach the Almighty, and affront his
Majesty, by contemning his Authority, profaning his sacred Name, violating his
Sabbath, slighting his Word and Ordinances, opposing his Truths, and abusing
his People. Ez$k. 9.4. 2 Pet. 2.7, 8. Psalm 119.136. Lam. 4.2. They also mourn
an absent God! The withdrawing of his comfortable Presence from them distresses
their Spirits; Psalm 42.5. Cant. 3.1, 2, 3. and 5 6, 8. The numerous Crowds of
wicked People, the Smallness of the Number of those that are truly Godly, and
the little Success of the Gospel of Christ, affords Matter of great Sorrow to
Newborn Persons, Matthew. 7.13. and 20.16. and 22.14. Nahum 7.1, 2. Psalm 3.1.
Isai. 53.1.

4. The Conscience is charged: As before it was not able to perform it is
Offices, or Functions, viz. to apply, convince, or tremble at the Word, but now
when the Soul feels the regenerating Influences of the Holy Spirit, what a
tender Sense fills the renewed Conscience? For what small Things will it smite,
rebuke and check the Sinner? How strongly will it bind to Duty, and bar against
Sin? The Consciences of the most of ungodly People are large, secure, and
mostly silent; if it be not when they commit gross and notorious Crimes, Titus
1.15. But the Consciences of regenerate Persons being purged from dead Works,
Heb. 9.14. do wake and rebuke sharply for small Offenses, 1 Samuel 24.5. and puts
the Sinner into Distress and Anguish, Genesis 43.21. Now it is the continued
Labor of the Newborn Person to get and keep a good Conscience, 2 Cor. 1.12.
Acts 24.16.

5. The Memory; now it is more apt to embrace and retain divine Things then
formerly, Cant. 1.4. Psalm 103.18. and 119.11. The regenerate Person endeavors
to lay up the Sayings of Jesus in the Cabinet of his Memory, Matthew. 26.75. I
confess that regenerating Grace does not change the natural Imperfections of
the human Constitution, only the moral. If a Person has naturally a weak
Memory, it cannot be reasonably expected that Grace will strengthen the natural
Faculty, for it is Design is not to heal the Body but the Soul, it only turns
the Vein of the Thoughts and Affections on divine Subjects, and helps to
perceive better, fundamental Truths, 1 John 2.20, 27. and makes a Person the
more desirous to retain them, but it don't enlarge or strengthen the Faculty it
self ordinarily; a Person may be a strong Christian, have an affectionate
Heart, and a holy humble Practice, and yet have but a weak Memory, but in the
mean time, it is surely the Practice of New born Persons to pore much upon
divine Things, Psalm 1.2 and 104.34 and 119.97, 99. Therefore when they forget
precious Truths they have heard explained (their Affections being fixed upon
them) they are grived. But

6. Their Conversation is changed: They were wont to be like Moles grovelling
in the Earth, now their Mind and Conversation is in Heaven; Phil. 3.20. Heb.
13.14. They are ashamed and blush at their sormer Conversation, on, Rom 6.21.
They have changed their former Masters, Sin, Satan, and the World, and broke
their detestable league with them and Death, Romans 6.14, 16 to 23 Isai. 28.15,
18. Gal. 5.24 And they that are Christ's have crucified the Flesh, with the
Affections and Lusts. The New born Person maintains a continual Conflict with
Sin, Gal 5.17. Romans 7.23. Now he does not only endeavor to restrain the
outward Act, but to crucify the Root of his inward Corruption, Psalm 51. Not
only to cut off some Branches, but all, even that Sin which has the strongest
S$at in his Constitution, Psalm 18.23. He endeavors to repress the first
Motions of Sin, and to flee the Appearance of Evil, being Diffident of his own
Strength, and afraid to offend his God, 1 Thessalonians. 5.22.

But I proceed to the third Thing proposed,

3. To offer Reasons urging the Necessity of Regenerations.

1. The universal Corruption or our Nature shows the indispensable dispensable
Necessity of renewing Grace; as in the 6 Verse of our Context. For without
Holiness no Man shall see the Lord, Heb. 12.14. Romans 8.13. Is it ressonable to
suppose that such a holy God as Jehovah is, who cannot look on Sin but with
Abhorrence, should reveive such polluted Wretches as unconverted Sinners are,
into his complacential Embraces?

2. Because while unconverted, the Law condemus us, Gal. 3.10. Romans 3.19. which
Sentence cannot be removed any other Ways but by Faith in Christ, Mark 16.16.
John 3.18. which no unconverted Person has, for if he had, it would change his
Heart and Practice, Gal. 5.6. 2 Thessalonians. 1.11. James 2.14. He may indeed have a
historical or temporary Faith, but that will not do for Salvation, James 2.19, 20

3. Because of the Stability and Firmness of God's Word He who cannot lie has
spoken it, and Heaven and Earth may and shall pass away, but not one Tittle
that God has spoken, shall pass away unaccomplished, Matthew. 24.35. Therefore
Regeneration is necessary to Salvation.

4. The Consideration of the Nature of the happiness of Heaven, with the
Respect that Regeneration has to it, plainly manifests the Necessity of it.
Surely the Nature of future Happiness is pure and spiritual, consisting in the
Vision and Fruition of a holy God, who is a Spirit, 1 Cor. 13.12. and in the
Society and social Worship of Saints and Angels, and such Pleasures and
Employments as the Beauty of the Objects and other Circumstances of the Place,
may be supposed to imply. Now what Sutableness is there between a carnal
unrenewed Mind, and the spiritual and pure Pleasures of Heaven? Does not
Pleasure spring from the Sutableness, between the Object and the Faculty? What
Pleasure then can be expected by the unregenerate in Heaven it self, if they
were carried there in their present Condition? (though they may be sure, in the
mean time, that while such, they will never have the Trial, Rev. 21.27. and
22.15.) there is such a Discord between their present Dispositions and the
Temper and Entertainments and Employments of Heaven, for these are holy and
spiritual, but they are carnal and sensual. This Dr. Scott expresses
beautifully, For alas (if we "consider the Matter rightly) how could Souls of
their Relish and Complexion, find a proper Employment for themselves in the
Regions of Bliss? There are no wanton Amors among those heavenly Lovers, no
Rivers of Wine, among their Rivers of Pleasure, to gratify their boundless
Sensuality; no Parasite to flatter their losty Pride, no Miseries to feed their
meager Envy, no Mischiefs with which that State abounds, (viz. Praise, Love,
Contemplation) are such that they would loath and nauseate them, as too pure
and refined for their depraved Appetites; and not improbably (if they had their
own Option) desire to fly to Hell for Shelter, to Spirits fo their own
Depravity, rather than stay to be tormented in a Heaven so incongrous to their
Nature So that if these Men would be happy they must either find out a new
Heaver, or get new Hearts.

Bishop Beveridge expresses himself thus upon this Head; "Supposing it should
please God to take us all up immediately into the highest Heavens, and there
place us around our blessed Savior; all such as are real Saints among us, as
love God above all things, and have prepared their Minds for spiritual
Enjoyments, how glad would they be to see their Redeemer, shining in all his
Glory? How suddenly would they strike up with the Choir of Heaven, in singing
the Praises of him that brought them thither? What infinite Pleasure would they
take in the Place, Employment, Company, and every thing they see there? But as
for others who are still in their Sins, and mind only Earthly things, how sad
and disconsolate would they be? they would wonder to see the Saints so pleasant
and joyful; for, as for their parts, they would see nothing there to take
delight in; in the midst of Light they would be still in Darkness, and in
Sorrow in the midst of Joys, they would not hear the Heavenly Music, or if
they did, it would sound harsh, and be all discords to them: they could not
taste these spiritual Dainties, or if they did, they could not relish or find
any sweetness in them: they could not see the Face of God, or if they did, they
would not be pleased but terrified and confounded at it; and all this for the
want of a true principle of Grace and Holiness, without which a blind Man may
as well delight in Pictures, the deaf Man in Music, or a brute Beast in
Metaphysics, as Men of such tempers, either in Heaven, or God himself.

Again, Regeneration has such a relation to our Salvation, that it is indeed a
part and beginning of it. Gratia est autora Gloriae; Grace is the very dawn of
Glory, differing only in degree and duration, from the happiness of Heaven. The
truth is (says Stanhope) God in his Wisdom "has so ordered the matter, so
admirably contrived our Nature and our Duty, that Virtue and Happiness, Grace
and Glory are one and the same thing, differing only in the Circumstances and
several Prospects we view them under. The good Man begins his Heaven upon
Earth, and finishes there what is imperfect here: for the more he masters his
sensual Appetites, and gets above the World, -- the more he is spiritualized,
and made meet to be a partaker with the Saints in Light.

Pray consider seriously that precious, but awful place of holy Scripture, Gal
6.15. It Is observable here that the Apostle was speaking of some who desired to
make a fair show in the Flesh, and therefore urged the necessity of
Circumcision, whom the Apostle informed, and assured, that in Christ Jesus
neither Circumcision nor Uncircumcision availed any thing, i. e. to Salvation,
but the new Creature. Circumcision was certainly and Ordinance of God's own
Appointment, a Seal of the Covenant between God and his People, Romans 4.11. A
badge of distinction between them and the Infidel Nations, Romans 3.2. a sign of
their original pravity, and of the necessity of inward sanctity, Jer. 4.4. Col.
2.13. Yet the Apostle informs those who thought they were bound to observe it,
that without an internal Change these supposed Privileges would avail nothing,
and by a parity of reason (as Dr. Edwards justly observes) he must be
interpreted to speak "to us, that our Sacramental Washing in Baptism, our
Spiritual Gifts and Endowments, our profound Knowledge and Learning, our
observation of the Ordinances of Christ, and our outward acts of religious
Worship, will all avail us nothing unless we have a new principle implanted in
us, such as influences our Lives, and produces evangelical Obedience.

But I proceed to the

4. Thing proposed, which was to Improve the Doctrine.

And,

USE. I. It Informs us that the way to be made a Member of the invisible Church
is by Regeneration; for there shall i$no wise enter into it any thing that
defiles; neither whatsoever works abomination, or makes a lie: but they
which are written in the Lamb's Book of Life, Rev. 21.27.

2. It informs us of the Love of God in revealing that way to us. Hos. 8.12.
which should strike our Admiration, and awake our Gratitude.

3. It informs us of the Love of Christ in purchasing after such a painful
manner, that Life for his People, to which this way leads, 2 Cor. 8.9. For ye
know the Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, that though he was rich, yet for our
sakes be became poor, that ye through his poverty might be rich. 2 Timothy 1.10.
Who has abolished Death, and has brought Life and immortality to light
through the Gospel. That having your Affections dead to, and we an'd from all
Enjoyments here, your Life may be hid with Christ in God; that when he who is
your Life appears, you may appear with him, Col. 3.4.

4. It informs us of the Emptiness and insufficiency of all outward and legal
Performances to obtain an actual Interest in the purchased Happiness, without
good principles of Action; such as a new Heart, and transcendent Love to the
divine Majesty. Luk 6.43. For a good tree brings not forth corrupt fruit:
neither does a corrupt tree bring forth good fruit. Therefore according to the
words fo Jesus, if you would have the Fruits good, you must make the Tree good,
Mat. 12.33. For God is a Spirit, and therefore will not accept of or be pleased
with any Worship but that which is agreeable to his Nature, Joh. 4.24.

USE. II. Of Examination. Now that you may know your present state and
condition, I shall propose some Characters of Regenertion.

Now the first Property of Regeneration is Divine Life. As natural Life is the
natural product of Generation, so is a spiritual Life, of Regeneration, Gal.
2.20. 2 Cor. 4.10. Now this Divine Life, has these following Properties, by
which it may be known analogous or agreeable to the Properties of a natural Life.

1. Breath. Without this a natural Life would soon expire. Psalm. 104.29. Thus
it is with the spiritual, 1 Pet. 2.2. As new born Babes desire the sincere Milk
of the Word: Some render the original Words (Logicon gala) rational Milk, such
as is fit for the nourishment, not of the Body, but of the Mind: A true Convert
desires the sincere Milk, the pure Word of God, not blended or diluted with
adulterating, depraving, and debasing mixtures. It Is the natural property of
every king of Life to desire Food suited to it is nature, without which it cannot
subsist: Now as the natural man chiefly longs after the enjoyments of this
World, Psalm. 4.6. so does the new born Person after Heavenly Enjoyments. Col.
3.1.

2. Sense. As a natural Life feels what opposes it, graples with its Enermy,
and if stronger, proves victorious: so it is eminently in the divine Life,
which having such supernatural Assistances, proves too hard for its Opponents.
Gal. 5.17. 1 John 5.4, 18 1 John 3.9.

3. Growth. It Is natural for Children to grow fast, if some uncommon accident
don't prevent it, and that not in the Head only, for indeed such are
distempered with the Rickets, but in all other Part proportionably; so do Babes
in Christ grow fast, if not distempered, 2 These. 1.3. and that not only in
Knowledge, but in Faith, Love, Holiness. 2 Pet. 3.18 1 Cor. 13.11. When I was a
Child I spoke as a Child, I thought as a Child, when I grew a Man, I put away
childish things. So it is with the growing Christian. they put away Childish
things; and this among the rest, viz. entertaining a fond imagination, that he
shall be always dandled on his Father's Knee, or in his Lord's Lap, or always
embraced in his Husband's Arms: When he was but a Babe in Jesus, he was apt to
conclude his Father had quite abandoned him, if he lost sight of his Face but
for a little, if he wanted the sweet sense of his Love he was pevish and
dejected; but now he knows better, that he is no to live by Sense but by Faith,
Gal. 2.20. Though he retains still an earnest desire after Communion with God,
yet it is more discreet believing and submissive; and when they cannot perceive
any growth in themselves after some time, they grieve and mourn. A Child of God
not only weeps at his birth afterward. Mr. Burkett has a very good Observation
upon this, that as natural Children "come crying into the World, so no
spiritual Child is still-born or born dumb. Act. 9.11. We may justly reckon
those graceless, and unrenewed Persons, who do not earnestly long and labor
after growth, or mourn not for their little proficiency. Heb. 6.1. Phil. 3.14.
They that are contented with stinted measures of supposed Grace, in reality
have no saving Grace at all. 1 Cor. 15.8. Ephesians. 3.18.

4. Mation. This is an inseparable property of a natural Life, Act 17.28. When
we see anything stand stock still for a considerable time without the least
motion, we know it is dead; e. g. when we observe a Statue void of motion with
its Eyes fixed, for some space of time, we are soon convinced for all its fair
face, that it has no Life; so when we behold Professors of Christianity having
but an empty form, without the powerful and progressive practice of Piety, 2 Timothy 3.5. May Not we judge them, and should not they judge themselves to be
(notwithstanding of their fair pretenses) dead Idols in a spiritual sense, void
of the Life of Jesus.

5. A Generative Faculty, when grown to maturity: So those that have a divine
Life labor to communicate it to others. Joh. 4.28, 29. Luke 22.32. Here we may
apply justly that of the Poet, Nascitur indigne per quem non nascitur alter. He
is unworthy of Life himself, who is not the cause of it to another.

2. Likeness. The Father begets a Son in his own likeness so did the first
Adam, Genesis 5.3. and so does the Second, Joh. 3.6. The Image of the first is of
the Earth Earthly, 1 Cor. 15.47, 48, 49. For he that is born of the flesh is
flesh, Joh. 3.6. i. e. exceedingly corrupt and sinful; not only fleshly but
flesh; abstracts denote great degrees of what is spoken, Ephesians. 5.8. Man by a
sinful indulgence of his appetite, Genesis 3.6. prostituted the dominion of his
Soul to the tyranny of Sense; so that now before Conversion he is quite sunk in
Sensuality; instead of deserving the honorable character of a living Soul as
formerly, Genesis 2.7. he now incurs that just, but sarcastical one of Flesh! His
Reason and all his noble Powers are so degraded, unhinged and corrupted; he
acts with such indifferency about Eternal, and with such vigor about Temporal
things, as if he had no Soul, but was wholly Flesh, a mere master Beast. But
the Image of the Second Adam is Heavenly and Spiritual. 1 Cor. 15.47, 48, 49.
For he that is born of the Spirit is Spirit, Joh. 3.6. i. e. his Soul has
recovered it is just, though lost, Empire over the Senses and brutish Appetites,
and is now guided and governed by the influence and direction of the Holy
Spirit, Romans 8.1, 4. As the natural Parent communicates of his Nature to the
Child, so those that are born of God are said to partake of the divine Nature,
2 Pet. 1.4. i. e. they have a certain resemblance of the moral, communicable
Perfections of the Diety, wrought in them: They are holy as he is holy, 1 Pet.
1.15, 16. Merciful as their Father is merciful, Luke 6.36. Perfect as their
Father in Heaven is perfect, Mat. 5.48. i. e. they endeavor earnestly after
perfection of degrees as well as of parts, Phil. 3.13, 14. Ephesians. 5.1, 2. So long
as Men are contrary to God in their generally prevailing Dispositions, and
course of Action, we may tell them as our Lord the perverse Jews, Joh. 8.44 Ye
are of your father the Devil, and the lusts of your father ye will do.

3. Love. A Child has a Love to his Father and Brethren, which the Law of
Nature teaches, and the likeness that is between them confirms: He is a very
Monster in Nature that is void of this Affection! Thus the new born Christian
has, 1. A predominant Love to God in Christ. Psalm. 73.25. Mat. 10.37. 2. A
permanent Love. Joh. 15.9.10. 3. A panting longing Love. Psalm. 84.1, 2. 4. An
operative and efficacious Love. 2 Cor. 5.14. Joh. 14.21 Romans 6.4, 5. And so he
has a real, effectual, universal and well grounded Affection to the Children of
God, as his Brethren in Christ $word$ Affection don't consist in windy Words, 1 John 3. $word$ 18. Neither is his Love limited to a Party of his own
Denomination, Temper or Sentiments: No, no! that is too narrow a Circle for
truly Christian Love, (such a confined Affection, is but a natural selfish
Party Zeal, which don't deserve the name of Love) which extends it self to all
that carry the Image of the holy God, and speak in the Language of Canaan, of
whatever Nation they he, or Denomination they bear; and as he loves all
Christians for that of God he sees in them, so consequently his Affection is
carried forth with a greates degree of ardor toward such as excel others in
Holiness, Humility, and Circumspection; and that not with a fearful but
complacential respect. Psalm. 16.3. 1 John 4.8. The


4. Character is that Change of the Practice, which I described in the
doctrinal Part of this Discourse; which I think is rather an Effect of the New
Birth than a Pars of it. It is obeservable that in every Generation, there is a
great Change in the old Creation, to which this Work of God is for many and
weighty Reasons compared, Ephesians. 2.10. There was fan admirable Alteration, when
the present most beautiful and regular System of Things was produced by the
Agency of the Infinite Spirit of God, (who moved upon the Face of the Waters)
out of the former Disorder, dark Mass, and confused Chaos. So is there not an
admirable Change, when a profane, ignorant sottish Creature is turned into a
sober, holy, heavenly Christian? Give me, says Lactantius, a "Man as profane
and abusive, as lend and lascivious, as can be imagined; and with a few
Instructions of God, I will make him as meek and innocent as a Lamb? Could ever
any of the Philosophers do this? Lib. 2. In short, such a Change deserves our
Admiration more than if a Clod of Earth were turned into a Star of Heaven! This
is no less a Change than from Darkness to Light, from Death to Life, Ephesians. 5.8.

And now, Brethren, I pray you for Christ's sake, Examine your selves, whether
you have had the Experience of these Things; it is easy to be mistaken in this
Matter, and a Mistake is dangerous, Jer. 17.9. Prove 14.12. I shall propose a
few Questions to your Consciences, from what I have been treating of, and I beg
you would answer them impartially as in the Presence of God.

And

1. Has Sin been discovered, and applied to your Consciences with Power, both
in Respect of it is vile Nature, and dreadful Effects, by the Law of God, and
the Spirit of God, as I before described?

Quest. 2. Have you been made to see your lost and deplorable State by Nature,
so as to be exceedingly distressed, and put to a Soul afflicting Plunge and
Loss, about obtaining Deliverance out of it, and shut up to Christ as the only
Door of Hope? Acts 2.37. and 14.27. John 10.7.

Quest. 3 Have thou O Sinner! been made to inquire after and seek for Relief,
with Anguish of Soul? Acts 9.

Quest. 4. Has the Lord Jesus been discovered by his Word and Spirit to your
inquiring, burdened, anxious Soul, in his mediatorial Excellency and
Sufficiency? Mat. 11.21. Gal. 1.16.

Quest. 5. And have you with Deliberation and Resolution, unreservedly closed
with the offered Redeemer, upon the Terms of Discipleship he has specified;
viz. of taking up his Cross, denying your selves and following him, John 1.12.
Luke 9.23. and 14.26. That is, have you been, and are you willing, and heartily
resolved, to quit freely and cheerfully your dearest natural and civil
Interests, your Friends, Relations, Estates, Lives, Liberties, respectively, if
called to it, for the Defense of Truth, and readily embrace Shame, Sollitude,
Poverty and Death? Are you willing also to abandon your own Righteousness, all
your religious Performances in Point of Dependence, and absolutely,
immediately, and freely, forsake all your darling Lusts, and embrace strict
Holiness? What say thou, Sinner? How is it with thee in these Respects,
willing or not? What, does that Man say it is hard? I cannot now! Wretched Soul!
As the Lord lives thou art a dead Man.

Quest. 6. Are old Things passed away? 2 Cor. 5.17.

As particularly, 1. Is thy old Blindness removed? 1 Pet. 1.4. 2 Thy old
Security disturbed? Luke 11.21. 3. Thy old Hope sapp'd at the Foundation? Romans
7.9 4. Thy old Enmity against God's People subdued? Cant. 6.1. 5. Thy old
carnal worldly Thoughts, Affections and Practice altered, or are they still as
they were? Why then I may say to thee as the Apostle Peter to Simon Magus, Acts
8.21, 23. Thou have neither part nor lot in this Matter: For thy Heart is not
right in the Sight of God. I perceive thou art in the Gall of Bitterness, and
in the Bond of Iniquity.


Quest. 7. Are all Things made new? 2 Cor. 5.17.

As particularly, 1. Have thou that new light in the Understanding? Acts 26.18.
2. That Pliableness in the Will? Psalm 110.3. Acts 9.6. 3. That Proness in the
Affections God ward, and Heavenward, which I before described? Col. 3.2. 4.
That Tenderness of Conscience? 5. That tenaciousness of Memory respecting
divine Things? Psalm 119.98. 6. That Reformation in Practice, which was before
described?


Quest. 8. Have you had that Life of God, that Likeness to God, that Love for
God and his People, which was before spoken of?

Quest. 9. Is your Obedience evangelical, universal, continual?

But I proceed to the

III. USE, which is of Conviction and Terror, to those that are not born again;
but who are they, and what may afford them necessary Terror?

1. More generally; You are they who cannot with a good Conscience say, Yea, in
answer to the nine Questions I proposed before. But more particularly. 1. May
Persons make a strict Profession of Piety, and be admitted to, and enjoy
religious Privileges, and so pass for Christians, and yet be unconverted? How
far then are you from this blessed Change, who even scorn to profess Christ and
Piety, who disdain and disclaim the very Name Saint, as a Term of Reproach, a
Badge of Dishonor, and grin and show your Teeth (silly Souls) when the very
Word is but mentioned in your Hearing? Remember, for this you shall gnash your
Teeth in Hell, except ye repent. I suppose you think to be saved without the
New Birth, in a Way of your own Contrivance, (O blind Moles!) ay, but then the
Devil your dear Father, and your Brethren the Sons of Belial, the whole Crew of
profane unclean Rebels, and venomous Vermin, the burdened Earth now bears,
for Hell contains, must be saved along with you, and a pretty Company you would
make all together, would you not? A fine Heaven indeed! How can ye expect that
Christ will own you hereafter, when you will not own him here? 2. May People be
convinced of Sin, and of their lost and deplorable Condition because of Sin, so
as to be in great Distress about it, without being new born? Alas then! What
will become of you who are yet secure and asleep in Sin? 3. May Persons be
restrained from gross Impieties, and yet be in a State of Death, estranged from
this divine Birth? O! What will then become of you, who give a loose to
Profaneness, Swearing, Whoring, Sabbath-breaking, Drunkenness, Uncleanness,
Fraud, and the Derision of what is good? Is not Burnings, Burnings from God,
Burnings hotter than Sodom's Flame, like to be your Portion? 4. May Persons
attain the Form of Piety, and be externally regular in the Performance of all
religious Duties, and yet not be new born? Then wretched Sinners! How far are
you from this divine Birth, who profane God's Name, slight his Word and
Ordinances, by neglecting to attend upon the one, and to seek Preparation for
the other, who as fearlesly as profanely, violate his holy Sabbaths, and
neglect many positive Duties of Religion? Read that Passage of God's Word, and
blush and tremble? Matthew. 5.20. 5. May People have great Gists, and good
Motions, and want this New birth, I have been treating upon? Then what will
become of you, ignorant Souls, especially such of you as are willingly
ignorant; how far are you from a sound Conversion to God, which begins to Light
and Knowledge? 1 Cor. 4.6. And how far will you be at last from obtaining that
Inheritance Conversions qualifies Persons for? Isai. 27.11. 1 Thessalonians. 1.7, 8. 6.
May Persons have a partial Alteration upon some or all the Powers of their
Souls, and be almost persuaded to be real Christians, and yet be void of the
New Birth, what will become of you hardened Wretches, every of whose Faculties
are perhaps altered for the worse, whose Necks are as an iron Sinew, and whose
Brow is Brass? Pharisces, Heathens and Devils out do you in what is good. The
Pharisees in most or in all the outward Duties of Religion, Philip. 3. The
Heathens in their Morality (perhaps) e. g. the Turks or some of them, have have
had a greater Concern about their Souls than thou have: Remember trembling
Felix, and be ashamed of thy horrible Stupidity! Yea, the very Devils tremble,
and yet thou art Semseless! O Man! Is thy Breast Adamant, or thy Bowels Iron,
that thou thus slightest the Terrors of the Almighty, which set themselves in
Battle array against thee, can thou imagine that thou art new born, or shall
be saved in this Condition? No, no: Be not deceived, the Devil himself would
find as easy an Admission into Heaven, as thou in thy present Codition, as our
Text demonstrates. 7. May Persons have a Zeal for Religion, as Jehu and others,
and yet be unconverted? O then! What will become of you lifeless, listless,
careless Geleos in religious Affairs, who do not care a Straw whether Religion
prospers or not, if you can but get worldly Prosperity, if you can but with
Gehazi get the Changes of Raiment, with Judas carry the Bag, or with cursed
Achan get the Wedges of Gold, you care not perhaps, though for it, you should
betray Christ's Cause, and bring Judgments upon others? But will not such
lukewarm, selfish Wretches be spued out of Christ's Mouth? Rev. 3.16. How far
are ye poor Souls from this divine Birth? 8. May unconverted Persons come so
far as to love God's People, associate with them, and delight in Hearing of
God's Word, and attending upon his Ordinances? How far then are those from
Regeneration, or the Way to it, who do not come half so far as Hypocrites in
this? Instead of associating with God's People, they carefully avoid their
Compary, deride them, and spitefully abuse them, and most contemptuously
neglect Opportunities of Hearing God's Word, instead of delighting in it, and
that forsooth because the Preacher will not be false to God and Souls, and preach
smooth Things according to their Fancy, will not Herod that heard John the Baptist
galdly, rise up in Judment at last and condemn the haughty and contemptuous
Wretches of this Generation? 9. May Persons be brought to mourn for Sin, withh
Bitterness and Anguish, and yet be Strangers to the New Birth, as Ahab and
Judas? How far then are those Monsters in Nature from Conversion, who instead
of mourning for their Impieties, boast of them, and so glory in their Shame?
But what are the Miseries of those and all other Kinds of unconverted Sinners?


Answ. 1. Ye are blind Men, Acts 26.18. Ye see not the Beauty of Holiness, of
Christ and Heaven, otherwise ye would not live as ye do, John 4.10 2. Poor Men,
however you swell and strut in worldly Wealth and Grandeur, Rev. 3.17. 3. Mad
Men, Psalm 14.1. compared with 10.1. Luke 15.17. You act like distracted Men,
in preferring Sin to Holiness, perishing sensual Gratifications, to the pure
sinless and everlasting Delights that are at God's right hand. Don't you act
like Fools, in preferring your Lusts to God and Christ, your worldly Gain,
which lasts but for a M$meant, to an immortal Crown of Life? And does not your
Folly and Madness eminently appear, in your daring to affront such a sovereign
infinite Majesty, whom you can neither overcome, deceive or avoid, whose
lovingkindness is better than life, but whose Anger is worse than Death, and
you will find it so in a little Time, when you shall wish for Death as a
Sanctuary from it, but shall not obtain your Desire? 4. Dead Men, wholly void
of divine Life, Ephesians. 2.1. 5. Darkened Men, or Men under the Power of Darkness,
Ephesians. 5.8. Col. 1.13. By which Metaphor the Scriptures express all Kinds of
Misery, Psalm 23.4. Math. 22.13. Isai. 50.10. 6. Possessed Men, under the Power
and Government, and in the Possession of the Devil, his Slaves, his Vassals,
Luke 11.21. 1 John 3.8, 10. 2 Timothy 2.26. 7. You are cursed Men, cursed by the
God that made you, which none can revoke but himself, and which has declared he
will not unless ye repent, Gal. 3.10. Luke 13.3. 8. You are condemned Men, John
3.18. 9. Gulty Men, Mark 4.12. And remember God has said, he will by no means
clear the Guilty, Numb. 14.18. 10. You are bereaved Men, secluded from and
bereaved of all the Notices, and sweet Intimations of God's peculiar Favor and
Friendship, in this World or the next. You are without God in the World, and
what can be worse than this? Ephesians. 2.12. And as you are justly deprived of his
Love, so you are continually exposed to his Wrath, John 3.36. You are the very
Children of the Devil by Imitation and Possession, the Seed of the Serpent,
Genesis 3.15. 1 John 3.9, 10. John 8.44. 11. Miserable Men; you are not only void
of true Light, Life, Confort, in this World, but of any Interest in the
Inheritance of God's chosen in the next, as our Text asserts, and are entitled
to a very contrary Portion, Ephesians. 2.3. 12. Murdering Men, cruel Murderers, Self
murderers, Soul murderers, Ezekiel. 18.31, 32. and 33.11. 12. Ineucusable Men,
your eternal Damnation is but the natural and necessary Fruits of your own
Wickedness and Obstinacy, in rejecting against your own Souls, God's repeated
Warnings and Invitations, and therefore it is but Justice, and that not owing
to any rigorous Severity of God, but entiely to your own Cruelty and Barbarity,
against your selves, that you should perish, Hos. 13.9. Acts 13.46. And this
you will be forced to own at last to God's Honor, and your own Shame, Matthew.
22.11, 12. For you have slighted the Remedy provided with infinite Cost for
Sin, this will make your Sin inexcuseable, your Damnation unavoidable, and your
selves unworthy of Pity, because your Misery is a voluntary Misery, but the
Fruits of your own Choice, Psalsm 95.8, 11. Matthew 22.3, 5. and 23.37. Prove.
29.1. What unspeakable Pain will your Reflections upon these Things cause in
your Confciences to Eternity, Mark 9.44. Isai. 66.24. O! think of these Things
and apply them to Heart before it is too late, and never rest until you get
converting Grace.


An Expostulatory Mournful Address to the Unconverted, with some Directions to
the Regenerate.
Added by Way of APPENDIX, to the Preceding SERMON.
Dear Brethren,
YOU have heard the Nature and Necessity of Regeneration opened, with it is
peculiar and distinguishing Characters described, in the preceding Sermon; now
don't you see that you are without this gracious Change, that you have not been
convinced of and humbled for Sin, as was explained, nor distressed about your
lost State, so as to be shut up to Christ, as the only Door or Hope?

Don't you see that you want the Experience of an inward, universal and
effectual Alteration of all your Faculties and Powers, a thorough Change of
your Practice? Alas! Are your not yet as carnal, and worldly minded as ever?
Don't you yet retain your old Shyness of, and Enmity against God's dear
Children, your old Aversion to strict Holiness? Alas! Do ye not retain your old
carnal Security, and false Hope of Heaven, whatever has been said to awake and
detect you notwithstanding?

O Brethren! What do you design to do? Will ye live contentedly in such a
State, in which ye cannot see God's Fa$e in Mercy? Perhaps some may say. I
design to turn to God afterward. Ans. Poor Sinners! This Practice has a
manifold Evil in it; it is dishonorable to God, hurtful to others, and
prejudicial to your selves.

1. It is dishonorable to God in three Respects.

And 1. It contains in it bold Rebellion against his Authority, which enjoins
you to turn speedily, even to day, Psalm 95.7, 8. Heb. 3.7. 2 Cor. 6.2. 2. A
profane Contempt of his Majesty: For by your Delay, you prefer the Devil, the
World, and your Lusts before him; by observing their Commands first, and by
giving them the Prime of your Strength and Years; than which what can be more
abominable, base and degenerous? What to prefer the vilest Evil, before the
greatest Good! the basest Tyrant, before the best and most beneficent Master!
3. Cruel Ingratitude against his Mercy: That instead of improving the morning
of your Time in the Service of it is Author; you should abuse it to his
Dishonor, in the Service of his stated and implacable Enemy. Miserable Souls!
is this the Way you requite the good God for all the multiplied Kindnesses he
has vouchsafed upon you? And will ye thus forsake the Fountain of living
Waters, and hunt after broken empty Cisterns? Jer. 2.13. Is not Ingratitude a
most complicated and atrocious Evil? A very Heathen could say, Si$ingratum
dixeris omnia dixeris, If you name Ingratitude, you mention all that is bad.


2. Your Delays are hurtful to others: For what has a more pernicious ensnaring
Influence than a bad Example? By this you induce others to sin, encourage them
and harden them in it, and thereby are like to bring them and your selves with
them to Destruction, Prove. 2.18, 19. and 13.20. Suppose you your selves should
be turned to God afterward (which is not probable) how could you persuade
those you have debauched, by your irreligious Example, to embrace that Piety,
which they through your criminal Influence, have an inveterate Prejudice
against. O! if you had any Love to the Souls of others, and particularly of
your own dear Relatives, would ye thus conspire with the grand Enemy of
Mankind, in procuring the Damnation of those you profess an Affection for? But

3. Your Delays are peculiarly prejudicial to your selves, upon many Accounts.

1. They are exceeding perilous, because of a threesold Uncertainty.

1. Of Life. James 4.13. For what is our Life? It is even a Vapor which
appears for a little time, and then vanishes away. There fore we should work
while the Day lasts, for the Night comes when no Man can work. 2. Of the Means
of Grace, and Seasons of Salvation. Hence we are commanded to walk in the
Light, while we have the Light. 3. Of a Blessing upon these Means Conversion is
God's Gift, Ezekiel 36.26. which he confers in his own appointed Time, not
according to our Pleasure, 2 Timothy 2.26. Therefore we should carefully improve
every Opportunity, for if we will not with Earnestness perform the outward
Duties of Religion while we can, it is juft with God to leave us so, that we
shall not when we would. Again.
2. Every Delay hardens the Heart more and more, gradually introduces a sinful
Custom, and thereby renders Conversion the more difficult, Jer. 13.23.

3. Augments the Number and Heinousness of your Insqurties, and provokes the
divine Indignation; for one Sin naturally leads to, and disposes for another,
as Deep calls unto Deep, Psalm 42.7 and 95.8, 9.10, 11.

4. Late Repentance is seldom true and genuine. There is but one Example of
this in the holy Scriptures, viz. that of the Thief upon the Cross; neither can
it be proved that this Man deferred his Repentance with that View or
Expectation, that he should obtain it at last. Read and consider that terrible
Scripture, Matthew. 24.48, 49.

5. A Purpose of deferring Conversion and Repentance is inconsistent with a
sincere Purpose to repent, 1 Pet. 4.3.

6. To delay in Matters of such Moment is the most perfect Madness. Would not
he act like a distracted Man who was bit with a poisonous Serpent, or had drank
Poison, or was mortally wounded, and yet would tarry some considerable Time
before he would send for a Surgeon, take an Antidote, or apply a Balsom?

7. Delays are very contrary to the Practice of God's People, Psalm 119.60. I
made haste and delayed not to keep thy Commandments.

8. But if we could be certain of obtaining a sound Conversion at last (which
is not attainable, those that wilfully delay are then like to be forsaken,
Prove. 1.28.) it would be base and disingenuous to treat the Almighty so as is
is not lawful to treat any of our Fellow Creatures, Prove. 3.28. and so as we
would not have the Almighty to treat us, Psalm 102.3. But to persuade you if
possible, to turn to God speedily, and seek converting Grace, consider
seriously.

1. That God the Father calls you, Jer. 18.11. Now therefore go to, speak to
the Men of Judah and to the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, Thus says the Lord,
Behold I frame Evil against you, and devise a Device against you: Return ye now
every one from his evil Way, and make your Way and your Doings good Ezekiel.
33.11. Say unto them. As I live says the Lord God, I have no Pleasure in the
Death of the Wicked, but that the Wicked turn from his Way and live: Turn ye,
turn ye from your evil Ways; for why will ye die, O House of Israel? I know not
a more piercing and moving Text in the whole Scripture than this. O! methinks
it is enough to melt a Rock, to make a Heart of Iron move: The Ingemination or
Repetition of the Entreaty, Turn ye, Turn ye: And also the Note of Obsecration,
O Israel, is very expressive, (1) Of the great Weight of the Matter spoken.
(2.) Of the Sincerity and Earnestness of God's Desire after the Happiness of
true Penitents, for it seems by the Context, that they questioned whether they
should live, although they did repent and reform, Verse 10. (3) The Stupidity
and Obstinacy of Sinners that want so many Warnings, Why will ye die? Why will
ye act so unreasonably and unaccountably, as to be wilful Procurers of your own
eternal Death? O! Will you not hear the Groans and Complaints of a God?

2. The Lord Jesus calls thee, O unconverted Sinner! (1.) By declaring the
Happiness thou may attain by Conversion, Matthew. 5.8. Blessed are the pure in
Heart: for they shall see God. (2.) By expressing the Danger thou art like to
incur by the Want of it, John 3.3, 5 (3) By offering the kindest Encouragement
to those convinced and distressed Sinners, that konestly, earnestly and
perseveringly seek it, Matthew. 11.28. John 6.37. John 7.37. In the last Day,
that great Day of the Feast, Jesus stood and cried, saying, if any Man thirst,
let him come unto me and drink, Rev. 22.17 and 3.20. Behold. I stand at the
Door and knock, if any Man will open the Door, I will come in and sup with him
and be with me. And (4.) When ungrateful Sinners will not comply with his
reasonable, encouraging, heart affecting, and condescending Invitations, then
does the holy Jesus take a mournful Complaint and bewail over their Obstinacy
against him, and Cruelty to their own Souls; John 5.40. Ye will not come unto
me that ye might have Life! O Sinner! Haft thou an Heart hard enough to
wichstand an entreating, woing, dying Savicur? Consider his Sovereignty, and
Self sufficiency, that his Happiness cannot admit of Increase or Decay, that it
is equally incapable of Addition or Diminution, that thy Goodness cannot extend
to him, Psalm 16.2. and wonder at, and comply with, his surprising
Condescension. I think Dr. Watts expresses this Matter in one of his lyrick
Poems, with admirable Beauty and Energy of Language after the following Manner.

"Did ever Pity stoop so low,
"Dressed in Divinity in Blood,
"Was ever Rebel Courted so,
"With Groans of an expiring God.
3. The Holy Spirit the third Person of the adorable Trinity, invites you to
turn to God, by the good Inclinations he stirs up in you, which if you continue
to oppose, he will withdraw for ever, and strive no more with you, Genesis 6.3.
And also by his good Word proposed to you, Rev. 22.17. And the Spirit, and the
Bride say come, and let him that is athirst, come: and whosoever will, let him
take the Water of Life freely. And will you be so cruel and barbarous as to
resist to your own Damnation the kind Invitations and compassionate Calls of
the God that made you, the Savior that bought you, and of the Holy Ghost who
offers to sanctify you?

4. Does not the Word of God in all it is Branches, whither of Terror or
Comfort, alarm or invire you to turn from Sin, to God? And will you withstand
all the Allurements of the mildest Lenity and Pity, and all the Arguments of
the most awful Majesty, and just Severity? Have ye no Ingenuity, and are ye
lost to fear? What then can be done with you?

5. Does not the Providence of God loudly call you to seek regenerating Grace?
Should not God's Mercies lead you to Repentance? Romans 2. And his Judgments upon
your selves or others deter you from Sin, which produces such bitter Effects
even in this Life, which are but a small Presage of what must be endured in the
next, unless Repentance prevent, and especially when you hear of any being
removed by Death? O! you have reason to tremble and quake, as not knowing but
you shall be the next, and yet are so unprepared for it. Are ye so Deaf and
Obstinate, that ye will not hear, the terrible Trumpet of God's Judgments? Joel
2.1. Blow ye the Trumpet in Zion, and sound an Alarm in my holy Mountain: Let
all the Inhabitants of the Land tremble --

6. Do not the faithful Ministers of God call you again and again, with utmost
Earnestness to turn to God, as they are commanded, Isai 58.1. Cry aloud, spare
not, life up thy Voice like a Trumpet, and show my people their Transgressions,
and the House of Jacob their Sins. 2 Cor; 5.20. Now then we are Ambassadors for
Christ, as though God did beseech you by us, we pray you in Christ stead be ye
reconciled to God. And what abundant Satisfaction would your sincere Conversion
yield to their oppressed burdened Heart? And will ye have no Compassion either
upon them, who travail in Birth for you, till Christ be formed in you, or upon
your own Souls? Are ye resolved upon your own Destruction? Why will ye die poor
Sinners?

7. Do not your own Consciences, those Harbingers of God in your Bosoms, call
you and urge you to turn, and tell you that it is now high time, that ye have
served Sin and Satan too long already? Do they not represent to you a dismal
Map of those Miseries you shall quickly feel if ye turn not, and will ye be
deaf to the Warnings of your own Minds? Don't you know that if your Heart
condemns you, God is greater than your Heart and knows all Things? 1 John 3.20.
Will not your holding and strangling the Truth in Unrighteousness, prepare
Matter for the most painful, tormenting, and never ending Reflections in the
other World, when Conscience however muzled shall have full Liberty to speak;
will not it prey like an old Vulture, upon your Heart Strings then think you?

8. Does not your Reason call you to turn from Sin to Jehovah, by showing you
the Necessity and Equity of this Change? viz. That it is not reasonable to
expect the savourable Smiles, and uninterrupted Enjoyment of a righteous holy
God, without Likeness to him, and that it is but equal you should improve the
Powers you have received from God in his Service, and make some grateful
Returns for his unmerited Kindness.

9. Does not the Happiness of Heaven invite you to seek converting Grace,
without which ye cannot be a Partaker of it? And are ye willing, miserable
Souls, to be for ever separated from the Light and Love, the Joys and Triumphs
of that blessed State?

10 Should not the Torments of Hell alarm you to flee from that Place of
perfect and miserable Misery, which you cannot escape without converting Grace?
The Damned in Hell while they lived here, were careless of their Salvation, how
deplorable alas is their Condition now! O! What would they give for the like
Opportunities, they have had and neglected? Was not this the Complaint of
Dives? He wanted some Body to go and tell his Brethren, that they might not
come into that Place of Torment. Luke 16.23, 24, 27, 28. Hear how Damned Dives,
roars and groans, In Hell he life up his Eyes being in Torment, and cried, and
said, Father Abraham, Have Mercy on me, and send Lazarus that he may dip the
Tip of his Finger in Water, and cool my Tongue, for I am tormented in this
Flame. I pray thee therefore, that thou would send him to my Father's House,
for I have five Brethren, that he may testify unto them, lest they also come
into this Place of Torment.

11. May not the Necessity of this Change excite you to seek after it? Ye can
neither behold God here by an Eye of Faith, or enjoy him hereafter without it,
Matthew. 5.8. John 3.3, 5. So that it is absolutely necessary You may live a
contented happy Life, without much Riches, or great Honors, but you cannot
taste of true Happiness without Holiness, Heb. 12.14. This is the one Thing
necessary, which whosoever chooses possesses not only the best, but the most
necessary Part; the Lord Jesus contemns the Care of many Things before this,
Luke 10.41.

12. The Excellency of it: For as much as it restores the defaced Image of God
in us (which is the Beauty of our Nature) to some Degree of it is primitive
Luster, and thereby capacitates us to answer the Design of our Being, which is
to serve and enjoy our Creator and Redeemer, without this we must be
unprofitable here, and miserable hereafter.

13. The Profitableness of it.

1. Does it not advance us unto the highest Honors? 1 Samuel 2.30. Rev 1.5, 6.
For thereby Jehovah who is the Fountain of Honor, becomes our Father, the Lord
Jesus our Husband, Angels our Guards, and Attendants, and the triumphant and
militant Church our Brethren; is it a Matter of no Moment for poor polluted
Dust, Heirs of Hell and Wrath, to be cleansed from their De$$r$$ty, and made
the Sons of a King, nay to be made Kings and Priests to God? Does not the
Apostle John speak with Surprise and Admiration concerning this Privilege? 1 John: 3.1. Behold what manner of Love the Father has bestowed upon us, that we
should be called the Sons of God!

2. Does not Conversion instate us in the purest Pleasures, even such as result
from the Embraces of a God of infinite Excellency, Beauty, and Glory?

3. Does it not entitle us to the most lasting Benefits, the peculiar Favor
and Friendship of an omnipotent, omnipresent, beneficent and everlasting God,
which cannot expire, (because of the Invariableness of his Nature and Covenant)
so long as God lives? Does not this entitle to a Kingdom that has Foundations
perfectly freed from those Variations and Vicissitudes, to which every Thing
sublunary is exposed, to a House not made with Hands, eternal in the Heavens,
whose Builder and Maker is God? John 3.3.

14. The Reasonableness of it: Is it not highly rational to secure an infinite
Good, Col. 1.12. and to guard against an infinite Evil, both of Sin and
Punishment, to preserve a pure peace speaking Conscience, and please that
Sovereign Majesty, from whose good Pleasure our Beings and all the Blessings we
possess or expect, proceed; upon whose Power and Providence, we have our
continued Dependence? Now without converting Grace we cannot obtain those
Privileges, as has been before proved, wherefore then, O Sinner, do thou not
importunately cry to God for, and earnestly labor after this Change?

15. The Freeness of it: Is not the Life of the converted, the freest Life?
John 8.36. If the Son therefore shall make you free, ye shall be free indeed.
Regenerate Persons are made free from their natural Bondage to Sin, Satan,
Death, the Law of God as a Covenant of Works, and the Curses threatened for the
Breach of that Covenant. But Sinner, while thou art without the New Birth, thou
art a miserable Captive to all these, John 8.34. 2 Timothy 2.26. Gal 4.25. Heb.
2.15. John 3.36. What! Art thou contented with this woeful Captivity, to the
worst of Tyrants? Art thou contented to be stripped of all thy original Raiment,
and clothed with basest Rags, confined in the darkest Dungeon, imprisoned in
the Pit wherein is no Water, starved for Want of Bread, wounded and lest half
Dead; chained with massy and unweildy! Fetters; this is really the rusul State
of every unconverted Sinner, Isai. 64.6. Zech. 9.11. Col. 1.13. Psalm 40.2. and
38.5. Isai. 44.20. and 55.2. Luke 10.30. Acts 8.23. And now when the Morning of
Mercy dawns, when the Dove of Heaven descends after the fatal Shipwreck of our
first Parents Apostasy, with a peaceful Olive in his Bill, and Life and
Immortality is brought to Light. When Zion's King issues out royal
Proclamations of Pardon, and the Silver Trumpet of the peaceful Gospel sweetly
sounds a joyful Jubilee, proclaims Liberty, Liberty to the forlorn Captives, a
valuable, costly and everlasting Liberty, 1 Pet. 1018, 19. When the blessed
Lord Jesus offers to open the Prison Doors, and set the Captive free from his
Chains. Darkness, Penury and Death, and to heal him with his Wounds, and cloth
him with his Righteonsness, will not you accept of this free and invaluably
precious Offer? What not accept of Liberty and Life! Be astonished; O Heavens,
at this, and be horribly afraid! Do thou stickle at the Acceptance of such an
Offer? Why then, Wretch, thou deservest to be damned, that thou may feel the
Fruits of thy abhorred Obstinacy! and damned thou shall be as certainly as
Christ is true, except thou repent, John 8.24. Such Self-traitors deserve no
Pity, neither from God nor Man.

16. The Safety of it: The converted Person has God to be his Shield and
Sanctuary, his sure Refuge, and exceeding great Reward, Psalm 18.1. Isai. 32.2.
Genesis 15.1. And who then can hurt them, or make them afraid? Romans 8.28. Psalm
23.4 and 43.1. and 46.2, 3. How secure and pleasant must the Repose of such
Persons be? Psalm 3.5, 6. But before this Change you are in Danger of utter
Destruction every Minute, and have no Shelter to cover you from the Vengeance
of an angry God; why then, poor Sinners, will you not turn to God, and seek
converting Grace?

17. The Sweetness and Pleasure of it: As the regenerate Person's Life is the
safest, so it is the sweetest Life, Prove. 3.17. Wisdoms Ways are Ways of
Pleasantness, and all her Paths are Peace. Christ's Yoke is easy, and his
Burden light. His Commandments are not grievous. Matthew. 11.30. 1 John 5.3. It
is true there is no small Difficulty and Pain that convinced Persons are
exposed to, before the Byas of the Heart is turned toward God, and new
Qualities infused into the Soul, but when a Person has got his Heart changed,
the Power of Sin broken, and a Sense of God's Love, then the Yoke of Christ is
easy, he goes on in his Way rejoicing, Acts 5.41. Now their Joys have these
remarkable Properties.

1. They are rational and solid, confirmed by and arising from Consideration
and Reflection, and therefore suitable to the Soul, which is the Seat and
Foundtain of our Reason. Whereas the Pleasures of Sin, are but a Flash, the
Result of a cruel Rape upon the Understanding by Sense, which according to the
Order of God and Nature should be it is Subject

2. Spiritual, proceeding from the Father of Spirits, and so adapted to the
Soul, which is of a spiritual and immaterial Nature, but the Pleasures of Sin
are gross and sensual, only suitable for the Gratification of the lower Passions
and Appetites, which Beasts possess in common with Men.

3. Peaceful. Prove. 3.17. They introduce a pleasing Calm into the Soul, Gal.
6.16. Whereas the Pleasures of Sin must needs produce Pain and Disorder, Isai.
48.22. Heb. 12.15.

4. Perpetual: Either in Seed or Fruit, State or Frame, Habit or Act, Psalm
119.165. Whereas the stolen Pleasures of Sin cannot be reflected upon without
Shame and Horror, unless by Men of reprobate Minds, and seared Consciences,
Romans 6.21.

18. Do not all Things in Nature bend to their own good? The very irrational
Animals by a natural Instinct, seek after their own Safety and Welfare, the
sick Dog will seek after a purgative Herb to cure himself, the Swallow after
Celandine to cure her blind young ones, the wounded Heart after Dittany to heal
her. But alas! few poor Sinners repair to Christ the great Physician for
Eye Salve, to cure their Blindness, Rev 3.18. Few hasten in earnest to the
Branch that sprung out of the Stem of Jesse, in Order to get a Leaf from that
Tree of Life to heal them, and one great Reason is because they feel not their
Sickness and Sores, Matthew. 9.12. O might not this Care of those poor Creatures,
who are destitute of the Direction of Reason, after their own Safety, excite
you who are blessed with that Faculty they want, to hasten to Christ, with the
most earnest Solicitations for converting Grace, without which you must die in
your Wounds.

19. May not the common Care of Mankind, about Things of infinitely lesser
Weight excite you? What Pains does the Merchant, the Mariner take, to incease
his Stock? Does he not spread his Canvas Wings and fly a cross the broad and
boisterous Deep, to the Extremities of the Earth, amidst a vast Vicissitude of
Dangers, Difficulties and Death? Does he not willingly endure the scorching
Summer Hearts, and the cold Winter Gusts? Sleep departs from his Eyes, through
the Excess and Anxiety of his Fears and Cares, and all this to gain or secure a
little perishing Pelf Do not Farmers and Tradesmen take much the same Pains,
for the most part they rise up early and sit up late, and eat the Bread of
Carefulness, under inexpressible Fatigue, and all to secure a little transient
and unsatisfying Gain; now will not ye be persuaded to take as much Pains about
your Souls, $word$ (in seeking of and laboring for converting Grace) as the
Generality of Men take about their Bodies and Estates, about an eternal as they
about a temporal and transient Good? Will ye not? Will ye not? Unhappy Sinners!
O how astonishing is your Madness! Holy and blessed God, enlighten the Minds
and change the Hearts of these poor Sinners, and turn them from Vanity to thy
self.

20 May not the Care of those who are without the Communion of the visible
Church about their Salvation and Happiness, alarm and excite you to seek after
a Renovation? How diligent are the Mahometans who pray no less than five Times
every Day statedly? How famous for Morality were some of the Pagans, as
particularly Seneca, Cato, Socrates? What did not the Pharisees do, whose Fame
was commended before others? Some Historians relate of them that they wore
Thorns in the Borders of their Garments, that when they sat down, by the
pricking of these they might be remembered of the Law; as also that they used to
wear Hats with very deep Brims, to prevent their being ensnared by tempting
Objects, through the Windows of the Senses; and that even in their Beds, they
were wont to hold a Bullet in their Hand, under which by the Bed side was
placed a Brass Bowl, that when they begun to sleep, the Bullet falling out of
their Hand into the Bowl, might by it is Report awake them to Prayer; and yet
the Lord Jesus assures us, That unless our Righteousness exceeds theirs, we
shall in no Ways enter into the Kingdom of God, Matthew. 5.20. Wherefore that is
not only necessary to be done, which they did justly, but more, otherwise will not
the Lord Jesus tell us, Do not the Publicans so? And these were not altogether
negligent, Matthew 5.46, 47.

In brief, Every Creature contained within the spacious Verge of the whole
Creation, whether in the visible Heavens, the Earth or Sea, may excite you; if
you look upon the Sun, Moon and Stars, these obey their Creator, while you
insolently control his Authority. If you view the Trees and Plants upon the
Earth or Fishes in the great Ocean, those bring forth their Fruit in their
Kind, and attain the End of their Creation, while you are barren, and live in a
continued Opposition, to the grand Design of your Being May not every Pile of
Grass, or Flower, or Fruit you behold, be an awakening Monitor to you?

Once more consider I earnestly beseech you, as upon my bended Knees, the few
following Motives.

1. That Heaven is the Soul's Center; (for which Conversion is a necessary
Preparative) Behold! how every Thing in the great Machine of the World inclines
to it is Center; see how the Rivers in the mazy Wanderings, run with speed to the
great Ocean, that Fountain and Original of Waters; how swiftly do the Sparks
fly upwards to their Rest, with what Vehemence do ponderous Bodies descend
downwards to the Earth! Then may the Sinner say, Is Heaven thy Center, O my
Soul! and shall these inanimate Things exceed thee in their Motion? Shall every
Thing hasten to it is resting Place but thee? Was it not the Speech of Naomi, to
her Daughter in-law the Moabitess? Ruth 3.1. Might we not say this to our poor
Souls? Shall I not seek Rest for thee, O my Soul, under the Wings of Christ, in
the Bosom of God, by imploring of, and laboring for converting Grace?

2. Consider, It is your own Concern: Perhaps one would be slack about
another's Busness, who would not be so about his own; now this is your own
Business, dear Brethren! whatever you get here goes into your own Treasury;
here if you are wise you are wise for your selves, but if you scorn Advice, and
Instruction, you alone shall bear it, Prove. 9.12.

3. An eternal Concern. Conversion entitles to, and fits for a Kingdom which is
not shaken, a Crown which fades not away, 1 Cor. 9.25. Are not worldly Things
valued according to their Duration and Permanency, and why should not this? In
comparison of which, they are but fleeting Shadows, which have no abiding,
Eccles. 6.12. 1 Chronicles. 29.15. 1 Cor. 7.31. What shall a Man give in Exchange
for his Soul? If he should gain the whole World and loose his own Soul, he
would make but a poor Bargain, Matthew. 16.26. Mark 8.36, 37. How much more when
Men profanely fell their Souls for a very inconsiderable Part of it?

4. Would it not be you greatest Wisdom? Are not those called wise by the God
of Wisdom, who consider their latter End? Deuteronomy 32.29. And can that be
considered to Purpose, without Labor after Conversion to God? No surely, Psalm
119.59, 60. Does not the Want of this Wisdom make Men like to Beasts, nay worse
than they? Psalm 49.20. For is it not worse to be like a Beast, than to be one?
Is it not a Fools Property to want a Heart. when he has a Price to get Wisdom?
Prove 17.16.

5. Will not Salvation fully recompense all your Pains? Certainly there is
enough in the heavenly Paradise to make amends for all the Labors, Services
and Sufferings of the People of God here on Earth; for Eye has not seen, nor
Ear heard, neither have entered into the Heart of Man (to conceive) Things which
God has prepared for them that love him, 1 Cor. 2.9. There their Prayers will
be turned into Praises, their Sighs into Songs, their Tears into Triumphs,
their Sorrow into Joy, their Cross into a Crown, their Reproaches into Pearls,
their Labor into Rest, their Darkness to Light, their Death to Life and Love,.
Rev 5.9.14.3 and 15.3. 1 Pet. 1.8. Heb. 4.9. Rev 21.4, 11, 12, 18, 19, 20, 21,
23. and 22.1, 2. Has the Crown of Righteousness, the Crown of Life, the Crown
of Glory, which God has promised to those that love and prepare for his
Appearance, 2 Timothy 4.8. James 1.12. 1 Pet. 5.4 no Influence on the Sinner? Have
thou no Desire after that Place of pure, consummate and everlasting Delight,
where neither Sighing nor Sorrow have any Access or Residence? Rev 21.4. Why
then, thou art worse than Balaam the Conjurer, Numb. 23.10. If you have, then
seek converting Grace, else your Desires are like to be as vain as his. Prove.
13.4. Pray observe, That though nothing can recompense for the Neglect, and Loss
of our Salvation, yet Salvation will recompense for the Neglect and Loss of all
other Things, Matthew. 16.26. Is it not better to be scoffed at for being too
strict and speedy in traveling upon Zion's Road, than to be damned for being
too loose and slow?

6. Will Not your sinful Sloth (against the Light of your own Minds) in seeking
regenerating Grace, aggravate your Punishments in Hell? Luke 10.12, 13, 15. It
shall be more tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrah --. Luke 15.22. If I had not
come and spoken to them, they had not had Sin; but now they have now Cloak for
their Sin.

7. Is there not Encouragments for earnest Seekers, for true Penitents? Matthew.
11.12. The Kingdom of Heaven suffers Violence, and the Violence take it by
Force. Let the convinced distressed Sinner read the following Scriptures, John
6.37. and 7.37. Rev 3.20. Isai. 1.18. and 65.24. Luke 7.37, to 48. 2 Chronicles.
33.11, 12, 13. That Expression of God's astonishing Affection recorded in the
Parable of the Prodigal, Luke 15. is enough I think to invite the most
obstinate Sinner to turn to God. No sooner did the poor Prodigal begin to turn
to his Father, but immediately his Father spied him a great Way off, his Bowels
were moved with Compassion toward him, and he hastened to his Relief, Verse 20
Mr. Henry I think glosseth excellently upon this Verse. (1.) Says he, Here
were Eyes "of Mercy, and these very quick-sighted; when he was yet a great Way
off, his Father saw him, -- he looks on Men when they are gone astray from
him, to see whether they will return to him, and he is aware of their first
Inclination toward him. (2.) Here were Bowels of Mercy, and those Bowels
turning within him, and yerning at the Sight of his Son, he had Compassion.
Misery is the Object of Pity, even the Misery of a Sinner, though he has
brought it upon himself, yet God compssionates him, Hos. 11.8. (3.) Here were
Feet of Mercy, and these quick-paced; He runs, this notes how swist God is to
show Mercy. The Prodigal came slowly under a Burden of Shame and Fear, but the
tender Father runsto meet him with his Encouragements. (4.) Here were Arms of
Mercy, and these Arms stretched out embrace him; he fell on his Neck, though
guilty and deserving to be beaten, though dirty and newly come form seeding
Swine, -- yet thus he thus he takes him in his Arms, and lays him in his Bosom.
Thus dear are all true Penitents to God, thus welcome to the Lord Jesus. (5.)
Here are Lips of Mercy, and those Lips dropping as the Honeycomb. He kissed
him. This Kiss not only assured him of his Welcome, but sealed his Pardon. Not
a Word of his former Miscarringages is mentioned against him, but on the
contrary he is caressed with the highest Honors, treated with the most
compassionate Respects, by his indulgent Father; he came home between Hope and
Fear, Fear of being rejected, and Hope of being received, but his Father was
not only better to him than his Fears, but better than his Hopes. for hes was
clothed with the best Robe, the Righteousness of Christ, had a Ring put on his
Hand, had the Earnest of the Spirit given him, and was thereby sealed to the
Day of Redemption; and Shoes upon his Feet, was endowed with the Preparation of
the Gospel, Ephesians. 6.13. A holy Resolution to follow Christ through all
Difficulties. Now Brethren, Is not this a powerful and persuasive M$tive?
Methinks the unconverted Sinnor should reason thus with himself, And is the
holy blessed God whom I have so cruelly offended, and whose Authority I have
slighted, whose Law I have broken, and whose Love I have abused, making Suit to
me for that Allegiance I owe to his Majesty, upon the Performance of which my
Life depends? Has the just and righteous God bore with me so long, when I was
ripe for the Sickle of his Justice, Joel 3.13. and plead with me so often to
fly from my own Death and Ruin? And now after so many Affronts and Refusals, he
is yet waiting to be gracious to me, and wanting to be exalted, that he may
have Mercy upon me, Isai. 30.18. What the Sovereign, the offended Majesty of
Heaven in whose Presence the brightest Seraphim vails his Face with his Wings,
as being conscious of his comparative Deformity, the God to whom it is a
condescending Stoop to behold the Things that are done in Heaven! Psalm 113.6.
wait upon a Rebel Worm! Rev. 3.20. Is the blessed God willing to be reconciled
to me after so many horrible and grievous Provocations, willing to wash my
crimson Sins, and make them white as Snow, Isai. 1.18. willing to embrace me
(vile Monster!) in the Bosom of his unmerited Love and peculiar Affection! Is
it possible? Is it possible? O strange! O wonderful! and shalld I? Can I? Dare
I withstand such Love any longer? God forbid! God forbid! Lord, my Heart earns
after thee, for I see thou art a gracious God, Jonah 4.2. Turn me, turn me,
most holy Jehovah, unbare thine Arm, and draw me unto to thee, for now Lord I
am weary with sinning against thee; now I want to fear and serve thee, I am
grieved at the Heart, O God! that I have served thine Enemies so long; away ye
wrethched Tyrants, be gone, for I hate you all! Now Lord, let me come to thee
as a poor hunger-starved Prodigal; I confess I have sinned against Heaven and
against Earth, and am no more worthy to be called thy Son, make me as one of
thy hired Servants, Luke 15.18, 19. O pity! pity me, blessed God, who would
fain fly under thy Wing for Succor, Is there not Mercy with thee, that thou
mayeth be feared, Psalm 1304. Have thou not been found of those that sought
thee not? Lord, will thou not be found of me, wretched me, who wants to seek
thee, and to abandon all other Lords and Lovers besides thee? Blessed Jesus, I
have been long lost and wandering from God, in the Deserts of Sin, and dead in
Trespasses: O thou almighty Shephered! bring me a poor stray Sheep, by thy Word
and Spirit to thy Fold; lay me on thy Shoulder, or in thy Bosom, Luke 15.4, 5.
Isai. 40.11. O let me the poor lost Sheep be found, that the Dead may live,
Luke 15.24.

8. Thy Conversion Sinner, would occasion Joy in Heaven and upon Earth; the
holy God, and holy Angels, and holy Men, would rejoice at it, Luke 15.10.24 and
your own Soul among the rest would shout with Joy and Triumph, Acts 8, 39. None
but wicked Men and Devils would be disturbed on that Occasion, and if that will
disturb them, God grant they may soon be disturbed; let all Hell rage, and
soam, let all the Devil's Imps growl or sniker, they cannot hurt thee if thou
come over to Jesus, Come then, poor Sinner come! what hinders thee? O almighty
Father! Pity and persuade those poor stupid Sinners to come from Darkness and
Death to thee.

9. What would you loose by turning to God? Is it dishonorable to be related
to the divine Majesty, to the Church of the first born, whose Names are writter
in Heaven, that august Assembly of perfected Spirits, and to Jesus the Angel
and Mediator of the everlasting Convenant? Heb. 12.23, 24. Is it dishonorable
to be adorned with the Beauties of Holiness, from the Womb of the Morning,
Psalm 110.3. to be conformed to a God of radiant, transcendent, and
inexpressibly glorious Excellency? Exodus 15.11. Is it uncomfortable to partake
of the Clusters of Canaan, the joyful Soul ravishing Earnests of all the Sweets
above? 1 Pet. 1.8. Can it be uncomfortable to entertain Communion with a God of
infinite Beauty, infinite Goodness, infinite Glory, Excellency and All
sufficiency, the Fountain of Power and Love. Cant. 1.13 and 21, 3. and 5.10, to
16. Exodus 34.6, 7. Genesis 17.1. Isai. 42.8. Psalm 16.11. Is it disadvantageous to
be entitled to an unalienable and everlasting Inheritance, extending infinitely
beyond the narrow Circle of created Matter, to be enriched with a Pearl of
immense Worth, more valuable than if the vast Volumns of the Heavens, and
spacious Globe of the Earth were turned into a Mass of solid Gold? Is it
disadvantageous to be clothed with the chiefest Robe in Heaven's Wardrobe, to
have a House perfectly freed from all the Decays of Time, and Wrecks of Matter,
built by God himself, to have Treasures that neither Moth nor Rust does
corrupt, nor Thieves break through and steal? Lam. 3.24. 1 Pet. 1.4. Math.
13.46. and 6.20 Rev 3.18. 2 Cor. 5.1. It is a Loss to enjoy the Friendship and
Protection of a God of infinite Power and Almightiness, before whom all the
Armies of Heaven and Earth, and Hell, are as the small Dust of the Balance?
Isai. 40.15. Genesis 17.1. Is it a Loss to forsake that (viz. Sin) which is the
greatest Dishonor of your Nature, and the most malignant Poison to you Souls?
-- Can that be done too soon, which unless it be done, you are undone for ever?
I mean turning to God by a sound Conversion, John 3.3. What hinders your
Compliance, O Sinner, with the Invitations of Heaven? You will say perhaps,
that Sin is pleasant: Ans. It is true, some Sins do please the Senses, but it
is as true, that their Fruits here and in Hell are bitter, Prove. 23.31, 32. And
are there not more safe rational and satisfactory Pleasures to be had in
serving the most high God, and seeking the Salvation of your poor Souls? Psalm
4.6, 7. and 23.4. and 46.23. Matthew. 11.40. 1 John 5.3. Prove. 3.17. Don't say
that you shall be reflected upon among your Neighbors if you turn religious,
if so, what then, those Reproaches would reflected Honor upon you, for
whatever you think, it is no small Honor and Privilege, to suffer for God and
his precious Truths, Phil. 1.29. James 1.2, 3. Matthew. 5.10, 11, 12. And if once
you obtained converting Grace, you would no more value the unjust Refecttions
of wicked People, than the Dust under your Feet. Don't say that you would loose
some worldly Advantage by the Profession and Practice of Religion, if you did
it would be infinitely more than made up, in the Love and Favor of God here
and hereafter. Why then don't you labor poor Sinners, to turn to God? Why will
you prefer any temporal Enjoyment before the Safety of your Souls? Did it not
argue a vile Temper in Esau, to prefer a morsel of Bread before his Birth
right, which are both sacred and civil Privileges? Alas! the World and it is
Enjoyments are to you as Jael's Milk to Sisera, as Delilah to Samson; is it not
a Pity, that Men should be such Enemies to themselves, as to prefer the
disguised Vanities of a fading World to the real and eternal Riches of another,
and a better? Poor Sinners, when you seek for Rest in temporal Enjoyments you
seek for the Living among the Dead, your labored Pursuit is as vain, as if
Israei had endeavored to fix his Abode in the Wilderness, among Serpents and
Enemies, or as if Noah had made the Ark his Home, when the Waters were fallen,
Why stand ye bear (viz in the Market Place) all the Day idle? Matthew. 20.6 Have
ye no Work to do for the immortal God, and your deathless Souls? Why stand ye
so indolent upon the Shore of a vast Eternity, not knowing but the next Tide
will sweep you off beyond all Hopes of a Remedy, and sink you in the dark
Retreats of Death. Speak therefore in the Language of the poor starving Lepers,
who sat at the Gate of Samaria, 2 Kings 7.3, 4 Why sit we here until we die? If
we say we will enter into the City, the Famine is in the City, and we shall die
there; and if we sit still here we die also. Now come therefore and let us fall
unto the Host of the Syrians: if they save us alive we shall live, and if they
kill us, we shall but die. If we return to a Course of Sin we shall surely
perish, Heb. 12.14. If we abide in our present Sloth and Security, we shall
pine away and perish for Want of Bread, if we stay here we must starve to
Death, as sure as God lives, Luke 15.17. If we go to God for converting Grace
and pardoning Mercy, he can but deny us, we can but perish, but if he saves us
alive (has Mercy upon us) we shall live; live spiritually, comfortably and
eternally. Up then Sinners, Awake, arise and hasten, hasten, hasten to Christ
for Life, for Bread, for Mercy: Behold God's Stores are open, the Treasures,
Magazine and Ward robe of Heaven is unlocked, Isai. 55.1, 2, 3. Rev. 22.17.
Zech. 13.1. And Christ carries the $word$ Rev. 3.7. Apply to the Lord Jesus
with the utmost Speed, and most intense Vehemence! May by you will meet with
more agreeable and satisfactory, and unexpected Entertainment, as the poor
Lepers, Luke 15, 20, to 25. You must resolve with Esther, to venture into the
King's Presence, Esth. 4.16. And so I will go in unto the King, and if I
perish, I perish. She was resolved to interceed for her People's Safety, though
it should cost her her Life; and should not you much more for the eternal
Safety of your Souls; she met with a favorable Reception from an imperious
Man, which banished her Fears, and encouraged her Hopes; he held out the golden
Scepter which she touched, and offered to answer her Request to the half of his
Kingdom, Esth. 5.2, 3. And why shay not the convinced Sinner much more expect
to find a gracious Answer from a good God, whose Being is Love, and who
delights in Mercy, 1 John 4.8. Mioah 7.18. Seeiog he is now enthroned on
Compassion, and holds forth (under the Gospel) the golden Scepter of Pardon,
Peace and Pity, Isai 61.1. Heb. 4.16. Luke 2.14. Hence is there not
Encouragement that the returning distressed Prodigal may be enabled by God, to
touch the Scepter by the Hand of Faith that he may live?

Well Sinners, Are ye become Gospel proof, got beyoud Bow-shet, past all
Feeling, that when we represent God's Majesty armed with Vengeance, seared on
his dreadful Thorone of Fustice, wreathed with Flames and Lightnings, circled
with Clouds of gloomy Horrors, encompassed with Myriads of holy Angels, casting
with his unbeat'd and unbroken Arm Thunderbolts of Death, or shooting the
barb'd pointed terrible Arrows of his inslamed Indignation, and with the other
holding a two-edged hright bunrnished glittering Sword, ready to be thrust into
your Hearts, into the innermost Recesses of your unarmed Souls, and yet ye are
not moved.

Or on the other hand. When we represent Jehovah seated on a Throne of Love,
holding forth the Scepter of Salvation, and with the mildest Grace and most
earnest Importunity, inviting, inducing, indearing Condescension, courting
worthless Rebels, Captives, Beggars, to accept of refined Gold, Liberty and
Life, and that not only with the strongest Arguments, but with Tears, Croans
and Blood, and yet you are not affected; O astonishing Stupidity! O Rock! O
Adamant! What Measures would you have the great God take with you to reclaim
you? Good God! What a wretched Blindness and Obduracy have Men brought upon
themselves by Sin? Be asto$$$ed ye Heavens, and mourn O Earth! O ye blessed
$$gels of God, who r$j$yeed at the bringing of those glad Tidings of Salvation
to a desolate World! Here is mourning Work for you, if ye were capable of it,
to see the precious Offers of this great Salvation bought with Blood, basely
slighted and neglected; but ye are incapable of Grief, being continually
delighted wi$h the bringt Vision of your God, you cannot lament with us, or be
Partners in our Pains.

O ye blessed Saints of the triumphing Church! be ye astonished at the
unparalled Madness of an infaruated World, in deceiving their precious Souls,
and slighting such $a dear, transcendently excellent, and unspeakably glorious
Rideomer. The most of Mankind will nor, a las, they will not earnestly seek
aster converting Grace! Can ye mourn with us blessed Souls? No ye are ignorant
of our Woe, Isai. 63.16. and continually delighted and ravished vished with the
Views of your Redeemer's Face, and Beauty: Ye are always drinking the pure,
sinless, soul satisfying Sweets of his life giving Love. Ye are always swimming
in a calm Ocean of Pleasure, and imbibing the Streams of pure Nectar, that
spring from the Throne of God, plucking Apples from the Tree of Life, sitting
under the Shadow of God, the King, the Lord of Hosts, breathing perpetual
Triumphs, and shouting continual Hosannahs.

O but did ye see the dismal State of Things here, how wretchedly poor sinners
deceive themselves, with Dreams and Delusions, with false and foolish Hopes of
Happiness, without the Experience of regenerating Grace, and in the mean time
affront the God that made them, reject the Redeemer that died for them, and
grieve the blessed Spirit, then surely if you had any Room for Sorrow, any
Access or Avenue to Grief, you would fill the Heavens with Sobs, Groans and
Lamentations, instead of your present Songs of Triumph. But blessed Souls, your
Tears are for ever wiped away, those crystal Fountains which run so fast in
this Wilderness, must now no more gush and bleed, no they are for ever shut and
sealed, and ye have more delightful Work to do, in exalting of and rejoicing in
your God and Redeemer! Who then Lord God' of Hosts, shall mourn over a
perishing secure, deceived unregenerate World? Why is not the bright Pavement
of the great King's Abode, the crystal Canopy of the visible Heavens darkened,
to testify it is Sorrow for a perishing deceived World? O thou beautiful Eye of
Heaven! whose benign Beams create our Days, and make all Nature glad, why do
thou not forget to shine? Why art thou not covered with a cloudy Dress? Why
coasest thou not to run thy wonted Rounds, in order to lament the wretched
perishing World? Will thou still lend thy Light to those who love to walk in
Darkness, to those who profanely abuse thy Creatures Goodness; and thou
blazing Moon, with all the Ranks of lesser Lights, have ye no Pity upou your
Fellow Creatures, who have quenched their once glorious Light in Darkness, and
are hastening fast though their Sloth and Delusions to eternal Death; why are
ye not. veiled to testify your Grief?

O let all the lower Creation mourn for Man; sinning Man has stained it is
Beauty and Glory; but what do I say? My Request is answered, the whole Frame of
Nature being oppressed with the Sin of Man, travails and groan, Romans 8.22.
Surely it inanimate Creatures were capable of Sense and Sympathy, the Winds
would whisper perpetual Sighs for, and the hard Rooks would break their long
Silence, and lament over the cruel Ingratitude which unconverted Sinners are
guilty of against God, and the stupid Barbarity which they exercise against
their own Souls; the great Ocean and all gliding Rivulets which love to sport
in meandrine Circuits round the Glove, would weep their useless Channels dry in
doleful Lamentations, the pregnant Clouds would spend all their watery
Magazanes in Tears, the blooming Trees would lay down their Honors, and be
clothed with a Winter mournful Garb.

O ye Saints of God! Are your Bawels of Brass and Iron, that they will not move?
Don't ye see the miserable State of the World? Look how fast and thick they
move (Men of all Ranks and Orders) upon the sable Road, searless and
unconcerned, to the dark Chambers of Death and Hell. Very dear Brethern! Are
not these miserably miserable Creatures, Objects of Pity? May not your Eye
aff$ct your Heart? Or have you forgot to Pity? Are the Fountains of your Sorrow
congealed, and have ye no Tears to shed upon this mournful Occasions God
forbid! O let Rivers of Water run down your Eyes, because Men, unconverted Men,
keep not your Father's Law! but obstinately slight the infinite Love of God,
and thereby destroy their own Souls.

And thou my poor Soul, Mours, mourn, mourn! O that my Head were Waters, and
mine Eyes a Fountain of Tears! that I might suffi iently bewail over these
miserable Sinners, whom I cannot persuade! Let me, Lord of Hosts, be clothed
with Sackoloth, and covered with Ashes, that I may mourn. And now, high, holy
and evelasting God, open the Springs of my Sorrow, and let them bleed to Death.
Burden my Heart most blessed God, with as great a Weight of Grief, as the Farm
of my Nature can bear; because of those deceiyed sluggish Souls, who will not
$uit their destructive Delusions, their damning Lusts, and turn to the liying
God. If I can do no more, good God! let me mourn; if I may not be indulged the
undeserved Privilege of persuading any, any poor Sinner, to turn to thee, my
God, then Lord Jesus, let me lament with all my Soul and Heart, with a bitter
and perpetual, but submissive Mourning Grieve my distressed Soul, and all ye my
mourning Passion, awake, awake, awake, and float in an incessant Vein of
grieving Grief!

But if any poor Sinner should ask me, how he should seek this Change? I answer
more generally,

1. Early. Eccl. 12.1. Prefer nothing to this, let the first of thy Time,
Thoughts and Cares be spent about it, When one asked the Lord Jesus leave to go
and bury his Father first, he denied it, and would have the first Fruits
offered to himself, Matthew. 8.21, 22. In Bethesda the Man that first went into
the Pool was healed of whatever Disease he had, John 5.4. The Israelites were
obliged to offer their first Fruits to God, and a Curse is denounced against
such as had in their Flook a Male, and vowed a corrupt Thing, Mal. 1.14. Delay
not a Moment longer: Don't you know the Deceits of your Enemies. "To day is
cunningly stole away in Hopes of to morrow, and when to morrow comes, an ill
Devil, as Basil observes, would have that Day for it self, and asks the other
morrow for God," and thus not a small Number of unwary Sinners are tolled to
Hell by the Threads of their good Resolutions.

2. Earnestly; as the poor Woman for the lost piece of Silver, Luke 15.18. And
that

1. Because the Good Conversion entitles us to is of great Moment, and is not
to be obtained by small Diligence. It is a great Salvation; now what will not a
Man do for the Safety of his Body? Eye for Eye, Skin for Skin, and whatsoever
he has, Job 2.4. How much more should he be ready to lay down all for the
Interest of his poor Soul?

2. Because Christ himself could not purchase our Happiness without great
Labor and Agony. It cost Jesus mournful Tears, bloody Sweat, and mortal
Wounds: Now seeing the Purchase was so dear to Christ, can we think to get an
Interest in it (by Conversion) without Pains?

3. Because many powerful Enemies endeavor to detain us in a sinful and secure
State, which are to be fought with and overcome, which how painful and
dissicult a Work it is to perform, is best known by those that have experienced
it. The Enemies to be contended with are these three, the World, the Flesh, and
the Devil, each of which is too strong for us without supernatural Assistance.

4. Without earnest Labor no Man is converted or saved, ordinarily. Hence we
are commanded to strive to enter in at the strait Gate, for we are informed,
that the Gate is strait and the Way narrow, which leads to Life, and that few
find it, Luke 13.24. Matthew 7.13, 14 Three Things in Christ's Metaphor show the
Necessity of Pains, viz. The Gate, the Way, the Travelers.

1. The Gate is strait and difficult (Regeneration is the Gate by which we
enter into the Way of Life) upon a twofold Account. (1.) It is hard to find
Therefore it is said in the Words, Few there be that find it. Why? because it
is above Nature, and only revealed to some by God the Father, John 1.13. Matthew.
11.25. (2.) It is hard to be entered into, for this is contrary to Nature,
against the natural Bet and corrupt 'Tendency of the Heart, urges for that
Circumcision mad without Hands, the putting off the Body of Sin and Death, Col.
2.11.


2. The Way is narrow in a twofold Respect. (1.) In Regard of Sin. The King's
Road to the new Jerusalem is so narrow that it will not hold a Man and
unmortified Lust together, it justles out one or both. (2.) In Regard of
Punishment, it is ados tethilimine, an afflicted Way, a Way hedged about with
Thorns, but blessed be God, not hedged up, the Gate is not only hard to find,
and to pass through, like that narrow Passage between two sharp Rocks, viz.
Bozer and Seneh, through which Jonathan and his Armor-bearer went, in order to
smite the Philistines, 1 Samuel 14.4. which resemble Presumption upon the one
hand, and Despair on the other, between which a true Christian must travel I
say the Gate is not only strait, but the Way is difficult, and that not only in
Respect of the Corruptions which must be subdued, but also of the Afflictions
which must be patiently and cheerfully endured; hence it is said that through
many Tribulations we must enter into the Kingdom of God, Acts 14.22. 2 Timothy
3.12.


3. The Travelers in this narrow Way are but Few, and was it not so since the
Foundation of the Earth? What became of all the antediluvian World, except
eight Persons? 1 Pet. 3.20. 2 Pet 2.5. What became of the many thousands in the
four Cities of the Plain, Sodom, Gomorrah, Zeboim, and Admah? Does not the
Apostle Jude inform us, Verse 7 That they are suffering the Vengeance of
eternal Fire? Though the Number of Israel be as the Sand of the Sea, yet Mercy
is extended but to a Remnant, Romans 9.27. Romans 11.5. There is a Remnant
according to the Election of Grace, Romans 11.7. For many are called but few
chosen, Matthew. 22.14. But

3. Ye must seek converting Grace perseveringly. Because many have perished who
have made seemingly good Beginnings, but continued not, they seemed to do
something, and suffer something, but not enough, not constantly, therefore
their Endeavors proved abortive, Luke 13.24. For many I say unto you will seek
to enter in, and shall not be able. The young Man in the Gospel did many Things
well, but the World was glued to his Heart, Matthew. 19.22. Agrippa was almost
persuaded, and therefore but almost saved, Acts 26.28. Observe what the
eloquent Apostle speaks to the Galatians, Chap. 3. Ver. 4 Have ye suffered so
many Things in vain, if it be yet in vain? A Person starving with Hunger would
not be contented with bare asking for Bread, unless he obtained what he asked;
so Brethren, for Christ's sake, be not satisfied with your praying for
Regeneration, except ye get what ye pray for. The Woman that had lost the piece
of Silver, sought dilignetly till she found it, Luke 15.8. Go thou and do
likewise.

If you desire more particular Direction, I refer you to those mentioned in the
close of the first Discourse, and shall only observe by the by, that Men are
more willing to hear Directions than perform them, and more willing to perform
them than quit Dependence upon them.

But before I conclude, I shall crave leave to offer a Word of Advice to
regenerate Persons.

Dear Brethren in Christ Jesus, be entreated,

1. To acknowledge the pure Grace and Goodness of God to you in your
Regeneration; which is 1. So distinguishing. May it not affect your Hearts to
consider that God has passed by so many thousands of better natural and
acquired Endowments, and revealed himself and his Son to you? That Prayer of
Jesus methinks should dwell in your Thoughts, Matthew. 11.25. I thank thee, O
Father, Lord of Heaven and Earth, because thou have bid these Things from the
wise and prudent, and have revealed them unto Babes, even so Father, for so it
seemed good in thy Sight. And that of the Apostle Paul to the Corinthians, 1
Cor. 1.26, to 29. For ye see your Calling. Brethren, how that not many wise Men
after the Flesh, not many mighty, not many noble are called. But God has
chosen the foolish Things of the World, to confound the Wise, and the weak
Things of the World, to confound the Things that are mighty, and base Things of
the World, and Things which are despised, has God chosen; that no Flesh should
glory in his Presence. 2. So Pure. Springing entirely from his own good
Pleasure, Matthew. 11.25 James 1.18. Of his own Will begat he us. Ephesians. 2.4, 5, 6.
But God who is rich in Mercy, his great Love, wherewith he loved us, even when
we were dead in Sins, has quickened us together with Christ, by Grace ye are
saved. John 1.13. Who has made you to differ from another, and what have you
that you have not received? 1 Cor. 4.7. 3. Precious. Ephesians. 1.3. Blessed be the
God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has blessed us with all spiritual
Blessings in heavenly Places in Christ. Therefore


2. Bless and adore God for this inestimable Benefit, he has so freely
conferred upon you, with all your Soul and Strength, Ephesians. 1.3. 1 Pet. 1.3, 4.

3. Depend upon him as the sole Original and Fountain of your divine Life, who
works in you both to will and to do of his own good Pleasure, Philip. 2.13. 2
Cor. 4.4, 5, 6. Without it had been God's good Pleasure to awaken and convince
you, ye had surely remained in the same deep Sleep of carnal Security, which
the most of the World continue in; and after ye were convinced of your lost
State, could ye have come to and complied with an offered Savior, unless you
had been drawn by and learned of the Father, no surely; you who are acquainted
with God and your selves, know better than to think so foolishly. John 15.5.
and 6.44.

4. Strive after Growth, in the earnest Use of appointed Means. 2 Pet. 3.18.
But grow in Grace, in the Knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. 1 Pet.
2.2. As new born Babes, desire the sincere Milk of the Word that ye may grow
thereby. Leaving the Principles of the Doctrine of Christ, not laying again the
Foundation of Repentance from dead Works, go on to Perfection. Heb. 6.1.
Forgetting the Things that are behind, press forwards toward the Mark;
reaching forth unto those Things which are before, Phil. 3.13, 14. It is a
Metaphor taken from such as run in a Race; who lean forwards with their Bodies
from eager Desire to get the End of the Race. So you must forget what is past,
in Regard of resting upon it, and being contented with it, without further
Progress, and stir up your selves to take hold on God, Isai. 64.7. Now that ye
may obtain Growth,

1. Be thankful for past Mercies, and make Use of them as Encouragements to
Faith in God, in the Way of Obedience. The People of Israel when they were
brought through the Red sea in Safety, they praised God for the signal
Deliverance he had honored them with, though they were then upon the Borders
of an howling Wilderness, just a going to encounter new Difficulties. David
made use of God's Mercy to him in delivering him from the Mouth of the Lion and
the Paw of the Bear; thence he was encouraged to hope that that God who had
been thus kind to him in Times past, would now deliver him out of the Hands of
the uncircumcised Philistine.

O Christian! despise not the Day of small Things, Zech. 4.10 Job 15.11. I know
that Babes in Jesus are apt to be peevish and dejected if they have not a
comfortable Sense of God's Love; but this is their great Sin and Folly, for we
must live by Faith, and not by Sense. Hab. 2.4. Rom 1.17. Gal 3.11. and 2.20.
Heb. 10.38. 2 Cor. 5.7.

2. Be humbled for past Sins, Psalm 32.5. and endeavor to keep humble if you
want to grow; let who will strut don't you do it. Luke 14.11. James 4.6. 1 Pet.
5.5.

3. Be watchful lest you be taken by Surprise, Matthew. 24.42. Go with your Loins
girt and your Lamps burning, and continue waiting for the coming of the
Bridegroom.

4. Be prayerful. Be conscientious in the Performance of secret Prayer, Matt.
6.6. Don't suffer your selves to be hurried away from it by a bare Repetition
of the Heads of Prayer; but endeavor to be imprortunate and fervent, James
5.16. Romans 12.12. Remember the Incense was put upon burning Coals, Lev. 16.12.

5. Encourage Faith in God through Christ, for that is a root Grace, and all
the rest do indeed languish and flourish with it, as it ebbs and flows.
Therefore it is the Butt of the Devil's Malice, that which he vehemently
oposeth. Hence we are bid to fight the good Fight of Faith, 1 Timothy 6.12.
Remember I only speak to God's Children now, who have scriptural Evidences of a
special Work of God's Spirit in them; as for others, I would not have them
believe what is not, but experienced Christians are commanded to believe in the
dark, Isai. 50.10.

6. Try Meditation upon God's Word and Works, both of Creation. Redemption,
Providence, upon the Perfections of God's. Nature. the Greatness of his Love,
your own Frailty, and the strict Account you must quickly make to God, Psalm
63.6.77.12.119.15, 78.23.48.148. 1 Timothy 4.15. Gen 24.63. Josh. 1.8.

Avoid an over frequent Examination of your State in Hours of Darkness; I know
you are prone to it, but it is very prejudicial, because you are then like to
pass a wrong Judgment; for how can Objects be truly discovered in the dark: It
is not the proper Time to judge of the Quality of Waters when they are muddied,
and a wrong Judgment creates unnecessary Pain, weakness your Faith in God, and
Love to him, and hinders you in the other Duties of Religion; wherefore it is
much better for you to strive to renew your Covenant with God, by making a new
and solemn Surrender of your selves to him and his Service, and strive to be
faithful in the Performance of the other Duties of Piety, Psalm 119.6.

7. If there be any Sin of Neglect or Commission that your Conscience accuses
you about; regulate that Matter or expect no Peace, 1 John 3.20. 2 Cor. 1.12.

8. Use Fasting upon special Occasions, which is of great Use, Joel 2.12. and
1.14. 2 Chronicles. 20.3. Ezra 8.21. Jer. 36.9. Jonah 3.5. Zech. 8.19. Neh. 9.1.
Matthew. 6.16. and 9.15. Luke 5.35. 2 Cor. 6.5. Acts 15.2, 3.

9. Endeavor to exrcise the Grace ye have received. For to him that has shall
be given, Matthew. 13.12. If we live in the Spirit, let us also walk in the
Spirit, Gal. 5.25. Romans 8.1. Being drawn run ye, Cant. 1.4. Your stony Heart
being removed, make you a new Heart and a new Spirit, Ezekiel. 18.31. Thus says
the Lord God, Repent and turn your selves from your Idols, and turn away your
Faces from all your Abominations, Ezekiel. 14.6. Put off concerning the former
Conversation, the old Man, which is corrupt according to deceitful lusts, and
put ye on the new Man, which after God is created in Righteousness and true
Holiness, Ephesians. 4.22, 23, 24. And remember that by Regeneration ye are God's
Workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto good Works, that ye should walk in
them, Ephesians. 2.10. Don't say that you cannot stir up the Gist that is in you, or
endeavor to exercise your Graces; you can endeavor, Isai. 64.7. and if you do
not, it is your own Fault; to say the contrary would be to make Men mere Blocks
and Machines. Also it opens a Door to Sloth, and reflects dishonor upon God.
But to him that orders his Conversation aright will be shown the Salvation of
God, Psalm 50.23. But

10. If ye are born of God, seek your Father's Honor, Mal. 1. A Son honors
his Father, and a Servant his Master: if then I be a Father, where is mine
Honor? and if I be a Master where is my Fear? Ye should labor to honor God,
(1.) By speaking well of him, Cant. 5. 10, to 16. (2.) By speaking boldly for
him, as a Child for a Father, Psalm 119.46 (3.) By bringing forth Fruits to
him, Philip. 1.11. John 15.8. Not to your selves least you be found empty Vines
at last, Hos. 10.1, (4.) By being grieved at the Reproaches that are cast upon
him, Psalm 69.1.

11. Seck your Husband's Interest. O! let Zion lie near your Heart, and engross
a considerable Part of your Tho'ts and Cares, Psalm 137.5, 6 Endeavor as
Instruments in God's Hand, to convert Sinners from the Evil of their Ways, by
mild and seasonable Reproofs, earnest Entreaties, and pious Examples, James
5.20.

12. Remember God expects more from you than others, Genesis 18.19. And well he
may, for he has given more to you Remember that Holiness is the Design of your
Election, Vocation, Redemption, Regeneration, and Adoption, Ephesians. 1.4. 2 Timothy
1.9. Tit 2.14. 1 Pet. 1.3. I John 3.1, 3. Be ye therefore Followers of God as
dear Children, and walk in love -- Ephesians 5.1, 2. Finally Brethren, Whatsoever
Things are true, whatsoever Things are honest, whatsoever Things are just,
whatsoever Thing are pure, whatsoever Things are lovely, whatsoever Things are
of good Report, if there be any Virtue, and if there be any Praise, think on
these Things. Those Things which ye have both learned and received, and heard
and seen in me do; and the God of Peace shall be with you. Amen, Amen

Adoption Opened.
I. JOHN III. 1. BEHOLD, what Manner of Love the Father bath bestowed upon us,
that we should be called the Sons of GOD.


THE Penman of this sacred Epistle has been concluded by the universal Suffrage
of the ancient Churches, to be the Apostle John; the amiable Signatures of his
divine and calm Spirit breathes and glides through all it is golden Veins.

There is some Difference of Opinion concerning the Time wherein he wrote it;
some ascribing it to an earlier, some to a later Date; but the most reasonable
Conjecture is, that it was wrote a little before that awful Catastrophe was
brought on the jewish Church and State, which the equal Retribution of their
in$andous Obstinacy. This Conjecture is grounded on the Apostle's speaking of
the last Times being at hand, which is generally understood to be the
concluding Periods of the jewish State.

The general Scope and main Design of this sacred Epistle was to confirm the
parthian Jews (to whom it was wrote) in all the main Truths of Christianity,
both speculative and practical: Particulary, in the Belief of our Lord Jesus as
being the promised Messiah; and also, in the Necessity of internal and external
Holiness, against the impregnated and inpious Efforts of apostate quondam
Professors, particularly, the infamous Gnostics, the pernicious Brood of that
grand Impostor, Simon Magus.

Hence this Apostle takes occasion in diverse Parts of this Epistle to excite
Christians to the Exercise of mutual Love, by a Variety of pregnant and pungent
Arguments, as the necessary Bull warks to screen them from the strong and
virulent Arrests of infectious Seducers. Love is the Cement which unites
Strength, and is not unita Vis sortior? The Want of this is the Bane of
Society, and exposes them to the ravening Depredations of common Enemies.
Surely there is a most cogent Motive of Love, in our Text, both to God our
mighty Maker, and to Man our Fellow Creature. Behold, what Manner of Love the
Father has bestowed upon us, that we should be called the Sons of God.

The Apostle having in the foregoing Chapter and last Verse, mentioned that
great and necessary Qualification, being born of God, takes occasion in the
beginning of this, to celebrate with Wonder and divine Transport, it is
consequent Privilege, Adoption. Behold, what Manner of Love the Father has
bestowed upon us, that we should be called the Sons of God.

In the Words are these four general Heads, 1. A great and honorable Gift
bequeathed, that we should be called the Sons of God. 2. The Donor of this
specified, The Father. 3. The Donee, or Persons upon whom this Gift was
bestowed and discovered, upon us: 4. The fontal or impulsive Cause of this,
mentioned.


Let us a little explain these Particulars in the Order proposed.

As to the first general Head, Has bestowed, -- that we should be called the
Sons of God. Here are two Things remarkable.

1. The Privilege conferred. 2. The Manner of conferring it.
1. The Privilege conferred, called the Sons of God. Ina teena the$u $lethomen.
Tecna a ticlo, pario, and ginomi, nas$er. Erasmus and some others render the
Word tecna, according to our Translation; but Theodor, Beza, and Pasor think it
is a larger Extent, and signefies Offspring, Proles Schools, a general Word
that imports Offspring, or Sons of every Age, Sex, Degree, in which Sense I
rather take the Word. Gl$thomen, a caleo, voco. This Word is not here inserted
with any Antiphrasis, Contradiction to, or Opposition of the Thing spoken of,
in Reality. It is not an empty Name, or vain Title, no, no; but the blessed
Privilege it self is here asserted together with this honorable Badge and
Epithet, as it is necessary Consequent or Effect, by a Metonomy of the
Consequent or Antecedent, Matthew. 21.13. compared with Luke 19.46. Clethomen,
called: This Word excellently holds forth the Nature and Dignity of Adoption.
(1.) The Nature of it. That it consists in a forensick Declaration; and so is
distinguished from natural Sonship. (2.) It Is Excellency and Dignity. That this
precious Privilege is not kept hid or latent, but declared and made manifest,
not only in the Mind of God, but in the Conscience of Believers. It eclipses
the relative Goodness of Benefits when we know them not.

2. The Manner of conferring this Benefit, has bestowed. Dedocen, a doc, dosa,
dedoca. There is no Difficulty that I know of in the Word; it shows with more
than oriental Splendour, the admirable Freedom of God's Bounty in our Adoption,
and cuts the Sinews of Merit. It Is a Gift, no Debt; we have neither Wisdom nor
Dignity to procure so inestimable a Benefit. But

2. The second general Head concerns the Author or Donor of this Benefit; The
Father; Ho Pater. A demonstrative Article is prefixed, emphatically showing the
glorious Dignity and matchless Greatness of the sublime Donor. Pater, a Pao,
pasco, quia Pater pasco liberos, velut Pastor pascit Oves. The whole Trinity
doubtless is intended by this; for all those sacred Persons act a Part in this
glorious Work: But more particularly and expressly, the first Person, God the
Father, called so, not only for the eternal Generation of his Son, Psalm 2.7.
But also for the Adoption of his People, John 1.12. because from him the whole
Family in Heaven and Earth is named, Ephesians. 3.15.

3. The third Head concerns the Donce, or Persons upon whom this Privilege is
bestowed. Hemin, upon us. Not upon all and singular, not upon any one or every
one, but upon us, Believers exclusively, who have been effectually called,
converted from Sin, and united to Jesus, in which is the Foundation of Adoption.

4. The fourth general Head, The fontal or impulsive Cause, Love, called in the
Original Agape, either ab agan poiein, multum facere, doing much; because it is
effectual and operative. Vel ab agan cata pan Because Love moves it self every
Way toward it is beloved Object. Vel ab agan pauesthai Because the Lover rests
in the Object he loves Or, ab agan pao, to love much. And thus it is eminently
in the Cause before us. Had not the blessed Lord loved much, would he ever have
taken a sinning Creature into so near a Relation to himself, as to have the
Privilege not only of being the Servants of God, which is a great Honor, but
the Friends of God, as was Abraham, which his much more? But to be the Sons and
Children of God, is doubtless, the Flower of Mercy, the Crown and Garland of
divine Love; so that Love here, surely signifies a vehement Affection to the
Beloved, not only a generous Purpose of doing Good, but the actual Completion
of it.

Now the Love of God is in general twofold, Immanent and Transient, 1. God's
immanent Love is that perfect Property of God, whereby he is inclined to love
himself. This Affection is terminated on no Creature, and is nothing else but
God's pure and perfect Essence. This is not the Love specified in our Text. 2.
God's transient Love is that Property or Attribute of God, whereby he is
inclined to love his Creatures, according to the good Pleasure of his Will. And
this Love is threefold, viz. Of Benevolence, Beneficence and Complacence.


1. The Love of Benevolence, is God's good Purpose before Time, of doing his
People good in Time. Ephesians. 1.4. According as he has chosen us in him, before
the Foundation of the World, that we should be holy and without Blame before
him in Love. Ephesians. 2.10 For we are his Workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto
good Works, which God has before ordained that we should walk in them

2. God's Love of Beneficence, in his actual doing of them good in Time,
according to his gracious Design from Eternity. Therefore they are said to be
called according to his Purpose. The great Jehovah in all his Dealings toward
his People in Time, acts according to the Pattern that was in his mind from
Eternity.

3. God's Love of Complacence is that whereby he delight in the Work$ $f his
own Spirit wrounght in his People Cant. 4. These three last I take to be the
Love meant in our Text. We find this fourth general Head ushered in with a
double Emphasis, viz. A Note of Attention, and a Note of Admiration.

1. A Note of Attention. Idete, behold, ab eido, video, to see, to lift up the
Eyes of the Mind to behold a Thing more accurately and intensely, as we lift up
the Eyes of the Body to behold any remarkable Object that occurs. This Note of
Attention is used in a fourfold Scope. (1.) To awaken the Attention. Isai.
65.1. I said, Behold me, behold me, to a Nation that was not called by my Name.
The universal Depravation of our deplorable Natures renders us totally averse
to good; so that such shocking Memento's are most necessary for us, to rouse us
from our lethargick Drouse. (2.) To excite Admiration, from the beholding some
new and admirable Thing, Isai 7.14. Behold, a Virgin shall conceive and bring
forth a Son, etc. (3.) To show the Certainty of a Thing spoken, Rev. 1.7.
Behold, be comes with Clouds, and every Eye shall see him. (4.) To show the
Excellency and necessity of a Thing, John 1.29. Behold the Lamb of God, which
takes away the Sins of the World.


2. A Note of Admiration. What Manner of Love; potapos, this Word is used both
to denote the Quantity and Quality of a Thing, Matthew. 8.27. It is as if the
Apostle had said, what Kind, what Sort of Love is this? Surprising, amazing
Love! There is a vehement Emphasis in this Expression, of Astonishment and
Transport. Hereby the Apostle plainly shows, that the Love of God is
exceedingly apparent, and marvellously manifested in Adoption. What! For an
alsufficient, self sufficient, independent Jehovah, to adopt a Stranger into
his Family, a Rebel into his Bosom? Is it not stupendous, transporting Love?
This is proposed by Way of Interrogation or Question, but implies a vehement
Assertion. It is as if the Apostle feeling himself incapable to comprehead this
immeasurable Ocean of divine Love, addressed himself to Believers in a kind of
Amaze, and said, Do you your selves speak or judge if you can, what kink of
Love this is? It is deep, I cannot fathom finite Love, well becoming the
infinitely glorious Majesty from whom it flows. Behold, what Manner of Love the
Father has bestowed upon us, that we should be called the Sons of God.

From the Words, thus explained we observe, That the superlative Love of God is
transiendently displayed in the adopting Strangers into his Family, and giving
them the Privileges of Sons.

In treating upon this Observation, I would endeavor by divine Assistance, to
speak to these three Particulars, viz. 1. Explain the Nature and Kinds of
Adoption. 2. Show the Prerogatives and consequent Privileges which flow from
it. 3. Show how exceedingly the Love of God is displayed in it.


And lastly, Shall endeavor to improve it (if God will) to our Edification.

As to the first proposed. I conceive Adoption may be thus described, that it
is a gracious Declaration of the blessed God, whereby he admits and receives
those who were by Nature Strangers and Enemies in Heart and Life to his
Majesty; but now, through Grace are effectually called, justified, regenerated
and united to Christ, into his Family as Sons, and communicates to them the
Privileges of Children.

I shall endeavor to explain the several Parts of this Description. And

1. Adoption is a Declaration. So says our Text, called the Sons of God. This
Declaration is expressed four Ways.

1. By eternal Election, or that everlasting Purpose in the divine Mind, Ephesians.
1.5. He having predestined us unto the Adoption of Children. In this Respect,
the Elect before their Conversion (by a certain Figure of Speech, Prolepsis)
are called the Children of God, John 11.52. 2. By Redemption in Jesus, with
whom they are united, Gal. 3.26. For ye are all the Children of God, by Faith
in Christ Jesus 3. By the Gospel, and it is copious precious Promises, whereby
Believers have ascribed to them that ample Dignity of Sonship, John 1.12. As
many as received him, to them gave he Power to become the Sons of God 4. In
their own Spirits, or Consciences. There God testifies by his Spirit that they
are his Children: Partly, by conferring certain Evidences of Adoption, and
partly, by irradiating their Minds to perceive and acknowledge these Evidences,
and therefrom to infer their Adoption.
2. A Declaration of God. He is the Cause of it, or the Person adopting,
generally, the divine Essence, but more particularly and specially, according
to the divine aeconomy, God the Father; to whom it is specially appropriated in
our Text. It is a Father's Property to have Children; hence that memorable
Saying of the Apostle to the Ephesians, Chap 3.15 Of whom the whole Family in
Heaven and Earth is named. But it is also ascribed to the Son to have Children,
Heb. 2.10. He is said to bring many Sons to Glory. And also to the Holy Spirit,
who in this Regard, is called the Spirit of Adoption, Romans 8.15.

3. A merciful and gracious Declaration; flowing freely from the unmerited
Goodness and superlative Love of an infinite JAH, without the least Regard to
the Creatures Desert. The intrinsic, impulsive Cause, is the peerless Bounty
and inexpressible Love of God, as our Text plainly voucheth. The extrinsick
meritorious Cause of this inestimable Privilege, is the spotless Merit of the
only begotten Son of God, the Lamb slain before the Foundation of the World,
Ephesians. 1.5, 6. Our Jesus assumed humane Nature in an hypostatical Union with the
Divine, and subjected himself, as Man, to the Law he made as God, that we might
obtain the Adoption of Children, Gal. 4.4, 5. But when the Fullness of Time was
come, God sent forth his Son made of a Woman, made under the Law, to redeem
them that were under the Law, that we might receive the Adoption of Sons.

4. The efficient Cause is the Holy Spirit. It is he who by his sacred and
secret Whispers, seals the People of God to the Day of Redemption.

5. The instrumental Cause is the Word of God. The soulenriching Promises of
the blessed Gospel, through which golden Conduit is conveyed to Believers the
Oil of Gladness, and a sure Hope which makes them rejoice with Joy unspeakable
and full of Glory.

6. The final Cause is God's Glory, principally bewrayed in his People's
Imitation of him, Ephesians. 5.1. Be ye Followers of God as dear Children. But then

7. The Object of this divine adopting Declaration, is poor sinful Man Here let
us briefly ruminate on their twofold Estate, viz. their former and present
Condition.

1. As to their former or natural Condition. (1.) They were such as were total
Strangers to God, far from the Knowledge of him, far from an Interest in him.
(2.) Implacable and revengeful Enemies to his sacred Majesty, and that both in
Heart and Life. Their Thoughts of him were ungenerous, grovelling or
blasphemous; wholly unsuitable to his Dignity and Glory. In their Lives they
industriously prosecuted this hereditary Spleen, with basest Virulency and
Heat, constantly desacing the broken Shreds of the divine Image in their
Breasts: Thus he who in his pristine Bliss, was the Crown and Garland of this
Globe, is by his Fall, become more abject and sordid than the most ignominious
Reptile that crawls on Earth. This they were. But 2. As to their present
Condition, they are through Grace, effectually called out of their former
Security. He has called us with an holy Calling, says the Apostle. They are
united to Christ by Faith, justified etc Romans 8.1. These Works of the Spirit do
necessarily, as Preparatives, preceed Adoption. Adoption is no Part of
Justification, but an illustrious Degree of Dignity annexed to it. So that,
8. The Manner of our Adoption is (1.) By Regeneration, whereby we are made
Partakers of the divine Nature; not in it is Essence; but gracious Qualities,
Justice, Holiness, Goodness etc. Col. 3.10. and receive Principles of divine
Life to enable us to live to God. This says Mr. Burkit, "is an inward
Principle, a universal Principle, a God exalting Principle, an abiding
Principle. (2.) By Union with Christ. While we are mystically united to him we
are rendered his Brethren, having one Father with him; so that though Jesus, in
Regard of his natural and eternal Generation, be the only Firstborn; yet
through this blessed Union, his People have that honorable Name, Heb. 12.23.
The Church of the First born.

9. The Terms of our Adoption. We are brought from Darkness, and the Dominion
of Sin and Satan, into the Family of the blessed God, and made household Friends
and Children. Henceforward God carries toward us as a Father, yea, as a kind
indulgent Father, and takes us under the gracious Wings of his divine
Protection. He directs us and provides for us, so that we securely and safely
rest in the Bosom of his almighty Power and Goodness.

10. There be two Kinds of Adoption, divine and humane. The first we have in
some Sort treated of. The second, viz. Humane Adoption, may be described thus,
to be an Act of Love or Compassion, ordinarily arising from the Want of
Children, whereby a Person admits an Alien or Stranger into his Family, and
communicates to him a Right to his Goods or Estate, to be enjoyed by him after
his Decease. In this brief Description, we may gather the main Differences
between a divine and humane Adoption.

1. They differ in their Surce and Original. A humane Adoption is generally
occasioned by the Defect of a natural Offspring; but the Divine flows from the
Abundance of God's Goodness.

2. In the Persons adopted. In humane Adoption they are Strangers, or such as
have no Right to Adoption; but in the Divine, though by Nature they are
Strangers and Aliens, Ephesians. 2.12. yet through Grace they are called and
justified, and consequently, have a Right to the blessed Inheritance, even
before the adopting Act.

3. They differ in their Nature. The Humane being but an external Denomination
and Bequeathment of temporal Goods; whereas the Divine consists in a real Act
of Jehovah, whereby he confers on his People spiritual. Life and Holiness, the
very Transcript of his own Nature.

4. The Humane confers the Inheritance to the adopted, after the Adopter's
Death; but the Divine confers it while both survive. But I proceed to the

2. Proposed, which was to show the Prerogatives and consequent Privileges of
Adoption.

I will not here essay to enumerate all and singular of them, only the more
eminent and special. And

1. An honorable and amiable Denomination is one of the Privileges of
Adoption. They shall be called the Sons of God, John 1.12. As those who are
humanely adopted, in a civil Sense, bear Name of their adopting Father; so
those that are spiritually or divinely adopted, bear the Name of their
celestial Father, as our Text testifies. Jesus is their elder Brother, they are
not only called Friends, but Children. This is not an empty Name, but the Thing
named is, in some Measure, conferred, viz. The Image of God, 2 Pet 1.4.

2. The Dominion over and Possession of the Creatures; in as much as God not
only created them for them, but has given them a Right to them. In Christ all
Things are ours, 1. Cor. 3.21. Many earthly Things are properly and proximately
in our Power, many thought at a Distance, serve us; the Sun, Moon and Stars,
yea, the angelick Spirits, those Nobles of the Court of Heaven above, serve
Believer, Psalm 34.7. Even penal Evils, through the mysterious Guidance of
divine Providence, promote their Good. They have the free (but lawful) Use of
all terrene Enjoyments. To the Pure all Things are pure, Tit. 1.15.

3. Conformity to the Son of God by a Communion of his prophetical, sacerdotal,
and regal Dignity, Rev. 1.6.

4. A fourth Privilege of Adoption, is christian Liberty. A temporal Son in a
Family has a Freedom abovea Servant; Jesus has purchased a spiritual Freedom
for his Children, at the Cost of his dearest Blood, Gab. 5.1. which contains
these things, 1. A Freedom from the Guilt of Sin; obtained by Justification,
confirmed and applied by Adoption. 2. A Freedom from the Dominion of Sin, by
Sanctificetion, Romans 6.14 3. From the Condemanation of the maral Law, Gal.
3.13. Christ has redeemed us from the Curse the Law, being made a Curse for
us. 4. From the Yoke of the ceremnial Law, which was nailed to Christ's Cross.
5. From humane Traditions and Institutios in God's Worship, Col. 2.20, 21, 22,


5. Another Privilege is. the Spirit of Adoption, to which is opposed the
Spirit of Bondage, Rom 8.15. Now this Spirit of Adoption has a twofold
Operation.

1. To ascertain us of our Sonship. Hence it is said that the Spirit testifies
with our Spirit, or Conscience, that we are the Sons of God. And this the
Spirit effectuates these three Ways, (1) By proposing Signs and Marks of a
gracious Work, in the Word. (2) By working the Work in the Hear. (3.) By
enabling the Soul, by comparing both together, to discern it is gracious State.
Although I solidly believe that ordinarily, Certitudo Argument "reflectioneque
acquiritur, as one says, Assurance is acquired by Argumentation and Reflection.
And though I do abhor the delusory Dreams of the enthusiastic Crowd, who depend,
a sit were, upon auricular Voices, and immediate Speeches from Heaven, without
duly attending to, and comparing themselves with the written Word: Yet I
conceive that it is a bold and dangerous meddling to limit the Power or Ways of
omniporence to Men's narrow Imaginations. In a Word, I think holy what
Rutherford, affectionate Ambrose and a througing Crowd of other godly Divines,
that God does persuade some Souls, immediately, by the Light of his Spirit
working upon their Hearts a Sense of their Interest in his Love: But then they
ought to, and will try this, by the written Word, with it is Effects, to know
it is divine Birth. We read of the sealing of the Spirit, and sure, the Seal
leaves it is Signature. I know that some Divines, of no small Figure, oppose
this. I shall not assume the Arrogance to tarnish the Character of those great
Men, only, I would venture to say, that I believe many incline to speak and
write as it suits their own Experience best. But no to insist.

2. The second Operation of the Spirit is that by which he enables the Children
of God to cry with a filial Boldness, Abba Father, or Father, Father, for so
the Word Abba signifies in the Syriack, says Mr. Pool; this Ingemination
plainly shows the Vehemence of Believers Affection to God, when they are
persuaded of his Love to them. A certain School man observes, That the Jews
would "not suffer their Servants to call Father, but God suffers his Children,
in all their Pressures and Diffi ulties, yea, in all their solemn Approaches,
to claim this filial Relation to himself. O never enough to be admired Love!
well might the Apostle as in a Maze, cry out, Behold, what Manner of Love is
this!
6. A sure Title to the heavenly Inheritance, with the first Fruits and
Earnests of it here, are the blessed Privileges of Adoption Romans 8.17. And if
Children then Heirs, Heirs of God, and joint Heirs with Jesus Christ. They do
inherit God himself, their Father is their full and final Portion. "A Man
leaves his Heirs what he has, says Mr. Burkit, but God leaves his Heirs what he
is" All his Attributes is for their Benefit, his Wisdom is theirs, to guide
them, his Power, to protect and desend them, his Mercy and Love to support and
resresh them. Heirs with Christ: He is the Heir of God, and Believers in him.
"They are Members of Christ, says Mr. Burkit, and shall be Heirs with him. In
Jesus they have obtained the Inheritance. By Adoption they have also the
Earnests of this Inheritance. Ephesians. 1.13, 14. In whom also after that ye
believed, ye were sealed with the Holy Spirit of Promise; which is the Earness
of our Inheritace, until the Redemption of the purchased Possession.

We advance now to the Prosecution of the third Thing proposed, which was to
show how exceedingly the Love of God is displayed in Adoption.

These four Particulars demonstrate this Truth. 1. The Person adopting 2. The
Persons adopted 3. The impulfive Cause of Adoption. 4. The Price of Adoption.


1. The Person adopting. Who is this? The great an glorious God. But for
Illustration, let us passingly view these four Properties of the blessed God.

1. His Majesty and divine Glory. He is the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords,
the sovereign Ruler of Princes, that inaccessible Light which no Man can
approach unto and live. The Angels those winged Seraphs of the Coure above,
vail their Faces before the dazzling Splendor of his Glory. is not his the Sun
which beautifies and illuminates the empyrial Heavens, and delights all the
Sons of Zion, that Zion, that Church of the First born, with perpetual and
sweet Transpores? What Creature breathing can sufficiently describe this Glory?
Even a Moses must be hid in the Rock, and discern only the darkest Glances of
it. The Psalmist when he bedeld through the liquid Either, the starry Heaven,
and viewed the Workmanship of the mighty God therein, Psalm. 8.3. He was justly
seized with a Rapture of Amazement, and cries out, What is Man that thou are
mindful of him? And can we not, shall we not wonder with him, that a God of
such august and serene Majesty and transcendent Glory should adopt such as we
are. O! how marvellously does the Love of God shine in this adopting Act? 2.
His Independency and Sovereignty. He is the independent and self existent Cause
of all creted Beings. All Things were created by him, and without him was not
any Thing made that is made. He could have made another Species of Creatures
than Man, declaratively, to express his Praises; but he not only made Man happy
in his primitive Endowments, but when he had lost himself, through Grace adopts
him into his Family. -- 3. His All Sufficiency and Self-sufficiency. He has all
Things withing the Compass of his perfect Essence, whereby he is infinitely
happy and blessed. He stands in no "more need of Man, says One, than the
superior Globes of a Fly to roll them round their respective Circles, or the
massey Earth of a Grasshopper to support it, or the Moon of an Atome to
enlighten it. His essential and primoeval Glory is stable, permanent and
eternal, and can receive no additional Prefections from the Creatues, nor
suffer any Diminution by them. If Jehovah had expected any additional Glory
from his Creatures, if must doubtless, have sullied and ecclipsed the
Brightness of his Love: But seeing there can be no such Thing, O! how
apparently, how sweetly, how transcendently does the divine Affection shine? --
4. His Justice and Sanctity. Angels and triumphing Saints justly cry out, HOLY,
HOLY, HOLY LORD GOD OF HOSTS. He charges his Angels with Folly. The very
Heavens are not clean in his Sight. Now, that such a holy Sinhating God should
adpot Rebels into his Family, how amazing, how astonishing is it! But we
proceed to consider,
2. The Porsons adopted. Not the great and boble, 1 Cor. 1.26. Let us a little
perpend these things relating to them, 1. Their Frailty. What is Man Dust and
Ashes, a Worm, a Moth, an Atome? Job 25.6 2. Impotency. They can do nothing,
either to merit, or sutably requite such adopting Love; his best Persormances
are corrupted and of no Advantager to Jesus. 3. Their Poverty. They are by
Nature poor, Rev. 3.17. They have neither Food nor Raiment, and in Debt
besides. 4. Deformity. They are deformed by Nature, and that not only
privatively, by the Want of Beauty, but also positively, by the Presence of a
spreading Leprosy. The Soul, in our apostate State, as to it is Qualities, is
not only void of it is pristine Beauty and primaeval Glory; but also filled with
a hateful Proclivity to violate the Commands of God. Is it not astonishing,
that the Love of God should terminate on such Deformity? 5. Enmity. Romans 8.7.
The carnal Mind is Enmity against God etc. The Soul of Man is naturally as full
of Enmity against God, as a Toad is of Poison. Sure, it is a Wonder that God
should love such Enemies so much as to take them into his Bosom.


3. The impulsive Cause of Adoption, is not any Dignity or Merit in us; but the
pure in omprehensible and eternal Love of God. What a Wonder of Love is this?

4. As to the Price of our Adoption. It was not purchased with Silver of Gold,
but with the precious Blood of the Son of God, as of a Lamb without Spot. Not
with a great Sum of Money, which the chief Captain purchased his Freedom with,
Acts 22.28. Nor with Abundance of Foreskins of the Philistines, whereby David
purchased his Sounship from the King, 1 Samuel 18.27. No. The Son of God must
descend from the Bosom of his Father, and assume the Nature of Man, and have
his Glory veiled in a Mantle of Flesh. Jesus must be humbled and abased to the
Death, yea, must become a Curse and Sin for us, that we might obtain eternal
Blessedness.

APPLICATION.
USE 1. This Truth we have insisted on may serve for a Use of Admiration: This
seems to be the Use the Apostle himself makes of it. It was mere Condescension
in Pharaoh's Daughter to preserve Moses an innocent Babe and a Stranger from
perishing by Water: But, O how much greater Kindness was it in almighty God, to
save guilty wretched Man from perishing by eternal Flames, and to take a Rebel
into his Bosom! Did Abigail thus excuse her self, when but a Refugee David
proposed Marriage to her, That she was not worthy to wash the Fees of the
meanest Servant of her Lord. Good God! What may we say of God's taking sinful
Man into his Family, and giving them the Privileges of his Children? May we not
say with the Prodigal, Lord we are not worthy to be called to thy Children?
From that, to what, has God brought Believers? From what a deep Degree of
extreme Misery, to what a Height of Dignity and Glory? O! let us call to
Admitation our Souls, and all that is within us at this blessed Love, this free
and undeserved Love, this enriching and everlasting Love. Did the Angels wonder
when they brought the happy Tidings of this Love to the World, did they look
with Admitation into these Things, and will not our Souls? Shall Sheba's Queen
wonder at the Splendour and Order of Solomon's Court, and shall not we wonder at
the Privileges here conserred! What! to be brought freely from Darkness to
Light, from the besest Slavery to the most honorable Liverty, from being Heirs
of Hell to be Heirs of Heaven, from being Children of Satan to be Children of
God, to have Familiarity and Child-like Boldness with the highest. Wonder O
Heavens, and be astonished O Earth at this!

USE. 2. Of Examination. If there be so many happy Privileges annexed to
Sonship; we should examine our selve by the Marks and Signs of it. Some of
which preceed Adoption. Such as,

1. Effectual Calling. (1.) Have we heard and obeyed God's Calls by his Word
and Spirit? (2.) Are we converted from Sin to God? John 3.5, 6. (3.) Have we
received Jesus as he is offered, by a lively Faith? John 1.12.

2. Some are Concomitants of Adoption, and some follow after it As (1)
Child-like Love. (2.) Child like Fear and Reverence to God, as a Father, Mal.
1.6. A Son honors his Father, and a Servant his Masier. (3.) Childlike
Boldness and Access to God, as a Father, Crying, Abba Father, Romans 8.15. (4.)
Fraternal Affection to all the Faithful, as being Children of the same Father:
1 John 5.1$ Every one that loves him that begat, loves him also that is
begotten of him. Yea. even Love to personal Enemies, Marth. 5.45. (5.) Child
like Obedience, whereby we aspire after the Image of God, Acts 27.23. and his
gracious Presen$e, Psalm 16.8.

USE 3. Of Comfort to the Children of God. Look to the great Privileges God has
given you by Adoption. (1) Your Name is changed. You have the new Name, and
(...) hidden Manna. (2.) You are advanced to honor able Relations. God is your
Father, and Christ your elder Brother and Husband. (3.) You are through Grace,
brought to a happy State, born of God, made Partakers of the divine Nature,
made Kings and Priests to God, Rev. 1.6. Privatively, ye are freed from the
Guilt and Power of Sin Pisitively, ye are made Partakers of all Things, 1 Cor.
3.21. All Things shall Work for your Good, Romans 8.28. God has a fatherly Care
over your Souls, he blesses you with all spiritual Blessings, he will not let
Sin rule over you, yea, he bares your Offenses as a Father his Child, Mab.
3.17. He will comfort you in your Straits, instruct you in your Bodies, your
Bread and your Water is sure. He that hears the Ravens, and clothes the Lillies
will not be deaf to your Cries If the Lord afflicts you he does it nor
willingly from his Heart, but as a tender Father, that you may not perish with
the World, who are fed for the Slaughter, and whose Tables are their Snares. He
pities his Lambs in Affliction, and hears their Sighs and Groans. Psalm 103.13.
Like as a Father pitieth his Children, so the Lord pitieth them that fear him.
He gives you an Interest in a Crown that shall never fade away. May not then
the Children of God rejoice in their blessed and bountiful Lord?

USE 4. Of Terror to all such as are not the adopted Sons of God, but the Sons
of Belial. But who are these?

1. You that never have been effectually called from Sin, nor thoroughly
convinced of the Vileness of it, though it may be you have heard the Word of
God often, yet it has not to this Day been as a two-edged Sword to you.

2. You who have never had your Hearts opened to receive Jesus, and who have no
Communion with the Father, through him; For, says the Apostle, of the Children of
God, 1 John 1.3. truly our Fellowship is with the Father, and with his Son
Jesus Christ.

3. All you that are openly profane, of what Sort or Denomination soever.

4. All you Gallio's. The Time is coming when you shall be spued out of the
Mouth of God. Sure, the Misery of such Men, without Repentance, will be
exceeding great in the Day of God's Power; for, if they remain such, they shall
be everlastingly secluded from all the fore mentioned Benefits, and be made
Possessors of contrary Miseries. Instead of Love, ye shall have Hatred; instead
of Singing with Angels, ye must take up with the Soul tormenting Embraces of
grisly Flames, and Howlings everlastingly with those that perish As ye shall
not enjoy the Presence of God, so ye shall be sent away with a Curse, Depart
from me ye cursed, into everlasting Fire prepared for the Devil and his Angels.
O that such would awake and seek for Help while Mercy is temdered in the Gospel!

USE 5. Of Exhortation. O let us seek to obtain this blessed Privilege and
Dignity, Adoption.

1. It is possible, probable, yea, it may be certainly attained, according to
God's firm and stable Promise, 1 Cor. 6.17. John 1.12. and the Experience of
God's Children.

2. The Mean to attain it is plainly prescribed, which is both Rational and
Easy, to receive Christ by Faith, John 1.12.

3. It is an honorable Privilege.

4. It is a profitable Privilege. How great is the Happiness of those who have
the Shines of the Face of God, and his perpetual Protection.

5. It is a necessary Privilege, universally and absolutely necessary; without
it we must be miserable in Time and in Eternity. Does it not then highly
deserve our Pains to obtain it?

I shall conclude with a few Directions. And

1. To the People of God that want the Sense of this Mercy. Some Things are to
be avoided, and some Things are to be done.

As to the Things that are to be avoided, (1.) Beware of gross Sins against the
Light of your Minds; for God is engaged to correct his wandering Children. Those
Sins grieve the Spirit, and hinder his Sealing Work. Those Sins bring spiritual
Desertions, and cause us to mourn with David, Psalm 51. (2.) Beware of the
Neglect of secred Prayer. (3.) Beware of Sloth. (4.) Of Pride.

Now, that which is to be performed is, (1.) The Exercise of Faith on Jesus;
thet being united to him, by the Help of Union with him, we may obtain Senship.
And to this End, we must use all the Means that increase Faith; such as the
Word, Prayer, the Secraments, and spiritual Conference. (2.) The Exercise of
Refentance for Sins of Infirmity. (3.) Lessen not the Work of the Spirit within
you; but be thankful for the smallest Discoveries of your Father's Face. But

To those have ebtained the Sense of this blessed Privilege. (1.) Exercise
Child like Fear, Love and Zeal, for your Father's Honor. Let Love be the
Spring of all your Performances. (2.) Submit to your Father's Will and
Pleasure. 1. To his preceptive Will. Let a Child's Obedience run through all
the Veins of your whole Conversation. 2. To his providental Will. Learn in
every State therewith to be content. Submit to your Father's Chastning, kiss
with Reverence his sacred Rod: Though there be Frowns in his Face, yet there is
Love in his Hear. (3.) Confide and trust in his fatherly Care, for he cares
for you. (4.) Love and help the Children of God, as being Children of the same
Father.

Now, upon the faithful and persevering Performance of these, and the other
necessary Duties, God in his own blessed Time, will help you to the full Sense
of that your Souls long for, viz your Adoption. So that working out your
Salvation with Fear and Trembling, you will at last be received with a Well
done good and faithful Servants, and enter those triumphant Regions where
singing eternal Requiems will be your everlasting Work, constantly admiring,
with the glorified Saints, the amazing Love that brought you there, and will
have just Occasion to say with the Apostle in our Text, Behold, what Manner of
Love the Father has bestowed upon us, that we should be called the Sons of GOD.

FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
THE Author's great Distance from the Press has occasioned many Erratas, the
most material of which, are here mentitioned, which the candid Reader is
desired to correct, with others of lesser Importance disignedly omitted.

PReface. Page 4 line 10 for Boil read Boyse. p. 5 l. 8 f. makes r. make. p.
101. 10$. Ronagadoes.

P. 14. l. 11 r. his Holiness. P. 23 l. 35 f. precious r. previous. P. 36 l. 3
f. do r. can. P. 47 l. 45 dele and. P. 73 l. 1 r. your good. l. 36 r. the
truth. P. 76 l. 10 r. himself. P. 77 l. 15 f. doubt r. don't P. 81 l. 29 r.
Lion like P. 91 l. 4 f. its r. is. P. 95 l. 35 f. Life r. lives P. 99 l. 33 r.
Le$a P. 102 l. 23 r. which is. l. 42 r. had felt. P. 120 l. 12 f. you are r.
thou art. P. 131 l. 10 r. immerg'd. P. 144 l. 34 r. Ghastliness P. 149 l. 22 f.
publish r. punish. P. 151 l 22 r. irreligions. P. 153 l. 21 r. L$su. P. 156 l.
17 f. that r. at. P. 160 l. 1 r. greatest. P. 167 l. 4 f. you are r. thou art.
P. 173 l. 3 r. affectionately.


