The Necessity Of Religious Violence in Order to Obtain DURABLE HAPPINESS.
Opened and Urged in a SERMON Upon Mat. 11. v.12. Preached at Perth-Amboy, June
29. 1735.

By GILBERT TENNENT, A. M. and Minister of the Gospel at New-Brunswick, in
New Jersey.

Deficile est fateor et tendit inardua Virtus sed quo Deficior a eo
prestantiora. Printed and Sold by William Bradford in New York.

The PREFACE.
Candid Reader;
It Is Customary to prefix some Apology before Performances of this Nature. All
that I shall offer of that kind is this: That my Profession as a Christian, and
Character as a Minister of the Gospel, oblige me to improve the small Talent my
Great Master has given me, for the honor of his Name, and in the Service of
his Church; and that, pursuant to this good Design, right Reason instructs me,
to make any of my Labors that I think have a tendency this Way, as extensive
and permanent as I can; that so far as I know my self, was the purpose of my
Heart in the Composure and Publication of the following Discourse, which if
attained, will yield me the Satisfaction I desire.

Farewell.
The Necessity Of Religious Violence, etc.
Mat. 11. verse. 12. And from the Days of John the Baptists, until now, the
Kingdom of Heaven suffers Violence, and the Violent take it by force.


THE great goodness of the Blessed God is equally apparent and conspicuous in
preparing a Happiness for his People, revealing the way to it, and sending his
Servants to incultate by all Arts of Persuasion possible, the Necessity,
Importance and Reasonableness of traveling in the One, in order to obtain the
other. Of this the Text under our present Consideration treats, in which we may
Note Three Things, 1. A Commendation of the Baptists Faithfulness. 2. An
Illustration of Gods Goodness. 3. A Description of the Way to Happiness.


1. As to the Baptists Commendation: It Is said, that from his time the Kingdom
of Heaven suffered Violence, i. e. from the Time in which he began to preach,
the Gospel Church began to be remarkably established; its Doctrines eagerly
embraced, and it is Precepts vehemently Practiced; and in this importunate
painful course, his convinced hearers longed after, and labored for the
Happiness of the blessed in Heaven. To this purpose Piseator and others, speak.
Lightfoot observes pertinently, that the Jewish People were forbid to touch the
Mount Sinai, but that now we may use Violence in ascending the mistical
Mountain: So Grotius also notes, Suffers Violence, Biazetai, i. e. is obtained
by Mortification, Repentance, Ignominy, Poverty, so Menochius, Basil,
Chrisostom, Hilarie, Austine.

2. God's Goodness is great in not only suffering guilty Creatures to take
Heaven by Violence, but even in exciting them to it, and in assisting them in
the performance of it.

3. We have a Description of the Way to the Imperial Heaven in these Words, and
the Violent take it by Force: These who are truly convinced of Sin, of
Righteousness and of Judgment John 16.8.
labor to take Heaven by Storm and will not stick at any cost to obtain it.
These seek with importunate vehemence, like Jacob of old, and will not cease
until they obtain the blessing. Genesis 32.26.
These put a force upon their corrupt Nature, are willing to perform the
hardest Services, and undergo the severest sufferings, in order to obtain the
great Salvation, (by force) as Dr. Hammond observes; the Jews who were the
Children of the Kingdom rejected it, and the despised Gentiles embraced it with
readiness and vehemence; even the Publicans and Harlots; the poor and
Illiterate People, whom the proud Rabbis deemed accursed.

Again, the Word seems to signify, that the Kingdom of Heaven is not now
confined to one People as of old, but lies open and exposed, without any
National Enclosures, that whoever will take persevering pains for it may
possess it; so Brugensis, Tirinus, Hilary and Ambrose. Once more it may signify
that the Kingdom of Heaven, is not now so much entailed on Descent and progeny,
as conferred on persevering Virtue; so Menochius and Maldonate. We are said to
take that by Violence which we tear out of another Hands; the Kingdom of
Heaven seemed to belong to the Jews, as Children by Covenant, even that Kingdom
is seiz:d and taken out of their Sloathful indolent Hands, by the inferior
Gentiles, through the violence of Faith and earnest Labor.

From the Words of our Text, thus briefly paraphrazed, we may observe the
following Proposition, viz. That these who would obtain an Interest in the
Kingdom of Heaven, must use Violence, in order to it.

Entreating upon this Proposition, I shall endeavor to show, 1st, what are the
Properties of this Kingdom. 2d, What are the Qualifications of its Possessors,
or what is included in that Violence which is necessary in order to obtain an
Interest in it. 3d. With whom we should use Violence. 4th. In what, 5th, For
what. And then Improve it in a Threefold Use. 1. of Information, 2.
Examination, and 3. Exhortation.


And, 1. I am to show you what are the Properties of this Kingdom; it will
appear, I think, by considering the following particulars, that it has all the
amiable Qualities that may command Esteem, or excite, Desire. For,

1. It is an Ancient Kingdom, it had its rise before the Foundation of the
Earth were laid, Genesis 1.1.

2. A Specious Kingdom: The Globe of the Earth is a vast Body in extent and
Magnitude, and yet it is but a small Point, compared with the visible Heavens,
which at an immense distance circle and compass it. Now the Emperial, or third
Heaven is Superior to, and therefore doubtless greater than the Christaline.
Therefore well might the blessed Jesus inform his mourning Disciples, that in
his Fathers House were many Mansions, John 14.2.

3. A rich opulent Kingdom; it abounds with all things, that are necessary, for
Honor, Support, Wealth, Pleasure. There are Thrones of Righteousness, Ensigns
of Majesty, Palms of Victory, Mansions of Beauty, Diadems of Glory.

There unambitious Honor bears unsullied Laurels, being fearless of a Rival,
or invidious Detractive, the poignant Darts of Malignant Reproach shall never
stain the white Names of the Lambs followers in their Fathers Kingdom.

There is the Manna of Angels to feed upon; there be the pure Crystal
Fountains of Life to bathe in, and drink of, that Spring from the Throne of
God, and the Lamb, with an invarible and eternal Tenor; there is the Tree of
Life, richly laden with Apples of Salvation, bearing Twelve manner of Fruits,
whose Leaves are for the healing of the Nations. Rev, 22.1, 2.


There are Streets of Gold, Gates of Pearl, and Walls of Jasper. Rev. 21.
But above all, there is a Lamb of God, the Pearl of great Price, who is
infinitely more valuable than if the immense Globe of the Earth, the
unfathomable Deeps of the Ocean, the broad Sheets of the Christaline or
Emperial Heavens were turned into a Body of Massy or Liquid Gold! And this
Pearl, dear Brethren, whose worth Surpasses the highest Flight of an Angel's
Thought to conceive, or his Tongue to express, belongs to every inhabitant of
that Kingdom. O Blessed God, how Great and Stupendous is thy Mercy, and dear
Affection, that suffers such a Kingdom to be taken through Violence by the
guilty, base Creatures. But to proceed,

There are pure and perpetual Pleasures, sinless and unstained Delights; for
the Lamb is the perpetual source of Light to the Metropolis of that Kingdom;
there sin with all its ruful train of Sorrow, Shame, Solitude, Diseases,
Darkness and Death, has not access or residence; all Tears are wiped away,
Sorrow and Sighing forever flee; the Inhabitants of that Kingdom shall not say,
they are sick. Isa. 33.24.
So that there will be no Avenues of entrance for that Sable Sergeant Death to
arrest them: But on the contrary, the Sun of Righteousness will shine with
uncloaded Luster upon all the Denizons of that City, opening to their
Understandings, all the dark Scenes of Nature, Grace and Providence, showing
the united tendency of every of them to exalt the declaritive Honors of the
Divine Perfections, and to secure the complete Happiness of the Redeemed.

But more particularly expressing the amazing heights of his Wisdom, the
Stupenduous depths of his Love, and the awful extent of his Power! what joyful
Transports must needs posses the Breasts of the Redeemed! When without an
intercepting Glass they shall perpetually behold the Glorious Perfections of
God, the amiable and transcendent Excellencies of the Redeemer, and clearly
perceive (without the least doubt to Eternity) every of these engaged to
promote their Happiness, and also feel the everlasting Streams of the Divine
Love and Affection; and be blessed with the Social Worship of Saints and
Angels, without any defect, variation or Period. but do I pretend to describe
these things! Eye has not seen, neither has Ear heard, neither has it entr'd
in the Heart of Man, to conceive what God has prepared for those that love
him. I Cor. 2.9.


4. A beautiful and glorious Kingdom; therefore called Paradise, with an
Allusion to the earthly Eden, which was crowned with a variety of Beauties and
innocent Pleasures. That must needs be a beautiful Place, which infinite
Wisdom, has contrived, and infinite Power framed, for the Manifestation of the
Perfections of the Deity, and Consumation of his Peoples Felicity. That must
needs be a glorious Place, where a glorious God being seated on a blazing
Throne of solemn Majesty, and unexpressible Beauty, makes the Perfections of
his blessed Nature shine forth with unvailed Brightness and Splendour, to the
equal wonder and delight of the whole Heavens, like the Sun in his Meridean
Altitude, when no dusky Cloud hides his Beauty, or intercepts his Rays. The
happy Inhabitants of that Kingdom do then with open face, (indeed) behold the
Glory of God shining in the Face of Christ, and are transformed from Glory to
Glory.

5. An unshaken and everlasting Kingdom. It is a City that has Foundations,
whose Builder and Maker is God; perfectly freed from all the vertegenous
Vicissitudes, or various Changes of Time, a House not made with Hands, eternal
in the Heavens. But I proceed to confider, the Second proposed, viz. To show
what is included in that Violenee, which is necessary in order to obtain an
Interest in eternal Happiness. And,

1. It includes early Endeavors after Christ and Holiness, Mat. 6.33. Eccles.
12.1.
for our Creator must be remembered in the days of our Youth; that which we
love most, we will seek first; the blessed God being the greatest and best of
Beings, and the Auther, Preserver and Benefactor of ours, undoubtedly deserves
our most ready Regards and intense Affections; and is best able to reward our
defective Services, and Satiate our longing Souls. Add to this, that he
encourages all those who seek him early, with the promise of a kind Reception.
Prove. 8.17.


2. Eager Desire: It is the distinguishing Character, and prevailing
Disposition of a Child of God to Thirst insatiably after Communion with him,
and conformity to him, and a sense of his Love and Favor, more than Life it
self, and its most amiable Enjoyments, show me a Token for Good; Ps. 4.6. Ps.
42.1, 2. Ps. 63 1.2.3, 8 Ps. 84.1.2. Ps. 86.17.
I have longed for thy Salvation, O Lord, and thy Law is my delight, Ps. 119.174
O! how vehement are the desires of convinced Souls, after the lovely Jesus;
and pardon through his Blood, they contemn all things else in comparison of
this, Acts 2 37. Phil. 3.8.
They are apt to speak in such Language as this, O! for a Christ, or I die; O!
for a Christ, or I perish; O! if the blessed God would but give me an interest
in Jesus I would be well, my hungry Soul would be well satisfied, I would be
contented with Shame and Poverty, Pain and Death itself: O! the importunate
pleadings! O the unutterable Groans of such awakened Sinners! how do they Scale
the Heavens with their Tears and Sighs, and will take no denial of God; with
what mournful Countenances and longing Hearts, will they look up to the visible
Heavens, the bright Pavement of their Fathers Courts! How do such dear Souls
sit alone and keep Silence Lam. 3.28.
and yet continually breathe forth vehement desires, strong cries, and sad
complaints, until the Gracious God, (whose Ears are ever open to the Cries of
the Poor and oppressed) hears their Groans, and sets them at Liberty Ps. 102.20.


3. Earnest Labor: Luke 13.24.
The lukewarm indolent Soul is hateful to Christ, and will (so continuing) be
surely rejected with Abhorrence Rev. 3.15.16.
God never intended Heaven to gratify the wishes of Sluggish Balaam's Numb.
23.10.
or indifferent Gallio's Acts 18.17.
but to give those Rest that are Weary and heavy laden. Mat. 11.28.


4. Persevering Diligence lip. 6.8.
the Troubles of such as are truly and savingly convin'd, are not like the
morning Cloud and early Dew which soon passes away, as is the sad case of many
Hypocrites, whom God complains over, Hos. 6.4
No, no, they want their Hearts thoroughly and perpetually broken, and the Laws
of God engraven on the Tables of them, as with a Pen of Iron, and the point of
a Diamond, and laid in the Rock forever; they want to shed Seas of Grief for
their breaches of these holy Laws; how freely can they join with Jeremiah's
Petition, Jer. 9.1. It Is their chief Sorrow that they Sorrow no more for Sin.
But they not only mourn, but labor, Acts 2.37. And observe by the way, they
not only labor for a time, and then leave off, as too many Hypocrites do, but
they keep seeking till they find, and cant't content themselves in the Duty
done, without the gracious Presence of God in it, Mat. 5.3. Luke 15.18.
like the Woman who diligently searched for the piece of Silver until she found
it, Luke 15.9.
so do they seek after the Happiness of their lost perishing Souls, till they
attain Satisfactory Evidences of it, and then they rejoice indeed, and the
whole Heavens with them, because the Child who was lost is found, and the
Person who was dead is made alive. Luke 15.9, 24, 32.
But I proceed to consider, The

3. Third proposed; which was to show with whom we should use Violence.

1. With God, in imploring his Mercy both for our selves and others, after the
following manner, viz.

1. Fervently; with great intensness of Spirit, Summoning all our Powers to,
and solemnly engageing them in the Worship of the blessed God. It Is such
praying that is most like to succeed, the Incense must be put upon burning
Coals, Lev. 16.12.13.
for it is the fervent-Prayer of a Righteous Man that avails much. Jam 5.16.


2. Affectionately, with flowing Tears and heavy Groans; thus holy Jacob
wrestled with the Angel, and prevailed, and why? Because he wept, and made
Supplication unto him Hos. 12.4.
The gracious God informed Hezekiah, that he had heard his Prayers, for he had
seen his Tears, 2 Kings 20.5.
A crying Prayer, (says one) pierces the depths of Heaven, is like Music on
the Water, Melody in the Ears of God; Cries and Groans from a Heart truly broken
in Prayer, are like to many Eloquent, Advocates at the Throne of Grace.

3. Believingly relying upon the Power or promise of God, James 1.6.
We may say at least, with the poor Man, who cried, Lord if thou will, thou
can make me clean Luke 5.12.


4. Argumentatively, Earnestly, but Reverently expostulating with God, and
pleading for Relief, by a variety of Arguments drawn from the Mercy of God, and
our former Experiencies of it; from the Name of God, and our Reliance thereon;
from our Relation to the Divine Majesty, from the inflexible Equity, and
gracious Promises of God, and the Reproach it will be to his Honor, if he
will not hear and help his poor opposed and oppressed People.

These Arguments, and many more of the like Nature, we may find dispersed
throughout the Sacred Records, and frequently used by the faithful Servants of
God in their distress and extremity Has God forgotten to be gracious? has he
in Anger shut up his tender Mercy, Selah. Ps. 77.9. Ps. 74.1 Ps. 27.9. Ps. 4.1.
Ps. 9 10. and 31.17.
Awful was the threatening of God against Israel, Deuteronomy. 9.14. Let me alone, that
I may destroy them. And memorable the pleadings of Moses to prevent the
Execution of it, from the 26th verse of the same Chapter, to the end.

5. Importunately and perseveringly; being urgent and instant in Prayer. To be
so, is not only a Duty but a sign of Mercy's being near; when Elijah had prayed
seven Times, the Cloud appeared. 1. Kings 43.
The excellency and efficacy of this way of Praying, is represented by our Lord
in Two pathetical Parables. Luke 11 8. Luke 18.5.
Deservedly famous is the instance of the Woman of Canaan, who notwithstanding
a Series of dejecting discouragements, yet continued instant. Mat. 15.22. -- 28.
Go you and do likewise, and thou shall not fare worse.

2. With our selves, in exciting our selves to Duty in general, and to these
Duties in particular, to which we have a natural Aversion

We must stir up our selves to lay hold on God, and press forward toward the
Mark set before us. Phil. 3.14,
As to the Duties of Religion in General; we must use Violence in resisting the
following Hindrances to them, viz.

1. The Sloth of our Nature, which inclines us to ease and indolence, and break
through the strong Chains and soft Enchantments of all such Voices which under
the pretext of Ease, betrays your thoughtless Souls into endless Pains and
Agonies, and utterly bereaves us of true Liberty and Happiness. How long will thou Sleep, O Sluggard? When will thou awake out of thy Sleep? Prove. 6.9. Jon
1.6.
Dear Brethren, We must labor to rouse our selves out of this Sloathful
Security and resist the flattering Charms of it, as a drowsy Man would do when
he perceives the House on fire over his Head. To excite to this, we should
consider,

1. That as the Sluggards Field is covered with Thorns, and his Back with Rags,
as Solomon instructs us, so Sluggish Souls are over grown with Corruptions,
deprived of the Robes of the Redeemers Righteousness, and can expect nothing
(reasonably) but Shame and contempt. And,

2. That the Sluggards desire, slay him, because his Hands refuse to labor,
Prove. 21.25.
So do Sluggish Slothful Sinners deceive and damn themselves, by foolishly
imagining their Balaam like inefectual Wishes to be Signs of a good State. And

3 Dosn't the Sluggard turn himself upon his Bed, as the Door upon its Hinges,
and crying A little more Sleep, a little more Slumber? Dosn't he therefore fold
his Hands in his Bosom, and eat his own Flesh? And may not carnal Slothful
Sinners, that fondly hug their sinful Ease and Security in despite of the
Remonstrances of Reason and Conscience, foolishly delaying to seek pardoning
Mercy? and courting a little more Sleep, a little more Slumber, also expect to
eat their own Flesh i. e. to be filled with such Indignation against themselves
(perhaps when it is too late to mend the matter) that they will be desirous to
tear out their own Bowels for their Madness in neglecting (through Sloth) to
improve the precious Price put into their Hands, in Hell there will be weeping
and gnashing of Teeth. Once more.

4. The Sluggard will not Plow by reason of cold, and so want's Bread in
Harvest. Prove. 20.4.
so are there not many sloathful Souls that neglect these Duties of Religon,
which are as necessary to obtain Happiness as plowing is to prepare for a Crop,
because of some difficulty that attends the performance? But as there is no
Comparison between suffering a little Cold and starving for want of Bread: So
is there any parallel between the temporary. Pains of Mortification and the
eternal Agonies of Damnation? but

2, We should equally resist the Temptations of Satan with the Sloth of our own
Nature; O how many are the Artful policies and deep devices of Satan to keep
the People of God, especially from the sweet Duties of Religion?

1. Sometimes he will tell them that they are not in a right Frame now, your
Prayer with such a cold Frame, will signify nothing, it will be but a mere
mocking of God, stay a little longer till you get a good frame, and then go to
Prayer; and so perhaps the Season of the Day is lost and the poor Soul is
brought under Guilt by the sinful Neglect; Satan thy Temptation is both
unreasonable and false.

1. It Is unreasonable; it is as if a poor Beggar would neglect asking an Alms,
'till it was given him without asking for, (which he cannot reasonably expect)
and then go and ask for it. And then,

2. It Is false that there is no good in such Prayers as are offered with a Cold
frame; the Matter is surely good, for it is an Act of Obedience to the divine
Command; and oftentimes when the People of God begin with a cold frame, they
end in a warm one; for God will meet these that wait upon him in his Way.
Diligence after this manner, with a holy Violence is an Evidence of our
uprightness, and the good God is not unjust to forget our Work and Labor of
Love. And truly it is an Act of greater Self-denial to be diligent in Duty when
Gods Face is hid from us, than when we are under the shines of it. Again.

3. Satan will plead, you have no Time, no Time for Prayer; and so point to
other Duties you have to do; Answ. Pray how can this be, for what was all our
Time given us? But to serve God and secure an interest in his Love? What have
we time to free our Bellies and chatter idle Discourse, and no time to serve
the God that made us? O shame! But

4. It Satan finds that we will go to Prayer do what he can, then he will listen
into your Ear, be short, be short, just run over the Heads of Prayer, and that
will do for this Time well enough; God knows your wants before you speak, you
cannot inform him, he is unchangeable, you cannot turn him, and also you must
beware of vain Repetitions. It Is true Satan, we cannot inform God, but we should
obey him, we cannot affect him, but we may in some Sort our selves. Again

7. The Devil will allege that it favors too much of the Covenant of Works of
a legal Spirit to be so Diligent in Duties. I answer, It Is as great a Falsehood
as the Father of Lies can invent, and in it he vents his hellish venom with a
view to sully the Beauty and disparage the Honor of the whole Gospel, as if it
relaxed in a Measure our Obligation to Holiness, which is the vilest affront to
Redeeming Love that can be imagined, for our Obligations, instead of being
lessened are exceedingly increased by the condescending goodness of God in
Christ, who has come to destroy the works of the Devil, and given us great and
precious Promises, yielding the strongest excitements to purify our selves
from all filthithess of the Flesh and Spirit 2 Cor. 7.1.


Querie, But is not it a Sin to strive in our own strength? I Ans. It is a Sin
to depend upon our own strength, or performances, as though they could commend us
to God, or merit his Favor. But I assert that it is no Sin, but an important
Duty for us to use our strength in Gods Service, to stir up our selves to take
hold upon him, for to him that has shall be given. Matt. 13.12.
Mat. 13.12. But

3. We should use Violence in resisting the Temptations of the World against
Duty, as particularly.

1. Of the Business of the World, and many Hypocrite-professors will make the
Worship of God, truckle to Mammon, they will pray a few Words in the Evening, when
the Business and Diversions of the House, are over, when they themselves are
perhaps half asleep, and the rest a snoreing, sweet Prayers! But will they pray
in the Morning? commonly, no; have a care of that, they have something of
greater Weight to be done, their dearly Beloved Mammon is to be worshipped, and
his golden Precepts speedily obeyed, the God of Heaven must take up with the
Worlds leavings and Scraps, and be served when they have nothing else to do.
What would not you have them to serve him first whom they love best? I confess
it is very natural to do so. We cannot well serve two Masters at once, if Christ
and Reason may have any Credit, Matt. 6.24.


2. Of the pleasures of the World: How lively can many be in discourse, in
eating and drinking, they can sit up late enough to perform these pleasant
tasks; but when ever Prayer comes upon the Board, then their Spirits lag, and
they are presently disposed to take a Nap; Is this taking Heaven by Violence!

3. Of the People of it, if any strangers or acquaintances come in, then don't
many People shut Prayers out of Doors, and perhaps spend their Time in
impertinent unedifying Discourse, as if they were ashamed of the Service of
God; But I believe they are not ashamed to Eat before them, if they are to
pray. But if we are ashamed of Christ's Worship here without Repentance and
Reformation, he will be ashamed of us when he comes in the Glory of his Father
with the Holy Angels.

4. Of the God of it, We must use Violence against Satan by discrediting his
Fair, but false Promises, by contemning his empty threats, resisting his sly
Insinuations, and avoiding his crafty Disputations; we had not best hold a
parley with him, for he has too much Subtilty for us to vanquish by dispute, we
stand upon unequal Ground with him, both in respect of Age and Experience, and
therefore it is much safer for us to resist him, and then he will fly from us;
and to hasten from his crafty Sophisms and strong Temptations upon the Wings of
devout Supplication to God, and with Michael the Archangel pray to Jehovah to
rebuke him. We must fight against all the Hosts of Hell, but it should be in
the Armor of God; every Part of which we should be careful to have on in the
field of Battle, (which continues during our abode in this Wilderness) it is
advisable in our disputes with Devils to observe the Martial Order, to eye our
Captain General, and obey his Directions, to keep our Faces against the Enemy
as well as our respective Places in the Field of Fight, and not to give Ground
one Hairs breadth for all the Forces of Hell and Earth, but rather advance by a
steady regular Progress upon the Enemy, by which they are diseouraged and we
strengthened. Ep. 6.13.14.


4. We must use Violence against Sin.

1. In resisting its inward Motions, which if indulged, proceed to outward
Acts. Jam. 1.15.
as also,

2. Inavoiding outward Temptations and enducements to Sin. These that are
Sincere will shun the Appearance of Evil, 1 These. 5.22.
but Hypocrites are bold Fellows, they are not afraid to tread the Devils ground,
because they are ignorant of their own Weakness as well as Satan's strength, and
are void of real Love to Holiness. And,

3. In withdrawing Fuel from our Lusts, using Moderation in Meats, and
sometimes a total Abstinence, which is of vast Service in the course of
Christanity, nam sine cerere et baca friget venus, without Meats and Drinks
lusts languishes. There are some Devils that will not be cast out without
Fasting and Prayer, Math. 17.2^.
If professors will not Labor as well as Pray for Mortifications of Sin, they
may pray till they are gray headed before they find much of it. Praying for such
things as we don't earnestly endeavor after is gross Hypocrisy in our Combats
with Sin; let us not forget frequently and importunately to implore the divine
aids: For if we through the Spirit mortify the Deeds of the Body, we shall live
Romans 8.13.
and labor in Concurrence with the divine Assistance to strangle the first
Conceptions and buds of it, (obsta principiis) it is easiest crushing this
Cockatrice in the Egg, the longer it is indulged, the stronger and more
impetuous it grows, like Water running through a small Hole or Crevice in a
Mill-dam, if it be for a while neglected, increases to a violent Torrent, and
scorns Resistance. To excite you to this noble Work, think of the Words of the
Apostle in his Epistle to the Hebrews, Chap. 12. verse 4. You have not resisted
unto blood, striving against Sin. But I proceed to the

4. Proposition, viz. to show in what we should use Violence. Now to prevent a
tedious prolixity, I shall only transiently touch at a few of many Duties,
which I think suit the present State of my Audience. And,

1. We must use Violence, in reading the holy Word of God, that Magazine of
Martial Furniture, that Mine of the purest Gold, that Treasure of Sacred Truth,
in which is hid the orient Pearl of everlasting Value. Here is the Pole Star of
pure Precepts to direct us. Here is the Manna of precious promises to refresh
us Here are the awful Beacons of dreadful threatenings and example. to terify
and affright us from Sin, and guide our wandering Souls into the Port of Bliss.

Now the Violence that we must use, in reading the Scripture is against the
Sloth and Infidelity of our Natures, and the lightness of our Spirits, we
should read the Oracles of God with Order, frequency, seriousness and believing
Application. Joh. 5.39.
The Bereans were commended for the searching their Scriptures. Acts 17.11.
it is with a solemn pause, having first implored Heaven for Direction and
Illumination, that we should open the Leaves of the sacred Records, laboring
to hear the Voice of God in them, and observing the Characters of divine
Majesty engraven on them.

2. In hearing the Word: This we should labor to prepare for by considering
the Necessity and Importance of this Duty Romans 10.14.
as well as the Danger, and sin of neglecting or abusing the Oppertunities of
performing it. Jam. 1.21, 22. Heb. 2.3.
and by supplicating Heaven for your own Preparation, and the Ministers
Direction to speak to your Case. O the Groans that should be sent up to the God
of all Grace upon a Sabbath Morning! Ye ought to endeavor to plow up the
fallow Ground of your Hearts by Consideration and Prayer, that there may be
some Room for the Seed of the Word in your Hearts, that it may not be sowed
among Thorns, Jer. 4.3.
or hard Rocks, and devoured by the Birds of Prey; and when you come to hear,
you should attend carefully to what is spoken, believe firmly what is agreeable
to the Scriptures of Truth, apply closely what is suitable to your Case, and
obey evangelically. Acts 16.14. Heb. 4.2. Acts 237. Jam. 1.22.
And,

3. In self Examination. 2 Cor. 13.5.
Examine your selves whether ye be in the Faith, prove your own selves; this
Examination should be speedy without Delay, impartial without previous Bias,
universal of our State, Frames, Thoughts, Speeches, Actions; without
Limitation, regular, without Variation from the Word, which is the proper Test
and Touchstone of Goodness, the Standard of Sincerity, and Scale of Action.
And,

4. In self-judging 2. Cor. 11.31.
for if we Judge our selves, we shall not be judged; this should be deliberate
and decisive, after having weighed our Evidences in the Sanctuary's Scales with
great Solemnity and Exactness, we should come to a positive conclusive
Judgment, concerning the goodness or badness of our State; and not always hang
in suspense, between Hope and Fear. If our State be good, we want the Comfort
of it in a World of Sorrow, if bad, we need the Consideration of its Danger and
Terror, to alarm and excite us to that Pain and Labor which is necessary to
obtain an Escape.

5 In Consideration Ps. 50.22.
Now as the Neglect of this Duty exposes to the most destructive Dangers, even
to be tore in Pieces by the Hand of Justice, so the right Performance of it
enhances the most valuable and durable Benefits, Conversion to the divine
Majesty, and the dear Caresses of the Arms of his Mercy. The Father fell upon
the Prodigals Neck and kissed him. Ezak. 18.28. Luke 15.20.
The Subjects to be especially thought of, are the Terrors of an Offended
Sovereign, the dangers of a guilty State, the glories of the celestial
Paradise, the Honors of the infernal Furnace, the Charms of Holiness, the
deformities of Vice, and Beauties of the divine Goodness; there be many other
necessary Duties, such as Family Religon, Instruction of Children, keeping the
Sabbath, avoiding excessive Wordly care; et Cet. which I should mention, but
the Time would fail me; and therefore we come to the

5. proposed. Which was to show for what we should use Violence, before I
propose the particalar Reasons, I shall first endeavor to confirm the Truth of
the general Proposition, which I think is very evident from the various
Metaphors in Scripture, representing the Christian Travels to the New
Jerusalem, such as these following, viz. of Running Heb. 1 2, (...).
Wrestling Ep. 6.12.
Fighting 1 Timothy 6.12.
Now do not every of these clearly and emphatically hold forth the utmost
Necessity of Pains and Vehemence in the Service of the most high God? In
running a Race, dosn't a Man bend his Body forward, use all his Strength and
Swiftness to gain the Prize! So must we, Dear Brethren, if we would gain, not a
Garland of Bays, (which is said to be the Reward of Olimpick contests) but a
Spangling never fading Crown of Life and Glory. In Wrestling is not all the
strength of the Bodyexerted to prevent a shameful Fall? So my Dear Brethren, if
we who are called to contend with Devils, these strong and subtle, Spirits do
not use much labor and carnestness in Petitioning God, and opposing them,
they will certainly give us a doleful and destructive fall, into the dark Deeps of
the damned Dragons. Again, when Men fight, is not all their Vigor excited and
Anger inflamed to foil their Opponent, and gain the Honors of the Field of
Battle? So must we with the utmost hate and revenge oppose Sin and Satan; 2
Cor. 7.11.
and that not so much for the Honors, as the Benefits of the Victory, which
are Noble as our Souls, and lasting as our God. But more particularly, the
Reasons of using Violence are these.

1. God commands it, strive to enter in at the strait Gate; for many, I say
unto you, will seek to enter in, and shall not be able. Luke 13.24.
And surely, a God of infinite Wisdom and Goodness woun't command what was
unreasonable or unnecessary; will not you obey, poor Sinners, the God that made
you, in a case that so highly concerns your greatest Interest!

2. The Nature of the Case requires it; the Duties of Holiness are so contrary
to our corrupt Affections that we must do Violence to the one, if we would
perform the other: The enemies of Religion are so numerous, so malicious, so
politic, so powerful, that without watchful Violence we are in danger, either
of being betrayed by the Craft and Subtilty, or vanquished by the might and
malice of these restless Enemies of our Souls, who, either by artful
Ambuscades, or open Assaults continually seek our Ruin,

3. The importance of the Case deserves it: Is there any thing of equal Moment
with that of Securing, the endless Happiness of our deathless Souls? No surely,
for what shall a Man give in exchange for his Soul, if he should gain the whole
World and lose the same? Mat. 16.6.26.
O! the idle Amusements, insipid Pleasures and ensnaring gains of a vain, vain
World! They are as the emptiest Dreams and basest dross in comparison of it!
This is the one thing necessary which whoever obtains, secures not only the
best but the most necessary Part. We may apply with too great reason the Words
of Christ to Martha, to many unconverted Sinners, Martha, Martha, thou are
careful about many things, but one Thing is needful. Luke 10.42.


I proceed to the Improvement in the Three fold Use before mentioned; the First
of which, was that of Information.

Does the Kingdom of Heaven suffer Violence? Then this informs us,

1. Of the great goodness of God in the following Instances, 1. In preparing
such a Kingdom for Sinning Mankind, while in the mean timehe utterly abandoned
and passed by the whole race of the sinning Angels, Creatures of a nobler Mould
and higher Order than we, and never gave them one offer of pardoning Mercy
after their Apostasy. 2. In sending his only begotten Son out of his Bosom in
the fullness of Time to take upon him, not the Nature of Angels, but the seed
of Abraham, in Order by the labors of his Life, and sufferings of his Death to
purchase that prepared Happiness for his People Heb. 10.19.
3. In sending a Troop or Choir of his Elect Angels to publish to the perishing
World the Birth of this Purchaser and Savior who is Christ the Lord. Luke
2.9.10.11.
And 4. In sending the Apostles further to discover the Beauty and Glory of the
purchased Happiness, than was done before under the Shadowy Jewish Economy.
Hence we are told, that Life and Immortality was brought to light through the
Gospel. 2. Tim. 1.10.
5. In proposing this Happiness on the most equal Terms, viz. The forsaking our
Iniquities and using Violence to obtain it. Now our Safety, Liberty and Life,
obliges us to comply with the first: And Honor and Gratitude, with the Second.
6. In sending his Ambassadors to urge us by the most proper and powerful
Perswasives to a compliance with these equal Terms. And. 7. In sending his
blessed Spirit, to Seal their Attempts, and prepare poor Sinners for that
glorious Good which the Father had prepared, and God the Son had purchased for
them. Joh. 16.8. Romans 8.13.
These things duly considered may make us use the Apostles Exclamation, O the
depth of the Riches both of the Wisdom and Knowledge of God! how unsearchable
are his Judgments, and his Ways past finding our. Romans 11.33.
And in another place, may be able to comprehend with all Saints, what is the
Breadth and Length, and Depth and Highth; and to know the love of Christ which
passes knowledge, that ye may be filled with all the fullness of God. Ep. 3.18
19.



2. Of the great madness, ingratitude and obstinacy of Sinners in slighting and
rejecting so great a Salvation; What can be a more Astonishing pitch of folly
and madness, than to reject the sweetest Life, the most valuable Liberty, and
never expiring Glory, for a Bondage, Shame and Death! for the trasient trifles
and sordid rubbish of this perishing World, that cannot satisfy us while we have
them and must soon betaken from us, or we from them. Or for base lusts that
dishonor and enslave us; for Honors that have no substantial Goodness, but
the most corrupting and fatal Effects;

And what can be more ungrateful and obstinate than to slight the most
compassionate and dear Mercy! the most ravishing Goodness and the greatest
Glory? Such free, rich, valuable, dearly purchased, and everlasting Benefits!
So condescendingly offered! So importunately enforced! by the softest Charms,
the strongest Arguments at the sweetest incentives that are wont to make
Impressions on Men's understandings, or consciences, their Fears or their Love!
What say you Sinners! Will you always slight this great Salvation! What! Slight
the most tremendous Majesty! The tenderest expresses of Bowel Mercy! the
brightest blaze of ravishing and amazing, Glory! And shall the Holy Jesus have
always reason to complain over you! as he did over the obstinate Jews? O
Jerusalem Jerusalem, how often would I have gathered thy Children together,
even as a Hen gathers her Chickens under her Wings, and ye would not! Mat.
23.27.
What ails you poor wretched unconverted Sinners! where is your Reason and
Consciences! Alas! have you abandoned both? arn't you the most infatuated
Creatures that ever breathed? who thus vilely trifle with the great God, and
your poor perishing Souls! and sordidly reject the offers of his Love, and
thereby your own Life and Happiness! for how shall we escape if we neglect so
great Salvation? Heb. 2.3.
O cruel World, that thus slight the blessed God! the Holy Jesus, and their own
Souls Happiness! Your eyes will be opened by and by to see the horrid glaring
Scene of your Shame and Guilt, your Stupidity, obstinacy, madness and misery!
if not now to your Humiliation and Conversion, then surely among the damned to
your Confusion and Torment; then will you fill those dismal Regions with
doleful Roarings, hideous Screeches, passionate, but useless Lamentations! But
I pass, to the

2. Use, which is of Examination; pray Heaven, do you use that Violence to
obtain Heaven which I discrib'd in the Doctrinal part of this Discourse! How is
it with you? poor Sinners? Do you seek after Happiness with such early
endeavor, eager Desire, earnest Labor, and persevering Deligence?

Do ye use Violence with God by praying to him fervently, affectionately,
believingly, argumentatively and importunately?

Do ye also use Violence with your selves in opposing your sloth and in a
conscienticy performance of all known Duty? As also in opposing the Temptations
of Satan and of Sin, in faithfully resisting its inward Motions and carefully
shunning outward Incentives to it?

Do ye also conscientiously oppose the Temptations of the World in the Business
of it, yea, pleasures of it, and People of it? Again,

Do ye use Violence in the performance of these following Duties of Religion?

1. In reading the Word of God with such Frequency, Order, Seriousness, Belief,
Application and Practice? as was before hinted?

2. In hearing the Word, do you labor and prepare for it, by Meditation and
Prayer? and do you Solemnly attend to what you hear, as in the presence of God?
Do you closely apply your proper Portion, and Evangelically practice it? And,

3. Do you Examine your selves with such impartiality, and regularity as has
been spoken? And,

4. Do you judge your selves deliberately, and decissively, and habitually
Practice the great Duty of solemn and affecting Consideration? Do you realy use
this Violence, my Brethren If so, then 1. Bless God for exciting you to it, and
assisting you in it: Without his preventing influence you would have been as
secure and sloathful as others are. 2. Rejoice in his distinguishing Goodness,
for this conscientious evangelical Violence, is a sure presage of eternal
Happiness. Our Text informs us, that the Kingdom of Heaven suffers Violence,
and that the Violent take it by Force: Ye shall reap if ye faint not; he that
preseveres to the end shall obtain a Crown of Life that fades not away. This
may encourage, animate, and content you in all the Labors and sufferings of
Life; for what are these in Comparison of that weight of Glory which shall be
revealed; 2 Cor. 4.17.



But Alas! what reason is there to fear that a great Number of you have the
very contrary qualities to these now mentioned!

Are there not some who instead of seeking Heaven early, delay that grand
pursuit, one Month and Year after another, who Instead of being eager in
Desire, or earnest in Labor that way, are secure and lukewarm Laodicean-like,
inconstant as the Wind that blows in the Affairs of Religion. Don't the Aims,
Desires and Labors of most of you bend to an opposite Mark, and run in a quite
contrary Vein? How vehement are your desires, how early, earnest, and
persevering are your Labors about the enjoyments of this dying Life I while in
the mean Time the great concerns of your Souls, and eternity are sadly
neglected! Dosn't your common vein of Speech betray your Worldly Hearts? they
are (says St. John) of the World; therefore speak they of the World, and the
World hears them, 1 John 4.5.


Instead of Praying fervently, affectionately, believingly, argumentatively,
importunately, don't you pray coldly, stupidly, presumptuously indifferently,
abruptly; and offer Violence to your own Reason and Consciences, in sinning
against God, by knowingly, and habitually, breaking his blessed Laws, and
slighting his rich Love: Mat. 22.5.
and thereby prove your selves to be the Children of your Father the Devil,
John 8.44. Joh. 3.8.
Are there not many, who instead of using Violence with their Corrupt Nature,
in opposing sloth, do Violence to their Consciences by indulging it?

Are there not many, who instead opposing Violence in opposing the Temptations
of Satan, and the Worlds Business, People Pleasures, do run knowingly into the
Way of Temptation? tempt the Devil to tempt them, as if he was too slow in his
Work, embarass themselves in needless, worldly Business, or employ their
thoughts and cares inordinately about that which is Necessary, and who court
and covet needless Conversation with wicked People, and thereby discover their
damnable Hypocrisy, and themselves to be the very Sons and Daughters of Death,
notwithstanding all their fair pretenses?

Are there not many, who instead of using Violence against sinful Motions,
secretly indulge them, and thereby prove themselves to be but whited
Sepulchers? and who instead of withdrawing the Fuel of Sin, make Provision for
the Flesh to fulfill the Lusts thereof, Romans 13.14.


And how few among us use such Violence in reading of the Word, as I described?
Are not our Bibles almost molded in our Chests, or upon our Shelves? Who is
there that reads that blessed Book with Solemnity and close Application? Who is
there among you that hears the Word with such previous Preparation, close
Attention, and believing Application, and evangelical Obedience? Don't you hear
it with indifferency and unconcernedness, as the Words of a Man, rather than of
God? And forget it as fast as you hear it! Don't I saw upon hard Rocks! Where
are the effects of a preached Gospel? Where is there one convinced humble Soul
among you at present. that Labors to take Heaven by Violence.

Again, Instead of examining and judging your selves, as I before described,
don't some of you Studiously avoid the knowledge of your State, and are still
in suspense between a groundless Hope and a just Fear, and will not come to a
conclusive judgment about your Condition, for fear of the necessary pain that
it would Occasion? And to this end, don't you carefully ward off all the
Strokes, and Arrows of the Word which would wound or awake you? And,

As to the Duty of solemn Cosideration upon terrible Subjects, don't you keep
your selves as great Strangers to it as you can, lest your present false Peace
should be disturbed? Arn't you rushing along, poor Sinners, to a vast Eternity
in a thoughtless inconsiderate course of Action? In which you will be quickly
plunged? (So continuing) and brought to your Senses with a Vengence, and made
to roar out eternally without hope or help of your present Madness and Folly!

Is it necessary to use Violence in order to obtain eternal Happiness? Then
what will become of the following sorts of Sinners?

1. Of the Secure, who have never been so much as convin'd thoroughly of their
damnable Condition, who have never cried out with the Prodigal, I perish with
Hunger, Luke 15.17.
or with Peter's hearers, when pricked in their Hearts, Men and Brethren, what
shall we do? Acts 2.37.
2. Of Apostates, who have been convinced, but draw back to Perdition. Heb.
10.18, 19.
Arn't these possessed with seven Devils? Mat. 12.43 -- 45.
3. Formalists, who content themselves with a dead Form of Religion; O! That
such would consider Seriously that saying of Christ, Mat. 5.28 But I say unto
you, That who'oever-looketh on a Woman to lust after her, has committed
Aduliry with her already in his Heart. 4. Profane People of all Sorts,
Drunkards, Swearers, Whoremongers, Adulterers, Sabbath Breakers, Thieves: Don't
all these storm Hell, and endeavor to take Damnation by Violence, out of the
Hands of the Devil? They are as earnest, as if they would take no Denial; But
they need n't fear, they shall have their Wages (so continuing) as sure as God
is truth. ^. Cor. 6.9, 20.
5. Covetous Idolatrous Worldlings; these are using Violence indeed, but not
for Christ and Heaven, but for this Earth, these merciless Rooks are tearing
all they can out of the Hands of it is just Owners, perhaps as if they could
never, never, get enough of that Earth, they set their Hearts and Souls upon;
But I may tell them for their GOD son, they shall by and by, get their Eyes and
Mouths and Hearts full of it in the (...) Grave, where their pampered (...)
will quickly become a (...) of dry Bones. Let these Earth Worms read their
Portion, Ephesians. ^. 5. 6. Filthy Hypocrites, who have double Tongues and divided
Hearts; these Stage (...) who g^ve their Maker the Tongue, the Cap and (...);
for in Speech they (...) Love to God and Violence, for Heaven, (...) their
Hearts go (...) their Covetousness and other ^^^sts, (...). ii.
(...) your (...), you (...) Hypocrites, in the 24th Chapter of St. Matthew the
51st verse.
3. The Third and last Use, is a Use of Exhortation: Be entreated, Friends and
Brethren, in the Name of God, to use Violence, in order to obtain the Kingdom
of Heaven; to this end consider, I beseech you, the following Arguments, or
Motives. And,

1. It is a necessary Duty, and that in two Respects, viz. of Command and Mean.

1. Of Command, Strive to enter in at the strait Gate, for many I say unto you,
will seek to enter in, and shall not be able Luke 13.24.
Let us Labor therefore to enter unto that Rest, lest any Man fall, after the
same Example, of unbelief. Heb. 4.11.
Is Not it necessary to obey your Creator! 2. Of Mean. 1. In respect of God; we
can do nothing to purpose in Religion without his assistance. John 15.5
which cannot ordinarily be obtained without Labor. Mat. 25.29.
2. In respect of us.
For, 1. The Gate is strait through which we are to pass; for Conviction and
Conversion is quite contrary to our Natural case and Inclination. 2. The Way is
narrow, which we are to Travel in; the path of Holiness is opposite to our
corrupt Dispositions; for the carnal Mind, is Enmity against God. Romans 8.7.
Joh. 3.6.


3. The Enemies many, that we are to Travel through, and very crafty, powerful
and invidious; the World the Devil and the Flesh lie continually in Ambush to
destroy us, or else Labor by open Combat to make us quit the Field of Battle,
or lie at their Feet as bleeding Victims to their Rage: These Considerations
prove plainly, the absulute necessity of Violence, if we would be Victorious
and obtain the good we seem to aim at, and propose. It some seek that shall
never find, how shall these find that never, or but coldly Seek?

2. It Is a very beneficial Duty, for in the performance of it, we are like to
obtain eternal Happiness; and what is so valuable in itself, or should be so
much desired by us, as this Ancient, spacious, rich, beautiful and everlasting
Kingdom?

3. It is a very Rational Duty; in doing this, we comply with the united voice
of Reason, of Conscience, of Man, and of God, in obeying our Maker, and
securing our greatest Interest. A wake then, you sluggish Souls, and strive to
enter in at the strait Gate; for many will seek to enter in, and shall not be
able.

4. Others are battering the Heavens night and day, with Tears, and Sighs and
Groans, as I am informed, they are coming to Christ in Flocks in New England,
at this time; and will you forever lie still in your beds, of carnal Security,
over the dreadful steeps of Damnation; like a sleepy Man, on the top of a Mast?
Wretched Sinners! is not there one Soul among you all that will be persuaded to
awake this day? Ah! not one prodigal prevailed what to return to his offended
Father! Not one Lidia open her Heart to hear the Word of Christ? O Doleful! O
Mournful! Mournful! Mournful! O wretched mould of your Hearts! you hardened
Sinners, suffer me to bewail over you in the Language of mourning Jeremiah, Oh!
that my Head were Waters, and mine Eyes a Fountain of Tears, that I might weep
day ana night for the slain of the Daughter of my People. Jer. 9.1.


5. Awake and strive, Sinners, to enter in at the strait Gate; for see what
vehement Labor and Hardship of Travel, Heat and Cold, Perils by Land and Sea,
many perform, endure and expose themselves to, and all to secure a little
worldly Pelf; Will Not you take as much pains about your Sou a, as they about
their Boches and Estates, about an Eternal, as they about a Temporal good O
Shame! O Wonderful!

6. The Violence that many wicked People take to Damn themselves, by wicked
Courses, should make you more painful in seeking the Happiness of your poor
Souls; shall they take more pains in the Service of the Devil, than you in the
Service of God; more pains for Damnation, than you for Salvation! O strange
madness!

7. See what Violence the Devil uses against you to destroy you; and will not you
take as much pains to save your Souls, under God, as the Devil does to damn
them!

I shall conclude with the Words of Moses to the People of Israel, (...). 30
from verse 15. to 20. See I have set before you this day. Life and Good and
Death and Evil, in that I command you this Day etc. etc. And of the Apostle
Paul to the Hebrews. Heb. 4.1^. Let us Labor therefore to enter into that
Rest, lest any Man fall short after the same Example of Unbelief. Amen.

FINIS.
Errata.
Page Line for Read 1 6 Incultate Iuculcate 6 1 a the 14 the thy 18 4 free feed
25 22 decifive decisive 28 12 woun't woudn't 33 18 Heaven Hearers 28
Conscienticy Conscientious, 36 25 opposing of using 38 1 saw sow 40 18 gave
give 43 13 what with


