Mr. Clark's Artillery Election SERMON June 7, 1736.

Christian Bravery. A SERMON Preached before the Honorable Artillery Company
In Boston, June 7 th, 1736. Being the Day of their Election of Officers. And
now Published at their Request, with the Enlargements, that, for Brevity, were
omitted in the Delivery of the Sermon.

By Peter Clark, A. M. Pastor of the Church in Salem-Village.

1 John 2.14. I have written unto you, young Men, because ye are strong, and
the Word of God abides in you, and ye have overcome the wicked one.

2 Timothy 1.7 God has not given us the Spirit of Fear, but of Power, of Love,
and of a sound Mind.

BOSTON: Printed by S KNEELAND and T. GREEN, for D. HENCHMAN in Corn hill. 1736.

Christian Bravery.
1 CORINTHIANS xvi. 13. -- Quit you like Men, be Strong.


THE Occasion and Design of this large and excellent Epistle of Paul to the
Corinthians, appears from the Contents of it; wherein the Apostle having
reproved the Disorders and Factions of the Church of Corinth, and resolved
several Cases, and instructed and directed them in several important Duties of
Christianity, and confuted some Errors of dangerous Consequence that had sprung
up among them through the Influence of false Teachers, particularly that relating
to the Resurrection, proceeds in the Close of all, in this 16 th Chapter, to
direct and exhort them to sundry distinct Duties, among which is that in our
Text; which being observed, 'twill be the less needful to look into the Context
for clearing the Sense of these Words, which indeed, are, in a Manner,
independent, either on the preceding or subsequent Verses. The holy Apostle
being aware of the Dangers that still threatened the Church of Corinth in their
present unsettled State, through intestine Divisions, and "the Leaven of their
old Maxims and Manners that had not been thoroughly purged out by the Christian
Principles they had entertained," and through the restless Agency of Satan and
his Instruments, to corrupt their Faith and Practice, could not forbear
expressing his hearty Affection and Concern for them, by leaving with them
these important Words of Caution and Counsel, Watch ye, stand fast in the
Faith, quit you like Men, be strong.

The Phrases here used appear at first View to be of a Military Import, being
borrowed from the Custom of War, wherein, as Soldiers in the Camp, Garrison, or
City, are set to keep Watch and Ward, to descry Dangers at a Distance, to give
timely Notice of the Approach of an Enemy, that they might be in a prepared
Posture of Defense, so Christians who are engaged in a spiritual War, are
highly concerned to Watch, to keep their spiritual Senses awake and in
Exercise, that they may be always on their Guard against the Dangers that
continually surround them from their spiritual Enemies, the World, the Flesh
and the Devil, and be in a Readiness, with Wisdom and Skill in the Use of their
spiritual Armor, to oppose their malicious Designs, and to secure and defend
themselves. And as Soldiers being about to face an Enemy, are exhorted and
encouraged to stand their Ground, to be true and faithful to their Leaders, and
to stand firm in the Defense of the Cause and Interest of their Country, and of
their public Liberties, so Christians are, answerably hereunto, required to
Stand fast in the Faith, their Faith being not only the main Part of their
Armor, with which they must Fight, but the main Cause for which they must
Fight, the Prize they are to contend for: I have fought a good Fight, says the
Apostle, -- I have kept the Faith. 2 Timothy 4.7.
And they must stand fast in this Faith, and in order thereunto must act like
Men, with Wisdom. Strength and Courage. Quit you like Men, be strong. These
Words, which I have chosen for my Text, (not excluding the Consideration of the
foregoing, of which some Improvement may be made) carry in them the Sound of a
Charge from the Mouth of a Captain, or Commander of an Army, animating his
Soldiers to some vigorous Engagement with an Enemy; like that of Joshua to the
Captains of the Tribes, encouraging them to their Wars in Canaan, Be strong and
of good Courage, Josh. 1 18. And again Chap. 10 25 God himself had encouraged
Joshua with the same Words, Chap. 1.9. And the like Speech often occurs to the
same Purpose. Particularly remarkable is that of Joab at the Head of the Forces
of Israel, animating them to charge with Vigor and Courage in the Battle
against the Syrians and Ammonites, 2 Samuel 10.12. Be of good Courage, and let us
play the Men for our People, etc. Thus we find the Philistines stirring up each
others Courage to Fight against Israel, when they understood that the Ark of
God was bro't into the Camp. Be strong and quit your selves like Men, -- in the
very Words of the Text. 1 Samuel 4 9. The Word here in the Original (...)
signify's to play the Man, or to act Manfully and Valiantly Leigh. Crit. Sacra.
. And Critics observe that the Greek here answers to the Hebrew in those
Passages of the Old Testament I have referred to Vid. Pol. Syrop. Critic. in
Loc.
. Thus it is required of Christians that they should exert a masculine Spirit
and Courage, in maintaining with Perseverance, a vigorous Opposition against
the Enemies of their Peace. Wherefore I shall here endeavor, First, with what
Brevity I can, to open and inculcate the Christian Duty that is recommended to
us in these Terms. And then, being led by the Allusion, shall make a more
particular Apolication of this Charge to Men of the military Profession,
agreeable to the Design of this Day. Accordingly, the Point that lies before us
is this, viz.

DOCTRINE. That Christians in the Management of their spiritual Warfare, must
quit themselves like Men, and be strong.
And I hope to make it appear both in the doctrinal and applicatory Part of my
Discourse, That true Manlyness is supported and improved by the Principles and
Rules of Christianity. And here,

1. It is supposed that our present State in the World is a warfaring State;
our Life is a Warfare, which it requires the Wisdom, Skill and Courage of Men,
to manage aright; and in this Warfare we are concerned both as Men and as
Christians.

1. As Men. Job 7.1. Is there not an appointed Time, or as the Translation is
varied in the Margin, Is there not a Warfare for Man upon Earth? Man is born to
various Labors, Struggles and Conflicts, which are not terminated but in
Death. This Warfare is both External and Internal. External, arising from a
thousand Dangers, Hardships, Adversities, Crosses and Oppositions that befall
us in the World. Internal, proceeding from the disquieting Passions, excited by
external Objects, Anger, Grief, Sorrow, Fear, Shame, Despair, and the like,
with which we are exposed to daily Conflicts: so that oftentimes without are
Fightings, and within are Fears 2. Cor. vii 5.
. But more especially,

2. As Christians, listed under Christ's Banner, we are engaged in a Warfare
with his, and our Soul's Enemies, Sin, Satan, the World and the Flesh: All
these hold in Confederacy together. Satan's Kingdom, which is set up in
Opposition to the Kingdom of Christ, is founded in Sin: And the Temptations of
the World, both its Allurements and Terrors, are his Auxiliaries; and fleshly
Lusts are the Traitors in our own Bosoms that hold Correspondence with this
Enemy, and give him mighty Advantages against us, and are therefore the most
dangerous of all. Now with all these our spiritual Enemies, we have openly
declared War, by taking upon us a Christian Profession, and by coming over into
the Camp of Christ, and renouncing the Interests of Sin and Satan. And
therefore in Point of Duty and Fidelity to our Lord Redeemer, the Captain of
our Salvation, as well as from a prudent Regard to our own spiritual Peace and
Welfare, we ought to be constantly armed for a Conflict, to take to ourselves,
and with Wisdom, Courage and Resolution to improve, the whole spiritual Armor
he has furnished us withal. Ephesians. vi. 11.


Wherefore,

2. In the Management of this spiritual Warfare, we must quit our selves like
Men, and be strong.

Now the Enquiry is,

Q What Matter of Duty is laid upon us by this Charg,e to quit our selves like
Men? The latter Injunction, Be strong, comes in as an Explication of the
former, and shows in one special Instance, how we must quit our selves like
Men, viz. by putting on Strength, Resolution and Courage, becoming Men; and
therefore may be considered as one main Branch under this general Head, wherein
true Manhood consists? Or how must we quit our selves like Men?

I Answer, We may be said to quit our selves like Men, either by governing our
selves by Principles of Reason, whereby Men are differenced from Brutes, or by
showing forth a manly Spirit, whereby Men distinguish themselves from Children.
Both these Ways we must quit our selves like Men. Therefore,

1. In general, To be truly Religious, is to quit our selves like Men, like
reasonable Creatures: For Religion is the highest Improvement and Exaltation of
Reason, and that which puts the main Difference between Men and Beasts. All the
Reason of Man is for Religion and Holiness, and against Sin. Hence that
upbraiding Admonition to Idolaters, Isai. 46 8 Remember this, and show your
selves Men. If Sinners would show themselves Men, and act up to the Dignity of
the humane Nature, and exert the peculiar Powers and Capacities of it, they
must needs become Religious, and abandon all Irreligion, Sin and Wickedness,
which is highly Irrational, besides Reason, and against it: Whereas all the
stated Laws of Religion are adjusted to the strictest Reason; Piety and
Devotion toward God, Righteousness and Charity toward Man, Sobriety and
Temperance with Respect to our selves, (in which the Sum of practical Religion
consists Titus ii. 12.
) are Things unexceptionably just, and approve themselves to the purest Reason
of Mankind. In the moral Government of Man, God deals with him as a
reasonable Creature; in all the Revelations of his Will concerning Man's Duty
and Happiness, he still addresses him as a rational free Agent. So he speaks in
the Prophet Isai. 1.18, 19, 20. Come, and let us Reason together, says the
Lord, -- if ye be Willing and Obedient, ye shall eat the Good of the Land, etc.
His Laws are so adapted to our reasonable Powers, and as it were interwoven
with them, that were we freed from the bias of carnal Affections and Passions,
which participate of the Temper of the Body, wherein we are allied to the Brute
Animals, and were we at Liberty to pursue the rational Dictates of our Minds,
Religion in its strictest Rules would not be though it Grievous, but embraced out
of Cho^ce, as a Thing connatural, easy pleasant, and the most beautiful and
amiable Thing in the World. Moreover, all the Promises and Threatenings of God's
Word are suited to the Principles of Man's Nature, as he is a Creature endowed
with a rational Judgment, and Liberty of Choice, capable of being influenced in
his Actions by Hopes and Fears Deuteronomy. xxx. 19.
. So that then we may be truly said to act like Men, when we behave our selves
toward God as Creatures, so made, ought to do, in pursuing the End of our
Beings, by using aright the noble Powers of our rational Natures, in all the
Instances of a sober, righteous, and godly Life, which is a Thing so Just, that
none can except against it, without disclaiming, at the same Time, the
Principles of Reason and Humanity. More particularly,

2. To quit our selves like Men, is to put away childish Things, and to put
forth the Virtues and Perfections of a manly Spirit.

1. We must put away childish Things. When I was a Child, says the Apostle, I
spoke as a Child, I understood as a Child, I thought as a Child, but when I
became a Man, I put away childish Things 1 Cor. xiii. 11
. It is unbecoming Men in their adult Age, to think, speak, and busy themselves
like Children. So if Christians would act like Men, and preserve the Dignity of
their Natures, as Men, and Christians, they must put away the Follies, Vices,
and Impertinences of Children, which through the Weakness of their Age, or the
Corruption of their Natures, they are subject to.

We must put away,

1. Childish Thoughts. How vain and confused are Childrens Thoughts and
Fancies, which they despise and reject when they arrive to riper Years? Thus
Christians must guard their Minds against all vain, foolish, trifling and
confused Thoughts and Musings, especially all vicious Imaginations; and learn
to think seriously, closely, and pertinently, as Men of ripe Parts, and employ
their Meditations upon the great Things of God's Law and Gospel; Things
Spiritual and Heavenly; and not suffer earthly Things to engross all their
Thoughts and Studies, and fill their Minds from Morning to Night, without
leaving Room for the more serious and spiritual Exercises of the Mind. Thoughts
excited by, and exercised upon sensible Objects, are childish Thoughts, mean
and trifling in comparison of the more rational, manly, and sublime Meditations
on the spiritual Mysteries of Religion; the delightful Exercise of pious Souls
Psalm i. ^.
.

2. Childish Talk. All unsavory, vain, frothy, unedifying Communication, is
unbecoming the Gravity of Christians, even as Childrens Talk is unbecoming Men
of Understanding. In all our Conversation we should have Regard not only to
Truth and Charity, but to Decency, and consider what is becoming our holy
Profession. But Fornication and all Uncleanness, or Covetuousness, let it not
be once named among you, as becomes Saints; neither foolish Talking, nor
Jesting which are not convenient, says the Apostle, (Ephesians. 5.3, 4.) And again,
Let no corrupt Communication proceed out of your Mouth, but that which is Good
to the Use of edifying, (Chap. 4.29.)

3. Childish Pastimes. The Age of Youth and Childhood is "the pleasant playing
Age." It Is promised as an Instance of God's Favor to Jerusalem, (Zech. 8.5.)
That the Streets of the City shall be full of Boys and Girls, playing in the
Streets thereof. It Is decent enough for Children, who for want of Discretion of
Mind, or Ability of Body, are not fit for more serious Business, for "Boys and
Girls to play in the Streets;" but it is unseemly and scandalous in Men and
Women to spend their Time in Sports and Diversions, whose Age and Capacity fit
them for graver Employments. Herein Christians must act like Men in renouncing
vain, carnal Mirth and Pastimes, and filling up their Time, as much as this
State of Imperfection will admit, with the Business of their general and
particular Callings. See that ye walk circumspectly, not as Fools, but as Wise*
redeeming the Time, (Ephesians. 5.15, 16) Not slothful in Business; fervent in
Spirit, serving the Lord, (Romans 12.11.)

4. Childish Passions. Children are often peevish and quarrelsom, sullen and
out of Humor at every slight Disgust. Quarrels and Contentions are childish
Things, which Christians should put far away from them; especially such as
arise from small Provocations: Some may, perhaps, think they act a manly Part
to resent every Slight put upon them, to manifest their Displeasure at every
petty Injury or Affront, to bear a Grudge, and study Revenge; and that it is a
weak and cowardly Part to put up Wrongs and Abuses; but really it is a childish
Weakness, not to be able to curb the Passions, and shows they want that Command
of themselves, that Men of Reason ought to have: and that they want that
Discretion of a Man that deferreth his Anger, (Prove. 19.11.) The contrary
Temper often discovers Men's Shame and Folly; for a Fools Wrath is presently
known* says Solomon, but a prudent Man covers Shame, (Prove. 12.16)

5. Childish Appetites and Desires; and these both as to the Matter and Manner
of them. As to the Matter of them, Things agreeable to the Senses: For Children
are led by Sense, before they come to the use of Reason, and are much better
pleased with Toys that take their Senses, than with those Things which would do
them a real Benefit. Young People are for walking in the Sight of their Eyes
Eccl. xi 9.
. And therefore are like Children herein, who are led by Sense, whose Desires
are mainly carried out to carnal Things, that suit the Appetites and
Conveniences of the Body, and have no Taste or Relish for Things Spiritual;
thus they that are after the Flesh, do mind the Things of the Flesh Romans viii.
5.
. But Christians must be otherwise minded, to distinguish themselves from
Children, and must renounce the Conduct of Sense, and subordinate Sense to
Reason and Faith. We must walk by Faith, and not by carnal Sight and Sense 2
Cor. v. 7
; and must learn to discern the Things that differ, and approve those that are
Excellent Phil. i. 10.
. And as to the Manner of Childrens Desires, they are, for the most part,
vehement and impatient of Delay, they know not how to wait for what they
eagerly desire, but must have present Satisfaction. So are all the fleshly
Lusts of Men's Hearts, importunate to be gratified with present Things. But
Christians must renounce such childish Appetites, and deny worldly Lusts, and
disclaim this present World for their Portion, and govern themselves by Faith
of better Things, and be content to wait for an Inheritance in Reversion;
agreeable to that Maxim of true Wisdom, that requires us to submit to a lesser
Evil, to avoid a greater, and to deny our selves in some present Conveniences,
for the obtaining a greater Good.

2. We must quit our selves like Men, by exerting the Virtues and Perfections
of a manly Spirit. Particularly,

1. We must exercise the Reason and Understanding of Men, in all Matters of a
religious Nature, and in the whole Conduct of our Lives. Be not Children in
Understanding, says the Apostle 1 Cor. xiv. 20.
howbeit, in Malice be ye Children, out in Understanding be Men. We must
improve our Reason in studying and contemplating the Discoveries God has made
of himself and his Perfections by his Word, and by his Works. This is a noble
Employment of our reasonable Powers. Especially we must exercise our Reason and
Understanding, in searching into the Truths of Revelation for the Government of
our Faith and Practice, and that we may be able to give a Reason of that Faith
and Hope that is in us 1 Pet. iii. 15.
. And in all Duties of religious Worship, we must offer a reasonable Service to
God Romans xii. 1.
. Ignorance may well enough pass for the Mother of popish Devotion; but the
manly Devotion of a true Christian, requires the intense Exercise of his
intellectual Powers. It is not enough to have a warm Affection, but we must
have a clear and sound Mind. Moreover, both our personal and relative Conduct
affords a large Scope for the Exercise and Improvement of Reason. But this
rather falls under the next Head.

2 We must exercise the Wisdom, Judgment and Discretion of Men Children are raw
and unexperienced, and their childish Weakness is often seen in their Judgment
and Choice, in preferring Trifles before Things of great Worth. But Men whose
Reason is ripon'd by Age, and improved by much Experience and Observation, are
capable of a more solid Judgment; and herein Christians must show themselves
Men, of a ripe Judgment, which is highly needful in all Matters of Faith, that
they may be able to distinguish and judge aright of Things that differ, and
being skilful in the Word of Righteousness, may readily discern between Truth
and Error, as Men of full Age, who by Reason of Use, have their Senses
exercised to discern both Good and Evil Heb. v. 13, 14.
. This manly Discretion and Wisdom, is necessary to reduce our Knowledge to
Practice in all particular Cases, that the Knowledge of God's Will may produce
its happy Fruits in us, in all Wisdom and spiritual Understanding Col. i. 9.
. This is of singular Use in the whole Christian Life and Warfare, to direct us
how to order our Conversations aright toward God and toward Man; how to spend
our Time most profitably, what Portions of it to apply to religious Exercises,
and what, to our worldly Occasions; how to order all our secular Affairs, that
they may not entrench on Religion, nor justle out the Duties of God's Worship;
how to demean our selves in every Relation, as Members of the Family, Church,
and common Wealth, that our whole Converse and Deportment may be inoffensive,
pure and amiable, seasoned with the Fear of God; how to dispose our Charity to
the best Advantage; how and when to please our Neighbor for his Good to
Edification, without indulging him in any sinful Humor; how to administer
Reproofs as to Time, Manner, and Circumstances, so as may be most likely to
gain an Offender; when to keep Silence, and when, and how to Speak; how to
Converse as becomes our holy Profession, in good Company, and in bad Company;
how to govern the Passions and Appeties; how to carry it in the Use of our
lawful Liberty, in Meats, Drinks, Apparel, Visits and Recreations, that we may
not transgress the Rules of Decency, Reason, and Religion: In all these, and
numberless other Instances, Wisdom is profitable to direct, and this spiritual
Wisdom will make a Christian's Face to shine Eccl. viii 1.
, and add a wining Beauty and Luster to his Conversation.

More especially, this manly Virtue is eminently useful in our spiritual
Warfare, to direct us how to manage it most successfully, and how most
skilfully to employ the several Parts of our spiritual Armor; that
understanding and considering our peculiar Temptations, Infirmities, and most
prevalent Corruptions, and being acquainted with the Advantages, Wiles and
Stratagems of our spiritual Adversaries, we may be excited to use all needful
Precaution, to be always sober and vigilent, depending on divine Grace and
Strength, and to double our Guard where our Weakness chiefly lies, and in a
Sense of our own Insufficiency to have recourse to divine Aids by Prayer and
Supplication. In all which Respects, Christians should acquit themselves like
Men of Wisdom and Discretion.

3. We must show forth the Stability and Constancy of Men, in Opposition to the
Fickleness and Unsteddiness of Children, who have their Way to choose, and
often change and repent the Choices they have made. It Is expected that Men
should manage themselves with a more steady and regular Conduct. And herein
Christians must be of a manly Spirit, and not suffer themselves to be like
Children tossed to and fro, and carried about with every Wind of Doctrine Ephesians.
iv. 14
. But must be steadfast in the Faith, and steadfast, and unmovable, always
abounding in the Work of the Lord 1 Pet. v. 9. 1. Cor. xv. 58.
. Having chosen the Way of Truth, and settled our Principles, we must be
invariably true, and constant in our Adherence to them, and stick close to
God's Testimonies Psalm. cxix. 30, 31.
. But much of the Nature of this Virtue runs out into the next I shall mention,
and chiefly insist on, which the Text puts the greatest Emphasis upon.

4. We must show forth the Strength, Courage, and Resolution of Men. This is a
Perfection so peculiar to a manly Spirit, which distinguishes Men from Children
and Babes, that it has the Name of Manhood in an appropriate Sense commonly
given to it. This spiritual Fortitude (for it is the Strength of the Soul, and
not of the Body, that is here intended) seems to be peculiarly aimed at by the
Apostle in this Injunction, Quit you like Men; for he adds by way of
Explication, as I have observed, Be strong. This Fortitude is a martial Virtue,
which has a peculiar and sovereign Use and Influence in our Christian Warfare:
It is by this Virtue that we are enabled perseveringly to adhere to a good
Cause, and manfully to persist in the Paths of Virtue and Holiness, whatever
Temptations, Difficulties, or Discouragements are thrown in the Way to obstruct
us herein, or divert us therefrom.

True Fortitude holds the Mean between those two Extremes of a daring Rashness
on the one Hand, and a sneaking Cowardice on the other. Rashness offends in the
Excess, when Men out of foolish Obstinacy, expose themselves to Dangers, or
rush into them unadvisedly and without necessity, prompted by vain Glory, or
any other headstrong Passion, not duly considering the Consequences of their
Actions. Cowardice is as much an Error in the Defect, when Men are prevailed
with to decline their Duty, or to desert a good Cause in which they are
engaged, through Fear and Dispondency of Mind, under a prospect of Difficulties
and Dangers. But in Opposition to both these Extremes, a true Spirit of
Fortitude, as it will not expose a Man to needless Dangers, so it will enable
him, being supported by Faith and Hope in God, to go on with a resolved
Constancy in the Way of his Duty, without shrinking or swerving, whatever Fears
he may be impressed with, or whatever Temptations, Difficulties, or Dangers may
present themselves to his View.

The shuning of needless Dangers, is an Effect of that Wisdom and Precaution
that is proper to a reasonable Creature, in Pursuance of the grand Principle of
self Preservation, implanted by the wise Creator, in all rational and sensitive
Beings; and therefore not inconsistent with a valiant Spirit, which can contemn
the greatest Dangers, when a virtuous and good Cause makes it necessary to
encounter them.

Nor, again, is it an Argument of a weak and cowardly Spirit, to be impressed
with Fear of those Evils, which we must unavoidably encounter, if we would
persevere in the Way of our Duty. This is evident beyond Exception from the
Example of the Man Christ Jesus, who, as in all other manly Perfections, so in
a Spirit of Courage and Might, incomparably excelled all the Children of Men; a
signal Specimen whereof, he gave the Night before his Sufferings, when having
eaten the Passover with his Disciples, (in the original Institution whereof,
the Israelites were forbid to go out of their Houses, for fear of the
destroying Angel Exodus xii. 22, 23.
, yet,) he courageously went forth to meet his Enemies (having a full Prospect
of all the Circumstances of his Passion) as it were challenging all the Powers
of Darkness, in such triumphant Language (we may suppose) as that in which he
is bro't in speaking, by the evangelical Prophet, in his State of Humiliation,
He is near, that justifies me, who will contend with me? Let us stand
together; who is mine Adversary? Let him come near to me Isai. l. 8.
. Therefore he set his Face like a Flint, and went on with an undaunted Courage
and Magnanimity, being confident of the Goodness of the Cause, and the glorious
Issue of the Combat, through the divine Power and Presence with him. But was he
then without all Fears? No; the Evangelist tells us, that he was sore Amazed,
(Mark 14.33.) And the Author to the Hebrews, that he Feared, (Heb. 5.7.) These
Fears argued no Degree of Despondency, but were the Effect of the natural
Reluctance of the innocent humane Nature of our blessed Savior, against his
Sufferings in View; but his Courage exceeded his Fears, and carried him
triumphantly through all. Fear is an involuntary Impression on the Mind of a
reasonable Creature, arising from the Pre-apprehensions of approaching Evils,
especially if they be great, near, and unavoidable. Some may seem to be
courageous and fearless, through mere Ignorance, or a stupid Inconsideration of
the Causes of Fear. But the greater such Fears are, that arise from a just
Cause, the greater is the Courage and Resolution that withstands them, that
breaks through them, and gets the Mastery of them.

This is one Instance of true Fortitude, not to be without Fears, but so to
manage, and keep them under, that they may not divert us from, nor clog and
depress our Spirits in our Course of Duty; but that we may be able
notwithstanding, to keep up a comfortable Hope in God, free from a servile
Dejection of Spirit.

But Christian Fortitude is discovered in withstanding all Opposition to the
spiritual Life, not only from the Terrors of Sense, but from the Gratifications
of Sense, worldly Pleasures, Profits and Honors; when these prove Temptations
to decline our Duty, or betray our Virtue and Innocence in any Degree, we must
resist them with a manly Resolution, and be inflexible to their Importunities.
Here lies much of our daily Christian Conflict, while we are surrounded with
the tempting Objects of this World. And we have need of a Spirit of Fortitude,
that we may quit our selves like Men, and preserve the Dignity of our Natures,
as Men, and keep up the Dominion of Reason and Conscience, over brutal
Appetites and Passions: for this Purpose we must be constantly armed with the
Fortitude and Resolution of Men. This will be a Guard to every Virtue, and a
Bulwark against every Vice; yea, it is the very Life and Soul, and animating
Principle of all the Virtues Without Fortitude, Wisdom will soon degenerate
into Weakness; Temperance expire in Luxury; Meekness, ruffle into Passion; take
away Fortitude, and Justice will soon warp, Constancy will soon waver, Charity
will soon cool, Hope will soon flag* Zeal will soon slacken, Patience will soon
tire: In a Word, Fortitude is so essential to all the Virtues, that without it,
they loose both their Name and Nature.

Now the several Instances in which we shall have Occasion to exert our
Christian Fortitude in this our militant State, are these three, viz. In
Services, Sufferings, and special Conflicts.

1. In Services. A Christian's Work is inseparable from his Warfare, by Reason
of the continual Conflict between Flesh and Spirit. For the Flesh lusts
against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the Flesh; and these are contrary
the one to the other; so that ye cannot do the Thing that ye would Gal, v. 17.
. We meet with Opposition every Step of our Way to Heaven. The Flesh will be a
constant pull-back, persuading us to consult its Ease; therefore we had need to
exert our selves with Courage and Vigor in doing the Will of God. Hence says
God to Joshua, Not only, be strong, and of good courage to Fight the Cnaanites;
but be thou strong and very courageous, that thou may observe to do
according to all the Law which Moses my Servant commanded thee; turn not from
it to the right Hand nor to the left Josh. i. 6, 7.
. When we consider the Labors and Self-denials that a Course of strict
Religion will cost us, as it will often put us upon crossing the Flesh, and
executing a kind of Violence on the Members of the Body, plucking out a right
Eye, and cutting off a right Hand, upon watching, striving, wrestling, and
counter-acting the corrupt Principles and Practices of a carnal World, whereby
we must expect to incur the Censure and Derision of the ungodly Multitude, it
will appear that an high Degree of Strength, and Courage, and manly Resolution,
is necessary to an unwearied Progress and Perseverance therein.

2. In Sufferings. If thou faint, says Solomon, in the Day of Adversity, thy
Strength is small Prove. xxiv. 10.
. A Time of Adversity will try the Strength of our Souls; and a persevering and
unfainting Patience under the Adversities of Life, supported by the Reasons of
Faith, and a steadfast Trust in God, his Power, Mercy, Truth, and all
Sufficiency, engaged by Promise, and a comforting Hope of the happy Conclusion
of all in eternal Life and Blessedness, is a noble Instance and Evidence of the
spiritual Strength and Valor of a Christian. And here, in this vale of Tears
is, the trial of the Faith and Patience of the Saints; those warfaring Graces,
suited to a State of Sufferings Rev. xiii. 10.
. And to be able to hold out with an unmoved Constancy in the Exercise of
Patience and Long suffering with Joyfulness, under all Sorts of Trials, will be
an Evidence of a glorious divine Power supporting, of an heavenly Vigor
infused into the Heart of a Christian Col. i. 11.
.

3. In special Conflicts with Corruptions and Temptations. Our three great
Enemies, with whom we are engaged in a War, are the Flesh, the World, and the
Devil* 1 Pet. ii. 11.
. But the main Advantage that the Devil and the World have against us, lies in
the Treachery of those carnal Lusts that are inbred in our corrupt Natures, and
which take Part with the Devil and the World, against the true Interest of our
Souls; our Conflict therefore with our spiritual Enemies lies not abroad, or at
a distance, but is a domestic War; the Seat of it is in our own Bowels: So
that neither the Devil, nor the World, can work us any real Annoyance (except
in peculiar Cases, wherein Satan is permitted to afflict the Children of God
with his more immediate cursed Suggestions and Terrors) unless our Flesh join
in Confederacy with them. The Flesh is an Enemy, in respect both of its corrupt
Lusts and Passions; or in respect of inordinate Appetites to the delectable
Objects of Sense, such as Sensuality, Covetousness and Pride, (or as the same
are otherwise expressed by the Apostle, terming them, the Lust of the Flesh,
the Lust of the Eyes, and the Pride of Life Joh. ii. 16.
) and irregular Passions excited by Objects disagreable to Sense, as Anger,
Wrath, Malice, Discontent, and Impatience, carnal Fear and Shame: These carnal
Lusts and Passions are kept in Life, fed and cherished by the World, which
presents the Objects, and fomented and inflamed by the Devil. If therefore, we
manfully resist and conquer these Lusts, our Victory over Satan and the World,
will follow of Course. Here then our Christian Fortitude must principally
discover itself, in expelling these secret Traitors, these Enemies of our own
House, that do us the greatest* Mischief, in carrying a strict Hand over the
Affections, in resolutely withstanding the insinuating Cha^^^ of vicious
Appetites, and resisting their importunate Cravings, and keeping the disorderly
Passions under a regular Management. Here we must be strong and quit our selves
like Men, and Fight Alluding to 1 Samuel iv. ix.
, that we may not become Servants to these base Lusts, and so degrade our
selves from the Dignity of Men, to the Condition of Beasts. We act the Man,
while we contend to keep up our Dominion over them. We act the Beast, by a
shameful yielding to their Influence. And Wisdom will teach us to employ our
Fortitude chiefly against our peculiar favorite Lusts, which we are most in
Danger of being overcome by. Here especially we must both watch, and strive to
stand our Ground with the Constancy and Resolution of Men; against these we
must bend the Force of our whole spiritual Armor, for in them lies the main
Strength of our Enemies, and our Success in the spiritual Conflict is very much
to be estimated according as we prevail and get the Victory over them*

In these several Instances, wherein the whole Concern of our spiritual Warfare
is comprised, we must put on and exercise a masculine Courage and Fortitude. I
shall only add, that the Christian Principles by which this Virtue is supported
and animated, are chiefly these three, viz Faith, Hope, and Love, the essential
Ingredients in the Christian Temper 1 Cor. xiii. 13.
; and they have each their Part assigned in our spiritual Warfare. Let us put
on, says the Apostle 1 These. v. 8
, the Breastplate of Faith and Love, and for an Helmet, the Hope of Salvation.
Let a Word or two suffice to each of these.

1. Among the militant Graces, Faith leads the Van, and inspires Life and
Vigor into the rest. Faith as it acts on Christ, who is the Strength of our
Hearts, and on the Word of God, the Means of deriving spiritual Strength from
him, is of singular Use in the spiritual Warfare; and though it often meets
with hard Struggles, yet it will at last bare away the Victory; and therefore
the Apostle recommends it as the choicest Piece of our spiritual Armor. Above
all, says he, take the Shield of Faith Ephesians. vi. xvi.
. Faith is a Christian's Shield that encompasseth him around, that on which
Side soever he be attacked, his Faith will be of eminent Service for his
Defense.

There are Temptations on the right Hand, and on the Left; the Blandishments of
worldly Pleasures, Profits and Honors on the one Hand, and the Terrors and
Affrightments of Sense, Hardships and Discouragements on the other; but Faith
as it realizes invisible Things, as it is the Substance of what we hope for,
and the Evidence of what we see not Heb. xi. 1.
, is able to bring preponderating Reasons to baffle the Force of all
Temptations. Against worldly Allurements, it can lay in balance the Pleasures,
Riches, and Honors of the Kingdom of God, and so brakes the Force of the Enemy
from that Quarter: And the everlasting Punishments of a future State, which
Faith apprehends as real, and most awful, are more than an over Balance to all
the Terrors of Sense. Let us therefore stand fast in the Faith; and then we
shall be strong, and quit our selves like Men.

2. Hope, the genuine and immediate Offspring of a Christian Faith, serves for
an Helmet in this Warfare, as it secures the Head, and keeps up Life and
Spirit, and fortifies Resolution in the midst of Temptations and
Discouragements This is the great Incentive to the Exercise of all our active
Powers, as it counter-acts, and suppresses dispiriting Fears It Is Hope that
will enable us to renew the Conflict with fresh Vigor, when worsted by the
Importunities of the Flesh. And when Afflictions and Calamities overflow and
reach even to the Neck Isai viii 8.
. Hope will keep the Head above Water, in a patient Expectation of the happy
Issue of all, still looking for the Mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ unto eternal
Life.

3. Love is also a Principle of Christian Fortitude, which, in Conjunction with
the two former, will render a Christian impregnable against all Assaults. This
is indeed a working Grace, and suited to Labor: hence we often read of the
Work and Labor of Love Gal. v. 6. 1 Thessalonians. l. 3. Heb. vi. 10.
. But meeting with Opposition, Love will flame out into Zeal. Holy Paul and his
Companions in the Gospel, were though it Men beside themselves, such was their Zeal
in the Cause of their blessed Master; but the true Reason was, the Love of
Christ constrained them 2 Cor. v. 13, 14.
. Love is generous, and public spirited, and will not shrink at Dangers, or
Difficulties, to serve its beloved. No Waters can quench it. Love is strong as
Death Cant. viii. 6, 7.
, says Solomon. And of the primitive Martyrs it is said, They loved not their
Lives unto the Death Rev. xii. 11.
, i. e their Love, and Loyalty to their blessed Redeemer, prevailed over the
natural Love of their own Lives, so that they could yield them up to Death for
his sake: And thus they came off Conquerors in the War with the Dragon, and the
combined Powers of Earth and Hell. And it is a Precept of our holy Religion,
that we ought to lay down our Lives for the Brethren 1 John iii. 16.
, for those that ba^e that Relation either in the Bonds of civil Society or
spiritual Communion; and it is a Precept suited to this heroic Principle of
Love, which on just and proper Occasions, will prompt to the Observance of it.
Thus we see by these few Hints, what a Spirit of Fortiude and Manhood, our
christian Principles will inspire into those that are truly acted and
influenced by them. I come now to the

APPLICATION.
And here, omitting wholly the more general Uses, and Inferences, from what has
been discoursed, which I though it to have propounded; I shall proceed according to
my intended Method, To make a more particular Application of the Charge in the
Text to those of the Military Order and Profession; who are concerned on a
double Account to act a manly Part, both as Christians and Soldiers.

But, in Order hereunto, there are two Principles I shall lay down, as the
Ground of this Address.

The First is the Consistency of the Christian with the military Calling and
Employment. And Secondly, That true martial Courage and Valor is greatly
befriended and improved by the Principles of Christian Fortitude.

First, I shall lay it down as a Principle, That th^re is no Inconsistency of
the Military with the Christian Calling; though the Weapons proper to the one,
are Carnal, to the other, Spiritual, yet that it is lawful and warrantable for
Christians, as Members of the common Wealth, to bear Arms, and engage in a just
War under the Conduct and Authority of the civil Magistrate; which is a Point
capable of easy Proof, however confidently it has been denied and opposed by
the Socinian Tribe, and sundry other, Sects, both in the present, and past
Ages, being led into this Error, by some misunderstood, and misapplied Passages
of Scripture. Though my Subject does not lead me to consider the Lawfulness of
the Soldiers Calling, or to settle it as a Point of Conscience, yet to show the
Propriety of this Address to Men of that Order, and that it may appear that the
Christian and the Soldier are not Terms incompatible. Let me observe in a few
Words,

1. That it is beyond Dispute, that the People and Servants of God under the
Old Testament (among whom, were diverse eminently pious and holy Persons) took
up Arms and made War against their Enemies, by a manifest divine Direction and
Approbation; which shows that the Thing is not in it self Unlawful; nor is
there the least Hint in the sacred Writings, that leads us to conclude it to be
so; on the contrary, if we would form a Judgment by the Light of Nature, it
appears reasonable and just, being directed to; and warranted, especially in
Case of an injust Invasion, by the natural Law of self Preservation. Hence,

2. Let me observe, That there is no Alteration made in those Things that are
founded on the Law of Nature or Nations, by the Religion of the New Testament
of our Savior. It being very remote from the Design of Christ, or of the first
Preachers of the Gospel, to erect a new civil Polity in the World, or to
abolish any Ordinance of Man for the Preservation of the Peace and Order of
civil Society. As therefore, particular Persons are allowed, and required by
the immutable, and unrepealable Law of Nature, to repel force by force in
necessary self Defense; so by the same Right, Kingdoms and politic Bodies, may
lawfully defend themselves against any injurious, encroaching Enemy, by
exerting the Force proper to them, as such: And this warrants, at least a
defensive War. And allowing but the Lawfulness of a defensive War (on Grounds
of Nature) against an unjust Aggressor, even this is sufficient to justify the
military Employment. The Kingdom which our blessed Lord came to set up in the
World, being of a spiritual and heavenly Nature, does not at all interfere with
the Rights of Nations, or earthly Kingdoms, but leaves them as fully possessed
of them, as it found them. Besides,

3 There are clear and plain Intimations, in the Writings of the New Testament,
of the Lawfulness of the military Calling When our Savior was questioned
concerning his Kingdom, by Pilate, he answered, (John 18 36) My Kingdom is not
of this World: If my Kingdom were of this World, then would my Servants Fight,
that I should not be delivered to the Jews. Intimating, as one observes Bishop
Hopkins on the sixth Commandment.
That though Wars and Fightings were not proper Means to advance the spiritual
Nature of his Kingdom, yet if the Methods of his Humiliation had permitted him
to assume the Royal Scepter, his Servants and Followers, might lawfully have
Fought to defend his Claim and Title. There is no Prohibition of the Soldiers
Employment in the Scriptures of the New Testament, (even when the most proper
Occasion offered) which would not have been omitted, if it were unlawful. The
Reply of John the Baptist to the Soldiers Demand, What shall we do? is well
known Luke iii. 14
. This Preacher of Repentance does not insist upon their laying down their
Arms, and quitting the Service they were employed in, as unlawful, which
surely, he that so freely reproved the Vices of that Age, and called upon all
Sorts to bring forth Fruits Meet for Repentance, would not have failed to have
done, had there been any thing in that Employment immoral, or inconsistent with
Repentance, and a pious Life, but instead of this, he cautions them only
against those Vices, which Men of that Profession are most commonly guilty of,
Do Violence to no Man To obviate the Misconstruction that may be put on these
Word, Do Violence to no Man, as if they intended a Prohibition Fighting with an
Enemy: It may not be amiss to note, that it is altogether improper and unusual,
to term Acts of Hostility or Fighting, in a just War, a doing Violence. But
this being coupled with the other Crime of false Accusing, plainly manifests,
that it is intended as a Caution against wronging or invading the Rights of
their fellow Subjects, (whom they were set to defend) by robbing them of their
Money, Goods, and the like; which Soldiers are prone to do, under color of
military License. They are therefore forbidden to be Injurious to the People
among whom they were quartered So Mr Henry And how unreasonable and absurd had
it been in the Baptist, implicitly to allow of their Employment, by permitting
them to take the Wages proper to it, and in the same Breath to forbid them to
Fight, (if that be the Meaning of doing no Violence) though commanded by their
Superior.
, neither accuse any falsely; and exhorts them to be content with their Wages,
which is a racit Concession of the Lawfulness of their receiving the Wages of
their Warfare, which, who can imagine he would have allowed them to do, without
doing the Service that gave them a Right to these Wages.

The Force of this reasoning may not be evaded by pretending that John was a
legal Preacher, or that he entered on his Ministry before the Gospel
Dispensation began; for we are expressly told, that the Law continued until
John, and from the Days of John the Baptist, the Kingdom of God was preached
Mat. xi. 12, 13, Luke 16.16.
. And the Evangelist Mark dates the Beginning of the Gospel of Jesus Christ,
from the preaching of John Mark i. 1, -- 4.
. John's Ministry therefore, was a sort of Boundary to the legal Dispensation,
and the Beginning of the Evangelical; and his Doctrine was purely Evangelical,
being the same for Substance, that Christ and his Apostles afterward preached,
even the Doctrine of Repentance for the Remission of Sins. Moreover,

We have the Examples of several eminent Soldiers, who embraced the Christian
Faith, without the least Intimation of their quitting the military Function, or
their being directed and ordered to do so, either by Christ* or his Apostles.
Such was the Centurion that addressed our Savior, ( Matt. 8 5.) whose Faith he
so highly commended, above all that he had found in Israel* (Verse. 10) Such was
Cornelius, a Centurion of the (...) Band, a Person of eminent Piety, and
Intercourse with Heaven, ( Act. 10 1, 2, etc.) And Sergius Palus Deputy, or
Proconsul of Cyprus, converted to the Faith of Christ by the Ministry of the
Apostle Paul, (Act. 13.7, 12) Had their Calling been unlawful, they must have
left it upon their Conversion to the Faith: But there is not the least Hint
given by the sacred Historians, that they were either reproved for it, or
discharged from it.

Again, For what End can we suppose, the great Apostle Paul (being informed of
the Conspiracy of the Jews to kill him) should so industriously seek to make
known his Cause to the chief Captain Act. xxi. 17, 18, etc.
, but that he having the Command of the Soldiery, might rescue and protect him?
And does not this manifestly imply an Approbation of that Order of Men? Would
the holy Apostle betake himself to unlawful Shifts in a Time of Danger? How
would this consist with his trusting in God?

Further we may observe, That by the Doctrines and Precepts of the Gospel, the
Authority of the civil Magistrate is established, and all Christians obliged to
Obedience and Submission to it Romans xiii. i. Tit. iii 1.
. The Magistrate is represented as God's Minister, and Vicegerent, to whom the
Sword of Justice is committed, to inflict Vengeance on evil Doers Romans xiii. 4
, to protect the Injured, and punish the Injurious, and consequently to defend
the Rights and Liberties, the Lives and Goods of the Subjects, by drawing the
Sword of War to execute public Revenge on a rapacious, malicious Enemy; to
whom therefore, as vested with, and exercising this Power and Right, Christians
are bound to pay Subjection and Tribute Verse 6.1
. They are, moreover, required to submit themselves to every Ordinance of Man
for the Lord's sake Pet. ii. 13, 14.
. But the constituting and ordering the Militia is an Ordinance of Man, that
carries in it no Repugnancy to any Ordinance of God, which therefore challenges
Submission to it, from a Principle of Conscience toward God. Finally, to add
no more, We are bound to pray for Kings, and all that are in Authority, that we
may lead a quiet and peaceable Life in all Godliness and Honesty 1 Timothy ii. 1,
2.
But in many Cases, it is impossible to lead a quiet and peaceable Life,
without the Magistrates using the Power given him by God; that is to say,
without the Use of the Sword for suppressing of Violence and Injustice at home,
and repressing the Insults and Molestations of an Enemy from abroad. Mortuae
sunt Leges, and Judiciis nulla vis, nec authoritas inest sine gladio. Nec
tantum carnifice opus habet Magistratus, sed aliis quoque Ministris, quorum ex
numero sunt Milites; ubi non aliter pacem tueri potest, quam illorum praesidio,
and manu. Calvin.


From all which, and diverse other Insinuations in the Scriptures of the New
Testament, the Lawfulness and Expediency of bearing Arms, and of the military
Discipline and Employment, might be fairly argued. War is indeed a penal Evil,
justly to be deprecated by all, a severe Scourge wherewith God oftentimes
chastizes sinful Nations and Kingdoms; yet considering the Pravity of humane
Nature, and the Constitution of humane Affairs, and the exorbitant Lusts and
Passions of Men, whence proceed Wars and Fightings, and the great Power and
Influence of Satan (the mortal (or rather immortal) Enemy of the Peace and
Welfare of Mankind) in the Kingdoms of this World, it cannot otherwise be
expected, but that the Nations will frequently be embroiled in Wars: And in
such a State of Things, who is not sensible, that military Men, valiant and
expert in War, good Soldiers and well disciplined Armies, are not only lawful,
but highly necessary and Useful, and at all times to be encouraged, and justly
to be esteemed the Beauty and Ornament, and under God, the Strength and Defense
of a People? So that a Christian may not only with a good Conscience undertake
the military Function, when called thereunto, but may also therein perform
eminent Service for God and his Country, by exerting that public Spirit, that
Zeal and Courage, which his Christian Principles inspire him withal. The
Objections made against this, from the Commands of Christ, requiring an
universal Love, and peaceable Spirit in his Disciples and Followers, and
forbidding Revenge, duly considered and examined, appear to be of no Weight:
For our Savior forbidding to resist Evil, (Matt. 5.39.) intends only to lay a
Restraint on private Revenge: For the Apostle inculcating the same Prohibition,
(Rom 12 19) Dearly beloved, avenge not your selves etc.) does not include all
kind of Revenge, but only that between private Men; for he presently subjoin,
in the Beginning of the next Chapter, ( Verse 4.) That the civil Magistrate is
authorized by God (to whom Vengeance belongs) as his Vicegerent, to be a
public Revenger of Wrongs. Now War is a kind of public Revenge, and the being
Instrumental therein, has no necessary Connection with a vindictive Spirit,
which the Gospel forbids; and as to a Spirit of Peace and Charity, which it
constantly recommends, it is certain there is nothing more essential to the
Temper and Genius of Christianity, yet this Temper is not inconsistent with the
Office of bearing Arms against the injurious Adversaries of ones Country As to
that Prediction of the Prophets, ( Isai 2 4. and Mic. 4 3.) concerning the
Nations beating the Swords into Plowshares, etc. and their not learning War any
more, which has been objected against the Lawfulness of Christians making War;
it may be understood as a Description of the Nature of the Kingdom of Christ,
which (wheresoever, and so far as it prevails) will remove the Grounds and
Occasions of Wars and Fightings, by extinguishing those corrupt Lusts of Men
that give rise to them, and by implanting in their Hearts, opposite Principles
of Peace and Love. And all that can be gathered hence, is, that to provoke and
stir up Wars and Quarrels, is contrary to the Principles and Laws of the
Christian Religion, which (were they universally entertained) would introduce
an universal Peace and Harmony; but by no Means that it is unlawful for a
Christian People to make Use of Arms in their just and necessary Defense
against the violent Encroachments of an Enemy. Indignum est, esse inter
Christianos, qui vim inferant, sed non indignum est Magistratu Christiano, vim
illatam propulsare. Rivet* in Decalogum. Or if it be understood as a Prediction
or Promise, to be literally verified, it must have reference to some future
happy Period of the Church, when the peaceable Kingdom and Government of Jesus
Christ shall more universally obtain, and prevail in the Kingdoms of Men. For
from the Beginning of Christ's Church to this Day, it is apparent that the
Event has not, in this Sense, answered the Prediction, nor have the Nations yet
ceased to learn and practice War. And indeed, it is a Prophecy to be fulfilled
by the Influences of divine Grace on the Nations in general, and not given as a
Rule to any particular Nation.
, when the Necessity of a greater Charity to the Community we are Members of,
constrains to it. Christians are indeed required, if it be possible, as much as
lies in them, to live peaceably with all Men Romans xii 18.
. This they ought to aim at, and endeavor by all possible Means, but sometimes
this is not possible, even as often as it is necessary to repel unjust
Violence; and when this becomes necessary, Christianity requires, it should be
managed with peace, able Intentions; to make War for War sake, or to gratify
Men's boundless Amibition, Pride, Avarice, Revenge, or any other carnal Lust, is
certainly inconsistent with the Christian, and indeed with all religious
Principles. God will scatter and destroy the People, that delight in War Psalm
lxviii. 30.
. But the great End of a justifiable War being to establish Peace on just and
solid Foundations, this should seem to agree well with the Temper and Spirit of
Christianity.

Thus having observed the Consistency of the Christian with the military
Calling (which though seemingly a Digression, yet being inservient to my main
Design, I could not wholly omit it) I shall proceed now to observe,

Secondly, That true martial Courage and Valor is greatly befriended, and
improved by the Principles of that Christian Fortitude, that is so necessary
and Useful in our spiritual Warfare. Strength and Courage, as well as Skill in
the military Art, all must allow, to be requisite to an accomplished Soldier.
There is indeed a Difference between military Valor, and Christian Fortitude.
The one is more active, the other more passive: The one is more seen in acting
with Vigor and Resolution, in great and hazardous Enterprises; the other is
more discovered in suffering Hardships, and Grievances, with Constancy of Mind,
Faith, and Resignation to God; in sustaining with an unshaken Firmness of
Spirit, the Assaults and Oppositions it meets with in a Course of Virtue and
Holiness. The former depends more on bodily Strength, and the Warmth and
Sprightliness of the natural Constitution, suited to that external Warfare to
which it is applied; the latter depends more on the Improvement of the Mind, by
the Grace of God's holy Spirit, and those divine Qualities and Principles,
wrought into the Temper of the Soul, that establish and strengthen it against
all Temptations and Terrors. They both conspire in a resolute Contempt of
Danger in Adherence to, and Pursuit of a good Cause.

But that which I assert is, There is nothing more condusive to a well tempered
Courage in a Christian Soldier, than the Principles of his Religion, that
inspire him with Zeal and Fortitude in his spritual Warfare. True Religion,
though it lays a Restraint on the vain glorious Humor, and banishes Pride,
Ambition, and false Notions of Honor and Greatness, that help to generate a
sort of Courage and Boldness in profane Men, yet it does not tend to make men
Cowards, but truly valiant, whenever there is a just Occasion to exert their
Valor. What shall we say of Abraham the Father of the faithful, who with so
much Courage and Generosity undertook, with his trained Servants and Allies, to
pursue the victorious Army, defeated them and rescued his Brother Lot Genesis xiv.
14, 16.
? The Church of God (as well as the World) has had its Worthies nourished up in
the Principles of the true Religion, who have signalized themselves in martial
Exploits, with that Justice and Honor, Courage and Bravery, Conduct and
Success, which perhaps, is scarce to be equaled by the most celebrated Heroes
in the gentile World; such were Moses and Joshua, the Leaders of the Armies of
Israel, and those renouned Champions enrolled in the Catalogue of Believers, by
the Author to the Hebrews, Chap. 11.32, 33, etc. Gideon, Barak, Sampson, Jeptha
and David, who through Faith subdued Kingdoms, wrought Righteousness (or
vindicated the just Cause of God's People against their unreasonable and
tyrannical Oppressors) -- out of Weakness were made Strong, waxed valiant in
Fight, turned to flight the Armies of the Aliens. And of Zion it may be said,
this and that brave Man was born and bred there, who has acquired great Fame
and Renown by their Valor in the Wars of the Lord. And as that Example of
those forementioned Worthies, who were great and eminent Soldiers, reflects an
Honor on the military Office; so it shows that Faith and Piety is not only
consistent with, but greatly befriends martial Courage and Success. For it is
observable, that it was their Faith in God, that Faith which has such a signal
Use and Influence in the spiritual War, to which our Victories over Sin, the
World and the Devil, are peculiarly ascribed; it was that Faith, I say, which
inspired them with that heroic Valor, that enabled them to perform such
notable Exploits. Through Faith they subdued Kingdoms, waxed valiant in Fight,
etc. True Faith in God and his Word, with the Train of Graces that march under
the Conduct of it, Self-denial, Love, Zeal, Hope, Patience, Humility, will not
only fit a Man for doing great and acceptable Service to God, but also embolden
him to face Dangers, and endure Hardships and Adversities, with an
unconquerable Resolution: And having by Faith engaged the Power and Presence of
God by his Spirit within him, and his Providence about him, he can rest
confident and secure, as to the Issue of the Conflict.

Yea, divine Grace many times adds a mavelous Strength and Courage to those
that are of a Temper naturally weak and timorous; who (in this Sense,) out of
Weakness have been made strong. The Gospel speaks Strength and Magnanimity into
the fearful and fainthearted. Isai. 35.4. Say to them that are of a fearful
Heart, be strong, fear not. And the Spirit that goes along with it and breaths
in it, is not a Spirit of Fear, or Cowardice, but a Spirit of Power, of Love,
and of a sound Mind, 2 Timothy 1.7. It Is prophesied, Zech. 12* 8. He that is feeble
among them at that Day shall be as David Divine Grace, (says Mr. Henry there)
makes Children not only Men, but Champions, not only good Soldiers, but great
Soldiers like David Those that were feeble by Nature, have been made strong by
Grace, to encounter the greatest Terrors of the World; witness the Martyrs of
Jesus: Though the Archers shot at them and hated them, and fore grieved them, yet
their Bow abode in Strength* and the Arms of their Hands were made strong by
the Hands of the mighty God of Jacob. It Is surprising to read in Ecclesiastical
Story, the Triumphs of divine Grace over the Power and Malice of Earth and
Hell, even in many Persons of the tenderest Constitution, who with an
invincible Christian Patience and Constancy, have been enabled to meet with
Torments and Death, in all the Forms of Terror that the Malice of Hell could
contrive. Behold, with us, (says one of the Ancients, speaking of the Christian
Martyrs,) The weaker Sex, and the most tender Age, suffer all the Parts of
their Body to be torn and burnt, not out of Necessity, for they might shun it,
but out of Choice, because they believe in God; this is that true Virtue, which
the Philosopher vainly boasts of, but never really possessed. If therefore to
be truly courageous and valiant, is to be able to surmount our Fears, and
despise Dangers, on just and honorable Occasions, we see whence it is we may
be best furnished with true Valor and Magnanimity, namely, from those
Christian Principles by which the noble Army of Martyrs were acted, under the
Conduct of Michael, in the War with the Dragon Rev. xii. 7.
. When in Adherence to the Faith and Hope of the Gospel, and in the Cause of
Virtue and Piety, they could bid Defiance to the greatest Terrors of Sense, and
triumph over all Opposition, with an unshaken Constancy. In a Word, The true
Christian is the true Hero; and they that act the Christian will not fail to
act the Man; all manly Virtues being improved to their highest Perfection by
the Spirit of Christianity.

These Considerations now warrant me, with great Propriety, in Compliance with
the Occasion and Design of this Day, to address this Exhortation to Men of the
military Profession, and particularly to the Honorable Company of the
Artillery, at whose Invitation and Request, I have engaged in the present
Service to declare to them some Part of the divine Counsels. Wherefore,

Honored Sirs! The Exhortation I bring you from the Oracles of God is this,

If, together with military Skill, you would also excel in a truly martial
Spirit, becoming the Profession of a Soldier, Learn to quit your selves like
Men in the Christian Sense, and be strong. Put on, and put forth a Christian
Fortitude and Magnanimity in the Course of your spiritual Warfare; and thus you
will be accomplished in the best Manner for any hazardous Service, if called to
it in a Time of War.

Let me observe, that among the various Changes and Vicissitudes of humane
Affairs, the different and opposite Events that do interchangeably succeed each
other in the Course of humane Life, for which Solomon tells us, there is a Time
and Season alloted by the Degree of Heaven Eccl. iii. 1, 8.
, those which do more eminently affect Nations and Kingdoms, are a Time of War
and a Time of Peace. These take their Turns in their Seasons appointed, and
determined by God, which is an Admonition to us, that as War must be managed
with Views of Peace, so a Time of Peace must be improved to prepare for War.

It is now, blessed be God, a Time of Peace with us, as it has been for some
Years past; and notwithstanding the War, which we have been of late threatened
withal, yet it has pleased God to direct and succeed the public Counsels of
our Nation so far, as not only to preserve the Peace of the British Dominions,
but also through the prudent Mediation of our gracious Sovereign, to give an
hopeful Prospect of an happy Period to the War that has of late Years disturbed
and distressed Europe.

Nevertheless, considering the frequent Changes, incident to the public
Affairs of Nations, it must be owned to be a People's Wisdom and Interest, in a
Time of this profound Tranquillity and Peace, to strengthen and prepare
themselves in the best Manner for War; to be furnished with a good Militia, to
keep alive the martial Genius, and by all proper Means to encourage it, that
they may be in a ready Posture of Defense on the turn of Affairs. For which
Reason, as I heartily concur with those of my Reverend Fathers and Brethren who
have stood here before me, on these anniversary Occasions, in recommending
military Skill and Discipline, so, at the same time, I think it highly proper
and needful, particularly to encourage the keeping up the martial Spirit and
Valor, which is more in Danger of sinking and declining in a Time of Peace,
than bare Skill in the Use of warlike Weapons.

These are two different Things, though they mutually support and befriend each
other; and it is a desirable Thing that those who excel in military Skill,
might also excel in true Valor; and on the contrary, that those who excel in
a Spirit of Valor, might be endowed with equal Skill to guide and manage it;
yet it is known, these do not always go together. We read Psalm. 78.9. The
Children of Ephraim being armed, and carrying Bows, turned back in the Day of
Battle. Though furnished with all warlike Accoutrements, being armed, and
carrying Bows, armed with the Weapons of War then in Use, and well instructed,
no doubt, in the Use of them, yet when it came to a Battle in good earnest,
they made an inglorious Retreat, for want of Spirit and Courage; could not face
the Enemy, but turned back in the Day of Battle. Wherefore, to acquire and
cherish this martial Spirit, to be brave and bold in the Face of Danger, is no
less the Concern of a good Soldier, than to get furnished with Skill in the Art
of War. And since all Occasion of exerting this Spirit of Valor in any
military Service, is now happily prevented by the Peace we enjoy, and through the
great Goodness of God have some Prospect of the Continuance of; I have
therefore thought proper and seasonable to exhort you to keep up the masculine
Spirit in Life and Vigor, by exerting it in all such Instances of Christian
Fortitude, for which our spiritual Warfare administers frequent Occasions, and
which are highly becoming a Christian Soldier.

It is not indeed an hazardous Thing with us, either to undertake a Christian
Profession, as it was in the primitive Times of Christianity, when the ruling
Powers of the World were set in Oppsition to it, or to profess it in its
strictest Purity, free from the corrupt Additions of Man's devising, as it is
at this Day in popish Countries. On the contrary, it is both safe and
honorable. The bare Name and Profession of a Christian is a cheap and easy
Thing, that requires no great Degree of Courage and Resolution; but to live up
to the Majesty and Power of our holy Profession, to bear up against the Stream
of Flesh and Blood, and the corrupt Maxims, Customs, and Examples of a
degenerate World, in a Course of self denying Obedience and Patience, will
still try the Sinews of our Souls, and draw out, and exercise all our spiritual
Strength.

It Is true, through the distinguishing Favor of Heaven, we in this Land are
Strangers to the fiery Trial, and are not called to give a Proof of our
Christian Fortitude and Valor, by resisting unto Blood Heb. xii. 14.
, or sealing our Testimony with our Blood; the Profession and Practice of our
holy reformed Religion, being established and patronized by the civil Authority
from our Beginnings; a Favor which many of our Brethren and Companions in the
Kingdom and Patience of our Lord Jesus Christ, would esteem above all the
Wealth in the World; yet we are not Christians indeed, unless we be, in
Disposition and Purpose, Martyrs for Christ. And there are lesser Conflicts in
which our Christian Manhood and Fortitude is daily put to the Trial,
particularly in such Instances as these, viz.

In striving against Sin; which all are bound to do, that are listed under
Christ's Banner In combating with our own darling Corruptions and Lusts. In
withstanding, restraining, reproving, and testifying against the prevailing
Sins and Vices of others, as the Duty of our several Places requires. In a
conscionable and strict Observance of such Instances of Piety and Devotion, of
Charity and Sobriety, as may be too much out of Fashion in a degenerating Age,
without being ashamed of the Words of Christ, or any Part of his holy Religion,
in an adulterous and sinful Generation Mark viii. 3^.
. In being true and firm to the Principles of Conscience, whatever Hazards we
run, and in Opposition to secular Allurements and Temptations arising from
worldly Interests and Advantages.

In a stable Adherence to a good and just Cause, though it should happen to be
discountenan'd by the many and the mighty.

In a vigorous Prosecution of any reasonable Proposal for the public Good; and
a resolute Self-denial, and postponing our own private Interest to that of the
Public, when the one comes in Competition with the other.

In calming and keeping down the tumultuous Passions under Affronts and
Provocations.

In keeping up a lively Hope in God, and a placid Resignation to his Will under
adverse Occurrences. In getting our Hearts so far raised above the World, both
its Frowns and Flatteries, as to be ready to entertain the worst Events that we
suppose may happen, with a well governed Temper of Mind, in Opposition to
desponding Fears and disquieting Cares.

In these, and other like Instances, the true Magnanimity of a Christian is
tried and discovered; and if in these lesser Conflicts and Trials, our Courage
fails, what shall we do in greater? If thou have run with Footmen and they have
wearied thee, how can thou contend with Horses? If in the Land of Peace thou
art wearied, then how will thou do in the swelling of Jordan? Jer. xii. 5.


Be encouraged then, to play the Man in the constant Course and Exercise of
your spiritual Warfare; that being trained up herein, you may be the better
armed and prepared for more difficult Encounters and Trials which you may be
called forth unto. And for your Direction herein, I can offer nothing more
pertinent, than the important Advices which precede the Text, in the same
Verse, Watch ye, stand fast in the Faith; which are both the Means and
Evidences of spiritual Fortitude. I shall briefly consider and inculcate them
as the Means of promoting and increasing a manly Spirit and Courage, proper to
the Christian and the Soldier. Under the former I shall offer a few Things in
the Nature of Cautions; under the latter, some more positive Advices.

First then, Watch ye; Keep up a wakeful Sense of your Danger, and be always on
your Guard. This Charge belongs to all Christ's Soldiers. His Kingdom in this
World is environed with Enemies; and a Man that has an Enemy must beware how
he sleeps Security is very detrimental, on temporal and spiritual Accounts
Nothing more manifestly tends to throw the Minds of Men into a Consternation
and Confusion, then unlooked for Dangers; when Men are surpised in their
Security, and in no Posture of Defense against sudden Attacks. Let us not be
lulled asleep by our present Peace, as for getting that we are the Objects of
the Envy and Spite of our evil Neighbors; or neglecting such Means of our
Defense, both by Sea and Land, as may render it dangerous to those that are
otherwise sufficiently disposed to invade and molest us when ever an
Opportunity shall occur Remember Laish, a People that dwelt Careless and
Secure, who therefore became an easy Prey to the first Invaders Judges xviii.
7.27.
.

Much greater is the Danger our Security will expose us to on spiritual
Accounts. Our great Adversary the Devil is both vigilent and expert, and has
manifold Advantages against us by Reason of our Weakness, Ignorance,
Unskilfulness, and frequent Inadvertencies, through the multiplicity of our
Diversions, Business, Company, Calling, Employment, and Recreations; and he is
too vigilant an Adversary to loose any of the Advantages he has against us:
what Reason then have we to be constantly on our Guard? Be sober, be vigilant,
because your Adversary the Devil, as a roaring Lion, walks about, seeking
whom he may devour 1 Pet. v. viii.
. And it is our Security and Presumption that leaves us exposed and defenseless
against the Assaults of our spiritual Adversaries.

But that which I aim at under this Head, is to caution you particularly
against those Evils that tend to impair and diminish a Spirit of Fortitude and
Valor.

1. Watch against the Love of Ease and Idleness, or a slothful indolent Temper.
As bodily Exercise contributes to the Strength and Firmness of the bodily
Constitution, so all spiritual Gifts and Endowments, natural or supernatural,
are invigorated and increased by Use and Exercise, but are diminished and fall
into decay by Sloth and Negligence. The Blood of the Soul (as one speaks) runs
out in wasted Time. When Gideon was well employed, he hears the Angel saluting
him, The Lord is with thee thou mighty Man of Valor. Judges vi. 11.12.


2. Watch against all kind of Intemperance. Nothing does more emalculate the
Mind, nor quench the natural Vigor, than the inordinate Indulgence of sinful
Pleasures, Drunkenness and Debauchery. Whoredom and Wine, and new Wine, says
the Prophet, take away the Heart Hos. iv. 11.
. How many gallant Minds have been enfeebled and dispirited, by being dissolved
in Ease, Luxury, Intemperance, and Effeminacy? This Caution is the more to be
regarded, because of the too great Prevalency of this Vice, in Town and
Country, especially on Days of Training, to the Scandal of those military
Exercises, and defeating in a great Measure, the proper Ends of them.

3. Watch against all unseemly Heats, and outbreakings of Passion in Word and
Behavior. This is unmanly, and an Argument of a dangerous weak Mind; whereas
to be able to bridle the Passions, and quell those intestine Commotions, is a
nobler Instance of true Fortitude, than the famed Atchievments of Alexander or
Caesar. To this agrees the Sentence of Solomon, He that is slow to Anger is
better than the mighty, and he that rules his Spirit, than he that takes a
City Prove. xvi. 32.
.

4 Watch against Pride, Ambition, Avarice, and inordinate worldly Cares; which
tend to contract the Spirits, and to narrow up a Man's Views to his own private
Interests, and to draw out the Strength and Vigor of his Soul the same Way;
contrary to that public Spirit, that generous enlarged Charity, that should
inspire and warm the Breast of a Soldier, and engage him to stand in the
Defense of the public Liberties of his Country; and when need requires, to be
courageous, and play the Man for his People, and the City of his God 2 Samuel x.
12.
.

It Is not from a Suspicion that this honorable Company will suffer the Stain
of any of these Vices to cleave to them, that I urge these Things, but rather
that they might be moved to excel in the contrary Graces, and be Examples to
the whole Militia of the Country, in all military Virtue, as well as Skill and
Discipline. Nevertheless, the most confirmed Virtue needs to be thus guarded.
And our blessed Savior saw it requisite to caution his own Disciples against
some of the worst of these Vices; saying to them, Take heed to your selves,
least at any time your Hearts be over charged with Surfeiting and Drunkenness
and the Cares of this Life Luke xxi 34.
. But to proceed to the more positive Advices under the second Head.

2. Stand fast in the Faith; and that by a firm Adherence to the Doctrine of
Faith, a constant Perseverance in the Grace of Faith, and an unshaken Fidelity
and Stedfastness in the Covenant of Faith.

1. Adhere firmly to the Doctrine of Faith, the Gospel Revelation of our
Savior; the great Usefulness whereof in its several Articles, to establish and
embolden the Hearts of Men to encounter Difficulties and Dangers, I must not
insist upon: but I cannot forbear observing that the two grand Articles of
revealed Religion, viz. The Doctrine of a Sinner's Reconciliation to an
offended God by an atoning Mediator, and that of eternal Life hereafter in the
Kingdom of Heaven, seriously improved by Faith, have a peculiar Force above all
the great Dictates of moral Philosophy, to raise a Courage that will hold out
against the most threatening Dangers. A Man conscious to himself of the
Displeasure of his Maker, however he may, in the heat of Blood and Spirits,
rush with a seeming Fearlessness on Dangers and Death, (which yet looks rather
like a brutal Fierceness, than the Courage and Confidence of a Reasonable
Creature, who sedately ponders the Issues of Things) yet let him once entertain
serious Thoughts of that God with whom he is at Variance, and the vast
Preparations of Wrath he has made against the Time of Trouble, against the Day
of Battle and War; and his Courage must needs fail him, and his Heart sink
within him; for can thine Heart endure, or can thine Hands be strong in the Day
that he shall deal with thee? Whereas upon the Terms of a Reconciliation to
God, it is promised, Thou shall not be afraid of Destruction when it comes,
yea, thou shall laugh at Destruction and at Famine, Job 5 21, 22 For those who
are quieted with Heaven's Smiles may bid Defiance to all the terrible Things of
this World. And the Soldier who having his Feet shod with the Preparation of
the Gospel of Peace Ephesians. vi. 15.
, and supported and animated with the Hopes of a better Life after this, which
that Gospel inspires, can with an interpid Courage look the King of Terrors in
the Face, may reasonably be supposed to be best prepared of all Men (Caeteris
Paribus) to face an Enemy in the Field of Battle, with a Presence of Mind not
to be intimidated by all the confused Noise where with every Battle of the
Warrior is carried on, and with Garments rolled in Blood Isai. ix. 5.
.

Therefore adhere to the Principles of revealed Religion; Stand fast in the
Faith. Stand fast in the Gospel of Christ, which is the only solid Ground of
Patience and Fortitude in encountering the Evils that surround us in this our
warfaring State, and of all our Comforts and Hopes living and dying.

And indeed this Exhortation, let me note by the Way, seems peculiarly
seasonable at this Day, when revealed Religion is so openly attacked by Deists
and Libertines, and profane Spirits, that set their Wits and Mouths against
the Heavens. The more secret and subtle Insinuations of Infidelity that appear
in some, and the more open and bold Challenges of bare faced Infidels* in
others of the Books and Writings of the present Age, call upon all Ranks and
Orders to be valiant for the Truth Jer. ix. 3.
, and to contend earnestly for the Faith once delivered unto the Saints Jud. 3.
; a Faith that has been in such a remarkable and convictive Manner attested
from Heaven, and sealed with the Blood of so many Thousand Martyrs, and which
is the most powerful Instrument of beating down the Kingdom of Sin and Satan,
and of advancing the Kingdom and Glory of God in this lower World, and the only
effectual Means of recovering Mankind, from their brutish Degeneracy, and the
Charter of all our great Hopes Surely this is a Faith worth contending for,
with Zeal and Earnestness!

2. Persevere constantly in the Grace of Faith, without which the Doctrine of
Faith will be but of little Use. Our Faith is mainly struck at by our spiritual
Enemies, because all our other Graces, wherein our Strength and Armor of
Defense lies, live or die with it: Let Faith therefore be kept up in a lively
Exercise. It is the Property of this Grace to quiet and confirm the Heart
against all Fears; and to enable us to stand our Ground against the Wiles of
Satan, and his fiery Darts; and to keep our selves untainted from the
Impurities, Lusts, and Temptations of this present World, and also to fortify
our Minds against visible Dangers and Terrors. It was the Faith of those great
Heroes mentioned Heb. 11. that enabled them (as was observed) to triumph over
the armed Powers of their visible Enemies, as well as to persevere victoriously
in their spiritual Warfare. Faith looks at that God who is invisible, and sets
him as present before us, and resting itself on his almighty Power, Wisdom,
Goodness, and Truth, enables the Believer to triumph before the Battle. If with
David, we fix the Eye of our Faith on God, and can say of him by an
appropriating Act of Faith, The Lord is my Light and my Salvation whom shall I
fear? the Lord is the Strength of my Life, of whom shall I be afraid, Psalm 27
1. Then, though with him, we forecast in our Minds the most amazing Dangers, this
our Faith will furnish us with a Courage to surmount them, as it follows, Ver 3
Though an Host should encamp against me, my Heart shall not fear, though War
should rise against me, in this will I be confident. Arm your selves therefore
with this Faith, which reconciles and reunites this Soul to God through Christ,
and engages his gracious Presence and Protection, which will afford an holy
Security and Confidence in Cases of the greatest Danger and Extremity. God is
our Refuge and Strength -- therefore will not we fear though the Earth be
removed Psalm. xlvi. 1, 2.
.

3. Abide faithful and steadfast in the Covenant of Faith. The Gospel is
propounded to us in the Form of a Covenant, which is the Rule and Warrant of
our Faith; wherefore to stand fast in the Faith is to continue true and
faithful to God in the Duties of the Covenant, as well as to rely on his Truth
and Faithfulness in the Promise of it. And a true Heart is a necessary
Requisite to a full Assurance of Faith Heb. x. 22.
. And there is nothing that does more effectually ruin Men's Confidence, and put
a damp on their Spirits, than Conscience of Guilt and Perfidiousness. The
Reason why the Children of Ephraim, that warlike Tribe, being armed, and
carrying Bows turned back in the Day of Battle, Psalm 78 9. is assigned in the
next Words, They kept not the Covenant of God, and refused to walk in his Laws,
Verse. 10 Whereas on the contrary, nothing will give a Man Boldness and
Confidence in the Sight of God and Man, like a good Conscience toward God;
this will make him like an Iron Pillar, and a brazen Wall, and enable him to
lift up his Face without Spot, to be steadfast, and not fear. The wicked flee
when "no Man pursues, but the Righteous are bold as a Lion Prove. xxviii. 1
. Wherefore adhere faithfully to God and his Service, and he shall strengthen
your Hearts, and the Conscience of your Integrity, will minister a Courage that
is capable of enduring the sharpest Trials. But after all, it is fit that we be
minded that our Strength lies not in our selves, but must be derived from
Heaven by Faith and Prayer, and maintained by continual Supplies thence. Be
strong therefore in the Lord, and in the Power of his Might Ephesians. vi. x.
.

These Directions, it is confessed, are, according to the primary Design of the
Apostle, of more general Use to all Christians in all their spiritual
Conflicts; yet we see also, by the few Hints I have given, how peculiarly
Serviceable and Useful they are to raise and maintain a truly masculine Courage
and Boldness, proper to an accomplished Soldier, which confirms the
Observation, That true military Valor is best supported by the Principles of
Christian Fortitude.

All that now remains is to point out and press the general Intendment of my
Text, with Respect to Christians of all Ranks and Degrees. Let us be strong,
and quit our selves like Men, in the Management of our spiritual Warfare. Our
Baptism is our military Oath to be true and faithful to our great Leader and
Commander, the Captain of our Salvation, in fighting his Battles against the
Powers of the Kingdom of Darkness, which is a Kingdom founded in Sin and
Rebellion against God. Let us therefore with manly Vigor and Resolution oppose
our own Sins and Lusts that war in our Members, and war against our Souls, and
suppress the Insurrection and Rebellion of carnal Affections against the Rule
of Reason and Grace. The Contest here is for the Dominion of a reasonable
Creature, that the manly Part of our Natures may not be enslaved to the brutal;
that Reason and Conscience may not be overborn by impertuous sensual Appetites,
Lusts and Passions. In striving for the Mastery of these, let us play the Man,
and fight, not as beating the Air; but let us keep under our Bodies, and bring
them into Subjection 1 Cor. ix 26, 27.
, that they may not hinder our Improvements in the Virtues and Perfections of
the spiritual Life. And let us in our several Places, with like Vigor and
Resolution, set our selves to oppose the prevailing Corruptions of the present
Age; the Iniquities that abound and spread among us in a fearful Degree;
Irreligion and Profaneness, Swearing, Cursing, Lying, Sabbath Profanation,
Pride, Licentiousness, Injustice, Violence and Contention, Tale-bearing and
Slandering, Idleness, Luxury, Fornication and Uncleanness, Drunkenness and
Intemperance. These Enemies breaking in like a Torrent on our Land, threaten to
spoil us of all that is dear and valuable to us, as Men and Christians, as they
provoke the great God to become our Enemy, and to Fight against us with his
Judgments. A War with these is necessary to our Peace with God, on whose Favor
our all depends; and to the prolonging of our outward Peace and Tranquillity.

Wherefore, since we are now, through the merciful Indulgence of Heaven, at
Liberty from other Wars, let us engage in the vigorous Prosecution of this War;
a War which is unexceptionably just and honorable, and highly agreeable to all
Christian Charity; a War that requires no Expense of Blood or Treasure, and in
which we may be confident that we shall have no Enemies, but such as will be
found to Fight even against God. Let us take Courage then and act like Men,
like Champions: Every one has his Part to act in this War, Magistrates,
Ministers and People. Magistrates, by enacting and executing good Laws against
Profaneness and Immorality, by brandishing the Sword of Justice for the Terror
of evil doers. Ministers, by plying the spiritual Artillery of the Gospel
against the strong Holds of Sin and Satan, and by lifting up their Voice like a
Trumpet, as God's Heralds, proclaiming his Wrath against the Ungodliness and
Unrighteousness of Men, and as his Ambassadors soliciting their Consent to the
Gospel Treaties of Peace and Reconciliation, and by taking Care of the due
Administration of the Laws of Christ's Kingdom, for keeping up the Power of
Godliness, and extirpating Scandals and Corruptions. And the People in general,
by coming in to the Help of the Lord against the Mighty; by appearing on the
Lord's Side, in the Service of his Cause, and the Interests of his Kingdom, by
their Prayers and serious Endeavors in the Work of personal and family
Reformation.

But nothing of all this will be likely to be effected to any considerable
Purpose, unless we put on Strength and Courage and a manly Resolution, and
exert our selves with a lively Zeal and Vigor. Permit me therefore to enforce
this Exhortation, with the exciting Words of the Prophet, in a Case not
altogether unlike to this Hag. ii. 4, 5.
, Now be strong O Zerubbabel, be strong O Joshua, and be strong all ye People
of the Land, and fear ye not, but be assured, that if your Hearts are engaged
in this good Work and Warfare, the Lord of Hosts is with you* to own, assist,
and strengthen you, and to crown your Endeavors, if not with all the desired
Success, yet at least with his Favor and gracious Acceptance.

Now to close all with some animating Considerations to the good Soldiers of
Jesus Christ, who are engaged in this spiritual Warfare. Be strong, and quit
you like Men For consider,

First, The Necessity of this Warfare. Urgent Extremities, it is observed, will
inspire Courage into a Coward, and even compel him to play the Man. This is our
Case; there is an absolute Necessity of our striving for the Mastery. If we
conquer, we shall obtain the Crown, but if we suffer our selves through Sloth
and Cowardice to be overborn by the Enemies that war against our Souls, we
shall (as Castaways) become the Scorn of Angels and Saints. If we suffer our
selves without Reluctance, to be carried down the Stream of our corrupt
Inclinations, there is no Remedy, but we must fall under the Power of the
second Death; for it is only the victorious Christian that is exempted: He that
overcomes shall not be hurt of the second Death Re^. ii. 11.
.

Consider again, If you persevere in a manful Resistance, you shall certainly
overcome. Resist the Devil, and he will flee from you Jam. iv. 7.
. Here the Battle is always to the strong; though it be not so in other Wars
Eccl. ix. 11.
Stand your Ground in a Dependence on the Power and Aids of your glorious
Captain, and with a Resolution not to yield, and you shall infallibly get the
Day, and though your Enemies may inveagle or threaten, they cannot hurt you: None
every died in this War, none shall die eternally in fighting Christ's Battles;
adhere faithfully to his Cause and Interest, and he has assured you of the
Victory, he will bring you off Conquerors at last, and make you more than
Conquerors. Romans xvi. 20. 1 Cor. xv. 5, 7.
Consider also, by such a resolved manful Resistance, you will recover the true
Honor and Dignity of the humane Nature, and the excellent Prerogatives of it,
that have been basely betrayed by Sin By every effectual Resistance, by every
act of Self-denial, and laborious Striving against the Opposition you meet with
from Satan, or your own Corruptions, in a Course of Duty, you will rise up more
and more toward a State of Perfection, Liberty, Peace and Joy.

Again consider, Who are the Spectators of this Warfare. Men that are put upon
the Trial of their Strength or Skill, before proper Judges, to whose good
Opinion they are ambitious to commend themselves, will be sure to do their
best, and exert their utmost Endeavors. We are now upon our Trial, and God and
Christ and holy Angels are Spectators of the Conflict; and think what a
pleasing Thing it is to the great God, to see his poor fallen Creatures
struggling with the Opposition that attends them in a Course of Virtue, in
aspiring after the Perfection of their reasonable Natures, and so pursuing the
End of their Beings! What a Pleasure to the Lord Jesus, to see the Power of his
Grace magnified in the Weakness of a Believer, when he is enabled thereby to
stand firm against the Attacks of his ghostly Adversaries, to see his Strength
put forth to his Praise in and by Babes and Sucklings, for the stilling of the
Enemy and the Avenger! Psalm viii. 2.
Holy Angels also, who rejoice at a Sinner's Repentance Luke xv. 10.
, and at every Degree of his Recovery to God, look on with Joy and Pleasure,
and are ready to congratulate your Successes, and to welcome you to their happy
Regions, to take Possession of the vacant Seats of those apostate Spirits, who
do now so enviously and maliciously oppose your Progress thither.

Consider further, That God, Christ, and Angels are not only Spectators of your
Conflicts, but also engaged to be your powerful Assistants therein. And if God
be for you, who can be against you Romans viii. 31.
? And you have the Mercies and Compassions, the Grace and Spirit, the
Sufferings, Victories and Triumphs of your Lord Redeemer, his Satisfaction and
Intercession, to depend on for your Encouragement. And the Angels are under him
ministering Spirits for your Assistance Heb. i. 14.
. Those immortal Warriors are always ready to befriend you with their Aids. On
which Accounts you may justly conclude, that those that are with you, are far
more and mightier than all that are against you 2 Kin. vi. 16. 1 John iv. 4.
.

Lastly, Consider the glorious Reward promised to the victorious Christian; a
Crown of Righteousness, a Crown of Life and Glory 2 Timothy iv. 8. 1 Pet. v. 4.
. The Saints who have finished their Warfare, are represented in the glorious
triumphant State, clothed with white Robes, with Crowns on their Heads, and
Palms in their Hands, ministering before the Throne to the supreme King, among
the heavenly Courtiers Rev. vii. 9, 15.
But alas! all Language fails to describe the Glories that encircle the
victorious Christian; and Spirits that dwell in mortal Flesh are too weak and
narrow to conceive of the Grandeur of Heaven's Triumphs. The holy Ghost is
pleased to assist our Imaginations by sensible Representations, and Allusions
to earthly Triumphs, which yet Reason teaches, must be poor Things in
comparison of the heavenly. We must realize by Faith what Eye has never seen,
nor Ear heard. It is enough that our blessed Savior has promised, Be thou
faithful unto the Death, and I will give thee a Crown of Life Rev. ii. 10.
.

Be strong then and have a good Heart on it, ye Soldiers of Jesus Christ! Abide
true and faithful to your Captain, persevere in your Conflict with Sins,
Corruptions, Temptations, Afflictions, Crosses, and Oppositions, which you must
expect during your militant State, with Courage and Constancy unto the Death;
then he will give you the Victory and the Crown, when your Warfare shall be
fully accomplished, all Enemies subdued, and Death (the last of them) swallowed
up in Victory; and you shall put on the Garland of Immortality, and live and
reign with him in a glorious undisturbed Peace and Rest for evermore!

FINIS.

