AN ESSAY CONCERNING The RESTORATION OF Primitive Christianity, In a Conduct
Truly Pious and Religious.

The Third Edition with Additions.

By Thomas Beaven.

NEWPORT, Rhode Island: Reprinted by JAMES FRANK^

THE PREFACE.
THE Love of God and of the Souls of Men, prevailed with me to write the
following Treatise, to pay the Debt I have long owed to my fellow Creatures; in
entreating them to enter into their own Hearts, and learn Piety and Religion of
God himself, who speaks there by His Spirit as never Man spoke; who speaks
there to much better Purpose, with clearer Evidence and Demonstration than Men
can speak; that their Faith might not stand in the Wisdom of Men, but in the
Power of God 1 Cor. ii. 5.
.

Which is the only Remedy, as I apprehend, for restoring Piety and Religion to
its primative Purity and Beauty, in an Age wherein the excessive Pretension to
Power, in some of the Clergy (perhaps not of the best Lives) have made a great
many Men of excellent Capacities too loose, and indifferent unto Piety and
Religion.

It Is sad to think, that because some high Pretenders to Religion, who are of
bad Lives and Principles, would exercise Dominion over the Faith and
Consciences of others, and turn Religion into worldly Riches and Immunities,
make Gain their Godliness, and the Lust of Power their earnest Pursuit; (I say
it is sad to think) that therefore Religion, the most noble and necessary Thing
in the World, should fall below the Regards of Men.

Because Men of bright Parts and great Ingenuity, have by the Force and Power
of Reason baffled those exorbitant Claims; to think therefore God does not
afford Men any superior Light and Aid; this is to run into the other Extreme.

For though none of the real Injunctions of Religion and Piety are, or ever can
be contrary to right Reason, yet the common Reason of Man stands in Need of
Light and Help from Heaven, for attaining the true Knowledge and Practice of
Religion and Piety; as the great Lock acknowledges, in the Quotations I have
made from him in my fifth Chapter. Which Light and Help from Heaven, is so far
from being destructive or repugnant to Reason, that it is the divine Spirit
which enlightens and influences the noble Faculty of Reason, to the higest
Pitch of Knowledge and Certainty in heavenly Things, and gives it the greatest
Repose, Delight and Satisfaction: Nevertheless, Reason and the Spirit of God
remain always, two several Powers and Principles in Man, of different and
distinct Natures, the one Humane and the other Divine. And what Lock says of
Revelation, as contained in the Scripture, viz. that many are beholden to
Revelation, who do not acknowledge it. Vol. ii. Fol. 535. May as truly be said
of the Light and Influence of the divine Spirit in the Hearts of Men.

For Men sometimes finding clear Discoveries of God in their Minds, and of
their Duty to him on the one Hand; and of the Darkness, Impurity and
Unpreparedness of their own Hearts for his Service, on the other Hand; are apt
to impute those Discoveries to the Light and Activity of their own Reason; or
not to acknowledge that they are beholden to the immediate Revelation of God's
Spirit within them for such Discoveries; when one would think nothing in it
self can be clearer, than that Darkness cannot give Light for the Discovery of
it self: For whatsoever does make manifest is Light Ephesians. v. 13.
.

Reason corrupted and depraved by vicious Habits, cannot discover the
Corruption and Depravity of it self, without Light from Heaven, gives it such
Sight; much less can it without such Help know God and divine Things. It was
all purely the Work of Grace (says the great Lock) for they were all dead in
Trespasses, and Sins, and could do nothing, not make one Step or the least
Motion toward it -- it is God here (says he) does all by Revelation, of what
they could never discover by their own natural Faculties -- and being thus
quickened by the Spirit (says he) may as Men alive, work if they will. Vol.
iii. Fol. 359.

To deny Men the Influences of the divine Spirit, is to leave them without God
in the World. To say the Light of humane Reason without Light from any Thing
above it, is the Light of God's Spirit, or the only Light that is in Man, is to
take one of the most effectual Courses that can be, to overturn the Christian
Religion, which is founded on divine Revelation, and can only be savingly
understood and practiced by the Influence of the same Spirit which gave it
Being. It casts a very ill Aspect on Devotion, and directly and unavoidably
tends to render all Addresses to God, for Light and Help from him ridiculous
and insignificant: For if we our selves without any immediate Influence and Aid
from him, are able by the Exercise of our own natural Powers and Faculties, to
know and practice our whole Duty, to what Purpose do we ask Light and Aid from
him?

This Scheme tends to take off all Dependence upon God, and the Light and
Tuition of his holy Spirit, for Understanding and Strength; and to bring Men to
depend on themselves and their own Sufficiency; the fatal Consequence of which
too much appears in the World already, in the loose and vicious Lives of Men;
and is too likely to appear in a greater Degree, unless Men can be persuaded to
forsake the evil Ways of their own Hearts, address themselves to God, and
depend upon, and become Subject to the Light and Power of his good Spirit in
their own Souls.

It was therefore my principal Design in the following Undertaking, to set
before the Eyes of Men, and make it as plain to them as possibly I could, that
the Light of their Spirit and of God's Spirit are of different and distinct
Natures and Kinds. That their own natural Powers and Faculties alone are not
adequate for attaining to the Knowledge and Practice of true Piety and
Religion; and that therefore they must apply themselves to God for Light and
Help from Heaven, who is ready to shine into their Hearts 2 Cor. iv, 6.
, and to work in them, to will and to do of his own good Pleasure Phil. ii.
12.13.
, if they will but withdraw their Hearts from this World and turn them to him,
that he may purge them from evil, and dispose them to Virtue and the Love of
Himself; and prepare them for such divine Sensations of his Goodness, as will
fill them with inconceiveable Delights, with Joys unspeakable and full of Glory
1 Pet. i. 8.
In Comparison of which all the Pleasures of this World are Nullities and
Vanity.

I shall only add, that on the various Subjects treated of in the following
Pages, I have endeavored, according to the best Light I had, to speak of them,
as clearly and distinctly as I could (which is all that can be expected from
me) that the Reader might form, with as much Ease as possible, right Idea's
thereof; and from thence take Occasion, if he shall be piously and religiously
inclined, to make Trial of the inward Ways of Virtue and taste and see that the
Lord is good and gracious Psa. xxxiv. 8. 1 Pet. ii. 3.
.

May it please Almighty God to make this small Tract of such Use to some Souls,
and I shall think it Satisfaction enough for all my Labor and Pains therein.
To that End I commend my Re^ to the Conduct and Guidance ^t his Good and Holy
Spirit.

THE CONTENTS.
CHap. I. Of the Reason and Design of Piety and Religion. Chap. II. Of
Salvation by Jesus Christ. Chap. III. Of the Power and Operation of the Holy
Ghost. Chap. IV. Of the Necessity of divine Illumination, and that the Light
and Operation of God's Spirit, and the Light and Operation of Man's Spirit are
different and distinguished the one from the other. Chap V. Containing some
Testimonies of modern Authors, of different Persuasions, to the Truths
maintained in the foregoing Chapter. Chap. VI. Of the Freedom and Liberty of
Man, etc. Chap. VII. Of Reason. Chap. VIII. Of Prayer. Chap. IX. Of Preaching.
Chap. X. Of the spiritual Baptism of Christ, and his divine Supper. Chap. XI.
Of the Possibility and Necessity of keeping the Laws of God in this Life, by
the Assistance of the Grace of God. The CONCLUSION.
AN ESSAY Concerning the Restoration of Primitive Christianity, etc.
CHAP. I. Of the Reason and Design of Piety and Religion.
THERE is nothing more becoming rational Creatures, than an early and constant
Consideration of the Cause and Design of their Being; how they came to have
Existence in this World, and for what End.

It is preposterous to think that our Existence was the Effect of mere Chance
and Accident. The wonderful Order and Contrivance of the Parts, of which Man
and the whole World of Beings are constituted; and the Support and Subsistence
of such an innumerable Company of Beings, in such Beauty and Harmony, as is
evidently maintained in the Universe; prove nothing less, than, that the same
is the Effect and Design, of incomprehensible Wisdom. So that it seems
impossible for any Man who gives himself the Liberty of thinking, to doubt the
Existence of a Being who made, and sustains, such an infinite Number of
Creatures: Which Being we justly call Almighty God. So that hence the Cause of
our Being is clearly manifest.

The next thing to be considered, is, what we may reasonably conclude, this
infinitely wise, and Almighty Being, designed in the Production of Mankind.

Can it reasonably be thought, that he intended any thing less than their
Felicity according to their several Capacities, as well as his own Glory? That
Man whom he has made the noblest of all his Creatures, here on Earth, endowed
with reason and Understanding, was not in an especial Manner, designed to be a
Partaker of the Fruition, and Felicity of his Maker?

That, Man, as to his Body, is provided for in a Degree above the Beasts of the
Field, the Fowls of the Air, the Fishes of the Sea, and all other animate
Beings, who have the Life of Sensation, whom they all fear in Virtue of the
natural Dominion God has given him over them, will, I doubt not, be readily
agreed; and that he consists of Body and Soul, an outward and an inward Man,
endowed with proper Senses adapted to the Knowledge of Things external and
visible; and a Mind, Soul, or intellectual Spirit, with inward Senses, suited
and adapted to the Preception and Enjoyment of internal and spiritual Objects,
is evident: For the Accommodation and Felicity whereof, it is most reasonable to
believe, that God in his infinite Goodness has made plentiful Provision.

For can it be thought that the infinite and gracious God, should make less
Provision for our Souls, than for our Bodies; that he who has so richly
provided, for our outward Man, should neglect the better and nobler Part of us,
our Souls? that He who has provided a beautiful External World for the Pleasure
and Entertainment of the Senses of our outward Man, should not also have
provided, a much more beautiful and glorious World, for the Pleasure and
Entertainment of the superior Senses of our Inward Man?

For as the Senses of the inward Man, must needs be as much more excellent than
those of the outward Man, as the inward Man is more excellent than the outward;
so consequently, must the Objects of Sensation of the former be much more
excellent than the Objects of Sensation of the latter.

These Considerations afford a solid Foundation, for a noble Pursuit of true
Religion, and the attaining the Knowledge, of the things of the heavenly
Kingdom; for when Men are fully persuaded, that they have inward Senses suited
and adapted to the Knowledge of God, and Enjoyment of him, they will not (if
they consult their own Interest) set their Hearts on the short lived Pleasures,
and Enjoyments of this World, which we every Day see to be exceeding transitory
and uncertain; but being as it were loose and indifferent, as to the Things of
this Life, will ardently seek a divine Sensation, of the Pleasures and
Enioyments of the spiritual Kingdom, called in the sacred Writings, The Kingdom
of God; which will afford them more satisfaction and delight, than, the
Increase of the Corn, Wine, and Oil, of the Earth can do.

We are to be here but a very little Time, and it is hard to think that, that
noble and excellent Part of us our Souls or inward Man, endowed with such
wonderful and extensive Capacities, which nothing less than the Knowledge and
Enjoyment of God himself can truly and completely satisfy, will be dissolved
with our Bodies; though were it to be so, which is entirely irrational to think,
from the nature of Things; yet a Life in this World, in which, those noble
Powers and Faculties of the Soul, are enlightened and actuated by the Divine
Spirit, and brought into a real Sensation, of the Things of the heavenly
Kingdom, whereby our evil Inclinations and Passions, which give us so much
uneasiness, while they are predominant, would be brought under and mortified;
and the Love of God and our Neighbor, a quiet and serene Mind and Conscience,
one of the greatest Blessings on Earth, will naturally ensue; such a Life
cannot but be the most desirable and delightful. And therefore it may very
well be said, that, Godliness has the Promise of the Life that now is, as well
as, of that which is to come 1 Timothy iv. 2.
.

It has been too much, more is the pity, the Design of a Generation of Men,
who have called themselves God's Priests or Ministers, among Heathens,
Mahometans, Jews, and Christians, to render Religion very mysterious, and
thereby themselves more necessary, than there is just Occasion for; which they
have improved to the accumulating the Power, and Riches of this World to
themselves; to the great scandal and Damage of true Religion; and to the
exceeding Discouragement of the Pursuit of divine Knowledge, and a true Sense
of God and Goodness, among Mankind. Erecting a Dominion over the Consciences of
the Laity, and dealing out to them such Creeds and Systems of Religion as they
thought fit, in the several Parts of the World where they had Power, which the
unthinking Part of Mankind have been obliged to receive, on peril of the Loss
of the Good Things of this Life, and as far as in them lay Damnation in the
Life which is to come.

Though at the same Time nothing can well be plainer, than, that the Knowledge of
the Christian Religion, is adapted to Men of inferior, as well as superior
Capacities, the Souls of the former, being as precious in the Eyes of God, and
as capable of enjoying him, as the latter. And therefore it is, that as God
affords Mankind, an external Luminary, the Sun in the Firmament for their
Bodies, by which Medium Men may see the Things of this World, without the Help
of the Magistrate; So he also in his great Mercy affords, an internal Luminary,
The Sun of Righteousness, for their Minds; whereby Men may see the Things of
God, and of the World to come, without the Help of Ministers.

It is true that the Ministers of Religion, themselves, being turned to God,
have been, and still are of great Use, in turning People to this Light of God
in their Souls; advising them to open their inward Eyes to it, and to walk
therein; that they may know and understand for themselves; and feel in
themselves the blessed and divine Sensations, of God in Christ reconciling them
to himself; and taste of the Sweetness and Love of God, in turning from
Darkness, from Ignorance, and evil Works; exhorting them to exercise those
noble Powers and Faculties of their Souls, under the Influence of the divine
Spirit, in their own Hearts; whereby they may come to know the Will, Mind, and
Law of God, to themselves, and not p^n their Faith upon any Man, Councils or
Synods of Men, but only upon the Holy Ghost, and the Sacred Scripture, which
proceeded from it. And they who have the Benefit of this Holy Writing, which
was wrote by the Movings of the Holy Ghost 2 P^t. i 21.
, will by the same Spirit, if they duly apply to it, come to understand so much
of the Scripture as is necessary for their Salvation.

It was about 2400 Years after the Creation of the World, before Mankind had
any external written Law, for the Rule and Conduct of their Lives, so far as
appears by either sacred or profane History; in all which Time Mankind,
generally speaking, had only for their Rule of Faith and Manners the external
Creation as a Monitor to their outward Senses, for Evidence of the Reality and
Certainty of the Existence of the Supreme Being; and the internal Impressions,
God by his divine Spirit made upon the Capacities and Powers of their Souls, or
inward Man; and perhaps some of them oral Traditions delivered from Father to
Son.

'The Love and Favour' (says the memorable John Hales in his Golden Remains pa.
1) which it pleased God to bear our Fathers before the Law, so far prevailed
with him, as that without any Books and Writings, by familiar and friendly
conversing with them and communicating himself unto them, he made them receive
and understand his Laws: Their inward Conceits and intellectuals being after a
wonderful Manner, as it were, figured and charecter'd (as St. Basil expresses
it) by his Spirit, so that they could not but see, and consent unto, and
confess the Truth of them. Which Way of Manifesting his Will, unto many other
gracious Privileges which it had, above that which in after Ages came in Place
of it, had this added, that it brought with it unto the Man, to whom it was
made, a Preservation against all Doubt and Hesitancy, and a full Assurance,
both who the Author was, and how far his intent and Meaning reached. We that
are their Offspring ought, as St. Chrysostom tells us, so to have demeaned our
selves, that it might have been with us as it was with them, that we might have
had no need of writing, no other Teacher but the Spirit, no other Books but our
Hearts, no other Means to have been taught the Things of God.

And then when God, because of the Transgressions of the Jews, committed his
Will to writing in Tables of Stone on Mount Sinai, until the Seed (Christ)
should come Gal. iii. 19.
, who were but a very small Part of Mankind, and afterward inhabited but a
small Tract of Land, at the Head of the Mediteranean Sea; the rest of Mankind,
were still left to the same Means for their Conduct and Behavior, as they had
before.

And though God added to the Seed of Abraham an external written Law, yet it is
inconsistent with His Goodness, to think that the other Means, which He then
afforded the rest of Mankind, which was the only Means that all the World had
before, to know and do his Will, were not sufficient, for their pleasing Him,
and being happy; especially if we consider, that the Ten Commandments,
contained in the two Tables of Stone, brought down by Moses from Mount Sinai,
are but a kind of Transcript of the moral Duties, wrote by the Finger of God,
in the fleshly Tables of the Hearts of Mankind in general Romans ii. 14, 15. 2
Cor. iii. 3. Jer. xxxi. 31. Heb. viii 10. and x. 16.
.

CHAP. II. Of Salvation by Jesus Christ.
GOD did upon the Fall and Disobedience of Man, inform him of a Savior, as is
generally understood by these Words, viz. I will put Enmity between thee (the
Serpent) and the Woman; and between thy Seed, and her Seed; it shall bruise thy
Head Genesis iii. 15.
. Which Seed here called the Seed of the Woman, because as concerning the
Flesh, in the fullness of Time, (the time appointed by God) He viz. Christ was
to be born of a Woman, did doubtless then exist when this Promise was made, and
had so done as to his Divinity from Eternity; and which Seed, properly the Seed
of God, has been accordingly sown in the Hearts of all Adam's posterity, to
bruise, bring down, and destroy the Seed and Power of Satan there: and good Men
in all Ages, who have attended to its influence and Operations on the Reason,
Understanding, and Faculties of their Souls, and have been subject to the Law
and Regulations, it would introduce, bring in, and establish there, have been
Witnesses of the Power and Force thereof, To deliver them from the Bondage of
Corruption; to set them free from the Law (or Power) of Sin and Death Romans
viii. 2.
. Whereby they have been brought to experience Peace and Joy from God in their
own Hearts; which transcendent Delights, infinitely surpass all the Pleasures
of this World.

In due Time this Seed took Flesh in the Womb of the Virgin Mary, according to
Scripture Luke i. 31. Gal. iii. 19. and iv. 4.
. Which it is reckoned was about 4000 Years after the Creation of the World; was
born in Bethlehem Mat ii. 1.
in the Land of Judea, did many mighty Miracles, among the Jews, to convince
them that He was the promissed Messiah, whose Coming they were then in full
Expectation of; lived a most exemplary Life; taught a most excellent and
heavenly Doctrine, recorded by the 4 Evangelists; submitted to the shameful
Death of the Cross, to make Atonement and Propitiation for the Sins of the
whole World Romans v. 11. 1 John ii. 2.
. (So that all who lived before that Offering was made, as well as they who
have lived since that, were subject to this Seed and Light in their Hearts,
have had the Benefit of that One Offering:) He was buried, and the third Day
rose again from the Dead, according to the Scriptures 1 Cor. xv. 4.
. and was conversant with his Disciples about 40 Days concerning the Things of
the Kingdom of God Acts i 3.
, and the great Work he had for them to do in this World; which he commanded
them not to enter upon, till they had received the Power of the Holy Ghost Acts
i 4 to 8.
Col. iii 1.
, which alone was adequate to the Undertaking, and which he ordered them to
wait for at Jerusalem; and then he was taken up into Heaven Acts i 11.
, and set at the right Hand of God the Father Ephesians. i. 20.
, where He ever lives to make Intercession for them that come unto God by him
Heb. vii. 25.
. By whom God will judge the World in Righteousness, in the Day he has
appointed Acts xvii. 31.
; when all that are in the Graves shall hear His Voice, and shall come forth,
they that have done good unto the Resurrection of Life, and they that have done
evil unto the Resurrection of Damnation John v. 28, 29.
.

CHAP. III. Of the Power and Operation of the Holy Ghost.
ACcordingly as the Apostles were met with one Accord in one P^ace, at
Jerusalem the Holy Ghost came upon them, and they were all filled with it, and
began to speak with other Tongues, ^as the Spirit gave them Utterance Acts ii
3, 4.
. And thus having received the Gift of the Holy Spirit as Ministers, they
preached and taught the things concerning the Kingdom of God far and near, as
they were led by the divine Spirit; which Kingdom they now saw and knew to be a
spiritual Kingdom, contrary to what they had before thought of an earthly and
worldly Kingdom; and they, as their Lord and Master before them, were truly
received by such only as submitted to the Teachings and Drawings of God the
Father, in their own Hearts, John vii. 44, 45.
, enlightening and quickening the Powers and Faculties of their own Souls. For
though the Miracles the Lord Jesus and his Apostles did among Men, were
sufficient to confirm the Truth of the Gospel Mission, and to evidence their
being sent from God; yet as their teaching was by and from the divine Spirit,
so 'twas not possible that the same should take effect unto Salvation, in them
who heard, but as the same Spirit enlightened and wrought upon the Intellects
and Powers of the Souls of them who heard; by turning their Thoughts and Minds
inward, to attend the purifying Work and Power of the heavenly Kingdom within
them Luke xvii. 21.
. And this Way, and by this Means, the true and saving Faith of the Lord Jesus
Christ, then was, and ever will be received and maintained by Mankind. And all
Notions, Systems and Creeds of Christianity, ever did, and ever will prove
emp^y and unprofitable to the Souls of Men without it.

Hence the Fruitlessness of any Ministry, not brought forth and conducted by
the divine Spirit, in a Heart washed from Wickedness, and created a new by the
divine Word, does very easily appear; And to how little purpose it is to send
Men to Universities and Academies, to give them humane Learning only, and reach
them School Divinity, to make them Ministers of Christ. A humane Qualification
for a divine Vocation. Oh preposterous! H^re is the Origin of the principal
Mischief, Confusion, and Damage, which Christianity has sustained since the
primitive Ages of it; Men puffed up with humane or School Divinity, have
undertook to teach the Things of God's Kingdom, the heavenly Doctrine, to which
they were Strangers; to expound the Holy Writings with unholy Hearts and Hands;
to make mysterious the plain and easy Doctrines of (...) and his Apostles; to
compose humane Systems and Creeds, and then fill the World where they have
Power, with Bitterne^, Rage, Persecution, fire and Faggot, if their Dictates
are not received. Alas poor Christianity, how exceedingly has thy amiable
Visage been marred by these Things. If ever thou recover'st thy self, it must
be by thy Ministers coming to the Lord Jesus Christ, The Minister of the
Sanctuary, and of the true Tabernacle which the Lord pitched and not Man Heb.
viii, 2.
; and waiting inwardly, upon the Operation of his divine Spirit in their own
Hearts; to be purified and sanctified; and then haing received a Gift from Him
to minister, they are to attend on the Directions and Motions of such divine
Gift for Doctrine and Matter; and Minister the same of the Ability which God
gives 1 P^t. v. 11.
. Not for Filthy Lu^re, but of a ready Mini^; neither as being Lords over God's
Heritage, but being ensamples (of Christian Virtue and Humility) to the Flock 1
Pet. v. 2, 3.
. And the Hearers also must use diligence in coming together to worship God,
and when met, they are to retire to, and wait upon, the divine Grace and Light
of God in their own Hearts, to receive a true Sense of the Condition and State
of their own Souls, and have a Sight of their several Wants, and then heartily
to close with the Operation of the divine Grace in themselves, for the working
evil Inclinations and Habits out of their own Souls; and bringing them to live
soberly, Righteously, and Godly in this present World Tit. ii. 12.
.

This is the Way for Men to become Ministers of Christ indeed, and also to be
good Subjects to Princes and Governors; to mind the Business of God's Kingdom,
which is spiritual and not the Business of the Kingdoms of this World, which is
earthly; so as not to give Kings and Governors Opposition or Disturbance, in
the Exercise of their civil Power and Authority for the Punishment of evil
Doers, and the Praise of them that do well 1 Pet. ii. 13, 14.
. The Hearers likewise will live inoffensive, and make the weight of Government
fit easy on the Shoulders of those on whom divine Providence has laid it. For
as the divine Spirit ever did lead its Followers into the Love of God, and all
the social Virtues, so it ever will; as being in it self unchangeable: And all
extravagant capricious Delusions, have been, and ever will be testified against
by its true Votaries.

And as Princes and Governments ought not at the Instigation of Church Men or
others, to invade the Kingdom of Christ, in laying Restraints or
Discouragements upon the Consciences of any of their Subjects by penal Laws, or
Disqualifications on Account of Matters purely spiritual and religious, which
appertain not to their Province; so ought not Churchmen under any pretense
whatsoever, to invade the Kingdoms of this World, or stir up Rebellion against
their Lawful Princes to whom they owe Allegiance by the Law of Nature and their
own Promises, who are the Ministers of God unto them for Good Romans xiii. 1, to
4.
, and appointed by him, for the Protection and Preservation of Men's worldly
Rights and Properties: And we in this Kingdom have great Reason to esteem our
selves very happy, in being Blessed with such an excellent Form of Government,
and with such a benevolent Prince at the Head of it, who is the common Father
of all his People. But to return.

The Knowledge and Feeling of the Influence of the divine Spirit, sensibly and
experimentally enlightening and quickening our Reason, Affection, and Will,
those noble and principal Powers and Faculties of our Souls, is the Life and
Spirit of Piety and true Religion, or rather is Piety and true Religion it
self, without which all external Acts, howsoever good in Appearance, are empty
Things and avail not in God's Sight, who looks at the Source and Origin of
Actions: Hence our Savior took occasion to reprehend the Scribes and Pharisees
of Old, for their Want of Holiness of Heart, though they made a fine outward
Appearance, and performed external Worship, with a great Show of Devotion and
Piety; saying, Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees, Hypocrites, for ye make clean
the outside of the Cup and of the Platter, but within they are full of
Extortion and Excess. Thou blind Pharisee, (says He) cleanse first that which
is within the Cup and Platter, that the outside of them may be clean also.
Adding, Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees, Hypocrites; for ye are like unto
whited Sepulchers, which indeed appear beautiful outward, but are within full
of dead Men's Bones, and of all uncleanness; even so ye also outwardly appear
righteous unto Men, but within ye are full of Hypocrisy and Iniquity Mat.
xxiii. 25, 26, 27, 28.
. And this was the Condition of their Fathers before them; they had God,
Religion, and Devotion in their Mouths, Sacrifices Oblations and Incense in
their Hands; and observed new Moons, Sabbaths, calling of Assemblies and solemn
Meetings; but were departed from God in their Hearts, and become a sinful
Nation, a People laden with Iniquity, and a Seed of evil Doers: Children that
were Corrupters, who had forsaken the Lord Isa. i.
. But that they might return to Him, he called upon them, saying, Wash ye, make
ye clean, put away the evil of your Doings from before mine Eyes; (for God
looks at the Heart) cease to do Evil, learn to do well Isa. i. 16, 1^.
. And again, Oh Jerusalem, wash thine Heart from Wickedness, that thou may^st
be saved (...) iv. 14.
.

Our Savior therefore in his excellent Sermon on the Mount, says, blessed are
the pure in Heart, for they shall see God Mat. v. 8.
which is the indispensable Qualification of a Child of God, and real
Christian; for they, and they only, are the Sons of God, whose Hearts are
purified in being led by the Spirit of God, and thereby experiencing their
vicious Inclinations and Habits, mortified, according to the Doctrine of our
Gentile Apostle to the Romans, If ye live after the Flesh (...) shall die, but
^f ye through the Spirit do mortify the Deeds of the Body, ye shall live. For
as many as are led by the Spirit of God, they are the Sons of God Romans viii.
13, 14.
.

CHAP. IV. Of the Necessity of divine Illumination, and that the Light and
Operation of God's Spirit, and the Light and Operation of Man's Spirit are
different, and distinguished the one from the other.
IT will I doubt not be readily agreed, that the Spirit of God and the Spirit
of Man, must needs be different and distinct in Nature and Essence. The divine
Spirit and Wisdom of God, and the humane Reason of Man must needs be of
different Kinds and Natures; otherwise the Soul of Man would be God, of the
same Essence with Him, and not a Creature, but Almighty, omnipresent, and
omniscient; for so without Controversy God is; else He could not produce such
an innumerable Company of Beings and Creatures, as are contained in the
Universe, preserve them in that admirable Beauty and Harmony they are in, and
provide for all Events, as it is manifest he does, to the Wonder and Amazement
of Men; which Man is utterly incapable of. And therefore the Spirit and Wisdom
of God, and the Spirit and Reason of Man, are infinitely different in their
Powers and Natures. And then, that the Light and Operation of each of these
Spirits or Powers, must needs also be of different Kinds and Natures, according
to the Principles from which they flow, I think unavoidably follows. This I
take to be exceeding clear from the Reason and Nature of Things, and the same
is not less manifest from the Holy Scriptures.

For God said, My Spirit shall not always strive with Man Genesis vi. 3.
. If God's Spirit and Man's Spirit had been of the same Kind and Nature in
their Light and Operation, there could not have been a strife between them.

In the Levites acknowledging of God's Goodness to the Children of Israel, they
said unto him, Thou gave also thy good Spirit to instruct them Nehe. ix. 20.
. So that their Spirit had need of Instruction from God's Spirit, and therefore
they appear to be two distinct Spirits in their Light and Operations.

The Spirit it self bears witness without Spirit, that we are the Children of
God Romans vlii. 16.
. The Apostle is here speaking, of the Evidence and Testimony of the Spirit of
God, to the Spirit of the Sons of God, that they are His; so that the Spirit of
God, and the Spirit even of the Sons of God, the Spirit of Men born again,
appear to be Distinct Beings and Spirits, and to be contradistinguished in
their Light and Operations.

Eye has not seen, nor Ear heard, neither have entered into the Heart of Man
the things which God has prepared for them that love Him: But God has
revealed them unto us by his Spirit 1 Cor. ii. 9, 20.
. It Is evident, by the Insufficiency of the Heart or Soul of Man to discover
Gods Kindness, and Will to them who love him, without the Help or Revelation of
God's Spirit, that they are distinct Spirits and have different Light and
Operation.

And in the very next Verse we have the Apostles Reason, For what Man knows
the Things of a Man, save the Spirit of Man, which is in him; even so the
Things of God knows no Man, but the Spirit of God. A clearer Distinction
between God's Spirit and Man's Spirit, in their several Lights and Operations
cannot possibly be made. Here is see forth the absolute Necessity of the Divine
Illumination of God's Spirit, to enligthen Man's Spirit in order to his
Knowledge of the Things of God. Which shows how unable Man's Reason, Affection,
and Will, is to such an Undertaking without God's Help; and what need there is
of being strengthened with Might by his Spirit, in the inner Man Ephesians. iii. 16.
. So much as to Christians in General.

Then as to the Ministeries of the Prophets, in their Days the common Phrase
among them was, The Word of the Lord came unto me saying. Now this was the
Voice and Speech of God's Spirit, to their Spirits; for the Prophecy came not
in old Time, (or at any Time, as the Margin reads it) by the Will of Man (or
Man's Spirit) but holy Men of God spoke as they were moved by the Holy Ghost 2
Pet. i. 21
.

The Word of the Lord (says Ezekiel) came unto me saying, Son of Man prophesy,
against the Prophets of Israel, that prophesy, and say thou unto them that
Prophesy out of their own Hearts; (such as made Discourses without divine
Inspiration) Hear ye the Word of the Lord, Thus says the Lord God, Woe unto the
Foolish Prophets that follow their own Spirit and have seen nothing (i. e. from
God) or as the Margin reads it, and Things which they have not seen (i. e. from
God) Eze^. xiii. 1, 2, 3.
. See here how clear the Distinction is made, between God's Spirit and Man's
Spirit in their several Influences and Operations.

In the Days of Christ and his Apostles the Phrase was changed, into that of
the Leading, Utterance, Revelation or Guidance of the Spirit, or the Holy Ghost
being upon them. It is said of Simeon, The Holy Ghost was upon him. And it was
revealed unto him by the holy Ghost, that he should not see Death, before he
had seen the Lord's Christ. And he came by the Spirit into the Temple etc. Luke
ii. 25, 26, 27.
Acts xi. 12.
1 Cor ii. 1^.
.

Jesus being full of the Holy Ghost returned from Jordan, and was led by the
Spirit into the Wilderness Luke iv. 1.
.

And Jesus returned in the Power of the Spirit into Galilee verse 14.
.

And they were all filled with the Holy Ghost, and began to speak with other
Tongues, as the Spirit gave them Utterance.

The Spirit said unto Philip, go near and join thy self to this Chariot Acts ^
.

While Peter thought on the Vision, the Spirit said unto him, behold three Men
seek thee Acts x. 19.
.

And the Spirit had me go with them, (said Peter) Acts viii. 29.
.

And the Apostle Paul says, God has revealed them (viz. His Things unto us by
his Spirit Ephesians. iii. 3, 5.
.

How that by Revelation (says Paul) He (God) made known unto me, the Mystery --
which in other Ages was not made known unto the Sons of Men, as it is now
revealed unto his holy Apostles and Prophets by his Spirit John xiv. 26.
.

But the Comforter, which is the Holy Ghost, whom the Father will send in my
Name, he shall teach you all things (necessary for you to know of God and
Religion) John xvi. 31.
.

Howbeit when He, the Spirit of Truth, is come, he shall guide you into all
Truth, (necessary to Salvation.) 1 John ii. 27
.

But the anointing which (by measure) ye have received of Him (Christ the
anointed of God without Measure) abides in you, and ye need not that any Man
teach you; but as the same anointing teaches you of all Things (necessary to
Salvation.

In these Quotations we have an Account given us of God^ Spirit coming upon
Man's Spirit, filling of it; loading of it; speaking to it; revealing to it;
teaching, guiding, and giving ^terance to it; from whence it clearly appears
they are two distinct Spirits, and differ as much in their Light and Operation,
as the Creator from the Creature in Perfection and Power; and how necessary
divine Illumination in Religion is.

CHAP. V. Containing some Testimonies of modern Authors of different
Persuasions to the Truth maintained in the foregoing Chapter.
THE Christians Pattern wrote by Thomas of Kempis above 250 Years ago, has in
it a great many Testimonies to the Truth laid down in the former Chapter.
Particularly in book 1 Cap. iii. Of the Doctrine of Truth. ibid. Cap. v. Of the
reading the Holy Scriptures. In book 2. Cap. i. Of the inward Life. ibid. Cap.
viii. Of familiar Conversation with Jesus. In book 3. Cap. i. Of the inward
speech of Christ to a faithful Soul. Ibid. Cap. ii. That Truth speaks
inwardly without noise of Words. Where the Necessity of divine Illumination is
clearly asserted, and evident Distinctions maintained, between the Teachings of
God in the Soul, and the Soul's own Teaching. And how much preferable God's
Speech to the Soul, the Inspirer and Enlightener of all the Prophets is, to
Man's Speech.

There can therefore (says the ever memorable J. ^es) be but two certain and
infallible Interpreters of Scripture; either it self or the Holy Ghost the
Author of it. page 18. Golden Remains.

The literal, plain, and uncontroversable Meaning of Scripture (says he)
without any Addition or Supply, by Way of Interpretation, is, that alone which
for Ground of Faith we are necessarily bound to accept, except it be there,
where the Holy Ghost himself treads us out another Way, pa. 24. Only to ground
for Faith (says he) on the plain uncontroversable Text of Scripture, and for
the rest to expect and pray for the Coming of our Elias; This shall compose our
Waverings, and give final Rest to our Souls. pa. 31. And on these Words of the
Apostle (viz.) I can do all Things through Christ that (enableth or)
strengthens me Phil. iv. 13.
. He says I ask then first as the Eunuch does in the Acts, of whom speaks our
Apostle this, of himself or of some other Man? I answer, both of himself and
all other Christians; for every Christian Man, by reading it as he ought, makes
it his own; for in reading it as he ought, he reads it with the same Spirit,
with which St. Paul wrote it. pa. 149.

And says he, Why seems it more miraculous, to open the Eyes of him that was
born blind, than for every one of us to open the Eyes of our Understanding,
which by reason of original Corruption was born blind? For by the same Finger,
by the same Power of God, by which the Apostles did work these Miracles, does
every Christian do, this: And without this Finger it is as impossible for us to
do this, as for the Apostles to do the Miracles they did. page 162.

The Christian says he, carries a show of Weakness without, but within, is full
of God and Christ. pa. 166. On that Text, My Kingdom is not of this World John
xvlii. 38.
. He says, To rule the inward Man in our Hearts and Souls, to set up an
imperial Throne in our Understandings and Wills; this Part of our Government
belongs to God and to Christ: These are the Subjects, this the Government of
his Kingdom; Men may be Kings of Earth and Bodies; but Christ alone is the King
of Spirits and Souls. pa. 198, 199.

The Kingdom of Heaven is within you, says he, let every Man therefore retire
into himself, and see if he can find this Kingdom in his Heart; for if he find
it not there, in vain will he (seek to) find it in all the World besides. pa.
202. And speaking of the Voice of the Church, witnessing to us, the Truth of
the Holy Scriptures, and their Authority as the greatest, if not the sole
outward Means of our Consent to the same, He adds But this is only fides humano
judicio et testimonio acquesita; what shall we think of fides infusa? Of the
inward working of the Holy Ghost, in the Conscience of every Believer? How far
it is a Perswader unto us of the Authority of these Books, I have not much to
say: Only thus much in general, that doubtless the Holy Ghost does so work in
the Heart of every true Believer, that it leaves a farther Assurance, strong
and sufficient to ground and stay it self upon. pa. 330, 331.

From these Quotations out of this valuable Author, it appears that he
understood that the Figures and Characters of God's Spirit, in the Hearts or
Spirits of Men, and not their own Hearts and Spirits, were the Law, or Rule to
Mankind, before the outward Law was given, and that as the Holy Ghost, and not
Man's Spirit, was the Author of the Holy Scriptures; so, not Man's Spirit, but
the Holy Ghost, in his Light and Operation, is an infallible Interpreter of it.
That every Christian Man ought to read it in the same Spirit, with which it was
wrote; without which, it is as impossible for our Understandings to be
enlightened (as to the Things of God) as it was for the Apostles to work
Miracles. That God and Christ, have set up an imperial Throne in our
Understandings and Wills, to rule the inward Man in our Hearts: (For it seems
according to him that it is not to rule but to be ruled.) That Christ alone, is
the King of Spirits and Souls, and as His Kingdom is within, so every Man must
retire into himself to find it there, if ever he finds it. What plainer
Testimonies can there be given to the divine Illumination and Operation of the
Holy Ghost upon the Reason or Understandings, and Wills of Men, as, distinct
from the same; and not only of Service, but of absolute Necessity to the
Happiness of the Souls of Men.

The learned and judicious Dr. Robert Gell, who lived in the Reign of K.
Charles the first, and preached a Sermon before him at New Market, in the Year
1631. as the Preface to the two Volums of his Notes and Observations on the New
Testament says, has these remarkable Passages on this Subject, in the said
Volumes.

It Is impossible, says he, to give true Testimony of Christ, unless we know and
feel him livingly acting in us, in his Work and Deed, unless we can truly and
experimentally say, that We have seen and bare witness 1 John i. 2.
. Vol. 1. Fol. 295. God's immediate Voice says he, is that whereby he speaks
inwardly unto the Man in his Heart. Audiam quid in me l^quotur Dominus Psalm.
lxxxv. 8.
. Do ye seek a Proof of Christ^s speaking in me 2 Cor. xiil. 3.
? The Angel spoke IN ME. This Voice speaking in Man is no other, than, that
inward Tracius, or the Drawing of God. John vi. 44.
. ibid 383. And he says, He, (God the Father) has given an unerring Guide
unto the World, his Word, that speaks to us and in us. That (...) (Word) which
has spoken in all Men, from the Beginning, and yet speaks. ib^d 408. How can
Christ be said to be crucified in the Galations? To which says he, I answer,
when they yielded not, unto the Motions of his Spirit, in themselves, but
withstood them, resisted them; when they withstood the Holy Inspirations of
Christ's Spirit, striving with them; when they grieved, when they quenched the
Holy Fire in themselves; when they yielded unto the inward Antichrist, usurping
a Power in them: For both cannot live together. Vol 2. fol. 233. These four
Quotations out of Dr. Gell contain clear Testimonies to the Spirit of God and
Christ, as operating in and upon Man's Spirit, and evidently distinguished from
it.

Let us hear him again What He (God) promised, that he would fill his House, or
Temple with his Glory Hag. ii. 7.
, What understand we but the Bodies, Souls and Spirits of his Saints, who are
his Temples, with his Holy Spirit, ibid. fol. 265.

God who commanded the Light to shine out of Darkness, shines in our Hearts, to
give the Light of the Knowledge of the Glory of God in the Face of Jesus Christ
2 Cor. iv. 6.
. This divine and glorious Light of Knowledge says he, the Understanding
receives from the Sun of Righteousness; as we receive the Sunbeams in a Glass;
and as those beget a Resemblance of the Sun from whence they come; so these
heavenly Rays beget a Likeness and Resemblance unto God, whence a Follower of
God becomes renewed in the Spirit of the Mind Ephesians. iv. 23.
, that is, renewed in Knowledge, according to the Image of him that created him
Col. iii. 10.
Ibid 274. So that says he, as Christ the Subject of the Gospel comes, and
preaches inwardly unto Men, so do the Ministers testify and preach outwardly;
and in this Sense, he that hears you (that is outwardly) says our Savior,
he hears me, i. e. inwardly: Thus St. Paul came and preached outwardly to the
Ephesians Acts xix.
. And Christ himself, came and preached inwardly unto them, (for outwardly, we
cannot understand it) Ephesians. ii. 17.
. Ibid. fol^o. 330, 331. The Deity cannot be approached unto (says he) but by
somewhat of its own; as no Man can see the Sun but by its own Light Ibid. 534.
And thus Christ (says he) is the (...), the Eternal living Word, which has in
all Parts of time, come and spoken to the Patriarchs and Prophets, and all holy
Men of God: Thus he preached in and by Noah, a Preacher of Righteousness 2 Pet.
ii 5.
. This is the Wisdom of God that lifts up her Voices and cries. Prove. viii. 1.
Ibid 550. And again he says, The Lord speaks and writes with the Finger of his
Spirit, in the Heart. Ibid. 551.

These are but a small Number of the many Quotations, which might be made out
of those two excellent Volums, in Confirmation of the Truth and Necessity of
the Immediate Teachings of God by his Spirit, in the Hearts of Men; as distinct
and distinguished from the Teachings of Man's own Spirit, Reason, or Wisdom;
and as hig^ly surpassing the Light and Operation of the Powers, and Faculties
of our Souls and Spirits.

Dr. Hamm^nd in his Paraphrase and Annotations upon the new Testament, says on
these Words, (viz) For what Man knows the Things of a Man save the Spirit of
a Man which is in him? even so the Things of God knows no Man, but the Spirit
of God 1 Cor. ii. 11.
. In his Paraphrase as follows (viz.) For as among Men the Thoughts, and great
Concernments, and Designs of a Man, though none else knows them, yet his own
Spirit does; so these Divine Matters, though none else can reveal them to us,
yet His Spirit can. On verse 12 he adds And this is that Spirit which we have
received, the very Spirit of God, (not the Spirit which suggest worldly Things
to us, that instructs us in those.)

And on verse 14 he says, But such Things as these, they that are led only by
the Light of humane Reason, the learned Philosophers etc. do absolutely
despise. And of the Christian, he says, on verse 15, Being not himself
persuaded by any other Arguments, but only by those that he has thus received
from the Spirit of God, he cannot reasonably be refuted, by any other Sort of
Arguments taken from humane Reason or worldly Wisdom. Fol. 515.

Here are every plain Distinctions made, between the Light and Teaching of the
Spirit of God and the Things that it reveals on the one Hand; and the Light
of the Reason or Spirit of Man, and the Things that it is capable of Teaching
on the other Hand; which shows that the Light and Influence of the Spirit of
God; and the Light and Influence of the Reason or Spirit of Man, are not one
but two distinct Principles, or Agents in Men; and the absolute Necessity of
divine Illumination for the Knowledge of the Things of God.

Take one Testimony more from this famous Doctor, to the same Purpose, in his
Annotation on 1 John iii. 9. (viz.) What (...) being born of God, signifies as
has been noted John i. note b. to have received some special Influence from
God, and by the Help or Power of that, to be raised to a Pious Life. Agreeably
(...) he that has been born of God, is literally he that has had such a
blessed Change wrought in him by the Operation of God's Spirit in his Heart, as
to be Translated from the Power of Darkness, into the Kingdom of his 'Dear Son,
transformed in the Spirit of his Mind. That is sincerely changed from all Evil
to all Good, from Obedience to the Flesh, etc. to an Obedience to God. Folio.
831.

The ingenious and judicious Lock, that great Admirer and Master of Reason, who
seems to have carried humane Understanding to its highest Pitch, and to have
made full Proof of the Abilities of our natural Powers and Faculties, yields
to the Force of these Truths, and confesses, that God affords Man, divine
Illumination, or Light and Help from Heaven, of a Nature superior to, and
contradistinguished from the Light of the Mind, Reason, or natural
Understanding of Man, as what is necessary for him to enlighten and assist him
in the Knowledge of the Things of God and true Religion.

I am far from denying (says he) that God can or does, sometimes enlighten
Men's Minds, in the apprehending of certain Truths, or excite them to good
Actions by the Immediate Influence and Assistance of the Holy Spirit. Vol. i.
of his Works Folio 334. Seeking and examining (says he) without the special
Grace of God, will not secure even Knowing, and learned Men from Error. Vol. ii
Folio 266. God alone (says he) can open the Ear, that it may hear, and open
the Heart, that it may understand. Ibid Fol. 269. It Is too hard a Task (says
he) for unassisted Reason to establish (even) Morality in all its Parts, upon
its true Foundations, with a clear and convincing Light. -- Experience shows
that the Knowledge of Morality, by mere natural Light, (how agreeable soever it
be to it) makes but a slow Progress, and little Advance in the World -- it is
plain in fact, that humane Reason unassisted failed Men in it is great and
proper Business of Morality It never from unquestionable Principles, by clear
Deductions made out, an entire Body of the Law of Nature. And he that shall
collect all the moral Rules of Philosophers, and compare them with those
contained in the New Testament, will find them to come short of the Morality
delivered by our Savior, and taught by his Apostles: A College made up, for
the most Part of Ignorant, but inspired Fishermen. Ibid. Fol. 532, 533. Here
(says he) Morality has a secure Standard, that Revelation vouches, and Reason
cannot gainsay, nor question; but both together witness to come from God, the
great Law Giver. Ibid. Fol 534. The Philosophers (says he) who spoke from
Reason, made not much mention of the Deity in their Ethics. They depended on
Reason and her Oracles; which contain nothing but Truth: But yet some Parts of
that Truth lie too deep for our natural Powers easily to reach, and make plain
and visible to Mankind without some Light from Above to direct them. Ibid. 53.
We are (says he) favorable enough, to our own Faculties to conclude that they
of their own Strength would have attained those Discoveries without any foreign
Assistance. Ibid. Fol. 534, 535.

Many (says he) are beholden to Revelation who do not acknowledge it. It Is no
diminishing to Revelation, that Reason gives its suffrage too, to the Truths
Revelation has discovered. But it is our Mistake to think, that because Reason
confirms them to us, we had the first certain Knowledge of them from thence,
and in that clear Evidence we now possess them. The contrary is manifest in the
defective Morality of the Gentiles, before our Savior's Time. Ibid. Fol. 535.
To these I must add (says he) one Advantage more by Jesus Christ, and that is,
the Promise of Assistance. If we do what we can, He will give us His Spirit, to
help us, to do what and how we should. 'Twill be idle for us, who know not how
our own Spirits move and act us, to ask in what Manner the Spirit of God shall
work upon us. The Wisdom that accompanies that Spirit knows better than we, how
we are made, and how to work upon us. Ibid. Fol. 537. To a Man (says he) under
the Difficulties of his Nature, beset with Temptations, and hedged in with
prevailing Customs; it is no small Encouragement to set himself seriously on the
Courses of Virtue, and Practice of true Religion, that he is from a sure Hand,
and an Almighty Arm promised Assistance to support and carry him through. Ibid.
Fol. 537, 538. Here are evident Testimonies to the Necessity of divine
Illumination, and clear Distinction (...) maintained between the Light of
Reason, our own Spirits and natural Powers of the one Hand; and Light from
Above to direct and help us, or, the Operation of the Spirit of God in us, on
the other Hand.

In his Paraphrase on 1. Cor. ii. 10. he says, But these Things which are not
discoverable by Man's natural Faculties and Powers, God has revealed to us by
His Spirit, which searches out all Things, even the deep Councils of God;
which are beyond the Reach of our Abilities to discover. Vol. iii. Fol. 154.

On 1 Cor. iii. 3, 4. he paraphrases: Are ye not carnal, and manage your selves
in the Conduct, both of your Minds and Actions, according to barely humane
Principles, and do not as spiritual Men, acknowledge all that Information, and
all those Gifts wherewith the Ministers of Jesus Christ, are finished for the
Propagation of the Gospel to come wholly from the Spirit of God. Ibid. Fol. 157.

And on verse 7 What Gifts, says he, of the Spirit, what Knowledge of the
Gospel, has any Leader among you, which he received not, as entrusted, to him
of God and not acquired by his own Abilities. Ibid. Fol. 160.

On I Cor. xii. 3. he says, For all that own our Lord Jesus Christ and believe
in him, do it by the Spirit of God; i. e. can do it upon no other Ground, but
Revelation coming from the Spirit of God. Ibid. Fol. 191.192.

On 2 Cor. iv. 12. he says in his Paraphrase, The Energy of the Spirit of
Christ, whereby he lives in, and gives Life to those, who believe in him. Ibid.
fol. 226.

On 2 Cor. x. 5. he paraphrases thus; Beating down humane Reasonings, and all
the towering and most elevated Superstructures, raised thereon by the Wit of
Man, against the Knowledge of God, as held forth in the Gospel, Captivating all
their Notions, and bringing them into Subjection to Christ. Ibid. Fol. 238.

On Romans viii. 6. his Paraphrase is, Our setting our selves seriously, and
sincerely to obey the Dictates and Directions of the Spirit; produces Life and
Peace. Ibid. Fol. 302.

And in his Notes in the same Folio he says; As Christ in the Flesh was wholly
exempt, from all Taint of Sin; so we by that Spirit which was in him shall be
exempt, from the Dominion of our carnal Lusts, if we make it our Choice, and
endeavor to live after the Spirit. Ver. 9, 10, 11. For that which we are to
perform by that Spirit, is the Mortification of the Deeds of the Body, Ver, 17.

Now, says he, it is the Spirit of God alone that enlivens Men so, as to enable
them to cast off the Dominion of their Lusts. Ibid. Fol. 303. Here he (the
Apostle says he) shows, that Christians are delivered from the Dominion of
their carnal sinful Lusts, by the Spirit of God, that is given to them, and
dwells in them, as a new quickening Principle and Power, by which they are put
into the State of a spiritual Life, where in their Members are made capable of
being made the Instruments of Righteousness. Ibid. Fol. 304. On Ephesians. ii. 5. he
Notes. This Quickening was by the Spirit of God; given to those, who by Faith
in Christ were united to him, became Members of Christ and Sons of God,
partaking of the Adoption; by which Spirit they were put into a State of Life,
see Romans viii. 9 -- 15. And made capable, if they would, to live to God, and
not to obey Sin in the Lusts thereof, nor yield their Members Instrument of Sin
unto Iniquity; but to give up themselves to God, as Men alive from the dead,
and their Members to God as Instruments of Righteousness; as our Apostle
exhorts the converted Romans to do Romans vi. ^^ -- 13.
. Ibid. Fol. 358.

On Ephesians. ii. 8. he notes. No Deeds or Works of theirs, nothing that they could
do to prepare or recommend themselves contributed ought, to the bringing them
into the Kingdom of God, under the Gospel; that it was all purely the Work of
Grace, for they were all dead in Trespasses and Sins, and could do nothing, not
make one step, or the least Motion toward it. Faith which alone gained them
Admittance, and alone opened the Kingdom of Heaven to Believers, was, the sole
Gift of God; Men by their natural Faculties could not attain to it -- It Is God,
here, does all by Revelation of what they could never discover by their own
natual Faculties. Ibid Fol. 356. see also Ibid. Fol. 360, 361. to the same
Purpose.

What can be plainer, than that it was the Sense of this great Writer, that
Man's natural Faculties and Powers alone, bare humane Principles humane Reason,
could not prepare, recommend, or contribute ought, to the bringing Men into the
Kingdom of God, under the Gospel; or enable them to make one Step, or the least
Motion toward it. That Men by their own natural Faculties, could not attain
it; or so much as discover it; As being that which is beyond the Reach of our
Abilities. But that, this is, to be discovered, revealed, and attained to, by
the immediate Influence, and Assistance of the Holy Spirit only. That this
comes wholly from the Spirit of God, from the Energy of the Spirit of God and
Christ, as a new quickening Principle and Power. And is purely the Work of
Grace; and the sole Gift of God.

Which contain clear Testimonies, that the Light and Influence of the Spirit of
God, operating on Man's Spirit, is of absolute Necessity, because it alone can
give him the Knowledge and Enjoyment of divine Things; and that the Disability
of the Light and Influence of Man's Spirit, Reason and Understanding, is such,
that without divine Help, it is not capable of the great and noble Pursuits, of
true Piety and Religion. And therefore it unavoidably follows, from his nervous
Reasoning, that the Light and Power of God's Spirit; and the Light and Power of
Man's Spirit must needs be, of infinitely different Natures and Kinds.

The ingenious Monro, Vicar of Letter Kenney in the Kingdom of Ireland, in the
second Edition, of his Just Measures, of the pious Insitution of Youth, has
among many others of like Import, the following remarkable Passages on these
Subjects.

Divine Things, says he, before we can discover their Beauty or feel their
Efficacy, must be seen in a divine Light. The natural Man says St. Paul 1 Cor.
ii. 14.
, that is, he that has nothing in him, but his corrupted Reason and Faculties,
and the Shadow, and oftentimes false Light, that the Exercise of these affords;
cannot know, the Things of the Spirit of God; Know them speculatively and
notionally as the Devils do, he may; but know them divinely, so as to be
transformed by them, and conformed to them, he cannot; the Reason is plain,
Because they are spiritually discerned; that is, they are truly and Savingly
knewn, by the Illumination of the Holy Spirit only. Part. 2d. Pa. 331. For it
is certain, says he, that all true Christians in every Age, are anointed with
the same Spirit, that the Holy Jesus himself was, otherwise they are not true
Christians. For the very Import of that worthy Name is to be anointed, that is
to be led, taught, governed and sanctified, by the Holy Spirit. If any Man,
says St. Paul Romans viii. 9.
, has not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of His; besides I would fain ask
those who deny that any other Light is necessary in order to know God and
divine Things, savingly, but that of Reason, assisted by outward Revelation,
what tolerable Sense they will put on the devout and ardent Breathings of the
Psalmist Psalm cxix.
Open mine Eyes, teach me thy Statutes, give me Understanding, and the like,
which he repeats at every turn? To be sure the Psalmist, had as great and as
many Advantages, as others can pretend to; he had the Benefit of a written Law,
and the Ministry of extraordinary Prophets, and no doubt had as good natural
Faculties as his Neighbors; and yet he saw the Necessity of another Light, in
order to be divinely instructed, Ibid. 332. When we have listened unto, says
he, and complied with the inward Calls and Motions (of the Spirit,) He (God)
comes and takes Possession of us, and dwells in us, as in his living Temples:
And then it is, that we are divinely illuminated and taught Ibid. 335. For the
Holy Spirit, says he, cannot dwell in unholy Hearts; he may indeed and actually
does visit wicked Men, with the gracious Designs of a wakening them out of
their sinful Slumbers; urging and importuning them to their Duties, and
assisting in the Discharge of them; but take up his Residence in them, and
abide with them, he cannot. For what Fellowship can Light have with Darkness?
How incongruous, as well as impossible is it, that the Spirit of Purity and
Joy, of Love and Peace, of Unity and Harmony, of Sweetness and Benignity,
should be strictly united to, familiarly converse with, and constantly dwell in
Souls, that are sensual and earthly wrathful and furious, revengeful and
malicious, jarring and uneasy Souls, disordered and melancholy; these Things
are contrary the one to the other, and cannot possibly sort together. Ibid.
336. Neither, says he, can we hear the Voice of the Holy Spirit, nor receive
any Profit from his loving Care, to instruct us, as long as our Minds are
distracted, and our Attention diverted, by the Cares and Concerns of the World,
by the Tumults of our unruly Passions, by inordinately pleasing our Sensuality,
and indulging our selves the Liberty of Speculating vainly. His gentle Voice is
heard only in silence, and recollection, when the Mind is serious and
undisturbed, our Passions hushed and the World secluded. Ibid. 340, 341. The
Holy Spirit, says he, speaks inwardly and immediately to the Soul; for God is a
Spirit; the Soul is a Spirit and they converse with one another in Spirit; not
by Words, but by spiritual Notions, which however are more intelligible than
the most eloquent Strains in the World. God makes himself to be heard by the
Soul, by inward Motions, which it perceives and comprehends proportionably, as
it is voided and emptied of earthly Ideas; and the more the Faculties of the
Soul cease their own Operations, so much the more sensible and more
intelligible are the Motions of God to it. These immediate Communications of
God with the Souls of Men are denied and derided by a great many; but that the
Father of Spirits should have no converse with our Spirits, but by the
Intervention, only of outward and foreign Objects, may justly seem strange;
especially when we are so often told in holy Scripture, that we are the Temples
of the Holy Ghost, and that God dwells in (...) good Men: And why the Holy
Spirit's speaking, inwardly to the Souls of Men, His Illuminating, teaching and
working in them immediately, should be treated in ridicule, and be made a
Subject of Drollery and J^st, I know no Reason, but that Men are so sunk into
Earthliness and Carnality, that they have quite lost all Sense and Relish of
divine and spiritual Things, and therefore think fit to deny, what by Reason,
of their Indisposition, and Listlesness, they can have no Experience of. But
that our Thoughts, says he of this important Particular may be distinct and
clear, we must consider that the Holy Spirit speaks to two Sorts of Persons,
1st, to such as are in a State of Sin and Impenitency: These he solicites and
importunes to return by inward Motions and Impressions, by suggesting good
Thoughts, and prompting to pious Resolutions, by Checks and Controuls, by
Conviction of Sin and Duty; sometimes by Frights and Terrors, and other whiles
by Love and Endearments. Thus he is said to stand at the Door and knock Rev.
iii. 20.
, and when any by the Strength wherewith he has already inspired them, do
sincerely abandon and forsake their Sins, turn to God, and absolutely resign
themselves to His Conduct and Operations, then they are said to hear His Voice,
and open the Door, and accordingly He enters in, and takes Possession of them;
and if they continue faithful to him, and do not return again to folly Psalm.
lxxxv. 8.
, He will continue to carry on to Perfection, that which He has graciously
begun. On the other Hand, when, notwithstanding all His loving Solicitations,
Men do still cherish and cleave to their Lusts, and presevere in a State of
Sin, they are then said to resist the Holy Ghost Acts vii. 51.
whereby their Condition becomes very deplorable and their Conversion very
difficult; for the more Men resist the Importunities, and stifle the Motions of
the Holy Spirit, the stronger do the Chains of their Corruption and Servitude
become. Every new Act of Sin gives it a Degree of Strength, and consequently
puts a new Obstacle in the Way of Conversion; and when Sin is turned into an
inveterate and rooted Habit (which by reiterated Commissions and long
Continuance it is) then it becomes a Nature, and is as difficultly altered as
nature is. Can the Ethiopian change his Color? Or the Leopard his Spots? Then
may you also do Good who are accustomed to do Evil Jer. xiii. 23.
. So that in this Case the Conversion of Men becomes morally impossible; for
though the Mercies and Graces of God do never fail, and though the Holy Spirit
continues his Solicitations, yet when Men by a long and Wilful Continuance in
Sin have so hardened themselves, that they become stupid and wholly insensible
to the divine Calls and Voice, then the Holy Spirit abandons them to their
Conduct; but my People says God by the royal Prophet, would not hearken to my
Voice, and Israel would none of me; so I gave them up to their own Hearts
Lusts, and they walked in their own Counsels Psalm. lxxxi. 11 12.
. This weighty Consideration should oblige Parents with all possible
Seriousness, to recommend to their Children, that they fail not betimes to
listen to the Calls and Voice of the Holy Spirit, and that they be infinitely
tender of resisting His gracious Importunities. This good Spirit begins very
soon to attack young Hearts, that he may win them to the Love of God, and
engage them to Remember their Creator in the Days of their Youth. And oh happy!
Yea thrice happy, they who comply with these early Motions, and who do not
listen to the sly and cunning Insinuations of a tempting Devil, a flattering
World, and deceiving Flesh! Oh how easy and delightful would Conversion to
God, and the Obedience of his Commands be, if we gave ear to the first Calls of
the divine Grace and did set about the Work of our Salvation, while our Hearts
are tender, and flexible, and before we have contracted vicious Habits;
whereas, if we neglect an I delay it, and follow the Swing of corrupt Nature,
and the Conduct of the wicked World, and listen to the fallacious Proposals of
the great Enemy of our Souls; as our Conversion will become extremely
difficult, yea, and next to impossible, so if ever we shall be prevailed with
heartily to engage in it, it will be infallibly attended with most piercing
Sorrows and Agonies, with Fears, and Anxieties, Horrors and Tremblings, with
Doubts and Uncertainties, and a Thousand other racking and bitter Ingredients.
2dly. He speaks to such as are in a State of Purity, that is to such as by his
powerful Operations have crucified the Flesh with the Affections and Lusts Gal.
v. 24.
, are sanctified in Soul, Body and Spirit, 1 These. v. 23.
, and cleansed from all Filthiness 2 Cor. vii. 1.
. These are indeed the Temples of the Holy Ghost, wherein he has actually
taken up his Residence, with these he entertains a most amicable and delightful
Converse; he speaks to them Peace and Consolation: He will speak Peace to his
People and to his Saints Psalm. ixxx^ 8.
, he speaks in them; because ye are Sons, God has sent forth the Spirit of his
Son into your Hearts, crying Abba Father Gal iv. 6
He inspires their Prayers with devout and fili^l Affections, and makes
Intercession for them with Sighs and Groans that cannot be uttered Romans viii.
26.
, he guides and manages them. The Sons of God are led by the Spirit of God Romans
viii. 14.
. he makes his blessed Fruits, Righteteousness, Peace, Joy, and divine Love,
more and more to abound in them; he confirms them in Goodness, persuades them
to Perseverance, and seals them to the Day of Redemption Ephesians. iv. 30.
. Ibid. 344, to 348. Again If ye then being evil, know how to give good Gifts
unto your Children, how much more will your heavenly Father give the Holy
Spirit to them that ask Him Luke xi. 13.
.

It is the Prerogative of the Gospel Economy, that it is the Administration of
the Spirit; and it is the Privilege of all sincere Christians, not in one
only, but in every Age, to have this Promise made good to them, that is truly
to receive the Holy Ghost, which becomes in them a living Source, or Principle
of Purity and Healing, of Life and Power, of Wisdom and Counsel, of Joys and
Consolations, and in a Word, of all divine and heavenly Graces, which therefore
are called in holy Scripture, the Fruits of the Spirit. Part iii Pa. 212. The
Soul, says he, being thus raised up from the Death of Sin, and born again, is
divinely animated, and discovers that it is alive by the vital Operations which
it performs, and by the due Exercise of his nobler Faculties, which are now
awakened, and invigorated, and the Life which it lives, in consequence of so
blessed a Change, must be truly excellent and sublime. It Is this that I am in
the next Place to evince, and the Truth of it will appear, if we consider, 1st.
The Source whence this Life is derived; for such as the Source is, such must be
the Streams that issue from it. If the former be of an excellent Nature and
Quality. so must the latter be likewise. Now it is certain that the Source
whence the Life I am speaking of, flows, is supernatural and divine, for it
comes from Above, even from Him with whom is the Fountain of Life Psalm. xxxvi.
9.
, and whose Prerogative it is, to give Life unto the Dead. It is God, says St.
Paul, that quickens those that are dead in Trespasses and Sins Ephesians. ii. 1, 4,
5.
. And our Lord informs us, that it is He who communicates these Living Waters
which become in the Souls of such as desire and admit of them, A Well of Water
springing up into everlasting Life John iv. ^0, 14.
. And hence may appear the Reason, why the Apostle gives this Life the
Designation of the Life of God Ephesians. iv.
; namely, because it is an Emanation from him, and breathed into the Soul by
his Spirit of Life and Power; which Consideration, as it sufficiently evinces
the Excellency of this Life, and justly intitles it to the Character of Divine,
as being a Derivation from a divine Original; so likewise it clearly points out
unto us the Way how we may come to be Partakers of it, which without doubt is
by addressing with frequency and fervor its adorable Author and Cause; for he
has promised that if we ask we shall receive, if we seek we shall find; and if
we knock it shall be opened unto us Mat. vii. 7, 8.
. And that Passage of his, in his Converse with the Woman of Samaria, if thou
knew the Gift of God, and who it is that says unto thee, give me to drink,
thou would have asked of him, and he would have given thee living Water John
iv. 1^.
plainly let us see, that our devout Prayers and pious Importunities, are the
Means of deriving the divine Life into our Souls. The Excellency of this Life
appears from the noble Principle that influences it; for a Life that owes all
its vital Motions and Operations to a Principle that is heavenly, and sublime,
cannot but be excellent, and will discover that it is so, by its Inclinations
and Desires, by its Designs and Aims, by all its Actions, and Carriages, and by
the secret Breathings and Tendencies of the inward Man, which certainly must be
quite other than those which Flesh and Blood, and Corruption, do inspire
withal; for since they proceed from a noble Principle, they must consequently
be of a higher and more excellent Strain. Now as to the Principle of that Life
which the Regenerated do live, we are to observe, that the holy Scriptures use
a great Variety of Expressions concerning it; for it is represented sometimes
by God's dwelling in them 2 Cor. vi. 16. 1 John iv. 12.
; sometimes by Christ living in the Heart Gal. ii. 20.
; at other Times, and very frequently, by The Law of the Spirit of Life in
Christ Jesus, or the Holy Ghost inhabiting and influencing the inner man Romans
viii. 2, to 6, etc.
; Finally by the Emblem of Living Waters, springing up as a Well in the Soul
John. iv.
Joh. iv. 14.
. The Result of all these different Ways of speaking amounts in short to this
great and Important Truth; namely, that a certain intimate and operative
Presence of God in the Soul, is that noble Principle of the new Life, which we
are enquiring after. It Is this Presence that by it is mighty Energy, and divine
Force, communicates a heavenly Vigor and Sprightliness unto the inward Man.
It Is it that powerfully touches and moves our nobler Faculties, that not only
dilates, and actuates our Capacities, but also delightfully entertains and
satisfies them; for it is the Light of the Understanding, and the sovereign
Good of the Will; it is the Love that ravishes, and the Fullness that allayes
the eager Thirst of the Soul. We ought always when we have Occasion to consider
or discourse of this Subject, carefully to remember, that the Soul of Man was
originally designed to lodge the Deity, and that for that End it was endued
with Capacities vastly great and large, and such as no created Object, nor even
all the Creatures together, do bear any Proportion unto, it being only an
infinite Object, that can give entire Repose and Quiet to those boundness
Desires which we are conscious, do move and stir in our Bosoms. Now the blessed
God, that infinitely perfect and most communicative Being, is this Object; and
he is so, not merely after an Ideal Manner, as when we employ our active Powers
in the Contemplation of him and his Excellencies, in which Case it is not
himself, but some shadowey and languid Pictures of him, some faint Resemblance
of his Perfections, that are immediately presented to our Minds. But he is then
the beautifying Object, when he is really and efficatiously present in the
Soul; and manifests his being there by his divine Operations, and the gracious
Communications which he makes of his Light, and Grace, and ineffable Joys. This
blisful Presence, the Regenerate who are delivered from the Dominion, and
cleansed from the Impurities of Sin, have recovered again, and it is on the
Account of it, that they are said to be an Habitation of God through the
Spirit, and the Temples of the Holy Ghost Ephesians. ii. 22. 1 Cor. vi. 19.
for that good Spirit takes Possession of them, resides in their Hearts,
becomes the Mover, Enlightner, and Director of all their Faculties and Powers,
gives a new and heavenly Tincture and Tendency to all their Inclinations and
Desires, and in one Word, is the great Spring of all that they think, or do, or
say; and hence it is that they are said to walk no more after the Flesh but
after the Spirit, and to be led by the Spirit of God Romans viii. 1, 14.
. Passages which intimate very plainly, that these happy Souls are not any more
under the Conduct and Power of Corruption, nor acted by Flesh and Blood, but
that a divine and more excellent Principle animates, and influences them, even
the Holy Ghost, who now is become dominant in the inward Man, and exerts his
mighty Efficacies there, all Things that were inconsistent with his Presence
and Operations, being removed and done away. From what, says he, I have said on
this Head, may appear the fundamental Reason why the Inspirations and
Communications of the Holy Spirit ought not to be looked on as Favors peculiar
only to certain Persons, and to certain Times, but should be considered as
common Blessings; for they are such, as were originally intended for all
Mankind; and whereof all are capable by Virtue of their Creation, as having
every one of them the Faculties and Powers, that are necessary for so noble an
End. And besides the Happiness and Pefection of humane Nature, and that by
which Man becomes a living Image, and Representation of the Deity, consists in
the luminous, operative and intimate Presence of God by his Spirit in the Soul;
so that one may as well confine Mankind, as limit the Inspirations of the Holy
Ghost, to some Persons and Ages of the World. It Is true, all Men by their
Apostasy from God, and the Degeneracy and Corruption of their Natures have
forfeited this glorious Privilege; but then, as their Capacities for it do
still continue, so it is still recoverable, and the Regenerate we see do
actually recover it. And indeed all, who through the Spirit do mortify the
Deeds of the Body and crucify and extinguish the old Man with his Lusts, will
feel and Experience the Power and Appearances of the divine Presence, which
will certainly manifest it self propotionably as Purity, and Righteousness do
advance the inner Man. A great and justly celebrated Author (Page 104 Edit. 5.)
in his Account of the Beginning and Advances of a spiritual Life, after having
laid it down as a sacred, and certain Truth, which none who have any
Acquaintance with the inward Ways of God, can so much as question. namely, that
there is a new Birth, and a divine inward Operation of the Spirit of God, which
does constantly exert it self in the Souls of His Children, and more especially
in their Regeneration; and having also informed us (Page. 105. that the formal
Character of the new Dispensation, by which it is Distinguished from that of
Moses, is this, that in it we shall have a new Heart, and new Spirit put within
us; that we shall be taught of God; and that his Spirit shall be poured out on
all Flesh. He delivers himself yet further, concerning this Matter in these
remarkable Words; This, says he, is most irreligiously restrained to the
extraordinary Effusion of the Holy Ghost on the Day of Pentecost, or to the
miraculous Gifts of the Spirit in those Beginnings of Christianity. This is
clearly Contrary, both to the Promises of the Old Testament and the whole
Current of the New, and to nothing more than to our Savior's divine Prayer,
wherein he expresses, that he was not interceeding for his Disciples only but
for all that should believe on his Name, through their Word (...) ^^ii. 20.
. So that all those sublime Effects of the divine Spirit being one in God, that
Christ might be in them, and that the Love wherewith the Father loved the Son,
might be in them, are there prayed for in behalf of all Believers. Wherefore if
any that bear the Christian Name, are not animated and influenced by the Holy
Ghost, which alas! Is the Case of too, too many, the Reason certainly is,
because they are not faithful to the Offers, nor improve the Advantages of the
Gospel, and more especially because they do not comply with the preventing
Calls of this good Spirit, who by the secret Touches and Insinuations of his
Grace, lovingly importunes them to turn and live; for though he strives long
with ungrateful and rebellious Mortals, yet at last, when they obstinately
persist in their Opposition to his gracious Operations, and stifle all his kind
Motions, and Suggestions, choosing rather to be under the Conduct and
Impressions of their Old Man and Corruptions, than under his Guidance and
divine Influences, he is justly provoked to withdraw from them, and to abandon
them to their own Lusts. Psalm. lxxxi. 12.
. Part. iii. Page 402, to 408. This excellent Author has set this Matter in an
exceeding good Light, his Expressions are so clear and evident, and his
Distinctions between Man's Reason or the natural Powers and Faculties of his
Soul, and God's divine Light, or the Influence and Operation of his Holy
Spirit; so uniform, and consistent, the Necessity of knowing divine
Illumination and the immediate Voice and Operation of God's Spirit in and upon
our Spirits, and the Faculties and Powers of our Souls, in order to the saving
Knowledge of God, Peace with him here, and Felicity and endless Happiness with
him hereafter; that it is scarce possible any Thing should be plainer, and
better said to the Purpose; and made more evident than that the heavenly Light
and Operation of Gods Spirit in us is infinitely different from, and of a
superior Nature to, the dim Light of mere humane Reason, and its Operations in
us.

CHAP. VI. Of the Freedom and Liberty of Man regarding his Choice, of Good or
Evil, and of the sensible and experimental Operations and Visitations of the
Spirit of God in the Soul of Man.
THE working and striving of God by his most blessed Spirit in the Souls of
Men, in order to their Repentance and Reformation is not irresistible, but
suited to Man's Rational Nature and Freedom of Choice and Action. For Man is
not a necessary Agent (if I may so speak) but a free Agent; and therefore he is
an accountable Creature for his Conduct and Behavior in this World; And for
that Reason becomes a proper Object of Rewerds and Punishments in the next
Life, according as his Works have been in this.

For if we were necessary Agents, or Agents whose Actions were not free and
voluntary of our own Choice, but we were forced irresistably to Action, by an
irrevocable Decree of the Almighty God, or by his preordination, we should be
like mere Stocks or Stones, in his Hand, and move as the Orbs in the Planatary
System do, without the least Liberty or Choice of Action; and therefore, should
be entirely unaccountable for any and even all the base, irreligious and most
inhuman Actions which we do or can do; and no Reward or Punishment could in
Justice, or the Reason of Things, be due to us for any good or bad Actions.

Religion would indeed then be what the Irreligious seem to desire it should
be, viz. a mere Sham or Nullity.

For to what Purpose, and how preposterous would it be, to call Men to
Repentance and Amendment of Life? When at the same Time they have no Need of
Repentance, since they are all doing of his Will, and cannot help it; all
obedient to his Preordination, because 'twas impossible for them to resist the
irresistible Force impelled upon them by the Almighty. So that this Hypothesis
in my Opinion, tends directly to an utter abolishing of the Notions of Virtue
and Vice and to extirpate, the same out of the Minds of Mankind.

But Almighty God has not impelled on us such an irresistible force to either
bad or good Actions, as our own Experience, as well as the Reason of Things
fully evince: For we feel he has given us a Liberty and Freedom to choose or
refuse good or evil Actions; to turn our Thoughts hither and thither, from one
Object to another, and change our Actions a^ Pleasure, so that whatsoever
Liberty and Power we lost in Adam, regarding divine Things, we have regained by
Jesus Christ.

True it is, Man considered in Adam in the Fall, abstractly, is a very weak and
impotent Creature, regarding God and spiritual Things, and can do nothing in
that Respect without Christ or his divine Help; but Man considered as the
Purchase of the beloved Son of God, to whom as such he gives Light and Power;
can by Virtue thereof, do all things necessary for pleasing and serving God
acceptably. And therefore it is but reasonable, that we should account for our
Actions to him, and receive a just Retribution from him in a future State,
according to our Works in this World, whether they shall be good or bad; which
the Revelations of the Will of God, contained in that holy Book the Bible, give
a clear and evident Account of: So that there is nothing in this State of Trial
and Probation here, that Men ought to be more sollicitous about, than that of
pleasing God in walking in his Ways, and doing of his Will and Commandments.

And the Spirit of God also bears Witness in the Hearts of Men to the Will of
God, so plainly and experimentally, that I conceive it to be impossible for any
sober Men, who retire their Minds from the Creatures and Things without them,
and empty their Souls of all earthly Ideas, and then fix and stay their Hearts
and Thoughts on God, steadily waiting on him, and humbly walking with him, in a
holy and daily Self-denial and Cross to their carnal and sinful Appetites and
Passions, which they have Power from Jesus Christ to do. I say, I take it to be
impossible for Souls so disposed and given up to the Will of God, trusting in
the Lord Jehovah, to miss or fall short of a Sense and Feeling in themselves,
of the experimental Work and Evidence of God's Spirit in their Souls, to
enlighten them in a sweet and blessed Manner concerning the Will of God, and
what he requires of them; consonant to the Doctrine of the Gospel, and
witnessing to the Truths contained in the Bible, as coming from God, through
his Inspiration of those holy Men who speak them.

And such Men so turned to God, and enlightened by him, cannot fail of feeling
in their Hearts a being quickened and strengthened to holy and pious Actions, to
live soberly, righteously and Godly in this World: In such Souls an Abhorrence
is begot to vile and evil Actions. as a Shame to human Nature, as well as an
Offense to God, as an unmanly and brutal Course of Life, and therefore very
displeasing to God, who made us Men, that we should live like Men, and act
becoming rational Creatures, and not like brute Beasts, below our rational
Nature, but behaving our selves to our own Honor as well as His.

For every evil and sinful Act is an irrational Act; every excessive and
disorderly Appetite and Passion is a marring and abusing the Man who gives Way
to it, bringing Shame upon him in the Opinion of others, and which he cannot
but be ashamed of himself when he thinks like a Man, when he retrospects on his
Actions and reflects as becomes a rational Creature. The Apostle might
therefore very well ask enlightened and quickened Souls, What Fruit (or Profit)
had you then in those Things whereof you are now ashamed Romans vi. 21.
.

For as there is both Light and quickening Virtue, in the Rays and Beams of the
outward Sun in the outward Firmament; so there is both Light and quickening
Virtue in the Rays and Beams of the inward and divine Sun of the Soul (called
in Scripture the Sun of Righteousn^ss Mal. iv. 2.
in the inward Firmament of God's Power in the Heart.

And where is even the earthly minded Man, that at some Time or other does not
meet with a Visitation of God within his own Soul, though unsought after by
him; that sets his Sins in order before him, and pricks him to the very Heart
for the same? This is the Day of God to the Soul: This is the Time in which the
Spirit of God strives with Man Genesis vi. 3.
for his Redemption and Salvation from Sin: This is the Season, in which God
would gather the Soul to himself, as a Hen gathers her Chickens under her Wings
Luke xiii. 34.


But if Men will not be so gathered, if they will have their own ways, and not
God's Ways; for they have their Choice, then their Souls will become desolate,
and their Condemnation will be just, for this (said our Savior) is the
Condemnation, that Light is come into the World (into the Hearts of sensual,
sinful and worldly minded Men) but Men (such brutal Men) love Darkness (their
dark and wicked Ways) rather than Light, (than the Light of God in their
Hearts) because their Deeds are evil. For every one that does Evil, hates the
Light neither comes to the light ('tho the Light at certain Times comes to
him) least his Deeds should be reproved or discovered (which he don't like to
see and feel in himself Reproof and Condemnation for) John iii. 19, 20.
.

Until therefore this Light of God in the Soul, is come to by Men, its coming
to them, is not like to reform them. Nothing will ever reform the sinful and
degenerate World, but their coming to the Light and walking in it. Men may, and
some even do make a fair Show in the Flesh, which will prove but like the
Morning Dew, if they don't come to the Spirit, and bring forth the Fruits of
the Spirit, as the Effects of a vital and living Principle in the Soul.

The Light of God is come to Men universally, for Christ is the true Light,
which lights every Man that comes into the World John i. 9.
But oh that Men would as universally come to the divine Light! by abstracting
their Thoughts and Minds very frequently from the Creatures and Things of this
World around them, to wait upon and attend the Illuminations thereof, and to be
enlivened in their Souls to a heavenly Love; to the true and real Love of God
and the Things that belong to their everlasting Peace and Salvation.

God will then give us as much Strength as we want, if we do actually and
indeed truly trust in him, who is the Lord Jehovah, in whom there is
everlasting Strength Isa. xxvi. 4.
If we yield our selves to him, and the Faculties and Powers of our Souls, as
Instruments of Righteousness to him Romans vi 13.
for we our selves must have a Hand in our own Salvation, and the working of it
out with Fear and Trembling Phil. ii. 12.
with a real Consciousness and Care of our Actions; with a Fear of offending
him, and with a trembling at his Word. And in order to our Help therein, he
will work in us to will and to do of his good Pleasure Verse 3.
He will strengthen us with Might by his Spirit in the inner Man Ephesians. iii. 16.
.

And it is in vain for us to expect the Coming of the Kingdom of God in our
Souls, as a dominant and ruling Power there, if we keep our Hearts from him,
and will have our own Will and Ways; will eat our own Bread and wear our own
Apparel Isa. iv. 1.
and be contented with a Name to live, while we remain dead in Trespasses and
Sins. For it is the doing of the Will of God in Earth, as it is done in Heaven,
that qualifies us for Witnesses of the Kingdom of God to come with Power and
Rule in our Hearts Mark ix. 1.
. for God will not save us, and take to his Rule and Reign in us against our
Wills, but with our Wills; he will be sought unto by us for this wonderful
Favor; we must yield our selves to him, in order to become Subjects of his
Kingdom of Grace here, that we may become fit for his Kingdom of Glory
hereafter.

In which blessed yielding ourselves to God, we shall in a very heavenly
manner, be delighted with the Fruition of his luminous Presence, and overcoming
Love and Goodness in our Hearts and Souls, in his Service here on Earth, and be
assured beyond all Hesitation and Doubt whatsoever, that if we persevere in his
Will and Way to the End, we shall not miss a Crown of Righteousness in the
Kingdom and World to come, to all Eternity 2 Timothy iv. 8.
These are Things truly worth minding, when all the Things of this World, in
Comparison of them, are but lean, empty and insignificant Appearances, that
perish with the using, that will stay with us, or we with them, but for a
Moment; when the Love of God, and the Peace and Joy of the Holy Ghost will
never fail us, as we habituate our selves to walk uprightly with him, and do
his Commandments in this Life, and will in the End lead us forth into an Ocean
of divine Love for ever and ever.

CHAP. VII. Of Reason.
REASON that noble Power and Faculty of the Soul of Man, which suits or adapts
him for the Knowledge of things humane, and divine, must have the Regards paid,
which are due to it. For though it is not sufficient of it self, to give Man the
saving Knowledge of God, and of Things which are heavenly; yet without it, it
does not appear how that Knowledge can be conveyed to us, by the Light and
Operation of the divine Spirit: Or how Man could know God without that Faculty,
any more than he can, without, this supernatural Agent. It Is on Man's Spirit
that God's Spirit works, to make him a new Creature, a Child of God, and Heir
of Heaven. And though the Discoveries which the divine Spirit makes of Religion
and the Things of God, are more sublime, than Man's Reason could have made; yet
are they not, when they shine in upon the Understanding, dissonant or repugnant
to it: For there is an excellent Harmony in well disposed Minds, between the
Dictates of Heaven and right Reason.

Reason is given us by our bountiful Maker, not only for transacting the
Affairs of this Life, but to distinguish between what comes from God, as his
Will, to be done by us on Earth, in order to Happiness in Heaven; and the Wiles
of Satan, as well as the Imaginations and Inventions of Men in Religion, let
their Pretenses be never so specious, in which they seek themselves, and to
impose upon us, for their own Honor or Interest.

We may rest assured, that nothing comes from God, but what is worthy of him,
and becomes his infinite Wisdom and Majesty; and that as the Christian Religion
is a reasonable Service Romans xii. 1.
, so all things which are pretended to belong to it, and are Opposite to
Reason, are not Injunctions of so excellent a Religion, or Dictates of the
divine Spirit.

The sacred Scripture, contains an undoubted Revelation of God's Will evidently
consonant to right Reason; and all Pretensions to divine Authority from God
must be subjected to that excellent Test, or Touchstone, as what God will never
speak contrary to. For Reason cannot be of one side the Question and Truth on
the other. Men who are sent by, and subject to Heaven, will neither say or do,
Things contrary to the Mind of Heaven. They will not misuse their Vocation, and
reproach their Master, by avouching that he says; when it is their own
Imaginations that speak: They will be humble and modest: Much less will they in
God's Name, utter Falsehoods, or erroneous Doctrines repugnant to Scripture, or
right Reason.

God I own (says the great Look cannot be denied, to be able to enlighten the
Understanding by a Ray darted into the Mind immediately from the Fountain of
Light, Vol. i. Fol. 33. By Reason of the Extravagancies, (says Monro) both as
to Opinion and Practice, which some pretending to the Holy Spirit have run
into, the Doctrine which asserts the Necessity of his divine Operations, in
order, to become a genuine and real Christian, is brought into Disesteem with a
great many. Part iii. page 408. Now one of the greatest, and most succesful
Artifices that he the grand Adversary of Mankind, says Monro) makes use of to
accomplish his Design, as to this, is to push some that may be remarkable, for
some goodly outward Appearances of Piety and Devotion, but who are really
unsound at the Bottom, and under the Dominion of Corruption and Sin, and
consequently under the Power and Management of Satan; to push them, I say,
under Pretense of Inspiration, to utter, and do Things that are evidently
absurd, ridiculous, and unreasonable. Ibid. 409. CHAP. VIII. Of Prayer.
PRAYER is a devout, sincere and hearty Address, or Application of the Soul, to
the adorable Majesty of God, in and under the Influence and Assistance of the
divine Spirit; in which only the Soul has Access to him, and Acceptance with
him: And therefore an inward Retirement to the divine Grace is essentially
necessary to a right Performance thereof.

For all Prayer by prescribed Forms, or extempore Conceptions, in which the
divine Spirit is not felt, to lead and Influence the Soul, whether it be in
public or in private, is of no Availance in the Sight of God.

Besides, we must always consider, and have in our Minds, the Purity, and
Holiness of God, and how unmeet and unfit we are to draw nigh to Him in an
unholy Frame of Heart: The holy God is of more pure Eyes than to behold
Iniquity Hab. i. 13.
. We must wash, and make clean our Hearts, we must cease to do evil, and learn
to do well; for without Holiness, no Man shall see Him, How unacceptable to God
are all dead, dry, and formal religious Performances, not proceeding from a
pure Heart, influenced and quickened by the Holy Spirit.

On the contrary, how living and acceptable to Him are the Sacrifices and
Offerings of a clean Heart, enlightened and guided by the Divine Spirit? What
Delight and Comfort does the Soul feel? What Returns of Love from the Divine
Presence? What Times of Refreshing come from Him? What new Life and Vigor is
the Soul inspired with, to abandon all the Ways of Vice, and persevere in
Virtue, and the Love of God? How is the Heart enlarged to run the Ways of God's
Commandments Psalm cxix 32.
. And indeed, blessed are the pure in Heart, for they shall see God M^. v. ^.
. These come into His Courts with Praise Psalm. c. 4
.

These have the Capacities and Powers of their Souls, filled with the luminous
and intimate Presence of God; who becomes unto them like a Place of broad
Rivers and Streams Isa. xxxiii ^^.
.

Doctor Gell before quoted, says, Words conceived only in an Earthly Mind, and
uttered out of the Memory by the Man's Voice, which makes a Noise in the Ears
of Flesh and Blood, are not, nor can, be accounted a Prayer, before our Father
which is in Heaven. Vol. i. Fol. 156.

And therefore (says he) Devotion is said to be a Moving of the Mind and Will
toward God, which may be in manifold Acts; as Holy Meditation, Resignation,
Elevations, or lifting up the Heart by Prayer and Thanksgiving unto God,
collecting, and gathering in all the distracting, and wandering Thoughts unto
Unity. Ibid. 544. I know some far outstrip others (says he) in this outward
vocal Praise of God, every Sabbath D^y, spend it wholly in hearing and
repeating Sermons, and conferring and singing most devoutly; yet on the Week
Days are ordinarily as devoutly drunk, and they are as ordinarily blamed for
uttrue and unfaithful Dealing, Cheating, Lying and Dissembling. Oh beloved,
Praising of God is not to make a Noise with a Man's Mouth, the best Praising of
God is the real praising of him in Heart, Vol. ii. Fol. 155. What do we else
(says he) but betray our Lord with a Kiss, when in Praying and Praising and
Singing, and Preaching, we draw near unto him with our Lips, but our Hearts are
far from him. Ibid. 307. In the Golden Remains of the ever memorable Hales,
before cited, we have him delivering himself in his Sermon on Luke xviii. 1.
thus.

For Prayer indeed especially was the Sabbath ordained, yet Prayer it self is
Sabbathless, and admits no Rest, no Intermission at all: If our Hands be clean,
we must, as our Apostle commands us, lift them up every where, at all Times,
and make every Place a Church, every Day a Sabbath Day, every Hour canonical:
As you go to the Marker, as you stand in the Streets, as you walk in the
Fields, in all these Places you may pray as well, and with as good Acceptance,
as in the Church; For you your selves are Temples of the Holy Ghost, if the
Grace of God be in you, more precious than any of those which are made with
Hands. page 178. It requires, says he, no outward Labor of the Body, no
outward Fashion or Manner of Doing, but is internally acted in the Soul it
self, -- quaint witty, and set Forms of Prayers proceed many Times from
Ostentation, more than Devotion. Nay, one Thing I know more, that the most
forcible Prayer, transcends and far exceeds all Power of Words, For St. Paul
speaking unto us concerning the most effectual Kind of Prayer, calls it (...)
Sighs and Groans, that cannot be expressed. Nothing does cry so loud in the
Ears of God, as the Sighing of a contrite and earnest Heart. Ibid 182. It
requires not the Voice but the Mind, not the Stretching of the Hands, but the
Intention of the Soul, not any outward Shape or Carriage of the Body, but the
inward Behavior of the Understanding. How then can it slacken your worldly
Business and Occasions, to mix them with Sighs and Groans, which are the most
effectual Kinds of Prayer? Ibid. 183. And Monro, in his Just Measures of the
pious Institution of Youth before quoted, say, All I doubt not will allow, that
it is not the Expressions how fluent soever they may be, but the Heart that God
regards, and that the seeming Fervor which is occasioned by the Tone of the
Voice, is not the genuine Fire, of Devotion; it is very possible, that one may
be truly devout, though he makes no Use of either Words or Voice.

The Breathings of a recollected Soul, and not noisie or clamorous: The
Language in which Devotion loves to vent it self, is, that of the inward Man,
which is secret and silent, but yet God hears it, and makes gracious Returns
unto it. Sometimes the pious Ardours, and Sensations, of good Souls, are such
as they cannot cloth with Words; they feel what they cannot express. I would
not however be thought to insinuate, that the Voice and Words are not to be
used at all; it is certain that public and common Devotions cannot be
performed without them, and that even in private, they are not only very
profitable, but sometimes necessary: What I here aim at is, that the Youth
should be made sensibe, that Words are not otherwise valuable, than as they are
Images and Copies of what passes in the ^en Man of the Heart, especially
considering, that a great many, who appear very Angelical in their Devotions,
it we take our Measures of them from their Voice and Tone, do soon, after these
Intervals of seeming Seriousness are over, return with the Dog to the Vomit,
and give palpable Evidences of their Earthliness and Sensuality, Pride and
Passion and the like shameful Irregularities. Ibid Part ii. Page 206, 207 It
will not, says he, I suppose be unseasonable on this Occasion to take Notice of
that ordinary Distinction of Devotion, by which it is divided into vocal and
mental; and to give a brief Explanation of it. The vocal is, when by our Voice
and Words, we express outwardly our inward Sentimens and Affections, or in the
royal Psalmist's Phrase, Psa. xiv. 1.
, when the Heart indites, and the Tongue is as the Pen of a ready Writer.
Whence i^ appears, that vocal Prayers, whether they be Forms or extemporary,
ought not to have the Name of Devotion, unless there be a Conjunction of the
Heart and Voice; and therefore though one says or pronounces never so many good
Words, yet if there be not correspondent Motions in the inward Man, he cannot
be truly said to pray; his Words in this Case, are but as Shells without the
Kernels; and his Voice as s^anding Brass, which certainly are le^n Sacrifices,
and unfit to be presented to God, who will be worshipp^d in Spirit and in
Truth, and rejects the Addresses of such as pretend to honor him with their
Lips, when their Hearts are far from him.

Mental Devotion, is that which is transacted in the hidden Man of the Heart,
and it comprehends not only the silent, vehement Pantings of the Soul after
God, but also the secret Manifestations that God makes of himself unto the
Soul; for it is in both these together, that the spiritual and holy Intercourse
that is between God and pure Minds does consist. Of this internal Devotion
there are two Sorts; which I shall briefly consider; the first is, when one
imploys or exercises his Faculties, that is, his Understanding, Will and Desire
in the Contemplation, Love and Adoration of the Beauties and Perfections of
God, and in aspiring after his gracious Communications, and Conformity to his
holy Will and Nature. Here the Soul is active, and particular; sometimes it
views one Perfection, sometimes another. It contemplates God in his Word and
Works, and Providence. And According to the several Views it bath of Him, it
forms several and distinct Acts; such as of Faith, of Love, of Hope, of
Gratitude, Humility and the like; taking Occasion from every Thing of making
devout S^l^ies and E^cul^ons, of which I have given Instances in the Beginning
of this Chapter.

The other Sort is, when the devout Soul, being disengaged from all created
Things; from Sin, and Self, and Corruption, and firmly believing that God, who
fills all Things, is present in the Soul, and ready to display his Power, and
communicate his Light and Graces, does by an Act of Faith, state himself in his
Presence, and there having turned the Eye of the Soul to the Interior, and
made an entire Surrender of himself into the Hands of God, with an humble
Desire, that he would dispose of him as be pleases, and that his holy Will may
be done in him; he continues in a profound Silence and Recollection, waiting
for the divine good Pleasure.

Now, though the Soul when it is entering on this State be active, yet being once
in it, it ceases from all particular and distinct Operations of its own; not
that it is then idle, on the contrary, it is in this Juncture employed in the
noblest manner, for it does in a full Bent and Tendency, and with its Powers
all united, move vigorously toward God, but still in a Way of Tranquillity and
Repose, and without acting particularly; and the heavenly Graces of Faith,
Hope, and Love; of Humility and Resignation, are then in the sublimest
Exercise, though not distinctly apprehended by the Soul; whereupon the blessed
God, as the Experience of many eminently devout Persons does abundantly
justify, visits these Souls that are thus abandoned to him, and depend on him,
with his peculiar Favors, displayes in them the Riches of his Power and Grace,
and makes them feel in an ineffa^ Manner, the Reality of his Presence in their
inward Man; whence it comes to pass, that they improve wonderfully in every
thing that is good, just, and true, pure, and lovely, and advance with Speed
toward Christian Perfection.

I am persuaded, that it would be vastly advantageous, says he, for the Youth,
if Care were taken, to train them up to this Method of Prayer; that is if they
were taught frequently to place themselves in the divine Presence, and there
silently to adore their Creator, Redeemer, and Sanctifier. For hereby they
would become habitually recollected; Devotion would he their Element, and they
should know by Experience, what our blessed Savior and his great Apostle
meant, when they enjoin us to pray without ceasing. It was, I suppose, by some
such Method of Devotion as I am now speaking of, that Enoch walked with God
Genesis v. 24.
; that Moses saw Him that is invisible Heb. xi ^
; that the Royal Psalmist set the Lord always before him Psalm. xvi^. 8.
; and that our Lord Jesus himself continued whole Nights in Prayer to God Lu^e
vi. 12.
: No Body I believe will imagine this his Prayer, during all the Space in which
it is said to continue; ^as altogether vocal; when he was in his Agony in the
Garden he used but a few Words, his vocal Prayer then consisted only of one
Petition and an Act of pure Resignation, thrice repeated: But I h^pe all will
allow that his Devotion lasted longer than while he was employed in ^terring of
a few Sentences. Without Doubt his Holy Soul did, both then, and on other Times
which he more especially consecrated to Prayer, converse in Silence with his
heav^nty Father; so that I think it would be very absurd to say, that his
Devotion on these Occcasi^s was limited to the short Spice, wherein he might
have spoken some Words. I would humbly advise that they who are not yet
acquainted with this Method of Prayer, would not run it down or disparage it,
but rather piously resolve to make a Trial of it; for it is only their own
Experience that can solidly convince them, whether, or not, it has all the
Advantages, to which it pretends,

Ibid. 212, to 215. CHAP. IX. Of Preaching.
AS Prayer is an Address of the Soul to God, so Preaching is an Address of it
to Men; and as that is performed acceptably to God by the Influence and
Operation of the blessed Spirit only, so this is performed profitably and
beneficially to Men, only by the Illumination, Help, and Power of the same
Spirit.

In vain are all the studied, elaborate and eloquent Discourses, or Sermons,
which proceed only from the mere Activity of humane Reason, about the Things of
God, and the Exercise of the Soul toward Him. For as Religion is a divine
Science to be learned only savingly* by the Illumination and Dictates of the
divine Spirit in our Souls, so it is to be taught others only, to Edification
and Salvation, by Men inspired from Heaven.

Hence appears the Reason, in a great Degree, of the Irreligion and Looseness of
Multitudes of Men, who attend such Discourses and Sermons; who being not
acquainted with, or subject to, the divine Operations of God upon their Souls,
nor visited with secret Touches of the heavenly Grace in the Sermons they hear;
which are oftentimes so far from inculcating even the Notion of such divine,
efficacious, and sensible Operations of God in their Souls, that they seem to
deny the same; and so Men rest contented with some mere Nations and
Speculations of Religion, and the Observation of some Ceremonies and Externals
some outward Shows and Appearances of Godliness* without the real Power of it;
Please themselves with a Shell without the Kernal, a Profession without
Possession, a Name to live while dead in Trespasses and Sins; for nothing but
the sensible and Experimental Operations of God in us, can quicken our Souls,
to Him, can purify our Hearts, can make new Creatures of us, give us a new and
spiritual Life, raise our Affections from Earth to Heaven, give us a Taste and
Relish of divine Things, satiate the vast and noble Desires of our Souls, make
us Subjects of God's Kingdom, of Grace here, and Heirs of his glorious Kingdom
hereafter.

Wherefore Men that would teach Religion, must themselves be first taught of
God, must go to Christ's School, must come under the Discipline of his Holy
Spirit in their own Hearts; must retire to, and attend his Operations there;
must mortify the Deeds of the Body by his Spirit, must crucify the Flesh with
the Affections and Lusts thereof; must put off the old Man which is corrupt;
and then they must put on the new Man which after God is created in
Righteousness and true Holiness Epi^. i^ 22, 24.
; live and walk in the Spirit, that they may be anointed by the Spirit to
preach Liberty to the Captives of Sin, and Satan, and the Opening of the Prison
to them who are bound (by Iniquity) to proclaim the acceptable Year of the Lord
Isa. lxi. 1, 2.
, the Salvation that is offered, and made eligible by our Lord, who atoned for
our Sins, in dying for us, without us, and knocks at the Door of our Hearts,
for an Entrance within us; to save us from our Sins; to redeem us from all
Iniquity, and purify us for his own Service.

Men thus taught of God, and anointed by his Spirit to preach the Gospel; will
be able to declare to others what God has done for their Souls Psalm. lxvi. 16.
; to tell them how they shall get Dominion over their vile Lasts and Passions,
and have a new Heart, and a new Nature; and where it is that Christ feeds his
Flock and causes them to rest at Noon Cant. i. 7.
. They themselves being Witnesses of these Things; they will not then speak of
the Things of God, from mere Hearsay, nor from Divinations of their own Brain;
but from what they have seen, and felt of the Word of Life, and do continue to
feel and witness 1 John i. 1, 2.
, in their own Souls.

Their Testimony will be a Living Testimony; the Impressions the divine Spirit
makes on the Powers and Capacities of their own Souls, will be the Source or
Spring of their Ministry; which coming from God, will have a natural Tendency
to lead to God. The Virtue and Life which will be in their Words, will reach to
dead Souls and tend to the awakening them out of their sinful Slumbers; to open
their blind Eyes, and unstop their deaf Ears; to dilate those noble Powers and
Faculties of their Souls, which have been locked up in Sensuality and brutal
Lusts; that the Light of the glorious Gospel of Christ, may shine into their
Hearts; that in Truth and Reality they may be turned from Darkness to Light,
and from Satan's Power to God; that so they may indeed receive Remission of
their Sins, and an Inheritance among them which are sanctified Acts xxvi. 18.
; and actually and truly be Partakers of those glorious and ineffable
Manifestations, Emanations, and Sensations, of the luminous, operative, and
intimate Presence of God in their Souls, in this Life and in that which is to
come.

Such a Ministry as this, is truly edifying and comfortable to Men, in which
the Wisdom and Wit of Man has so little Hand. And the divine Spirit, presides,
governs, directs, and animates the Minister: Who sets him to work, and manages
him in that holy Vocation; not for Gifts and Rewards, not for the Riches,
Honor, Dominion and Government of this World: But for the Discharge of a good
Conscience toward God, with an Eye singly to the carrying on the Work of God,
to promoting the Business, enlarging and establishing of the Kingdom of God; a
spiritual Kingdom; a Kingdom that is not of this World; which is in Truth and
Reality the blessed Kingdom of our gracious Redeemer; the heavenly Kingdom of
our adorable Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, which God in his infinite Mercy,
grant may come, more and more into the Hearts of Men, that his Will may be done
in Earth as it is done in Heaven to his Glory and the Salvation of the Souls of
Men.

And as all Christians allow that the Apostles, and primitive Ministers of the
Gospel, were such Ministers were so enlightened, wrought upon and guided by the
Holy Spirit as aforesaid; so I cannot see any just Reason, why we should nor
esteem the immediate and sensible Influences and Operations of the Divine
Spirit, to he as necessary for Ministers now, since the Kingdom of Christ is
still the same, and the Business of that Kingdom the same, and Men now have as
much Need of the Holy Spirit as they had then. And such a Sense of this weighty
Subject, we may find expressed by the following Authors, whom among many other
that might be mentioned, I thought not unworthy my Readers Notice ad
Observation.

Whoever teaches (says Dr. Gell) before he himself be taught of God, w^ever
will rise up to draw Disciples after him, before the Day Star be risen in his
Heart, he may teach others, but God teaches not by him. Vol. i. Fol. 231. It
is impossible to give true Testimony of Christ, unless we know and feel him
livingly acting in us, in his Work and Deed, unless we can truly and
experimentally say, that we have seen and bear Witness 1 John i. 2.
. Ibid. Fol. 295. Those (says he) who are authorized by our Lord to teach, are
chosen Vessels; such are the Scribes taught to the Kingdom of God, who are
taught by God what they teach the People: But to the Wicked says God, why do
thou teach my Law, or take my Covenant within thy Mouth Psalm. l.
. Ibid. 410. The Laborers, says he, are very averse and unwilling, and
therefore there is more than ordinary need, that the Lord move them powerfully
by his Spirit; and therefore the Greek Words are (...) and the same Words again
Luke x. 2.
in the present Tense (...) that he cast out, or thrust out Laborers into his
Harvest. Laborers in God's Harvest must be sent. How can they labor, how can
they preach except they be sent Romans x.
? Paul the great Apostle who labored more than they all, he rejects Man's
Mission Gal. i. 1.
not of Men nor by Man. Yea, the greatest Apostle of our Profession, Christ
Jesus, he is sent by his Father: And so no doubt he was called of old Missus
Genesis xlix. 10.
which we read Shilo for so V. L. until Shilo come Donec veniat qui mittendus
est; till he come who is to be sent Who sends them? The Father he is Lord of
the Harvest; thus 1 Cor. xii. 28. which is ascribed to the Son Ephesians. iv. 7.
And the Spirit says, separate to me Barnabas and Saul Acts xiii. 2.
. It Is horrible Presumption for Man to take this Honor to himself: It is the
Father Son, and Holy Spirit. It is the Academy, the great Sanhedrim and Council
of Heaven; not any University; not all the Universities upon Earth, that can
send forth such Laborers into God's Harvest. Ibid. 200. But, says he, he has
received that Gift by the laying on of the Hands of the Presbytrey 1 Timothy iv.
14.
. Ans. That may well be questioned since nihil dat quod non habet; nothing can
give that to another which it has not it self. Vol. i Fol. 231.

Let every one, says he, consider well, whether he know Christ thus ( i. e
experimentally) yea or no, before he confess him; otherwise to prate or talk of
him before thou art comfortable to his Death, and not Partaker of his divine
Nature, thou speak what thou know not, and bear false Witness of
Christ. Ibid. 579. The Spirit must first speak to the Minister before the
Minister can speak to the People. Ibid. 680. Who, says he, sends him ( viz.
the Preacher) who but God who reaches to the Heart? Then from the Spirit to the
Spirit? Alas, Men run before they are sent, and are sent out by them who are
not sent themselves: An Hydra. Vol. ii. Fo. 244. They who have heard the Lord,
says he, are the only fit Witnesses to testify and confirm the Gospel. -- Any
kind of Knowledge is not enough for a Witness of the Gospel: The Devils knew
Christ, yet Christ rejected the Devils Skill, wherefore the Lord would not
suffer them to testify of him. -- The Gospel being the Doctrine of Life, and
Salvation, which is Life. Sir. It cannot well be taught and preached by any but
such as live in it Ibid 552. Truly, says he, unless they who publish the great
Salvation, first hear him, even the Lord himself, and obey his Word, what
Credit can be given to what they say? What can they publish but their own
Readings and their own Hearsay? As the Lord speaks of the false Prophets Jer.
xiv. 14.
St. Paul prophesies of such under the Gospel Acts xx. 29.
, and St. Peter 2. Pet. ii. 1.
, and therefore the Apostle tells the Ephesians, that Christ Jesus came and
preached unto them Ep. ^ ^i. 17. and iv.
. Ye have not so learned Christ, if ye have heard him, and have been taught of
him. And so he spoke from Heaven to the Hebrews Heb. xii. 25.
. Now if it be necessary, that Christ in the Spirit, and by his Spirit, speak
to and teach the People, and they hear him, and be taught by him how much more
is it necessary, that he also teach the Teachers themselves, that they hear him
and be taught of him. Ibid. 553. Hear this Author once more. A Fountain sends
not forth bitter Waters and sweet Jam. iii. 11.
This is specially their Fault, who speak their Hear-says; such as talk of far
Countries, with a great deal of Confidence, which they never saw, such as speak
of good Things whereof they have no Share, bear false Witness; they tell Tales,
though they speak what is Truth; for to lie formaliter, is to speak what is
contrary to our Mind, and the Truth whereof we are persuaded; therefore the
evil Spirit was silenced Mar. i.
, and the Spirit of Divination cast out, and the Time shall come when God will
make the Diviners mad; when Men shall not dare to speak what they read only, as
Water out of a Cistern, but Acts ii. 4. (...) and then they shall not dare to
speak what they take up upon Trust for Truth; but what God has wrought in them
and by them Romans xv. 18.
; when that of the Apostle shall be obeyed, Let him that speaks, speak as the
Oracles of God 1 Pet. iv. 11.
, as one that has Urim and Thummim in his Breast, when they shall not dare to
speak but what they are inwardly moved to speak by the Holy Ghost. Ibid. 566.

And Monro in his Just Measures of the pious Institution of Youth. Part I. p.
7. to 9. says,

Every Body will be sensible, that when a Youth, who as soon as his Capacities
did begin to appear, began also to be instructed in the Principles, and trained
up in the serious Practice of Religion; who has been taught the Excellency and
Worth of the Soul, and the Methods by which it must be carried to this blessed
End for which it was designed, who professes not merely a notional Knowledge,
but the Realality and Substance of Divine Things; and who in his own Experience
has felt the Power and Efficacy of divine Truths, seen the Beauty of the Ways
of Wisdom, and tasted the Pleasures of walking in them: I say, every body must
be sensible, that when such a Youth comes afterward to be advanced to the
Pastoral Charge, he will be an eminent and noble Instrument for promoting the
good of Souls: His Conversation will be shining and flagrant, because a living
and unaffected Piety is the Principle of all his Actions: His Discourses,
whether public or private, will be savoury, and attended with Force, for he
speaks that he feels. His Diligence indefatigable, having a deep Sense, both of
the Preciousness of the Souls of Men, and how difficult it is to rescue them
out of the Entanglements of Sin and Vice. His Prayers fervent and frequent, as
well knowing, ^^a^ though he plant and water, yet it is God that gives the
Increase. But on the other hand, when a sort of young Sparks undertake the
sacred Function, whose Minds have never been form^d according to the Maxims of
Christian Piety; who have not been under any regular Decipline, but all along
permitted to follow the Swing of their natural Inclinations, to please and
gratify all the Appetites of Flesh and Blood, and Corruption, without Control;
who have no Experience of divine Things, nor any other Knowledge of the Truth
of Religion, but what is speculative and superficial, dry and jejune; and are
so void of Skill in the Conduct of Souls, that they scarce Know any thing of
their Duty in that Regard, unless it be to patch up a Discourse, which by its
studied Periods and high flown Sallies, exceeding the Capaci^y of the Vulgar,
may tickle the Ears of some nice Hearers, but not touch the Hearts of any: It
is easy to see how fatal the Consequences of such Advancements may be to the
Church and the Souls of Men; for it is plain, tha^ ^hey of this Kidney are more
calculated to ^opagate Irreligion and (...) than to advance the Interests of
Piety, and an Holy Life. The Spirit and Maxims of the World, according to which
they have been educated, will now begin to appear, and betray them into such
shameful Immoralities, as will expose their Character to Contempt and Scorn,
and baffle all their Exhortations, render every thing they say in favor of
Religion, not only ineffectual, but even ridiculous too; make the less thinking
take up with false Notions of Piety; and to conclude, that since the Pastor
does nothing but talk and discourse of Religion, it will be enough for them to
hear what he says, and in fine, give ground to Atheistical and profane Wits to
cry out of Priestcraft, of Cheat and Imposture. And indeed, if the Causes of
that Atheism and Libertinism which at present abound in the Christian World,
were seriously enquired into. I make no doubt but the sad Miscarriages of the
Ministers of Religion would be found to be a principle one. And he adds, p. 47.
It is necessary that they should be practically acquainted with Religion, have
felt its divine Powers and mighty Efficacies and exemplify its heavenly
Precepts in their own Conversations: For it is this that will both inspire them
with Zeal and Diligence, and give Force and Authority to what they recommend.
When o^ speaks of Religion from his own Experience and because it is vitally
seated in ^is Heart, there is a certain, secret and engaging f^cy that
accompanies what he says.

Again, in p. 49. he says. Alas! it is because there is so little of this
heavenly Fire in the Hearts of Men, that they are so careless and unconcerned
about the Good and W^e of these Souls they have the Charge of and indifferent
whether they sink or swim.

In a Word (says he, p. 50. they should 'entirely depend on God for his divine
Aids. CHAP. X. Of the Spiritual Baptism of Christ, and his Divine Supper.
A Clean Heart, and a new Nature are the great Qualifications, necessary to the
F^l^ and Happiness of Mankind: Impurity of Heart and a corrup Nature, ever
were, and ever will be, the Cause of God's Controversy with Men, stained with
Guilt, and immerged in Sensuality, walking after the Flesh, and living without
the Life of God in their Souls; a deplorable and miserable Condition! Out of
which all the external Washings and Works in the World cannot recover or
restore Man and give him that Purity of Heart, and Rectitude of Desire and Will
as is well pleasing to God. The Ceremonial Washings, and external Observations
of the Law, things of Gods own Appointment, had not that Power in them, nor
were ever intended by him but as a kind of Types and Figures of inward Purity
and Rectitude, of the Work of the Divine Spirit in the Soul, and of him who was
to come and cleanse the Heart, who was able thoroughly to purge the Floor, and
make the inside clean indeed. The Royal Psalmist seems very sensible of the
Ineffectualness of all external Ceremonies and Performances for this so needful
a Work; and therefore he cries out very earnestly and ardently for heavenly
Help, saying, Create in me a clean Heart, O God, and renew a right Spirit
within me Psalm. li. 10.
. Agreeable to which the Author to the Hebrews says, The Holy Ghost this
signifying, that the Way into the holiest of all (in the Dispensation of the
Law) was not yet made manifest, while as the first Tabernacle was yet standing,
which was a Figure for the Time then present, in which were offered both Gifts
and Sacrifices, that could not make him that did the Service perfect, as
appertaining to the Conscience, which stood only in Meats and Drinks, and
diverse Washings, and carnal Ordinances (Rites or Ceremonies as the Margent
reads it) imposed on them until the Time of Reformation Heb. ix. 8. to 10.
. For the Law having a Shadow of good Things to come, and not the very Image of
the things, can never with those Sacrifices which they offered Year by Year
continually, make the Comers thereunto perfect -- x. 1.
. There is verily a Disanulling of the Commandment going before, for the
Weakness and Unprofitableness thereof -- vii. 18.
. which are a Shadow of things to come, but the Body (or Substance) is of
Christ Col. ii. 17.
.

To expect Holiness of Heart should be produced in us by any Creature or
Element without us, that our Souls should be nourished up to Eternal Life by
external Food, is greatly to deceive our selves. God has not so changed the
Nature of Things, as to make those Things capable of doing such a Work now,
which they were not capable of heretofore; to make Things that were then weak
and unprofitable, to be now strong and profitable; Things that were then carnal
Ordinances, Rites, o^ Ceremonies, to be now spiritual Powers; Things that were
then at best but Shadows of good Things, to be now the good Things themselves;
Things which were then but to continue for a time, to be now of perpetual
Obligation.

And these who are so weak, (in my Opinion) as to think that our Savior, did
t^ke some of the Mosaic Rites or Ceremonies into his Gospel Church, yet surely
cannot be so strong (in their own Opinion) as to believe that they are altered
in their Nature, but that they remain still to be only Ceremonies, which have
not the Power of purging and feeding out Souls, and therefore cannot be
Essentials of his Religion.

Dr. Hammond, in his Annotations on Mat. iii. 11. having spoke of the Jews Use
of Water Baptism, adds It Is now most easy to apply it to the practice of John,
and after of Christ who certainly took this Ceremony from them. For so he
expressly calls it. Fol. 14.

And he says Christ came to review and reform (the Religion of the form^r Age)
to bring Substance instead of Shadows -- to require the substantial Duties
instead of the Shadows, that darkly signified them. Fol. 26.

Which therefore must be of the Nature of indifferent Things, considered in
themselves, without inherent Goodness, and as such Mankind may use or disuse
them as they are persuaded in their own Minds without offending God, and about
which they should not be offended one with another.

True it is, that Men who love Dominion and their own Interest, are even most
zealous for Ceremonies, and things that they claim to have the only Power of
dispencing to others; they would have Ceremonies make Christians confirm
Christians, feed Christians, absolve Christians, and entitle them to Heaven,
yea wash away their Sins, and give Life to their Souls; and that they only have
Power to give Efficacy to such Ceremonies; and to administer them. On Account
whereof they claim Dominion over Mankind, and a Right to be richly paid by them
or otherwise to send them to Hell, or turn them out of God's Favor. This is to
pervert the Religion of Humble and Holy Jesus; to make external Rites and
Ceremonies of the Essence of his Laws, and the Grandeur Dominion, and Riches of
this World, of the Nature of his Kingdom, who said, My Kingdom is not of this
World John. xviii. 36.
.

The great Apostle of the Gentiles says, Meat commends us not to God; for
neither if we eat are we the better; neither if we eat not are we the worse 1
Cor. viii. 8.
. This holds good as to all Sacramental, or ceremonial external Eatings
whatsoever. For the Kingdom of God is not Meat and Drink but Righteousness,
Peace and Joy in the Holy Ghost Romans xiv. 17.
.

And the Baptism that saves is not the putting away the Filth of the Flesh,
but the Answer of a good Conscience toward God 1 Pet. iii. 21.
, which is the washing of Regeneration, and the renewing of the Holy Ghost T^
iii. 5.
.

This Baptism is the Baptism of Christ, his Spiritual Baptism with the Holy
Ghost and Spiritual Fire of the Divine Word, burning up the impure Stuff and
combustible things of Sin in our Hearts, and washing them from the Filth
thereof; and is contradistinguished from the ceremonial Washing of John the
Baptist with Water, even by John himself, who said, I indeed Baptize you with
Water unto Repentance; but he that comes after me is mightier than I, whose
Shoes I am not worthy to bear, he shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost and
with Fire, whose Fan is in his Hand and he will thoroughly purge his Floor, and
gather his Wheat into the Garner: but he will burn the Chaff with unquenchable
Fire Mat. iii. 11, 12.
. I indeed have b^ed you with Water, but he shall baptize you with the Holy
Ghost Mar. i. 8.
For as in the Commission given by Christ to his Apostles, Go teach all
Nations, baptizing them in, or rather, into the Name of the Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost Matt. xxviii. 19.
, Water is not mentioned, so it is very reasonable to think that Water is not
intended; since, as is just now proved that was not Christ's but John's
Baptism; but that our Savior intended his own Spiritual Baptism, which Dell
undertakes to prove at large in his Doctrine of Baptisms, to which I refer. And
Dr. Gell in his Remains, observes that the Chaldee Word which our Lord used
signifies to dip, as Meat in Sauce. So that to baptize (says he) is to season
the Soul with the Doctrine of the Father, Son and Holy Spirit. Vol. II. Fol.
341.

As the Apostle Peter baptized the Gentiles; of whom it is said, While Peter
yet spoke these Words (i. e. Words concerning Christ, and Faith in him for the
Remission of Sins) the Holy Ghost fell on them which heard the Word Acts x. 44.
. And Peter himself relates it thus, As I began to speak, the Holy Ghost fell
on them as on us at the beginning: Then remembered I the Word of the Lord, how
that he said, John indeed baptized with Water, but ye shall be baptized with
the Holy Ghost -- xi. ^, ^
.

The great Apostle of the Gentiles thanked God, that he had made but very
little use of Water Baptism 1 Cor. i. 14, 1^.
. From which It Is evident, he did not take it to be intended in the Command
Matt. xxviii. 19.
but that 'twas a Matter of mere Compliance with a Jewish Ceremony, both in him
and the rest of the Apostles. For (says he) Christ sent me not to Baptize, but
to preach the Gospel Ver. 1^
.

The ever memorable Hales says, Let us, not deceive our selves, for neither is
Ceremony now, neither was Sacrifice then (that is before Christ came) esteemed
necessary, neither was the Command of God concerning it, by those to whom it
was given, ever taken to be peremptory.

For Proof of which he quotes Chrysostom, and brings in David saying to God,
Thou requirest not Sacrifice, else would I have given it thee, but thou
delightest not in Burnt-Offerings: The Sacrifice of God is a broken Spirit, a
troubled and contrite Heart, O God, do thou not dispose. After the Revolt
(says he) of Jerob^am and the ten Tribes from the House of David, there were
many devout and religious Persons in Israel, and yet we find not that they used
the outward Form of Worship which was commanded. Elias and Elizeus, two great
Prophets in Israel, did they ever go up to Jerusalem to worship? Obadiah, a
great Courtier in King Ahab's Court, and one that feared the Lord exceedingly;
the seven Thousand which bowed not their Knees to Baal, when came they up to
the Temple to offer? A Thing which doubtless they would have done, if they had
understood the Commandment of God in that behalf to have been absolute indeed.
See his Sermon in his Golden Remains on these Words, my Kingdom is not of this
World, p. 203, 204. Dr. Gell. says, That St. Paul told the Galatians, that
their ceremonial Observations were weak and beggarly Elements Gal. iv. 9.
. Such as could not nourish nor strengthen the Soul with Grace. And says he,
the same we may say of all Ceremonies, in themselves considered; whether they
be, first, such as the Church enjoins, or secondly, such as they observe who
oppose them, and oppose the Church in opposing them. In themselves they are no
other, whose only Worth is in their Serviceableness, and Signification of
better Things; and therefore he that is taken with these, in themselves
considered, feeds as it were on the Husks and Chaff, and neglects the Corn; he
admits as it were, the Dish, and tastes not of the Meat: These in themselves
are the Meat that perish, vain and empty Things, which shall not profit us in
the latter End: The Heart must be established with Grace, and not with such
Meat, Vol. I. Fol. 348.

Observe, then says he, what esteem the Spirit of God has of a ceremonial
Worship, if rested in; all such Services, though God's own Institutions, are old
Things: And shall we think that Christian Ceremonies if, rested in, are better?
-- This was St. Paul's Practice, and is and ought to be the Duty of every
Minister, to warn the People committed to his Charge touching the Nature of
these old Things, that they are such, that they are transitory, and that they
ought to pass away from such as are new Creatures. Vol. II. Fol. 196.

All the Ceremonies in the World cannot adequately signify unto us heavenly
Things, but are at the best only Shadows of them, as the Apostle calls them;
like the Painters first rude Draught of a Picture with a Coal: And therefore,
as the Shadows are the longest at the rising and setting of the Sun, so are
these ceremonial Shadows.

They were longest in the Rising of the Jewish and Christian Church; if they
should grow long again, and we repose Trust in them, it might be feared (which
God avert) the Church would set with them.

Ibid. 198. For be it granted, says he, though these ceremonial old Things
preserve the spiritual Truth, as Shells and Skins preserve the Pulp and Kernel,
yet that is but till the Fruit be ripe, and then these are neglected and cast
away. ibid. Fol. 230. This reproves those who dote about Types and Figures, and
look not for the fulfilling of them in themselves by Christ. Ibid. 265. And
Burnet in his second Letter to Law, says, For even they (the Sacraments) are
not strictly Means of Grace, nor does our Salvation absolutely depend upon
them. page 83.

St. Peter, says he, entirely confirms this Notion of Baptism, 1 Epist. iii.
21. where he expressly lays our Salvation not on the outward Sign, but on the
inward Disposition* Baptism says he, does also now save us (nor the putting
away the Filth of the Flesh, but the Answer of a good Conscience toward God)
by the Resurrection of Jesus Christ. page 85. It was necessary, says he, that
the Apostles should be sent to preach the Gospel to all Nations, baptizing
them, etc. But, that therefore it is still absolutely necessary to be baptized
by one of a particular Set, or Succession of Men, does not in the least follow;
especially considering that no Mention of this Necessity, or even Intention, is
ever once made throughout all the Writings either of the Evangelists, or of any
of the Apostles. p. 166, 167. And speaking of the Supper, he says, The Effect
of this Prayer (meaning what is called the Prayer of Consecration, p. 42.) is
not CONVERTING the Bread and Wine into Means of Grace, by a humane Benediction.
CONVERTING is a Term, says he, I can never hear, without fearing, that by
degrees the old Doctrine of Transubstantiation is to be stolen in upon us
again; yet you says he to Law, seem to be particularly fond of it. But there is
no such CONVERSION wrought by the Prayer of Consecration, nor are there any
Means of Grace there says he, but the Disposition of the Hearts p. 43.

To which he adds afterward, Here is no immediate Necessity of any Minister:
And so we do not find expressed any Intention that there should be any: Our
Savior gives no Commission to any to be such, as he did in Baptism; nor do the
Apostles any where intimate that there ever was any such Minister of this
Sacrament in their Time, or leave any Directions about choosing or appointing
one to their Followers, or appointing any themselves for this Purpose. p. 167,
168.

And, says he, far be it from me, or from any Christian, to take upon us, to
judge or condemn those, who after such a Measure of Industry in finding Truth,
as humane Prudence and ordinary Discretion, as Mr. Chillingworth states it,
advises them to; do not and cannot satisfy themselves, that Christ has required
the Continuance of those outward Actions which he never laid any Stress upon,
but as Signs of inward good Dispositions; -- I dare the less do this, says he,
when I observe what plain Difference our Savior himself has placed between the
Thing and the Sign of it Mar. xvi. ^.
. -- And farther, when I consider how small a Weight is laid on these TWO
CEREMONIES of his own Institution, says he, in the Gospel, in comparison of the
great Weight which is there laid on Matters of quite another Nature; how often
the one is spoken of, and insisted upon, and how seldom the other. Though, I
confess, to those who believe them to have been Appointments of Christ's,
designed to continue to the End of the World, they become necessary; insomuch
as all Obedience to Christ is necessary to the Salvation of Christians, but not
for any thing in the Ceremonies themselves. page 164, 165. As the real and
substantial Baptism of Christ is a spiritual Work in the Soul, a Washing the
Heart from Wickedness Jer iv. 14.
, a Cleansing within Matt. xxiii. 26.
, a purifying of the Heart Jam. iv. ^.
, a cleansing from all Unrighteousness 1 John i 9.
, a being baptized by the Spirit 1 Cor. xii. 13.
; which Spirit therefore must be turned unto in our Hearts, minded, attended
depended upon, submitted unto, and followed in his divine Operations, as one
that is come to do that in us, which Men by all outward and ceremonial Washings
could not do for us, as one that is come to make new Creatures of us 2 Cor. v.
17.
, to create in us clean Hearts Psalm. li 10.
, to give unto us a new Heart, and put a new Spirit within us Ezekiel. xxxvi. 26.
. In a word, to make us Sons of God, and Heirs of Heaven. This is the Spiritual
Baptism of Christ, this is the initiating Ordinance to Membership in Christ's
Church, to the Immunities of his Kingdom of Grace in this World, and the
inconceivable Joys and Felicities of an eternal Inheritance in Heaven.

So the true and Spiritual Supper of Christ is a feeding and partaking of Food
and Nourishment from Heaven, which they who are born from above do receive from
the immediate Hand of God, in their Waiting on him, and hungering and thirsting
after it: He hears the Cries of these panting Souls, who being born not of
Blood, nor of the Will of the Flesh, nor of the Will of Man; but of God Jo^. i.
13.
, cannot live upon, or be satisfied with any thing that is of Man, any thing
that he can give, any external Ceremony, or any of the Creatures, but God only,
and the Things which come immediately from him. These are the Souls who have
opened their Hearts to the Knocks of Christ, into whom he comes, and with whom
he sups, and they sup with him R^^ iii ^^.
. These partake of that delicious and satisfying Feast of fat things which God
has made in his holy Mountain for all People Isa (...)
. It Is a Feast that all are invited to; a Feast sufficient for all; and a Feast
that all who are born of God, of the incorruptible Seed and Word of God, and
have longing and ardent Desires after, shall be satiated with. Hear the
Invitation and Promise of God, He every one that thirsts, come ye to the
Waters, and he that has no Money; come ye, buy and eat, yea, come buy Wine and
Milk, without Money and without Price. Wherefore do ye spend your Money for
that which is not Bread? and your Labor for that which satisfyeth not? Hearken
diligently unto me, and eat ye that which is good, and let your Soul delight
itself in Fatness Isa. lv. 1, 2.
. The Spirit and the Bride say come; and let him that hears say come; and let
him that is athirst come; and whosoever will, let him take the Water of Life
freely Rev. xxii. 17.
. In the last Day, that great Day of the Feast, Jesus stood and cried, saying,
If any Man thirst, let him come to me and drink. He that believes on me, as
the Scripture has said, out of his Belly shall flow Rivers of living Water:
But this spoke he of the Spirit, which they that believe on him should receive
Joh. vii. 37. to 3^
.

Then Jesus said unto them, verily, verily I say unto you, except ye eat the
Flesh of the Son of Man and drink his Blood. ye have no life in you (you are
dead as to the Life of God in your Souls) Whosoever eats my Flesh and drinks my
Blood has eternal Life (in the Beginnings of it), and I will raise him up at
the last Day (to the full Fruition of it:) For my Flesh is Meat indeed, and my
Blood is Drink indeed. He that eats my Flesh and drinks my Blood dwells
in me and I in him, (which cannot be said of any outward, sacramental, or
ceremonial Eating and Drinking, because all then, howsoever wicked, who partake
thereof, would dwell in Christ, and Christ in them, a preposterous Thought!) As
the living Father has sent me, and I live by the Father; so he that eats me,
even he shall live by me. This is that Bread which came down from Heaven: Not
as your Fathers did eat Manna and are dead. He that eats of this Bread shall
live for ever -- vi. 53. to 5^
.

This is the Food that nourishes up the Soul to eternal Life, which is not
tied to any outward ceremonial Eating, but is received by the Faithful when and
wheresoever their Souls are heartily breathing to God for it, under
Preparations meet for so sublime a Favor. Which Dr. Gell makes to be the End
of the outward Ceremony, saying, As often as ye eat this Bread, and drink this
Cup, show ye forth the Lord's Death until he come. Why? He is with us always to
the End of the World. Until he come therefore, says he, is until his Life
appear in us; for, adds he, our Receiving of the Sacrament is our Profession of
Conformity unto the Lord's Death until he come and live in us. Vol. II. Fol. 68.

And as his Coming and Living in us may be and is witnessed in the Disuse of
that ceremony, and the Apostle leaves it with so much Indifference, saying
only, as often as ye eat this Bread, etc; and as this Ceremony has been made the
Occasion of much Bloodshed, and more Quarrels and Controversies, than perhaps
any other thing besides; and as it is not very likely that Christians will be
ever agreed about it, it may as justifyably be laid aside, as the brazen
Serpent made by Moses, at the Commandment of God, was broken without any
express Authority from him, upon the Misuse of it; as God knows this Ceremony
has been, and is misused by most Churches, if not all, who are zealous for it.

Some worshipping of it, some kneeling to it, and yet making it a Test for a
Worldly Calling, and others two much resting on it, expecting from it more than
is to be found in it. It seems high Time that Men should be called from the
Shadow to the Substance, from outward Ceremonies to inward Truth, and Purity,
to seek Christ, where he is to be found; not in Figures and Types, but in
Substance, in pure Hearts, in sanctified Souls, in his own Temple, The Minister
of the Sanctuary, and of the true Tabernacle which the Lord pitched and not Man
Heb. viii. 2.
That Men may feel his ineffable Joys and satisfying Consolations in their
inward Man, having the noble Powers and Capacities of their Souls enlightened,
quickened and filled with his luminous, operative and intimate Presence.

CHAP. XI. Of the Possibility and Necessity of keeping the Laws of God in this
Life by the Assistance of the Grace of God.
TO believe that God has given us a Law to keep, which is either in its own
Nature, or through Means of our Corruption, impossible by supernatural Aid to
be kept; is to believe very preposterously of God, and to cast a very high and
dishonorable Reflection on his Justice and Goodness.

To think that he has given an impossible Law to Mankind, is to think he has
given them no Law at all, because such a Law can be no Law to rational
Creatures. An impossible Law is a Solecism, a Law that is impossible to be
kept, is no Law in it self, but must be void from the Beginning; as being
entirely contrary to the Reason and Nature of Things.

To think that the Grace which is come unto us by Jesus Christ, is not
sufficient to purify, and rectify our Natures, and enable us to keep his
Laws, since 'twas for our Breach thereof that he dyed, and made Atonement on
the only and absolute Condition of our Repentance and Leading a new Life; is to
think very unbecomingly of his great Undertaking, for us, and to render him no
Savior at all. For if he be not a Savior from Sin, which is, and ever was the
Cause of God's Wrath toward Men; his Displeasure with them must needs remain;
since he is of more pure Eyes than to behold Iniquity. The Holiness of his
Nature will not admit any unholy Creature to abide with him; And therefore as
Adam when he broke the Law of God, and defiled his Heart, was driven from his
holy Presence; so the Heart must be cleansed and we must return to Obedience to
God's Law, before we can approach him, and enjoy his Delightful Presence again.

For this End therefore, Jesus Christ gave himself for us, that he might redeem
us from all Iniquity, not from the Guilt of it only, but from the Act, from the
Thing it self, and purify to himself a peculiar People, zealous of good Works
Tit. ii. 14.
. He came to finish the Transgression, to make an End of Sins, and to make
Reconciliation for Iniquity, and to bring in everlasting Righteousness Dan. ix.
24.
. In a Word he came to save his People from their Sins. (not in their Sins)
Mat. i 21.
. And the beloved Disciple seems very sensible of this important Truth; for,
says he, He that commits Sin is of the Devil for the Devil sins from the
Beginning. For this Purpose (therefore adds he) the Son of God was made
manifest that he might destroy the Works of the Devil 1 John iii. ^.
.

It Is the first and capital Article in the Creed of the Kingdom of Darkness to
believe the Power of Satan in us to be stronger in it self than the Power of
Christ in us; a more direct Doctrine to perpetual Bondage unto Sin and Satan in
this Life, cannot be invented; nor more opposite to the Kingdom of God and its
coming in the Hearts of Men. This is believing the Devil is almighty in us
instead of God, and that Christ in us is not able to dethrone him, and cast him
out of the Hearts of Men. A Doctrine contrary to that of our Savior, who
represents himself and that very truly, to be stronger than the strong Man, who
has long kept the House; as one that is abe to cast him out and spoil his
Goods Mat. xii. ^^
.

And to that of the beloved Disciple, who told the Christians, greater is he
that is in you, than he that is in the World (...) ii ^^ John. iv. 4.
.

To call upon Men, to fight manfully against Sin and Satan; and yet at the same
Time to tell them they cannot conquer, by any Aid they can have in this Life,
but shall infallibly be conquered; is as great a Discouragement to Christians
in the Pursuit of Virtue, as it would be to military Men, to treat them after
such a Manner, in their Calling; contrary to the Wisdom and Prudence of all
Commanders.

It Is rendering Prayer to God for Help and Strength against inward Corruptions
and vicious Habits, vain and to no Purpose; and in a Word strikes at the very
Vitals and Essence of Religion; at the Kingdom and Dominion of Christ in the
Hearts of Men: And is indeed a Doctrine contrary to Godliness and all Goodness,
which one would think could never have entered into the Hearts of any Men, but
such as would make a Penny of the Peoples Sins, and are themselves immerged in
Impurity and Darkness; such as are Strangers to the Life of God in their Souls;
such as are Ignorant of the Power of divine Grace, and unsensible of the
efficacious Operation of the divine Spirit in their own Hearts; through Neglect
of Attention to it, and Dependence upon it; and in a Word such as have their
Heads filled with mere empty Notions of God, without their Hearts being turned
to him.

For nothing can be more evident and plain, to a Soul entered into the paths of
Virtue, than that God who has begun this good Work in them, is able to carry
it on effectually, and complete it; than that Christ who has begun the Work of
Holiness in their Souls, is able to perfect it; to thoroughly purge his Floor 2
Cor. vii. 1.
; to save them to the uttermost who come unto God by him Mat. iii. 12.
; to deliver them (intirey) from the Bondage of Corruption, and bring them into
the glorious Liberty of the Children of God Heb. vii. ^^.
.

So that all the Failures, Miscarriages and Evils which Men fall into, who in
the Main may seek after Virtue and eternal Life, must be ascribed to their Want
of Watchfulness; to their Want of dwelling with God; to their Want of Due
Subjection to the divine Spirit in their own Hearts; and not to a Necessity
they are under of sinning; not to Want of Power in the divine Grace, to save
them from it; but for Want of their steady and constant Adherence, to that
heavenly Help; For want of Application to God, to be strengthened with Might by
his Spirit in the inner Man Romans viii. 2.
. Man must place his Sins to his own Account, and his Salvation from them to
God's Account: That God in all Things may be glorified through Jesus Christ, to
whom be Praise and Dominion for ever and ever 1 Pet. iv. 11.
.

Would Men accustom themselves to a daily and constant Turning of their
Thoughts, and Minds from the external Creation; from resting in the Things of
this World; and attend the holy influence and Operations of God in their own
Souls they would by Degrees feel a new Heart created in them; a new and holy
Nature to be brought forth, and raised in their Hearts; from which there would
flow forth, good Thoughts and good Actions as naturally as evil Thoughts and
Actions do from a corrupt and evil Nature.

This is the New Birth. This is being born again. This is being born of God:
That blessed Change of Heart so often mentioned, and so earnestly pressed in
the Holy Scriptures; but alas! I doubt, very little minded by Mankind.

This new Heart will send forth a new Life, and Conduct and run the Way of
God's Commandments Psalm. cxix 32.
. with great Delight and Pleasure -- cxix. 92. 143. Prove. iii. 17.
. The Yoke of Christ is easy to it, and his Burden Light Mat. xi. 3^
; his Commandments are not grievous to it 1 John v. 3.
But it is with such a Soul in good Measure as it was with our Lord, it is Meat
to do the Will of God Joh. iv. 34.
Such Souls are delighted and overcome with the Fruition of God, they partake
of heavenly Dainties, and are filled with Joys unspeakable, and full of Glory 1
Pet. i. 8.
; they wait upon the Lord, end renew their Strength: They mount up with Wings
as Eagles, they run and are not weary, they walk and are not faint Isa. xl. 31.
; and the glorious Lord will be unto them a Place of broad Rivers and Streams
-- xxxiii. 21.
To whom Christ will say, Eat O Friends, drink, yea, drink abundantly O Beloved
Ca^ v. ^
: The divine Sensation, such Souls will have of God, will make them say to him,
thy Love is better than Wine -- i ^.
, in thy Presence is Fullness of Joy, at thy Right Hand there are Pleasures for
evermore Psalm ^vi ^^.
.

Some Testimonies of modern Authors to the Possibility and Necessity of keeping
the Law of God in this Life, by the Assistance of the Grace of God.

In the Golden Remains of the ever memorable Hales in his Sermon on Peter's
Fall (he says) For through the Grace of him, that does enable us, we are
stronger than he, (the Devil); and the Policy of Christian Warfare has as many
Means to beat back and defend, as the deepest Reach of Satan has to give the
Onset. p. 135.

He says, St. Austin was of Opinion that it was possible for us, even in this
natural Life, seconded by the Grace of God, perfectly to accomplish what the
Law requires at out Hands P. 136.

In his Sermon on these Words, I can do all things through Christ (that
enableth or) that strengthens me Phil. iv. 13.
, he says, Look what Strength we lost in Adam, that with infinite Advantage is
supplied in Christ. Page 147.

Now, says he, what an Error is it in us Christians when we see the Principal
and Captain Sins, so easily vanquished, to think the Common Soldier, or lesser
sort invincible? For certainly, if the greatest Sins be weak, the lesser cannot
be strong. Page 156 On Psalm. xxxvi. 1. I said I will take heed of thy Ways, he
says, Many learned Men can delight themselves in discoursing of the Weaknesses
of Man's Nature, of the Difficulty, yea Impossibillty of keeping the Laws of
God. Again, says he, on the contrary Side, should I say that we are bound to
take up this (dixi custodiam) Resolution with David, but with Reservation, that
in this Life we can never be able to make it good; I do not see what I could do
more to dishearten, to deter Men from entertaining this Lesson of Christian
Resolution, which (above all Lessons in the World) I would have commended unto
them. For what wise Man will attempt that which he knows before hand to be
impossible? Page 314.

Is he bound, says he, to think it impossible? Shall he so discourage himself
from the happiest Experiment in the World? I know many Men hold it impossible,
and live accordingly: but I would have all under my Charge to hold it possible,
and to live as they meant to prove it, P. 319. R. Bacon, Ph. who collected and
set in order Dr. Rob. Gell's Remains, says in the Preface, That he (the said
Dr. Gell) preached before King Charles the first (on Ephesians. iv. 10.) at New
Market in the Year 1631, a bold Discourse, yet becoming him, testifying before
the King, that Doctrine he taught to his Life's End; The Possibility (through
Grace) of keeping the Law of God in this Life.

In above 200 several Places of which Collection I find the said Doctrine
taught, and shall accordingly present the Reader with a few Instances thereof.

O! What a World of People (says Dr. Gell) are tempted by the Devil? What a
World believe the Devil, that he is stronger to destroy, than the Lord Jesus is
to save? What a Multitude are ready to stone Joshua and Caleb, and whoever are
led of their Spirit, who dare declare the Power of God, and his Spirit,, and
say that they are well able to overcome and destroy Satan, and tread him under
their Feet. Vol. 1. Fol. 18. He who commands thee this Duty (says he) is the
Way, the Truth and the Life, the Wisdom, the one Lawgiver, who knows what we
are able to do, and therefore would not give us an impossible Law. He is the
Power of God, he is ready to empower thee to all whatever he commands, only he
requires that thou comply with him. Ibid. 148. We pray (says he) and are here
taught to pray, that God's Will may be done on Earth, and that so as it is done
in Heaven; yet hold Opinion that it cannot be, so done on Earth, as it is done
in Heaven, is it not evident, that the Commandment of the Lord is his Will
Psalm. xl. 8.
? Is it not as manifest, that the Lord here ( Matt vi. 10.) teaches us to
pray, that, that Will of the Lord may be done, and that on Earth as it is done
in Heaven? Is not therefore such Opinion directly opposite unto the manifest
and express Word of God? Can they who believe that the Will of God is
impossible so to be done, can they pray in Faith? Do not they who teach that it
is impossible, that the Will of God should be so done upon Earth as it is done
in Heaven, do they not teach expressly contrary to the Word of God? Do they
not teach the Doctrine not of Faith but of Unbelief? Can such be accounted
Ministers of the Gospel, who teach directly contrary to the Gospel of Jesus
Christ. Ibid 156.

They believe, says he, that the Devil can make a perfect wicked Man, but they
believe not that it is possible, the Lord, whom they confess Omnipotent and
Almighty, that he can make a Man perfect. Do they not ascribe more Power to the
Devil than to God himself. Ibid. 239. Our Lord, says he, the Wisdom of God,
and Righteousness of God, would not give a Law that is impossible, nor blame
Men for omitting and not fulfilling that which is impossible and not feasible
to them. Ibid. 415. Would thou obey even to the Death of the Cross? Love the
Lord thy God, says he, with all thy Heart: There is no Commandment of God
impossible to him that loves. Ibid. 554. That it is possible, says he, through
Christ to turn away from all our Sins; and that all Iniquities should be put
away from us Romans xi. 26.
; thar we shall be justified and cleansed from all Sins yea all Things, etc;
this is no erroneous Doctrine, but the very same which was preached by the
Evangelists and Apostles: That Jesus should be so called because he should save
his People from their Sins Matt. i. 21.
. That Jesus is the Lamb of God that takes away the Sins of the World Joh. i.
. That God has sent Jesus to bless us, and to turn every one of us from our
Iniquities That this is the very same Doctrine which the Apostle preached in
this Text ( Acts xiii. 38, 39.) when he says, That by this Man is preached
unto us Remission of Sins. Wherefore to teach Men that Remission and Putting
away of Sins, and Justification, and Cleansing from all Sins, is impossible in
this Life, through Christ, and not to be believed, is to teach Men Unbelief;
yea it is to teach despising of the great Grace of God, to teach false accusing
of God, and his VVays; yea it is to teach Apostasy, and Revolt from God and his
VVays. Hence we may learn how to judge of the present Generation, who think it
a Thing altogether impossible, that Sin should be wholly put away, removed and
turned from us; though it be promised to be done by Jesus Christ. Ibid. 703. No
unclean thing shall enter by any Means, says he, into the holy City Rev. ^xi ^.
. There is no Popish Purgatory to cleanse us, and purge us from the Relics of
Uncleanness (which Men say must be in us, while we live in this World) -- I
need not prove this to you; therefore if ever we enter into the Holy City, we
must really, and not by imagination, and thoroughly be purged and cleansed from
Sin in this Life; since we know this, Let us cleanse our selves from all
Pollution both of Flesh and Spirit Vol. II. Fol. 80.

Beloved, says he, to believe that God accepts Christ's Sufferings for us, so
that we need not suffer with him, and die with him to all our Sins, is to
believe a Lie. Ibid. 240. What else do they mean, says he, who say that it is
impossible, but that of Necessity we must sin? Is not this to deny the
Resurrection from the Death of Sin to the Life of Righteousness. Ibid. 349.
Jesus Christ, says he, is a perfect Savior, he saves us from every evil Work,
both that which otherwise we might suffer, and that which otherwise we might
do. First, That which otherwise we might suffer: This is the more to be noted,
because when we speak of Christ as a Savior, we do not commonly apprehend him
according to the Largeness and Amplitude of Salvation, but confine his
Salvation unto this, or that: as when we say he is our Savior, and saves us
from our Sins, -- according to the Angel's Etymology of his Name. But when we
enquire from what he saves, though the Angel, says from Sins, we commonly say, he
saves us from that we most fear, i. e. Punishment for Sin: But Punishment for
Sin, is not Sin; if he saves us from Sin, he saves from that which is the Cause
of Punishment. He is able to save us to the uttermost. Ibid. 406. If the Lord,
says he, deliver from every evil Work, then may the People of the Lord, his
Believers, be saved and delivered from every Sin. This is a strong Consequence:
A potentia ad actum non valet consequentia: As because Christ is able to save
to the utmost; therefore he will so do: This thoug^ be most true, as appears by
many Scriptures, yet the Consequence is not true: But when the Apostle says,
that the Lord will deliver from every evil Work, it undoubtedly follows that
Believers may be saved, and delivered from all and every evil Work, and Sin; ab
actu ad potentiam valet consequentia, from the Act which is pramised, to the
Power this follows undeniably. Ibid. 407. Hence it is evident, says he, that
they who believe not, that the Lord is able to subdue all their Spiritual
Enemies, and bring them into the Heavenly Canaan, they are truly said to tempt
the Lord by their Unbelief in the Power of God. Ibid. 667. And, says he, The
Law of the Lord is perfect, converting the Soul; that is, the Law of the Lord
is perfect in it self, and makes others perfect, which by the Assistance of
the Holy Spirit fashion and conform their Lives thereto. 749. But, says he, we
desire not that God should cleanse us from all our Unrighteousness, though that
be added 1 John i. 9.
. We love that too well to part with it, and say it is impossible to be
cleansed from it -- and yet, says he, we have so much Religion (such as it is)
that it has devoured all Honesty, Truth, Justice, Faithfulness; we have so
much of the imagined Righteousness of Christ, that it pays our Debts for us, it
feeds the Hungry for us, it clothes the Naked for us, it relieves the
Oppressed, visits the Sick. In a Word, we are so righteous by the imagined
Righteousness of Christ, that we can neither live sober, nor chaste, nor just,
nor honest, nor merciful, nor true, nor faithful; yet righteous all this while,
by the imputed Righteousness of Christ. We have so tenter'd the Righteousness
of Christ, that it serves to hide all our Unrighteousness, our Drunkenness, our
Whoredom, our Lying, our Cheating, our Couzening, our Oppressing, our
Unmercifulness; in a word, it is, A Mantle of Religion to cover our Knavery.
Ibid. 799. Is there not, says he, a Promise of greater Grace, Romans v.
, a Supply of more Help by the Second Adam, than lost by the First? Ibid. 803.
The Word (...) Salvation, says he, is considerable; either 1. In regard of the
Term a quo, from Sin: Thus it is a Deliverance from the Power of Sin, and
Pollution of it, and Punishment for it: Or, 2. In respect of the Term ad quem,
the bringing of Everlasting Righteousness, Life and Glory. We have both these
together 2 Timothy iv. 18. The Lord shall deliver me from every evil Work, and
shall preserve me unto his everlasting Kingdom. Ibid 807. It Is true indeed,
says he, Degrees there are of those that are born of God 1 John ii. 12, 13.
; yet is there no Degree so low, but has with it an Ability of resisting, and
not yielding to and obeying the World? Ibid. 819.

But how is it possible for me, says he, to overcome the World? This Conceit is
of Impossibility, O how does it blunt all Endeavors, and weakens Faith. See
Notes on Col. iii. 1. They could not enter in because of Unbelief. Ibid 827.
And, says he, how likely a Thing it is, that this Age should afford many
Friends of God and Christ, it appears by our Opinion we have almost generally
entertained throughout the whole Christian, World, and more notably among us;
That it is impossible to be a Friend of Christ. Is there any such Opinion? What
else do we mean, when we say, it is impossible for us to do whatsoever he
commands us, which is the true and proper Character and Note of Christ's
Friends Joh. xv. 14.
? Now who but a Madman or a Fool will ever go about to do that which is
impossible for him to do? or which he himself apprehends to be impossible,
which is all one? Ibid. 773. Dr. Hammond in his Paraphrase and Annotations upon
the New Testament, on 1. Joh. iii. says, And so v. 5. when it is said that
Christ appeared that he might take away our Sins, and that there is no Sin in
him; it is evident that he came to take away our Acts, as well as our Habits,
and that there was no Act, as well as no Habit of Sin in him: And so in all
that follows, v. 6, 8, 9, etc. one Act of Sin is contrary to abiding in Christ,
that is, to adhering to him, to seeing and knowing, that is to obeying him; one
Act is of or from the Devil, one Act as contrary to that Seed, that Purity,
that Principle of Filiation, that is in him, that is born of God, and not only
a Habit of it. -- what being born of God signifies, has been noted, Joh. i
Note b, to have received some special Influence from God, and by the Help and
Power of that, to be raised to a pious Life Agreeably (...) he that has been
born of God, is literally he that has had such a blessed Charge wrought in
him, by the Operation of God's Spirit in his Heart, as to be translated from
the Power of Darkness into the Kingdom of his dear Son, transformed in the
Spirit of his Mind, that is, sincerely changed from all Evil to all Good, from
Obebience to the Flesh, etc. to an Obedience to God. Fol. 831.

Monro in his Just Measures, before quoted says, So great is the Goodness and
Benignity (of God) and so perfect is the Justice of his Nature, that he will
not, cannot command Impossibilities. Whatever he requires of Mankind by way of
Duty, he enables them to perform it: His Grace prevents and assists their
Endeavors; so that when they do not comply with his Injunctions, it is because
they will not employ the Power that he has given them, and which he is ready to
increase and heighten upon their dutiful Improvement of what they have already
received, and their serious Application to him for more; to him that has shall
be given. Part I. p. 59.

The merciful God, says he, to be sure 'will never enjoin us any Tasks, but
what 'he will aford us Grace to perform. Part III. p. 240. Certainly they are,
says he, our Flesh and Blood, our corrupt Nature and Self-Love, and have
subverted the Gospel, represented the Precepts of it as impossible to be
obeyed. Ibid. 310. Whatever Heights I may have raised it (the necessary Duty of
Religion says he) up unto, they are such as are warrantable because evidently
founded on the Doctrine of the Gospel, which without doubt does not oblige us
to any Thing that is impracticable or impossible. Ibid. 456. Since, says he,
our blessed Lord in delivering the Christian Doctrine to the World, intended
that the excellent Precepts of it should be obeyed, it evidently follows, that
Obedience to them is not impossible or impracticable. It were to be sure very
absurd, yea, even blasphemous, to assert, that our merciful Redeemer, who
sufficiently understood the Infirmities and Weakness of Mankind, and who came
to deliver them from the uneasy Yoke of the Jewish Ceremonies on the one Hand,
and from the savage and inhuman Rites of Gentilism on the other, should himself
bind unsupportable Burdens on his Followers, and prescribe them Tasks that
they were not able to perform.

Indeed were Men left to themselves, and if Obedience to the Precepts of the
Gospel were required of them, in Virtue of their natural Abilities, now in this
State of Degeneracy and Corruption, where the Power of vicious Habits, is so
great, and the Baits of manifold Temptations so cunningly managed, by the great
Adversary of Souls, then they might justly cry out that it is impossible to
obey; but it is not so, we are under the Gospel, which is the new Law of Grace,
and which gives both the Will and the Deed, and which commands only, because it
gives Power to obey,

Ibid. 81. Tho, of our selves, and without him, Christ, says he, we can do
nothing John xv. 5^
. yet with him we can do all Things; (and then adds a little lower,) why should
any Duties frighten us, or seem impossible to us? And therefore our Lord had
very good Reason to recommend the Precepts of the Gospel to his Followers, as
an easy Yoke; and a light Burden (...) xi. 30.
; to which also his beloved Disciple St. John gives his Suffrage, telling us,
from his own Experience, no doubt; that his Commandments are not grievous 1
John v. 3.
. Ibid 82. To be short, says he, since our blessed Redeemer, has made
Obedience to the Precepts of the Gospel, to be as it were the very Essence of
his faithful Followers, the certain Evidence of true love to him, and the only
undeceiving Mark and Character, that distinguishes them, from the Hypocritical
and Hollow-Hearted, telling them, at every time, if ye love me keep my
Commandments Joh. xiv. 15.
. He that has my Commandments, and keeps them, he it is that loves me --
xiv. ^1.
; If ye continue in my Word, that is, in the Obedience and Practice of it, then
are ye my Disciples indeed ^
. And to the same Purpose elsewhere; ye are my Friends, if ye do whatsoever I
Command you ^
. And since, in fine, he expressly assures us, that they only who do the Will of
his Father, that is, who obey the Precepts of the Gospel, which indeed are so
many Declarations, of what God will have us to do, shall enter into the Kingdom
of Heaven, ^
, it is to a Demonstration evident that to assert that (it) is impossible to
obey the Precepts of the Christian Religion, is all one as to assert that it is
impossible to be a good Christian, or to be saved. Ibid. 83, 84. The CONCLUSION.
TO conclude, Obedience to the Impressions which God makes upon our Souls, of
his Will and Mind: This is Religion and true Christianity: This is the Conduct
that we ought to be found in, in order to be happy here, and hereafter. It Is
not the submitting our selves to the Decrees, Determinations, and Dictates of
fallible Men; to the Rites, Ceremonies, and Injunctions of Men, in Relation to
Externals, but a depending on, and Compliance with the internal Light,
Operations and Injunctions of the divine Spirit in the Soul; having the Powers
and Capacities of the Soul dilated and laid open to the Influence of Heaven, by
an upright Application to God, and waiting on him, with a Mind sequestered from
this World, and visible Objects; with a Mind and Heart, see king the Kingdom of
God and his Righteousness -- vi 33.
, following Christ in the Regeneration -- xix. 28.
, and doing whatsoever he commands Joh. xv. 14.
.

As every Man must give Account of himself to God Romans xiv. 11
, so let every one of us address our selves to Him, his Son and Spirit, and
here what he speaks in us, by his blessed Spirit, and what he speaks to us by
his sacred Writings the BIBLE; let us frequently read these holy Writings; and
as frequently turn our Minds to this holy Spirit; for as holy Men of God, of
old, (wrote or) spoke them as they were moved by the holy Spirit ^ Pet. i 21.
, so Men of God now can have no adequate Knowledge of them, no Knowledge of
them which is divine and saving by any other Medium, but only the same Spirit
by which they were wrote; for as they are Things of God so no Man knows them
but by the Spirit of God ^ Cor. ii. 11.
.

Laying aside therefore the Power and Prejudice we may have received by
Education and Tradition, the vicious Inclinations and Habits of Malice, Guile,
Hypocrisy, Envy, and Evil Speaking, let us as new born Babes desire the
sincere Milk of God's Words (in Respect of what he Dictates, both without us,
and within us,) that we may grow thereby 1 Pet. ii. 2.
, that we may be ^ed and nourished by him unto eternal Life; for as our Souls
are Spirits, and want spiritual Sustenance; so God alone is that Spirit which
can yield it to us, and bestow upon us the heavenly Viands; who can give unto
us the true Bread from Heaven Joh. vi. 32.
; and let us not content our selves with any Shadows and Figures of it; or any
external or bodily Service; f^ it is the Labor of the Mind, the Hunger a Thirst
of the Soul, as influenced by the divine Spirit, that is the necessary Work,
and proper Qualifications for partaking of the Meat which endures unto
everlasting Life Joh. vi. 27.
.

As Mankind come into this Exercise of Mind so acceptable to God, and
profitable to themselves, from a true Sense of their spiritual Wants, their
Cries and Prayers, in and under the Aid and Power of his Spirit, will enter into
the Ears of the Almighty, and have Access to him, and meet with suitable
Returns of Comfort and Supplies from him. Here Ministers will have the heavenly
Bread to break to the People; they will not feed them with husky Notions, with
dry and jejune Discourses, with humane Compositions, and Words which Man's
Wisdom teaches, but which the Holy Ghost teaches 1 Cor. ii. 13.
.

As their Ministry will spring from God, so it will lead to God; 'twill not be
a dead, but living Ministry 'twill reach to the Heart and tend to raise it into
a living Sense of God; 'twill not impede and hinder the Souls of them who are
breathing for a greater Sensation of the Life of God Ephesians. iv. 18.
in themselves, but will be a Furtherance and Help to them in that divine
Exercise; and Ministers and Hearers will be made to drink into one Spirit 1
Cor. xii. 13.
. They will all eat the same Spiritual Meat, and all drink the same spiritual
Drink -- x. 3, 4.
; and being fitly framed together, will grow into an Holy Temple of the Lord
Ephesians. ii.
: In which Temple the Lord will dwell, and delight to do Good, to these Souls
who are thus fitly framed together in Him.

Such Souls will know beyond all Hesitation the Certainty and Reality of the
Existence of the Deity. They will not only be convinced of that great Truth,
from clear Deductions of Reason and Scripture, but will feel and witness it, by
such sensible, transporting, and delightful Manifestations of God in their own
Hearts, as will make them no more to doubt of his Existence, as Monro says,
than they can doubt that the Sun shines, when at Midday, with open Eyes they
see his Light and feel his warming Influences.

FINIS.

