AT A CONFERENCE Held at Deerfield in the County of Hampshire, the Twenty
seventh Day of August, Anno Regni Regis GEORGIJ Secundi, Magnae, Britanniae,
Franciae et Hiberniae, etc. Nono, Annoque Domini, 1735. By and between His
Excellency JONATHAN BELCHER, Esquire Captain General and Governor in Chief in and
over His Majesty's Province of the Massachusetts Bay in New England.

AND

Ountaussoogoe and others, Chiefs of the Cagnawaga Tribe of Indians, etc. who
were accompanied by a Number of the St. Francoi^ Indians, who at their own
desire were included in the Treaty with the Cagnawagas, the whole being Twenty
seven.

Cuncaupot Captain, with his Lieutenaut and several others of the Chiefs of the
Houssatonuoc Indians etc, being upwards of Forty in the whole.

Marsequunt, Naunautooghija^, and Weenpauk, Three Chiefs of the Scautacook
Tribe and others, including Seventeen of the Moheegs, making Eighty in the
whole.

HIS Excellency being seated at a large Table under a spacious Tent for that
Purpose prepared, attended by a Quorum of His Majesty's Council, and a
Committee of the honorable House of Representatives, thereto appointed by the
General Court; with a great Number of Gentlemen and others Spectators.

The Union Flagg flying at the Head of the Tent.

His Excellency first received the Cagnawaga Tribe of Indians, with the St.
Francois, who were placed on Seats at a suitable Distance over against His
Excellency; they having first made their Compliments to the Governor by
shaking Hands etc.

Joseph Kellogg, Esquire being a Sworn Interpreter, Governor -- to the Interpreter
-- Inform the Chiefs I shall speak.

My good Friends and Brethren,

I Am glad to see you: I give Thanks to the Great GOD who has safely conducted
you through a long and tedious Journey; It is a great pleasure to me that we
have the Opportunity of refreshing our Faces with the sight of each other. --
Holding out one String of Wampum, -- proceeds, and says, --

My good Friends and Brethren, THIS is to wipe away all Tears from your Eyes.
-- Then holding out a second -- THIS is to open your Throats that you may speak
with all Freedom -- Then a third -- THIS is to wipe away all Blood, and to
comfort you under all your past Difficulties.


And then His Excellency delivered them the three Strings in one.

Auountauresaunkee Indian Speaker. WE that are deputed from our Tribes are come
at Your Excellency's Call -- at your desire -- and are glad we are got safe
here, after a long and tedious Travel over Hills and high Mountains, and join
with the Governor in our Thanks to GOD that we see the Faces of each other in
Health and Peace. As Your Excellency has done to Us, we do the same in answer
to You -- holding a String of Wampum -- proceeds and says, -- Our desire is
that all Tears may be wiped from Your Excellency's Eyes. -- Then holding out a
second String -- That your Throat may be open, that all freedom of Speech may
be had, we desire the Path may be clear and open, and no difficulty in the way.
-- Then holding out a third String -- We desire the Place where the Governor
stands may be clean from all filth of Blood:

And then he delivered the three Strings to the Governor. The Governor sent
for Three of Us, but usually more of us come than are sent for, we are Eight
instead of Three. We have brought our Wives who we always want with us. (Then
delivers a Belt of Wampum, being in Answer to One the Governor sent them by
the Messenger that called them)

We incline to be short left we should be troublesome to the Governor. We are
here the Representatives of the Three Families of the Cagnawaga Tribe,
Ountaussoogoe and Three others, one of the Families having sent two Delegates.

We desire nothing may be taken amiss by Your Excellency; if a wrong Word
should happen to fall from us, we desire it may be taken up and rectifyed; it
is what has been usual, and we desire it may be so now.

The Way is now clear, and the Door open for Freedom of Speech; but we have
nothing to say at present. We were sent for, and it is not customary for those
that are drawn by the Hand to speak first, and therefore wait to hear what Your
Excellency has to say, and desire You would please to appoint the time, when we
shall be ready to attend.


Governor. It is not at all disagreable to me that more of you are come than
were sent for; You are all doubly welcome, and I am glad to see you all; and if
more had come than are here they should have been very welcome too; I am glad
to see your Wives and Children also.


Ountaussoogoe. Brother, Governor, and Broad Way, we have now shaken Hands,
finished Salutation, and we take it the Method thereof is now ended: according
to the Custom of Our Forefathers.


Governor. I take it so too. I shall signify to you by Capt. Kellogg when I
shall be ready to speak further to you on Business, which I intend to Morrow in
the forenoon.


His Excellency drank a Health to King GEORGE to them.

They all drink with proper Salutations.

Ountaussoogoe. We are here at Your Excellency's Call, and when You say we are
dismissed we are ready to go: We return Thanks that we have been well provided
for since we have been here; we have wanted nothing, and thank the Governor.
When we came from Home we told Our People we purposed to return in forty Days,
we have been in this Place near thirty, and now wait Your Excellency's Pleasure
for our Return.


Governor. It is in some measure owing to your Selves that so much time is
already spent; Your Answer to me not coming seasonably, I waited for it a long
while, more than Six Months. It is the Great GOD that governs the Winds and
Weather, and by his Providence the Vessel sent by the Government from Boston
with Stores has been delayed.


Ountaussoogoe. When we received Your Excellency's Message Our Young Men were
out at War, and we inclined to see the Event; for if great Loss had happened, we
should have been obliged to revenge it Our Selves; and we are now come at Your
Excellency's desire. Although I am an Old Man, I am not wanting of Business,
sometimes being called to one Place, sometimes to another, on public Affairs
or otherways; and here we are now.


Governor. We cannot avoid Disappointments; I will endeavor you shall be early
dispatched; there are other Tribes here expecting to be treated with as well as
you, but I consider your distance, and shall give you the first dispatch.


Ountaussoogoe. We take it all Matters are over as has been customary by Our
Fathers at first meeting on such Occasions, and are now ready to take leave.


Then the Indians made their Compliment and withdrew.

Thursday August 28. 1735. The Conference Continued.
PRESENT

His Excellency Jonathan Belcher, Esquire

Captain General and Governor in Chief, etc.

Cuncaupot Captain, and Chief of the Houssatonuoc Tribe of Indians, attended
with Twenty three Men and Twenty Indian Women and Children.

THE Indians made the usual Compliment by Shaking Hands, etc.

Governor. I thank GOD who has brought you here in Safety and Health after a
long and tedious Journey. I look upon you as my Children, and hope you are good
Subjects of King GEORGE. I shall always take the same Care of you as of the
English, and take you under my Protection at all times; if you meet with any
Difficulty at any time, I expect to have Notice of it; and if you have any
thing to lay before me now I am ready to hear it. -- After some Pause by the
Indians -- If you are not prepared now to speak, I will give you a further
Opportunity till the afternoon, or to morrow Morning. And I will now go on.


Indians. We are come here to pay Our Respects to the Governor, and hear what
the Governor has to say to Us, but we have nothing to say at this time.

Governor. I rejoice very much at your Disposition to receive the Gospel by
One of Our Ministers, I hope you are all well satisfied with Mr. Sargent, and
with Mr. Woodbridge, (who are your Minister and your Schoolmaster,) and that
you will diligently and constantly attend on Mr. Sargent and Mr. Woodbridge
with your Children, to receive Instruction from them. Religion is a serious
thing, and it ought to be always born on your Minds. If you have any thing to
say or propose further to me herein, I shall rejoice in it, and be ready to do
it for the good of your Souls.

I hope you have been well entertained since you have been here, and that every
thing has been agreeable to you.


Indians. Yes Sir.


Governor. I have nothing further to say to you at present, I will meet you
when you are ready, this Afternoon, or to morrow Morning.

I drink to you all with an Heart full of respect: I drink the great King
GEORGE's Health to you.


Capt. Cuncaupot. We drink a Health to King GEORGE, and the Governor.


Indians. We are very glad the Governor takes so much Care of us, it takes all
sorrow from our Hearts, and we hope (as GOD shall enable us) to perform what
Your Excellency has recommended to us.


Governor. I have nothing further to say to you at present, but whenever you
would speak to me I shall be ready to hear you.


The Indians withdrew.

Thursday August 28. 1735. The Conference Continued.
PRESENT

His Excellency Jonathan Belcher, Esquire

Captain General and Governor in Chief, etc.

Marsequunt, Naunautooghijau, Weenpauk, Chiefs of the Scautacooks, with Sixty
three Men and Women attending, and also Seventeen of the Mobeeg Tribe with them.

The Chiefs above with the others, paid the usual Compliment to the Captain
General, by shaking Hands etc.

Governor. I am very glad to see such a Number of King GEORGE's good Subjects
in Health and Peace here together; I look upon you all as my Children, and
shall take the same Care of you as I do of the English at all times: If you
meet with any Difficulty at any time from the People, you must repair to me,
where you shall meet with all manner of Justice. The Government has set up a
Trading House under Capt. Kellogg's Care, that you may be continually Supplied
in the best manner, and not cheated in your Trade; they have also sent a
Minister to the Trading House at Fort Dummer and another to Houssatonnoc, that
you as well as the Indians there may be instructed in the true Knowledge of
JESUS CHRIST.

The Government as well as particular Gentlemen are very willing to be at great
Charge in spreading the Gospel among you, that you may live the better here,
and be happy for ever hereafter. It Is the highest Respect and Friendship the
Government can show you to instruct you in the true Religion; and I hope you will
express your thankfulness for it to GOD, by leading better Lives than ever yet
you have done, and that you your Selves as well as your Wives will make it your
business to attend on the Ministers, and observe their Instructions, especially
on GOD's holy Day, and that you will command your Children also, that they may
be taught to Read and to Write, and that they may be instructed in the true
Religion of JESUS CHRIST.

I hope you have been well entertained here, and that every thing has been
agreeable to you since you have been here.


Indians. In the Morning we eat, are well entertained at Noon, and at Night lie
down to Sleep; we Sleep well and are in good Health.


Governor. If you have any thing to propose or offer to me now or to Morrow,
or at any other time; when you are ready I am ready to receive it.


Indians. Our Father, We have heard Your Excellency Say, -- We take
extraordinary kindly Your Care of us, not only for our temporal Good, but for
the good of the Life to come (which is of the greatest Concern) that so it may
be well with us with that GOD who takes care for all Men, and with whom all are
alike.


And then laid down a Belt of Wampam, which they said was according to their
Custom of shaking Hands.

Governor. I have nothing further to say to you at this time; I am ready to
hear whatever you may have to say to me when you please.


His Excellency drinks King GEORGE's Health to the Indians.

The Indians return the Compliment; drink King GEORGE's Health and the
Governor's, and expressed their thankfulness for the Opportunity of so doing;
and then took leave, and withdrew.

Thursday August 28. 1735. The Conference Continued.
PRESENT.

His Excellency Jonathan Belcher, Esquire

Captain General and Governor in Chief, etc.

Ountaussoogoe, and the others of the Cagnawaga Tribe.

Governor. My good Friends and Brethren,

THere has been a long Friendship between King GEORGE's Subjects, and the Five
Nations from whence you originally came, and there was a special Covenant made
between this Government and You (the Cagnawaga Indians) at Albany, eleven Years
ago, which you on Your part as well as we on Ours, have faithfully observed
hitherto; and we now readily acknowledge that you have testified your
Faithfulness in diverse Instances of your Friendship; and I now come by the
desire of the People of this Government to renew that Covenant, and to brighten
the Chain, that a good Understanding of Peace and Friendship may be Cultivated
and Continued for ever, that so the Children unborn may in times to come
rejoice in Our meeting together this day.


His Excellency delivers them a large Belt of Wampum.

Auountauresaunkee Indian. It is not to be questioned but when the Govermour
has done saying, He will inform us He has done.


Governor. There are some of your People who resort to Fort Dummer, where
Captain Kellogg Commands: The Government have placed A FATHER there, who will
be ready to learn them and their Children to Read and Write, and to inform them
of the Principles of Our Religion; If any of you are willing to be instructed
therein, I look upon you to be a free People, You are my Brethren, and you need
not be afraid of any body, nor of receiving Knowledge: It will cost you nothing
to have your Children instructed by the FATHER that lives at that Fort. It is
from the same respect and love that I have for my self, that I would have you
and your Children Instructed. And this Matter I leave to your Consideration at
your return Home.

Then His Excellency delivered another Belt of Wampum. There is a Present from
the Government to be given you, which you shall have to Morrow.

I have done speaking for the present.


Auountauresaunkee, Indian Speaker -- Stands up, -- And distinctly repeats
every thing His Excellency has said, and he in the Name of the rest, returns
their hearty Thanks for the Governor's Care over them and Kindness for them;
gratefully acknowledging the Respect shown them by the Governor, -- and
proceeds -- It is exceeding kind of the Governor (and we rejoice to see it)
that the BROAD WAY is kept Open between Us, that there is safe passing, and no
hindrance or stop therein. Matters of such Consequence as these are of great
Moment, and deserve the Attention of a better Head than mine (which is weak) to
speak to, especially what the Governor mentions as to the Covenant made about
eleven Years ago at Albany.

Ountaussoogoe, Indian Chief, -- Rises up, -- And repeats again Article by
Article what His Excellency had said: Then lays down a large Belt of Wampum
doubled; and in answer to the Governor, (with one End of the Belt) says, --

Brother, the Broad Way. I am poor in the Case: Don't expect a full Answer from
us here; but I take up Your Word and shall carry it home to them that have sent
us here; they are now upon their Knee waiting for Our return, they are the
Three Families of the Cagnawaga Tribe, and they with us will take these
Affairs, which are of such great Weight under Consideration, in order to give
the Governor an Answer. And we give thanks to the Great GOD that has given
Your Excellency and Our Brethren of the BROAD WAY, an Heart to continue of the
same Mind as when the Covenant was entered into: We also rejoice that GOD has
continued Us of the same Mind, and that there is no seeking of any kind, but
Good.

With the other End of the Belt. He returns thanks for the Favors received.
And now we have gone through the Work, what have we further to do? We desire to
know His Excellency's Pleasure when we may be returning Home.


Governor. I have had News from Boston to day; there is a Ship lately arrived
from England, and brings the Account that the Peace is still subsisting between
King GEORGE and the French King; but if there should happen a War between King
GEORGE and the French King, yet I shall have a good Opinion of your Fidelity.
If it should be War, there is no question but your Justice and Faith, as well
as your Interest will hold you to Peace with us; You will be always honestly
dealt with by Capt. Kellogg at the Truck House, where you may have such things
as you need, at a cheaper rate than any others can or will let you have them.

It is with a great deal of Pleasure I have undertaken the fatigue of this
Journey to meet you here, and save you the trouble of going to Boston. The Way
to Boston is open and clear, and I shall always be glad to see you there,
whenever you please to come. On Monday I hope you will be ready to be going
home, when you shall have Provision for your Journey: But you must dine with me
to Morrow -- when you shall have the Present, and take leave after dinner.


The Governor drinks lasting Health and Prosperity to their Tribe.

Ountaussoogoe drinks King GEORGE's Health and the Governor's, etc.

Friday August 29. 1735. The Conference Continued.
PRESENT

His Excellency Jonathan Belcher, Esquire

Captain General and Governor in Chief, etc.

Cuncaupot Captain, and the others of the Houssatonnoc Tribe etc.

Governor. CAptain Cuncaupot, I am now ready to hear what you have to say. I
understand you desire what you have got to say should be drawn up in Writing,
and that Mr. Williams will read it, which shall be rendered to you again by your
Interpreter, in short Sentences.


And it was accordingly done, and thereupon the Indians manifested an universal
Approbation thereof; which is in the words following, viz.

Deerfield August 29th. 1735. May it please Your Excellency,
WE thank Your Excellency as Our Father, that we have received Your Kindness
and Love, and we would express Our Duty and Subjection to Our Rightful
Sovereign King GEORGE, whom we pray GOD long to preserve.

We are desirous to receive the Gospel of Our LORD JESUS CHRIST; and hope that
Our Hearts are in what we say, and that we don't speak only out of our Lips:
And we are thankful that Mr. Williams and other Ministers are come to us, and
especially that Mr. Sargent, and Mr. Woodbridge, have been sent to us, and pray
to the Great GOD to keep them, and cause they may have Health, and live long
with us.

And Sir, Our Father, We did not come to you of our Selves, and tell you that
we wanted any thing, and yet you have taken Care of Us as your Children, and
given us Learning etc. No Child says to his Father, I would have so and so; but
a Father when he sees his Children in want, is ready to help them: And so we
think Your Excellency as our Father is willing to do to us upon every account;
and we pray that when we are wanting any thing we may be directed to tell Col.
Stoddard of it, that he may send to Your Excellency, that what we want may be
done for us.

Sir, Our Father, As we have been taught the Gospel, so we hope to have it to
Our Heart for ever.

Sir, Our Father, Our Children are afraid of strict Laws, and of being brought
into trouble, and put in Prison for Debt etc. and we pray that Care may be
taken by your Excellency as Our Father, and by the General Assembly, that we be
not hurt by the severity of the Laws, seeing we don't understand how to manage
in such Affairs, so as that there may not be any danger at any time that Our
Children be taken away from us for Debt etc.

We don't pretend to desire any thing, but that if any of Our People should
commit Murder or any other crying Wickedness, they should be liable to the Law.

Sir, Our Father, We are concerned for our own Children, as we think you, as a
Father are for Us, and therefore we pray that it may be given us in Writing (or
established by a Law) that Our Children after us be not wronged or injured.

We thank your Excellency, You sent for Us here to see Your Face, and so many
honorable Gentlemen, and that there has been such Care taken of us on all Our
Journey, and since we came to this Place. We find that by what we have
experienced of Your Excellency's Care for us, that we need not Crave of You,
but leave Our selves to your Care for the time to come.

And are Your Excellency's dutiful Servants, Cuncaupot Captain Vmpecheny
Lieutenant Wauntauga Meet Naunaune Canutt
in the Name of the rest.

And then Capt. Cancanpot laid down a percel of Deer Skins as a Present.

Governor. I take very kindly what you have said, and you shall have a
particular Answer to it to Morrow.


The Governor drinks the great King GEORGE's Health to the Indians, and says,
That under GOD, the King is the common Father of them and us, and wishes they
may always prosper in Soul and Body.

Captain Cuncaupot returns the Salute, and drinks the King's Health.

Governor. I shall see you to Morrow, when there will be a Present for you
from the Government, and after dinner I shall take leave of you.


One of the Indians complained he had left a Gun at Mr. Stebbins's at
Northampton, and cannot get it again.

Governor. I will inquire into that matter, and shall give direction to Col.
Stoddard that Justice be done therein.


Indian. There were also Eight Deer Skins at Mr. Miller's, which I cannot have
any account of.


Governor. When you meet with any Injustice you may repair to Col. Stoddard,
as you have desired, who will see you have Justice done you.


His Excellency then gave them a Caution against drinking too hard, by which
they would prevent their being imposed on or defrauded by any body.

After which the Indians withdrew.

Friday August 28. 1735. The Conference Continued.
PRESENT.

His Excellency Jonathan Belcher, Esquire

Captain General and Governor in Chief, etc.

Ountaussoogoe Chief, and others of the Cagnawagas.

Governor. I hope you are all well this Morning.


Ountaussoogoe. No Sir, One was taken Sick this Morning, and a Child has been
Sick ever since we came.


Governor. I am sorry for it; the Doctor shall tend on them -- I expect none
here now, but those of the Cagnawaga Tube. --

[Some others being under the Tent.] The Present of the Government which lays
before you, is designed only for your Tribe, and you must take care that it be
justly distributed among your Selves: The Government has made other Provision
for the others.

Then the Present was delivered. I hope you will carefully lay up all I have
said to you, and though we are at such a distance in Our Persons, yet I hope
Our Hearts will be always near one another: And you shall be provided with what
may be necessary for your Journey, as well Provisions as Skins for Shoes etc.

To Morrow will be the last day of the Week, and the next Day will be GOD's
Day, so you had best tarry till Monday morning; but I don't say this to put you
out of your Way. You shall do as you please.


Auountaurcsaunkee Indian Speaker. We return thanks for the Care Your
Exceilency has taken of us, and for the Present of the Government.

Your Excellency has minded us of Our Duty, and we shall keep it in mind and
observe it.


Governor. I drink King GEORGE's Health, and wish you Health and Happiness.


Ountaussoogoe. I Salute the Governor and all the Gentlemen here. I have been
so handsomely treated since I have been with you, that I have almost fancied my
self to be in Heaven, and I shall not be able to forbear Weeping when I leave
the Governor.


The Present was delivered, and the Indians dined with His Excellency etc.
under the Tent.

Saturday August 30. 1735. The Conference Continued.
PRESENT

His Excellency Jonathan Belcher, Esquire

Captain General and Governor in Chief, etc.

Cuncaupot Captain, and others of the Houssatonnoc Tribe.

Governor. I Am glad to see you this Morning: I hope you are all in good
Health. I shall now make you a particular Answer to what you said to me
yesterday.

My good Friends of Houssatonnoc,

I take very well the Expressions of your Duty and Loyalty to Our common Father
the great King GEORGE, and I shall do my self the Honor of giving Him the
Account of it; and you may be assured He will always look on you as his
Children and good Subjects, and I shall think it my Duty as his Governor and
Representative to let you feel upon all Occasions, the Advantage and Happiness
of being under so good and gracious a Sovereign.

There are good Laws provided by this Government to save you and your Children
from being hurt, or from their being taken away from you for Debt, and if you
should meet with any difficulty on this or any other Account (as you have
desired) you may with the greatest Freedom apply your selves to Col. Stoddard
of Northampton, whom I have directed to take a particular Care of you, and you
may depend on his favor and friendship, and that he will do every thing in his
power that you may have Justice done you from time to time.

My Friends and Children,

Although I am much pleased with the Duty you express to my Royal Master King
GEORGE; yet it rejoices my Heart above all things that you are desirous to know
and understand the Gospel of Our LORD JESUS CHRIST, who is GOD as well as Man,
and the only SAVIOR of all Men; by the Knowledge of His Glorious Gospel, and
by living in Obedience to it, you will become good Subjects to the KING of
Kings, and be led in the Way to be happy here, and eternally so in a better
World.

I am thankful to GOD, and well pleased with you that you so kindly receive and
entertain the Ministers of JESUS CHRIST, who have been sent among you, and more
particularly Mr. Sargent, and also your SchoolMaster Mr. Woodbridge. These
Gentlemen are sent to you by an honorable Company of Gentlemen in Old England,
who alone are at the Charge of their Preaching to you and Instructing you; and
as I am One of their Agents here, I think it is a Respect and Honor due to
them to let you know this, that you may in due time express your thankfulness
for their pious Care and Compassion to your Souls.

And I must also take Notice to you how the GOD of the Spirits of all Flesh,
seems to be encouraging and supporting your worthy Minister in the difficult
Undertaking he is engaged in for your best Happiness, and I expect you will
carefully attend upon his Instructions, and always pay him great respect and
honor.

To morrow will be the Lord's Day, and the time intended for the Ordination of
Mr. Sargent to the special Work of a Minister of JESUS CHRIST among you; and
that you and your Children may thereafter as you may become worthy, enjoy the
privilege and happiness of the holy Sacraments of Baptism and the Lord's
Supper; and I pray GOD so to succeed the Endeavors used with you as to recover
you from a state of Darkness, to the clear Light of his blessed Gospel.

I have been sometimes informed that you live remote from one another, and that
you are not accommodated with Land sufficient to support your Families: This
Matter I shall lay before the great Council of this Government, and recommend
to them the giving you Lands to Settle you more conveniently and compact, and
what may be enough for your living comfortably upon; and at the same time I
shall recommend your whole People to the special Care and Favor of this
Government.

All I have said to you from Our first meeting here shall be printed, and then
be sent to you, that you may as often as you please refresh your Memories with
it.

I expect you to be very careful to morrow in observing the LORD's DAY, It is
GOD's Day, and always to be kept holy, and you must attend the public Worship
both parts of the Day: You shall have a Place by Your Selves, that you may the
better see Mr. Sargent's Ordination.

I have nothing more to say at present.


Captain Cuncaup^t. Father,, We cannot but thank you for the Love and Care you
have taken of us as to Our Knowledge of the Gospel.

Sir, Father, We cannot but return Our humble thanks for the Kindness shown us,
while we have been here.


Governor. I now deliver you the Government's Present.

After the LORD's DAY is over you shall be going homewards whenever you please,
and you shall be provided with Necessaries for your Journey; and while you stay
here you shall be kindly entertained.

I intend to go away next Monday; and if you would say any thing to me in the
mean time by Mr. Williams, he will tell me; and I would have you dine with me
to Day.

I drink King GEORGE's Health to you, and wish you Health and Prosperity.


The Indians drink the King's Health, and return the Salutation.

Ompawmet One of the Chiefs of this Tribe being Sick, sent his Son to inform
His Excellency he could not wait on him Personally, but had sent him to thank
the Governor for his Favors to their Tribe.

Saturday August 30. 1735. The Conference Continued.
PRESENT.

His Excellency Jonathan Belcher, Esquire

Captain General and Governor in Chief, etc.

Marsequunt, and the Two other Chiefs, and the rest of the Scautacooks, etc.

Naunautookeau Indian Speaker. OUr Father and the Governor. We have considered
what Your Excellency said to us the day before yesterday, and we take great
Pleasure in it.

Lays down three Beaver Skins in token thereof. Furthermore, Father -- the
Governor -- In all you have said we adhere.

And in token thereof lays down three Beaver Skins. -- Our Father, We thank
Your Excellency, that ever since we have had Knowledge of THE WAY it has been
kept very Straight without any Crook; and we thank Your Excellency you have
kept it so very plain and clear.

Lays down three Beaves Skins in token thereof. We pray Your Excellency, that
as it has formerly been agreed that Your Excellency has been Our Father, and We
Your Children, so Our hearty desire is that that Agreement may be continued.

Lays down three Bever Skins in token thereof. We have done.


Governor. I hope you are all in good Health.


Indians. We are all well.


Governor. I hope you are entertained to your own Satisfaction. I take
particular Notice of what you have said now. I depend you will always continue
faithful Subjects to King GEORGE, and then you will have the Favor and
Protection of this Government; You shall always be treated like the rest of the
Children of this Country. I am glad you are come near to the Fort to live, and
I shall endeavor you shall have Land to live on.

You must carefully and diligently attend on the Instructions of Mr. Hinsdale
your Minister. And in token and confirmation of all I have said to you, I
deliver you this Belt.

The Governor delivers them a Belt of Wampure. To morrow is the LORD's DAY, I
expect you keep your selves sober, and attend on the public Worship of GOD at
the Meeting House.

I shall be glad to hear from you by Capt. Kellogg, whenever you have any thing
to say to the Governor. And whenever you have a mind to it, I shall be glad to
see any of you at Boston.

And in token of the Friendship of this Government, there is the Present They
have sent you.

I drink King GEORGE's Health to you, and wish you all Prosperity.


The Indians manifested great Satisfaction in what the Governor said, and
returned the Salutation.

Weenepauk. We return Your Excellency thanks for all Favors, and we thank GOD
Almighty that he has given us Opportunity to see Your Excellency, and so many
Gentlemen with you.

Though we are ignorant and not capable of seeing for want of Understanding,
yet we praise GOD that he has fixed a Day -- this Day; and the time of Day --
about Noon -- When the Sun shines so bright upon us.


Here follows the Order of the Proceedure in the Ordination of Mr. Sargent,
within mentioned. viz.

Deerfield, September 1 st. 1735.
YEsterday being the LORD's DAY, the Reverend Mr. John Sargent, the Gentleman
that has been sometime preaching to the Houssatonnoc Indians, was solemnly set
apart, and Ordained to the Work of the Ministry in presence of His Excellency
Our GOVERNOR, the honorable His Majesty's Council, and a Number of the
Gentlemen of the honorable House of Representatives, who accompanied His
Excellency at the Conference with the Indians; and also a very numerous
Assembly being present, both of English and Indians.

The Houssatonnoc Indians being seated by themselves in one of the Galleries of
the Meeting House, many of the Indians of the Cagnawaga and Scautacock Tribes
with the Mobeegs being also present; the whole Affair was carried on with great
decency and solemnity.

The Ministers that managed the Ordination were the Reverend Mr. Williams of
Hatfield, Mr. Appleton of Cambridge, Mr. Williams of LongMeadow ( Springfield)
Mr. Hinsdale, and Mr. Ashley; the said Gentlemen having the day before the
Ordination made Inquiry of Mr. Sargent, and received satisfaction as to his
Orthodoxy.

The Reverend Mr. Ashley began with Prayer, the Reverend Mr. Appleton preached
a suitable Sermon to the Occasion from 2 Timothy 2.21. The Reverend Mr. Williams
of Hatfield as Moderator opened the Affair, and in a particular manner
addressed himself to His Excellency the GOVERNOR, as Head of the Commissioners
of the honorable Company for Propagating the Gospel among the Indians in New
England, and Parts adjacent; and asked Him whether it was his desire that Mr.
Sargent should be set apart to the Work of the Ministry (among the Indians at
Houssatonnoc) by Ordination; and His Excellency said, it was.

The Moderator then proceeded to Mr. Sargent's Consent herein etc. And then
Hands were laid upon Mr. Sargent by all the Ministers before named. The
Reverend Mr. Williams of Hatfield made the first Prayer after Imposition of
Hands, and then gave the Charge; the Reverend Mr. Appleton made the other
Prayer; and the Reverend Mr. Williams of Long Meadow gave the Right Hand of
Fellowship to Mr. Sargent.

After which Mr. Williams turned himself to the Houssatonnoc Indian Tribe, who
were Seated in the Gallery by themselves; and asked them if they were desirous
of having Mr. Sargent for their Minister; that if they were, they would show
some Sign or Manifestation thereof: Whereupon they all rose up by one Consent,
and with grave as well as cheerful Countenances signified their full, and
hearty Acceptance of him.

The Sermon in the Afternoon was from Isaiah 2.4. by the Reverend Mr. Williams
of Long Meadow.

Prove. of the Mass. Bay.
THE aforegoing Conference was taken as it passed by and between His Excellency
JONATHAN BELCHER, Esquire Captain General etc. and the respective Indians within
mentioned.

By His Excellency's Command. John Wainwright, Cler.


