Reliquiae Turellae, et Lachrymae Paternae. The Father's Tears over his
Daughter's Remains.

Two SERMONS Preached at Medford, April 6. 1735. By Benjamin Colman, D.D. The
Lord's Day after the Funeral Of His beloved Daughter Mrs. Jane Turell. To which
are added, Some large MEMOIRS of her Life and Death, By her Consort, the
Reverend Mr. Ebenezer Turell, M. A. Pastor of the Church in Medford.

Proverbs xxxi 26. She opens her Mouth with Wisdom, and in her Tongue is the
Law of Kindness. Ver. 31. Give her of the Fruit of her Hands, and let her own
Works praise Her in the Gates.

BOSTON: Printed by S. KNEELAND and T. GREEN, for J. EDWARDS and H. FOSTER in
Cornhill. 1735.

TO THE READER.
THE following Sermons, plain and simple as they are, for Mourning forbids
Ornament, had been published sooner, if at all, after the Funeral of my dear
Child, if the putting in Order some Memoirs of her short Exemplary Life had not
obliged us to some Delay.

I hope both the Sermons and the Memoirs may be of good Use to Parents and
Children, and to Ministers and their Children in particular, or I should not
trouble the Public with them.

As the Father of the Deceased I owe this Respect unto her Memory, but more as
a Minister I owe it to the Children of my Country and of the Town. It becomes
Me now in Age to write for Those unto Whom I have been ministering these five
and thirty Years; and I magnify my Office (to borrow the Words of the Great
Apostle) if I may provoke to Emulation those that are my Flesh. I mean, If what
is here published may serve to put Parents on more early and continued
Endeavors for the Souls of their Children, and to inspire our Dau'ters in
particular with Desires to improve in Knowledge and Goodness under the
Instructions of their wise and gracious Parents. This, by the Will of God,
ought to be to me a Joy next to any Saving Ministrations to my own Offspring,
whereof the following Record gives me some humble Hope: Scil. That it has
pleased God to make Me, together with my good Son Mr. Turell, a Spiritual
Father to my loved Child, and that in Christ Jesus we have begotten her through
the Gospel; (again to use the Apostle's most pleasant Words) -- At least the
Reader will charitably judge that I have with some Pains and Throws been
travailing in Birth till Christ was formed in her. In which I beseech Others to
be Followers of me, who yet am not worthy to be named among the Ministers of
Christ.

For I have at last very poorly answered that first and great Commandment of
God to all his People, Deuteronomy. vi. 4, -- 7. "Hear, O Israel, The Lord our God is
one Lord! And thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thine Heart, and with
all thy Soul, and with all thy Might: And these Words which I command thee this
Day shall be in thine Heart, and THOU SHALL TEACH THEM DILIGENTLY UNTO THY
CHILDREN, etc. See how much true Love to God lies and shows it self in our Care
for the Souls of our Posterity! and how much He will account this in us Love to
Himself.

My Deceased has it may be better answered the Commandment of God to Children,
Prove. iv. 1. "Hear the Instruction of a Father, and attend to know
Understanding"; and could with true Delight take up the following Words, "For I
was my Father's --, tender and only beloved in the Sight of my Mother; He
taught me also and said to me, Let thy Heart retain my Words, keep my
Commandments and live: "Get Wisdom, get Understanding, forget it not, etc.

O might we see many, many of our Sons and Daughters answering to this Original
in the Book of God, this wisest of the Sons of Men, in a much superior Measure
to what my Deceased did in her Childhood and Youth!

The first of these Sermons was composed on the Sudden Death of her dear
Mother, and she sat at my Feet and heard it in her great Mourning, with some
Character of her loved Parent; whose Cares for her Soul she records with great
Thankfulness to God in some of her Papers. And when Mr. Turell prevailed with
me to come and weep with Him and his People, the Sabbath after the Funeral of
his Wife, I chose to repeat that Sermon to my Self and Him; adapting it to the
Communion which then fell in Curse.

The other Sermon I had preached at Home the Lord's Day before, and now I make
the DEDICATION of both, first to the Beloved Children of my own Flock and Town,
and then to the Beloved People of Medford, to Whom I gave away no small part of
the Light of my Eyes in the Day I married her to their Pastor.

May They and their Sons and Daughters serve Themselves of these her living
Remains, and whatsoever things are just, pure, lovely and of good Report, let
'em think to these things. -- And while She being dead speaks to You in what is
here published, after a short and silent Life among you; GOD grant her
Surviving Spouse may be long continued to teach and feed You in the Name and
Strength of the LORD GOD, and to carry many of You with him to Heaven.

Boston, May 20. 1735. Benjamin Colman.

An EPISTLE To the Reverend Mr. Ebenezer Turell, Occasioned by the Death Of his
late Virtuous CONSORT. By the Reverend Mr. JOHN ADAMS.
WHY hangs such Sorrow on your pensive Brow?
Say Turell, why the Tears so freely flow?
If you lament the lovely Partner fled,
In vain you heave the Sighs, or Rivers shed.
The Darts of Death within her Bosom deep
Have urged the fatal Wound, and fixed the lasting Sleep.
The impartial Tyrant round his Arrows throws,
Nor heeds our Prayers, nor melts before our Vows.
The Charms of Beauty wither from his Hands,
As fades a Flower, and to a Tempest bends.
Nor Eloquence can sooth, nor Virtue awe,
Nor Force repel the Power of Nature's Law.
To Limits fixed, our destined Course we bend,
And with resistless Haste to Death's pale Empire tend.
From Scene to Scene our shifting Moments go,
And then return the Ground the Dust we owe.
As glides the pictured Dream before our Sight,
Winged with the fleeting Shadows of the Night,
So born upon the quick succeeding Hours
We drop in Death, and drink surviving Showers.
Adown our Cheeks the unwearied Currents shed
Can never revive, but may increase the Dead.
Had you the Lyre of Orpheus, which could move
The quickened Stones, and each attentive Grove;
Or could you flow in such a moving Strain
As Turell warbled to the listening Plain;
In vain the tender Plaints would charm her Ears,
Bound to the breathing Consort of the Spheres.
Who would the doubtful Maze of Life repeat,
Where flattering Scenes the gilded Fancy cheat?
Where Cares and Sorrows circle through our Years,
While future Evils rise before our Fears?
And feel the Fires of heavenly Rapture die,
And blot with Tears the Visions of the Sky?
None that had tasted of sublimer Springs,
Could feel a Thirst for these inferior Things.
As who a Lawn, distinct with silver Rills,
Would change for burning Sands, or broken Hills?
Or in the Covert of a lonely Cell
From all the beauteous Realms of Phoebus Steal;
When smiling Prospects and unfading Greens
Courted his Sight with their enameled Scenes,
And all the Arch of Heaven's expanded Sky
Burnt with unnumber'd Glories to his Eye?
Through Death's dark Valley, winding out her Way,
The Saint has opened to a Blaze of Day.
The Shades, now nearer, hang upon your Sight,
But still they border on eternal Light.
So when the gathering Clouds the Skies deform
The Air is dark, and Nature wears the Storm,
While all above is spread a smooth Serene,
And tinged with Light the gilded Vapors shine.
Let not those Glories which should bring Relief
Expire in Shades, and fade in Floods of Gri^f.
But while the Skies the aspiring Spirit claim,
Behold her Picture and enjoy her ^ame.
Nature had shed upon her ample Mind
It Is various Gifts, which Art had well refined.
In her, paternal Touches you might trace
To shape her Mind, and form each future Grace:
And soon her Virtues into Prospect raised
The Father's Care, but most the GOD confessed.
He smoothed her Strains, and tuned her sacred Lyre,
And breathed within her Soul Seraphick Fire.
Even now, the flowing Numbers left behind
Reflect the Features of her virtuous Mind.
Nor yet of all the Nymphs that grace the Plain,
Has one appeared to sing so sweet a Strain.
But most, Devotion did its Power diffuse,
Soul of her Soul, the Spirit of her Muse.
Of all her heavenly Tempers this was chief,
Lived in her Heart, and lived within her Life.
Witness her Closet, whence her glowing Prayers,
Winged with celestial Vigor, reached her Father's Ears.
There GOD vouchsafed to be her frequent Guest,
And sunk in Calms the Tumults of her Breast.
Happy, when thus retired from human Eyes,
New Scenes of Glory opened from the Skies.
Free from Ambition She despised the Charms
Of tempting Riches, circled in its Arms;
But loved the Silence of the rural Scenes,
And often would rove amidst the embroidered Greens;
Where Zephyrs fanned her with their cooling Wings,
And Birds in Consort sung with murmuring Springs.
There She could move through Nature's artful Maze,
And contemplate on what the Simple gaze.
Ah fade ye Greens! and weep ye gliding Rills!
Droop all ye Flowers! in Vapor rise ye Hills!
Ye Zephyrs into mourning Murmurs turn,
And gather Clouds for Tears for Turell's Urn!
The tender Ties of nuptial Life She graced,
And all the Mother to the Child expressed:
The best of Daughters in her Carriage shone,
She felt the Friend, and charmed the weeping Town.
Few were her Words, but chose and weighty too,
We could not blame, but grieved they were so few.
A steady Wisdom led her cautious Life,
Concealed the Whisper, and forbid the Strife.
Deep Contemplation tinged her serious Mind,
Broke through her Eyes, and in her Aspect shined.
Nor did her steadfast Virtue 'ere refuse,
In gayer Hours her graver Thoughts to lose;
Nor Wit to lend its Aid to Innocence,
To raise our Pleasure, and to point her Sense.
Politely read, what various Books she knew?
Which on her Mind unfading Traces drew.
Nor was She vain, nor stained with those Neglects,
In which too learned Females lose their Sex.
But now, ah! now, the heavy Shades of Night
Have sealed her Eyes, and sunk her from our Sight.
The Etherial Picture has forsook our Eyes,
To gain the perfect Touch within the Skies.
There all the Shadows will appear below,
But all above the heightened Features glow.
Nor could the fainter Light our Sphere imparts
Reveal the Beauties which the Draught asserts.
Now, in a proper Point of Vision placed,
The kindled Graces are to Life expressed.
Fain would the Muse her Plaintive Numbers cease,
And lose her Sorrows in these Realms of Bliss.
But TAILOR Mrs. Elizabeth Tailor, the lovely Consort of the Rev. Mr. John
Tailor, Pastor of the Church in Milton, and Daughter of the late Reverend Mr.
Nathanael Rogers of Portsmouth in New Hampshire, died April 16, 1735. three
Weeks after Mrs. Turell, and alike esteemed and lamented by all that knew her.
calls me downward, and demands
Tears from my Eyes, and Cypress from my Hands.
Snatched in a sudden Shade, She gave her Breath,
And all her Bosom wears the Dews of Death.
Nipt in the beauteous Bloom of Youth She lies
A faded Flower, bedewed by numerous Eyes.
O could our Tears revive so fair a Flower,
Sure every Eye would spring the quickening Shower.
Sure you would weep, ye tender Offspring! too;
But Years forbid the Stream to Nature due.
But most the recent Babe, too soon denied
The Bosom, whence he drew the vital Tide.
Ah! why ye Bards! is Taylor's Hapless Hearse,
Undeck'd with Garlands of unfading Verse!
She loved your Strains; your springing Bays would rise,
Green with the falling Showr's of friendly Eyes.
Fair was her Face, but fairer was her Mind,
Where all the Muses, all the Graces joined.
For tender Passions turned, and soft to please,
With all the graceful Negligence of Ease.
Her Soul was formed for nicer Arts of Life,
To show the Friend, but most to grace the Wife.
O had kind Heaven her longer Glories lent,
And spared the plaintive Tears which now are spent!
And may these Numbers, dying over her Urn,
Excite some softer Muse her Fate to mourn.
If Nature should forbid the Power to praise,
Even Sorrow might create the melting Lays.
Ah! die ye Roses in each faded Fair!
Let in each Eyelid hang the pearly Tear;
For drooping now, sequestr'd Shades impend
The boasted Flowers, that opened on the Land.
Ye rising Laurels flourish in a Shade,
And with protecting Greens embrace the Dead!
While Joys Immortal widen in their Breast,
And Heavenly Visions charm the Stranger Blessed.
Though now the Tears demand to leave our Eyes,
We soon shall see the fair Immortals rise,
And with new Figures grace the wondering Skies.
The piercing Trump shall wake up every Charm,
And bid their Spirits their cold Ashes warm.
While heightened into Form by Heavenly Art,
Their finished Features fiercer Fires will dart.
Before the vivid Glory of their Frames,
The Sun it self shall fade in paler Flames.
O let these Saints inspire to tread the Way,
That leads and opens to so bright a Day.
Be sunk ye fading Scenes! ye Heavenly rise!
Let every Bosom burn to gain the Skies!
Ye Clouds of Sorrow! scatter all away,
And let the Purple Skies diffuse the smiling Day.
Ah! should our Eyes be dim with bursting Tears,
When Heaven's surrounding Landscape spreads on Theirs?
What mean the Murmurs of our pensive Moan?
Hear Their melodious Music warble down;
While all the Rivers of their Joy upbraid
Those Tears which only for our Selves are shed.
Their snowy Robes, which drink celestial Light,
Should through the shades of Mourning strike our Sight,
If we behold the melted Weepers nigh;
The circling Seraphs sparkle on their Eye:
And JESUS in sublimer Charms confessed,
Dispenses all his Fires to warm their Breast.
Here, Bodies moulder in a narrow Tomb,
There, boundless Empires rise, and Fields of Glory bloom.
But if the Showers of Sorrow must descend,
Let pious Tears our Penitence attend,
The precious Drops like pearly Seed be sown,
Till in the golden Fields of Zion grown,
The Harvest shall arise in Heavenly Light,
And all distinguished wave upon the Sight.
So when the spreading Clouds their Tears bestow,
The blooming Iris bends her varied Bow,
The falling Drops with living Colors dies,
And every Glory glitters through the Skies;
While issuing Phoebus paints the sable Veil,
Whose envious Shades his Beauties would conceal.
Aaron 's Silence On the Death of his SONS.
LEVITICUS X. 3. And Aaron held his Peace.


VERY gracious and exemplary was this Silence of Aaron, and very awful was the
Providence and Trial which made it so excellent and admirable in him. He and
his Sons having been called of God unto the Priesthood, and solemnly
consecrated to the service of the Sanctuary; upon the first Execution of their
Office the Glory of the Lord appeared unto all the People, and a Fire came from
before the Lord and consumed the Burnt-Offering upon the Altar. This was a most
open and glorious Testimony of the Lord's accepting of his Sanctuary and Altar,
his Priests also and the worshipping People. Well might it fill them all with
transports of Joy, and make them shout and fall on their Faces. So they adored
and gave Thanks to the King Eternal and Invisible, who vouchsafed thus to
manifest Himself to them, and show 'em His Glory.

But the Sin and Sudden Death of Nadab and Abihu (the two Sons of Aaron who had
been dignified among the Elders of Israel, and by Name called up into the
Mount, to see the God of Israel, and He laid not his Hand on them; Exodus xxiv.
1, 11.) gave a dreadful Damp to the Joys of that glorious Day.

These young Priests, proud it may be of their Office, and half intoxicated
with the Joy of the sacred Festival, took either of them his Censer, probably
without the Divine Order to burn Incense at that Time; and whereas they should
have taken of the Fire that was newly kindled on the Altar from before the
Lord, they offered strange Fire, used common Fire, which He commanded them not.

This was a great piece of Rashness, Irreverence and Presumption in them; and
being the first Profanation of God's House and Worship by the Priesthood, it
pleased the Holy and Dreadful Majesty to strike 'em dead upon the spot. There
went out Fire from the Lord and devoured 'em, and they died before the Lord.

This was such a kind of Bereavement as never but once happened, enough to
swallow up all Words! and no doubt but Moses and Aaron and all the worshipping
Assembly were struck with Astonishment at the terrible Execution. But Moses
inspired of God, with a Presence of Mind as surprising as the present Event,
immediately showed them that so it became the Holiness of God to sanctify
Himself on them that came nigh Him, if they did not take care to sanctify his
Name in their Approaches to Him and Ministrations before him: ver. 3. Then
Moses said unto Aaron, This is it that the Lord spoke, saying, I will be
sanctified in them that come nigh me, and before all the People I will be
glorified: And Aaron held his Peace.

So Aaron hearkened to the Word of God, from the Mouth of his Brother Moses, and
was dumb because God had done it in his wise and righteous Severity: So he
sanctified the Lord, and glorified Him before all the People, in adoring
Silence and profound Submission.

This was as indeed became the High Priest of the Lord. What an Example did he
give to the frighted gazing Congregation! But he did no more than was his Duty,
nor all that neither. It was of God's great Grace and Mercy to him that he bare
as he did. Let God have all the Glory, and Aaron his praise also; for God put
Honor on him, glorified his Grace in him.

It is the Duty of all Men, more especially of Ministers, to be Silent under
Divine Corrections. Not only to bear, but to accept of the Punishment of Sin.
And the most effectual Arguments, for silencing and quieting a gracious Heart
under Affliction, are those that are fetched from God's Glory. The Holy One had
sanctified his own Name, and vindicated the Glory of it: This silenced Aaron.
God was glorified and Aaron is satisfied.

The Doctrines I would briefly speak to are, 1. That there is a gracious
Silence which may highly become us in our sorrowful Bereavements; more
especially when they are sudden and awful, and carry much of God's holy Anger
and Displeasure in them. 2. That Ministers especially should be Instances and
Examples hereof under such Bereavements.

I. There is a gracious Silence which may highly become us in our sorrowful
Bereavements, more especially when they are sudden and awful, and carry much of
God's Holy Anger and Displeasure in them.

Such was this of Aaron's in the Text: To have two Sons, just consecrated to
the Service of God, suddenly struck Dead, as it were by Lightning, and that
because the Holy God was not served by 'em in that reverend Manner which he
required, -- What could be more surprising, more awful and expressive of Divine
Displeasure?

The first Death, the first Bereavement of the first Parents of Mankind, was a
very sudden and awful Breach upon them! And no doubt but Adam and Eve though it God
very angry with them, when they saw one Son, and him a godly one, Murdered by
his ungodly Brother; because his Works were righteous and He accepted by God.

Job's Bereavement was the most sudden and tragical that we ever read of: His
ten Children feasting together, and rejoicing in one another Love; and on a
sudden comes a fierce Wind from the Wilderness, and blows down the House, and
buries 'em all together in a moment of Time; crushed to pieces in the mighty
Ruins of some princely Fabric.

Jacob's Bereavement in the Sudden Death of Rachel was very awful to him; as
indeed all Deaths in Childbirth are, because of the joyful Hope therein
frustrated of a new and double Life. We have not the like scarce, but in the
dying of the Wife of Phineas. Read the moving, killing Stories: Genesis xxxv. 16,
-- 20. Rachel travailed and she had hard Labor, and the Midwife said to her,
Fear not, thou shall have this Son also: And as her Soul was in departing She
called his Name Benoni: The Son of my sorrow! And Jacob set a Pillar upon her
Grave; it is the Pillar of Rachel's Grave unto this Day. But never was the holy
and terrible Anger of God more testified against a Family of Religion, than in
the united Deaths of Eli, his Sons, and his pious Daughter-in-law: 1 Samuel iv.
19, -- 22. And when she heard that the Ark of God was taken, and that her
Father-in-law and her Husband were dead, She bowed her self and travailed: And
about the Time of her Death, the Women said to her, Fear not, for thou have
born a Son! but she answered not, nor regarded it; only named the Child
Ichabod, saying, The Glory is departed from Israel, for the Ark of God is taken.

The fair Naomi had a very awful sense of the Divine Anger, when she returned
from the Land of Moab desolate and empty; having buried her two Sons and her
Husband: Ruth i. 20. Call me not Naomi, call me Mara, for the Almighty has
dealt very bitterly with me, and testified against me.

David's Bereavement in the Death of his Child, was an express Testimony of the
high Displeasure of God against him for his Sin. Nathan told him in way of
Threatening and Punishment, The Child shall die. He fasted and wept therefore
before the Lord. But the Death of Amnon for his Folly and Incest, and the Death
of Absalem in his Rebellion, were much more sudden and awful Bereavements, and
greate^ Testimonies of the Divine Anger.

The Widow of Zarephath, who was honour'^ to nourish Elijah, (that is to say,
he fed her b^ the Power of God) had a most awful sense of the bereaving Hand of
God in the Death of her Son* She was even broken under the fearful Apprehension
of it. 1 Kin. xvii. 18. Ah, thou Man of God* said she, art thou come to call my
Sins to remembrance? and to slay my Son?

And yet these awful, sudden and grievous B^reavements were no always from the
Divine Displeasure, however well the Bereaved did ^ apprehend it, and fear and
mourn and fall at God^ foot. We cannot say that Rachel's Death w^^ from God's
Displeasure with Jacob, who was ^ his way to Bethel, to pay his Vow. And we
ce^tainly know that Job's Bereavements were (...) for his Sin, nor from any
Displeasure of God t^ward him; but the Lord in the Sovereignty ^ his Grace gave
Satan a Permission to try and pro^^ those excelling Measures of Grace with
which ^ had dignified him, and whereof He had spok^ with the highest Pleasure
and Esteem.

And so it seems to have been in the Death* the Prophet's Wife, when the Desire
of his (...) was taken away with a Stroke, and behold I do ^ said the Lord to
him, and forbad him to mo^^ or weep, Ezekiel. xxiv. 16. Nor was there; ^ Anger of
God in the Death of Lazarus or D^cas; but only Glory to Himself with Love ^
Favor both to the Dead and to the Livin^ however bitterly the Survivors took
both the ^ and the other.

Nevertheless (...) becomes us to appre^^nd and fear the ^oly Anger of God in
his be^^aving Providence; and the more suddenly ^^ey come upon (...), the more
awful they should ^ to us; and frequently the Displeasure of God ^ great in
them, and we cannot certainly judge ^^en it is not so. Wherefore in all such
Cases a ^^acious Silence may exceedingly become us. We ^^ay well be struck
dumb, and like Aaron hold ^^r Peace, when the Hand of God suddenly ^^uches us.

So the excellent Servants of God have be^^v'd, both before and since the days
of Aaron, ^^der a like eminent Government of the Spirit of ^^ace. Job when he
heard of the distastrous ^^d of his seven, his ten, his all, fell down and
^orshipped, in a few Words. But when the fu^^^us Devil had covered him with
dolorous and ^hy Ulcers, then he seems to have sat down ^e silent and astonished,
laying his Hand upon his ^uth, and keeping it with a Bridle. His Friends and
him in this Silence, and accompanied him ^. Job ii. 13. So they sat down with
him upon ^ Ground, seven Days and seven Nights, and none ^e a Word unto Him;
for they saw that his ^f was very great. The Wife of Phineas died ^ Grief, and
died silent. The wise and pious ^amite told not her Husband of the Child's ^th,
and lay silent for a time at the Prophet's ^ When David's Sorrow was stirred,
you read ^ Practice, his Victory over himself, Psalm. xxxix. ^ was dumb with
Silence, I held my Peace. Such ^ his gracious Silence at his Infant's Death,
^ot so at Absalom's.

Such Mourners were (...) ^^sters of Lazarus; they thought much and said
little: Lord, said they when Jesus came, if thou had been here, my Brother
had not died. Jesus himself mourned with them in like Silence: He wept, he
sighed, he groaned within himself as he came to the Grave.

He bare our Sins and Sorrows silent, and went to his Cross as a Lamb to the
Slaughter; so he opened not his Mouth, Isai. liii.7. At the Bar of Pilate,
loaded with false Accusations, he answered nothing, insomuch that the Governor
marvelled greatly Not that our Lord Jesus in all his Sufferings, and more
particularly in some of Those that attended his Crucifixion, meant to give us
an obliging Example, for our Imitation. Some of them it may be were Inimitable
by the best of his poor Members in this mortal Flesh, and some that were in
themselves imitable, were however peculiarly proper to Himself, and only to
Him; who was made Sin for us, and had Power over his own Life, to lay it down
as a Sacrifice and Price of Redemption

We must therefore distinguish if we can, and wisely consider, what in the
Sufferings and Dying of our Lord Jesus Christ was meant as an Example to us and
for our Imitation, and what not? or how far the same Things may be imitable by
us, and in what Respects above our Imitation?

For Instance, Our Lord stood silent before the High Priest and before Pilate,
and would not answer the malicious and false Accusations against him; He went
also whither he knew the Traitor would follow him, nor would he go away when
the Guards fell before him. It does not follow that we are bound to imitate
Christ in one or other of these Things; nay it might be Presumption in us, and
a Trespass on the Glory peculiar to Him, the Lord of Life in our Nature. We are
to imitate the Meekness, Patience and Submission to the Will of God,
conspicuous in Sufferings of our Lord; but His Case was singular, his Station
in the World proper to Himself alone, and there was to be None after him, no
second Jesus, a Redeemer and Savior. For there is One God, and one Mediator
between God and Man; the Man Christ Jesus. For this End was I born, said He to
Pilate, and to this End came I into the World! Could any of his Saints say
This, they might act like Him, in all the Circumstances of his Dying. Wherefore
in Honor to our Lord we may not presume to do as He did, in things peculiar to
Him as Lord and Christ.

I do not deny but that under the Influence of the Spirit of Christ, his
Martyrs, and other suffering Saints, may know and feel themselves called to
extraordinary Things, in Conformity to their Suffering Head; in which Cases we
must beware of judging them: But then neither are They to be drawn into an
Example to our Selves or Others; that we should judge our selves or one another
for not being able to imitate, to which we may rather think we are not called;
and if not, it would be to tempt the Lord our God, and to expose Religion with
our selves.


. Mat. xxvii. 14. The Son of God, the Man of Sorrows has thus sanctified a
gracious Silence under the stand of His Father. He agoniz'd in the Garden, in
fervent Prayer, but in a very few Words. And those Words were full of adoring
Silence; Father, if this Cup may not pass away from me, thy Will be done. He
said little on the Cross, but there was very much in that little.

God has sometimes enjoined his sorrowful People Silence. Psalm. xlvi. 10. Be
still and know that I am God. My Context gives us the most singular Instance of
it; Moses forbad Aaron and his Sons to bewail the Breach which the Lord had
made on them, lest they died. So Ezekiel was commanded not to weep, when God
took away his Wife, This was one Time and Way, when his Tongue was made to
cleave to the Roof of his Mouth.

Now such gracious Silence may exceedingly become us under our awful and sudden
Bereavements, because

1. To be sure then there is nothing said against the will of God, and his
Doing: Nothing in way of Complaint against God, as if he were a hard Master:
Nothing in way of Anger and Displeasure, as Job's Wife would have provoked his
Spirit: Nothing in way of Murmur as the Israelites of old spoke against God.
Far, far be from us, any Look or Appearance of Displicency at what God orders
out to us or ours, and much less any Word from our Lips of that nature. -- Yet
David was displeased when God struck Uzza, and Jonah was angry when his Gourd
was blasted. But Job sinned not, nor charged God foolishly.

2. This gracious Silence speaks much and aloud for God. It has its Voice and
Language, and is easily heard and understood. There is no Speech nor Language
where its Voice is not known.

It speaks Submission to the Sovereign Will of God: As a Son or Servant is
silent under the Rebuke or Correction of a good Father or Master: Or as a
Criminal is silent before his Judge; or as a Subject before his Prince when he
has displeased Him.

We justify God in his Judgment when we hold our Peace. We own Him just and
righteous, not having a Word to say. We humble our selves in his Sight, and
accept of the Punishment of our Sin.

Silence in a Sinner is expressive of Penitence, Sorrow and Shame and Fear. We
take Shame to our selves, and are afraid before God, and lay our Hand upon our
Mouth. As Job did, Chap. xl. 3, 4. Behold I am vile, what shall I answer Thee?
Ones have I spoken, but I will proceed no further. xlii. 6. Wherefore I abhor
my self, and repent in Dust and Ashes.

Silence before God under his afflicting Hand ascribes to Him all the Glories
of his Sovereignty, Wisdom and Justice. It is mental Worship. The Mind thinks,
considers and adores, while the Tongue is silent and the Lips move not. So
devout Souls mean it, and so God hears and accepts it. So Aaron glorified the
Holy One of Israel in the Presence of many Worshippers. There had not been, it
may be, on that Solemn Day, a like Act of Worship, as this Silence of Aaron. O
what a Sacrifice did he make to God, while he held his Peace! A sacred
Reverence stopped his Mouth! Mark me, and be astonished, and lay your Hand upon
your Mouth. The whole Assembly of Worshippers stood silent and adoring with him.

3. This gracious Silence under sudden and awful Bereavements highly becomes us
in point of Prudence and Care; Caution and Guard upon our selves. Now keep the
Door of thy Lips, fear to speak in a surprise, lest it be unadvisedly; which
even the meek Moses himself did, and smarted for it; and was enjoined Silence
in his Suffering on that Account; "Speak no more to me (said God) of that
matter.

Be not rash with thy Mouth, is not only a piece of wise Advice in the case of
Worship and Vowing to God, but also in that of Suffering under his Holy Hand.
Why should thou speak suddenly, and then have cause to say, "It was an
Error? Why should God be angry at thy Voice? Eccl. v. 2, 6.

Keep your Silence, said Moses to Aaron and Eleazer in my Context, lest ye die.
Gracious Silence speaks a wise and reverend Fear of God, and a conscious
Jealousy of our Selves. It shows a due Sense of our own Imperfection,
Corruption and Sinfulness, that we dare not trust such a foolish Heart and
Tongue. Our Affections are irregular, our Passions unruly; apt to break out at
our Lips, when our Hearts are hot within us. We no sooner take fire within, but
we blow up and burst to pieces. Out of the Abundance of the Affections the
Mouth speaks; but Silence keeps them down from making Work for Repentance. It
was therefore wisely resolved by David, Psalm. xxxix 1, 2. I will take heed to
my Heart, that I sin not with my Tongue; I will keep my Mouth with a Bridle
while the Wicked is before me: I was dumb with Silence, I held my Peace. The
Rein in the Mouth holds in the headstrong Passions, that would else run away
with us. The Horse that has a hard Mouth, and too much Spirit, needs a hard
Kirb, and a strong Hand. Moreover. Silence in a Surprise gives Time and Room
for Thought, while he that speaks suddenly speaks without thinking; and when he
thinks over what he has said is ready to bite his Tongue, and wishes he could
eat his Words. And well may he be ready to gnaw his Tongue, who speaks hastily
and foolishly of God or to Him. Therefore get alone, and keep Silence, and put
thy Mouth in the Dust, when God rebukes and afflicts. The Prudence of the
thing, as well as the Religion of it, so directs. And indeed Religion is
evermore the highest Wisdom. But after all that has been said in Praise of
gracious Silence before God, it must be added,

4. That wise and gracious Speaking, to God and of Him, in the Day of our
Affliction, may be sometimes better than Silence; more to the Glory of God, the
Edification of Men, and our own Ease and Comfort. Let but Grace govern the
Heart and the Tongue, and whether we speak or hold our Peace, there will be the
same Adoration of God, Humiliation before Him, Submission to Him, and Prudence
with respect to our Selves.

The Tongue was made to speak, as well in the Day of Grief as in the Day of
Gladness; and in both to the Glory of God. Moses spoke admirably to the Honor
of God, while Aaron stood silent. Aaron's Silence kept Time and Concert with
Moses Words. There was perfect Harmony in both together.

Job in his Bereavement spoke, -- O how well at first! but afterward there was
much amiss. It had been better to have kept Silent still, than to open his
Mouth and curse his Day as he did. Yet in his after Speeches he showed a better
Judgment, and as good Affections, as his pious Friends. God saw him right in
his Principle, Aim and End. He and they meant fervently to honor Providence,
but Satan tempted and at times irritated them all: so poor are we at our best
Estate, and in our best Exercises compassed with Infirmity.

We must make the best of what is spoken, and piously meant in the Day of
Sorrow. If the good Woman spoke too passionately to Elijah on the Death of her
Son, yet she spoke penitently, and the Passion was overlooked. Did Elijah
remember against her her Sins? or did he slay her Son? No; but she remembered
her own Sins before God, and all was well. God considered that she was a Mother.

I might give some Directions here, and say

1. Under the surprising and awful Providence of God let our Words be few. God
is in Heaven and we on Earth. We are dust and ashes before the most High God.

2. Let our Words be deliberate and well weighed, Think awfully and speak
slowly, for it is before the Lord; to Him and of Him. Teach me what I shall
speak, and how!

3. Speak humbly, abasing our selves in the Sight of God. As Job answered the
Lord and said, Behold I am vile, what shall I answer thee? I will lay my Hand
upon my Mouth. The holy Son of God himself fell upon his Face and prayed, in
the Hour of his Sorrows.

4. Speak adoring: fall down and worship: make Supplication, to thy Judge. What
shall I say, He has both spoken to me, and Himself has done it.

5. Speak as a guilty and repenting Sinner. Confess Sin and justify God.
Ascribe Righteousness and Mercy to thy Maker, and take Shame to thy self. Job's
last Words were the very best that he spoke, Chap. xlii. 5. N^w mine Eye sees
Thee, wherefore I abhor my self, and repent in dust and ashes. The Lamentations
of Jeremiah are the highest strains of penitential Humiliation under amazing
Afflictions. The Yoke of my Transgressions is bound by his Hand; they are
wreathed and come up upon my Neck: Remembering my Affliction and my Misery, the
Wormwood and the Gall, my Soul has them still in Remembrance and is humbled in
me: -- He sits alone and keeps silence, he puts his Mouth in the dust,
he gives his Cheek to him that smites him, he is filled full with Reproach.

6. We must speak our Trust in the Grace and Mercy of God through the Lord Jesus
Christ. No Words of Despondency should fall from our Lips. We must speak unto
God and of Him, as he speaks of Himself: Neh. ix. 17. But Thou art a God ready
to pardon, gracious and merciful, slow to Anger and of great Kindness.

7. We must speak with profound and absolute Submissoin. Has not the Potter
power over the Clay? Shall not God do what He will with his own? Who has given
Him the Charge over the Earth? Or who has disposed the whole World? If He set
his Heart upon Man, if he gather to Himself the Spirit and Breath, all Flesh
shall perish together, and Man shall turn again to his Dust.

To close on this Head, -- We must hold our Peace from Murmuring, or any Words
of Discontent, Displeasure and Complaint at what God does; but we must open our
Mouth to adore, confess, supplicate, bless and praise the wise, the holy,
sovereign, good and faithful God. Our Sins may well stop our Mouth from
complaining, but the Grace of God opens 'em in humble Confessions and
Supplications to him: And to speak also unto others for their Instruction,
Admonition, Direction, Excitation, Consolation, spiritual Edification and
Establishment in Faith and Holiness. Such speaking is at any Time, and in every
Case, better than Silence. And Silence, like Aaron's in the Text, is then only
great and good, when it speaks thus to the Eyes and Hearts of all about us.

But this for the first Doctrine, That there is a gracious Silence which may
highly become us in our sorrowful Bereavements. I pass to the other Observation.

II. That the Ministers of Christ are more especially obliged to be Instances
and Examples of a wise, gracious and reverend Deportment under the bereaving
Hand of God.

Aaron was in my Text singled out for an Example to the whole Congregation of
Israel. We read how well he behaved, and gave Glory to God. It highly became
him to do so. God had set him over his House, and before his Worshippers. He
was to go before 'em in bearing as well as doing. And we are bid to take him,
among the Saints and Prophets, who have spoken in the Name of the Lord, for an
Example of suffering Affliction, and Patience Jam. v. 10.

Aaron was both a Prophet and a Priest, the Mouth of God to Israel and their
Mouth to God; and he could speak well, yet was now Silent. He was now in
Waiting, ministering in his Place, in the Sanctuary, when he gave this
Illustrious Example of profound Submission: And so he stands a teaching and
commanding Pattern to the Ministers of God for ever, and to them especially.
Every worshipping Israelite were to learn of him that awful Day, but the
Priesthood and Levites, his own Family and Tribe, more than others.

I speak therefore more especially to my self, and to my dear Son, your
honored and beloved Pastor, this Day; to charge my self and him, in the Name
and Presence of the Great and Holy God, who is pleased to lay his bereaving
Hand upon us; that we fall down before Him and implore his Grace to help us to
carry Our selves before You with that Silence and Humiliation that shall honor
his Holy Name before You, and exemplify in some manner those Doctrines and
Commandments of God our Savior, which we have been so often preaching to you
in the Days of Death and Mourning that have passed over us.

Ministers have their Trials, and very awful ones as well as others. They are
Sinners as well as others, and their Sins are greater, more aggravated and
heinous then other Men's. And if they are like Aaron among the Saints of God, as
by their special Consecration to Him they are peculiarly bound to be, they are
the more likely to be exercised with Afflictions, for many are the Afflictions
of the Righteous; and they are the more meet to be so exercised, because they
have Graces to exercise in this Way; according to what we read, Heb. x. 32.
After ye were illuminated ye endured a great Fight of Afflictions Unto such it
is given on the behalf of Christ, not only to believe in Him but to suffer for
his Name. Phil. i. 29. It is given to them to do so! Grace is given to them for
this End, and it is a Favor done 'em, an honor put upon 'em, when by the help
of Grace they bear and endure in an exemplary manner the Afflictions and
Sufferings which it pleases their Holy Savior to call them to.

Ministers are under the common Bonds of all Christians, together with the
superadded Charge of God. 2 Timothy iv. 5. Watch thou in all things, endure
Afflictions, make full proof of thy Ministry. ii. 9. Thou therefore endure
Hardness, as a good Soldier of Jesus Christ. We cannot fulfill the Ministry that
we have received of the Lord Jesus, if we be not conformed to Him in suffering
Affliction and Patience, as he calls us to it. This Commandment we have
received from the Captain of our Salvation, who was made perfect through
Sufferings.

Ministers bear Testimony and Witness to the Doctrine of the Cross, by bearing
it themselves, after Christ and before the Flock. They honor Him and edify the
Church while they do so. They follow Him and lead the Flock in his steps. Rev.
i. 9 I John who am your Brother and Companion in Tribulation, and in the
Kingdom and Patience of Jesus Christ. 1 These. i. 6. And became Followers of us
and of the Lord, in much Affliction, and Joy of the Holy Ghost.

Brethren, pray for us, who though we are called to minister to You in Holy
Things, yet are compassed with Infirmity, and are not sufficient of our Selves
to think a good Though It, or to bear the least Burden in a becoming manner; so as
to adorn the Doctrine of God our Savior, or bear about his Afflictions and
Dying in our mortal Flesh Pray for us, that whether we be afflicted it may be
for your Consolation and Salvation! that by the Blessing of the Holy Spirit it
may be effectual in your enduring the same Sufferings! and that we may be
comforted of God in all our Tribulation, so as to be able to comfort others in
every Trouble, by the Comfort wherewith we our selves are comforted of God. 2
Cor. i. 4, 6.

Yea, We have sometimes gladly learned, and been edified by some of you in your
Sorrows, while we have been ministering unto you; and shall always rejoice to be
taught by your humble and gracious Example.

Let Ministers and People be together looking unto Jesus, the Author and
Finisher of our Faith, who for the Joy before Him endured the Cross. Of his
Fullness, in whom it has pleased the Father that all Fullness should dwell, we
all may receive and Grace for Grace: Grace for the doing, and Grace for bearing
and suffering, his holy Will. And He has said to his suffering Saints and
Ministers, "My Grace is sufficient for you, for my Strength is made perfect in
Weakness.

O seek that alsufficient Grace for your Selves in all your Trials, and seek it
for Me and mine now in the Sudden and awful Stroke of God upon us! that his
Hand may be sanctified to us, and that His Name may be glorified in your Sight
by our Silent Submission and Fear before Him.

God has been very gracious to me and mine in his sparing Mercy. For about Six
and twenty Years there had been no Death in my Family, when God suddenly called
for the M^ther from my Arms, and now at the End of three Years and a half the
Daughter follows. When Death has staid long from a House, yet come it must, and
then it often strikes double. This is the necessary Fruit (as Judge Hale said
on the Death of a Son) of living long in a dying World. Bereavements multiply
upon them that have numerous Relatives, and live to be old. And he that has but
an only Child, must silently yield to the good Pleasure of God, if he be tried
like Abraham with an Order from Heaven, "Take now thy only One and offer him up
to Me.

The Lord is calling us this Morning to his Holy Table, in our Mourning over
our Dead. It is meet for us to remember Christ's Sorrows, and show forth his
Death, bearing our own before Him, and preparing for our own Dying. We may not
excuse our Selves from eating of the Sin-^ffering in the Holy Place, because of
our Mourning; as Aaron made excuse for his surviving Sons; C^ntext, ver. 19.
Behold such things have befallen me, and would it have been accepted in the
sight of the Lord? To be sure if we are going in holy Mourning and godly
Sorrowing to the Table of Christ, we shall be accepted. The Ordinance calls for
it, and is given to assist us in it. There let us be mourning for Sin, mourning
after Christ, Pardon, Peace, and Communion with Christ in the Benefits of his
Sufferings; and we shall find that the Lord has anointed Him to give unto them
that mourn in Zion, Beauty for Ashes, the Oil of Joy for Mourning, and the
Garments of Praise for the Spirit of Heaviness.

We must be bearing about in our Bodies the Dying of our Lord Jesus, that the
Life of Jesus may be manifested in our mortal Flesh. He is the Example to us of
holy Dying, and also the quickening Spirit for this blessed End. Let us learn of
Him how to keep Death and Eternity always on our Hearts, in a lively
Remembrance, and in the most awful effectual Consideration of it.

Is not the Lord's Table a Bond upon us to live as dying Men and Women? and
also a Means appointed for this End unto Believers? And a well adapted Means
this Representation and Memorial of the Dying of our Lord, to excite us greatly
to be getting ready for our own, and to resign up ours to Death when He calls
for them.

Our Consolation in the Death of our godly Relatives is founded on the Dying
and Resurrection of our Lord Jesus. For if we believe that Jesus died and rose
again, even so them that sleep in Jesus God will bring with Him. Therefore we
cannot Sorrow as th^se that have no Hope. No but we have even Communion with
the Dead in Christ at his Table, in the blessed Hope of being shortly with them
at a better Table, in an Everlasting Sabbath, where the Days of Mourning shall
be ended: According to those Soul-reviving Words, enough to quiet, silence and
comfort us in all our Tribulations: Luke xxii. 24, 29, 30. Ye are they which
have continued with me in my Temptations, and I appoint unto you a Kingdom, as
my Father has appointed unto Me; that ye may eat and drink at my Table in my
Kingdom.

David 's Words Upon the Death of his Child.
2 SAMUEL XII. 23. -- I shall go to him, but he shall not return to me.


THEY are David's calm and quieting Words upon the Death of his Child. He had
been in great Sorrows, the Sorrows of Nature and also of Grace; the Sorrows of
deep Humiliation and Repentance under the holy Anger and Hand of God.

Nathan the Prophet was sent by God to him to lay open before him his Sin, and
to tell him that the Child should die. David humbled his Soul with Fasting, and
lay all Night upon the Earth. The Elders of his House went to him to raise him
up and constrain him to eat, but he would not be entreated by them. Therefore
when the Child was dead they were afraid to let him know of it, lest his Sorrow
(which was so great before) should quite overwhelm him. But to their Surprise
he arose and washed himself, and went into the House of God and worshipped; and
they set Bread before him and he did eat. His Servants humbly ask him the
Reason of this his Conduct, and in the Meekness of Wisdom and Grace he answered
and satisfied 'em. While the Child was yet alive, said he, I fasted and wept;
for I said, Who can tell whether God will be gracious to me, that the Child may
live? But now he is dead, wherefore should I fast? Can I bring him back again?
I shall go to him, but he shall not return to me.

The Soul of the Child was gone: gone from the Body which was therefore to turn
into Dust, and gone to the World of Spirits, to the Spirits of the Just, (as
David hoped) to the Bosom of Abraham; according to the Prayers he had been
pouring out for it, with strong Crying and Tears.

He could not think of a Resurrection from the State of the Dead, his Prayers
and Tears could not bring him back again; he could not expect or desire it.
God's Will was done, and it became him to submit; to make the best and get the
Good of the Bereavement, to worship and behave agreably. He turned his Thoughts
therefore to his own Dying, to get himself more ready for his own Departure;
and if his Child were happy to meet it in a better Life. "I shall go to him,
but he shall not return to me.

The Words present us with the following useful, but familiar and plain
Observations.

1. That our Dead are gone from Us and this World of ours, no more to return to
Us or it till the last Day.

2. That we are all going after 'em to the other World.

3. That we should seriously remember this in the Days of our Bereavements, and
in our Sorrows over our Dead.

4. That Parents especially should think awfully of it, in their Mourning for
dead Children.

I. The Dead are gone from this World of ours, no more to return to it till the
last Day. The Spirit leaves the mortal Body, its earthly House and Tabernacle;
and goes to the World of Spirits, the invisible World, into an eternal and
unchangeable State. For there is an unseen future World whither the Soul goes
at Death; and there is a twofold State in that World of Spirits; a State of
Happiness for elect and sanctified Souls, and a Place of Misery and Torment for
unholy and unclean Spirits.

For when the Dust returns to the Earth as it was, the Spirit returns to God
that gave it. Eccl. xii. 7. And its everlasting State is then decided and fixed
by Him, in a most righteous Judgment passed immediately upon every one: Some go
away into everlasting Punishment, but the Righteous into Life Eternal. Mat.
xxv. ult.

There are the Spirits in Prison, i. e. Hell. 1 Pet. iii. 19. And broad is the
Way, and wide the Gate, that leads to Destruction, and many there be which go
in thereat, Mat. vii. 13. A whole World of precious Souls once went down
together, into that Abyss of Misery, Eight only excepted. They went quick into
Hell. The Depths covered 'em, they sank to the Bottom as a Stone. In what
Sholes did they sink! as Fishes taken in the wide Net of God! how did the proud
Waters go over their Souls! and the Floods overwhelm them! for Violence was in
their Dwellings. -- And what Multitudes from Age to Age have since gone to the
Generation of their Fathers, never to see Light! Psalm. xlix. ult. Tophet is
large eno' to receive them all, and the many more that are still following
their pernicious Ways. We are told of one of these many, roaring in the place
of Torments as soon as out of the Body, and begging that his five surviving
Brethren might be warned and prevented from coming after him. Luke xvi. 28.

But there is a Remnant according to the Election of Grace that are gone to
Heaven; to Everlasting Life, Blessedness and Glory; and a few more chosen of
God, and called by his Grace, are going after Them. There are Abel, Seth,
Enoch, and the Antediluvian Patriarchs; there Noah, Abraham, Moses, Prophets
and Apostles; and there the Spirits of all the Just, made perfect, Heb. xii. 23.

These happy Dead are entered into Life, are alive for evermore. In the Day
they died they were taken up by Angels, and carried to the Paradise of God;
They are there with Christ, where He is, to behold his Glory, and to come with
Him at the Resurrection of the Just. And blessed and holy are all they that
have Part therein! on Them the Second Death has no Power.

Thus the Dead are gone! and whither they go we know, and the Way we know: Not
as to Individuals, but considered Collectively as two vast Bodies of Godly and
ungodly, in their unchangeable State.

For they must return no more to us, in this World. "Can I bring him back
again? or shall he return to me? says my Text. O no! not all the Prayers and
Tears of the Living; nor all the Wishes and Cries of the miserable Dead, can
obtain a Return for any One of them: and as for the pious and happy Deceased,
they would not return if they might.

This Account and Idea of Death should be familiar to us. Job x. 21. I go
whence I shall not return. vii. 8, 9, 10 The Eye of him that has seen me shall
see me no more, -- he that goes down to the Grave shall come up no more; he
shall return no more to his House, neither shall his Place known him any more.
The dead are in a fixed State; they have bid a final Farewell to this World; so
has the buried Body and so the departed Spirit till the Resurrection Day; then
they will be again united, and share together in everlasting Sorrows or in
everlasting Joys.

So Man lies down and rises not again till the Heavens be no more, Job xiv.
12. And then the dead shall rise only to be judged, every one according to what
he has been and done here in the Body, whether good or evil, 2 Cor. v. 10. How
far is this from any Return to this animal and sensitive Life, to our present
earthly Relations or worldly Possessions, or to any second Time of Probation,
or further Opportunity for serving God and our Generation, and working out our
own Salvation: the only worthy End and Work of our present Time and Life.

Upon all, An Existence somewhere, after we go hence, is supposed. Going and
returning plainly imply this. We could not be said to go, if our Spirits were
not in some Place or other after this Life is ended; and much less could we
speak properly of not returning, if we did not indeed exist any where.

Yet neither can it be inferred from such a mode of Speech, that the Body shall
never return to Life again, or that the Soul shall never return into the Body:
It only means that the departed Spirit returns not hither, that we know of,
till the Resurrection of the Dead at the last Day. 'Till that Day the Body will
not return from the Grave, nor the Spirit from Hades, the invisible World: But
then there will be a Reunion of Soul and Body. -- This was an Article of Faith
before Job's Time, and has continued to be so down to our Days: Job xix. 25.
For I know that my Redeemer lives, and that He shall stand at the latter Day
upon the Earth; and though after my Skin worms destroy this Body, yet in my Flesh
shall I see God: Whom I shall see for my Self and my Eyes shall behold, and not
another: though my Reins be consumed within me. 1 Cor. xv. 42. For this
Corruptible shall put on Incorruption, and this Mortal Immortality.

In short, Going and not returning in our Text means, never to live again such
a Life as this which we now do in the Body, either on bodily or spiritual
Accounts: "He shall return no more to his H^use, as it is said in the Book of
Job, to his present worldly Possessions or Enjoyments, Business or Delights:
No, nor to the Worship here any more, as Hezekiah bemoaned himself under the
Sentence of Death; "I shall not see the Lord, even the Lord in the Land of the
Living; I shall beheld man no more with the Inhabitants of the World. He must
take leave for ever of his Palace and Court, his princely State and
Magnificence; but what was more than all this, he must see the Temple of God
and his Courts no more; no more be among his Worshippers, in whom was all his
Delight, as the most excellent on Earth.

And this is at last the awful meaning of going at Death, to return no more, "I
must enter into a fixed and unchangeable State for Eternity, never to enjoy
another Time of Probation and Trial. There is a great Gulf fixed betwixt this
and the next World, as well as between the two infinitely distant States in
that to come. Luke xvi. 26, 27. Neither did miserable Dives ask to come back
himself into this World; he knew it could not be granted. And when he prayed
that Lazarus might be sent from his blissful Seat, upon the glorious Errand of
converting his Brethren, a Work worthy of the highest Angel, the Answer is,
"That there are living Ministers to preach the Gospel, and Saints departed have
other Work.

The Sum of all is, Our present Life is the only Time and State of Probation to
us; at Death we pass into the World of Reward or Punishment, which is eternal
and unchangeable. This Life is the only Space granted us for Repentance, and
for working out our Salvation with Fear and Trembling.

This World is not our Home. We are all leaving it. Time is of infinite price
to mortal Man, and the shorter his Time is, it is of so much the more Price.
Every Moment of it should be carefully redeemed, in observing the Seasons of
particular Duties; to fill it up with Work and Spirit. Death, the Period of
this Time, is a very awful and critical Moment. Let us see to it, that we all
live as Those that are going hence, we know not how soon, never to return. And
let it comfort the Godly, that they are going from, never again to return to,
this State of Sin and Sorrow.

II. As our Dead are gone, no more to return to us, so We are going after them
to the Grave, and to the World of Spirits, to the State of everlasting
Happiness or everlasting Misery. This nearly concerns us, and should
exceedingly affect us. Every one must say to himself, as David here, "I shall
go also! I am going, I must go, must soon be gone! and we should be able to
add, Through Grace I am preparing, getting ready for my Departure, and am willing
to be gone! -- This we may think to be the Sense of David's Heart, the Spirit
with which he spoke.

Within a very, very little Time we shall all be gone! gone hence for evermore!
every Man Woman and Child! every one in his Time and Order, which God has
appointed. For is there not an appointed Time to Man upon Earth? are not his
Days also like the Days of an Hireling? for now shall I sleep in the Dust, and
thou shall seek me in the Morning and I shall not be. Job vii. i. and ult. Thus
our Days are determined by God, the Number of our Months are with Him, He has
appointed our Bounds which we cannot pass. xiv. 5. For we are Strangers with
Him and Sojourners, as all our Fathers were, and after them we go hence and are
no more, Psalm. xxxix. ult.

We know that God will bring us to Death, and to the House appointed for all
the Living. We as surely know it, as that others are dead and buried before us.
Every Man is drawing after as there are innumerable before him. We might have
gone before many whom we have seen buried. We are, it may be, a Wonder to our
Selves, that we did not go first; How soon we shall follow is unknown to us. We
know not the Day of our Death; we know neither the Day nor the Hour. This we
know, and should be saying to our Selves, the Young as well as the Old, "I go
the Way of all the Earth. It is appointed for all Men once to die. We see that
wise Men die, also the Fool and brutish Person perish. And what Man is he that
lives and shall not see Death? Shall he deliver his Soul from the Hand of the
Grave? Or who can by any Means redeem his Brother, or give to God a Ransom for
him? that he should still live for ever and not see Corruption? Psalm. xlix. 9,
10.

The Grave is one of the unsatisfied and insatiable things that cries, Give,
give! and never says it has enough. One Generation goes down into it after
another, yet is it not full. After the Thousands that are buried to Day, it
craves and has as many more to morrow. And if we wait a little longer it is our
House, it is ready for us. Job xvii. 1.

Our Souls are also going to the same Places of Happiness or Misery that those
before us are gone to. Souls are not mixed in the next World as they are in
this: Here the Godly and the wicked dwell in the same House, eat at the same
Table, sleep in the same Bed, worship together in one Family and in one
Assembly. But Death makes a perfect and total Separation of the one from the
other. The Godly are gathered to their People, as the Soul of Jacob to the
Spirit of Abraham, and as the Soul of Lazarus to his Bosom; but the wicked and
ungodly go to the Generation of their Fathers, never to see Light. -- David, in
the full Persuasion of his Child's Salvation, said, "I shall go to him.
Gracious Parents will see again their Elect Children in everlasting Life. And
there all pious Relations will meet again with Joy, and embrace for Evermore:
But others shall see Abraham and Isaac and Jacob, and all the Prophets in the
Kingdom of God, and be themselves shut out, Luke xiii. 28.

Put then the Question, every one to himself, "To whom and whither am I going?
Going we all are, and hasting out of Time into an awful Eternity; but to which
State in the Eternal World are we hastening? Whither others are gone is not so
much our Business to enquire, but whither we our Selves are going is a most
important and necessary Consideration: O the happy few that are daily thinking
of this! and upon good Grounds can say to themselves, as in 2 Cor. v. init. For
we know that if our earthly House of this Tabernacle were dissolved, we have a
Building of God, a House not made with Hands, eternal in the Heavens: For in
this we groan earnestly, desiring to be clothed upon with our House which is
from Heaven. -- Now He that has wro't us for this self-same thing is God, who
also has given to us the Earnest of the Spirit, Therefore we are always
confident, knowing that while we are at Home in the Body we are absent from the
Lord; (for we walk by Faith and not by Sight) We are confident, I say, and
willing rather to be absent from the Body and to be present with the Lord.
Wherefore we labor that whether present or absent we may be accepted of Him.

I come to the third Head,

III. We should seriously remember and consider these things in the Days of our
Bereavement, in our Mourning over our Dead. Then it was that David said, "I
shall go to my Dead, it shall not return to me."

This is a moving Season, wherein to muse and let the Fire kindle, and then
speak to our Selves and others of our own and their Dying. Yea, and to speak to
God and say, as in the xxxix Psalm, Lord! make me to know my End and the
Measure of my Days, what it is; that I may know how frail I am! Behold thou
have made my Days a hand-breadth, and my Age is nothing before Thee! Verily
every Man at his best Estate is altogether Vanity.

David the King, the Prophet and the Saint is a good Teacher, a great Example
to us. Let us learn of Him to turn our Eyes off from our Dead, upon our Selves;
upon our own Souls, their State, and Frame; and to say, My Soul, thou must soon
go after thy Dead! in what Preparation art thou for a better World? in what
Readiness to leave this? and where would be thy Lot if this Night thou were
required hence?

O that we were wise, that we understood this, that we were considering our
latter End! This is God's Wish concerning us, and we cannot wish our Selves
better than this wise and understanding Heart. Let us ask of God this Wisdom
which we so greatly want, and which He is liberal to give. Psalm. xc. 12. So
teach us to number our Days, that we may apply our Hearts unto Wisdom. What an
easy Numeration Table is this! So many of our few Days already past; but so
many more at the utmost Bounds to come; and whether indeed one more of them
remaining to us, altogether uncertain.

One would think that Flesh and Blood should teach men all this: And if not the
Tokens of Death within our Selves, yet the pale and ghastly Face of it on our
nearest Relations, Friends and Nei'bours. But neither Flesh and Sense, nor
natural Affection and Sorrow of Heart can make us to know our own End, and the
Measure of our Days, how frail we are. God only can reach the Hearts of Sinners
with an effectual saving Impression. Men see others go, and feel themselves
going, and yet will not consider it. There is an Enmity and Aversion in mortal
Man to the sober Consideration of Death, the realizing his own Death, and the
Consequents thereon. Death passes by us, and touches us, and we are a little
moved for the present, but presently forget it again. Sin which has brought
Death on us, has taken away the Understanding, the Power and Heart to make a
just and deliberate Reflection on the matter.

This Wisdom comes down from the Father of Light, and is one of his most
perfect Gifts. We are naturally all Darkness and Insensibility in our Way to
the Grave, as well as when we are in it. We need Divine Teaching in this most
plain and obvious matter, of which we are willingly ignorant. God must give us
an Eye to see, and an Ear to hear, and a Heart to understand. The fault does
not lie in the Head, but in the Heart. The Promise of God is, a new Heart will
I give you. He gives it liberally to them that ask it. It is the Spirit and
Practice of his Saints to think daily and seriously of Death and Eternity, and
to be often saying to Themselves and before the Lord, O my Soul, thou art going
after the Generations before thee! Is there not an appointed Time to me as well
as others? O remember that my Life is Wind! thine Eyes are upon me and I am
not! for now shall I sleep in the Dust, and Thou shall seek me in the Morning,
and I shall not be!

This is proper Discourse of a Soul to it self, and to God, in this mortal
Body, and through this passing World. So let it muse, and ^he Heart grow hot,
and out of the Abundance of it the Tongue speak, "Lord make me to know my end.
Light and Heat come thus together into the considering Heart, and the Sun of
Righteousness arises over it with vital Influences; gives spiritual Life and
sustains it in this Way. So Bodily Death serves to spiritual and eternal Life
under the Power of the Holy Ghost. The Flames of Devotion kindle, are blown up,
and kept burning, by daily Meditation on Death and Eternity. But as this
ceases, so the other goes out.

It is in this Way, very much, that the Spirit of God works on Souls, and
carries on his good Work in them. He works by Providence and Ordinances
together to this End, and on this wise. He revives and renews his good Work
hereby. He sends Death into our Windows, Chambers and Bosoms on this Errand;
and he is the Minister of God to us for Good, a Messenger one of a thousand.
David in our Text found Nathan and Death alike to him in the Hand of God. It
was good for him that his Child died. (And in all Probability it had been ill
for all Israel had it lived.) Death rung a Peal in his Ears, and he answered,
"Lord I am coming! And as often as any die in our Families, this is the Lord's
Voice to us, Man, Woman, Child, thou also art following! in what Readiness art
thou? Who is the Man of Wisdom that hears and answers to this Voice of God?
This makes it good to go unto the House of Mourning, there to consider of the
End of all Men, and lay the matter to Heart.

This is the Will of God in Christ Jesus concerning us, for He has given us the
Example. He kept his own Hour in Mind, and quickened Himself, "I must work the
Work of Him that sent Me, while it is Day, the Night comes. He retired upon
the Death of his Friend the Baptist, and he wept and groaned in Spirit at the
Grave of Lazarus; for He was presently to die Himself, and how was He straightened
till it was accomplished?

How great then is the Irreligion of Christians, and the Madness of mortal Men,
in their Inconsideration of their own frail and dying State! Eccl. ix. 10. Man
knows not his Time; but as the Fishes are taken in an evil Net, and as the
Birds are caught in the Snare, so are the Sons of Men snared in an evil Time,
when it comes suddenly upon them. As if we were not made wiser than the Birds,
or were made as stupid and insensible as the very Fish!

This Imprudence and Improvidence of the Children of Men is very provoking to
God, and great Sin in them; being in Contempt of the Reason which God has given
them, of the Souls that He has made them, and of his Word which He has written
for them, and of all that is therein said to 'em of a future State and of the
Eternal Judgment.

The Holy Ghost therefore interprets this senseless fearless Life to mean
nothing less than those Words of profane License, which are so severely
animadverted on and exposed in Scripture, "Let us eat and drink for to Morrow
we die! And to Morrow shall be as this Day and much more abundant! Soul, thou
have Goods laid up for many Years, Eat Drink and be Merry. What is this but the
God of this World blinding, stupifying and hardening Men to their own
Destruction! They blow out the Candle of the Lord within them, and quench the
Spirit of the Lord in his Convictions. Let him smite and wound us we do but
half awake, and presently fall asleep again. Let Him lead us again and again to
the Grave after our Friends, we go home and forget where we have been, what
manner of Men, what corruptible Flesh we are, and that we our selves may be
next carried out and buried.

Let Relatives in their Sorrows over their Dead judge themselves by what has
been said, and be thereby directed and quickened. Let us at least make this
Improvement of the Dispensation, I shall go after! in what readiness am I?
Where and how do I look to meet those who are gone before me! or those that are
to follow after me.

But as my Text came from the Lips of a pious Parent in his Mourning, so I am
led in a peculiar Manner to direct the present Truth to Them: Yet not to them
only, but to Children also in the Death of Parents, and so in every other
Relation. I go on therefore to say,

IV. Parents especially should think of this in their Bereavements, and in
their Sorrows over their dead Children. The Words of David belong first to
Them, "I shall go to it.

The Death of Children is the most common Case in the whole Course of Death.
Parents often live to bury many Children, and sometimes all. They that live
long in this World, as the Excellent Judge Hale said on the Death of a Son,
must look for this Grief. And the Grief is usually great in this Case, for
Natural Affection is like Water, flowing downward. The Love of Parents runs
down in a Torrent, the Love of Children returns as in an Eddy, which is also
caused by the Stream. When the Spirit of God would represent the most bitter
Grief, He represents it by a Mourning for an Only Son, and for a firstborn.
Zech. xii. 10.

The first Mourning was of Parents for their Son. Abel's Death was a bitter
Grief to our first Parents. It called for Tears of Blood, and was as a Sword in
the Bowels of Eve.

When God would prove Abraham it was in this most tender point. "Take now thy
Son, thy only one, whom thou love, and offer him to me. The God of Abraham
knew what of all earthly things lay nearest to his Heart, and was the utmost
Test of his Love.

Jacob was able to see his beloved Rachel die, and when he had set a Pillar on
her Grave he journeyed on. Genesis xxxv. 20, 21. No Author ever drew Nature naked
and to the Life like Moses. And no wonder; for he wrote under the Inspiration
of the God of Nature, to whom all things are naked and open. He the Father of
Souls and Former of the Spirit of Man within him, knows his own Work, the Soul
that He ha^ made, the hidden Springs and secret Movements of a ^^thers Loves
and Joys and Griefs; which are like the Flowings of the great Deep. Job
xxxviii. 9, 10. Nor is there any part of sacred Story that delineates these,
like that of Jacob and Joseph, inimitably tender and moving. How is the Heart
of a Father here painted beyond the Life, to a humane Eye, pierced, bleeding
bursting, on supposed repeated Bereavements, in the Loss of three Sons? Genesis
xlii. 36, 37, 38. And Jacob their Father said to them, Me have ye bereaved of
my Children; Joseph is not, and Simeon is ^ot, and ye will take Benjamin away:
All these things are against me. And Reuben spoke unto his Father saying, stay
my two Sons if I bring him not to thee; deliver him into my Hand, and I will
bring him to thee again. And he said, My Son shall not go down with you, for
his Brother is dead, and he is left alone; if Mischief befall him by the Way in
which ye go, then shall ye bring down my gray Hairs with Sorrow to the Grave.
Chap. xliii. 6, 11, 13. And Israel said, Wherefore dealt ye so ill with me, as
to tell the Man whether ye had yet a Brother? -- But if it must be so now, --
Take your Brother and arise, go again to the Man; and God Almighty give you
Mercy before him, that he may send away your other Brother and Benjamin! If I
am bereaved of my Children, I am bereaved. -- What a giving up of Nature was
here! like his after gathering up his feet into the bed! So the dying Body
after a vain Struggle resigns, and gives up the Ghost. And if hid God had that
Day required the Patriarch's Spirit and his Breath, the Summons had been much
more readily obeyed, than this Surrender of his Benjamin to the Will of the Man
who had so strangely demanded a Sight of Him. But he had Simeon in Bonds, and
the Life of all the rest of his Sons and their Children depended on his
Submission; the Famine was sore upon them all, and this constrained him to let
the other and only remaining Part of his Rachel go.

No doubt but it was a Spectacle highly pleasing to Angels, as it is unto Men
for evermore; but how much more unto the Father Almighty Himself, to behold the
dear Parent in his feeble Age wrestling and agonishing in Prayer for Divine
Direction, and then in Faith committing his Only One to the tender Care and
strong Protection of Alwise and Sovereign Providence, even as Abraham had done
Isaac long before.

Judah had with the utmost Emotion of Soul observed all these things, and laid
'em up in his Heart; and as he had in a Strain of filial Tenderness which
merited the Birthright and carried it from Reuben, pleaded with his Father and
prevailed: So when he stood again before the Man and saw Benjamin arrested by
his Order and in Custody, he was able to set the Soul of his Father in such a
Light before Joseph, as overwhelmed his Constancy, and broke up all the Springs
of Nature, which he had damm'd up with the greatest Art and Resolution, as Bars
and Doors to the great Deep. See Genesis xliv. 18, -- 34.

Forgive a Father in the Depth of Sorrow, that he has tried to soothe his Grief
in this Excursion on the Parental Tenderness of Jacob in the Day of his
Bereavements.


But when he though it Joseph, the Son he had by her, torn from him by Death, how
did he take on? Chap. xxxvii 33, 34, 35. It is my Son's Coat; an evil Beast
has devoured him; Joseph is without doubt rent in Pieces! And Jacob rent his
Clothes, and put sackcloth upon his loins, and mourned for his Son many Days.
And all his Sons, and all his Daughters rose up to comfort him; but be refused
to be comforted; and he said, For I will go down into the grave after my Son,
mourning: thus his Father wept for him. This was but a supposed Death, yet real
to the tender Parent, undoubted and certain to him, and mourned accordingly.

In like manner the mighty Reverence and Strength of Aaron's Grace was tried,
as with Fire, in the Sight of all Israel, and he held his Peace. His profound
Silence spoke aloud his profound Grief. -- Job had been long before tried in
more awful manner than this of Aaron; and he stands a prior Instance of
Parental Tenderness and Constancy. No one had more Pleasure and Joy in a
numerous Issue, none ever behaved more piously toward a pious Progeny, and
never did Brethren and Sisters live more in mutual Love and Delight than they;
yet when he was surpised with the heavy Tidings of their Sudden and tragical
Death together in their eldest Brother's House, he prostrated himself on the
Ground and worshipped; "Naked came I out of my Mothers Womb, and naked shall I
return (into the Grave, the common Womb and Repository of the Dead) the Lord
gave and the Lord has taken away; blessed be the Name of the Lord.

My Text relates how David behaved on the Death of his Child, but on more
bitter Occasions of Grief he lost himself, when he should rather have kept the
Possession of his Soul, and called in the Exercise of Reason and Grace: I mean
more especially on the Death of Absalom; unto Whom he could not wish to have
his Soul gathered; though he wished to have died for him, if he might have lived
to repent.

The Love of Mothers is yet more tender. We read of two under a like
Bereavement, but not in a like Passion of Grief; the Widow of Zidon and the
Shunamite: When the one saw her Son dead she burst out, "O thou Man of God! art
^hou come to call my Sins to Remembrance, and to slay my Son? But when the Son
of the other died in her Arms, she silently laid him on her Bed, and in her
bitterness fell at the Prophet's feet.

The Parent we should think will improve the Grief, behave and speak aright
under it; speak unto God, to himself and his. He has Years, Experience and
Wisdom; is a Father and has seen much of a dying World: And what is the
Father's Lesson from his Child's Death, but this in my Text? This at least,
this the least, "I shall go to it.

First then, Let Parents prepare to part with their Children. Look on them as
dying Creatures, and accordingly care for their Souls. Look not upon them as
yours, but God's, who may call for them when he will, having only given them to
you in Trust and Charge, to educate them for him, for his Service here, and for
Blessedness in Himself for ever. Teach 'em betimes to know God and themselves;
that they have precious immortal Souls, and that God is the Father, Lord and
Judge of their Spirits; that they are made for another and far better Life, may
very soon die, and must whenever God orders, who will surely bring them into
Judgment.

2. Let Children think of and prepare for their going hence before their
Parents. They are by no means sure of out-living them, much less should they
expect it. Did not Job's Sons and Daughters all die before hi^? I mean his
first Quiver full of them. So did Aaron's two Sons die in the Presence of their
Father; And Naomi buried her two Sons in the Land of Moab. Indeed Parents
naturally desire that their Children may outlive them; and good Parents may
let their Children hear 'em ask it of God in their daily Family Prayers; that
theirs (by his holy Will) may live to serve Him when they are gone. With
Reverence and great Submission Children may say Amen to such Prayers of their
Parents; but they may not please themselves with the Expectation of surviving
their loving and dear Parents; to come into their Estate, nor for any worse
Ends. We read of One who wickedly expected to outlive his Father and said, The
Days of Mourning for my Father are at Hand, and then I will kill my Brother.
But pious Children, from the Day of Abel's Death, think of dying before their
Parents.

3. Let bereaved Parents be greatly quickened in their Preparations for their
own Death. It is a sorrowful Case to need this Way of learning, by such a
Providence. We should prepare for Death before we come to be Parents. Yet we
need to learn it more and more, better and better, as long as we live. Live and
Learn, learn to die as long as you live, and by all the Sorrows and Changes of
Life especially. Learn betimes, learn in due Season, and yet learn in Age, out
of due Time, if you have not learned before. Learn this Lesson over and over
again, get it well by Heart, rivet it in your Memory, speak of it to your
latest Breath, and practice it in your dying Moments.

4. Let Parents quiet and compose themselves in their Bereavements, by keeping
in Mind their own Departure. Thus did David in the Text. He had done well to
have had his own Death as much in Mind, and in a like manner, when he heard of
Absalom's; though indeed he could not without horror have though it of going to him.
Happy the Father and Mother, the Son or Daughter, that can look forward to
their own Death, and quiet themselves in the Day of their Bereavement. O what
need is there to be in a State of Grace and Peace with God for this End! and to
have a well grounded Hope of such a State! of an Interest in Christ and a
better Life. -- A Parent should look on himself as so much nearer to Death than
his Child, and should be able to hope, through Grace, that he is so much higher
to a better Life, that he should feel the strong Attraction and Powers of the
World to come. -- As the most pious and venerable Mr. Richard Baxter, after his
Advance in Life and Grace, and a sufficient Experience of the Vanity and
Emptiness, the Afflictions and Sorrows of this World, wrote under his Picture
two of the best Lines that were ever written, "Farewell vain World! as thou
have been to me,
"Dust and a Shadow, these I leave with thee.


5. Let those who have no Children, no Name and Posterity of their Bodies, to
leave behind them, live so much the more mindful of and devoted to a better
World, that is an Heavenly. Absalom for this Cause erected himself a Pillar
upon Earth; but what an End did he come to? View him hung by his Pride, his
flowing Locks, in the Oak, and there bleeding to Death for his unnatural
Rebellion against his Father and his King; (his too indulgent Parent, who would
have gladly died for him) and then look upon his Pillar, the Monument and
Memorial of his Crime and Shame. Like the Wretch that burnt the Temple at
Ephesus to make himself remembered for an execrable Villain. But there is an
Everlasting Name, a Name written in Heaven, provided for and proposed to those
Humble and Holy Souls in the Church of God, who neither have nor crave a Name
(to leave behind 'em) upon Earth. Isai. lvi. 3, 4, 5. Neither let the Eunuch
say, Behold I am a dry Tree! For thus says the Lord unto the Eunuchs that keep
my Sabbaths, and choose the Things that please me, and take hold of my
Covenant; even unto Them will I give in my House and within my Walls, a Place
and a Name better than of Sons and Daughters; I will give them an Everlasting
Name, that shall not be cut off. They that leave behind them here a Number of
pleasant Children, leave but a dying Name in them which must soon be cut off;
but a Name among the Sons and Daughters of the Lord Almighty is to Everlasting,
in the Presence, Glory, Vision, Love, and high Enjoyment of the living God to
all Eternity. God himself has raised a Pillar for his Elect in all Ages, and
written their Names on it, to be read by Angels for ever and ever: Rev. iii.
12. Him that overcomes will I make a Pillar in the Temple of my God, and he
shall go no more out; and I will write upon him the Name of my God, and the
Name of the City of my God, which is New Jerusalem, which comes down out of
Heaven from my God; and I will write upon him my New Name.

6. Let us all be exhorted and taught of God, to live always mindful that we
and ours must shortly take leave, a final everlasting leave of this World and
all things in it. We are all going, as fast as we well can, fast to our own
surprises from Year to Year, one after another, out of a vain World, into an
awful Eternity! Lord! that we could live and act, from day to day, under this
View! What manner of Persons should we then be, and ought we therefore to be,
in all holy Conversation and Godliness! in all Sobriety, Righteousness, Purity,
Devotion, Heavenliness. It would make us look, not at the Things that are seen,
but at the Things which are not seen; for the Things which are seen are
temporal, but the Things which are not seen are Eternal. 2 Cor. iv. ult. One
effectual Conviction of the temporary Nature of every thing under the Sun,
abiding on us, would cure our inordinate and criminal Fondness for earthly
Possessions, our unjust Cravings and Endeavors after them, as not worth a
dying Creature's doing an unjust thing to gain, nor worth a wrangle about, to
recover (if wronged of) a due Portion in it. -- We and our Families, we and our
Children, are together hastening to the Grave, and it may be they before us; and
what Portion have we under the Sun! Let the Words of the Apostle sink therefore
into our Ears, and on every Occasion lie uppermost on our Hearts; 1 Cor. vii.
29, 30, 31. But this I say Brethren, the Time is short; It remains that both
they that have Wives be as though they had none, and they that weep as though they
wept not, and they that rejoice as though they rejoiced not, and they that buy as
though they possessed not; and they that use this World as not abusing it, for
the Fashion of this World passes away.

7. And lastly, Pious Parents should even find a sacred Pleasure in thinking of
going after and unto their pious Children deceased. They may follow them to the
Grave with the consolatory and peaceful Thought, which our Venerable Eliot
spoke out aloud as he went, after his dead Son, This is the Way to Heaven! As
Grace and Friendship wro't in the Apostle John, and he suddenly answered on his
hearing of the Death of Lazarus, "Let us go and die with him! So a like
Transport of Love and Desire, may be forgiven to a gracious Parent on the Death
of a Child, in whom he has seen the ruling Grace of God from early Infancy.
Jacob did not behave like Himself, when he refused to be comforted on the
supposed Death of such a Son as Joseph, saying, "No, but I will go down to the
Grave after my Son mournin! It becomes the Seed of Jacob rather in the Days of
Mourning over their pious Deceased, to take to themselves that other and better
Transport of the Aged Patriarch, when he heard of Joseph yet alive, and next to
the Throne in Egypt, and to say, The Soul of my Dead lives in the Presence of
Christ, far above all Heavens, let me die and go to be with him there for
evermore.

It was in this Hope that Jacob gave Commandment concerning his Bones, that his
Sons should bury Him with his Fathers; and in the like Hope a believing Parent
might desire to be laid with his Children.

Surely it cast some Light into the first Grave that was ever dug, that Abel,
the Darling of Heaven as well as of Adam, was the Person buried; and it may
seem to the Godly through all Ages a kind of sanctifying and sweetning the Grave
for ever. It is only and wholly the Grace of Christ in a Child before its
Death, that can make it an Object of Desire after Death, in a religious
Parent's Heart.

I hope I have in all your Hearts this Ground for Communion still with my dear
deceased Child, in whom I think I saw the shining Grace of God before she came
among you, and more since; though always under the Veil of great Modesty and
Reserve. In the several Relations of a Child, a Wife, a Mother, a Sister, a
Mistress, and a Friend, she has found Grace to carry her self in a laudable and
exemplary manner. You are Witnesses that she has lived blameless and without
Offense among you, and we who have known more of her secret Walk with God, and
Watch over her self in her Retirements, have this for our Rejoicing, That in
Simplicity and godly Sincerity, not with fleshly Wisdom but by the Grace of
God, she has had her Conversation in the World.

You will give me leave therefore openly to utter my great Thankfulness to God,
that He has pleased to Honor me before You in being the Father of such a
Child; and if I have any Hope of the Grace of God in my own Soul, I must have a
Measure of holy Joy in the Hope of going to her at my Decease, which cannot be
far off, and of coming with her in the Day of the Resurrection of the Just.

[The Sovereign God of our Spirits made her a pleasant Soul to her Parents from
her Infancy. Thrice she received the Sentence of Death before she was Eighteen
Months old, and it was a melancholy Time with us by reason of her great
Weakness, and the mortal Symptoms returning on her. It kept us the more in
constant and fervent Supplications for her Life, and in daily Resignations of
it; and her second and third Recoveries were as surprising to her Physicians,
and unto others who saw her in her low Estate, as unto her near Relations. I
have the Sermons of Wonder and Gratitude to God, yet lying by me which I
preached on those Occasions, when all Hopes of Life had been once and again
taken away. And I can never forget the dark and fair Day, when the Beloved
Physician having warned me that nothing now remained but to make the last
Resignation of her into the Hands of her Savior, I called my Family together
for that End, and did it in the most solemn manner I was able, wherein I found
my self greatly enlarged, begging of God an easy Death by his holy Will: when
on a sudden the Babes piercing shrieks ceased, for she lay in great Anguishes
of pain, and the sleep of Death as we though it came on and filled us with Tears of
Joy to see her expiring in Ease: but to our great Surprise we found it the next
Morning to be the sleep of Life, for she waked free from every Sign of Danger,
her great Weakness excepted: She half opened one of her sunk Eyes, and answered
unto the Barrow in the Street, repeating what was cried there to be Sold. When
the dear and Reverend Mr. Pemberton saw this strange Recovery, and had
expressed a kind of Astonishment at it, he turned to me and said, Well Mr.
Colman, I am persuaded God purposes to make this Child a Blessing and
remarkable in her Life.

In the midst of this Bodily Weakness her Soul made uncommon Improvements for
an Infant State; and it may be much the more for the weak State of the Body;
for she had not Strength to run about and play like other Children, which was
then our Grief. We made it therefore our daily Pleasure, and her Diversion, to
learn her Letters, and Prayers to God her Maker, Redeemer and Sanctifier, and
to fill her little Mind with the Stories of all the Holy Men on Sacred Record;
to strike her Admiration and Affection with true Excellency and Perfection; for
which End I took care to speak to her of every thing in a just and proper
Manner, if possible to convey regular Ideas into her, as of the Greatness and
Goodness of God, so of all that relates to his Worship and Service. By this
Means before she could go alone she had sucked in a little Treasure of Sacred
Knowledge, and was nourished up from the Breast with the sincere Milk of the
Word; the Knowledge whereof became the humble Pride of her Childhood, for we
taught her to value her self on it, as far better than bodily Ornaments.]

I early observed her daily Retirements to pray to her Father in Heaven, at
five or six year old, or before; and though it it my Duty to praise her for it, and
examine her how and for what she prayed? and whether she kept to Mr. Henry's
excellent Form for Children? but her Answer greatly pleased as well as
surprised me, "that she found God gave her Words to speak when she began to
pray. I cautioned and directed her, and gladly left her to the best Teacher.

The Spirit of God was moving upon her often in her following Youth. The
Families she sometimes visited in the Country took Notice of her serious and
good Inclinations, her chaste Conversation coupled with Fear, her meek and
quiet Spirit, Prudence and sober Cheerfulness, her Love of Lettess and Solitude.

Her Heart was always above the Things of this World; so far as I could
perceive from first to last; and neither the Prospects of it elevated her, nor
Injuries from it ^oil'd or depressed her. With a View to a better Life she
disposed of her Self in Marriage, and has (I trust) found the Benefit of doing
so to her infinite Gain. None was more content with her Lot, and no one happier
in a tender Husband, or in the Love of her Nei'bours. There never was an
Instance of more filial Piety, nor a Child more dearly beloved of Parents. -- I
might speak of her great Ingenuity, and how well she used her Pen as well as
her Lips, both which dropped as the H^ney-comb; but her inward Adorning, of
great Price in the Sight of God, was her Humiliation, Faith and Devotion before
God, with Resignations to his blessed Will in all things; her Benevolence to
all, and special Love to the Godly in Christ Jesus.

She early gave her Self up to God, but her timorous Disposition restrained her
from proceeding early to the Lord's Table; nor was it without much Conflict of
Soul and great Distress, through Fear of coming unworthily, that she at last came
into full Communion. She afterward exceeded, to her own and her Consort's great
Discomfort in her Preparations for Communion Days; which was her Infirmity, and
I do not praise her for it. Good Christians should take more the Comforts of
Religion in their Way to Heaven, in their Obedience to Christ, and in the
Observation of his special Institutions. Isai. lxiv. 5. Thou meetest him that
rejoices and works Righteousness, those that remember Thee in thy Ways.

Her Sister's Soul was, next to her own, her chief Care, and she even travailed
in Birth for her, to see Christ formed in her: She wrote to her, and spoke to
her for this End, living and dying, with the greatest Concern and Endearment.

But yet more did her pious Soul travail and wrestle in Prayer for the Children
of her own Bowels! Her many Papers on this Head, found since her Death, are a
pregnant Proof hereof; how she prayed for them, dedicated and resigned them to
God before they were born, as well as after it. -- I can never forget the holy
Fervours of Affections, and flowing Tears of Joy, with which she sent her first
S^n to Baptism, and received him back from the House of God; and how I was
instructed, charmed and reproved by her Example, that pleasant Day! But yet
more so Eleven Days after, when God called for the Babe away, to see her resign
him with a Silence and Calmness, like that of the Shunamite of old, and almost
without a Tear; for she had surrendered and offered him up on the Day he was
baptized.

[Her dear Cousins tell me that when they sometimes visited her, and made some
abode with her, she would in the Afternoons slip away from them, and at an
hours End return with a Smile and tell 'em how pleased she had been to hear 'em
so merry. Alas! had we apprehended how soon we were to see her no more, we had
all seen her oftener, and it may be had but kept her from her better Retirements.

Her Afflictions were many for the short Time she lived, in her own bodily
Sicknesses and in the Burial of her Children; but her greatest Sorrow was in
the Death of her Mother; under all which she behaved with admirable Submission
and Devotion, and the most fervent Repentance; as it is written and required,
Rev. iii. 19. As many as I love I rebuke and chasten; be zealous therefore and
repent.]

But after all it must be said, That her Temper was exceeding timorous, and her
Distemper Hysteric, the Accidents of which all know to be a Swimming of the
Head and Inquietude of Mind. This naturally both clouded and frightened her in
her Sickness. She was then ready to Enquire, "Why is it thus with me? If I have
in Sincerity given up and resigned my Self to God, as if I know my own Heart I
have (...), and now do it again, why then am I so afraid? Nor could we more
quiet and comfort her, than by laying before her the true and real Cause of it,
from the Nature of her Illness. Nevertheless her Disorders would return and her
Fears with them; and she had eno' to do to wrestle with them, by encouraging
her Self in God, and making her Resignations to Him, to the last Moments of her
Understanding.

This short Account of Her, living and dying, is both consolatory to us, and
also monitory and exciting, (and to Young People in particular) to be instant
and earnest in caring for our Souls, and getting ready for a dying Hour. --
What a Joy should it be to me this day, to be able to move you from the Example
of one of my Children? O might the pious Parents of this Flock, all of them,
have the like and greater Consolation in the Burial of their Adult Children, if
God call 'em to such a Sorrow! May your Daughters be, all of them, more
polished Stones in the Temple of our God! the Similitude of a Palace for the
King of Glory to dwell in.

But I forbear. -- My Text admonishes us to prepare to follow, both the Elder
and Younger, and her Father in particular. She will no more visit his house,
nor he see her again in what was once her own; it is eno' that there are
Mansions in the Father's House above, whether She is gone. She must no more be
seen in these Places of the H^ly, this House of Prayer which she loved, nor
keep another Sabbath with us on Earth; but there is a better Everlasting
Sabbatism and Places of more Holiness, the Rest which remains to the People of
God after this Life: And what signify our Sabbaths, Sermons and Funerals, if we
are not going thither!

Let our Souls therefore cleave to the Dead in Christ; by Faith in Whom, and
living to Him, we come into that Union to all Saints which Death can never
dissolve.

I now leave my dying Prayers and Blessing, with You the dear Flock of Christ
in this Place; and with your honored and Beloved Pastor, to whom God has made
me doubly a Father. The Lord long continue Him to you, and increase your Joy in
him, and his in you; and make You to each other a Crown of Rejoicing in the Day
of Christ.

I thank you this Day for all the Love shown to my Child, while she was with
You, and the Sorrow you express at her Death. She has lived desired, and died
lamented by You.

I pray God to requite to the pious Sisters of the Flock, the tender Affection
with which they have minister'd to the dear Deceased in her Sicknesses. May a
merciful and faithful Savior put these Kindnesses of God into that Roll of
Charities which He will call over in the last most blessed Day; and say of
them, I was sick and ye visited Me! for in as much as ye have done it to this
least of Mine, ye did it unto Me.

I leave a grateful Record of my particular Obligation to the pious and beloved
Physician Dr. Tusts.
of the Town, who to and even beyond his Power has always ministered gratis to
the Pastor and his Family. The Lord show Kindness to the House of his Servant.

And now Brethren, "I commend You to God and to the Word of his Grace which is
able to keep you, and to build you up unto the Inheritance of the Sanctified.

When, or whether ever, we shall again see one another Faces in this Place is
with God, and wholly uncertain to us; but absent in Body, let us be together in
Spirit: And pray for Me in my Age, "That the few Days yet remaining to me on
Earth, I may find Grace to be still serving the Lord with all Humility of Mind,
whatever Tears and Temptations may befall me through the Residue of my
Pilgrimage! that none of these things may move me from, but indeed quicken and
excite me in the Discharge of the Duties of that Ministry which I have received
of the Lord, to testify the Gospel of the Grace of God.

Peace be to the Brethren, and Love with Faith, from God the Father, and the
Lord Jesus Christ! Grace be with all them that love our Lord Jesus Christ in
Sincerity. Amen.

MEMOIRS OF THE Life and Death Of the Pious and Ingenious Mrs. JANE TURELL, Who
Expired at MEDFORD, March 26 th. 1735. Aetat. 27. Chiefly collected from her
own Manuscripts.

Prove. xxxi. 28. Her Husband also and He praises her.

BOSTON: N. E. Printed in the Year, MDDCCXXXV.

Some MEMOIRS Of the Life and Death of Mrs. Jane Turell, Who Deceased at
Medford, March 26. 1735. Aetat. 27. Chiefly collected from her own Manuscripts.
THERE is a Passage in Tully the Roman Orator to this purpose, "That if Virtue
were incorporate, and to be seen with our bodily Eyes in a substantial Form,
she would carry such Charms along with her as to ravish her Beholders; and
command the Love and Admiration of all that saw her. -- Alike beautiful and
engaging (and more so) should the holy Life and shining Example of the
Christian be, to all that are blessed with the Sight and Knowledge of it; for
herein we not only behold the godlike Image of it, but learn the
Practicableness of the thing, and have our natural Ambition and Imitation
mightily fired and excited.

That my Readers may be charmed into a Love and Admiration of Virtue and
Holiness, I now place before their Eyes the Picture of my Dear Deceased: The
Lines and Lineaments, Colors and Shades laid and drawn by her own lovely Hand,
guided by the Spirit of Grace and Truth.

And I present it particularly and in the first Place to her dear and only
surviving Sister; and then to her nearest Relatives and Acquaintance, and to
all the rising Daughters of New England, that they may understand what true
Beauty is, and what the brightest Ornaments of their Sex are, and seek them
with their whole Desire; even the hidden Man of the Heart, in that which is not
corruptible, the Ornament of a meek and quiet Spirit, which is in the sight of
God of great Price. For Favor is deceitful, and Beauty is vain: but a Woman
that fears the Lord, she shall be praised. -- And such an one (with some
additional Excellencies and Accomplishments) was Mrs. Jane Turell born in
Boston, New England, Feb. 25. A. D. 1708. of Parents Honorable and Religious.

Her Father the Reverend Dr. Benjamin Colman (through the gracious Favor of God)
is still living among us, one universally acknowleg'd to be even from his
younger Times (at Home and Abroad) a bright Ornament and Honor to his Country,
and an Instrument in God's Hand of bringing much Good to it.

Her Mother Mrs. Jane Colman was a truly gracious Woman, Daughter of Mr. Thomas
Clark Gentleman.

Mrs. Turell was their third Child, graciously given them after they had
mourned the Loss of the two former; and for seven Years their only one. Her
Constitution from her early Infancy was wonderful weak and tender, yet the
Organs of her Body so formed as not to obstruct the free Operations of the
active and capacious Spirit within. The Buddings of Reason and Religion
appeared on her sooner than usual. -- Before her second Year was completed she
could speak distinctly, knew her Letters, and could relate many Stories out of
the Scriptures to the Satisfaction and Pleasure of the most Judicious. I have
heard that Governor Dudley, with other Wise and Polite Gentlemen, have placed
her on a Table and setting round it owned themselves diverted with her Stories.
-- Before she was four Years old (so strong and tenacious was her Memory) she
could say the greater Part of the Assembly's Catechism, many of the Psalms,
some hundred Lines of the best Poetry, read distinctly, and make pertinent
Remarks on many things she read. --

She grew in Knowledge (the most useful) day by day, and had the Fear of God
before her Eyes.

She prayed to God sometimes by excellent Forms (recommended to her by her
Father and suited to her Age and Circumstances) and at other times ex cord,
the Spirit of God helping her Infirmities. When her Father upon a Time inquired
of her what Words she used in Prayer to God, she answered him, -- "That when
she was upon her Knees God gave her Expressions.

Even at the Age of four, five, and six she asked many astonishing Questions
about divine Mysteries, and carefully laid up and hid the Answers she received
to them, in her Heart.

Throughout her Childhood she discovered a very serious Spirit. Her Heart was
tender, and her Conscience a well-inform'd faithful Guide, and Monitor.

The most that I am able to collect of her Life from six to ten is general (and
from her) viz. That her Father daily instructed her, and enriched her Mind with
the best Knowledge; and excited her to the due Performance of all Duty. And that
her tender gracious Mother (who died about four years before her) often prayed
for, and over her, and gave her the wisest Counsels, and most faithful
Warnings; and that she was thankful and grew in Knowledge and (she hoped) in
Grace under them. -- That she loved the School and the Exercises of it, and
made a laudable Progress in the various Kinds of Learning proper to her Age and
Sex.

At nine or ten (if not before) she was able to write; for in the Year 1718, I
find a Letter of her honored Father's to her wrote in Answer to one of here is,
Dated Brookline -- Which he expresses himself well pleased with. A Copy of it
follows.

Boston, Aug. 4 th. 1718. My Dear Child,
I Have this Morning your Letter, which pleases me very well, and gives me
hopes of many a pleasant Line from you in Time to come; it God spare you to me,
and me to you.

I very much long to see your Mother, but doubt whether the Weather will permit
me to Day. I pray God to bless you, and make you one of his Children. I charge
you to pray daily, and read your Bible, and fear to sin. Be very dutiful to
your Mother, and respectful to every Body. -- Be very humble and modest,
womanly and discreet. Take care of your Health, and as you love me do not eat
green Apples. Drink sparingly of the Waters except the Day be warm. When I last
saw you you were too shame-fac'd; Look People in the Face, speak freely and
behave decently. I hope to bring Nabby in her Grand-Father's Chariot to see
you. The mean while I kiss your dear Mother, and commend her Health to the
gracious Care of God, and you with her to his Grace. -- Give my Service to Mr.
A -- and Family: also to Mr. S -- and Madam; and be sure you never forget the
Respect they have honored you with.

Your loving Father, --


In this her Eleventh Year I find an Hymn fairly written by her, dated January
4. 1718. Which I give you Verbatim.

I Fear the Great Eternal One above,
The God of Grace the God of Love:
He to whom Seraphims Hallelujah's sing,
And Angels do their Songs and Praises bring.
Happy the Soul that does in Heaven rest,
Where with his Savior he is ever blessed;
With heavenly Joys and Rapture is possessed,
No Tho'ts but of his God inspire his Breast.
Happy are they that walk in Wisdom Ways,
That tread her Paths, and shine in all her Rays.
Her Father was pleased to encourage her in this feeble Essay she made at
Verse: He condescended to return her Rhymes like her own, level to her present
Capacity, with a special Aim to keep and fix her Mind on God and heavenly
Things, with which she had begun. He therefore wrote and gave her the following
Lines, which he permits me to insert.

JOY of my Life! is this thy lovely Voice?
Sing on, and a fond Father's Heart rejoice.
'Twas nobly dared, my charming Child! a Song
From a Babes Mouth of right to Heaven belong.
Pleasant thy Wit, but more the sacred Theme,
Such as thy Name and all my Cares beseem.
Already you repay the Pains I took
To form you for your Maker and your Book.
Sing on my Bird! and let thy early Days
Be Sacred to thy God and to his Praise:
Thy Infant Wit devote to things Divine,
And like some beauteous Infant Angel shine.
But do thou truly fear the Eternal One?
Be sure you do, for he is God alone.
And would you join with Angels in their Songs?
Thy earliest and thy best to Him belongs.
And do thou count them blessed that rest above,
In Jesus Presence, Image and his Love?
Now seek a Name among his Saints, and let
Thy Heart on heavenly Things be early set.
Then happy thou, my Child, in Wisdom's Ways
Shining in thy transfigur'd Savior's Rays.
These Condescentions of her Father were no doubt of great Use to her, and had
in some measure the Effect proposed, to put her on thinking and writing more
and better, and to gain more of his Esteem for Ingenuity and Piety, which she
was wisely ambitious of; but above all to approve her Heart before God, her
Heavenly Father who sees in secret.

And accordingly she early began a sort of Diary without the knowledge of any
one, wherein in her fourteenth Year I find entered solemn and pertinent Prayers
to God to deliver her and the Town from the Small Pox then threatening it; or to
prepare her and his People for the Visitation: Also a Meditation and Prayers
occasioned by the Death of a Friend, her Companion and Acquaintance Mrs. Kilby.
, a few Months after of that Distemper; filled with such Sentences as these --

"Gracious and merciful God and Father, pardon my Sins for Christ's sake. Let
my Soul be precious in thy sight. I fly to thee for Protection. Give me an
entire Resignation to thy Will and Preparation for Death; and let me be found
among thy Children at the Great Day.

"I this Day followed to the Grave a true and faithful Friend. Lord sanctify
her Death to me: Awaken in me proper tho'ts of my own Frailty and Mortality. I
might have been taken away and she spared. -- Lord let me see thy great Mercy
in sparing me, and be fitted to live to Thee and to die to Thee. Spare and heal
those that are visited in the Town, and bless it, and thy Churches in it, and
all the Rulers of it; and forgive mine Enemies for Christ's sake.

In the same Book October. 25. 1721, I find her praising God, and exto^^ing his
Goodness, in sparing her when so many Hundreds were swept away by this
Judgment. -- Also a particular Record of Dr. Noyes's Death, with some Remarks
and Prayers, entered March 29. 1721. --

"On the 11th. Instant died here Dr Noyes in the midst of his Days and
Usefulness, one of the Ornaments of his Country; whilst God is sparing me a
worthless and sinful Creature, who am unable to do him any Service. Lord affect
my Heart with this and other such Dispensations of thine, and fit and prepare
me for my great Change. Pour out of thy good Spirit upon me, and Seal my Pardon
with thy Son's Blood, and make me thine for ever. Amen.

Between these and her Eighteenth Year there are to be seen among her
Composures many things considerable both in Verse and Prose.

(1) In Poetry, (among others) there are the following,

To her Honored Father, on his being chosen President of Harvard College, a
Poem of thirty Lines, Dated December 27. 1724. which begins thus, --

Sir,
AN Infant Muse begs leave beneath your Feet,
To lay the first Essays of her poetic Wit;
That under your Protection she may raise
Her Song to some exalted Pitch of Praise.
You who among the Bards are found the Chief, etc.

But I am not allowed to insert the other Lines, and but a small part of the
next Poem to her Friend, on her return to Boston, which begins after this
manner --

THrice welcome Home thou Glory of our Isle,
On whom indulgent Heaven delights to smile:
Whose Face the Graces make their chosen Seat,
In whom the Charms of Wit and Beauty meet.
O with what wondering Eyes I on you gaze,
And cannot recover from the sweet amaze!
This Lovely Form, those sweet but sparkling Eyes
Have made the noble Polydore their Prize. etc.
Her Father now a second time took notice of her Poetic Genius, and wrote her
the following Lines, which I found in her Cabinet.

My Dear,
YOu have now shown ^ three Poems, on three well chosen Su^jects, the first a
Song of Praise to your Great Creator, the second of Reverence to your Father,
the last a Song of Love to your Friend: Now to encourage and reward your
Ingenuity your Father says to you, --

THrice I have heard your tuneful Voice,
And thrice I praise your worthy Choice.
The noble Order of your Theme
Deserves my Praise and high Esteem.
With Heaven your Infant Muse begun,
Then sang of things below the Sun;
In a right Line your Songs descend,
Your GOD, your Father and your Friend.
Your Heavenly Father made your Tongue,
And first his Glories should be sung.
Your Earthly Parent next may claim
Your Filial Praise; a dearer Name
You know nor yet on Earth; and then
Your Friend should have your Heart and Pen.
So consecrate thy tender Muse
To Virtuous and Religious use;
And let your chosen Subjects be,
Devotion, Friendship, Piety.
But most the First; to Heaven your Voice,
Your Maker's Praises make your Choice:
To Heaven your Heart and gazing Eyes,
Nor sing of things below the Skies.
Of GOD sing in your early Days,
Your Infant Muse may lisp his Praise.
Your green Ear Offerings He approves,
Your filial Reverence He loves.
This humble Tribute therefore bring,
Your first Fruits to your Heavenly King,
Who formed your Mind to think, your Mouth to Sing.
June 7. 1725.

Psalm cxxxvii. Paraphrased, August 5th. 1725. Aetat. 17.
AS on the Margin of Euphrates Flood
We wail'd our Sins, and mourned an angry GOD;
For GOD provoked to strangers gave our Land
And by a righteous Judge condemned we stand;
Deep were our Groans, our Griefs without compare,
With ardent Cries we rent the yielding Air.
Born down with Woes no Friend at hand was found,
No Helper in the waste and barren Ground;
Only a mournful Willow withered there,
Its aged Arms by Winter Storms made bare,
On this our Lyres, now useless grown we hung,
Our Lyres by us forsaken and unstrung!
We sighed in Chains, and sunk beneath our Woe,
Whilst more insulting our proud Tyrants grow.
From Hearts oppressed with Grief they did require
A sacred Anthem on the sounding Lyre:
Come, now, they Cry, regale us with a Song,
Music and Mirth the fleeting Hours prolong,
Shall Babels Daughter hear that blessed Sound?
Shall Songs Divine be sung in heathen Ground?
No, Heaven forbid that we should tune our Voice,
Or touch the Lyre! whi^^t Slaves we cannot rejoice.
O Palestina! our once dear Abode,
Thou once were blessed with Peace, and loved by GOD!
But now art desolate, a barren waste,
Thy fruitful Fields by Thorns and Weeds defaced.
If I forget Judea's mournful Land,
May nothing prosper that I take in Hand!
Or if I string the Lyre, or tune my Voice,
Till thy Deliverance cause me to rejoice;
O may my Tongue forget her Art to move,
And may I never more my Speech improve!
Return O LORD! avenge us of our Foes,
Destroy the Men that up against us rose:
Let Edoms Sons thy just Displeasure know,
And like us serve some foreign conquering Foe,
In distant Realms; far from their native Home,
To which dear Seat O let them never come!
Thou Babel's Daughter! Author of our Woe,
Shall feel the Stroke of some revenging Blow:
Thy Walls and Towers be levelled with the Ground,
Sorrow and Grief shall in each Soul be found:
Thrice blessed the Man, who that auspicious Night
Shall seize thy trembling Infants in thy sight;
Regardless of thy flowing Tears and Moans,
And dash the tender Babes against the Stones.
The forgoing Poem she sent to her Father from Reading. And it gained her the
following Letter from him,

Boston, August 10th. 1725. My Dear Child,
Yours of the fifth Instant was exceeding pleasant to me, both your Paraphrase
on the 137 Psalm, and the Letter that enclosed it. In the Letter you wish you
might inherit something of your Father's Soul and therein his Gifts. If that be
worthy of your Desire God has in a great Measure given it to you; only you must
go on by Reading and Study to improve the Powers which God has given you. My
poor Gift is in thinking and writing with a little Eloquence, and a poetical
turn of Thought. This, in proportion to the Advantages you have had, under the
necessary and useful Restraints of your Sex, you enjoy to the full of what I
have done before you. With the Advantages of my liberal Education at School and
College, I have no reason to think but that your Genius in Writing would have
excelled mine. But there is no great Progress or Improvement ever made in any
thing but by Use and Industry and Time. If you diligently improve your stated
and some vacant Hours every Day or Week to read your Bible, and other useful
Books, you will insensibly grow in Knowledge and Wisdom, fine Tho'ts and good
Judgment, from Year to Year, to the Pleasure of your Friends, the Profit of
your Children, if God give you any, and to your own spiritual and everlasting
Advantage; if you direct all unto, and govern it by the Glory of God. But as to
a Poetical Flight now and then, let it be with you only a thing by the by. At
your leisure and spare Hours you may indulge your Inclinations this way. But
let them not break in either upon the daily Hours of secret Reading or
Devotion. -- So you shall consecrate your Heart and Life, your Muse and your
daily Works, to the Honor of Christ in the Way of your own Salvation.

You ask me to forgive the flow of your Affections, which run with so swift a
Current of filial Duty as may carry you beyond your self sometimes, and make
you wanting in that Respect which you aim at expressing". It is true, my Dear,
that a young fond and musical Genius is easily carried away thus; and never
more than when it runs into the Praises of what it loves; and I would have you
therefore careful against this Error, even when you say your Tho'ts of
Reverence and Esteem to your Father, or to a Spouse if ever you should live to
have one. It is easy to be lavish and run into foolish Flatteries. I think you
have done well to correct your Self for some of your Excursions of this kind
toward me. Your Father is pleased with your love; and you are but a poor
partial Judge of his Gifts or Virtues. -- But if you see any thing of Christ in
any, and whatever things are just, whatever things are lovely, think of these
things and imitate them.

You desire me to correct the faults in your Verses. I have always done that
freely, both as to your Prose and Verse. Nor be discouraged hereby, but
instructed. It is your learning time, and I am not ashamed of my Pupil. -- But
you have taken the last Paper of Verses with you, which prevents my sending you
any Emendations of them. Commendation of them in the general I do however send.
The serious melancholy Psalm is well turned in the most parts of it,
considering your Years and Advantages for such a Performance. You speak of a
single withered Willow which they hung their Harps on; but Euphrates was
covered with Willows along the Banks of it, so that it has been called the
River of Willows. I hope, my Dear, your Lyre will not be hung on such a
sorrowful Shrub. Go on in sacred Songs, and we'll hang it on the stately Cedars
of Lebanon. Or let the pleasant Elm before the Door where you are suffice for
you. -- Give my love to Mr. P -- and Madam, who receive you with such Courtesy
and Love. We wish their pleasant Air and Conversation may serve your Health
both of Body and Mind; and that your Company may be of some Pleasure and Use to
them.

I am, your affectionate Father, --


Part of the Fifth Chapter of Canticles paraphrased from the 8 th. verse.
Entered Sept. 14 th. 1725.
YOU beauteous Dames, if that my Love you see,
With eager Steps conduct him here to me,
Tell him no Joy to me you can impart,
And that no Pain is like a bleeding Heart.
Say I am sick of Love, and moaning ly,
Whilst the sad Echo to my Groans reply,
Who is thy Love? the scornful Maids reply,
And for what Form waste you your Bloom in sighs?
Let Us know the Man, if he be worth your Care,
Or does deserve the tender Love you bear.
Whilst your Request with Pleasure I obey,
Your strict Attention give to what I say.
My Love excells all that is on Earth called Fair,
As the bright Sun excells the meanest Star.
His Head is Wisdoms spacious Theater,
Riches of Grace and Beauty there appear.
A down his Shoulders with becoming Pride
Falls his fine Hair in beauteous Ringletts tied.
His sparkling Eyes in splendent Luster vie,
With the Twin Stars that grace the azure Sky.
His Cheeks excel the fragrant blushing Rose
Which in the fruitful Vale of Sharon grows.
His Lips like Lillies in their flowery Bloom
Yield a sweet Odor and a rich Perfume.
His Ivory Arms more charming to behold
Than orient Pearls, incas'd in shining Gold.
His well turned Legs like stately Pillars stand
Of Marble, polished by a curious Hand.
His Mien is noble and august his Air,
His Countenance as Lebanon does appear.
The 28th Psalm Paraphrased.
O Happy Man that fears the Lord!
And walks acco^^ing to his Word.
He shall abundantly be b^est
And of all Good shall stand possessed.
The beauteous Consort of your Bed,
Like a fair Crown shall grace your Head.
Her softer Hours she will improve
With the fair Pledges of your Love;
Round thy full Table they shall stand
Fed by her careful tender Hand:
Behold the Lord will thus requite
Him that does in his Laws delight,
From Sion's Hill shall Blessings flow,
And a sweet Calm shall grace his Brow.
To good old Age he shall arrive,
And in his Childrens Children live.
On reading the Warning by Mrs. Singer.
Surpised I view, wrote by a Female Pen,
Such a grave Warning to the Sons of Men.
Bold was the attempt and worthy of your Lays,
To strike at Vice, and sinking Virtue raise.
Each noble Line a pleasing Terror gives,
A secret Force in every Sentence lives.
Inspired by Virtue you could safely stand
The fair Reprover of a guilty Land.
You vie with the famed Huldah.
Prophetess of old,
Burn with her Fire, in the same Cause grow bold.
Dauntless you undertake the unequal strife,
And raise dead Virtue by your Verse to life.
A Woman's Pen strikes the cursed Serpants Head,
And lays the Monster gasping, if not dead.
The 8th Psalm Paraphrased.
MY God, the excelling Glories of thy Name
Through all the Earth thy Majesty proclaim.
Above the Skies it is that they are shown,
Where Angels worship round thy dazzling Throne.
From thence thou scatterest all thy Blessing round,
And in an Infant's Lips thy Praises sound.
Thy gracious Care to Sucking Babes extends,
And feeble ones thy Providence defends.
'O from a Suckling's Mouth now strength ordain,
'Nor Praises From a lisping Muse disdain!
'Assist me Savior, thou the Babe whose Breath
'St^^^k the Avenger to Eternal Death!
'Inspire thy Babe in this my sacred Theme,
'And still the Foe, whose Curse is to blaspheme.
When I survey those wondrous Fields of Light,
The azure Skies so pleasing to my Sight:
With those bright Orb; which high in Ether roll,
And by their Motion rule this lower Pole;
The Sun that glorious Light, whose piercing Ray
Dispels the Shades, and brings the smiling Day;
The Moon that beauteous Regent of the Night,
With the fair Stars which yield a fainter Light:
What then is Man! that thou should mind his Frame,
A wretch'd Worm defiled with Sin and Shame!
That thou should visit him with saving Grace,
And own thy Image in his guilty Face!
For thou have placed him but a little lower
Than those bright Hosts, that minister before
Thy Throne above! where holy Songs employ
Their Tongues in an Eternity of Joy.
Thy Love to Man thou graciously did show,
And made him Ruler of thy Works below.
The forest Beasts to him their Homage pay,
And tamer Herds his Sovereign will obey.
The feathered Clans are subject to his will,
That skim the reaky Lake, or range the Hill.
The scaly Shoals submit to his Command,
Nor can Leviathan his Force withstand.
The Glory of Jehovah's awful Name,
Let Men on Earth, and Saints in Heaven proclaim.
To my Muse, December 29. 1725.
COme Gentle Muse, and once more lend thine aid,
O bring thy Succor to a humble Maid!
How often do thou liberally dispense
To our dull Breast thy quickening Influence!
By thee inspired, I Will cheerful tune my Voice,
And Love and sacred Friendship make my Choice.
In my pleased Bosom you can freely pour,
A greater Treasure than Joves Gelden Shower.
Come now, fair Muse, and fill my empty Mind,
With rich Idea's, great and unconfined.
Instruct me in those secret Arts that lie
Unseen to all but to a Poet's Eye.
O let me burn with Sappho's noble Fire,
But not like her for faithless Man expire.
And let me rival great Orinda's Fame,
Or like sweet Philomela's be my Name.
Go lead the way, my Muse, nor must you stop,
'Till we have gained Parnassus shady Top:
'Till I have viewed those fragrant soft Retreats,
Those Fields of Bliss, the Muses sacred Seats.
I Will then devore thee to fair Virtues Fame,
And to be worthy of a Poet's Name.
These were the early Essays of her Youth at Poetry, in which it must be freely
owned that as there are many things good and ingenious, so there is a great
deal low and juvenile; which the candid understanding Reader will be ready to
excuse from that common Rule of a Child's speaking and writing as a Child. At
the same time, the Turn of the Mind here evident to God and Religion, is what
the Pious will esteem and praise, and it is to be wished that Children may be
taken herewith and drawn to imitate. -- It is eno' (as her honored Father
elegantly expressed it to me) if they may be accepted as a green offering of
First Fruits bro't to the Door of the Sanctuary, the promising Earnest of a
future Harvest: at least, as the first lisping of the Tongue at Words is a
pleasing Music to the Ear of the Mother, and the first Efforts of the Mind at
Reasoning delightful to a Father, so are the first Risings of a natural Genius
unto a wise Observer.

(2.) In Prose there are also many Things.

1. Some Essay to write her own Life, which begins with Thanksgivings to God
for distinguishing her from most in the World by the Blessings of Nature,
Providence and Grace, which she specifies and enumerates in the following
manner,

(1) I thank God for my Immortal Soul, and that Reason and Understanding which
distinguishes me from the lower Creation.

(2) For my Birth in a Christian Country, in a Land of Light, where the true
God and Jesus Christ are known.

(3) For pious and honorable Parents, whereby I am favored beyond many others.

(4) For faithful and godly Ministers, who are from time to time showing me the
Way of Salvation.

(5) For a Polite as well as Christian Education.

(6) For restraining Grace, that I have been withheld from more open and gross
Violations of God's holy Laws.

2. Her Tho'ts on Matrimony, with the Rules whereby she resolved to guide her
Self in that important Affair of Life.

She writes of the Wisdom and Goodness of God in making Man a Sociable
Creature; of the Institution of Marriage in the paradisaical State, and the
Happiness of the first Couple; and what alone will render Persons happy in our
fallen State; namely, a faithful Discharge of all the Duties of that Relation;
and then particularises the Duties, and treats of the Mischiefs that follow
upon the Neglect of them; Shows at large what their Duty is who are about to
enter into that State, namely, to seek to God by humble Prayer for his
Direction and Conduct, and that he would overruled all the Circumstances of
that momentous Affair in Mercy, on which so much of the Comfort and Pleasure of
Life depends. -- She carries her Tho'ts to the Afflictions and Temptations of
that Condition, and Prays for sufficient Grace to carry aright under all. And
for her Assistance in making a right Choice she laid down a Number of Rules,
from which she resolves never to start: Some of them are the following,

(1) I would admit the Addresses of no Person who is not descended of pious and
credible Parents.

(2) Who has not the Character of a strict Moralist, sober, temperate, just and
honest.

(3) Diligent in his Business, and prudent in Matters.

(4) Fixed in his Religion, a constant Attender on the public Worship, and who
appears not in God's House with the Gravity becoming a Christian.

(5) Of a sweet and agreeable Temper; for if he be Owner of all the former good
Qualifications, and fails here, my Life will be still uncomfortable.

3. Many Letters to her honored Father on various Occasions.

I shall only present you with one dated June 11 th. 1725.

Honored Sir,
I Return you many Thanks for your kind Letters to me, which I read with vast
Delight and Reverence, as who would not such good and tender Lines from the
best of Fathers, who has spared no Cost nor Pains in my Education. It is no
small Grief to me that I answer them no better, that I have so little of his
Soul in me, from whom I descend. I heartily embrace the Offer you condescend to
make of conversing by Letters, by which I shall not only learn to write good
Sense, but also be instructed how to behave my Self in all the Changes and
Conditions of Life, as becomes a Christian; not to be too elated in Prosperity,
nor sunk under Adversity, but ever resigned to the Will of God in all things. I
beg your Prayers for me that as I grow in Years I may grow in Grace, and
persevere therein. I pray you to forgive the many Faults in my present Writing,
and subscribe my self with all Humility,

Your Dutiful and Obedient Daughter.


Before She had seen Eighteen, she had read, and (in some measure) digested all
the English Poetry, and polite Pieces in Prose, printed and Manuscripts in her
Father's well furnished Library, and much she borrowed of her Friends and
Acquaintance. She had indeed such a Thirst after knowledge that the Leisure of
the Day did not suffice, but she spent whole Nights in reading.

I find she was sometimes fired with a laudable Ambition of raising the honor
of her Sex, who are therefore under Obligations to her; and all will be ready
to own she had a fine Genius, and is to be placed among those who have excelled.

When I was first indin'd (by the Motions of God's Providence and Spirit) to
seek her Acquaintance (which was about the Time she entered her nineteenth Year)
I was surpised and charmed to find her so accomplished. I found her in a good
measure Mistress of the politest Writers and their Works; could point out the
Beauties in them, and had made many of their best Tho'ts her own: And as she
went into more free Conversation, she discoursed how admirably on many Subjects!

I grew by Degrees into such an Opinion of her good Taste, that when she put me
upon translating a Psalm or two, I was ready to excuse my Self, and if I had
not feared to displease her should have denied her Request.

After her Marriage which was on August 11th. 1726, her Custom was once in a
Month or two, to make some new Essay in Verse or Prose, and to read from Day to
Day as much as a faithful Discharge of the Duties of her new Condition gave
Leisure for: and I think I may with Truth say, that she made the writing of
Poetry a Recreation and not a Business.

What greatly contributed to increase her Knowledge in Divinity, History,
Physic, Controversy, as well as Poetry, was her attentive hearing most that I
read upon those Heads through the long Evenings of the Winters as we sat together.

Some of the many remarkable things she wrote in her Marriage State are the
following; some in Verse, and more in Prose.

November. 1st 1731. She sent her Father the following Letter, with an Encomium
on Sir Richard Blackmore's Poetical Works. -- She knew it would be pleasing
eno' to her Father, to hear her sing in Praise of Sir Richard, of whom she
always heard him speak with great Esteem; not as the first of Poets, but as one
of the best; consecrating his Muse to the cause of Virtue and Religion, with a
most noble Aim to inspire the Princes and Nobles of the Nation, with the true
Sentiments of Glory and Usefulness; than which nothing could be more worthy of
a Christian Poet and an English Patriot. And as such He is celebrated in the
following Poem.

Honored Sir,
NOT having the Happiness of seeing You as I desire, I wait on you with a Poem.
The first fourteen Lines were written in 1725, and have lain by ever since: I
added the rest in some vacant Hours the last Week. I submit the whole to your
Candor and kind Correction, which I am sure they very much need, and I shall
with all Thankfulness receive. I find my Inclinations to Poetry still continue,
though I hope I do not follow them to the omitting more necessary Things. It is
my Study and Endeavor to be a Blessing. And I ask your Prayers that I may be
so to You and to all to whom I am related. etc.


On the Poems of Sir Richard Blackmore.
BLackmore, thou wondrous Bard! whose Name inspires
My glowing Breast to imitate thy Fires.
O that my Muse could give a lasting Fame!
Then should my Verse immortalize thy Name.
Thy matchless Lines thy inborn worth displays,
Inspires our Souls, and fills our Mouths with Praise.
Thou for Mankind's Preceptor Heaven designed,
To form their Manners, and instruct their Mind.
In Virtues Cause undaunted you engage,
To stem the Tide of Vice, res^^m the Stage,
And place the present with the Golden Age.
What Eyes can view thy Her^es and not find,
In them the lively Copy of thy Mind?
None but a Soul profusely great and good,
A Soul with every princely Gift endowed,
Could draw such Virtues in their native light;
Virtues in which Heroic Souls delight.
With what sweet Majesty Eliza stands,
While valiant Vere attends her high commands?
The vanquished Gault before her Chohorts fly,
And with their Blood the Da^^bes Current dye.
Here pious Arthur plows the watery Main,
Heavens righteous Cause and Worship to maintain;
His pious Deeds and his victorious Arms
Are crowned with Peace; and Ethelima's Charms.
The virtuous Alfred next imbarqu'd we find,
In quest of Wisdom for a princely Mind,
To Empire born and for a Throne designed.
Sages and Kings alike the Prince admire,
The Schools and Courts yield him his whole Desire:
His Virtue faithful Guithan was thy Care;
Nobly he fled the lewd Sicilian Fair!
Chaste he returned, and as an Angel wise,
And more than Crowns he found in fair Elsitha's Eyes.
Thus Arthur, Alfred, and Eliza stand,
Drawn for Examples by your matchless Hand.
Had but the Man^uan felt that heavenly Fire,
That warms thy Breast, when 'ere you tune the Lyre,
Rome ^e'r had known a Rival in her Praise,
Nor to Augusta 'ere resigned the Bays.
To sacred numbers next your Lyre is strung,
And Mysteries Divine flow from your Tongue.
What Heart's not sad, what Eye flows not with Tears,
When Job in all the Pomp of Grief appears?
His learned Friends in vain attempt and try,
God'^ secret Springs of acting to descry;
And Job condemn, till God does justify.
With Isreal's Psalmist next in cheerful Lays,
Raptured in sacred Love and heavenly Praise,
To Israel's God your purer Offerings rise,
For a sweet smell and grateful Sacrifice.
No more shall Epicurian Doctrine find,
Belief in any but a s^^kly Mind;
Nor will the Stagirit^ again persuade,
'Twas not in Time these mighty Orbs were made,
Who read Creation by your Wit displayed.
Nor the bold Arrian whose blasphemous Breath
The impure Steam of sulphurous Hell and Death,
Shall scan the Almighty's Ways, his Truths deny,
And from the Savior tear the Deity:
No more shall he the gazing World delude,
Nor on Mankind his hellish Schemes obtrude;
While you Redemption sing our Faith does cry,
My God, my God, I see thy Deity!
O happy Land! and of unrivaled Fame,
That claims thy Birth, and boasts so great a Name!
Albion alone is blessed with such a Son,
A Birth to Ages past, and Thee O Greece unknown.
Her Father in his next Letter called this Poem a rich Present, and told her
his Opinion that Sir Richard and his Works were worthy of her highest Esteem,
and far above all her Praises. That he was properly the Christian Poet, and
after the Reverend Dr. Watts the Laureat in the Church of Christ. That he knew
it was his Purity and Virtue, his Piety and Devotion that charmed her Heart:
And that this well became the Daughter and Wife of a Minister of the Gospel. He
added, That Sir Richard had merited unspeakably of the Age he lived in, and
that he hoped future Times would be more just to pay the Debt. -- That he was
pleased with her paying for his Family; That she had eno' of his Esteem, and on
much better Accounts than her P^etic Genius; even the ornament of a meek and
gracious Spirit, which is of much greater Price in the Eyes of God and Man. --
It is your shining Crown (says he) that you desire to be a Blessing. God make
you so more and more to us all, and to your dear Son in particular. The Lord
bless him and keep him.

When she had read Mr. Wallers Poems, it appears that she was struck with the
pleasing Admiration of him also; as for the Beauty of his Tho'ts, so more
especially for the Purity of his Style and delicacy of Language. It was He that
taught us the Simplicity and Easiness of Expression, which has ever since been
the Character of our best Writers.

On the Incomparable Mr. Waller.
HAIL chaste Urania! thy Assistance bring,
And fire my Breast while I attempt to Sing,
In artless Lays, Waller the Poets King.
Waller, the tuneful Name my Soul inspires,
And kindles in thy Breast poetic Fires.
Hail mighty Genius! Favorite of the Nine!
Thy Merits in four Reigns distinguished shine.
Country and Court, alternate, you enjoy,
One claims thy nobler Tho'ts, and one thy Muse employ.
Chaste is thy Muse, and lofty is her Song,
Softer than Ovid and like Virgil strong.
Much thee thy Country, more its Language owe,
All that adorns it it received from you.
What weighty Sense does in thy Works abound!
And sterling Lines are in thy Poems found.
In sweetest Numbers you your Tho'ts express,
The justest Standard of our English Verse.
A tender Passion every Bosom warms,
When 'ere you Sing of Sacharissa's Charms,
O lovely Maid! mild as the morning Light,
When first its Beams salute our longing Sight.
As Virgin Fountains in their Basins roll,
So calm, so bright is Sacharissa's Soul.
As the fierce Sun, by his meridian Rays,
Exhales the Moisture from this lower Earth;
Again at Might by Dews the Fields repays,
That Nature labors with a double Birth:
So you engross in your capacious Soul
All that the World Polite and Learned call,
But in your Works you do repay the whole,
With large Additions of your own to all.
O happy Isle that bare a Son so bright,
Of whom the Ages since have learnt to Write.
An Invitation into the Country, in Imitation of Horace, left only in a rough
Copy. --
FROM the soft Shades, and from the balmy Sweets
Of Medford's flowery Vales, and green Retreats,
Your absent Delia to her Father sends
And prays to see him 'ere the Summer ends.
Now while the Earth's with beauteous Verdure died,
And Flora paints the Meads in all her Pride;
While laden Trees Pomonian's Bounty own,
And Ceres Treasures do the Fields adorn.
From the thick Smokes, and noisy Town, O come,
And in these Plains a while forget your Home.
Though my small Incomes never can afford,
Like wealthy C^lsus to regale a Lord;
No Ivory Tables groan beneath the Weight
Of sumptuous Dishes, served in massy Plate:
The Forest never was searched for Food for me,
Nor from my Hounds the timorous Hare does flee:
No leaden Thunder strikes the Fowl in Air,
Nor from my Shaft the winged Death do fear:
With silken Nets I never the Lake despoil,
Nor with my Bait the larger Fish beguile.
No luscious Sweetmeats, by my Servants placed
In curious Order, 'ere my Table graced:
To please the Taste, no rich Burgundian Wine,
In crystal Glasses on my Side-board shine;
The luscious Sweets of fair Canaries Isle
Never filled my Casks, nor in my Flaggons smile:
No Wine, but what does from my Apples flow,
My frugal House on any can bestow:
Except when Caesar's Birthday does return,
And joyful Fires throughout the Village burn;
Then moderate each takes his cheerful Glass,
And our good Wishes to Augustus pass.
But though rich Dainties never spread my Board,
Nor my cool Vaults Calabrian Wines afford;
Yet what is neat and wholesome I can spread,
My good fat Bacon, and our homely Bread,
With which my healthful Family is fed.
Milk from the Cow, and Butter newly churn'd,
And new fresh Cheese, with Curds and Cream just turned.
For a Desert upon my Table's seen
The Golden Apple, and the Melon green;
The blushing Peech and glossy Plumb there lies,
And with the Mandrake tempt your Hands and Eyes.
This I can give, and if you will here repair,
To slake your Thirst a Cask of Autumn Beer,
Reserved on purpose for your drinking here.
Under the Spreading Elms our Limbs we'll lay,
While fragrant Zephires round our Temples play.
Retired from Courts, and Crowds, secure we'll set,
And freely feed upon our Country Treat.
No noisy Faction here shall dare intrude,
Or once disturb our peaceful Solitude.
No stately Beds my humble Roofs adorn
Of costly Purple, by carved Panthers born.
Nor can I boast Arabia's rich Perfumes,
Diffusing Odours through our stately Rooms.
For me no fair Egyptian plies the Loam,
But my fine Linen all is made at Home.
Though I no Down or Tapestry can spread,
A clean soft Pillow shall support your Head,
Filled with the Wool from off my tender Sheep,
On which with Ease and Safety you may sleep.
The Nightingale shall lull You to your Rest,
And all be calm and still as is your Breast.
I might add to these some Pieces of Wit and Humor, which if published would
give a brighter Idea of her to some sort of Readers; but as her Heart was set
upon graver and better Subjects, and her Pen much oftener employed about them,
so I choose to omit them, though innocent enough, and to preserve the Memory of
her Ingenuity only by the forementioned, and two or three more Occasional
Pieces, that will be inserted in their Place.

(2) We come now to Things more serious and profitable, in Prose, though many of
them very melancholy, being writ under the more immediate Cares and Distresses
of her Mind about her Spiritual State.

I shall first insert a long and broken Letter to her Father, in which you will
see (as her Father expresses it) the Natural Workings of a broken contrite
Spirit, in the Depths of Humiliation, Shame and Fear and Grief; yet in the
lively Efforts of Faith, Hope, Desire and gracious Love.

Honored Sir,
I Have been about Writing to you a great while, but thinking I could better
Speak than write my Tho'ts caused me to delay. But not knowing how long it may
be before I see you by reason of the Weather, and my present Indisposition, I
take this Opportunity to trouble you with my Fears and Doubts. I know of none
in this World I can so well apply to for Comfort as your Self, and I doubt not
but you are both able and willing to advise me how to behave under them.

This is the short and broken Account of my Soul at present. Sometimes my Sins
come pressing on my Mind, and appear so black and numerous that I am quite
amazed. I look all around, and see a World of Vanities, which can yield me no
Comfort, much less any Help. Only in Christ is my Help found; O that I had
Faith to lay hold on him, and Love to join my Soul to him! -- The last Week I
was in great Distress, I could not go to Christ, nor hope in him, nor pray to
him, nor take any Comfort from any thing I heard, read or discoursed about. --
I seem in a maze, that such a Sinner as I, am spared from day to day; and
admire at the Patience of God in giving me a space for Repentance. O that he
would give me Grace to repent! -- Often in a Day I think what would become of
me if I should die? I think, if it were possible, I could open my very Breast,
and tear the accursed thing Sin out of it. But since I cannot wholly take it
out, or drive it out, I look to God for his Grace that I may more mortify and
subdue it, and prevent it is reigning in me. -- Sometimes I feel in a Tumult by
reason of Blasphemous Tho'ts crowding in upon me, and wicked, revengeful,
quarrelsome Tho'ts rising up in me. I find also rash passionate Expressions
ready to break through the doors of my Lips. Yet I bless God who has restrained
me by his Grace from consenting to the one, or uttering the other. I hope I can
truly say, My Soul abhors them. -- I often mourn the Loss of that Time I have
spent in reading useless Books, which I am sensible had been better improved in
working out my Souls Salvation. I frequently take up that Lamentation, "How
have I hated Instruction, etc. -- I feel my Heart at times harder than an
Adamant, at other times by reason of God's Terrors I am Distracted. The Things
that once appeared innocent Amusements, now appear to be sinful. It amazes me
to think that one so Young as I, scarce Twenty Years Old, should have heaped up
so much Sin and Guilt. I dare not stay away from the House of God, but when I
am there, my Heart is as the Way Side, and Stony Ground to the Seed ^own. -- I
am very sensible, though it is my Duty to apply to you for Advice, that it is not
in the Power of the dearest and holiest Relation in the World to afford me any
more than their Pity, Prayers and Counsels. The Tho'ts of my Approaching every
Day nearer to the Grave, in such a Condition, adds to my Terror and Distress. O
let not Death come upon me until God is in and through Christ reconciled unto me!
But Amidst all my Spiritual Troubles that Text has afforded me some Comfort, --
Shall he bring to the Birth, and not cause to bring forth?

I cannot but hope after all that God has begun a good Work in me; and will he
not carry it on and finish it? I would hope that in his own Time he will
deliver my Soul from all her Sins and Fears -- I bless God I have not been
without Supports and Consolations from him in my dark Hours. -- I have been
much at a loss about laying hold on and applying the Promises, and when I have
been (searching my Bible to find out a Promise, that Scripture has come full in
my Mind, What last thou to do to take my Covenant into thy Mouth? -- But I have
lately met with a Book The Godly Man's Ark.
of Mr. Calamy's that has greatly instructed and comforted me on that Head. --
I know not what to think of my Self; sometimes I fear I never had an Interest
in Christ, but am an Hypocrite: At other times I think I am Sincere: I am sure
I desire to be so -- I am more mortified to the World since the Earthquake, and
love is less. I desire and pray I may be so wise as to lay up my Treasure in
Heaven where it will be sure; and to have my Heart there also. -- I commend my
self now, Honored Sir, to your Blessing and Prayers, which I doubt not but I
constantly have, and remain your Dutiful Daughter. --

Medford, December. 6. 1727.

Her Father was ready and careful to Answer all her Letters, and to be sure
therefore could not let this want a speedy Answer. -- The Day he received it,
he answered it in the following Words,

My Dear Child,
I Have your long and melancholy Letter, but scarce Time to read it; Mrs. H --
calls in for a Minute. O how good is God in his Awakenings to you! He also will
be your Comforter. He wounds and he heals. Why art thou cast down O my Soul,
and why art thou disquieted within me? Hope thou in God for I shall yet praise
him. My Soul grieves for you, and rejoices in you, and I long* be with you. You
are a thousand times dearer to me than ever. The Devil envies and hates you,
but God loves you, and will help and save you. Go to him, and keep with him,
and his Grace in Christ Jesus be with you. Rejoice in the Lord always, and
again I say rejoice.

Your loving Father. --
December. 8. 1727.

But there is a fuller and more particular Answer dated the next Day; which was
a vast Comfort to her, and may so to some of my Readers under the like
Circumstances, for whose Benefit it is here inserted; wherein her Father thus
addresses her.

My Dear Child,
YOUR Letter of the 6th Instant both affects and comforts me exceedingly. I
tenderly feel all your Tears and Distress, the Pain and Anguish of your Soul,
and am distressed for you. But I rejoice too to see you sorrowing after a godly
sort, for godly Sorrow works Repentance unto Salvation never to be repented
of. Think it not strange (my Dearest) that you are under such Pressure of
Spirit, and are bowed down heavily, for it is no more than what many of the
dear Children of God have experienced, and they have been to them as the Pangs
of the New Birth: These will be remembered with Joy if you are indeed born to
God; as the sorrows of Childbed are forgotten for Joy that there is a Child
born.

Thanks be to God who makes Sin, and the Sins of your Youth (which yet has been
very innocent if compared to that of many other Young People, who have
nevertheless become eminent for Grace and Holiness) appear so evil and amazing
to you; and Thanks be to God who gives you such a Sense of the Vanity of all
things under the Sun, without an Interest in Christ and a better Life: Let
these united Convictions carry you to him as all your Salvation.

You admire the Patience of God toward you; O admire his Grace and Favor to
you, that he is now, and thus early, working on you by his Holy Spirit;
convincing and awakening you, humbling and striving with you. You think what
would become of you if you should die! But thank God that the Day of Life and
of Grace is still continued, and make your renewed Flight to the Lord Jesus for
Pardon and Cleansing, and the closing of your Soul with him; and trust your
Soul with him, "Yea though he slay me I will trust in him.

It ought greatly to comfort you, that you can say, You think of your Sins with
loathing and hatred, that you desire to get Sin mortif'd and subdued that it
may not reign in you. This is a Sign of true Grace, and if it be the abiding
governing Frame of your Soul, it will be a happy Fruit and Evidence of it: the
Lord fix and increase this in you.

O I hope God means of his free Grace to make you a holy and happy Woman, a
gracious Wife, Mother, and Mistress in your House, a Blessing in your Place,
and blessed for ever. I have Joy in you my dear Child, in this Hope and
Prospect.

I am sorry to hear of the Temptations that assault you, but rejoice in the
Res^raints you speak of. Christ himself was thus tempted, and so have all the
dear Children of God been; He is able to succor them that are tempted, and
ready to do it; and to bruise Satan under their Feet. Fly to him, who knows how
to have Compassion, and who said to Peter, I have prayed for thee that thy
Faith fail not, though Satan has desired to sift thee. He said to Paul as he
cried thrice under the Thorn, My Grace is sufficient for thee.

You mourn the time spent in reading useless Books; you do well, I am glad you
see the Emptiness and Folly of them: Mr. Tur^ll has a Library for you to be
repairing to, let him put proper and profitable Books into your Hand.

Those things which once appeared to you to be but innocent Amusements, now
appear to be Sins, you say. I am glad to see the Sense you have of the
Appearance of Evil, and the Weight of the least Sins upon your tender Soul.
Because Josiah's Heart was tender the Lord loved him, and the high and lofty
One looks to him that is of a contrite Spirit, to revive the Spirit of the
humble and the Heart of the contrite ones. To be sure there is a great deal of
Sin in a vain and careless trifling away our Time and Days. But Satan will be
ready now to accuse and terrify and amaze you, by hideous Representations of
your youthful Vanities, which is one of his Wiles and Devices when he cannot
keep a Soul secure and fearless in Sin. Remember, my Dear, the infinite Mercies
and Compassions of God to a repenting Sinner, that casts a perishing Soul on
the Merits of Christ* How was the Prodigal Son received of his Father? Read
Luke 15. How was the Woman that had been a great Sinner received by Christ,
when she lay at his Feet? Luke 7 44. And what Grace did the trembling Woman
find in this fight? Luke. 8.47. And are your Sins so many and great, my Child,
that they may not find the like Mercy? yea and like Love from Christ? Do not
fear, do not doubt it in the least: Be not afraid with any Amazements: trust in
free, rich, sovereign, infinite Mercy. -- You are amazed that one so Young as
you should have heaped up such a Load of Guilt, you say: O stand amazed at what
God has wro't in Christ Jesus for the Salvation of the greatest Sinners; having
laid on Him the Iniquity of us all, and called every weary and heavy laden Soul
to him for rest. Ah my Child, thy Sins are few and little compared to Thousands
of whom Christ has saved! And were thy Sins a thousand fold more and greater
than they are, they would be all forgiven upon thy penitent believing Flight to
Christ for Pardon and Sanctification. Yet your Sins should appear as they do
(...) you, if they had not been half so many and great as they are.

As a Father pitieth his Children, so the Lord them that fear him, Psalm. 103.
And if earthly Parents know how to give good Things to their Children, shall
not your Heavenly Father give his Holy Spirit to them that ask him? Matthew.
7.11. O how would I give you Grace, Pardon, Comfort, if it were in my Power!
but the Bowels of Christ are moved infinitely more to you, if he sees in you
the Mournings of a true Repentance. The Father of your Flesh don't love you, in
comparison of the Father of your Spirit; the Father of Mercies. -- O my dear
Child, magnify your Heavenly Father, believe him, confide in him, cast your
Care upon him, cast your Self into his gracious Hands; and read what he says to
you, "Fear not I am with thee, be not dismayed I am thy God. "As I live says
the Lord God, I have no pleasure that the Sinner should die; but that he turn
and live. "Though your Sins be as Scarlet they shall be as Wool, though red as
Crimson they shall be as Snow.

Shall he bring to the Birth and not cause to bring forth? Will he quench the
smoking Flax, or break the bruised Reed? No, no: Be confident of this very
thing, that he who has begun a good Work in you will perform it to the Day of
Christ. But he will be inquired of, and sought unto, and you must continue in
Prayer, and in a diligent Walk with God, in all the Means of Grace private and
public: Watch unto Prayer with all Perseverance.

Blessed be God for the Comforts you taste at times: O be very thankful for
them, prize them, and live on them, when Darkness returns. And still follow God
in the Dark. God will not leave you comfortless. He will come to you, and I hope
is laying a Foundation for Peace and Joy in the Holy Ghost, and a happy
pleasant Life under his Light, and in the Sense of his Love through Christ.

Satan would turn Scriptures against you, which are not meant to any in your
present Frame; and wrest those from you which belong to you. What have thou to
do to take my Covenant into thy Mouth? Yes; every awakn'd, humble, mournful
Soul, bleeding for Sin with a broken Heart, has a right to take hold on God's
Covenant, and on all the Promises and Mercies of it; flying thereto for Refuge
as the Hope set before him. -- Turn to the strong Hold ye Prisoners of Hope.

Nothing is there in your present Case, the Sense of your own Hardness and
Stupidity, and Fears of your Hypocrisy, but what is common to the Children of
God; especially under the first Workings of the Spirit on their Souls. -- You
say You desire to be more and more mortified to the World; and that you daily
see less and less in it, and that you hope and pray to be made wise for your
Soul and Eternity. And will not this comfort you? Whilst you are looking less
to the things that are seen, and more to those things which are unseen and
eternal, you are and will be getting more above and loose from this World, and
be ripening for a better. God keep you in (...) Desires and Prayers, and give
you Treasure in Heaven, where (...) our Heart is.

My Dear, my Joy and my Crown! What thanks can I give to God for you! how can I
bless him eno' for what (...) is doing for you! If I may be a Parent of a Child
of God by Faith in Jesus Christ, how should my Heart rejoice, even mine! What a
glad Father should I be in a wise Child? wise to Salvation! God Almighty bless
thee; and increase his Grace in thee; make thee fruitful and multiply thee;
Cause his Face to shine on thy Soul; upon his own Work in thee; give the
Blessing of Abraham to thee and to thy Seed, and say of thee that thou shall be
a Blessing: Make thee a happy Mother, and a better Parent to thine than I have
been to thee.

Pray for your Parents and Sister da^ly, that we may see you in Heaven, and be
blessed together in a most indissoluble Relation; and by a Life full of Grace
endear your self more and more to your dear Spouse and to us.

Live cheerfully with Him whom thou love, and to whom thou art espoused; with
Him in Heaven which is Christ; and with him on Earth who will love thee as
Christ loved hiss Church, and help thee on in thy way to Heaven. Make Mr.
Turell's Life easy and pleasant by seeing you so. -- But as you say, Christ
must help you, enlighten and comfort you; we can only give you our Pity,
Prayers and Counsels; look off from us, look up to Christ; and we will be doing
this with you and for you: and He for his own Name sake and of his mere
Compassions will do abundantly beyond all that we can ask or think. May He
speak Peace to you, and his Peace keep your Soul.

Your loving Father.
Boston, December 9. 1727. Your Mother is better, and sends her Blessing.




Her next Letter was a very Excellent one to her Sister a few Weeks after.

My Dear and only Sister,
THough we are absent, I hope we are not forgetful of each other. I am sure my
Tho'ts are often employed about you, and I am daily concerned for you. You have
now just past your Childhood, and are arrived to that Stage of Life which is
most exposed to Snares and Temptations; and according as you behave in it, your
Reflections will be uneasy or comfortable afterward. Think not the Counsels of
a Sister, who loves you as her self, unseasonable; or the Effect of melancholy
Vapors. No, It is from the best Love to you, and my great Desire to see you
virtuous and happy.

Let me warn you then of the Vanity and Deceit there is in all Worldly Things,
and urge you to employ your Time in working out your Soul's Salvation; and
therefore in learning those things that will help you Heavenward; and not spend
it in those Pleasures that will not profit, or in those Follies and Sins which
will in the End bite like a Serpent and sting like an Adder. -- You have a
precious Opportunity for Instruction and Improvement under the best of earthly
Fathers. O then improve it to the best Purposes, lest you provoke God to
deprive you of your Advantages, and take away your Father from your Head -- O
remember your Creator now, even now in the Days of your Youth: Let him have
your first Love and Service: Keep in Mind what Christ the Wisdom of God says, I
love them that love me, and those that seek me early shall find me. Fly to that
great Shepard who takes the Lambs in his Bosom. He greatly delights in the
Virtue and Piety of Young Persons. -- When the Young Man in the Gospel came to
Him with his serious Enquiries about Eternal Life, Jesus beheld him and loved
him. Joseph was beloved of his God for his early Piety, and because he feared
to Sin against him in Private. Moses was honored of God, and was taken into
the nearest and most intimate Acquaintance with him because he despised the
Pleasures of Egypt, and chose to suffer Affliction with the People of God God
revealed himself to pious Samuel while he was yet a Child. Because young
Josiah's Heart was tender, therefore God bro't not the Evils in his Days.
Timothy was remarkable also for his early Piety, and he was ordained young a
Bishop at Ephesus.

These and many more shining Examples might be produced. Look into your Bible
and read them; and O that you might profit by reading them! But I cannot leave
you without offering you one more, and that is the Incomparable Pattern and
Example which our Lord Jesus Christ has left unto Young People to Copy after: O
read his Life over and over, as it is given you by the Evangelists, and conform
yours to it as far as possible. Beg of him his Holy Spirit, and gracious
Assistances; and he will own your Endeavors and accept you. O how does God
delight in the Blossoms of his Gardens! Their Scent is fragrant in his Nostrils!

O My Dear, let me beg of you not to spend any part of your precious Time in
reading Romances or idle Poems, which tend only to raise false Ideas and impure
Images in the Mind, and leave a vile Tincture upon it.

Flee Youthful Lusts; and follow after Holiness without which no Man shall see
the Lord. Let it be your constant Care to begin and end every Day with secret
Prayer to God; and reading a Portion of the Holy Scriptures. Be deligent at
Work, eat not the Bread of Idleness. Have respect to all God's Commandments.
Never dare to profane God's Name, or Sabbath. Be dutiful and show all Reverence
to your Parents. O remember the Fifth Commandment; study the Promises and
Threatenings of it. Put away all Childish things. Behave your self Womanly, and
like a Christian to all with whom you converse. Indulge not a passionate or
fretful Temper; much less a haughty or insulting Carriage toward the meanest
Servant in the Family. Be obliging, and modest, and humble, so shall you
deserve and have the Esteem of every Body. Hearken to Instruction, and let your
Ears be open to Reproof. Be thankful to and pray for them that are so kind as
to admonish you. Be contented with your Lot; wish not your self in another's
Place, or that you had another's Liberty. There are but Few in Town favored on
all Accounts as you are: think so, and bless God for distinguishing you. -- I
have many more things to say when I see you. So earnestly beseeching you to
turn to the Lord, in and through Jesus Christ; to the keeping of whose Grace I
commend both your Soul and mine.

I am your loving Sister.


This Letter was too good to be overlooked by her Father; I find him presently
making the following most just, and yet most obliging Return for it.

December. 21. 1727. My Dear Child,
NAbby has your dear Letter, she thanks you for it; your Mother and I do so
more. We love you more than ever. We prize it beyond an Ingot of Gold. It is
more precious than Rubies, an Ornament of Grace, and better than Chains for the
Neck. Your Sister cannot read it for Tears: may it enter deep into her Heart.
You have done a Sister's part, and acted like One converted to God, desiring to
carry your only and younger Sister with you. You have amassed the most
excellent Rules for her, with the strongest Motives, and put them in the best
order. Your Letter is worthy to be printed in Types of Gold. Such is your
Father's Esteem of it! What then think you is his Joy in you for writing of it?
-- Go on, my Dearest, in your Care for your own Soul, and the Souls of your
dear Relatives. Continue your tender Solicitude for your dear Sister. God make
her a Blessing to you and your Crown; as You are to us. -- When God gives you
Children, as I hope he will, take such Care of them, more and better than We
have of you; and may the Blessing of Abraham be on them. -- And now my Dear,
live joyfully with him thou love, the tenderest of Husbands; and go gladly
with him toward Heaven; be helped by him along and be helpful to him. Your
Mother is melted with your Letter, and sends you a thousand Loves.

Your loving Father.


I have several more Letters to show, which she wrote me from Boston in the
Year 1729, in equal Strains of Piety. A Paragraph or two shall be offered.

-- I commit my Self and my Case into the Hands of a wise and gracious God, who
knows what is best for me; and who will order all things for the best. O may I
continue in this Faith and Prayer, and so be prepared for the great
Deliverances I stand in need of, both for Soul and Body.


Again,

I thank you for your good Advice and Counsels, and pray I may have Grace given
me to practice agreably. I have had large Experience of the Goodness of God in
my former Travails, as well as through my whole Life, He is the same God, and the
same to me: His Arm is not shortened, and I daily experience his Power and
Goodness in preserving both the Tree and Fruit; I therefore will trust in Him.
Let me always have your Prayers and Counsels. I take leave commending you to
the Care and Keeping of God's Grace and Providence, praying him to watch over
us while we are apart, to cause us to rejoice together in this World, but
especially in a better.

Your loving dutiful Wife.


Here follows a remarkable One she wrote me from her Chamber.

My Dear,
YOU must forgive my Infirmity in not uttering my Griefs to day. I though it you
might have guessed the State of my Mind by my Countenance. I am under great
Fears and Doubts, about my Eternal Welfare, and my Soul is exceeding heavy. My
Sins stare me in the Face, my Guilt confounds me. I have sinned against such
clear Light and so many Mercies, that I am ashamed and blush to lift up my Face
to God. -- One particular that grieves me to Day is my being over merry in
Company the last Night. -- Another, that I cannot p^ay without the utmost
Confusedness. When I rise from my Knees I tremble for fear I have enhanced my
Guilt; and that Scripture d^^^esses me, -- The Prayers of the Wicked are an
Abomination to the Lord: Yet I follow after God in the Dark, and hope he will
be found of me, and be better to me than my Fears. What shall I do? tell me
freely, and resolve me quickly.

Your distressed Wife.


Upon the Receipt of this Script I observed unto her, that it was truly an
Infirmity, and a very faulty one, to hide her Griefs; it being no other than a
piece of Cruelty upon her self, and aggravated, in as much as she had many a
time found Relief by laying them open to her Friends. -- That God only knows
the Hearts of all the Children of Men, and that the C^untenance is a most
uncertain Rule for any to guess the State of a Person by. -- As to her Fears
and Doubts about her Eternal Welfare founded on the Greatness of her Sins, I
told her she well knew it was as easy for infinite Power and Mercy and Grace to
save from many Sins as from few, from great as from small; that the Promise of
Pardon was made to true Penitents let the Degree of their Guilt be what it
would. -- That the particular she mentioned, of being over merry in Company,
proved nothing against her. Her Heart's troubling her for it was like David's
Heart's smiting him for cutting off Readiness skirt, which for any thing that
appears in Scripture, proceeded from mere Tenderness of Conscience, a Fear
least something might be amiss. -- That her not being able to pray with desired
Composure and Affection must not be though it to affect her State. Her present
unhappy Frame might proceed from bodily Indisposition, natural and not moral
Causes, which is oftener the Occasion of such Frames in God's People than most
are sensible of; and that she ought not to draw up C^nclusions about her State
either from the Ebb or Flow of her Affections, but from the Bent and Sincerity
of her Heart, and Course of her Life. -- That her Fears about her Prayers being
an Abomination were ill-grounded; for more was intended by Wicked in that
Scripture then she imagined; and I hardly thought she would own her Self the
resolved Sinner, delighting in Sin and committing it with Greediness: Nay that
she proved the contrary by what she added of her following God in the Dark, and
hoping in him -- Upon the whole, I led her to Christ the true Light, and told
her, though Grief endures for a Night, yet Joy would come in the Morning: For
they that sow in such Tears of Humiliation and Repentance, will anon reap the
Joys of Assurance.

I now repair to her Diary, which filled much faster after Marriage than
before: wherein she takes notice of God's Providence to her Self, her Friends,
and the Land in general.

There is in it the Covenant, in Mr. Alleine's Form, solemnly Subscribed with
her Hand, and often Renewed on Sacramental and other Occasions.

It is not very easy to methodize a Christian's Diary, and place every thing
under distinct and proper Heads. In her Books there is notice taken of These
among other Things.

(1) Her Mercies and Deliverances, Afflictions and S^rrows.
Upon the Receipt of any Favor it is common for her to write thus, -- What
shall I render to the Lord for all his Benefits, and for this Benefit! O that I
could live more to the Honor of God, than ever I have yet done! I will bless
the Lord while I live, and sing Praises to him while I have any Being! May I
never forget the Mercy.

In the Close of Years, and also on her Birth Days, she enumerates God's
Favors Temporal and Spiritual unto her; and is sometimes very particular, and
always full in her grateful Acknowlegements.

She writes more or less upon the Births of all her Children, and of the
Circumstances of her Travails; and never forgets to sing of Mercy, whatsoever
Judgment and Affliction was mixed with it.

On her first Child, among many other Things she writes, -- It pleased God of
his infinite Mercy to command a great Deliverance for me. -- Blessed be his
Name! Though my Womb became as it were a Tomb to my Infant, yet will I not forget
his wonderful Appearing for me, when my Senses were locked up, and saving me
alive -- She knew nothing of her Delivery till two Days after it.

There is but a short Record of the Birth and Death of her second Child ( Clark
Thomas) who lived Eleven Days. She prayed for a Name better than of Sons and
Daughters. But all the Family remember the many Tears of Joy and Thankfulness
she shed at the Presentation of this Child to God in holy Baptism, and her more
than common Composure of Mind and Quietness at it is Death and Funeral.

On this Occasion I find her Father writing to her, I thank God who has carried
you, my dear Child, with so much Courage and Strength of Grace, through the Pains
of bearing, and now of burying your Infant. He helped you to offer up your Son
to him in Baptism with so many Tears, and now to resign and commit it to the
Grave with so few. May all Supplies of Grace be given in unto you from time to
time, and the Power of it be always exhibited by you to the Glory of your
Savior, who has given you his strong Consolations against the Hour you have
been called to pass through.

On the Birth of her surviving Son, she not only blesses God, but receives him
thankfully as an Answer of many Prayers, and writes, For this Child I prayed,
and the Lord has given me my Petition which I asked of him: Therefore my
Desire is that my Samuel be lent to the Lord, and be employed by Him in his
Service in his Church. Lord do thou graciously accept of him, and furnish him,
and let him do more and better for Thee than any of his Progenitors.

May God graciously answer the Prayers and Desires of his Handmaid, and our
little Son be greatly Affected and Influenced, when he comes to read and
understand this Paragraph.

At another Time when she was delivered of a Son alone, the Surprise and
Distress of which hazardous Minute every one may easily think of; she writes,

Blessed be God, who has appeared for me in such an Hour of Distress and
Danger! I can never eno' admire the Goodness and Mercy and Power of God in
composing me, and inspiring me with Courage and Conduct at this Time. It shall
be said, In the Mount of the Lord it shall be seen! -- No humane Help was nigh,
the Lord was my Helper, and that right early. O that I may ever be impressed
with a deep Sense of this Mercy.

There is a Poem also composed by her on some of these Occasions, and many
other Passages in her Diary, wherein she declares she had laid hold on the
Covenant for her Self and for her Children; and her Faith concerning them, and
Hopes to meet the^ ^^t the Right Hand of Christ another Da^

The Poem I here insert.
PHoebus has thrice his Yearly Circuit run,
The Winter's over, and the Summer's done;
Since that bright Day on which our Hands were joined,
And to Philander I my All resigned.
Thrice in my Womb I Have found the pleasing Strife,
In the first Struggles of my Infants Life:
But O how soon by Heaven I Am called to mourn,
While from my Womb a lifeless Babe is torn?
Born to the Grave 'ere it had seen the Light,
Or with one Smile had cheered my longing Sight.
Again in Travail-Pains my Nerves are wrecked,
My Eye Balls start, my Heart Strings almost cracked;
Now I forget my Pains, and now I press
Philander's Image to my panting Breast.
Ten Days I hold him in my joyful Arms,
And feast my Eyes upon his Infant Charms.
But then the King of Terrors does advance
To pierce it is Bosom with his Iron Lance.
It Is Soul released, upward it takes it is Flight,
Oh never more below to bless my Sight!
Farewell sweet Babes I hope to meet above,
And there with you Sing the Redeemer's Love.
And now O gracious Savior lend thine Ear,
To this my earnest Cry and humble Prayer,
That when the Hour arrives with painful Throws,
Which shall my Burden to the World disclose;
I may Deliverance have, and joy to see
A living Child, to Dedicate to Thee.
At other Times she passed through a great deal of Bodily Weakness, in the
exercise of strong Faith and Patience, and humble Submission to the Will of
God. The Times and Turns of her Illnesses she records, with suitable Prayers
for Wisdom and Grace: Particularly, "That she may be ever in an actual as well
as habitual Preparation for Death. "Let my Change be safe, and (by the will of
God) Joyful.

One of the first Things I find her setting about after a Recovery from
Sickness, is the Renewal of the Covenant, and laying her Self under fresh
Obligations to conform her Life to the Rules of the Gospel, and the Pattern of
Jesus Christ. She has said it over and over and written it, It is good for me
that I have been afflicted: I devote my spared Life and revived Health to the
Service and Glory of my great Creator, Redeemer and Sanctifier.

(2) Her Resentments of the Sicknesses and Deaths of others, and God's Mercies
to them.
I find her recording her Parents Sicknesses and Recoveries with Prayers and
Thanksgivings.

The sudden Death of her Mother very much surpised and affected her, and she
his written much upon it. She looks back upon all her Carriages toward her
from her early Childhood; calls to Mind her Prayers, Counsels, Charges and good
Example; and earnestly begs of God to make up the Loss of her in Himself, and
to take her up in the Arms of his Providence and Grace, and long continue her
Fathers Life and Usefulness, and that the Prayers of both her Parents may be
answered for her and her Offspring.

There is also a short Funeral filial Transport written by her on this Occasion.

She Is gone! she is gone! I saw her rise
And quickly gain the distant Skies.
Sudden from Heaven a sacred Mandate came,
Bro't by a Convoy of celestial Flame.
She was prepared, the Summons did obey,
And joyful left her tottering House of Clay.
Her Pains, her Tears, her Fears, are all now past
In Joys unspeakable which ever last.
Her Soul in Jesus Arms remain,
The Grave her Body does detain.
Parted a while, her Joys will be complete,
When in the Resurrection Morn they will meet.
Ah dearest, tenderest Parent! must I mourn,
My heavy Loss, and bathe with Tears your Urn!
Since now no more to me you must return.
O Quickening Spirit! now perform thy Part,
Set up thy Glorious Kingdom in my Heart;
That when those Sands which in my Glass do run
Are spent and all my Work below is done,
I the dear Saint may then in Glory meet
Where Sin and Death lie vanquished at our Feet:
Where Jesus ever will improve
Our Souls with heavenly Grace and Love.
Her Father at this Period in Honor to his most dutiful and affectionate
Child, directs me to insert her Letter to Madam Clark, upon the first notice
she had of his Addresses to her.

Medford, Feb. 5 th. 1731. Madam,
THis waits on you to testify how much I always honored and reverenced you.
And since it has pleased God in his holy Providence to take my dear Mother from
me, I do assure you, Madam, there is no Gentlewoman in the World but your Self
that I should desire to see in her Place. Therefore as soon as my Father's
Inclinations were made known to me, I could not but rejoice in it, as a Smile
of Heaven, that all our Affections center in the same Person. -- I entreat you
Madam, not to think this a Piece of Complaisance or Constraint, but my real and
sincere Sentiment. -- I add my Prayers to God to continue you a Blessing, as
you have always been to many.

Your obliged, humble Dutiful etc.


Her Father covered it in the following Words,

Madam,
The Enclosed came to me last Night from your dear Daughter Turell. As she is
to Me, I hope she will always be to You, one of the best of Children. You have
long ago cherished her with your Esteem, and long since she has honored you
with a dutiful Reverence. But let her speak for her Self, and may her Letter be
as acceptable to you, as it is to her delighted Father, etc. --


I go on to remark her religious noticing the Deaths of others. She takes
notice of her Friend Mrs. Clark's Decease, and admires the Patience and
Long-suffering of God in sparing her. In giving me (she writes) a Space to
repent, and I hope Grace to repent also.

She records the Death of her Friend Mrs. Wigglesworth, with earnest Prayers to
be prepared for her own, Lord, says she, let me be reconciled unto Thee by the
Death of thy Son, and then the King of Terrors cannot harm me. Let me no longer
fear Death, since Christ has conquered it, and the Grave. Into thy Hands I
commit my Self, living and dying let me be thine.

June 12. 1729. She writes thus, This Day a most awful Providence happened
before my Door. A Boy of about Twelve Years old was killed in a Moment by a
Cart oversetting and falling on him. I was the first that saw it; and earnestly
pray it may be sancrif^^ to me and my Household. May I never forget it, but as
often as I look toward the Spot, remember the Shortness and Uncertainty of
Life; and how suddenly, and unexpectedly Death may fall on us.

April 5. 1732. She writes thus upon a dangerous Fall of her little Son. O my
Soul! why was I so overcome and filled with Distress and Terror at this
Providence? Where is thy Faith and Resignation to God's holy Will? It may be I
have made this Child too much of an Idol, and my Heavenly Father has sent this
Rebuke to let me see how soon I might be deprived of my dearest Enjoyments, if
I dote too much on them. -- The Use I would make of it is, to be more weaned
from my Child, and dead to the World, and loosed from all Creatures.

Feb. 4. 1728. She writes on the Deaths of several worthy Ministers of the
Gospel; the Reverend Messieurs Thacher, Danforth, Waldron, and particularly Dr.
Cotton Mather; marks their Virtues and Graces, and excites her Soul to an
Imitation of them.

(3.) Temptations and Distresses.
There has been something already offered on this Head by way of Letter. In her
Diary are found these Passages.

July 16. 1727. As I lay on my Bed under great Weakness of Body, meditating on
God and expecting Death, it pleased my Heavenly Father to suffer the Enemy of
my Soul to beset me with sore Temptations; particularly with that in Job 2.9.
Curse God and die. I was long hurried by it, and yet in Horror at such a Though It
rising in me. I cried earnestly to God that I might not be left to consent to
it; and upon my continuing instant in Prayer, that Scripture came with mighty
Weight upon my Mind, Psalm. 146.2. I will praise the Lord while I live, I will
sing Praises to my God while I have any being: Which helped me to repel the
Temptation, and brought Comfort to me.

At other times, I was tempted to a like Distrust and Denial of God; but through
Grace I resisted and was ever directed to some Scripture or other to strengthen
my Faith. And though I continued under Doubts and Fears about my Spiritual State
a great while, yet I could still hope in God, and encourage my self in his
Goodness, which had been wonderful to me.

Another time she writes, Much distressed on the account of wicked Tho'ts
following me, but I hope God will preserve my Soul, and deliver me from them.
-- I trust in him.

I was much tempted this afternoon to Blasphemy and Despair by my grand Enemy,
(who is often of late in this manner disturbing my Quiet) but I fly to and
trust in a tempted Savior, who knows how to succor me, and will deliver me,
-- I pray, Lord lead me not into Temptation but deliver me from Evil; Suffer me
not to be tempted above what I am able to bear, but together with every
Temptation make way for my Escape. Guide me by thy Counsel, and uphold me by
thy free Spirit, and receive me to Glory.

Another time, Much distressed on the Account of my Soul, just ready to sink
under the Sense of Sin, and to despair of Mercy and Pardon for a time. But
blessed be God who has kept me from adding to the Number of my Sins that fatal
one of Despair. Christ has been discovered to me as able to save unto the
uttermost the very chief of Sinners, and all those that come to God by him
without exception. His Blood cleanses from all Sin, and I fly to the Fountain
of it to wash in. Give me Faith in Him, and to rely on his glorious
Righteousness. Uphold me by thy Grace, and make me faithful in thy Covenant.

Again, In the House of God greatly distressed on the account of Deadness and
Dullness under the Word preached. I did all I could to raise and fix my Tho'ts,
but all in vain. I then lift up my Soul to God in and through Christ in the best
manner I was able, and earnestly begged Pardon for my Wanderings and Dullness; and
beseech'd Him to open my Heart to receive Instruction, and afford me the
Comforts and Teachings of his Spirit, and it was better with me. Behold Reader,
a good Method to be taken by Thee in the like Frame!

Another Time, I went to the House of God with a heavy Heart, resolving not to
partake of the holy Sacrament in the Frame I was then in; lest I should
dishonor God, and profane the Ordinance: but the Sermon I then heard on
Justification by the Righteousness of Christ alone, greatly encouraged me, and
I spent the Day in holy Delight and Pleasure.

Another Time, This was a dark and distressing Day to me; I was strongly
tempted to absent my self from the Lord's Supper, on the Account of my not
having spent so much Time in Preparation as usual. I poured out my Soul in
Prayer to God for his Direction, and after much Conflict and Struggle resolved
to venture: And afterward I feared whether I had not laid too great a Stress
on my own Performances, Prayers, Examinations and Renewals of Covenant
heretofore; and was happily brought to renounce all that was my own, and to
depend wholly on Jesus Christ for Righteousness and Strength.

(4) Preparations for Church Communion, and other Matters relating thereunto.
She was for many Years exceeding tho'tful about renewing her Baptismal
Covenant, and giving up her Self to God before his People, and coming to the
Table of Christ. Her Fears were great lest coming unworthily she should eat and
drink Judgment unto her self. She was often in an Agony, that she might draw
near to God with a true Heart, and in the full Assurance of Faith. And her
Endeavors were crowned with a comfortable Hope when she came, which was on
that memorable Day October 29. 1727, which preceeded the Great and Amazing
Earthquake.

The chief part of the Day before she spent in Secret, bewailing her Sins
Original and Actual, entreating the Mercy of God to pardon, and his Grace to
help her; 'in seeking the Wedding Garment, that she might appear adorned as a
Bride for her Husband, and hear Christ saying to her at his Table, Daughter be
of good cheer, your Sins are forgiven you.

On the Day after she makes a Record of her Admission, renews the Dedication of
her Self to God; and seems to have had her Heart much drawn forth to Christ, by
the vast Variety of Expressions she uses on this Occasion. She writes
particularly of the Earthquake, and makes many pious and pertinent Reflections
and Petitions. 'Lord awaken in me a more lively sense of thy Perfections, and
of my Duty toward thee. O cause me to stand firm in the Truths and Ways of
Christ. Make me steadfast in thy Covenant, that I may hold fast the Profession
of my Faith without wavering, etc.'

She usually spent a considerable part of the Saturday before the Sacrament in
Preparation for it, and sometimes other Days.

She writes that Company at such Seasons was very unwelcome and burdensome, and
bewails it that she has been sometimes hindered by it.

Her strict and close Examinations of her Self before the Sacrament are noted
down. The Word of God was her Rule, and the Marks and Signs of a good and bad
State there given are what she judges upon. -- I also find her making use of
the Judgment of the best Divines and Casuists. -- Two Books one for Devotion,
and the other for Instruction generally lay on her Table on Communion Days,
namely Dr. Patrick's Christian Sacrifice, and Mr. Henry's Communicant's
Companion.

In one of her Papers she answers all Mr. Henry's Questions, under the Head of
Self-Examination; namely, What am I? What have I done? What am I doing? What
ground do I get? What do I want? What do I resolve to do? to her own Comfort
and Satisfaction.

Her Frames at the Lord's Table were very different, but always consistent with
real and vital Religion.

Sometimes she seems overcome with Fears, and born down with Doubts and
Scruples; but before she has finished her Record there is an evident Mourning
after Christ, and an ardent Love to him discoverable.

There are those which she calls her uncomfortable Sabbaths and Sacraments,
others her pleasant Days and joyful Communions. I observe that when she went
laden with the most Fear, she generally brought home Comfort in return.

She writes once, I was exceeding dull and heavy, and ready to go away from the
Sacrament, but when I had resolved to stay, I presently had what I desired, a
composed Mind; and have not spent a Sabbath in such Pleasure for some time.

Again, This being the Lord's Day, and our Sacrament, I read over my Covenant
and renewed it: And though I felt not such flowings of my Affections as I have
sometimes, yet I hope I was sincere. Lord accept of Sincerity, and graciously
overlook my Infirmities; and meet me in thy House, and at thy Table, and let
this Sabbath be a Day of Rest and Joy to my poor Soul.

July 16. 1732. I bless God that upon a careful Review of my Life, I have some
Reason to hope that my Labor has not been in vain in the Lord, but that I am
passed from Death to Life. Search me, O God, and know my Heart, try me and know
my Tho'ts, and see if there be any wicked Way in me, and lead me in the Way
everlasting. I desire to renounce all Confidence in the Flesh, to have my whole
Dependence on the Satisfaction and Obedience of Christ for Pardon, Acceptance
and Eternal Blessedness. I take Him in all his Offices, as my Prophet to teach,
as my Priest to atone and interceed; and my King to rule me, and conquer my
Enemies. It Is my sincere and constant Endeavor to lead a Life of holy
Obedience unto his blessed Will, and to submit to all his righteous
Dispensations. I firmly believe that all things shall work together for good to
them that love God; and I hope I can truly say that I love Him. I am sure I can
say, I desire to love Him with all my Heart. I bless God that I have
experienced more outgoings of Soul toward my Savior (in his House and at his
Table) to Day, and more of the divine Afflations comforting and refreshing me
than ever in my Life before. I returned home filled with Joy and Praise. I
think I could see my Interest in Christ, and the Father's reconciled Face
shining on me. My Beloved is mine and I am his! All things are mine! O my God
and Savior, let not this my Hope and Joy be that of the Hypocrite which shall
perish; but that of the Righteous which abides for ever.

This was not the only Time she had Joy in believing.

At other Times she writes This Evening I was much enlarged in Prayer, and
experienced much Comfort. I had some outgoings of Soul to my Savior, and my
Meditation on Him was sweet in my Bed. --

This Day I was much affected with God's Goodness to me through my whole Life. I
hope I can truly say I love my Redeemer, that he is altogether lovely, and I
prize him above ten thousand Worlds. I trust in none but Him. I have had a most
ravishing Sight of Him! How wonderful is his Love! He has begun a good Work in
me, and will carry it on to the End.

This Morning I hope I have had spiritual Communion with God, in and through
Jesus Christ. I have been greatly affected with his dying Love. I rest on Him
alone for Salvation: I cast my trembling Soul upon him.

Last Night the Lord was pleased to give me (a most unworthy Creature) such a
Taste of the Consolations of his Holy Spirit, as filled my Soul with Transports
of Joy. And if but a Taste of God's Love in Christ gives such Joy to a poor
Soul on Earth, how do the Saints in Heaven feel? who constantly partake of
Fullness of Joys and Pleasures which flow at God's right Hand for evermore!

(5.) Remarks on more public Matters.

In her Diary she takes Notice of God's Judgments and Mercies to the Land,
particularly his Visitations by Earthquakes, Thunders, Lightnings, Storms,
Drought, etc.

She was among the Mourners in Zion for those provoking Evils which stirs up
the Wrath of a righteous God and Judge against a wicked People.

I find her also taking notice of God's Appearing for the Land, granting
Showers of Blessing in a time of Drought, July 3. 1728.

Some unhappy Affairs of Medford in the Years 1729 and 30, produced many
Prayers and Tears from her, with the following Poem in Imitation of the 133
Psalm, which I publish as a Monument for and Motive to my own People, to
continue in Love and Peace.

BEhold how good, how sweet, their Joy does prove,
Where Brethren dwell in Unity and Love!
When no Contention, Strife, or fatal Jar
Disturb the Peace, and raise the noisy War.
It Is like the Ointment, which of old was poured
On Aaron's Head, and down his Garments shower'd;
Through all the Air perfuming Odor spreads,
Diffusing Sweetness to the neighboring Meads.
Or like the Dew on Hermon's lofty Head
Which on the Mounts of Sion Moisture spread.
'Circled with Peace, they shall within the Land
As shining Patterns, and Examples stand.
If Sinners wrangle, let the Saints agree;
The Gospel breathes out naught but Unity.
To such the Blessing from the Lord is given,
Even Life eternal, in the highest Heaven.
Having related these Things, you will not wonder if I now declare my self a
Witness of her daily close Walk with God during her married State ^^d of her
Retirements for Reading, Self-Ex^^ination and Devotion.

It was her Practice to read the Bible out in Course, once in a Year, the Book
of Psalms much oftener, besides many Chapters and a Multitude of Verses which
she kept turned down in a Bible, which she had been the Owner and Reader of
more than twenty Years. If I should only present my Readers with a Catalogue of
these Texts, I doubt not but that they would admire the Collection, be
gratified with the Entertainment; and easily conjecture many of her holy Frames
and Tempers from them. -- I must own, considering her tender Make and often
Infirmities she exceeded in Devotion. And I have though it my self obliged
sometimes (in Compassion to her) to call her off, and put her in mind of God's
delighting in Mercy more than in Sacrifice.

How often has she lain whole Nights by me mourning for Sin, calling upon God,
and praising him, or discoursing of Christ and Heaven? And when under Doubts
entreating me to help her (as far as I could) to a full Assurance of God's
Love. Sometimes she would say, Well, I am content if you will show me that I
have the Truth of Grace. And I often satisfied her with one of Mr. Baxter's
Marks of Love to Christ, namely, Lamenting and panting after him; for this kind
of Love she was sure she exercised in the most cloudy Hours of her Life.

I may not forget to mention the strong and constant Guard she placed at the
Door of her Lips. Who ever heard her call an ill Name? or detract from any
Body? When she apprehended she received Injuries, Silence and Tears were her
highest Resentments. But I have often heard her reprove others for rash and
angry Speeches.

In every Relation she sustained she was truly Exemplary, sensible how much of
the Life and Power of Religion consists in the conscientious Practice and
Performance of Relative Duties.

No Child had a greater Love to and Reverence for her Parents, she even
exceeded in Fear and Reverence of her Father, notwithstanding all his
Condescentions to her, and vast Freedoms with her.

As a Wife she was dutiful, prudent and diligent, not only content but joyful
in her Circumstances. She submitted as is fit in the Lord, looked well to the
Ways of her Household, and her own Works praise her in the Gates.

Her very Apparel discovered Modesty and Chastity: She loved to appear neat and
clean, but never gay and fine.

To her Servants she was good and kind, and took care of them, especially of
the Soul of a Slave who died (in the House) about a Month before her.

She respected all her Friends and Relatives, and spoke of them with Honor,
and never forgot either their Counsels or their Kindnesses.

She often spoke of her Obligations to her Aunt Staniford, which were great
living and dying.

She honored all Men, and loved every Body. Love and Goodness was natural to
her, as her Father expresses it in a Letter Years ago.

Her tender Love to her only Sister, has been already seen; and was on all
Occasions manifested, and grew exceedingly to her Death. A few Days before it,
I heard her speak to her particularly of preparing for another World. Improve
(said she) the Time of Health, it is the only Time for doing the great Work in.

And in Return for her Love and amiable Carriage, She had the Love and Esteem
of all that knew her. Those that knew her best loved her best, and praise her
most.

Her Humility was so great, that she could well bear (without being elated)
such Praises as are often found in her Father's Letters to us. viz. I greatly
esteem as well as highly love you: The best of Children deserves all that a
Child can of a Father: My Soul rejoices in you: My Joy, my Crown. I give Thanks
to God for you daily. I am honored in being the Father of such a Daughter.

Her Husband also, and he praises her as a Meet Help both in Spirituals and
Temporals.

Her Relations and Acquaintance ever manifested the highest Value for her.

The People, among whom she lived the last eight Years of her Life, both Old
and Young had a Love and Veneration for her; as a Person of the strictest
Virtue and undefiled Religion. Her Innocence, Modesty, Ingenuity, and Devotion
charmed all into an Admiration of her. And I question whether there has been
more Grief and Sorrow shown at the Death of any private Person, by People of
all Ranks, to whom her Virtues were known; Mourning, for the Loss sustained by
our selves, not for her, nor as others who have no Hope. For it is beyond Doubt
that she died in the Lord, and is Blessed.

The Death of every such praying Saint is a Frown upon the whole Land, and
calls upon us to make that Prayer, Psalm. xii. 1, Help Lord for the Godly cease,
and the Faithful fail from among the Children of Men.

ADDENDA. Concerning her last Sickness and Death.
HER Illness began with violent Symptoms, such as Opressions at the Breast and
in the Bowels, which held three or more Hours in the Night Season; under which
she cried to God that Patience might have its perfect Work, and that her Faith
might not fail. -- After some Time it changed, and put on various Forms, as is
common in Hysteric Cases. For some Days her Complaints were chiefly of
Faintness and Sinking of the Spirits, in the Proxysms whereof she often though it
her self a dying, and would graciously resign her self, hoping it would be well
with her.

When Fear overcame her, and she was ready to despond, she would check her self
and say, This is Nature, and Grace cannot wholly conquer it.

On the Saturday Night before she died she lay under the most wracking Pains in
her Back, Shoulders etc. and in the Morning fell into a Degree of Stupor, which
bro't on Fits by Monday Afternoon.

The Tuesday Night she caused me to be several Times awaked by the Watcher, to
discourse* of Spiritual and Eternal Things, and to bring Promises and Comforts
to her Mind.

She had her lucid Intervals all along, which she improved in lifting up her
Voice and Soul in most pious and pertinent Ejaculations.

The last Day of her Life (which was Wednesday) her Frame was proper to meet
Death in, so long as she could be kept awake; and spoke often of its
Approaching; especially in the Evening. When I spoke of praying, she desired me
to be short and sweet, for she could not be long intent.

Her last Words, were, 'Thou have delivered, thou do deliver, and I trust in
Thee that thou will still deliver. -- And Death is the Deliverance of those
that live as she did.

Between the Hours of Eleven and Twelve (after she had struggled with two or
three violent Fits) we apprehended her Change would quickly come on. I
therefore stood up and Prayed over her, with her Friends; and in the midst of
our Resignations of her, and commending her Spirit into the Hands of her
Redeemer (without any Groan or Motion) she fell asleep in Jesus, and is gone to
everlasting Rest and Joy. The Lord gave and the Lord has taken away, and
Blessed be the Name of the Lord.

POSTSCRIPT.
THE Reader will easily observe, through the preceding Memoirs, the great
Advantage Mrs. Turell had in the early Care of her Father to infuse Knowledge of
the best Kind, in the easiest and kindest Manner, into her little Mind, as fast
as it grew capable of receiving it. He first talked into her all he could in
the most free and endearing Manner, and then supplied her with the best Books
of every kind, suited to her Years and Inclinations, without making them a Task
and Burden; which it must be owned was very much owing to her natural Genius
and Inclination. His next Care was to teach her to read his Hand, and then by
writing to her, in a Manner becoming him and proper for her, he insinuated
himself more and more into her Affections, and increased her Reverence of Him,
and Desire of his Esteem. The Way to merit and obtain that, he let her see was
by a prudent, humble, virtuous and religious Conduct, upon the Principles and
Motives of Christianity, the Fear of GOD and a Desire to please her Heavenly
Father. The Success and Fruit of these happy Methods have been partly seen in
the foregoing Narrative; and though it cannot be pretended that the like
Endeavors will always be attended with like Success, yet it may be supposed
they would very often, if Parents, with a humble Reliance on the Blessing of
God, and Prayers for it, would go into them.

Ministers especially have great Advantages herefor, and are under special
Obligations to be Examples to their Flocks, in this Rule of their own House.
And though the Father of Mrs. Turell, would not pretend to propose Himself as an
Example to his Brethren, yet upon a Review of his Letters to his Daughter he is
inclined to publish some more of them, believing they may be of Use to the
Living, as he has Reason to think they were to his Dead.

Boston, June 5. -- My Dear,
YOU were wishing last Night that I would instruct you how to write Letters,
which I willingly undertake to do by writing to You, and requiring you to
answer me as often as I write. I know no Way of teaching you so easy and
pleasant to me, and that may be so profitable to you. I hope it will be a very
great Pleasure to you to hear from your Father often this Way, and to speak to
him again, and to have his loving Lines to you to read over again and again at
your Leisure. Besides, Your lisping at good Sense will be as Music to your
Father's Ear, and much more your Growth the Joy of his Soul.

You need not be ashamed to let your Father see your Ignorances and Defects,
for to be sure he will kindly cover 'em, as well as inform you of 'em.

A very little Use will make you Mistress eno' of the Art of decent, familiar,
common Letters. Practice is the best and shortest Way of learning this; and it
will be well worth a little Pains to learn, being of constant Use while you
live, and not one of the least Ornaments and Pleasures of Life.

Write without Fear or Awe to Him who is your own, and whose you are. Write
more or less according as you find your Tho'ts flowing or restrained. But
always remember, that it is better to be short and full of good Sense, than to
draw out your Letters to an empty Length.

Mine to you will be on one Head or other of Religious and Virtuous Conduct,
wherein I shall teach you the Fear of the Lord and the Care of your own Soul,
which are the true and highest Wisdom. I shall breathe hereby into your Ear,
and may it please God into your Heart, many a good Wish and Prayer, for you to
make over again for your Self. And may you find Grace from God, to make this
Benefit of that tender Affection, which fills the Soul of your loving Father --
--

June 12. -- My Dear Child,
YOU have much honored and endeared your Self to me by your Letter Yesterday.
You have answered all my Hopes, and outdone my Expectations. I see you are a
Mistress both of Matter and Form in your first Essay See page 78.
, which yet is not your first neither. Yet you will grow by Use, the only Way
of learning every thing that is good.

There is but one Word amiss in your Letter, besides a false Spell or two, and
that is the Word Fortune. The Heathens made a Goddess of the blind Nothing, and
ignorantly Worshipped it. The Philistines, as you read in your Bible, speak of
Chance. But Christians have learned the Doctrine of a glorious Providence that
governs and orders those things which Men call casual.

You are sorry, you say, "that you have so little of your Father's Soul in
you", and I am well pleased you have so much of it; but I hope God will make
yours better than your Father's.

God give you your Petition, that as you grow in Years, you may in Grace. And
be sure that you pray for your Father, Mother and Sister, when you do for your
own Soul.

I am, my Dear, Your most Affectionate Father.
I omit Others to her in her Childhood, and come to some sent her after her
Marriage.



December. 20. 1726. My Dear,
YOur Letter of the 9th. of this Month was exceeding pleasant to Me and to your
Mother, wherein you express your great Contentment in the kind Disposals of
Providence respecting you. No worldly thing can rejoice us more than your
Happiness in Mr. Turell, and his in you. You will emulate his tender Regards to
you and his incomparable good Temper; and learning of him return the same to
him, that he may have as rich a Blessing in You, as you have in Him. O the
Happiness, when two Souls meet in the Marriage Relation, that are suited to
each other, and mutually strive which shall be most obliging and endearing!

But my Dear, let all this draw you to Christ, in Love, Gratitude and
Devotedness to Him. Mr. Turell will direct you in renewing your Espousals to
Christ at his Table. Delay not this Duty, but join your Self to that Church and
People of God, who (you say) are so full of Good Will and Love to you. Give
your Self first to the Lord, and then unto Them by the Will of God.

-- Be prudent and frugal, moderate and humble in your Desires and
Expectations, cheerful and thankful; careful for the Meat that perishes nor,
but endures to Life everlasting. Begin and end with God daily; and believe it
that nothing will sweeten to you the Enjoyments of life, or the Afflictions of
it, which we must never forget to prepare for, like daily Communion with
Heaven, and the Hope of your Portion there when this transitory life ends. This
is the Blessing we wish you, and rest

Your affectionate Father, --

Boston, Sept. 1. 1727. My Dear Child,
IN yours to me of this Week you ask my Tho'ts about that See Page 52, and 111.
Text, 1 Cor. 11.2^, 29. Whosoever shall eat this Bread, and drink this Cup of
the Lord unworthily, shall be guilty of the Body and Blood of the Lord; he that
eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks Damnation to himself, not
discerning the Lord's Body.

You say that it comforted you to find Mr. Flavel saying, That by Damnation
here is not meant eternal Condemnation, but some temporal Judgment and
Chastisement in order to the preventing the eternal Damnation. -- This is no
more than what you have often heard from me and other Ministers.

It is certain that the Greek Word rendered here Damnation, signifies only
Judgment in general, as the Margin of our Bibles renders it. And this Judgment
is primarily meant of temporal Judgments; as it immediately follows, ver. 30,
31.32. For this Cause many an weak and sickly among you, and many sleep; for if
we would judge our selves, we should not be judged: But when we are judged, we
are chastned of the Lord, that we should not be condemned with the World.

Here, my Dear, you have Mr. Flavel's Interpretation in the Apostle's own
Words: Scil, that temporal Judgment and Chastisement is the primary Meaning of
that Text, and this in order to the preventing eternal Damnation.

But if you look into the Context, you will easily see how gross and soul the
unworthy Eating among the Corinthians was. They acted after such a manner that
the Apostle told them ver. 20. That it was not to eat the Lord's Supper. They
did not discern the Lord's Body. They made a kind of common Meal of it. The
Abuse of their Love Feasts, used before the Sacrament among them, was the
Occasion hereof. The poor were neglected, every one took his own Supper; one
was hungry and another was drunken! ver. 21. What, says the Apostle, Have ye
not Houses to eat and drink in? or despise ye the Church of God? ver. 22. Here
was gross Disorder indeed, even to Intemperance; such as is not like to be
known among us. Wherefore, neither are the like temporal Judgments known among
us on this Account, as were inflicted upon those Corinthians.

But if People do incur the Judgments of God by unsuitable partaking at the
Lord's Table, Do they not equally by a careless Omission and irreverent and
profane Neglect of it, think you? Is not the Reason the same? the Irreligion
and Provocation the same? And so may the Danger be justly apprehended.

Indeed either the "Omission or careless Performance of the holy Duties of
God's Worship, secret or public, do justly expose People to the Judgments of
God, both bodily and spiritual, temporal and eternal. And the spiritual
Judgments we should especially fear. And if People habitually and profanely and
impenitently stay away from the Lord's Table, or come to it; both the one and
the other will turn to their Damnation in the World to come.

But what is the Inference or Argument from hence? Is it not that therefore we
should religiously prepare for, and reverently come to the Ordinances of
Christ? We must neither stay away from them, nor profane them in the Use of
them; for both of these Errors will alike incur the Judgment of God, here and
hereafter, without Repentance

And think my Dear, Is it only by Eating and Drinking unworthily, that the
Judgment of God is incurred? Is it not also by unworthy Praying? For it is
said, That the Prayer of the wicked is an Abomination to the Lord. Is not this
as dreadful as the Word Judgment? And do we not read of the Word Preached, that
it will become a Savor of Death unto Death by our unworthy hearing it? Here is
eternal Damnation indeed in these fearful words, Death unto Death. Let us fear
then to pray and hear unworthily, as well as to eat unworthily. But to be sure
we may not say, "Well then, it is best not to pray at all, and best not to hear
at all, lest I bring Judgment and Condemnation upon my self: No more should we
say -- I will not dare to go to the Lord's Table for the same Reason.

In a word, If we profane the Sabbaths and Ordinances of Christ, it will be to
our Judgment, both on temporal and spiritual Accounts; and they will be
profaned by us, if they are not reverently observed by us. The Rule therefore
is, ver. 28. Let a Man examine himself, and so let him eat of that Bread, and
drink of that Cup. So let a Man examine himself, and prepare for the other
Ordinances of Christ. Keep thy foot when thou go to the House of God, and
offer not the Sacrifice of Fools who consider not that they do Evil. Be solemn,
serious, and reverend in the whole worship of God, for it is all holy, and God
will be sanctified in it by us, or will sanctify himself upon us.

You have Mr. Pool and Mr. Burkit; see what they say upon the Place. Read also
and weigh well the 41, 42, 43 Pages of Mr. Henry's Communicant's Companion, In
our Boston Edition.
there you will find a good Answer to all the rest of your Letter to me.

It is uncertain when I shall see you, but God will I trust be with you, and
your Heart toward him. We all send you our Loves, and I am

Your loving Father.

Friday, October. 27. 1727. My Dear,
THE Face of the Sky this Morning, begins to forbid me the Pleasure of seeing
you to Morrow. I would not have you expect me, nor that Mr. Turell should have
the least Dependence on me. I hope God will be with you in your open Giving
your self to Him. The great thing lies in Secret, between God and your own
Soul. The public joining your self to the Church is but the doing that before
Men, which you have first done before God in secret. With the Heart Man
believes unto Righteousness, and with the Mouth Confession is made unto
Salvation. If you should feel some Flutter and Disorder of Mind in public, let
not that discourage you: The Self-dedication was done sedately in secret. Yet I
pray God to give you much Comfort, and the Tokens of his Grace and Presence in
the public Transaction. And may you live long to serve God, and enjoy much of
God in your Closet and also in his House, on Lord's-days and other Days; and be
a Blessing in your Place, both to Mr. Turell and to the People among whom your
Lot is cast.

Go on then, my dear Child, in the Fear and Love of God, and in the Strength
and Righteousness of Christ, and join your self unto the Lord, in an
everlasting Covenant, never to be forgotten. Jer. I. 5. See there the Frame,
and Voice, and Act of a Soul preparing, or through Grace prepared, for the
renewing and confirming its Covenant with God. Both the Duty and the Grace of
the Covenant are wonderfully expressed in this Phrase. A Word of wonderful
Condescension on the part of God, and of strong Obligation and Binding on ours.

For in Covenanting with God we join our selves to Him, as Servants to their
Master by an Indenture; as Subjects to their King by an Oath of Allegiance; as
Soldiers to their General in a War against Sin and Satan; and as a Wife to her
Husband in a Marriage Covenant; a Covenant of mutual, endearing, constant and
perpetual Love. -- O with what a consenting joyful Soul, should you now (my
Dearest, my Joy and my Crown!) make your Vows to God! Let the Love of Christ
constrain thee. Say, I will go unto the Altar of God, unto God my exceeding
Joy! I will take the Cup of Salvation and call upon the Name of the Lord! I
will pay my Vows unto the Lord, now in the Presence of all his People. O what a
Mercy, and Matter of everlasting Thanksgiving, is a Heart thus given to Christ!

And remember, that what you do is for Perpetuity, never to be forgotten. We
Covenant for Life and for Eternity. It is the Covenant of the Living God, with
Immortal Creatures, for our whole Being here, and for our eternal Well being in
another World. We must reverently use the Signs and Seals of the Covenant of
our God, to keep in Memory our Bonds and God's Promises.

This is a Sketch of the Sermon I might have brought you, had my Health and the
Weather permitted me. It may lie by you, be reviewed on Occasion, and do you
more good, than if I had come and preached to you. Grace be with you. Amen.

Your loving Father, --

October. 30. 1727. My dear Child,
NO doubt but you heard the Roar, and felt the awful and terrible Shock of the
Earthquake last Night, with like Surprise as we did We spent the Night in
humble Cries to God for our Selves and Nei'bours, and in fervent Praises to our
Great Preserver. Your Mother and Sister were exceeding thankful that I was not
with you, that is to say, not absent from them, as we were proposing on
Thursday last. And as God has ordered it, I hope it is much the best. We long
to hear from You, how you do, after such a terrible Dispensation to the Land,
which is a loud Call to all parts of it to fear God and repent and give Glory
to Him. God sanctify the Rod which he has shock over us for our Humiliation,
Terror and Reformation. I hope, my Dear, that it will strengthen and confirm
you in your Choice of God and his Ways, in the Dedication and Resignation of
your Self to Him for ev^r; and help to prepare us all for that Kingdom of His
which ^ in never be shaken.

It p^eases us that you are in the Arms of a kind and dear Instructor and
Comforter: But God is that to You and Us. N^ne teaches like Him. May He Seal
up Instruction to us, show us his Mind and Will, and be our Trust and Savior.
I leave You in his powerful and gracious Hands, in whose Hand our Time is, and
who is the God of all our Salvation. You have our affectionate Prayers, and we
question not yours for us.

Your loving Father, --

October 28. 1730. At two of the Clock Morning, My dear Turell,
THESE bring you the surprising awful News of the Sudden Death of your dear
Mother Colman. She went to Bed as well last Evening, and better than she has
been wont to do of late, but waked after Twelve in one of her striving Fitts.
We all rose in an Instant, and Dr. Davis was with her as soon as possible, and
bled her; but after a small Gasp or two she expired, as soon as her Arm was
bound up. -- I left her calling upon Christ, and committing her Self to Him,
when I ran for the Doctor, but she was past speaking, or knowing any body, when
I came back. -- -- Let my dear Daughter know of it as cautiously and mildly as
can be, which yet I need not say to you. Beg of her from me to be still and
know that it is God. I hope God will support her, and preserve the Fruit. O I
am afraid of Sorrow upon Sorrow, if she fall into Fitts. I pour our my Soul in
Prayer for my Self and her, as you both will for me. Come down as soon as may
be to comfort and assist me with your Presence. Beg of my dear Child to submit
quietly to her Heavenly Father's Will, the only Support she can give to her
loving, earthly, dying Father. May you live long Blessings to each other, but
for the most Sudden Separations the good Lord prepare us.

-- --

My last to her, Feb. 25 th. 1734, 5. My dearest Child,
I Know your tender Heart, and am much concerned for you upon the Death of your
Servant. It comes near to you, as Deaths in our Families always should. I pray
God to sanctify his Hand, support you under it, and help you to submit to his
holy Will with a becoming Reverence, Fear and Love. May you be also quickened by
it to the more earnest Preparations for your own Change, by a more diligent
Care to be a Blessing in your House while God continues you in it; which I hope
will be long to the Glory of God, the Good of all Yours, and more especially
of your dear Samuel, and to your own Account at last with Joy.

GOD can find you another Servant, and a better. This is one of the good and
perfect Gifts from the Father of Lights, Your earthly Fathers also will be
ready to do what they can to repair the Breach on you. For you are dear and
pleasant to us, as you highly deserve to (...), and our Life is much bound up
in your Comfort, and all that we have is Yours and for you; and that not at
Death only when we can need or use it no more, but now while we live with you,
which is our present mutual Pleasure; but more especially the Parents that has
a Heart to give, in the Image of the Living Father in Heaven; Who if earthly
Parents know how to give good Gifts unto their Children, will much more be
ready to give his Holy Spirit to them that ask him. Seek this (my dear Love)
before and above all things. It will make up every Loss, supply every Need, and
be the sure Earnest of all spiritual Blessings in the Heavenly Places. -- We
all love and pray for you, and long to hear you are well.

Your loving Father, --

FINIS.

