INSTRUCTIONS FOR THE Cultivating and Raising OF Flax and Hemp: In a better
Manner, than that generally Practiced in IRELAND.

By LIONEL SLATOR of Cabragh, in the County of Cavan, Flax and Hemp Dresser to
the Honorable THOMAS COOTE of Coote-hill, in the said County.

Printed at Dublin in the Year 1724. And now Published for the Benefit of the
Inhabitants of New England, and recommended to their Perusal.

BOSTON: N. E. Printed by S KNEELAND and T. GREEN, for DANIEL HUNCHMAN, in Corn
hill. 1735.

To the HONORABLE THE TRUSTEES OF The Flaxen and Hempen Manufactures of
IRELAND.
GENTLEMEN,
IN Obedience to your Commands, I consulted Lyonel Slator, who I take to be one
of the most skilful Flax and Hemp Dressers in this Kingdom, and gathered from
him what Instructions he was capable of giving me, in order to the cultivating
and raising of Hemp and Flax, more skilfully than hitherto has been practiced
in Ireland; I have endeavored to place his Instructions under proper Heads,
and where he used the Terms of Art known in England, yet not generally made use
of here, I have taken Care to explain them by the Terms commonly known in
Ireland: I have likewise consulted Mr Richard Hall' s Report, which he made
you, on his first Return from Holland; and least I might mistake his Sense, I
had him several Days with me, and settled with him each Section contained in
his Part of the ensuing Tract: His had been a complete System of Directions and
Instructions, for the making of Flaxen, Linen, and Hempen Canvas in all its
Parts, from the Seed to the Bleaching, inclusive, could he be persuaded to
expose to the Public, his Observations relating to the Practice of Bleaching
of Flaxen Linen in Holland; for I really believe him extremely skilful in that
Art or Mystery of Bleaching; but as this depends much on the Soil whereof the
Bleach-yards are composed, the Nature of the Water wherewith they bleach, and
the Difference of Climates, his Fears or Apprehensions of misguiding People,
(ere he had himself experienced in Ireland, how his Observations in Holland
might best be put in Practice here,) being great, he could not be prevailed on
to make his Notions public: This is a very becoming Modesty in him, and very
commendable; for no Body can so readily make the Dutch Practice comport with
the Circumstances of this Kingdom, as Mr. Hall can do, and is determined to
make public, after one or two Years Experience thereof.

Gentlemen, all I can offer as to my own Perfomance in this Matter, is, That I
have endeavored to make these two skilful Men's Nations as intelligible to all
Capacities, as I possibly could; and If I have in any Sort contributed to the
Service of this Kingdom, and to merit your Approbation, I shall deem my self
sufficiently rewarded; who am with infinite Respect,

GENTLEMEN, Your most faithful and most devoted Servant, T. COOTE.

INSTRUCTIONS FOR The Cultivating and Raising of Flax and Hemp, etc.
SECT. I.
The Choice of the Soil.
THE first Thing which the Husbandman is to do, when he goes about to raise
Flax, Choice of the Soil.
is to choose a Soil that is naturally proper for his Purpose; for thereon the
Fruits of of his Labor will very much depend. In the first Place, he must see
that his Grounds are in good Heart, free from Rushes, Flags, or other Weeds,
that betoken the Lands to be wet or spewey; such Lands never bring good Flax,
either in Quality or Quantity, being poor, cold, and hungry. The hot, burning,
sandy Grounds, never yield a good Crop of Flax. Grounds which promise well for
producing Barley, (known to all Husbandmen) will always yield a suitable Crop
of Flax, if they be skilfully cultivated; for Flax may be raised on hazily,
loamy, or Clay-grounds, provided you give to each of them such Dressing or
Plowing, as they naturally require. Ley-grounds are always best for Flax, and
preferable to Grounds that have been lately broke up, be the Soil what it will.
The Husbandmen should likewise avoid sowing Flax-seed, in Lands lately dunged;
for nothing whatever is a greater Enemy to Flaxen Manufactures, than raising
Flax in dunged Grounds, because such Flax is always tender, and can scarce be
brought to a good Color. The Reason why wet spewey Grounds, or hot, burning,
sandy Grounds, are improper for Flax, is, that the first scalds the Roots, the
other binds them so hard, that they never give a good Crop: By no means sow
Flax in Soil composed of Turff mold, being too light in dry Weather to afford
Nourishment to the Plant, and in wet Weather, it retains too much of the Water.

SECT. II.
Of the Plowing the Ground.
THE Situation of Grounds ought to be as well weighed and considered by the
industrious Husbandman, The Situation of Ground.
as the Nature of the Soil; and so ought likewise certain Incidents to Land to
be well observed and prevented; for a good Husbandman will readily acknowledge
and confess, that Lands which lie flat, whether they be hazily, loamy, or
clayey, must be plowed in a different Manner, whether they be wet or dry, from
other Lands which have more or less of Descent.

In Grounds that are deep and rich, and not over wet or moist, Deep and rich
Ground:
it is scarcely possible to make your Ridges too broad, and too flat, nor your
Furrows too shallow; in such Grounds as these, the Plow need not go deeper than
four Inches, there being no Danger of Water lying at the Root of the Flax, in
so light a Soil; unless it be from accidental Waters, falling from higher
Grounds, which must be intercepted, and conveyed away in such a Manner, so as
they may, by no Means, prejudice the Flax.

If loamy Soil lies flat, the Plowing ought to be at least six Inches deep,
Loamy Soil.
to the end the Rain may sink as far from the Roots* (and not scald them) as is
requsite; loamy Grounds being less subject to soak in the Water, than hazily
Grounds are, especially where the Clay is most predominant: These Ridges ought
to be raised higher, the Furrows deeper than the hazily Ground, and also the
Ridges should be narrower: Eight or ten Foot wide, made flat at the Top, with
Furrows proportionable to the Quantity of Water, so as to drain well the
Ridges, is the husbandly Way of working such Grounds.

If the Soil be Clay, and the Lands lie flat, you must plow such Grounds still
deeper, Clay Soil.
in Proportion to the Stiffness of the Clay: You ought to plow this Sort of
Land thrice, and cannot possibly give it too much Weathering; whereas hazily or
loamy Grounds need no more than one Plowing, provided they are well harrowed
first, with a heavy Iron Harrow, that will break the Sods and Clods, afterward
with lighter Harrows, which bring the Mold to be as fine and light as is
possible, the better to cling to the Seed. When the Soil is Clay, the first
Plowing it has, ought to be in the common Season of fallowing. The second
Plowing given it, ought to be the latter End of September, or Beginning of
October; and across the Ridges of the former Plowing; then must it be harrowed
with a heavy Iron Harrow, not only to break the Sods and Clods sufficiently,
but to gather up the Weeds and Grass, after such a Manner placed, as at the
third Plowing, they may be conveniently cast to the Bottom of the Ridge, so as
to warm the Soil as they rot.

The Ridges in the Clay Soil must be equally flat with the others, Ridges.
but by no Means so wide; their Breadth ought to be in Proportion to the
Stiffness of the Clay, because Clay is apter to retain the Rain Water, than any
Soil whatsoever; therefore, to prevent the Rain from settling at the Roots of
the Flax, the Ridges ought to be raised higher or lower, Furrows.
and the Furrows deeper in Proportion to its Stiffness; and also the Furrows
ought to have a Communication with each other, and a proper Drain or Drains
placed after such a Manner, Drains.
as may carry off the Water from them all, and especially the cold Springs,
which Clay-grounds are too much incident to.

The third Time which you plow this Ground, ought to be the latter End of
March, Plowing the Ground.
or the Beginning of April; then are the Ridges and Furrows laid the Reverse of
the second Plowing; and being well plowed, it ought like wise to be well
harrowed; the Rubbish, if any, ought to be entirely removed from off the
Ground, the Clods completely broke, and the Mold rendered as fine as is
possible; so as when the Seed is sown, the same may more easily be covered by
the Means of a Thorn bush drawn over it, than it can be by any Harrow, be it
never so light.

SECT. III.
Of the Choice of the Seed, the Quantity, and Manner of sowing it.
THE Goodness or Badness of Flax-seed is easily known by Persons conversant in
it; Goodness or Badness of the Seed imported.
the good Seed is generally of a brownish Yellow, the Husk well filled, and not
so thin or broad as the decayed Flax-seed is, at the Point of the Seed that
which is good, is apt to turn up, and much of it will have a little Turn at the
End, the Kernel will be white and hard; whereas the decayed Seed is either a
paler yellow, or perfectly black, broader yet thinner by far than the good Seed
is, and the Kernel so thin and weak, as not to yield Substance to the Flax.

The Dutch Seed (could we of Ireland have the best of it) is fitter for our
Soil and Climate, The Nature of the Dutch Seed.
than either the Riga or Nerva Seed; but so many are the Evils incident to
Dutch Seed, through the Tricks they in Holland play with it, that it is hard to
say what the Quantity ought to be, sufficient for the sowing of a Plantation
Acre: For as they frequently mix decayed Seed along with their best ripled
Seed; and sometimes they send us ripled Seed unmixed, but this is so ill saved
and dried, that it frequently heats in the Cask, and possibly not two Thirds of
it come up when sowed: The Riga or Nerva Seed is generally mixed with the Seed
of the Weeds, so that by the time you have severed the good Seed from the bad,
you have scarce half of your Measure of Flax-seed.

However, when I sow Dutch Seed, if the Lands are coarse, The Quantity of the
Seed.
I give from three Bushels and a half to four Bushels, but I never exceed four
Bushels and a half to the richest Land I have ever seen in Ireland; nor do I
think there is occasion for more, if the seed be good. In Lincolnshire they
seldom give more than nine Pecks, or ten at the most; their Lands are nothing
inferior to the best here in Ireland, save only in the Measure, for their Rod
or Perch is but sixteen Foot, ours in Ireland is one and twenty; the Number of
Rods or Perches in the Acre, is the same as with us in Ireland, so that their
Acre is less than ours, as sixteen Foot and a half is to one and twenty Foot in
a Perch. There can be nothing more pernicious to the raising of the Flax, than
the sowing it over thick; Sowing Flax over thick.
for by so doing, the Flax can never be ripe, the Harl has no Substance, the
Seed produced is bad, both in Quantity and Quality, and the Flax will
infallibly lodge, cre it is ripe or fit for Use.

The casting or sowing of Flax-seed in an even and equal Manner, The Casting or
Sowing the Seed.
is a Matter of more Art than many People in this Kingdom think of, and a great
deal depends thereon; husbandly Men may soon be taught the Manner of doing it,
but it must be long Practice must make them expert in it.

When you have sown your Seed, you must get a pretty large Thorn-bush, whereon
you fix a Weight of Timber, sufficient to make the Thorns to enter in some
measure your Ground: This Bush is dragged by a Horse over your new sowed
Ground; which covers your Flax seed much better than a Harrow can do; but
because the Bush may be apt to be choked by the Rubbish, there ought to be a
small Cord so fixed to the Bush, as that a Boy by holding that Cord in his
Hand, may, by giving it a Twitch, raise the Bush some what off of the Land,
which will make the Dirt and Rubbish to fall down from the Bush; all which must
be removed from off of the Ridges, that the Flax may spring equally.

The next thing to be done is, to roll the Ground very well with a Roller,
Rolling the Ground.
four Foot four Inches long, and about fifteen Inches diameter, made as round
as possible; this is to be drawn in a Frame by a Horse; but great Care is to be
taken, that the grounds be not Rolled in wet Weather, for if they be, both Soil
and Seed will cling to the Roller and spoil all. The End of Rolling of Grounds
is, to make the Soil lie close to the Seed, so as neither the scorching, or
bleak Winds hurt the Seed, nor the Birds gather it: Besides, the Trouble of it
is not great, for one Horse will roll six Acres in a Day.

SECT. IV.
Of Weeding Flax.
FLAX must be wed when it is about four Inches high, Weeding Flax.
the Weeds must be cut with a sharp Knife, as near the Root as you please, but
the Roots must not be pulled up, because that loosens and abuses the Flax. The
Weeders cannot hurt the Flax by sitting, or lying on it while they are weeding,
but they may do it much prejudice by standing on it, especially if they have
Shoes or Pumps on, by cutting the Flax with the Heels of them.

SECT. V.
Of Pulling Flax.
THE way to know when Flax is ripe or fit for pulling, Pulling Flax.
is to observe when the Boughs become brown, and the Leaves toward the Root
fallen from the Stalk, then may the Flax be pulled; observing to pull the
finest Flax by it self, and the coarsest by it self, and so kept apart and
wrought seperately, through the whole rating and dressing of Flax; for the
coarser Flax is much sooner rated than the fine; and should they be
promiscuously pulled, the coarse Flax would be rotten ere the fine was rated:
When there is as much Flax of either sort pulled, as a man can conveniently
hold in his Hand, it ought to be bound in such small Sheaves, that a Man may
conveniently hold it while he is ripling, and the Teeth of the Ripling comb
pass through; and when the fine Flax and coarse are all pulled, the next thing
to be done is to riple it.

SECT. VI.
Of Ripling of Flax, and Saving the Seed.
FLAX riples and waters better when it is green and fresh pulled, The Manner of
ripling of Flax.
because the Boughs and Leaves quit the Stalk at that time more readily than
they do afterward when the Flax is weathered; besides I have always observed,
that the greener Flax is put into the Water, so much the better Color will it
take when properly rated.

The Manner of ripling of Flax is thus: A Ripling comb, made of Iron, is fixed
in a long Form, which Form is placed over a Winnowing-sheet, to receive the
Boughs of the Flax; through this Comb the Flax is gently drawn, to sever the
Leaves and Boughs from the Stalk. The Husbandman's Management of his Flaxseed
differs, in proportion to the Quantity which he has under his Care and
Management, and the Conveniences he has for doing it; for if he has but a
small Quantity, it may be easily weathered, spreading the Pods or Boughs which
contain the Seed, as thin on Winnowing cloths or Sheets as he possibly can;
frequently turning them, as they lie abroad exposed to weather, till the Chaff
of the Boughs, and the Seed be thoroughly dry: And afterward, the best way to
prevent such Seed from heating, is to lay it when dry, on a boarded Floor,
spread about four or five Inches thick, and turn it once a Week at the least,
till the sowing Season comes on: But by no means do not sever the Seed from the
Boughs, until the sowing Season; for though the Seed has quitted the Boughs, and
that the Boughs are broke in many Pieces by frequent turning, yet do those
Boughs contribute much toward preserving the Flax-seed from heating, by giving
the Air a better Opportunity to pass through the Seed, not suffering it to cling
so close together as otherwise it would.

But if the Husbandman has great Quantity of Flax-seed to manage, it will be
impossible for him without an unreasonable Expense, to weather his Flaxseed on
Sheets abroad in the Air; therefore his Business is, as soon as his Seed is
ripled, to sever the Seed-pods with the Seed contained in them, and likewise
what Seed happens to be shaken out, from the Leaves and Rubbish, which at first
are mixed with them, in the ripling: Let him then spread these Boughs and Seed
on the dryest Malt-house Floors, or other boarded Floors that he has: At first
they ought not to be spread thicker than a quarter of an Inch, so as the Air
may pass through them; they should be turned once a Day till they are pretty dry,
afterward they may be spread about an Inch thick, but turned once in two Days
at the least, till they are perfectly dry, and past the Danger of heating. But
in regard Flaxseed is the most liable to heat of any Seed whatever, it is good
Husbandry to turn it at least once a Week, and not to sever the Chaff from it,
as I said before, till the sowing Season, giving it as much Air as you
conveniently can, during the whole time.

It is certain, that the Flax takes a better Color that is rated the same
Season it is pulled in, Concerning the Color in rating.
than that which is rated in the Spring or Summer following; therefore a good
husbandly Man ought to riple as much of the Flax, as he can conveniently water
and grass; for though it must be confessed that the Seed receives Nourishment
from the Stalk, as long as it has Sap to feed on, yet considering the
Differences of Color between Flax watered and grass'd the same Season, and
that which is watered or grass'd the Spring or Summer following, it is, in my
humble Opinion, most advisable, to riple as much as you can possibly water or
grass that Season; and if the seed be preserved from heating, and changed every
fourth Year, from clay Grounds to loamy Grounds, or from loamy to hazily, they
will hold many more Years sowing, and yield good Crops, than is generally
believed that they would otherwise do.

I have been informed by very skilful Flax-men, that they have found their
Flax-seed to hold longer, by giving it a Year's Rest, once in three or four
Years, keeping it with the Chaff duly turned, till the Spring come twelvemonth
following, and that Flax-seed thus kept, will yield a better Crop the Season it
is sowed, than otherwise it would; but I must confess I never experienced this,
and therefore dare not recommend it as a general Practice, but the Curious may
easily make a Trial on a small Quantity, without great Detriment to themselves;
for this is certain, that nothing can contribute more to the good Success of
the flaxen Manufactures of this Kingdom, than the skilful preserving of the
Seed, that the Subjects of this Kingdom may depend, as little as possible, for
Supplies from abroad. There is one thing that I cannot avoid (on this Occasion)
to mention, both for the Honor of the Gentleman who made the Experiment, and
the Good it may do the Kingdom in general, if further Trials be made, till
Matters be brought to Perfection (as I am in very great Hopes they may easily
be:) The Matter was thus: A worthy Gentleman, Col. Robert Tailor of the Country
of Limerick, procured some of the most degenerated Irish Seed he could get, and
sowed it in his best Corcus Lands, which having been gained from the Sea, were
consequently much impregnated with Salts; this Seed so sown produced a Crop of
Seed, part of which the Colonel sent to my Master Mr. Justice Coote, who
directed me to sow it in the ensuing Season, in the same Soil, and with the
like Culture as I gave to my best Dutch Seed; and I had as good a Crop from it
as from the Dutch, save only it was not altogether so long as the Dutch; but I
was more than recompensed in that Particular by the Quantity, for every Grain
took place, and it grew much thicker and finer than the Dutch did, and when I
had wrought it with the same dressing that I gave the Dutch, I found it wrought
more silky and soft than did the Dutch Flax, neither could the Length of it be
complained of.

This last Season, I sowed some of the Seed which I had saved of my first
Produce, Seed sowed.
with as good Success as formerly, and the Seed of the last Crop pro^ises as
well as any I have ever seen: I therefore design to sow (...) this ensuing
Spring, and bestow on it as good Soil as any I have. I hear that worthy
Gentleman has been unfortunately lost, to the great Detriment of his Country;
he having been an indefatigable Promoter of the flaxen and hempen Manufactures
in Ireland for some Years past, and of every thing else which might conduce to
the Good of his Country.

The Flax which is not ripled the Season it is pulled, Unripled Flax.
ought to be made up in Sheaves, about the bigness of the Calf of a Man's Leg,
and tied as near to the upper End, as it conveniently can be done; that when it
is set on the Butts, those Butts may be drawn out, and the Middle of the Sheaf
left as hallow as a Bird cage; these Sheaves ought to be left in the Field, two
and two leaning on each other, in long Rows, until they are so dry as that
there is no fear of its heating in the Mow; then must the Husbandman proceed as
speedily as he can to stack it, in Ricks, rather than Cocks, and give it no
longer weathering in the field, or elsewhere abroad, than is of absolute
Necessity to prevent its heating. Now as to the stacking of his Flax, the
Length of the Sheaves ought to be well considered, and the Situation of the
Ground where his ^^^ggort is, in point of Shelter, for accordingly he must put
more (...) Sheaves in the Breadth of his Mow or Rick; for if the Rick be over
narrow in the Structure, a Storm of Wind and Rain may happen to over-set it, to
the Husbandman's great Damage; and if the Stack be made over wide, it must of
course rise higher, and expose the Head of it more to the Storms, or not lay it
with a sufficient Water-cast; therefore Care and great Judgment are to be used
in the erecting or making of a Rick of Flax; (...) of Flax.
first, that there be a Foundation made with Stones, sufficiently raised from
the Earth, as no Under-water (...) prejudice the Flax; this Foundation ought to
be made as firm and even at the Top as possible, that the Rick may have no Bend
or Leaning any way. Secondly, the coarse Flax and the fine must be kept apart
in the stacking; and when the Breadth of the Rick is well considered, with
Regard had to the Length of the Flax, be sure to make the Rick in Point of
Breadth, of an equal Number of Sheaves, whether they be six, eight, or more;
but I would not willingly exceed eight, unless the Flax was exceedingly short;
then must the Husbandman carefully lay the Seedend of his Sheaves outward, and
the Root inwards, till he has done one Half of the Breadth; afterward he must
lay the Sheaves with the Seed-end outward, from the Middle to the other Side of
the Rick; this I find to be the best Way to prevent the Seeds heating: I am
sensible that this Method is liable to great Objections, because the outward
Sheaves may shed their Seed, either by the Boughs falling or opening, as the
Rick stands, or they may be injured much, as the Thatch is removing from the
Rick; therefore, I submit this to the Husbandman's own Consideration.

In the forming of the Rick, it is requisite, that at every two Foot Distance,
The forming of the Rick.
the Rick be dressed throughout with Reeds, filled with Poison, herein after
directed, to prevent the Vermin from coming to the Seed, and knawing the Flax,
to make Beds to breed in: When the first Floor is laid, proceed to lay the rest
in like Manner, till the Butt is high enough, that it is requisite to form the
Eaves to throw off the Drops, that they may not fall on the Butt of the Rick;
and after the Eaves are well made, be careful skilfully to draw in by Degrees,
at first, by laping the Seed ends of the Sheaves over the Butts, till the
Number of the Sheaves be necessarily abated in the Breadth of the Rick; and
thus proceed to lap and abate, till the Head of the Rick will hold but one
Sheaf across it: Then must there be a good Head of Straw laid after such a
Manner, as may protect the Flax from any Rain falling through, and be brought
to as narrow a Ridge as is possible.

It is very difficult to make good Ricks of Hay or Corn, The Difficulty of
making Ricks of Flax.
but much more so of Flax, because there is an absolute Necessity of keeping
Flax in Sheaves, from the Time it is pulled, to the Time that it is hackled;
for if Flax was suffered to mingle promiscuously with each other, it would be
an infinite Labor to reduce them to Order again, without which it would be
impossible either to swingle or hackle it. Now, in regard that Flax so tied in
Sheaves, will be apt to have diverse Hollows in the Ridge of the Stack, there
must be great Care had to fill up these Hollows with Straw, and the whole Ridge
made with so so sharp a Cast, and completly thatched with Straw, that the Rain
may lie or sink any where into the Stack, but fall off at the Eaves, as from
off of the Roof of a well built thatched House.

The Way to dress the Rick with Poison, The way to dress a Rick.
is to have an equal Quantity of white and yellow Arsenick, ground by an
Apothecary to a palpable Powder, with this Powder, a sufficient Quantity of
Flour must be mixed, wet the whole with Milk, and a little Canary Wine, with a
few Drops of Oil of Annis-seeds; when the whole Mass is in a Paste, fill the
Hollows of the Water-reeds, cut about a Spang long with the Paste, and stop up
each End of the Reed, if there be Occasion, with small wooden Pegs, so as the
Poison may not drop out; the Smell of the Canary and of the Oil, will draw the
Vermin, and tempt them to know the Reeds, which they cannot do without eating
some of the Poison, which will make that Part of the Vermin, which are not
poisoned, to desert the Stack, and never more come near it.

The Reasons why I advise the making of Ricks, rather than round Cocks of Flax,
Reasons why Ricks should be made rather than round Cocks.
are these, If you are to break a round Cock, possibly there may not be Room in
the Barn to lodge it safe, while the Seed is ripling, and should any Storm of
Rain come while the Cock is open, it is great Hazard, but that so much of it as
lies thus open, may be lost; whereas in a Rick, so much and no more may be
taken, than what may be conveniently housed.

About the latter End of March, the unripled Flaxseed may be ripled, The Time
to riple the Seed.
or thresh'd out with small light Flails: But I prefer Ripling to Threshing, as
not hurting the Harl so much as Threshing would, or the Breaking of the Bunn,
Ripling prefered to Threshing.
which may do much Mischief in the rating or watering it. As soon as the Seed
is ripled, sever it from the Chaff; and if the Lands are ready for Sowing, and
that the Season offers fair, then may the Seed be sowed, covered, and rolled,
as speedily as possible; for though I have seen in Ireland, tolerable Crops
produced from Seed sown the latter End of April, or even the beginning of May,
yet I am confident the Crops had been much better, The Husbandman ought to have
his Flax Grounds ready by Mid. march.
had the same Seed, in the same Soil, been sowed the latter End of March, or
Beginning of April: Therefore, I advise the industrious and careful Husbandman,
to have his Flax-grounds ready for sowing by Mid-March, that he may get his
Seed into the Ground as soon afterward, as Weather and other Things will admit
of; he will find his Account therein, in many respects, but more especially by
an early Harvest, which will afford him longer Time and probably better
Weather, for (...), and grassing of his Flax, and for ^^owing it safely against
the Winter Occurencies.

SECT. VII.
The Rating or Watering of Flax.
IN England, Rating or watering of Flax.
when they speak of watering of Flax, they call it rating it; and when they
grass it from the Beginning, without watering it, they call that Dew-rating it;
Dew-rating.
I have often tried to Dew-rate Flax, without Success, though it be much
commended by Mr. Cromilin, Rating Flax in water preferable to Dewrating.
in his printed Directions for raising of Flax; and I have likewise observed
many Counties in England, to practice it, but they fail both with respect to
Color and Goodness; I therefore prefer the rating it in Water rather than
Dew-rating.

The rating of Flax is the nicest Part of Flax-dressing: The Nicety in rating
Flax.
The Husbandman who will take upon him to rate Flax, must be very nice in the
Choice of the Water; in the first Place, it must not (...) in any swift
Current, for the Stream would tear the Harl from the Bunn. Secondly, it must
not be in hard Water that partakes of Mines or Minerals: Thirdly, it ought not
to be in Bog-waters, because they generally are stained by a Shurb that grows
on the Bogs, called Bog-aulders which Stain can seldom be got out by the best
Bleaching. The oest Waters are the standing Waters, therefore the Loughs or the
Lakes, which abound in the whole Province of Ulster, rate Flax the best of any
Water I ever saw: Lakes.
But where Lakes cannot be had conveniently, then must the Husbandman provide
himself with a Pond or Ponds convenient and proper for his purpose. Ponds
situated.
In the first Place, these Ponds must be so situated, as that he can convey his
Water from some adjacent Stream, at his Will and Pleasure, in the dryest or
drowthiest Summer which can possibly happen. In the next Place, he should
consider the Situation of the Grounds wherein the Ponds are to be made;
Situation of the Ground.
for provided the Water can be kept upon a Level, from End to End of the Pond;
the longer the Pond is, it is so much the better* In the third Place, Gravelly
Grounds most proper for the Ponds.
Care must be had not to make these Ponds in foul, mouldering Grounds; Gravel
or stiff Clay are best for that Purpose. The Ponds which I would choose or rate
in should be four Foot and a half wide, and five Foot deep; that I might
command my Flax as it rates in the Water, Ponds to rate in, four Foot and a
half wide,
without abusing the Laborers in their Working, which can be easily done, from
Side to Side, or by the Help of a Board or two laid across the Pond. I should
likewise advise the making of a small Trench, five Foot deep.
to take off the waste Water, yet so contrived, as such Part of the Water as is
necessary, may be turned in at the Head of the Pond, at Will and Pleasure; for
thereon depends the giving the Flax such Color, as take ^^st with the Country.

In Ireland, they are fond of the white or yellow Flax, In Ireland they are
fond of the white or yellow Flax.
but in Holland and Germany, and the East land Country, they rate much more of
the Silver-blue; judging that it will be sooner and easier brought to a
brighter and higher White, than the pale or yellow Flax could be. I made some
Silver-blues in and about Cootehill, The rating of Silver-blues in Holland, etc.
in the County of Cavan, and so did Mr. Sutton when he lived there; they proved
as good as could be made with Hands, and nothing inferior to what I have seen
come from Holland; yet the Spinners, Yarn-merchants, Weavers, and Bleachers,
durst never meddle with them; for the skilfulest Bleacher at Cootehill, who,
for ought as I know, is the best in Ireland, made a Trial of the White, the
Yellow, and the Silverblue, two Years successively, without being able to bring
the Silver-blue to equal the others in Color: But this, I believe, was owing
to his using only Fern-Ashes and Soap in his Bleaching; Fern Ashes and Soap.
whereas in Holland, they have Variety of Ashes, the weakest of which is much
more effectual in Bleaching, then Fern-Ashes can possibly be.

When the Husbandman has ripled his Flax he designs to water that Season, it is
to be hoped, he has filled his rating Ponds with Water, so early in the Year,
as that it may be sufficiently softened and qualified by the Weather, to perform
its Office: Then must he lay his Flax in the WaterRange, after Range, The
laying the Flax in the Water.
from one End to the other, until he has raised his Flax within fourteen Inches
of the Surface of the Water: Then must the Head of the Flax be covered with
Fern, two or three inches thick, and over the Fern a Weight of Stones be laid,
sufficient to keep the Flax and all under Water, if possible; for as soon as
the Flax has been laid four and twenty Hours in the rating Pond, it will
ferment so strongly, as to require all Hands at Work, to keep it down, to the
end the upper Range may be equally watered with the lower. When the Flax has
been three or four Days in Water, some few straws may be drawn out of a Sheaf,
bend some of them, if they break readily, instead of bending, and the Harl
quits the Straw without Difficulty, the Flax is sufficiently rated; but if the
Straw does neither readily break, or the Harl quit it, then most the Husbandman
repeat this Experiment twice a Day, until he has found thereby his Flax to be
sufficiently watered: Yet when the Fermentation (which I formerly mentioned)
gives over, so that the Flax sinks of it self, it is a Sign that it is
sufficiently rated: And as soon as that the Flax is discovered to be
sufficiently rated, it must be hastened out of the Pond to be grassed as speedy
as possible, taking it up Sheaf by Sheaf, and giving each of them a gentle
Shake in the Water, to clear them from the Slime and Filth generally contracted
on the outside of the Sheaf, Hard to know a stated time for rating Flax.
in the rating. It is impossible to fix upon any stated Time for the complete
rating of Flax, because this Matter depends so much upon the Weather, the
Quality of the Water, and the Nature of the Flax, that the Time spent in
Rating, will vastly differ; for if the Weather be hot, or hotter than ordinary,
Fermentation.
so will the Water of course be, and therefore the Fermentation stronger, and
the Rating sooner compassed, especially if the Flax be kindly: But if the
Weather be cold, or colder than ordinary, of Course the Fermentation is weaker,
To rate the fine Flax and the coarse separately.
and longer, coming; and therefore the Rating must be more tedious. This is a
certain Rule in rating of Flax, to rate the Fine by it self, and the Coarse
apart by it self, because the Fine takes several Days longer to rate than the
Coarse will, The fine Flax rated before coarse colored Flax.
therefore the Pine is first rated, as being the most difficult.

The Color given to Flax depends much upon the Skill and Judgment of the
Husbandman who rates it; if he designs to have it a good clear White, he gives
it gradually so much the more Water, yet must he still avoid letting it stream
in, to occasion a perceivable Stream or Currency in the Water: All that is
requisite to be done in that Case is, to keep the Pond constantly full with
Water, so as the stained Water may proportionably wash over the Banks of the
Pond. This Way of watering must be more tedious than ordinary, because the
Water which comes into the Pond by way of supply, will of course allay the
Fermentation, and probably will harden the Flax, and make it less kindly in
working.

If the Husbandman desires his Flax to have a tolerable good Color, The Way to
let the Flax have a good Color.
and his Flax to work kindly, his Method must be to give it no more Recruits of
Water, than what is of absolute Necessity to keep the Stones laid over the Flax
continually covered; and then will the Fermentation be vigorous, the Flax well
purged, and be soft and kindly in the Harl; and whether it proves white or
yellow, it is all one; for it will be sure to bleach so much the better, in
proportion to its purging in the rating; and it will shrink much less in the
bleaching, after it is woven, and take less Time to rate in.

The Method which I have observed practiced in England, The Method to bring
Flax to a silver-blue.
to bring Flax to a Silver blue is, by rating it in the same Water that the
former Flax was rated in, giving it longer Time for rating, and no more Supply
of Water, than what is necessary to cover the Stones; and let as little Water
run over the Banks as possible.

There is yet a darker sort of Flax than the silverblue, A darker Sort of Flax,
than the Silver-Blues.
in great Demand in England, for the making of brown Threads and brown Tapes,
without dying: This Sort of Flax is only rated in the same Water that the
Silver-blues were taken out of, observing the same Cautions, with respect to
the Recruiting of the Water, as was formerly given, and frequently trying the
Experiments, to know when the Flax is sufficiently rated; for to be sure, this
Flax will take longer Time to rate, than did the Silver-blue.

If the Husbandman is desirous to have still a more dark Flax, More dark Flax.
than the last mentioned, for the Use of the Dyers, to die black Threads or
Tape, he must rate the Flax in the last mentioned Water that the last Flax was
taken out of, When Flax is taken out of the Water, it must be immediately
grass'd.
observing the same Cautions in every Respect, and his Purpose will be
answered. This general Rule must be observed, that as soon as Flax is taken out
of the Water, and rench'd, it must be immediately grassed, but not all grassed
in the same Manner; as will better appear, when I come to treat at large of the
grassing of Flax.

When the rating of Flax is over for the Harvest Season, To empty the Ponds
when the Flax is rated.
then should all the Ponds be emptied by the Means of a large Pipe, laid at the
Bottom, which you can open at your Will and Pleasure, and the Ponds made as
clean as possible; then stop the Pipe, and let the Ponds be filled three
Quarters full and no more, that they may retain as much of the Rain and
Snow-water, as they can gather in the Winter; which will very much facilitate
the rating of the unripled Flax, the ensuing Spring, about Mid April, which is
the best Time for rating unripled Flax; Mid-April the best time for rating
unripled Flax.
because the Meadows cannot suffer so much, by the Grassing of it so early in
the Year, as they would by treading and trampling on the Grass later in the
Year; and on the other Hand, should the Flax be rated earlier, of Course it
must be earlier grass'd which would not be consistant with the March Winds, or
the Winds which blow too frequently in the Beginning of April. I shall conclude
this Section, only with this Observation, that the unripled Flax is become more
hard and stubborn, than the ripled Flax was; that the Water is colder, and
consequently the rating of Flax must be more tedious; so that it behooves the
Husbandly Man to be exceeding diligent, in making his Observations to catch the
critical Moment, when his Flax is sufficiently watered: For wherever Flax is
over-watered, it is fatal, but Under-watering may be remedied by proper
Grassing, as I have experienced my self, and agrees with Mr. Cromilin's
Opinion, in his Treatise of Flax

SECT. VIII.
Of Grassing Flax.
I Know not whether I have hitherto been sufficiently careful in giving
Directions concerning the binding of Flax, The binding of Flax.
throughout the whole Process which it must undergo, ere it is rated or
grassed; therefore I take the Liberty with my Reader, here to treat of it in
all its Circumstances, for as they differ, so will the binding.

The Flax designed to be ripled, The Flax bound up in Bunches
the same Season it is pulled, must be bound at the Middle, in Bunches of such
a Size as the Riplers may easily command, and the Teeth of the Ripling comb
penetrate, to the very Bottom of the Comb, without tewing or breaking the Flax;
yet when all the Flax is ripled, these Bands may be taken off, and the Sheaves
enlarged to the Bigness of the Calf of a Man's Leg, The Sheaves enlarged.
in order to the rating of it. Now, as to the binding of the unripled Flax,
there is no occasion for its being bound, while it stands on the Butts a
weathering; because the Seed-pods which are at the End of the Flax, will so lap
one within another, that when the Butts are spread out, and two Sheaves are
placed to support each other, there will be no danger of their Fall; or if they
should happen to fall, they must be as speedily erected as possible. When the
Flax is thoroughly dry fit for stacking, the Sheaves must be of the same Size,
and bound in the Middle, as the other was.

When the Flax is sufficiently rated in the Water, then must it be grass'd in
the following manner; When the Flax is sufficiently rated it must be grass'd.
first, the Bandage must be taken of, Sheaf by Sheaf, and the Flax spread in
Rows, as even at the Roots, and as thin as it is possible, on a new mowed
Meadow, leaving at the Butt-end of the Flax as much Room uncovered, as will
receive the Flax when turned over on the Butts; The Bandage taken off.
then proceed to make a second Row with the same Care and Caution, only with
this Difference, that there is (...) occasion for leaving greater Distance
between the Heads of the first Row, and the Roots of the second, The Flax
spread in Rows.
than an Inch or thereabouts, that they may not entangle with each other* for
the Space of Ground that contained the first Row, when turned will contain the
second; proceed after this manner to spread all the Flax. Mr. Cromilin advises
the turning the Flax every Morning, by the means of a long Wand, held in both
the Hands of the Person that turns it, and gently thrust under the upper Ends
of so much of the Flax, as he designs then to turn; thus by bringing the Wand
gradually toward the Root, till he finds that he can command the Flax to turn
over upon the Root, the Heads the other way* the Roots still kept as even as
possible; The Roots kept even.
and so proceed Row by Row, till the whole Meadow is turned: But for my part, I
do not approve of this Practice of such frequent turning, because it lays the
Flax so light, that every Puff of Wind would turn them Heads and Points, and
cause the utmost Confusion, or an insufferable Trouble and Expense to the
Husbandman to re instate them or place them as they ought to be, The Butts must
be together.
for the Butts must be together when swingled, hackled, or brushed, nay even
when it is spun; if the Spinner spins the long way of the Flax, as the ought to
do for fine Linen, the Butts of the Flax must be always kept together: For my
part, though I turn my Flax by the help of a Wand, as Mr. Cromilin does direct,
yet I do not turn it, till I perceive that the upper part of the Flax has, by
Showers of Rain or the Dew, acquired a Color to my Mind; unless it be that I
observe that the Grass grows too fast through my Flax, or that my Flax sinks to
the Root of the Grass, which may mildew or rot it: In the first Case, viz. when
it is come to Color, I turn it once, till the lower Side has acquired as good
a Color as the upper had; but in the latter Cases, I choose rather by the help
of my Wand, to raise it gently toward the Top of the Grass; which exposes it
less to the Power of the Winds, which are much more frequent in Ireland than in
Flanders.

When Flax is brought to the desired Color, which is either the white or the
yellow, Flax brought to the desired Color.
the first dry Day that can be had afterward, it must be taken from off the
Grass and laid in Bundles, proportionably to the Largeness of the Sheaves
designed to be made, in which there is no great matter, The Flax taken from off
the Grass and laid in in Bundles.
but every Man may do as he pleases. These Sheaves must not at first be tied,
but placed on the Butts and drawn round at the Bottom, and made as hollow as a
Bird-cage, that the Sun, Air, and Wind may dry them sufficiently, least
otherwise they heat; but in case the Weather should prove wet, Flax will not
suffer at all by thus standing, till a dry Day can be had to draw it home to
the Huggort, and stack it in as careful a manner, and as well thatched as was
before directed. It matters not the keeping of the fine Flax from the coarser,
after it has been watered and grass'd, provided both be well rated and grass'd;
for the Swingler Hackler and will bring both to be equally fine, but in case
they are not equally rated and grass'd, they caust of necessity be kept apart,
and separately swingled and hackled; Flax separately swingled and hackled.
for the swingling and hackling of the one, would destroy the other.

Great Care ought to be had in grassing of Flax; and see that the Flax which
was not sufficiently watered, lies longer on the Grass than the other, Great
Care ought to be taken in grassing Flax.
which you may easily know, by taking part of the Flax which you suspect to be
under-watered, and holding one Hand above the other at some Distance, crush the
Flax between both your Hands and rub it, and if the Bunn breaks readily, Great
Care to be taken when Flax is over watered.
and the Harl separates well from it, all is well, and there is no Danger; but
if it is otherwise, this Flax must be longer grass'd, until the Bunn will break
readily, and the Harl separate: But if on the other hand, Flax has been
over-rated in the Water, a good husbandly Man should be careful and diligent to
observe (a Day or two after he has grass'd, If the Bunn of the Flax breaks
readily, it must be taken off the Grass immediately
and that the Flax is grown stiff) whether the Harl does of it felf quit the
Bunn, or will easily strip from the upper End of the Flax to the Root; and if
the Bunn breaks readily, such Flax ought immediately to be taken off the Grass
and stook'd on the Butts in the Field, till it be sufficiently dry, then
carried to the Barn or other dry House, and avoid stacking it if possible; for
every Moisture increases the Evil, especially where the Excess in watering is
considerable.

This Flax, The Harl of the Flax that has not Substance ought to be first
swingled.
if the Harl has not any Substance, ought to be the first swingled and hackled,
for it will not be the better for keeping; yet if the Harl has Substance
sufficient, there is no Danger in keeping and managing of it in the same manner
that other Flax is managed, provided it be not over grassed, which would
infallibly tender the Harl beyond Reason.

In the grassing of Silver-blues and the other brownFlax, Care to be had in the
grassing of Silver-blues.
there must be care had not to grass them longer than till the Flax is stiff,
then must they be put on the Butts, and stook'd in the Field till dry enough to
be out of Danger of heating, and carried home and stacked apart. This Sort of
Flax will not admit of long grassing, especially the silver blue, and it is
only the proper rating of it, that can bring the Harl to quit the Bunn.

When Flax has been sufficiently grassed, Flax sufficiently grass'd.
and dry enough to stack, such of the Cautions as I have already given, that
are proper to Flax in these Circumstances, ought to be observed in the stacking
of it* Or if there be a large Quantity of it, Long Ricks preferable to round
Cocks.
prefer long Ricks to round Cocks, for the more convenient dressing of it in
the Workhouse, without incumbring the Workhouse morethan needs must* And it
would be a double Trouble to fetch it from other Outhouses, admitting they
could be conveniently spared from other purposes. Be careful to defend the Flax
at all Times, Care to be taken to keep the Flax from Under-water and Rain, etc.
from Underwater or from Rain, from great Winds, and Storms; which cannot be
done without good Shelter, the Rick skilfully made, and well thatched in every
Part of it: For if any Rain drops through, or gets into the Stack, it will
mildew, and may be rot as far as it reaches. It is more to be wished than hoped
for that Farmers or Husbandly Men had in Ireland, large Barns for the safety of
their Hay, If Rain gets into the Stack it will mildew the Flax.
Corn, and other husbandly Matters, as in England. I am sensible, that the
Gentlemen and Farmers of Ireland conceive otherwise; imagining, that they would
not agree with this Climate, and be apt to heat or even fire the Barn. But I
beg Pardon if I am in an Error in delivering my Opinion, for I humbly think
that Barns would do as well in Ireland as in England, and save a vast deal of
Hay, that is lost in the Field in Ireland by their Tramcocking; and keep their
Corn much sweeter and freer from Mustiness, Tramcocking
than at present they do: And for the better Support of my Opinion, I have the
Opinion of the Right Honorable the Lord Viscount Molesworth; who lived many
Years in Yorkshire, and is a most skilful Husbandman: he has lived many Years
both in Ireland and England, and has experienced both the Climates, and is
determined to build, on his Farm near Breckdens- Town, a complete Barn to
receive all his Crops.

SECT. IX.
Of Breaking Flax.
MR. Cromilin is a declared Enemy to the Use of Breaks, Mr. Cromilin an Enemy
to the Use of Breaks.
in the breaking of Flax, and recommends rather the Use of an Engine for that
Purpose to which I refer my Reader; because I prefer the Breaks made use of in
Ireland, where we are arrived to a sufficient Degree of Knowledge, in the
making of Breaks in such a Manner as to squeeze and break the Bunn, without
doing the least Injury imaginable to the Harl; and I am confident, that I can
break more Flax in an Hour, than the strongest Man living could in a whole Day,
Breaking of Flax, the proper Business of the Swingler.
and with less Labor to my self, were he to work with Mr. Cromilin's Engine,
and I with the Breaks. But we must not if well long upon this Subject. Breaking
of Flax, being the proper Business of the Swingler, he ought to do it at the
same time he swingles.

SECT. X.
Of Swingling and Hackling of Flax.
WHAT I call swingling of Flax, others call scutching of it; Swingling called
scutching by some.
(differing in nothing but the Terms) that is to say, to sever the Harl or Skin
of the Flax, from the Bunn or Straw of it. Swingling is a handy craft Trade,
and consists so very much in the Slight or Hand of the Artist, that several who
have served their Apprenticeship thereto, work much worse than others; so that
one Man can swingle a Stone of Flax, consisting of fourteen Pound, more to the
Profit of his Employer, by two Pound in the Stone, than another can perform,
let him do what he can. The like may be said of Hacklers in every respect;
which is a national Loss, as well as a particular one.

It is a Matter I have often thought of, Flax and Hemp Dressers in every Town
in England.
and been amazed at to observe; in every Town in England, nay, almost in every
Village of any Consideration, there are Flax and Hemp-dressers, each of whom
live well, and follow their Callings comfortably; yet they in England have no
national flaxen, or hempen Trade, as it seems to be the Portion of Trade
allotted to Ireland; where there are scarce any Flax or Hemp-dressers,
excepting in Dublin and Cork, and some few brought over by the Trustees, and
settled here. Differences in swingling
If there be such Differencse in swingling and hackling, between Artist and
Artist, what must this Nation loose, by the barbarous Methods followed by the
House-wives? who have neither Tools, nor Skill to use them if they had them.
One of the most skilful Women in the North of Ireland, in point of hackling,
desired she might have a Parcel of Flax delivered her, equal in Quantity and
Quality with what was delivered me: The Gentlewoman for whom I hackled,
gratified her, and gave to each of us Half a Stone of the same Flax: The Woman
hackled hers, and I mine: Out of her seven Pound of swingled Flax, she scarce
had two Pound of good Tare: I had out of mine, considerably more than double of
good Tare, besides the Shorts. I write this, The Necessity of having good
Flaxmen in the Kingdom.
to show the Necessity of having good Flax-men in the Kingdom: The Trustees
have long endeavored it, without much Success: which was more owing to the
Knavery and Villainy of some of those Persons brought over by them, than Want of
Industry in the Trustees, or the Encouragements they readily give to Artists.

If the Gentlemen of this Kingdom, who have Soil proper for Hemp, and others of
them that have Soil proper for Flax, would bend their Thoughts toward the
cultivating of Hemp and Flax; allowing they have not Hands sufficient in their
Country to establish Facturies, yet they have Hands enough to manage their Hemp
and Flax, till it is fit for the Market. What prodigious Benefit might this be
to Ireland in general, The Benefit that might accrue to Ireland by the
preventing buying foreign Seed and Flax.
by preventing our buying of foreign Seed and Flax, as we annually do at vast
Expense; and likewise by employing their own Poor, and drawing about them an
industrious Sort of People, which in Time would enable them to establish
Facturies at home, and enrich their Country? Can it be imagined, that the
industrious North-country People of Ireland, that now give fifty Shillings per
Hundred for foreign Flax, would not much rather purchase Flax of the Growth of
the Kingdom, which might be afforded vastly under, and yet be great Gainers?
Would also the North-country People purchase foreign Flax seed, under the many
Disadvantages I have already mentioned, when they might be better supplied at
Home, with relation both to the Goodness of the Seed, and the Price of it? No
certainly they would not. Let us of Ireland take Example by the People of
Lincohshire, Warwickshire, and diverse other Shires in England, who raise vast
Quantities of Flax and Hemp, and have not Hands among themselves to work it up;
yet it is bought up by People from other Countries, who work it to their great
Profit. I wish well to this Country, and have received several Favors in it: I
have ventured to write my Thoughts, in hopes of putting Gentlemen in mind, how
they might benefit themselves and Neighbors in particular, and the whole
Kingdom in general: I cannot have any Views of Profit to my self thereby, being
possessed of as great a Share or Portion of the Trade, as I could heretofore
have hoped for.

SECT. XI.
Of HEMP.
HEMP requires a much richer Soil than Flax does; The Soil.
the richer and deeper the better. Ley-lands yield a better Crop of Hemp and
Seed, than Grounds that have been lately broke up, and used to other Purposes.

It is not proper to sow Hemp Seed, in Land that has not been thrice plowed
that Season; Plowed.
that the Earth may be as mellow about the Roots as possible.

The first Plowing may be about Candlemas: If the Soil be hazily or loamy, it
ought to be plowed and fallowed earlier. The second Plowing ought to be across
the former; and if the first was begun at Candlemas, the second may be
reasonably three Weeks afterward; and as well harrowed with an Iron-harrow, as
the Husbandman can possibly do it. The third Plowing ought to be about the
Beginning of April; and the Mold made as fine with a Harrow, as Grounds are
made for Onions in a Garden.

The Ridges ought not to exceed four Foot wide; make them as flat and even at
the Top as you can. The Ridges.
The Reason why they are made thus narrow, is for the more convenient Pulling
of the Hemp, Fimble Hemp.
which bears no Seed, and is called Fimble-hemp, and is always pulled and
carried away, several Weeks before the Hemp that bears the Seed, is ripe or fit
for Pulling; this Seed-hemp is that which is called Carl-hemp.

About the Twentieth of April, Hemp Seed should be sown, Hemp Seed sown about
the twentieth of April
if the Weather offers fair; this may be continued till the first Week in May,
and covered with a light Harrow, so as neither the Winds nor the Birds may
annoy the Seed; cast the Seed as even as possible, that the Hemp may have Room
for its Root: In sowing of Hemp, Care and Judgment must be used in sowing Hemp.
great Care and Judgment ought to be used, that it be not sowed too thick or
too thin: In the first Case, it would be apt to lodge, and so loose the Crop;
In the second, the Hemp will run more to Bunn or Straw, than it will to Harl or
Skin. When the Seed is once sown of Hemp, the Husbandman need take no further
Care of it until the Fimble-hemp be ripe; except it be to keep the Fences up,
and in good Order, to prevent Cattle getting in, and breaking and treading it
down; for Hemp never needs Weeding.

The Fimble-hemp is always a Month sooner ripe than the Carl; the way to know
when it is ripe enough for Pulling, is to observe when the Stalks turn yellow,
and the Leaves fall off at the Butt; The way to know when the fimblehemp is
ripe.
give them a small Shake to some of the Fimble-hemp, and if it is ripe, a Dust
will rise from the Head of it; then fall to pulling of the Fimble-hemp, without
Delay; be careful that they who pull the Fimble-hemp, do neither break, or even
bruise the Carl.

When the Laborers have pulled as much Fimble-hemp as will make a Sheaf, about
the Bigness of the Calf of a Man's Leg; then let them tie it pretty tightly,
first in the Middle, and afterward near the Ends of the Sheaf. Hemp is apt to
shrink in the Water, Hemp apt to shrink in the Water.
for which Reason, the Sheaves ought to be made as tight as possible, and the
Bands made of the shortest Fimble-hemp.

When all the Fimble-hemp is pulled, then must it be rated in Ponds, Rating of
fimble-hemp.
such as has been herein before prescribed, for rating Flax; with this
Difference only, that unless the Ponds be made in a gravelly Soil, The Ponds to
be made, in a gravelly Soil.
the Bottom of the Ponds will be apt to be muddy or foul, which may be injuring
to the Hemp; therefore, to prevent such Mudd, the Bottom of the Ponds may be
either flag'd or plank'd, where there is not a solid Bottom of Gravel. The
Manner of rating the Fimble-hemp, is the same with the Flax, observing always
to make the same Trials from Time to Time, to know when it is sufficiently
rated, and by no Means to overrate it.

Hemp must not be grass'd; but as soon as it is sufficiently rated, Hemp not to
be grass'd.
and renched clean from the Slime or Filth, which it contracted in the Pond,
convey it to some Walls or Hedges; there unloose the Bands, and set it on the
Butt, spread as thin as possibly you can, leaning against the Wall or Hedge, so
as the Air may pass under the Hemp; there let it stand to weather, until such
Time as the Bunn breaks easily, and that the Harl quits it without Difficulty.

When the Hemp is in the above Condition, sufficiently dry, Housing or stacking
of Hemp.
and out of Danger of heating, then may it be either housed or stack'd; but if
it is stack'd, it must be with the Butt end outward: In all other Respects,
the like Cautions are to be observed in the Stacking of Hemp, as you are
desired before to use with relation to the Stacking of Flax; Hemp large by far
than Flax.
and if possible to be still more cautious in this Particular, than in the
former; because that Hemp is larger by far than Flax, and consequently, the
Rain, driven by the Winds, can more easily penetrate the Rick, and the
Husbandman can never be too careful herein.

Very often the Fault is assigned to the ill rating of Hemp, Ill rating of Hemp.
when the Hemp appears to be discolored, mil dew'd, and sometimes rotten;
when, if the Truth were known, it proceeds rather from the ill Stacking of it.
I have been informed, that in the Counties of Limerick and Clare, where
Gentlemen undertake to raise great Quantities of Hemp, they have not Straw
sufficient wherewith to stack their Hemp, but depend on the Butts defending it
from the Weather: If this be so, it is a very ill Practice both to themselves
and the Public.

The way to know when Carl-hemp is ripe, and fit for Pulling, How to know when
Carl hemp is fit for pulling.
is to observe when the Seeds begin to break out of the Pods, and to look
bright, then must it be pulled without Loss of Time, taking great Care not to
shed the Seed as it is pulled. As to the Sheaves, they ought to be made in the
same Manner as the Fimble-hemp; Care to be taken not to shed the Seed.
and as speedily as possible, set on the Butts in the Field in Rows, two and
two, leaning on each other, frequently turning them to weather, that each Sheaf
may be thoroughly dry, and out of danger of Heating; and if any happen to fall,
or to be blown down in Weathering, those must be speedily raised; the Birds of
all Sorts which feed on Grain, are fond of Hemp Seed; therefore, as this Seed
is a great Article in the Profit or Loss of the Crop, so much more must the
Care and ^^ligence be, in the preserving it from them; it being a Matter of no
small Difficulty.

When the Carl-hemp is fit for housing or stacking, then should
Winnowing-sheets, Carl-hemp is fit for stacking.
or other coarse Sheets be brought to the Butt of the Hemp, on each Side of the
Rows, in proportion to the Number of Hands you can spare to the Work; to be
sure the more the better; this Sort of Work being generally performed in the
Month of September, when the Weather is usually various and uncertain.

When the Sheets are placed on each Side of the Butts, Sheets placed on each
Side of the Butts.
turn the Heads of the Hemp over gently into the Sheets, and there thresh out
the Seed, with very light, short Hand flails; which may be easily managed with
one Hand, by the Women or Children as they sit thrashing out the Seed;
Thrashing out the Seed.
and by this Means avoid breaking the Straw of the Hemp. As the Sheets fill,
Women should be there ready with Riddles, to winnow and cleanse the Seed from
all Rubbish; and so convey it to a Malt-house, or other boarded Floor, where it
may be spread three or four Inches thick, and have Air enough: Turn it as
frequently with a Malting-shovel, as you would turn Wheat or other Grain: It is
not so subject to heat as Flax-seed is; because it does not lie so close: Yet
it will heat as readily as Wheat would: But in case the Floors cannot be spared,
Casking of the Seed.
it may in November be safely cask'd in dry Casks, provided the Casks be placed
in Places that are dry, and not subject to Moisture.

If the Husbandman, or other Person that takes upon him the raising of Hemp,
has any great Quantity on his Hands, more than he can furnish Houses to receive
it in, it were much better, that as he thrashes out the Seed, the Hemp be
replaced on the Butts, Hemp will be less damaged by standing than lying.
in the same Manner they were before the thrashing, till every thing be ready
in the Haggort for the stacking and thatching of it; for Hemp will receive less
Damage thus standing, than it would lying promiscuously together; which would
discolor it, and render it so black as to be useless; unless it were in the
making of what they call the Black-work, Cordage.
which is Cordage for Shipping: For all the Bleaching in Nature will not bring
it to Color. Now, as soon as the Weather offers fair and every thing is ready,
stack it, in the same Manner as was directed before for the stacking of the
Fimble-hemp. And because there may remain in this Hemp, some few Grains of the
Seed unthrash'd, it were convenient to dress the Stack with some of the
poisoned Reeds, to prevent the Vermin from doing Mischief.

Carl-hemp need not be watered till the Mid-summer following; Watering of
Carlhemp.
the Water may be sufficiently qualified by the Heat of the Sun, and all other
Accidents of Weather, the better to rate it. It will not take so long Time to
rate in as the Fimble-hemp; Carl-hemp rates sooner than fimble.
in all other Things, pursue the same Method as has been directed for the
Management of the Fimble hemp.

As to the breaking of Carl-hemp, the Mash of the Breaks ought to be deeper
somewhat than those employed in breaking of Flax; Breaking of Carl-hemp.
and yet not too deep, The Mosh of the breaks must not be too deep.
left the Harl be cut by the Bunn. Now, if the Breaker does his Duty
sufficiently, frequently bringing and whipping the Hemp, often under the Staves
of the Break, there will be no occasion for Swingling. Whipping the Hemp.
The Teeth of the Hackles ought likewise to be larger and wider, if the Hemp be
designed for Sail-cloth or Cordage: But in regard that very fine Linen, fit
for Shirting or Sheeting, may be made of Fimble-hemp; in this Case, the Hackler
ought to dress that sort of Hemp, first in his coarse Hemp-hackles, as fine as
he can; and afterward dress it over again in the Flax-hackles, till it is
brought to such a Degree of Fineness as is desired. Fine Linen may be made of
Fimblehemp.
I am told by Persons of Credit, that in France they make considerable
Quantities of fine hempen Linen, mostly worn by Persons of Quality and
Fashion; they finding it warmer and more lasting than flaxen Linen. There
occurs to me no Objection therein, but the Difficulty of bringing it to a
Color equal with Flax.

A Plantation Acre of very rich Land will take, Six Winchester Bushels and a
half of hemp seed to sow a Plantation Acre.
six Winchester Bushels and a half of Hemp Seed to sow it: But if the Grounds
are not very rich, in proportion to its Poverty or Riches, the Quantity of the
Seed may be abated accordingly. Hemp Seed ought to be laid deeper in the Ground
than Flaxseed. There is no occasion to roll it, because the Soil being rich,
will of it self sadden and cling to the Seed.

THE END.
OBSERVATIONS Made by Richard Hall, OF THE City of DUBLIN, Hemp and Flax
Dresser; ON The Methods used in HOLLAND, in Cultivating or Raising of HEMP and
FLAX.

And Likewise, His REMARKS on Mr SLATOR's Book.

Printed at Dublin in the Year 1724. And now Published for the Benefit of the
Inhabitants of New England, and recommended to their Perusal.

BOSTON: N. E. Printed by S. KNEELAND and T. GREEN, for DANIEL HENCHMAN, in
Cornhill. 1735.

OBSERVATIONS Made by Richard Hall, On the Methods used in HOLLAND, in
Cultivating or Raising of FLAX and HEMP, etc.
SECT. I.
Of the Choice of the Soil.
IN the Province of Holland, there is a Country known by the Names of Targou
and Gouda; it is there that they raise the best Hemp the Dutch are Masters of:
The Soil is exceeding deep and rich. They frequently make use of Ley-grounds
for sowing of Hemp in; Leygrounds.
yet do they not so far confine themselves in that Particular, but that they
often continue to sow the same Soil with Hemp, Every two Years the Dutch
recruit their Soil.
for many Years successively, only every two Years they recruit their Soil
thus, viz. When they have pulled their Hemp, they rake together all the Grass,
Weeds, and Trash which they find on the Ground, and lay them in large Heaps to
rot: These Heaps are made thus large, to the End the Sun may not exhale the
Virtue from the Dung ere it is spread over their Hemp-grounds. And they also
gather what Slush is washed from out of their Lands, into their Trenches or
Ditches: This Slush they lay in Heaps, sometime in the Month of August, and
there let it lie the whole Winter; only they turn it often with the Spade.

This Targou or Gouda is a large Country, and for near twenty Mile a together,
is exceeding fertile and proper for Hemp; which the State observing, they
formerly gave great Rewards to the Boors, to induce them to be industrious in
the raising of this useful Plant: But these Rewards were not of long
Continuance; because the States soon perceived, that the Boors had their
Accounts sufficiently answered by their Profits.

A Farmer or Boor in Targou or Gouda seldom sows more than two Acres with Hemp,
and many of them less, that he may the better manure it; and also, that the
pulling of the Hemp may not divert his Servants from their other Business.

SECT. II.
Remarks on the Soil of Ireland, as to Hemp.
I Reland has great Quantities of Land proper for Hemp, Land proper for Hemp
especially in the Counties of Limerick, Clare, Kerry, Tipperary, and some
Parts of other Counties. It is not to be expected, that the Lands in each of
these Counties, should hold equally the one as the other. Corcuslands.
Doubtless the Corcus lands of the Counties of Limerick and Clare, which have
been gained from the Sea this many Years, and are vastly rich, Up lands
will stand longer under Culture, than even the Up-lands of the same Counties
can. Likewise, the Up-lands of the County of Lemerick are much more tertile,
than the Generality of the other Lands of the Kingdom. Even those Up-lands last
mentioned, ought to be frequently changed, for the Benefit and Advantage as
well of the Husbandman as of the Public; For since three Plowings must be made
for Hemp, Three plowings to be made for Hemp.
the Husbandman must be very much wanting to himself, that does not as soon as
his Hemp is off the Ground, give it another Plowing, and sow it with
Winter-grain.

The Corcus lands of the Counties of Limerick and Clare are violently hot,
Corcuslands.
and therefore apt to throw up large stalked Hemp, which never skins so well as
the midling Hemp of five Foot high: Yet I am of Opinion, that if these Grounds
were successively sown with Hemp for some Years, their Fire would soon abate,
so as they might be brought to yield Hemp nothing inferior to the Dutch;
provided they were as skilfully and diligently manured.

Holland not only abounds in Canals for public Use, Canals.
but also in a Multitude of private ones; there being scarce any Commodity that
is not brought to their Doors by Water. It is true, Ireland has not the
Advantage of artificial Canals; but there is no Spot of Earth in the World
better furnished with Rivers, either naturally navigable, or capable of being
made so on easy Terms, than Ireland is: Therefore, to say nothing of the many
others Rivers in Ireland, what vast Quantities of Hemp might the Shannon, the
Barrow, the Noar, the Sure, and the Black-water furnish to Facturies for
Sail-cloth or Cordage? The Facturies for Sail-cloth at Waterford, Rak^il, and
Dunkittle, are not only well placed for Water-carriage, which is a great
Article in such cumbersome Goods as Hemp is; but also are situated in the
Neighborhood of good Soil. Indeed Dunkittle is the remotest, yet might it be
very well supplied with Hemp; if the People that live on the Black-water were
industrious to raise it, and bring it by Water to Youghal, thence it may be
boated to Dunkittle with Ease.

SECT. III.
Of Plowing for Hemp in Holland.
THEY plow in Holland, especially in Targou or Gauda, Plowing.
in a Manner vastly different from ours; occasioned (as I conceive) by the
Wetness and Depth of their Soil. Wetness and Depth of their Soil.
They plow their Leys in August, and so let them lie till April, that their
Grounds may be hard enough to bear their Horses; which does not always happen,
Land poachy.
for sometime their Land is so poachy, that Horses cannot stand thereon; then
are they forced to dig it: Digging the Land.
But in case their Horses can stand, they harrow it across with heavy Iron
Harrows in April, Harrowing
which break the Sods with great Ease; they having lain from August to April,
that they become rotten.

When they plow their Leys they seldom go deeper than four Inches, Plowing
their Leys.
which cut the Turff or Sods so thin, Richness of the Soil.
that it soon rots; besides the Soil is so rich, and the Frost so constant in
the Winter, that their Land is soon mellow'd, Land made mellow.
and yields to their Harrows without Obstruction: These Harrows cleanse their
Grounds from all Rubbish and Filth: Then do they fall to Plowing their Ley
grounds, Plowing their Leys.
with as deep a Furrow as the Nature of their Lands will admit of.

The Ridges made for Hemp in Targou, are (...) from twelve to sixteen Foot
wide: Ridges.
Their Furrows are very narrow and shallow, because they have very large
Drains, at every ten or twelve Perches further Distance or nearer, as their
Grounds are more or less wet.

In Utretch, the Lands are a stiffer Clay than in Targou; Targou.
they make their Ridges thirty or forty Foot wide, their Furrows deeper; they
raise there a very good Hemp, Marshy wet Grounds.
and great Quantities of it, they have likewise large Drains, but not so close
together; the Grounds about Utretch, not being so marshy and wet as in Targou.

SECT. IV.
The Author's Opinion, what Culture might be most proper for Lands in Ireland.
IF the Soil be deep and rich, with a good Bottom, distant from hard Gravels,
Soil deep and rich.
Quarries or blue Clay, (any of which would hold the Water) such Lands need no
more Plowing and Harrowing, than just to bring them to be mellow and clean, the
Mold made as fine as possible, and the Ridges laid as flat at the Top, as they
are in Holland. I approve of Mr. Slator's making his Ridges narrow, for the
Convenience of pulling the Fimble-hemp, Narrow Ridges.
because the Laborers in Ireland, are not so expert as yet, at the pulling of
Hemp, as the Boors in Holland are: And I likewise approve of his Directions, as
to the making of the Furrows and Drains for carrying off the Water.

There are many Places where the Soil is good and proper for Hemp, Places where
the Soil is good and proper for Hemp.
were it not too thin; Quarries of Stone, or a hard Gravel, or stiff Clay,
lying too near the Surface of the Earth; a careful Husbandman might gather this
Soil by his Plow, and double, or more, the Depth of it. These Grounds well
harrowed, and laid flat at Top, will bring as good a Crop of Hemp as the other.

Loamy and Clay Grounds require to be thrice plowed, Loamy and Clay Grounds.
well broke with Iron Harrows; the Crop will scarce be as good as the former;
the Furrows should be deep, Furrows. Ridges.
and the Ridges pretty high, then the Husbandman may expect a Crop, which may
sufficiently reward his Labor.

SECT. V.
Of Pulling and Watering of HEMP.
THE Fimble-hemp is the first ripe: Fimble-Hemp.
The Way to know when it is so, is by observing when the Leaves turn yellow
toward the Roots; To know when it to ripe.
and also, if, by touching the Stalk of the Fimble-hemp with a Stick in the
Morning, you perceive a Dust, and that the Blossom falls easily off, then is it
fit for pulling: But these Signs will not appear in all the Fimblehemp at one
and the same Time; Short Fimble.
for the short Fimble is sooner ripe than the long Fimble; yet Care must be
taken not to leave the long Fimblehemp unpulled, after you perceive the other
ripe; for if you should let it grow too long a Time, after the above
Observations appear, the short Fimble will be over ripe, and be of no Use.

In Holland, they pull the long Fimble-hemp separately and apart from the
short; Pulling the long Fimblehemp.
especially, such as they perceive to have shed its Leaves and Blossoms,
because the short Fimble is longer Time a rating than the long Fimble is: They
are so careful not to break or bruise the Carl-hemp, as they pull the other,
that when they pull their Fimble, they are forced to take off their Coats and
Shoes, and tuck the Skirts of their Vests within their Breeches, and also have
the Sleeves of their Vests made so tight to their Arms, as none of their
Clothes might break or bruise the Carl-hemp: Ridges wide.
And though their Ridges be so very wide, that they are forced to walk through
the Hemp, yet will they not break any Part of it.

When they have pulled a large Handful of either sort of the Fimble-hemp, then
do they bind them with two Bands, Bindingthe Fimblehemp.
one at a small Distance from the Top, and the other toward the Butts, and let
it lie three or four Days in the Air, to stiffen; after which they take thirty
or forty of these small Sheaves, and place them on the Butts, with the Heads
leaning on each other; so by drawing the Butts of the Sheaves out, they leave
the Pile as round and hollow within, as possibly they can; by which Means the
Air passes readily through the Hemp, as it stands; thus they leave it till it
is thoroughly dry, and the Stalks turned yellow; they then fall to binding of
their Hemp in larger Sheaves, about three Foot in Circumference, and on each
Sheaf they bind three Bands, viz. one in the Middle, and one toward each End;
by which Means, each Sheaf is made exceeding tight, and so proceed to rate it.

The Dutch always rate both their Flax and Hemp in their Drains, which are
always large enough to receive their Hemp, in any Manner they are pleased to
lay it. The first Range is laid long-ways, which they stitch together with
coarse Line, Sheaf by Sheaf, the whole Breadth of their Drain, to the end that
the Sheaves may not separate from each other in the Water, and serve as a
Foundation for such other Hemp as they design to lay over it. Their Manner of
stitching their Sheaves together is thus: They first consider how many Foot
wide their Drain is: In the next Place, they consider how many Sheaves, laid
Side by Side each other, will fill that Space; so many Sheaves do they
accordingly lay, and stitch them to each other at both Ends, and in the Middle,
with Lines which they have for that Purpose; then they shove into the Water
that Parcel, and on the Surface of the Water they place it in the Manner they
design it shall lie, when sunk; Then they proceed to make another in like Form,
and shove that also into the Water, and range it so as it lies, at the End of
the other. They afterward make as many of these, and place them according to
the Length they design to make their Pile of Hemp: That done, they begin and
lay other Sheaves across one End of the former, and continue so to lay Sheaf by
Sheaf, till they have quite covered the Sheaves first laid in the Water: Then
do they pile up their Hemp of one Sort, till they come within twelve Inches of
the Surface of the Water, when the Pile is sunk. The Dutch are forced to sink
both Hemp and Flax when they rate them, by covering them with Muddsods, and
such ponderous Things as they can get; Stones not being to be procured in those
Countries. When this Pile is sunk of the short Fimble-hemp, they then apply
themselves to the making of another Pile for their long Fimble-hemp: This is
made exactly in the same Manner with the former.

When the Hemp has been in Water about four Days, they thrust their Arms down
as far as they can reach, and at first draw out a Handful out of the short
Fimble-hemp, which they rinse in the Water, and set it on the Butt, leaning on
the Horse or Frame herein after described; and when it is dry, they try whether
the Harl will easily quit the Bunn; if it does not, they repeat these Trials
twice a Day, until they find that it will do; and then do they heave it Sheaf
by Sheaf from off the Pile, rinsing each Sheaf from the Slime and Filth which
clings to the outside of the Sheaf; that done, they immediately take off the
Bands which were tied about the large Sheaves, and likewise those Bands at the
Butt end, tied in the Field at the Pulling; and then set up these small Bundles
against the Frame or Horse, in the Manner you see herein below described, and
there let it stand till it is perfectly dry, at which Time they bind it at each
End, into Sheaves of what Size they please, and house it carefully. The long
Fimble-hemp must be treated exactly as the former, and kept apart.



In Ireland, we cannot have the Opportunities of these Drains, which are so
frequent in Holland; therefore, where we cannot have Loughs or Lakes, Loughs.
or other still Waters, we must have Recourse to Ponds made for that Purpose. I
do not dislike Mr. Slator's Manner of making his Ponds, from any Experience I
have of Inconveniences which might attend them: Yet I should think, if they
were made wide enough to receive at least one Sheaf athwart the Pond, if not
more, for the better piling of it under the Water, I should think it were so
much the better* for in my Opinion, the Dutch have some Reason why they lay
their Sheaves across each other in the Ranges, alternately, and not lay it
always one Way, Ponds.
as they must of Course do, if the Ponds are to be but four Foot and a half
wide. It is certain, the Sheaves lie closer when they are all laid in the same
Manner, than when they are placed as the Dutch place them; and consequently,
the Water has a freer Access, which may be of more Importance to the proper
rating of Hemp, than at first Sight appears As to the Depth of the Ponds I
think Mr. Slator's is sufficient, Depth of the Ponds.
considering the great Expense which must attend the making them the same Depth
the Dutch have their Drains; besides the Hazard of meeting with Rocks, which
they in Holland are in no Danger of.

Ponds should be made in stiff Clay, rather than in gravelly Grounds, Ponds
should be made in stiff Clay.
there being less Danger of meeting with Rocks in Clay-grounds than in Gravel:
For should a Husbandman happen to light on a Rock or Rocks in sinking his Pond,
he must either lose what Labor he has been at, or be at the Expense and
Trouble of bringing the Bottom to a Level, and also to a Face fit to receive
Flax or Hemp: For if the Points or sharp Edges of Rocks lie near to the Harl of
Flax or Hemp, Edges of Rocks.
whether on the Sides or in the Bottom, they will cut the Harl as far as they
reach; besides, Claywater is generally preserved more soft than in gravelly
Grounds: For these Reasons, I prefer Clay to Gravel.

But Mr. Slator is much in the Right, in preferring Gravelly Grounds to Grounds
composed of loose Earth, Gravelly Grounds.
or boggy Soils, for making the Ponds in; for to be sure, these loose Grounds
will be always falling in, and not only foul the Water, but be apt to let the
Water go: I scarce think, that Ponds made in such Sorts of Soils as these, will
ever turn to account; for flag them or plank them, it would be all one; the
Water will wash under and behind them, and it must be an immense Charge to keep
them in Repair.

The Dutch always house their Hemp after it is rated, Housing Hemp.
because their Quantity is not so great, but that they can afford it
House-room: And they have been in the Enjoyment of this Husbandry for so many
successive Ages, and their Profits so great thereby, that it is not a Matter of
Wonder that they are supplied with every thing requisite thereto: Whereas our
People of Ireland are Novices therein, and as it were, making Essays to see,
first, whether the Thing is practicable: Secondly, whether it is worth their
Time. It is to be hoped, that some are convinced of both, yet it is evident,
that many are not; and until this Sort of Husbandry be more generally known in
those Parts of the Kingdom proper for raising Hemp, and also practiced, the
Profits will be in particular Hands, who will not launch out their Money in the
making of Barns, and other Improvements proper for this Culture, in which they
have had hitherto so little Experience.

However, Mr. Slator has very justly stated the Conveniences and Inconveniences
attending the present Practice in Ireland, by the Want of convenient Barns. I
shall conclude this Section with this general Apology in my own behalf, for
being so large in my Observations and Remarks though this System of flaxen and
hempen Agriculture, That I conceive it to be so much my Duty, fully to inform
all Persons engaged or to be engaged in this important Matter, that I submit
rather to be censured as prolix than deficient.

SECT. VI.
Of Breaking of Hemp.
THE Dutch use a Method in breaking of their Hemp, Breaking of Hemp.
rarely practiced in England, that I know of, which is thus: They make a very
large Kiln, A large Kiln.
sometimes built with Brick, but more frequently with Sods; which Kiln is made
about five Foot high, ten Foot long, and eight Foot wide, flat at the Top; over
which, cross Pieces of Sticks are laid, which are wattled thin: On this they
lay their Hemp in the small Bundles they were at first tied in the Field, then
with the Hurds or broken Straw of the Hemp, or some such combustible Matter,
they dry it well, and afterward take it thence, and cover it close about three
Hours, there to sweat: Then they proceed to break it, in Breaks made much like
ours, save only they are not so deep mashed. In the breaking, they begin at the
Tops of the Hemp, and work it downwards till the Shoves are sufficiently
wrought out; and they never swingle Hemp in Holland. -- When they have wrought
to the Butts or Roots, they turn the Butt-end the other Way to break it; and if
all the Butts do not readily break, they have a blunt Knife lying by them,
wherewith they scrape such of the Roots and Butts, as the Breaks did not
effectually divide the Harl from the Bunn, until the Harl and Bunn are well
separated: This Scraping they perform across their Knee, as frequently as
requisite.

The pulling of the long Fimble hemp apart from the short, is not only
necessary with regard to the Watering, but also of absolute Necessity in the
working of them; for should the long Fimble-hemp be broke, and hackled
promiscuously with the short, it would occasion vast Waste; for the Artist
always holds the Roots in his Hands, as evenly as he can. When he breaks or
hackles, he must work the whole Hemp equally down to the Roots; and if they be
of a very unequal Length, the Tops of the long Fimble will be over wrought, and
rendered useless, if any of them should happen to remain.

Mr. Slator has given the proper Reasons against grassing of Hemp, therefore I
shall take no Notice of that here.

They have in Holland about a Guilder per Hundred for breaking of Hemp, which
is two Shillings English.

SECT. VII.
Of Pulling and Saving the Carl-Hemp.
THE People in Holland who are best skilled in raising of Hemp, determine their
Carl-hemp to be ripe and fit for pulling, by the following Methods. First, they
observe whether any of the Seed begins to appear, and has burst the little
Carl, or Seed bed that Nature has provided for it. Secondly, whether those
Seeds so appearing, have the Kernel of them perfectly formed, or whether it be
soft and like a Jelly; if so be that it is soft, they allow it to stand longer
to ripen; but if the greater Part of the Seeds be hard and well filled, they do
not defer pulling of it longer: And their Method of pulling the Carl, is the
same with that of the Fimble in every Respect; especially pulling the long Carl
apart from the short, and binding them in small different Bundles, viz. as much
as a Man can well hold in his Hands.

These small Bundles of Hemp being bound at each End, as the Fimble-hemp was,
they raise up upon the Butts, on each side of the Frame or Horse formerly
described: They make these Frames or Horses with any Rubbish of Wood they can
get; they are far from being costly, though they have many of them; because they
in the drying of their Hemp, are so very careful, as not to dry their long Carl
hemp at the same Frame with their short, left the long might shade the short,
or else over top them, and prevent their drying: Sometimes they venture to put
three or four Sheaves, one over the other, as they stand leaning on the Frame;
but if they do so, they are sure to remove them, and turn them after such a
Manner, as that all the small Sheaves may be equally weathered; thus do they
let it stand till the Leaves are perfectly dry, and the Seed ready to shed.

They then provide Sheets or Winnow cloths, and spread them in some convenient
Place in the Field, and thereon lay two Pieces* Timber, about eight Inches
square, and ten Foot long; these Pieces of Timber are placed just opposite each
other, at five Foot Distance; over which they lay the Tops of the Hemp hanging:
About a Foot beyond the Timber two Men stand, within the Winnow-cloth or Sheet,
and with Flails thrash out the Seed, as the Sheaves hang over; and at the
Butt-end of each Sheaf stands a Woman, who constantly turns the Sheaves, still
as the Seed is beat out. When the Sheets begin to fill with Seed, Women come
and take it thence to riddle it; which they do through a wide meshed Riddle,
and sever the Seed from the Leaves, Stalks, and grosser Part of the Filth,
which was before mixed with it. Yet, as to the Dust and Chaff which passed
through the Riddle along with the Seed, they leave that to remain with the
Seed, until such time as the Seed is completely dry; because it is their
Opinion, that this Dust and Chaff prevents the heating of the Seed as it lies
drying.

When the Seed is thus thrash'd out of their Hemp, they convey it to a well
boarded Floor, where it is laid much in the same Manner, is Malters lay their
Couch of Malt, about two or three Inches thick; and they turn it once a Day
regularly, during the first three Weeks, not suffering the Man who turns it, to
have either Shoes or Pumps on, lest he should break or bruise the Seed by
treading on it. About three Weeks afterward, they clean their Seed again, but
not entirely from the Chaff or Dust: For the former Reason, they continue the
Seed still on the boarded Floor, and observe to turn it twice a Week, till the
Season comes for sowing it.

Hemp seed is generally sold in Holland at eight Guilders per Hogshead, which
is sixteen Shillings English Money: Their Hogsheads sheads ought to hold seven
Bushels of their Measure; each of their Bushels being an eighth Part less than
our Winchester Bushel. The Dutch are a very frugal People, yet I think Mr.
Slator's Method of thrashing out his Seed, is much more saving than theirs; for
when Hemp is dry, it is very apt to shed its Seed, great Part of which must be
lost, by removing it Sheaf by Sheaf to the Place where it is thrash'd; and
there are in Holland many more Hands less usefully employed, by thrashing out
the Seed in their Manner than in his: Therefore as it was my Duty, not only to
observe their Practice, but likewise to display to the Public (in Obedience to
the Commands of my Employers) the best Practice, according to the best of my
Judgment, without copying the Dutch beyond Reason.

SECT. VIII.
Of Dressing or Peeling of Carl-hemp.
THE Dutch never break their Carl-hemp with Breaks* left the Bunn should cut
the Harl; they therefore peel it in the following Manner; that is to say, they
break with their Fingers, the Bunn or Straw of the Hemp, about six Inches from
the Top or smaller End of it; then they bruise the Stalk or Straw of it between
their Thumb and Fingers, down to the Butt or Roots; which causes the Harl or
Skin to split, so as the Bunn is easily taken out: They afterward clear the
Tops that they have broken off from the Bunn; then hang the Harl on a Chair
Back, or a Pin set up for that Purpose, till they have gathered about a Pound
or two of Harl; and keeping the Butt-ends of their Hemp all together, as even
as they can, they lap the last mentioned Harls up in Bundles, and lay it by.
Yet all this While they never mingle their long Carl with their short, but
constantly work them apart.

Their Time for peeling the Carl-hemp is, either during the long Winter Nights,
or such wet Days, as they cannot work abroad in the Fields. This is the
merriest Time in the Year for the Boors; for then it is, that the Neighbors
make their Visits to each other; and assist to peel the Hemp. The Man of the
House then treats his Neighbors in a very commendable, friendly, yet frugal
Manner; he lays Pipes and Tobacco before them; the Frow brings in a Slice of
Rye-bread, exceedingly thin spread with Butter, and a thin Slice of
Wheat-bread, nothing better furnished with Butter than the former; between
these two Pieces of Bread and Butter, is placed a Piece of Cheese, so
exceedingly thin, that ten of them would scarce make an Inch; these are
delivered to every one of the Guests, which they eat with great Comfort, and
wash down with a Draught of their brown Beer, much like to our (...) Shilling
Beer, in point of Strength; then, in order to warm their Stomachs, they have a
Viol of Geneva, which they call a Bubblekee, and holds about half a Pint; this
Viol is contrived to be so narrow at the Throat, as that the Geneva cannot come
out more than Drop by Drop; and a Man must be exceedingly well breathed, that
can suck thence more than half a Spoonful at one Pull; for it is not customary
to take a second Pull at it, and the Dutch are strict Observers of their own
Customs and Manner of living, so that after one Man has had his Pull at the
Bubblekee, he must in good Manners deliver it over to his Neighbor, and so it
goes round

I have made this Digression, without Design of reflecting in the least on the
Dutch for their Frugality; but on the contrary, to show my Countrymen how the
Dutch have acquired, and do still acquire, that vast Wealth of which they are
Masters. I have in part given them a Specimen of their Industry, and now an
Instance of their Frugality and Abstinence; and with Concern I speak it, were
these merry Meetings made at English or Irish Houses, the Mutton, the Poultry,
and the Bacon, as well as the Beer, Ale and Brandy must have paid the Shot:
Besides, the Mistress and her Family must have been diverted, each of them from
their Household Affairs, to attend the Affairs of the Kitchen and Pantry.

In Muscovy and other Parts of the East-land Countries, where they raise vast
Quantities of Hemp, they have Wind-mills, or Water-mills so contrived, with
Rollers one after another, as they can break the Hemp with Safety, and with
such Dispatch, as to afford the doing it at sixteen Pence per Hundred. In those
Countries where these Mills are, they have the Convenience of Water-carriage,
by the Means of their Canals and navigable Rivers. It is true, we have no
Canals, but we come no ways behind them with respect to navigable Rivers. If
the Public is disposed to have such a Mill made, I dare venture to direct the
making of it exactly.

Foreign Countries are very careful to promote their Manufactures, by the Help
of Engines that dispatch more Business, and frequently better than many Hands
can perform; by which Means they always under-sell us in foreign Markets. We
may easily in Ireland arrive at such a Degree of Perfection, as to furnish
Great Britain, our selves, and the foreign Plantations with Sail-canvass and
Cordage; which ought to be vended as cheap as our Neighbors can afford them:
But if ever we expect to have Share of Trade in foreign Markets, it must be by
exceeding them in point of Goodness, and by selling at Rates as reasonable;
these can never be compassed, but by acquiring the best Engines proper for
Trade, that are used any where with Success; or by contriving at home, others
equally good.

SECT. IX.
To what Uses the Dutch convert their Fimble-hemp, and Carl-hemp.
THE Fimble-hemp is in Holland, for the most part, employed to the making of
Sail-cloth, they seldom making hempen Linen; it is sold there generally, from
two and twenty to thirty Shillings per Hundred.

The larger Carl they generally work into white Cordage; sometimes they mix
their own with the Riga and East-land Hemps, wherewith they make Cables; but
generally speaking, they make their large Cables of Riga Hemp, the Dutch
themselves being of Opinion, that their own Hemp would contract, or draw up in
the Salt Water, should any of the large Carl-hemp be employed to the making of
Cables. This long Carl sells in Holland, from fourteen to twenty Shillings per
Hundred.

The short Carl, they cause it to be beaten well in their Hempmills, and
afterward hackled, for making of Twine for Fishingnets, or for the Sail-makers
Thread, wherewith they sow the Sails. Pack-threads and Shop-threads are made
with the Tow or Hurds of the short Carl, which last mentioned Hemp sells
generally in Holland, from two and twenty to five and twenty Shillings per
Hundred.

The Dutch never make Sail-cloth of either of their Carl-hemps; and we in
Ireland have endeavored to make a Trial, how far we could work up their
Carl-hemps in Sail-cloth, but we could not make it do, any more than they. Though
we make tolerable Sailcloth with the Carl-hemp which grows in this Kingdom, yet
I am very sure, that the Facturies for Sail-cloth in Ireland, would find more
their Account in making all their Sail-cloth of Fimblehemp; because it is much
more easy to bring this to Color, than they can possibly bring the other.

SECT. X.
Of Hemp-Mills.
IT is scarce possible to keep a Sail-cloth Factury, without Hempmills to beat
their Hemp: There are four of these Mills erected in Ireland, at the Expense of
the Public, exactly in Imitation of the (...) but these are found too costly
for private Undertaking. In England, they have found out a Way of making their
ordinary Corn-mills, with a very small Expense, in comparison of the others to
answer all the Ends and Purposes of Hempmills: It is thus, They make the Beam
of the Mill-wheel so much longer than usual, and place the Cogs they design to
employ in the Hemp-mill, in proportion to the Number of Beaters they have
Occasion for. Any Mill-wright that has once seen a Hemp-mill, and considered
it, may soon make a Corn-mill to perform this Office. The Dutch beat their Hemp
in their Mills after this Manner, they take about two Pound of their Hemp,
which they turn over at the Middle, they then fold down the two Ends, and tuck
them into the first Fold, as close to the Head as is requisite to make the
Truss of Hemp, very near the Length of the Trough, and the Breadth of the
Beater or Stamper: These Beaters or Stampers are raised by the Cogs fixed in
the Mill-wheel Beam, and the Beaters being made of large weighty Timber, come
down with great Force and Violence, and are so contrived, to turn the Hemp in
the Troughs, each Stroke they give it: When the Hemp begins to be warm with
beating, they take that Bundle or Truss out, and put in another, and while that
is beating, they open the former Truss, give it a Shake, and adjust the Butts
as evenly as they can, and so truss it again, and lay it on the Bench by them,
made for that Purpose; by this time, the second Truss is sufficiently hot,
which they therefore take out, and supply with a third: They manage the second
as they did the first, and lay it on the same Bench, i^ Course and Order as it
was beaten; so they proceed, till they have beaten as many Trusses, as the
Miller judges will hold beating alternatively, so as the first Truss may be
cold enough to be beaten a second Time: Then they proceed to beat and manage
the Trusses, one after another, in the Order and Course they were laid, and in
the same Manner exactly with the first. These Beatings must be repeated, until
the Hemp is soft enough to be spun.

In Holland, the Hemp-millers is a Trade of it self, and requires much Judgment
and Experience, to know to what Degree of Heat the Hemp may with Safety be
beaten, without firing or discoloring it: You ought also to know when it is
soft enough for the Spinners: And a good Miller of Hemp ought to be handy in
the Repair of his Mill, whenever there is Occasion, else the whole Factury may
be kept idle, and the Employer at great Expense for dead Wages. The Miller,
together with the Owner or Occupier of the Mill, have in Holland eight Stivers
per Cent. for each Hundred of Hemp they beat and truss, which is about ten
Pence Irish, and is two Pence less than what is at present paid in Ireland:
This may be thought an inconsiderable Difference in Trade, but they who
consider Manufactures rightly, must endeavor to save the minutest Part of all
Fractions, on every Bolt or Piece of Canvas they make, else these Fractions in
a bulky Trade, may be a great Loss to the Nation. I have never observed the
Dutch to lose in the beating or hackling of their Fimble-hemp, more than ten
Pounds in five Score; sometimes, nay very often, their Loss is less: I fear it
is much greater in Ireland: I am sure it was so when I was concerned at
Dunkittle near Cork, before I went to Holland. Since my Return, I have not had
either Leisure or Opportunity to be informed how that Matter is; for if the
Loss be greater here than in Holland, it may proceed from many Reasons, as well
from the Nature and ill Management of the Hemp, as from the Faults in beating
and hackling.

SECT. XI.
Hackling Hemp for Sail-cloth.
THE Hackles which the Dutch make Use of for hempen Sailcloth, are much finer
than those employed to the same Purpose in Ireland; on their coarsest Hackle,
they make their first Hackling, and dress the Butts, and other the coarsest
Part of the Hemp, to be of equal Fineness with the rest, they finish on a
Hackle as fine as those which came from Coventry, called Number four; by which
Means they dress their Hemp of equal Fineness to the Flak, wherewith Yarn of
two Dozen in the Pound Statute Reel, and Count, is usually made in Ireland:
They hackle their Tow or Hurds as free from Knots as may be, and place them in
the Inside of the Tare: This Tow or Hurds will never spin well, if it be
knoted; and it is of them that the Worst-yarn is always spun.

Hemp for Sail-canvas must be hackled very fine, else the warping Yarn, which
is always made of Tare, will not be sufficiently plyant, and yield to the Slay
in the beating up of the Woof, be the Slay-board never so weighty. The
Warp-yarn for Canvas must be both strong and plyant, to prevent the Yarn's
breaking, which composes the Warp, which otherwise would be attended with many
Inconveniences: As, in the first Place, many Knots spoil the Skin of the
Canvas; to conceal which, the Weavers, as they weave, cut these Knots as close
to the Skin of the Cloth, as they can: By which (...), as soon as the Canvas is
strained by the Wind, it runs into Holes immediately. In the next Place, it
occasions great Delay to the Weaver: But that which is the worst of all, is,
that in case the Warp be not plyant, the Woof can never be close enough beded,
admitting it to be three Stroke Work, which is what is generally given to
Sail-canvas; and if the Woof be not close beded, the Canvas will draw a Wind,
and prevent the Ship from lying by the Wind, when there is Occasion.

The Hackling the Tare fine, must of Necessity make more Tow and Hurds, than
otherwise; but that is no Loss to any Body, because the Tow or Hurds are always
spun into Woof yarn, which is equally valuable with the former, when wove into
Canvas.

The Tow or Hurds which are taken off the Butt-ends, and coarsest Part of the
Hemp, in the Dressing, the Dutch never suffer to be wrought into Canvas, but
apply these last sort of Hurds to the making of Bed-cords, or Cords made use of
in Packing.

Each Hundred of good Hemp produces in Holland, from 42 to 48 Pounds of good
Tare. The Hackler has five Stivers (which is Sixpence English Money) for every
twelve Pounds of clean hackled Hemp, which is near one half cheaper, than it is
done in Ireland; and consequently a heavy Clogg on our Trade. I cannot see any
Remedy thereto, but by increasing the Number of Hacklers and Swinglers, from
all Parts of the World where they can be had, and by instructing the Natives of
the Country, to be sufficiently skilled therein; for each of these Artists are
exceedingly requisite to this Kingdom, both of them necessary to the breaking,
swingling, and hackling of Flax, and also requisite to the breaking and
hackling of Hemp, allowing the People here should conform to the Dutch, and
never swingle Hemp.

SECT. XII.
Of Spinning Hemp for Sail-canvas.
THE Wheels which they make Use of in Holland, wherewith they spin the
Warp-yarn for Sail-canvas, are much the same with those commonly used in the
Irish Factories; yet the Dutch are more careful in the proportioning of their
Whirl, Spool, and Flyers, to their Wheel, and also in making the Whirl, the
Spool, and the Flyers, conform to each other; without which it is difficult for
the Spinners to make the Thread equal, and the Twist to be neither more nor
less than it ought; for thereon depends the making good Sail-cloth: For if it
be over twisted, it will never be plyant, which is so great a Requisite, that
without it, it is impossible to make a good Cloth, for the Reasons already
given. And on the other Hand, if it be under-twisted, the Warp will be weak,
and the Woof start into Holes immediately. I could never yet see a Wheel-wright
that could determine what the exact Proportions of these Things ought to be,
with regard to each other, so as they might be reduced to some Certainty, by
Geometrical Rules in Mechanism. It is certain, that each Wheel-wright has some
Rule by which he makes his Wheels and Tackle; but either he cannot or he will
not make that Matter intelligible to others, so as a good Mechanick-head might
bring this Machine under some certain Regulations: For my Part, it is a
Province I dare not undertake; for should I be guilty of the least Mistake, the
Errors might be attended with very ill Consequences.

In the fixing the Tare to the Spinner's Waste, the Dutch always have an Apron
on, they Place the Harl equally before them at the Waste, lapping the two Ends
between their Body and the Apron-strings, and draw the Thread from their Waste
into a small Hole that is made for that Purpose, at the End of the Spool. They
always spin their Warp in this Manner, because it twists less, and they find
they can dispatch more Work that Way. A good Spinner in Holland, can, with
Ease, spin from nine to twelve Pounds of Tare in a Day.

The Woof is all spun on Wheels like to those which we call here in Ireland,
long Wheels: This they likewise spin from the Waste, and is performed in the
same Manner as the white Cordmakers spin their Yarn, of which they make their
Ropes; the Spinner going back to a proper Distance, while another turns the
Wheel: And when he has gone as far back in spinning as is proper, he there
stops a very little Time, and then advances, till the Thread he has spun, be
wound up: By this Means, the Woof has a softer Twist than the Warp. A good
Hemp-spinner will spin from fifteen to eighteen Pounds a Day, of Woof-Yarn. The
Price for spinning of Warp, is there eighteen Stivers per Dozen, which is
between one and twenty and two and twenty Pence English. The Price for spinning
of Woof-yarn is fifteen Stivers per Dozen. A good Spinner will spin a Dozen and
a Half of a Woofyarn in a Day. I know not what Wages is now given at the
Facturies, for spinning of Warp and Woof for Sail-cloth; but if a Man may be
allowed to form a Judgment of spinning of Hemp, by the proportionable Hire
given generally to Spinners, for spinning of Flax, it will be found, that
Hemp-spinning might be afforded in Ireland, vastly cheaper than in Holland: For
if two Pence a Hank be in Ireland, thought good Wages for spinning of flaxen
Yarn, of two Dozen in the Pound, Statute Reel and Count; and, generally
speaking, the Flax spinners do not spin more than a Hank and a half, one Day
with another, of Yarn of that Set, whereby the Spinner earns three Pence a Day:
How comes it to pass, that the Hemp-spinner should be allowed to earn one and
twenty Pence a Day, on Warp, and seven and twenty Pence a Day, by spinning of
Woof? The Difficulty is soon solved. There are in Ireland, two thousand
Flax-spinners, for one Hemp-spinner; and if I have Flax to spin, the Spinners
being many, court my Work: If I have Hemp to spin, the Spinners a few, and I
must court them. Therefore, to diffuse this Art of spinning of Hemp, and make
it more general, it were advisable, that all the poorer sort of People
thoroughout the whole Province of Munster, and such Parts of Connaught and
Leinster, as have the Convenience of the Shannon the Barrow, and the Noar, be
taught to spin Hemp, both Warp and Woof; that the Owners of the Facturies be
obliged to have Agents in proper Places, for the more convenient and easy
carrying on of this Trade: By this Method, the Facturies will be supplied with
Spinners, at easy and cheap Rates; and, by the Means of Water-carriage, diverse
other Advantages will accrue to the Public, which might be now demonstrated,
were I not afraid of trespassing too much on the (...) Time.

SECT. XIII.
Of Bleaching Sail-canvas Yarn.
THE Dutch bleach their Canvas-yarn with a Boiler, which they call a Tirnine.
This Engine is made of Brass, narrow at the Bottom, and widens gradually as it
rises to the Top: It has a close Cover made of the same Metal, in which there
are Vent-holes of about three Inches Diameter; over which Holes they place
small sliding Covers, by Means whereof they can give Vent to their Lees, when
boiling; for otherwise, all would fly as the Heat increased: For sometimes the
Lees boil with that Violence, that they will shoot through those Vent-holes,
six or eight Inches high above the Cover: For which Reason, the Boiler it self,
and the Lid which covers it, are so contrived, as to be somewhat hollow at the
Top, to receive the Lees again as they fall down on the Lid, whence they easily
pass down again into the Boiler. They are so apprehensive of the Violence that
these Lees may possibly arise with, they have a strong Bar of Iron placed cross
the Funnil, to which another Iron-bar is fixed, that comes down to the Lid of
the Boiler, in order to keep the Lid fixed in its Place, till they see Occasion
to remove it. These Tirnines can boil about a hundred and twenty Pound Weight
of Yarn at a Time; they are fixed in Brick and Lime, exactly in the same Manner
with our Furnaces, with proper Grates for the Fire; and as near to the Bottom
of this Tirnine as they conveniently can, they place a Cock, to let go the
Lees, when the Yarn is sufficiently boiled.

Their Manner of boiling their Yarn is thus: They take about ten Pound Weight
of the Hanks of Yarn, and lap each Hank over the other, round like a Ball; they
have ten of these Balls lying by them: They then fill their Tirnine three
Quarters full of cold Water, then make their Fire under the Tirnine or Boiler,
till the Water is Milk-warm. In this Water, they place first one Range of the
Yarn, lapt up as aforesaid; they are exceeding careful in the laying their Yarn
in the Boiler, lest it may tangle; and over the Yarn that is first laid in the
Boiler, they strew about five Pounds of Ashes, mixed and prepared in the Manner
herein after mentioned; then they put in another Layer of Yarn, and straw the
like Quantity of Ashes over it: Thus they proceed in the laying in of their
Yarn, constantly strewing over each Range five Pounds of Ashes, till all the
Yarn, with its Proportion of Ashes, is laid in the Tirnine: They are forced to
press the Yarn hard down, that they may put on the Cover. Thus, at every
Boiling, they use about sixty Pound Weight of Ashes; they make a sharp Fire,
under the Tirnine, so as to cause the Lees and Yarn to boil for three Hours, as
sharply as they can, opening the Vent-holes gradually as the Heat increases; or
rather as they see there is Occasion for giving it Vent, they will close and
open these Vent-holes neither more nor less, than absolute Necessity requires;
so desirous are they to preserve the Spirit of their Lees from flying away as
they boil, that it may remain and do its Office on the Yarn.

When the Yarn has thus boiled during three Hours, they open the Cock which is
placed near the Bottom of the Tirnine, and let go the Lees: After the Lees are
gone, they pour cold Water into the Tirnine over the Yarn: The Quantity of cold
Water is much the same with that which the Yarn was boiled in, having first
removed the Fire from under the Tirnine; they then let go this Water at the
Cock, and load in fresh cold Water, and as it empties at the Cock, they
continue lading in of more Water, till the Yarn is pretty cold, and has done
smoking; then is the Yarn carefully taken out of the Tirnine, and opened Hank
by Hank, constantly throwing cold Water thereon, till all the Hanks which were
in the Tirnine, are perfectly cold.

The Yarn being sufficiently cold, they first rinse it very well, in fair, cold
Water, and afterward lay as many Hanks on the Batting plank, as they can
conveniently spread thereon, and their Batting-sticks can reach. They never lay
their Yarn thicker than two Hanks, while they batt; and their Manner of making
of their Batts is, by tying two Sticks together like Flails, but that which
comes down on the Yarn, is always made as smooth and even, as they possibly can
get them, lest the Knots in the Sticks might break the Yarn While the Yarn is a
batting, another Person with a Scoop casts cold Water continually on it; When
one Side is sufficiently batted, they turn up the other, till they have batted
that Side likewise in the same Manner: They then rinse it well, and wring it on
the Engine hereafter mentioned, till it is freed from the Water. Their next
Care is to put these Hanks one by one, on smooth Poles which they have for that
Purpose, and shake the Yarn very well, and spread it on the Poles, so as none
of it may cling together; that done, they lay carefully Poles and all on the
Grass in their Bleach-yard, during three Days and three Nights, turning it
every Day in order to bleach it; yet they never suffer it to lie longer Time on
the Grass, but afterward raise it with the Poles, on the Horse prepared for
that Purpose, where it hangs till it is dry.

That which I here call the Horse, are square Pieces of Timber, of about six
Inches square, ten Foot high above the Surface of the Bleach-yard; they are
Fixed in the Ground at the Edges of the Grass plot, pretty deep, that they may
stand the firmer, and at the Distance from each other, in proportion to the
Length of the holes, which generally are between five and six Foot long; in
these Posts there are Catches fixed on that Side next the (...), and they
always put as many of these Pegs or Catches one under another, as they conceive
the Horse can bear, in proportion likewise to the Length and Depth of the Hanks
and Poles as they hang; taking great Care, that the upper Ranges of the Yarn
beat not on the lower, as they are moved by the Air or Wind: On these Horses
the Poles are hung, with as much Yarn thinly spread, as can well stand between
each Post, and there they let it hang till it is dry.

While the Bleacher was thus managing of the first hundred and twenty Pound of
Yarn in his Bleech-yard, in order to bring it to Color, the Boiler or Tirnine
does not during that Time stand idle, but is filled with a second, and after
that with a third, fourth, and fifth Proportion of Yarn, each of them equal to
the Quantity first boiled; by which Means, they have in a few Days boiled, and
prepared six Hundred Weight of Yarn fit for bucking.

Before I proceed to describe the Manner of the bucking of their Yarn, it is
requisite that I acquaint my Reader with the many other Conveniences in and
about the Bleach-yard, which the Dutch are very careful to provide, so as
nothing may be wanting, that is either necessary, or convenient for to compass
their Ends: For this Reason it is, they have always their Bleach-yards at a
Distance from any Highways, or other Places where the Dust may be ^^ised by
the Wind, which may drive over their Bleach-yards, and ^ully their Work. And to
the end nothing offensive might come into the Bleach-yard, they have a Wall
about eight or nine Foot high, built at the Extremes of all the Bleach-yard;
under the Shelter of these Walls they build Penthouses, wide enough to set
their Yarn with the Poles across them, when the Weather is so wet or windy, as
that it is not convenient to have the Yarn hang abroad on the Horse; therefore,
let the Wind blow from what Point of the Compass it will, they are provided
against any Inconveniences of Wind or Weather: And lest the Turf of their
Graf-plot should be either foul'd, or dirtied, or worn out by their Laborers
treading on it, more than what is of absolute Necessity, there is always a Walk
of six Foot wide, between the Pent-houses and the Green, where the Laborers
perform all their Labor or Work; excepting only when they spread their Yarn on
the Green, or when they mow, sweep, and roll it; for they keep their Green as
fine as a Bowling green, left their Yarn be stained, either by long Grass or
Flowers; this they would infallibly be, if the Green was not kept with the
utmost Exactness.

When they have boiled five times a hundred and twenty Pound Weight, and
prepared every Part of the Yarn, so as to have six hundred Weight ready for
bucking, (counting five Score to each Hundred) then they proceed to buck this
six hundred Weight of Yarn altogether, after this Manner:

They have in their Buck-house, close to their Tirnine or Boiler, an Engine
made in the Form of a Chest, of two inched Plank, about eight Foot long, five
Foot wide, and six Foot deep; this Chest is so contrived on the Outside of it,
that the Planks may slide up and down and be taken out, for the more convenient
filling the Chest with the Yarn and Ashes; and the Joints are so contrived, as
to shoot into each other, and so retain the Lees while the Yarn is bucking: In
the Bottom of this Chest they have Holes made by an Augre, somewhat larger than
an Inch, each Hole a Foot Distance from each other; they stop these Holes with
Plugs, and when they see occasion to let go the Lees, they take out as many of
the Plugs as is necessary. This Chest is placed a little in the Ground, over a
hollow Drain made with Brick and Lime after such a Manner, that all the Lees
that come from the Chest, pass through a Gutter, ((...) likewise of Brick and
Lime) to an open mouthed Vessel, placed there on purpose to receive it and the
other Lees thrown out of the Tirnine each Time they boil: When this Vessel is
full, they empty it into old Hogsheads, after having filtered or passed them
through spent Ashes and Straw: These Lees serve better to boil Yarn in, than fair
Water can, and by their passing them through spent Ashes and Straw, they are
purged from any Filth they contracted in the boiling or bucking, yet do they
retain some Part of the Strength of the Ashes.

Their Method of bucking of Yarn is thus: They take twenty Pound of Zuda Ashes
and the like Quantity of Ashes called double Deprise, with these they make a
strong Lee; and having placed one Range of their Yarn Hank by Hank, so as to
cover the Bottom of the Chest, in the smoothest Manner they can possibly lay
it, they gently pour over this Layer (...) of Yarn, as much scalding Lees as
will wet it quite through, then do they lay another Layer of Yarn, over which
they pour Lees as before, and when there is occasion, they put the (...) their
proper Places, still as the Yarn and Lees rise higher in the Chest, and proceed
to range the Yarn Hank by Hank, pouring on of Lees, over each Range, till the
whole six hundred Weight of Yarn be completely stowed in this Chest or Engine,
which in Holland is called a Lough Bank, whereto they have a Lid or Cover to
keep in the Steam, which they are so exact to prevent its coming out that they
stop up every Crevis in their Laugh-Bank, and cover it all over very carefully
with Cloths, so as neither the outward Air, or the inward Steem, should get in
or out to obstruct the bucking.

Thus they continue their Yarn, for the Space of twenty four Hours complete;
during which Time they having prepared another Lee, made of Z^^da, and double
Deprise Ashes, of each seventeen Pound and a half, they let go the former Lees,
and so pour on the fresh ones, and there let them lie for the Space of twenty
four Hours more, observing the same Cautions as before, to keep the Lees from
evaporating: When the Yarn has lain thus long a bucking, they let go the Lees a
second Time, and when it is cooled, (...) ^^nse it very well in cold Water, and
proceed to wring it on the Engine they have for that Purpose: When it is well
wrung, they place their Poles in the Hanks about a Foot Distance from each
Ley-band, and shake it and spread it on the Poles, so as the Yarn may lie as
loose without clinging together as is possible: They then spread the Yarn,
Poles and all, on the Grass, for three Days and three Nights, turning it every
Day, and afterward hang the (...) and Yarn on the Horse, till it is perfectly
dry; or if the Weather will not suffer it to hang on the Horse, they then hang
their Yarn and Poles under their Pent-houses till it is completely dry, so as
to weave it.

Thus may you perceive what Quantity of Ashes are made use of in the bleaching
of six short Hundred of Yarn; but lest there might be a Miss computation or
Mistake in this Matter, which is so essential to the Trade, I shall cast up the
Quantity of the Ashes made use of on each Occasion: First, there are sixty
Pound Weight of Ashes employed in the boiling of each hundred and twenty Pound
Weight of Yarn, and there being five times that Quantity boiled ere they buck;
these Boilings take up three Hundred Weight of Ashes, and the twice bucking
takes from seventy five Pound Weight to eighty, according to the Strength or
Goodness of the Ashes, or the Yarn is more or less kindly in the bleaching; so
that the whole six Hundred Weight of Yarn may be reasonably computed to take
three hundred and eighty Pound of Ashes, which will sufficiently bleach this
Quantity of Yarn, provided the Hemp was well saved and watered, and is of a
kindly Nature in it self, for it may be hard and fullen, from some Imperfection
in the Soil; in either of which Cases, the Dutch themselves are forced to give
their Yarn a second Buck, ere they can bring it to that bright Color they so
much affect in Holland. I must here beg my Reader's Pardon, that I make this
general Observation on the whole Matter, relating to the bleaching of hempen
Yarn for Sail-canvas, That the Bleacher and those employed under him, can never
be over cautious or careful, that all Parts of their Yarn have equal Share of
the Lees, both in boiling and bucking; therefore, the round Balls put into the
Boiler, must not be drawn hard, so as to prevent the Lees piercing them through
and through with Ease: It is true, the Ley-bands must be kept on each Hank, but
not so straightly tied as to make the Yarn cling together; therefore, they lay
their Hanks in the Lough bank, and spread it as even and light as possibly they
can, so as the Lees may penetrate each Thread of it in the bucking: And when
they are to weather it on the Poles, they shake and divide each Thread from the
other, so as no Part of it may cling together, for otherwise some of it would
be rowy, and make Rows in the Canvas, which cannot afterward be retrieved. or
cured.

The Names of the several Sorts of Ashes made use of by the Dutch, and the
Prices they are sold for in Holland. viz.
Ellibanks -- 8 and half Doyts per Pound. Double Deprise -- 10 Doyts per Pound.
Sattiens -- 9 and half Doyts per Pound. Cassoepes -- 11 and half Doyts per
Pound. Kerrisouse -- 10 Doyts per Pound. Zeuda -- 11 and half Guilders per
Hundred.


I have already observed, that a Guilder contains twenty of their Stivers, and
is equal to two Shillings English; their Stiver contains eight Doyts; so that
it is an easy Matter to reduce their Money to ours of England, and afterward,
that of England to ours of Ireland.

When they boil their hempen Yarn, they use an equal Quantity of Ellibanks,
double Deprise, Sattiens, Cassoepes, and Kerrisouse, mingled all together; but
when they buck, they use none but Zeuda and double Deprise Ashes. All these
Sorts of Ashes when used, must be well ground and fitted; or well pounded and
fitted; when they grind them, they have Mills in Holland, which go in the
Manner as the Stones do for grinding of Rape-seed; but some pound it, with a
Beater made of a hard Piece of Wood, about twelve by fifteen Inches oblong
square, and two Inches and a half thick, well shod with a Plate of Iron, about
a Quarter of an Inch thick, with a Handle made after the Fashion of Mr Slator's
Beaters, for beating out Flax-seed; with this, they beat the Ashes on an old
Millstone, or a large Flagstone fixed in the Floor.

The Engine for wringing Yarn, its Description.
A. The Sill, 12 Foot long in the Clear, 12 by 9 Inches square, settled about 2
Foot in the Ground.



B. B. The upright Post, 8 Foot long, 12 by 9 Inches square.

C. The Trough to carry off the Water, by the Spout at S

D. The Winlace 1 Inch and a half diameter, and about 3 Foot and a half long,
made with a Shouldering at C, 3 Inches diameter, with Teeth for the Catch R.

E. The Hook, 12 Inches within the Upright, to answer the Winlace D.

F. F. Two Braces put to the Sill and upright Posts of B. B.

G. The Supporters for the Trough C.

H. H. Braces from the Sill to the upright Posts, from A. to B.B.

The Use of the Engine for wringing of Yarn.
PUT one Hank of Yarn double over the Hook E keeping the two Ends open, through
which they thrust another Hank, and so continue linking them together, till
they will reach to hang on the Hook of the Winlace D. wring them very hard, and
the Catch R. will hold them to the Degree they were wrung to, while the Wringer
runs his Hands along the Yarn, to sweep off all the wet which remains on the
Outside of the Yarn, to make it as dry as possible, then they put it on the
Poles, as was before directed.

SECT. XIV.
Of Weaving Sail-canvas.
THE Dutch weave their Sail-canvas in Looms, made much after the same Manner
and Form as those are which are made Use of at Dunkittle, by Colonel Edward
Hoar in his Factury, for the making of Sail-canvas, only the Scantling are
somewhat larger in Holland, especially the several Beams made Use of in the
Loom.

The Yarn-beams of each Loom are all contrived with Shoulderings at each End of
them, in Proportion to the Breadth of the Canvas, which keeps the Yarn from
Rolling from its proper Place; by which Means they make the Selvages of their
Canvas exceeding even and strong, and is of great Consequence to the Sails:
These Shoulderings are raised about four Inches higher than the rest of the
Yarn-beams; their Tradles and Spring staves are linked together with
Iron-links, and also their Seats are made with a Sloap toward their Tradles,
so that the whole Weight of the Weaver lies on the Tradle, to keep it firm
while he strikes the Woof to its Place, with the Slay-board. I presume the
Dutch Weavers now at Dunkittle, have thus fitted the Looms wherein they work;
but if they have not, it is requisite they should, for the Goodness of the
Canvas very much depends thereon.

The Dutch count the Number of Threads which compose each Beer by single
Threads* but in England and Ireland, they are always counted by double Threads;
therefore, when they in Holland are about to warp a Canvas of thirty Inches
broad, they usually put from thirty nine to forty five Beers therein, according
as they intend to slay higher or lower: But in England and Ireland, their
Manner of the Count of the Beers is thus, that is to say, their thirty nine
Dutch Beers make but nineteen and a Half of ours, and the forty five Beers of
their makes twenty two and a Half of ours, for the Reason I have already given.

When the Dutch weave Sail-canvas, they make their Dressing of Buck Wheat-meal;
whereas we make ours of Wheat. Theirs is much better, which is a great Defect
in us, considering Buckwheat would grow any where in Ireland, if it were
cultivated, and be of great Use to other Purposes at well as this.

They do not tallow their Warp with hard Tallow, as we do, but they dress it
with green soft Soap, which makes the Warp much more plyant than Tallow does,
half a Pound of their soft Soap will dress a Bolt.

Their Manner of computing what the Proportion ought to be of Warp-yarn and
Woof-yarn is thus: That is to say, they first compute how many Pound Weight of
Warp and Woof-yarn the Bolt will take; then they apportion to the Warp, such a
Weight, and to the Woof such another Weight; as for Instance, if a Bolt of
Canvas is designed to weigh forty five Pounds, the Woof of it ought to be
twenty seven Pound Weight, so as the Weight of the Warp, compared to the Weight
of the Woof, is as eighteen is to twenty seven; so likewise, when a Bolt is
intended to weigh thirty nine Pound, the Woof must be twenty two.

The Wages given in Holland, for weaving of Sail-canvas, is much the same with
what is given at Dunkittle, viz. nine Shillings per Bolt, to ten Shillings,
where the Sail-canvas is thirty Inches wide, and contains forty five Beers of
theirs, or twenty two Beers and a Half of ours; but if the Canvas be thirty
Inches wide, and contains only thirty nine of their Beers, or nineteen and a
Half of ours, then they have only from seven to eight Shillings per Bolt for
weaving. A Bolt of Sail-canvas in Holland, contains fifty Dutch Else in Length,
which is thirty seven Yards and a Half of our Measure, and each Bolt is sold
there, from fifty eight Shillings to three Pound per Bolt.

SECT. XV.
The Method of making Brass-reeds for Sail-canvas.
IN Holland, they make all their Reeds or Slays of Brass splits; for which
purpose they choose the toughest and cleared Brass plates that they can get,
being the tenth Part of an Inch thick: They then divide the Plate, marking out
the Length of the Split, and cut so much off the Plate, from End to End. After
this they divide this Piece of Brass plate, into so many Splits as they judge
proper; and with a Hammer and File, they beat them out, and file them to a
Truth, and set them in the Reed or Slay, in an Engine herein described.

A. The Frame eight Foot long, eight by six Inches square, in the Manner of a
Lath with Popots

B. B. The two Popots about twelve Inches above the Frame with Tenent coming
through at Q.

C. C. Iron Clasps for fixing the Ribbs of the Reed F. with two Screws in each.

D. The Screw with its Nut on B. and Swivel in C. to strain the Ribbs of the
Reed F.

E E. The Standard for A. about three Foot and a half high.

G. The Pot with Duff coal to melt the Wax-thread, when laping in the Splits.

H. The Center with a Butten s^ivel in C. to answer D.

I. The Driver twelve Inches long, two broad and two tenths to drive the Splits
close.



SECT. XVI.
Of Sowing and Saving of Flax.
IN those Parts of the United Provinces where Flax is mostly cultivated, they
choose their best Barley-grounds, therein to sow their Flax-seed; but those
Sort of Grounds are with them so light, and at the same time so good, that with
twice plowing and harrowing, they are better fitted or prepared for the
Reception of either Barley or Flax seed, than any of our Grounds would be by
four times that Labor: It is true, that their Grounds are naturally good, and
probably in some measure better than ours; yet I cannot say but that there are
many Grounds in Ireland, especially in the South (...) of it, if they were as
frequently turned up and enriched with Dung, Marl, Compost, etc. or other
Improvements proper to the Soil, as is from time to time given to their Grounds
in Holland, we might expect Crops of all Sorts, nothing inferior to theirs: For
it their Grounds met with such lazy and unskilful Treatment, as the Generality
of our Grounds here in Ireland meet withal, their Crops in Holland, would then
be little better than ours: But as they have vastly more Hands to employ, in
proportion to the Extent of their Grounds, than we have, and consequently their
Farms are not so extensive as ours, their Labor is confined to a small
Pittance of Earth, improved by Industry and Skill to the greatest Degree of
Perfection that Agriculture can attain to.

The Dutch sow their Flax about the Middle of April, and when it is grown about
six Leaves high above the Ground, they roll it with a Roller made eight Square,
six Foot long: This Roller is drawn by a Horse, shod with broad leathern Shoes,
to prevent his cutting the Flax as he treads thereon, or his sinking too far
into the Soil. Their Way of judging when their Flax is ripe, is exactly the
same with what Mr. Slator has set forth.

Their Manner of saving of Flax differs much from what is practiced, either in
England or Ireland that I know of; though as to the pulling of it, I did not
observe that the Dutch pull the fine Flax, and the coarser Sort separately, as
Mr. Slator very well advises; for certainly there is some Difference in point
of rating them; however, the Dutch do not heed it, but when they have pulled as
much Flax as they can well hold in their Hand, they lay that down and pull
another Handful, which they lay across the first, till they have as much as
will make a Sheaf, and there let it lie for six or seven Days to weather; then
they turn the Inside out of their Flax, as they bind it into Sheaves; eight or
ten of these Sheaves are by them placed on the Butts, in a round or circular
Form, with the Heads leaning on each other, so as the Wind may pass through them:
Thus they proceed with all their Flax, and leave it there eight or ten Days
more, until it is perfectly dry; then carry it to their Barn, and riple in the
Manner herein after described, such Part of their Flax as they design to riple
that Season.

The Flax which they reserve for Seed, the Dutch never riple the same Season
they pull it, but keep the Flax and Seed together till the ensuing Spring, and
in the mean time, either house it or stack it, in such a Manner as may best
preserve it from Rain or other Water, until they have occasion to sow it.

When they have ripled as much Flax as they design to riple that Season, they
gather all the Boughs, and lap them up in round bundles with the Rubbish and
waste Flax, and lay these bundles Side by Side on a plain Floor, paved for that
Purpose; the Floor is about forty Foot square; they then bring the Carriage of
a Wagon, drawn by two Horses, and thereon lay a considerable Weight; which
Horses and Wagon they drive over these bundles, until they conceive they have
broke the boughs and trod out the Seed; but lest there might be some Inequality
in the Pressure, they very carefully turn the bundles, as the Horses and Wagon
pass over them; this they continue doing, till they conceive that the whole
Seed is perfectly trod out, and the boughs broke.

Their Manner of separating the Seed, with the broken Pieces of the boughs or
pods from the grosser Part of Rubbish, is in this Manner: They have a large
mesh'd Riddle, which is fixed in a Frame contrived for that Purpose only, which
suffers nothing to pass through it, but the Seed and the Shells of the boughs
or pods; these they convey to an upper boarded Floor, and spread them as thin
thereon as possibly they can, allowing as much Air thereto, as is requisite to
keep the Seed from heating, and turn it every Day constantly, till the Seed be
sufficiently dry: Afterward they turn it every Week at least twice, till such
Time as there is a Demand for it in the Market: Then have they Sieves made with
a large Parchment Bottom, punch'd as full of small round Holes, as close and
contiguous as can be, so as not to suffer the Flax-seed it self to pass
through, but only the Dust and the Seeds of the Weeds: This done, they have
another Parchment Sieve, punch'd with oblong Holes, through which they sift the
Flax seed, and sever it from the Pieces of boughs or pods which till then the
Seed was mixed with: There is now at the Board of Trustees, one of each of
these Sorts of Sieves, and a Sievemaker may easily imitate them.

They have another Way in Holland of cleaning their Flax-seed, but it is very
seldom used, neither does it clean Flax-seed so well as the Parchment Sieves
do, therefore I decline describing them.

SECT. XVII.
Remarks on the Ripling of Flax.
THE Reasons why the Dutch when they pull their Flax, lay the Handfuls across
each other, and suffer it so to remain for six or seven Days till it is
weathered, before they bind it up in Sheaves, is that they may the better
manage it when they riple, without breaking or bruising the Harl or Straw of
their Flax; by this Means, each Handful clings together, and readily separates
from the rest of the Sheaf when they are about to riple, for more than one
Handful cannot be ripled at a Time.

In my humble Opinion, the ripling of Flax is much preferable to the thrashing
of it in any Manner whatever, for the following Reasons: First, their
Ripling*comb not only severs the Boughs or Seed-pods from the Flax, but it also
severs the Leaves and Branches from it, which thrashing cannot do, the same
Season it is pulled. Secondly, the Flax lies better in the Water, and spreads
more easily on the Grass, when by ripling, the superfluous Branches are
removed; and it likewise swingles better.

I have already observed how careful the Dutch are, not to sever the Seed which
they intend to sow themselves, from the Stalks of the Flax, till the ensuing
Season for sowing it: Their Reasons for so doing are, that they conceive the
Seed is not only less liable to heating, but that it likewise attracts further
Nourishment from the Stalks, than what it had when pulled. In Holland they
seldom sow themselves any of the first ripled Seed, but convert it either to
Oil, or export it to foreign Markets.

Many are the Devices and Tricks which the Dutch put in practice with their
export Flax-seed: First, they are not always very careful that the Seed they
export, be all of it well preserved from heating on the Floor or in the Cask:
Secondly, if they have any old Seed by them of a former Season, which has slipped
the Market, they make no Scruple of mixing it with the fresh Seed; neither do
they scruple to mix decayed or degenerated Seed with their fresh Seed: Thirdly,
the Flemings set little or no Value upon their Seed, save only such Seed as
they reserve for their sowing; therefore pull their Flax before the Seed is
half ripe, that the Flax might work so much the finer; these Seeds the Dutch
buy from them, and mix with their own, in such Proportion as not to be easily
discerned by the Buyers: Fourthly, the Dutch supply themselves from Riga,
Nerva, or other of the East-land Countries with Flax-seed, from time to time as
they have occasion; but because the East country Flax-seed is universally mixed
with the Seeds of the Weeds which grow along with the Flax, they are very
careful to separate the one from the other; they keep the good Seed to
themselves, but they never fail to make their foreign Customers pay equally for
these Seeds of Weeds, as they do for their best Flax-seed; for they divide them
constantly into each Cask or Hogshead which they export: And if they intend to
impose their own Seed on the Buyer, they mingle these Seeds of Weeds with some
of their own Flax seed, and cask them up in small Casks, containing three
bushels and a half, in Imitation of those made use of in other Countries.

Thus are Foreigners who deal with the Dutch for Flax-seed imposed on, and I
cannot think of any Expedient to prevent it, unless the Board of Trustees find
out some Way to have this Kingdom supplied with the East country Flax-seed, in
as cheap and beneficial a Manner as the Dutch are: Our People here may soon
learn to separate the Flax-seed from the Seeds of the Weeds, in the same Manner
as the Dutch do, by the Means of their Parchment Sieves; or these Seeds may be
separated by the Care and Diligence of the Factors, in those Countries where
the Seed is bought; whereby the Expenses of Casking Freight, Portrage, and
other incident Charges, may be very much lessened or saved, and these noxious
Weeds kept out of our Country, and not foul our Grounds as they will infallibly
do, unless each Flax-man be very careful and diligent, are he sows his
Flax-seed, to cleanse it from all other Seeds.

The most pernicious of all these Weeds, is that which is called in England,
Heighop: I know not by what Name it is called here, but the Weed it self grows
among the Flax, and twines it self about it, as Hops do round a Pole; by which
Means, the Harl of the Flax is cut or towed, or else makes it so rotten, that
it will not work. It is hard to distinguish at weeding Time, this plaguey Weed
from the Flax; the Seed of this Weed is easily distinguished from the
Flax-seed; for it is shaped like white Mustardseed, somewhat less in Size, and
of a bright yellow Color.

In Holland, when they sell their Flax-seed to the Oyl-mills, they generally
sell it at thirteen Guilders per Hogshead, which is twenty six Shilings English
Money.

A Description of the Ripling comb.
A The Bench eight Foot long, fifteen Inches broad, and two Inches thick.

B. Is the Comb it self, the Teeth whereof ought to be of Iron, and fifteen
Inches long; the Edges of the Teeth ought to stand directly opposite to each
other, the better to catch the Boughs of the Flax as it is ripling.

C. C. D. D. Are the Feet with their Braces, which support the Bench, and are
about two Foot and a half high.



The Method observed in Holland in ripling of Flax, is thus: They first spead a
large winnowing Sheet on the Floor, over which they place their ripling Bench,
to which Place they bring (...) of Flax, in order to be ripled; then two Men
mount the Bench, or sit astride thereon, one on the one Side, the other on the
other of the Comb, each of whom is served by a Person, whose Care is to open
the Sheaves, and to hand to his Ripler the Handfuls of Flax, of which the Sheaf
was composed, and I formerly mentioned: And as the Ripler riples that Handful,
the Person who tends him receives that back again, and supplies him with
another Handful. The ripled Flax is laid by it self, observing still to keep
the Handfuls together, till they have a sufficient Quantity wherewith to make a
Sheaf; then the Person who tends the Ripler, binds it into a Sheaf about thee
Quarters of a Yard in Circumference: When they have thus ripled all the Flax
they design to riple that Season and bound it into Sheaves, their next Care is
to rate it.

But before I proceed to acquaint you with their Manner of rating, it is
requisite I should inform you, that the Dutch are very curious and neat in the
making of all and every of their Engines, so as they might best answer their
Purposes in every Respect* therefore in the making of this Ripling-bench, they
do not make it flat at the Top, but on the contrary, make it as round at the
Top as they conveniently can, to the End the Persons that sit upon them, might
sit with Ease, and each of them strike their Handful of Flax into the Comb
alternately; by which Means, they riple their Flax with fewer Combs, and with
greater Dispatch than otherwise they could do. There is yet a further
Convenience in the rounding of this Bench, which is, that neither the Seed,
Leaves, nor Branches of the Flax lie on the Bench to cumber it, but constantly
fall on the Winnowing-sheet, as the Riplers proceed in their Work.

SECT. XVIII.
The Manner of Rating of Flax in Holland.
THEY always choose in Holland standing Water for rating Flax in; and to the
End they may perform their Work with the utmost Exactness, they measure the
Depth, the Breadth, and the Length of the Water they design to employ; they
know by the Number of the Sheaves of Flax, what Space they shall fill; they
generally rate their Flax in the Dreins about their Lands, which for the most
Part are from eight to ten Foot deep, and from ten to sixteen Foot wide, more
or less, according as their Land is, swampy or wet.

Those Sheaves that they design to lay in the Bottom of their Water they tie
with strong bonds, within six Inches of each End of the Sheaf. Then draw some
strong Twine through the middle of the Sheaf, between the Bands: With this
Twine, they tie their Bands Sheaf by Sheaf, till they have formed a Platform of
equal length and breadth with the Water they rate in. This is always done on
the banks of the Water; and when they have stitched together as many of these
Sheaves as is necessary, they shove the whole Platform into the Water, which
floats thereon; whereby they have an Opportunity to lay another Range of
Sheaves athwart the other, till they have completely covered their Platform:
They constantly observe in rating of their Flax, to lay first the Platform with
their Flax, the long Way of the Canal: The next Range of Sheaves is laid across
the Canal; and so they proceed alternately, till their Flax is piled up as high
as they design to raise it: but to the end they might sink it gradually, they
always stand on their Flax in the Water, after they have laid two or three
Ranges; by which Means, they are readier in the placing of the Sheaves on the
Pile, till they conceive that the Pile of Flax when sunk, will be about
fourteen Inches under the Surface of the Water; and because they have no Stones
in that Country, to sink it withal, they are forced to sink it by the Weight of
such Slush or Mudd, as they can get from the Bottom of their Drains.

When their Flax has been in Water about four Days, they thrust their Arm as
far into the Water as they can, and draw forth a Handful of the Flax by the
Butts, which they spread thin on the Grass: If they observe when this Flax is
dry that it is sufficiently rated, they then raise all their Flax from out the
Water; but if they perceive it is not sufficiently rated, they repeat this
Experiment twice a Day, until they are satisfied that the whole is watered
enough: Their next Care is to discharge it of the Mudd and Slush that was on
it, and raise their Flax, Sheaf by Sheaf, till they have taken it all out of
the Water; yet as they raise it, they never fail to rinse each Sheaf in the
Water, to cleanse it from the filth it contracted in the Water, as it lay
therein, purging and fermenting.

Having thus raised their Flax, and cleansed it, they open the Sheaves, and
spread their Flax as thin on the Grass, Row by Row, as Mr. Slator has
mentioned; where they never suffer it to lie more than two Days, in order to
stiffen it, unless they perceive some Part of it to have been under-rated: In
which Case they leave such Part on the Grass till it be sufficiently rated; but
if they find on the grassing of their Flax, the Water has had its Effect, they
(after two Days Time) gather as much of the Flax as they conceive will make a
Sheaf; this they open very wide at the Butt, in the form of a Bird-cage, giving
the upper End a little Twist, to make it cling together: Thus they set all
their Flax through a whole Field, Sheaf by Sheaf, in Rows; and if any happens to
be overturned by the Wind, they set it up again; and there let it stand, till
it is sufficiently dried and weathered.

SECT. XIX.
Reasons why Flax ought to be rated in running Waters.
IF Water has any great Currency through Flax, it will fret and tear the Harl
to such a Degree, that allowing it should not spoil the whole, yet will it
cause so great a Waste in the working, as that the Owner will be a great
Sufferer thereby; but further, the Harl which remains untorn will not be worth
the working, it will be so very hard and wiery. In proof of what I here assert,
be pleased only to observe, that whenever Oak or solid Timber is cut down when
the Sap is in it, be the Beams never so large; if you place them for two or
three Months in running Water, the Sap will be as effectually washed out of the
Timber, as if it had been cut down in the Depth of Winter: And if running Water
has such Power over large Logs of Timber, what must its Power be over so tender
a Plant as Flax is. There is yet a further and more essential Reason why Flax
ought not to be watered in a running Water, which is this, the Water running
through the Flax will keep it so cold, that it would never ferment. Now
Fermentation is as requisite to make the Flax purge it self from the Filth
which it brings with it from the Soil, as any thing which happens in the
rating: Therefore a skilful Flax-man uses his utmost Industry to keep his Flax
under Water while this Fermentation lasts, that all the Flax may partake
thereof.

I would not be understood by this* as if I were for encouraging the pernicious
Practice of rating Flax in Bog-holes, too frequent in Ireland, which I fear
occasions the Rows in their Linen, and the dark and sullen Cast which commonly
attend the Irish Linen, though the Bleacher has performed his utmost Skill;
for it is evident that Turff mold will always stain the Water which stagnates
or stands therein; and though Water which stands in stiff Clay is not liable to
this Objection, yet I would not have it altogether stagnated Water, but have my
Rating-pond so contrived, that I could give it a Recruit of fresh Water
gradually, or by such Degrees as might neither occasion a great Currency of the
Water in the Pond, or prevent the Fermentation of my Flax.

Lough-water (in those Parts of this Kingdom where it can conveniently be had)
if it will bear Soap, is preferable to any Ponds whatever; because those Waters
are better weathered than any other, and consequently more soft: But where
Lough or Lakewater cannot be had, it is then of absolute Necessity that Ponds be
made, after such a Manner as to be sufficiently supplied at all times, with
Water drawn from Rivers or Brooks. I see no Reason why the Rating ponds should
be made so narrow as Mr. Slator has directed; for if they be made ten or twelve
Foot wide, consequently the Pile of Flax will be so much the larger, and the
Fermentation quicker and more effectual: The Charge will be much the same,
provided the Soil be free from Rocks, which of all Things must be avoided in
Rating-ponds. And as to the Depth of them, they ought never to be less than
five or six Foot deep, nor more than ten.

SECT. XX.
The Reasons why the Dutch do not grass their Flax, so much as in England or
Ireland.
THE Dutch having stiffened their Flax on the Grass, they raise it on the
Butts, and open it as evenly as they can possibly at the Butts, in order to
give it all the Benefit and Advantage it can have from the Sun, the Wind, and
the Air. They judge that it is the Water which rots the Bunn or Straw of the
Flax, and causes the Harl to separate readily from it. They are very fond of
having their Flax of a beautiful Color which they conceive they cannot have, if
their Flax be suffered to lie long on the Grass, which would infallibly grow
through it, and consequently would shade the Flax, and prevent the Air from
passing so readily through it, as it would otherwise do, when placed (as
aforesaid) on the Butts. They likewise judge, that whatever Rain or Dew falls,
in the aforesaid Position, will sink readilier down to the Earth, and less
hinder the Bunn from drying, than it will when laid flat on the Grass. For my
own Part, I am humbly of Opinion, that this Way of Management, were it put in
Practice in Ireland, would turn to good Account. In point of Color of their
Linen, there stands one Objection in the Way of this Practice, which must be
obviated, else I fear Ireland can scarce comply with it; for should any great
Storms of Wind catch the Flax thus erected on the Butts, it would have much
more Power over it, and be apt to mingle their Butts and Ends so together, as
it would create a vast deal of Trouble in the setting all right again; for to
be sure, the Butts of Flax or Hemp must be always kept together, else it could
never be dressed; therefore the Season or Time of the Year when Flax is
grassing and weathering, after it is rated, ought to be very well weighed and
considered; for should it be during those great Storms which are vulgarly
called in Ireland, the Michaelmas Rigs, it would be impossible to raise Flax in
the Manner practiced in Holland, or indeed to grass it flat on the Ground,
without being tossed and tumbled by the Storms. The only Way to remedy this
Evil is, to sow early in April, that the Flax may be the earlier ripe, pulled,
and rated, ere these Storms usually happen.

SECT. XXI.
Of the Management of Flax reserved for Seed.
I Have already acquainted you, that the Dutch never sever the Seed which they
themselves intend to sow, from the Flax, the same Season it was pulled in:
therefore when they are just ready to sow, they fall to ripling of it as fast
as they can, and cleanse the Seed from all its Filth and Seeds of Weeds, in
like manner as they did the former; then do they either rate the Flax
immediately, in the Drains which they have in their Grounds, or defer the
rating it, till they fall to rating of the ensuing Crop; but they never rate
them both in the same Pile, because the Seedflax will take somewhat longer Time
to rate it in, than the other; but in all other Respects it is managed exactly
conformable to the other; and if the Flax-man be skilful that rates it, I could
never observe much Difference between either the Goodness or Color of the
Flax, the one from the other.

SECT. XXII.
Of Breaking, Swingling, or Scutching Flax.
THE Dutch before they break their Flax have a large Oven, which they make so
Warm as they can put their Flax with Safety therein, placing it on the Butts;
having first untied the Sheaves, they stop the Mouth of this Oven as close as
possible and there let the Flax stand for the Space of twelve Hours to sweat;
this done, they remove it thence, and bind it into Sheaves as large as they
please, and cover these Sheaves with Cloths as close as they can, and there let
it lie for six Hours more. The Way they have to judge whether the Oven be in
Temper or not, is by putting in a Handful or two of their Flax on the Butts
into the Oven, ere they venture to expose any Quantity of Flax therein; and
accordingly they either increase the Heat, or suffer the Oven to cool till it
is in Temper.

When Flax has been thus managed, during eighteen Hours, they apply themselves
to the breaking of it; which they do in Breaks made with three Bars under, and
two above; the Mash of their Breaks is made shallower than those generally made
in England or Ireland; the Rollers of theirs are square, and not rounded off as
ours are, which keeps their Work tighter and steadier than ours do; their
Breaks are somewhat shorter than ours; which has a good Effect on their Flax,
because they can manage them more nimbly and readily, and whip their Flax and
turn it under the Break, so as to break and squeeze the Bunn to Pieces; and the
Mash of their Breaks being so shallow, the Harl runs no Risque of breaking or
tewing.

This Practice in Holland of thus baking their Flax, is not only very rational,
but expedient to be imitated; because it is freed from all Inconveniences of
Fire or Smoke, which generally attends the kilning or drying of Flax over Fire;
and at the same Time, it makes the Bunn to break, and the Harl to separate
readily in the swingling, and not run so much to Tow or Backings, as otherwise
it would.

The Scutching-boards which they make use of in Holland, are much the same with
those we of late make use of in Ireland; but their Scutching-handles differ
much from ours, as appears by the Figure. They break and scutch six Pound of
Flax for five Stivers which is equal to our English Sixpence; so that it
amounts exactly to a Penny a Pound, which is much after the same Rate that is
paid in Ireland, to the most skilful of our Swinglers.

SECT. XXIII.
Of Hackling of Flax.
THEY generally hackle their Flax in Holland by the Women, who are exceedingly
skilful and dextrous therein: Their Hackles are much finer than those which
came from Coventry; yet I have seen some made here by Mr. Tailor, which he
called his* superfine Hackles, which are as fine as any I ever saw in Holland.
I see no Reason why the Woman here might not be instructed to hackle as well as
the Men; the Labor is not so great, but that the Women might undergo it. As to
the breaking, swingling, or scutching, that I must acknowledge to be laborious;
yet every Boor in Holland, and every good Husbandman in the Isle of Axom in
Lincoh shire, not only raise great Quantities of Flax and Hemp annually for
Sale, but they likewise rate, break, and swingle it, either by themselves or
their Laborers very skilfully And I am the more inclined to wish that young
Girls were taught to hackle in Ireland, to that Perfection they ought to be
instructed; because it will be much easier to persuade young Girls to apply
themselves to that Sort of Work, than it has hitherto been found to persuade
Boys: And as a great Share of the national Profit arising from the Linen
Manufacture depends on the well or ill hackling of Flax, it should seem to me
to be expedient to lose no Time in the teaching and instructing Girls, as well
in hackling as in spinning.

SECT. XXIV.
Of the Spinning of Flax.
THEIR Wheels in Holland are much after the same Form with ours in Ireland,
called Dutch Wheels; only they are made firmer, and the Rims heavier: The Axis
on which it turns, although it be made of Iron, as ours are, yet is it turned in
a Lath to a Truth: Whereas every bungling Smith in Ireland, pretends to bring
it to a Truth by a File, which is scarce practicable.

Flax-wheels require to be made with an exact Proportion between the Wheel, the
Whirl, the Spool, and the Flyers. I have endeavored to inform my self of the
true geometrical Proportions of each of these, by discoursing with the ablest
Wheel-wrights that I could meet with, wherever I came; but it has been hitherto
all in vain: For either they could not, or would not tell how and in what
Manner this Mystery in the Trade, might be brought to a more mechanic
Regulation than at present it is under.

These Observations might have great Influence on the Improvement of spinning
Linnen*yarn in Ireland; for if the Wheels and Axes be made to a Truth, and a
just Proportion observed between the Wheel, the Whirl, the Spool, and the
Flyers, the whole will move regularly without hobling; the Yarn will be equally
twisted, and it must be the Spinner's own Fault, if the Yarn has not a proper
Twist: It is certain, that Yarn designed for Warp, ought to have somewhat more
Twist than Yarn designed for Woof, because the latter ought to be more plyant
and readier to yield to the Slay, and is easier struck up; for which Reason, a
skilful House-wife's Bolt of Linen Cloth is, generally speaking, preferable to
a Master-weaver's Bolt, of the same Degree of Fineness, because she has taken
care to give a proper Twist both to the Warp and Woof.

The Spinners in Holland have a Piece of fine woollen cloth, pasted round the
Rock, purposely to prevent the Flax from coming down too fast, as the Spinner
draws: Besides, they have a Piece of Oyl-leather, which they bind gently over
the Flax, while it is tied to the Rock, to prevent its drying too fast, and to
preserve it from Dust.

SECT. XXV.
The Description of the Scutching-handle.
THIS Instrument is commonly made of Walnut; from A. to B. is about sixteen
Inches; four of which are taken up in the Handle, from C. to C, nine Inches.
There runs a Rib in the Middle, from the Point B. down to the Handle, falling
off thin toward the Edges at C. C. as per Shade on the ride Side C.



SECT. XXVI.
Of Bleaching of Linen Cloth, Yarn, Thread, etc.
I Have been twice of late Years in Holland, to inform my self the best I
could, of all and every the Mysteries and Practices in Holland, in Bleaching of
Linen Cloth, Linnen-yarn, Thread, Tape, etc. I have the Vanity to believe,
that there is not one Branch in the whole Bleaching-trade that I have not
acquired the Knowledge of in Theory; but as to the practicing it my self in that
Country, I could by no Means attempt the doing it: For it is well known to all
Persons conversant of late Years in Holland, that the Dutch are very jealous of
the Endeavors used in Ireland, to compass flaxen and hempen Manufactures; they
are aware of the Benefits which will accure not only to this Kingdom, but to
all His Majesty's Dominions thereby; and the immense Loss it must be to
themselves, should the People of this Kingdom attain to the Perfection which
they in Holland have attained to, with great Labor and Industry, during these
two last Centuries.

I had frequent Specimens of their good Nature, whenever I attempted the
transporting hither either Artists or Seed from thence: For although the
Magistrates in the united Provinces, are always cautious and fearful how they
behave toward any of His Majesty's Subjects, left they should draw upon
themselves His Royal and Powerful Resentments: Yet are the Populace so jealous
of their Trade, and so ready to insult the Person of any Man against whom they
have any Umbrage, that it is impossible for any Stranger, not naturalized, to
practice any of the Mystery the Dutch are peculiarly skilled in. I my self
escaped very narrowly from being mobbed twice or thrice by them; and, had I not
been very well befriended there, I am confident I should have felt the utmost
of their Fury, which seldom terminates with less than the Destruction of the
Party.

The Rules and Practice observed by Bleachers in Holland, I found Ways and
Means to be informed of; but as Bleaching very much depends on the Climate, the
Water, and likewise on the Ground made Choice of to compose the Bleach-yard; I
dare not venture (before Trial made here my self) to give any Directions how to
bleach conformably to the Dutch. The Honorable the Trustees of the flaxen and
hempen Manufactures of Ireland zealous to discharge their Trust to the Public,
have caused a convenient Bleach-yard to be made near to the City of Dublin. The
Choice of the Ground and Water they gave me Leave to make, after they had well
weighed and considered the Reasons by me offered, for such Choice: They also
gave me Leave to make the Buck-house, Trenches, and Utensils, requisite to this
Work, after the Dutch Model. I hope by the next ensuing Spring or Summer, at
the farthest, to put in Practice what Knowledge I have acquired in bleaching,
either in Holland or elsewhere: And when I have made full Proof to my own
Satisfaction, how far the Rudiments of this Craft are best practicable here, I
shall cheerfully and ingenuously communicate them to the Public, in Discharge
of my Duty to my Employers, and of the sincere and high Honor I bear to the
Kingdom of IRELAND.

FINIS.

