CATO's MORAL DISTICHS Englished in Couplets.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed and Sold by B. FRANKLIN, 1735.

The PRINTER to the READER.
THE Manuscript Copy of this Translation of Cato's Moral Distichs, happened
into my Hands some Time since, and being my self extremely pleased with it, I
thought it might be no less acceptable to the Public; and therefore determined
to print it as soon as I should have convenient Leisure and Opportunity. It was
done by a Gentleman amongst us (whose Name or Character I am strictly forbid to
mention, though it might give some Advantage to my Edition) for the Use of his
own Children; But in my Opinion, it is no unfit or unprofitable Entertainment
for those of riper Years. For certainly, such excellent Precepts of Morality,
contained in such short and easily-remember'd Sentences, may to Youth
particularly be very serviceable in the Conduct of Life, since there can scarce
happen any Affair of Importance to us, in which we may need Advice, but one or
more of these Distichs suited to the Occasion, will seasonably occur to the
Memory, if the Book has been read and studied with a proper Care and Attention.

When I obtained Leave to make this Publication, I procured also the following
Account of the Author and his Work: for I thought something of the kind
necessary to be prefixed to it.

In most Places that I am acquainted with, so great is the present Corruption
of Manners, that a Printer shall find much more Profit in such Things as
flatter and encourage Vice, than in such as tend to promote its contrary. It
would be thought a Piece of Hypocrisy and pharisaical Ostentation in me, if I
should say, that I print these Distichs more with a View to the Good of others
than my own private Advantage: And indeed I cannot say it; for I confess, I
have so great Confidence in the common Virtue and Good Sense of the People of
this and the neighboring Provinces, that I expect to sell a very good
Impression.

Some ACCOUNT of the following Piece, and Conjectures concerning its AUTHOR.
THOUGH the Original of these Moral Distichs, by being put into the Hands of Boys
of the lower Forms at the Latin School, have been frequently considered as an
Entertainment suitable only to such childish Years; yet great and able Judges
have conceived a much more honorable Esteem of them. They have been commented
on by diverse Authors, but particularly by Erasmus: They were translated into
Greek by Maximus Planudes, a native of Greece, and one of the most learned of
his Age. But the great Joseph Scaliger, dissatisfyed with that Performance,
gave another most elegant Version of them into the same Language, which has
been diverse times printed. And though a Critic in that Tongue, on viewing the
Version, would not easily be induced to believe it could be bettered, yet it
has been twice since attempted by two other several Hands, mentioned by
Fabricius. So that at least four Greek Translations of them have appeared. Into
the European Languages, as French, Italian, Dutch, there have been many
Translations, and into each of them by several Hands. They have also been
diverse Times rendered into our own; but the Author of this never saw any of
them, that by Charles Hoole, made in plain and low Language for the Use of
Schoolboys, only excepted; and therefore he knows not but they may have been
much better done before: But as he intended them (as th^^ are here finished)
solely for the Use of his own Children, with some of their Acquaintance, and
never for public View, he is no way solicitous what others may have performed,
provided these as they are, will answer the End they were intended for. Those
who find Fault with them may try to do better on any Score of them together,
and then they will be more capable of judging, whether it is a very easy Task
throughout the whole, to comprize the Sense of two Latin Hexameters in twenty
Syllables in English, with a smooth Cadence, and tagg'd with a strong Rhyme.

Of the Author of these Distichs there have been various Sentiments; they are
called Cato's, but they could neither be the Work of the Censor, the elder of
that Name, nor of the much greater Man the younger, called Uticensis from the
Place of his Death: For in these Verses, Virgil, Macer, Ovid, and Lucan, are
mentioned, none of whom wrote till after the Death of both these Cato's. The
first of the Ancients whose Works remain, that appears to have known them, is
one Vindicianus a Physician, who in a Letter to the Emperor Valentinian the
elder, about the Year 370, quotes one of these Lines: And in a Glossary printed
at the end of the Autores L. Latinae, said to be Isidore's, who died about the
Year 630, the uncommon Word Officipedi is found, and Cato is expressly quoted
for it as an Author; which Word [in another Declension] is met with in the 4th
Book, Numb. 42 of these Distichs

Some have thought him a later Christian Writer; but for the Reasons given he
could not be late, nor could he be a Christian; for no Christian would have
been Author of that Distich, Lib. 4. Numb. 14.

Cum sis ipse nocens moritur cur Victima pro te?
Stultitia est morte alterius sperare Salutem.
Since this is directly repugnant to the main Fundamental of the Christian
Religion. Scaliger's Opinion, upon a due Consideration of the Style (which is
allowed by all but Boxhornius to be correct and pure) and of all other
Circumstances, seems to be the most just; which is, that he was an unconverted
Gentile, and lived about the Times of Commodus or Severus; that is, toward the
beginning of the third Century: To which may be added, that it is probable he
might be inclined to the Doctrine of the Pythagoreans and Platonists, which was
revived and came much into Repute about that Time. But whoever the Author was,
notwithstanding they have a Fault very common with most of the Ancients, that
is, that there is scarce any Order in (...) diverse Repetitions, as also that
sometimes the Thought is either low or obscure, (which it is hoped is somewhat
mended in the present Version) yet they have been very justly esteemed in all
Ages past, since they were known; and in those to come may continue justly to
deserve the same.

CATO's MORAL DISTICHS.
1.
IF God be Spirit, as old Texts assure,
Him chief over all with purest mind adore.
2.
Be still industrious, too much Sleep refrain;
For Vice from Sloth does constant Succors gain.
3.
Think the first Virtue's well to rule the Tongue;
He Is godlike wise, who never employs it wrong.
4.
Consistent always with thy self be found;
Who thwarts himself, would thwart all Mankind round.
5.
If over Men's Lives and Deeds thou cast an Eye,
While all spy Faults, free from them none thou wilt spy.
6.
The Charms of hurtful Joys, though sweet, refuse:
It Is sometimes Gain even Wealth itself to lose.
7.
Or grave or gay appear, to suit the Time:
The Wife may Manners change without a Crime.
8.
Let not your Wife's weak Humors Anger move
Against a Servant you have just Cause to love.
9.
When thou reproves a Friend, though scarce he will bear,
Though much he frown, continue still thy Care.
10.
Wage not with Men of Words, a noisy War;
Words all have got, Few Wisdom to their Share.
11.
So love thy Friends, and so thy Favors deal,
As that thy self their Want may never feel.
12.
Spread not Reports, lest they be thought thy own:
From Tatling Mischief springs, from Silence none.
13.
Let not another's Promise thine engage
To plight thy Faith; it is now a faithless Age.
14.
When others praise thee, judge thy self alone;
Better you are to thy self than others known.
15.
A Friend's good Offices aloud proclaim;
But thy good Deeds to others never name.
16.
While in Old Age you others Conduct tell,
Think whether in your Youth your own was well.
17.
What Men in private whisper, never mind;
The Guilty always think themselves designed.
18.
While Fortune's smiling, bear a watchful Eye
On her Reverse, her Favors swiftly fly.
19.
Since on so frail a Tenure Life is held,
Thy Hopes on Death's Reversions never build.
20.
The poor Man's Present from his scanty Store
With Thanks receive, as if its Worth were more.
21.
Since Nature formed thee naked in the Womb,
Grudge not at Want; it does thy State become
22.
Fear not the End of Life, it ends thy Care;
He present Life destroys, who Death does fear.
23.
When to thy Merit, Friends ungrateful prove,
Accuse not Heaven, but with more Judgment love.
24.
Spare but to spend, and Spending spare so well,
As neither now nor after want to feel.
25.
Promise not twice what may at once be done,
Lest thou be bounteous deemed in Words alone.
26.
Him, who is kind in Words, but false in Heart,
In his own Coin repay, with Art for Art.
[Yet with unblemished Honor act thy Part.]
27.
No Stress on smooth-tongu'd Men's Professions lay;
Sweet plays the Fowler's Pipe to gain his Prey.
28.
If thou have Children, but no Wealth to give,
Then teach them Arts, that they may learn to live.
29.
Mean things as Great, great things as Mean esteem;
So neither prodigal nor near thou wilt seem.
30.
Act not thy self what thou art wont to blame;
When Teachers slip themselves, it is double Shame.
31.
Crave what is Just and Honest, naught beside;
It Is vain to ask what may be well denied.
32.
The unknown to what thou knows do not prefer;
For Judgment governs here, Chance only there.
33.
Since Life's frail Course through certain Danger lies,
Each new-come Day as a new Purchase prize.
34.
Though in the right, yield sometimes to a Friend;
Friendship by kind Complaisance is maintained.
35.
In quest of greater Matters, spare not small;
It Is Profit that in Love unites us all.
36.
With Intimates no trifling Quarrels move;
Wrath Hate begets, Concord increases Love.
37.
When Servants Failings thy Resentments warm,
Thy Anger check, lest thou their Persons harm.
38.
Your Friends overcome not always when you can;
For Patience often speaks the greater Man.
39.
What thou have gained with Toil, preserve with Care:
Heavy's the Task past Losses to repair.
40.
In Plenty let thy Friends thy Bounty share;
Yet make they self thy most peculiar Care.
BOOK II.
YOU who in Husbandry would Skill attain,
May Virgil read; or if you would Knowledge gain
In healing Plants, these you will in Macer find,
With Cures prescribed for Ails of every kind.
If Civil Wars and Rome's sad Broils you would know,
Lucan those dire Exploits of Mars will show.
Or if by Rules you would guide Love's gentler Flame,
Ovid consult: But if your nobler Aim
To steer your Life by Wisdom's Laws aspire,
Read here, and learn the Prudence you desire.
1.
Even to Strangers thy good Deeds extend;
It Is better than a Crown to gain a Friend.
2.
Search not God's Secrets, nor his Works on high;
Mind what concerns thee as you are born to die.
3.
Avoid the Fear of Death, it idle shows
For fear of losing Life, its Joys to lose.
4.
Of Doubts contend not in an angry mind:
Wrath clouds the Soul, and does the Judgment blind.
5.
Genteely spend as Circumstances crave:
It Is sometimes Loss penuriously to save
6.
Avoid Excess, pursue the Golden Mean;
It Is sasest Sailing in the gentle Stream.
7.
What gives thee Shame, reveal not unto more,
Lest Many blame what but One blamed before.
8.
Think not th'Unrighteous in their Crimes succeed;
Time that conceals reveals an impious Deed.
9.
No feebler Creature's Want of Strength despise;
For Nature Want of Strength by Skill supplies.
10.
When over-match'd, in time resolve to yield;
Thus often the Victor's by the Vanquished foiled.
11.
Shun with thy Friends contentious Words to use;
For Discord often from trifling Words ensues.
12.
All Search of Fate by Divination fly:
God without thee thy Lot decrees on high.
13.
Create not Envy by a sumptuous Dress;
For though it hurts not, 't may affect thy Peace.
14.
Be not dismayed when Judges do thee Wrong;
The Cause that is gained unjustly, thrives not long.
15.
In Quarrels past name not what was unkind:
To think on it argues an ungenerous Mind.
16.
Nor praise nor blame thy self, for only Fools
Thus court Vainglory by preposterous Rules.
17.
Manage with Care thy Wealth, Expense restrain;
The Estate's soon lost that took long time to gain.
18.
A Fool, when there is Occasion for it, appear;
It Is sometimes Wisdom, Folly's Mask to wear.
19.
With equal care avoid a Miser's Name
And Prodigal's; they both will wound thy Fame.
20.
Believe not all, some kind of People tell;
They talk not always true, who talk a deal.
21.
Forgive not what thou do provoked by Wine;
It Is not the Liquor's fault; to drink was Thime.
22.
Thy Counsels to a trusty Friend declare;
Thy Health commit to wise Physicians Care.
23.
At worthless Men's Advancement never grieve:
Who highest mount, the heaviest Fall receive.
24.
Still for the Worst to come, thy Mind prepare;
So with more Ease thou Ills foreseen wilt bear.
25.
In adverse Times let not thy Courage fail:
Still hope, against Hope even Death can scarce prevail.
26.
Slip not the Season when it suits thy Mind;
Time wears his Lock before, is bald behind.
27.
View well what is past, and what may next ensue,
And Janus-like at once both Seasons view.
28.
Thy Health to guard, Pleasures sometimes refrain;
To Pleasure somewhat give, but Health's the Main.
29.
Slight not the general Vogue while you are but one,
Lest while thou slights the most thou pleases none.
30.
Manage thy Health 'bove all with prudent Care,
Nor for thy Follies blame the unwholesome Air.
31.
Regard not Dreams, the Mind will still pursue
In Sleep, what waking it had most in View.
BOOK III.
WHOEVER will on these Lines some Thoughts bestow,
Which wholesome Rules for Life's sure Conduct show,
Will reap the Advantage: Those who them despise
Will prove not mine, but their own Enemies.
1.
No Pains to adorn thy Mind with Knowledge spare;
Without it Life does Death's dull Image bear.
2.
For Loss of Pelf against Fortune don't exclaim;
Virtue not Wealth gives Happiness and Fame.
3.
Scandal, while thou uprightly acts, deride:
It Is not in human Power Men's Tongues to guide.
4.
When as an Evidence thou must appear,
Favor thy Friend, but keep thy Conscience clear.
5.
Against soft soothing Speeches guard thy Heart;
Truth Plainness chooses, Frand dissembling Art.
6.
To Sloth, Life's great Consumption, give not way;
Sloth in the Mind does on the Body prey.
7.
By turns with Pleasure soften anxious Care,
That thy cheered Mind Life's Load may easier bear.
8.
To censure others Deeds or Words decline;
Lest in their turn, they make as free with thine.
9.
With Care preserve what dying Friends bestow,
Lest thou the World's just Censure undergo.
10.
If Wealth abounds, when Life draws near its End,
Enjoy thy self and be a generous Friend.
11.
Counsel, though from thy Servant, don't despise;
But true good Sense even in the meanest prize.
12.
Should Fortune reassume what she had lent,
Retrench Expenses, but still live content.
13.
Never for the Sake of Portion take a Wife;
Nor keep a brawling Scold to plague thy Life.
14.
Thy Life by other Men's Example steer,
And thence learn what to practice, what forbear.
15.
Match to thy Strength thy Task, lest overprest,
And vainly struggling thou must yield at last.
16.
Others Misdeeds labor not to conceal;
Lest thou by Silence seem t'approve the Ill.
17.
When Laws oppress, Aid from the Judge desire;
For laws some Mitigation often require.
18.
What thou from Justice suffers, calmly bear,
And on thy Guilt thy self be most severe.
19.
Read much, and much of that when read reject;
For Poets Wonders more than Truth affect.
20.
At Feasts in Talk be modest, lest thou gain
A Trifler's Name while studying to entertain.
21.
Regard not Woman's Passions, nor her Smiles
With Passion she ensnares, with Tears beguiles.
22.
Enjoy thy Goods, but let no Waste be made:
Who wastes his own, will others Right invade.
23.
Firmly resolved, Death's Summons scorn to fear,
Which if not lovely, ends at least all Care.
24.
If thy Wife's virtuous, bear her Tongue, for sure
Thou may for her good Deeds some Words endure.
25.
Equal Affection for both Parents bear;
Nor slight the one the other to revere.
BOOK IV.
YOU who a Life secure from Ills would lead,
And Virtue's Paths by Vice untainted tread,
Firmly impress these Precepts on your Mind,
Here by your self you will safe Direction find.
1.
Riches contemn if thou true Bliss would find;
Who honor these, are Beggars in their Mind.
2.
If by wise Nature's Rules thou bounds Desires,
Thou Wilt easy live; it is little she requires.
3.
For Ills that from thy own Imprudence came,
Thy own weak Folly not thy Fortune blame.
4.
The Use of Money not the Metal prize;
Souls truly great will ever that despise.
5.
To keep thy Body sound, spare not thy Wealth:
Riches are tasteless when not blessed with Health.
6.
If when at School the Master's Rod thou bore,
Bear with a Parent's Anger much the more.
7.
In Things of real Use thy Time employ;
Vain Projects Time and Money both destroy.
8.
Sell not thy Favors through unkind Delays,
But Friends, the noblest Purchase, with them raise.
9.
When thou suspects a Mischief, strait enquire;
Neglected Sparks ost raise destructive Fire.
10.
When Venus through thy Blood enflames Desire,
Retrench thy Food; high Feeding fans the Fire.
11.
Devouring Beasts Man justly dreads, yet know
That Man to Man is the most dreadful Foe.
12.
If thou excells in Strength, direct it well;
So may thou in true Valor too excel.
13.
In Straits a well-prov'd Friend's Assistance crave:
In Straits no Doctor like a Friend can save.
14.
Why for thy Guilt should guiltless Victims bleed;
By others Death thou cannot from Death be freed.
15.
When some true Bosom-Friend thou seeks to choose,
Let Wisdom and not Wealth direct thy Views.
16.
Vile Avarice detest, enjoy thy Store:
The Miser midst his Heaps of Wealth is poor.
17.
If thou a Fame unblemished would maintain,
The alluring Charms of Vice with Care refrain.
18.
In Youth mock not old Age; Youth swistly spends,
And double Childhood human Life attends.
19.
Still learn some useful Thing, for small's the Cost,
Yet that may hold when all Things else are lost.
20.
In Silence ponder well what others say:
Words ost the Speaker's inward Soul betray.
21.
When thou have gained a Science, practice still;
Practice in every Art improves the Skill.
22.
With future Ills thy Soul never terrify:
Who Life despises needs not fear to die.
23.
Learn of the Learned, and others teach again,
That useful Knowledge through the World may reign.
24.
Drink not beyond thy Strength; for from Excess
Disorders spring that the whole Frame distress.
25.
What you have approved in public, don't again
Condemn through Lightness; 'twill your Credit stair
26.
In prosperous Times don't on their Stay presume:
In adverse, hope for better still to come,
27.
Cease not to learn, Wisdom's by Care attained,
And Prudence from a long Experience gained.
28.
Sparingly praise thy Friend, lest to thy Shame
Some one rash Act his want of Worth proclaim.
29.
To learn whatever thou knows not, think no Shame;
Knowledge just Praise deserves, to want is Blame.
30.
From Love and Wine both Strife and Pleasures spring;
Wisely choose thou the Sweet, and shun the Sting.
31.
Of silent Men with Looks demure beware;
The deepest Streams the smoothest Faces bear.
32.
When tempted at thy Fortune to repine,
Consider those whole Lot's still worse than thine.
33.
Know thy own Strength, and in due Limits keep;
The Shore is safe, but Danger's in the Deep.
34.
Against the Just try not the Force of Laws,
For God's the Avenger of the righteous Cause.
35.
Let not the Loss of Wealth thy Soul distress,
But cheerful Thanks for every Good express.
36.
Hard is the Loss of what was held with Care,
Yet some for Friends we patiently should bear.
37.
Don't on long Life presumptuously depend,
Death, like thy Shade, does every where attend.
38.
Think not Heaven's Wrath with Blood of Calves to appease;
The Plow's their Task, Incence will better please.
39.
When hurt by Power, yield gently to the Blow;
For those that hurt, again may Favor show.
40.
For Sins on thy own Heart sharp Penance strain;
In healing Wounds Pain is the Cure of Pain.
41.
If an old Friend at length a Foe should prove,
Though he be changed remember former Love.
42.
By generous Returns thy self endear,
Lest thou the hard Censure of ungrateful (...).
43.
Be not suspicious, 'twill but give thee Pain;
Suspicion's of all Joy the deadly Bane.
44.
Seize on Time's Forelock when it does present;
For when it is fled, in vain thou will repent.
45.
When thou a Servant buys, though termed thy Slave,
He Is Man, and Men a humane Treatment crave.
46.
Let not the Death of ill Men give thee Joy;
Who spotless live may truly happy die.
47.
In Wedlock joined, to avoid a dangerous Snare,
Of Visits from pretending Friends beware.
48.
Though much thou knows, yet gain by Study more;
The Mind's never burdened with the enlightening Store.
49.
If couched in two flat Lines each Precept lies,
Yet brief and strong the Sense; let this suffice.
[Sound pleases Fools, but Truth and Sense the Wise.]
FINIS.
Errata.
PAge v. line 5. for have, read has. Page vi. line 12. for Officipedi, read
Officiperdi. Page 10. line 28. for Complaisance, read Complacence. Page 11.
line 15. for they, read thy.


