Mr. Chauncy's SERMON after the Funeral of Mr. Jonathan Williams.

Prayer for help a seasonable duty upon the ceasing of Godly and Faithful men.
A SERMON occasioned by the death of several worthy Members of the first Church
in Boston: Preached the Lord's Day following the Anniversary fast, being the
sabbath after the funeral OF Mr. Jonathan Williams, one of the Deacons of said
Church; who departed this life, March 27th. 1737. AEtat. 63.

By Charles Chauncy. A. M.

Isaiah. LVII. 1. The righteous perishes, and no man lays it to heart; and
merciful men are taken away, none considering that the righteous is taken away
from the evil to come. Boston: Printed by T. Fleet, in the Year 1737.

Prayer to God for help a seasonable duty, when the Godly man cease, and the
faithful fail from among the children of men.
Psalm. XII. 1. Help Lord! for the Godly man cease; for the Faithful fail
from among the children of men.
THEY are the words of holy David. The occasion of his penning them is not
certain: But it is probable, 'twas now a dying time among the Godly and
Faithful; or a time of growing degeneracy among all sorts and orders of men:
upon either of which accounts, 'twas a proper Season to cry to almighty God for
help. And this the Psalmist accordingly does in the language of my text, Help
Lord! for the Godly man cease; for the Faithful fail from among the children
of Men: In speaking to which words, I shall, I. Open to you the character of
the Godly man and the Faithful man, the persons here particularly mentioned.
II. Explain the sense in which these persons may be said to cease and fail from
among the children of men. III. Show what reason there is to cry to God for
help, when this is the case.


The whole will then be followed with some suitable application.

I. I am, in the first place, to open to you the character of the Godly man and
the Faithful man, the persons mentioned in the text.

1. And first, I shall speak of the Godly man; the foundation-stroke in whose
character is, his faith in God as a being infinitely great and glorious; the
creator and governor of the World, the savior and rewarder of them that
diligently seek him: according to that of the apostle, Heb. 11. 6. Without
faith it is impossible to please God: For he that comes to God must believe
that he is, and that he is a rewarder of them that diligently seek him.

Nor is his faith, in the being and attributes and dominion of God, a mere
speculative notion; but an active living principle, suitably exciting and
moving the several passions and affections of his mind.

He so believes the majesty and power of God, as to be filled with an habitual
awe and reverence of him; dreading his displeasure, being much more afraid to
offend him than any other Being whatsoever; in conformity to that caution of
our Savior, Luke 12. 4, 5. Be not afraid of them that kill the body, and after
that have no more that they can do. But I will forewarn you, whom ye shall
fear: Fear him, which, after he has killed, has power to cast into hell; yea,
I say unto you, fear him.

He so believes the faithfulness and veracity of God, as to rely on his word,
confide in the truth and depend on the fulfillment of his promises: And however
little appearance, humanely speaking, there may be at present, of their
accomplishment, he staggers not at the promise of God through unbelief; but is
strong in faith, giving glory to God: being persuaded, that what he has
promised, he is able also to perform.

He so believes in God as a being infinitely amiable, beautiful and desirable,
as to love him with all his heart, and soul, and mind, and strength; esteeming
his favor as life, and his loving kindness better than life. None in heaven, in
his account, is like unto God, nor does he desire any on earth besides him: And
his chief concern is, that God would be his friend, his God and portion forever.

He so believes the paternal care, kindness and goodness of God, as to place
his entire hope and confidence in him; trusting in the Lord at all times:
Especially, making God his refuge in the day of his distress; relying on him
for all that help and salvation, which is in vain to be looked for from the
hills, and the multitude of mountains, and is to be had only in God, the
savior of his people in the time of trouble. Yea, he is so firmly persuaded of
the love and pity of God toward them that fear him, that he casts his whole
care upon him; taking no thought, no inordinate thought, for his life, what he
shall eat, or what he shall drink, or wherewithal he shall be clothed: as
knowing, that God feeds the fowls of the air, and cloatheth the lilies of the
field, and will much more feed and cloth his own children, who are much better
than they.

He so believes the supreme authority, and sovereign universal dominion of God,
as to acquiesce in all his dealings; not daring to dispute his pleasure, or
resist his will, or find fault with or murmur against his providential
dispensations. That Is the habitual inward sense and temper of his mind, It is
the Lord, let him do what seems him good. He is willing, at the call of God,
to part with any thing, his reputation, his interest, his friends; yea, he
counts not his life dear so he may but honor God, and finish his course with
joy.

In fine, he so believes in God as sending his only begotten son into the
world, not to condemn the world, but that the world through him might be saved,
that he hopes for salvation in none but in Christ: and through him, and the
merits of his mediatorial undertaking for sinners, he trusts in the mercy of
God to eternal life.

But this is not all.

The Godly man's faith in God has a powerful influence on his life as well as
heart. It not only excites an internal regard toward God in the affections of
his mind, but a due care to express this regard in all proper acts of outward
reverence and obedience.

The blessed God is the constant object of his external homage and worship. He
is a man of prayer; delights in the duty, and is frequent in the practice of
it. He is one that prays without ceasing; is habitually in a praying frame, and
improves every proper season of making known his requests to God by prayer,
with supplication and thanksgiving. He daily retires from the world, and enters
into his closet, and prays to his father who is in secret, and hears in secret
in order to his rewarding openly. And as becomes a man of Godliness, he every
day takes care, that the morning and evening sacrifice ascends up to God from
his family, as the perpetual burnt-offering: Nor is he content with these more
private duties of devotion: but is constant at the house of God, serious and
reverent in his attendance on the exercises of public worship, both in season
and out of season.

And very particular is the regard which he pays to the Lord's sabbath. It Is
his great concern and care to sanctify this day of God; not allowing himself
to do his own ways, or find his own pleasure, or speak his own words. He
religiously seperates himself from the world, rests from all its labors and
employments, and spends the time in the service of God, and to the purposes of
piety and devotion.

And he pays a great regard to the word as well as sabbath of God; consulting
it upon all occasions, as the man of his counsel, his main guide in the way of
duty. The scripture he receives as given by inspiration of God: And because
it is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for instruction in righteousness, he
repairs to it as a suitable means in order to his becoming perfect as a man of
God, and thoroughly furnished unto all good works.

In a word, the Godly man is one that expresses a due regard to God and every
thing that bears relation to him, through the general tenor of his actions. He
is one entirely devoted to God; and it is his desire and care, that his whole
external conduct may express the highest veneration of him. He would not
willingly do any thing offensive to God, but every thing pleasing in his sight.
He aims at the glory of God; and what gives the finishing stroke in his
character, constantly endeavors to be as like him as possible. He continually
sets God before him as his pattern and exemplar, and is an imitator of him as a
dear child. He has no higher ambition than to resemble God, and it is his daily
care to appear in the world, in some proportion, a living image of him; being
holy as he is holy, and perfect as his father in heaven is perfect.

2. But I must now go on in the second place, to speak of the Faithful man. The
text makes mention not only of the Godly man, but the Faithful man. And the
character is capable of being understood in a variety of senses, according to
the various use of the word Faithful*

Sometimes, it relates to our words, and means the same thing with speaking the
truth. Hence that of Prove. 14. 5. A faithful witness will not lie. And in this
sense of the word, the faithful man is a man of truth and veracity; one who
makes conscience of his words as well as actions. Lying and deceit are
abomination to him, as they are to the holy God. He knows not how to utter a
falsehood, nor dare he do it, nor will he ever knowingly break in upon the law
of truth. He is one whose word may be relied on. There is an agreement between
his heart and tongue. He believes what he says, and when ever he speaks, it is
under the habitual influence of those apostolic injunctions Col. 3. 9.
, Lie not one to another, seeing ye have put off the old man with his deeds.
Ephesians. 4. 25.
Wherefore putting away lying, speak every man truth with his neighbor: for we
are members one of another.

Sometimes again, the word faithful relates to our promises, and intends
faithfulness in performing them. Thus it is used, 1 These. 5. 24. Faithful is he
who calls you, who also will do it. And in this sense, the faithful man is
one who will stand to his word, be punctual in a compliance with his
engagements. He is not one of those who make promises to serve a present turn,
without any intention to perform them: But when ever he passes his word, he
speaks the truth in his heart, honestly designs to do what he says; looking
upon his word as sacred, and himself as solemnly bound by it: Nor will he fail
if possible, of an exact compliance with it. Yea, so punctual is he to his
word, so exact to his engagements, that he will be faithful to comply, though it be
to his real damage. As the Psalmist has drawn his character Psalm. 15. 4.
, though he swears to his own hurt, he changes not.

Sometimes again, the word faithful relates to a trust committed to us, and
means the same thing with fidelity in the discharge of it. And this is the most
proper as well as common sense, in which it is used in scripture. In this sense
of the word, we read of Moses in that language, Numb. 12. 7. My servant Moses,
-- who is faithful in all my house. So of David, 1 Samuel 22. 14. Who is so
faithful among all thy servants as David. So of Daniel, Dan. 6. 4. Forasmuch as
he was faithful; neither was there any error or fault found in him. And in this
sense of the word, the faithful man is one who uses fidelity in the trust
reposed to him. Whatever the betrustment be that is committed to him, whether
it relates to the souls or bodies of men, their temporal or spiritual concerns,
he will endeavor to be answerable to it, by a conscientious care to discharge
the duties expected and required of him. He will not betray his trust, nor shrink
from under the burdens of it; neither will he let it suffer through neglect, or a
carless, slothful, inactive management of it: but will be tho'row and effectual
in doing the duties belonging to it. He looks upon his trust as committed to
him by God. He realises the eye of God upon him; and upon the principles of
religion, a regard to God and the good of men, behaves with care and prudence,
and diligence. He expects to be called to an account at the great day of
reckoning, how he has managed his trust, and therefore applies himself to the
proper duties of it, with the greatest care; being active and laborious in
doing what he has been called to in the providence of God: And he is solicitous
to do what he does in the best manner, so as shall best answer the end of his
betrustment, and so as that he may finally come off with the testimony of a
good conscience, the approbation of men; and what is of infinitely more worth,
the approbation of his Lord and Judge, saying unto him, in the great day of his
appearing, Well done, thou good and faithful servant; thou have been faithful
over a few things, I will make thee ruler over many things: Enter thou into the
Joy of thy Lord.

In fine, the word faithful is sometimes taken in a large and extended sense,
so as to mean the same thing with fidelity in the whole work of religion. Thus
it is used, Rev. 2. 10. Be thou faithful to death, and I will give thee a crown
of life. And this is one thing, perhaps the chief thing intended, when we read,
in the epistles of Paul, of this and the other fellow Christian, in that style,
a faithful servant of Jesus Christ. And in this sense of the word, the faithful
man is one, who employs himself with fidelity in the great business of
religion. He does not content himself with vain wishes and faint ineffectual
endeavors; but is active and stirring in the work of God and his soul's
salvation. His concern is, to fill up his time with work and labor; doing with
his might whatsoever his hand finds to do: considering there is no work, nor
device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom in the grave, whither he goes. He considers
the several relations he sustains in the world, and is sollicitous to do the
duties of them. He considers the various talents committed to him by his great
Lord, and uses his best skill to improve them to the best advantage. He
considers the particular state and condition of life it has pleased God to
place him in, and is careful to behave in it to the honor of God and his own
final good account. In a word, his great aim is, to serve God and his
generation according to the will of God; and this is the chief care, the main
endeavor of his life.

And thus you have seen the variety of senses, in which a man may be
characteris'd as a faithful man. The particular sense, in which the description
is to be understood in the text, is not certain: nor is it material. For in
either sense, the character is beautiful and lovely; and affords just ground
for lamentation, when persons so excellent and desirable cease from among men.
And this brings me,

II. In the second place, to explain the sense, in which the Godly and faithful
are said, in the text, to cease and fail from among the children of men. And
there are two senses, in which the words may be explained.

1. They may be understood of the death of the faithful and Godly. And the
death of this kind of persons is a common case. The Godly are equally exposed
to death with the ungodly, and will as surely fall by the stroke of it, sooner
or later. There is no discharge in this war for saints any more than sinners.
Holiness it self will not secure from the first, however it will deliver from
the second death. Says the Apostle, Heb. 9. 27. It Is appointed for all men once
to die. Agreeable whereto is that of the inspired Psalmist, Psalm 89. 48. What
man is he that lives, and shall not see death? The sense is, there is no man,
let him be who he will, or his moral character what it will, but he shall as
surely die as he is now alive.

And the Godly have always been subjected to death in common with others. We
read of Noah, Abraham, Moses, and a long list of celebrated saints, in that
language, These all died in faith. It Is through the dark valley of the shadow
of death, that the saints have all along, through the several successive ages
of the world, passed into the heavenly state; and they must pass the same way
still, in order to their arriving at the same blessed place.

And now, this removal of the Godly and faithful by death, is what the holy
Psalmist might have particularly in his view, when he speaks in the text, of
their ceasing and failing from among the children of men.

It Is observable, Ahimelech, a Godly faithful man, and together with him, no
less than fourscore and five Priests of the Lord, were slain upon the spot, by
the command of Saul, in the days of David and upon his account; as we may read,
in the 22d. Chapter of the first book of Samuel. It might possibly be upon
this, or some such sad and remarkable ceasing and failing of the Godly and
faithful by death, that David uttered these words: or, he might cry out in the
language of the text, upon the news of the decease of some pious and faithful
friend. It Is thought, that Samuel, the Lord's prophet, a Godly man, and one of
David's best and most faithful friends, died about the time of the composure of
this Psalm: Upon which, says one, When I read, 1 Samuel 25. 1. That Samuel died,
and all the Israelites were gathered together, and lamented him, and buried him
in his house in Ramah; methinks I hear David among the mourners, crying out
with the greatest sorrow and concern, Help Lord, for the Godly man cease, for
the faithful fail from among the children of men.

And it is with great justness and propriety, the Godly and faithful may be said
to cease and fail from among the children of men, when they are taken away by
death. For an end is now, at once, put to their being on the earth; and we may
say of them in the language of holy Job Job 7. 8.
, The eye of him that has seen them, shall see them no more. For they are
gone, as he elsewhere observes -- 10. 21.
, whence they shall not return, even to the land of darkness, and the shadow of
death. Agreeable whereto is that elegant description he has given us of death 7.
9. 10.
, As the clod is consumed and vanishes away, so he that goes down to the
grave shall come up no more to his house, neither shall his place know him any
more.

2. The words may be understood of the ceasing of the Godly and faithful, through
the growing corruption and degeneracy of the times. And this is the sense, in
which the words are most commonly explained. Says a learned Annotator Bp.
Patrick in Loc.
. This Psalm was composed in a very corrupt age, in which it was hard to find
an honest plain-dealing man, in whom one might confide. To be sure, we often
find this holy man of God lamenting the badness of the times, complaining of
the increase of wickedness, a universal degeneracy. Says he, in the verse
following the text, They speak vanity every one with his neighbor: with
flattering lips and a double tongue do they speak. And he makes that sad
remark, Psalm 14. 2, 3. The Lord looked down from heaven upon the children of
men, to see if there were any that did understand and seek God. They are all
gone aside, they are altogether become filthy, there is none that does good,
not one. And some suppose, that this might probably be the state of things,
when David penned the text. There was so little an appearance of real virtue
and goodness, and so great an appearance of vice and wickedness, among all
sorts of persons, that he trembled at the sad prospect, and could not refrain
from applying to God for help. We may charitably and reasonably hope, says a
celebrated writer* there were many serious and upright men in the land; as
there were seven thousand in the days of Elijah, who maintained their
integrity, when he thought there had been none besides himself: But it seems
they were so private and concealed, so much out of David's view and
observation, that he feared they were ceased from among the children of men: at
least, the defection was so general, that he thought he had just reason to take
up his lamentation, and go to God for help.

And it must be acknowledged, there is not a more awful token of the
displeasure of almighty God, than the general ceasing of Godly and faithful
men. When men of known piety and fidelity fail from among a people, by being
called out of the world; or when they cease by means of the growing degeneracy
of the times, it is a sad symptom, and bodes ill to a people: Nor is there a
more proper season, nor can there be greater reason, to cry after God in the
language of the text. And this leads to the third thing proposed, which was,

III. To show what reason there is to cry to God for help, when the Godly and
faithful fail from among men. And there is good reason for this upon the
following accounts.

1. There is just ground of fear, what God may be about to do against a people,
when the Godly and faithful cease from among them: And this, whether they cease
by death, or the growing degeneracy of the age.

If they cease by reason of Death, it is a sad presage of evil a coming. For
Godly faithful men are the defense and safety of the places where they live. So
good Josiah was the protection of Israel. While he was alive, God would not
bring deserved evil upon them* but as soon as he was gathered to his fathers,
the threatened calamities brake in upon them. And it is often the method of
providence, to remove good men by death, to make way for the execution of his
judgments. It Is observable, the first thing we read of, after the death and
burial of Elisha, that holy man of God, is, that the Moabites invaded the land
2 Kings, 13. 20.
. And it is particularly remark't of the righteous, that they are taken away
from the evil to come Isaiah 57. 1.
. As one expresses it, "There is great cause of fear, when God houses his dear
and faithful servants, lest some heavy storm of Judgment should be ready to
break upon them.

Or, if the Godly and faithful cease by means of growing wickedness, there is
the same, or rather, greater reason for fear, what may be the event. There is
no worse symptom upon a people than that of increasing degeneracy. When
Godliness fails through the prevalency of profaneness and impiety; when real
virtue and goodness ceases, through and overballance of vice and wickedness, it is
a sad prognostic of impending judgment. For it has always been the method of
heaven, to testify against the degeneracy of a people; especially has this been
the method of providence, when the defection is great; God is generally
neglected, his ordinances despised and ways forsaken.

The ceasing of Godly and faithful men is therefore a matter that administers
just ground of fear, lest the effect should be something sad and sorrowful in
the course of divine providence. We may, in this case, well tremble for fear of
God, and be afraid of his judgments. And if ever, there is now reason to seek
the Lord, and cry earnestly to him for help; especially, if we go on, and
consider in the second place,

2. That help may be obtained from God, and can be had from none else.

If the Godly and faithful cease by means of death, he can raise up and qualify
others to stand in their place and make their ground good. The residue of the
spirit is with him: and he can cause the spirit of Elijah to rest on Elisha. As
he takes Godly useful men out of the world by death, he can raise up others,
and form within them like principles of universal goodness. He can make them
men of like piety and integrity, of like truth and fidelity, of like zeal for
the divine honor, and of like extensive serviceableness in their day and
generation. And God only can do this. In vain is it to look for help, in this
matter, from any but him. He only forms the spirit of man within him, and he
only can form men for his own glory.

Or, if the Godly and faithful cease by the prevailing badness of the times, in
this case also, God only can afford help. When a people are become generally
corrupt and wicked, the powerful interposition of God, and this only, will be
effectual, to restrain them from vice, and bring them back to the practice of
religion and virtue. They may possibly think there is little need of the Divine
help, and be apt to leave God out of all their thoughts. But if ever they are
reformed, and recovered to their duty, it must be by means of help obtained
from God. Says the Prophet, bespeaking the Jewish Nation in the name of God, O
Israel, thou have destroyed thy self; but in me is thy help Hos. 13. 9.
. And Ephraim, by whom we are to understand the Kingdom of Israel, the ten
tribes; I say, Ephraim is represented as being made sensible, that his help was
only in God; and is therefore brought in, applying to God in that serious and
pertinent language, Turn thou me, and I shall be turned; for thou art the Lord
my God Jeremiah 31. 16.
. If it shall please God, by the powerful influence of his grace and spirit, to
turn a degenerate people from their vices and follies, they will then be
effectually turned; and not else. It can be done by no other power, by no other
means, in no other way. Says the prophet, affording direction to a sinful
people, in their return to the Lord their God, Take with you words, and turn to
the Lord: say unto him, Take away all iniquity, and receive us graciously,
Hosea 14. 2.

Now, as help may be had from God, and can be had from none else, this is a
good reason, why we should apply to him for it: Especially if it be added in
the next place,

3. That he expects to be sought to for help. And this is very particularly his
expectation from a sinful and degenerate people: Nor without suitably applying
to God, may they hope to receive that help, without which they must perish in
their iniquities. It Is remarkable, when God had promised his people of old, to
cleanse them from their filthiness, to give them a new heart, and put his
spirit within them, to make them a Godly faithful people, he adds upon it, in
that express and peremptory language, I will yet for this be enquired of by the
house of Israel, to do it for them Ezekiel. 36. 37.
. And when God intends mercy to a people fallen by their iniquities, he does
not ordinarily bestow it, till they are brought upon their Knees, and earnestly
pray for it. Says God to his people Israel, Jer. 29. 11. I know the thoughts
that I think toward you, thoughts of peace and not of evil. It follows in the
next words, Then shall ye call upon me, and ye shall go and pray unto me, and I
will hearken unto you. And ye shall seek me and find me, when ye shall search
for me with all thine heart.

Upon these and such like grounds, we should be crying to God for help, when
the Godly and faithful cease from among us. We should go to him in a way of
prayer, committing the case to him, as to our merciful father, who is able and
ready to do for us even beyond all that we can either ask or think.

Only, when we seek to God for help, let us remember to do it in the Name of
Christ; according to our Savior's own direction as well as encouragement, John
14. 13, 14. Whatsoever ye shall ask in my name, that will I do; that the father
may be glorified in the son. If ye shall ask any thing in my name, I will do
it. Parrallel whereto are those words in the 16th Chapter the 23d and 24th
verses, Verily, verily, I say unto you, whatsoever ye shall ask the father in
my name, he will give it you. Hitherto ye have asked nothing in my name: Ask,
and ye shall receive, that your joy may be full.

And our prayer for help should be put up likewise, with a becoming
seriousness, reverence and subjection of soul; not pretending to prescribe to
God the time, or manner or method of helping us; but leaving it with his own
infinite wisdom and goodness, to manage the matter as he knows to be best.

The Application now remains.

And it shall be in one word, turning the discourse into a serious exhortation;
beseeching us to apply our selves to God, in the language of holy David in the
text, Help Lord! for the Godly man cease; for the faithful fail from among
the children of men.

And considering our present circumstances, perhaps there is as much reason for
the prayer now, as there was in the days of David. How many holy good men, men
of eminent piety and fidelity, both in Church and State, have been removed out
of the land by death, within the compass of a few years!

What a ceasing has there been among our Godly faithful magistrates? How many
have been taken away of late years, who were Zealous for the honor of God, and
sought the welfare of their people; men of known integrity and impartial
distribution of justice, the ministers of God for good; not terrors to good
works, but the evil.

And if we look into the Sepulcres of the prophets, how many shall we find
there, who, not many years since, shone among us as Stars of the first
magnitude; men eminently pious and laborious, wise and prudent, faithful and
useful, and greatly renowned for the gifts of grace, as well as their natural
and acquired accomplishments.

And in private life likewise, how many have failed from among us by reason of
death? Men devout toward God; men of conscience and religion; men of faith and
prayer, sound in God's statutes, and of an exemplary good conversation in
Christ.

But what is still more lamentable, what a fearful ceasing has there been of
the Godly and Faithful, through the growing degeneracy of all sorts of persons
among us? How general has been our revolt from God, our defection for real and
substantial goodness?

The blessed God might bespeak us, with relation to our original or first
existence as a people, in the language of Jer. 2. 2, 3. I remember thee the
kindness of thy youth, the love of thine espousals, when thou wentest after me
in the wilderness, in a land that was not sown. Israel was holiness to the
Lord, and the first fruits of his increase. But might he not expostulate with
us, as in the two following verses, Hear ye the word of the Lord, O house of
Jacob, and all the families of the house of Israel: Thus says the Lord, what
iniquity have ye found in me, that ye are gone far from me, and have walked
after vanity, and are become vain? It may, with great propriety, be said of
New England as in Judges 2. 7. And the people served the Lord all the days of
Joshua, and all the days of the elders that out lived Joshua, who had seen all
the great works of the Lord, that he did for Israel. But may it not, with as
much truth and justness, be added, as follows in the 10, 11, 12. verses, And
all that generation were gathered unto their fathers: And there arose another
generation after them, which knew not the Lord, nor yet the works which he did
for Israel. And the children of Israel did evil in the sight of the Lord, --
and they forsook the Lord God of their fathers. --

When we consider the great piety of our progenitors; their reverence toward
God, their love to the Lord Jesus Christ, their zeal for the purity of the
Gospel worship, their contempt of the world, their self denying temper and
conduct; and in a word, their holy and exemplary walk in all the commandments
and ordinances of the Lord: I say, when we consider these things, and then take
a comparative view of our selves, we have reason to blush and be ashamed to
think, how dreadfully we are degenerated. The holy God might lament over us, as
he once did over his people Israel Isaiah 1. 4.
, Ah sinful nation, a people laden with iniquity, a seed of evil doers,
children that are corrupters: they have forsaken the Lord, they have provoked
the holy one of Israel to anger, they are gone away backward. We have risen up
in our Godly and faithful fathers stead, a generation that have wickedly
departed from the Lord: And it is astonishing to think, to what a height we are
grown in impiety and profaneness, in formality and hypocrisy* in injustice and
oppression, in pride and ambition, in covetousness and worldliness, in rioting
and drunkenness, in chambering and wantonness, in voluptuousness and a
universal debauchery of manners.

Upon this view of the state of things in our land, we have surely reason,
infinite reason for humiliation and mourning; to lament not only the ceasing of
the godly and faithful by death; but the ceasing of their Spirit, their piety
and integrity, their zeal for God and the establishment of true religion, through
the prevalence of evil and all manner of wickedness, which, like an increasing
flood, threatens to overflow the land.

It Is certainly time, high time to cry to God for help. And this we have been
doing the week past, on the day of our solemn fasting and praying. But have we
not reason for inquiry, did we then keep a fast unto God, even unto God, an
acceptable fast, the fast which he has chosen? If so, we shall not think it
enough, that we have confessed and externally humbled our selves for our sins;
but we shall forsake them, making it our care to turn every man from the evil
of his ways. We shall loose the bands of wickedness, undo the heavy burdens,
and let the oppressed go free. We shall deal our bread to the hungry, and bring
the poor that are cast out to our house: When we see the naked we shall cover
him, and we shall not hide our self from our own flesh. Then shall our light
break forth as the morning, and our health shall spring forth speedily, and our
righteousness shall go before us: the glory of the Lord shall be our rereward.
Then shall we call, and the Lord shall answer; we shall cry, and he shall say,
here I am. Then shall God appear for our help, revive among us the good spirit
of our Godly faithful Progenitors; pour out his spirit upon us, and his
blessing on our offspring: making our seed and name, like the new heavens and
the new earth, to remain for ever.

But I shall be yet more particular, and take liberty to address the
exhortation to this flock of our Lord Jesus Christ; calling upon you, to plead
with God in the words of the text, Help Lord! for the Godly man cease, for
the faithful fail from among us.

Great has been the ceasing of Godly Faithful persons among us, both men and
women, within these few years. The ancient strong pillars of this Church are
mostly thrown down by death. The hoary heads of those numbers of venerable aged
disciples, which were once as a crown of glory to this assembly, are now laid
in the dark and silent grave: and small is the remnant that is left. Like the
gleaning of the vintage, they are thinly scattered, but here and there one to
be seen in the place of worship.

It Is worth our remark, the continuance of old men, the protracting their days,
is particularly mentioned as one of the signal blessings of that happy time,
which, according to the promise of God, we are looking and hoping, and praying
for. To this purpose we read, Isa. 65. 19, 20. And I will rejoice in Jerusalem,
and joy in my people: -- There shall be no more thence an old man that has not
filled his days. And on the other hand, the ceasing of old men is made, in
scripture, a very severe token of the Divine displeasure: according to that
threatening of God against the house of Eli, 1 Samuel 2. 31. Behold the days come,
that I will cut off thine arm, and the arm of thy Father's house, that there
shall not be an old man in thine house: Agreeable whereto is that sorrowful
exclamation, Isa. 3. 1, 2. For behold, the Lord, the Lord of hosts, does take
away from Jerusalem, and from Judah, -- the prudent and the ancient.

A general failing of aged saints should therefore be esteemed a sorrowful
humbling article, in the course of Divine providence. And as there has visibly
been a very great ceasing of the aged disciples of this Church, we should, as
it is our duty, religiously observe and resent the hand of God herein.

But what I would more especially call upon you to lament is, the ceasing of
those Godly and Faithful men, the manner of whose holy life and happy death is
yet fresh in our remembrance.

The first whom it pleased God to remove from us, was taken out of the Seat of
Deacons Mr. Zachariah Thayer, who died Feb. 7. 17^^
; a man of faith and prayer: full of Christ, and admiring adoring tho'ts of the
riches and freeness of sovereign grace toward lost and perishing sinners; an
early convert, and a well-grown Christian; an exact and conscientious keeper of
the sabbath; a devout and constant attender on the public worship; a zealous
and faithful reprover of sin; a known promoter of serious and heavenly
discourse; a hearty mourner for the increasing badness of the times; a fast
friend and well wisher to the interest of these Churches; and lastly, one who
discharged the office he sustained among us, with fidelity to God, compassion
and impartiality toward the poor, and acceptance among his brethren.

We were then called in the holy and righteous providence of God, to resign up
one of those good men Mr. Jonathan Jackson, who died May 4. 1736.
, for whom, as the Apostle speaks, one would even dare to die; a devout man,
and one that feared the Lord with all his house, which gave much alms to the
people, and prayed to God always; a man universally beloved and well spoken of,
for his meek and quiet spirit; his humble, peaceable and inoffensive carriage;
his large and seasonable charities, which were ever going up for a memorial
before God; and in a word, his strong and steady faith in God and Christ, and
things unseen and eternal: discovering it self in a holy contempt of the world,
with all its pomps and vanities; an uninterrupted willingness; yea, constant
desire, in the midst of riches and plenty, to depart hence to be with Christ,
which he esteemed far better than to abide here.

And more lately, one Mr. Nicholas Buttolph, who died Jan. 28. 1736, 7*
from the second Seat, was selected for death and suddenly taken from us; a man
of solid and substantial religion; pious toward God and righteous toward men;
sober in his life, exact and regular in his whole conduct; a constant mantainer
of good order and religious duties in his family; of an upright heart, and a
blameless and exemplary conversation.

And more lately still, we have been called to mourn the death of one, who,
though not related to us these few last years, was yet formerly, and for a long
course of time, your faithful laborious Pastor Mr. Benjamin Wadsworth, the
Reverend President of Harvard College, who died March 1^. 17^7.
: than whom, perhaps, few were more constant and diligent in employing their
time and talents in the service, and to the honor of God: And not many have
been more instrumental of spiritual and eternal good to the souls of men. I
doubt not, he has a testimony in the hearts of many of you, to his care of your
souls, his conscientious arduous endeavors to bring you to God, in the way of
true and undefiled religion. You are all witnesses of his holy and heavenly
walk among you; of his being to you an example, in word, in conversation, in
charity, in spirit, in faith, in purity. -- But his excellent character having
been already laid open to you, by a better and more proper hand, I shall only
add that exhortation of the apostle, adapting it to the present case, Heb. 13.
7. Remember him, who had the rule over you, who spoke unto you the word of God:
whose faith follow, considering the end of his conversation.

It remains now to take some proper notice of the more special occasion of my
bringing you such a discourse at this time; the death of that valuable person,
it pleased the holy God to take from us the last week.

I could not refrain from dropping a tear over his grave: Nor can I suppose,
that any that knew him will except against a public recommending an example,
in many respects, so worthy of imitation.

The person, whose decease we are lamenting, was an instance of early piety. He
betimes entered upon a religious course, and had made good progress in the way
of God's commandments. He was a cheerful, active, good Christian; a hearty
lover of God and all good men; especially the Godly faithful Ministers of
Christ, whom he highly esteemed for their work's sake, often showing them the
kindness of the Lord. He was a man of prayer; constant at the house and worship
of God; true to his word; punctual to his engagements; sincere in his
professions; charitable in his deeds, being always ready to every good work; an
upright, sober, honest, faithful man; one that feared God above many, and
walked in all the commandments and ordinances of the Lord blameless.

As a Deacon, he was grave, not double-tongued, not given to much wine, not
greedy of filthy lucre; holding the mystery of the faith in a pure conscience:
And he used his office, being found blameless. He was indeed excellently turned
and spirited to it; and by his active, constant, prudent and faithful
attendance on the duties of it, was a signal blessing in his place, and known
and acknowledged to be so.

It may be said of him, with truth and justice, he was generally beloved while
living, and as generally lamented now he is dead. And in his death, the Town
have lost a man useful in his generation; the Church, a faithful officer as
well as generous benefactor; and the poor, an open-banded and compassionate
friend.

I shall only add, as he was one who lived to Christ, we have reason to hope he
died in him: And of such the apostle John speaks in that remarkable language,
Rev. 14. 13. I heard a voice from heaven, saying to me, write, blessed are the
dead which are in the Lord, from henceforth: Yea, says the spirit, that they
may rest from their labors; and their works do follow them.

A thought comforting and refreshing! and should be as a spring of joy to the
mourning children, who should temper their sorrow with the good hope they have,
that it is now well with their departed father in the paradise of God. Be
thankful you mourn not as those who have no hope: For if Christ died and rose
again, even so them also which sleep in Jesus, will God bring with him.
Wherefore comfort your selves and one another with these words. And beware of
witholding from God the glory of his sovereign dominion. Be dumb with silence,
and open not your mouths, unless it be to acknowledge and adore the
sovereignty, and holiness, and wisdom, and righteousness of this dispensation;
and to supplicate at the throne of God all that support and comfort you need.
And let it be your care to make a wise and holy use of this providence. Learn
herefrom the uncertainty of all earthly enjoyments; and more than ever trust in
God, and make him your hope and happiness. Choose your father's God for your
God; and know him and serve him with a perfect heart and a willing mind: So
will he be your friend and father; your guide through the world; your guide through
death, and your portion for ever.

And now, my brethren, the ceasing of such godly and faithful men by death, is
a frown of providence, and a sore breach upon us. Let us not be insensible of
our great loss in the many deaths, there have been, of late, among us. Our
glory is hereby thinned, our strength impaired, and we are gradually becoming
weak and feeble. Let us lift up a cry to almighty God with holy David, Help
Lord! for the Godly man cease; for the Faithful fail from among the children
of men. And let there be no reason for that complaint, the righteous perishes,
and no man lays it to heart. Let us duly resent the removal of our pious
brethren in Christ, and be concerned to see their places filled. And let us be
constant and fervent in our applications to God, to be the repairer of our
breaches; to make daily additions to us, of those who shall be men of like
piety and integrity, with those who are gone off the stage.

I shall only add, have we not reason to fear, whether there han't been a far
more awful ceasing of the Godly and faithful from among us, through the growing
wickedness of the present day, than by means of death? O let us lament our
grievous departures from the living God! He, which searches the reins and
hearts, might justly bespeak us, as he once did the Church of Ephesus, I have
somewhat against thee, because thou have left thy first love Rev. 2. 4.
. And the exhortation following hereupon, is as applicable to us as them, verse.
5.
Remember therefore from whence thou art fallen, and repent, and do thy first
works. O let us not be insensible of the sad low state of religion among us!
Let it deeply affect us to think, how far we generally fall short of that
christian spirit, and heavenly good conversation, for which our predecessors
were remarkable. And let us be mightily concerned for the revival of the things
among us, which remain, and are ready to die. Let that be our ardent prayer to
God, the God of all grace, O Lord, revive thy work in the midst of the years,
in the midst of the years make known; in wrath remember mercy. Or, in those
well adapted words of the inspired Psalmist, let us with one united voice make
our supplications, Return, we beseech thee, O God of hosts; look down from
heaven, and behold, and visit this vine -- which thy right hand has planted.
Let thy hand be upon the man of thy right hand, upon the son of man, whom thou
made strong for thy self: so will we not go back from thee. Turn thou us
again, O Lord of hosts, cause thy face to shine, and we shall be saved.

And may it please the good and gracious God, as Godly faithful men are caused
to cease from among us by death, to raise up others, from time to time, to
supply their place! And may there never be wanting a Godly seed to serve God,
and uphold the Gospel worship and ordinances in this place! Instead of the
fathers, may there be the children! And may they rise up in their spirit, and
be filled with their zeal for the honor of Christ, and of pure and undefiled
religion!

And may it please the glorious King on God's holy hill of zion, to sanctify
and cleanse this his Church! And may it be presented, in the great day of his
appearing, to God even the father, a glorious church, without spot, or wrinkle,
or any such thing! Amen and Amen.

FINIS.

