AN ACCOUNT Of the Numbers that have died of the Distemper in the Throat,
Within the Province of New Hampshire, With some Reflections thereon. July 26.
1736.

BOSTON: Printed for Eleazer Russel in Portsmouth. 1736.

An Account of the Numbers that have died of the Distemper in the Throat,
within the Province of New Hampshire.
WE in the Province of New Hampshire (with the neighboring Places) have had
frequent Occasion to repeat that doleful Lamentation; Death is come up into our
Windows to cut off the Children from without. -- And it is fit that the
extraordinary Mortality which has been among us, should be ever remembered to
our Humiliation; in order to which a particular Account of the Numbers that
have died, in the several Towns within this Province, mostly the last Winter,
is here presented to the Public.

Though some have died of sundry Ages, yet the far greatest part were under Ten
Years of Age; and Providence having made such a remarkable Distinction, I
thought it proper to take Notice of it in the following Account.

In Portsmouth,

In the upper part of the Town have died,

Under Ten about 40. Between Ten and Fifteen 6. Above Twenty 1.
Two have died out of sundry Families, Four out of one. Some Families have lost
their only Child, and some who had but two Children have lost both of them.

In the lower part of the Town have died,

Under Ten 27. Between Ten and Twenty 2. Above Forty 1.
Two Families lost three, one of which lost all, who were buried at the same
time. One Family lost four.

In that Part of Portsmouth called the Plains, died,

Under Ten 14. Between Ten and Twenty 7. Above Forty 1.
Two Families lost four a piece.

In New Castle died,

Under Ten 11.
At the Shoals have died,

Under Seven 34. Between Ten and Fifteen 2. About Sixty 1.
One Family lost three, six Families lost two a piece; no Family lost all.

In Rye have died,

Under Ten 34. Between Ten and Fifteen 6. Above Fifteen 4.
Two Families lost three, one of which lost all, one Family lost four, and one
five.

In Greenland have died,

Under Ten 13. Between Fifteen and Twenty 2. Between Twenty and Thirty 3.
Two Families lost their only Child.

In Newington have died,

Under Ten 16. Between Ten and Fifteen 4. Between Fifteen and Twenty 1.
One Family lost four, two lost three, one of which lost all.

In Hampton,

In the first Parish have died,

Under Ten 37. Between Ten and Fifteen 4. Between Fifteen and Twenty 4. Between
Twenty and Thirty 8. Above Thirty 1. Above Ninety 1.
A Woman, who had the manifest Symptoms of the Distemper upon her.

Five Families lost three out of each, one Family lost four, one lost five,
within about a Fortnight, the Eldest dying first, and then the next Eldest,
'till the fifth died, and a sixth Child lived.

Three Families lost their only Child.

In the second Parish of Hampton have died,

Under Ten about 160. Between Ten and Fifteen about 25. Between Fifteen and
Twenty 15. Above Twenty, the eldest of which was nigh Forty 1^
All of these except a small Number died of the late fatal Distemper.

Nigh Twenty Families lost all their Children, Twenty two lost all their Sons,
most of them being only Sons. One Family lost seven, (six Children and a
'Prentice Boy) Two Families lost six a piece, Two Families lost five a piece,
Six Families lost four a piece; about fourteen Families lost three a piece.

Forty nine died in the Month of December.

It Is supposed that more than a sixth part of the Number of Inhabitants in that
Parish have died, within 13 Months.

In Exeter have died,

Under Ten 105. Under Fifteen 13. Between Fifteen and Twenty 5. Above Twenty 4.
Two Families lost each three, Two Families lost each four, Two Families lost
each five, of which one lost all, and the other had one spared.

The Distemper came into Exeter the Beginning of August, 1735.

In Stratham have died,

Under Ten 18.
One Family lost four.

In Newmarket have died,

Under Ten 20. Under Fifteen 1. Above Thirty 1.
One Family lost five, Four Families lost all their Children, one of them two,
and the other one a piece.

In Kingston have died,

Under Ten 96. Between Ten and Fifteen 10. Between Fifteen and Twenty 5. Above
Twenty 1. Above Thirty 1.
One Family that had four Children lost them all, another lost four out of six;
Six Families lost three each, one of which had but three.

The Distemper came into Kingston the latter end of May, 1735.

In Chester have died,

Under Ten 21.
One Family left three.

In Dover have died,

Under Ten ^^. Between Ten and Fifteen 5. Between Fifteen and Twenty 3. Between
Twenty and Thirty 3.
Sundry Families lost their only Child, and others that had but two lost them
both. Five Families lost three Children a piece, one of which buried three in
one Day. Two Families lost four, and one of them buried four in a Day. One
Family lost six Children, and four were buried at once.

This Distemper began among them in October, 1735.

In Durham have died,

Under Ten about 79. Under Twenty about 15. Between Twenty and Thirty about 6.
Three Families lost four Children a piece, each of which lost all but one.
Three Families lost all. The Distemper began among them in September.

In the Lower Parish of Kittery, a neighboring Town to Portsmouth, in the
other Province have died, 122.

No more than six exceeded Fifteen Years, and not more than six arrived to
Fifteen Years. These have died from June 1735, to the 16th of July, 1736.

According to the foregoing Accounts, there have died,

In Portsmouth, 99. In Newcastle, 11. At the Shoals, 37. In Rye, 44. In
Greenland, 18. In Newington, 21. In Hampton, 265. In Exeter, including
Newmarket, 149. In Stratham, 18. In Kingston, 113. In Chester, 21. In Dover,
88. In Durham, 100. The whole Number is, 984.
The Distemper began much later in most of the Towns than in the rest.

Since I received the Account from some of the Towns, the Distemper has come
into sundry more Families, and proved mortal to some of their Children.

I shall here take Occasion to give some Hint referring to this awful
Providence, which ever judicious Person may easily enlarge upon in hi^ own
Thoughts.

The Grave is a Land of Darkness without any Order, which has of late been
remarkably seen, in respect of the Age of those that have been brought to it,
when so many Younger ones have gone to their long Home before the Elder: Yet
every one may be said to die in his own Order, in respect of God's appointment,
who has determined the Time of every ones Death, and without whose Providence
not a Sparrow falls to the Ground; which is a good Reason why we should be
silent and submissive under such heavy Trials.

The Death of many Children before they were arrived to Years of Discretion,
shows the woeful Effects of Original Sin, and gives us all just Occasion to make
the same humble Reflection on our selves that David did, Behold, I was shapen
in Iniquity, and in Sin did my Mother conceive me: On which Account we might
justly have been cut off in the Beginning of our Days, but God has spared us in
the greatness of his Mercy.

In consideration of the above mentioned Mortality, which has been chiefly
among Children, young ones should be awakened to seek after God betimes, when
they see those that were as young, or younger than themselves, taken out of the
Land of the Living. It Is storied of a Child that was noted to be serious and
religiously disposed, and one asking the Reason hereof, the Child said, I
remember I must die; but being told you are likely to live many a Year longer,
the Child replied, I was lately at a Funeral, where I saw a Grave shorter than
my self. Many such sad Spectacles have been to be seen to late. O! that our
Children that are arrived to any Years of Discretion were so wise as to
consider their latter End, when they have had so frequent Warnings of it. Let
Children remember their Creator and Redeemer in their early Days, lest these
should be all the Days they shall ever have to remember them in. Many dear
Children have been laid in their Graves, where there is no remembrance of God;
those that survive are very inexcusable if they do not lay it to Heart, so as
seriously to think of their own dying, and instantly to prepare for it. Let
Children consider that they are Sinners, or else they would not be liable to
the Stroke of Death, and they have no more assurance of living long, than those
Children had, that are now gone down into Silence; and let them think sadly
what a doleful Condition they will be in, if they should die in their Sins; and
let them speedily seek an Interest in Jesus Christ, who alone can save them
from their Sins, and who has said for their Encouragement, Those that seek me
early shall find me. Let every Child set himself to learn and understand his
Catechism, and learn to be good betimes. A Pious Child is the Delight of God
and Angels. Let every Child learn to pray, and daily go alone and beg of God,
that for his Mercy's sake and for Christ's sake, He would forgive his original
Sin and all his actual Sins, and that He would give him a new Heart and put a
new Spirit within him, and cause him to love Him above all, and to take heed of
offending Him any more by sinful Thoughts, by wicked Words or vicious Deeds.
And O! that all our Children would remember the Sabbath Day to keep it holy,
not spending it in Play or Idleness, but in diligent reading of the holy Bible
and other good Books, and in a diligent attendance on the Worship of God,
Private and Public. Such Children may hope that God will own them for his
Children, that He will take them under his Protection, and that they shall
live, so long as an All wise God sees Life would be good for them in this
World, and if they should be cut off in their younger Days (as many others have
been) God will satisfy them with long Life, even with Length of Days for ever
and ever in a better World.

It has been observed concerning several Children, that their Spirits have been
strangely supported in the Agonies of Death; they have showed a becoming
submission to the Divine Will, and expressed good Hopes of being received to a
better World; and uttered such things as yielded great Consolation to their
sorrowful Parents. Out of the Mouth of Babes and Sucklings God can perfect
Praise.

The great Mortality that has been among Children, should make Parents very
sensible, that their Children are uncertain Comforts, and should quicken them
to a faithful Discharge of their Duty toward their Children, by sincerely
dedicating them to God, and by training them up in the Knowledge and Fear of
God. This will be the way for them to have Comfort in their Children, whether
Living or Dying.

Elder ones should adore the Power and Patience of God in prolonging their
frail and forfeited Lives; and when they see so many younger and more Innocent
than themselves, taken away in such an awful manner, they have reason to make
haste and not delay to keep God's Commandments, lest He should be provoked to
inflict the like awful Judgment upon them: And some of sundry Ages having been
taken away by this woeful Distemper, it should serve for the awakening of all;
for what has befallen others may also befall any of us.

How awakening especially should the Death of Children be to their Parents?
When the firstborn of the Egyptians were smitten, they said, We be all dead
Men. Parents are strangely stupid, if the Death of their Children does not put
them in mind of their own Mortality. And it should cause them to consider
wherein they may have offended God; as the Woman said to the Man of God, Art
thou come to call my Sin to remembrance, and to stay my Son?

But we are not to look upon the immediate sufferers in this Calamity as
greater Sinners than others: Our Savior checks this censorious Humor, Suppose
ye that these Galileans were Sinners above all the Gali-leans, because they
suffered such Things? I tell you, nay; but except ye repent, ye shall all
likewise perish.

And it must be granted, that the Good are often involved with the Bad in
Public Calamities; but God can and will make all things work together for good
to those particular Persons that love his Name.

We read of a hopeful Child in the House of Jerebeam, that died when he was
young, whereby he was taken away from the Evil to come: When hopeful Children
are taken away, we know not what Evil may be coming; it concerns us speedily to
acquaint our selves with God and make our Peace with Him, and then Good shall
come unto us.

Many have been bereaved of their only Child, and others who have had more
Children have been bereaved of them all; but there is enough in God to make up
all our Losses in the Creature: And those that seek Him in good earnest shall
find Him better to them, than ten Sons.

Sundry have been raised up from a very low estate; for the Lord kills and
makes alive, He brings down to the Grave and brings up, which may be
understood either of the Distinction He makes between some and others; He
kills some, and makes or keeps others alive, that were attended with the
same threatening Symptoms, which must be resolved into the Sovereign Pleasure of
God; even so Father, because it seemed good in thine Eyes; or it may be
understood of the Change He makes in the same Person, whom He brings down to
the Brink of the Grave, and raises up when He pleases. Our Eyes have beheld
many such Instances of the Wonder-working Providence of God.

And the Distemper that has proved mortal to so many, and very grievous to
others, has hither to been escaped by many, or they have had it in a moderate
Degree. Such distinguishing Favors calls for great Thankfulness.

Let those Families whom God has mercifully spared, so as not to make any
Breach upon them, not be high-minded, but fear: The discriminating Goodness of
God toward them should lead them to Repentance, and they are deeply obliged,
If Iniquity be in their Hands, to put it far away, and not to suffer Wickedness
to dwell in their Tabernacles.

Those Parents that have been bereaved of one or two of their Children, and
have had others spared to them, when they consider how many have lost a greater
Number, and that several have been bereaved of all their Children, they have
great Reason to be silent both in Heart and Tongue, under the Loss that they
have sustained, and to bless the Name of God, that He has not dealt so severely
by them, as He has by some others, acknowledging that it is of the Lord's free
and undeserved Mercies that they and their's have not been consumed.

And it becomes us all as the Elect of God to put on Bowels of Mercies toward
those sorrowful Parents, that have lost sundry of their Children, and
especially those that have been bereaved of all, and we ought to present our
fervent Requests before the Throne of Grace in their behalf, that as their
Sorrows abound, so the Divine Consolations may abound toward them; and though
they are ready to think as good Jacob once did, that these things are against
them, we should pray that they may be really for them, in the Issue, that they
may work for their spiritual and everlasting Good.

Though Days of Fasting and Prayer have been observed in the Beginning of this
fatal Calamity, it is to be feared they were not attended with a suitable
Reformation; and therefore God has answered us by terrible things in
Righteousness.

We have for some Years been free from the Calamity of War, but God has many
Arrows of Judgment in his Quiver, and He can send such Epidemical Diseases
among us, as shall be more distressing to the Country in general, than any Wars
that we have ever experienced.

We were some Years ago visited with a terrible Earthquake, which was a loud
Call to Repentance, but the good impressions made by that awful Providence were
soon worn off in most Places; it is no wonder then that God proceeds to real
inflictions of Judgments, when we have forgotten the awful Warning. He has
given us thereof.

The Progress of the late Distemper has been very strange in its passing from
one Town to another, after a considerable space of Time, and in its long
remaining in one part of a Town, before it has passed into other parts, and in
its returning where it seemed to be quite gone and the Fears of it were blown
over; on these Accounts the Act of Providence is the more visible in sending
it, and we are led to look beyond natural Causes to the Hand of God, to whom we
are chiefly concerned to apply our selves, for the Removal of this awful
Calamity.

We know not what the Designs of Providence may be, but by what we hear of the
spreading of this Distemper in other parts of the Country, it seems as if the
Lord were risen up out of his holy Habitation and coming forth in this awful
manner against the whole Continent. It therefore concerns all Places and
Persons to prepare to meet the Lord in the way of his Judgments, by unfeigned
Repentance and humble Supplication, that He may turn from the fierceness of his
Anger.

The Loss of so many Children, whom if it had pleased God that they had lived,
might have built up many Families, will be a great Prevention of the Growth and
Increase of the Country; and ought therefore to be looked upon as a Frown of
Providence upon the Land in general, as well as a sore Affliction to the
Parents in particular.

We should seriously enquire wherefore the Almighty has thus contended with us?
We have Reason to look upon the strange unusual Distemper that has prevailed
among us, as the Fruit of strange Sins. Have not many strangely neglected the
great Salvation? Have not many Professors of Religion strangely contradicted
their Profession in their Lives? Have not many been strangely guilty of
profaning God's sacred Name and Sabbaths? Have not many People been strangely
addicted some to one Vice and some to another? To Pride, Envy, Malice, Evil,
speaking, Fraud and Injustice, Strife and Contention, Sensuality and
Intemperance, or to a worldly Spirit, whereby they have been disposed to be
strangely grasping after the World for the sake of their Children: But God by
the late awful Providence, has showed how vain a thing it is for Parents to be
inordinate in their Desires and Endeavors, to lay up for their Children, when
they know not whether their Children shall live to enjoy what they have laid up
for them.

It concerns us all to search and try our Ways, and turn unto the Lord, and
diligently hearken to his Voice, the Voice of his Rod as well as Word, and to
do that which is right in his Sight, and to give ea^^ to his Commandments and
keep all his Statutes; we may then expect the like Favor from Him, which He
promised to his ancient People; I will put none of those Diseases upon thee,
which I have brought upon the Egyptians; for I am the Lord that heals thee.

FINIS.

