Mr. BYLES's POEM Upon the Death OF THE QUEEN.

On the DEATH OF THE QUEEN. A POEM. Inscribed to His EXCELLENCY Governor
BELCHER.

By the Reverend Mr. BYLES,

Non Ego illam mihi dotem duco esse, quae dos dicitur:
Sed pudicitiam, et pudorem, et sedatum cupidinem,
Deum metum, parentum amorem, et cognatum concordiam:
Tibi morigera, atque ut munifica sim bonis, prosim probis.
Alcm. in Plaut. Amphit. BOSTON in NEW ENGLAND: Printed by J. DRAPER, for D.
HENCHMAN in Cornhill 1738

On the Death OF THE QUEEN. To His EXCELLENCY Governor BELCHER
WHile from each soul the sorrows copious flow,
And weeping Nations heave with mighty woe;
Whilst every lyre to mournful notes is strung,
And CAROLINA flutters on each tongue:
The mourning Muse, to consolation deaf,
Swells the sad consort with melodious grief.
Ten flowery springs on golden plumes have flown
Since she, triumphant, hailed thee on thy throne.
Oh CAROLINE! Oh Princess now no more!
Each heart bleeds inward, and all eyes deplore.
Stretched pale in death thy lovely limbs are laid,
Thy beauty, Albion, and thy joys are fled!
To thee, our tears their filial torrents bring,
And every passion opens every spring:
Lost to despair, in wild laments we moan,
And distant regions echo groan for groan.
'Twas she, adorned by Virtue's heavenly charms,
In rosey beauty blessed her Prince's arms;
Her lover with a pious eye she viewed,
And CAESAR at her feet successless su'd:
Imperial purple her calm eyes disdain,
And Roman Eagles waved their wings in vain;
Inspired, Religion's dictates to discharge,
She gave her self to Britain and to GEORGE.
Say, raised Britannia, how her gentle air,
Adorned the palace, and improved the fair.
Discord, and party-rage grew tame, to gaze,
And noisy factions clamoured in her praise.
Domestic life the illustrious Pattern graced;
On Royal milk the Royal infants feast:
Formed by her hands the Monarch race were seen,
The ripening Hero, and the future Queen.
Far fom vain courts her silent footsteps roam,
Where chosen volumes decked the sacred dome:
Still loud applauses of the joyful age,
Pursued her through the lonely Hermitage.
Here, in high raptures, her immortal mind,
Over Newton's Orbs expatiates, unconfined;
Familiar guest! she visits all the Skies,
From world to world, from sun to sun she flies;
Thence smiles at Mimick crowns which Sultans wear
In the mock empires of this little star.
Such was the Queen! she was -- but is no more! --
Wide wounds the woe, and spreads from shore to shore;
Groans the hoarse Ocean as the tidings fly,
Wave roars to wave, and rocks to rocks reply,
She was, but is no more -- lost all relief!
Now all her graces greaten all our grief.
Even our far land its anguish loud proclaims,
We felt her influence, and we blessed her beams.
But, BELCHER, first in Grief as in Command;
With early zeal you kissed her beauteous hand;
Your honors to the destined Queen you paid,
Ere the crown flashed, far-beaming, on her head
The Muse reluctant, by your Order sings,
Else had she silent wept, and broke her strings.
What fame to us reports, by you were seen,
The glance attractive, the majestic mien,
The Angel form each milder feature wears,
That look obliging, those descending airs.
Collected in her innocence she stood,
Devout to Heaven, to men divinely good,
You saw -- now see the fated end of all:
How the FAIR fades, and how the MIGHTY fall!
See the pale cheek its faded blush resign,
The dying eyes with transient luster shine;
Hoarse the sunk voice, the breast no longer warm,
And death gains fast over every mortal charm.
O Virtue, now thy joys are all sincere!
The exulting Queen demands the final prayer,
(Eternal glories opening to her view,)
Waves her joy hand, and bids the Globe adieu.
See, in the Regal vaults, the shattered lead,
Whose gaping seams disclose the Royal dead.
Were these, O Muse, triumphant Sov'reigns once!
This skin all shrivel'd! and these naked bones!
No more resentful, great ELIZA, rest,
Support in peace the Scottish Mary's chest!
Whilst close, by Glorified MARIA's shrine,
We place the dust of Heavenly CAROLINE.
Ye Living, hear what mouldring Monarchs say!
"For endless joys give mortal dreams away.

