Mr. Williams's ARTILLERY ELECTION SERMON June 6. 1737.

Martial Wisdom Recommended. A SERMON Preached at the Desire of The Honorable
Artillery Company in Boston, June 6. 1737. Being the Day of their Election of
Officers.

By William Williams, M. A. Pastor of the Church in Weston.

Eccl. 2.13. Wisdom excels Folly, as far as Light excels darkness.

Dan. 11.32. But the People that do know their God shall be strong and do
Exploits,

BOSTON: Printed by T. Fleet, for DANIEL HENCHMAN, over against the Brick
Meeting House in Cornhill. 1737.

Martial Wisdom Recommended.
Eccl. 9.18. Wisdom is better than Weapons of War.


THOUGH it is the want of Wisdom, in the divine sense of it, that has introduced
Arms, or weapons of War into the world, for there are no wars where wisdom
shines and reigns in perfection; and there had been no Wars in these lower
Regions, where all things were created in beautiful Order and Harmony, had not
Man unhappily revolted from his Allegiance to his Maker, and lost the knowledge
of Him who is the fountain and Center of all Righteousness, peace and
blessedness; -- yet notwithstanding, in the present state of things, and the
Condition to which Man is now subjected, Arms are very needful and very
consistent with Wisdom in the strictest Sense, and they are mutually
subservient.

If Men must be divested of Wisdom, which is their greatest Excellency, in
order to their becoming warriors, or if handling weapons of War were
inconsistent with wisdom, they would surely ill become the Christian, and as
ill, the Ministers of CHRIST to say any thing in their behalf; for Wisdom
should be justified of all her Children.

When the wise Man (as in the Text) compares Wisdom with weapons of War, and
gives the former the preference, it is not with design to disparage them, (for
he honors them in the very comparison) but his design is to commend Wisdom;
and it would be but a slender Commendation, if the thing to which it is
compared were not good, or of but little worth and significancy.

This Aphorism of Solomon is grounded on his observation and Experience, from
the notable Instance he mentions, v. 13, -- 15. This wisdom have I seen under
the Sun, and it seemed great unto me: There was a little City, and few Men in
it; and there came a great King against it and besieged it, and built great
Bulwarks against it; now there was found in it a poor wise Man, and he by his
wisdom delivered the City. -- This has been thought by some, a Parable, but it
seems more probable to have been a Case in fact, in some Neighboring Country,
of a poor Man who by some wise Counsel was the happy means of saving a City
when besieged by a numerous Army of a potent King, (like the Woman of Abel, 2 Samuel 20.16.) -- But such was their Ingratitude, that the poor Man is forgotten,
no notice taken, nor recompense made him, nor honor put upon him Mr. Henry.
. But yet the Wisdom was useful and excellent: It must and ever will be so,
which makes a Man a blessing to his City, his Country. -- Wisdom is better than
strength. -- For that may be effected by Wisdom, which cannot be accomplished
by strength. -- It is better than weapons of War, -- whether offensive or
defensive, for without wisdom there can be no right use of them, nor will any
Success be likely to attend them. Even in the midst of Arms, the most notable
achievements and victories have been obtained by wise stratagems.

-- The words are a distinct Proposition, and need not to be cast into any
other form of Doctrine, or if you will please to have them rather, thus,

Doct. That though weapons of War are good and useful unto Men, yet Wisdom is
more useful and excellent.

In the handling of them, I propose to consider,

I. That weapons of War are good and serviceable unto Men, in the present State
of things.

II. -- The preference or superior excellency of Wisdom.

I. To Consider, something of the usefulness and benefit of weapons of War. --
And by them I understand any regular Military Force, Arms, Forts, Castles or
other warlike preparations.

When I assert the usefulness and benefit of weapons of War, the lawfulness of
them is implied; and this may also be very justly asserted: Notwithstanding it
has been (I am well aware) disputed and denied by Socinus and his Followers,
and is, at this Day, by some Enthusiasts, who have drank in this, with a
confused medley of other Errors; through a misunderstanding or perversion of some
passages of Scripture.

None indeed can deny but that Wars and Fightings came from the Lusts of Men.
(Jam. 4.1.) And that if Adam had retained the Rectitude of his primitive State,
in which he had the beautiful Image of God his Maker instamp'd upon him, in
Knowledge, Righteousness and Holiness, with an established Rule and Dominion,
given him by his munificent Creator, over all Creatures in this lower world;
there would have been no occasion for Armies and Battles. As the Creatures
would have continued in their subjection to their Lord, so Mankind being just
and holy, must needs have continued in perfect amity; there would have been no
Jars nor discords in the natural or moral world. But alas! How soon do we read
of the unhappy fruit of that fatal Revolt? Brother against Brother! proud and
discontented Cain shedding the blood of righteous Abel! And how has this world
been ever since, almost a Theater of tragical Scenes, of Wars, Desolations and
Destructions, through the wickedness of them that dwell therein? And we have
little reason to expect but that it will generally be so, 'till the glorious
day, (which the Lord hasten!) when the Prince of peace, whose Scepter is a
Scepter of Righteousness, shall take unto Himself his great Power and Reign,
and tread down his Enemies, who will not that He should reign over them, and
make the glorious Principles of his holy Religion so known and received, that
the Kings and Judges of the Earth, shall kiss the Son, and yield subjection
unto Him; and they shall beat their Swords into plough-shares, and their Spears
into pruning hooks, nation shall not lift up Sword against nation, neither
shall they learn war any more. According to that Prophecy, Isa. 2.4. -- But
until this happy time comes on, and the Principles and Rules of the Gospel are
not yet so entertained, but that a Christian State is exposed to the Incursions
and Ravages of proud, ambitious or covetous Men; it is needful, that they
should take care for their own Security and Defense. God can indeed, make those
who are disposed to be their Enemies, to be at peace with them. And it is the
highest interest of any People to labor to be in good terms with the great
Ruler and Governor of the world; and to put their trust in Him, as their
defense. Yet since, according to the ordinary Course of Providence, his own
People have seldom enjoyed lasting peace, but have been exposed to Invasions
and Encroachments of unreasonable Men, therefore it is needful and prudent for
them to be upon their Guard and Defense, and be able to repel force by force.
Otherwise their Civil and Sacred Liberties, their Lives and Properties, and all
that is dear unto them, may be in the utmost hazard. So that by the principles,
which the God who has made us, has implanted in us, it is plain that
Christians need Armor of Defense against their Enemies, that they may not be
made a Prey unto Devourers.

Self-preservation is a fundamental Law of humane Nature, and Christianity does
not overthrow any such Laws but establish them. -- This is intimated to us, by
that of our Lord to his Disciples, Luke 22.35, 36. -- He said unto them, when I
sent you without purse and scrip and shoes, lacked ye any thing? and they said
nothing. Then said He unto them, But now he that has a purse let him take it,
-- and he that has no Sword let him sell his Garment and buy one: Signifying,
that the Instruction which He gave them for the Execution of their first
Commission, was but temporal, and for that time only observable, now the time
requires that you be armed to Encounter many Difficulties" Engl. Annot.
. Now the posture of your affairs will be much altered, you must expect Enemies
and Oppositions; and the Tragedy will begin with me --. You stand concerned to
make as good preparation as you can in these things, etc" Pool in L.
. If our Lord does not design to teach Ministers to take Arms for their
Defense, nor in the least intend that the Gospel should be propagated by the
Sword; yet he intimates to them and to all succeeding Christians, that they
must not expect or depend on Miracles for their Supply or Defense, -- but that
the Sword may become as necessary as our Clothing. -- Nor is this at all
inconsistent with that Repremand of our Savior unto Peter, Mat. 26.52. Then
said Jesus unto him, put up thy Sword now into its place; for all they that
take the Sword shall perish with the Sword. For this is to be understood, of
private Persons taking up the Sword against the lawful Magistrate, or Persons
who have not a lawful Call or Warrant. And thus all Christians are to learn the
same Lesson. Men must have the Sword orderly put into their hands, before they
may use it. It was not the Design of our Savior to set up a Temporal Kingdom,
or civil Dominion, as he says, in another place, My Kingdom is not of this
world, else would my Servants fight, (Joh. 18.36.) or they might reasonably do
it.

The lawfulness of weapons of War, and the benefit of well appointed Arms,
disciplined and skilful Soldiers, has been well showed from this Desk, -- Let
it suffice therefore, now to suggest,

That the LORD himself has this Title given Him as his great Honor:
particularly in that Song of Triumph after the miraculous Destruction of his
People's Enemies, Exodus 15. Jehovah is a Man of War --. And how often is he
called, The Lord of Hosts? -- The Lord strong and mighty: -- the Lord mighty in
Battle! -- This at least, intimates that a warlike Genius, dextrous Skill and
undaunted Courage, are honorable qualifications among Men.

The devout Psalmist, who was also the valiant Leader of Israel, and by whose
martial and brave Genius and Conduct, God subdued the Nations, the Enemies of
his People, pays his acknowledgments to God, as the Giver of All his Dexterity
and Skill, in handling his weapons of War, (Psalm. 44.1.) Blessed be the Lord my
strength, who teaches my hands to war and my fingers to fight. -- It is also
recorded as part of his honorary Character, (2 Samuel 1.18.) That he bade them
teach the Children of Israel the use of the Bow.

And long before, in the Story of Abraham, we find that he had more than Three
Hundred Servants, Trained Soldiers of his House, expert and ready for the
business, at an Hour's warning, ( Genesis 14.14.) And what remarkable Service did
they, under his Skill and Conduct?

If we consider the whole History of the People of God in former Ages, we may
observe it has been the Care of the wisest and best of Rulers, to cultivate and
cherish the Art of War, from a just and generous regard to the Safety and
Prosperity of their Country.

Our holy Religion does not at all encourage People, in an idle and slothful
dependence upon God, without the use of proper means. It would be sinful
presumption for Men to expect the miraculous Interposition of Divine
Providence, to defend them from Death and Ruin, while they neglect proper
endeavors for their own Safety; -- for Soldiers to lay down their Arms and
expect that the Stars in their Courses should fight against their Enemies. Even
when Moses himself was in the Hill praying, Joshua and the armed Men must be
fighting, as they expected their Enemies should be subdued. -- How is Joshua
that pious and valiant Leader of Israel celebrated for his martial Skill,
Courage and Conduct? And have we not on Sacred Record, handed down unto us, the
high Encomiums of such who have been remarkable for their Courage and Martial
Achievements, -- as of Gideon and Barack, Sampson, Jepthah and David, -- and
many others, who through Faith subdued Kingdoms, -- waxed valiant in Fight,
turned to flight the Armies of the Aliens? (Heb. 11.32, -- 34.) Why are their
Names thus mentioned with honor, and consecrated to the latest Posterity, --
but to teach us not only the lawfulness of War, in the present State of things,
but that it is also highly commendable, and that such deserve Honor and Esteem
among their Brethren, who endeavor to be well skilled and accomplished, for
such Service of their King and Country?

The more War is to be deprecated, the more good Warriors are to be desired'.

How much does the Honor, Strength and Safety of Government and Civil Rulers,
depend upon Military Weapens and Force? How would turbulent and factious Men be
suppressed, Thieves and Riotous Persons, and Disturbers of the public Peace,
if there were not such means of awe and restraint?

II. I now pass to Consider, The preference or Superior Excellency of Wisdom.
Wisdom is better than Weapons of War. -- Here it cannot be expected, that I
should enter into the Consideration of Wisdom, in the large and various
Signification of the Word, in the Sacred Oracles; nor is it to be supposed that
the wise Man here intends it, in all that Latitude. Nor shall I stay to name
the several acceptations of it. -- But shall consider in in these two respects,

1. As it refers to weapons of War, and the right use of them.

2. As it relates to the Christian, or spiritual and divine Wisdom.

1. To consider it, as it relates to the use and improvement of weapons of War;
-- or martial Wisdom. For as there is the Wisdom of the Handicrafts-Man in
working in Gold and Silver, in Brass, Weaving and Embroidery, Cutting and
Setting of precious Stones, Carving of Timber, etc. which God gave to Bezaleel
and Aboliab Exodus 31 3 -- 6. Chap. 35.31, -- 35.
, and the Apostle compares himself to a wise Master Builder Cor. 3.10,
, and of the Husbandman it is said, Isa. 28 26.
his God instructs him to Discretion; so there is Wisdom in the Art of War.
As there is Sagacity and cunning artifice in the forming of weapons of War, and
several are the Inventions of latter Ages, and Men are arriving at greater
Perfection and Improvements; so there is Wisdom in the ordering of these, and
in all Military Preparations and Exercises, that they may answer the good
Intentions of them. And in waging War, there is (as one observes) the greatest
Improvement of Humane Wisdom, Application and Industry.

Whether this be the Wisdom intended by Solomon in the Sentence before us, I
will not dispute; for whether it was by any subtle Stratagem of War, now
seasonably devised, or wise Treaty with this powerful King, that occasioned his
Raising the Siege; or whether it was by his Piety, Faith and Prayers, -- we are
left at uncertainty. But that this poor wise Deliverer of the City, was a good
Man, and in this Sense wise, seems intimated by the last clause in the Verse,
where he stands opposed to a Sinner, -- But one Sinner destroys much good. --
Therefore I may without any just exception, I think, take in the Consideration
of these two Senses of the Word.

And as to this first, though a Lecture upon it might seem more natural from a
Field-Officer, or Military Man, accomplished to lay down the Rules of Prudence
for himself and Fellow-Officers and Soldiers, and although this may be termed
Humane Prudence, -- yet it is not so aliene to the Sacred Oracles, as that a
Minister of Christ should be wholly a Stranger to it; seeing that the Captain
of our Salvation, who has traveled in the greatness of his Strength, through a
Field of Blood, who is now at the Head of his Church Militant, has been pleased
to leave in his Word such Instructions as are adapted to give Prudence and
Wisdom to Men in all Capacities and Conditions, not only to Men in the Sacred
Order, but also Civil and Military, from the King on the Throne to the lowest
Officer and Sentinel; and it being the Duty of his Ambassadors, as they are
called, to make application of particular Rules to Men in their several
Capacities, and to endeavor to give to every one their portion, in Season; --
Therefore I hope the following hints will be well accepted on this Occasion.

1. Martial Wisdom will teach Men to fix upon right Ends in their Military
Exercises and Enterprises. Soldiers must act as becomes reasonable Beings, who
are capable "to act for some End, and should have that in their Eye as the
measure of their Actions". And as of all other things, so of this, the supreme
End must be the Honor of God, and next to this, the Safety of the
Commonwealth. The Good of warlike Weapons, is to be considered as relative to
this, that a People may enjoy Peace and Safety. This is the End to be aimed at
in all Martial Preparations. And when War is actually engaged in, or before it
is undertaken, we find that God would have Peace first offered. -- Deuteronomy. 20.10.

It is bloody and barbarous Cruelty to aim at, and delight in butchering our
Fellow-Men. The great Design and Exercise of moral Prudence as it relates to
Society, is that they may enjoy Peace and Safety, and so, as by the most
natural Nurse, Plenty, Civility and good Order, Arts and Religion may grow and
flourish. --

It is beneath the Character of Men of Martial Wisdom to aim at mere Bravery
and Show, or Pomp and Appearance, or to make only a Diversion of their
Exercises, -- but that they may be qualified to stand in a Day of Battle and
War, and to speak with the Enemy in the Gate. Therefore,

2. They must make it their Endeavor to be well furnished with Military
Science and Skill. These are the first and necessary Lessons of Martial Wisdom,
that they understand the Military Words of Command, their various Facings and
Motions, that they commit no Errors or Blunders, and that they well and
thoroughly understand the Exercise of their Arms, and are expert and ready in
every Posture, at the Word of the Commander.

As this Order and ready Dexterity and Skill in an Army or particular Company,
is a beautiful thing, so it will give a vast advantage to those who attain and
observe it, over those who are but Adeptists in these Things. It is the
Encomium of the Soldiers of Zebulun, 1 Chronicles. 12.33. That they were expert in
War, with all Instruments of War, who could keep Rank. -- Skill in the Military
Art is necessary in order to answer the main End propounded relating to a
People, and without endeavoring after this, a Soldier does not act as a Cause
by Counsel, or becoming the powers of Reason. And how unsafe will they be, and
all others who depend upon them, who when they come to use their Armor against
the Enemy, they have not proved it, and scarce know their right Hand from their
left. Martial Skill has not a little contributed to the Grandeur and Wealth of
Nations. Numerous Armies have been put to the rout by a few well-disciplin'd
Troops. Hereby Alexander pushed on his Conquests to such prodigious Success:
and hereby the Romans gained such universal Empire.

3. Another part of Martial Wisdom lies in the Choice of the fittest weapons or
warlike preparations, for the several Ends or Purposes in view. It is well
understood that different warlike Preparations are required to engage an Enemy
at Sea, from those by Land; and that such Batteries or Bulwarks as may be a
Defense against Small Arms, will not be so against Cannon. And that such, may
be prepared and accomplished Men, to engage with an Enemy in an open and
well-formed Camp, who are not fit to follow an Enemy in the Thickets and
Lurking places of a howling Wilderness. -- We read sometimes of chosen Men of
Israel. Every one is not fit to be a Soldier. Men should be selected and chosen
according to the several Services to which they are designed; And their Martial
Weapons, Provisions and Preparations should be accordingly. In this, Wisdom is
profitable to direct. It was the great Strength and Prudence of the Ruebenites
and Gadites that they were furnished with all manner of Instruments of War for
the Battle. (1 Chronicles. 12.37.)

Soldiers in general, should be able to endure hardness. (2 Timothy 2.3.) But some
are much more capable to endure Hunger and Thirst, and Travel and Cold, and
lying in the Deserts than others. As a Scythian Commander said to Philip of
Macedon, You command Macedonians that can fight with Men, but I command
Scythians who can sight with Hunger and Thirst. There are but few like the
Soldiers of Gustavus Adolphus, the brave King of Sweden, of whom the ingenious
Fuller says, They had most life in the dead of Winter. -- Some such we have
had, and may need more.

It was certainly Prudence in Rehoboam, however he failed in his Policy, in
hearkening to his young Counselors, that afterward he made him fenced Cities,
and put therein Provisions, Officers and warlike Stores, -- as 2 Chronicles. 11.5,
-- 12. See also what is recorded, as an instance of the Wisdom of pious King
Hezekiah, on a threatening Invasion, 2 Chronicles. 32.2, -- 6.

4. -- In placing the greatest Trust in Men of the best Prudence, Discretion
and Courage. This refers especially to the Care of Superior Rulers, whose
business it is to put their Sons into places of Trust and Command. -- But then
as to the Persons themselves be-trusted in any Military Post, they will surely
think it their Wisdom and Honor, to understand well and observe the Duties of
their Station, and every one do their own Business. -- One wise Commander may
be better than many fighting Men.

King Saul strengthened himself in his War against the Philistines, as it is
said of him, (1 Samuel 14.52.) That when he saw any strong or valiant Man, he
took him to himself.

It was David's Wisdom to confer the chief Command on Joab, who was a Man of
such singular Courage and Valor. And as it was his great Honor to uphold and
greatly to promote and encourage the Worship of God; so it was not a little
owing (under God) to his Prudence in seeking out and bestowing Places of
Command on Men of great Spirits and Martial Prowess, that he had such Victories
and Successes; that the Nations round about were brought into a State of
Subjection or Tribute or Alliance; that in the Days of his Son and immediate
Successor, there was no Adversary nor evil occurrent.

5. -- In observing the best Seasons for any Enterprises or Treaties. This
requires a good degree of natural Sagacity, together with Prudence gained by
Observation and Experience; to avoid Rashness and Precipitancy on the one hand,
and Dilatoriness and Sluggishness on the other. Success has often depended on
the actual timing of Engagements or Treaties; or vigilant Improvement of the
Tempers, Dispositions and Manners of Enemies. Through neglect or want of Policy
or Counsel great advantage may be given to the Enemy, and the benefit of former
Victories may be lost: as Hannibal, Attilius-Regulus, and other stout Warriors
have done. Hence it has been a trite Saying, In bello nihil est mininum
negligendum. We must beware of the least Error in War. (In bello non-licit bis
peccare.) It is said of the Romans, that they conquered more by their Wisdom,
than by their Enterprises.

6. -- In the good Government of Commanders, and the strict subjection of
Soldiers unto them. It is highly necessary that Officers and Soldiers be Loyal
to their King, true and faithful to their Country. It is the Duty of Christians
in common, to submit to the King as Supreme, and unto Governors as those that
are sent by him. (1 Pet. 2.13, 14.) and it is peculiarly expected of Men under
a Military Consideration, as they receive their several Posts, Commissions and
Orders from them.

Order is the Beauty of the Universe, the Strength and Glory of all Societies.
And this in an Army or any Military Company, consists, in every one's observing
the Duties of their respective places.

It highly concerns Officers to consider this, that Soldiers in their State of
Discipline may be trained up and prepared for Service, by a ready Obedience,
that they may not upon Emergencies and Dangers run out of their Line, Mutiny
and Desert, to the Shame of those that lead them, and Ruin of the People that
trust in them. -- This, I apprehend to be one great end of the Training Days,
that Soldiers may be taught good Order and ready Obedience to their Commanders
and in their several Places; and this is exceeding serviceable and necessary.
It must needs be looked upon as the Wisdom of a State to enact good Laws for the
upholding of Martial Government and Order, and severe Penalties in case of
Disobedience, or according as the Crimes may deserve: -- Yet it is greatly to
be desired and is the most certain expedient that Officers by their Wisdom,
Courage, Integrity, Clemency and shining Examples do gain and command their
Hearts. It is the Character of a good Officer, 'that he loves and is beloved by
his Soldiers'; -- and of a good Soldier, that it is his Care to please him who
has chosen him to be a Soldier. (2 Timothy 2.4.) It is the great Commendation both
of the Centurion and of his Soldiers, (Mat. 8.9.) I also am a Man under
Authority, and I say unto one go, and he goes, and to another come, and he
comes; and to my Servant do this, and he does it.

How lovely and beautiful is Order in all Societies? The lovers of it, are
pleased to see it in the Artillery Exercises. And most strictly it should be
observed in real Engagements. Every one must keep Rank, do the Duty and keep
the Place assigned him. Personal Danger will not excuse the breach of Order,
otherwise their Weapons may be pointed to one another's Destruction.

It is a sad Omen to a Country, to the Military and Civil Concerns of it, when
an ungovernable mutinous Spirit prevails. Such a Spirit in an Army threatens
the utmost Confusion and Ruin; and it is not much less dangerous in the State.

7. Martial Wisdom consists not a little, in avoiding such things as will
disqualify and unfit Men for the Business to which they are designed.
Whatsoever tends to unfit a Commander or Soldier for real Service, and so to
frustrate the good end which they should aim at, Prudence obliges them to
avoid. As,

Idleness and Sloth, Carelessness and Inactivity. A Military Life requires
Spirit and Action. The dull unactive Person is very unlikely to be prepared for
Service, and such as have a Spirit of Indifferency and care for none of these
things. Sloth benumbs the powers of the Soul, which should be roused and
engaged: such will be averse to undertake any Martial Enterprises, and
especially to undergo Fatigues and Hardships.

So Luxury and Intemperance, are Vices very dishonorable in their Nature, and
very disqualifying to them. -- These weaken and enfeeble the Body and deprave
the Mind, and indispose a Person for any noble, brave and heroic Actions. --
Avarice and inordinate worldly Cares and selfish Vices are not only contrary to
the Christian Institution, but to that Martial Wisdom which is the Glory of a
Soldier. No Man that warreth, entangleth himself with the affairs of this Life.
(2 Timothy 2.4.) For hereby the Mind becomes narrow and contracted, contrary to
that public Spirit and generous Love to his Fellow Creatures, which should
warm his Breast, and engage him to expose himself for the Defense of his
Country. -- Wisdom teaches and obliges the Soldier to watch against these, as
also Security, Fraud and Falsehood, Violence and Injustice, -- and all other
Vices which Man's own Reason, Observation and Experience have taught them are
prejudicial to their own Good, and the laudable Design of their Institution.
And also to watch against all such Temptations as are common to Men, or
peculiar to their Employment or Profession; whereby their Constancy, Courage
and Fidelity are threatened and endangered. -- When the Host goes forth
against thine Enemies, then keep thee from every wicked thing. Deuteronomy. 23.9.

8. -- That they actually engage in War, only in a just Cause. Not to gratify
Pride, Avarice and Ambition, to increase and enlarge our Possessions by the
Ruins of those who might dwell securely by us. But for the vindication of our
own just Rights and Properties, when incroach'd upon and invaded or threatened
by the unreasonable and injurious, and this after Terms of Peace and
Accommodation are rejected by them. Though every good Soldier is not fit to be a
Casuist, and Causes of War may be sometimes so complicated and perplexed, as
that they may not have ability to dive thereinto; yet it seems reasonable, that
as it is expected, they should play the Men for the Cities of their God, they
should be some way convinced and satisfied of the justice of the Cause; that
they are so injured or threatened by Men as that they may appeal to God, as the
Avenger of wrong, the Righteous Judge of the World. What a noble Confidence
will this produce, when they can refer to him as the great Arbiter of all
Disputes? as Psalm. 17.1, 2. Hear the right, O Lord, let my Sentence come forth
from thy presence. And like that bold and prudent General, Judge. 11.27. I have
not sinned against thee; but thou durst me wrong to war against me: The Lord,
the Judge, be judge this Day, between the Children of Israel and the Children
of Ammon.

9. Martial Wisdom has Courage, Resolution and Fortitude accompanying it: and
this, the beforementioned apprehension of the Justice of the Cause, not a
little contributes unto: This tends much to invigorate the Mind and Spirits:
Herein lies the Foundation of their acting from a generous and public Spirit.
The more free and deliberate Men are, the more likely they are to act with
Steadiness and Resolution when called to Service. Temerity and Cowardice is a
mean Spirit, unworthy of a Soldier. -- We find it as a Direction of Divine
Wisdom to Moses, the Leader of Israel, and which was to be a standing Rule to
the People, Deuteronomy. 20.5, -- 9. That such as were feeble and faint-hearted were
to be dismissed.

'A Soldier should choose an honorable Death, rather than save his Life by a
cowardly Flight'. Fear, Dastardliness and despondency of Mind under apprehended
Difficulties and Dangers, are great failings and disqualifications in a
Soldier. These will make them desert a good Cause, and their Fellow Soldiers,
when there is most need of their Assistance.

Though Men should not expose themselves to needless Dangers; this is not a wise
Bravery; nor throw away Life where the Case is plainly desperate: But
Magnanimity and Fortitude is an excellent Qualification of the Men of Arms, as
fitting them for great Attempts, and preparing the Mind to bear up against
Hardships and Difficulties, and to hazard their Lives in the Cause of God and
his People. What a brave and animating Expression was that, and how becoming a
General of Israel? (2 Samuel 10.12.) Be of good Courage, and let us play the Men
for our People, and for the Cities of our God; and the Lord do what seems him
good!

10. Lastly, Martial Wisdom requires, that while preparing for War, or when
engaged in it, they be in strict Amity, Union and Harmony amongst themselves.

Obey them that have the Rule over you; is a Principle and Law of Reason and of
Christianity. As there should be a due regard to Authority in the ready
Obedience, Respect and Duty of Soldiers to their Officers, so there should be a
Brotherly Union and Harmony among themselves, in all Ranks and Degrees of their
Officers or others, as Persons joined in the same Cause, pursuing the same
common Good. Mutinies or Discords in an Army, in the same Company, or between
one Company or Regiment and another, are certainly very hazardous to the Safety
and Good of the whole. The least appearances that way are therefore generally
animadverted on, by wise and observing Commanders, as a thing of dangerous
Consequence. It is in like manner so, for any to hold a Treacherous
Correspondence with Enemies. Thus, one Sinner may destroy much good. This may
prove like a Leak in a Ship; or like a Spark in a Barrel of Gunpowder, suddenly
blowing up all before it.

A House or Kingdom divided against it self cannot stand. This is our Savior's
wise Aphorism, (Mark 3.34.) and we find, that the Psalmist when he prayed for
the Destruction of his Enemies, desires their Dissension as the ready means of
it, Psalm. 55.9. Destroy O Lord, divide their Tongues. Jerusalem when besieged
by the Romans, was much sooner prepared for Ruin, by the unhappy Divisions and
Dissentions among themselves: which was also an awful Judgment of God upon
them. As it is the Health and Security of the Body natural, when every part
performs its proper Office; so it is of Bodies politic, Civil, Ecclesiastical
or Military; when every one understands and keeps within the Limits of his own
Sphere and Station. When a Spirit of Love and good agreement runs through the
whole: this is the Bond of perfectness in all Societies; the contrary, Envying
and Strife, brings on Confusion and every evil Work.

Now when these several parts of Martial Wisdom are considered, will it not be
readily acknowledged, that this Wisdom has the preference to weapons of War
themselves? -- For to what purpose are they, if not under a good Direction? --
Yea they are evil and mischievous, if the End to which they are improved be
evil and unrighteous, sinful and unwarrantable. Or if they are taken up on a
good Design, and with laudable Views, if they are not understood and skilfully
handled, of how little benefit? -- or if Martial Men and Arms are not wisely
chosen and adapted to particular Occasions and Emergencies, or according to the
Qualities and Circumstances of the Enemies engaged against? -- or if Martial
Government, Discipline and Order be not prudently asserted and maintained, or
but little regarded by those under Authority, is there any thing great or good
likely to be effected? If Arms are not supported by Justice and Right, if they
are not pursued with Sedateness, Courage and Magnanimity, certainly
Disappointment, Losses and Sorrows are to be expected, instead of Victory and
Success. And so, if such Vices are indulged in Men of that Order, as not only
fully their Character, but have a natural tendency to weaken their Hands and
Hearts.

Or if Discord and Mutiny, Falsehood and Treachery should arise, instead of the
happy Bonds of Love, brotherly Agreement and Harmony, how will Arms ever so
strong and well-appointed, be rendered fruitless and insignificant? Parva sunt
foris Arma, nisi est Concilium Domi. Cicero.

2. I am to consider the preference and excellency of Wisdom, under a religious
or divine Character. Here I may not discourse as the Subject would admit, but
briefly.

This Wisdom consists in the Knowledge of God in Jesus Christ, or as he has
revealed himself to us in the Gospe; in such a Knowledge of his Will and his
glorious and attractive Excellencies as prevails on the Will, and accordingly
governs the choice and affections of the Soul. Such as have this Wisdom though
they have the most valuable Knowledge, yet they have not always the largest
natural Understanding, nor the greatest Stock of Ideas treasured up in their
Minds. They may be very destitute of civil Policy, and be deficient in many
points of humane Prudence. But they have such apprehensions of the Divine
Perfections, of the Glory of God in the Face of Jesus Christ, as that they
unfeignedly embrace Him as their Portion and everlasting Happiness. They devote
themselves to Him, and make it their principal Care to obey and please Him, as
most worthy of the highest Honor from all the principles of Justice, Love and
Gratitude. And it is their prevailing Concern and Desire, as their highest
good, that they may have such a clear Knowledge of God as shall perfect their
Natures and make them conformable to his moral Excellencies, that they may be
for ever with Christ and behold his Glory!

This is the beginning of Wisdom, (the chiefest Wisdom) when Men know and fear
God and give Glory unto Him. This Knowledge of the Holy is their Understanding.
This is the Wisdom of the highest Intelligencies, and this is their Glory; --
the Glory of the highest Seraphs, that they know and reverence and love the
most perfect Being, the Author of their Beings, and of all Good.

This is the superior Wisdom and Excellency of Man, in every Character and
Station, and gives the precedence to them that have it. It gives an Ornament of
Grace to their Head, and a Crown of Glory does it deliver them.

But here I shall a little apply it to Men as under a Military Character, and
show the Advantages of it to them: For the Business and Life of a Soldier
should not be thought inconsistent with this Wisdom, no more than any other
lawful Employment and Business of Life. The better Christians Men are, or the
more they are acquainted and enriched with this divine Wisdom (other things
being equal) the better they are in every Calling and Employment of Life: the
better furnished to a due deportment in all Capacities, Relations and
Conditions. And particularly, it is the best Qualification and the greatest
Honor of Men in Military Life. "They are the only fit Men to be Commanders who
have learnt to obey their God.

This Wisdom will direct and fix their Views; that the supreme End of their
Preparations and Military Labors and Achievements, be what ought to be the
Christians governing Design in all the weighty Concerns of Life, the Glory of
God, and the good of their Fellow Christians, as concerned herein; the Defense
and Security of their Religion, Liberties and Estates. -- In the Name of the
Lord they will set up their Banners. (Psalm. 20.5.) This Wisdom gives them the
best Rules of their Actions, and will guard them against all Irregularities and
Vices, innumerable Mischiefs and Dangers. This will direct their dependence,
where they may trust and not be afraid: even in the Lord of Hosts, the God of
Armies. While some trust in Horses and some in Chariots, they will remember the
Name of the Lord their God. -- Thus they are led to the Captain of our
Salvation, whose Name is, King of Kings, and Lord of Lords.

What Courage, Fortitude and presence of Mind will this give his Followers, his
Soldiers, when engaged in his Cause, and assured of his Presence, who alone can
win the Field in the despite of all Opposition? or who can save by few as well
as by many; who can make one chase a thousand, and two put ten thousand to
flight, as in the Instance of Jonathan and his Armor-bearer.

This Wisdom will give them the best Support under present Exigencies and
greatest Difficulties. The Name of the Lord is a strong Tower, whereunto they
may run and be safe, (Prove. 18.10.) (or be set aloft) They who are wise, know
his Name and will put their trust in Him. They are the Men who are prepared for
the most difficult Encounters, and to run the greatest hazards, who have
secured their greatest Interest, and being so wise as to become interested in
the mighty Savior, who has overcome Death, and whose Love, neither Life nor
Death nor any Creature, can separate them from: who can by Faith, according to
his Word, look beyond Death to a glorious Inheritance, incorruptible,
undefiled, reserved in the Heavens for them. If the Men of the Sword will
undergo the greatest hazards, toils and miseries for temporal Fame and Glory,
what will not the believing view and prospect of immortal Life and Glory prompt
them to? so that the truly wise are prepared to be the best Soldiers, the most
renowned Warriors, and Persons of the greatest Bravery in the World. Others of
an atheistical Spirit may under a strange senselessness and stupefaction run
fearless upon the Edge of the Sword sometimes; but they have not a true
greatness of Soul. But the Righteous are bold as a Lion, (Prove. 28.1.) -- and
such have also the best assurance of the powerful presence of the Supreme Lord,
who gives Salvation to his People, and covers their Heads in the Day of
Battle. For thou Lord wilt bless the Righteous, with Favor will thou encompass
him, as with a Shield, Psalm. 5. ult.

Use. 1. I might have inferred, that to acquire Military Skill and Wisdom, will
require sedate Thoughts and application of Mind. --

2. That the good Christian (coeteris paribus) will make the best Soldier, --
the true Hero.

3. That this Wisdom, Persons should humbly seek to God for, who is the
Fountain of all Knowledge and Wisdom, natural, moral or Divine. -- But I shall
insist only on this, and apply it to the Purposes before me, viz.

That Martial Skill and Wisdom should be endeavored after by a People exposed
to Wars, and assisted and encouraged by All, who are concerned for their
Defense and Safety.

This Land has always from the beginning of our Settlement, among a barbarous
Heathen, been exposed to Wars. We have rarely long together had rest from it.
Very great has been the Expense of Blood and Treasure by it: and how many, the
Losses, Distresses and Sorrows, the miserable Captivities and Deaths, that have
been suffered by it? especially by such as dwelt in our exposed Frontiers! in
the remembrance of which, our Souls should still be humbled in us!

Though now, through the Smiles of Divine Providence upon the wise Counsels of
the British Government, a general War among the Nations of Europe, which we had
the threatening Prospect of, has been prevented, -- and through the same Mercy
of the most High, the Lord of Hosts powerfully spiriting and succeeding the
Courage, Hardiness and never-to-be-forgotten Bravery of some of our Martial
Men, Travailing and Jeoparding their Lives in the howling Wilderness, to the
Annoyance and Destruction of many of the Enemy: and by the Care of the
Government since, in their prudent Treaties and Negociations with our late
troublesome Neighbors, we enjoy at this Day (in the midst of other
Afflictions) a happy Tranquillity. -- Yet we have little Reason to be secure, so
long as the expected Peace so slowly comes to a Conclusion: But especially so
long as the Iniquities of the Land are so many, and greatly increasing! And as
God left of the Nations of Canaan to prove Israel; who were often as Thorns in
their Sides and pricks in their Eyes, so has he dealt with us. The Canaanites
are still in the Land, and little Prospect alas! of the Conversion of them to
the Faith and Obedience of the Gospel. Notwithstanding some Endeavors have
been used, which if it might be happily effected, would be our best Security as
to them. And therefore I humbly conceive, is by all means, greatly to be
endeavored and more thoroughly pursued, from a Regard to our own Interests, as
well as Charity to their Souls. Thanks be to God for any Success in this good
Work in our Western Borders At Housatonnock.
, and may the Lord greatly prosper it in Mercy to them, and to his People.

But according to the present State of things, it must certainly be looked upon
a point of Wisdom in this People to cherish and cultivate a Martial Spirit and
Genius, and from a wise precaution to make all suitable Preparations, if a dark
Day of War should come on.

And since I have the Opportunity to speak in the Presence of His Excellency
our Commander in Chief, and many of our Civil Rulers, -- I would, with humble
Deference, entreat them to take into Consideration the defenseless State of
this Country, and that it will be very impolitick in us to be like the Men of
Laish unconcerned and secure, when as liable to unexpected Destruction, and
much further from our Zidon, whence we might expect some Relief.

It is observable, that the most polite Nations have encouraged the Military
Art, and hereby have laid the Foundation for their Security, growing Wealth and
Honor. And it has been long since observed by a venerable Person Mr.
Pemberton's Artil. Ser. p. 22.
, on a like Occasion, That the Glory of most Kingdoms has ebbed or flowed with
this Skill.

It is to the honor of this Government, that they early encouraged a Martial
Spirit and Military Exercises, and particularly in what relates to the Ancient
and Honorable Artillery Company, as also in the Laws which have been made
relating to Military Affairs: and by Donations and Rewards lately, unto many
Persons, or their Heirs and legal Representatives of such who have in this way
served their Country, some to the hazard, and others to the Loss of their
Lives: But might not more be done, either by strengthening the Hands of
Officers, or for the Encouragement of a Military Spirit Here if I might be
allowed to hint, -- That such Soldiers as were obsequious, and by their
application, became observably dextrous and skilful should have some particular
Marks of Respect put upon them, or have some Immunities or Privileges, or at
the discretion of the Officer, be excused from a constant attendance, etc.
and Exercises? Not for the increase of Training-Days, but that they may be
more seasonably and diligently attended and observed, to the attaining of the
good Intention of them. And especially by preventing their degenerating into
growing Intemperance, Licentiousness and Disorders, to the increase of the
Guilt of this Land! too many indulging themselves in such Lusts, as war against
the Soul!

Through the Favor of God, many of the Sons of New England are capable of making
good Soldiers, from their Ingenuity, Sprightliness, natural Courage, Strength
and Activity, who by a good Government and Discipline might be formed and
accomplished for singular Service. And a good Soldiery to this Land of
unwall'd-Villages, how necessary for our Defense? This would be more our
Security than the Mines of Mexico and Peru. Martial Skill and Valor discovers
a brave manly Spirit, and when it is the Character of a People it reflects
Honor upon them, recommends them to the Esteem of others, and bespeaks
Alliance and Friendship with them; as well as gives dread to disaffected
Neighbors.

It is the gracious Promise of God to his People, (Isa. 33.6.) Wisdom and
Knowledge shall be the Stability of thy Times. Martial Wisdom is here to be
reckoned, as well as Civil, Commercial, etc. -- This point of Wisdom we might
learn from a neighboring Power to Great Britain and to us; in Times of Peace,
to be preparing for War, by building and strengthening of Garrisons, furnishing
them with all manner of warlike Stores: that when the unhappy Scene comes on,
they may not have the Difficulty and Charge of these Things to grapple with,
besides the standing Burden of their Alarms, Watchings, Marches and actual
Engagements.

I crave leave to offer this one Thing, That since the laudable Projection of
settling a Line of Towns on (...) Frontiers, in as defensible a manner as may
be, is so (...) come into, as that a Number of Towns have been grant^^ with
this view; -- that the same may not be left only to the Care and feeble
Attempts of the Grantees, but may be directed and very much encouraged and
assisted b^ the Government; that in Case of a War with the French or Heathen
Salvages, these may prove a Barrier and Defense to the scattered Plantations
and Villages which lie exposed to be an easy Prey to little Bands of merciless
Robbers and Plunderers.

Our Captain General, who is at the Head of our Militia, under our rightful
Sovereign King GEORGE, from his natural and paternal Concern for the Land of
his Nativity, has several Times recommended the repairing and strengthening the
Forts and Garrisons of this Province. But how little has been done, except of
late in our principal Fortress? -- We trust it is His Excellency's Care, from
such a Spirit and Principle, to put the chief commanding Offices into the Hands
of such as may fill and adorn their Station, as well as to recommend it to the
Field-Officers (as I am well informed) to fill up the Posts under their Care,
with known virtuous, sober, accomplished Men. -- Such will have it to answer
for, who may recommend Men out of private Interest, Favor or Affection,
without a due regard to good Qualifications.

Now to apply this Inference to Men of the Military-Order. -- It is much to be
desired that the several Officers, according to the Trust reposed in them,
would labor to excel in Martial Accomplishments, and lay out themselves to
communicate them to those under their Care and Command, and to uphold good
Order and Government, and to be exemplarily sober and virtuous, and as much as
possible restrain and prevent all manner of Vices and Exorbitancies.

And may the Soldiers yield a ready Obedience and have a laudable Ambition to
be furnished with such Skill and Discretion as may render them servicable, if
^^^ine Providence should call them to actual Engage^^nts; not neglecting, or
through Sloth and Indifference eluding the Design of their public Exercises. It
is a Shame to see that some who for many Years have attended their Trainings,
yet are so unknowing and inexpert, that when for the time they might have been
Teachers of others, yet need to be taught the first Rudiments of this
commendable Art.

It is an unhappy Disadvantage to a People, when Men a little above the
ordinary Rank, as to Breeding or Estates, are disposed to flight the Military
Skill and Exercises, when it becomes an unfashionable Thing to give their
attendance on such Occasions; as if it were a dishonor to them to appear in
the Field, or it were their Interest to pay their small Fines. -- How may an
exposed Country, by the prevailing of this Temper, be deprived of the Service
of some of the best natural Capacity and Strength, when its greatest Exigencies
call for them?

Indeed when Martial Weapons are neglected, it is an Evidence that a People are
growing very secure, or mean and low spirited, servile and readily subject to
those who may be disposed to invade or insult them: As it was with Israel, when
they had forsaken the Lord and served other Gods. Among Forty Thousand of them
there was not a Shield or Spear to be seen, 'till a Woman rose and judged them.
(Judge. 5.8.)

Such then are to be commended and honored, who from a generous Desire to
serve the best Interests of their Country, apply themselves to attain Martial
Skill and Prudence, and voluntarily without being pressed into it, would take
the Oath (Sacramentum militare) of the Roman Soldiers, pro aris and focis
certare Godwin's Romans Antiq. p. 23.
.

It is therefore to be desired that this Spirit were cherished, and more
appearing and acting in this leading Town, and so in all parts of the Land,
that it may become fashionable and reputable. Ill Examples have prevailed to
give a sort of Reputation to some Evil Practices. It is pity that Virtue and
some useful and laudable Exercises and Accomplishments, should not find as many
Patrons, and of all Ranks of Men to encourage them.

Now to apply my self to the Gentlemen of the Honorable Artillery Company in
this place.

It is at your Request, Gentlemen, that I stand in this Desk at this Time,
however unequal to the Service expected from me. As I have (I trust) an honest
intention to serve you, both in your Military and Christian Capacity, I hope
for your Candor and good Reception of what I have offered. -- Your Calling you
see, is warranted from the Word of God, and what are the generous and pious
Views that must act and govern you in your Martial Exercises, that you may be
accomplished to serve God and your Country, if called thereunto in the
hazardous Enterprises of War.

I take it to be a part of the good Design of this Honorable Company, to set a
good Example by their attendance on these Exercises, as not unworthy of Men of
Estates or Character and Education, with this noble and generous View that they
may be better capacitated to serve in the Defense of their Country, their
Liberties, Estates, Lives, Religion, and all that is dear to them. -- May this
Honorable Company prove a happy and growing Seminary of good Soldiers, not
only of this Town, but from all parts of this Land, and by their Example revive
the Military Skill and Genius. -- When you consider your ancient Charter (now
entering, I think, into the Hundredth Year) and the prudent Design of our
Forefathers, you will by a conscionable attendance on all proper means
endeavor to be furnished with Military Skill and Wisdom, and excel therein.

It is Understanding and Wisdom that gives Man advantage over the Bruits,
otherwise he would soon loose his Dominion. And Wisdom according to the Degrees
of it gives Men advantage one over another, and particularly in Military
Enterprises.

And you will always remember that you are Christian Soldiers, and that not
only the Principles of State Policy and moral Prudence must be consulted, but
especially the grand Principles of Christian Wisdom. Moral Prudence is always
reckoned among the Cardinal Virtues; but Christian Wisdom is the first
excellency and shining Glory of a Man in every Capacity and Station. This will
be profitable to direct you. -- You are sensible who is the Source and Fountain
of all Wisdom, and that you need Direction from the Sacred Scriptures, which
are designed to make Men wise. Your Sense of these Things is the Reason, we
conclude, why you desire your Anniversary most public Appearence, should be
thus attended, that it may be sanctified by the Word of God and Prayer, -- that
you may be more furnished and disposed to approve your selves Christian
Soldiers. And if this Wisdom enter into your Heart, and is pleasant to your
Soul, -- Discretion shall preserve you, Understanding shall keep you, (Prove.
2.10, 11.) -- This will be on all Occasions, your Strength and Safety, your
Ornament and Glory. -- To see a Soldier clad in his goodly Attire and rich
Habiliments, attracts the Eyes, and pleases the Imagination of Spectators. But
surely this Wisdom is the goodlier Ornament, this is the Righteousness of the
Saints. The Soldiers that follow the Lamb should be clothed with this fine
Linen white and clean. Thus they will be also furnished from the Divine
Armoury, for every Grace attends this Heavenly Wisdom. This is indeed a lovely
Sight! The Holy Angels will be pleased to behold such, and will be ministering
Spirits to such here on Earth, and gladly guard their Heaven-born Souls whether
departing in War or Peace, and convey them through the Regions of the Prince of
Darkness, unhurt, untouched: and will make you their Companions amongst the
bright and Heavenly Hosts. And you shall come again with them in the Great Day,
(which the Church-Triumphant as well as Militant waits for!) the Day of that
Grand Master of all the Celestial Armies, when the flaming Chariots of the
Great King will be Ten Thousand times Ten Thousand.

O who will not wish themselves of that Glorious Army, under the Conduct and
Protection of the Captain of our Salvation? when the Archangel shall sound the
Alarm to all the World, and his mighty Voice shall be heard in the silent Tombs
and in the great Deeps, and the Dead shall come forth, the glorious Army of
Martyrs, and all that in Faith have laid down their Lives in the Cause of
Christ, and who have resisted unto Blood, striving against Sin. And they shall
be gloriously arrayed, -- there they shall receive the ( Corona triumphalis)
the Crown of Glory, which the Righteous Judge has laid up, not for that
Christian Hero only, the great Apostle Paul, but for all who have fought the
good Fight, and finished well their Course. (2 Timothy 4.7, 8.) It is surely the
best Wisdom to make this your Choice, and to take the Course that leads to this
Felicity.

To Conclude, This is what concerns us all as Christians, who are, in the
Sacred Oracles, frequently considered as Soldiers, who have our spiritual
warfare to accomplish. There we are directed to put on the Armor of Light,
(Romans 13.12.) i. e. to be well furnished with the best of Knowledge and
spiritual Wisdom. This will be our Defense against Sin and Temptation, as it
will show us the evil and mischief of Sin, the excellency and benefit of
Obedience. This will help us to regulate our disorderly Passions, to subdue our
Lusts and walk circumspectly (exactly) in every Relation and Condition; as it
leads us to the spiritual Armoury, the Word of God, and especially as it leads
us to Christ, and to derive Strength from Him who is stronger than the strong
Man armed, and who has overcome the World, and bid us therefore not to fear.
This will teach us to set his Example before us, and to keep in our View the
strongest Motives and Arguments to all Duty, -- the Glory and Honor of Him
under whose Banner we are enlisted, and the blissful Rewards of perfect
Knowledge and Holiness, and the fullness of Joys which are in his Presence for
ever.

O let us then labor earnestly after this Wisdom, humbly seeking to the
blessed Author of it in the diligent improvement of all appointed Means, and
grow and increase therein; we may then expect the gracious Conduct of the
Glorious Head of the Church, the Leader and Commander of his People, and that
we shall be carried through the Difficulties of our present warfare, and be
more than Conquerers through Him who has loved us, -- and may depend upon that
great and surprising Promise of his, Rev. 3.21. To him that overcomes will I
grant to sit down with me on my Throne, even as I also overcame, and am set
down with my Father on his Throne. Amen.

FINIS.

