Mr. Barnard's Sermon, to the Assembly of Ministers, June 1. 1738.

The LORD JESUS CHRIST the only, and Supreme Head of the CHURCH

A SERMON, delivered, in Public, to the Assembly of Ministers, at their
Anniversary Convention, in Boston; which was followed with a Collection for the
Propagation of the Gospel. June 1. 1738.

By John Barnard, A.M.

Pastor of a Church in Marblehead.

Matthew. xvi. 18 Upon this Rock will I build my Church, and the Gates of Hell
shall not prevail against it.

BOSTON: Printed by S. KNEELAND and T. GREEN, for H. FOSTER, at his Shop in
Cornhill. 1738.

JESUS CHRIST the Head of the Church.
COL. I. 18. And, He is the Head of the Body, the Church.


THIS Epistle seems to have been written, by the Apostle Paul, with two
distinct Views, both of them conspiring to promote the Truth, and Vigor, of
the Christian Religion, viz. to bring off the christianized Jews from their
Fondness to (...) Law of Moses; that they might not mingle the Rites, and
Ceremonies, of that ancient Paedagogy, which was now abolished, with the purer,
and more spiritual, Services of the Gospel: and to purge the christianized
Gentiles of their Attachment unto vain Philosophy, after the Traditions of Men,
and Elements of the World, that the Doctrine, which is according to Godliness,
might not be corrupted, and a ^ulterated, with that, which, though it had a Show
of Wisdom and Humility, was truly but a cover to Ignorance and Pride, being an
intruding into Things which they have not seen, while they were vainly puffed
up in their fleshly Mind.

And that he might prevail with both these Sorts of Proselytes to live
according to the Christian Scheme, believing the Doctrines, and Practicing the
Duties, of it, though somewhat different from the Law of Moses, and inexplicable
by the Wisdom of Philosophy, he refers them to the Original of the Christian
Institution, and lets them know, that neither that famous Lawgiver, whom the
Jews had such a Veneration for, nor any of the Heads of the Sects of the
Heathen Philosophers, whom the Gentiles esteemed their Masters, were the
Authors of this divine System, but JESUS CHRIST, the incarnate Son of GOD, who
greatly excelled them all, having in all Things the Pr^heminence.

And to convince both Jews and Gentiles, that neither Moses, nor Plato, nor any
other Master of Reason, was comparable unto this JESUS, and therefore not to be
equally reverenced and submitted to, the Apostle, in my Context, sets before
them, some of the bright Characters of CHRIST, which fully point out his
superior Excellencies; as, His near Relation unto the living GOD, being His
dear Son, and so best a^quainted with his Mind; and his Image, being most like
him, and setting before the World the nearest Representation of the Deity; and
as having the Supremacy over all Creatures, being their Maker, and Ruler, who
best knew how to give Law unto them; and as having a special Relation unto a
peculiar People, being the Head of the Church; upon all which Accounts he was
admirably qualified, beyond all that went before him, to instruct the World in
the Mind, and Will, of GOD, and therefore deserved a more diligent Attention,
and profound Submission, than any other Master.

The last of these Characters I have chosen for the chief Subject of my present
Discourse; though I shall have Occasion to take a little Notice of the others, as
I pass along: He is the Head of the Body, the Church. The former Characters
place Him at the Head of the Universe, as superior unto all Creatures; (upon
which we were agreably entertained, on an other Occasion yesterday, By the Rev
Mr. W^bb, the Day of the Election of His Majesty's Council, from those Words,
in Isa^^ ix. 6. The Government shall be upon his shoulder
) This sets Him at the Head of a peculiar People, and speaks his special Right
of Dominion over them, and most tender Regards for them.

I shall not attempt to enter into a particular Consideration of all that these
Words would naturally afford, but only offer a few Thoughts upon two Things
contained in them, namely,

I. The Church. II. The Head of the Church. And then I shall, III. Draw such
Inferences from them, as are suitable unto the present Occasion.
1. I shall first offer some Considerations upon the Church. And under this
Head, I shall endeavor to show, according to the best Light I can get,

1. What is the Church; 2. Of what does the Church consist; and 3. What
constitutes ^t.
I. I shall endeavou^^^^ show, what is the (...); what is meant by the Church,
bothName, and Thing.

A due Consideration of this will serve to prevent our Minds being imposed
upon, by the equivocal Use of the Phrase, the Church, and enable us to
discourse properly about it.

Here then, I would observe in the General, that the Church means, Soci^^as
Hominum, ex universo genere (...), jam corr^pto, per (...), juxta (...), uni
(...) Chriso, (...). Camero. p. 210.
a particular Company, selected from among Mankind, belonging unto CHRIST,
their special Head. Therefore it is here called his Body, that Body of which He
is, in a peculiar manner, the Head; so that they belong unto Him, as the Body
belongs unto the Head; and this Body is composed from among the Children of
Men, whom the Apostle here distinguishes from all other Creatures whatever. But
then it is to be remembered that this Church fallsunder various Considerations;
as,

1. Either visible, or invisible. The invisible Church means, all true
Believers on Christ; all for whom Christ effectually dyed; all that ever were,
and ever shall be, called out of a State of Sin and Misery, and brought into a
State of Salvation by Jesus Christ. Thus the Church is caetus evocatus, from
the Idea whereof some suppose the Word Ecclesia takes its Rise. It is the whole
Company who are chosen to be the Heirs of Grace here, and of Glory hereafter.
This is the Church, which GOD has purchased with his own Blood: Act. xx. 28.
Part whereof has already entered upon the Possession of the glorious Rewards
above, while a Part is yet struggling for the Mastery, and running for the
Crown; and a Part thereof yet remains to enter upon the Stage of Action, and
fulfill their Warfare; and then the whole Company of the Redeemed shall appear
in one Body, with Palms of Victory in their Hands, and radiant Crowns upon
their Heads, with the Songs of the ransomed of the Lord in their Mouths,
shouting their loud and endless Hosanna's, unto Him that has redeemed them
unto GOD, by His Blood, out of every Kindred, and Tongue, and People, and
Nation. This is properly the catholic^ Church, known unto GOD, but invisible
unto us.

But then, there is the visible Church, which consists of the externally
called, by the Grace of the Gospel, to a visible Profession of CHRIST, (...)
their Head, and Lord: of which the Apostle spoke, when he said, 1 Cor. xv. 9.
I persecuted the Church of GOD. This Church, as visible, is to be considered

2. As more General, or Particular.

Thus the Church, in General, means all visible Christians, in all Parts of the
World, and in any Age of it, that call upon the Name of the Lord JESUS CHRIST,
both their Lord, and ours. The Church of CHRIST is, and can be, but one, being
his Spouse, and consists of visible Christians, all the World over; however
loca^^y distant, and variously denominated; these all make up but one Body, are
called in one Hope, having one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, and one God and
Father of all. Ephesians. (...). 4,5,6.
And may be called the visible Catholic Church.

But, because this whole Company of professed Christians, in all Parts of the
World, cannot possibly meet together in one Assembly, to perform those Acts of
Worship which CHRIST has appointed, in his Word; therefore the great Founder
of the Christian Church has wisely provided for the subsisting of this whole
Body in particular Assemblies, as the humane Nature does in it is Individuals;
and hence the Church falls under a more limited Consideration, and intends
such a Number of visible Christians, being a Part of the whole Body, as
assemble together, in one Place, 1 Cor. xi^. (...).
at one Time, to attend upon the various Duties of instituted Worship; which
therefore, in the Days of the Gospel, is, and can be, no other than
Congregational.

Our Platform Chapter III. 4.
observes, the Matter of the Church, in respect of it is Quantity, ought not to
be of greater Number than may ordinarily meet together conveniently in one
Place; nor ordinarily fewer, than may conveniently carry on Church Work. And
Mr. Cotton, in his Catec^ism, gives us this Definition of a Church, A
Congregation of Saints, joined together in the Bonds of the Covenant, to
worship the Lord, and edify one another, in all his holy Ordinances: Which is
very little different from the Account, those Worthies, which compiled the 39
Articles of the Church of England, give us, of a Church, in the 19th Article.
The visible Church of Christ (say they,) is a Congregation of faithful Men, in
which the pure Word of God is preached, and the Sacraments be duly ministered,
according to Christ's Ordinance, in all things that are of Necessity unto the
same. And we must leave it to those who subscribe those Articles to inform us,
how a Congregation of faithful Men, in which the pure word of God is preached,
and the Sacraments be duly ministered, means the same Thing with Twenty, or an
Hundred such Congregations, assembling at a great Distance from one an other.

A Congregation of Saints, or, faithful Men, worshipping the Lord in all his
holy Ordinances, or, in which the pure Word of God is preached, and the
Sacraments be duly ministered, truly, according to the View which the
New Testament gives us of this Matter, seems, to me, to be a very good
Definition of a particular Church; and therefore that loose Mode of Speech,
that a Church is a worshipping Society, is by no means to be approved of,
because the^e may be innumerable worshipping Societies in which the Ordinances
of Christ neither are, nor can be, duly ministered.

This particular Church, as a Congregation of Saints, worshipping the Lord in
all his holy Ordinances, is all the Instituted Church that is to be found under
the New Testament Dispensation: for we may observe that it is the constant
Language of the Acts, and Epistles, of the Apostles, by whom the Gospel Church
was completed, that a Church means such, or such, a particular Assembly of
Christians, worshipping God, under the Inspection, and Presidency, of their own
Pastor, Bishop, Minister, or Elder, by all which Titles he is denominated; as,
the Church of Ephesus Act. XX. 17.
, the Church at Corinth 1 Cor i. 2.
, etc. And when the Apostles speak of the Assemblies of Christians in a
Province, or Kingdom, they speak, not in the singular, but, in the plural
Number; as, the Churches of Galatia Gal. i. 2.
, the Churches of Macedonia 2 Cor. viii 1.
. etc.

And after the most laborious Enquiry into the State of the Primitive Church,
it appears to have been the constant Practice, the first three hundred Years
after Christ, that the Churches consisted of particular Congregations, each
having their own Pastor, to minister unto them in the holy Things of God See,
an Inquiry into the Consti^ution, of the primitive Church, by an impartial
Hand. Chapter I. and Chapter II.
; and every such Assembly of professed Christians, with their own Pastor at
their Head, worshipping God according to all his holy Ordinances, had entire
Power within it self, to manage the Affairs of the Kingdom of Christ, and the
holy Discipline belonging to it, without any Dependence upon any superior
Power upon Earth: which, the venerable Dr. Increase Mather, in his Attestation
to the Ratio Disciplinae Fratrum Nov Anglorum, says, was the Principle of our
Fathers, who laid the Foundation of these Churches, in this Wilderness.

Surely, then, we may well eno' rest satisfied with this honorable Account of
our Fathers, and firmly abide by their Principles, when we have the sacred
Scripture so plainly directing of us, (...) the Practice of the Church of
Christ, the first three Hundred Years, and the Definition of a Church, by the
Founders of the Church of England, so strongly abetting of us therein.

Thus I have considered what is a Church, which in the General, comprehends the
whole Body of professing Christians, but more particularly considered, means a
particular Assembly of visible Christians, worshipping the Lord in all his holy
Ordinances.

II. I shall now pass to consider, of what does this Church consist. And here,
as to the invisible Church of Christ, this consists of the whole Company of
true Believers, the really sanctified in Christ Jesus. But then, the visible
Church, whether General, or Particular, consists of visible Saints. Our
Platform styles them Saints by Calling Ch III. 1.
; and comprehends under that Style, visible Professors, and their InfantS^^d
Chapter III. 2
, who, indeed, from the Beginning of a visible Church upon Earth, were a Part
of it Genesis xvii. 9. 10. 11.
. These, in the sacred Scriptures, are termed the sanctified 1 Cor. 1 2.
, the called to be Saints Romans 1. 7.
; and in the primitive Church, agreeable to Scripture Language, were called, the
Elect, faithful Men, Brethren, and the like Enquiry, (^^pra) p. ^.
.

These Constituents of a Church are to be considered, according to their
different Station, and Employment, in a particular Church, where, there must of
Necessity be, some to minister in all the Parts of divine Worship, and that by
proper Authority derived from CHRIST therefore, and others that are ministered
unto. So that there are the Officers of the Church, which are, not of humane,
but of divine Appointment; namely, Elders, Pastors, Bishop, T^^. 1. 5, 7.
, who are also styled Stewards 1 Cor. iv. 1.
, Watchmen Heb xiii. 17.
, Rulers 1 Timothy v.17.
, in the Church of God; by which Appellations are pointed out their Honor, and
their Labors: and, in subordination unto these, there are Deacons, to serve
Tables Act.6. init.
The primitive Church knew no other Order of Officers but these two, Bishops,
or Pre^^yters, and Deacons. Enquiry etc. (...).IV.
.

But then, there are those who are to be ministered unto, or such as are under
the Instruction, Watch, and Government, of them that are over them in the Lord,
which includes the Body of the Faithful; who, though they have an undoubted Right
to choose their own Officers Act. 14 23.
, yet have no Part of the Power of Office belonging to them Plat. Ch V. 2.
, whatever be their civil Character. And these fall under a twofold
Consideration, namely, of such as approach unto all special Ordinances, and are
in the Fellowship of the Brotherhood, to whom belong all the more peculiar
Privileges of a particular Church; and of such who, either by their Infant
Baptism, as yet unrenounced, or by their personal Covenanting, (or public
Profession,) in their adult State, (though through groundless Fears, or Scruples,
or, it may be, too great Negligence, they do not approach the Holy Table,) are
truly Members of the Church, and have some of the Privileges thereof
appertaining unto them.

So that as a competent Number of visible Professors of Christianity are
requisite to the Constitution of a particular Church, thus the Officers are
equally necessary to the completing of that sacred Body, without whom, no
Number of professing Christians can perform any Part of that Divine Worship
which is peculiar unto a Church Whatever Acts can be comprised under those
three Heads, of Preaching, Worship, and Government, were Parts of the Bishop^
Function and Office. Enquiry, Chapter III.. ^. And we find none of them Performed
in a particular Church, in the New Testament, but by the Officer.
. Though, indeed, that Vinculum by which they are cemented together, as a
religious Society designing the Worship of God in all his holy Ordinances, is
not dissolved, by the separation of their Officers from them, yet their Power
of Action, as to any Part of that Worship which is peculiar to them as a
Church, ceases; and they are but cat^chr^stically called a Church, while the
Officer, so necessary, not only to the been esse, but, to the very Being of a
Church, is wanting.

So that, neither the Officers, nor the Brethren, considered by themselves, are
the Church, nor the Acts of either of them, separate, Church Acts: And this, I
think, is but agreeable to the Apostle's Discourse of Schism 1 Cor. xii 21.
, where he says, The Eye cannot say unto the Hand, I have no need of you; nor
again the Head unto the Feet, I have no need of you: and consequently, cannot
the Hand say unto the Eye, or the Feet unto the Head, I have no need of you.

III. And now let us consider what it is that constitutes a Church. And because
the Materials of a Church, considered in every Light, are rational Agents, that
are capacitated and have a Right, to act for themselves, in all that relates to
the Worship of God, and the Salvation of their own Souls; therefore, I can
conceive of no other constituting Principle, Bond of Union, and Cement, in the
Church, but the free Consent of every particular Member of that sacred Body;
which free Consent, manifested in the Truth and Sincerity of Faith in the
Heart, renders a Person a Member of the real invisible Church, the true Body of
Christ; and expressed in an outward visible Profession of Christianity, renders
him a Member of the Catholic visible Church, and agreeing with and to a
particular Church, in their Faith and Worship, renders him a Member of that
particular Church.

So that the Cement, which holds the constit^ent Parts of a particular Church
in Union, cannot be the Sincerity of their Faith, which is unknown unto Men;
nor a professed Faith, which gives no Relation unto this more than unto that
particular Church, though it is the Ground of Communion in all Churches; nor
Cohabitation, because the nearest local Distance may be attended with the
greatest mental one; much less does it lie in an Act of the civil Power
combining of them together, because the Church subsists as truly under the most
violent Persecution, as the greatest Patronage: but the Bond of Union, in a
particular Church, can be no other than their mutual Consent, Agreement,
Stipulation, or Covenant, (call it what you please,) to worship the Lord
together, according to the Light they shall receive from the divine Oracles;
which, I think, the Apostle sufficiently intimates, when, writing to the Church
of Ephesus, he says, Ephesians, iv 16.
The whole Body fitly framed together, and compacted, by that which every Joint
supplyeth, according to the effectual working in every Part, makes increase of
the Body, to the edifying of it self in Love.

This Consent, Agreement, or Covenant, is either plainly expressed, or
necessarily employed in their mutual constant assembling themselves together for
divine Worship.

And, from hence it appears, That no Person, whether civil, or ecclesiastical,
has any Right to impose either Officers, or Members, upon this, or that,
particular Church, or to divest them of any of them, without their own Consent;
or has Right to control them, in any of their Actions, proper to them as a
Church; but they must be left to govern themselves, and direct all their
Actions, as a Church, according to the best of their understanding of the Mind
of their Master, their safest Rule, and to whom they must finally be
accountable: though yet other Churches may be assisting in handing Light unto
them, from the sacred Scriptures, when their own Way is dark, and perplexed.

Thus I have done with the first Thing I proposed to speak to, namely the
Church, and have considered it both in the General, and in Particular, as a
Gospel Instituted Church, and viewed it in it is Nature, it is constituent Parts,
and the Cement of it. I proceed therefore to offer something upon the Second
Thing; viz.

II. The Head of the Church. And here it may be enquired,

1. Who is it that is called the Head of the Church? 2. What Kind of an Head is
He? 3. In what Respects is He the Head of the Church? And then, 4. I shall
endeavor to evidence, That He is the Head of the Church.
I. The first Thing here is to enquire, who is it that is styled the Head of
the Church? Whom does the Apostle mean by this Character?

And, I think, there is no Room to hesitate, whether the Apostle mean Him, whom
we Christians call JESUS CHRIST, or some other Person. For we find the sacred
Writer, in the Entrance of this Epistle, giving Thanks unto God, on behalf of
the Col^ssians, Since (says he,) we heard of your Faith in Christ Jesus Chapter i.
v. 3, 4.
: That is, since we understood of your becoming Proselytes to the Faith of
Christ, or your embracing the Christian Religion: and at ver. 14th says he of
Him, in whom we have Redemption through his Blood: and again at ver. 20 th. he
speaks of the same Person, as making Peace through the Blood of his Cross. By
which Characters it is plain that JESUS CHRIST is the Subject of his Discourse.

But then the Question will return, though in other Words, viz. Who is this JESUS
CHRIST? And, I think, we may come at a sufficient Knowledge of who, and what,
He is, by considering the several Characters, and Description, given of Him in
my Context. And here I shall briefly touch upon the Characters of Him.

1. The Apostle styles Him, GOD's dear Son Ver 13.
. For in these Words, the Antecedent to the Relative He, in my Text, is found.
Who, (that is the Father, before spoken of,) has delivered us, (says the
Apostle,) from the Powers of Darkness, and translated us into the Kingdom of
His, (that is the Father's) dear Son. His dear Son, (he goes on) in whom we
have Redemption; -- who is the Image of the invisible God, the first born of
every Creature; -- and HE is the Head of the Body, the Church.

This then, is one Character of Him who is the Head of the Church, That He is
the Son of God, yea, His dear Son, or, the Son of his Love (...).
, that is, His most beloved Son. Christ is here called the dear Son of God, as
He is elsewhere styled his begotten Act. xiii ^3.
, and his only begotten Son Joh. iii. 16.
, to distinguish Him from all that, in any Sense whatever, are called the Sons
of God. And since the divine Revelation speaks of Him, in such strong Terms, as
the Son of God, I know not why we may not conceive of Him, as truly the Son A
Son, speaks not only a near Relation, but a ^ameness of Nature.
of God, as any Person is the Son of his Father, though we are not able to
conceive any thing about the Manner of the divine Generation.

2. An other Character of Him is, That He is the Image of the invisible GOD
Ver. 15.
. Thus He is a Son begotten in his Father's Likeness, and therefore His dear
Son. Thus He partakes of a Likeness to the invisible God, in those Things that
are Invisible; a Likeness resulting from the special Nature of the Father; (to
speak in the Sentiments of Bishop Da^^^^^^, in L^c.
) and so is the most perfect Image, partaking of the same Nature, and
Excellencies, with the eternal Father, by a supernatural Generation, as an
humane Son partakes of the Likeness of his Father, in the Sameness of Nature,
with all the essential Excellencies thereof, by a natural one: so that He is,
as the Apostle elsewhere styles Him, Heb. i. 3.
the Brightness of the Father's Glory, and the express Image of his Person.

He is also the visible Image of the invisible God, in that, when He
tabernacled among Men on Earth, He gave the most bright, and strong,
Representation of the moral Perfections of the Deity, in His own most holy
Life; so that He could say to Philip Joh, xiv. 9.
He that has seen Me, has seen the Father --.

3. A Third Character here given of Him is, That He is the Firstborn of every
Creature Ver 15.
: which may intend, either His prior Existence unto all Creatures: The
firstborn of every Creature does not necessarily infer His receiving His Being
in the same Manner with all Creatures, ye^, rather it points out unto us the
contrary, as one Begotten, while all Creatures are made; but it plainly asserts
His Priority to them all, that He existed before all Creatures. And that which
is before all Creatures is Eternal:

Or, it may mean His Dignity, that the Right of Rule, and Government over all
Creatures, belongs to Him; as the Primogeniture Psalm. lxxxix. 27. Genesis xlix.
3.
carries in it the Right of Dominion. Thus we may understand these Words, if we
retain the Phrase used in our Translation.

But I rather choose to understand the Original in a very different Sense,
namely, The first Cause of every Creature. For the Greek Word, (...), here
rendered firstborn, with a very little Variation of the Accent to (...).
signifies So Erasmus, and Dr Owen.
that from which a Thing originates, or the first Cause of a Thing. And it may
be many Words, in all Languages, admit a like Alteration of Sense, by the
Change of the Accent.

The Greek Language originally, and in the Apostles Days, was written without
Accents: And how easy was it for those that first accented the sacred Text, or
after Transcribers, to mistake in placing the Accent, which might lead our
Translators into their Version. And it seems to me very evident, that there is
a Mistake in placing the Accent, in our Greek Copies, upon the Word before us.
For if we diligently attend to the Scope, and Design, of the Context, (which is
the fairest way of understanding any particular Word, that may seem doubtful,
in any Writer,) We may easily see, that the Idea annexed unto this Word is that
of an Author, an efficient Cause, or that from which a Thing originates, as
it is first Cause; and thus the following Verse runs smooth and natural, which
it scarcely does, according to our Translation. For the next Words are
introduced as a Reason, and Evidence, of this Character of our Lord; He is the
first Cause of every Creature: for by Him were all Things created, that are in
Heaven, and that are in Earth, visible, and invisible, whether they be Thro^^s,
or D^minions, or Principalities, or Powers; all Things were created by Him, and
for Him Ver. 16
: which is equivalent to what the Apostle John says of Him Joh. i. 3.
, all Things were made by Him, and without Him was not any thing made, that was
made. And again Ver. 17.
says the Apostle, He is before all Things, and by Him all Things consist. So
that here we have the Character of Christ as the great Maker and Ruler of the
World which is both the natural Notion, and the Scrip^^^^ Accoun^, of the One,
Living, and True GOD.

From these Characters, we may rationally conclude, that this JESUS CHRIST,
this Head of the Church, is no other than a Divine Person, truly so called; for
what can HE be less, who is the dear Son of GOD, the Image of the Invisible
GOD, and the first Cause of every Creature, or the Maker, and Ruler, of the
World.

But then, That He is MAN, and truly partakes of the Humane Nature, is evident
from some other Characters here given of Him, as, in whom we have Redemption
through his Blood Ver 14.
; having made Pe^ce ^hro' the Blood of his Cross Ver. ^0.
; and in the Body of his Flesh through Death Ver. 2^.
. So that He is truly a Divine Person in Union to the Humane Nature, in the Man
JESUS, or, truly GOD, and truly MAN.

II. What Kind of an Head is this JESUS CHRIST unto the Church? And here, I
would only observe, that, as from a natural Head, so from CHRIST, the spiritual
Head, is derived spiritual Life, Vigor, Motion, and all divine Influences,
unto the whole Body, and unto every particular Member of the Church; all of
which, as an invisible Church, are spiritually, and truly, as a Visible Church,
externally and faederally, united unto Him, and to one another, that there may
be no Schism in the Body 1 Cor. Ch xii.


As a conjugal Head, He tenderly loves, carefully provides for, and watchfully
defends his Church, which is His Spouse, who owes the highest Honor,
Reverence, and Submission, unto Him, as it is Lord Ephesians. v. 23. --
.

As a political Head, He is the Church's Law giver, King, and Judge, who only
has the sovereign Power, of appointing what Laws His Subjects shall govern
themselves by, as in moral Duties, so in instituted Worship; and this is the
Confession which every Christian makes of Him, Rabbi, Thou art the Son of God,
thou art the King of Israel Joh. i. 49.
. Thus is He the Head of the Church, by way of Influence, Care and Government.

III. I am now to enquire, in what Respects CHRIST is the Head of the Church?
And here let it suffice to hint,

That He is the Head of the Church, not with Respect unto the Divine Nature
only; for then there would be no Agreement between the Head, and the Body: nor
with Respect unto the Human^ Nature only; for so should not the Head be able to
influence, provide for, and govern the Body: but it is as GOD and MAN, united
in one Person, that JESUS CHRIST is the Head of Church; by which Union He is
admirably qualified to perform all the Offices of an Head unto His Body.

And hereunto He is appointed of the Father Joh vi. 17.
, who has set Him as King in His holy Hill of Zion Psalm. ii. 6.
, which high Office He discharges, by instructing His Church, as it is Prophet
Luke xxiv. 19.
; by establishing it is Peace, and bringing it nigh unto GOD, as it is Priest Heb
iv. 14, 16.
; and by ruling of it, as it is King Ephesians. i 22.
.

As an Head, He has the Pre-eminence above, and Superiority over the Body; the
Honor, and Dignity belongs to Him, He is anointed above His Fellows Psalm.
xlv. 7.
; the Power and Authority is His, and the Church is Subject unto Him Ephesians. v. 24.
. Without Him, His Church can do nothing Joh. xv. 5.
; but, through Him strength^ing of it, every Member can do all Things Phil. iii.
13.
.

Mavelous also is the Agreement between this glorious Head, and His despised
Body 1 Cor. vi. 17.
, in the Sameness of Nature, each conspiring unto the same ultimate End, and
every Member closely united unto Him, and to one another, being animated by one
and the same Spirit.

These Things, which I have but named, you will find distinctly handled by the
excellent Bishop Davenant, in his Expositions of this Epistle. I proceed
therefore,

IV. To evidence that JESUS CHRIST is the Head of the Church; the only, and
supreme, Head thereof, whether we consider the Church as visible, or invisible,
as general, or particular. And this will sufficiently appear from two Things.

1. From the Relation which Christ stands in unto His Church, by Virtue of His
Office, as it is Mediator, founded in the eternal Covenant of Redemption between
the Father and the Son, which necessarily infers His universal, and supreme,
Headship. For, by Virtue of the Covenant of Redemption, and to answer the great
Ends thereof, the Government of the World is laid upon CHRIST's Shoulders Isai.
ix. 6:
that He might overruled all the Affairs thereof, so as, in the best Manner, to
erect, establish, enlarge, and promote the Benefit of His Church; and this
Church, as His peculiar People, necessarily comes under His special Government,
that He may seek them out, and bring them Home unto God, and Happiness; that He
may lead them in the Path of Life, effectually defend them from the malicious
Designs of their ghostly Adversaries, and finally conduct them as Sons to
Glory; and thus a special Mediatorial Kingdom is formed, in which His Church
becomes, in a peculiar Manner, subject unto His Laws, and receives the Blessing
from Him.

And in as much as this Mediatorial Kingdom requires the visible Manifestation
thereof in the World, both for the Improvement of those Methods which Christ,
in his Wisdom, fixes upon, to recover Subjects unto Himself from the Dominion
of the Prince of Darkness, and for the conveying the many Benefits, and
Privileges, which he designs as the present delightful Entertainment of His
Subjects, and necessary to the Christian Life, as also to strengthen the
obedient Subject in the Hopes of the future Happiness, and train him up into a
Meetness for it; therefore a visible Church is necessary, and that in
particular Assemblies, or Congregations, in which the Laws, and Ordinances, of
Christ may be administered, His Benefits ascertained and conveyed, and all
Things managed in such a Way and Manner, as not to fru^trate, but to advance
the glorious Design which He has in View, in his great Undertaking.

Thus the Church State, the visible Officers thereof, their Work and Duty, the
several Members, their Qualifications, Behavior, Privileges, Encouragements,
and Rewards, are all established by Him; all being founded in, and resulting
from, the Mediatorial Office of CHRIST, and the great Work of Redemption by
Him. Thus, God has raised CHRIST from the Dead, and set Him at his own Right
Hand, far above all Principalities, and Powers, and Might, and Dominion, and
every Name that is named, not only in this World, but also in that which is to
come; and has put all Things under His Feet; and gave Him to be Head over all
Things unto the Church, which is His Body, the Fullness of Him that fills all
in all Ephesians. i. 20, -- 23.


And then,

2. We see the supreme Headship in the Church confirmed unto CHRIST in the
sacred Pages. For there we find that He was the supreme Head, and Lord, of the
Church, in the Days of the Old Testament. He erected the visible Church of
Israel, prescribed their Worship, and appointed their Ordinances, Rites, and
Ceremonies: He was their expected Messiah, the Object of their Faith, and Hope,
the Author of their Religion, to whom all their Worship, and religious
Services, peculiarly pointed; He visibly appeared to them, especially in the
S^ec^^n^^, gave them their Laws, and was, in an appropriated Sense, their LORD;
the Hope of Abraham, the Fear of Isaac, the God of Jacob: all of which is very
apparent, to a careful Reader of the Old Testament; and this Stephen directs us
to in his History, in the seventh Chapter of Acts.

Thus also we find Him the Head of the Gospel Church. He abolished the Ancient
Jewish Church, the aronical Priesthood, the levitical Service, the whole Form,
and Mode, of that Church, and all the Worship Peculiar to it Ephesians. ii. 15. Heb.
vii. 12.
; and set up in the Room thereof, a new Gospel Church, not confined unto one
Place, and Temple, not subject unto any visible High Priest, not encumbered with
numberless R^tes, and carnal Ordinances, but, as he designed it, free from the
Yoke of Bondage, extensive unto all Nations, and subsisting in any Place; so
that wherever a few are gathered together, in his Name, and with his Ministers
attending to minister in the holy Things of his House, There his Church is.

This Gospel Church is built upon CHRIST, and other Foundation can no Man lay 1
Cor. iii. 11.
The whole Design and Model of it is from Him, as it is Head and Lord; the Word,
and Spirit, by which it is formed, both in the external Frame of the Building,
and the inward finishing of the real Christian, are from his Gift, and
Operation; and He only appoints the Laws, and Ordinances, the Fashion of the
House, and the Mode of Worshipping, with the Ceremonies thereof: leaving the
necessary Circumstances of Time, and Place, as Order and Decency requires, to
the Rules of humane Prudence.

This appears from his original Commission to His Apostles, and, in them, to
all succeeding Ministers ^ where He limits them to his Laws and Orders, and
allows them no Pretensions to set up for themselves, with any legislative
Power, and Authority, in His Church, saying to them, Matthew. xxviii 19, 20.
Go teach all Nations, -- teaching them to observe all Things whatsoever I have
commanded you. Therefore also, He forbids his Disciples to usurp any lordly
Power over one another, or to submit themselves to any humane Authority, in the
Affairs of His Kingdom, and that from their Sense of His sole and supreme
Lordship in his Church; Matthew. xxiii 8, 9, 1^.
Be not ye called Rabbi, for one is your Master, even CHRIST, and all ye are
Brethren; and call no Man your Father upon Earth, for one is your Father; Who
is in Heaven; neither be ye called Masters, for one is your Master, even
CHRIST. Which does not mean to dissolve the natural, and civil Relations, among
Men, and free us from the Duties thereof; for CHRIST came to establish these;
but the Design of this Discourse was to show them, and all the Disciples of our
Lord after them, that they must not themselves assume a Power over other Men,
nor give to any Men the Power over them, to rule and govern them by any Laws of
their own devising, in Matters of Conscience, and that relate to the spiritual
Kingdom of CHRIST; but remember that CHRIST, and He only, is their Head, their
Master, their Lord, whose Laws are to be their only Rule, and to whom they must
be finally accountable.

So that we have no need to look to any Power upon Earth, whether civil, or
ecclesiastical, to give Law unto the Church, to appoint the Bounds, to mark out
the Form, to constitute the Officers, to direct the Worship, or number the
Ceremonies thereof; seeing CHRIST, and He only, is the supreme Head of the
Church. He is the Head of the Body, the Church.

Thus I have offered a few Considerations upon the two Points I proposed to
speak to, namely, the Church, and the Head of the Church. And I shall now
proceed,

III. In the last Place, to draw such Inferences from what has been said, as
are suitable unto the present Occasion. And,

1 I think we may from hence very plainly and naturally infer, That to assume
unto our selves, or subject our selves to, any governing Authority, in the
Church, not established by CHRIST, is so far to throw off the Government of
CHRIST, as Head of the Christian Church. For since CHRIST is the supreme Head
of the Church, whether we consider it more generally, or in particular, and has
the sole Right to give Law to it, to appoint the Officers, Services, and
Regimen thereof, it can be no less than an invading of his Right, and a
throwing off his Government, for any to assume unto themselves the Power to
impose Laws, without a Subjection whereunto their Brethren shall be debarred
the Privileges of the Christian Church; and it is no less than a practical
disowning of the Headship of CHRIST, for any to submit to such lordly
Impositions.

This indeed is the Antichrist, which began early to work in the Christian
Church, and was completed in the Man of Sin, who struck at all the Offices of
CHRIST, by setting up of Oral Tradition, in Opposition to the sacred
Scriptures, by introducing innumerable Mediators as Competitors with CHRIST,
and by constituting a visible Head, with Power to enact Laws for the Government
of the Church; under the Tyranny whereof the Christian World labored for many
Ages, until a glorious Reformation, under the Character of Protestantism, nobly
recovered, the Rights of the Prophetic, and Priestly, Office of CHRIST, from
the Usurpations of Rome, and strove hard to rescue His Kingly Office, out of
the Hands of His Enemies, that CHRIST might be LORD ALONE in His Church.

But, though the Sweets of a lordly Power rendered it difficult for many to part
with that Authority they had in the Church, and so prevented that general
Reformation which was desired, yet, there were many, among whom we may well
reckon our venerable Fathers, who carried on that glorious Work so much
further, as to assert the Kingly Office of CHRIST in his Church, and, (what is
the Consequence thereof,) that every particular Church, with their own Pastors,
and Officers, has full Power in themselves, according to the Laws of CHRIST,
for all Church Acts, for their Preservation, Purity, Reformation, Peace and
Unity, and are not in Subjection unto any earthly Power; but yet owe that Love,
Fellowship, and Communion to, and with, one another, which is necessary to the
Welfare of the Church of CHRIST in general Such was the Constitution of the
primitive Church See, (...) Chapter VIII.


And now, my Fathers and Brethren, suffer me to say, That it highly concerns Us
to be true to the Rights of CHRIST, and the Christian Church, under Him, their
and our Head, according to the noble Principles of our pious Predecessors,
collected from the sacred Scriptures, and the Archives of the primitive Church,
and handed down unto us their Posterity, as their valuable Legacy.

Not that I would have our Platfo^m set up for Scripture, or the Sentiments of
it imposed upon any Man. For, though I cannot sufficiently admire the Learning,
Wisdom, and Temper, manifested in that Composure, which, the further we search
into the primitive Church, will be found the more agreeable to it is
Constitution, and which was calculated to comprehend in it, all that
acknowledged the Rights of particular Churches, and of CHRIST their Head, though
they differed in their Opinions, and Practices, in lesser Matters; yet, it is
abhorrent to me, as it was unto our Fathers, to set it up as a Rule, from
which, neither They, nor We, may ever in the least vary. No; they only
recommended it to the Churches, and left all to judge for themselves: and this
I look upon as the true Glory of our renowned Fathers, and the Liberty wherein
CHRIST has made us free; Us, even all his Churches, if we knew but how to use
our Liberty.

Hence, as a particular Pastor's taking upon himself the sole Government of his
Church, without the Consent of the Brethren, would be a lording it over God's
Heritage; so for other Pastors, and Churches, to assume an Authority over any
particular Pastor, and his Flock, would be a far greater Usurpation (...).
Actis Conci^. Carthag. apud Cyprian. P. 443.
being evidently a lording it, where they had nothing to do, but to advise,
when consulted. And however Pretensions of Zeal for the Glory of God, and
Service of his Churches, may stimulate any unto such a Practice, it will ever
be found, in the Conclusion, a Zeal without Knowledge, like their's, who
thought they did GOD good Service, while they persecuted and slew their
Brethren Joh. xvi 2.
. (...) was this pretended Zeal, in some ambitious Clergymen, who loved to
appear at the Head of every Thing, and be thought greater and wiser than their
Brethren, with their exciting the well-meaning among the civil Powers to back
their Zeal with coersive Methods, that laid the Foundation of the Romish
Hierarchy, and Apostasy, under the Tyranny of which so great a Part of the
Church is groaning, and bleeding, unto this very Day.

As it is the Right of the great Head of the Church alone to give Law to it, so
it is the Right of every particular Christian to judge for himself, according
to the best of his understanding the sacred Scriptures, what are the Articles
of Faith, and what is that Worship, which CHRIST requires him to believe, and
practice; that is to say, in what Way CHRIST will be acceptably served by him.
And in like manner, it is the just Right of every particular Church Therefore
(...) 52. 13. which is to be understood with the Consent of his People, for the
same Author says, (...)
to judge for themselves, what Mode, and Form of Worship, and Discipline,
appears to them most agreeable to the Mind and Will of CHRIST: and as it is an
Invasion of the Authority of CHRIST, the Head, for any to take upon them to
give Law unto His Church, so is it a tyrannical Usurpation upon the Liberties
of the Christian Church for any to attempt forcibly to reduce other Churches to
their Scantling. For there is, (says that great Master of Reason and Thought,
the present Bishop of Winchester, Dr. H^^dly The common Rights of Subjects, in
Answer to the Dean of (...). p. 125
) that Supremacy vested in every Christian, in his own behalf, that he has a
Right to judge for himself, in Affairs of Conscience, and Eternal Salvation; a
Right not to be prejudiced by the Claim of Power and Authority, in any Men upon
Earth: and consequently (say I,) a Right in every particular Church to
practice, in all their Administrations, according to the best Light they can
receive from the holy Scriptures; though others may be instrumental in handing
the Light to them.

As it has a direct Tendency to the Papacy for Churchmen to take upon them
(...), so (says the forementioned Author, Supra p. 102, 10^.
) The civil Magistrate has nothing to do, to enter with his Directions and
Restraints, of Temporal Laws, which are executed by Temporal Power, into these
Matters. A People have still an unalienable Right to make the best of their
Bibles.

And therefore, when the civil Powers shall take upon them, to form Churches,
to ascertain who shall, and who shall not, belong to this or that particular
Church, and who shall enjoy the full Privileges, which, as Members of that
Society, they have a natural, and religious, Right to, and who not; and when
Churchmen, under whatever Denomination, shall pretend to exert an Authority
over other Churches, and anathematise those that will not tamely submit
themselves to their Determinations; I say, if ever such Principles, and
Practices, should obtain among us, I must have leave to lament over our
Churches, with an Heu Prisca Fides! and to write upon them Icabod, the Glory of
New England is departed. For whatever Cry any may make of the Platform, and
Congregational Principles, it is very certain, that, by such Means, the very
Essence of Congregational Churches will be utterly overthrown.

Having observed these Things, suffer me now to address my self unto the
Candidates for the Ministry, who are to supply our Places, when we are fallen
asleep, -- That you, the Sons of the Prophets, our Hope and our Joy, would be
careful to walk by the same Rule; and while you take Heed unto your selves, to
have your own Hearts strongly impressed with the firm Belief of the Christian
Religion, and your Lives under the Influence thereof, you would also be
studious of the Truths of the Day, that you may see more and more of the
Excellency of CHRIST's Kingdom, and may steadfastly resolve to be true to Him,
and the Interest of His Churches, neither subjecting your selves unto human
Impositions, nor attempting to lord it over others.

And that I may be assisting to you, in your future Serviceableness, allow me
to mention a few brief Rules, which I think are worthy of your Observation.

1. Remember, That the great GOD, in revealing His Mind unto the World,
designed to be understood. As He has been pleased to condescend to accommodate
Himself unto our Capacity, in speaking of heavenly Things in humane Language,
so He wisely makes use of that Language as it is commonly understood among Men,
and does not mean to fix any Ideas, or Conceptions, unto Words, but what are
well known, in the common Use of them. This Rule, in your studying of the
Scriptures, and comparing one Part with an other, will secure you from making
the sacred Writings an uncertain Sound, and lead you into the true Doctrine of
the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit.

2. Study the sacred Scriptures with a steady View to the Sovereignty, and the
Grace, of God. These seem to be the two Master Characters, by which GOD would
have Himself to be known among the Children of Men; His Sovereignty more
especially displayed, in the infant State of His Church, under the Old
Testament Dispensation, though not without clear Discoveries of His Grace; His
Grace more illustriously shining forth, in the adult-state of the Church, under
the Old Testament, yet not without challenging the Rights of His Sovereignty.
That is to say, That he is LORD alone, and his Will, which is the Will of an
all-perfect Being, is a sufficient Reason for what he requires of us, or
appoints for us; and that all that he does for us, and has promised to us,
are Acts of free Grace and Favor. This will sufficiently establish you in the
Quinquarticular Controversy, without Fear of your giving to Man what is due to
GOD alone, or of reproaching the Divine Being as capricious, and humoursome,
and tyrannical.

3. Ever subject Philosophy to Divinity. Philosophy is but the Result of human
Understanding, and Reasoning; Divinity, I mean what turns upon Revelation,
flows directly from the Divine Mind: and therefore, though Philosophy be a fine
Accomplishment, and a great Improvement of our rational Powers, yet look upon
it, as it is, (and Honor eno' for it,) but as an Handmaid unto Divinity: and
never suffer the Handmaid to usurp Authority over the Mistress, our safer
Guide. This will keep you from corrupting the Truths of the Gospel with vain
Philosophy, after the Traditions of Men, or repudiating Divinity, and denying
the Truth because it is inexplicable by the Rules of Philosophy.

4. Do not endeavor to be wise above what is written. Probably, the
affectation of this Wisdom has given Rise to most of the Errors, that have
sprang up in the Christian Church. Remember, therefore, what God has not seen
cause to reveal, in Divinity, He never intended we should understand; and all
our Attempts to search the inscrutable (...) will but so much the more bewilder
us. We can never be sure that we are right in our Conceptions of what is
unrevealed, after our most diligent Enquiry; but we may be sure that we are so
far Wrong, as we pretend unto any Certainly about Things that are inexplicable
by us. Be content, therefore, with what is revealed; this belongs to us; but
secret Things belong upon the Lord our GOD. This will subdue the Itch of
Novelty, which will but prove the Church's Scab.

5. Be sure to preach CHRIST. I do not mean to be often repeating His Name,
though yet we are not ashamed of it; but, preach the Doctrines of CHRIST, of his
Person, Natures, Offices, and Benefits, as well as the moral Duties which he
requires: and endeavor to show, how all Grace and Favor, all Virtue and
Strength, flows from Him, the Head of all Influences, unto His several Members;
and that the Glory of all, as to Merit, and Efficacy, in the great Work of
Redemption, is to be returned unto Him. Suffer not the true Beauty, Excellency,
and Spirit of Christianity, to give Way to the saint Glitter, and feeble
Harrangues of Pagan Writers, which it may be has been too much the Error of
some late celebrated Preachers; but study to know, and preach, nothing so much
as JESUS CHRIST, and Him crucified.

6. Remember, you will have to do with the Souls of Men. And therefore, as they
are worth all your Care, and demand your most tender Compassion, and closest
Application, so they are not to be forced by any external Methods of Coertion;
but the only Compulsion, that will have any good Effect upon them, is that of
bringing Light to the Mind, and Warmth to the Heart; that by the Force of
Scripture and Reason, suitably applied, they may be strongly moved to their
Duty, and Interest. This will preserve you from a lordly usurping Spirit, and
make you to look upon your selves, not, as having Dominion over the Faith, but,
as Helpers of the Joy, of your Brethren.

But I go on to another Inference:

II. Hence we see that it must needs be our Duty to do all that we can for the
Honor of CHRIST, and the Interest of His Church in the World. Think now, who
is this glorious Head of the Church, and what His beautiful Church is, the many
Privileges we enjoy, and the divine Consolations we are refreshed withal, in
it; and surely upon the View hereof, we cannot suppose it too much for us, to
lay our selves out in suitable Services therefore. This should quicken us to
honor our glorious Head, by strenuously espousing His Cause, appearing on the
Side of Virtue, against all its Opposers; by endeavoring to exemplify the Life
of CHRIST, in the Holiness and Meekness of our own, and by manifesting a
sincere Love and hearty Zeal to our holy Religion.

This should fill us with a great Concern for the Welfare, and Flourishing, of
the particular Churches, to which we severally stand related, and that both as
Ministers, and Christians. As Ministers, in our painful Labors in the Work of
the Gospel, our affectionate Addresses to the Consciences of Men, our assiduous
Watchfulness over them, our meek instructing of them, our compassionate
counselling of them, our impartial ministering unto them, and our servant
Prayers to GOD for them: as Christians, in our hearty Subjection unto the
Gospel of CHRIST, and Submission, and Honor, to those that watch for our
Souls, our encouraging one an other to Love^ and to good Works, our studious
Endeavors to preserve the Peace, and Purity, of the Church, and our ready
supporting of it in the Enjoyment of all the holy Ordinances of CHRIST.

This should quicken us unto all proper Serviceableness to the Church of CHRIST
in General, by our asserting and defending the general Cause of Christianity,
by holding the Unity of the Faith, and maintaining the Bond of Charity, in our
brotherly Affection for all the sincere Worshippers of the Father, and of
CHRIST; that however we may differ from them, in some of the Externals, and
Modalitys, of Religion, yet there may be no Alienation in our Hearts from them,
but we may be of one Heart and of one Mind with them, as that, if possible,
there may be no Schism in the Body of CHRIST.

And, to come to the more special Work now before us, This should make us
willing, and ready, to expend of our worldly Substance for the sending, and
supporting, of the Gospel of JESUS CHRIST, and the Ordinances, and Privileges
of his Church, in the unevangeliz^d Parts of our Land; that the visible Kingdom
of our Lord JESUS CHRIST may more extensively flourish among us.

Can we think of the Glories of our exalted Head, and our Obligations to Him?
or, meditate on the Beauty of S^on, and the Advantages of our standing there;
without feeling the constraining Force thereof upon our Hearts, opening of them
unto a liberal Contribution, that they, who are ready to perish for lack of
Vision, may have the Light of the glorious Gospel shining upon them, to guide
their Feet into the Way of Truth and Peace?

Can we think what a miserable Condition this World would have been in, and our
selves in particular, if the Son of GOD had not set up His Church in the Earth,
and among us, and taken it under His special Government; and not see the
obligations we lie under to pay our Acknowlegements unto our great
Melchis^d^c,who has blessed us with all spiritual Blessings in heavenly
Matters?

Ye^, have we ever tasted the Sweetness of the Word, and Ordinances, and felt
the powers of the World to come, in the Renovation of our Minds, the
Sanctifying of our Affections, and bringing of us under a Consecration unto
GOD? Have we ever experienced the Communion of the Saints, and known what it is
to pass from Death to Life, and receive the Pledges of the dying Love of a dear
Redeemer, and to be filled with all Joy in believing, and possess the good Hope
through Grace, that we shall finally be associated with the general Assembly of
the Church of the firstborn; and all of this as the blessed Fruit and Effect
of the Church State among us, by which we enjoy the Adoption, and the Glory,
and the Covenant, and the giving of the Law, the Service of GOD, and the
Promises? and shall we not have our Hearts enlarged with Gratitude, and
Thankfulness, unto our glorious Head, and a tender Compassion to those poor
Souls, who, without our Assistance, will be likely to pine, and languish, and
dye, in the Want of the true Brea^.

Life, and spare a little of our temporal Interest, to enrich them with
spiritual Blessings, that they may, at length, become Fellow-Heirs with us, and
of the same Body, and partakers of the Promise in CHRIST, by the Gospel, and we
may rejoice together with them?

Come, my Brethren, though it be a Day of small Things, with the mo^^ of us, yet
let us not think much to take upon us this Fellowship of (...) the Saints; but,
us the loud Call, from the dar^ Parts of our Land, demands of us, so let us,
out of our deep poverty, abound in the Riches of (...) that the Things which
are honest, before GOD, and Men, may be provided, and if possible, no (...)
Soul may perish, for Want of the Offers of the Gospel, and the Ministration of
the Ordinances of CHRIST.

We rejoice to the several devout Christians, and some of supe^io^r Fig^^^
among us, affording us their Comp^^^, and ready, heartily to join with us,
(...) their Abundance to throw more liberall^ into this common Stock, (...) the
Supply of the poor Servants of GOD, who are endeavoring to build up the Church
of the LORD JESUS, in the more doleful Corners of our Land.

^^d let us all take the Encouragement, that, while, with sincere Hearts, and
open Hands, we do Good, and communicate, GOD is well pleased with our
Sacri^^ces Heb. xiii. 1^.
: ye^, remember, that all we do, of this Nature, we do it for CHRIST, and His
Church, and He will certainly take a grateful Notice of it, and plentifully
reward it; for so has He said, (...). ^ ^^, 41, 42
He that receives you, receives (...), and be that receives M^, receives
Him that sent M^. He that receives a prophet, in the Name of a prophet, shall
receive a Prophet's Reward; and ^e that receives a righteous Man, in the Name
of a righteous Man, shall receive a righteous Man's Reward: And whosoever shall
give to drink, unto one of these little Ones, a Cup of cold Water only, in the
Name of a Disciple, verily, I say unto you, be shall in no wise loss his Reward.

Now, (...) JESUS CHRIST, who is the faithful Witness, and the first-begotten
of the Dead, and the Prince of the Kings of the Earth; unto Him that loved us,
and washed us from our Sins, in His own Blood, and has made us kings and
priests (...) GOD, and His Father; to Him be Glory, and Dominion, for ever and
ever. Amen!

FINIS

