Mr. Mather's Artillery Election SERMON, June 4. 1739.

War is lawful, and Arms are to be proved. A SERMON Preached to the Ancient and
Honorable Artillery Company, on June 4. 1739. The Anniversary Day for Electing
their Officers, at BOSTON, New England.

By SAMVEL MATHER, M. A. Pastor of a Church in BOSTON.

Principes nos facit severitas Institutorum, ordo Militiae, Amor guidem Laboris
and quotidiana Exercitatione assidua Belli Meditatio.

QUINTILIAN. Declam. 3. pro Milite. Noli Existimare Neminem DEO placere posse,
qui Armis bellicia ministrat: In his erat sanctus DAVID, cui DOMINUS magnum
Testimonium perhibuit.

AUGUSTINE. ad BONIFAC. BOSTON: Printed by T. Fleet, for DANIEL HENCHMAN, 1739.

Boston, June 4. 1739. In the Artillery Company,
Voted,
THAT the Field Officers of the Regiment, with our present Commission Officers,
and those to be elected, be a Committee to give our Thanks to the Reverend Mr.
Samuel Mather for his Sermon preached this Day, and to desire a Copy of said
Sermon for the Press.

Tho. Simpkins, Clerk of said Company.

The Lawfulness of War, AND The Proof of Arms.
I Sam. XVII. 39. -- And DAVID said unto SAUL, I cannot go with These* For I
have not proved Them.


THE Armies of the Philistines were now gathered together in the Coast of
Dammim, and pitched between Shochoh and Azekah, a Place belonging to Judah:
And, in order to oppose them, SAUL and the Men of Israel were gathered together
also and pitched by the Valley of Elah and had set the Battle in Array against
them: The former Army stood on a Mountain on one side; and the latter stood on
a Mountain on the other; so that there was only a Valley between them.

Behold now a Champion marches out of the Camp of the Philistines, named
GOLIATH, who was of enormous Size and formidable Appearance: He comes in
warlike Armor complete, and with a Spear in particular as much exceeding common
ones, as his Stature exceeded the common Stature of Mankind: He advances to
defy the Armies of Israel, and challenges them to produce a Man that would be
so hardy as to encounter him.

SAUL, the unhappy King whom GOD gave in His Anger to Israel, was present to
behold the Surprise, the Disorder and Confusion of his enervated People: And
all Israel were overwhelmed with the fearful Expectation of ignominious and
cruel Slavery: Terror itself had chilled the Hearts of the whole Israelitish
Host and caused the Faces of the most Brave among them to be covered with
Distress and Anguish.

At the View of such a tremendous Adversary, and at the Hearing his mighty
Voice, his daring Challenges and his fierce, though too early Boasts and
Threatenings, their fainting Souls were upon the Wing and the Shades of the
Night were just rushing over them.

But now, when there was not a Man of the whole Israelitish Army, that had the
Heart to appear for them, to espouse their Cause and revenge their Wrongs;
Almighty GOD of His ineffable Goodness disposed and excited a brave Soldier to
accept the Challenge of the haughty GOLIATH: 'Twas DAVID the great, the good,
the generous, who with his gallant, but gentle, Voice revives the Hopes of
disheartened Israel and recals their departing Spirits.

The intimidated Israelitish Monarch indeed could not at first believe and
hope, that DAVID by Reason of his tender Youth was equal to the vast Encounter,
and therefore endeavors to dissuade him from the Tho'ts of it.

But the young Hero, instead of being discouraged and turned aside by the
Speech of his King, grows rather more courageous and more resolved for the
Combat: For he was strong in the LORD and in the Power of his Might.

Being therefore Divinely fortified in his Mind, he hence says to his terrified
Prince, Thy Servant will go and fight with this Philistine, seeing he has
defied the Armies of the living GOD; Q. D. Though you, my Sovereign, have
endeavored to put me off from my proposed Encounter, you have only confirmed
me in my valorous Purpose. It Is true GOLIATH is a Warrior, an old and
experienced Warrior, and I allow that I am but a Learner in the Art of War: But
in the present Case I have an unshaken Reliance, not on my own Power and Skill,
but on the Recruits and Aids of Divine Power and Grace: The audacious, godless
Giant has reproached our GOD, who therefore must be his Enemy: And, when this
our GOD is my Friend I have no Doubt but that HE will be my potent Auxiliary
and crown me with Victory and Triumph: It must be acknowledged, that he places
great Dependence on the Strength of his Body, the Force of his Valor and the
Glory of his Arms: But yet I have much the Advantage of him: For the Divine
Majesty is my Strength: He is my Deliverer and my Shield; and in Him do I put
my Trust to subdue this Gigantic Mortal under me.

So spoke the brave DAVID: And the Consequence of his Speech was, that King
SAUL was persuaded by it to let him engage with their Enemy: Accordingly, that
he might be equipped for this Purpose, we read, in Verse twenty ninth of the
preceding Context, that SAUL armed DAVID with his Armor, etc.

Some Expositors have hence absurdly enough supposed, that SAUL put his own
disproportioned and unsuitable Armor upon him: I said, They have absurdly
supposed it: For it is altogether unlikely and incredible, that SAUL should put
the Arms designed and made for his own Majestically tall Body, which over-top'd
all Israel by the Head, upon the small Body of DAVID. But others have with more
Probability determined, that this Armor is called SAUL 's, because it was taken
out of his Magazine or Armory.

DAVID then, being thus clad and accoutred according to the King's Mind, finds
that his Arms, instead of being a Service, would be an Injury to Him and an
Impediment to his Victory: He therefore determines to lay them aside. And DAVID
said unto SAUL, I cannot go with These: For I have not proved them. Q. D. My
Prince and Sovereign, I am going to fight with that proud and vain GOLIATH: It Is
fit and requisite, that I have suitable Arms with which to go against him: And,
as I have not by proving These found them to be so, I ought not to go with
Them, but should proceed to the Engagement with such Arms as are most proper
for me and which are most likely to be used well and successfully by me.

By the Words therefore, in this Exhibition of them before us, we are fairly
led to endeavor these three Things, namely,

In the first Place, To justify the Lawfulness of going to War:

Then, To consider Arms as requisite for them that go to War: And

Lastly, To show, that Men cannot well, nor should, go to War but with such
Arms as are proved.

Accordingly, in the first Place, The Lawfulness of going to War is to be
justified by us.

And here we shall readily grant, that War is a very grievous Calamity and
Judgment: For It proceeds for the most part from wild Ambition or Covetousness
or inordinate Anger or some other irregular Frame of Mind: And, if it should be
ever so just and righteous as its Causes; it is however so pernicious and
hateful a Thing as that no good Man can be well pleased with it.

For not to mention the Men generally improved by States and Princes for
carrying it on, who, though They be styled Regular Forces, are yet for the most
Part faithless, Nulla Fides Pietasque Viris qui Costra sequuntur. Lucan.
Pharsal. Lib. X.
profane and impious Wretches, and of such fordid Souls as not to regard any
superior Considerations whatsoever: These are the Men, who from the Love of
Praise or Lust of Wealth are always ready and prepared for the Battle: And
These must be received into fertile Fields and crowded Cities, and keep them in
Awe and Subjection under the Pretense of defending them.

But, not to insist upon This; It is a Thing by no means to be overlooked or
denied, that Men in a Time of War cannot well pursue their lawful Affairs and
Interests: For Then, through the Prevalence of Fear, the Labor of the Field is
neglected and the Trade of the Merchant is moored.

Nor is This all: But at such a Time, while good Laws are silent Inter Arma
silent Leges.
nor allowed to speak their Terrors; what Debaucheries, what Thefts and
Rapines, and how great a variety of other Villainies are perpetrated? And, even
after the Extinction of War, it is next to impossible but that this Pestilence
of Manners should continue and rage for a considerable while.

And besides; War is always very chargeable: And, supposing the War should
terminate with Success and Triumph; yet there is scarce any War so happily
concluded but that, upon the Review, it will be found the Loss sustained is
equal to the Benefit and Advantage accruing to the Victor.

And, which is no small and inconsiderable Unhappiness, many valiant, useful
and great Men fall Sacrifices in the Day of Battle: For, when with Shouts two
shocking Armies closed,
To Lances Lances, Shields to Shields opposed,
Host against Host with shadowy Legions drew,
The sounding Darts in Iron Tempests flew;
Victors and Vanquished join promiscuous Cries,
Triumphant Shouts and dying Groans arise;
With streaming Blood the slippery Fields are died,
And slaughtered Heroes swell the dreadful Tide.
Such are the Horrors of War, as the English HOMER has livelily painted them to
our View Pope's Homer Iliad. VIIIth. Prorsus experimur esse verissimum, quod,
ante tot Annorum Millia scripsit Homerus, Cibi, Potus, Cantionum, Chorearum and
omnium Rerum quamvis natura dulcium Homini Satietatem suboriri, solius Belli,
Rei omnium tristissimae, nullam esse Satietatem. Erasmi Epistolarum. L. XIX. p.
654.
.

But however, all these Things notwithstanding, War is sometimes requisite and
necessary: It is so for the Recovery of what is unjustly taken away, and for
the Vindication of some Wrong sustained, according to the Proportion of the
Injury, and for procuring and establishing desirable Peace Pax quaeritur Bello
was the Motto on the Medals of the great CROMWELL; who had like to have visited
New England, but was detained by Providence for the Deliverance and Protection
of the Kingdom.
.

It Is true there should be a Call of sufficient Authority to engage in War: Nor
should War be waged but with a good Intention and Frame of Mind: But, when War
is Thus not only commenced, but ^nly pursued also; and when, in the Prosecution
of it, there is Fortitude in Dangers, Patience in bearing Hardships, Industry
in setting about Things, Counsel in providing for them and Speed in
accomplishing them; Then it is not barely lawful, but it is honorable and
glorious.

There have bin indeed many in Germany and other Places, who have condemned all
going to War as unlawful and wicked: But, upon due Enquiry and Consideration,
it will be found, that They know not what they say nor whereof they affirm.

For it is certainly agreeable to the Law of Nature, and so it has unanswerably
bin proved to be over and over again by learned Civilians, that a People, as
such, have their just Rights and Claims, that They may and should assert and
maintain These, and, in so doing, repel the Violence used against Them with
their best Forces.

And, although the peaceable Men just mentioned have taken the Liberty to quote
some Passages from the Writings of the old and new Covenant, and formed some
specious Arguments from them against going to War; yet it can easily be proved,
as that the Texts produced are not well understood by them, and consequently
the Arguments collected from them cannot be good; so that the Passages in
Scripture, which are in Favor of going to War, are many and very considerable.

That GOD in the Law, which He gave to the Hebrews, directed them with respect
to the Way and Manner wherein They should proclaim, begin and prosecute their
Wars, This cannot reasonably be denied: But now such Things as are Evil are
rather to be disallowed and forbidden than permitted and even recommended with
suitable Statutes and Laws.

It is suggested indeed by the Enemies to War aforesaid, as if Testimonies from
the Old Testament could not be of great Validity in this Case; because there
are many Things to be found in That, which ought not to be imitated by us.

But the Reply to This is easy, which is, that, although it be true, it is
nothing to the present Purpose: For the Things written in the Law of MOSES
concerning War refer to the Law of Nature, which is perpetual: It being
eternally right and just, that the Innocent should be protected and the Evil
and Oppressive repressed.

And besides, We read, in the Eleventh to the Hebrews, concerning DAVID and
other ancient Worthies, that by Faith they subdued Kingdoms, waxed valiant in
War and turned to Flight the Armies of the Aliens: But, if they did these
Things in the Exercise of Faith, they were not then to blame for their thus
Warring.

But, in our Scriptural Proofs of the Lawfulness of going to War, we are not
confined to the Law and the Prophets: We have other Testimonies, besides These,
to be taken from the Books of the New Covenant.

When the Soldiers came to JOHN the Baptist and asked him, What they should do
to be saved? He did not advise them to quit their Service, but to carry
themselves well in it, namely, by doing Violence to no Man, by not accusing any
one falsely and by Contentment with their Wages, as in Luke III. 14. And our
blessed SAVIOR did not require the Centurion to resign his Post, whom He
commends as having superior Faith to any in Israel, as in Mat. VIII. 10. And we
read of CORNELIUS a Roman Captain, that, while he was so, his Prayers and his
Alms came up as a Memorial before GOD, as in Act. X. 4. TERTULLIAN indeed
supposes, that, after his Conversion to Christianity, he quitted his Post: And
This was the received Opinion of the Primitive Church: And, if the Roman Tests
for Soldiers were then in Force, as They probably might be; for all above the
common Soldiers Called Milites caligati.
were necessarily obliged to immolate to the Pagan Deities, as EUSEBIUS assures
us; we must then conclude with the learned Mr. MOYLE, that CORNELIUS
undoubtedly laid down his Commission.

But, to go on with our Demonstration; our blessed LORD required, as in Mat.
XXII. 21. Render unto CAESAR the Things which are CAESAR's: Now the Taxes then
collecting were without Question applied in Part for the Defense of the
Commonwealth and the Payment of Wages due to Soldiers: And the Apostle PAUL,
in Romans XIII. 4, 6 and 7 Verses, declares, as he is speaking of the higher
Powers or the Civil Magistrate, He is the Minister of GOD, a Revenger to
execute Wrath upon him that does Evil: For this Cause, proceeds He, pay you
Tribute also: For they are GOD's Ministers attending upon this very Thing:
Render therefore to all their Dues, Tribute to whom Tribute is due, etc.

It was, I doubt not, under the constraining Power of these and such like
Passages of Holy Writ, that the Primitive Christians served, as They thought
themselves in Duty bound to do, under the Pagan Emperors, as in the Theban
Legion: And EUSEBIUS tells us, that They fought under the Emperor MARCUS
AURELIUS in Germany Eusebius. Lib. I. cap. 5.
TERTULLIAN therefore makes it as a good Apology for the Christians, when by
the Pagans They were taxed as useless to the Commonwealth, We fight, says he,
along with you Vobiscum militamus. Tertullian. Apolog. 4.2.
.

But, having thus in Opposition to the Opinion of some weak and foolish
Enthusiasts justified the Lawfulness of going to War,

Let us now, in the Next Place, consider Arms as requisite for Them that go to
War.

For indeed, as DAVID thought it lawful and a Duty for him to go to War; so he
judged it requisite to go with suitable Arms: Accordingly for an Offensive
Weapon He takes his Sling: And, if we may believe the Jewish Historian
JOSEPHUS, He had a Breast Plate for a Defensive one.

It Is true the LORD of Hosts has sometimes remarkably interposed for His
People, and avenged Himself on their Enemies immediately, as in the
extraordinary Overthrow of Jericho and the miraculous Destruction of
SENNACHERIB's Army: But such extraordinary Things as these are not now to be
expected: Nor may we presume, that we shall obtain Deliverance and Safety from
Enemies but in the Use of the ordinary Means and Instruments which are Divinely
allowed and required.

It must be acknowledged at the same Time, that we ought not to confide in an
Arm of Flesh and the Force of Military Weapons Increpa Feras Arundinis. Psalm
LXVIII. 30. Metaphora est a Feris in unum Congregatis ducta: Q. D. Increpa
Congregationem Arundinis, h. e. Arundiferam, usitato Hebraismo. Schindler: We
read it according to its Sense, Rebuke the Company of Spearmen, that is, who
are confident in their Spears.
: But while we are improving the Instruments of War we are to place our Trust
in the Principal Agent: So DAVID would not trust in his own Sword or Bow or
faithful Sling: But He trusts in GOD, and blesses Him as teaching his Hands to
War and his Fingers to fight, as in Psalm CXLIV. 1: Where, an ancient Writer
observes, DAVID alludes to MOSES 's lifting up his Hands for the Conquest of
the Amalekites Docuit manus nostras in Praelio, non Armis, sed Precibus,
pugnatutas. Arnob in Loc.
: And it is very probable the Psalmist's Meaning was, that GOD had taught his
Hands to fight in Prayers, as well as with Arms.

While therefore we pay our Acknowlegements unto GOD, make Him the Object of
our Trust and place our entire Dependence upon Him; we are also to take the
Weapons of Defense and Annoyance.

As every Nation and People at some Time or other are molested with Enemies or
have Cause to be apprehensive of their Sallies and Attacks upon them; there
must therefore be Reason for a Compliance with our LORD's Direction, in Luke
XXII. 36. Let him, that has no Sword, sell his Coat and buy one: For, unless
Men procure Armor for themselves, be the Charge of it what it will, their
Enemies may with Safety and Courage come against them and make an easy Prey of
them.

There is therefore no Room to question but that Arms are requisite and
necessary for going to War: And indeed, to go without These into the Field and
face an Enemy, it would be a very stupid Thing: For such as are exposed to the
Assaults of Enemies, without Them, ought rather to think of ignominiously
running away than staying and Fighting Ita fit, ut non de Pugna, sed de Fuga,
cogitent, qui in Acie nudi exponuntur ad Vulnera. Veget, de Re Milit. ^ 1. cap.
20.
.

But however, as necessary as it is to have Arms in going to War, it is equally
requisite and necessary to have fit and chosen ones, and such as are both
suitable to the Times and adapted to the Persons that wear Them: And this is no
more than what is intimated unto us in the Text, wherein some Arms are rejected
and others are preferred before them.

The most ancient Arms were such as the humane Body afforded; and, according to
the Poet, Teeth, Hands and Nails were the Principal of them: Arma antiqua
Manus, Ungues, Dentesque fuerunt Lucret.
.

These were followed with Clubs and Stones for offending the Enemy, and with
the Skins of Beasts for the Defense of the Body Herodot.
.

But, by Degrees, as Mankind increased in Numbers and in their ambitious
Designs and Views; so their Weapons of War grew more numerous and more cruel.

Some have supposed, that MOSES was Eusebius. de Praep. Evangelic.
one of the first Inventors of warlike Instruments: Whether that be so or no is
uncertain: Though it is very probable, that He might be the Improver of many of
them.

If we consult the Law and the Prophets, and compare the several Passages in
them, wherein the Arms of the ancient Hebrews are mentioned; we shall find,
that they consisted of Carriages and Arms.

Their Carriages were of three sorts, namely Chariots with Scythes, Wagons and
Bow Chariots, the Disposition and Managery of which required no small Labor,
Activity and Skill.

As for the Arms for the Body; These were such as they wore upon them, and such
as were exercised by them.

Their Military Clothes were a Coat of Mail for the Body and an Helmet for the
Head: With such Clothes as these was the Philistine Champion accoutred: For we
read, at Verse fifth of the preceding Context, He had an Helmet of Brass on
his Head and was armed with a Coat of Mail: And the Weight of the Coat was five
thousand Shekels of Brass.

And, to these, we may add their Targets and Shields: The former were made of
raw Skins, and Hides, and sometimes of Wood; and they were of such Height as
that they would cover such as wore them from Head to Foot: The latter were made
of Iron and Brass and other Metals Suetonius says of Julius Caesar, that he got
his Soldiers adorned with Silver and Gold, that, for Fear of losing their fine
Clothes, they fought with the more Bravery.
. And betwixt these, there was a smaller Target or Shield, called afterward
Pelte, which was wore by the Archers or Bow-Men.

But here it must be observed, that, as the Hebrew Armies consisted of Horse
and Foot, so each of These had their proper and peculiar Weapons to use.

The Sword was the most ancient and common Weapon of War properly so called
that I can find: That used among the Hebrews was like the European. As for the
Hanger or Scymeter, which from ancient Times to the present Day has bin used
throughout all Asia, That is of an Assyrian Original.

We cannot certainly describe the Hebrew Pikes, Lances and Spears: But it is
not unlikely, that they might have such as the ancient Romans: Theirs were some
loop'd ones, some with Handles and some light Harness ones to be flung like a
Dart.

Among the Hebrews also Bows and Arrows were used: And they were doubtless
acquainted with those Instruments called Balistae and Catapultae among the
Romans, which were designed to cast huge Rocks and a great Number of Darts at a
Time.

And, without adding any Thing further, the common Sling was much improved by
them: The whole Tribe of BENJAMIN are celebrated for the skilful Use of it: And
the warlike DAVID is famous for his successful Improvement of it against the
bulky GOLIATH.

These were the Arms of the Ancients: But, as we do not now conform to their
Policy; so neither are we confined to their warlike Instruments: But there has
bin found sufficient Reason for changing them.

Fire Arms have now superseded many of the ancient Weapons, and obtained the
Preeminence before the Lance and Pike, the Bow and Arrow, the Dart, Javelin,
Sling and other offensive Weapons.

The first Inventor of Guns in Europe was a Monk, named BERTHOLD SCHUVART, a
considerable Alchymist, who lived in the Year of our LORD thirteen hundred and
eighty He^burt. Polon. l. 12, cap. 6.
. Though some affirm the Hand-Gun or Musket was never used until the Siege of
Rhegium in the Year fifteen hundred and twenty. And it is doubted by some, who
have made it their Business to enquire into such Things, whether it be so old:
For about the Year fifteen hundred and sixty some Muskets and but a very few of
them were mixed with Harquebusses: So that, according to this, it must have bin
forty Years before the Hand-Gun had learned to speak.

These Hand-Guns or Muskets have from the Time of their first Invention bin of
various Lengths and Bores: But it is proper to observe here, that it is always
fit the Muskets of one Army and of one State or Kingdom should be exactly of
but one Bore.

Besides these Muskets, there are now other Weapons for the Foot, such as
Touks, Shables, two handed Swords, Hangmen's Swords, Javelins, Morning Stars,
Rapiers; most of which are rather for the Defense of Batteries, Forts and Towns
than for the Field. As for the light-armed Foot, They for the most Part are now
armed with Musket and Sword or Rapier.

As to the Cavalry or Horse, They have now their peculiar Weapons; as the
Pistol, which was invented by CAMILLO VITELLI an Italian, in the Time of HENRY
the Eighth of England, the Harquebuss, which is of older Date, and the
Carabine. The Carabine is usually carried about the Soldier's Neck in a
Bandileer of Leather, which is a far easier Way of carrying them than the
former one of hanging them at their Saddles. Some, instead of these Carabines,
carry Blunderbusses, which are short Hand-Guns of a great Bore. Broad Swords
were constantly used by the English and Scots. As for the Rapier, that is not
above forty Years old; although (...) (...) Sort of them was used in the Times of
the Civil War in England for a while, and afterward laid aside.

Nor may we omit to mention here great Guns, which by the English are
accurately divided into the Cannon, the Culverin, the Pierior and the Mortar.
Each of which are sub-divided into several Sorts according to their various
Bores: The three former are generally made of Iron Brass and Copper: The
latter, I think, is generally of Iron: And, under the Mortar, may be
comprehended Pot-Pieces, Square Murderers, Tortles and Petards.

The Mortars are of vast Use in Sieges both to the Defendants and the
Assailants: For, while the Former use them against the Batteries and Approaches
of their Enemies to destroy their Men, to burn their Ammunition and ruin their
Works; the Latter use them to terrify and annoy the Besieged, to burn their
Houses and Magazines with Grenades, or break them down with ponderous Stones.

Thus I have cursorily called over the most used and approved Arms of both the
Ancients and the Moderns, and ranked them in the best Order I could. And,
although what I have thus done might appear very strangely on any other Occasion;
yet, in such an Auditory as This, there cannot, I think, be any sufficient
Reason to blame me for it.

It might now perhaps be expected, that I should enter into some Enquiry, which
Arms are in going to War to be preferred, The Ancient or the Modern: But, as the
Learned are divided on this Head, I shall not venture to give Judgment upon it:
Only thus far I will take leave to say, that We Moderns are frequently partial
and commonly judge in our own Favor Whoever desires a more full Acquaintance
with the Arms of the Ancients and Moderns may consult Vegetius de Re Militari,
Lipsii Poliorceticon, Pancirollus de Rebus deperditis, Machiavel of the Art of
War, and Turner 's Pallas Armata.
.

But let us now pass on to the third and last Enterprise, namely, To show, that
Men cannot well, nor should, go to War but with such Arms as are proved: For,
agreably to the Language in our Text, we cannot nor should go with These or
Those Arms, unless we have proved them.

As Use and Exercise is the End of other Instruments; so the same is the End of
all warlike Instruments in particular: And, without the Use and Exercise and
Proof of Them, their designed End is not attained.

And, if any pretend to appear in Arms, which They know not how to use, because
They never exercised and proved Them, They deserve to be condemned for their
Folly and Rashness.

That Christian and Apostolical Hero the blessed PAUL acquaints us, that after
the Manner of Men He fought with Beasts at Ephesus, in 1 Cor. XV. 22. And,
without Doubt, in that Encounter He skilfully and successfully used the Weapons
commonly improved against Beasts in the Amphitheater.

But, if any should go to War either with Beasts or Men with Weapons which they
have not exercised and proved, instead of fighting after the Manner of Men,
They would only fight after the Manner of Beasts, and perhaps not in so skilful
a Manner as they.

It Is certain that in those Times and Places, when and where Men have not known
the use of warlike Instruments, and have bin unacquainted with Military Order;
the strongest Party has generally, if not always, proved victorious and
triumphant.

But, since Men have learned the Art of War, the skilful Use of Military
Weapons and the suitable Disposition of Soldiers in Rank and File; this
Military Science is of equal Consequence with Strength, or rather superior to
it. It has to be sure a direct Tendency to make Men courageous: Whereas, on the
contrary, a Multitude without Skill in Arms and ignorant of Order are usually
dastardly and mean-spirited, and easily subdued by an inferior Number who are
versed in the Military Art.

We may well conclude then from these Things, that the Proof of Arms and
Military Discipline is altogether convenient and necessary among every Nation
and People.

This Military Science and Skill consists in the Soldier's knowing how to
proceed and fight on Horse or a Foot with Order, Regularity and Readiness: And
This is to be acquired in the Way of Drilling or Training.

Now, that Men in this Way may be formed for complete Soldiers, They should,
first of all, be taught their Postures; that is to say, They should be
instructed how to handle and manage their Arms with Dexterity and Vigor,
Readiness and Beauty: And then; They should be made in a Body to perform their
Motions and Evolutions, or to move in such an Order and cast themselves into
such a Figure as shall be commanded.

I shall not here be so minute as to say any Thing concerning the particular
Exercises of the Horse and Foot, lest I should be tiresome to Those of my
Auditory who are acquainted already with these Things: But I would only
observe, that the Words of Command both for Horse and Foot in their Motions are
the very same; though the Distances required of Them are different Three Feet are
allowed between Files of Foot, That is Order; Six is open Order; Twelve is
double double Distance or open open Order: In Exercising Bodies of Horse, Six
Feet are allowed for single Distance, Twelve for double: The Germans allow ten
for one, twenty for the other.
.

But, if any be desirous of obtaining a complete Knowledge of the Postures,
Motions* and Evolutions in the Training either of particular Men or of Bodies
of Horse and Foot; They may be assured, that it is not enough to learn the Words
of Command by Reading or by looking on the Figures of a Compliance with them:
For the Military Art is practical: And most Men shall understand more by
observing and practicing of it for three Days than by Reading and Study for
that Number of Years: LUCULLUS indeed was but a raw Soldier when he set out
from Rome; and yet, on his Journey and while he wintered in Greece, he so far
improved himself in the Art of War by consulting the Histories he had formerly
read, that, after several Battles and Sieges, MITHRIDATES pronounced him to be
the most expert and able Commander next to ALEXANDER commonly called the Great
that he had known or read of in History: but he is a singular and extraordinary
Instance.

Thus I have endeavored the Illustration and Proof of the Points offered to our
Consideration: And, if after all that has bin offered any should think, either
that War is not lawful in the Cases which have bin mentioned, or that Arms are
not requisite and necessary for carrying it on, or that Men may go to War
without Skill in Arms from the Proof and Exercise of them; I must ingenuously
own, that I despair of convincing and satisfying them to the contrary.

But the Improvement of what has bin offered now remains: And it shall be made
in a threefold Address, first of all, To the ancient and honorable Company who
have done me the Honor of an unanimous Choice to this Service; then, To the
Government over us; and, in fine, To this whole Militant Assembly.

As therefore to You, Gentlemen of the Artillery, who are the very Soul from
whom our Militia has its Life and Motion Turba militaris sine Duce Corpus est
sine Spiritu. Quint. Cur^.
, You are much to be commended for your Endeavors to revive the Proof and
Exercise of Arms among us.

For, although the GOD of Armies has blessed us with a long Peace; we know not
how soon our Plough-Shares may be turned into Swords, and our Pruning Hooks
into Spears: There is therefore no Room to doubt but that, as fit Arms are
necessary for us, our Men also should be made skilful in the Use of Them: For
it would be of dangerous and very bad Consequence to be obliged to learn
Military Skill, when the immediate Exercise of it is wanted.

But where is Military Skill to be learned but in the proper School of it?
Such, Sirs, is your Company: It was founded for this End by the Government:
And, as it has bin of great Use and Advantage hitherto for obtaining this End;
so we cannot but desire and hope, that it will be yet more and more successful
toward it.

The Generality of our People, I fear, look upon Training as an useless
Exercise or only a trifling Piece of Recreation: For, at our annual Trainings,
the Practice of many of our common Soldiers is sportful and ludicrous: But this
is a vast Indecency: And yet it is a much greater Piece of Indecorum and an
higher Fault, if any of the Officers can wink or smile at any such
Irregularities.

We may well expect of You, Sirs, who are our Masters in the Art of War, that
our Trainings and Martial Exercises be gravely performed and that our Skill in
Military Discipline grow and increase by a diligent Proof of it, that our Men,
while under Arms, be so sedate and quiet as that no Voice be heard but their
Commander's, and that, after they are dismissed, they do not grow boisterous
and unruly, but modestly retire with their Arms.

And, if you would keep the respective Companies of which you are the Officers
in good Order and lead them on to Piety and Virtue; it becomes you, as Tit.
III. 8. to be careful [not to maintain, as we render it, but] to go before
others in good Works: For the Greek Word PPOISTASTHAI. Turnus in Arma Viros
Armis circundatus Ipse Suscitat. Virgil Aeneid. L. IX.
here used is a Military Term taken from Those who lead a Company or Army.

And, in fine, Look up to GOD, the Giver of every good Gift and of every
perfect Giving, for all that Military Skill, Direction and Conduct which you
further want; and It shall be liberally and without upbraiding given You.

By the Observation of These and such like Rules, Dear Sirs, You may depend
upon the Divine Favor and Blessing, when War shall arise and an Host shall
encamp against You: So that, when You are called forth to Battle, You may say
to your People, as in the Style of DAVID to King SAUL, The LORD has delivered
us from the Paw of the Lion and the Bear; and He will deliver us out of the
Hand of the Philistine, as in Verse thirty seventh of the preceding Context:
And we, who have a raised Opinion of your Valor and Conduct, shall answer you
in the Language of SAUL to the Heroic DAVID, as in the same thirty seventh
Verse, Go, and the LORD of Hosts be with you.

In the Next Place; Our Address is to be made with a becoming Deference and
Submission, but yet with the Courage becoming a Soldier, In publico Diserimine
omnis Homo Miles est.
to the Government over us.

And here, since it entirely belongs to your EXCELLENCY to appoint our Military
Officers; we cannot but hope,

Sir,

That you will only honor such with Military Commissions as are Men of Piety,
Prudence, Generosity, superior Knowledge in Military Affairs and able to
support their Dignity and Authority; and that, if any of them appointed by your
EXCELLENCY fail to answer these Characters, you will take away their
Commissions and give Them to such as are more worthy of Them Detur digniori.
: And the Reason of this our Hope is assigned for us by the wise Man, who says,
in Prove. XXVI. 8. As he that binds a Stone in a Sling, or the Military
Instrument already mentioned called a Balista, so is he that gives Honor to a
Fool: For the heavy Stone and the stupid Fool are alike raised with a View to
their doing Execution: But They are equally insensible of their Advancement and
incapable of themselves to do any Thing to Purpose.

But, as to the Care of providing against a Time of War; This belongs to the
whole Legislature: To you,

Most Honored Rulers, It appertains to raise needful Moneys, to procure
suitable Arms, Ammunition and Provisions and to build and repair Fortifications.

As Money is necessary for carrying on a War and evidently appears to be the
Nerves and vital Spirit of it; It becomes you, Sirs, to see to it that your
Treasury be supplied with Money, and that it be with such Money as is well
regulated and established: This, I say, becomes you from a due Regard to
Righteousness and Honesty.

Since also Arms both of Defense and Annoyance are requisite toward
maintaining a War; It is incumbent on you to found an Arsenal or Magazine for
all warlike Instruments.

Again; As it is impossible for Men in a Time of War to hold out against their
Enemies and the Want of Necessaries; the Civil Magistrate therefore should take
Care, that such as are employed in their Service have their Backs well covered
and their Stomachs satisfied with good Provisions.

And, inasmuch as Fortifications are for the Safety of your Subjects and the
Security of our Properties; It is undoubtedly the Province of our most Honored
Legislators to build such in the Places most convenient for Them: And, Sirs,
allow me to speak it with Freedom, If you do not think it proper to erect any
New ones, it behooves you at least to repair, enlarge and strengthen the Old
ones His Excellency our Governor has repeatedly recommended this Thing to the
Government: But, to our Shame, we have not minded and followed what He has
recommended thus for our Safety and Advantage.
.

It is high Time, that our Batteries, which made an handsome Figure and had
some tolerable Strength formerly, but are now in spreading Ruins, should be
re-edified.

And you cannot wonder at it, Sirs, if, out of Respect to The Castle, where I
was improved in your Service for a Number of Years, and to my Comfort had a
delightful Opportunity of making Progress in useful Knowledge, I beseech you to
take a special Notice of that beautiful and important Fortress: It ought to be
further strengthened: And there is wanting a greater Number of Men, able and
effective Men, to be constantly there upon Duty: Nor is there sufficient
Encouragement for able Officers and Soldiers to abide there: Nor yet has it
been duly considered, how many and unavoidable the Expenses are of the
Commanding Officer usually residing there My Relation in Times past to The
Castle is, I think, a good Excuse for what I said in its Behalf: And my Love
and Respect to its Commanding Officer was too great and strong to be concealed
on such a fit Occasion for expressing it.
: These Things are in Fact true: And, if They be so, you will be so good as to
forgive me this Wrong.

And here it may be of Consequence to observe, that we have very few Persons,
as I have Reason to believe, in the Province who are versed in the Art of
Gunnery: This, if it should be a Time of War, We should find to be a vast
Inconvenience: I would therefore humbly move it to the Legislature, Whether it
would not be well for Them to pay for the Schooling of a meet Number of Persons
to learn this necessary Art.

Moreover, Honored Sirs, I would offer one Thing more to your Consideration,
which is; It appears requisite, that some Law should be enacted, whereby our
young Men shall be obliged to undergo certain fatiguing Marches and other
laborious Exercises: For otherwise there is Reason to fear, that we shall grow
a lazy, feeble, effeminate and pusillanimous People, and be soon and easily
overcome by any potent Invaders.

And what if, in particular, a Military Watch of a competent Number were kept
every Night in this Town, some of which might always be either walking or
standing Sentinels; while others, having performed their Duty, might be lying
down on Beds of Planks to brace up their loosned Frames and enure them to
salutiferous Hardships.

It has not bin tedious unto Me, but for you and your People I have judged it
safe, to mention these Things in your Audience: And I cannot but hope, that I
have not given just Ground of Offense in the Liberty which I have taken on this
Occasion.

But I proceed, in the Third and Last Place, to address this whole Militant
Assembly: For now Res ad Triarios rediit: And, as the Triarii among the ancient
Romans were in the Rere and were the most completely disciplined Soldiers that
they had; we have now also in the Rere of our Discourse to do with an higher
Order of Soldiers, even such as are Christian and spiritual Soldiers: Such
indeed either are or should be this whole Assembly.

You see your Calling then Brethren Videtis, Fratres, quaenam nostra fit
Vocatio: Milites sumus universi: Nec est cur nos illius Tituli pudeat vel
pigeat. Arrowsmith, Tactica Sacra. L. I. p. 65.
: We are all called and chosen to be Warriors and to fight the good Fight of
Faith: May none of us then entangle our selves in the Affairs of this Life,
that we may gratify Him who has chosen us to be Soldiers!

In our spiritual Warfare we are to fight not only against Flesh and Blood, but
against Principalities, against Powers, against the Rulers of the Darkness of
this World and against spiritual Wickednesses in high Places.

And These our Adversaries are not only powerful and malicious, but very artful
and subtle: Hence, in Ephesians. VI. 11. we read of their Wiles: Where the Word used
ETHODIAS -- significat Stratagemata Hominum, qui^us Adversarios aggrediuntur ex
ea Part, qua minime pertimescendum erat. Alardus in Loc.
refers to those Stratagems of War among Men, whereby They set upon their
Adversaries on the Side where They are least expected and feared.

But, however numerous, powerful, malicious and subtle our Enemies be; Let us
not be disheartened from the Combat Nunquam Bella Bonis, nunquam Certamina
desunt:
Et, quo cum certet, Men's pra semper habet.
Prosper. in Sentent.
, but be reconciled to the Labors to be undergone in it, and to the enduring of
Toil and Hardness Miles Probatur Labor, non Mollitie. Herodian. Hist. L. II..
XXXVI.
as good Soldiers of JESUS CHRIST.

Being thus prepared and fortified in our Minds; Let us by an holy Pact devote
our selves to the Service of GOD and the REDEEMER: For it was prescribed by the
old Romans, that none should go to War, until he had sworn to do whatsoever was
ordered him by his chief Officer Veget. L. 2. cap. 5. -- The Soldier's Oath,
according to Polybius, was, Obtemperaturus sum et facturus quicquid mandabitur
ab Imperatoribus juxta vires. Lips. de Militia Romans L. 1. Dialog 6. -- Those,
who had sworn This, were Milites te^ Sacramentum.
: And accordingly we should bind our selves by a solemn Oath and Vow to conform
to all the Directions and Orders of our Divine Generalissimo, with a
deliberate, serious and inviolable Purpose to walk in all His Commandments and
Ordinances blameless.

And, becoming thus Milites per Sacramentum, or Enlisted Soldiers by a
professed Subjection to the Gospel and its Ordinances; we are now to take the
Arms which our Divine Emperor has bin pleased of His Goodness to provide for
us: And These we are to exercise and prove.

These Weapons, like the Warfare in which they are to be used, are spiritual,
but powerful and mighty: For our suprerne LORD and Commander may address us
with much more Truth and Propriety than BELISARIUS his Army, when he was about
to put some lewd Soldiers to Death, Know, that I am come to fight with the Arms
of Religion and Justice, without which neither Victory nor Happiness is to be
expected: I desire my Soldiers should have their Hands clean to kill an Enemy:
Never will I suffer any Man in my Army that has Fingers crooked or bloody, were
he in Arms as terrible as Lightning: Force is of no Consequence, if it have not
Equity and Conscience for Companions Procop. L. 1. De Bello Vandal.
. -- And indeed He, who is our great and glorious Leader, has clearly revealed
it as His Will and Expectation, that we should have and exercise such spiritual
Arms as These.

But here, that so we may be acquainted with the whole Armor of GOD and put it
on; I shall fetch it out from the Tower of the Son of DAVID, especially from
that Apartment of it the Sixth Chapter to the Ephesians.

Here, Sirs, is a fine Belt for us. A military Girdle is of great Use for
Soldiers: And it is a Piece of Armor of such Significance, that in ancient
Times it signified a complete warlike Dress. But this Belt is a rich and
admirable one. It Is Truth, which is to be girded about our Loins. -- Some
suppose it is an Adherence to the Gospel or an holding fast the Form of sound
Words: But This is to confound the Belt with the Sword, which is afterward to
be produced. -- It is rather to be understood of Sincerity and Integrity, in
Opposition to Hypocrisy which enervates the Mind: And the Passage alludes to
That in the Prophecy, in Isa. XI. 5. Faithfulness shall be the Girdle of his
Reins. This Faithfulness or Truth or Integrity then, as our Military Belt, is
to be girded about us to keep us erect and steady in our spiritual Exercise.

And here, Fellow Soldiers, is a Divine Breast Plate for us: It Is
Righteousness: Which may denote an universal and impartial Obedience to the
Divine Laws: For This will defend and guard our Hearts against the Detractions
and Calumnies of a base and malicious World: And, in wearing this Piece of
Armor, we shall appear like our supreme Officer: For of Him it is written in
Isa. LIX. 17. He put on Righteousness as a Breast Plate.

In the next Place; If we want Armor for our Feet, here it is for us: And we
are to be shod with this Preparation of the Gospel of Peace. As it was usual in
ancient Times to fix short Stakes and cast Gall-Traps in the Way of the Enemy
to hurt their Feet and make them fall; and for this Cause the Soldiers had a
Sort of Boot for their Feet and Legs to accommodate and arm them against the
Inconveniences to which they were exposed: Even such is the Case now: For in
our Way to Victory and Triumph, we shall meet with Distresses, Lets and
Impediments. But, to keep us from many Wounds and Injuries, we have the Gospel;
which is called the Gospel of Peace, because it reveals, proposes and
establishes a Peace between GOD and Man: This Gospel then let us take, with its
Directions and Comforts: And This will be a wondrous Preparation against the
Evils, the worst of Evils, to be encountered.

And then; Because we cannot fight securely without a Shield, here is one for
us: The Name of it is the Shield of Faith; and it is equal to quenching all the
fiery Darts of the Wicked. Like the poisonous Scythian Darts, which in flying
caught on Fire and inflamed the Bodies which they pierced, are the Darts shot
against our Souls by Satan to inflame them: But, as the ancient Warriors had
Shields of raw Neats Leather to quench the Power and Venom of these Darts; so
we are now provided with Armor to quench the fiery Darts of the Wicked: It Is
the Shield of Faith; that Faith, which is the Substance of Things hoped for and
the Evidence of Things not seen; and that Faith in our Prince and Savior,
which covers all the Defects of our Obedience and is imputed unto us for
Righteousness.

But we are not yet fully provided with our Defensive Armor: We must have some
for our Head: Here then is an Helmet for us: It is the Helmet of Salvation; or
what is elsewhere called, the Hope of Salvation. Our Divine Commander has put
this Helmet on His Head, as we may see in Isa. LIX. 17. We are then to have a
firm Expectation of the Blessings of the New Covenant, and a lively, steadfast
Hope of the Accomplishment of all the Divine Promises to us: This will guard
our Heads against all hard Thoughts of GOD in the most terrifying Encounters
and keep us from shrinking at the Assaults of our fiercest Enemies.

We have now Armor sufficient for our Defense: But, that so we may be able not
only to stand, but to resist and oppose the Enemies of our Souls, we should
have some offensive Arms: Well Sirs: And here is the Sword of the Spirit, which
is the Word of GOD, for us: Concerning this Weapon we may say, as DAVID
concerning the Sword of the slain GOLIATH, There is none like it: With This our
great LORD conquered His and our Adversary; passing it is written at him to his
Foiling and shameful Retreat: And the same should we brandish and push against
our assaulting, spiritual Foe, who seeks our Destruction.

Nor yet are we provided with all our Armor: But, moreover, we are to pray
always with all Manner of Prayer and Supplication in the Spirit, watching
thereunto with Perseverance: When the Devil, the Flesh and the World come forth
against us and are furious in their Onsets, we must, like JEHOSHAPHAT in his
Distres and the Emperor THEODOSIUS in his Extremities, cry to GOD with Fervor,
Constancy and Importunity: And, according to Military Rule or Order, we must
continue upon our Watch, until we are relieved and even until we are discharged
from our Warfare by Death, like trusty Sentinels upon Duty.

Thus are we now entirely furnished with fit Armor for us, not only to defend
and guard us, but also for resisting and vanquishing our spiritual Enemies.

It remains now, that we should prove this our Armor: Let us then be daily and
constantly in the Exercise of it: For Use will make us perfect in the Exercise:
So we shall be prepared for the Battle continually, though the Enemy should have
the Hardiness to rally ever so often against us: And so we shall come off
Conquerors and more than Conquerors, even considerable Gainers Praemia nunc
alia atque alia Emolumenta notemus Sacramentorum: h. e. Militum Jure jurando
adstrictorum. Juvenal. Satyr. XVI.
and glorious Riders in Triumph, through HIM who has loved us.

And indeed This is no more than what may be reasonably expected; since JESUS
our LORD is for us and with us. After the Conversion of the Emperors to the
Faith, the Tessera or Word among Them frequently was DEUS nobiscum: And it
continues in frequent Use, as such, yet in the German, Danish and Swedish
Armies: This, my Brethren and Fellow Soldiers, is to be our Watch Word: And,
with the firm Belief of it, we are to engage in our Spiritual Warfare and
pursue it faithfully even to the Death.

In this Way we are to rejoice in the Salvation of JESUS, and in the Name of
our GOD we are to set up our Banners: For so we may rest assured, that the LORD
will be with us and save us with the Strength of His Right Hand: Let others
then trust in the Legs of Men or the Strength of their Horses: But we will
remember the Name of Immanuel, the LORD our GOD:

Now unto HIM, whose is the Greatness, the Majesty, the Power, the Victory and
the Glory, be all Honor and Praise both now and for ever,

AMEN!
FINIS.

