Mr. Clark's Election SERMON, May 30th. 1739.

The Rulers highest Dignity, and the People's truest Glory.

A SERMON Preached in the Audience of His EXCELLENCY the GOVERNOR, The
HONORABLE His Majesty's Council, And the Honorable House of Representatives,
Of the Province of the Massachusetts Bay, in New England, May 30th, 1739.

Being the Anniversary for the Election (...) His Majesty's Council for the
Province.

By Peter Clark, A. M. And Pastor of a Church in Salem:

BOSTON: Printed by S. KNEELAND, Printer to the Honorable House of
Representatives. MDCCXXXIX.

Province of the Massachusetts Bay In the House of Representatives, Jovis 31.
Die Maij, A. D. 1739.
ORdered, That Mr. William Brown, and Mr. Thomas Lee, the Representatives of
the Town of Salem, be directed to give the Thanks of the House to the Reverend
Mr. Peter Clark of Salem, for his Sermon preached Yesterday before the General
Court, (being the Anniversary for the Election of Counselors) and desire a
Copy thereof for the Press.

J. Quincy, Speaker.

An Election SERMON.
HOSEA XI. 12. Latter Clause. -- But Judah yet rules with God, and is faithful
with the Saints.
IT IS a very high Character and Commendation that is given in these Words of
the Kingdom of Judah, both of Prince and People, on the Account of their steady
Adherence to the divine Constitution of their Government, and to the Purity of
sacred Institutions, when the ten Tribes had for a long Time apostatized to
idolatrous Worship. And a brighter Representation could scarce be given in so
few Words, of the true Interest and Glory of a professing People. If therefore
the opening of this Character, and displaying some of the Beauties and
Advantages of it, according to the Measure of the Gift I have received, may be
of Use to excite a pious Emulation in the Rulers and People of this Land, and
the various Orders and Degrees of Men, that compose this great Audience, it
will sufficiently answer the Design I had in view in the Choice of my Subject.

Concerning this Prophet Hosea, whose Words I have read, we may observe, That
it appears from the Date of his Prophecy, that he was one of the ancientest of
the Prophets who penned their Prophecies, and continued longest in the
Discharge of the prophetical Function, during the successive Reigns of several
Kings; for the Word of the Lord came unto him in the Days of Uzziah, Jotham,
Ahaz, and Hezekiah, Kings of Judah; and in the Days of Jeroboam, the Son of
Joash, King of Israel: (Chap. 1. 1.) The Prophecy consists of Reproofs, and
Convictions of Sin, and Comminations of divine Judgments for the awakening a
secure People, and serious and urgent Exhortations to Repentance, addressed
both to the Kingdom of Israel and Judah.

I shall not spend Time on the Context, the Connection of the Verse of our
Text, being variously understood by Interpreters; some making it the Close of
the eleventh Chapter; others, Vide Rivet: Comment: in Hosea^: Pol: Synops: in
Loc.
with greater Probability, understand it as the Beginning of a new Discourse,
which the Prophet continues in the following Chapter, upbraiding the apostate
Israelites, with their Defection from the true Worship of GOD, and the Faith
and Piety of their Ancestors, and with their vain Confidence in an Arm of
Flesh; and upon Conviction thereof, exhorting them to Amendment, and a penitent
Return to the Lord their GOD. But it may conduce not a little to the clearing
of the Words, to take some Notice of the opposite Clause of the Verse, Ephraim
compasses me about with Lies, and the House of Israel with Deceit. Ephraim put
in Distribution with Israel, as here, is commonly used to denote the House of
the King, the Princes and Rulers of Israel; Jeroboam, who headed the Revolt
from the House of David, and the Defection from the instituted Worship of GOD
at Jerusalem, being a Man of that Tribe. And by the House of Israel is meant
the Body of the ten Tribes. That which they are charged with, is, That they
compassed GOD about with Lies, and with Deceit. In which Words the Prophet
taxes the Perfidiousness, Hypocrisy, and Idolatry of the Israelites; they
pretended a mighty Veneration for the GOD of Israel, and Zeal for his Service;
yet having deserted his own Institutions, and set up their Calves at Dan and
Bethel, and worshipping him by Images and Rites of their own Invention, it was
all, in GOD's Account, Deceit and a Lie.

Perfidy, and Hypocrisy in Religion, is, in Scripture, called Lying to God.
Psalm. 78. 36. They flattered him with their Mouth, and they lied to him with
their Tongues. So likewise is Idolatry and False-worship; it being familiar in
Scripture to term Idols, Vanities, and Lies, a Work of Errors, and Teachers of
Lies. Jer. 16. 19. Psalm. 40. 4. Romans 1. 25 Jer. 20. 15. Hab. 2. 18.
They are lying Representations of the true GOD, who is a glorious
incomprehensible Spirit, deceive their Worshippers, and frustrate the
Confidence they repose in them.

To aggravate this Perfidiousness of Israel, the Prophet sets before them the
Example of Judah, (comprehending the Tribe of Benjamin, and other pious
Israelites, who adhered to the House of David, and the true Worship of GOD,
after the Revolt of the ten Tribes) with an high Encomium of their Stedfastness
and Integrity. But Judah yet rules with GOD, and is faithful with the Saint^.
It is a Description of the State of Judah, in it is best and purest Times. Here
are two signal Instances of the Integrity of the two Tribes, mentioned to their
Commendation.

1. That Judah ruled with GOD. This has a direct Aspect on the Princes and
Rulers of Judah, who were peculiarly designed by GOD to the Government of the
Kingdom: They ruled with GOD, as his Delegates, executing their Commission for
his Honor and Interest, and according to the Direction of his Laws. Some
indeed give us this general Meaning of the Words, Judah persisted faithfully in
the Service of GOD, following him as their Guide and Ruler: for to serve GOD,
is to rule with him. The Gloss, I confess, seems rather ingenious than solid;
for, however true it be (and a great Truth doubtless it is, though a Paradox to
the World) that The Service of GOD is not only true Liberty and Freedom, but
Dignity and Dominion. Yet that Ruling here is to be understood in its proper
Signification, appears from the tacit Opposition between Ephraim and the House
of Israel on the one Hand, and Judah on the other. Ephraim, the royal Tribe,
that is, the Rulers of Israel, are supposed to rule without GOD, when they fell
to Idolatry; yea, it was their Ambition, and Lust of Domination, which was the
Cause of their casting off the true Worship of GOD; for this politic Reason it
was, that Jeroboam set up the idolatrous Worship of the golden Calves, and
devised new Institutions, that by this Means he might strengthen his Dominion,
and prevent the Return of the Tribes of Israel to the House of David, which he
feared might be occasioned by their Resort to the Temple at Jerusalem to offer
Sacrifice, especially on the three (...) Feasts. 1 Kings 12, 26, 27, 28.
And the same State-Maxims prevailed with all his Successors 'till the
Captivity, to tread in the same Steps. But Judah (i. e. the Governors of the
two Tribes, for GOD chose Judah to be the Ruler, 1 Chronicles. 28. 4.) yet ruled
with GOD, because in Judah remained the true and lawful Succession of Princes
in the House of David, chosen and approved of GOD, and because in Judah the
Kingdom remained united with the true and lawful Priesthood, appointed and
settled by GOD in the House of Aaron. So that GOD himself ruled by his own
Institutions in the Kingdom of Judah: And especially Judah might be said to
rule with GOD, when the Princes and Governors of Judah took Care to administer
the political Affairs of the Kingdom, and to order Mat^ers of Religion in it
according to the righteous Laws and Ordinances of GOD their supreme King.

If it be said, That this same Prophet gives a very different Character of the
Princes of Judah, representing them as guilty of great Irregularities (for
which GOD had a Controversy with them) in several Passages of his Prophecy,
particularly, Chap. 5. 10. The Princes of Judah were like Men that remove the
Bounds; either by introducing Corruption into GOD's Worship, by their impious
Examples and Decrees, and so encroaching on GOD's Rights, and removing the
Bounds of Religion, or by invading the Rights and Properties of the Subjects,
and so removing the Bounds of Justice and Equity; therefore, it follows, I will
pour out my Wrath upon them like Water. How then is this consistent with their
ruling with GOD?

To solve this, we must recollect what has been observed concerning the Date of
this Prophecy, which was given forth, not all at once, but in the several
Reigns of the Kings of Judah, in the Days of Uzziah, Jotham, Ahaz, and
Hezekiah. Whence it appears, That what the holy Prophet has left on Record, was
but a brief Summary of those Things that were more largely delivered in the
successive Reigns of so many Kings, and that as he lived and prophesied in the
Reign of one of the worst of them, viz Ahaz, to the Character of whose Reign
the worst Things here charged on the Princes of Judah, might well agree; so did
he also continue in the Discharge of the prophetic Office, in the Reign of one
of the best, his Son and Successor, Hezekiah; to whose religious and prosperous
Reign, the Character exhibited in the Text did undoubtedly belong. Thus Grotius
understands it to be a Description of the Times of Hezekiah, who restored the
true Worship of GOD in Judah, when Corruption in Worship and Manners did
exceedingly prevail in the ten Tribes.

2. The other Instance of their Integrity was, That they continued faithful
with the Saints: Which is to be understood of the whole Kingdom of Judah in
general, including both Prince and People, as the Antithesis betwixt this, and
the former Branch of the Verse, requires. This is the Praise of Judah, That
when his Brethren of the House of Israel, apostatized to Idolatry and false
Worship, he was faithful with the Most-Holy, according to the marginal Version,
that is, with GOD; which denotes his faithful and constant adherence to the
Worship of God; or with the Saints, as the Text renders the Word in its most
proper and usual Signification. He was faithful in the Service of God in
Communion with all the Saints. By the Saints may be meant either the godly
Patriarchs, and Predecessors of the Jewish Church, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob,
Moses and the succeeding Prophets, by whom God revealed to them his Laws and
Ordinances, and directed their Worship and Obedience to him: So to be faithful
with the Saints, is to persevere in the Steps of their pious Ancestors, and
faithfully to retain the true Religion in its Purity, as it was transmitted to
them by their Hands. Or by the Saints may be meant the Priests and Levites, the
Ministers of holy Things, who being consecrated to God, and his special
Service, were in a peculiar manner dignifyed with the Title of Saints, or holy
Ones, the High Priest, more eminently, Aaron the Saint of the Lord. Psalm. 106.
16.
And Moses in blessing the Tribes of Levi, he said, Let thy Thummim, and thy
Urim be with thy holy one. Deuteronomy. 33. 8.
Thus Judah was faithful with the Saints, when Hezekiah, with his Princes and
People joined with the sacred Order the Priests of the Lord, in promoting the
Worship of God, when they kept close to sacred Institutions, attending the
Service of the Temple, performed by the Priests and Levites, according to God's
Ordinance, whom Jeroboam and his Successors had cast off from executing the
Priest's Office. 2 Chronicles. 11. 14.
In this we find Abijah King of Judah glorying in his Speech to Jeroboam, and
the Tribes of Israel, 2 Chronicles. 13. 9, 10. But as for us, the Lord is our God,
and we have not forsaken him, and the Priests which minister unto the Lord are
the Sons of Aaron, and the Levites wait upon their Business, etc. And this
indeed served to heighten the Commendation of Judah, that notwithstanding the
Revolt and Degeneracy of his Brethren, and the ill Example of their idolatrous
Worship, he stood firm in his Loyalty, and Fidelity to God in the Profession
and Practice of the true Religion. Judah yet rules with God, and is yet
faithful etc. But it shall suffice to have offered thus much in way of
Explication.

Now though the State of the Jews under the old Testament, was properly a
Theocracy, God himself being in a peculiar manner their King, having by various
extraordinary Methods, formed them a People for himself, took upon him, by the
general Consent of that Nation, the Government over them; their Constitution
both civil and ecclesiastical, was of his forming, the Laws by which their
Commonwealth was administered, as well as their religious Institutions were
enacted by his immediate Authority; their Magistrates and Rulers were of his
more immediate and peculiar Designation, authorized and furnished by him with
Powers for the execution of their Office, as his Deputies on Earth, For which
Reason I humbly conceive that the glorious Title of Gods in Scripture is
attributed, if not appropriated only to the Magistrates of the Israelitish
Nation, as they were in a peculiar Manner the Delagates, or Lieutenants of the
God of Israel on Earth, empowered by a special Commission from him to execute
his Laws; and especially as they were in that Capacity Types of the Messiah,
who is that in Truth, which they were in Type, God over all blessed for ever.
To which purpose the Words of our Savior are remarkable, who in quoting that
Passage of the Psalmist, Psalm. 82. 6. I have said ye are Gods etc. from thence
justifying his own Claim to the Title of the Son of God against the cavils of
the Jews, thus argues, Joh. 10. 36. If he called them Gods unto whom the Word
of God came, and the Scripture cannot be broken; say ye of him, whom the Father
has sanctified, and sent into the World, thou blasphemest, because I said, I
am the Son of God? Those Words, and the Scriptures cannot be broken, plainly
show, that the Prophet's Words were spoken of the Jewish Magistrates, with a
typical Reference to Christ (in which Respect they have the Nature of
Prophecys, and must be fulfilled) and were verifyed and fulfilled in him, who
(being God, not only by Office, but by Nature (as the Antitype always carries
in it the Truth and Reality of what was but shadowed in the Type) and therefore
equal to his Charge) is appointed by the Father, his high Commissioner to the
Children of Men.
who were also favored with frequent Particular Messages sent them by Angels
from Heaven, and holy Prophets inspired thence, for Reproof, Warning, counsel
and Direction, as Occasion required; on which Accounts the Jewish Magistrates
might be said to rule with God etc. in a Manner peculiar to that distinguished
Nation: Nevertheless the Words in their general Meaning, and main Intention
(setting aside what was peculiar to the Jewish State, which was wholly
extraordinary) may be well accommodated to a christian State and Government.
And in this View I propose to Consider them, and the Subject of my intended
Discourse from them, I shall offer to you in this general Observation, viz.

DOCTRINE That as it is unquestionably the Duty, so it will be highly for the
Interest and Reputation, both of Rulers and People professing the true
Religion, especially in Times of Degeneracy, to rule with GOD, and to be
faithful with the Saints.

I shall endeavor to speak in order of these two Branches (into which the
Subject naturally resolves itself.) First, Of Ruling with God. Secondly, Of
being faithful with the Saints. The former Branch principally concerns the
Rulers of a professing People. The latter, the Body of a People, as well as
their Rulers. Accordingly,

I. I shall endeavor to show, when the Rulers of a professing People may be
said to rule with God, and how much it will be for their Honor and Advantage
so to do: For ruling with God speaks both the Duty and Dignity of Rulers.

1. As it speaks their Duty, the Enquiry shall be, When may Rulers or
Magistrates be said to rule with GOD? To this I shall answer as briefly as I
can, in the following Particulars,

1. When they make the Glory of GOD, and the Good of their People, the great
Ends of their Government, and pursue these in all their Acts and
Administrations. These are the proper Ends of the Institution of Government
among Men. All civil Power and Authority being of GOD, according to the
Apostle, Romans 13. 1.
must be improved for him; for whatever is of him as the first Cause, must be
to him, to his Glory and Honor, as the last End. Romans 11. 36.
The next End in Subordination and Subserviency to this, is the Good of their
People: Magistracy being in the original Institution of it, designed for the
maintaining and promoting the good Order, Peace, and Welfare of the several
Societies of Men. He is (says the Apostle, speaking of the Magistrate) the
Minister of GOD to thee for Good. Romans 13 4.
He is so, by the Design of his Institution, being ordained of GOD, to take
Care of the public Good, in which every Man's particular Welfare is involved.
And these are the Ends of the divine Government: The supreme Lord and Ruler of
Heaven and Earth, has a constant and inviolable Regard to his own Glory, and
the Good of his Creatures, in all his Administrations. It Is his Prerogative to
rule for his own End. This Right incontestably belongs to him, who being an
independent Sovereign, has none above him to give him the Charge of the World,
or take an Account of his Administration: and as he is a Being most excellent,
infinitely and invariably perfect, can have no other Designs but what are
great, and wise, and good, becoming himself; and, being the universal first
Cause, must needs have an unalienable Dominion over the Creatures, and a Right
to order and govern all for his own Glory. And this his Right is confessed and
proclaimed in the Adorations of the heavenly Church; the twenty four Elders
casting their Crowns before the Throne, saying, Thou art worthy, O Lord, to
receive Glory, Honor, and Power for thou have created all Things, and for thy
Pleasure, or thy Will, they are and were created. Rev. 4. 11.
And next to his own Glory, he designs the Good of his Creatures; yea, the one
is inseperably connected with and involved in the other; for hence arises his
Glory and Praise from all his Works, even because he is good to all, and his
tender Mercies are over all his Works. Psalm. 145. 9, 10.
The blessed GOD being from Eternity self-sufficient, above all possible Want,
and being immutably Good, could have no other End or Motive, conceivable to us,
to create and govern such a World as this but to display his Bounty, Wisdom,
Allsufficiency, Justice and Mercy, in the Eyes of admiring Intelligencies;
diffusing his Benignity to all Parts of the Creation, and disposing all Things
for the Good of the Universe.

The whole World is his Family, which as the universal Parent, he precides
over, sustains, and provides for, (...) a paternal Bounty, Wisdom, and Care;
exhibiting the Proofs of his Being, and governing Providence, in Instances of
Kindness, even to the heathen World; Acts 14. 17.
and to the Evil and Unthankful, Luke 6. 35.
but he has peculiar Designs of Good to his own People and Children, (the
special Favorites of Heaven) in conducting and disposing the Affairs of the
World, as the holy Scriptures abundantly testify. See 2 Chronicles. 16. 9. Psalm. 33.
18. and 73. 1. Isai 43. 4. Romans 8. 28. Ephesians. 1. 22. 2 Cor. 4. 15.
Such being the Ends of the divine Government, earthly Magistrates may be said
to rule with him, when they harmonize with the supreme Ruler, in these great
Ends of his Glory and the Good of Men; when they make it their Aim, in all the
Acts of their Government, to approve themselves to him, and to promote the
Interests of his Glory in their whole Jurisdiction; as those that are
commissioned by him, dependant on him, and accountable to him, and when they
concur with him in all the great Designs of his Mercy and Good Will to Mankind.
seeking the Welfare of their People. Esth. 10. 3.


To this End Rulers ought to be Men of public generous Spirits, not seeking
their own Honor, or the agrandizing or enriching themselves and their
Families; for thus they will pervert the Design of their Office, and abuse the
Trust devolved on them, but aiming at the public Weal in all their Counsels,
Enterprises, and Actions: The Motto of that heathen Roman Emperor, Non mihi sed
Populo, well becomes a christian Magistrate, he must not think himself advanced
to that high Dignity for his own Interest, but for that of the Public. For
this Reason Jethro advised Moses in the Choice of Magistrates, to have a
particular Regard to this Qualification among others, that they should be Men
-- hating Covetousness. Exodus 18 21.
This Selfishness and Contractedness of Spirit very ill becomes a Man in a
private Capacity, since Nature itself teaches, that no Man is born for himself
alone; the great Author of our Beings ha^ing given us, in the very Frame and
Constitution of our Natures, a Capacity for social Converse and mutual
Assistance, has thereby laid an Obligation upon us, to seek each one another's
Welfare; and Christianity enforces this Dictate of Nature, by recommending a
generous Charity as the peculiar Characteristick of its Votaries; a Charity
whose Property it is not to seek her own Things. 1 Cor. 13. 5.
However such Self-seeking is more pardonable in private Persons, than in those
that are advanced to a public Station, and have a public Trust committed to
them, which adds to the obligations of Nature and Christianity, to intend and
pursue the public Welfare. 'Twill therefore be a laudable Ambition in Rulers
to approve themselves Fathers and Benefactors of their Country, laying aside
all such private Views, as interfere with the common Good, which their Office
binds them to endeavor the Advancement of, to their power, to mend what is
amiss among their People, to defend their Rights and Properties, and promote
their true Interest and Prosperity, and especially to seek the Good of the
Church of GOD under their Dominion. Thus while they answer the Ends of
Government, and conspire with the supreme Ruler, in his wise and good Designs,
they may be truly said to rule with him.

2. When they seek the divine Direction and govern themselves by the Rules of
GOD'S Word in the Exercise of their Authority. A Person or People is said in
Scripture to be with GOD while they seek him. 2 Chronicles. 15. 2.
And then may the Rulers of a People be said to rule with GOD, when they are
much with him in Prayer, not only on their own Account in common with all
devout Christians, but on the public Account, seeking the divine Guidance and
Blessing on their Counsels and Administrations; as those that acknowledge and
firmly believe the Superintendency of a divine Providence over humane Affairs;
and that the good or ill Success of all their Enterprises depends entirely on
its Smiles or Frowns. The Weight of Government and Cares of the Public that
lie upon them, call for the united Prayers of their People. And all pious
Christians will think it their Duty, as they are bound by the Rules of the
Gospel, to be often and earnestly addressing Heaven on their Behalf, that they
may be replenished with a Spirit of Wisdom and Counsel, and mightily assisted
and succeeded in the Conduct of public Affairs. Much less will pious Rulers,
sensible of their Dependence on GOD, be wanting in this Duty, in which
themselves are so immediately concerned, and which is so necessary to engage
the Divine Presence with them, and to bring down a Divine Blessing on their
Government, and on the People under their Care, so whom they should be
compassionate Intercessors. Such were Moses, Joshua, and Samuel, David,
Jehosaphat and Hezekiah, and other pious Princes of Judah, who are set forth as
glorious Examples to all Rulers who have the Welfare of their People on their
Hearts. And the Prayers of pious Rulers have a mighty Power with God, to
procure public Blessings: And when they spirited like Moses stand in the
Breach, to avert the Divine Wrath, God's Hands seem tied up by their
Intercession, from executing just Vengeance on a provoking People, as his Words
to Moses to divert him from pleading for sinful Israel, Let me alone, Exodus 32.
10.
seem to import. When Rulers do thus approve themselves Men of Prayer, and
Intercessors for the Public, then do they Rule with God in the best Manner, as
those that have a powerful Interest in him, yea, as Princes with God.

And to maintain this Character of their Government, they are obliged not only
to seek the divine Direction and Blessing, but also to endeavor Conformity to
the Rules of Religion, the Rules of God's holy Word in the Exercise of their
Authority: to take the Will of GOD for their Rule, and govern themselves in all
their Counsels, and Actions, by those Principles of Justice, and Integrity,
Wisdom and Prudence, Meekness, and Benignity, which the Law of Nature, and
especially the holy Scriptures recommend, and require in Rulers. The Kings of
Israel were commanded by GOD to write a Copy of the Law, and to read therein
all the Days of their Lives, that they might learn to fear the Lord their GOD,
and to keep all the Words of his Law. Deuteronomy. 17. 18, 19.
Which Precept (though it may not be supposed binding in the Letter of it to
Christian Magistrates, yet) carries this Instruction in it to all Christian
Kings, and subordinate Rulers, that they ought to be very conversant with the
sacred Writings, and well acquainted with the Will of GOD therein revealed, for
the ordering aright their Conduct in those high Stations and Employments they
are placed in. And the Rules and Maxims of Religion steadily pursued by those
that are employed in a public Trust, however repugnant these may be to the
Maxims of worldly Policy, which are calculated to serve some separate Interest,
yet will ever be found most conducive to the right Ends of Government, in the
Advancement of GOD's Glory and the Welfare of the public.

3 When they act under the realizing Views of the Divine Omniscience, and the
Account they must render of their Administrations to the supreme Judge. To be
with God in the Style of Scripture, sometimes signifies to be under actual
Apprehensions of the Majesty, Presence, and Inspection of God. Thus the devour
Psalmist, having been contemplating the divine Omniscience, and Omnipresence,
expresses the constant Sense he had of the Eye of God upon him in these Words,
When I awake, I am still with thee. Psalm. 139. 18.
And this is necessary to that Part of the Rulers Character laid down in sacred
Writ, Ruling in the fear of God. 2 Samuel 23 3.
-- They must transact all the Affairs of Government and Judgment, as those
that know they have a GOD of infinite Knowledge, and impartial Justice, always
present with them, to oversee, and review, all their Counsels Debates,
Sentences, and Decrees; for he stands in the Congregation of the Mighty. Psalm
82. 1.
He presides in all humane Courts, whether of Jurisdiction or Judicature, as
supreme Judge of all the Rulers and Judges of the Earth, and very narrowly
inspects their Principles, Aims and Designs, as well as overt Acts, in the
Exercise of that Authority he has committed to them, in order to a strict
Reckoning with them. And Magistrates that behave themselves in their Posts,
under the Influence of these Considerations, who always set God before them in
a deep Sense and Reverence of his Authority, Presence, Inspection, and Justice,
and are influenced by the Prospect of the Account they must give to Him of
themselves and their Administration, unto a strict Care to approve themselves
to him, and to keep in good Terms with their Judge, may undoubtedly be said to
rule with him.

4. When they take a special Care of Religion among their People, and improve
their Authority to uphold and promote it. Thus the reforming Kings, and
Magistrates of Judah ruled with God, when they took Care by their Example and
Authority to set forward the Worship of GOD, and true Religion in the Kingdom.
GOD himself rules in a peculiar Manner, where true Religion flourishes and
prevails. This is the special Kingdom of GOD in this World, as it stands in
Opposition to the Kingdom of Sin and Satan. And it is the Christian Religion
especially, as it was taught and established by the Son of GOD, which has in
great Part restored his Kingdom among Men, after it was almost banished out of
the World. And it is the Advancement of this Kingdom, wherein his own Glory, and
the Good of Mankind are jointly concerned, which is the great Design of his
providential Government of the World. Here he will Rule in the midst of his
Enemies, and in spite of them; Psalm, 110, 2
and will go on to make Overturnings in the Earth, till the Kingdoms of this
World become the Kingdoms of our Lord, and of his Christ Rev. 11. 15.
And it is the Wisdom and the Interest of earthly Magistrates, and Rulers, to
Kiss the Son, according to the Language of holy Scripture, Psalm 2, 11, 12.
to profess Subjection, and pay Homage to the incarnate Redeemer, to devote
themselves, and their Power and Authority to his Service. And when these
Shields of the Earth, as they are called, Psalm, 47. 9.
are consecrated to the Lord Jesus, to exalt Him in their Dominion, by
affording Protection and Encouragement to his Religion and Servants; when they
concur with the Design of the blessed GOD, by their Endeavors to advance the
Kingdom of his Son, and to promote his pure and undefiled Religion, by showing
themselves the Patrons of it, and nursing Fathers to the Church of Christ, then
do they in an eminent Manner rule with GOD and for him.

The secular Magistrate indeed may not use his Authority to impose Articles of
Faith, or Modes of Worship, on the Consciences of the Subjects, or enforce
these by civil Penalties; for the Consciences of Men are immediately subject to
GOD, and acknowledge no Superior but Him alone. It is a Branch of the royal
Prerogative of the supreme King, which he will share with no Authority on
Earth, to rule in the Conscience; his Image and Superscription it bears, and
not Caesar's. If the Magistrate's Sword could pierce and wound the Conscience,
he might have a more justifiable Pretension to exercise a Jurisdiction over it;
but no Sword can reach this spiritual Faculty in Man but the Sword of the
Spirit, the Sword that proceeds out of the Mouth of him whose Name is the
Word of GOD. Yea, it is the undoubted Interest of civil Magistrates to preserve
the Rights of Conscience entire and inviolable among their People; for when
once their Consciences are vitiated and debauched (as most certainly they are)
by forced Compliances with Impositions against their Light and Dictates, the
sacred Ligaments of Society and Government are at once broken and dissolved; no
Promises, Covenants, or Oaths can be supposed to have any sure Hold upon them,
who have broken loose from the natural Reverence of GOD in their own
Consciences.

However, there is notwithstanding sufficient Room, and Scope for the Exercise
of the Magistrates Authority in, and about Matters of Religion. The Morals of a
People, that make up an essential Part of practical Religion, and which affect
Society, are undoubtedly the Object of the Magistrates Inspection and Care, who
is generally confessed to be Utriusque Tabulae Custos and Vindex; the Guardian
of both Tables. Here, he bears not the Sword in vain; nor can he exercise too
severe a Concern in this Matter: This is the great End of Magistracy, as the
Apostle has declared, whether of the King as Supreme, or of Governors that are
sent by him; they are ordained for the Punishment of evil Doers, and for the
Praise of them that do well 1 Pet, 2. 13, 14.
They are to be a Terror to Evil Doers by making severe Laws against Impiety
and Vice, armed with such Penalties, as may be effectual to curb in and
restrain the vicious Inclinations of Men; and by zealous Execution of them. The
Magistrates Sword of Justice must like that set about Paradise, turn every Way,
to Guard God's sacred Name, and Day, and the holy Things of his House, against
open Prophanations of all Kinds; and to correct and repress as much as in them
lies, the Immoralities of the second Table, all Violence and Injustice, Pride,
Luxury, Whoredom, Drunkenness, Lying, Slandering, and the like Enormities;
which no less violate the Peace, and Welfare of Societies, than the Rules of
Religion. They have it also much in their Power to protect and encourage the
Profession and Practice of true Religion, by countenancing the Pious and
faithful among their Subjects; honoring them that fear the Lord, while a vile
Person is contemned in their Eyes; and advancing those of that Character to
public Posts in the Government, according to the Example of the royal
Psalmist's Resolution, Psalm 101. 6
Mine Eyes shall be upon the faithful of the Land, that they may dwell with me:
He that walks in a perfect Way, he shall serve me. More especially by
affording all proper Encouragement to a learned, pious, and faithful Ministry,
on which, as the Means GOD has ordained and sanctified, true Religion depends:
I mean not the Name only, but its Vitality, Power, and Influence on Men's
Hearts and Lives. And also by supporting Schools of Learning for the
Instruction of Youth, and forming their Minds betimes to Religion and Virtue;
which are highly necessary to these Ends; because of most Parents want, either
of Ability, Inclination, or Leisure to instruct their own Children, and without
which a People will soon degenerate into Barbarism and Irreligion.

In such Ways as these, and others that might be mentioned, the Magistrate's
Authority may be well improved for the Advancement of Religion and the Kingdom
of GOD; and if, as the wise Man observes, Righteousness exalts a Nation,
Prove. 14 34.
tends to their Honor and Prosperity, and Sin is a Reproach to any People,
tends to bring them low, and subject them to Poverty, Reproach and Misery, it
is certainly the Magistrate's Duty, as he is ordained for the public Good, and
no less his Interest, to use his Power to encourage and promote Religion and
Righteousness, and to suppress Vice and Wickedness. And those that act with
Zeal and Faithfulness for these Ends of their Office, who rise up against the
evil Doers, and stand up for GOD against the Workers of Iniquity, and employ
their Authority for the Interest of his Kingdom, or moral Government over Men,
may justly be said to rule with GOD, to rule according to his Heart.

5. When they study to exemplify, in their Administration, those Perfections of
the supreme Ruler, that are most eminently demonstrated in his Government of
the World; particularly his Wisdom, Justice, and Mercy. These divine properties
shine with a peculiar Luster in the Acts of his governing Providence over
Mankind; in the Manifestation whereof he is greatly delighted and glorified,
when, as he speaks by the prophet, he is known, adored, and imitated, as a GOD
that exercises Loving Kindness, or Mercy, Judgment, or Wisdom, knowledge, and
Discretion, and Righteousness in the Earth. Jer. 9. 24.
This Earth is the Theater on which those glorious rectoral Perfections of the
supreme Majesty, his Mercy, Wisdom, and Justice, are more admirably displayed,
for ought we know, than on any other Part of the Creation; for we know of no
other rebel Creatures besides degenerate Mankind, whom the Great GOD has
vouchsafed to take under his Government and Care, in order to their being
reduced to their Allegiance and Happiness: And such a Race of revolted
Creatures taken under the divine Management for such Purposes, must needs
afford a large Scope for the Exercise and Manifestation of infinite Wisdom, and
the admirable Temperature of Justice and Mercy in all his Dealings with them by
a Mediator.

And earthly Rulers, who bear the Image of his Authority in their Office, and
sustain the Character of his Vicegerents, are, as such, under peculiar
Obligations to imitate the supreme Governor in his moral Perfections,
especially to endeavor a Resemblance of him in his Wisdom, Righteousness and
Clemency, in the Exercise of their Authority, and then will they give the
clearest Proof of their ruling with him. And such are the Qualifications of
Rulers which the holy Scriptures most frequently recommend, and insist upon, as
requisite to the faithful Discharge of their Office. I purpose not to insist
here, but shall very briefly observe,

1. They must be Men of Wisdom, Understanding, and Discretion; well acquainted
with the Rules and Methods of Government, and with the Manners, Customs,
Tempers, and Interests of their People, and the Circumstances of their Affairs.
They must excel in useful Knowledge, especially is such Kinds and Degrees as
may give them a thorough Insight into their Office, in order to a regular and
successful Management: They must be Persons of a solid Judgment and Though It,
Discerning and Penetration; capable of seeing with their own Eyes, that they
may not be led blindfold by others: Such as have Understanding of the Times,
like the Men of Issachar, to know what Israel ought to do; 1 Chronicles. 12. 32.
and know the Things that belong to the Peace of their People, and study to
promote the same by a prudent and dextrous Application of proper Means for that
Purpose. This Qualification Moses directs to in the Choice of Rulers; Take ye
wise Men, and Understanding, and known among your Tribes. Deuteronomy. 1. 13.


2. They must be Men of strict and impartial Justice: for the GOD of Israel
said -- He that rules over Men, must be just. 2 Samuel 23. 2.
And natural Reason readily subscribes to that divine Oracle, that such as are
vested with Magistratical Authority over Men must be just, and neither do wrong
themselves, nor suffer it to be done by others, and take Care that Justice may
have its free Course in the common Wealth, by enacting righteous Laws and Rules
of Government, and by a righteous and impartial Execution of them, always
maintaining an unbrib'd and unbiassed Disposition to do Justice to all, without
Respect of Persons, in Imitation of the supreme Judge.

3. Mercy and Clemency also must enter into their Character to temper the
rigor of Justice. Magistrates must rule with Clemency. For as the T^rone is
established by Righteousness; so it is also upholden by Mercy, says the same
wise King. Provo 20. 28.
And this is the peculiar Glory of the Divine Government. Now when these
amiable divine Qualities, I have mentioned, do meet in Rulers, and are carried
through their Administration, it is apparent, that God himself rules in, and by
them, and they with him. I shall only add,

6. When they approve themselves Persons of strict Religion and Virtue. When
all their other Accomplishments for Rule and Government, are crowned with real
and exemplary Piety. This alone, it is true, will not qualify a Man for
Government, nor is every sincerely pious Man fit to be made a Magistrate; yet
it will add a Luster, and give Life to a Man's other intellectual and moral
Endowments, and qualify him for ruling with GOD in the forementioned Respects,
not only as a subservient Instrument of his Providence, as others may be, who
are destitute of real Piety, but as one who is animated and conducted by a
divine Spirit, impressed with the Image of GOD, living in Communion with him,
and devoted to his Service and Honor, and as such, more eminently (as it may
be expected) assisted, owned, and blessed of GOD in his public Station. This
therefore is necessary to the more effectual reaching the Ends of Government in
ruling with and (...) GOD, and for the Good of Men, that Magistrates, who stand
in Places of Eminency among their People, should be Persons of conspicuous
Piety and Devotion toward GOD, of Righteousness and Charity toward Men, and
of exemplary Sobriety and Temperance; for how unfit are they to Rule over
others, who have not yet learnt to govern themselves, or to rule their own
Appetites and Passions by the Laws of Reason and Religion? How unfit are they
to punish: Vice and Irreligion in others, who cherish it in themselves, whose
Examples will have a greater Influence to corrupt the Morals of their People,
th^n the Punishments they inflict, to correct and reform them? But when Rulers
distinguish themselves by real Personal Virtue and Piety, they will not then
bear the Sword in vain, but may with greater Decency and Authority, with
greater Courage, Confidence, and hope of Success, exert it for the Correction
and Punishment of Vice and Profaneness, and for promoting the Reformation of
Manners. Thus much may be signified by the Phrase of ruling with GOD, as it
speaks the Duty of Rulers. I come now

2. To consider it as it speaks their Dignity, Honor, and Advantage. The
Office and Authority of Rulers among Men, in it self considered, is high and
honorable; but when they that rule others do serve the Great GOD with their
Authority, in so doing (it may be truly said, without a Paradox) they rule with
him, in the loftiest Sense of the Phrase, and share in a subordinate Degree,
some of the Dignity and Honor of the supreme Ruler, and stand high in his
Favor, which is the greatest Honor that mortal Men are capable of. Two Things
seem plainly implied in it, which conduce much to the Honor and Interest of
Rulers.

1. That GOD will honor them with his special Presence and Favor. Those that
rule with GOD, have GOD ruling with them. Their having the Presence of GOD with
them in the Exercise of Government, being the necessary Import and Result of
their ruling with him. And this Connection (in the Reason of the Thing) between
their Duty and Privilege, is confirmed by the divine Promise. The Lord is with
you, while you are with him. 2 Chronicles. 15. 2.
He is with them to direct and assist them in the difficult and important
Affairs of Government, to prosper and succeed their Counsels and Enterprises,
to own and bless them with his peculiar Favors and Smiles. It is this Presence
of GOD with them that truly magnifys them, and exalts their Character, and
makes their Authority venerable, and commands Respect and Reverence from all
about them: As Joshua was magnified in the Sight of all Israel, when it
appeared that GOD was with him, as he was with Moses. Josh (...)
Those that honor GOD in their public Stations by improving their Authority
for the Interests of his Glory, he will thus honor by the distinguishing
Tokens of his Presence. And

2. Their Authority is, hereby, best established and secured. They that rule
with GOD, shall rule, i. e. they shall be confirmed and prosper'd in the
Exercise of their Authority, being supported by the Power and Presence of the
Almighty: They shall have the Dominion, according to GOD's Promise to his
People Israel when they kept close to him, they shall be above only, and shall
not be beneath Deuteronomy. 28. 13.
The improving their Power for the Defense and Maintenance of the Cause of GOD,
Religion and Virtue, is the most effectual Course they can take for the
strengthening their own Dominion; for the Cause of GOD has always the greatest
Strength on its Side, and shall surely prevail at last. And their giving
Encouragement and Protection to Religion, and religious People,(which is one
eminent Instance of their ruling with GOD) will be found the best Support of
their own Interest, according to that of the Prophet Zechariah, The Governors
of Judah shall say in their Hearts, the Inhabitants of Jerusalem shall be my
Strength, in the Lord of Hosts, their GOD. Chap. 12. 5. which as it seems to
relate to the Times of the Gospel, may be thus paraphrased in the Language of
the new Testament; The Magistrates of a Christian People, shall account the
true Members of the Church of Christ, the Citizens of the heavenly Jerusalem,
that is, pious and good Men, the Strength of their Country, and of their
Government, because of their Relation to, and Interest in GOD, the Lord of
Hosts. And happy are those Rulers, and that People, who can thus discern
wherein their true Interest lies.

The Authority of Rulers thus improved for the Honor of GOD, and the public
Good, can seldom fail of being established in the Hearts of a willing People.
This will dispose them to pay all due Subjection, Honor, and Tribute to them,
not only for Wrath, but for Conscience sake, and not only so, but from
Interest, Inclination, and Choice. This will make them the Joy of their
Subjects, and the Envy and Terror of their Enemies; for says Solomon, When the
Righteous are in Authority, the People rejoice. Prove. 29. 2.
All good People will rejoice, as they have Reason, and those of another
Character, will yet be pleased to see Men of approved Integrity, advanced to
Posts in the Government, and the Administration put into good and faithful
Hands. They were the Enemies and Ill-wishers of the Jewish State, whom it
grieved exceedingly, that there was come a Man to seek the Welfare of the
Children of Israel Neh. 2 10.
This will conciliate Esteem and Veneration in all welldisposed Minds, more
than all their Titles of Honor, rich Revenues, and pompous Ensigns of
Authority, and entail a lasting Renown on their Memories with Posterity.
Moreover, This above all Things, will make them easy in their posts, as the
Consciousness of their Integrity will furnish them with a sure Store of
Confidence, that they may venture themselves open to the Light, and need not
fear the exactest Scrutiny and Survey of their Conduct, and will raise them
above those troublesome Suspicions, and Jealousies of a Discovery, which the
dark Designs, and corrupt Views of carnal Politicians perpetually expose them
to. But above all this, will make them easy under the Prospect of their final
Account to the Judge of all, and administer Peace and Comfort in a dying Hour,
when having ruled with GOD as Hezekiah did, they may reflect with him, and say,
Remember now, O Lord, how I have walked before thee in Truth, and with a
perfect Heart, and have done that which is Good in thy Sight. Isai. 38. 1^.
To them Death will be Gain, which, though it divests them of their earthly
Authority, will yet advance them to the high Honor and Dignity of reigning
with Christ, and his Saints, in the endless Glory of the heavenly World.

I come now to speak in a few Words to the second Branch of the Subject.

II. It will be highly for the Interest and Reputation both of Rulers and
People professing Religion, to abide faithful with the Saints, especially in
Times of Degeneracy.

I must not enlarge here as the Importance of the Subject might seem to
require, but shall confine my self to a few Hints under these Heads, First What
is it to be faithful with the Saints? Secondly, When may this Character be
applied to a People in General? Thirdly, The Connection between ruling with
GOD, and being faithful with the Saints. And Fourthly, How much it will be for
the Interest and Reputation of a professing People, especially in Times of
Degeneracy, to abide faithful with the Saints.

First, I am to show what it is to be faithful with the Saints. Faithfulness
supposes a Trust committed to us, or an Engagement we take on ourselves: And
both these Ways a professing People are under Obligations to Faithfulness. In
coming into Covenant Relation to GOD, they take upon them solemn Engagements to
Obedience; they avouch the Lord to be their GOD, to walk in his Ways, to keep
his Statues and Commandments, as he avoucheth them to be his People. Deuteronomy. 26.
17, 18.
They have also a Trust committed to them. They are entrusted with the Religion
GOD has instituted and revealed, not only to be observed in their own Practice,
but to be carefully preserved and conveyed down in its Purity to the next
Generation. Hence we read of the Faith delivered to the Saints; Oracles of GOD
committed; Ordinances and Commandments delivered to a professing People, to be
kept without Spot, unrebukable through all Generations, 'till the appearing of
our Lord Jesus Christ. Jude 3. Romans 3. 2. 1 Cor. 11. 2 23. 2 Pet. 2. 21. 1 Timothy
6. 14
And though all that enter into Covenant Relation to GOD are Saints by
Profession, visible Saints, Psalm. 50. 5.
yet those only are Saints indeed, who are faithful to GOD: and all real Saints
are, and will be faithful to the Trust GOD has committed to them, and to their
Engagements to him, according to the Measure of Grace they have received. Hence
the Saints and Faithful are mentioned in Scripture as convertible Terms. Ephesians.
1. 1. Col. 1. 2.
And so we may be said to be faithful with the Saints in these two or three
Respects, Viz.

1. When we receive, and faithfully and inviolably retain the true Religion,
Faith, and Worship, as it is delivered to us in the inspired Writings of holy
Men of GOD, the Prophets and Apostles. As the Jewish Church was faithful with
the Saints in adhering to the Religion transmitted to them by their pious
Ancestors, and to the Prescriptions and Ordinances of the Law of Moses; so may
Christians, in a special Manner, be said to be, when they adhere faithfully to
the Doctrines and Institutions of the new Testament, delivered to them in the
sacred Writings of the Evangelists and Apostles. This is the Faith which was
once delivered unto the Saints, and which all the Saints have been most careful
to preserve, not only for their own Use and Benefit, but as a sacred Depositum
to be handed down to succeeding Ages. And this will be the best Evidence to
Ministers and Churches at this Day, of their being truly apostolical, the true
and approved Successors of the Apostles, without which, all other Reasons and
Pleas to support such a Claim, will plainly appear far fetched and
inconclusive; This, I say, will be the only sure Evidence, namely, Their
retaining the true Faith, the true Worship, and the true Piety which the
Apostles taught and recommended by their Preaching and Example, and have
transmitted to us in their Writings.

2. When we carefully imitate the Saints that have gone before us in their
Faith and Piety; not only in the Profession of the true Religion, but in the
Virtues of an holy Life. When we follow the Footsteps of the Flock of Christ,
and tread in the Steps of good Men, whether of such as have been of our special
Acquaintance, or our pious Forefathers, who were shining Patterns of Faith,
Zeal, Self-denial, Charity, Humility, and other Christian Virtues; or of the
Saints in former Ages, whose pious Example is left on Record for our Imitation;
as we are required to walk in the Steps of faithful Abraham, and to be
Followers of those who through Faith and Patience inherit the Promises Romans 4.
12. Heb. 6. 12.
This will be the surest Proof of our Faithfulness with the Saints, as it
evidences our Fellowship with them in the same Spirit.

3. When we faithfully adhere to the Communion of living Saints, especially
those of the sacred Order, and under the Conduct of a pious and faithful
Ministry, observe all the Ordinances and Commandments of GOD our Savior, in
particular Church Fellowship, and duly attend the Duties that such a Relation
binds us to; approving our Faithfulness to GOD in keeping the Charge of his
Covenant, in the several Instances I have mentioned; and maintaining a firm
Constancy in the Profession of the Truth, and in the Duties of our holy
Profession, whatever Temptations surround us to move us from our own
Stedfastness. These, I take to be the principal Things intended by being
faithful with the Saints.

Secondly, When may this Character be applied to a People in general?
Particular Persons may be found faithful to GOD in Times of general Apostasy
and prevailing Corruption; but when may it be said of a People in general, as
here, they are faithful with the Saints?

To this I answer in a Word, When not only an outward Face of Religion, or Form
of Godliness, is kept up by a professing People, but the Power and Practice of
Piety, Righteousness, and Holiness is found in a prevailing Degree among them;
when the Body of Professors keep close to GOD's Institutions, though some, yea
many Hypocrites and wicked People may be intermixed with them, which must be
expected in the purest Communities, 'till the great Day of Separation; yet when
Religion has the visible Ascendant, and no open Iniquity or Impiety is
tolerated, when those that bear Authority in Families, Churches, or in the
State, faithfully exert their Endeavors to suppress Sin, and promote Religion
and Virtue: When this is the Case of a People in general, though there may be yet
much amiss in them (as there was in Hezekiah's Time) that calls for
Reformation, yet according to the Mitigations and Abatements the Mercies of GOD
are wont to allow, they may be denominated a religious faithful People.

So I proceed

Thirdly, To show the Connection between Ruling with GOD, and being faithful
with the Saints. And this appears necessary, with Respect to the Persons of
Rulers, and the People under their Charge.

1. With respect to the Persons of Rulers, it is evidently supposed in their
ruling with GOD, that they are also faithful with the Saints; that they profess
and practice the true Faith and Religon in common with all the Saints, and use
their Power to encourage, protect, and promote it, as I have showed already.
And on the other Hand, supposing Power and Dominion given to the Saints of the
Most High, or, which is the same Thing, to those that are faithful in the
Communion of Saints, it is quite out of Character for them to use their
Authority for any other Ends than those of GOD's Glory, the Interest of
Religion, and the Good of their People; and these are inseperably linked
together.

2. With respect to the People under their Charge, we may observe, That a
People's Reputation for Religion and Virtue will very much follow the Character
of their Rulers. If they are vicious and corrupt, no Wonder Iniquity abounds in
a Land, and Corruption of Manners every where prevails; when those that should
be a Terror to evil Works and evil Workers, do rather countenance and promote
them: When vile Men are exalted to Places of power and Trust, no other can be
expected but that the Wicked will walk on every Side. Psalm. 12. 8.
On the contrary, when Rulers are pious and faithful, and employ their Power on
GOD's Side, for the Advancement of pure Religion, their Example and Authority
will go far to engage a People to Faithfulness in their Duty to GOD in the
observance of his Ordinances, and will have a mavelous Influence on their
Religion and Morals.

And if we look over the History of the Kings of Israel and Judah, we shall
find this Observation commonly verifyed, That as their Rulers were well, or
ill-affected to Religion, and the Worship of GOD, such were for the most Part
the Body of the People, who generally followed their Leaders. When those that
are in Authority are endowed with Grace and Wisdom from above, and go before
their People in an Example of Piety, and use their Authority for its right
Ends, in the Suppression of Vice, and Reformation of Manners, it may reasonably
be hoped that the People under their Charge, will lead quiet and peaceable
Lives in all Godliness and Honestly. 1 Timothy 2. 2.
They have it much in their Power by the Sword of Justice that is put into
their Hands to restrain and suppress the open Practice of every Thing that is
impious and vicious, that the criminal Actors of it shall be forced to lurk in
Corners, and the Guilt lie on themselves alone, and not on the Public. And
from the public Countenance given to Religion, all that look for Preferment in
the State, will readily apprehend what must be the necessary Qualification. And
their pious Example in these honorable Stations will have an attractive and
engaging Influence on all about them, and serve to bring Vice and vicious
Persons into Contempt, and Religion and Virtue into Reputation, and so take off
much of the Prejudice that lies on the carnal Hearts of Men against it. We all
know what an happy Influence that zealous Resolution of Joshua had on the
Congregation of Israel, when he so bravely declared to them, that though every
Man of Israel should forsake GOD and his Service, as for me and my House, we
will serve the Lord; upon which all the Motives of Honor and Conscience
conspired to bring them on to join with him in the same noble Resolution, We
also will serve the Lord, for he is our GOD. Josh. 24. 15, 18.
And they were as good as their Word, while this zealous Magistrate lived, the
People served the Lord all the Days of Joshua. Judge 2. 7.
And thus may it be expected that a People will be found faithful with the
Saints, when their Magistrates and Leaders rule with GOD.

Wherefore I add in the last Place,

Fourthly, That it will be highly for the Interest and Reputation of a
professing People, especially in Times of Degeneracy, to abide faithful with
the Saints. I need not insist here, the Evidences and Proofs of this are
obvious to the least Reflection. Thus when good Hezekiah, (to whose Reign, I
suppose the Prophet's Words to refer,) had purged out Corruptions of Worship,
restored Religion to its Purity, the Kingdom of Judah began to lift up its
Head, and recover its sinking Reputation, and GOD magnifyed him in the Sight of
the Nations, and blessed him with Success, Victory, Wealth, and Honor. Nothing
can contribute more to the Reputation of a People, than their Fidelity to GOD
in keeping his Covenant, and Commandments. This will make them high above all
Nations in Praise, in Name, and in Honor; Deuteronomy. 26 19.
and procure them Esteem and Admiration among their Neighbors. So long as
there remains in the Consciences of Men a Sense of the real Difference between
moral Good and Evil, and a Conviction of the Wisdom and Excellency of Holiness
and Virtue, and of the Turpitude of Vice, which is not wholly effaced in the
most degenerate of Mankind; so long virtuous and religious People must be had
in Honor and Esteem.

And when a People, a Church, or Community, preserve an uncorrupted Integrity,
while other Nations, and Churches, fall away from the purity of Religion; this
will add the Praise of Constancy to their other Virtues, and render them more
bright and illustrious, and recommend them to the distinguishing Regard of
Heaven. And whatever may be supposed, the true Interest of a People depends
entirely upon this. Their most valuable spiritual and eternal Interests, are
unquestionably secured hereby, and their temporal Happiness most effectually
provided for; which indeed is the natural Result of those Duties GOD requires
of a People, as linked together in Society, Justice, Sobriety, Humility,
Charity, Meekness, Frugality, and Diligence: these have a natural Influence on
People's Safety, Honor, and Prosperity. But besides this, the GOD of Heaven
and Earth, will be faithful in keeping Mercy and Truth for them that are
faithful and steadfast in his Covenant. GOD Almighty shall bless them, as he has
promised, on whose Smiles their whole Felicity depends. When ^e gives
Quietness, none can make Trouble. Job 34. 29.
And when his Judgments are abroad in the Earth, they stand fairest for the
distinguishing Care and Protection of Divine Providence and Grace; according to
Christ's Promise to the Church of Philadelphia, Because thou have kept the Word
of my Patience, I also will keep thee from the Hour of Temptation, which shall
come upon all the World, to try them that dwell upon the Earth. Rev. 3 10.
And under the Blessing of the Almighty thus engaged, and his auspicious
Influence, they may expect to be built up and prospered, and may promise
themselves whatever may contribute to their temporal Peace and Prosperity,
Wealth and Honor; or that the Effect thereof will be just and righteous
Liberties, a regular and successive Administration, the flourishing of Learning
and Arts, the prosperity of Trade, Husbandry, and Manufactures, and the Success
of all the Works of their Hands. For though these Things are but additional to
the main Blessings of the Covenant, yet are they commonly bestowed as the
Rewards of Public Virtue: For (as has been often, and I think justly observed)
though particular Persons are capable of future Rewards and Punishments, which
are therefore most usually deferred to another Life, yet public Societies, as
such, are not; they will all be disbanded before the Great Day of Retribution:
and therefore if they be rewarded, or punished at all, as Communities, or
collective Bodies, (as it is highly congruous to the Wisdom and Justice of the
divine Government they should) it must be in this Life, and accordingly they
usually are either prosperous or miserable, as either Piety and Virtue, or
Irreligion and Vice abound in them, and meet with public Countenance and
Encouragement.

Nevertheless, let it be also observed, that those particular Persons that
abide faithful with GOD in the midst of a degenerate People, whether in an
higher or lower Station, shall be honored with special Marks of divine
Approbation: And though they may be trampled on, and despised by the ungodly
Multitude, and though they may be involved in public Judgments on a sinful
People, yet their Constancy and Fidelity in the Cause of GOD and Religion will
be had in great Reputation in Heaven, and they shall be safe in all their most
valuable Interests, and a glorious Crown is reserved for them. Be thou faithful
unto Death, says Christ, and I will give thee a Crown of Life. Rev. 2. 10.
And says he to the Church of Sardis, Thou have a few Names even in Sardis,
which have not defiled their Garments, and they shall walk with me in white,
for they are worthy. In a Word, those that are faithful with the Saints shall
have an happy Lot among them, and a better can never be desired by those that
well understand what an Honor and Happiness it is to share in the Favors of
God's peculiar People, to see, and enjoy the Good of his Chosen, to rejoice
with the Gladness of his Nation, and to glory with his Inheritance.

I come now to make some Application of what has been discoursed. And

First of all; It might well deserve a serious Inquiry, Whether, or how far,
the Character which has been opened, may be applied to the present Incumbents
of this Land? The Examination hereof, I shall leave to be pursued by all
concerned, both Rulers and People; and shall only observe, that as the first
Settlement of this Country was enterpriz'd on a religious Account, so when it
is considered what an uncommon Spirit of Zeal, and Self-denial animated our
pious Forefathers to engage in so hazardous and expensive an Undertaking, in
transporting themselves and their Families into this remote Wilderness for the
Sake of a purer Reformation, which they had long contended for in vain,
especially for the Purity of Gospel Institutions, a pure scriptural Worship and
Discipline, which, through the Iniquity of the Times, they were not allowed the
peaceable Enjoyment of in their native Land: And when it is considered how much
it was their Concern to lay Religion in the Foundation of their Settlement, and
to erect Churches to our Lord Jesus according to Scripture Pattern, and so to
set up his Kingdom in these Ends of the Earth, to assert and vindicate his sole
Authority as King and Head of the Church, to Rule in it by his own Laws and
Ordinances, that they might observe all, and only the Things that he has
commanded, and not only enjoy for themselves, but transmit and secure to their
Children and Posterity, the Covenant Enjoyment of all the Ordinances and
precious Things of his Kingdom, and so to order their civil Constitution and
Administration, as might best serve the Purposes of Religion and Reformation:
And what eminent Examples they generally were of true practical Religion, of
Christian Piety, Charity, Justice, Self-denial, and Sobriety: When these
Things, I say, are considered, little doubt remains, but that it might be
justly and truly said of them that they ruled with GOD, and were faithful with
his Saints. And GOD was signally present with them, and owned them by the
remarkable Appearances of his Providence for them; in protecting and prospering
them. But alas! how visible and sad are our Degeneracies at this Day? We have
been going away from GOD's Ordinances from the Days of our Fathers, and have
not kept them. The Complaint began in their Day, and the Grounds of it have
been increasing since. I am loath to take up the Lamentation of the Prophet, and
say, How is the faithful City become an Harlot? Isai. 1 21. I would hope Things
are not yet come to this pass among us: Nay, I am persuaded, that
notwithstanding our Degeneracies, there is yet, to the Praise of divine Grace,
a very considerable Number, among all Ranks, of serious devout Christians, who
are Examples of undissembled Piety; and doubt not but the Son of GOD, our LORD
JESUS CHRIST, who still walks in the midst of his Golden Candlestick, yet
observes many Things commendable in these Churches, which he beholds from
Heaven with a well pleased Eye. But at the same Time we may as little doubt,
that he has Cause enough to say to the New England Churches, as he did to the
Church of Ephesus, Nevertheless, I have somewhat against you, because you have
left your first Love. The former Strictness in Religion, that Brotherly-Love,
that Public Spirit, and Zeal for the Order and Ordinances of the Gospel, which
was so much the Glory of our Fathers, is very much abated, yea disrelished by
too many: and a Spirit of Licentiousness, and Neutrality in Religion, of
Uncharitableness and Contention, Pride and Sensuality, and other corrupt
Manners and Practices of a World that lies in Wickedness, so opposite to the
Ways of GOD's People, do exceedingly prevail in the midst of us.

We have, its true, the outward Symbols of true Christianity among us; the
Oracles of GOD, committed to us, an instituted Ministry, Ordinations to that
sacred Office, ordinarily managed with great Solemnity, Gospel Truths in their
Purity generally taught in our Churches, and solemn Covenantings with GOD: We
have our Sabbaths, our Sacraments, and religious Assemblies, Days of Fasting,
and Thanksgiving: Yet all this amounts to no more than a Form of Godliness,
while in the mean Time, that real vital Piety, which should diffuse a Life and
Beauty into this external Face of Religion, is greatly under Decays, as it has
been long observed and lamented by the pious and faithful in our Israel. And
though we appear together on these Anniversaries, from all Quarters of the Land,
with the Heads of our People, to pay our religious Acknowledgments to the GOD
of our Fathers, and our GOD, and to inquire in his Temple, and to usher in our
civil Transactions with solemn Prayer, and consult the Oracles of GOD, and so
far we are doubtless in the Way of our Duty; yet if after all we will not be
guided by this Counsel, what do we more than the Jews in their corrupt and
degenerate Times? They seek me daily, says God by the Prophet, and delight to
know my Ways, as a Nation that did Righteousness, and forsook not the
Ordinances of their GOD, they ask of me the Ordinance of Justice, etc. When at
the same Time, GOD bids his Prophet, Cry aloud, and spare not, lift up his
Voice like a Trumpet, and show his People their Transgressions, and the House
of Jacob their Sins. Isai. 58 1, 2.
Our religious Formalities without the Life and Power of Religion, instead of
recommending us to the Favor of GOD, will but add new Matter of Provocation to
him.

Moreover, the Divine Rebukes on the Land in a variety of judicial
Dispensations, though intermixed with abundance of Mercy, are a plain Intimation
that GOD has a Controversy with us for our Backslidings, and Unfaithfulness in
his Covenant. For all his Judgments on a professing People are designed to
avenge the Quarrel of his Covenant. But that which is the most lamentable
Symptom of all is our Security under the Rebukes of Heaven, and Insensibleness
of the Anger of GOD manifested therein against us, (while we are apt to
terminate our Views and Complaints on second Causes of our Troubles and
Grievances) and (as the Consequence thereof) our Incorrigibleness, and walking
contrary to GOD in the Ways of his Judgments, and neglecting a practical
Compliance with the Design of them, which is to humble and reform us. And if we
go on in our Departures from GOD, without being reclaimed by more gentle
Corrections, we may justly fear that the Wrath of GOD which has been so long
impending over us, will break out upon us in more awful and exemplary Instances
of Severity, than have been yet seen, or known. For what else can be expected
according to GOD's ordinary Methods, as the Consequence of the Apostacies of a
People so highly favored on religious Accounts as we have been? The
Consideration whereof should not indeed leave us dispirited, or to conclude
there is no Hope; No, there is no Reason for that; if (...) would but hearken
to, and be ruled by GOD's Counsel, we might yet be an happy People; but it
should rather call up, and animate our Zeal and Resolution to attempt a
Reformation, that we may retrieve, if possible, this glorious Character in
whatever Instances, or Degrees, we may be supposed to have fallen short of it;
That it may still be said that New England, yet rules with GOD, and is
faithful with the Saints. And

This is that which in the second Place, I crave Leave to press upon all in
their several Stations and Capacities, with the most earnest Solicitude and
Concern to aspire after, as that which is most certainly our greatest Interest
and Glory, agreably to what has been discoursed.

Which may

First, Be improved for Direction to the honorable and worthy Persons, in whom
the Election of His Majesty's Council for this Province is vested by the Royal
Charter; which is the Business of this Day.

You have been often minded, on such Occasions as this, of the weighty Trust
that is committed to you by GOD, your KING, and Countrry, and of which you must
give an Account. Remember you stand, and act in this Affair, in a public
Capacity; wherefore let no private Aims and partial Affections influence you,
but with a disinterested Concern for the public Good, for which you are
entrusted to act, let your Views be directed to such, as according to your best
Understanding, will be most likely to answer the Character of Government now
represented, and to rule with GOD: Men of known Ability and Integrity, who are
cordial Friends to the best Interests of their Country, and also of personal
Virtue and Piety.

And thus we may hope still to see our Judges as at the first, and our
Counselors as at the beginning, whose Authority and Influence may go far
toward the reviving and maintaining of Godliness and Honesty among this
People, that we may yet be called the City of Righteousness, the faithful City.
Isai. 1. 26.


To this End,

Let me in the next Place apply my Discourse, in an humble Address to His
EXCELLENCY OUR GOVERNOR AND COMMANDER IN CHIEF, to the HONORABLE HIS
MAJESTY'S COUNCIL, together with the HONORABLE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES; and
all that do or may bear Part in the public Administration.

Suffer me (much honored and esteemed) who am the least of our Lord's
Messengers, being called By the late Honorable House of Representatives.
to speak in his Name this Day, to be an humble Remembrancer to you, whom
divine Providence has made the Rulers and Leaders of this People, of those
Things which have been represented as the Duty and the Honor of the Rulers of
a professing People. The divine Counsel then to be laid before you is, That you
would so discharge the Duty, that you may maintain the Character and Dignity of
Rulers with GOD.

As GOD has honored your EXCELLENCY particularly, with the chief Seat of
Government over a People, who are professedly subject to the Rule and
Government of our Lord Jesus, so he has put you in a Capacity of being
eminently serviceable to the Interests of his Kingdom among us, and has
enlarged your Opportunities and Advantages for promoting the temporal Welfare
and religious Interests of these Churches, to which we trust you are engaged by
Inclination and Choice, as well as Office and Profession, and by employing your
Power and Influence for the Service of Christ and his People, you will thus,
doubtless answer the most valuable Ends of Government, and have the Honor of
ruling with and for our blessed Redeemer, an Honor that shall survive the
Monuments of all earthly Grandeur, and last to Eternity.

May I then be allowed, with a becoming Deference and Humility, to suggest in a
few Words, what our Expectations are from you, our honored Fathers in the
Government, under the Character of those that Rule with GOD, and are faithful
with the Saints

You will then improve the eminent Talents of Wisdom and Understanding,
interest and Authority, wherewith it has pleased GOD to dignify and distinguish
you, for the Advancement of his Glory, and the Common Good, and in seeking the
Welfare of your People, with a Spirit as public as your Station and Influence;
you will highly value, and on all Occasions appear in the De^^nce both of our
Civil and Religious Rights and Liberties, which are entrusted to your
Guardianship and Care.

You will also act with Zeal in maintaining that Righteousness, both
Distributive, and Commutative, which is the Ground and Basis of Society, and of
every happy Government. Particularly, it will be your Concern to endeavor by
all proper Means to preserve the public Credit in the present Medium of
Exchange, the fluctating and sinking whereof, it is to be feared, is the
Occasion of abundance of Injustic^ (...) Extortion and Oppression, and likely
to be more so, (and how far a public Guilt may be contracted on this Account,
deserves well to be considered.) which calls upon the Wisdom and Justice of the
Legislature to find out, and apply a timely Remedy to so great a Grievance. You
will express a particular Concern for the Interest of Religion and GOD's
Worship; and take Care, as far as your Authority and Influence may extend, that
the Ministers of Christ's holy Religion, the faithful and painful Laborers in
Word and Doctrine, may not be defrauded of their just and reasonable Dues,
through a Deficiency in the present Medium; but that they may be supported and
encouraged in the Service of Christ, and of Souls, the best Interests of a
People, with such a Maintenance as is suitable to their Station, Character, and
Employment, and as the Law of Christ intitles them to, which may raise them
above Contempt, and enable them to give themselves wholly to their Work, free
from the Encumbrance of Worldly Cares. A singular Pattern of this tender
Concern for Religion, and the Ministers of it, you have in that godly King
Hezekiah, to the Honor of whose Memory it is recorded, that he spoke
comfortably to all the Levites that taught the good Knowledge of the LORD; and
took effectual Care that the Portion of Maintenance assigned them by the Law of
GOD should be duly rendered to them, that they might be encouraged in the Law of
the Lord. 2 Chronicles. 30. ^2. and Chap. 31. 4.
And for as much as Learning is a necessary subservient Means of Religion,
without which it must needs languish and fail, you will account the good
Education of the Youth of this Land, Matter of the highest Importance, that
they may be trained up in Learning and Virtue, for the Service of the next
Generation: And that Inferior Schools be duly upheld in our several Towns, so
as that they may effectually answer the Design of the good Laws in that Case
provided. And especially, as Patrons of Religion and Learning, you will always
look on the College as entitled to your particular Smiles What has been done so
honorably by the Government for the Society the last Year, deserves a grateful
Commemoration, and gives Hope that under the same generous Care, that Seminary
may continue to flourish more and more, as our distinguishing Glory among the
American Provinces.

But especially, you will exert your Authority for the Suppression of the
Growth of Vice and Irreligion, profane Swearing, Lying, Sabbath-breaking,
Pride, Idleness, Injustice, Theft, Drunkenness, Fornication, and other
Abominations that defile the Land, and bring down the Judgments of GOD upon it,
who will surely visit a People for these Things, even a whole People and Land,
if the Magistrate, his Vicegerent, neglects to do it by inflicting due
Punishment on the particular Persons of Offenders. Did not Achan the Son of
Zerah commit a Trespass in the accursed Thing, and Wrath fell on all the
Congregation of Israel? and that Man perished not alone in his Iniquity. Josh.
22, 20.
And if the wholesome Laws in being against these Vices be had in Contempt by
bold and daring Transgressors, either for Want of a zealous Execution of them,
or for Want of severer Penalties to render them a greater Terror to Evildoers,
you will readily understand what is to be done in these Cases without a Monitor.

Among the Sins that are meet to be punished by the Judge, I have mentioned
that of Pride, which as it is a latent Evil in Men's Hearts, does not indeed
fall under the Cognizance or coercive Power of the Magistrate, yet it may
deserve Consideration, Whether the Visible Indications of this Vice, in the
Excesses People of all Ranks run in^o in their Garb and Manner of Living,
mayn'^ ^^quire some Correction, and whether nothing further may be done by
sumptuary Laws for a Check and Restraint to this growing Extravagance, which is
so evident a Token of our walking contrary to GOD under the humbling Rebukes of
his Providence, and a threatening Omen of a shameful Fall. And would our pious
Rulers, whose Exhortations we gladly receive, in their Proclamations for Days
of Fasting and Prayer, to make penitent Confession of our manifold Sins that
have provoked the righteous Anger of GOD against the Land, would they, I say,
join with the sacred Orders the Ministers of Christ, as those that are faithful
with the Saints, in bearing a more open and public Testimony against the
prevailing Sins of the Times, and in concerting proper Methods for the
Reformation of them, it would greatly strengthen the Hands, and encourage the
Hearts of the faithful in the Land, in their pious Endeavors to serve the
Cause of Reformation, and might tend to put Vice out of Countenance.

In fine, You will regulate all your Counsels and Proceedings by the revealed
Will of GOD, the supreme unerring Rule of all Righteousness; and you will lead
and guide this People, as by your Authority, so by a bright Example of pure and
undefiled Religion in all the Instances of it, both in your Personal and
Relative Conduct.

These Things, I do but mention, having been (the most of them) more copiously
urged and inculcated on former like Occasions. And such are the Things, My
Fathers, which will be a Testimony for you, that you bear Rule on GOD's Side,
and with his Approbation and Concurrence: So you may expect the Smiles of
Heaven on your Administration, and to be accepted of the Multitude of your
Brethren; so you shall be honored as Instruments by the Divine Blessing of
recovering and saving a degenerate People, and of prolonging their Tranquillity:
Above all, your Praise shall be of GOD, and your Reward glorious, and we shall
rejoice to see exhibited in the Government of this Land, so happy a Prelude of
the Approaching Kingdom of Jesus Christ, which has been long the Matter of the
Faith and Hope, and Prayer of GOD's People, when the Saints shall have the
Dominion, and reign with Christ on Earth. And our Prayer shall always be, that
GOD would think upon you for Good, according to all that you do for this People.

In the next Place, the Subject discoursed warrants an Application to the
Sacred Order, the Reverend Pastors of these Churches; whose Office designed by
the scriptural Titles of Ministers of Christ, Stewards of the Mysteries of God,
Overseers of the Flock, spiritual Guides, Ambassadors, Watchmen, and the like,
lays them under peculiar Obligations to be faithful to Him that has appointed
them, faithful in maintaining the true Faith and Worship, and the Government
and Discipline of GOD's House.

Wherefore, my Reverend Fathers, and Brethren, Let us look on our selves, as
Trustees of the Faith once delivered to the Saints, on whom it is incumbent in
Point of Faithfulness to our Trust, to take Care that it may pass through our
Hands pure, and unadulterated to those that come after us: And as we have
received it upon a full Conviction of its Divine Authority, as a sacred
Depositum from the Hands of our pious Predecessors, and have been Witnesses to
their Zeal for the Purity of the Faith, and of Gospel Institutions, so let us
with equal Zeal and Care, in setting apart others to succeed us in the sacred
Office, follow the Direction of the holy Apostle Paul to Timothy, to commit the
same to faithful Men, who shall be able to teach others also 2 Timothy 2. 2.
Let us also consider that the Exercise of that delegated Rule and Authority,
which is committed to us in the House of GOD, consists in nothing else, but a
prudent and faithful Application of the Word, and Administration of the Laws of
Christ's Kingdom, so as that Christ himself may be seen to Rule in and by our
Ministry; our Wisdom and Fidelity in this Matter will be very glorious in his
Eyes. To this End, we must not fail to declare the whole Counsel of GOD, that
we may be pure from the Blood of all Men; freely and faithfully reproving Sin
in all Ranks, and testifying against the Corruption of the Times.

Divine Providence has cast our Lot in an Age of great Degeneracy and
Licentiousness, and that we may abide faithful in such a Day, not only as
common Christians in keeping our own Garments undefiled, but as Ministers of
Religion, we need much of the Spirit of Elijah, to be clad with Zeal for the
Lord of Hosts, and with Bowels of Mercies to precious immortal Souls, in
calling Men to Repentance, to be mortified to the World, the Pleasures, Pomps,
and Vanities of it, and of an heavenly Mind and Temper, and to be Examples of
strict Religion and Holiness to our Flocks; it is requisite we should lay out
our selves in our Preaching and Conversation to revive and promote the Life and
Power of Godliness, chiefly recommending and inculcating, in the Course of our
Ministry, the essential Points of Christianity. And if we stand in God's
Counsel, and cause his People to hear his Words, we shall be most likely to
speed in our Endeavors to turn them from their Evil Ways. Jer. 23. 22.
For this End, we should be constant and earnest Intercessors for our People;
and cry Day and Night to GOD for the pouring out of his Spirit on the Land, on
which the good Success of all Means of Conversion and Reformation entirely
depends.

And whatever Temptations and Discouragements our Ministry may be attended
with, if we can but obtain Mercy to be faithful, whatever our Success be, the
Consciousness of our Fidelity and Integrity will afford Matter of inexpressible
Joy; and we may be assured of our Master's Approbation in that blessed Euge,
than which we can have nothing greater in our Aim and Desire, Well done good
and faithful Servant.

Lastly, Let me address a Call to this whole People in their Representative
Body, to abide faithful to GOD in Communion with all the Saints, and especially
in Imitatation of those holy Men of GOD who laid the Foundation of these
Churches, in their good Principles, their Faith and Piety, and christian
Conversation. Your whole Interest is wrapped up in this, in being faithful to
GOD, loyal and dutiful Subjects (...) the good Government he has set over us;
the former necessarily infers the latter, Loyalty and Subjection to the Order
of Magistracy, being a special Point of Religion, in which we must manifest our
Obedience to GOD. Consider it therefore, as that which is of the highest
Importance to your spiritual and temporal Welfare, to be faithful to GOD in the
Observance of his Covenant and Commandments.

The Churches of Christ in this Land are founded on a sacred Covenant,
transacted between GOD and them, in a more solemn and explicit Manner than
perhaps in most Churches in the World. And were we as faithful to our solemn
covenant Engagements, it might reasonably be hoped that GOD would as remarkably
distinguish us with his Favors. As when he came upon Terms with Israel of old,
and undertook their Protection, He said, surely they are my People, Children
that will not lie: That will not deal falsely and perfidiously with him, to
whom they had vowed Fealty and Allegiance, so he was their Savior. Isai. 63. 8.
But on the other Hand, What can be expected as the Consequence of our
treacherous and unfaithful Dealings in Covenant, but that he will hide his Face
from us, and treat us as a very froward Generation, Children in whom is no
Faith; as he threatened his People Israel. Deuteronomy. 32. 20.
And what an awful Threatening this is, I will hide my Face from them, and what
Woe and Misery it carries with it, and draws after it, Moses declares, Deuteronomy.
31. 17. Mine Anger shall be kindled against them in that Day, and I will
forsake them, and I will hide my Face from them, and many Evils and Troubles
shall befall them, so that they shall say in that Day, are not these Evils come
upon us because our GOD is not among us? The only Way to secure us against such
fearful Consequences, is to repent and return from our Backsliding to a more
conscionable and faithful observance of our covenanted Duty.

I purposed, (would the Time have permitted) to set before you, and earnestly
recommend some special Instances of Duty, wherein GOD expects and requires you
should give a Proof of your Loyalty and Fidelity to him, in Conformity to the
Example of our godly Ancestors, and to the Practice of the Saints in all Ages.
Let me mention only the general Heads, and so draw to a Close.

1. Your Loyalty and Faithfulness to GOD demands the strict Observance of all
moral Duties, Righteousness, and Honesty, Charity, Sobriety, and Temperance. If
you fail here, not only the Saints, but many virtuous Pagans, will rise up in
Judgment against you, and condemn you.

2. The Observance of positive Institutions, the Duties of GOD's Worship,
secret and social Prayer, attending on a Gospel Ministry, submitting your
selves to your spiritual Guides, who speak to you the Word of GOD, and watch
for your Souls; a strict Care to sanctify the Lord's Day, and reverently to
approach the Lord's Table, observing all the Ordinances of the House of GOD in
Communion with particular Churches. The free, and unmolested Enjoyment of such
Gospel Institutions was the known Design of our Fathers in coming hither. These
Things indeed do belong to the Form of Godliness; yet have they a vital
Connection with the Power thereof, insomuch that where this is wanting, they
will be either wholly neglected, or but carelessly and superficially attended.
But the Life and Power of Religion, wherever it is, will evidence it self in a
strict Observance of these divine Institutions, which are designed for the
Honor of GOD in the World, and a public Testimony of his People's Loyalty and
Subjection to him, which have ever been had in precious Esteem with all real
Saints, as the Means of maintaining and improving their spiritual Life in
Communion with GOD, till they arrive to immediate Vision in the Life of Heaven,
and also as the Means of reviving the Power of Godliness when it is fallen into
Decay. When it pleases GOD to send down his quickening Spirit upon a People,
who have very much lost the Spirit and Life of Religion, and have degenerated
into Lukewarmness and Formality, he ordinarily makes Use of the Instituted
Forms of Religion among them, as the Vehicles of those heavenly Influences,
particularly the Word preached and heard, Fasting and Prayer. And by this
Means, Religion is propagated from Parents to Children, from one Generation to
another. Wherefore

3. Another Article which demands your most serious Regards is the keeping up
Family Religion, Family Instruction, Worship and Government. It Is not to be
doubted, but that the Licentiousness of Youth, and most of the Iniquities that
abound in the Land, are mainly owing to the criminal Remissness of Governors
of Families, or of those that ought to be so, with respect to the religious
Education of those under their Charge. And all that Magistrates or Ministers
can do to reform them, will be to little Purpose, unless Heads of Families
faithfully do their Part: And if there be any Hope of a more general
Reformation and Amendment of what is amiss among us, it must chiefly be done by
a more strict Care of Family Religion, and of the virtuous and pious Education
of Youth. O remember the Charge of GOD that lies upon you with respect to your
Children and Posterity, to teach them the fear of the Lord, by your
Instruction, Examples, Counsels, and Prayers Your Faithfulness to GOD, to your
Children, and the public Interest, requires it of you, that you take Care that
they be well principled in Religion betimes: And if you desire that you and
yours may be blessed with faithful Abraham, let it be your Ambition to imitate
him in this Instance of his Faithfulness, of which GOD gives that honorable
Testimony, Genesis 18. 19. I know him, that he will command his Children and (...)
Household after him, and they shall keep the way of the Lord, to do Justice and
Judgment, that the Lord may bring upon Abraham that which he has spoken of him.

4. The last Thing which I would propose as the most necessary and important
Instance of your faithfulness to GOD, is, the Observance of spiritual
Evangelical Duties, in a Life of Faith, Repentance, and unfeigned Love to GOD,
and sincere Devotion to him; seeking the Things above, and Communion with
Christ, and Mortification to this World, the predominant Love whereof in
Christian Professors (which prevails so much at this Day to the Consumption of
the very Vitals of Religion) the Scripture taxes as an Instance of spiritual
Adultery, and Disloyalty to GOD, as it is a Breach of the spiritual Marriage
Covenant between him, and them, yea of Enmity to him. Ye Adulterers, and
Adulteresses, know ye not that the Friendship of the World is Enmity with God?
whosoever therefore will be a Friend of the World, is the Enemy of God. James
4. 4
You cannot be loyal and faithful to GOD, if you suffer the World to rival him
in your Affections* nor is it consistent with the Character of real Saints. And
as the Effect and Evidence of the Love of GOD, let me recommend that cordial
undissembled Love one to another, that Peace, and Union, that Gospel Charity
which is the Bond of perfectness, that Love between Magistrates and Subjects,
Ministers and People, Neighbors and Brethren, in every Relation and Society,
which is the Life and Strength, the Beauty and Glory of a Christian People, in
Opposition to Strife and Variance, Enmities and Animosities, which apparently
tend to weaken and dissolve Societies, and to introduce Confusion and every
Evil Work. But I forbear.

Thus having, as the Time and my Talent would admit (though, I fear, very
imperfectly) presented to your View the Things, which I apprehend, are of
greatest Importance at this Day, to the several Ranks and Orders to whom my
Discourse has been applied: Suffer me now to make Use of the Words of Moses, in
that moving Address to Israel, Set your Hearts unto all the Words which I
testify among you this Day -- for it is not a vain Thing for you, because it is
your Life, and through this Thing ye shall prolong your Days in the Land. Deuteronomy.
32 46, 47.
And let me only add, that as it cannot be doubted, but that the Cause which
our Fathers appeared for, was the Cause not of a Party or Sect, but common to
all the loyal Subjects of Jesus Christ, yea, that it was the Cause of GOD, if
Religion and Reformation may be so called, ( the Things for which they
expressed so ardent a Zeal, being the Rights of Conscience, or the Liberty of
worshipping GOD as their Consciences were persuaded, and directed by his holy
Word, and the Kingdom of Jesus Christ, both as to it is inward Power in real
Religion, and it is visible Glory in the purity of Gospel Administrations,) so
it might be on all Accounts our Interest, as we are bound in Honor and
Conscience faithfully to adhere to and vigorously to pursue the same Glorious
Cause; our Life and Happiness as a People in Covenant with GOD, is bound up in
it: And on these Terms we may hope that GOD most High will appear for us, in
all our Difficulties, and Straits, as our Savior, Protector, and Benefactor.
Very pertinent to this Purpose are the Words of a very renowned Person The
Honorable WILLIAM STOUGHTON Esquire; when he was Preacher of the Gospel at
Dorchester, -- hence he was called successively ^o many Stations of the highe^^
Figure in the civil Government. And when he dyed was Commander in Chief or the
Province. See his Election Sermon, entitled, New England's true Interest not to
lie.
among our Fathers, in a Sermon preached by him in the Audience of the General
Court of the Colony of the Massachusetts, above seventy Years ago. The common
Interest of the People of God (says he) and of Us the Lord's People in
special, is, the Interest of practical Piety and Holiness, -- the Interest of
unmixed spiritual Gospel Worship; -- the Interest of Unity, and Peace in the
Ways of Reformation; the Interest of these Things, and of just and righteous
Liberty, in order thereunto: The Times are coming and hastening more and more,
wherein Faithfulness to GOD in all these Things will be the Most glorious Crown
that can be worn upon Earth, a Crown, upon which it shall be graven, Here is
the Faith, and Patience of the Saints. This then is the Word of the Lord to his
New England Churches, Let no Man take this your Crown from you! God grant we
may all hear and obey this Word of the Lord, that is yet spoken to us And

To Conclude, Let us all heartily unite in that Prayer of Solomon, 1 King 8.
57, 58. The Lord our God be with us, as he was with our Fathers: Let him not
leave us, nor forsake us. That he may incline our Hearts unto him, to walk in
all his Ways, and to keep his Commandments, and his Statutes, and his
Judgments, which he commanded our Fathers. To which Prayer, we have an Answer
dictated from the same inspired Oracles, which carries in it a solemn
Admonition to all, both Rulers and People, which deserves the closest Attention
and Regard, in the Words of the Prophet Azariah, 2 Chronicles. 15. 2. Hear ye me,
Asa, and all Judah, and Benjamin, the LORD is with you, while ye be with him:
and if ye seek him, he will be found of you: but if ye forsake him, he will
forsake you.

FINIS.

