Mr. Hancock's Century Sermon, September 16 th. 1739.

A Memorial of GOD's Goodness. Being the Substance OF TWO SERMONS, Preached in
the first Church of CHRIST in Braintree, Sept. 16 th. 1739. On completing the
first Century since the Gathering of it.

By John Hancock, M. A. their present Pastor.

Printed at the earnest Desire of the Hearers; in Remembrance of GOD's Mercy.
Together with some Marginal Illustrations.

Hos. xi 1 When Israel was a Child, then I loved him, and called my Son out of
Egypt. 1 Chronicles iv. 22 And these are ancient Things. Ezra iii 12. But many of
the Priests, and chief of the Fathers, who were ancient Men that had seen the
first House, when the Foundation of this House was laid before their Eyes, wept
with a loud Voice Rev. ii. 5. Remember therefore from whence thou art fallen,
and repent, and do thy first Works --. BOSTON: Printed and Sold by SKNEELAND
and T. GREEN, over against the Prison in Queenstreet. 1739.

TO The Flock of CHRIST under my Pastoral Care.
Dearly Beloved,
YOUR Importunity, and the Reasons on which it is founded, have prevailed upon
me to publish these Discourses, when nothing else could have overcome my
Aversion to the Publication of them. I must confess that such a public Record
of the Wonders of GOD's Power and Mercy in your Settlement and Increase to this
Time, is but a proper Testimony of Gratitude to your great Preserver; and may
be of Use to perpetuate the Memory thereof in your Families, and throughout
your Generations, that the Memorial of them may not perish from your Seed; but
that the Generation to come might know them, even the Children which should be
born, who should arise and declare them to their Children. With this moving
Argument you have obtained my Consent, and so you will clear me of the Odium of
withholding more than is meet.

Having therefore this Testimony in your Hands, you may frequently review it,
to see the Dealings of GOD with you and your Fathers, and your Calling to exalt
him, and trust in Him. Let it* be a Remembrancer to fix in your Minds the Sense
of God's ancient loving Kindnesses, and your strong Obligations to answer the
pious Design of your Transplantation into this Wilderness. May those Words of
Grace to the People of Israel be remembered and verified unto us, Jer. 2 2, 3.
Thus says the Lord, I remember thee, the Kindness of thy Youth, the Love of
thine Espousals, when thou wentest after me in the Wilderness, in a Land that
was not sown: Israel was Holiness unto the Lord, and the first Fruits of his
Increase; all that devour him shall offend: Evil shall come upon them, says
the Lord

The uncommon Sufferings and Hardships our Fathers endured in their wearisome
Pilgrimage in this Wilderness to seek a godly Seed, should endear their Memory
to us, alleviate the Pressure of our own Troubles, and obviate all our
Complaints. Alas! our Sufferings are not worthy to be compared with theirs, in
the Days of their Pilgrimage; who were in Perils by Robbers, in Perils by their
own Country Men, in Perils by the Heathen, in Perils in the Wilderness, in
Perils in the Sea, in Perils among false Brethren, in Weariness and
Painfulness, in Watching often, in Hunger and Thirst, in Fastings often, in
Cold and Nakedness: Why should we then complain and murmur that the former Days
were better than these? It is true, GOD may justly complain of us, that as we
have been increased, so we have sinned against him, and that from the Days of
our Fathers we are gone away from his Ordinances and have not kept them. But
yet he has not changed our Glory into Shame, nor taken his Kingdom from us. Our
temporal Prosperity and Increase is an encouraging Argument that we are still
beloved for the Father's Sake, and for the Sake of the many Thousands in this
Land that fear God and think upon his Name.

I am sensible of the Darkness and Difficulty with which some of the Affairs of
Government are perplexed at this Time; the Province is in great Affliction, but
yet we are not in Despair, so long as our wise Men that are among us are our
Pilots, and rule with GOD.

And the revival of Religion among all Orders and Ages of Persons, and
particularly of a public charitable Spirit (which we should all earnestly
covet) would greatly contribute to extricate us from all our Difficulties and
Dangers: for the Religion of Jesus consults the Prosperity of the State as well
as of the Church; and the Practice of Godliness will serve the great Interest
of both. For the Throne is established by Righteousness, and Righteousness
exalts a Nation, but Sin is the Reproach and will be the Ruin of any People.
Thus speaks the Lord of Hosts, saying, execute true Judgment, and show Mercy
and Compassion every Man to his Brother, and oppress not the Widow, nor the
Fatherless, the Stranger, nor the Poor Zech. 7. 9, 10.

Holy Brethren, Partakers of the heavenly Calling, let my Counsel be acceptable
to you, to approve your selves good and useful Members of the State, and
shining Examples of Piety in the Church, praying always, with all Prayer and
Supplication in the Spirit, for the Peace of Jerusalem, and seeking its Good,
because of the House of the Lord* Now the Lord of Peace himself give you Peace
always by all Means. The Lord be with you all. You are the Seed of the blessed
of the Lord and your Offspring with you* I write unto your Fathers, Young Men,
and little Children, and honestly design the Glory of GOD and our mutual
Edification in the Composure and Publication of the following Discourses;
humbly beseeching the God of our Fathers, and the God of all Grace to accompany
the same with his Blessing, to make me a faithful Pastor to your Souls, and
bless all my Administrations to serve the Interest of our common Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ. I trust you will cordially accept this Token of unfeigned
Love to you, and Desire of your eternal Felicity.

Braintree, Dec. (...). 1739. From your affectionate Pastor, JOHN HANCOCK.

A MEMORIAL OF GOD's Goodness.
ISAIAH LXIII. 7. I will mention the Loving-kindnesses of the LORD, and the
Praises of the LORD, according to all that the LORD has bestowed on us: And
the great Goodness toward the House of Israel, which he has bestowed on them
according to his Mercies, and according to the Multitude of his
Loving-kindnesses.
THIS Day compleats a Century since the Foundation of this first and ancient
Church was laid. Memorable have been the interchangeable Providence of God
toward it in this Period, as we may well suppose in the present mutable State
of Things: But it has survived the various Changes of Time, according to God's
Mercies, and according to the Multitude of his Loving kindnesses. Having
therefore obtained Help of God, we continue unto this Day, a Monument of his
sparing Mercy under the visible Decays of Piety among us; and have this happy
Opportunity Upon the Lord's Day when the Administration of the Lord's Supper
was attended, and the Church solemnly renewed the original Church Covenant. The
Church was gathered on Monday Sept 16. 1639.
to commemorate and mention the Loving-kindnesses and Praises of the Lord,
according to all he has bestowed on us in particular, and his great Goodness
toward his People in general, in the Dispensations both of Grace and
Providence.

These Words are a devout Meditation and Expression of God's great and
unwearied Goodness to his Church, and the Praises due unto him for it. They
were spoken either by the Church, or by the Prophet in their Name, and are
written for our Learning, and if I mistake not, will afford us some pious
Instructions and Reflections suitable to the Business of this Day.

Here I shall observe this important Truth as comprehending the Sense of the
Text, viz. That it has been the exemplary and pious Care of the Church of God
to mention his Loving-kindnesses, and Praises, according to all that the Lord
has bestowed on them in the Riches of his Mercy; to make a solemn Mention and
Memorial of the Riches of the divine Goodness, as indeed the Church of Christ
on Earth, the Church Militant is full of his Riches. The Words of the Text are
very emphatical and full to this Purpose; they abundantly express the Memory of
his great Goodness, they express the greatest Sense and Acknowlegement of the
Church of Israel, for the great Goodness which God had bestowed on them and on
their Fathers, according to his Mercies, and according to the Multitude of his
Loving-kindnesses.

In discoursing on this Subject I shall endeavor to show, 1. That it is the
Duty and has been the pious Practice of God's People to preserve and express
the Memory of his great Goodness to them. 2. It is also their Duty, and has
been their pious Care to express the Praises of the Lord in Remembrance thereof.

I. I am to show, that it is the Duty and has been the pious Practice of God's
People to preserve and express the Memory of his great Goodness to them. This
is the pious Resolution of the Church of God, I will mention the
Loving-kindnesses of the Lord, according to all that the Lord has bestowed on
us, and his great Goodness toward the House of Israel. This supposes a due
Commemoration and Sense thereof, and that the Heart is warmed with deep
Meditation thereon: For out of the Abundance of the Heart, the Mouth utters
the Memory of God's great Goodness, as the devout Psalmist declares Psalm 39. 3.
, My Heart was hot within me, while I was musing the Fire burned, then spoke I
with my Tongue. Again, Psalm 77. 11, 12.
I will remember the Works of the Lord; surely I will remember thy Wonders of
old; I will meditate also of all thy Work, and talk of thy Doings. Whereas
Forgetfulness of God, and his wonderful Works, robs him of the Glory of an
honorable Mention of them; therefore the People of God should take great Care
to keep in their Minds the Remembrance of his wonderful Works both to
themselves and to the Church, lest they bury any of them in ungrateful
Oblivion, and restrain their grateful Acknowlegements of them: So they should
refresh and strengthen their Memory by frequent Recollection and Meditation of
them; that they may be always ready to mention them to the Praise of God.
Particularly,

1. It well becomes the People of God to make solemn Mention of his Loving
kindnesses to themselves. I will mention the Loving-kindnesses of the Lord,
according to all that the Lord has bestowed on us. Every one that is godly
will take particular Notice of God's Loving kindness to himself, and be ready
to speak of it to the Glory of God. Psalm 66. 16.
Come and hear all ye that fear God, and I will declare what he has done for
my Soul. So should every particular Church and Society of Christians consider
and declare what great Things the Lord has done for them; as the Church of
Israel celebrates the Memory of God's wonderful Works to them, Psalm 126 3.
The Lord has done great Things for us, whereof we are glad; as in their
Plantation-Growth, Preservation, and remarkable Deliverances from manifold
Dangers. But how great is the Sum of them! That Declaration of the Psalmist
should be often in our Lips Psalm 40 5.
, Many, O Lord my God, are thy wonderful Works, which thou have done, and thy
Thoughts which are to usward, they cannot be reckoned up in order unto thee.
If I would declare and speak of them, they are more then can be numbered. But
the more remarkable Instances of God's Loving kindness should be sutably
noticed and celebrated by us as we are a Body of People, or a Communion of
visible Saints, a Church of Christ.

The planting and settling of Churches is the Work of the Lord that he may be
glorified. God sends his Gospel into one Place of his Dominion, and not into
another, affords to one Nation the Means of Salvation, and not to another, one
Piece is rained upon, and made fruitful with the Doctrines of Grace and
Salvation, and the Piece whereupon it raineth not, withers and is nigh unto
Cursing* This is a mysterious Dispensation of the infinitely wise, good and
holy God: He gives no Account of this Matter, but Righteous art thou, O Lord,
when we plead with thee; righteous in all thy Ways, and holy in all thy Works.
Shall not the Judge of all the Earth do right? It must be resolved into the
divine Sovereignty; Even so Father, for so it seemed good in thy Sight. Mat.
11. 25, 26.


Thus it pleased the sovereign and only wise God to set up his Candlesticks and
cause the Light of the glorious Gospel to shine in these dark Places of the
Earth which were full of the Habitations of Cruelty, not a Century and half
ago* This is the Doing of the Lord, and it should be mavelous in our Eyes.

These Churches have abundant Cause to sing of the Mercy, the distinguishing
Mercy of the Lord, in planting, watering, increasing and defending them to this
Time: If it had not been the Lord who was on our Side, may these New-English
Churches say, if it had not been the Lord who was on our Side, when Men rose up
against us, then they had swallowed us up quick, when their Wrath was kindled
against us. Our Help is in the Name of the Lord, who made Heaven and Earth.

We should with the Church of Israel of old set up our Ebenezer, 1 Samuel 7. 12.
our Stone of Help and say, Hitherto has the Lord helped us.

This Church of Christ in particular should do it this Day, Set up a Memorial
of the divine Goodness, and mention the Loving-kindnesses of the Lord,
according to all that he has bestowed on us. This, this is the Day of the
Gladness of our Heart, for God's manifold Mercies to us and to our Fathers, and
if it be the Day of our Espousals to Christ we shall have Cause enough to
rejoice in the Lord always with Joy unspeakable; The Lord grant it may be so in
his good Pleasure

This is a very proper Time to recollect, consider and rehearse what great
Things God has done for us, as a Church and People, and for every one of us in
particular, that we may be sutably prepared, disposed and quickened to praise
the Lord for them: Let us not neglect and miss the happy Opportunity, but
diligently improve it to the Glory of God, and to our Furtherance in Christian
Knowledge, and practical Godliness.

2. It becomes the People of God to mention his great Goodness toward the
Church in general. I will mention the great Goodness toward the House of
Israel, which he has bestowed on them. This indeed is a very copious Theme,
and who is sufficient to give the sacred History? Who can utter the mighty Acts
of the Lord? Who can show forth all his Praise? But it is our Duty, and it
should be a sacred Pleasure to revolve in our Minds, and declare with our
Mouths the wonderful Works of God to his Church in all Ages; though we are not
able to set them all in order.

The Prophet, or the Church, whoever it is that speaks here, does not confine
the Consideration of the divine Goodness to themselves of that Generation, but
generously extends the Review of it to distant Ages of the Church that were
past; and mentions his great Goodness to the Church in general: And indeed
there is such a summary of Church History in the holy Bible from the Beginning
of Time as may furnish rich Matter for our delightful Exercise in the Duties of
Religion, both for Meditation, Praise and Discourse. O how great is his
Goodness which he has bestowed on the Church from Age to Age.

As the Church of Israel were formed and preserved by a Series of remarkable
Providence, so God took Care to preserve the Remembrance thereof in several
Ways to the latest Posterity. Particularly,

Of their very remarkable Deliverance from the Egyptian Bondage, and
miraculous Preservation in the Wilderness forty Years, till their Introduction
and Settlement in the Land of Cannan. These Things are so full of the Wonders
of God's Power and Mercy that they well deserved to be commemorated and
acknowleged in all their Generations, and indeed in all Ages of the Church.

Accordingly, God commanded his People Israel to transmit the Knowledge of them
down to all their Generations: That one Generation might praise his Works to
another Psalm 73 (...)
. That the Generation to come might know them even the Children which should be
born, who should arise and declare them to their Children, that they might set
their Hope in God, and not forget the Works of God, but keep his Commandments
Psalm 44. 1.
We have heard with our Ears, O God, our Fathers have told us what Work thou
did in their Days, in the Times of old.

This was one wise and effectual Method God took to preserve the Knowledge of
his Will and Works in the Church of Israel, viz. PARENTAL INSTRUCTION.

Moreover, God instituted several Memorials or Monuments of his wonderful Works
of Mercy to them. So the Passover was instituted in Remembrance of his Mercy in
bringing them out of Egypt, when he slew all the Firstborn in Egypt, a Night
to be much observed to the Lord in their Generations. Exodus 12. 26, 27.
It shall come to pass, when your Children shall say unto you, What mean you by
this Service? That ye shall say, It is the Sacrifice of the Lord's Passover,
who passed over the Houses of the Children of Israel in Egypt, when he smote
the Egyptians, and delivered our Houses. Yea, so great was the Deliverance,
that God has preserved the Memory of it in the Preface to the Decalogue or
Moral Law, which is in these Words, Exodus 20. 2.
I am the Lord thy God which have brought thee out of the Land of Egypt, out
of the House of Bondage. You may observe also, that in the Repetition of the
Law of the Sabbath Deuteronomy. 5. 15.
, the Observation of it is enforced upon the Israelites, from the Consideration
of that Deliverance, And remember that thou wast a Servant in the Land of
Egypt, and that the Lord thy God brought thee out thence through a mighty
Hand, and by a stretched-out Arm, therefore the Lord thy God commanded thee to
keep the SabbathDay: Though originally instituted in Memory of the Creation.
Genesis 2. 3.


The Song of Moses recorded in Exodus 15. is a standing Memorial of the great
Deliverance God gave them by the Destruction of the Host of the Egyptians in
the Red Sea.

Their miraculous Preservation in the Wilderness forty Years, where God fed
them with Manna, and gave them of the Corn of Heaven, and they did eat Angels
Food, was commemorated by the Golden Pot that had Manna, and was put in the Ark
within the Vail Heb. 9. 4 Exodus 16 32; etc.


In like manner, God was pleased to preserve the Remembrance of his miraculous
Work in dividing the Waters of Jordan for the Armies of Israel to pass safely
through, as on dry Land, by causing twelve Stones to be taken out of the midst
thereof, and set up in Gilgal for a Memorial forever Josh. 4 6, 7.
Thus God made his wonderful Works to be remembered, his wonderful Works to the
House of Israel, in that remarkable Period from their memorable Deliverance out
of Egypt, to their Introduction to Canaan, which prepared their Way for their
future Establishment and Prosperity.

As God has had a Church in the World from the Beginning, so he has taken
special Care of its Preservation and Support: It is built upon Christ the Rock
of Ages, so the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against it. The Burning Bush is
not consumed. Many a Time, may the Church say, have they afflicted me from my
Youth, yet they have not prevailed against me. The World, the Flesh and the
Devil act in Confederacy against it, yet it stands secure against all the
Assaults that have been made upon it, from Earth and Hell. The Lord is in the
midst of it, its Glory and Defense, For I, says the Lord, will be unto her a
Wall of Fire round about, and the Glory in the midst of her Zech. 2. 5.


Sometimes the Glory of the Church has been made thin, and the true Worshippers
of God have been few in Number, yea very few.

In the Time of great Declension in the Church of of Israel, in the Days of the
Prophet Elijah, he verily thought in himself that he only was left, and of the
People there was none with him, that feared God, and thought upon his Name, no
not one. But yet at that Time there was a Remnant left 1 Kings 19. 14 18.
"God always preserves a Remnant in the heaviest Judgments which he brings upon
his People" A Remnant shall be saved in Times of the greatest Defection and
Apostasy from the Faith.

So in the Times of antichristian Superstition and Tyranny for several
Centuries together, before the dawning of the Reformation the christian Church
seemed to be buried in the Rubbish; Darkness covered the Church, and gross
Darkness the People: And there was but little Hope of its Recovery and emerging
out of that sinking and ruinous State, but then it was Time for God to work,
with whom all Things are possible; by whom else should Jacob arise when he is
small and without Strength, to his former Strength, Beauty and Glory? And
indeed God raised up some Confessors of Christ and his sacred Truths in the
most declining and corrupt State of the Church, some of whom sealed the Truth
with their Blood; The learned Dr. Edwards in his Answer to that Objection of
the Papists (...) Protestant Religion is new and upstart, has given us a
Catalogue of the Confessors of Christ and his sacred Truths from the Rise of
Popery in the seventh Century, to the Time of Reformation in the sixteenth
Century Among many other glorious Defenders of the Faith, these that follow
deserve a particular Mention: viz. Bid. Johannes Scotus. Smaragdus.
Berengarius. Bernhard. Peter Waldo. Gulielmas Parifie^sis. John Dun Scotus.
Nicolas Lyra. John (...). William Santre Parish Priest of London, who was burnt
alive Feb. 26. 1400. He was the first that suffered Death in England by that
bloody Act, De Heretico Comburendo; for Heresy. That bloody Statute stood
unrepeal'd till 1667. Rapin.

In the fifteenth Century also in Bobemia appeared John Hus and Jerome (...)
Prague, who for opposing the popish Errors were condemned to the Stake by the
Council of Constance.

Then in the sixteenth Century flourished that eminent Reformer, Martyn Luther,
and others.

Thus there have been Testimonies against Popery in every Age, and the true
Protestant Religion may be fairly vindicated from the Imputation of Novelty.


'till at length above two hundred Years ago, God raised up and inspired a
Luther, one of the Wonders of the Church, with Zeal and Courage to preach
against the Pope's unchristian Mandates, and begin a Reformation of Religion
Martin Luther was an Augustine Friar and Professor in Divinity in the new
University at Wirtemberg in Germany, who in 1517 alarmed the Pope, by
publishing some Writings, not without some satirical Remarks upon the plenary
Indulgences granted by Pope Leo 10. and ordered to be publicly sold at so
moderate a Price, that a Man must have been very careless of his own Salvation
not to purchase them. This Sale of Indulgences was made on Pretense of carrying
on the War with the Turks. Hence sprung the glorious Reformation from Popery.
Rapin.
And he lived to see this glorious Work go on prosperously in several Parts of
Germany, Switzerland, etc. In England also he saw several Attempts made toward
a Reformation by Means of Archbishop Granmer who happily laid the Foundations
of it Thomas Granmer that eminent Reformer and venerable Prelate commenced
Doctor in Divinity in 1523. He was born at Aslackton in Nettinghamshire 1489.
Burnet. Who having been Professor at Cambridge had lost his Place upon being
married. He had traveled into Germany where he had read Luther's Works, and
embraced his Doctrines. Whilst he was only Doctor, and in Quality of Praeceptor
in a Gentleman's House at Waltham; he opened the Way for King Henry VIII.
Divorce, 1529. from which Time he was ordered to follow his Court, and was ever
in great Esteem by that Monarch. Granmer suffered Mardyrdom in Queen Mary's
Reign, March 21. 1556 in the 67th Year of his Age. Rapin.
After Luther's Death Luther died at Eysleben in Saxony, Feb. 18. 1546, in the
63d Year of his Age. It is remarkable that he died quietly in his Bed, in the
midst of a Multitude of popish Enemies, who had often thirsted for his Blood,
an Instance of the powerful Protection of divine Providence toward his
faithful Servants; who has said, touch not mine anointed, and do my Prophets no
Harm, Psalm 105. 15.
God formed many useful Instruments to carry on the Reformation from Popery,
till whole Nations and Kingdoms became Protestant The Diet of the Empire at
Spire making a Decree against the Reformation. April 19 1529. several of the
Princes of the Empire publicly read their Protest against it, whence the
Reformed take the famous Name of Protestants.
. And especially in the English Nation which has been very much the Glory and
Bulwark of the Reformation to this Time, and God grant it may be so even to the
Consummation of all Things As Bishop Ridley and the venerable old Bishop
Latimer were burning at the Stake, October. 16. 1555, Latimer prophesied that
they two should light such a Candle in England, as by God's Grace would never
be extinguished. Fox May God arise and shine upon his own Work, causing it to
shine more and more unto the perfect Day, of Restitution of all Things.
. Thus the State of the Church has been checkered with Light and Darkness, but
the Glory of God has shined through the thick 'Darkness, and has been a Light
unto it, and we trust in God that he will still appear in his Glory and build
up Zion in all Generations.

Moreover, as it becomes the People of God to utter the mighty Acts of the Lord
to his Church in general, and speak of his Glory in the Defense and
Preservation of it to this Day, so it becomes them to mention his great
Goodness to it in all the Revelations of his Word and Spirit, from the first
and ancient Promise of the Messiah, in Gen 3. 15. to the completing of the
sacred Canon in the Fullness of Time: By which the People of God in all Ages of
the Church have had the Knowledge of his Will, and the Way of Salvation by Jesus
Christ revealed to them, more darkly indeed under the mosaic Dispensation, and
distant Ages of it, but now clearly and universally by the Gospel, and the
Promulgation of it among the Gentiles.

For many Ages the Church was very much confined to the Jews within the Limits
of Canaan, to them pertained the Adoption, the Glory, and the Covenants, and
the giving of the Law, and the Service of God, and the Promises, and of whom as
concerning the Flesh, Christ came who is over all God blessed for ever Thus he
showed his Word, Statutes, and Judgments to Israel, he had not dealt so with
any Nation.

But when Christ the Glory of his People Israel, was manifested to them, in the
Fullness of Time, he spread the Knowledge of God and his Grace, preaching Peace
to them that were afar off, and to them that were nigh, both to Jews and
Gentiles: And gave it in Commission to his Apostles to christianize the whole
World of Mankind, and preach the Gospel to every Creature: So the Scripture was
fulfilled Isai 9 1, 2. compared with Mat 4 14, 15, 16.
. The People which sat in Darkness, saw great Light, and to them which sat in
the Region and Shadow of Death, Light is sprung up. And thus Christ is a Light
to lighten the Gentiles, as well as the Glory of his People Israel. The
Gentiles came to his Light, and Kings to the Brightness of his Rising: So the
Church of Christ has commenced Christian and Catholic.

The Goodness of God in revealing Christ and the saving Doctrines of the Gospel
to the Church is very great; Surely God is good to Israel

The Church is the Repository of the Revelations of God, and is entrusted with
the Care of them: They should be kept pure and incorrupt, and so transmitted
down to the latest Generation. The Father to the Children shall make known thy
Truth. (...) 38, 19.


And now, my Brethren, but our Hearts be warmed with a lively Sense of the
Living kindnesses of the Lord to our selves, and his great Goodness to his
Church, and in his Temple let every one of us speak of his Glory, and show
forth his Praise.

The Foundation of our present happy Establishment, and Liberty, was laid by
our pious Fathers when they embodied in Church State here this Day an hundred
Years ago, by a solemn Covenant See the Covenant with the Names of the (...)
original Members in the Appendix.
Blessed be the Lord God of our Fathers who inclined their Hearts to lay such
an early and good Foundation for themselves and for their Children against the
Time to come, when they were but few in Number, but eight Persons: And blessed
be his glorious Name that he has built us up and not plucked us down. We trust
that we are built upon the Foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus
Christ himself being the chief Corner Stone, in whom all the Building fitly
framed together, grows unto an holy Temple in the Lord. According to the
Grace of God which was given to our Fathers, as wise Master Builders, they laid
the Foundation, and others builded thereon; but let every Man take heed how he
builds thereupon, not Wood, Hay and Stubble, such Things as will soon perish,
and not bear the fiery Trial; but let us build upon it, Gold, Silver and
precious Stones which shall abide the Trial for the Fire shall try every Man's
work of what Sort it is if any Man's work abide, he shall receive a Reward, if
any Man's work shall be burnt, he shall suffer Loss.

Let us be careful to follow the Piety and Zeal of our Fathers who first
settled this Country and this Church. Let us not be slothful, but followers of
them who through Faith and Patience inherit the Promises.

We that are joined together in Church Fellowship profess to have laid the
Foundation of Repentance from dead works, and of Faith toward God. Therefore
leaving the Principles of the Doctrine of Christ let us go on unto Perfection
And, O that the Spirit of God and of Glory may rest upon us, and assist us in
the solemn Acts we are about to perform, in renewing the Dedication of our
selves to God, in renewing the Covenant that the pious Fathers of this Church
entered into at the gathering of it, and in the Celebration of the Sacrament of
the Lord's Supper, that all may be done heartily as to the Lord, and not to
Men, to the Glory of God, and our mutual Edification and Comfort; that so the
solemn Transactions of this Day may be accepted of God, and turn to our
Salvation, through our Prayer, and the Supply of the Spirit of Jesus Christ, to
whom be Glory in the Church throughout all Ages World without End. Amen.

The Second SERMON.
HAving in the Morning opened the first general Head, which is to show, That it
is the Duty and has been the pious Practice of God's People to preserve and
express the Memory of his great Goodness to them, I shall now apply my self, by
divine Assistance, to show in the second Place, That it is also their Duty, and
has been their pious Care, to express the Praises of the Lord in Remembrance
thereof; I will mention the Praises of the Lord etc.

The blessed God is worthy to be praised: The Fullness and Glory of his own
Perfections shining forth in his Word and Works, challenge the Adoration and
Praises of the whole World, All his Work: shall praise him, and his Saints
shall bless him O give Thanks unto the Lord, for he is good, for his Mercy
endures for ever. Worthy is the Lord to receive Blessing and Praise, for all
the Displays of his Glory in the Works of Creation, Providence and Redemption.
Oh that Men would praise the Lord for his Goodness, and for his wonderful works
to the Children of Men! All the Hosts of Heaven and Earth should join in this
divine Service, Let every Thing that has Breath praise the Lord. Thus we see
the Lord is great, and greatly to be praised, and his Greatness is
unsearchable; Who can show forth all his Praise? The Book of Psalms is full of
the high Praises of God, and to mention them in order would be to repeat a
great Part of it: Praise ye the Lord, -- for Praise is comely for the Upright.

1. It has been the pious Practice of the standing Church of God to praise him
for his Loving kindnesses to themselves I will mention the Praises of the Lord,
according to all that he has bestowed on us. The devout Psalmist very
frequently calls upon his own Soul, and upon the Church of God to praise the
Name of the Lord, for his great Mercies to himself and them. Bless the Lord, O
my Soul. Psalm 31 2^
Blessed be the Lord, for he has showed me his mavelous Loving kindness. --
So he invites the Church of Israel to celebrate his Praises, Psalm (...)
Praise the Lord, O Jerusalem, praise thy God, O Zion, for he has done great
Things for them, both upon temporal and spiritual Accounts as the Psalmist
proceeds to testify in the following Verses.

It well becomes every Soul apart, every Family apart, and every particular
Church and Congregation apart to celebrate the Praises of the Lord with joyful
Lips, and with sincere Hearts, that is, in the most christian and gracious
Manner, for whose thus offers Praise, gloriforth God.

Every particular Church of Christ and Communion of Saints, have Reason, more
or less, to mention the Praises of the Lord, for his mavelous Loving Kindness
to them: and they should be ready to this delightful and heavenly Employments
and frequently exercise themselves in it: every Member separately, and all the
Members conjointly; especially on some solemn Occasions of Recollection and
Rejoicing in the Goodness of the Lord, such as is this Day, wherein we are
celebrating the Memorial of Christ's Resurrection, and by a wonderful
Concurrence of Circumstances, we are also commemorating the Favor of Christ in
the Plantation, Preservation, and Increase of this Church for a Century past.
Let us then say among the Heathen, the Lord has done great Things for us,
whereof we are glad, we will rejoice and be glad in his Salvation, for under
his Shadow we shall live among the Heathen. Let us sing unto the Lord for he
has triumphed gloriously, the Lord is our Strength and Song, and he is become
our Salvation; He is our God, and we will prepare him an Habitation, our
Fathers God, and we will exalt him.

If we exercise our selves in the serious Consideration and Meditation of God's
wonderful Works to us we shall find Matter enough for devout and affectionate
Thanksgiving to his glorious Name. Who can refrain himself upon this solemn
Occasion? Who can but prophesy? Who is so stupid and senseless as to restrain
the Praises of the Lord? The Lord has spoken, I have nourished and brought up
Children; He is our Father that has bought us, he has made us and established
us. Let it never be said, Tell it not in Gath, that we have rebelled against
him. Such was the shameful Charge God, fastened upon his People Israel, after
all his Kindness to them, in 9. and 10 Verses of the Context, In all their
Affliction he was afflicted, and the Angel of his Presence saved them* In his
Love and in his Pity he redeemed them, and he bare them, and carried them all
the Days of old, but they rebelled and vexed his Holy Spirit. Let us take heed
lest we fall after the same Example of Disobedience.

2 It has also been the pious Practice of the People of God to celebrate his
Praises for his great Goodness to the Church in general. I will mention the
Praises of the Lord, according to the great Goodness toward the House of
Israel, which he has bestowed on them, according to his Mercies, and according
to the Multitude of his Loving kindnesses. Here is an uncommon Fullness and
Fluency of Speech, proceeding out of the Abundance of the Heart of the Speaker,
to express the extraordinary Kindnesses of God to his Church.

As God has taken Care to preserve the Memory of his Goodness to Israel, in
several significant Institutions, so they have in Obedience to the divine
Authority celebrated the Memorials thereof.

Particularly, the Institution of the jewish Passover in Remembrance of God's
delivering them out of the Egyptian Bondage, which they observed to the Lord
in their Generations, to the Period of the Mosaic economy: When Christ the
true Passover was sacrificed for us, and instituted the Ordinance of the Supper
as a sacramental Representation of his Death to be observed in the Christian
Church, to the End of the World, For as often as ye eat this Bread, and drink
this Cup, ye do show the Lord's Death till he come,

So the Change of the Sabbath was made in Commemoration of the Resurrection of
Christ, as it was first instituted to be a Memorial of the Creation of the
World. For he that is entered into his Rest, he also has ceased from his own
works as God did from his Heb. 4 1^
.

The jewish Church had many public Records and Memorials of God's Wonders to
them of old, as the Song of Moses, in Memory of their Deliverance at the
Red Sea Exodus 15
The Song of Deborah and Barak, rehearsing the righteous Acts of the Lord, and
expressing his Praises for delivering them from the Hand of Sisera Judges 5
What a public and grateful Testimony did King Solomon give of God's Covenant
Faithfulness with the Israelitish Church at the Dedication of the Temple 1
Kings 8, 56.
? Blessed be the Lord that has given Rest unto his People, Israel, according
to all that he promised, there has not failed one Word of all his good
Promise, which he promised by the Hand of Moses his Servant. And what is the
136th Psalm but a Song of Praise and standing Memorial of God's great Goodness
to them, beginning and ending with a solemn Exhortation of Praise to God? For
he is good, for his Mercy endures forever: Which Clause is repeated in every
Verse of the Psalm, viz. twenty-six Times* We read also of the Song of the
Church in the New Testament, They sung a new Song, saying, Thou art worthy to
take the Book, and to open the Seals thereof, for thou wast slain, and have
redeemed us to God by thy Blood, out of every Kindred, and Tongue, and People,
and Nation. So we have the Song of the Angels, and of the Church, saying with a
loud Voice, Worthy is the Lamb that was slain, to receive Power, and Riches,
and Wisdom, and Strength, and Honor, and Glory, and Blessing Rev. 5 9, 10, 12.


Thus the Church gives unto God the Glory due unto his Name, and shows forth
his Praise from Age to Age: One Generation shall praise thy Works unto another,
and shall declare thy mighty Acts: They shall abundantly utter the Memory of
thy great Goodness, and shall sing of thy Righteousness Psalm 145.


Moreover, considering that all the Instances of God's Loving kindnesses both
to our selves and others, are free and unmerited, we must acknowledge our selves
to be under all possible Obligations of Love and Gratitude to the gracious
Donor of them. By Grace we are saved: By the Grace of God, we are what we are:
Every good Gift, and every perfect Gift is from above. Thus it is said in the
Text, which he has bestowed on them, according to his Mercies, and according
to the Multitude of his Loving-kindnesses: This is the true Scource and
Fountain of all our Blessings, and we hold all of his free Mercy. Glory be to
God in the highest. Let us praise God according as we have thought of his
Loving kindness, in the midst of his Temple: And such as fear the Lord, will
speak often one to another.

I have now finished the doctrinal Part of my Text, and shall now proceed to
make some APPLICATION of what has been said: First, With Respect to this Church
and Congregation in particular. Secondly, With Respect to the Churches in this
Land in general, according to the Direction of the Text.

1. This Doctrine invites us to mention to the Praise of God the Multitude of
his Mercies to this Church and Congregation in particular. Let us be
constrained to it; let the Multitude of his Loving-kindnesses constrain us, and
let us not forget any of his Benefits. Let us this Day remember the Works of
the Lord, and his Wonders of old: And I desire to be your Remembrancer of these
Things before the Lord, to speak of his Glory in his holy Temple, that God may
be glorified, and we our selves instructed and comforted.

Now then, Let us look back to the original Plantation and Settlement of this
Town and Church, and observe the several Steps of divine Providence in our
Rise, Growth and Establishment as it is this Day, according to God's Mercies,
and according to the Multitude of his Loving-kindnesses.

I have been (...) to collect as succinct and just an Account of these ancient
Things, as may be profitable to your religious Improvement.

One of the first Settlements and Plantations in the Massachusetts Bay There
was a Settlement in Wossagusset now Weymouth, by Mr. Weston's People in 1622,
who proving an unruly Company, having no good Government over them, were broken
up in one Year: And an additional Settlement of a better Sort of People from
Weymouth in England, in 1622. There were also some straggling Plantations at
Mantasket and Cape Ann.

See the Rev. Mr. Prince's Annals, etc.


was begun here, Anno 1625 Captain Wollaston began his Plantation in good
Circumstances, being well provided with Servants, Stores, etc. Deputy Governor
Dudley says, there came thirty with him From him this Place took the Name of
Mount Wollaston Mr. Hubbard says the Captain spent much Labor, Cost, and Time
in planting at Mount Wollaston. Mr. Prince conjectures he only tried the Crops
of the next Summer, and finding Things not answer his Expectation he removed to
Virginia, with a great Part of his Servants in the Fall 1626.

But one Mr. Morton whom he left there with Part of the Company, fell to great
Licentiousness and Profaneness, till the good People in their scattered
Plantations in the Massachusetts Bay, unite with Plymouth Government, and go
and suppress them, and disperse the worst of the Company, (...) here, and
sending Morton to England (...) Messenger and Letters to inform against him,
for his wicked and insufferable Behavior.


by Capt. Wollaston and others, but they continued not long together in that
Place.

These Lands were afterward granted to Boston by the General Assembly of the
Massachusetts The Words of the Grant in the public Records of this Province
run thus, viz. At a General Court hold at Newton Sept. 3. 1634. It is ordered
that Boston shall have Enlargement at Mount Wollaston and Rumney-Marsh. The
Bounds were settled April 13. 1636.
viz. Anno 1634.

The Settlement was soon carried on by sundry Inhabitants who came chiefly from
Boston, and had Grants of Land from that Town for their Encouragement. They
were erected into a Township Anno 1640 At a General Court of Elections held at
Boston. 13 May 1640. The Petition of the Inhabitants of Mount Wollaston was
voted, and granted them to be a Town according to the Agreement with Boston,
and the Town is to be called Braintree.
by the Name of Braintree.

The Rev. Mr. Wheelwright preached some Time to this Part of the Church and
Town of Boston, and acquired large Possessions here This worthy Gentleman's
Character and Conduct are set in a clear Light by the acute Author of the late
Answer to a printed Letter etc. relating to the Ministry Land in South
Kingston, Narragansett, Page 3. I shall give my Reader a short Abstract
thereof, viz.

Mr. Wheelwright, says he, was a noted Preacher of the congregational Way, and
so remained as long as he lived: He was a Member of Boston Church, was desired
by many to be their Teacher, with Mr. Cotton and Wilson, but the church being
to well supplied, the Church by Vote on Oct. 30 1636. allowed him to preach to
some of their Members removed to Braintree for the preparing for a Church
gathering there as the Vote expresses it; Was in the same Sentiments with Mr.
Cotton, who in his Way of Congregational Churches cleared, expresses a great
Value for him, and expressly tells, us tho he gave some Offense in some Passages
at the Assembly (which he since upon further Conference and Consideration
retracted) yet neither the Church not my self (notwithstanding those unsafe
Expressions) did ever look at him either as an Antinomian or Familist: Many of
us knew that he had taken good Pains against both and in that very Place where
he was wont to preach, that is Braintree then a Branch of Boston Church.

The State indeed did censure Mr. Wheelwright in March 1636. 7 not for his
Opinions but for a Sermon which they judged contemptuous and seditious. And in
November. following, disfranchised and banished him for justifying the same. Yet
Boston Church never saw Cause to censure him. But on Jan 6. 1638, 9. they
dismissed him with some others of the Brethren to the Church of Exeter: After
which he was reconciled to the Court, afterward became Pastor of the
congregational Church at Wells, and in 1662, of the congregational Church at
Salisbury, where he lived in great Esteem to his death in 1679.

It is certain the Proceeding of the Government against Mr. Wheelwright and
others much grieved and offended many good People in the Colony, and some
removed to Rhode Island, among whom was William Coddington Esquire the manificent
Donor of our School Lands, which now rent at l.142 from which this Town have
reaped great Benefit in good Schools for many Years past.

The good People at Rhode Island, quickly sent to the said Mr. Wheelwright, and
urged him much to come to them, but he refused their earnest Invitation and
Call of him to minister to them: This cannot be sufficiently regretted.


.

After Mr. Wheelwright's removal from Braintree, the Rev. Mr. William Thompson
and Rev. Mr. Henry Flynt soon succeeded in the sacred Ministry: And embodied in
Church Fellowship with fix others, by that Covenant which this Church have
solemnly renewed this Day at the Lord's Table The Church both Males and Females
renewed the original Covenant, by standing up and testifying their Consent unto
it, and Resolution by the Grace of God, to continue faithful in it unto the
Death
.

Shortly after Mr. Thompson and Mr. Flynt were ordained, the former to the
Office of Pastor, and the latter to the Office of Teacher to the Church, as the
Custom of these Churches then was Mr. Thompson was ordained eight Days after
the Church was gathered, viz. Sept 24. 1639, and Mr. Flynt 17. of March
following. This was the 20th Church gathered in the Massachusetts Colony.

In Oct. 1642, Rev. Mr. Thompson with Rev. Mr. Knowles of Watertown engaged in
a Mission to Virginia, upon Letters from some well-disposed People there to the
Ministers of New England, entreating their compassionate Consideration and
Relief of their destitute Circumstances for Want of good Ministers to preach
the Gospel: But the next Year they were driven home again by the Government
there who made this Order, viz That such as would not conform to the Ceremonies
of the Church of England, should by such a Day depart the Country.


.

Soon after this the Church proceeded to the Choice and Ordination of two
Deacons The first Deacons of this Church were Mr. Samuel Bass, having been
dismissed and recommended to them from the Church in Roxbury. July 5 1640. And
Mr. Richard Bracket, who was ordained July 21. 1642. having been received to
Communion by a Letter recommendatory from the Church of Boston, June 26 1642.
And some Years after made Choice of a Ruling Elder Mr. Stephen Kinsley of
Dorchester, now Milton, was ordained the first Ruling Elder in this Church,
Oct. 12. 1653. I find in an old Record of Mr. Flynt's, that on 27. March 1653.
Votes were given for Elders, and Deacon Bracket had 18 Votes, Deacon Bass 15,
and Mr. Kinsley 8. I suppose Mr. Bracket and Mr. Bass refusing, the Lot fell
upon Mr. Kinsley. Mr. Francis Eliot and Mr. William Alice were ordained Deacons
the same Day, viz. October. 12. I find in the same Manuscript of Mr. Flynt's
several Persons were in Nomination for Deacons at this Time, viz. July 3 1653.
viz. Mr. Alice who had 21 Votes, Mr. Eliot 17, Mr. Doscet 10, Mr. Penniman 2,
Mr. Needham 1. The successive Deacons to this Day are these, viz. Mr. Robert
Parmenter chosen in the room of Deacon Eliot, who deceased October. 23. 1677; and
Mr. Samuel Thompson Son to the Pastor both ordained Nov 2. 1679, by the Rev Mr.
Fiske. Then succeeded Mr. Thomas Bass, Mr. Joseph Penniman, Mr. Nathanael
Wales, afterward ordained Ruling-Elder, viz. Feb 27. 1700. by Mr. Fiske: The
Rev. Mr. Peter Thacher of Milton, and Elder John Rogers of Weymouth joining in
the laying on of Hands. Mr. Benjamin Savel succeeded Mr. Wales in the
Deaconship, then Mr. Moses Pain who is still living in an advanced Age, then
Mr. Gregory Belcher, who was killed by a Plough, July 4. 17^7, then Mr. Peter
Adams, and Mr Samuel Savel were chosen Aug. 21 1727, who are also still living
So that there have been 14 Deacons in this Church, (...) 2 Ruling Elders. Elder
Wales died March 23. 1717, 18.


After the Decease both of the Pastor and Teacher Mr. Thompson died here Dec.
10 1668, Aetat. 68. and Mr. Flynt, April 27. 1668.

Mr. Flynt was Father to the Rev. Mr. Josiah Flynt formely Pastor of the Church
of Christ in Dorchester, and Grandfather of Henry Flynt Esquire senior Fellow of
Harvard College

During the Time of Mr. Thompson's and Mr. Flynt's Ministry, there were 204
adult Members of this Church. I have also a Record in Mr. Flynt's Manuscripts
of Baptisms from April 30 1643, 10 March 1. 1667. 8, though I am jealous there
were some Omissions; the whole Number amounts to 408. I cannot find any Account
of Baptisms in the Time of Vacancy between Mr. Flynt's Death and Mr. Fiske's
Settlement.


the Church fell into unhappy Divisions, one being for Paul, and another for
Apollos (as is too often the Case in destitute Churches) and were without a
settled Ministry above four Years, viz. from April 27. 1668, to Sept. 11. 1672,
when the Rev. Mr. Moses Fiske was peaceably ordained the Pastor of this Church
Mr Fiske being sent by the Court of Sessions for the County of Suffolk, to
preach God's Word to the Church of Braintree in their destitute divided State.
I thought it not amiss to give a Transcript of the Order verbatim, because of
the Rarity and Success of such an extraordinary Proceeding.

At a County Court held at Boston, by Adjournment 23 of Nov. 1671* The Court
having taken into Consideration the many Means that have been used with the
Church of Braintree and hitherto nothing done to Effect, as to the obtaining
the Ordinances of Christ among them: This Court therefore orders and desires Mr
Moses Fiske to improve his Labors in preaching the Word at Braintree until the
Church there agree and obtain Supply for the Work of the Ministry, or this
Court take further Order.

This a true Copy as attest Freegrace Bendall Clerk.

Mr. Fiske obeyed, and went not without the Advice of the neighboring Elders,
and preached his first Sermons here Dec. 3. 1671. The next Day about 20 of the
Brethren came to visit him, manifesting (in the Name of the Church) their ready
Acceptance of what the honored Court had done, and thanking him for his
Compliance therewith; and on Feb. 24. following the Church gave him a unanimous
Call to the pastoral Office: This Record I find in his own Manuscripts. He was
ordained Sept. 11. 1672; Mr. Eliot prayed and gave the Charge, Mr Oxenbridge
and the Deacons joined in the laying on Hands, Mr. Thacher of Boston gave the
Right Hand of Fellowship.


. After his Death Mr. Fiske died here Aug. 10. 1708, in the 66. Year of his
Age, and 36, of his Pastorate. In the Time of his Ministry 147 Members added to
the Church, including himself. Baptisms 779. No Baptisms recorded in the Time
of Vacancy.
, you were happily resettled in about nine Months by the unanimous Call and
Ordination of the late Rev. Mr. Joseph Marsh, to the pastoral Office over you,
viz May 18. 1708, who continued his faithful Labors among you till his
Translation Mr. Marsh deceased here March 8. 1726. in 41 Year of his Year Age,
and 17. of his Pastorate. The Number of Members added to this Church under his
Ministry, including himself is 102. Baptisms 288. In the Vacancy between his
Death and my Settlement, there were 8 Baptisms.

This Church claims the Honor of having the Sepulchers of their Prophets with
them to this Day. Mr Thompson's Gravestone is still standing. Mr. Flynt's
Monument is still to be seen, though much gone to decay, but I hope to see the
Tomb of the Prophet rebuilt.

Mr. Fiske and Mr. Marsh lie together in the same Tomb under a handsome
Monument of Stone, on which there is now to be seen the following (...). Viz.

Braintree! Thy Prophet's gone (...) Tomb inters,
The Rev. Moses Fiske his sacred Hers^
Adore Heaven's praiseful Art that form the Man,
Who Souls not to himself, but Christ often won.
Sailed through the Straits with Peter's Family,
Renowned, and Galus's Hospitality.
Paul's Patience, James' Prudence, John's sweet Love,
Is landed, entered, cleared, and crowned above.
Here follows the Inscription upon the Monument over the reverend and learned
Mr. Leonard Hoar, D. M. and some Time President of Harvard College, who died
Nov 28. 1675. Aetat 45 and lies interred here.

Three (...) Friends under this Tombstone lie,
Patterns to Aged, Youth, and Infancy.
A great Mother, her learned Son, with Child,
The first and least went free, He was exiled
In Love to Christ, this Country, and dear Friends:
He left his own, crossed Seas, and for amends;
Was here extolled, envied, all in a Breath,
His noble Consort leaves is drawn to Death.
Strange Changes may befall us e're we die,
Blessed they who well arrive Eternity.
God grant some Names, O thou New-England's Friend,
Don't sooner fade than thine, if Times don't mend.
His aged and pious Relict the late Madam Ush^^, was brought hither from
Boston, and interred in the same Grave, May 3^ 1723, according to her Desire.


, whose Memory is still precious with you.

Your present unworthy Pastor was quietly settled here Nov. 2. 1726, in about
eight Months after the Decease of your late Rev. Pastor, and has been with you
in Weakness, and in Fear, and in much Trembling, almost thirteen Years in the
pastoral Relation In this Time there have been added to the Church, including
my self 105. So that the whole Number of Church Members from the Foundation of
it to this Time, amounts to 558. Baptisms since my Settlement are in Number
278. The whole Number of Baptisms upon Record amounts to 761.
God has so increased and multiplied you, that two distinct Parishes have
swarmed from you The first Precinct was voted Nov 3. 1708, confirmed by the
General Court, Nov. 5. following. The Rev. Mr. Hugh Adams was ordained the
Pastor of the Church there 10 Sept 1707, when the Church was also gathered: But
removed 22 Aug 1710. The Rev. Mr. Samuel N^les is the present Pastor of it,
ordained the 23. May 1711. The second Precinct was voted, March 13.1726, ^. and
soon after confirmed by the General Court. The third Church of Christ was
gathered May 28 1731. The Rev. Mr. Elisha Eaton (...) the Pastor of it, June 2
following.
: So that there are now in the Town three worshipping Assemblies of our own
Denomination, beside one of the Church of England The Church of England in this
Place within the Compass of 40 Years have had several Missionaries from the
Society in London for propagating the Gospel, besides occasional Preaching,
viz. The Rev. Mr. Bartlet Mr. Eagers, but they soon returned: The Rev. Mr.
Miller, the present Missionary, opened his Mission here Dec. 25. 1727.


This is the third House This latter beautiful House was raised July 27,28,29.
1731. was finished and dedicated October. 8. 1732, in peaceable Times. The Text
preached upon at the Dedication was Isai 60 13. The Sacrament of the Lord's S
upper was then administered. At the same Time also we began to read the holy
Scriptures in Course in the public Assembly.

N. B. Madam Mary Norton, Relict of the late reverend and learned Mr. John
Norton of Hingham. the same Day presented to the Church a very handsome Velvet
Cushion for the Pulpit.


in which we are now worshipping, that we and our Fathers have built for the
public Worship of God: May the Lord have Respect unto us, and unto our
Offerings, and fill this House with his glorious Presence, making the Glory of
the latter House greater than of the former.

Great is the Liberty where with Christ made our Fathers free, and in the
Defense whereof they endured Hardness as good Soldiers of Jesus Christ; and
spent much Blood and Treasure; and so have left this good Land and many
invaluable Privileges for an Inheritance unto their Children. Your Fathers,
Where are they? I observe in looking over the Names of the first Inhabitants
here, that many ancient Families are extinct, and their Names lost. Again, some
Families have multiplied at a great Rate: Particularly, Mr. Samuel Bas^'s who
himself lived to the Age of 94, and died Dec. 30 1694; having been Deacon of
this Church above 50 Years. At his Death he was the Father, Grand father, and
Greatgrand father of 162 Children.

Mrs. Sarah Penniman his youngest Daughter and Relict (...) Deacon Penniman,
and formerly Wife of Deacon Stone of Watertown, is now living among us, and was
at our Communion this Day, in good Health and of a sound Mind. She was baptized
in this Church, April 30. 1643. received to Communion May 4. 1662. She is now
at least in the 97. Year of her Life.

I think it is also worthy of Notice, that 7 Brethren and Sisters, Children of
the late Mr. Stephen Pain, and GrandChildren of Deacon Bass, are now living
together, the youngest whereof is 68, and the eldest died since the Writing
this, viz. on Dec. 10 1739, 86 Years old.

There have been also several other Instances of Longevity among us. viz. Mr.
Francis Newcomb who died here May 27. 1692 upwards of an hundred. Mr. Lawrence
Copeland, who died here Dec. 30. 1699, at least an hundred Years old. Betty
Suchunmug, Indian, was reckoned an hundred Years old at her Death.

There have been two remarkable Instances of sudden Death in the House of God
in the Time of divine Service, viz. Mrs. Lydia Saunders who sunk down in her
Seat and died instantly, March 9. 1711, 12. A. M. in a good old Age. And Mr.
Joseph Parmenter who dropped down Dead in the Pulpit, Feb. 20. 1737, 8. A. M. in
the 82. Year of his Age.

Here follow some other Instances of the Increase and Prosperity of some
Families among us, viz. Mr. Henry Neal the Father of 21 Children, written on
his Gravestone. Mr. William Rawson the Father of 20 living Children by one
Wife. A remarkable Instance of Fruitfulness has been noticed, in the second
Parish of this Town, viz. That in the Term of 25 Years from the Settlement of
the Rev. Mr. Niles. 60 Children were born at 30 Births: Of which Number Mrs.
Arnold had 4 at two Births in the Space of eleven Months. I think it is
remarked that Twin Children have more commonly had Twins than others.


And the Prophets, Do they live for ever.

But through the kind Indulgence of Heaven and the tender Mercies of our God, the
Children of his Servants do continue, and their Seed is established before him;
so that instead of the Fathers are the Children.

Now it should be our great Care to stand fast in the Liberty of our Fathers,
and remember their great Errand into this Wilderness, which was the Advancement
of the Glory of God, and their own spiritual Interest in the Enjoyment of the
pure Ordinances and Worship of God: Let us pursue this glorious Design and
build on their Foundation. Why should any envy us the Enjoyment of our civil
and religious Interests and seek our Hurt?

Let us cheerfully cast in our Mite this Day for the Defense of (what is
apprehended) a common Cause The Support of the Rev. Mr. Torry in the Defense of
the ministerial Lands in Narraganset, against the Claims of the Rev. Dr.
McSparran, a Missionary of the Church of England; our Collection amounted to
eleven Pound seven shillings, an handsome Proportion.
God grant that all who love and seek the Prosperity of these Churches may
prosper.

Oh that God would pour out his Spirit upon his Servants, and his Blessing upon
our Offspring, and by his Spirit and Power turn the Hearts both of Parents and
Children unto the Lord God of our Fathers; and the disobedient to the Wisdom of
the Just, to make ready a People prepared for the Lord.

I would address the Children of this Church in the solemn Language of David,
in his dying Charge to his Son. And thou Solomon my Son, Know thou the God of
thy Father, and serve him with a perfect. Heart, and with a willing Mind, -- if
thou seek him he will be found of thee; but if thou forsake him he will cast
thee off for ever. I Chron 28. 9.


Have we not great Reason to humble our selves under the Decay of vital Piety,
and the Tokens of God's Displeasure? How is the Gold become dim, and the most
fine Gold changed? Where is the primitive Faith, Zeal and Purity of our
Fathers? Is this our Kindness to our Friend? to our Father that has bought us?

Shall not God's Soul depart from us for these Things? Is not the Glory
departing from the House of the Lord, and the solemn Administrations of it? Oh
let us lament for it, saying. Ah Lord, and ah his Glory! Where is the Lord God
of Elijah? Inquire ye, Return, come. As it follows in our Context. Then he
remembered the Days of old, Moses and his People, saying, where is he that
brought them up our of the Sea, with the Shepherd of his Flock? Where is he
that put his Holy Spirit within him? To make him an everlasting Name. Look down
from Heaven, and behold from the Habitation of thy Holiness and of thy Glory:
Where is thy Zeal, thy Strength, and the sounding of thy Bowels and of thy
Mercies? Are they restrained? Doubtless thou art our Father, though Abraham be
ignorant of us, and Israel acknowledge us not: Thou, O Lord, art our Father, our
Redeemer, thy Name is from Everlasting.

Let us remember from whence we are fallen, and return to the Lord, and he will
return to us. Let us seriously consider wherein we ought to return That should
be our very serious Inquiry in Mal. 3 7 Wherein shall we return? We have the
Answer of God to his People Israel in the five following Verses, which you may
read and digest at your Leisure How applicable these Words are to God's People
in this Land under the present Oppression of the sacred Ministry, is obvious to
every one that is wise to discern the Signs of the Times. I firmly believe that
most of the fierce Contentions that have risen in these Churches of late Years,
are owing to the depreciating Nature of the Bills of Credit, whereby the People
have been deceived, and many of God's faithful Ministers have suffered Loss.
Some of them have been exposed to the cruel Hatred of their People by being
obliged to sue out their honest Contracts, in the common Law, and then been
forced to accept a Dismission from their Churches, contrary to the Law of Self
Preservation


Blessed be God that we enjoy so much Peace and Quietness in this Place under
our different Apprehensions and Modes of Worship: And if I have somewhat
boasted of you for your Peaceableness, Prudence and Charity, I hope you will
not make my glorying void I verily think the Conduct of this Church and
Congregation, toward our Brethren of the Church of England has been christian
and exemplary: I Will mention several Instances of it, to the Glory of God, and
their Praise. In the Vacancy before the Rev. Mr. Miller received holy Orders
for this Place, this Church admitted to their Communion all such Members of the
Church of England, as desired to have occasional Communion with us, and allowed
them what Posture of Devotion they pleased, and they used to receive the
Sacrament standing.


N. B. It is pertinently observed by the forementioned ingenious Author of the
Answer to the printed Letter etc. relating to the Narraganset Affair. That though
by Virtue of Communion of Churches congregational Churches admit to occasional
Fellowship the pious Members of the Church of England, as well as of all other
Protestant Churches, without obliging them to own our Covenant, or submit to
our Government; yet it is the most known and avowed Principle of congregational
Churches from their Original, that as the Matter of Christian Churches is
visible Saints; so the Form of particular Churches which distinguishes them
from others, is only the mutual Covenant between their Members, whereby they
are especially bound and joined to each other in one Society Till therefore the
Members of other Churches are received by Covenant, we do not account them
Members of those Churches they hold occasional Fellowship with, nor enter them
into our Record of Members; but account them Members of those other Churches,
though they live ever so long, and have Fellowship with us.

Upon Mr. Miller's coming, this Parish reimbursed (according to their own
previous Vote) to the declared Members of the Church of England, their
Proportion of the Charge of my Settlement, and generously excused them from any
further Payments toward my Support. And this was done before ever any Act of
this Nature passed in the Government. The Vote above referred to, is in these
Words, viz.

Braintree North-Precinct, May 29 th 1727.
JO hn Vesey, Benjamin Vesey, Henry Turner, Samuel Pain and Samuel Hayden
personally appearing at this Meeting, and desiring that the Case of their being
latelately taxed to the Settlement and Support of Mr. John Hancock, might be
considered by the Precinct, and that they might be relieved in the Premises

The Question was put by the Moderator, Whether the Precinct will reimburse
John Vesey, Benjamin Vesey, Henry Turner, Samuel Pain and Samuel Hayden the
Sum or Sums they are or shall be assessed, and that shall or may be collected
of them, for the Ordination Charge, and Settlement of our Rev. Pastor, Mr. John
Hancock, when they shall have a Minister of the Church of England settled and
supported among them? It passed in the Affirmative.

A true Copy from Braintree North Precinct Records, John Adams Precinct Clerk.

Wherefore let us all study to be quiet, follow after the Things which make for
'Peace, and Things wherewith one may edify another. If it be possible as much
as lies in you, live peaceably with all Men: Above all Things put on Charity
which is the Bond of Perfectness. This is the Bond of Union, the Cement of
Societies, without which they will soon disband and be dissolved Let brotherly
Love continue.

Let us begin our second Century with new and better Frames, Tempers and
Resolutions than we have ever had; and make it our constant and zealous
Endeavor to express a grateful Sense of the divine Favors in the Virtues and
Praises of a Life devoted O God: As a chosen Generation a peculiar People,
showing forth the Praises of him who has called us out of Darkness into this
mavelous Light and Liberty, and commanding our Children and Households to keep
the Way of the Lord -- that the Lord may abundantly bless us in all our
Generations. I will make thy Name to be remembered in all Generations, therefore
shall the People praise thee for ever and ever Psalm 45 ult.


2. Let us all be exhorted to mention to the Praise of God, the great Goodness
which he has bestowed on his Churches and People in this Land.

I cannot well help inserting here the following Paragraph out of Mr. Rapin,
which will please the ingenious Reader.

Upon Charles Vth's resigning the Empire to his Brother Ferdinand he delighted
very much in mechanical Curiosities, and particularly had great Variety of
Clocks which he tried a long Time to cause to strike exactly together, but
could never bring it about; Whereupon he broke out into this remarkable
Exclamation; How vain and foolish is it for Princes to endeavor to make all
their Subjects to be of one Mind in Religion, when no Art is able to make a few
Clocks strike together.

This was truly a wise Restraction worthy to be inscribed in Letters of Gold,
upon the Door Posts of every Potentate and Prince on Earth: And has been
established by the Unsuccessfulness of the several Acts of Uniformity, passed
in (...) Reigns of the British Monarchs, since the Reformation. And is
justified by the present Toleration.


It is certain God did great Things and mavelous for our Fathers, in their
first Plantation and Settlement in this Country, when it was a Land not sown,
and possessed by brutish Salvages. Our Fathers saw the Hand and Work of God and
were glad; and they frequently met together for religious Conference, to
mention the Loving kindnesses of the Lord, and the Praises of the Lord,
according to all that he had bestowed on them. They spoke often one to another
of these Things to the Praise of God, and their mutual Edification and Comfort.

And it becomes us also the Posterity of those great and good Men, who bare the
Heat and Burden of the Day to speak of them with Pleasure and Gratitude.

The Preparation and Room God made before our Fathers Rev. Mr. Prince in his
Chronological History of New England, has carefully collected the Memoirs of
ancient Things for the Instruction of this and succeeding Generations: A Work
of vast Labor and general Usefulness, deserving the Praise and Acceptance of
the Multitude of his Brethren. And may it please the sovereign God to lengthen
our his useful Life, for the finishing this great Undertaking, and farther
Services in the Church of Christ.

I shall take the Liberty of transcribing some material Passages from his
History to my present Purpose.

Diverse Attempts, says he, are made to settle this rough and northern Country:
First by the French who would fain account it Part of Canada. And then by the
English, and both from mere secular Views; but such a Train of Crosses
accompany these Designs of both the Nations, that they seem to give it over as
not worth the planning: Till a pious People of England not there allowed to
worship their Maker according to his Institutions only, without the Mixture of
humane Ceremonies, are spirited to attempt the Settlement; that here they might
enjoy a Worship purely scriptural, and leave the same to their Posterity.


should be mavelous in our Eyes, and is worthy of a very particular
Remembrance; as for Instance, in a great Plague that befell the Natives in
New England, which wasted them exceedingly two or three Years before the coming
of the English; by which so many of them died, that the living were not able to
bury them, and their Skulls and Bones remained above Ground at the Places of
their Habitations for several Years after.

God hereby testifying that the Iniquity of the Amorites was full and that he
was making Room for a better People.

So remarkable also was the Providence of God in conducting our Fathers to the
Place where they at first sat down, It was on the 9th of Nov 1620. that they
made Land, after long bearing the Sea; and on 31st of Dec. following, they kept
their first Sabbath on the main Land, at the Place now well known by the Name
of Plymouth. At this Time Mr. Prince fixes the Era of their Settlement here.
for it was beside their Design to settle on this northern Shore; being bound
to some unknown Country further southward about Hudsons River: But by their
being guided hither they then unknowingly escaped the greatest Danger of
falling among the Multitude of Salvages at that Time filling the Countries
about Hudson's River, and were landed in a Place of greater Safety, where God
prepared the Way for this feeble Company by thinning the Natives.

And as evident an Interposition of Providence was the extraordinary Restraints
laid upon those that survived that were disposed to do hurt to God' s little
Flock in this Wilderness. The whole Number that arrived at Cape-Cod Harbor
consisting but of 101 Souls Within five Months Time, above half their Company
are carried off by Sickness; whom they account as doing in this noble Cause,
whose Memories they consecrate to the dear Esteem of their Successors; and bare
all with a christian Fortitude and Patience, as extraordinary as their Trials.


Thus God was pleased in a wonderful and extraordinary manner, to introduce and
settle this handful of People on this strange and distant Shore; and to
preserve them alive, and establish them through a Series of kind and powerful
Providence, in the midst of an infinite Variety of distressing Difficulties
and Dangers.

We have heard with our Ears, O God, our Fathers have told us, what Work thou
did for them in their Days, in the Times of old: How thou did drive out the
Heathen with thy Hand, and plantedst them, how thou did afflict the People,
and cast them out: For they got not the Land in Possession by their own Sword,
neither did their own Arm save them; but thy Right Hand and thine Arm, and the
Light of thy Countenance, because thou had a Favor unto them. Psalm 44.
begin.


Thus God brought a Vine into this Land from a far Country, and cast out the
Heathen and planted it, he prepared Room before it and did cause it to take
deep Root, and it is filling the Land. She sent out her Boughs into the Sea,
and her Branches unto the River. Return we beseech thee, O God of Hosts, look
down from Heaven, and behold and visit this Vine, and the Vineyard which thy
Right Hand has planted, and the Branch that thou made strong for thy self:
So will not we go back from thee,: Quicken us, and we will call upon thy Name.
Turn us again, O Lord God of Hosts, cause thy Face to shine, and we shall be
saved. Psalm 80. 8, etc.


God enabled our Fathers to do Wonders in their Infant-State, both in the Wars
of the Lord against a barbarous Enemy, and in Works of Piety.

But one of the most memorable Instances of a public heroic Spirit in our
Ancestors, is the founding the College A General Court held at Boston, Sept. 8.
1636. advanced l. 400 toward building a College.

The Rev. Mr. John Harvard of Charlestown soon after bequeathed l. 779 17 s.
2d. toward the Work, from whom the College took its Name.

The College was founded in 1639. It has now completed its first Century.


This is enough to raise our Esteem and Veneration for them, that they took
such early Care (agreeable to the christian Design of their Transplantation
into this Wilderness) to transmit Religion and Learning to their Posterity.
This makes us to differ from the Rest of the British Colonies in America. In
this Respect: this Province may well be styled Princess among the Provinces The
Praise of it is in all the Churches of our Lord Jesus Christ in this Land, and
Churches in distant Provinces also have been richly furnished with able and
faithful Ministers from this flourishing Seminary. Scarce any one Town in this
Province has reaped greater Advantage from it than this; there having been
graduated in it if I mistake not 49 of the Children of this People, and 42 of
them out of this Parish; many of whom have done worthily and been famous both
in Church and State One of the highest Characters in the Government has been
raised up from hence, viz our late Hon. Agent, EDMUND QUINCY, Esquire my honored
and dear Friend. The General Assembly have given Orders to erect to his
precious Memory a handsome Monument upon his Grave in Bunhill-Fields, London,
with this elegant Latin Inscription, viz.

EDMUNDI QUINCY Armigeri, Patria Nov. Angli Massachusettensis, Vi^i Pietate,
Prudentia, et bonis Literis, spectatihic depositae sunt Reliquiae.

Qui variis ab ineunte Aetate Muneribus in Re tam civili, quam militari a suis
sibi Commissis (his praesert^m Regi a Conci^iis. Curiae supremae Judicatoriae
Justicia^ii, et Militum Tribuni) summa Facultate, et spectata Fide Functus,
Laudem merito adeptus est.

Re Par^iae suae publica postulante ad Aulam Britannicam legatus est Prosectus,
ut Jura suorum et Commoda procuraret

Variolis Arreptus, Morte praematura obiit, et cum ^o Emolumen^a, quae in ejus
Legatione, summa cum Spe reposita erant, omnibus suis Popularibus penitus
desiderabilis, decessit, at nullis magis quam Patrio Senatui, qui in Amoris
Testimonium et Gratitudinis, ejus Tumulo hoc Epitaphium inscribi curaverunt.
Obiit Londini, Feb. 23. 1737. Aetat. 57.

For the Sake of the English Reader I have translated it into English as
follows.

Here are deposited the Remains of EDMUND QUINCY Esquire Native of the
Massachusetts Bay in New England, a Gentleman of distinguished Piety, Prudence
and Learning.

Who early merited Praise, for discharging with the greatest Ability and
approved Integrity, the various Employments, both in the civil and military
Affairs that his Country entrusted him with (these especially, as one of his
Majesty's Council, a Justice of the supreme Court of Judicature, and Colonel of
a Regiment of Foot.

The public Affairs of his Country so requiring, he embarked their Agent to
the Court of Great Britain in order to secure their Rights and Privileges.

Being seized with the Small Pox, he died a praemature Death, and with him, the
Advantages expected from his Agency with the greatest Prospect of Success: He
departed the Delight of his own People, but of none more than the Senate, who
as a Testimony of their Love and Gratitude have ordered this Epitaph to be
inscribed on his Monument The Monument it self was raised at the Expense of the
Government; viz. Twenty Pound Sterling.
He died at London, Feb. 23. 1737. in the 57th Year of his Age.


.

To this pious Foundation we owe in great Measure the Preservation and Security
of our religious Interests, and even the Form of Religion among us. May it ever
flourish under the Smiles of Heaven, the Liberality and tender Care of the
Government The late Liberality of the Government to the Rev. and Hon. Mr.
President Holyoke is an acceptable and fresh Instance of their paternal Care
for the Prosperity of the College.
, and the Benefactions of other pious Friends Among whom Thomas Hollis, Esquire the
late munificent Founder of the Divinity and Mathematical Professorships in
Harvard College, should be always mentioned with particular Esteem.
. Hence what a pleasant Thing is it to see the Gospel carried into the
Wilderness with all our new Settlements! There being a rich Supply of good
Ministers for them all, and for several Assemblies of christianized Indians in
diverse Parts of the Province. May all the Churches of our Lord Jesus Christ
stand and flourish under the tender Care of the great Shepherd of the Sheep.

And now seeing God has done so many and wonderful Works for us, may we not
receive them as so many Earnests of his Goodness for the Time to come? Let us
humbly plead God' s former Loving-kindnesses, in our Intercessions for all the
farther Displays of Mercy we need. Numb. 14. 17 -- 20. Joel 2. 17. Psalm 36 7.
How excellent is thy Loving kindness, O God? Therefore the Children of Men put
their Trust under the Shadow of thy Wings.

Let us humbly beseech the glorious God to appear in his Glory and build up
Zion, to revive his Work in the midst of the Years, and pour out his Spirit on
all Flesh, and remove the Iniquity of this Land, and of this Church in one Day.
That he may be with us as he has been with our Fathers, and never leave nor
forsake us. O that our Prayers and Praises, with our Alms may come up for a
Memorial before God this Day. Now therefore in the Sight of all Israel, the
Congregation of the Lord, and in the Audience of our God, keep and seek for all
the Commandments of the Lord your God, that ye may possess this good Land, and
leave it for an Inheritance for your Children after you for ever 1 Chronicles. 28. 8.
Now blessed be the Lord God of Israel, from everlasting and to everlasting,
Amen and Amen.

APPENDIX. A Copy of the original Covenant at the Gathering of the Church of
CHRIST in Braintree, Sept. 16. 1639.
WE poor unworthy Creatures who have some Time lived without Christ and without
God in the World; and so have deserved rather Fellowship with the Devil and his
Angels, than with God and his Saints: Being called of God out of this World to
the Fellowship of Christ by the Ministry of the Gospel; and our Hearts stirred
up by his gracious Spirit, and made willing to join together in Church
Fellowship; do by the Help and Strength of Christ renounce the Devil, the
wicked World, and the sinful Flesh, with all the Remnants of antichristian
Pollution, wherein sometimes we have walked, and all our former evil Ways, and
do give up our selves first to God the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, and offer up
our professed Subjection to our Lord Jesus Christ as the only Priest, Prophet
and King of his Church, beseeching him in his rich Grace and free Mercy to
accept us for his People in the Blood of his Covenant: And we give up our
selves also one to another by the Will of God, promising in the Name and Power
of Jesus Christ, who works in us both to will and to do according to his good
Pleasure, to worship the Lord in Spirit and Truth, and to walk in brotherly
Love, and the Duties thereof, according to the Rule of the Gospel, to the
common Edification of the Body, and of each Member therein; and to be guided in
all Things according to God's revealed Will, seeking to advance the Glory of
Jesus Christ our Head, both in Church and brotherly Communion; through the
Assistance of his Holy Spirit, which he has promised to his Church: And we do
manifest our joint Consent herein this Day, in the Presence of the Lord, and
this Assembly, by this our present public Profession, and by giving to one
another the Right Hand of Fellowship.

William Thompson, (Pastor) Henry Flynt, (Teacher) George Rose, Stephen
Kinsley, (Elder) John Dassett, William Potter, Martin Saunders, Gregory
Belcher.


FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 2. Line 27. for greatest read grateful. P. 9. l. 17. (...). S^utre. P. 10
l. 22 r. Martyrdom P 14 l. 35 r. Employment. P. 18. l. 22 r. 1624. l. 23 r.
Nanta^ket. P. 23. l. 4. r. 1709.


