THE ART OF PREACHING, IN IMITATION OF HORACE's ART of POETRY.

LONDON, Printed: PHILADELPHIA, Reprinted, and sold by B. FRANKLIN, in Market
Street. M,DCC,XXXIX.

THE ART OF PREACHING, etc.
Humano capiti cervicem pictor equinam
Jungere si velit, and varias inducere plumas
Undique collatis membris, ut turpiter atrum
Desinat in piscem mulier form^^a superne;
Spectatum admissi risum t^neatis amici?
Credit, Pisones, isti tabulae fore librum
Persimil^m --

SHOULD some strange Poet, in his Piece affect
Pope's nervous Style, with Ward's low Puns bedecked;
Prink Milton's true Sublime, with Swift's true Wit;
And Blackmore's Gravity with Gay's Conceit;
Would you not laugh? Trust me that Priest's as bad,
Who in a Style now grave, now raving mad,
Gives the wild Whims of dreaming Schoolmen vent,
Whilst drowsy Congregations nod Assent.
-- Pictoribus atque Poetis
Quidlibet audendi semper fuit aequa potestas --
Sed non ut placidis coeant immitia --

The Priests, it is true, have always been allowed
To teach Religion, and it is fit they should;
But in that sacred Name, when they dispense
Flat Contradictions to all common Sense;
Though Fools and Bigots wonder and believe,
The Wise it is not so easy to deceive.
Inceptis gravibus plerumque et magna professis --

Some take a Text sublime and fraught with Sense,
But quickly fall into Impertinence.
On Trifles eloquent, with great delight
They flourish out on some strange mystic Rite;
Clear up the Darkness of some useless Text,
Or make some crabbed Passage more perplexed;
But to subdue the Passions, or direct,
And all Life's moral Duties they neglect.
Maxima pars vatum --
Decipimur specie recti --

Most Preachers err (except the wiser few)
Thinking established Doctrines, therefore true:
Qui variare cupit rem prodigaliter unam
Delphinum sylvis appingit, fluctibus aprum.

Others too fond of Novelty and Schemes,
Amuse the World with airy idle Dreams:
In vitium ducit culpae fuga, si caret art.

Thus too much Faith, or too presuming Wit*
Are Rocks, where Bigots, or Free-Thinkers split*
Emilium circa ludum faber imus and ungues
Exprimet, and molles imitabitur aere capillos;
Infelix operis summa, quia ponere totum
Nesciet --

The very meanest Dabler at Whitehall
Can rail at Papists, or poor Quakers maul;
But when of some great Truth he aims to preach,
Alas, he finds it far beyond his reach.
Sumite materiam vestris, qui scribitis, aequam
Viribus --

Young Deacons try your Strength, and strive to find
A Subject suited to your Turn of Mind;
Method and Words are easily your own,
Or should they fail you -- steal from Tillotson.
^^^dinis haec virtus erit and venus, aut ego fallor,
Ut jam nunc dicat, jam nunc debentia dici
Pleraque differat; ut presens in tempus omittat --

Much of its Beauty, Usefulness, and Force,
Depends on rightly timing a Discourse.
Before the L -- ds or C -- m -- ns far from nice,
Say boldly -- Bribery's a dirty Vice --
But quickly check yourself -- and with a sneer --
Of which this Honorable House is clear.
In verbis etiam tenuis cautusque serendis --

Great is the Work, and worthy of the Gown,
To bring forth hidden Truths, and make them known.
Yet in all new Opinions, have a care,
Truth is too strong for some weak minds to bear.
Et nova fictaque nuper habebunt verba fidem, si
Graeco font cadunt, parce detorta.

And are new Doctrines taught, or old revived,
Let them from Scripture plainly be derived.
-- Quid autem
Caecilio, Plautoque, dabit Romanus, ademptum
Virgilio, Varioque? --

Barclay or Baxter, wherefore do we blame
For Innovations, yet approve the same
In Wickliffe and in Calvin? Why are These
Called wise Reformers? Those mad Sectaries?
-- Licuit, semperque licebit,
Signatum praesente nota producere nomen.

It Is most unjust. Men always had a right,
And ever will, to think, to speak, to write
Their various Minds; yet sacred ought to be
The public Peace as private Liberty.
Ut silvae foliis pronos mutantur in annos --

Opinions are like Leaves, which every Year
Now flourish green, now fall and disappear.
Once the Pope's Bulls could terrify his Foes,
And kneeling Princes kissed his sacred Toes;
Now he may damn, or curse, or what he will,
There Is not a Prince in Christendom will kneel.
Reason now reigns, and by her Aid we hope
Truth may revive and sickening Error droop:
She the sole Judge, the Rule, the gracious Light
Kind Heaven has lent to guide our Minds aright.
Res gestae regumque, ducumque, and tristia bell^
Quo scribi possent numero, monstravit Homerus.

States to embroil and Faction to display,
In wild Harangues, Sacheveril showed the Way.
Versibus impariter junctis quaerimonia primum,
Post etiam inclusa est voti sententia compos.
Quis tamen exiguos elegos emiserit auctor,
Grammatici certant, and adhuc sub judice lis est.

The Funeral Sermon, when it first began,
Was used to weep the Loss of some good Man:
Now any Wretch, for one small Piece of Gold,
Shall have fine Praises from the Pulpit sold:
But whence this Custom rose, who can decide?
From Priestly Avarice? or from human Pride?
Musa dedit fidibus Divos puerosque Deorum --
Archilocum proprio rabies armavet iambo. --

Truth, moral Virtue, Piety, and Peace
Are noble Subjects, and the Pulpit's Grace:
But Zeal for Trifles armed imperious Laud,
His Power and Cruelty the Nation awed.
Cur ego, si nequeo ignoroque, Poeta salutor?
Cur nescire -- quam discere malo?

Why was he honored with the Name of Priest,
And Greatest made, unworthy to be Least,
Whose Zeal was Fury, whose Devotion Pride,
Power his great God, and Interest his sole Guide?
Versibus exponi tragicis res comica non vult. --
Interdum tamen and vocem Comaedia tollit;
Et Tragicus plerumque dolet sermon pedestri.

To touch the Passions let your Style be plain;
The Praise of Virtue asks a higher Strain:
Yet sometimes the Pathetick may receive
The utmost Force that Eloquence can give;
As sometimes, in Elogiums, it is the Art,
With plain Simplicity to win the Heart.
Non satis est pulchra esse Poemata --
-- male si mandata loqueris
Aut dormitabo, aut ridebo.

It Is not enough that what you say is true,
To make us feel it, you must feel it too.
Show your self warmed, and that will Warmth impart
To every Hearer's sympathizing Heart.
When honest Foster Virtue does enforce,
All give Attention to the warm Discourse;
But who a cold, dull, lifeless Drawling keeps,
One half his Audience laughs, the other sleeps.
-- Tristia maestum
Vultum verba decent: Iratum, plena mirarum;
Ludentem, lascivia; severum, serio dictu.
Format enim natura prius nos intus ad omnem
Fortunarum habitum: --

In censuring Vice be earnest and severe,
In stating dubious Points concise and clear;
Anger requires stern Looks and threatening Style,
But paint the Charms of Virtue with a Smile.
These different Changes common Sense will teach,
And we expect them from you, if you preach;
For should you Manner differ from your Theme,
Or on quite different Subjects be the same,
Despised and laughed at, you must travel down,
And hide such Talents in some Country Town.
Intererit multum, Davusne loquatur an Eros --

It much concerns a Preacher first to learn
The Geuius of his Audience, and their Turn.
Amongst the Citizens be grave and slow;
Before the Nobles let fine Periods flow;
The Temple Church ask Sherlock's Sense and Skill;
Beyond the Tower -- no matter -- what you will.
Famam sequere --

In Facts or Notions fetched from sacred Writ
Be orthodox, nor cavil to show Wit:
Si quid inexpertum scenae committis, and audes
Personam formare novam; --
-- tuque
Rectius Iliacum carmen deducis in actus --

Or if your daring Genius is so bold
To teach new Doctrines, or to censure old,
With Care proceed; you tread a dangerous Path*
Error established, grows established Faith.
It Is easier much, and much the safer Rule,
To teach in Pulpit what you learnt at School;
With Zeal defend whatever the Church believes,
If you expect to thrive, or wear Lawn Sleeves.
Nec sic incipies, ut scriptor Cyclicus olim --

Some loudly bluster, and consign to Hell
All who dare doubt one Word or Syllable
Of what they call the Faith; and which extends
To Whims and Trifles without Use or Ends:
Quanto rectius hic --

Sure it is much nobler, and more like divine,
T'enlarge the Path to Heaven, than to confine.
Insist alone on useful Points, or plain;
And know, God cannot hate a virtuous Man.
Tu quid ego, and populus mecum desideret, audi;
Si plausoris eges aulaea mane^tis, and usque
Sessuri, donec cantor, vos plaudite, dicat,
AEtatis cujusque notandi sunt tibi mores --

If you expect or hope that we should stay
Your whole Discourse, nor strive to slink away;
Some venial Faults there are you must avoid
To every Age and Circumstance allied.
Reddere qui voces jam scit puer --

A pert young Student just from College brought,
With many little Pedantries is fraught:
Reasons with Syllogism, persuades with Wit,
Quotes Scraps of Greek instead of sacred Writ;
Or deep immersed in politic Debate,
Reforms the Church, and guides the tottering State.
Conversis studiis, aetas animusque virilis
Quaerit opes, and amicitias: --

Those Trifles with maturer Age forgot,
Now some good Benefice employs his Thought;
He seeks a Patron, and will soon incline
To all his Notions civil or divine;
Studies his Principles both Night and Day,
And as that Script^^^ guides, must preach and pray.
Multa senem circumveniunt --

Avarice and Age creep on: his reverend Mind
Begins to grow Right-reverendly inclined;
Power and Preferment still so sweetly call,
The Voice of Heaven is never heard at all:
Set but a tempting Bishopric in view,
He Is strictly Orthodox and Loyal too;
With equal Zeal defends the Church and State,
And Infidels and Rebels share his Hate.
Aut agitur res in scenis, aut acta refertur:
Segnius irritant animos demissa per aurem,
Quam quae sunt oculis subjecta fidelibus, and quae
Ipse sibi tradit Spectator. --
-- in avem Progn^ vertatur, Cadmus in anguem,
Quodcunque ostendis mihi sic, incredulus odi.

Some things are plain, we cannot misunderstand;
Some still obscure, though thousands have explained:
Those influence more which Reason can conceive,
Than such as we through Faith alone believe:
In Those we judge, in These you may deceive:
But what too deep in Mystery is ^hrown,
The wisest Preachers choose to let alone,
How Adam's Fault affects all human Kind;
How Three is One, and One is Three combined;
How certain Prescience checks not future Will;
And why almighty Goodness suffers Ill;
Such Points as these lie far too deep for Man,
Were never well explained nor ever can.
Neve minor, ^eu sit quinto productior ^ctu
Fabula. --

If Pastors more than thrice five Minutes preach,
Their sleepy Flocks begin to yawn, and stretch.
Nec deus intersit, nisi dignus vindice nodus
Inciderit: --

Never presume the Name of God to bring
As sacred Sanction to a trifling Thing.
Actoris pa^^^s chorus, officiumque virili
Defendat. --

Before, or after Sermon, Hymns of Praise
Exalt the Soul, and true Devotion raise,
In Songs of Wonder celebrate His Name,
Who spread the Skies, and built the starry Frame;
Or thence descending view this Globe below,
And praise the Source of every Bliss we know.
Tibi^ non, ut nunc orichalco vincta, tubaeque
Aemula; sed tenuis, simplexque --
Postquam c^^^it agros extendere Victor, and urbem
Latior ampl^^^i murus vinoque diurno
Placari Geni^^ festis impune diebus;
Accessit numerisque modisque licentia major,
Indoctus quid enim saperet liberque laborum,
Rusticus, urbano confusus turpis honesto?

In ancient Times, when Heaven was to be praised,
Our humble Ancestors their Voices raised,
And Hymns of Thanks from grateful Bosoms flowed,
For Ills prevented, or for Good bestowed:
But as the Church increased in Power and Pride,
The Pomp of Sound the Want of Sense supplied;
Majestic Organs then were taught to blow,
And plain Religion grew a Raree-show:
Strange ceremonious Whims, a numerous Race,
Were introduced, in Truth's and Virtue's Place,
Mysterious Turnpikes block up Heaven's Highway,
And for a Ticket, we our Reason pay.
Mox etiam agrestis Satyros nudavit, and asper
Incolumi gravitate jocum tentavit: --

These Superstitions quickly introduce
Contempt, Neglect, wild Satire, and Abuse;
Religion and its Priests by every Fool
Were thought a Jest and turned to Ridicule;
Some few indeed found where the Medium lay,
And kept the Vide Martin in the Tale of a Tub.
Coat, but tore the Fringe away.
Scribendi recte sapere est and principium and ^ons.
Qui didicit Patriae quid debeat, and quid Amicis;

Of Preaching well if you expect the Fame,
Let Truth and Virtue be your first great Aim.
Your sacred Function often call to mind,
And think how great the Trust, to teach Mankind!
It Is yours in useful Sermons to explain,
Both what we owe to God, and what to Man;
It Is yours the Charms of Liberty to paint,
His Country's Love in every Breast to plant;
Yours every social Virtue to improve,
Justice, Forbearance, Charity, and Love;
Yours too the private Virtues to augment,
Of Prudence, Temperance, Modesty, Content.
When such the Man how amiable the Priest!
Of all Mankind the worthiest, and the best.
Centuriae seniorem agitant expertia frugis;
Celsi praetereunt austera poemata Rhamnes,
Omne tulit punctum qui miscuit utile dulci,
Lectorem delectando, pariterque monendo. --

Ticklish the Point, I grant, and hard to find,
To please the various Tempers of Mankind.
Some love you should the crabbed Points explain,
When Texts with Texts a dreadful War maintain:
Some love a new, and some the beaten Path;
Morals please some, and others Points of Faith;
But he is the Man, he is the admired Divine,
In whose Discourses Truth and Virtue join:
These are the Sermons which will ever live,
By these our Two noted Booksellers in London.
Tonsons and our Two noted Booksellers in London.
Knaptons thrive;
How such are read, and praised, and how they sell,
Let Barrow's, Clarke's and Butler's Sermons tell.
Aut prodesse volunt, aut delectare poeta --

Preachers should make us either good or wise,
Him that does neither, who but must despise?
If all your Rules are useful, short, and plain,
We soon shall learn them, and shall long retain:
But if on Trifles you harangue, away
We turn our Heads, and laugh at all you say.
Sunt delicta tamen quibus ignovisse velimus --

But Priests are Men, and Men are prone to err,
On common Failings none should be severe;
All are not Masters of the same good Sense,
Nor blessed with equal Powers of Eloquence.
It Is true, and Errors with an honest Mind.
Will meet with easy Pardon from Mankind;
But who persists in Wrong with haughty Pride,
Him all must censure, many will deride.
Non quivis videt immodulata poemata judex --

Yet few are Judges of a fine Discourse,
Can see its Beauties, or can feel its Force;
With like Indulgence some attentive sit,
To sober Reasoning, and to shallow Wit.
What then? Because your Audience most are Fools,
Will you neglect all Method, and all Rules?
Or since the Pulpit is a sacred Place,
Where none dare contradict you to your Face,
Will you presume to tell a thousand Lies?
If so, we may forgive, but must despise.
Sic mihi, qui multum cessat, sit Choerilus ille,
Quem bis terque bonum, cum risu miror: and idem
Indignor, quandoque bonus dormitat Homerus.
Verum opere in longo fas est obrepere somnum.

In jingling Bev'ridge if I chance to see
One Word of Sense, I prize the Rarity:
But if in Hooker, Sprat or Tillotson,
A Thought unworthy of themselves is shown,
I grieve to see it, but it is no Surprise,
The greatest Men are not at all Times wise.
Ut pictura, poesis, erit: quae, si propius stes,
Te capiet magis; and quaedam, si longius abstes.

Sermons, like Plays, some please us at the Ear,
But never will a serious Reading bear:
Some in the Closet edify enough,
That from the Pulpit seemed but sorry Stuff.
It Is thus: There are who by ill Preaching spoil
Young's pointed Sense, or Atterbury's Style;
Whilst others by the Force of Eloquence,
Make that seem fine, which scarce is common Sense.
Ludere qui nescit, campestribus abstinet armis: --
Qui nescit versus tamen audet fingere* Quidni?

In every Science, they that hope to rise,
Set great Examples still before their Eyes,
Young Lawyers copy Murray where they can;
Physicians Mead, and Surgeons Cheselden:
But all will preach, without the least Pretense
To Virtue, Learning, Art, or Eloquence.
Why not? you cry; they plainly see, no doubt,
A Priest may grow Right Reverend without.
-- Fuit haec sapientia quondam,
Publica privatis secernere, sacra profanis;
Concubitu prohibere vago; dare jura maritis;
Oppida moliri; leges incidere ligno. --
-- Sic honor and nomen divinis vatibus atque
Carminibus venit. --
-- Post hos --
-- Animos in tristia bella
Versibus exacuit.

Preachers and Preaching were at first designed,
For common Benefit to all Mankind.
Public and private Virtues they explained,
To Goodness courted, and from Vice restrained:
Love, Peace and Union breathed in each Discourse,
And their Examples gave their Precepts Force.
From these good Men, the Priests and all their Line,
Were honored with the Title of Divine.
But soon their proud Successors left this Path,
Forsook plain Morals for dark Points of Faith;
'Till Creeds on Creeds the warring World inflamed,
And all Mankind, by different Priests, were damned.
Natura fieret laudabile carmen, an art,
Quaesitum est.

Some ask which is the Essential of a Priest,
Virtue or Learning? What they ask's a Jest:
We daily see dull Loads of reverend Fat,
Without Pretense to either this or that
But who like Hough or Hoadly hopes to shine,
Must with great Learning real Virtue join.
Qui studet optatam cursu contingere metam,
Multa tulit fecitque puer; sudavit and alsit --

He who by preaching hopes to raise a Name,
To no small Excellence directs his Aim.
On every noted Preacher he must wait,
The Voice, the Look, the Action imitate:
And when complete in Style and Eloquence,
Must then crown all with Learning and good Sense.
But some with lazy Pride disgrace the Gown,
And never preach one Sermon of their own;
It Is easier to transcribe than to compose,
So all the Week, they eat, and drink, and doze.
Ut praeco, ad merces turbam qui cogit emendas --

As Quacks with lying Puffs the Papers fill,
Or hand their own Praise in a pocky Bill,
Where empty Boasts of much superior Sense,
Draw from the cheated Crowd their idle Pence,
So the great H -- ley hires for half a Crown,
A quack Advertisement to tell the Town
Of some strange Point to be disputed on:
Where all who love the Science of Debate,
May hear themselves or other Coxcombs prate.
Reges dicuntur multis urgere culullis,
Et torquere mero, qu^m perspexisse laborent,
An sit amicitiae dignus. --

When Dukes or noble Lords a Chaplain hire,
They first of his Capacities enquire,
If stoutly qualified to drink and smoke,
If not too nice to bear an impious Joke,
If tame enough to be the common Jest,
This is a Chaplain to his Lordship's Taste.
Vir bonus et prudens versus reprehendet inertes --
-- ambitiosa recidet
Ornamenta; parum claris lucem dare coget: --

If Bards to Pope indifferent Verses show,
He is too honest not to tell them so.
This is obscure, he cries, and this too rough,
These trifling, or superfluous, strike them off.
How useful every Word from such a Friend!
But Parsons are too proud their Works to mend,
And every Fault with Arrogance defend:
Think them too sacred to be criticiz'd,
And rather choose to let them be despised.
Ut, mala quem scabies, aut morbus regius urget,
Aut fanaticus error, and iracunda Diana,
Vesanum tet^gisse timent, fugiuntque Poetam,
Qui sapiunt: --
Quem vero arripuit, tenet occiditque legendo,
Non missura cutem, nisi plena cruoris, hirudo.

He that is wise will not presume to laugh
At Priests, or Church Affairs, it is not safe.
Think there exists, and let it check your Sport,
That dreadful Monster called a Spiritual Court,
Into whose cruel Jaws if once you fall,
In vain, alas! in vain for Aid you call:
Clerks, Proctors, Priests, voracious round you ply,
Like Leeches sticking, till they have sucked you dry.
FINIS.

