Mr. Cooper's Election Sermon, May 28. 1740.

The Honors of CHRIST demanded of the MAGISTRATE

A SERMON Preached in the Audience of His EXCELLENCY the GOVERNOR, The
HONORABLE the COUNCIL AND Representatives, Of the Province of the
Massachusetts Bay, in New England, May 28. 1740. The Day for the ELECTION of
His MAJESTY'S COUNCIL there.

By William Cooper, A. M.

Pastor of a Church in BOSTON.

John 5. 23. That all Men should honor the Son, even as they honor the
Father. BOSTON: N. E. Printed by J. DRAPER, Printer to His EXCELLENCY the
GOVERNOR and COUNCIL, for J. EDWARDS and H. FOSTER, in Cornhil. MDCCXL.

At a Council held at the Council Chamber in Boston, on Thursday the 29th of
May, 1740.
ORdered, That Jacob Wendell and Richard Bill, Esqrs; give the Thanks of this
Board to the Rev. Mr. William Cooper, for his Sermon preached Yesterday before
the General Assembly; and that they desire a Copy thereof for the Press.

Attest. Simon Frost, Dep. Secr.

AN Election SERMON.
PSALM II. x, xi, xii. Be wise now therefore, O ye Kings: be instructed ye
Judges of the Earth.

Serve the LORD with Fear, and rejoice with Trembling.

Kiss the SON left He be angry, and ye perish from the Way, when his Wrath is
kindled but a little: Blessed are all they that put their Trust in Him.


THIS anniversary Day which is now returned upon us, may very well be called A
Day which the Psalm. 118. 24.
Lord has made; inasmuch as He has given us the happy Occasion of it, by
putting our Fathers, and continuing us in the Possession of those invaluable
Privileges, the Exercise whereof is the proper Business of the Day: And if we,
and our People, do not rejoice and show ourselves glad in it, with a religious
as well as civil Joy, our Stupidity and Ingratitude will be an Evidence, how
unworthy we are of the Favors of Heaven wherewith we are distinguished.

WE again see the Princes, the Legislators of the People, even the People of
the God of Abraham, gathered together; not only in the State-House to dispatch
the public Business, but in the Lord's-House to pay Him their public Homage,
and to learn their Duty to Him by inquiring in his Temple: Psalm. 47, 9.
And since the Shields of the Earth do belong unto God, it is fit He should in
this Way be exalted by them.

OUR present Rulers desire this public Day may continue to wear the Garb of
Religion, not only out of Custom, and in Conformity to the Practice of their
Ancestors; but, we trust, from a Sense of Duty, and because they inherit a good
Measure of the same Spirit of Piety and Devotion, which was the distinguishing
Glory of the Fathers of our Country.

I know your Excellency, and the honorable Counselors, who have ordered me
into the sacred Desk on this great Occasion, don't expect from me, either an
Address of Compliment, or a Lecture in Politics; both of which are as distant
from my Genius, as they would be disagreable to my Character. That which you
have called me to is, as a Gospel Minister, to direct you from the Word of God,
and remember you of your Duty as Christian Magistrates; which I shall
accordingly endeavor, by divine Help, with all Fidelity, and a proper
Deference: And I don't know how I can better do this, than from the solemn
Passage I have just read.

IF then you are come together to hear what God the Lord has to say unto you,
the Message bro't you in his Name, by the unworthiest of his Ministers, is
this, Serve the LORD with Fear, and rejoice with Trembling. Kiss the SON left
He be angry, etc.

THE Psalm of which our Text is the Close, is a prophetic Discourse of the
Kingdom of the Messiah. It foretells the Opposition which would be given to
that Kingdom, when it should be set up in the World. Though the Laws of this
Kingdom, and the Administration of it, are every way suited to make the
Subjects thereof easy and happy; and the Nature of it is such, that if it did
universally obtain, it would make the Kingdoms of this World resemble the
Kingdom of Heaven; for it consists in Righteousness, Romans 14. 7
and Peace, and Joy in the Holy Ghost; yet such are the Prejudices of Men, that
they not only refuse to become the Subjects of this Kingdom themselves, but do
their utmost to prevent its Establishment and Spread in the World. And this
Opposition is general, made by all sorts of Persons; not only the common Rout,
from whom little better is to be expected, but the Kings and Rulers are engaged
in it; as if they though it the Reign of Christ would eclipse their Glory, and
diminish their Authority. These back their Strength and Power with Policy and
Counsel. The Kings of the Earth set themselves, ver. 2, 3.
and the Rulers take Counsel together, against the Lord, and against his
Anointed, saying, Let us break their Bands asunder, and cast away their Cords
from us.

BUT for the Comfort of all those who have heartily espoused the Interests of
Christ, and are the faithful Subjects of his Kingdom, the Vanity and
Unsuccessfulness of this Opposition follow. Their Attempts will certainly be
defeated, and their Counsels baffled, however confident they may be of carrying
their Point. The most High controls their Rage, and derides their Folly. Why do
the Heathen rage, 1. and 4. v.
and the People imagine a vain Thing? He that sits in the Heaven* shall
laugh, the Lord shall have them in Derision. For the Thing they attempt is not
only unlikely, but impossible. The Kingdom of Christ is better established than
any of the Monarchies of the World. It is founded upon an irrevocable Decree of
God the Father, from which he cannot recede in Point of Honor. This eternal
Purpose and Resolve, which lay hid in the divine Counsels from the Days of
Eternity, is published with Solemnity: 6, 7, 8. v.
Yet have I set my King upon my holy Hill of Zion. I will declare the Decree;
the Lord has said unto me, Thou art my Son, this Day have I begotten thee. Ask
of me, and I shall give thee the Heathen for thine Inheritance, and the utmost
Parts of the Earth for thy Possession. Nay; The Opposition will issue not only
in a vexatious and shameful Disappointment, but in the dreadful, utter and
irrecoverable Ruin of all that are in the cursed Confederacy. The Honors of
this divine King will be sufficiently vindicated; and they who would not submit
to his gracious Scepter, shall be broken with his iron Rod. v. 9.
Thou shall break them with a Rod of Iron, thou shall dash them in Pieces like
a Potters Vessel; so suddenly, easily, and irreparably.

Now our Text is the Application of all this, by way of Counsel and Admonition,
to Persons of the highest Rank and Order in the World, as more especially
concerned in it. And here we may observe, 1, The Persons to whom the Counsel is
addressed. 2, The Counsel that is given them. And 3, The Arguments and Motives
with which it is enforced. These three Divisions of the Text may be the general
Heads of our Discourse: And, if I mistake not, they will furnish us with Matter
proper for this Occasion; and naturally suggest to us such weighty Things, as
will concern every Person of whatever Degree or Station, in this large Assembly.

I. THE first Thing then that falls under our Observation is, The Persons to
whom the Counsel in our Text is addressed: And these are the Kings and Judges
of the Earth. That is, Sovereign Princes and their Underofficers; all
Magistrates, both the supreme and the subordinate; those that have the
legislative, and those that have the executive Power, in the Government of any
People.

THE Office of the Magistracy is here supposed at least; the Institution of
Government conc^^ed to if not asserted: For some Persons are here addressed as
vested with Authority and Rule.

NOTHING in the World is plainer than this, That it is the Mind and Will of God
that there should be Magistracy in the World; that Men should be governed by
Laws and Polity, and kept in Order by this Means.

SURELY no one can doubt whether the Foundation of civil Government is laid in
divine Institution, who but reads, without a Comment, such Texts as these.
Prove. 8. 15. By me Kings reign, and Princes decree Justice: By me Princes rule,
and Nobles, even all the Judges of the Earth. Romans 13. 1, 2. Let every Soul be
subject unto the higher Powers. For there is no Power but of God: The Powers
that be are ordained of God. Whosoever therefore resists, resists the
Ordinance of God. 1 Pet. 2. 13, 14. Submit your selves to every Ordinance of
Man for the Lord's sake. Whether it be to the King as supreme, or to Governors
as sent by him; for the Punishment of Evil Doers, and for the Praise of them
that do well. For so is the Will of God --

AND this is the Dictate of Reason, as well as the Voice of Scripture. The very
Light of Nature gives a sufficient Indication of the Mind of God in this
Matter: For all Nations, how barbarous soever, have united in some Kind of
Government or other, for their common Peace and Safety; nor can any Number of
Men continue any Time, without something of Law and Rule; which shows that
Government is from God as the Author of Nature.

IT is as truly as commonly said, Nothing is more unequal than Equality.
Neither the Beauty nor Benefit of the World will allow it. The Notion of
Levelism has as little Foundation in Nature as in Scripture. 1 Cor. 15 41.
If we look up to the Heavens, there is one Glory of the Sun, and another Glory
of the Moon, and another Glory of the Stars; neither are these of the same
Magnitude and Luster, but one Star differs from another Star in Glory. And if
we look round the Earth, we see it is not cast into a Level; it has Mountains
and Plains, Hills and Valleys. Even so in the political World, there are the
Distinctions of Superiors and Inferiors, Rulers and Ruled, public and
private Orders of Men: Some sit on the Throne of Majesty, some at the Council
Table, and some on the Bench of Justice; and some hold subordinate Places of
Power; while others serve their Generation only in a private Capacity.

AMONG the native Spirits of Heaven, the holy Angels, who have their abode in
the Realms of Light and Purity above, where there are no Lusts to be
restrained, it is supposed there are not only different Degrees of Excellence,
but different Offices and Employments. It has been though it a sufficient
Foundation for this Conjecture, that we read of Thrones, Col. 1. 16.
Dominions, Principalities and Powers, in the heavenly Places. And if Man had
retained his primitive Holiness, and his Nature not been stained with Sin as
now it is, there would doubtless have been Government in this lower World, and
within the Circle of Paradise it self; not coercive or punitive, for there
could then be no "Occasion for that; but directive, and conservative" of
Superiority and Inferiority, such as will be in the heavenly State after our
Savior shall have delivered up the Kingdom to God, even the Father.

BUT how necessary is Government, even in the severer Restraints of it, for Man
in his present fallen and corrupt State? To how much greater a Height would
Wickedness rise, if there were none to be a Terror to evil Doers? If all Men
were left to their unrestrained Liberty, what an uncomfortable and dangerous
Place would this World be? What vexatious and uneasy Companions would Men be to
one another? And how would this Earth resemble the Hell of the Damned? They
that now enjoy the Pleasures and Advantages of Society, would be ready to wish
they could dwell solitary in the Wilderness. And good Men more especially would
have Reason to utter David's Complaint, with a heavy Accent, Woe is me, that I
sojourn in Mesech, Psa. 120. 5.
that I dwell in the Tents of Kedar! Among a People rude and barbarous, hateful
and hating; governed not by Reason and Religion, but only by Will and Lust.

THEREFORE God's good Will to Men, and Concern for their Happiness, appears
next to the Gospel and the Ministry of it, in the Institution of Magistracy;
his appointing that Men, in their present State, should be governed by Men. If
the World was to be constantly governed by God in a more immediate way, by a
Voice from Heaven, and such awful Appearances of the divine Majesty as those on
Mount Sinai, when he delivered his Law to his People Israel; as this would not
so well agree with that State of Probation the World is now in, in which Men
are to walk by Faith and not by Sight, 2 Cor. 5. 7.
so it would not suit the present Frailty of our Nature.

THE People of Israel found this by Experience, in the Day when God promulg'd
his Law to them, in a way suited to his own Majesty and Greatness. They could
not bear it. They were struck into such Amazement and Terror, as to make it
their humble Request that he would please to go into a Method of Government
more suited to Spirits in Flesh; Exodus 20. 19.
and that they might no more hear the Voice of the Lord, least they should die:
And God granted their Request, and in Condesention to their Weakness and
Infirmity, when the Government over Israel was a Theocracy, he used the
Ministry of Men in the Management of it. Truly, the accurate Wisdom and
compassionate Goodness of God are seen, in governing as well as teaching us by
Men like our selves.

THIS does not indeed lessen the Obligations to Obedience; for he that
despises, despises not Man but God: But it is a very good Reason why we
should make favorable Allowances for the Defects and Failings of Rulers. They
are but Men; of the same Make and Constitution with Others, of like Passions
and Appetites, under all the Weaknesses and Corruptions of human Nature since
the Fall, and beset with the like and with some peculiar Temptations. We should
not therefore place an undue Confidence in them, nor expect too much from them.
To be sure, a perfect Conduct and Administration we must not look for. And
their Mistakes and Mismanagement, whether in private or public Life, should
not be too severely censured. To pray more for Rulers, and talk less against
them, would many Times be a better Way to get some Things amended.

I don't mean that out of Reverence to Authority, we should resign common
Understanding, and the public Interest, to Men in Power: Nor would I be though it
to deny the Right which every private Man, as he is a Member of the Body, and
his Interest is involved in that of the Public, has to judge of the Conduct of
public Affairs. No; I am too deep in the Principles of Liberty, to mean any
thing like this. But this I say, the Censure of Rulers should be in matters of
which we are able in some good Measure to form a Judgment, upon Things
apparent, and where Facts may be compared together; and always managed with
Decency, and tempered with Charity. -- Nor should we presently vote those to be
ill Men, Enemies of their Country, regardless of its Interests, or designing
its Ruin, who don't judge with the Populace, or go into the Measures which
others think best. For Persons equal in Integrity and Love to their Country,
may judge very differently about the public Interests.

WHAT we have spoken of the divine Institution of Government, you all
understand to be meant of Government it self, and not of any particular Form or
Model of it: For one is no more appointed by God than another; but every People
are left to judge for themselves, to frame such a Constitution as may best
answer the Ends of Government for them, and to alter and change that too at
Discretion, and by common Consent.

THE Kingly Government is mentioned in our Text; but is not to be understood
exclusive of other Forms. And all Persons are for Conscience sake to yield
Obedience to the Laws and Magistrates under which they live, and from which
they receive the Benefit of Protection; whether in Kingdoms or Common Wealths;
and whether the Government does or does not descend by hereditary Right.

The same Model of Government would not suit every People; their Genius,
Situation, and other Circumstances are so ^^rious. It is therefore an Instance
of the Kindness of God that he has not prescribed one for all Nations. And by
the various Forms of civil Government, which there are among the Nations of the
Earth, the Wisdom of God in the Government of the World in general, is rendered
the more illustrious and admirable.

OF the various Forms of civil Government which are in the World, some are
undoubtedly much better than others, and it is a greater Happiness to live
under one than another of them. The Consideration of this should make us
thankful for our Privilege as ENGLISHMEN; which is to live under the happiest
Constitution in the World, if compared in its proper Lineaments with other
Governments. For as was justly observed by a noble Patriot of the last Age Lord
Delamere.
This Government has as it were extracted the Good of all other Constitutions,
having avoided the two Extremes of Tyranny and an unbounded Liberty; no
Government under the Sun being so exact a piece of Symetry, having so nicely
poised the Prerogative and Property that they are mutually assistant of each
other.

AND if we consider our selves as NEW-ENGLISH MEN, our Obligation to
Thankfulness rises still higher: For we enjoy not only the Immunities and
Liberties of natural Subjects born in the Realm of England, but have some
additional ones granted and affirmed to us by a Royal Charter, which is as a
Hedge about our dearest and most valuable Interests: So that none can with more
Justness, and greater Propriety than our selves, use those thankful Words of
the Psalmist, Psalm. 16. 6.
The Lines are fallen to us in pleasant Places, yea we have a goodly Heritage.
May there never be among the Sons of New England, Heb. 12. 16.
any such profane Person as Esau, who despised and sold his Birthright!

WE have been saying, GOD has in Kindness to Men appointed that they should be
governed by Men; yet, He has been too good and kind to leave them to be
governed by Men according to their arbritrary Will and Pleasure. The End of
Government is the public Peace and Safety; when therefore this is neglected,
and the Ordinance of Government only made an Engine of Tyranny and Oppression;
when the Constitution is subverted, the Liberties and Properties of the People
invaded, their Religion and Laws made a Sacrifice to the Superstition,
Ambition, or Covetousness of the Prince that is over them; when this is really
the Case, as it has been in our own Nation, doubtless the Remedy is left in
their own Hands, and every Man is under higher and earlier Engagements to the
Community in general, than he is to the supreme Magistrate.

HE that has freed his People from their spiritual Taskmasters, has not left
them under the Power of earthly Tyrants. The Rules of Obedience laid down in
the Gospel oblige none to submit to unlawful Impositions. It is mentioned to
the Reproach of Issachar, that the Men of that Tribe wanted the true Spirit of
Liberty; Genesis 49. 14, 15.
Issachar is a strong Ass, couching down between two Burdens: He bowed his
Shoulder to bear, and became a Servant unto Tribute.

AND though GOD has not prescribed any one Form of Government in Scripture, yet
he has therein given general Rules to be observed by all that are in
Government. The civil Magistrate's Commission is thus limited by the great
Monarch of the World, 1 Samuel 23* 3.
He that rules over Men must be just, ruling in the Fear of God.

AND that they may not be unmindful of the Duties of their Station, he has
appointed another Order of Men to be their faithful and humble Monitors; I
mean, the Ministers of Religion. For Ministers are as truly the Magistrates
Teachers, as Magistrates are their Governors: And as we must put our People in
Mind to be subject to Principalities and Powers, Tit. 3. 1.
to obey Magistrates; so we must put Magistrates in Mind to be subject to the
Lord Jesus Christ, and use their Power in a Subserviency to the Interests of
His Kingdom.

THIS leads us to the second Thing to be considered in the Words, which is,

II. THE solemn Counsel here given to earthly Rulers of all Degrees: Serve the
LORD; Kiss the SON.

THE same Person is here meant by the Lord, and the Son; namely, the Lord Jesus
Christ, Godman, Mediator.

THE Duty required is expressed two Ways. They must serve him, as those that
are in Subjection to him, in all the Instances of Devotion and Obedience. They
are to kiss him; with a Kiss of Adoration and Worship: They that worshipped
Idols kissed them; 1 King. 19. 18
for we read of the People, their kissing of Baal, and kissing the Calves. --
With a Kiss of Allegiance and Loyalty: Hos. 13. 2.
So when Samuel anointed Saul, he kissed him, and said, It is because the Lord
has anointed thee to be Captain over his Inheritance. 1 Samuel 10. 1.
And with a Kiss of Affection and Love: So it is a common Custom in the World
for Friends to salute one another: And the Usage in some Courts, is to kiss the
Hand of the Prince, in token of Subjection to his Government, and Affection to
his Person.

I take the Words to be comprehensive of the Duty of Rulers in their double
Capacity; the private and the public; as Christians and as Magistrates.

1. RULERS are, as Men and as Christians, obliged to the general Service of
Christ, in common with others. And the Service of Christ includes in it, real
inward Religion, and practical Godliness in all the Parts of it.

HERE many Particulars offer themselves to our Tho'ts, which are in themselves
worthy of Enlargement: But I must content my self with a few comprehensive
Hints, in opening to you the Character of a Servant of Christ in his single or
private Capacity.

A Servant of Christ is one who has parted with his old Masters; fallen off
from his Allegiance to, Isa. 26. 13.
and renounced the Service of those other Lords which have had Dominion over
him; Satan and the World.

HE has actually submitted to the Government of the Lord Jesus Christ, Psalm.
119. 106.
taken his Yoke upon him, and sworn Allegiance to him.

AND now,

HE obeys all his Laws, and makes his Will the Rule of all his Actions; how
contrary soever to his own Will or Humor, Ease or Interest. He sits at the
Feet of his divine Master, and makes that Inquiry, Acts 9. 6.
with a sincere Resolution to obey, Lord, what will thou have me to do? Or,
Luke 14. 25.
Good Master, what shall I do to inherit eternal Life?

HE therefore attends upon all his Institutions, those Ordinances which Christ
has appointed to show his Authority over, and Care for his Church. He
religiously observes the Sabbaths of the Lord, constantly frequents the solemn
Assemby, reverently hears his Word preached by his Ministers, and devoutly
attends upon the Administration of the holy Sacraments. 1 C^
He will neglect none of these, lest he should seem to show Contempt to him
that has appointed them, or want the Badge and Livery of his great Lord and
Master.

MOREOVER,

HE follows his divine Master's Example, and desires to copy the Life of the
holy Jesus into his own; and will follow no Man, of what Name or Figure soever,
any farther than he sees him to follow Christ. ^ Cor ^1. 1


THE Servant of Christ does also resign to his Conduct without Reserve, and is
determined to follow the Lamb whither soever he goes, and not to turn from
following after him, ^om. 14. 4.
whatever Opposition and Danger may be in the Way.

ONCE more,

A true Servant of Christ makes the Glory of Christ his chief and governing
Aim; and, both habitually and actually, directs his Actions, in the best Manner
he can, toward this great End. It is his highest Ambition to please his Master
in Heaven, and he will make all lower Designs give Place to this. He pursues
his Honor and Approbation in every Relation wherein he stands, in every
Station he fills, and with every Talent committed to him. And in this he
labors, that whether present or absent, ^ (...) 5.9.
both in this World and the next, he may be accepted of Him; and then it is a
small Thing with him to be judged of Man's Judgment. 1 Cor. 4. ^.


To this Service of Christ there are some special Adjuncts annexed in our Text,
Joy, Fear, and Trust. Serve the Lord with Fear, and rejoice with Trembling:
Blessed are they that trust in him.

THE Service of Christ should be accompanied with Rejoicing. Psa. 149. 2.
Let the Children of Zion be joyful in their King. They should rejoice that
they have such a Master to serve; and show themselves cheerful in his Service,
as those that choose it, and are not forced into it; as those that like it, and
would not go free from it. So the People of Judah in the Days of Asa bound
themselves to the Service of GOD, not only with great Solemnity, but with great
Cheerfulness, and all possible Expressions of Joy. They swear unto the Lord
with a loud Voice, 2 Chro. 15. 14, 15.
and with Shouting, and with Trumpets, and with Cornets. And all Judah rejoiced
at the Oath: for they had sworn with all their Hearts, and sought him with
their whole Desire.

BUT this rejoicing well consists with Fear and Trembling, and should be always
tempered therewith. Heb. 12. 28, 29.
We should serve the Lord with Fear, and rejoice with Trembling, because as he
is a gracious so he is a jealous GOD, who cannot be deceived and will not be
mocked; who regards the Intention as well as the Action; who looks into the
Heart, and sees through all Disguises. His Servants therefore should always
maintain a holy Jealousy lest they come short of his Approbation and
Acceptance; and at the same time that they rejoice in the Hopes of his Favor,
should tremble in the Tho'ts of ever falling under his Displeasure. And while
we thus submit to the Lord Jesus Christ, and serve him with holy Joy and Fear
as our Sovereign, we must also trust in him as our Savior; and renouncing all
other Dependence whatsoever, as satisfactory and meritorious, must repair to
his Obedience and Atonement, as the only Refuge of guilty Souls, and Ground of
a Sinners Acceptance with GOD: We must so trust in Christ as to have no
Confidence in the Flesh; and never go about to establish a Righteousness of our
own, but submit our selves to the Righteousness of God; Phil. 3. 3.
desiring to be found in Him, 9. v.
not having on our own Righteousness which is of the Law, but that which is
through the Faith of Christ, the Righteousness which is of God by Faith -- This
it is to serve the Lord: This is a brief general Account of personal Religion,
and real Christianity; which may be summed up in these two Words, Subjection to
and Dependence on the Lord Jesus Christ.

WE may collect from it, How great a Thing it is to be a Christian indeed! And
the Reason we have to fear that Christ has but few true and real Servants,
among those who wear the christian Name, and take upon them the christian
Character.

Now, Kings and Judges are as strictly bound to serve the Lord in all the
Instances of personal Religion, and practical Godliness, as any of their
People. Romans 10. 12.
For there is the same Lord over all; who stands in the same Relations to them
that he does to others; as Creator, Lawgiver and Judge. There is the same
infinite Distance between Him and them, that there is between Him and the
lowest of their Subjects. They are under the common Obligations of Christians,
by their Birth in and Baptism into the christian Church, and their Profession
of the christian Religion. They must be saved, if ever they are so, upon the
same Terms, and in the same Way, that others are. In Matters of Religion, in
the Concerns of Salvation, they are without Privilege or Dispensation. The
Gospel makes no Distinction between them and others in these Things; but the
Commands of it are addressed to them in common with Persons of lower Degrees in
Life. Psalm. 49. 1, 2. Hear this all ye People; give ear, all ye Inhabitants of
the World: Both Low and High, Rich and Poor together. Psalm. 148. 11, 12. Kings
of the Earth, and all People; Princes and all Judges of the Earth. Both young
Men and Maidens, old Men and Children; let them praise the Name of the Lord.

IF there is any Difference, these are more strictly bound to observe the Laws
of Christ than others; because the Eminency of their Station, will make their
Conversation to be the more observed; and their Example will be like to have
the greater Influence upon Inferiors. A City set upon a Hill cannot be hid;
was our Savior's Observation: And he made it for the sake of that Exhortation
and Charge which follows, Mat. 5. 14, 12.
Let your Light so shine before Men, that they may see your good Works, and
glorify your Father which is in Heaven.

2. RULERS are to serve the Lord Jesus Christ in their public Capacity, and in
the Exercise of their Office as Magistrates. And it is in this Capacity more
especially that our Text addresses them.

AND so they are to consider themselves as Christ's Ministers and Stewards,
placed in their Stations to serve him and his Interests.

THEREFORE,

THEY must not seek Themselves, and their own Things, Phil. 2. 21.
to the Neglect of the Things of Jesus Christ. If they are covetous and Self
seeking, and aim at Nothing but gratifying their own Ambition, raising
Themselves and Families, enlarging their Honors and Estates, this is not to
serve Christ, but to serve themselves of him; and to prostitute their high
Office to low Ends.

MUCH less must they carry on any cross Designs, or do any thing in Opposition
to his Kingdom, or that may damage his Interests. They must not therefore
persecute his Saints, silence his Ministers, hinder the free Exercise of his
holy Religion, or do any Thing that may obstruct the Work of the Gospel; as the
Rulers of the Jews did when they imprisoned the Professors of Christianity, and
forbad the Apostles to preach in the Name of Jesus.

THEY must make no Laws that are repugnant to, or inconsistent with the settled
Laws of Christ's Kingdom. For although GOD has given this Power to all Kingdoms
and Nations to make Laws for the better Support and Government of themselves,
yet he has not given them Leave to repeal any of his own Laws, nor to enact any
Thing contrary to them. It is usual for a Prince, when he grants a Charter to a
City or Company within his Dominions and to give Power therein to make Bylaws
for the Management of the Affairs of that Community, provided they be no way
repugnant to his own or the common Laws of his Kingdom; if they be, they are
null from the beginning. And so are those Laws made in any particular Kingdom
of the World, if they be in the lest contrary to any of the common Laws of the
World, those which the King of Kings has made for all Mankind, both Kings and
People to observe. In such a Case, Acts 5. 29.
the general Law is, that we must obey GOD rather than Man.

THE BIBLE therefore, which is the great Statute Book of Heaven, must be
consulted by the Rulers of a People, and they must frame their Administration
by the general Laws there laid down. The Kings of Israel were commanded by GOD
to write for themselves a Copy of the Law, and to read therein all the Days of
their Lives, Deuteronomy. 17, 18, 19.
that they might learn to fear the Lord their God, and to keep all the Words of
his Law. And Jehojada gave to Joash the Testimony with the Crown, 2 Kings, 11.
12.
when he anointed him King. Which carries this Instruction in it, That those in
Government over GOD'S People, should acquaint themselves well with his holy
Word, and should have an inviolable Regard to the Laws of Christ in the whole
of their Administration.

MOREOVER,

CHRISTIAN Magistrates must employ their Power for the Advancement of Christ's
Kingdom* They are in a Lieutenancy to Christ; and so they are to concur with
Him in carrying on the same Design for which all Power is given to Him, Matt.
28. 18.
both in Heaven and in Earth.

TRUE indeed, the Care of Souls is not committed to the civil Magistrate; nor
may he extend his Power to force Articles of Faith, or Modes of Worship, on the
Consciences of Men: For Conscience is exempt from every Jurisdiction but
Christ's; and He alone must reign there. Yet we must not run into the other
Extreme, and say that the Magistrate has nothing to do in Matters of Religion.

AS they rule by Christ, so they are obliged to rule for Him; and therefore to
protect and encourage the Practice of his holy Religion; to guard and defend
GOD'S sacred Name, Day and Institutions, from the Insults of those who would
openly profane and trample upon them; and to restrain and punish those Vices
and Immoralities, which are as contrary to the Laws of Christ as they are to
the Welfare of Societies: For the very End of their Office is, the Punishment
of evil Doers, 1 P^^. 2. 14.
and the Praise of them that do well; and this is the Design of their
Institution, 1 Timothy 2. 2.
that under them we may lead quiet and peaceable Lives in all Godliness and
Honesty.

IN a word,

THEY should openly profess the Religion of Christ, publicly espouse his
Cause, and zealously promote it as far as ever their Authority and Influence
will reach; and should strenuously set themselves against every thing that is
opposite to his Interest, against the Works and Kingdom of the Devil which our
blessed Savior came into the World to destroy. 1 John 3. 8.


THERE is a War carried on in this World, between the rightful King and the
usurping God of it; between Christ and Satan; and whoever stands neuter,
Magistrates, who are Christ's Officers, must not: If they do, they are Traitors
to his Crown and Government, and must expect from him the highest Resentment,
and the severest Punishment. Which leads us the third and last thing observed
in the Words.

III. THE Arguments and Motives with which the divine Counsel here given to the
Kings and Judges of the Earth is enforced.

AND the

1st REASON or Argument may be taken from the Wisdom of such a Conduct. Be wise
now therefore, O ye Kings: be instructed ye Judges of the Earth. Serve the
Lord, etc.

WISDOM is a very requisite Qualification in Rulers. Without this they will
make but a poor Figure, and both their Persons and Authority fall into
Contempt. Now, to serve the Lord, Behold! this is Wisdom. When Rulers do this,
they engross all the Rules of Policy into one.

FOR,

THIS is the way to have the Presence of Christ with them in their
Administration, to direct their Counsels, and succeed their Endeavors for the
public Good; without which their own Policy and Power will be in vain; the
wisest Schemes will be baffled, and the most promising Enterprises defeated.
Whatever the wise Men after the Flesh may think, the Rules of Religion steadily
pursued by those entrusted with the public Affairs of a People, will be found
to conduce more to the true Ends of Government, than all the Maxims of carnal
Policy. 1 Samuel 23. 3, 4. He that rules over Men must be just, ruling in the
Fear of God: And he shall be as the Light of the Morning, when the Sun rises,
even a Morning without Clouds; as the tender Grass springing out of the Earth
by clear shining after Rain. i. e. The religious Ruler will be a great common
and extensive Blessing, like the Light and Rain of Heaven.

THIS is also the best way to secure and exalt their own Character. For, if a
serious and strict Regard to Religion runs through their Conduct, both in private
and public Life; if they appear to act in the Fear of God, and with a
governing View to the Honor of Christ, this will certainly make them look more
great and venerable in the Eyes of the People, than any shining Titles or
glittering Badges of Honor which they wear: This will procure them not only
outward but inward Reverence. When Piety is found in Conjunction with
Greatness, the Person shines with a diviner Luster, and the Authority wherewith
he is vested strikes into a greater Awe, and more powerfully constrains
Submission and Obedience. So Joshua was magnified in the fight of all Israel.
Josh. 4. 14.


THUS they will be likely to sit easy in their Posts of Honor; not only from
the Consciousness of their own Integrity, which will always give them inward
Peace, and raise their Minds above the Censures and Clamours of ignorant and
disaffected Persons; but also from the Acceptance which their faithful
Endeavors will find among the Generality of their People. For as bad as the
World is, when the Righteous are in Authority, Prove. 29. 2.
the People rejoice. Common People, and even vicious People, are under such a
Conviction of the Excellency of Virtue and Religion, that they cannot but take
Satisfaction when they see it exalted to great Dignity.

MOREOVER,

THIS is the most likely way for them to be established and continued in their
Authority, and to have their public Opportunities and Advantages lengthned out
by that GOD in whose hand their Times are. For it stands in the Book of GOD as
an Argument why the King should above all Things mind Religion, To the end that
he may prolong his Days in his Kingdom. Deuteronomy. 17. 20. Agreeably (as one
observes) we find in the History of the Kings of Judah, that generally the best
Reigns were the longest, except when GOD shortened them for the Punishment of
the People, as Josiahs. Or, this will minister pleasing Reflections to them,
and give them a Satisfaction divinely calm, if they see Others fill the
Stations they have held; or in the near Approach of Death, and Prospect of
their final Account to GOD the Judge of all. Be wise now therefore, O ye Kings;
be instructed ye Judges of the Earth: Serve the Lord, etc.

2. IF we consider the Dignity of this glorious Person whom the Kings and
Judges of the Earth are commanded to serve, there will appear the highest
Reason why they should obey the Command: He is the LORD; the SON.

CHRIST is here spoken of both with Respect to his eternal Deity, and his
Office of Mediator. He is the Son of GOD by eternal Generation; and he is the
Son of Man, i. e. God-man, Mediator: And all Men are bound to serve him, not
only on Account of his eternal Deity, but his Office as Mediator. His Supremacy
over the World, is a Prerogative annexed to his being Head of the Church. For
GOD has now set him at his own right Hand, Ephesians. 1. 21.
far above all Principality, and Power, and Might, and Dominion, and every Name
that is named, not only in this World, but in that which is to come; and has
put all things under his Feet, and given him to be Head over all Things to the
Church, which is his Body. So that he is Lord Paramount of the whole Creation.
He has a Title both by Inheritance and by Appointment. A natural and delegated
right. A natural one, as he is the true GOD, John 1. 3.
by whom were all things made that are made; and a delegated one, as he is
Mediator: So he is invested by the Father, who is the Fountain of Power, with
the sole Administration of Government, in the Kingdom of Providence as well as
of Grace. Thus he is the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, Psalm 72 11
the blessed and the only Potentate: All Kings shall how down before him, and
all Nations shall serve him.

THE Title and Character of Lord given to Christ in the Text, suggests to us
these following Reasons why the Kings and Judges of the Earth, Rulers of all
Degrees, should serve him.

1. HE is the LORD, and so their Authority is derived from him. It is so with
respect to the Constitution of Government it self: for Dominion and Rule are
his Appointment in the World; the Original of Power is from Heaven, as has been
shown already. -- And it is so with respect to the Designation of the Persons
clothed with it. In whatever Way, by whatever Means and Methods, Men are
advanced to their several Stations, the Providence of the Lord Jesus Christ is
to be acknowledged and adored therein. For both Riches and Honor come of thee;
1 Chronicles. 29. 12.
and in thy band it is to make great, and to give strength unto all. We many
times see strange and unexpected Turns, and are surpised at the sudden
Disgrace of some," and Elevation of others: But we should consider" that the
most high rules in the Kingdom of Men, Dan. 4. 12.
and gives it to whomsoever he will. Preferments depend not on the Will of the
People when they choose, nor on the Will of the Prince when he appoints; but on
the Will of GOD who has all Hearts in his Hand. This is a great Truth
respecting GOD's providential Government of the World, which the Psalmist has
instructed us in, Psalm. 75. 6, 7. Promotion comes neither from the East, nor
from the West, nor from the South; but God is the Judge: He puts down one,
and sets up another. When there are Candidates for an Election into a Post
of Government, and a Struggle among the Electors, the King of the World sits
Umpire, and in a powerful though invisible Way, determines the matter, so as to
bring about his own Counsels, and serve his own Purpose. The Lot is cast into
the Lap, Pro. 16. 33.
but the whole disposing thereof is of the Lord. This is a good Reason why they
who are in public Stations should serve Christ in them, because He has placed
them where they are* Since of him, and through him, are all things, as the
Fountain and Conveyance; all things should be to him, Romans 11. 36.
as the ultimate End. So the Rivers pay a constant Tribute to the Sea, whence
they all come.

2. HE is the LORD, and so their Authority is dependant on him. They are
dependant on him as to the Exercise of their Rule. He has not given them an
absolute Power, but restrained and limited them by certain general Rules and
Instructions, to which they must conform. The Glory of his Supremacy he will
not give to another -- And they are also dependant on him as to their
Continuance in their Authority. They hold their Places only during Pleasure. He
that gave them their Commission, can revoke or superceed it whenever he pleases.

IT was an Instance of the papal Pride and Arrogance, when the Pope after he
had crowned an Emperor kneeling, immediately with his Foot kicked off his Crown
again, as an emblematical Boast of his Power to make and unmake Kings at his
Pleasure. But this is a Right which belongs to, and is actually exercised by
Christ the Lord, who is God over all blessed for ever: Romans 9. 5.
A Flower in his Crown, who is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords. He removes
Kings, Joel 2. 21.
and sets up Kings. Psalm. 76. 12
He cuteth off the Spirit of Princes, and is terrible to the Kings of the Earth.

Now Dependence is always reckn'd a very good Reason for Service and Obedience:
When this is the Case, Duty and Interest unite to strengthen the Obligation.

3. HE is the LORD, and so their Power is in Subserviency and Subordination
unto His. Romans 13. 7*
They are called his Ministers. Whatever Power they have it is but ministerial,
and in order to Service. A Servant entrusted by his Lord may have many
encouraging Privileges and Advantages for himself; yet the great End of his
Employment and Advancement is his Masters Service and Profit. The Honor and
Power of Rulers do not terminate in themselves* as if the Design of GOD in the
Institution of Magistracy, was only to gratify a few particular Men, by raising
them above the common Rank, and putting them into Authority for their Persons
Sake, and only to make them look great. No! His End is the Service that is
expected from them to GOD and Man, the Church and the World: And the Dignity is
affixed to the Person, as an Encouragement to, and a necessary Means of doing
that Service* Their Places and Offices are given them with Reference to the
Duty expected from them. And he is an unworthy Servant who when his Master has
put him into an honorable Office, and given him large Encouragement to be
faithful in the Business of it, only grows proud and insolent, and becomes
regardless of his Masters Honor, and negligent of his Service.

4. HE is the LORD, and so they are accountable to him for their Conduct. Every
Master expects an Account from his Servants, what they have done in the
Business he has employed them in; and will take a proper Season to inquire into
it. Matt. 25.
The Lord of these Servants comes, and will reckon with them, for the
Improvement of their Power, Honor and Influence, which were Talents committed
to them to occupy for Him.

RULERS, as well as others, must appear before the Judgment of Christ; to give
an Account as well of their public as of their private Life. I saw the Dead
small and great stand before God. Rev. 20. 12
And here surely is a powerful Reason why they should endeavor to acquit
themselves as good Stewards of the manifold Grace of GOD, that so when they
must give an Account of their Stewardship, they may do it with Joy and not with
Grief, and may escape the Rebuke and Punishment of the wicked and unfaithful
Servant. This brings me to a third Motive and Argument in the Text, which is
taken from

3. THE high Displeasure of Christ, and the utter Ruin consequent thereupon,
which those Rulers who refuse to comply with this Counsel, will bring upon
themselves. Be wise now therefore, O ye Kings; be instructed ye Judges of the
Earth: Serve the Lord; Kiss the Son; lest He be ANGRY, and ye PERISH from the
Way, when his Wrath is kindled but a little.

"THE SON can be angry, though he be the Savior. Gracious and condescending as
he is, he can be severely angry. He has Jealousy as well as Love; Wrath as well
as Compassion and Grace. And if He be angry, who is the Mediator between GOD
and Man, what will become of us? who then will interceed for us with a GOD
already offended?

"CHRIST is called the Lamb; Rev.
yet he is the Lion of the Tribe of Judah: and the Wrath of this King, of this
King of Kings, is as the roaring of a Lion, and eno' to make the stoutest Heart
to tremble.

A little of his Wrath is eno' to be the Destruction of the Sinner. Lest ye
perish in the way, in the Course of your Sin and Rebellion against him, when
his Wrath is kindled but a little. How then can the proudest Sinner stand
before his flaming Wrath, when his Jealousy burns like Fire.

THE Kings and Judges of the Earth must not think themselves above the
Resentment of Christ, or too big for him to deal with. He will be angry with
them as soon as with others; and they will be as little able to stand before
his Indignation. Whatever Prerogatives they may lay claim to here, they will be
of no Service to them in the Day of Death, Isa. 30. 33.
and the Day of Judgment. Tophet is ordained of old, for the King it is
prepared, that will not submit to this King of Kings, and become his Servant.

NAY, he will get himself more Honor upon these, in the Execution of his
righteous Displeasure against them, if they refuse to honor him now: For in
Proportion to the Talents which Men have neglected or misimprov'd in this
World, will be the Degrees of Wrath inflicted on them in the next. And so we
find the Kings of the Earth, and the great Men are the foremost of those who in
the great Day of the Wrath of the Lamb, will run to the Rocks and Mountains for
Shelter, Rev. 6. 15.
as if his Face carried more of Displeasure in it toward them. Let the Rulers
of the World then be so wise as to give their Power to the Lord Jesus Christ,
that they may not fall under his Displeasure; that they may be accounted worthy
to escape all these things which shall come to pass, Luke 21. 36.
and to stand before the Son of Man. This Counsel in our Text is enforced by
one more Argument, which we may not quite pass over; and this is

4. THE Happiness of this Submission: BLESSED are all they that put their trust
in him. That thus Submit to him as their Sovereign, and put their Trust in him
as their Savior.

WHILE his Wrath burns against others, his Face will shine upon these. While
his Appearance strikes others into killing Terrors, it will fill these with
warmest Transports of Joy. Instead of that dreadful Order, Take the wicked and
unprofitable Servant, Mat. 25. 30.
and cast him into outer Darkness, they will hear that applauding commendation,
Well done good and faithful Servant; Mat. 25. 21.
and be bid to enter into the Joy of their Lord.

THEN subordinate Rulers who have well filled their lower Places, will have it
said to them, Thou has been faithful over a few things, 23. v.
I will make the Ruler over many things.

THEN the Kings of the Earth who religiously and dutifully cast their Crowns at
the Feet of Christ, will have a weighter, brighter, and more durable one than
that which they wore here, set upon their Heads; the heavenly Crown of Glory
and Life, of which they will never be deprived.

IN a word,

ALL they who have ruled for Christ, in their several Orders of Government,
shall at the Consummation of all Things, reign with Him for ever and ever; set
down with him on his Throne, even as he is set down with his Father on his
Throne. An Honor and Blessedness this, ineffable, inconceiveable! What an
Incentive is this to the Men of Ambition, that seek and court Honor! But, Oh!
where is the Faith of it? -- The Thing is future and invisible, therefore few
believe it, and seek after it, though it be not the less real and certain.

THUS I have discoursed upon the Text in the several Divisions of it; and must
hasten to bring Home what has been said in a distinct Application to the two
Divisions, of Rulers and Ruled, which take in this whole Assembly.

AND,

1. OUR honored Rulers, of every Degree and Order in the Government, are
taught what their Duty to Christ is, and what are His just Expectations from
them. Since he is the supreme Lord, and the Fountain of Power: Since the
Institution of Government is from Him, and your own Designation to your several
Trusts and Offices is by him: Since you are employed in Subordination to him,
and with a View to the same Design for which he has received all power in
Heaven and Earth: Since you depend upon him, who is Lord both of the Dead and
Living, for the Continuance of your Lives and public Advantages: Since you are
accountable to him, and must very quickly render up your Account: And since you
will then, according as you acquit your selves now, either fall under his
terrible Displeasure which is worse than Death, or receive the distinguishing
Marks of his Favor, which is better than Life in all the Honors or Enjoyments
of it: Since it is thus, I say, Duty, Gratitude and Interest conspire, all the
Rules of Justice, Decency and Honor unite, to oblige you to act in your
particular Posts and Stations, according to his Will, and for his Glory.

BUT it may be this Message of Heaven may the more awaken your thinking and
active Powers, and come with a greater Force and Weight upon you, if it be more
particularly applied.

WHEREFORE,

1. In the first place, let the Counsel of Heaven which has been given, be
acceptable to your EXCELLENCY, to whom with a most dutiful Respect it is now
addressed.

AND it is our great Pleasure and Happiness this Day, that we can address our
Governor in Chief, as one who has openly chosen the LORD to serve him, and
that in the Way of these Churches. Suffer me then, SIR, to remind you, That you
publicly devoted your self to the Service of the exalted Son of GOD, when you
had just entered the World in superior outward Circumstances and Advantages;
and it was a great Pleasure to your own and your Fathers Friends, and the
Friends of Religion, then to observe it; from the Hopes it gave them that
Christ and his People here would afterward have much Service from you, by the
Will of GOD: And doubtless you look upon your Covenant Obligations to be
strengthn'd, by the Honors to which Christ in his Providence has since
advanced you.

A Servant of Jesus Christ, is a Character which Kings and Governors have no
reason to be ashamed of; a Title which they should be ambitious of: For it will
be found their truest Honor, when all the Glory of this World shall vanish
like a Blaze in Straw; and will turn to their greatest Advantage, when all the
Prerogatives they were possessed of here, will be forgotten and useless.

THE Honor of Christ and his Interest are very much concerned in your
Excellency's Conduct and Administration. Religion is not in such a State at
this Day, but it needs the Example of the greatest amongst us to render it more
reputable and honorable. But while your Excellency is seen to pay a solemn
Regard to the Day of GOD, to attend with Reverence and Devotion upon his
public Worship, and to live in the Practice of those private and public
Virtues which adorn the Christian Character, this will go very far to prevent
its falling into ^^rther Contempt and Neglect.

ESPECIALLY if together with this the Honors of the Government, which are so
much at your Excellency's Disposal, are conferred on true Piety, and not given
in Course or out of Compliment. I humbly conceive your Excellency cannot give a
better Sanction and Security to the Religion that remains amongst us, than by
this wise Distinction in your Commissions -- And here, I think we should be
ungrateful to GOD and your Excellency, if we did not acknowledge the
Countenance and Encouragement which the Religion of the Country has received,
under your Excellency's Administration, from your Example and Authority both.

PROVIDENCE has placed your Excellency over a People, who stand in a special
Relation to Christ and are a distinguished Part of the Lot of his Inheritance:
And all your faithful Services to them, He will accept as done to Him. For I
trust we are still beloved for our Father's Sake; and for the Sake of a
precious Number through the Land, who are yet faithful with the Saints.

THEY are also your own People; and, as you have been pleased to say of them,
Bone of your Bone, and Flesh of your Flesh. And we may suppose the Intenseness
of your native Affection is increased, by the public Relation in which you
have so long stood to them.

AND suffer me to say, Sir, the distressed State of this People at this Day,
loudly calls for your paternal Compassions, your wise Councils, and best
Endeavors for their Relief. Their Case resembles that of the Jews in the Time
of Nehemiah; and like them they look to their Governor for Help and Redress.

IT may be many think it is more in your Excellency's Power to gratify and
ease them, than it really is; and do not eno' consider the Restrictions you are
under.

BUT you will at least discover your Tenderness for them in your Speeches from
the Chair, and Representations of their State to the Government at Home; and
even become an Intercessor for them, as in your Wisdom you judge you can serve
them: This cannot fail to engage them to you more and more in Duty and
Affection.

IF now I have gone too far in what I have said, I must rely on your
condescending Goodness to forgive me. The Searcher of Hearts knows it proceeds,
as from an ardent Affection to my dear Country, so from a sincere personal
Regard to your Excellency, and an unfeigned Desire that your Excellency may
long sit easy in the Chair of Government, and this People sit with Delight
under your Shadow.

YOUR Power, Honor and Influence employed for Christ and for his People, this,
SIR, will be a Crown which no Man can take from you: This will give you
undisturbed Serenity in a Recess from the Cares and Burdens of Government, and
cause the Blessings of an obliged People to follow you into Retirement; or it
will brighten the Shades of Death to you, and carry you from the Chair of
Government, to the Sepulcher of your Fathers, with the public Praises and
Lamentations; and will finally give you a blessed Part in the noble Triumphs of
the Saints of the most high, in the Fulfillment of that Word of our Savior, If
any Man serve me, John 12. 26.
let him follow me: And where I am there shall also my Servant be. If any Man
serve me, him will my Father honor.

2. LET this word of God be in the next Place addressed, with all Decency to
the honorable his MAJESTY's COUNCIL, and the honorable House of
REPRESENTATIVES, this Day in General Court Assembled. The Demand of the King of
Heaven from you all is, That you serve Him, and show your selves faithful to
his Interests in your several public Capacities, and this upon Pain of his
highest Displeasure.

AND here I would first of all apply my self to you, as having the Power of
Election to be exercised this Day. Herein you are entrusted with a singular
Opportunity to serve Christ and this People: And He that stands in the
Congregation of the mighty critically inspects you in, and will call you to a
strict Account for the Management of this Day's Work.

IT is an Affair of no small importance you are to transact this Afternoon; to
elect his Majesty's Council for the Province: These, in the Frame of our
Government, do, as it were, stand between the King and the People, both of
which do in a Sort meet in them; and while they are to guard the Prerogative of
the one, they are to preserve the Privilege of the other: They are one Branch
of the Legislature, and bear a distinct Part in the framing and enacting of our
Laws: Without their Consent on Civil Officers can be appointed in the Province;
and the College, in which the Churches through the Land are so deeply concerned,
falls in Part under their Inspection and Government. These Things render it a
Matter of no small Moment, who that Board consists of from Time to Time. And
though they are chosen but for a Year, great may be the Benefit or Detriment of
such a Choice; for in one Year are often laid the Foundations of many
Generations.

Let the Importance then of this Days Work lie with a due Weight upon the Mind
of every one concerned; and let none act in so weighty an Affair with a
triffling, a partial, or a party Spirit. Let me tell you, Gentlemen, your Votes
are not your own; you vote for Christ and for his People; and therefore must
look to the Qualifications of those you vote for. You know the Rules of
Election into Posts of Government prescribed in the Oracles of GOD: Consider
them, and act under the Direction and Awe of them. The Advice of Moses and
Jethro are indeed the Charge of GOD to Electors from Time to Time. Deuteronomy. 1. 13.
Take ye wise men, and understanding, and known among your Tribes. Exodus 18 21.
Thou shall provide out of all the people, able men, such as fear God, men of
truth, hating covetousness, and place such to be Rulers. Men of a general
Character for Capacity, Integrity, public Spiritedness, and Piety. Men of a
Genius for Government, and who understand the civil and religious Interests of
their People: True Men, that will act upon Principle, and not be daunted by
Frowns nor Clamours: Men not governed by narrow and selfesh Views, but that can
generously sacrifice their private Interest to that of the public, when they
stand in Competition: And Men that appear to act in the Fear of GOD in their
private Life; for only such will act for his Glory in a public Station; and
they are the most likely to be favored with the divine Presence and Blessing.

IT were sad indeed, if among our Tribes, in the several Parts of our Land,
there could not be found Persons of these Characters, eno' to fill every Seat
at the Council Table. Your Business is to look for them -- And may He who sits
in the Heavens, and presides over the Affairs of the Children of Men, lead you
in your Choice, to his own Glory, and the Advantage of this People; and therein
give us a happy Token that He is still in the Midst of us!

WHEN the Election of this Day is over, the three Parts of the Legislature will
come to act in their legislative Capacity: and they that give Law to others,
must consider themselves as under the Law to Christ.

VAST is the Trust committed to you in this Capacity: The Virtue and Religion,
the Liberties and Privileges, the Trade and Riches, the Protection and Defense
of this People, are very much in your Hands. And you must be entreated by the
Honor you bear to Christ, and your Allegiance to Him, to serve this his People
in these and all their Interests, to the utmost Reach of your Power.

AND I suppose never did the State of this People call for more consummate
Wisdom, tender Compassion, inviolable Fidelity, and unceasing Solicitude for
their Welfare, from their Fathers in the Government, than at this Day.

AN empty Treasury, a defense less Country, and embarrass'd Trade, are indeed
melancholy Things. How to supply the one, fortify the other, and relieve the
third, will to be sure be the Matters of your Attention. But here you expect no
Advice from the Pulpit. And indeed the Wisdom of the wise seems to fail them,
and humane Contrivance to be at a non plus. But when we know not what to do,
our Eyes should be unto the Lord: For he has said, Prove. 8. 14. 20.
Counsel is mine, and sound wisdom: I lead in the Way of Righteousness, in the
Midst of the Paths of Judgment. And innumerable Ways are open to his View, when
all are shut up to ours.

AMIDST these Cares which will now press upon you, you will not forget that you
are the Guardians of Religion; but will do what you can to maintain the the
Kingdom of Christ among us, in its Light, Purity and Glory. It is for the Sake
of the Church that the World stands, and Christ is Head over all Things for the
Church: Therefore they that rule by Him should employ their Care and Power for
that in the first and chief Place. So the Princes of Israel, in their March
though the Wilderness, pitched their Standard, at the Commandment of God, Number. 2.
2
about the Tabernacle of the Congregation to secure it. You will therefore
think it your Duty to strengthen the Hands, and encourage the Hearts of the
faithful Ministers of Christ; and do your Part that there may be a Succession
of such in Times to come, by supporting the Means of Education, and cherishing
the College from whence the Churches look for their Supply: Your generous
Smiles on that Society we thankfully acknowledge as an Instance of your just
Care that Religion and Learning may still flourish amongst us.

WHETHER any new Laws need to be bro't forward, for the suppressing our growing
immoralities, You, Gentlemen, who live in the several Parts of our Land, can
best judge. But what will the best Laws signify without a vigorous Execution?
Let ^e therefore in the next Place apply my self,

3. To the Executive Part of the Government over us; the Honorable Judges of
our Courts, and Justices in our several Countys. Permit me to say to your
Honors, You are Christ's Officers and Ministers, and must act for Him in that
Part of Government which his Providence has assigned you.

LET your Courts therefore be always opened in His Name: I mean that you pay
Him your public Homage, and adore him as the supreme King, Lawgiver and Judge,
by solemn and open Prayer. This is done, I suppose, in our several Courts of
Justice through the Land: And I think that all the Officers of the Court, and
those who have Business at it, should be ordered reverently to attend --
Realise his Presence, Presidency and Inspection, and act under the Awe and
Influence thereof: For He stands in the Congregation of the mighty, and Psalm.
82. 1.
judges among the Gods. -- In dispencing public Justice endeavor a
Conformity to His Administration. Psalm. 45. 6. 7.
For the Scepter of his Kingdom is a right Scepter: He loves Righteousness,
and hates Iniquity.

IN civil Causes let there be shown the most steady Impartiality, and
unreproachable Integrity. The Charge which King Jehoshaphat gave to his Judges,
is the Charge of the King of Heaven to you, Take heed what you do; 2 Chronicles. 19.
6, 7.
for ye judge not for Man, but for the Lord, who is with you in the Judgment:
Wherefore let the Fear of the Lord be upon you: For there is no Iniquity with
the Lord our God, nor Respect of Persons, nor taking of Gifts. -- And in
criminal Cases, let the Edge of the Law be sharpened in Proportion to the Nature
of the Crime, and the Boldness of the Transgressor. While you sit on the Seat
of Judgment, Sinners should behold your Face as the Face of God, which is set
against them that do wickedly: And the Day of Assize should be a little Image
of that Day, when the Lord will come to judge the World in Righteousness, and
the People with his Truth; and shall render Indignation and Wrath, Tribulation
and Anguish, to every Soul of Man that does Evil. The Judge on the Bench should
be worthy of that Commendation, which Christ gave to the Angel of the Church of
Ephesus, Rev. 22.
I know thy Works: How thou can not bear them which are evil.

BUT as the wise Constitution of our Government has put the Execution of our
Laws very much into the Hands of a single Magistrate, so I would apply my self
here to those who are in the Commission of the Peace through the Province.

You, Gentlemen, may do much in your single Capacity, to restrain the Sons of
Wickedness; to stop the Mouths of profane Swearers and Cursers; to prevent
Sabbath-breaking, Drunkenness and Idleness; and to break up such Houses as are
Places of Debauchery, and Cages of unclean Birds. Courts can take Notice only
of what is presented to them; but you can search out Iniquity, and follow it
into its hiding Places. And let me beseech you for Christ's Sake, and charge
you in his Name, to arise and exert your selves. For, is there not Occasion? Is
not the present Generation loose and dissolute in Manners? Does not Iniquity
come in upon us like a Flood? And Vice almost ride triumphant? Will you then
let the Sword of Justice rust in your Hands? Shall our good Laws prove a dead
Letter, and lie by as waste Paper, only for want of a vigorous Execution? And
shall the Enemies of GOD and Godliness, find Security under Christian
Magistrates? -- Certainly they who receive such an important Trust as the
Execution of our Laws, and accept of the Honor attending the Title of
Magistrates, should be faithful in the Discharge of their Office.

THANKS be to GOD! We are blessed under the present Administration with a
Number of such Magistrates. And the Zeal of some of them in this Town is truly
laudable, and has had a visible good Effect -- Go on, Gentlemen, with new
Resolution and Vigor, in your pious Endeavors for the legal Suppression of
scandalous Wickedness. Despise the little Flirts of some, and fear not the big
Looks of any. Still say to the foolish, Deal not foolishly; Psalm. 75. 4.
and to the ^icked, Lift not up the Horn.

YOU have the Law on your Side. Our Governor has lately called upon and
charged you in a seasonable Proclamation. Good People do bless you. And GOD
will accept and reward you! So Jehoshaphat encouraged the Ministers of Justice
under his Government, to a resolute Discharge of their Duty; 2 Chronicles. 19. 11.
Deal courageously, and the Lord will be with the good.

II. IT is now Time for me to hasten to apply my self to the Body of the
People, those who are only in a private Capacity, and fall into the Division of
the Ruled.

AND here I can be spared only a few short Hints.

LET me exhort you then to Thankfulness, that you live under Christian
Magistrates, who are a Terror not to good Works, but to the Evil; and who
countenance Religion by their Example as well as Authority. To use the Words of
an eminent Person of our Order on this Occasion many Years ago, The late Rev.
Mr. PEMBERTON, in his Election Sermon.
Is it not a valuable Blessing, that we don't see such Madness and Folly set in
great Dignity over us, which would make Vice reputable? That we don't see the
first Chair of Government, the Council Table, and Seats of Judgment, filled
with Men of infamous Lusts, whose Lives are the last Defiance to all that is
sacred and divine, to Religion, common Honesty and Sobriety; openly wallowing
in the grossest Pollutions of Sensuality? Ought not this to be esteemed a
Favor of Heaven, which challenges a Tribute of Gratitude and Praise. For the
Lives of such Rulers would give a Sanction to Wickedness; and what a Torrent of
it would then break in upon us, and bear away all Opposition before it? It is
an ancient Observation, and will always be found true, The Wicked, walk on
every Side, Psalm. 12. 8.
when the vilest Men are exalted.

LET me also exhort you to reverence Government as an Institution of GOD and to
treat Magistrates as Christ's Ministers: And since the Honor of Christ, as
well as the public Weal, is so much concerned in their Administration, make
Conscience of praying for them, constantly and fervently. -- And also to be
assisting in your several Stations to the Magistrate, that so the great and
good Ends of civil Government may be attained.

FINALLY,

I am to demand Subjection and Obedience to the LORD JESUS CHRIST, from every
one of you all. If Kings and Judges of the Earth, are to kiss the Son of GOD,
and serve the Lord with Fear, Common People cannot be excused. Christ is your
rightful Sovereign: But does he reign in your Hearts, and in your Lives? Are
none of you in a foreign Service? He that has your Obedience, the same is your
Lord and King. To whom ye yield your selves Servants to obey, Rom 6 16
his Servants ye are to whom ye obey. To whom then do you yield the most
cheerful and constant Obedience? To the Commands of Christ, or the
Solicitations of Satan, and your own Lusts? -- The works of the Flesh are
manifest, which are these, Drunkenness, Uncleanness, Swearing,
Sabbath-breaking, Wrath, Hatred, Variance, etc. How many by living in these
Sins, and also in the Neglect of those holy spiritual Duties of Religion which
Christ requires, trample upon his Authority, and declare They will not have
this Man to reign over them? This is the Language of Sinners, Let us break
those Bands asunder which bind us to Christ, and cast away his Cords from us!
-- But will You, O Sinner! persist in this Rebellion? If you do so but a little
longer, it will issue in your utter Ruin, and his Power and Righteousness will
raise Satisfaction and Glory to themselves from your deserved eternal
Destruction. Luke 19. 27. But those mine Enemies, that would not that I should
reign over them, bring hither, and slay them before me.

HEAR then the Counsel of Heaven, and obey the Command of the Gospel this Day;
every one of you without Exception. Kiss the Son, with a Kiss of Loyalty and
Subjection; and henceforth serve in Holiness and Righteousness before him all
the Days of your Life: Heb. 5. 9.
For he is the Author of eternal Salvation, only to them that obey him. -- Kiss
the Son with a Kiss of Affection: 1 Cor. 16. 22.
For if any Man love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be Anathema,
Maran-atha! -- Kiss him in Token of Trust and Dependence: Act. 4. 12.
For there is Salvation in no other, nor any other Name given under Heaven,
whereby Men can be saved. -- This is the only Way of Safety and Blessedness:
For his faithful Subjects shall be preferred and rewarded, when he will take
Vengeance on his Adversaries, and render Wrath to his Enemies.

BUT I must break off --: And I know not how to conclude better than with
repeating the solemn Words of my Text, as addressed to the whole Assembly. Be
wise now therefore, O ye Rulers of all Degrees: Be instructed all ye People,
high and low, rich and poor together, Serve the LORD with Fear, and rejoice
with Trembling: Kiss the SON, least He be angry, and ye perish from the Way,
when his Wrath is kindled but a little: Blessed are all they that put their
Trust in Him!

The END.
CORRECTIONS.
Page 5. l. 5th from the Bottom, read conceded.

P. 11. l. 8. for curious read various.

P. (...) After Judgment add Seat.


