Mr. Whitefield's SERMON* On Acts xxvi. 28. Almost thou persuadest me to be a
Christian

The Almost Christian

A SERMON Preached to a numerous Audience in England.

By George Whitefield, A. B. Of Pembroke-College, OXFORD.

To which is added, A POEM on his Design for GEORGIA.

London Printed: printed at Boston, by T. Fleet, for CHARLES HARRISON,
Over Against the Brazen Head in Cornhill. 1739.

The Almost Christian.
ACTS xxvi. 28. Almost thou persuadest me to be a Christian.
THESE Words contain the ingenious Confession of King Agrippa; which having
some reference to what went before, it may not be improper to relate to You the
Substance of the preceding Verses, to which these Words are so closely
connected.

THE Chapter then, out of which this Text is taken, contains an admirable
Account the Great Saint Paul gave of his wonderful Conversion from Judaism to
Christianity, when he was called to make his Defense before Festus and another
Gentile Governor. Our Blessed Lord had long since foretold, that, When the Son
of Man should be lifted up, his Disciples should be brought before Kings for
his Name's sake, for a Testimony unto them. And very good was the Design of
Infinite Wisdom in thus ordaining it: For Christianity being from the very
Beginning a Doctrine of the Cross, the Princes and Rulers of the Earth thought
themselves too high to be instructed by such mean Teachers, or too happy to be
disturbed by such unwelcome Truths: and therefore would have always continued
Strangers to JESUS CHRIST and him Crucified, had not (...) Apostles, by being
arraigned as Criminals before them, gained Opportunities of Preaching to them
JESUS and the Resurrection. Saint Paul Knew full well that this was the main
Reason, why his blessed Master permitted his Enemies at this Time to arraign
him at a public Bar: And therefore, in compliance with the Divine Will, thinks
it not sufficient barely to make his Defense, but endeavors at the same Time
to convert, his Judges. And this He did with such Demonstration of the Spirit,
and of Power, that Festus, unwilling to be convinced by the strongest Evidence,
cries out with a loud Voice, Paul, much Learning does make thee mad. To which
the brave Apostle (like a true Follower of the Holy JESUS) meekly replies, I am
not mad, most noble Festus, but speak forth the Words (...) Truth and
Soberness. But in all Probability seeing King Agrippa more affected with his
Discourse, (...) observing in him an Inclination to know the Truth (...) he
applies himself more particularly to Him: The King, says he, knows of these
Things; before whom also I speak freely; for I am persuaded that none of these
Things are hidden from him. And then, that if possible he might complete his
wished-for Conversion, he, with an inimitable Strain of Oratory, addresses
himself still more closely, -- King Agrippa, Believe thou the Prophets? I
know that thou believe them. At which the Passions of the King began to work
so strongly, that he was obliged in open Court to own himself affected by the
Prisoner's preaching, and ingeniously to cry out, Paul, almost thou persuadest
Me to be a Christian.

WHICH Words, taken with the Context, afford us a lively Representation of the
different Reception the Doctrine of CHRIST's Ministers, who come in the Power
and Spirit of Saint Paul, meets with nowadays in the Minds of Men. For
notwithstanding They like the Great Apostle, speak forth the Words of Truth and
Soberness; and with such Energy and Power, that all their Adversaries cannot
gainsay or resist: yet too many, with the most Noble Festus before mentioned,
being, like him, either too proud to be taught, or too sensual, too careless,
or too worldly-minded to live up to their Doctrine, -- in order to excuse
themselves cry out, that much Learning, much Study, or what is more
unaccountable, much Piety, has made them Mad. And (...), Blessed be GOD! all
do not thus disbelieve our Report; yet amongst those many others, who (...)
receive the Word, and confess that we speak the Words of Truth and Soberness,
there are so Few, who arrive at any higher Degree of Piety than that of
Agrippa, or are any farther persuaded than to be Almost Christians, -- that I
cannot but think it highly necessary to warn my dear Hearers of the Danger of
such a State. And therefore from the Words of the Text shall endeavor to
consider these three Things: I. First, WHAT is meant by an Almost Christian.
II. Secondly, WHAT are the chief Reasons why so few arrive no higher than to be
Almost Christians. III. Thirdly, I shall consider the Ineffectualness, Dange^*
Absurdity, and Uneasiness that attend those (...) but Almost Christians. IV.
Fourthly, I shall conclude with a general Exhortation, to set all upon striving
not only to be Almost but Altogether Christians.


I. AND First, I am to consider What is meant by an Almost Christian.

AN Almost Christian then, if we consider him in respect to his Duty to GOD, is
one that ha^^s between two Opinions, that wavers between CHRIST and the World;
that would reconcile GOD and Mammom, that is, Light and Darkness, CHRIST and
Belial. It is true, He has an Inclination to Religion, but then he is very
cautious how he goes too far in it: His false Heart is always crying out Spare
thyself, Do thyself, no Harm. He prays indeed, that GOD's Will may be done on
Earth as it is in Heaven: but then, notwithstanding He is very partial in his
Obedience, and fondly hopes that GOD will not be extreme to mark every Thing
that He wilfully does amiss? though an inspired Apostle has told him, that He
that wilfully offends in one Point is guilty of all. Above all He in one that
depends much o^ outward Ordinances, and upon that Account looks upon himself as
Righteous, and despises Others, though at the same Time he may be as great a
Stranger to the Divine Life as any other Person whatsoever. In short, he is
fond of the Form but never experiences the Power of Godliness in his Heart: He
goes on Year after Year, feeling and attending on the Means of Grace; but then,
like Ph^roah's Lean Kine, is never the better, but rather the worse for them.

IF you consider Him in respect to his Neighbor. He is one that is justly
strict to all, but then this does not proceed from any Love to GOD or Regard ^o
Man, but only out of a Principle of Self-Love* because he knows Dishonesty will
spoil his Reputation, and consequently hinder his Thriving in the World.

HE is one that depends much on being Negatively Good, and contents himself
with the Consciousness of having done no one any Harm; though he reads in the
Gospel, that the Unprofitable Servant was cast into ^uter Darkness, and the
Barren Fig Tree cursed and dried up from the Roots, not for bearing bad, but no
Fruit.

HE is no Enemy to Charitable Contributions, if not ^oo frequently recommended:
But then he is quite unacquainted with the kind Offices of Visiting the Sick
and imprisoned, Clothing the Naked, and Relieving the Hungry. He thinks that
these Things belong only to the Clergy, though his own false Heart tells him,
that nothing but Pride keeps him from exercising these Acts of Humility, and
that JESUS CHRIST, in the 15th Chapter of Saint Matthew, condemns Persons to
everlasting Punishment, not for being Fornicators, Drunkards, or Extortioners,
but merely for neglecting these Charitable Offices. When the Son of Man, says
our Blessed Lord himself, shall come in his Glory, He shall set the Sheep on
his Right Hand, and the Goats on ^is Left. And then shall He say unto them on
his Left hand, Depart from me ye Cursed, into everlasting Fire prepared for the
Devil and his Angels! For I was an ^^ngred, and Ye gave me no Meat; I was
thirsty, and ^e gave me no Drink; I was a Stranger, and Ye took ^e not in;
Naked and Ye Clothed me not; Sick and in ^rison, and Ye visited me not. Then
shall They also say, Lord, When saw we Thee an hungered, or a thirst, or a
Stranger, or naked, or sick, or in Prison, and did not minister unto Thee? Then
shall be answer them, Verily I say unto you, Inasmuch as Ye have not done it
unto one of the least of these my Brethren, ye did it not unto me: And these
shall go away into Everlasting Punishment. I thought proper to give You this
whole Passage of Scripture at large, because our Savior lays such a
particualar Stress upon it; and yet notwithstanding it is so little regarded,
that, were we to judge by the Practice of Christians, one should be tempted to
think there were no such Verses in the BIBLE.

BUT, to proceed in our Character of an Almost Christian: If we consider him in
respect to Himself; as before we said he was strictly honest to his Neighbor,
so he is likewise strictly sober in himself: But then both his Honesty and
Sobriety proceed from the same Principle of a false Self-love. It is true, He
runs not into the same Excess of Riot with other Men; but then it is not out of
Obedience to the Laws of GOD, but either because his Constitution will not away
with Intemperance; or rather because he is cautious of forfeiting his
Reputation, or unfitting himself for temporal Business. But though he is so
Prudent as to avoid Intemperance and Excess, for the Reasons before mentioned;
yet he always goes to the Extremity of what is lawful. It is true, He is no
Drunkard; but then he has no Christian Self-denial to plead for him. He cannot
think our Savior to be so austere a Master, as to deny us to indulge ourselves
in some Particulars: And so by this Means he is kept out of a Sense of true
Religion, as much as if he had lived in Debauchery, or any other Crime
whatever. As to settling his Principles as well as Practice, He is guided more
by the World than by the Word of GOD. As for his Part, he cannot think the Way
to Heaven so narrow as some would make it; and therefore considers not so much
what the Scripture requires, as what such and such a Man does, or what will
best suit his own corrupt Inclinations. Upon this account, he is not only very
Cautious himself, but likewise very careful of young Converts, whose Faces are
set Heavenward; and therefore is always acting the Devil's Part, and bidding
them spare themselves, though they are doing no more than what the Scripture
strictly requires of them to do: The Consequence of which is, that He suffers
not Himself to enter into the Kingdom of GOD, and They that are entering in he
hinders.

THUS lives the Almost Christian: Not that I can say, I have fully described
him to you; but from these Out-lines and Sketches of his Character, if your
Consciences have done their proper Offices, and made a particular Application
of what has been said to your own Hearts, I cannot but fear that some of you
may observe some Features in his Picture, obious as it is, too near resembling
your own; and therefore cannot but hope, at the same Time, that you join with
the Apostle in the Words immediately following the Text, and wish yourselves
not only Almost, but Altogether Christians.

But it is Time for me to proceed to the Second General Thing Proposed; namely,
to Consider the Reasons why so many are no more than Almost Christians.

AND the first Reason I shall mention is, because so many set out with false
Notions of Religion; and though they live in a Christian Country, yet know not
what Christianity is. This perhaps may be esteemed a hard Saying, but
Experience sadly evinces the Truth of it: For some place Religion in being of
this or that Communion; more in Morality; most in a round of Duties and a Model
of Performances; and few, very few, acknowledge it to be, what is really is, a
thorough, inward Change of Nature, a Divine Life, a Vital Participation of
JESUS CHRIST, an Union of the Soul with GOD; which the Apostle expresses by
saying, He that is joined to the Lord is One Spirit. Hence it happens that so
many, even of the most knowing Professors, when you come to converse with them
concerning the Essence, the Life, the Soul of Religion, I mean our New Birth in
JESUS CHRIST, confess themselves quite ignorant of the Matter, and cry out with
Nicodemus, How can this Thing be! And no wonder then, that so many are only
Almost Christians, when so many know not what Christianity is: No marvel so
many take up with the Form, when they are quite Strangers to the Power of
Godliness; or content themselves with the Shadow, when they know so little
about the Substance of it. And this is one Cause why so many are Almost, why so
few are Altogether Christians.

A SECOND Reason that may be assigned why so many are no more than Almost
Christians, is a servile Fear of Man: Multitudes there are, and have been, who
though awakened to a Sense of the Divine Life, and have tasted and felt the
Powers of the World to come; yet, out of a base sinful Fear of being counted
singular, or contemned by Men, have suffered all those good Impressions to wear
off again. It is true they have some Esteem for JESUS CHRIST; but then, like
Nicodemus, they would come to him only by Night: They are willing to serve him;
but then they would do it secretly for fear of the Jews: They have a mind to
see JESUS, but then they cannot come to him because of the Press, for fear of
being laughed at, and ridiculed by those with whom they used to sit at Meat.
But well did our Savior prophesy of such Persons, How can ye love me which
receive Honor one of another? Alas! have they never read, that the Friendship
of this World is Enmity with GOD; and that our Lord himself has threatened,
Whosoever shall be ashamed of me or of my Words, in this wicked and adulterous
Generation, of him shall the Son of Man be ashamed, when He comes in the Glory
of his Father and of his Holy Angels? But no wonder that so many are no more
than Almost Christians, since so many love the Praise of Men more than the
Honor which comes of GOD.

A THIRD Reason why so many are no more than Almost Christians, is a reigning
Love of Money. This was the pitiable Case of that forward young Man in the
Gospel, who came running to our Blessed Lord, and kneeling before him, enquired
what He must do to inherit Eternal Life; to which our Blessed Master replied,
Thou know the Commandments, Do not Kill, Do not commit Adultery, Do not
Steal: To which the Young Man replied (Oh that every Young Man here present
could do so too!) All these have I kept from my Youth. But when our Lord
proceeded to tell him, Yet lackest thou One Thing, Go sell all that thou have
and give to the Poor, -- he was grieved at that Saying, and went away
sorrowful, for he had great Possessions! Poor Youth! He had a good Mind to be a
Christian, and to inherit Eternal Life, but thought it too dear, if it could be
purchased at no less an Expense than of his whole Estate! And thus many, both
Young and Old, nowadays come running to worship our Blessed Lord in public,
and kneel before him in private, and enquire at his Gospel, What they must do
to inherit Eternal Life: but when they find they must renounce the
Self-Enjoyment of Riches, and forsake All in Affection, to follow Him, They
cry, The LORD pardon us in this Thing! -- We pray Thee, have us excused. --

BUT is Heaven so small a Trifle in such Men's Esteem, as not to be worth a
little gilded Earth? Is Eternal Life so mean a Purchase, as not to deserve the
temporary Renunciation of a few transitory Riches? Surely it is? But however
inconsistent such a Behavior may be, this inordinate Love of Money is too
evidently the common and fatal Cause why so many are no more than Almost
Christians.

NOR is the reigning Love of Pleasure a less uncommon, or a less fatal Cause
why so many are no more than Almost Christians. Thousands and Thousands there
are, who despise Riches, and would willingly be True Disciples of JESUS CHRIST,
would parting with their Money make them so; but when they are told that our
Blessed Lord has laid it down as an indispensable Condition, that Whosoever
will come after him must deny himself; -- like the pitiable Young Man before
mentioned, they go away sorrowful: For they have too great a Love for sensual
Pleasures: They will, like Herod, perhaps send for the Ministers of CHRIST, as
He did for John, and hear them gladly: But touch them in their Herodias, tell
them they must part with such or such a darling Pleasure; and with Wicked Ahab
they cry out, Have thou found us, O our Enemy? --

TELL them of the Necessity of Mortification, Fasting, and Self-Denial, and it
is as difficult to them to hear, as if you was to bid them cut off a Right Hand
or pluck out a Right Eye: They cannot think our Blessed Lord requires so much
at their Hands, though an inspired Apostle has commanded us to mortify our
Members which are upon the Earth: And He himself, even after he had converted
Millions, and was very near arrived to the End of his Race, yet professed that
it was his daily Practice to Keep under his Body, and bring it into Subjection,
lest after he had preached to Others, He himself should be a Castaway!

BUT some Men would be wiser than this Great Apostle, and chalk out to us what
they falsely imagine an easier Way to Happiness. They would flatter us we may
go to Heaven without offering Violence to our sensual Appetites; and enter into
the Strait Gate without striving against our carnal Inclinations. And this is
another Reason why so many are only Almost, and not Altogether Christians.

THE Fifth and last Reason I shall assign why so many are only Almost
Christians, is a Fickleness and Instability of Temper.

IT has been, no doubt, the Misfortune that many a Minister and sincere
Christian has met with to weep and wail over Numbers of promising Converts, who
seemingly began in the Spirit, but after a while have fell away, and basely
ended in the Flesh; and this not for want of right Notions in Religion, nor out
of a servile Fear of Man, nor out of a Love of Money or sensual Pleasure, but
out of an Instability and Fickleness of Temper.

THEY looked upon Religion merely for Novelty; as something which pleased them
for a while, but after their Curiosity was satisfied, they have laid it aside
again; Like the Young Man that came to see JESUS with a Linen Cloth about his
naked Body, they have followed him for a Season, but when Temptations have come
to take hold on them, for want of a little more Resolution, they have been
stripped of all their good Intentions, and fled away naked. They at first, like
a Tree planted by the Waterside, grew up and flourished for a while; but
having no Root in themselves, no inward Principle of Holiness and Piety, like
Jonah's Gourd, were soon dried up, cut down, and withered. Their good
Intentions are but too like the violent Motions of the Animal Spirits of a Body
newly beheaded, which though impetuous, are not lasting. In short, they set out
well in their Journey to Heaven, but finding the Way either narrower or longer
than they expected, -- through an Unsteadiness of Temper, They have made an
Eternal Halt, and so returned like the Dog to his Vomit, or like the Sow that
was washed to her wallowing in the Mire!

BUT I tremble to pronounce the Fate of such unstable Professors, who having
put their Hands to the Plow, for want of a little more Resolution, shamefully
look back. How shall I repeat to them that dreadful Threatening, If any Man draw
back, my Soul shall have no Pleasure in him! And again, It is impossible, that
is, exceeding difficult at least, for those that have been once enlightened, and
have tasted the Good Gift of GOD's Holy Spirit, and the Powers of the World to
come, if They should fall away, to be renewed again unto Repentance. But
notwithstanding the Gospel is so severe against Apostates, yet many that begun
well, through a Fickleness of Temper, (Oh that none of us here present may ever
be such) have been by this Means of the Number of those that turn back unto
Perdition. And this is the Fifth and last Reason I shall give why so many are
only Almost and not Altogether Christians.

BUT you, Brethren, have not so learned CHRIST, GOD forbid that a Fear of a
little Contempt, a Love of a little worldly Gain, or a Fondness for a little
sensual Pleasure, or Want of a steady Resolution, should hinder you from
entering into Eternal Life, or make you so sottish as to think you may compound
Matters between GOD and your Souls.

III. PROCEED we therefore now to the Third General Thing proposed, namely, To
consider the Folly of being no more than an Almost Christian.

AND the first Proof I shall give of the Folly of such a Proceeding is, -- that
it is ineffectual to Salvation. It is true, such Men are Almost Good, but
almost to hit the Mark is really to miss it. GOD requires us to love him with
all our Hearts, with all our Souls, and with all our Strength: He loves us too
well to admit any Rival; because so far as our Hearts are empty of GOD, so far
must they be unhappy. The Devil indeed, like the false Mother that came before
Solomon, would have our Hearts divided, as she would have had the Child; but
GOD, like the true Mother, will have all or none. My Son, give me thy Heart,
thy whole Heart, is the general Call to all: And if we do not perform this
Condition, we never can expect the Divine Mercy.

PERSONS may indeed flatter themselves that a partial Obedience will serve
their Turn* but GOD at the Great Day will strike them dead, as he did Annanias
and Sapphira by the Mouth of his Servant Peter, for pretending to offer him all
their Hearts, when they kept back from him the greatest Part. They may perhaps
impose upon their fellow Creatures for a while, but He that enabled Ahijah to
cry out, Come in, thou Wife of Jeroboam, when she came disguised to enquire
about her sick Son, will also discover Them through their most artful
Dissimulations, and if their Hearts are not whole with him, -- appoint them
their Portion with Hypocrites and Unbelievers.

BUT Secondly, What renders an halfway Piety more inexcusable is, that it is
not only insufficient to our own Salvation, but also most prejudical to that of
Others.

AN Almost Christian is one of the most hurtful Creatures in the World: He is a
Wolf in Sheep's Clothing; He is one of those false Prophets our Blessed Lord
bids us beware of, in his Sermon on the Mount, who would persuade Men, that the
Way to Heaven is broader than it really is; and thereby, as it was observed
before, enter not into the Kingdom of GOD themselves, and those that are
entering in, they hinder. These, these are the Men that turn the World into a
lukewarm Laodicean Spirit; that hang out false Lights, and so shipwreck
unthinking benighted Souls in their Voyage to the Heaven where they would be.
These are they that are greater Enemies to the Cross of CHRIST, than Infidels
themselves: For of an Unbeliever every one will be aware; but an Almost
Christian, through his subtle Hyp^oci^y, draws away many after him; and
therefore must expect to receive the greater Damnation.

BUT Thirdly, As it is most prejudicial to ourselves and hurtful to others, so
it is the greatest Piece of Ingratitude we can express toward our Lord and
Master JESUS CHRIST. For did He come down from Heaven, and shed his precious
Blood, to purchase those Hearts of ours, and shall we only give him half of
them? Oh how can we say we love Him, when our Hearts are not wholly with him?
How can we call Him our Savior, when we will not endeavor sincerely to
approve ourselves to Him, and so let him see of the Travail of his Soul, and be
satisfied!

HAD any of us purchased a Slave at a most expensive Rate, that was before
involved in the utmost Miseries and Torments, and so must have continued for
ever, -- had we shut up our Bowels of Compassion from him; and was this Slave
afterward to grow rebellious, or deny giving us but half his Service: How, how
should we exclaim against his base Ingratitude! And yet this base ungrateful
Slave thou art, O Man, who acknowledgest thyself to be redeemed from infinite
unavoidable Misery and Punishment, by the Death of JESUS CHRIST, and yet will
not give thyself wholly to Him. But shall we deal with GOD our Maker in a
Manner we would not be dealt with by a Man like ourselves? Shall we mete but a
^ess Measure of Love to our Savior, than we would have dealt to ourselves? GOD
forbid!

IV. No, (that I may come to the last Thing proposed, namely, to add a Word or
two of Exhortation to be not only Almost, but Altogether Christians) Let us
scorn all such base and treacherous Treatment of our King and Savior, nay our
GOD. Let us not take some Pains all our Lives to go to Heaven, and yet plunge
ourselves into Hell at last. Let us give GOD our whole Hearts, and no longer
halt between two Opinions: If the World be GOD, let us serve That; If Pleasure
be a GOD, let us serve That; but if the LORD He be GOD, let us, Oh let us serve
Him alone. Alas! Why, why should we stand out any longer? Why should we be so
in Love with Slavery, as not wholly to renounce the World, the Flesh, and the
Devil, which, like so many spiritual Chains, bind down our Souls, and hinder
them from flying up to GOD. Alas! What are we afraid of? Is not GOD able to
reward our entire Obedience? If He is, as the Almost Christian's lame Way of
serving Him seems to grant, -- Why then will we not serve Him entirely? For the
same Reason we do so much, why do we not do more? Or do you think that being
only half Religious will make you happy, but that going farther will render you
miserable and uneasy? Alas! this, my Brethren, is Delusion all over! For what
is it but this half Piety, this wavering between GOD and the World, that makes
so many that are seemingly well disposed, such utter Strangers to the Comforts
of Religion? They choose just so much of Religion as will disturb them in their
Lusts, and follow their Lusts so far as to deprive themselves of the Comforts
of Religion. Whereas, on the contrary, would they sincerely leave all in
Affection, and give their Hearts wholly to GOD; They would then (and they
cannot 'till then) experience the unspeakable Pleasure of having a Mind at
Unity with itself, and enjoy such a Peace of GOD, which even in this Life
passes all Understanding, and which they were entire Strangers to before. It is
true, if we will devote ourselves entirely to GOD, we must meet with Contempt;
but then it is because Contempt is necessary to heal our Pride. We must
renounce some sensual Pleasure; but then it is because those unfit us for
Spiritual ones, which are infinitely better. We must renounce the Love of the
World; but then it is that we may be filled with ^he Love of GOD: And when that
has once enlarg^d our Hearts, we shall, like Jacob when he served for his
beloved Rachael, think nothing too difficult to undergo, no Hardships too
tedious to endure, because of the Love we shall then have for our dear
Redeemer. Thus easy, thus delightful will be the Ways of GOD even in this Life:
But when once we throw off these Bodies, and our Souls are filled with all the
Fullness of GOD, Oh! What Heart can conceive, What Tongue can express, with what
unspeakable Joy and Consolation we shall then look back on our past sincere and
hearty Services, which have procured us so invaluable a Reward! Think you then,
my dear Hearers, we shall repent we had done too much; or rather think you not
we shall be ashamed that we did no more; and blush we were so backward to give
up All to GOD, when he intended hereafter to give us Himself? -- Let me
therefore, to conclude, exhort you, my Brethren, to have always the Unspeakable
Reward of an entire Obedience set before you; and think withal, that (...)
Degree of Holiness you neglect, every Instance of Piety you pass by, is a Jewel
taken out of your Crown, a Degree of Blessedness lost in the Vision of GOD. Oh!
do but always think and act thus, and you will no longer be laboring to
compound Matters between GOD and the World; but on the contrary, be daily
endeavoring to give up your selves more and more unto Him; you will be always
Watching, always Praying, always aspiring after farther Degrees of Purity, and
Love, and so consequently always preparing yourselves for a fuller Light and
Enjoyment of that GOD, in whose Presence there is Fullness of Joy, and at whose
Right Hand there are Pleasures for evermore! Amen! Amen!

FINIS.
To the Rev. Mr. WHITEFIELD, On his Design for GEORGIA.
HOW great, How just thy Zeal, adventurous Youth!
To spread in Heathen Climes, the Light of Truth!
Go loved of Heaven! with every Grace refined,
Inform, enrapture each dark Indian's Mind;
Grateful, as when to Realms long hid from Day,
The cheerful Dawn fore-shews the solar Ray.
How great thy Charity! whose large Embrace
(Intends the eternal Weal of all thy Race)
Prompts thee, the Rage of Winds and Seas to scorn,
^'effect the Work for which thy Soul was born.
What Multitudes, whom Pagan Dreams deceive,
shall, when they hear thy powerful Voice, believe?
Oh Georgia's Shore thy WESTLEY shall attend,
To hail the wished Arrival of his Friend.
With Joy, the promised Harvest he surveys,
And to his Lord for faithful Lab'rers prays:
Though crowded Temples here would plead thy stay,
Yet haste, blessed Prophet on thy destined Way.
Be gentle, Winds! and breathe an easy Breeze!
Be clear, ye Skies! and smooth, ye flowing Seas!
From Heaven, ye guardian Angels! swift descend,
Delighted, his blessed Mission to attend;
Which shall from Satan's Power whole Nations free,
While half the World to JESUS bow the Knee.
Long as Savannah, peaceful Stream! shall glide,
Your Worth renowned shall be extended wide:
Children, as yet unborn, shall bless your Lore,
Who thus, to save them, left your Native Shore*
The Apostles thus, with ardent Zeal inspired,
To gain all Nations for their LORD desired:
They measured Seas, a Life laborious knew,
And numerous Converts to their MASTER drew;
Whose Halleluja's on the aetherial Plains,
Rise scarce beneath the bright Seraphic Straing*

