THE DOCTRINE OF PREDESTINATION unto LIFE, Explained and Vindicated: In Four
SERMONS, preached to the Church of CHRIST, meeting in Brattle-Street, and
published at their general Desire: With some additional Passages and Quotations.

By WILLIAM COOPER, One of the PASTORS of said Church.

With a PREFACE by the Senior Pastors of the Town.

Doctrinam autem hanc de praedestinatione Dei aeterna atque immutabili, esse
neque supprimendam omnino, neque in scholis tantum inter doctos explicandam,
sed etiam in Pulpitis ad populum praedicandam; sed sobrie, hoc est, juxta ea
tantum, quae de hac in scripturis revelata sunt; et prudenter, hoc est, sermon
ita attemperato, ut neque ad licentiam, neque ad desperationem adducat, sed ad
aedificationem faciat, dico, atque doceo.

Zanch BOSTON: Printed by J. DRAPER, for J. EDWARDS and H. FOSTER, in Cornhil.
MDCCXL.

TO THE READER.
THE Subject of the following Treatise is one of the Doctrines of the
Reformation, embraced and owned by the Protestant Churches, when they threw off
the Yoke, and renounced the Errors of Popery; and is particularly the Doctrine,
not only of the Church of Scotland, but of England and Ireland, as they are by
Law established. Yet it is embraced by us, as it was by the Reformers from
Popery, because we find it in our Bible. This it is that makes us
Predestinarians and Calvinists: For Calvin nor Augustine, nor any Names
whatever, are any thing to us, but as they speak from the Holy Scriptures.
These are our only Oracles. What we find there, we believe and profess, though
incomprehensible to our weak and shallow Minds, which are by no means the
Measure of Truth. And we think we act a perfectly rational Part, as well as
reverent before the HIGH GOD, the Infinite Intelligence, in bowing our
Understandings to his Revelations respecting Truth and Duty, even where we
cannot answer every Scruple or Objection, for the reconciling seeming
Oppositions.

Let none then entertain the Doctrine of Election with Aversion, Scoff and
Ridicule; but with the lowest Reverence and highest Adoration. You will see
with what Reason from the plain and sincere word of God, through the following
Discourses; which are, in our Judgment, as modest, strong and brief an
Explanation and Vindication of this important Truth, as the Reader will be like
to meet with: and well suited to convince Gainsayers, satisfy the doubting,
establish the wavering, and stop the Mouth of vain Talkers, in Contradiction to
the faithful Word, which we are commanded to hold fast and contend for.

We willingly take this Opportunity to testify our Concurrence with the Author
in the Verity and Importance of this Doctrine; and our Satisfaction in his
having preached and published these Discourses.

And it is our hearty Prayer to God that the Churches of the Reformation, and
our Churches in particular, may be confirmed and established in this and other
Doctrines of Grace, as they have been of old delivered to 'em and received by
'em: And that as it is their indisputable Right and Duty in their choice of
Pastors, to take heed to the Soundness of their Principles, as well as to their
godly Life and edifying Gifts, they may ever do so in Fidelity to God, and Care
of their own Souls, and those of their Families.

That these Discourses may be attended with a Divine Blessing for these Ends,
and that our dear Brother may long live a Blessing to the Flock over which the
HOLY GHOST has made him an Overseer, to feed them in the Strength of the LORD
GOD, and be continued a burning Light before all the Churches; and after a Life
of great Services receive the Rewards of the wise and faithful Servant at the
Coming of our LORD, are the Prayers of his Brethren and Fellow Servants with
him to these Churches of CHRIST.

Benjamin Colman, Joseph Sewall, Thomas Prince, Andrew LeMercier, John Webb.
Boston, April 15. 1740. N. B. Among the CORRECTIONS at the end, these
following should have been mentioned;

Page 35. l. 7. from the bottom, read, The elder shall serve the younger. p.
77. l. 14. for two r. too.



OF Predestination unto Life.
SERMON I.
ROMANS, VIII. 29, 30. For whom he did foreknow, he also did predestinate to
be conformed to the image of his Son, that he might be the firstborn among
many brethren.

Moreover, whom he did predestinate, them he also called; and whom he called,
them he also justified; and whom he justified, them he also glorified.


THE apostle having in the foregoing chapters of this epistle, explained the
doctrine of justification, and pressed the necessity of sanctification, applies
himself in this to the consolation of the Lord's people. For the holy
scriptures are not only profitable for doctrine for reproof, for correction,
and instruction in righteousness, but are written that we, through patience and
comfort of them, might have hope: And the ministers of the word are appointed
to be helpers of the joy of them who through grace have believed. And, as a
worthy Expositor Mr. Henry.
says of this chapter, many of the people of God have found it a well spring of
comfort to their souls, living and dying, and have sucked and been satisfied
from these breasts of consolation, and with joy drawn water out of these wells
of salvation.

Having reckoned up many particular instances of the happiness of true
christians, such as a freedom from guilt and condemnation, the indwelling of
the Holy Spirit, a relation to God as his children, a title to future glory,
and the concurrence of all providence to promote their spiritual and
everlasting good, he represents the ground of all these as laid in God's
eternal decree of Election, or Predestination unto life, in the words that I
have read. For whom he did foreknow, them he also did predestinate, etc. Here
the order of the causes of our salvation is plainly set before us These words
have been commonly called the golden chain of salvation; and such a chain it is
as cannot be broken. There are four links in it.

1. Whom he did foreknow, he also did predestinate to be conformed to the
image of his Son. Whom he did foreknow. This is the foundation upon which the
whole frame of the surprising work of man's redemption stands; the first thing
to be considered in the scheme of salvation, upon which all the other parts
follow, and with which they are inseperably connected. It is here said of a
number of the children of men, as distinguished from the rest, that God has
fore-known them. And this foreknowledge implies choice; his having pitched
upon them to be the objects on whom his redeeming grace shall be glorified. It
is the same with that everlasting love, wherewith he is said to have loved his
people, Jer. 31.3. And means nothing less than his having set them apart for
himself, Psalm. 4.3. Words of knowledge in scripture often signify affection
and choice. So God said to Moses, Exodus 33.17 Thou have found grace in my
sight, and I know thee by name. Where one expression explains the other. So the
apostle tells us, 1 Cor. 8.3. That if any man love God, the same is known of
him. A knowledge of savor and good will must needs be here intended; and this
previous and preparatory to any thing recommending and lovely in the objects of
it; as is plain from the manner in which the apostle speaks to the Galatians,
ch 4. v. 9. Ye have known God, or rather are known of God On the other hand, we
are told Mat. 7.23.
our Savior will say to some in the great day, I never knew you, i e. I never
approved and owned you; for both their persons and characters were well known
to him. Duplex Dei decretum versatur circa electos, quorum alterum appellat
Ap^stelus (...); alterum (...), predestinationem, sive electionem* (...) autem
(...), sive proenotio, non est nudoe et simplicis not it oe, sed approbationis,
juxta usitatissimam scripturae phrasiologiam. Si quis diligit Deum, hic
cognitus est ab eo. Ecquid cognitione nuda, seclusa approbatione Dei? At sic
c^gnuscuntur etiam osores Dei. Twissi Vind. Great. Lib. 3. page 250. Etiam a
Piscatore observatum (...) ^roeodem adhiberi.


The same word is rendered foreordained, in 1 Pet. 1.20. Who, (i. e. Christ)
was verily fore ordained before the foundation of the world, but was manifest
in these last times for you. God's fore-knowing his people means nothing less
than his eternal purpose to make them his friends and favorites. It must
signify his determining mining to do them good, to call, justify, and
sanctify them now, and glorify them hereafter.

Those whom God thus fore-knew, he did predestinate to be conformed to the
image of his son; to be like to Jesus Christ in the temper of their minds, and
actions of their lives. This takes in the whole work of sanctification, of
which Christ is the great pattern and samplar. Observe; It is not said God
fore-knew they would be conformed to the image of his son, and so predestined
them, as some turn the sense of the words. This cannot be the meaning of them;
for this conformity to Christ is said to be the thing they are predestined
to, and is made the result of this foreknowledge; the effect of it, and not
the cause. Whom he did foreknow, them he did predestinate to be conformed to
the image of his son. Being designed for glory and happiness as the end, they
are decreed to grace and holiness as the way. For if there is a difference
between foreknowledge and predestination, it seems to be this, the former is
the appointment of the end, the other of the means unto it. And they are
predestined to this conformity to the image of the son of God, for the honor
of Christ, whose glory is designed by the Father in the whole work of
redemption. That he might be the first born among many brethren; might have the
honor of being the great pattern of holiness, as well as the meritorious cause
of our salvation and so in all things might have the pre-eminence.

2. Whom he did predestinate, them he also called. Not only with the external
call; so many are called, that were not chosen Matt. 12.16
; but with the internal and effectual call; which is the work of the Spirit of
God, whereby he convinces the conscience of guilt and wrath, enlightens the
understanding in the knowledge of Christ; bows the will, and inclines the
heart, to embrace him as a savior, and obey him as a king and lord. It Is, says
one, an effectual call from self and earth, to God, and Christ, and heaven, as
the end; from sin and vanity, to grace and holiness, and seriousness, as the
way." This is the first open work of grace upon an elect person. And all whom
God has from eternity predestined to grace and glory, he does in his own way
and time, thus effectually call.

3. Whom he called, them he also justified. Being in their effectual calling
persuaded and enabled to embrace the Lord Jesus Christ as he is offered in the
gospel, they are through him absolved from guilt, and accepted as righteous; are
no longer looked upon and dealt with as criminals, but owned and loved as
friends and favorites.

4. Whom he justified, them he also glorified. The other privileges the elect
of God are made partakers of in time, this of glorification, when time shall be
with them no more; in the soul first at death, in soul and body united after
the resurrection, through a blessed never-ending eternity. To this they were
designed in their election; for this they are prepared by their effectual
calling, and the sanctification of the spirit; that which hinders is taken out
of the way in their justification; and now, what can come between such a soul
and glory? As for God his work is perfect Psalm. 18.30
; and in the glorification of all the elect, his design of love to them will
have its full accomplishment.

It is not my intention to speak of all these privileges in the order in which
they stand connected in our text; and I have but lately discoursed concerning
two of them, effectual calling and justification. My present purpose therefore
is, to treat only of that which is the ground of them all, and from which the
rest result, namely, Election, or Predestination unto life.

This is an illustrious and very precious doctrine of christianity; so plainly
revealed in the holy scriptures, that it is really strange that any who profess
to regulate their faith by the bible can deny it. Yet it is not only denied by
many, but decried and reproached as unworthy of God, and prejudicial to
religion; while others who don't care to deny it, yet speak of it as amongst
those mysterious, controversial, and speculative points, which it is best not
to meddle with; and so they would have it smothered in the church, and shut out
of our sermons.

True indeed this doctrine has its mysteries, and abstruse difficulties, when
our minds try to enter far into it; so has other doctrines of the gospel which
yet we must affirm constantly, and endeavor to explain. Nor is it a doctrine
purely speculative; no, it has a powerful influence upon vital religion, and
practical godliness -- It has a direct tendency to advance the glory of God's
grace in our salvation, to humble the pride of man, to engage the love, excite
the praises, and constrain the obedience of God's children.

Our savior preached this doctrine; so did his apostles after him; and the
epistles to the churches are full of it; which plainly shows God would not have
it locked up from his people. Should we therefore, who now preach the gospel to
you, pass it over in silence, we should not be able to say we have declared to
you the whole counsel of God. I humbly apprehend such an omission would be in
effect to say, that Christ and his apostles preached, and the scriptures reveal
a doctrine, which is found to be useless if not hurtful, and therefore may not
now be insisted on. And would not this be to reproach the Holy Spirit who has
indicted the scriptures, and to do an unspeakable injury to revelation it self?

Besides, we are verily persuaded the edification and consolation of the people
of God, are not a little concerned in the opening and applying of this truth;
and that many other doctrines of the gospel cannot be righly understood without
it -- I have therefore chosen this for my subject, out of the chapter that has
been read in course this afternoon; sensible, I hope, that it is an awful and
tremendous subject; and with an humble dependence on the Holy Spirit so to
enlighten and assist me, as that the truth may not suffer, nor any soul be
hurt, through an unskilful management.

Indeed, let the subject be managed never so cautiously and scripturally, it
can hardly be expected but it will be treated as the discourses of the apostle
himself were, of whom we read, Acts 19.8, 9. That when he went into the
synagogue, and spoke boldly for the space of three months, disputing and
persuading the things concerning the kingdom of God, diverse were hardened, and
believed not, but spoke evil of that way before the multitude. But duty is
ours, and the event God's. We must always leave the success of our preaching
with him; and we are assured his word will not return void, but will accomplish
the thing whereunto it is sent Isa, 55.11.
If any should be enraged and hardn'd by the things that are spoken, and wrest
them to their own destruction, (which God forbid!) some, I trust, may be
confirmed, edified, and comforted. Yea, possibly these discourses on election,
may be blessed for the conversion of some of the elect of God, who may be
awakned hereby to give diligence to make their calling and election sure: And
if so, free grace will have the glory.

Though I shall study as much brevity as is consistent with clearness, yet I
cannot prosecute my design within the compass of a single sermon; three or four
discourses, if God give us the opportunity for them, will be little eno' for my
purpose And now, my Hearers, let me crave, and, as I speak in the name of
Christ, I may demand your reverend and serious attention. Let me entreat you to
lay aside prejudices, if you have entertained any, against this doctrine, and
to receive with meekness the engrafted word which is able to save your souls.
Let me desire you to stop all censures till I have finished the subject, if,
through the good hand of our God upon us, I may be allowed to do so. And let me
further ask you, before I proceed, to lift up your heart to God, in some such
secret petition as this, "Lord! If this doctrine be according to thy mind and
will, suffer not my mind to be prejudiced against it; but help me to receive it
in the love of it, and to improve it to all those holy saving purposes for
which thou have revealed it in thy word!" If any will not do thus, let me tell
them, their minds are not rightly disposed to hear, nor can they be looked upon
to be sincere enquirers after truth.

And now the method in which, through divine assistance, I would pursue the
subject is this,

I. I would represent and state the truth, to show you what we intend by the
doctrine of Election, or Predestination unto life.

II. I will endeavor to prove it, and show that the doctrine so represented
and stated, is really the doctrine of the gospel.

III. I shall attempt to answer the objections commonly bro't against it, and
to clear the doctrine of some difficulties wherewith its enemies have loaded it.

IV. I shall expose a few of the absurdities which follow upon the denial of
this doctrine, and mention some difficulties of which the contrary scheme
labors, and with which they are embarrass'd who are on the other side of the
question.

V. I shall open the importance of the doctrine, and show of what consequence
it is in the christian scheme.

Lastly, I shall endeavor to improve it to the great ends of serious religion,
and practical godliness.

I. I am in the first place, to represent and state the truth, and show what we
intend by the doctrine of Election, or Predestination unto life. And I choose to
describe it to you in the terms of the 17th among the famous articles of the
church of England, which are subscribed by all the allowed clergy of the nation
"Predestination unto life, says that article, is the everlasting purpose of
God, whereby before the foundation of the world was laid, he has constantly
decreed by his counsel, secret to us, to deliver from curse and condemnation,
those whom he has chosen in Christ Jesus out of mankind, and to bring them by
Christ unto everlasting salvation, as vessels made to honor." With this
article agree the confession of faith set forth by the assembly of Divines at
Westminster, and also their Catechisms, both the larger, and the shorter which
we receive and teach. This truth so asserted in our public standards, I shall
explain in several distinct propositions.

1. Predestination unto life respects only some of mankind It cannot respect
all, inasmuch as all the children of men will not be finally saved. As there
are evidently two sorts of persons in the world now, good and bad, so we are
sure from the word of God there will be found two very different sorts of
persons at the great day, who will be dealt with after a very different manner;
the righteous and the wicked. These shall go away into everlasting punishment,
but the righteous into life eternal. Mat. 25.46.
And if all mankind are not finally saved, to be sure they were not originally
predestined unto life; for the decree of God cannot be frustrated. He has
said, My counsel shall stand, and I will do all my pleasure. Isa. 46.10.
There is a remnant, says the apostle, according to the election of grace, Romans
11.5. and a remnant cannot be all. So in the 11th v. The election has obtained
it, and the rest were blinded. The common distinction therefore of the elect,
and non-elect, is just and necessary. When some are chosen out of many, the
rest must of consequence be left, or the very notion of election is destroyed.

2. These were personally chosen and pitched upon in the purpose and decree of
God concerning them. Some will have the election the scripture speaks of, to be
only of qualifications, and not of persons; but this is mere evasion and
trifling. The scripture plainly speaks of an election of persons. Whom he did
foreknow, says the text, them he did predestinate. These our savior styles
Joh. 17.6.
the men that the father had given him out of the world, and their names Rev.
17.8.
are said to be written in the book of life from the foundation of the world.

3. Those who are predestined unto life and happiness as the end, are also
predestined unto faith and holiness as the way. When God chooses persons to an
end, he also determines the means to that end. The same decree that
predestinates any persons to salvation, ascertains the means of attaining that
salvation. These, according to the constitution of the gospel, are faith and
holiness; and so they come under the same decree by which any are predestined
unto glory. The elect are not predestined unto life, provided they perform
the conditions of salvation, do believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, and are holy,
in which they are lift entirely to their own will and choice. No; the
predestination we are speaking of, is no such conditional uncertain thing as
this makes it to be. The objects of it are by one determinate decree appointed
to a certain salvation, which they shall obtain through faith and sanctification,
which are given them in consequence of the decree, So the Apostle tells the
believing and sanctified Thessalonians, 2 ep, 2. ch 13 v. God has from the
beginning chosen you to salvation, through sanctification of the spirit, and
belief of the truth; whereunto he called you by our gospel, to the obtaining of
the glory of our Lord Jesus Christ. And our text tells us, whom God fore-knew,
he predestined to be conformed to the image of his son; in which is included
the whole of that work of sanctification by which they are made meet for the
inheritance of the saints in light. Col. 1.12.

4. Predestination unto life is from everlasting. Therefore those who are the
objects of it, are said to be chosen before the foundation of the world, Ephesians.
1.4. before the very first dawn of time, i. e. from all eternity. Though there is
no inward nor visible difference between the elect and others, till the grace
of God in their effectual calling in time makes it, yet the purpose of mercy
concerning them was before the mountains were settled, or the hills bro't
forth, while God had not yet made the earth, nor the fields, nor the highest
part of the dust of the world. God's purposes are, like himself, eternal; for,
such is his perfection that he comprehends all things referring to his
creatures, together and at once, and no new thoughts or designs ever come into
his mind, but what were there from eternity, in which there is no succession.
And, O the pleasure! for any to follow God's thoughts concerning them so far
back, as to apprehend him saying unto them, as to his church of old, I have
loved thee with an everlasting love, therefore with loving kindness have I
drawn thee. Jer. 31.3.


5. It is a perfectly free and sovereign act of God. His distribution of
rewards and punishments at the last day will be founded in justice, but his
choosing some to make them the objects of his love, and passing by others, is
founded in his sovereignty and supremacy, whereby he is Lord of all, and
accountable to none. This is what proud mortals are loath to stoop to, and apt
to rise up against; but let us be struck into an awful adoring silence, by what
the apostle says of this matter, in Rom 9 chapter from the 14th v. where the divine
sovereignty is both asserted and pleaded for. What shall we say then? Is there
unrighteousness with God? God forbid. For he says to Moses, I will have mercy
on whom I will have mercy, and I will have compassion on whom I will have
compassion. So then, it is not of him that wills, nor of him that runs,
but of God that shows mercy. -- Thou will say then unto me, Why does be yet
find fault? For who has resisted his will? Nay, but O man, who art thou that
reply against God? (...) thing formed say to him that formed it, why have
thou made me thus? Has not the potter power over the clay, of the same lump to
make the vessel unto honor, and another unto dishonor? The great God was
under no necessity to chute any of us unto eternal life. He would have been
perfectly blessed himself, if our whole race had perished for ever. That he has
chosen any is owing entirely to the good pleasure of his will. If he was
pleased to make choice of any, he was under no necessity to pitch upon such and
such. All the reason to be given is that, Matt. 11.26.
Even so father for so it seems good in the sight! There was nothing in the
chosen remnant to move God to place his regards upon them before others The
sore sight of their faith and obedience was not the cause; for, as we have had
occasion to hint already, they were chosen to faith and obedience, and so it
could not be for them: they are the effects of our election, and therefore
cannot be the causes of it. God's foresight of their faith and holiness,
presupposes his purpose to bestow faith and holiness on them; an this very
purpose is a part of their election it self. The apostle therefore tells us,
Romans 9.11. That the purpose of God according to election, is not of works, but
of him that calls.

6. It is certain, infallible, and irrevocable. So are all the decrees of God,
and therefore this of Predestination unto life. And if it were not so, the
people of God could not take much comfort from it. God will never go back from
his purpose to save his people; for, Job. 23.13.
He is of one mind, and who can turn him? What can induce him to alter his
affection toward them? For such is the perfection of his knowledge, that he
can never be surprised by any sudden new event, that may cause a change in his
mind and will. He foresaw all the sins of his people, their undutiful and
ungrateful carriage toward him through the whole course of their lives Now, if
the foresight of them did not hinder his electing love in its rise, can they
frustrate its end, the bringing of them to glory? -- And whatever they need to
have wrought in them, or done for them, is comprehended in one and the same
decree concerning them, and so shall be accomplished by the power of God. The
enemies that would hinder them, are indeed numerous and powerful; but the
Father that gave them to Christ is greater than all, and none shall pluck them
out of his hand. John 10.29.
Every thing will conspire, that the purpose of God according to election may
stand, Rom 9.11. The apostle speaks peremptorily, 2 Timothy 2.9. The foundation of
God stands sure, having this seal, The Lord knows them that are his.

7. It is in Jesus Christ that any are predestined unto life. This is
expressly said, Ephesians. 1.4. He, i e. the Father, has chosen us in him i. e.
Christ, before the foundation of the world Not that we are to suppose that the
elect are chosen for the sake of Christ, or that he is the meritorious cause of
their election No; for though he has merited their salvation, purchased for them
pardon, grace, and glory, he did not purchase their election, but they were
considered as elected when they were given to Christ to redeem, and so election
is not to be looked upon as a purchased blessing. But they are said to be
chosen in him, because it is by virtue of that union with him, which is made in
their effectual calling, that they come to be made partakers of those benefits
to which they are chosen. The Lord Jesus Christ was in God's eternal purpose
considered as the great Mediator by whom the salvation of his chosen people was
to be brot' about; and those ordained to salvation were given to Him, that he
might rightfully entitle them to that salvation, and successfully bring them to
it. Thus he stands as the head of the elect, and they are said to be chosen in
him; and he is spoken of as set up from everlasting, Pro. 8.23. and is himself
called God's elect, Isai. 42.1. being himself chosen to be the mediator and
redeemer by the same decree in which the elect among the children of men were
chosen to salvation Doctor Goodwin observes, from Zanchy, There is a great deal
of difference between God's doing a thing in Christ and through Christ, (...)
and (...). When God is said to do a thing in Christ, it usually notes out some
one of those immanent acts of God toward us, that past between him and Christ
for us, when they were alone, before we existed, and Christ was a common person
representing us all, and God gave all to Christ for us. So we read of the grace
that was given us in Christ Jesus before the world was. 2 Timothy 1.9. But things
that God does through Christ, are usually some transient acts of God toward
us, or those things which he actually performs and applies to us through
Christ. So that though God redeemeth through Christ, justifies through Christ, and
saves through Christ, yet he chooses in Christ; so that to choose in him is not
all one with what the apostle says, He has ordained us to obtain salvation
through Jesus Christ our Lord, 1 These. 5.9. Goodwins Works, Vol. I. p. 58.
.

Once more,

8thly, The last and highest end of this is the manifestation of the divine
glory, in the salvation of some of the fallen human race. The divine glory is
the most excellent end that can possibly be aimed at, and therefore an
infinitely wise God cannot design any thing short of it, as the great motive or
inducement for him to act: and so whatever lower ends are (...) by him, they
must all be resolved into this as the principal. For, of him, and through him,
and to him are all things Romans 11.36.
. The two attributes which God has a peculiar design at the display and
advancement of, in and by his reasonable creatures, are his grace and his
justice; the former in them that are saved, and the latter in them that perish.
This is plainly to be gathered from those words of the apostle, Romans 9.22, 23.
What if God, willing to show his wrath, and to make his power known, endured
with much long suffering the vessels of wrath fitted to destruction: And that
he might make known the riches of his glory on the vessels of mercy, which he
had before prepared unto glory? The design then which lay at the bottom of God's
decree of election, is the everlasting display of his sovereign and glorious
grace to the worlds of intellectual creatures which he has made. To this the
scriptures refer it, and in this they ultimately resolve it. Ephesians. 1.5, 6,
Having predestined us to the adoption of children by Jesus Christ, to
himself, according to the good pleasure of his will, TO THE PRAISE OF THE GLORY
OF HIS GRACE. And the same reason is given over again, in the 2 chapter 7 v. That
he might show the exceeding riches of his grace, in his kindness toward us,
through Jesus Christ.

Thus I have, in several distinct propositions, explained and stated the truth
before us. The time will not allow me to enter upon the second thing proposed,
the proof of the point, or to show that this doctrine, as we have now
represented it, is really the doctrine of the gospel I shall therefore conclude
the present discourse by adding a few words that have a tendency to give what
has been already said, an enlivening and quickening efficacy upon our hearts.

1. Predestination unto life is a thing secret to us. Who the persons are that
are the objects of it. God has not revealed. This is at present locked up
within the divine breast. Yet we know,

2. It comprehends a very great and glorious number. Some have thought the
elect among mankind, were to make up the number, and supply the room of the
fallen angels. But this is an extra-scriptural conjecture; and for ought we
know they may be many more. To be sure they are a number sufficient to give the
brightest display of the riches of free grace in; and a number worthy of that
infinite price the blood of the son of God, which was laid down to redeem them.
They are said to be many in our text. Whom he did predestinate to be conformed
to the image of his son, that he might be the first born among many brethren.
And they are said, in Rev. ^. ^. to be a great multitude which no (...) number.

3. Some of all sorts, conditions, and characters, are of this number They are
taken out of all nations, and kindreds, and people, and tongues; and in the day
when they shall be made up, shall be seen to come from the east and from the
west, and from the north and from the south. Rev. 7.9. Luke 13.29.
If not many wise men after the flesh, not many mighty, not many noble, are
chosen and called, yet some are 1 Cor. 1.26.
. And, hearken my beloved brethren, says the apostle, Has not God chosen out
of the poor of this world, some to make them rich in faith, and heirs of the
kingdom. James 2.5.
Yea, some who have been the greatest sinners, while in their unregenerate
state, are of this number. The apostle tells the Corinthians, some of you were
fornicators, idolators, adulterers, abusers of your selves with mankind;
theives, covetous, drunkards, extortioners, etc. but ye are washed, but ye are
sanctified, but ye are justified, in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the
Spirit of our God. 1 Cor. 6.11.


4. Some of them are bro't forth in every age of the world; that so Christ may
have a seed to serve him in every generation to the end of time, and there may
be some to balance the world, even a blessing in it, Isa. 64.8.
for whose sake it should not be destroyed.

5. Wherever the gospel is preached there are some of these to be gathered in
by it. It is more than probable that where God sends a faithful ministry, and
the gospel is preached in the purity of it, He has a design to extend his
saving grace to some among that people, whom he will by such a ministry
effectually call, and bring home to himself. So the apostle Paul was sent to
preach the gospel in Gorinth, because God had much people in that city, Acts
18.10.

It follows then, that this is no such discouraging doctrine as some would
represent it. Since it is a secret with God who are predestined unto life, and
who are not; since the number of the elect is such a great number, an
innumerable multitude; since a part of them are bro't forth in every age; since
the greatest sinners may be of this number, and none are excluded on account of
any outward circumstances; since the preaching of the gospel is the appointed
means of gathering them in, and wherever the gospel is preached, we may suppose
there are a number to be bro't by it to that faith and holiness, which is the
predestined way to eternal life; since, I say, these things are so, there is
enough to prevent discouragement, to raise our hope of, and quicken our
endeavors after salvation.

Therefore our way is, to accept of the general grace offered in the gospel, to
devote and resign our selves to God, to depend upon the merits of our Redeemer,
and put our selves under the teaching sanctifying influences of his Spirit, in
the use of the appointed means, humbly waiting for his renewing and reconciling
grace: Thus we may come to know the purposed love of God to us, that he has
not appointed us to wrath, but to obtain salvation by our Lord Jesus Christ.
Instead then of rising up against, and quarrelling with what we have now heard,
let us turn it into a prayer.; and there cannot be a better prayer after this
sermon, than that which the Holy Ghost has put into our mouths, Psalm. 106.4, 5.
Remember me, O Lord, with the favor that thou bear unto thy people! O visit
me with thy salvation! that I may see the good of thy chosen; that I may
rejoice with the gladness of thy nation; that I may glory with thine
inheritance!

SERMON II.
ROMANS, VIII. 29, 30. For whom he did foreknow, he also did predestinate to
be conformed to the image of his son, that be might be the firstborn among
many brethren.

Moreover, whom he did predestinate, them be also called; and whom he called
them he also justified; and whom be justified, them be also glorified.


THERE is an excellent and most wise order and connection in all that God
brings to pass; and this order so settled and joined together, that it can
never be broken. The salvation of any of the children of fallen Adam, takes its
rise in the eternal counsel, free purpose, and electing love of God. Whom he
did foreknow, and personally choose to salvation, them he did predestinate to
all the means which lead to that salvation. That which first follows
predestination is effectual calling: Whom he did predestinate, says the text,
them he also called. In his appointed time, by his word and spirit, he
powerfully draws these to a thankful acceptance of, and firm reliance on the
Lord Jesus Christ as their savior, and an obedient walking in him as the way
to eternal life. Upon this ensues their justification: Whom he called, them he
also justified. Being united to Christ in their effectual calling, they are
through him absolved from guilt, and accepted as righteous. Now, after their
calling, they are in Christ Jesus, Romans 8.1.
and walk not after the flesh but after the spirit, and so no condemnation
belongs to them. Upon these will finally follow their glorification in heaven,
after they have glorified God on earth; in which God's design of love to them,
will have its full and eternal accomplishment: Whom he justified, them he also
glorified.

It was not my design, when I began upon these words the last Lord's Day, to
speak of all these privileges in the order in which the text presents them; but
only of that which is the ground of them all, and from which the rest result,
namely, Election, or Predestination unto life; a plain and precious, but
disrelish'd and opposed truth of the gospel. That I have taken this in hand,
I Am sure is not from a love to controversy, or fondness to oppose the schemes
of others, but, I hope, from a sincere desire to fulfill the ministry of the
Lord Jesus which I have received among you, by testifying the gospel of the
grace of God in all the parts of it. We trust, my Brethren, that we aim to
speak, not as pleasing men, but God; and therefore we dare not baulk any truth,
in its proper place and season, because it is unfashionable, opposed by the
wisdom of the world, or run down by popular outcry. Nor am I determined to this
opinion by the prejudice of education, but because after careful searches and
researches, I am convinced of the truth of it, upon what appears to me to be
the strongest evidence; and the more I enquire into it, the more I see it to
agree with the holy scriptures, and the divine perfections.

It was the business of the former discourse to explain and state the truth
under consideration. That which we are next to proceed to is to prove and
confirm it. The point then to be now established is this, "That a certain,
great and glorious number, were elected by God, in his eternal counsel and
purpose, from the rest of fallen mankind, to be in time effectually called and
justified, in order to their being finally bro't to eternal life and glory; and
this out of his mere good pleasure, and for the praise of his glorious grace."
And if the truth of this is once evinced to the conviction of a sober, honest,
and serious mind, it may be hoped all disgust at it will cease, and every
thought that exalts it self against it will be suppressed.

I. In the first place, this truth must be established by the authority of the
sacred scriptures. Hither we must refer the decision of all points in religion.
Here we must repair to know of every doctrine whether it be of God. Now, What
says the scripture concerning this doctrine? And surely he that runs may read
this truth throughout the sacred pages.

Let me prepare the way to the more direct and positive proof I shall fetch
from the bible, by first of all presenting you with some scripture instances of
a lower election, of God's choosing and predestinating certain persons by name,
and some of them long before they were born, to some special privileges, high
honors, and signal services in the world. And if these may not be taken for
positive proof of that election we are treating of, yet they will serve greatly
to illustrate it, and they are by very judicious Divines looked upon as
examples and patterns of it, inasmuch as they plainly show that the glorious
God does act with respect to the children of men, with a sovereign liberty, and
in a way of discriminating favor; yea, many of them were instances of the very
election we are now to exhibit the proof of, inasmuch as it plainly appears by
the account the scripture gives of them, that at the same time they were called
to those external privileges and temporal honors to which they were chosen,
they were also called to the spiritual and saving blessings of the covenant of
grace.

Thus Abraham was pitched upon to be the root and father of God's peculiar
people, whom he would own and honor above all the nations of the world; and
also to be one from whose loins the Messiah himself should descend. Genesis 12.
begin. Now the Lord had said unto Abraham, Get thee out of thy country, and
from thy kindred, and from thy fathers house, unto a land that I will show
thee. And I will make of thee a great nation and I will bless thee, and make
thy name great; and thou shall be a blessing. And I will bless them that bless
thee, and curse them that curse thee: and in thee shall all families of the
earth be blessed. A high honor and advancement indeed! Yet he was more blessed
in those spiritual blessings which accompanied it. For he was at the same time
made a justified believer; as we read, Abraham believed God, and it was
accounted to him for righteousness Romans 4.3.
He had a covenant interest in and relation to God, and such acceptance with
the Almighty, as to be spoken of in this style, The friend of God. James. 2.23.
And was there any thing in Abraham, to move God thus to prefer him above the
rest of his kindred? No, in no wise. It was all special grace and favor. For
he was a stupid idolater as well as the rest of his family, and had served God
no better than they The scripture represents God as acting herein with a
sovereign liberty, and by a free hand of mercy snatching him as a brand out of
the burning Joshua, in God s name, declares this to the tribes of Israel when
they were assembled at Shechem, Josh. 24.2, 3. Thus says the Lord God of
Israel, Your fathers dwelt on the other side of the flood in old time, even
Terah the father of Abraham, and the father of Nachor; and they served other
God's. And I took your father Abraham from the other side of the flood, etc.
For this God is adored long after in a solemn assembly of the children of
Israel, Neh 9 7, 8. Thru art the Lord the God, who did choose Abram, and
broughtest him forth out of Ur of the Chaldees, and gave him the name of
Abraham, and made a covenant with him. And when the prophet had occasion to
put that people in mind of their original, he does it in these terms, Isai.
51.2, 3. Look unto the rock whence ye are hewn, and to the hole of the pit
whence ye are dug. Look unto Abraham your father, and unto Sarah that bear
you; for I called him alone, and blessed him.

With the like sovereign liberty he acted with respect to Abraham's seed. He
takes not all of them; but in Isaac shall thy seed be called Genesis 21.12.
. Thus Isaac was taken, and not Ishmael. And though in answer to Abraham's prayer
for Ishmael, common blessings are secured to him, yet covenant blessings are
reserved for Isaac, and appropriated to him, who was not yet born. Genesis
17.18.19, 20. And Abraham said unto God, O that Ishmael might live before thee!
And God said, Sarah thy wife shall bear thee a son indeed; and thou shall call
his name Isaac: And I will establish my covenant with him for an everlasting
covenant, and with his seed after him And as for Ishmael, I have heard thee:
Behold I have blessed him, and will make him fruitful, and will multiply him
exceedingly: twelve princes shall he beget, and I will make him a great nation.
But my covenant will I establish with Isaac, whom Sarah shall bear unto thee at
this set time in the next year.

The like sovereignty was exercised in the case of Jacob and Esau, whose story
is recorded in the 25th chapter of Genesis, and is recited and referred to by the
apostle in the 9th chapter to the Romans, to illustrate and confirm the truth we
are establishing. They were both the sons of Isaac by one mother, and were
twin-brethren. But there was a difference made between them by the divine
counsel, before they were born. Both lay struggling alike in their mothers womb,
when it was said, Genesis 25.22, 23.
The (...) shall serve the (...) And contrary to the intention of Isaac, Jacob
inherits the blessing. And though the good father blessed Jacob unwittingly, and
by mistake, yet, being afterward convinced that he was the person for whom God
designed the blessing, and on whose head it was to rest by the divine
determination, he acquies'd in the will of God, though it contradicted his own
apprehension and affection; and was so far from reversing what he had done,
that he repeats it and passionately affirms it, Genesis 27.33.
I have blessed him, yea, and he shall be blessed. And though Jacob acted a
dishonest and sinful part, (of which he was afterward no doubt made sensible,
and bro't to repentance for it, and so mercifully pardoned of the free grace of
God through the promised Messiah) yet Isaac in his blessing him, and not
reversing it, was under the conduct and influence of the divine Spirit; for we
are told, Heb. 11.20. By faith Isaac blessed Jacob, and Esau, concerning things
to come. Here Jacob is put first by the apostle, though the younger, as having
the precedence, and a better blessing. It is indeed a strange story! And if the
design and meaning of it be inquired after, the apostle explains it thus, in
Romans the 9th chapter 11 v. That the purpose of God according to election might
stand, not of works, but of him that calls. i. e. says Mr. Henry on the
place, "That this great truth may be established, that God chooses some, and
resuseth others, as a free agent, by his own absolute and sovereign will,
dispensing his favors, or withholding them, as he pleases."

And if we look to the posterity of Jacob, the Israelites, this people the Lord
chose in Abraham, four hundred years before he publicly owned them They are
expressly termed an elect nation, as being distinguished from the rest of the
world; an holy, special, and peculiar people unto God. When he divided to the
nations their inheritance, and separated the sons of Adam, He took these for
his own portion, the lot of his inheritance; Deuteronomy. 32.8, 9.
tho the earth was his to choose a people out of to his name. And their history,
from the time of their being first formed into a people, abundantly shows the
special and peculiar love of God to them, above all other people in the world.
Because they were precious in his sight, and honorable, therefore he gave men
for them, and people for their life, when their preservation and interests
called for it; yea, he gave Egypt for their ransom, Ethiopia and Seba for them.
Isa. 43.3.
And why did the Lord take these? What was there to entitle them to this
distinguishing honor? Did he choose them because they were a better people, or
a greater nation? No such matter. Moses tells them, Deuteronomy. 7.7, 8. The Lord did
not set his love upon you, nor choose you, because ye were more in number than
any people, for ye were the fewest of all people. And as their number was
small, so their disposition was bad and their manners ill. They were a peevish
and humoursome people, froward and perverse, obstinate and incorrigible;
strangely addicted to the idolatries of Egypt, and other nations. The Lord
foresaw this before he chose them; for he tells them by the prophet, Isai.
48.4.8. I knew that thou would deal treacherously, and wast called a
transgressor from the womb. I knew that thou wast obstinate, thy neck an iron
sinew, and thy brow brass. I have even from the beginning declared it unto
thee; before it came to pass I showed it thee. Therefore the only reason
assigned why God set his love upon them as he did, is this, because he loved
them. All was from free favor, to manifest his sovereignty, and because he had
his elect among them, in a still higher and more appropriate sense. So God said
to Moses, Exodus 33.19. I will be gracious to whom I will be gracious, and will
show mercy to whom I will show mercy.

If we go on to name David, He, the most unlikely among the sons of Jesse, was
chosen to be the king of Israel. He was the youngest of the family, employed in
the meanest service, to keep the sheep,; scarce reckoned as one of the family,
for he was not bro't in amongst the rest, when Samuel was sent to anoint him
whom the Lord had chosen. But when all the other had been refused as they
passed before Samuel, though several of them stood fair in the eye of the
prophet, and David was at last fetched; as soon as he appeared the Lord said.
Arise, anoint him, for this is he. 1 Samuel 16.12.
The peculiarity of the divine choice appearing in this instance* the psalmist
sings of, Psa. 78.70, 71. He chose David also his servant, and took him from
among the sheep-folds; from following the ewes great with young, he bro't him
to feed Jacob his people, and Israel his inheritance.

Another remarkable instance was Cyrus. This man was designed in the purpose of
God for great and noble work; to destroy a mighty monarchy, release God's
people out of captivity, and rebuild his temple. It was foretold what great
things should be done by him, more than an hundred years before he was born;
and he was called by his name too: And this not from any worthyness in himself,
for it is said he did not so much as know the Lord. This famous man and his
wondrous actions, were prophesied of so long before hand, by the prophet
Isaiah, in the latter part of the 44th, and the beginning of the 45th chapters
of his book. Thus says the Lord, that confirms the word of his servant, and
performs the counsel of his messengers; that says to Jerusalem, thou shall
be inhabited, and to the cities of Judah, ye shall be built, and I will raise
up the decayed places thereof: That says of Cyrus, He is my shepherd, and
shall perform all my pleasure; even saying to Jerusalem, thou shall be built,
and to the temple, thy foundation shall be laid. Thus says the Lord to his
anointed, to Cyrus, whose right hand I have holden, to subdue nations before
him: and I will loose the loins of kings to open before him the two leaved
gates, and the gates shall not be shut. I will go before thee, and make the
crooked places straight; I will brake in pieces the gates of brass, and cut in
sunder the bars of iron: And I will give thee the treasures of darkness, and
hidden riches of secret places; that thou may know, that I the Lord, which
call thee by thy name, am the God of Israel. For Jacob my servants sake, and
Israel mine elect, I have even called thee by thy name; I have even sir-named
thee, though thou have not known me.

The prophet Jeremy was likewise ordained to great things before he was born.
To him God said, Jer. 1, 5. Before I formed thee in the belly I knew thee; and
before thou came forth cut of the womb I sanctified thee, and I ordained thee
a prophet unto the nations.

And of the apostle Paul the Lord said, He is a chosen vessel unto me, to bear
my name before the Gentiles, and to suffer great things for my names sake, Acts
9.15. He, afterward speaking of his conversion, and call to the postleship,
ascribes them to the powerful grace of God, in consequence of his previous
purpose and fore-ordination. Gal. 1.15, 16. It pleased God, who separated me
from my mothers womb, and called me by his grace, to reveal his son in me, that
I might preach him among the heathen. Now, shall we say that these, and other
such instances on sacred record, are to be considered only as historical
relations? Surely that would be too low and narrow a meaning for them.
According to the apostle's reasoning in the 9th chapter to the Romans, in the cases
of Isaac and Ishmael, Jacob and Esau, it is very plain they were intended for
the illustrating the methods of God's grace toward particular persons. And, I
think, it is justly inferred and argued, "If there be an election personal unto
things of a temporal concernment, and that so long before some of the persons
were in being, how much more unto things of a spiritual and eternal
concernment? And if the Lord did not look out of himself for the moving
considerations on which he selected these persons to their several privileges
and honors, much less can election unto life be founded in any deservings of
the creature From the less to the greater is a scriptural way of arguing, and
in many cases proves strongly" Mr. Cole in his Discourse on the Sovereignty of
GOD.


But I proceed to exhibit that more direct and positive proof which the bible
furnishes us with. There we read abundantly of an election which can be
understood of no other than a personal election unto eternal life as the end,
and unto Christ, and faith, and holiness as the way. And though we find this
doctrine in the old testament, in the writings of Moses and the prophets; as
appears from some of the scriptures we have had occasion already to mention,
and from others which I might turn you to 1 Kings 19.18. compared with Romans
11.2, 3.4, 5. Isai. 1.9. compared with Romans 9.29. Isai. 10.21, 22. compared
with Romans 9.27.29. Jer. 18.6. compared with Romans 9.20, 21. Psalm. 106.4, 5.
Isai. 65.8, 9. Jer. 50.20. Mie. 7.18.
; yet I shall here look only into the new testament, where the mysteries of
godliness are more manifest, and things that have been hid from ages and
generations are discovered.

I shall not distribute the scriptures I shall mention into any other order
than that which the bible presents them in: And so we must begin with some
passages in the discourses of our blessed SAVIOR himself, by which it will
appear that HE taught this very doctrine; He, who is the faithful and true
witness, and well knew what doctrine was safe and profitable to teach, as well
as true. I think the first passage we meet with to our purpose, if we read the
evangelists in the order of an harmony, is in the sermon which Christ preached
to the people at Nazareth, Luke 4 25, 26, 27. But I tell you of a truth, many
widows were in Israel in the days of Elias, when the heaven was shut up three
years and six months, when great famine was in all the land; but unto none of
them was Elias sent, save unto Sarepta, a City of Zidon, unto a woman that was
a widow. And many lepers were in Israel in the time of Eliseus the prophet, and
none of them were cleansed save Naaman the Syrian. The manifest design of our
savior in these two examples, is to assert the sovereignty of God in the
dispensations of his favor; and to let them know, that as the prophet Elijah
was sent to relieve a favorite widow, and the prophet Elisha to heal a
distinguished leper, so he came with a commission and design to save, not all,
but a select number, of the Jews and Gentiles. And it seems they could not bear
this doctrine even in those days: For it follows, And all they in the
synagogue, when they heard these things, were filled with wrath, and rose up,
and thrust him out of the city, and led him to the brow of a hill, that they
might cast him down headlong. But this did not cause him to suppress the truth,
or wave it, when he had occasion to mention it, whether in his prayers or
sermons. -- At a time when he had been reproving and threatening the places
where he had preached the gospel, for their impenitence and unbelief, he
comforts himself with the thoughts that there was a number upon whom the word
had come with a saving light and power, pursuant to the purpose and pleasure of
the father; whom he adores as the proprietor and disposer of all spiritual and
heavenly blessings, and whose free dispensation of his savours, he most
heartily approves of, and acquieses in, Mat. 11.25, 26 At that time Jesus
answered and said, I thank thee, O father, Lord of heaven and earth, because
thou have hid these things from the wise and prudent, and have revealed them
unto babes. Even so, father, for so it seems good in thy sight! -- At another
time when his disciples expressed themselves something surpised that he taught
the people in parables, without an exposition to let them into the meaning of
what he delivered to them, explaining things only to their small and select
company in a private way, and desired a reason of this his conduct; he answers
them in such a manner as to let them know, that spiritual light and knowledge,
a saving discovery of gospel truths, were given to some, and to themselves in
particular, in a way of free special distinguishing favor; but withheld from
others according to God's wise holy and sovereign pleasure: He said unto them,
Because it is given to you to know the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven, but
to them it is not given, Mat. 13.10, 11. -- So when, on another occasion, there
were some who complained against the method he observed in the bestowment of
his bounty and mercy, He in reply to them, vindicates his own right to dispose
of the blessings of the gospel as he saw meet, because he was the sovereign
proprietor thereof, and none could claim what he did not see cause to give.
Mat. 20.15, 16. Is it not lawful for me to do what I will with mine own? Is
thine eye evil, because I am good? So the last shall be first, and the first
last; for many he called, but few chosen. And when, a little after this, the
mother of Zebedees children, who had entertained the notion of a temporal
kingdom which Christ was about to set up, came to him with that ambitious
request, that her two sons might be his chief favorites and ministers, might
set the one on his right hand, the other on his left in his kingdom; in his
answer to her he not only lets her know she was mistaken about the nature of
his kingdom, which was not of this world, but that the donatives and honors of
it, were long since settled, and were to be disposed of by him to those persons
for whom they were designed in the Father's counsel and purpose, and to no
other. He said, To sit on my right hand, and on my left, is not mine to give,
but to those for whom it is prepared of my father. -- In the 13th chapter of Mark,
our savior fore-tells the unparalled distress and desolation which would come
upon the Jews, when the Roman armies should make a descent upon Judea, and
invest Jerusalem, the holy city; whose power and rage would be so great as to
make even a full end of that people, if the merciful providence of God did not
interpose, to restrain and limit them Such a remembrance of mercy in the midst
of this judgment he gives them the promise of; but withal lets them know this
favor would be shown them, for the sake of a chosen number; that such of his
elect as were then living in their sins, and those of them who were to descend
from the loins of some of that age, might be bro't to faith and repentance; and
that they together with the already converted, might be preserved for the
propagation of his kingdom in the world; the 19, and 20th verses, For in those
days shall be affliction, such as was not from the beginning of the creation
which God created, unto this time. And except the Lord had shortened those days,
no flesh should be saved; but for the elects sake whom he has chosen, he has
shortened the days: Our savior goes on in the next verses, to foretell that
false christ's, and false prophets would arise at that time; so plausible in
their pretenses, so artful in their managements, and so industrious to seduce,
that they would deceive and draw away the very elect themselves, were not their
perseverance in the faith secured by the purpose of God concerning them, and
their seduction and overthrow thereby rendered impossible --. In the 6th chapter of
John, we have our blessed Lord complaining of the unbelief of the generality of
those who had both seen his miracles, and heard his preaching; yet comforting
himself, and refreshing others who wished to see his saving work go on, with
the thought, that a goodly number would after all believe and be saved; even as
many as the father had given to him for his charge and care. The 36, 37, 38,
and 39th, verses; I have said to you, that ye also have seen me and believe
not. All that the father has given me, shall come to me: -- for I came down
from heaven, not to do mine own will, but the will of him that sent me. And
this is the father's will which has sent me, that of all which he has given
me, I should loose nothing, but should raise it up again at the last day -- In
the 10th chap. he speaks of his own redemption, as being of just the same
extent with the Fathers election; represents himself as under a necessity to
bring all that belonged to this election, into his church, and a participation
of the blessings of the gospel, by the influences of his spirit accompanying
his word, because he could not otherwise discharge his trust, and fulfill the
engagements he had entered into; and speaks of the continued unbelief of those
to whom he preached the gospel, as a sign they were not included in this
number. The 15th, 16th, 26th, 27th, and 28th, verses; -- I lay down my life for
the sheep. And other sheep I have which are not of this fold; them also I must
bring, and they shall hear my voice; and there shall be one fold, and one
shepherd. Ye believe not, because ye are not of my sheep, as I said unto you.
My sheep hear my voice, and I know them, and they follow me: and I give unto
them eternal life, and they shall never perish, neither shall any pluck them
out of my hand. My father which gave them me is greater than all, and none is
able to pluck them out of my fathers hand; whose power is also engaged for
their preservation, and from whom I am never separated in council and working.
It is true, The calling of the Gentiles into the church is referred to in what
is said in the 16th v; but to restrain all that our Savior has here said to
the calling of them as a body, appears to be very contrary to the run of his
discourse, wherein by the sheep which he speaks of as belonging to himself in
the quality of a shepherd, is evidently meant a select number out of the Jews
and Gentiles both --. In the 13th chapter of this same gospel, our Savior giving
an intimation to his disciples of the damning sin of Judas just before he
committed it, makes this distinction between him and the rest of the apostles,
I speak not of you all; I know whom I have chosen, v. 13. The choice must refer
to salvation, and not to the apostleship, for to this he was chosen, as much as
the other apostles; wherefore he says in another place, Have not I chosen you
twelve, and one of you is a devil? It is manifest to me, that Christ here means
a more peculiar and beneficial election, than to the office of Apostles; for he
had chosen them all to this. But he here speaks of a discriminating choice of
some of them, which did not extend to them all, and particularly to Judas: And
to show that his knowing whom he had chosen, related not to their temper and
disposition, but to the persons themselves, he did not say, I know, (...), what
their qualities are, but, (...), the persons, whom I have chosen. GUYSE's
excellent Paraphrase, in the margin.
-- Our Savior, as he began, so, he ends his ministry with this doctrine: For
his parting prayer with his disciples, just before he left them and the world,
is full of it. It is recorded in the 17th chapter of John's gospel; and plainly
shows that as in his mediatorial undertaking, he was concerned with a peculiar
number given him by way of distinction out of mankind in general, so these only
were interested in this intercessory prayer, as those to whom the blessings he
asked for and claimed, did rightfully belong. These words spoke Jesus, and lift
up his eyes to heaven, and said, Father, the hour is come; glorify thy son,
that thy son also may glorify thee. As thou have given him power over all
flesh, that he should give eternal life to as many as thou have given him. -- I
have manifested thy name unto the men which thou gave me out of the world;
thine they were, and thou gave them me, and they have kept thy word. I have
given unto them the words which thou gave me, and they have received them,
and have known surely that I came out from thee, and they have believed that
thou did send me. I pray for them; I pray not for the world, but for them
which thou have given me, for they are thine. Keep through thy own name, those
whom thou have given me. Sanctify them through thy truth. Let them be one, as
thou father art in me, and I in thee. Father, I will that they also whom thou
have given me, be with me, where I am, that they may behold my glory which thou
have given me. And that none might restrain this prayer to the apostles, our
savior shows how extensive it was in the intention of it; that it included all
that in every age should obtain the faith of God's elect. v. 20. Neither pray I
for these alone, but for them also which shall believe on me through their word.
-- Thus far we have quoted the words of Christ Himself, the great prophet of
the church; who, came from the bosom of the father, the seat of his counsels as
well as love, and therefore was well able to reveal the secrets of heaven to
men upon earth; and was faithful to him that appointed him, as also Moses was
faithful in all his house.

The disciples whom our Lord sent forth to preach under the special guidance of
his spirit; and the apostles who were trained up for the work of the ministry
under the personal instructions of their divine master, or were taught the
gospel they were to preach by immediate revelation from Christ himself; they
taught this doctrine after him without the least hesitation, and preached and
wrote in the same strain with him.

The Evangelist Luke, (who was very probably one of the seventy disciples, and
with good reason is supposed to have wrote the narrative of the Acts of the
Apostles, as well as the third of the four gospels which bears his name) giving
an account of the success of the gospel among the Gentiles, upon the Jews
refusal of it makes the work of saving faith in those in whom it was wro't, to
be the result of that act of grace which we call predestination. Acts 13.48.
And when the Gentiles heard this, they were glad, and glorified the word of the
Lord; and as many as wore ORDAINED unto eternal life believed.

The apostle Paul the great doctor of the Gentiles, was a zealous assertor of
this truth in almost all his epistles. When he writes to those in Rome who were
beloved of God, and called to be saints, he takes care to let them know the
ground of all the privileges they enjoyed in time, and of that happiness they
hoped for through eternity, was laid in God's free electing love. The 8th chapter at
the 28th v. And we know that all things shall work together for good to them
that love God, to them who are called ACCORDING TO HIS PURPOSE. Then follows
the words of our Text For whom he did foreknow, he also did predestinate to be
conformed to the image of his son, that he might be the first born among many
brethren. Moreover, whom he did predestinate, them he also called; and whom he
called, them he also justified; and whom he justified, them he also glorified
And to show the immutability of this electing love of God, and that nothing
should hinder the objects of it from being put into the actual possession of
the grace and glory to which they were designed, he leads them into that noble
triumph with which the chapter ends, Who shall lay any thing to the charge of
God's elect? -- Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? -- I am
persuaded that neither death, nor life, nor angels, nor principalities, nor
powers, nor things present, nor things to come; nor height, nor depth, nor any
other creature, shall be able to separate us from the love of God which is in
Christ Jesus our Lord. -- In the 9th chapter he goes on to illustrate this
doctrine from particular instances, and to vindicate it against some
objections. When Rebecca had conceived twins by our father Isaac, it was said
unto her, the elder shall serve the younger; as it is written, Jacob have I
loved, but Esau have I hated; though the children being not yet born, had done
neither good nor evil: That the purpose of God according to election might
stand, not of works, but of him that calls. What shall we say then? Is there
unrighteousness with God? God forbid. For he says to Moses, I will have mercy
on whom I will have mercy, and I will have compassion on whom I will have
compassion. For the scripture says to Pharaoh, Even for this same purpose have
I raised thee up, that I might show my power in thee, and that my name might be
declared throughout all the earth. Thou will say then unto me, Why does he yet
find fault? For who has resisted his will? Nay but, O man, who art thou that
reply against God? Shall the thing formed say to him that formed it, Why
have thou made me thus? Has not the potter power over the clay, of the same
lump to make one vessel unto honor, and another unto dishonor? Some will
reply to this, and say, It is not a personal, but a national preference which
is here spoken of; and the apostle does not refer to Jacob and Esau in their
single capacity, or to the spiritual and everlasting state of either of them;
but intends only their posterity, and the difference made between the
Israelites and the Edomites, in the external dispensations of providence; which
he mentions to justify God, and silence the Jews from complaining, though they
were cast off, and the Gentiles called in their room. But though Jacob and Esau
are here spoken of with respect to their descendents, it does not follow that
they are not to be personally considered also; especially since Pharaoh is
mentioned, and bro't in as an instance with them. And whoever attends to the
manner of the apostles discourse, I think must see that he has something higher
than any temporal concerns of men in his eye all along, and refers to their
spiritual and everlasting state. Why else does he draw that inference from it
in the 16 v; So then it is not of him that wills, nor of him that runs,
but of God that shows mercy? And speak in the 22 and 23 verses, of God's
showing his wrath, and making his power known, on the vessels of wrath fitted
for destruction, whom he here endured with much long suffering; and his
displaying the riches of his glory, in the vessels of mercy, which he had before
prepared unto glory? In the 11th chap. he further vindicates the divine conduct
in casting off the Jews, and reconciles it both with the promise made unto the
fathers, and with the divine goodness in general: And he does this by asserting
an election of grace among that people, which would certainly take effect. The
rejection, he says, was not total. They were cast off indeed, but not all.
There was a chosen remnant among them, that obtained righteousness and life by
faith in Jesus Christ, though the body of that people remained in unbelief; of
which number he reckons himself to be one; and he suggests too that it was a
larger number than some might imagine, as was the number of the chosen,
preserved and faithful, in the days of Elias. From the 1st to the 7th v. I say
then, has God cast away his people? God forbid. For I also am an Israelite of
the seed of Abraham, of the tribe of Benjamin. God has not cast away his
people which he FORE-KNEW. Wot ye not what the scripture says of Elias? How he
makes intercession to God against Israel, saying, Lord, they have killed thy
prophets, and dug down thine altars; and I am left alone, and they seek my
life. But what says the answer of God unto him? I have reserved to my self
seven thousand men, who have not bowed the knee to the image of Baal. Even so
then at this time also there is a REMNANT ACCORDING TO THE ELECTION OF GRACE.
And if by grace, then it is no more of works, otherwise grace is no more grace.
But if it be of works, then it is no more grace; otherwise work is no more
work. What then? Israel has not obtained that which he seeks for; but THE
ELECTION HAS OBTAINED IT, and the rest were blinded.

He begins his epistle to the Ephesians with a most devout and solemn
thanksgiving to God, for those spiritual blessings wherewith believers are
blessed; and not only mentions their election and predestination as one, but as
the secret spring from whence all the rest do flow. Chap 1. V. 3, 4, 5: Blessed
be the God and father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has blessed us with all
spiritual blessings in heavenly things in Christ: ACCORDING AS HE HAS CHOSEN
US IN HIM, BEFORE THE FOUNDATION OF THE WORLD, that we should be holy, and
without blame before him in love: Having predestined us to the adoption of
children by Jesus Christ to himself, according to the good pleasure of his
will, to the praise of the glory of his grace. Surely this must contain much
more than their being appointed to the outward privileges of the church state
of the gospel; for though this is a great savor, yet all who are thus savored
cannot be said to be blessed with ALL spiritual blessings in Christ, as those
here spoken of are said to be. The apostle leaves us at no loss about the
persons here intended; for he calls them in the 1st v. The saints at Ephesus,
and faithful in Christ Jesus; and they are farther described in the 7th v. as
having redemption through his blood, even the forgiveness of sins; which things
cannot be said to belong to those who are no more than visible or nominal
christians --.

To the Thessalonians he writes, as knowing their election of God, because the
gospel had come to them, not in word only but in power; which plainly shows
something more is intended than their election to the enjoyment of the gospel;
for its coming in word only would have been a sufficient proof of that. 1 Ep.
1. chapter 45. v. This is farther explained, in his 2d epistle, the 2. chapter at the
13th and 14 verses; where the gospel is considered as the means of their
attaining that salvation which they are said to be chosen to; for he says to
them, God has, from the beginning, chosen you to salvation, through
sanctification of the spirit, and belief of the truth; whereunto he called you
by our gospel, to the obtaining the glory of our Lord Jesus Christ --. Hitherto
our quotations have been out of those Epistles of Paul which are directed to
churches. He also wrote some to particular persons; as to Timothy his own son
in the faith, to direct him how to discharge his office as an Evangelist: Him
he charges to hold fast the form of sound words, which he had heard from
himself; and we find this to be some of those sound words, a part of the
christian doctrine in which he instituted this young divine; That salvation
takes its rise, from the free grace, and eternal purpose of God in Jesus
Christ. 2 ep. 1 chapter 9th v. Who has saved us, and called us with an holy
calling; not according to our works, but according to his own purpose and grace
which was given us in Christ Jesus, before the world began. That he might be
willing to do and suffer any thing, to promote the salvation of others, he
proposes to him his own example, in the 2 chapter the 10th v. I endure all things
for the ELECTS SAKE, that they may obtain the salvation in Christ Jesus, to
which they are designed. And lest he should be discouraged when corrupt
teachers should advance dangerous and destructive opinions, as Hymences and
Thiletus had done, and the faith of many nominal christians should be
overthrown by them, he lets him know, That as many as God had set apart for
himself, would be preserved through faith unto salvation, v. 19. Nevertheless the
foundation of God stands sure, having this seal, the Lord knows them that
are his. Nor does he leave this out of the scheme of principles he taught
Titus, another Evangelist; whose business was to water the churches planted by
the apostles, and to strengthen and carry on the work which they had begun. In
the preface of his epistle to him, he speaks of himself, as a servant of God,
and an apostle of Jesus Christ according to the faith of God's elect, and the
acknowledging of the truth which is after godliness: in hope of eternal life,
which God that cannot lie promised before the world began. In the body of the
epistle he charges him, to speak the things which become sound doctrine; and
not only to inculcate the duties of practical religion, but to set forth the
free grace of God in man's salvation by Jesus Christ; and to urge obedience
from this peculiar motive of the gospel, the end of Christ's death, Who gave
himself for us, to redeem us from all iniquity, and to purify to himself a
PECULIAR PEOPLE, who should be zealous of good works. Tit. 1 chapter 1, 2. v. 2 chapter
1. 13, 14. v. 3 chapter 4, 5, 6. verse.

There was a union of the other apostles with Paul in teaching this doctrine.
It is more than implied in those words of James, (chapter 1. v. 18) Of his own will
begat he us with the word of truth, etc. His own will there, means nothing less
than his purposed grace: It is the same with what the apostle Paul calls his
good pleasure, which he has purposed in himself. Ephesians. 1.9.
And when he is warning against a partial regarding the rich, and despising the
poor, he shows this to be very contrary to God's method in dispensing spiritual
favors. The 2d chapter 5th v. Hearken my beloved brethren, has not God CHOSEN the
poor of this world, rich in faith, and heirs of the kingdom which he has
promised to them that love him?

The apostle Peter will not leave this subject untouched. Writing to the
christians driven by persecution from their own country into places where they
were strangers, he addresses them in this style, ELECT according to the
foreknowledge of God the father, through sanctification of the spirit unto
obedience, and sprinkling of the blood of Jesus. He distinguishes between them
and others, in the next chapter at the 8th and 9th verses; Others, he says, took
offense at Christ, and stumbled at his word, being disobedient, whereunto also
they wore appointed; but these were a CHOSEN GENERATION, a PECULIAR PEOPLE, to
show forth the praises of him, who has called them out of darkness into his
mavelous light. And in his next epistle, the 1st, chapter the 10th v. he exhorts
them to give diligence to make their calling, and therein their election sure;
i. e. sure to themselves, with respect to their own comfortable knowledge of
it, as it was already sure with respect to the decree and purpose of God.

The testimonies shall finish with John, as his writings close the book of God.
He was especially the disciple of love, and his epistles, as well as his
gospel, breath the electing love of God. In his first epistle the 14th chapter the
19th v. He makes the antecedent eternal love of God to us, not only the
incentive, but the rise and spring of the believers love to him; We love him,
because he first loved us. And he inscribes his second epistle, to an
honorable matron, whom he calls the elect Lady; not only a choice one, but one
chosen of God -- Nor is the book of the Revelation which Jesus Christ made to
him silent about this truth. There we are told, That all that dwell in the
carth shall worship the beast, and be deceived by satan, either in doctrine or
practice, to their perdition, excepting those whose names are written in the
lambs book of life from the foundation of the world; 13th chapter 8. v. 17. chapter 8
v. And in the 14th verse, the followers of the lamb have this description and
character given of them, they are called, and chosen, and faithful Finally, we
are told in the 21 chapter 27th v. Who shall gain admission into the new Jerusalem,
the Jerusalem which is above, the city of the living God; that there shall in
no wise enter any thing that defiles, neither whatsoever works abomination,
or makes a lie; but THEY WHICH ARE WRITTEN IN THE LAMB'S BOOK OF LIFE. This
expression frequently occurs in the sacred style. Of some particular saints we
read, (Phil. 4.3.) their names are in the book of life. And the whole body of
them are styled, (Heb. 12.23.) The church of the firstborn written in heaven.
All which places refer to the common usage among men, of keeping books of
record, in which are entered the names of persons admitted into their community,
and all elections to offices among them: And so in this metaphorical way of
speaking, the scripture represents the great discriminating favor of eternal
election.

It appears from all, that the doctrine we are treating of, is no scattered,
single, or independent article; but runs along with the stream of the bible. We
have not this truth as the small drop of a bucker, but as the sound of many
waters. If these texts do not mean what we are maintaining, to me they mean
nothing at all. And however one or two of them may be artfully evaded, or
turned to another sense by the slight of any; If any would see a number of the
scriptures we have mentioned rescued from the strange and unnatural
interpretations of Hammond, Whitby, and others; let them consult, Doctor
Edwards's Veritas Redux, and the late Doctor Ridgley's Body of Divinity.
yet they who deny our doctrine must fight with an exceeding great army of
scriptures, and contend with Moses and the Prophets, CHRIST and his Apostles.
And thus we see what we have asserted, strongly establish d by the authority of
the holy scriptures.

II. We may argue this truth from the divine perfections; particularly, from
the infinite wisdom, and certain foreknowledge of God.

1. From the infinite wisdom of God, in conjunction with his power. Whatever
God does, he must be supposed to have before determined to do: This must be
allowed or else it would argue him defective in wisdom. And whatever he
determines to do he must accomplish, or it would argue him defective in power.
I find this though it so well pursued by a late rational and sound Divine, The Rev.
Mr. Sladen.
that I will take the liberty to use his words, with but little variation.

"It must be allowed that whatever perfection or excellency is to be found in
any creature, the same must be essential to the most high God, and that in the
most eminent and transcendent degree. For, if every creature derives its being
from God, as the first cause, then no creature can possibly be possessed of any
excellency, but what must, in the highest and most absolute sense, belong to
God -- Now, no one can deny that it is an excellency in any creature to be wise
and powerful; wise to lay a scheme of what he intends to do and powerful to
perform and accomplish what he designs. For a rational being to set about a
work, without first forming in his mind a model of what he intends to pursue,
is to discover a defect of wisdom; as not to be able to accomplish the plan he
has laid down, bewrays a want of power. -- These premises being granted which
indeed cannot be denied, it must follow, that whatever the great God does he
designed to do; and whatever he designed to do he does. For, to suppose God to
perform any work which he did not before design to perform, is to charge him
with a degree of folly, and with acting below an intelligent agent; as to
suppose him to design a thing which he does not effect, is to tax him with
impotence. If then it is an instance of the wisdom and power of man, first to
design a work, and then to perfect it, the great God, who is infinite in both
these perfections, must design what he effects, and effect what he designs. To
this decision of reason the sacred scriptures bear their testimony in the
fullest and strongest manner. With how much majesty does the great God deliver
himself in those words, Isai. 46, 10, 11? I am God, and there is none else; I
am God, and there is none like me; declaring the end from the beginning, and
from ancient times, the things that are not yet done, saying, My counsel shall
stand, and I will do all my pleasure. -- To apply this to the great work of
fallen man's redemption. Either God actually saves all men, or he does not; if
he does, he must have designed it; if he does not, it is plain he never designed
it. All that God designed to save, he saves; but he actually saves some only,
therefore he designed only to save some of fallen Adam's children. Now, if we
consider God as infinite in wisdom, and of almighty power, there cannot be a
more rational way of arguing, than from his acts to his designs."

2. The very Foreknowledge of God argues the same thing. That known to God are
all his works from the beginning, Acts 15.8.
will be easily granted. Few, if any among us, are disposed to deny this, That
God did from all eternity foreknow who should be saved. He must then foreknow
that the requisite qualifications to salvation should be found in them; that
they would repent, and believe, and obey the gospel; for none can be saved
without these. And since the scripture is plain that these are God's gift, of
his working wherever they are found, he cannot be said to have fore-known that
these would so repent and believe, without an unalterable determination in his
own mind to bestow these saving graces on them in particular. Therefore,
Foreknowledge and predestination are linked together in our text, Whom he did
foreknow, them he did predestinate. I take this argument to be conclusive. It
is that upon which the great Doctor Twiss mainly rests the cause, in his
learned defense of this truth against the opposers of his day. And it was this
convinced the celebrated Dr. South, and brought him into those principles
called Calvinian. It will not be foreign to my purpose, and possibly it may
more than inform and please some, if I should insert a short account of that
matter into this discourse. I have it then from very good authority, Dr.
Calamy's continuation of the account of the silenced ministers, Vol. 1st. p.
146.
that this eminent person, sometime after the restoration, being in company at
Oxford with several persons of note, and among the rest with Mr. Thomas
Gilbert, who was afterward one of the ejected ministers, they fell into a
conversation about the arminian points. And although it was more than suspected
that Dr. South, who fell in with the new conformity, did also incline to the
new divinity of that time, yet upon Mr Gilberts asserting that the
Predestination of the Calvinists did necessarily follow upon the Prescience of
the Arminians, the Doctor presently engaged that if he would make that out, he
would never be an Arminian so long as he lived. Mr Gilbert immediately
undertook it, and made good his assertion to the satisfaction of those present;
and the Doctor himself was so convinced, as to continue to the last a very
zealous assertor of the reformed doctrine against its various opposers -- And
thus the truth we are maintaining may be argued from the divine perfections.

III. It may also be argued from the dispensations of providence and grace; in
giving the gospel to some people, and not to others; and in blessing the
preaching of it for saving good to some who enjoy it, and not to others.

1. In giving the gospel to some and not to others. In order to complete the
salvation of men, the redemption purchased must be applied; and in order to
this application there are means appointed and made necessary by God's
institution: these are the word and ordinances of the gospel. For, as says the
apostle, Romans 10.14. How shall they call on him in whom they have not believed?
And how shall they believe in him, of whom they have not heard? And how shall
they hear without a preacher? Now, the gospel of salvation is sent to some
places, and not to others; and this by a special providence. Not only the
doctrine, but the journeys and travels of the apostles, were under the
direction of the spirit of God. Acts 16.6, 7 Now when they were gone throughout
Phrygia, and the region of Galatia, and were forbidden of the Holy Ghost to
preach the word in Asia, after they were come to Mysia, they assayed to go into
Bithynia: but the spirit suffered them not. Agreably when the apostle Paul was
preaching the gospel at Antioch, he told the people of that place (Acts,
13.26.) Men and brethren, to you is the word of this salvation SENT. Not so
much bro't by us as sent by God. And this disposition of providence cannot be
accounted for but by an election of grace to be gathered in from among such a
people. This was given as the reason why Paul was sent to preach the gospel at
Corinth, Acts 18.9, 10. Then spoke the Lord to Paul in the night by a vision,
saying, Be not afraid, but speak, and hold not thy peace, for I am with thee,
and no man shall hurt thee; for I HAVE MUCH PEOPLE in this city. And so the
preaching of the gospel in other Gentile places is accounted for, Acts 15.14.
James answered saying, Ye have heard how God has visited the Gentiles, to take
out of them a people for his name.

2. In blessing the means of grace for saving good to some who enjoy them, and
not to others. The wind blows where it lists; and the holy spirit works by
the ministry of the word, to will and to do, of his own good pleasure. Phil.
2.13.
One is awakn'd, convinced, pricked to the heart by a sermon; another in the
same seat, under the same sermon, feels nothing. Sometimes the most unlikly are
taken and effectually called, while others are left: And this after many years
delay and discouragement, and no hopeful prospect, but the contrary. Some out
of wicked families are converted; others, after a strict and religious
education, become vile and profligate. What different success has the gospel
at some times, and in some places; and at different times in the same place?
Though the same message, and the same preacher. Is there not an open display of
the sovereignty of divine grace in all this? Surely the conversion of sinners
is according to his purpose, as to the subjects themselves, and also as to the
time and season of their change, and the means and method by which it is
accomplished.

Once more,

IV. Such an election as we are treating of, is necessary to secure to the Lord
Jesus Christ what he purchased by his death. It would be very dishonorable to
suppose that Christ undertook the great and difficult work of man's redemption;
that he came into our world, suffered and died, upon an uncertainty what the
effect of his redemption would be; for this is plainly to make him act below a
wise intelligent agent. This could no ways be ascertained but by a divine
fore-ordination; for otherwise it must be left to turn upon the corrupt
fallacious will of man. If men were left to themselves, such is their impotency
to what is good in their present fallen state, and such a strong biass are they
under to the world and sin, they would never comply with the terms of
salvation; and so must fall short of it after the purchase of it was made.
Therefore a special number were chosen, and given to Christ, with respect to
whom the father engaged, that they should be bro't to believe on him, and be a
seed to serve him in this world, and through his merits obtain to everlasting
blessedness in the world to come. We are told in the revelation which God has
made to us of the hidden mystery which God ordained before the world unto our
glory, that the success of his redeeming work was ascertained to our redeemer,
in an inviolable contract, upon his engaging in the great and glorious design.
Isai. 43.10, 11, 12. When thou shall make his soul an offering for sin, He
shall see his seed: the pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in his hand. He
shall see of the travel of his soul and be satisfied: By his knowledge shall my
righteous servant justify many. Therefore I will divide him a portion with the
great, and he shall divide the spoil with the strong: because he has poured
out his soul unto death. It was upon the assurance our blessed savior had
given him in this contract, that he spoke those words, John 6.37. All that the
father gives me, SHALL come to me. Thus I have confirmed the truth we are
maintaining, by what I take to be direct scripture proof, and solid argument
agreeable to scripture. And if the truth is once well established, there is the
less need to regard the objections bro't against it. Yet, I hope, through divine
assistance, in the next discourse to vindicate this doctrine, in some measure,
from the charges bro't against it, as if it argued unrighteousness in God,
discouraged persons from useing the means of salvation, tended to despair, etc.

In the mean time, let what we have now heard cause us humbly to bow down
before the throne of the divine sovereignty, and awfully to adore in the
apostles language, Romans 11. from the 33d v. O the depth of the riches both of
the wisdom and knowledge of God! how unsearchable are his judgments, and his
ways past finding out! For who has known the mind of the Lord, or who has
been his counselor? Or who has first given to him, and it shall be
recompensed unto him again? For of him, and through him, and to him are all
things: to whom be glory forever. AMEN.

SERMON III.
ROMANS, VIII. 30. Moreover, whom he did predestinate, them he also called; and
whom he called, them he also justified; and whom he justified, them he also
glorified.


THESE words have been the foundation of two discourses already, upon this
illustrious Doctrine of christianity, That a certain number were selected by
God, in his eternal counsel and purpose, from the rest of fallen mankind, to be
in time effectually called, sanctified and justified, in order to their being
finally bro't to eternal life and glory; and this out of his mere good
pleasure, and for the praise of his glorious grace.

This truth has been explained and stated in several propositions. It has also
been confirmed and established by positive scripture proof, and by some
arguments drawn from the scriptures. That which we are to proceed to at this
time is,

III. To attempt to clear this truth of some misrepresentations made of it; and
to give an answer to the objections commonly bro't against it.

Here I would first of all observe to you, We should not disown or relinquish a
doctrine we have been taught, because of some objections raised against it, or
difficulties attending it. For there is no one truth in all the bible, though
never so plainly laid down, but the corrupt, proud, and aspiring mind of man,
has formed some objections against it, and started some difficulties about it.
And if we cannot quite master all the difficulties, and reconcile every thing
that seems contradictory, we must not therefore withold our assent, if the
thing it self is expressly revealed in scripture, or necestarily inser'd from
it. We are indispensably obliged to believe whatever God has revealed, whether
it is obvious to our reason, and agrees with our preconceiv'd opinions, or not.
If we can but satisfy our selves the scripture asserts such a doctrine, the
obscurity, difficulty, and harshness, which seem to attend it, must not stumble
or offend us. For these are things which are to be received upon the credit of
him that reveals them; and we don't yield that obedience of faith which the
gospel requires, unless our understandings submit to a revealed truth, as
readily as our wills are to comply with a commanded duty.

It is scripture and not reason, that is the rule of faith: For we are
incompetent judges of revealed truths, not only on account of the narrowness of
our capacities, but because of that blindness of mind which is the consequent
of our fallen state.

Nor yet is the unsearchableness of a doctrine revealed in scripture, a
sufficient reason why we should forbear all inquiry into it, or discourse about
it. What we may not pretend to search out to perfection, or to explain the
modus of, we may yet know and speak so much of, as to subserve the great ends
of religion. And if it is not the object of inquiry, nor a sit subject of
discourse, to what end is it revealed at all? We are soon lost in the
perfections of the divine nature, as well as in the doctrine of the decrees;
yet they must not be let alone, if we would teach people what they are to
believe concerning God.

Though there are bounds set about the holy mount, and to break through to gaze, is
dangerous, and may be fatal; yet, keeping a proper distance, we may allowably
take a view of what is presented before us; and without affecting to be wise
above what is written, we may safely venture to go into a mysterious subject as
far as the scripture leads us, compareing spiritual things with spiritual: And
by going into the sanctuary of God, we may gain some satisfaction about what is
otherwise two painful for us.

Having said this by way of premise, I come directly to what we proposed, to
vindicate the present truth from some of the misrepresentations made of it, and
to answer some objections made against it.

1. To vindicate it from some misrepresentations For distinction is always to
be made between the objections to which a truth may be liable, and the
misrepresentations which are ignorantly or maliciously made of it. Some greatly
misrepresent this doctrine, and state it in such a manner as we are far from
allowing, but utterly disown and reject as well as themselves.

Thus,

1. Some represent the doctrine of election as God's ordaining to save some
particular persons let them live how they will.

But no such election as this was ever asserted by us. The scripture knows no
such election. and we are far from maintaining it. The same decree that designs
any persons to salvation, ascertains the means for the obtaining that
salvation: These are faith and holiness. God has chosen us to salvation through
sanctification of the spirit, and belief of the truth. And the elect of God are
predestined to be conformed to the image of his son, which takes in the whole
work of sanctification. And therefore we never said, that if a person was
elected he might be saved however he ordered his life; for this would be to
separate what God has indissolubly connected, and to destroy a part of the
decree itself.

2. Another misrepresentation is, when any speak as if the decree of God was
the Reason why men did continue in sin and unbelief.

Give me leave to reply to this in the words of another. Dr. Ridgley, by way of
reply to Dr. Whitby. See his body of divinity, Vol. 1st p. 230.
Indeed, the immediate reason why any repent and believe to eternal life, is
because the exceeding greatness of his power is exercised toward them, whereby
he works repentance and faith in them; and the reason of his exerting this
power to work these saving graces in them, is because he has determined to do
it; and so it is the execution of his purpose. But it does not follow from
hence, that the reason why others do not repent and believe is, because they
were not ordained to eternal life. It Is true, their not being ordained to
eternal life, or God's not having purposed to save them, is the reason why he
does not exert that power which is necessary to work repentance and faith in
them; and impenitence and unbelief will certainly be the consequent hereof; but
the immediate spring and cause of impenitence and unbelief, is the corruption
and perverseness of human nature, which is chargable on none but man himself.
We must certainly distinguish between impenitence and unbelief their being the
consequent of God's not working repentance and faith, and its being the effect
hereof. If God withholds his grace from some to whom he was not obliged to give
it, and they continue in sin, this is to be assigned only to that wicked
propensity of nature, which inclines us to sin, and not to the divine
efficiency; for the decree enforces no man to sin, as we shall have occasion to
show hereafter.

3. Another such gross misrepresentation of this doctrine is, when any speak as
if the assertors of it held, that men are damned by vertus of the decree,
without any consideration of their sin and miscarriages.

But this was never said by the most zealous assertors of election and
reprobation. We do indeed affirm that God of his mere sovereignty chose some to
everlasting life, and passed by others, without any consideration had to the
good works of the former, or the evil deeds of the latter; but then a
distinction is made between bare non-electing, and the decree of condemnation.
This, being a thing more positive in the nature of it, must be with a view to
sin committed, and from the foresight of it. The objects of the decree of
condemnation must be some way or other, obnoxious to justice, that the
righteousness of God may be entirely clear in the judgment of intellectual
creatures. For, though a favor may be placed on one to whom it is not due, while
it is withheld from another that has no claim to it, without any shadow of
injustice; yet, punishment cannot righteously be inflicted on one that no way
deserves it; and eternal punishment cannot be deserved, if no sin is to be
charged.

Among the Calvinistical Divines of the last century, Doctor Twiss was one of
prime note; and, though in the supra-lapsarian scheme, he declares himself in the
words following; In his riches of God's love, wrote against Mr. Hord, 2d part
page 50.
That in no moment of time or reason does God ordain any man to damnation,
before the consideration of sin. Every one that is damned is damned for his
sin, and that wilfully committed, and contumaciously continued, by them that
come to ripe years.

Doctor Edwards, another strenuous and learned defender of predestination,
says, In his Veritas Redux, p 163, 164.
It is a true proposition, that God never decreed to make any creature
everlastingly miserable, who by his voluntary transgression of the divine laws,
did not deserve it. To damn, being an act of punitive justice, supposes a
fault, implies some demerit. Tribulation and anguish to every soul of man that
works evil, Romans 2.9. All are under sin, Romans 3.9. That every month may be
stopped, and all the world may become guilty before God, v. 19. Therefore the
penal decree has respect to this.

And our venerable Willard In his Expository Lectures, p. 270.
speaks the same language, when he says, God intended to damn none but for sin.
Damnation is not an act of mere sovereignty, but of relative justice. God damns
none merely because he will damn them, but because they have bro't it upon
themselves. As in Jer. 2.17. Have thou not procured this unto thy self, in that
thou have forsaken the Lord thy God? Sin therefore is the only cause of men's
destruction. It is true, there is an infallibility of consequence upon
reprobation, that all who are under that decree will die; but they do not die
because they were reprobated, but because they sinned. And were it not so,
revenging justice would not be manifested in this. For, justice appears in
rewarding men according to their doings, judging by the law which they are
under. That justice then may take place, it must appear that the man really
deserves the penalty inflicted on him Now this desert arises from the nature
and merit of sin: the man then must be a sinner before he can be justly damned;
and if he be so, he then rightly deserves it. So we read, Romans 6.23. The wages
of sin is death; but the gift of God is eternal life, through Jesus Christ our
Lord. So that notwithstanding the decree, no one falls under this sentence,
till by his sin he has brought it upon himself. No man is doomed to hell and
destruction, because he was reprobated, but because he was a sinner and
deserved it

Having so far cleared the doctrine of these misrepresentations that are made
of it,

We come,

II To return some answer to the objections that are commonly offered against
it.

And

1. Some object against the doctrine of election, or God's free choice of some
of fallen mankind, to make them the subjects of his grace now, and heirs of
glory hereafter, while he passed by the rest, and left them in the ruins of
their apostasy; some object against this, as inconsistent with the justice and
righteousness of God. Why, say they, should he choose some and not others, to
make them the objects of his redeeming love and grace, when all were alike
miserable, and equally undeserving? Does not this make him a respecter of
persons? Whenas we are told, Acts 10.34. Of a truth God is no respecter of
persons; and he has strictly forbidden this in earthly judges.

To this it may be answered, That respect of persons which is blamed amongst
men, is when one is preferred before another, in a matter of right, for some
sinister and selfish ends; as when a judge favors the rich in his cause: but
this is not chargeable where a person is under no obligation by any law or
rule, but is at perfect liberty. Thus though a man that is a judge, must do alike
by all, when he dispenses justice; yet a man is at liberty to take into his
house and family whom he pleases, or to bestow his estate on whom he will. If
that place in Acts 10.34.35. where the apostle Peter says, Of a truth I
perceive that God is no respecter of persons: But in every nation, he that
fears him, and works righteousness, is accepted with him, is duly
considered, it will appear that it does not intend but that God does show
favor to some above others; but all that it means is this, that God respects
no man's person, either less or more, for his outward condition and carnal
privileges.

Now, it is certain that God's election had no regard to any thing in the
creature, to any deservings found in the objects of it; for all lay in one
corrupt mass when the decree was exercised about them, and whatever they have
excellent above others is the fruit of their election, and so not the cause of
it.

The glorious God was at perfect liberty, being a debtor to none He is
sovereign Lord of his own grace, and may certainly bestow it where he will.
None could lay claim to it, and therefore none are wronged if it is not
bestowed on them; though all are highly favored who are the partakers of it.

Shall it be reckoned an act of injustice in God to save some of mankind only,
when he might have left ALL to perish, as well as the fallen angels, and not
recovered so much as ONE of our aposta^^ ^ace? We may venture to refer the
matter here to the decision of impartial reason it self What! shall not God
have power to dispose (...) his own grace and glory as he pleases? When he is
a debtor to none but makes that open challenge, Who has first given to him,
and it shall be recompensed to him again? Our savior has said eno' to silence
this objection, in Mat. 20.15. Is it not lawful for me to do what I will with
mine own? Is thine eye evil because I am good?

2. This truth is further objected against as being inconsistent with the
goodness and mercy of God. They say, God's tender mercies are over all his
works; that he is represented in scripture as a great lover of mankind, and as
having no pleasure in the death of a sinner but a desire that he should live.
How then can it be that his saving design is restrained to any determinate
number, while the rest are left to perish everlastingly? And some are ready to
think and say, what is even horrible to repeat, that it taxes a merciful God
with the cruelty of making man to damn him.

To this I answer,

However great the goodness and mercy of God are, yet all his creatures in
misery do not equally partake in them. This is plain from the distinction that
is made between the fallen angels and fallen mankind. The fallen angels are
wholly passed by, and not one of them saved; and this to be sure, without any
derogation to the mercy of God. Yet there is as much reason to charge God with
want of goodness and mercy, in leaving all the fallen angels to perish, as in
passing by some of fallen mankind. Or will any presume to affirm that God is
unmerciful, because he chooses the objects of his mercy, or has mercy on whom
he will have mercy? The power of God is limited and determined in the exercise
of it, by his divine wisdom and sovereign pleasure; and why should not his
goodness and mercy be so too?

Nor does this give occasion for that injurious and blasphemous reflection,
that God made some men to DAMN them. For God's purpose to condemn men, does not
consider them as creatures, but as sinners; as we have had occasion to observe
already. That God did not create man on purpose that he might sin, is evident
from man's primitive state, that of innocence, in which he might have
continued. For though his creator made him mutable, he yet made him upright
Eccle. 7.29.
, without the least tincture of sin in his nature, or any disposition, or
inclination to it; but all the powers and faculties of the soul were disposed
to answer the ends of its creation, and thereby to glorify God. Now, as God
did not create man that he might sin, he cannot be said to create him that he
might condemn him: Several other ideas intervene between God's purpose to
create and to condemn.

And though the merciful God does not take pleasure in the death of a sinner, as
it is the misery of his creatures, yet he has, and from the perfection of his
nature cannot but have, a high satisfaction in the display of his own justice
toward some, whose sin has rendered them the proper objects for that terrible
attribute to be glorified upon. Besides, these same objections taken from the
goodness and mercy of God, lie as much against God's not eventually saving all,
as his determination not to save all. None say that all men will be finally
saved; for the scripture declares the contrary in many places. Yet it is
certain, God could save all men if he so pleased. He could change the heart of
every sinner in the world, prepare him for salvation, and then bestow it on
him. Is it any derogation to his goodness and mercy that he don't do thus? Why
then do any charge the opinion of God's determining to save but a part of
mankind, with such unmercifulness, when the objection lies full as strong
against their own opinion, that God will actually save but a part of our
species?

Nor do we by this opinion make salvation narrower, or more confined, than
those who oppose it; but, in fact, make it as extensive in its subjects as they
do. As one has well observed upon this argument, The difference between them
and us, is not about the number that are saved; we both agree in this, that
none shall be saved but such as repent and believe, and obey the gospel, and
that all such shall certainly be saved; but what we differ about is, the manner
of their obtaining salvation. We say, they are saved by virtue of the electing
love of God; they say they are saved because they rightly improve their own
free will. We affirm them to be saved in such a way as ascribes all to the
glory of God; the way of salvation which they hold is such, as leaves great
room for man to glory. Thus far then our doctrine appears every whit as
merciful to mankind as theirs, inasmuch as the difference is not about the
number of the saved, but the way and manner of their coming to this salvation.
Nay, our doctrine appears much more merciful than theirs who oppose it. For
ours makes the salvation of millions of the fallen children of men absolutely
certain, while theirs makes the salvation of any man, but barely possible And
let any unprejudiced person judge, whether a doctrine that secures the
salvation of an innumerable multitude, is not more worthy of a compassionate
and merciful God, than a notion that only puts the salvation of every one upon
a bare possibility, whence it may happen, that even according to their own
tenets, no one may be saved at last.

Nay the author we here refer to Sladen.
carries the matter still higher, and with good reason asserts, That the
doctrine of our opponents is an unmerciful doctrine, because it is so far from
ascertaining the salvation of any, that it makes the salvation of each man a
moral impossibility. They suppose the election the scripture speaks of to be
only a conditional one, i. e. provided men will repent and believe, and
persevere in holiness; but they will not allow that God has predestined any
to faith, repentance, and perseverance to the end; but that the performance of
these conditions depends upon their own will.

But if this is the case, the question which was once put to our Lord, may very
properly be asked here, Who then can be saved? For, if the scripture has
rightly represented men as by nature in a state of death, to every good work
reprobate; not sufficient as of themselves to speak a good word, or think a
good though it, how is it possible they should by their own innate power ever
perform these great and weighty conditions?

Thus our doctrine appears to be not only consistent with the mercy of God, but
to give it a brighter display. And I would only add upon this; It is the grace
and mercy which I see shining forth in this doctrine, that makes me embrace it,
and prize it, and contend for it. And however others may judge, I declare with
all seriousness, I would not for ten thousand worlds but my own salvation
should stand more secure, than any will or power of my own is able to make it.

To go on.

3. It is objected against the truth we are maintaining, that it is
inconsistent with human liberty, and tends to establish a fatal necessity of
things. Some will say, if men are predestined to faith and holiness, a force
is then put upon their inclinations, and a free choice taken away: As on the
other hand they say, this brings men under a necessity of smning; and why are
they to be blamed or punished for what they cannot help? Nay, some will venture
so far as to say, that upon this principle God himself must be the author of
sin, or the blameable cause of evil.

I answer, To reconcile the divine fore-ordination with human liberty, is a
thing too hard for us; nor may any one pretend to do it. Yet the matter of fact
is certain, that men do act with liberty and freedom in things that are
foreordained. And though we cannot reconcile them, there is certainly an
agreement between these two. Nor is it more difficult to reconcile this, than
some other things which yet are generally owned. As for instance, the duty and
success of prayer with the doctrine of God's unchangeableness. Such is the
perfection of God's nature that he is unchangeable in his mind and purposes.
When he is said in scripture to repent or change his mind, it is only spoken
after the manner of men; and can by no means be understood as if he had altered
his purpose upon any new prospect, or was bro't to do otherwise than he before
designed; for this would plainly be to derogate from the perfection of his
nature. Yet prayer is the appointed means of receiving mercy and blessings from
God, and he does many things for his people in answer to their prayers, and has
never said to the seed of Jacob, seek ye me in vain. Now I say, it is no more
difficult to reconcile the divine fore ordination with human liberty, than it
is the doctrine of the divine unchangeableness with the efficacy of prayer. And
so there is no more reason to reject the doctrine of the divine decrees, than
there is the doctrine of the divine unchangableness, which even reason teaches.

Though the elect of God are predestined to faith and holiness, no violence is
offered to their wills when they come to believe in Christ, and choose the way
of holiness. Though all that the father has given him, shall come to Christ, yet
they come freely, not by a force upon their wills, but a change in them. Surely
God may incline the wills of men, without destroying the nature and freedom of
them. So we road, Thy people shall be willing in the day of thy power, Psalm.
110 3. And God tells his people, I have loved thee with an everlasting love;
therefore with loving kindness have I drawn thee. And the church prays, Draw
me, we will run after thee, Cant. 1 4. On the other hand, Though the decree of
God leaves some unto the sinfulness of their own hearts and lives, out of which
he is under no obligation to recover them, yet this enforces no man to sin; but
men's sin is always voluntary and chosen. So it is said of God's sinful people
of old, Isai. 66.3. They have chosen their own ways, and their soul delights
in their abominations.

To illustrate and confirm this, let me refer you to the story of Joseph, which
presents us with a notable draught and scheme of providence. God had a purpose
to advance Joseph in Egypt, and also a design to save his fathers house alive
in a time of famine, by sending him there before them to make provision for
them; and as a means to this Joseph was sold to the Ishmalites, and by them to
an officer in Pharaohs court. But will any one say that his brethren did not
act freely in their selling of him, and gratify their own envy and malice by
that wicked deed?

So our Lord Jesus Christ was the lamb slain from the foundation of the world,
in the divine counsel and purposes; yet it is said of the Jews that for envy
they delivered him to Pilate, Mat. 7.18. And the apostle Peter thus charges
them, Acts 2.23. Him, being delivered by the determinate counsel and
foreknowledge of God, ye have taken, and by wicked hands have crucified and
slain. The crime is expressly said to be their own, though done in pursuance of
the divine determination.

Nor can the holy God be made the author of sin when he leaves the sinner to
his sinfulness: For though he permits the sin, he infuses no sinfulness into the
sinner.

"Will any say, God's denying the revengful person, or the murderer, that grace
which would prevent his executing his bloody designs, makes him the author of
the murder? Or is his denying to others the necessary supply of their present
exigencies, the cause of their making use of unlawful means, by plundering and
stealing, to subsist themselves? No, this is only to be assigned to that wicked
propensity of nature, which enclines to sin when occasion is offered, and not
to the divine efficiency."

4. It is objected that this doctrine of particular election is inconsistent
with such declarations in scripture as those that tell us, God is not willing
any should perish, but would have all men to be saved; and with such
expostulations as God uses with sinners, and lamentations over them, when he
says, Turn ye, turn ye, why will ye die? And, O that thou had known in this
thy day, the things of thy peace! And also with such general offers of grace as
that, Whosoever will let him take of the water of life freely.

This may seem a plausible objection at the first sound, but upon due
consideration will not be found to overthrow what we assert. For as to such
declarations as this that God would have all men to be saved, and therefore to
come to repentance, they cannot be understood to be any thing more than
declarations of men's duty to repent and turn to God that they may be saved, and
that the thing in it self considered is to be desired. They cannot possibly mean
that he wills the repentance and salvation of all as he does of some; that he
wills it as a thing which he will engage his power to accomplish; for then it
would immediately come to pass. -- The expostulations we meet with in
scripture, are forms of speech well suited to awaken men's consideration, bring
them to a sense of their duty, and excite them to return to God; and are of
this use in the hand of the Spirit, in the effectual calling and conversion of
God's elect. -- The lamentations that are made over sinners, represent the
deplorableness of their condition, and that God has no pleasure in their misery
considered as his creatures. If they are looked upon as representing God
disappointed in, and grieved at a thing which he could not help, and has come
to pass contrary to his design and expectation, they are certainly strained too
far. -- And as to the offers of grace in the preached gospel, they are and must
be general, for the elect and non-elect live together under the same gospel,
and none but God knows who the one and the other are. These free and general
offers are for the encouragement of persons awakened and in distress, and they
prevent the returning sinner from desponding. There is indeed no deceit in
these offers: Whoever will may take of the water of life freely. But when any
are willing to accept of salvation in the way in which it is offered in the
gospel, they are made so by God, and it is in pursuance of his purpose. We are
sure there is no inconsistency between particular election and a general
promise, since our savior asserted the former at the same time that he made
the latter, in that famous place, which we have once and again referred to,
John 6 37. All that the father gives me, shall come to me. And him that comes
to me, I will in no wise cast out. From hence I say, it incontestibly appears,
That a determinate infallible election is not inconsistent with a free general
offer of grace I shall mention but one objection more, which is,

5thly That this doctrine discourages persons in the use of means, and tends to
despair. If I am not elected may a person say, to what purpose are all my
endeavors for salvation? I can never attain to it by them. And if I am
elected, why should I strive and labor, when my salvation is made sure by the
immutable decree of God? But, how preposterous is this, when the end and means
come under the same decree? As I have had occasion once and again to observe in
the process of this subject. God's decree does not at all take off the use of
our endeavors, for in the use of the means the very decree it self is to
receive its accomplishment. Let me refer you to a scripture story for the
illustration and proof of this. When the apostle Paul was in imminent danger of
shipwreck in his voyage to Rome, he encouraged the company by assuring them,
there should not be the loss of any man's life, only of the vessel. For says
he, Acts 27.23, 24.
There stood by me this night the angel of God, whose I am, and whom I serve,
saying, fear not Paul, thou must be brought before Caesar: and lo, God has
given thee all them that sail with thee. Wherefore sirs be of good cheer: for I
believe God, that it shall be even at it was told me Yet when the shipmen were
by and by going to flee out of the ship to save themselves by boat, Paul said
to the centurion, and to the soldiers, except these abide in the ship, ye
cannot be saved. Which did not at all weaken the assurance he had just before
given them from God, that they should all be saved; for God who had appointed
the end, that they should be saved, had also appointed the means, that they
should be saved by the help of those ship-men: so though God has ordained the
salvation of those that shall be saved, he has ordained it in the way of faith
and holiness, and a working out their own salvation with fear and trembling.

There is no such decree as this, That the elect shall be saved, whether they
work about their own salvation, or not. Or, that the elect may continue
unconverted, and unconcerned about eternal blessedness, and yet get safe to
heaven at last. If any are ordained unto eternal life, it is also ordained that
they shall be awakn'd to a sense of their sin and misery, to earnest prayer to
God for recovering and renewing grace; and to a diligent waiting on him in the
ways of his appointment, until that he have mercy on them. How then does this
doctrine set aside the use of means in order to attain the end?

If any make this a plea for not setting about the work of their salvation,
it is only an excuse for sloth, and a mere pretense for their not doing what
they have no mind to do. For they do not urge and plead the decree in other and
lesser matters, as they do in the matters of their salvation. Other things are
fore-ordain'd as well as men's salvation; how long they shall live, and whether
they shall be rich and prosperous in the world But who says, I don't know
whether God has decreed that I shall live to be old, and therefore I will not
take food to preserve my life, nor physic to recover me when I am sick? Or, I
don't know whether the decree will allow me to prosper, or not; and therefore I
will not work nor trade, nor use any endeavors to get an estate. If any object
the decree in the one case, that do not in the other, surely they are
self-condemned.

And how can this doctrine have a peculiar tendency to drive persons to
despair, when it ascertains salvation to a very great number, an innumerable
multitude; and no one knows but he is of that number? For it is a very great
sin for any one to conclude himself a reprobate. The greatest and the oldest
sinner may not do so. For many of the elect of God have been left unto great
sins, and suffered to lie long in sin too; but been after all bro't to the
faith of God's elect, been washed, sanctified and justified in this world, and
glorified in the next. And if the sinner is awakned, and bro't into distress
and agony, there is the more hope that he will be found of this number, and
that a purpose of mercy concerning him is beginning to be executed. How in the
world does this doctrine tend to despair any more than those places of
scripture that speak of the difficulty of salvation, and tells us that few
comparitively will be saved? Such passages as that in our saviors sermon on
the mount, Mat. 7.13, 14. Enter ye in at the strait gate; for wide is the gate,
and broad is the way that leads to destruction, and many there be which go in
thereat: Because strait is the gate, and narrow is the way which leads unto
life, and few there be that find it.

But it is easy to load any truth with misrepresentations and abuses if men will
set themselves to do so: and such is the perverseness of some, that they will
give a wrong turn to a thing that is never so well explained and guarded. When
we set forth the mercy of God, his readiness to pardon, and willingness to
receive sinners that return to him by repentance and faith in Jesus Christ;
some will abuse it to presumption, and from thence encourage themselves to go
on in sin because grace abounds, and to defer their repentance to the last of
their time. This, so far as we can make a judgment, is a more common case than
the other; and it is full as dangerous to the souls of men: Yet none would have
us forbear it; and some think it cannot be too often treated of, nor eno'
enlarged upon.

Indeed it is a usual thing for persons under their first awakenings, to have
their minds exercised about the doctrine of election; but so far as I have been
able to observe, it has been a help, rather than an hindrance, to them in the
work of a thorough conversion, and saving closure with the Lord Jesus Christ;
and has been used by the Holy Spirit as a means to excite them to give more
diligence to make their calling sure, and to lay the stronger hold on the hope
set before them, in a glorious Christ to whom the gospel invites them to flee
for refuge.

And it seems to me that upon a fair and just representation of the state of
the case, it will appear to every considerate and unprejudiced person, that a
minister in treating with troubled awakned consiences, can do it with much
greater advantage upon the foot of particular election, and those other
doctrines of grace that are connected with it, than on the foot of universal
redemption, and the opinions that follow that. For, suppose a person in deep
concern about his everlasting salvation, should come to a minister for his help
and direction, and the minister should tell him; God was a kind and merciful
being, who delighted in the happiness of his creatures, and made none of them
miserable that did not make themselves so; and Christ was the savior of the
world, who died for all men, and consequently for him as much as for any one;
and if he did but repent of his sins, and trust in the merits of Christ, and
lead a good life, and continue to do so to the end, he need nor fear, for the
gospel promised salvation to him. Might he not reply? And if his concern was
deep and thorough, he would reply to this effect; Though God is a kind and
merciful being, it is as true that he is so holy as to hate sin, and so just as
to punish the sinner; and how much soever he delights in the happiness of his
creatures, we know it will be the portion of a great many of them to be
everlastingly miserable: True, he makes none of them miserable that don't make
themselves so; but this is my unhappy case: I see I am a sinner, though I was not
so sensible of it as I am now; I have revolted from him and rebelled against
him; and I fear he will make me as miserable, as I have made my self sinful.
And if Christ is the savior of all men, all men will not be actually and
finally saved by him; this general redemption leaves the salvation of all men
at an uncertainty. If I could know he died for me in particular, I should think
my salvation secured; but I have no reason to think he died for me any more
than for those who will perish forever. As to that faith, repentance and
obedience, which the gospel makes the conditions of an interest in salvation by
Jesus Christ, whatever undue opinion I have had of my own strength before, I am
now convinced these are things out of my power, and must be wro't in me by a
divine energy. I find my heart to be hard and unbelieving, averse to the way of
holiness, and only bent to sin. And there are so many evil inclinations to be
denied, temptations to be resisted, and enemies to be overcome, that I fear I
shall not hold out in the way to heaven; and without I endure to the end, I
cannot expect to be saved. Others have turned back, after they have seemed to
set out well; and I have no better security than they had. My salvation, for
any thing I can see, is very uncertain; yea, very unlikely, and next to
impossible, if I am left so much to my self in it.

On the other hand; When a minister tells an inquiring, solicitous, anxious
soul, not only that the death of Christ is of value sufficient to purchase
salvation for all men, if God had been pleased to design the salvation of all;
but that he died to render the salvation of a very great number of them
infallibly certain; and therefore has purchased for every one of these that
faith and repentance which the gospel makes necessary to salvation, which are
most commonly wro't in them by the HolySpirit in the use of the appointed
means; and that their final perseverance in grace, and complete victory over
sin, the world, and satan, are secured in a well ordered covenant, of which the
Lord Jesus Christ himself is the head and surety: and if when the inquiring
person expresles a doubt and fear that he is not one of the happy number, and
seems ready to be discouraged on this account, the minister further lets him
know, there is no real ground for any such fear, inasmuch as none can tell who
are included in this number, and who are not; and many are included in it who
have greatly feared the contrary; that the present concern of mind he is under
renders it very hopeful that he will be found of this number at last, inasmuch
as this is the way of the Spirit with the elect of God, when he is about
effectually to call them; first to awaken them out of their former ease and
security, to convince and humble them, and so drive them to Christ: That if he
goes to Christ for life upon the general call of the gospel, his election of
God is put out of question; and then he need not be discouraged on account
either of his unworthyness or inability; for the promises of effectual and
persevering grace made to Christ in behalf of the elect are absolute, and he
may plead them, and take the comfort of them, and rest assured that as Christ
will cast out none that come to him, so it is not the will of his father in
heaven, that one of these little ones should perish Mat. 18.14.
; and therefore he has undertaken to perfect that which does concern them, to
complete the good work begun in them, to protect and guide them through this evil
world, and carry them safely to the kingdom prepared for them. -- When, I say,
a minister applies himself in this manner, upon these principles, to an
awakened distressed soul, does it not carry greater encouragement, and stronger
consolation in it, than the other, which only makes the salvation of all men
possible, but secures salvation to none of them; and leaves them so much to
themselves in a difficult and hazardous work, to which they know and find they
are sadly unequal?

Thus an answer has been given to some of the more common objections bro't
against this truth. But I have not yet gone through all that I proposed; though I
have endeavored to be as comprehensive as I could. Another discourse must be
allowed me: In which I shall endeavor to improve the subject to the ends of
practical religion; and persons may be directed how to make their election
sure; for a person will never be thro'ly reconciled to this doctrine, till he
has a hope of his own interest in it. Consider of what has been said, and the
Lord give you understanding in all things; establishment in this, and every
other gospel truth. This also we wish, brethren, even your growing up toward
perfection, in knowledge and faith, together with holiness and comfort. We
would not have you always as babes to be fed with milk, but as men in Christ to
be able to receive and digest these truths which the apostle calls strong meat.
It Is a mean and a low thing for a christian to be content to know nothing but
what is necessary to salvation. There are many truths revealed in the gospel,
which we cannot say are absolutely necessary to salvation, which yet it is a
shame for christians not to have the knowledge of, because they redound to the
honor of God, and have an influence into some parts at least of practical
religion. And if these are among the deep things of God, let it not discourage
you from a humble cautious search into them by the light of scripture, and with
prayer to the spirit of truth, to lead you into all truth.

I conclude now with the apostles prayer for the Philippians, 1 chap. 9, 10,
11. v. This I pray that your love may abound yet more and more in knowledge,
and in all judgment; that ye may approve things that are excellent; (or, as the
margin reads it, try things that differ;) that ye may be sincere and without
offense till the day of Christ; being filled with the fruits of righteousness,
which are by Jesus Christ, to the praise and glory of God. AMEN.

SERMON, IV.
ROMANS, VIII. 30. Moreover, whom he did predestinate, them he also called: and
whom he called, them he also justified: and whom he justified, them he also
glorified.


WE have had three discourses from these words concerning the doctrine of
predestination unto life. The truth has been explained and stated in several
propositions. It has been confirmed and established by plain scripture proof,
and solid argument agreeable to scripture. Some misrepresentations made of it
have been rectified; and several objections obviated. I hope now to finish the
subject as God shall vouchsafe to help. And the next thing we are to proceed to
according to the method we at first proposed is,

IV. To set before you some of the absurd consequences which follow upon the
denial of this doctrine, and the difficulties of which the contrary scheme
labors, and with which they are embarrass d who are on the other side of the
question. This, I apprehend, will cast some more light into the subject, and
further confirm the truth we are maintaining; and it may help to undeceive some
who have been ready to think all the difficulty lies on our part, and there is
little or nothing for our opponents to reconcile, or to clear away, before this
notion can be embraced.

And

1. If such an election as we have been speaking of is not granted, it follows,
That the will of God, even in an affair wherein his own glory is so greatly
concerned as the salvation of men, is dependent on the will of the creature.

I think the more general scheme of those who cannot subscribe to the doctrine
of election is, That God has not infallibly willed the salvation of any
particular persons, but conditionally willed the salvation of all men; that is,
provided they will repent, and believe: but has not determined to give this
repentance and faith to any in particular; at least not till he sees how they
improve the common grace and advantages they are under. This is evidently to
make the will of God in this matter, subject to, and directed by the will of
man, which is very dishonorable to him. This notion represents God, as saying,
"I will that all men should be saved; nevertheless it must finally be, not as I
will, but as they will." This is in effect to take away the will of God; for,
to be sure he can have no absolute will of his own, whose will must be directed
by the will of another, and is liable to be frustrated by it.

2. Without such an election as we are maintaining, God might be wholly
disappointed in his saving design respecting the children of men, and the
precious blood of Christ might have been shed in vain. The o ne could not be
secured, nor the other prevented, without an election of individuals, to whom
the redemption purchased by Christ should be infallibly applied.

They will not get clear of this absurd consequence, by having recourse to the
foreknowledge of God, and saying, he certainly fore-knew that some, and a
great number would repent and believe, and so was assured he should not be
disappointed in his design, and that his son would not die in vain; because, as
we have shown already, the foreknowledge of God necessarily infers his
fore-ordination: for it is certain, that when all things future were no where
but in the mind of God, in the days of eternity, he could know nothing of them
but what was his determinate will and counsel concerning them.

Or if they will say, that to prevent this disappointment, God will so order it
that some shall be inclined and disposed to comply with the terms of salvation;
this is in effect to give up the point, and grant what we assert: for this will
be to allow discriminating grace exercised in time, which cannot well be
defended without allowing a discrimination in God's purpose relating thereto;
because they must otherwise suppose there are new determinations in the divine
will, which would be to argue him imperfect in wisdom and knowledge.

3. Another of the gross absurdities which I apprehend follows upon the denial
of this doctrine is, That man's salvation is left at the same uncertainty under
the new covenant, that it was in under the first; nay, that the state of
mankind now, is much more difficult and dangerous than it was then.

Man's happiness, or misery, turned upon the exercise of his own free will
under the first covenant; and so it does still if the salvation of a number is
not secured by electing love and grace. And can we suppose it consistent with
the love and kindness of God, to leave salvation again to depend upon the will
of man, which had ruined him once before? If free will ruined man in his first
state, while he was upright; is it not much more likely to ruin him in his
worst state, now that he is fallen and corrupt? How can we imagine the wise God
to expect his design of man's salvation should be answered in the same way,
when it was rendered much more unlikely; I may say impossible now, though it was
not so before? Agreably we read, Job 15.15. Behold, he puts no trust in his
saints. He does not trust the concerns of his glory in their salvation, in
their own hands; for he well knew his saving design would then never take
effect. And therefore their salvation is infallibly secured by the new
covenant, which is called a better covenant, established upon better promises;
promises of reconciling, renewing and persevering grace, positive and absolute,
Heb. 8.6. A transcript of which covenant follows, in the 10, 11, and 12. v. and
it runs in the most absolute unconditional strain that can be; This is the
covenant that I will make with them, says the Lord, I will put my laws into
their minds, and write them in their hearts; and I will be to them a God, and
they shall be to me a people. And they shall not teach every man his neighbor,
and every man his brother, saying, Know the Lord: for all shall know me, from
the least to the greatest. For I will be merciful to their unrighteousness, and
their sins and their iniquities will I remember no more.

Once more,

4thly, Another of the consequences, which, as I conceive, follows upon the
denial of this doctrine is, That the salvation of every particular man does
originate with himself; or at least is to be divided between God and the
creature.

They that are in the other way of thinking, suppose that by the death of
Christ mankind are put into a salvable state; but that the success as to
particular persons depends upon their acceptance of the offered salvation, and
compliance with the terms of it; which acceptance and compliance (according to
them) are not the result and fruit of God's purpose of grace, but rather of
men's own reason and consideration, will and choice excited by those rational
arguments that have been set before them, and that moral suasion which has been
used with them. Some of these will indeed speak of the grace of God, and
acknowledge we can do nothing without that; but all they seem to mean is a
common general grace which goes along with the gospel, and one may improve to
equal advantage as another. -- And if it be thus, the sinner that is saved, is
furnished with an easy answer to that question, 1 Cor. 4.7. Who makes thee to
differ from another? The happy difference instead of being ascribed to the free
and powerful grace of God, must upon this principle, be ascribed to the man
himself, his own reason and choice, good conduct and endeavors. There is no
medium here; for according to the apostles arguing, every man's salvation takes
rise from the free grace of God in election, or from his own works. Romans 11.5,
6. Even so at this time also there is a remnant according to the election of
grace. And if by grace, (such as I mentioned just now, vi z. electing grace; if
by grace, I say) then it is no more of works; otherwise grace is no more grace.
But if it be of works, then it is no more grace; otherwise work is no more
work. But that doctrine which gives the creature so much room to boast, and put
in for so great a share in the honor of his own salvation, cannot be of God;
for he will not have any thing of his glory given to another. And nothing can
be more contrary to the design of the gospel, which is to stain the pride of
all flesh, to take away all occasions of glorying from the creature, and to
secure to divine grace its full honors. The prophet shows the glory and
tendency of the gospel state, when he says, as in Isa. 2.17. The loftiness of
man shall be bowed down, and the haughtiness of men shall be made low, and the
Lord alone shall be exalted in that day.

The exaltation of FREE GRACE is evidently what the glorious God aims at in the
contrivance of fallen man's redemption. To this the whole frame is admirably
fitted, from the first corner stone, to the bringing forth the top stone
thereof. 1 Cor. 1.29, 30, 31. That no flesh should glory in his presence. But
of him are ye in Christ Jesus, who of God is made unto us wisdom, and
righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption: That, according as it is
written, He that glories, let him glory in the Lord. Ephesians. 2.7, 8, 9. That in
the ages to come he might show the exceeding riches of his grace, in his
kindness toward us, through Christ Jesus. For by grace are ye saved, through
faith; and that not of your selves: it is the gift of God: Not of works, least
any man should boast.

And so we proced to the

V. general head, which is, To show the importance of this doctrine, and the
place it holds in the scheme of christianity; by which you will be helped to
judge whether it is a doctrine that had better be suppressed than published in
the church. But here I must be content with hinting at things, without
enlargment, or I shall much exceed my limits.

To be sure; The gospel cannot be fully preached if this article is dropped; for
it is evidently a great part of the subject matter of the sacred pages.

We cannot rightly conceive of the attributes of God, if we are unacquainted
with this doctrine. -- It is in this decree of election, that several of the
glories and excellencies of the divine nature, appear in their brightest and
strongest light. As to the Jovereignty of the great God, his absolute supremacy
over all creatures, and right to dispose of them for his own glory; this is
left out of the notion men frame of God, and he quite looses the glory of this
high prerogative, when this truth is not understood and acknowledged --. And as
to the divine goodness, mercy and grace, nothing displays these so much, as the
everlasting purpose of God to deliver so many of the children of Adam, from the
misery they had involved themselves in, and the punishment they had deserved.
To deliver some, and not all, renders the divine goodness toward the subjects
of this deliverance, more perspicuous and glorious. The salvation of men would
not so fully appear to be from free mercy and grace, if no difference was made
between persons. To this purpose the apostle speaks, Romans 11.23. That he might
make known the riches of his glory on the vessels of mercy, whom he had before
prepared unto glory. His making choice of some, while he passes by others,
commends his favor to them, renders it more glorious in their eyes, constrains
their admiration now, and will raise their highest notes of praise hereafter.
The eternal melody they will make, is that, Rev. 5.9. Thou art worthy to take
the book, and to open the seals thereof: for thou wast slain, and have redeemed
us to God by thy blood OUT OF every tongue, and kindred, and nation.

Many of the peculiar, high and noble, instructive and comfortable doctrines of
the gospel are concerned in this, and connected with it. What will become of
that covenant of redemption between the father and the son from the days of
eternity, of which we read in the 89th Psalm; 53d chapter of Isaiah; 10th and 17th
chapter of John, and other places; if a distinguished number were not given to
Christ, as his charge, and as his reward? -- The satisfaction of Christ is
rendered a very loose uncertain and unsafe thing, if there are not a certain
number for whom it was made and accepted; and the value of it is lessened
exceedingly, if it did not purchase faith, repentance, and holiness, for them
on whom they are bestowed. -- That free will which stands in competition with,
and opposition to the grace of God in our salvation, can never without this be
thrown to the ground as it ought to be. -- The doctrine of efficatious grace
which does so much honor to the Holy Spirit; and the doctrine of the saints
perseverance in grace, which is so comfortable to them; depend very much on
this doctrine of election. -- This is the foundation of all those great and
precious promises contained in the new covenant; the groundwork of our
redemption; the rise and spring of all those spiritual blessings we are made
the partakers of, to which the saints should look back in their joyful praises,
and without the consideration of which, they cannot comprehend what is the
height and depth, the length and breadth of the love of God in Christ It is
therefore taken into that thanksgiving of the apostle, Ephesians. 1.3.4. Blessed be
the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has blessed us with all
spiritual blessings in heavenly things, ACCORDING AS HE HAS CHOSEN US IN HIM
BEFORE THE FOUNDATION OF THE WORLD.

In a word; As this doctrine is a spring of consolation to believers, so it is a
most powerful argument to holiness and obedience; and this not only that they
may not be without the tokens of election, but out of gratitude, and by way of
acknowledgment to God for his distinguishing and eternal love to them.
Accordingly it is matter of observation, that those who have embraced this
doctrine, have been among the most exemplary, cautious, diligent and fruitful
christians. But this has almost entered me into the

VIth and last thing proposed, namely, The improvement of the subject to the
ends of serious religion, and practical godliness. For had I taken it to be
only an abstruse speculation, and not a doctrine according to godliness, I had
spared my self the pains of these discourses.

The subject may be improved,

1. To let us into the meaning of several of the acts of God's providence.

Thus we are from hence furnished with a reason, why the human race was not
cast off by God, upon the apostasy, as were the angels that sinned. It was
because there was an election of grace amongst them. This gave birth to the
early promise of the seed of the woman to break the serpents head. To this it
was owing that there was an arrest of judgment, after the sentence was
pronounced on our apostate parents; and that mankind was allowed to partake so
largely of the divine goodness.

We also learn from hence the reason of God's patience with the present world,
that is grown so sinful. It is because of a distinguished remnant of mankind
that are in it now, and are to be born into it hereafter. So those words are to
be expounded, Isa. 65.8, 9. Thus says the Lord, as the new wine is found in
the cluster, and one says, destroy it not, for a blessing is in it: so will I
do for my servants sake, that I may not destroy them all. And I will bring
forth a seed out of Jacob, and out of Judah an inheritor of my mountains: and
mine cloot shall inherit it, and my servants shall dwell there. So our savior
said that for the elects sake, the days of the destruction of the Jews should
be shortened, and a stop put to that desolation, which otherwise would have
proceeded to that degree, that no flesh should be saved, Mat 24.22. When the
elect of God are all born into the world, and ripened for heaven, then judgment
will commence, the patience of God with our sinful species will be at an end,
and that destruction by fire unto which the world is reserved will come on.

Again,

Here Is a reason of the divine forbearance and long suffering toward
particular sinners. If they are not among the elect themselves, who are to be
effectually called in due time, it may be some of the elect are to spring from
them, and for this reason they are spared notwithstanding all their
provocations. If God should make quick work, and early destroy all the wicked
of the earth, whence should his elect arise in the world? Jeroboam and Abrz
were not cut off in their first transgressions, because good Abijah and
Hezekiah were to spring from them. Many that will heartily embrace Christ, must
rise from such as reject him. The Lord suffers many a wicked person to stand
for a time under his patience, says holy Mr. Flavell, because children are to
spring from them, who will obey and embrace that Christ whom their wicked
parents rejected." The world then has no need to murmur at, and quarrel with
this doctrine of election as they do. It is well for the rest of the world that
there is an election of grace out of it. Others fare the better for this: Since
for the sake of these the wicked world is spared from age to age, and the
execution of divine justice toward particular sinners delayed.

2. This doctrine affords much comfort and encouragement to serious and
thoughtful minds, in times of great defection and corruption.

When there is a wide spread of error, and a mighty torrent of profaneness;
when evil men and seducers wax worse and worse, as they will do in the last
days; when many are turned from the faith, and numbers loose their first love;
let the pious and faithful in Christ Jesus remember for their encouragement, it
is impossible to deceive the elect, in things that are essential to salvation;
and the foundation of God stands sure; having this seal, the Lord knows them
that are his. And it may be the number of these is much larger than we are
sometimes ready to sear. As in Elijahs time, when the apostasy from the true
worship and service of God was so general, that the good prophet though it there
was no one beside himself who preserved his integrity, he was told for h s
comfort, there were thousands more. The apostle mentions this instance, and
applies it to the times of the preaching of the gospel, Romans 11.2, 3, 4, 5. God
has not cast away his people which he foreknew. Wot ye not what the scripture
says of Elias? how he makes intercession to God against Israel, saying, Lord,
they have killed thy prophets, and dug down thine altars; and I am left
alone, and they seek my life. But what says the answer of God unto him? I have
reserved to my self seven thousand men, who have not bowed the knee to the
image of Baal. Even so then, at this present time also, there is a remnant
according to the election of grace.

3. Since some of the children of men are chosen unto salvation, predestined
unto life, let us inquire, Whether we have, at present, any good ground to hope
that we are of the distinguished number.

This may be known, or the apostle would not have exhorted us to give diligence
to make our election sure; as he does in 2 Pet. 1.10. And he writes to the
Thessalonians, as if their election, (or the election of the body of that
church) was no longer a matter of doubt, but of certainty. The 1st ep. 1 chapter 4.
v. Knowing, brethren beloved, your election of God.

We need not here say in our hearts, Who shall ascend into heaven, to see
whether my name is written there? Who will bring the book of life down to me,
to see whether I am enrolled in it, or not? The proof of this matter is near
us, even in the book of scripture which we have in our hands.

The apostle in the place just mentioned, tells the Thessalonians what was the
proof of their election. Knowing, brethren beloved, your election of God: For
our gospel came to you, not in word only, but in power, and in the Holy Ghost,
and in much assurance. Inquire then, what effect the word of the gospel has had
upon you Has it come to you with power? Has it had a convincing, enlightening,
humbling, converting efficacy upon you? Have you found it as a fire, and as a
hammer, that breaks the rock in pieces? -- Has it come to you in the Holy
Ghost? accompanied with such an energy of the spirit, as to kill sin in you,
and make you alive to God? for the letter kills, but it is the spirit gives
life. -- Has it come to you with much assurance? Are you so convinced of the
truth of the gospel, as to adhere to the profession of it against all the
disputings of men, and discouragements of the world; and so as to venture your
souls, your everlasting concerns upon the verity of it? Do you esteem the
records of the gospel to be faithful sayings, and worthy of all acceptance;
and make the bible the rule of your life, the foundation of your hope, and
spring of your consolation. This success of the gospel upon you will be a proof
of your election, as it was of the election of the believing obedient
Thessalonians.

The apostle Peter also shows us in what way and order to make our election
sure. As in the place we have just mentioned, (2 Pet. 1.10.) Give diligence,
brethren, to make your calling and election sure; your election by your
calling: For, whom he predestined, them he also called. If then God has added
the internal to the external call of the gospel. If you are bro't out of those
sinful ways you once walked in, to walk in the way of good men, the way of
holiness and obedience; If you are taken off from the world, and no longer seek
it as your blessedness, but have chosen God for your portion and happiness; if
heaven is your end, and you are resolved to take up with nothing short of it,
and make use of Christ as the way to it; you may then be assured, you shall see
the good of his chosen, and rejoice with the gladness of his nation, and glory
with his inheritance.

Again,

We are told, Acts 13.48. As many as were ordained unto eternal life, believed.
Examine then, whether the faith of God's elect is wro't in you. Do you believe
the record God has given of his son? God's way of saving sinners by Jesus
Christ, revealed and proposed in the gospel, do you receive it, approve of, and
rest in it; and renouncing all other hopes and expectations, repose your whole
confidence therein? And is Christ precious to you, as he is to them that
believe? You may know then you were ordained to eternal life before the
foundation of the world.

To proceed,

Your love to God, as well as your faith in Christ, evidences your election:
for so we read, 1 John 4.19. We love him, because be first loved us. Let it
then be inquired, Do I love the Lord our God with all the heart, and soul, and
mind, and strongth? Do I make choice of him before all other things, and
delight in him supreamly? Is this the inward language of my soul, Thou art my
portion, O Lord. Whom have I in heaven but thee? and there is nothing on earth
I desire besides thee. You may then hear him saying to you, Yea I have loved
you with an everlasting love.

But as love cannot be sincere unless it is obediential, so our new obedience is
another proof and evidence of our election. The apostle has told us, Ephesians. 1.3.
He has chosen us before the foundation of the world, that we should be holy,
and without blame before him in love. We must inquire then, if we would know
our election, Whether there is a separation wro't between us and our sins and
lusts? Whether we walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit? Whether
indwelling sin is a burden and grief to us, and we are laboring in the
mortification of it? Whether we are in the use of all proper and appointed
means, Cleansing our selves from all filthyness of flesh and spirit; perfecting
holiness in the fear of God? Do we desire nothing more than holiness, a
conformity to the image of Christ? And do we lament nothing more than our want
of holiness, or of conformity to the image of his son? This is a token of
salvation. You may rest satisfied from hence, that God has not appointed you to
wrath, but to obtain salvation by our Lord Jesus Christ.

4. The next use must be by way of counsel, to such as have no ground at
present to conclude themselves of this number; who have no reason as yet to
think themselves effectually called and converted; to have that faith, and
love, and holiness, which are the marks of God's elect. To such I would address
a few words of direction; and O that they might be regarded and put in practice!

1. Don't murmur at God's decree of election; for this is to rebel against
God, and will highly displease him. And besides, you have no reason to do so;
for this is not the cause of your continuing in sin and impenitence, as was
shown when we answered the objections against this doctrine; but it must be
assigned to the corruption and wickedness of your nature, from which indeed you
cannot be delivered but by the almighty grace of God. Labor to be reconciled to
God's method of saving sinners, though it be not such as human reason might have
carved out. His method of salvation is certainly the wisest and the best: For
as the heavens are high above the earth; so are his tho'ts above our tho'ts,
and his ways above our ways, Isa. 55.8.

2. Beware of drawing up any dark conclusions concerning your self, as if the
decree of God was against you. Satan may tempt you to this; but you are not
ignorant of his devices. Remember, though there are many signs of election, there
are no certain tokens of reprobation, except the sin against the Holy Ghost.
Supposing the doctrine of election, yet, as God has a reconciling work on foot
in this world, you are as likely to have an interest in it as another. It is
certain God has a purpose of mercy for a great many. Some in all ages shall
find mercy. And there is nothing to exclude thee, in thy country, sex, age, or
any of thy outward circumstances; no, nor yet in the greatness of thy sins, or
long continuance in them. For it is a faithful saying, and worthy of all
acceptance, that Jesus Christ came into the world to save sinners, even the
chief of them. Wherefore your way is,

3. To apply for mercy, and hope for it, upon the invitations and
encouragements of the gospel. Even a peradventure is looked upon to be
encouragement eno' to try in other cases of hazard and distress; and why not in
this? Remember the instance of Benhadad's servants, and take direction from it,
1 Kings 20.31, 32. And his servants said unto him, Behold now, we have heard
that the kings of the house of Israel, are merciful kings: let us, I pray thee,
put sackcloth on our loins, and ropes upon our heads, and go out (...) the king
of Israel; peradventure he will save thy life. So they girded sackcloth on
their loins, and put ropes on their heads, and came to the king of Israel, and
said, Thy servant Benhadad says, I pray thee, let me live. And the submission
was not only accepted, and his life spared, but he was treated with marks of
friendship and respect

Go and do thus, O sinner: submit to mercy, without indenting and making terms
with God. You have much greater encouragement to submit to the God of Heaven,
than they had to the present king of Israel. There was but a bare peradventure
in that case. They had heard only in the general that the kings of Israel were
merciful kings; but whether this king Ahab was of such a disposition, they knew
not; and yet they adventured upon it to seek to him But thou have heard that
the king of heaven is a merciful king. He has proclaimed his name, The Lord,
the Lord God, gracious and merciful, long suffering, and abundant in goodness
and truth. He has actually pardoned thousands and millions in the like
condition; and his reconciling work is not yet at an end. A gracious mediator
is provided to introduce you into his presence, and to make intercession for
you: If you will not then apply and seek, surely you deserve to perish.

O man, woman, whoever thou art, I must tell you before I leave you, Your
election of God need not lie long at such uncertainty with you. Yea, I may
venture to tell you, it may possibly be bro't to a happy conclusion at this
very time, that you are of this number I must repeat those words of our
savior, John 6.37. All that the father gives me, shall come to me; and him
that comes to me, I will in no wise cast out. Coming to Christ then is the
fruit and evidence of election; and so this important matter may be decided by
it. Now the call of Christ to you in the gospel this day is; Incline your ear,
and come unto me; bear and your soul shall live: and I will make an everlasting
covenant with you, even the sure mercies of David. Come to me, O sinner, for
such blessings as I have to bestow on the people of God. Put your soul over
into my hands, to be washed in my blood, just fied by my righteousness,
sanctified by my spirit, and preserved by my power. Let me henceforth be your
prophet to teach and enlighten you, your priest to atone and interceed for you,
and your king to rule you for my self --. If any soul of you do now comply with
this call: If you can make this answer, Lord, I am willing to come to thee, for
these ends and purposes. Thou have made me willing. I consent to be thine now
if I never did before, and take thee for my savior leader, owner, and ruler
for ever -- The matter is then at this time bro't to an issue. The secret
decree of election this day opens upon you. You may now know you were first
given to Christ by the father, or you would never have been inclined and
enabled thus to come to him; and henceforth you may read your name written in
the lamb's book of life.

5. The last use may be to put those who have any good ground to hope that they
are of this number, upon some special duties agreeable to their state and
privileges.

1. You should thankfully acknowledge and adore the riches of distinguishing
grace, eminently illustrated in your election. The disciple was so affected
with the distinguishing favor of heaven, to himself and others, as in a
rapture to cry out, John 14.22. Lord, bow is it, that thou will manifest thy
self to us, and not unto the world! A believer may say, How is it Lord, that
thou should choose me! That thou should set thine everlasting love upon me, when
so many others, fallen men as well as fallen angels, are passed by! And so many
of the learned, rich, and honorable of the world! And this before I had any
thing good in me; upon no foreseen merit; nay, notwithstanding thou saw how
I should dishonor and provoke thee by my sins! O glorious, sovereign, and
distinguishing grace! I can never eno' admire it! Eternity will not be too long
to praise thee for it! -- Peculiar favor calls for special thankfulness. I
thank thee, O father, Lord of heaven and earth, that thou have hid these things
from the wise and prudent, and have revealed them unto babes: Even so, father,
for so it seems good in thy sight! Here, here, says one, are thanksgivings of
the most elevated strain in christianity They are words, to lift up the born.
They sound high in our devotions. A thankful Christian raises his thanksgivings
to the highest notes, when he comes hereabouts. It Is a melody peculiarly
acceptable to heaven; it is the very beginning of heaven.

2. Love him who has first loved you, in such a manner as may something answer
his love to you. He loved you before you bad a being; and you should love him
while you have any being. He loved you above many others; and you must love him
above all creatures, more than houses and lands, brother or sister, father or
mother, husband, wise, or children; or you are not worthy of him, or of that
love which he has placed upon you.

3. Always remember you are under the highest obligations to holiness and
obedience. For ye are a chosen generation, a royal priesthood, an holy nation,
a peculiar people, that ye should show forth the praises of him, who has called
you out of darkness, into his mavelous light. 1 Pet. 2.9.
Put on therefore as the elect of God, holy and beloved, bowels of mercy,
kindness, humbleness of mind, meekness, long-suffering, forbearing one other,
if any man have a quarrel against any; even as Christ forgave you, so also do
ye. Col. 3.12, 13.
Do nothing to disgrace this holy doctrine. Be blameless, and harmeless, the
sons of God, without rebuke, in the midst of a crooked and perverse generation,
among whom ye shine as lights in the world Phil. 2.15.
Let your watchful, exemplary, fruitful conversation, serve to confute them who
say this doctrine tends to licentiousness. Duty, gratitude and interest, all
conspire to make you abound in the work of the Lord. You are favored above
others, and therefore should often think on that question which our Lord once
put, Mat. 5.47. What do you more than others?

4. Cheerfully acquiesce in all the dealings of God with you. For all his
providence are the effect of his purposes, and are best suited to carry on his
design of grace concerning you. We know, says the apostle, in the verse before
our text, That all things shall work together for good to them that love God,
to them who are the called according to his purpose. You are predestined,
says our text, to be conformed to the image of his son; and your very
afflictions and sorrows are appointed to bring you to this conformity to
Christ, who was himself a man of sorrows, and acquainted with grief. You may
rest satisfied, that nothing you meet with can hinder the purpose of God
concerning you from taking effect, but rather all things shall be subservient
the reunto. Therefore you may not only take the comfort of your mercies, but
get above your afflictions, and rejoice in tribulation. Read the believers
security and triumph, in the verses following our text; Who shall lay any thing
to the charge of God's elect? It is God that justifies: Who is he that
condemns? It is Christ that died, yea rather, that is risen again, who is
even at the right band of God, who also makes intercession for us. Who shall
separate us from the love of Christ? shall tribulation, or distress, or
persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword? (As it is written,
For thy sake we are killed all the day long; we are accounted as sheep for the
slaughter) Nay in all these things we are more than conquerors, through him
that loved us. For I am persuaded, that neither death, nor life, nor angels,
nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor
height, nor depth, nor any other creature, shall be able to separate us from
the love of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.

5. Forget not to pray for all that belong to the election of grace For those
that are not yet gathered. Other sheep Christ has, which are not yet bro't into
the fold; pray that these may hear his voice, and follow him. Some of the elect
are not only uncalled, but unborn: It is therefore a suitable petition in the
public liturgy of the church of England, which we can join in, That it may
please God of his gracious goodness shortly to accomplish the number of his
elect" See the (...) in the Common Prayer Book.


And pray for them that are gathered and added to the church, That they may be
holy in all manner of conversation, as he who has called them is holy: May walk
in the fear of the Lord, and in the comforts of the Holy Ghost; and be pressing
on toward perfection: May be guarded and safely carried through this evil world,
till they joyfully enter upon the rewards of the next. Pial. 28 9. Save thy
people, and bless thine inheritance, feed them also, and lift them up forever.

Once more,

6. Let the second coming and appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ. be the matter
of your earnest prayer, and object of your joyful hope and expectation. For in
this day the Lord will make up his jewels. Now Christ will raise up all that
were given him by the father, without letting any be lost or wanting; saying to
his father, Here I am, and the children which thou have given me. I present
them all together, a glorious church, not having spot, or wrinkle, or any such
thing. This will be done with exceeding joy, both on the part of the Father who
chose them, the Son who redeemed them, the Holy Spirit who sanctified them,
ministers who were instrumental to gather them in, and on the part of the
chosen and redeemed themselves.

We have a pleasant vision of Christ at the head of a happy remnant, preserved
from the corruptions and carried through the persecutions of antichrist: Read it;
and then think what a glorious sight it will be to see him at the head of the
whole church of the elect in the great day. Rev. 14.1, to 5. And I looked, and
lo, a Lamb stood on the mount Sion, and with him an hundred forty and four
thousand, having his Fathers name written in their foreheads. And I heard a
voice from heaven, as the voice of many waters, and as the voice of a great
thunder: and I heard the voice of harpers harping with their harps: And they
sung as it were a new song before the throne, and before the four beasts, and
the elders: and no man could learn that song, but the hundred and forty and
four thousand, which were redeemed from the earth. These are they which were
not defiled with women; for they are virgins: these are they which follow the
Lamb whithersoever he goes: these were redeemed from among men, being the
first fruits unto God, and the Lamb. And in their mouth was found no guile: for
they are without fault before the throne of God.

Thus I have been carried through what I proposed on this subject. Many things
which belong to it have been omitted; and others but touched, which I could
with pleasure have enlarged upon: but I have studied brevity.

And now, I desire to bow the knee in thanksgiving to the God and father of our
Lord Jesus Christ, who has given me this opportunity to bear a small testimony
to these important truths. I trust I have had a single aim at his glory in
these discourses; and so I look to Him, in his son JESUS, for his gracious
acceptance of what has been his own, and his merciful forgiveness of what has
been otherwise; and on him I humbly depend to succeed them.

I close all with the apostles prayer and benediction, in 2 Thessalonians. 2.16, 17.
Now our LORD JESUS CHRIST himself, and GOD even our Father, which has loved
us, and has given us everlasting consolation, and good hope through grace,
Comfort your hearts, and stablish you in every good word and work.

THE END.
CORRECTIONS.
PAge 4. line 10. in the margin, r. cognoscuntur. p. 11. l. 6. r. reverent p.
41. l. 9 r. apostleship. p. 44. l. 24. r. acquiesces. p. 45. l. 19. r.
Hymeneus. p. 72. l. 11. dele to. p. 88. l. 8. r. creature. p. 101. l. 10. r.
tell. p. 102. l. 5. from the bottom, r. consciences. p. 119. l. 2. from the
bottom r. partakers. p. 125. l. 8 dele, or not.


