Christmas well kept, AND THE Twelve Days well spent.

Printed and Sold by S. Kneeland and T. Green, in Queenstreet over against the
Prison. 1739.

Christmas well kept, AND THE Twelve Days well spent, An Extract from Mr.
Whitefield's Journal. 1738, 9.
SUNDAY, December. 24.
BEing Christmas-Eve, and having preached twice, I went in the Evening to
Crooked-Lane Society, where God enabled me to withstand several Persons, who
cavil'd against the Doctrine of the New Birth. I then went and expounded to a
Company at Mr. B -- 's, in Little-Britain, and then went to another Love Feast
in Fetter-Lane, and continued till near four in the Morning in Prayer, Psalms,
and Thanksgiving, with many truly Christian Brethren; and my Heart was much
enlarged and full of Love. God gave me a great Spirit of Supplication; Adored
be his free Grace in Christ Jesus, Amen and Amen.

MONDAY December. 25. About four I went and prayed and expounded to another
Society in Red-Cross-Street, consisting of near two or three hundred People,
the Room was exceeding hot. I had been watching unto Prayer all Night, yet God
vouchsafed so to fill me with his blessed Spirit, that I spoke with as great
Power, as I ever did in my Life. My Body was weak, but I found a supernatural
Strength, and the Truth of that Saying, When I am weak, then am I strong.

At Six I went to Crutched-Friars Society, and expounded as well as I could,
but perceived my self a little oppressed with Drowsiness. How does the
corruptible Body weigh down the Soul! When shall I be delivered from the Burden
of this Flesh!

Preached (never the less) thrice, and assisted in administering the Sacrament
the same Day, without going to Sleep. God will make his Power to be known in
me. -- This Day 24 Years I was baptized. Lord, to what little Purpose have I
lived! However, I sealed my Baptismal Covenant with my dear Savior's most
blessed Body and Blood; and trust in his Strength I shall keep and perform it.
Amen, Amen.

SATURDAY December. 30. Preached nine times this Week, and expounded near eighteen
times, with great Power and Enlargement. -- Blessed be God, I am every Moment
employed, from Morning till Midnight. -- There Is no End of People's coming and
sending to me, and they seem more and more desirous, like newborn Babes, to be
fed with the sincere Milk of the Word.

What a great Work has been wrought in the Hearts of many within this
Twelvemonth! Now know I, that though Thousands might come at first out of
Curiosity, yet God has prevented and quickened them by his free Grace. O that I
could be humble and thankful!

Glory be to God, that he fills me continually, not only with Peace, but also
Joy in the Holy Ghost! -- Before my Arrival, I thought I should envy my
Brethrens Success in the Ministry, but blessed be God I rejoice in it, and am
glad to see Christ's Kingdom come, whatsoever Instruments God shall make use of
to bring it about. -- Sometimes I perceive my self deserted for a little while,
and much oppressed, especially before preaching, but Comfort soon after flows
in. -- The Kingdom of God is within me! O free Grace in Christ!

SUNDAY, December. 31. Preached twice to large Congregations, especially in the
Afternoon at Spittlefields. I had great Hoarsness upon me, and was deserted
before I went into the Pulpit; but God strengthened me to speak, so as to be
heard by all.

I despaired of speaking much more that Night, my Cold being very great; but
God enabled me to expound to two Companies in Southwark; and I was never more
enlarged in Prayer in my whole Life.

Those Words were much pressed upon my Soul, "And the Power of the Lord was
present to heal them", and indeed I believe it was; for many were pricked to
the Heart and felt themselves to be Sinners. O that all the World knew and felt
that!

MONDAY, Jan. 1. Received the Holy Sacrament, preached twice, and expounded
twice; and found this to be the happiest New-Years-Day that I ever yet saw. Oh,
what Mercies has the Lord shown me since this Day Twelve Month! And yet I shall
see greater Things than these! O that my Heart may be prepared to see 'em! O
that my old Things may pass away and all Things become new! -- Had a Love Feast
with our Brethren at Fetter-Lane, and spent the whole Night in close Prayer,
Psalms and Thanksgivings. God supported me without Sleep. O that our Despisers
were Partakers of our Joys!

TUESDAY, Jan. 2. Staid at Home to receive those who wanted to consult me. --
Blessed be God, from seven in the Morning, till three in the Afternoon, People
came; some telling me what God (...) done for their Souls, and others crying
out -- "What shall we do to be saved? Being obliged to go out after this, I
referred several till Thursday. -- God enabled me to give 'em Answers of Peace.
-- How does he work by my unworthy Hands! His Mercies melt me down, O that I
were thankful!

THURSDAY, Jan. 4. My Cold continued, and I feared it would prevent my
Speaking, yet God enabled me to expound with extraordinary Power in a private
Society; and then to preach at Wapping Chapel, so that the Word pierced the
Hearers Souls! And afterward I expounded and prayed for an Hour and half, with
great Power and Demonstration of the Spirit, and my Heart was full of God.

How immediately does Jesus Christ reward me for my poor Services! as soon as
my daily Work is done, he says, "Enter thou into the Joy of thy Lord." He
commands, and it is done.

FRIDAY, Jan. 5. Held a Conferrence at Islington, concerning several Things of
great Importance, with seven true Ministers of Jesus Christ, despised
Methodists, whom God brought together from the East and West, North and South.

What we were in Doubt about, after Prayer, we determined by Lot; and every
Thing was carried on with great Love, Meekness and Devotion. -- We continued in
Fasting and Prayer till three of Clock, and then parted with a full Conviction
that God was going to do great Things among us. Oh that we may be any ways
Instrumental to his Glory! that he would make us Vessels pure and holy, meet
for our Master's Use.

Expounded twice afterward in London with great Power, and then was much
enlarged for near an Hour in Prayer, in Fetter-Lane Society. -- The Spirit of
Supplication increases in my Heart daily! May it increase ever, more and more.

I did not find the Pity I ought, upon seeing a Brother full of Self-love.
LORD, enlarge my narrow Heart, and give me that Charity, which rejoices not in
Iniquity, but rejoices in the Truth. -- I perceived something a little
bordering on Envy toward my Brother H. -- I find more and more that true
Humility consists in being submissive to those who are a little above or a
little below us. "Oh when shall (...) to rejoice in Others Gifts and Graces, as
much as in my own! I am resolved to wrestle with Jesus Christ, by Faith and
Prayer, till He thus blesses me.

SATURDAY, Jan. 6. (Twelfth-Day) Preached six times this Week, and should a
seventh, but a Minister would not permit me; which caused me to pray for him
most earnestly. Blessed be God I can say, I love my Enemies.

Expounded twice or thrice every Night this Week. The Holy Ghost so powerfully
worked upon my Hearers, pricking their Hearts, and melting them into such
Floods of Tears, that a spiritual Man said, "He never saw the like before.

GOD is with me of a Truth. Adored be His unmerited Goodness, I find his Grace
quickening me more and more every Day. -- My Understanding is more enlightened,
my Affections more inflamed, and my Heart full of Love toward God and Man. --
O that the Scoffers of these last Days were not only almost, but (...) such as
I am, except my Indwel(...) (...) (...)ruptions!

REFLECTION.
"WOuld to GOD that Christmas, if it must be observed, were kept something
after this Manner through all Christendom! And that Sabbaths were thus sanctified
in the Church of England, or among Dissenters! -- Not that I think ordinary
Ministers or Christians called of God or able, to go these Lengths. "But he
that can receive it, let him: That is to say, Let us all learn of, and labor
in our Places to imitate the High Devotion and Zeal of this admired Man,
esteeming him highly in Love for his Works sake: Let us give to free Grace the
whole Glory, and thank God for that Extraordinary Assistance and Success, which
he has given his Servant hitherto, in his Ministry to his Name, Truth, and the
Souls of Men. Let us also earnestly pray for him, that he may be kept humble,
without the Need of a Thorn in the Flesh for that End.


