Mr. Byles 's SERMON ON COL. iii. 2.

AFFECTION on Things ABOVE.

A DISCOURSE Delivered at the Thursday-Lecture In BOSTON, December 11th 1740.

By MATHER BYLES, V. D. M. And Pastor to a CHURCH in Boston.

REV. xi. 12. They heard a great Voice from Heaven, saying unto them, COME UP
HITHER. --

BOSTON, Printed by G. ROGERS and D. FOUL, for J. EDWARDS and H. FOSTER in
Cornhil. 1740.

Affection on Things above.
COLOSSIANS iii. 2. Set your Affection on Things above, not on Things on the
Earth.


THE great Error that all Mankind are prone to, and which indeed ruins the
larger Part of the World, is their placing their Happiness in this Earth. The
great Realities of another World, strike their Minds but weakly, and appear at
a wide Distance, and a strange Uncertainty to their unbelieving Hearts. But the
Things present, and that are seen, the Objects that we converse with every Day,
make a deep Impression upon us. We fancy they are solid, and would fain believe
they are lasting; nor do we care to detect their Falsehood and Treachery; their
Vanity and Emptiness. We have never been in the other World; and therefore we
don't know how to reallize the Existence of it: It appears to us a Novelty and
a Dream. But the Earth we converse with every Day; we live upon it, and it is
the constant Object of all our Senses. We have been a long Time used to it; and
the very first Impressions of our Infancy, have prejudiced us in its Favor.
But the news of another World, comes to us by hearsay; and after we have been
first attached to this Earth, by our Sight and Familiarity. But above all, our
Fall from GOD has brought a Cloud upon our Minds as to spiritual Matters, and
rendered our Appetites after carnal Things raging and impetuous. We all need
then the Address of the Text, Set your Affection on Things above, not on Things
on the Earth. They are the Words of an Apostle; they are then weighty and
solemn: But they are the Words of the HOLY GHOST in the inspired Apostle; they
come then armed with divine Authority and Command, with the Power and Name of
GOD. They are very plain and easy to be understood; and no Subtlety or Artifice
can obscure or elude the Evidence of the sacred Law. They are agreeable to the
Maxims of eternal Reason; and they are expressed in a very forcible and
emphatical Manner. To render it beyond all Doubt or Hesitation, the Phrase runs
both Negative and Positive. Set your Affection on Things above, not on Things
on the Earth. All the Circumstances tend to demand our most awakened Attention,
and ready Obedience.

The DOCTRINE of the Words is this.

DOCT. It is the great Duty of Christians, to withdraw their Affections from
the Things of the Earth, and fix them on the Things of Heaven.

In handling this Doctrine, need I go about to prove to you,

1. That the human Soul has in it many Affections?

This you feel in your selves; and your own Hearts, and your own Experience are
beforehand with me. You are all conscious to the Passions and Appetites of your
own Minds. You know that you love and hate; desire and abhor; rejoice and
grieve, hope and fear. That you have such Things as the Language of Scripture
and Philosophy and common Life, call Affections, is a self-evident Proposition,
and can need no Proof. To pretend a Demonstration of it, would only be to
obscure it. I shall drop this then, and pursue another, alas! that it is so
plain a Proposition.

II. Our Affections are naturally set on the Things of Earth.

We need such a Call as this of my Text, Set your Affection on Things above,
not on Things on the Earth. The Matter of Fact is plain in our selves, and has
been so through all the Generations of Men, that this Earth strangely allures
and engrosses our Affections. We feel in our Hearts a prevailing. Fondness to
the Things we possess, and a prevailing Desire to those we expect. And we see
the Case is the same with all about us, who are earnest to get and to keep the
vain Treasures of the Earth: And it has been so from the first Ages even until
now. All the Children of Men are born the Slaves of this World; and its Empire
is universal and continuing, like that of Death. It has reigned over all Men
from Adam even until now. If the Matter of Fact is so plain then, what are the
Reasons? How comes it to pass that our Affections are so linked to earthly and
mortal Things? Alas, it is easily and sadly accounted for. Our Fall from GOD
has corrupted our Taste, and blinded our Understandings, and brought us into
this deluded and bewildered Condition. Adam, our first Father, sat his
Affections on the Things below; and now the just Judgment of GOD has left us
his Offspring to do so too. He was led away by his Senses to forget the Things
which were above, and disbelieve and disobey his GOD. The forbidden Tree
allured his Sight, and appeared fair to look upon: It tempted his Palate; and
appeared good for Food: It excited his Desire, and raised his Ambition: A Tree
to be desired to make one wise: So he took the Fruit of it, and did eat. Genesis
iii. 6. Thus were our first Parents led away, and ever since then, the guilty
Progeny have been cheated by their Senses to place their Affection on earthly
Things. The holy GOD immediately withdrew the Restraints of his SPIRIT, and
gave up the Race to follow the Senses which they chose to follow. And now, the
Fetters are made strong upon many Accounts.

For Instance, Earthly Things are the first we converse with; and as they are
beforehand with our Reason, they insinuate themselves into our Affections,
before we are aware of their Treachery and Falsehood. The Child learns to
gratify his Senses before he comes to exercise his Reason; and the first
Impression is the deepest, and lasts the longest. His first Acquaintance is
with earthly Things; and therefore his Affections are placed upon them, before
Reason can set a Guard upon his Mind.

And as we converse first with earthly Things, so we do it constantly; and this
is another Reason why our Affections are fixed upon them. Earthly Things are
sensible Things, and familiar to our Eyes every Day: And constant Familiarity
begets Love. It Is a sufficient Reason how we come to prefer the Things of
Earth, before Things above: Because Things temporal are seen, but Things
eternal are invisible. Things unseen, are the Objects of our Faith; but the
Things of this World, are the Objects of Sight and Sense. Faith is the Evidence
of Things not seen; the Substance of Things hoped for. But the Things below
strike us more immediately; they bribe our Senses, and captivate our Souls.
Hence it is that we seek the Things which are below, and not the Things which
are above. And need the Warning and Exhortation of the Text; Set your
Affections on Things above, not on Things on the Earth.

The very Expression of the Text insinuates the Tendency of our Minds to
earthly Things, and the Difficulty to transfer them to heavenly. It Is because
one is below, the other above. It Is like panting up Hill, or sliding gently
down. The Things of Heaven are above, and we rise to them with Pains and
Labor; but the Things on Earth are about us, and beneath us, and we may sit
still, or sink down and enjoy them. So that in every Light the Proposition
appears evident, that our Affections are naturally set on Things below, and not
on Things above.

III. It Is our Duty to set our Affection on Things above, and not on Things on
the Earth.

It Is our Duty for so has the Command of GOD made it. The Will of GOD is the
Rule of our Duty. Whatever he enjoins immediately becomes our Duty. It Is enough
to enforce our Obedience and Compliance, that GOD has given his Orders, and
declared this to be his Will. A Thing may on other Accounts be our Wisdom, and
our Interest, our Honor and Safety, but it is the Command of GOD alone that can
make it our Duty.

And besure this is the Case here: For GOD has commanded it at our Hands, that
we set our Affections on the Things above, and not on the Things below. This is
the great Design of the Law of God, to take our Affections off from Earth, and
draw them up to Heaven. In the New Testament this Matter is more fully
explained, and more frequently and more strongly inculcated. Here we are
instructed, I. John ii. 15, 16, 17. Love not the World, neither the Things that
are in the World; if any Man love the World, the Love of the Father is not in
him. For all that is in the World, the Lust of the Flesh, the Lust of the Eye,
and the Pride of Life, is not of the Father, but is of the World. And the World
passes away, and the Lust thereof; but he that does the Will of GOD abides
for ever. It Is the Will of GOD then, that we set not our Affections on the
Things of the World; and it is then our Duty not to do it. Romans xii. 2. Be not
conformed to this World; but be ye transformed by the renewing of your Mind,
that ye may prove what is that good, and acceptable, and perfect Will of GOD.
It is impossible to obey GOD; to comply with the Will of GOD, without
proclaiming War with the World; without weaning our Affections and withdrawing
our Friendship from it. James iv. 4. Know ye not that the Friendship of the
World is enmity with GOD? Whosoever therefore will be a Friend of the World is
an Enemy of GOD. Thus the New Testament, which has more fully brought Life and
Immortality to Light, is, you see, full of the Matter.

But the Old Testament is not without sufficient Indications of this too; and
tends to lead our Affections from the Things of Earth to those of Heaven.
Indeed the Promises of the Old Testament, do for the most part refer literally
to the Land of Canaan: But they were ultimately regarded by the wise and good
Men of those Days, to signify the Blessings of the heavenly World. Hence the
believing ancient Patriarchs, all along professed that they were but Strangers
and Pilgrims here, that they sought a better Country, that is, an heavenly.
They looked upon the earthly Canaan, but as a Type of the heavenly; and applied
the Promises in the Letter temporal, to Things spiritual and eternal. And this
is the Spirit that breathes in the pious Patriarchs till the coming of their
blessed SAVIOR, whom they all regarded and lived upon in the Prospects of
Faith. They all believed a future World; a State of Recompense, and eternal
Rewards: And they withdrew their Affections from the Things below, and placed
them on those greater above. Is not this the Language of Moses, when he chose
rather to suffer Affliction with the People of GOD, than to enjoy the Pleasures
of Sin for a Season? Is not this the Consolation of Job, when I know (says he)
that my Redeemer lives, and though after may Skin, Worms destroy this Body,
yet in my Flesh shall I see GOD? Is not this the Insinuation of the Psalmist,
when he speaks of the Men of this World, who have their Portion only in this
Life: And what else could comfort him when he walked through the Valley of the
Shadow of Death, but that he knew for him to die would be Gain. Even Balaam
himself, when he came to have his Eyes open, could wish to die the Death of the
Righteous, convinced that the Day of his Death was better than the Day of his
Birth. So that upon the whole, all the sacred Pages represent this blessed
Truth to us, that there is a Reality in the Things above; that GOD therefore
calls us to set our Affections on those Things, and not on Things on the Earth:
And that accordingly this has been the Practice of good Men in all Ages, who
have so understood the Duty and so performed it.

Set your Affection on Things above, not on Things on the Earth. This does not
forbid us having an Affection for the Things below; but indulging an inordinate
Affection. We may have an Affection for earthly Things, but we must not set
them, must not six them upon these Things; must not set our Affection; not all
of them as ONE; not wholly upon earthly Things. We may desire worldly Good; but
not too vehemently; but it must be with profound Submission. We may love and be
glad of our outward Blessings; but it must be a subordinate Affection, we must
set loose by them, and be willing to part with them. We must set a much higher
Value upon the Things above; and look upon them to be by far better. This is
the State of the Case: You may have an Affection for the good Things in the
World but you must no set your Affection on these lower Things, but on Things
above.

It were high Ingratitude in us, to have no Regard at all for the good Things
which a bounteous GOD, on this Earth gives us. It Is he that bestows on us, our
Riches, and our Relatives; our Health, and our Life; and it were Disrespect to
the Giver to disrelish the Gifts. So an absent Friend sends us Tokens of his
Friendship, by which we should remember him: As it would be strange that those
Marks of Affection should be loved instead of our Friend to the Prejudice of
our Fondness for him, so it would be base and ungrateful not to esteem the
Tokens and remember our Friend by them. Let us relish the Creature for GOD's
Sake then, and there will be no Danger of an inordinate Affection.

Some have made strange Work with a Passage in the New Testament, where our
SAVIOR tells the young Man in the Gospel, Sell all thou have and give it unto
the Poor, as though this were a Command that reached unto every Christian, and
a Rule to hold universally as a Criterion to try our Love to the World by. It Is
a Wonder such Genius's for Exposition have not commented on that Passage in the
Old Testament, where Abraham is commanded to sacrifice Isaac; and demonstrated
that a Man could not be a true Believer who did not destroy his Children for
Burnt-Offerings; for the Ground for both is pretty near the same. In one Case
and the other, GOD gave a particular Command to try the Truth of Grace in the
Heart of a particular Person, and all the Difference was, one stood the Trial,
as every good Man would, and the other sunk under it, as would be the Case of
every Hypocrite. And had the young Man in the Gospel with the sincere
unrelucting Heart of Abraham, given up his Possessions, no one can say how far
they might have been given back again to him, as Isaac was to Abraham, or as
Job's Estate was doubled. However that may be, all we can infer from both the
Stories is this, That if GOD does really call for all our outward good Things,
a good Man so loves his GOD, that he would make a ready Surrender of them: And
not that he is now obliged either to slay his Son, or give away all his Estate.
It is plain this cannot be the Meaning in the latter Case, because it is a Duty
impossible to be performed: For how could every Man sell all his Estate and
give it to the Poor? Where would be the Poor to receive it! 'Twould indeed
serve to level all Mankind, destroy all Order, and break up the Community: As
though we should contrive that the Body natural should be all Hand, or all Eye:
And then where were the Hearing and the Taste?

And yet, after all, nothing is more certain than this Truth, that the Man who
has ever felt what a Work of Grace upon the Soul means, loves his GOD and his
SAVIOR beyond any Creature. And if he does not sell all he has and give it to
the Poor, it is purely because he knows it would not please GOD; and if he
sacrifices not his only Son, it is purely because GOD requires it not, but
forbids it.

But would you know whither this be the real Principle of your Actions, and not
the governing Love of the Idol-Creature, the best Way of discovering the
Matter, will be, not to try your selves in Instances, where, as GOD has not
commanded, so has no where promised to assist you: But to examine, do you
without Reluctance comply where his Commands are plain. 'Twas that young Man's
Duty to sell all. He could not do it: It Is plain he was not a sanctified Man.
'Twas Abraham's Duty to sacrifice Isaac: He set about it immediately: It Is
plain he was truly faithful. Neither of these are Commands to you. So that if
you are not assisted to do Things which are not your Duty, you have no need of
Discouragement at the Reluctance. The Rule is, Do you do what is your Duty? Do
you cheerfully give GOD his Dues out of your Estates? Do you give up this Part
of your Gains with a peculiar Pleasure, and far from any Regret? If you have
the Testimony of your Consciences here, you may be sure that as your future
Days so your Strength shall be. And your whole Estate, or your only Son you
shall be enabled to part with, if ever GOD really demands them. GOD will either
keep you from the Temptation, or make Way for your Escape, -- All our
Projections about future Trials proceed from our vain Confidence as though our
Strength was our own. -- Take no Thought for the morrow, but do the Duty of the
Day, and that is all GOD requires.

Thus I have briefly explained and evinced the Duty to you; and I come now to
improve and apply it.

Be exhorted, my beloved brethren, to set your Affection on Things above, not
on Things on the Earth.

Consider,

I. CHRIST is above. Is not this a sufficient Reason why you should place your
Affection there. Who is worthy of all your Love but he? The Creatures you are
so fond of, were made by him, and derive all that is lovely in them from him.
And if from his Fullness they have all received all their Graces, how superior
must his Fullness be? Besure then, if we are apt to set our Affections on Things
below, we have infinitely higher Reason to set them on Things above; for CHRIST
is there in his more abundant Glory. And so says the Apostle, in the preceding
Context, Seek those Things which are above, where CHRIST sits on the right
Hand of GOD. CHRIST is above; and the right Hand of GOD is above; is not this
then a Place worthy your Desire and Choice? At his right Hand are Pleasures for
evermore.

2. Set your Affection on Things above, not on Things on the Earth: For ye are
dead, says the Context: Ye are dead? What a Shock does it give to our Security
in earthly Enjoyments? We set our Affections on Things below: Alas! we must
presently be summoned by Death to leave them all. So certain is it that we must
die away from them, that it may be pronounced, we are already dead. Death has
passed upon all Men, in that all have sinned. In the Day thou eatest thou shall
surely die. It proved true, because in that same Day the Sentence took Place,
and we became liable to Death: Dead in Law. Ye are dead then. It Is as certain
you must be so, as if you were already dead. Set not then your Affection on the
Things below. When GOD requires your Soul, whose shall all these Things be?

But besure this is not the principal Intention of the Text, when it says, Ye
are dead, therefore set your Affection on the Things above, not on Things on
the Earth. Ye are dead: that is, the corrupt Principle in you is dead. The
reigning Power of your Lusts is dead; your inordinate Passions and Appetites
are mortified and dead. You are dead to this World. By the Cross of CHRIST the
World is crucified unto me, and I unto the World. And now why should you revive
the Dead Affections, and set them on Things below? Having escaped the Pollution
of the World through Lust, why should you be again taken and entangled therein?
Remember how the World treated your blessed SAVIOR, and let the Cross of
CHRIST crucify the World to you. Let the Remembrance of his Sufferings wean you
from the execrable Place.

3. But says the Text, Your Life is hid with CHRIST in GOD. Is CHRIST your
Life; the vital Principle of Thought and Action in you? Besure we should have
our Hearts and Affections where our Life is. Where should Life be, but it the
Heart? the Seat of the Affections? Now CHRIST our Life is above, on the Throne,
and in the Bosom of GOD. Our Affections should be there too then: Our Life is
hid with CHRIST in GOD. Your Life is hid indeed; but this Way you may discover
it to others, by your Indifference to the Things of this World, and your Ardor
to those of another. Your Life is hid; laid up out of Sight. But O realize it;
Look for a future Life. Remember this is not your Rest, why then should should
you terminate your Affection here?

4. Another Motive in the Context, is, If ye then be risen with CHRIST, set
your Affection on Things above, not on Things on the Earth. If we were always
to live among such Objects and Enjoyments, it were more excusable should they
seize our Affections; but when we expect so different a Resurrection-State,
what Madness is it, to circumscribe our Acquaintance in such narrow Limits? We
are made for the Resurrection-World, widely different from the present Scene of
Things; why then should we learn to love those short-lived Objects, and neglect
the future and eternal ones? CHRIST is risen: No Truth is more capable of Proof
than this. And we are risen with CHRIST, we shall as surely rise, as if we were
already risen. For if the Dead rise not, then is not CHRIST raised. -- we are
risen in Type, in Earnest and Pledge. It Is Folly then, it is the greatest Folly,
to set our Affections on the World of Death, when we are made for the quite
different Resurrection-World. Nay, but further, Ye are risen with CHRIST: It
signifies a spiritual Resurrection. A Resurrection from a Death in Sin, and a
Restoration to the Life of Holiness. Here now is the Argument, If ye then be
risen with CHRIST, set your Affection on Things above, not on Things on the
Earth. If you have experienced this blessed Resurrection with CHRIST; if you
have been renewed, and brought into the Life of GOD, Oh feed the divine Life,
and cherish it; by no Means stifle it by an inordinate Affection to the grosser
Things below. This Principle of Life in you, like a Flame, tends upwards: You
smother it when you set your Affection on the Things below. It Is worse in you
to do so than for others: For the natural Man cannot discern to do at all
otherwise. It is better not to have known and felt the Power of the Truth, than
after that to disobey it, and love the Things contrary to it.

5. Another Motive in the Context is, when CHRIST who is our Life shall appear,
then shall ye also appear with him in Glory; mortify therefore your Members,
which are upon the Earth. Set your Affection on Things above, not on Things on
the Earth. The second Appearance of CHRIST, and the Rewards which he will then
bestow on his Faithful, are a sufficient Reason why we should set our
Affections and Expectations on Things future and above. CHRIST will appear the
second Time: Behold he comes, and his Reward is with him. He will give the
Crown of Righteousness in that Day. Wherefore, forgetting the Things which are
behind, and calling our Affections back from them, let us reach forth to those
Things which are before, and press toward the Mark for this Prize. The Account
we are to give to CHRIST our Judge, this methinks is a most awakening Motive to
set loose by the Things of this World, and set our Affection on the Things
above. The Glory that we shall receive from CHRIST our Judge, this methinks
should raise our Expectations, and attract our Desires and fix our Affections;
for when CHRIST who is our Life, shall appear, then shall ye also appear with
him in Glory. My Brethren, are we not ambitious of this Honor? Do we not long
for this Glory? Is it not enough to call up and fire all our Affections? Are
the Things below worthy to be Rivals here? Are they, think you, worthy to be
compared with the Glory which shall be revealed? Think on the Appearance of
CHRIST; on the Glory of CHRIST; and that you shall appear with him in Glory;
and see if this has not a prevailing Charm to draw your Affection from the
Things below, and set them on Things above. If this will not do, consider,

6. The Wrath of GOD comes on the Children of Disobedience. So says the
Context very emphatically: Ver. 6. If your Affections are let loose upon the
Things below, they will lead you on to all excess of Uncleanness, for which
Things sake the Wrath of GOD comes on the Children of Disobedience. And is not
here fair Warning against inordinate Affection? The Wrath of GOD, is it, do you
suppose, a light Matter? Can you easily bear it? Dare you confront it with an
intreped Air? Can you resist, or can you escape? Nay, be not deceived, GOD is
not mocked: It is indeed a fearful Thing to fall into the Hands of the living
GOD. Can thy Heart endure, or can thy Hands be strong in the Day when he shall
rise up in his Vengeance and Flame! And this will be the amazing Danger, and
this the swift Destruction that shall pour upon the Head of those, who seek
earthly Things and neglect heavenly. The Things on the Earth are dying
Creatures; and those who set their Affection on them, go down to the Dead: What
wonder then, that they should be gathered with the Congregation of the dead?
GOD commands you to set your Affection on Things above, and not on Things on
the Earth; You disobey GOD, and you set up Creatures in the Throne of GOD, when
you let your Love loose below Him. And will not this justly provoke GOD? For
this Cause the Wrath of GOD comes on the Children of Disobedience. -- Thus far
I have confined my self only to the Motives of the Apostle in the Context.

7. And to conclude, Set your Affection on Things above, not on Things on the
Earth: For the Things on Earth are temporal, but the Things above are eternal.
This is the great and finishing Stroke of all: And though this Motive is not
expressed in the Context, yet it is implied in it, and urged in innumerable
other Places. The Things in this World are fading, transitory and perishing.
Why should we set our Eyes then, upon that which is not; or presently will not
be. Look upon the Things you are so fond of, in this Light, and see how
worthless they are of your warm Affection. You have an Affection to Wealth and
Plenty; you look with Joy upon your large Possessions, and let your Wishes
loose for more. Alas, Riches take themselves Wings, and flee away as the Eagles
toward Heaven. You have an Affection to the Pleasures of Sense and of Sin, and
are very loath to withdraw your Desire and Choice. Alas, the Pleasures of Sin
are but for a Season. You are fond of worldly Fame and Honor, and pant after
Dignities and a great Name. Alas, Man being in Honor abides not. You feel a
glowing Affection to your Relatives, and your Heart beats with the Ardors of
Love and Friendship. Alas, Lover and Friend must for sake you, and your
Acquaintance retire into Darkness. You desire long Life, and love many Days
that you may see Good. Alas, If by reason of Strength you should reach
fourscore Years, yet, -- it is soon cut off, and we flee away. Thus you see how
very temporary, how vanishing and transient are all Things here below! But now
set your Affection on the Things above, and they will last boundless as your
Wishes, and immortal as your Souls. The Riches there, are durable Riches. The
Pleasures are Pleasures forevermore. The Honors are, Salvation by CHRIST with
eternal Glory. The Inheritance is incorruptible, undefiled, and fades not
away. The Companions die no more: Death is swallowed up in Victory; there shall
be no more Death: And so shall we all be forever with the Lord. The Rewards are
an everlasting Crown, and Life eternal.

And now, who would not try to set their Affections on Things above, and not on
Things on the Earth? Who would not take Pains for the new Nature, that he might
do this? Though you go through Difficulty and Labor in this great Work, and
meet with many Oppositions, Temptations and Afflictions in it, yet remember and
take Encouragement from that Word of GOD, which I leave with you, and conclude,
II. Cor. iv. 17, 18. For our light Affliction which is but for a Moment,
works for us a far more exceeding and eternal Weight of Glory; while we look
not at the Things which are seen, but at the Things which are not seen; for the
Things which are seen, are temporal, but the Things, which are not seen, are
eternal.

FINIS.
The Comparison, the Choice, and the Enjoyment.
I.
WHO on the Earth, or in the Skies,
Thy Beauties can declare?
JESUS, dear Object of my Eyes,
My Everlasting FAIR.
II.
Mortals, for you this is too great,
Too bright, and too sublime:
This Angels labor to repeat,
And sink beneath the Theme.
III.
Behold, ye Beauties here below,
And clasp him in your Arms:
Can ye such heavenly Graces show,
Or rival him in Charms?
IV.
Though now, delighted, we can trace
Your Colors as they ly,
When he appears, from off your Face
The fading Colors fly.
V.
When all your Charms in vain we seek,
And all your Joys are fled,
Beauty blooms rosey on his Cheek,
And dances round his Head.
VI.
In vain your softest Smiles appear,
Or lovely Blushes rise:
Eternal Transports center here,
Heaven brightens in these Eyes.
VII.
Unveil, almighty LOVE, thy Face,
Thy Features let me see;
At once I Will rush to thy Embrace,
I Will spring at once to Thee.
VIII.
Thus fixed for ever, -- O the Joys!
Th'unutterable Bliss!
Now where is your Pleasure? earthly Toys?
Can ye compare with this?
IX.
No more from thy Embrace I Will roam,
My LORD, my LIFE, my LOVE,
I see the Scenes of Joys to come
In long Procession move.
X.
Now, vast Eternity, roll on,
O fathomless profound!
Ye endless Ages, swiftly run
Your never-ceasing Round.

