A CONTINUATION Of the Reverend Mr. Whitefield's JOURNAL FROM A few Days after
his Arrival at GEORGIA, TO His second Return thither from PENNSYLVANIA.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed and Sold by B. FRANKLIN, in Market-Street. 1740.

A CONTINUATION OF Mr. Whitefield's JOURNAL, and c.
SAVANNAH. Friday, January 11. 1739, 40.
WENT this Morning with some Friends, to view a Tract of Land consisting of 500
Acres, which Mr. H -- m, whom I left Schoolmaster of Savannah, was directed, I
hope by Providence, to make Choice of for the Orphan-House. It is situated on
the northern Part of the Colony, about 10 Miles off Savannah, and has various
Kinds of Soil in it, a great Part of it very good. Some Acres, through the
Diligence of my Friend, are cleared. He has also stocked it with Cattle and
Poultry. He has began the Fence, built a Hut; all which, will grea^^ly forward
the Work. -- I choose to have it so far off the Town, because the Children will
then be more free from bad Examples, and can more conveniently go upon their
Lands to work: For it is my Design to have all the Children taught to labor so
as to be qualified to get th^^ own Living. LORD, do thou teach an^ excite them
to labor also for that Mea^ which endures to Everlasting Life.

Thursday, Jan. 24. Went this Morning and took Possession of my Lot. I hop^ it
is cast in a fair Ground; and GOD in answer to our Prayers, will show the he
has given us a goodly Heritage* (...) called it BETHESDA, i. e. The House
Mercy -- For I hope many Acts of Men will be shown there; and that many w^^
thereby be stirred up to praise the LORD as a GOD whose Mercy endures forever*

Tuesday, Jan. 29. Took in The German Orphans, the most pitiable O^jects, I
think, that I ever yet saw. The Bodies were exceeding nasty, and two their
Heads eat raw with Lice. No n^ Negroes could possibly look more despi^^bly, or
require more Pains to instr^^ them. They have been used to exce^^ing hard
Labor, and though supplied (...) Provision from the Trustees, yet treated in a
Manner unbecoming even Heathens. Was all the Money I have collected, to be
spent in freeing these Three Children from Slavery, it would be well laid out.
I have also in my House near Twenty more, who, in all Probability, if not taken
in, would be as Ignorant of GOD and CHRIST, comparatively speaking, as the
Indians. Blessed be GOD, they begin to live in Order..

This Day I began the Cotton Manufactury; and agreed with a Woman to teach the
little Ones to spin and card. I find annual Cotton grows indifferently well in
Georgia: And, to encourage the People, I this Day bought 305 lb. and have
agreed to take all the Cotton, Hemp and Flax that shall be planted the
following Year, through the whole Province. I see more and more the Excellency
of the Charity in which I am engaged. I trust it will make Savannah lift up her
drooping Head. Though there are fewer Inhabitants, yet, I think the People are in
a better Situation than when I was here last. They now live independent on a
Public Store, Provisions (Flour especially) are much cheaper; Cattle more
plentiful; and by the Divine Blessing, if any Manufacture can be raised amongst
themselves, to prevent their exporting so much Money, they may yet do well. I
bless GOD! My Congregations are as large as usual. The Courthouse is generally
full, and I keep as near as may be to my old Way of Proceeding. We have the
Sacrament every Sunday, and public Prayer and Exposition twice every Day in
the Week. The LORD bless my Coming, and grant the Inhabitants may know the
Things which belong to their Peace, before they are eternally hid from their
Eyes!

Wednesday, January 30. Went to Day with the Carpenter and Surveyor, and laid
out the Ground whereon the Orphan-House is to be built. It is to be sixty feet
long, and forty wide: A Yard and Garden before and behind: The Foundation is to
be Brick, and is to be sunk four Feet within, and raised three Feet above the
Ground, which is intended for a Cellar and other convenient Places. The House
is to be two Story, with a Hip-Roof, the First ten the Second nine Foot high.
In all there will be near twenty commodious Rooms. Behind are two small Houses,
the one for an Infirmary, the other for a Charity-School for the poor Children
of the Town that are not Orphans; for I intend to take in some of them, as my
Stock will admit. There is also to be a Still-House built for the Apothecary.
-- And I trust, 'ere my return to England, I shall see my Children and Family
quite settled in it. I find it will be an expensive Work: But it is for the
LORD CHRIST; He will take care to defray all Charges. -- The Money that will be
spent on this Occasion, will keep many Families from leaving the Colony; and in
all Probability bring many others over. -- There are near thirty working at the
Plantation already, and I would employ as many more, if they could be got. --
Whatsoever is done for GOD ought to be done speedily, as well as with all our
Might.

Monday, Feb, 4. Met according to Appointment with all the Magistrates, and
former Trustee of the Orphans, who heard the Recorder read over the Grant given
me by the Trustees, and took a Minute of their Approbation of the same, LORD
grant I may carefully watch over every Soul that is, or shall be committed to
my Charge!

Monday, Feb. 11. Had much of the Divine Presence yesterday, both at Morning
and Evening Service. Took in four fresh Orphans; and sat out with two Friends
to Frederica, in order to pay my Respects to the General, and to fetch the
Orphans that were in the Southern Part of the Colony, LORD preserve my going
out and coming in, from this Time forth forever more!

PROVIDENCE, 14 Miles from Savannah.
Tuesday, Feb. 12, Lay here last Night at a Planter's House, expecting to meet
the Scout Boat this Morning; but finding it did not come at the Time appointed,
I and my Friends went to Bethesda, and, I hope, spent the Day to GOD's Glory,
and our own good. At Night we returned to Providence. About eight o'Clock, the
Scout Boat came; but it being late, we chose to defer going till the next
Morning: In the mean while GOD was pleased to give us refreshing Sleep, and to
fill my Soul (after it had been much cast down) with unspeakable Peace and Joy
in the Holy Ghost. Oh that I was careful always to behave so as not to provoke
that blessed Guest to depart from me! But I find that I have yet a Body of Sin
and Death. Thanks be to GOD! yet a little while, and I hope to have a complete
Victory through our LORD JESUS CHRIST!

DARIEN near Frederica.
Friday, Feb. 14. Lay on the Water two Nights, and reached the Scotch
Settlement at Darien to Day at Noon. Was kindly received by Mr. Mc'L^od, the
Minister and those of his House. Engaged to take four Orphans, which were in
his Flock: And about seven in the Evening, after some edifying Conversation,
and friendly Offices of Love, I took Boat for Frederica; where we arrived about
two in Morning; and having warmed and re-freshed ourselves, retired to Bed,
blessing GOD for the bodily and spiritual Comforts which He from time to time
imparted to us. Oh that my Eyes were open to see the Length, and Breadth, and
Height of the loving Kindnesses of the LORD! I can only adore it: Comprehend
it I cannot: It is past my finding out.

FREDERICA.
Saturday, Feb. 16. Waited upon, and was courteously received by the General,
with whom I and my Friends breakfasted, and dined, and spent most part of the
Day: At Night GOD was pleased to visit me with a Fever; which obliged me to go
to Bed sooner than usual: My Mind was also exercised with inward Trials; but in
a few Hours both were somewhat abated; and the Remainder of the Night I was
blessed with sweet Repose. Forever adored be the Keeper of Israel, who neither
slumbereth nor sleeps!

It Is he sustains my feeble Powers
With His almighty Arms:
He watches my unguarded Hours,
Against invading Harms.
No scorching Sun, nor sickly Moon,
Have leave from him smite:
He shields my Head from burning Now;
From blasting Damps at Night.
He guards my Soul, he keeps my Breath
When thickest Dangers come:
Still I Will go on, secure from Death,
'Till he commands me Home.
Sunday, Feb. 17. Found my self better in Body, though somewhat weak. Preached in
the Morning, in a Room belonging to the Storehouse. GOD was pleased to give me
much Freedom, and the People seemed very attentive -- Dined with the General.
Intended to go to St. Simons to the Soldiery; but it being too late to go there
and preach, I thought it advisable to preach a second Time at Frederica. The
General, Soldiers and People attended very orderly. After Sermon, I married a
Couple, baptized a Child, and spent the Remainder of the Evening with my two
Friends. Oh what a happy Thing is it for Brethren to dwell together in Unity!

Monday, Feb., 8. Rose this Morning by one o'Clock. Took Boat in order to go to
St. Andrew's: But the Rudder breaking, we were obliged to return back, and
desist from our intended Journey. -- Went to Bed, and slept for a few Hours.
Spent a good Part of the Day with the General: Received from him a Bill of
Exchange for One Hundred and Fifty Pounds, which he has advanced me in order to
begin a Church at Savannah. -- About seven o'Clock sat off for the Darien,
whither I promised to return to take Mr. Mc' Leod, and the Orphans, with me to
Savannah. -- The Passage to that Place is generally about four Hours; but the
Wind being high and contrary, we were obliged to come to a Grapling near an
open Reach, and did not get to Darien till the next Day at Noon. Mr. Mc'Leod,
and his Friends, received us with Joy; and finding me ill, advised me to lie
down, by which I was much refreshed, and was thereby enabled at Night to give
GOD Thanks in Family Prayer. Oh who can express the loving Kindness of the
LORD, or show forth all his Praise!

DARIEN.
Wednesday, Feb. 20. Preached about ten in the Morning to Mr. Mc' Leod's
Congregation, who seemed rejoiced at what GOD enabled me to deliver at that
time. -- About two o'Clock took Boat for Savannah -- But after we had ^^^wed
about 12 Miles, the Wind grew so rough, and the Water beat so fast into our
Boat (which was but small, and very heavy ^^den) that we were obliged to put in
at a Place called Doboy-Island, where we sat very comfortably round a large
Fire, and praised the LORD with joyful Lips, for providing such a Place for our
Safety. Oh GOD, thou, and thou only, art our Refuge against every Storm! O be
thou my Guide, even unto Death!

Doboy-Island, and Darien.
Friday, Feb. 22. Continued all Day yesterday, to my abundant Satisfaction and
spiritual Advantage, on Doboy-Island; and finding the Wind still continue high
and contrary, we thought it best to return back to Darien, where we arrived
this Day at Noon. The People were much pleased at our Return: And though I wanted
to see my dear Family at Savannah, yet I felt such a peculiar Satisfaction
within myself, as gave me Hopes GOD intended some good for the Scotch People at
Darien. Oh that they may have some spiritual Gift imparted to their Souls!

Sunday, Feb. 24. Preached once yesterday, and twice to Day; prayed with a sick
Person; spent some Hours in conversing with a well-disposed Family. -- Was
enabled to see more of the Vileness of my Heart and Nature; felt GOD's Spirit
striving with my Spirit; and upon many Accounts, both bodily and spiritual, had
reason to bless GOD for bringing me to and detaining me at Darien. I have
reason to say, it is good for me that I have been here: Retirement is a sweet
Means to keep up and quicken the Divine Life. LORD grant I may never be afraid
to converse with myself and thee!

SAVANNAH.
Thursday, Feb. 28. Preached on Monday, and settled a School, both for grown
Persons and Children, on Tuesday, at the Darien, to the great Satisfaction of
the Inhabitants. Set out with my Friends and Four Orphans about Six in the
Evening: Had pleasant Weather, lay Two Nights in the Woods, and reached
Bethesda about Noon. Was pleased with the Improvements that had been made in my
Absence. Was refreshed with some comfortable Christian Letters, that I received
from New York. Took Horse and came Home to my dear Family at Savannah, who
received me with Abundance of Love and Joy. The People also of the Parish, I
found were rejoiced at my Coming. They flocked to, and seemed ver^ attentive at
public Worship. GOD also was pleased to grant me some peculia^ Vouchsa^ements
of his blessed Presence i^ my Soul, and I was comforted on ever Side. LORD
prepare me for an Hour (...) Temptation! Amen, LORD JESUS, A^ men and Amen.

Thursday, March 13. Buried this Evening, one of the Women that came ove^ with
me, who, I trust, died in the LORD The Orphans sung before the Corpse, from our
House to the Courthouse. There preached; and after that, I gave another Word
of Exhortation at the Grave. M^ Soul was much affected with the Awfulness of
the Solemnity. The Word cam^ with Power. I pray GOD it may ma^^ such a deep
Impression upon all our Heart, that we may be so wise as practically to
consider our latter Eend.

CHARLESTOWN.
Friday, March 14. Arrived this la^^ Night at Charlestown, being called the^ to
see my Brother, who lately came from England, and brought me a Packet (...)
Letters from my dear Friends. Blesse^ be GOD, his Work goes on among them!
Waited on the Commissary, wit^ my Brother and other Companions, bu^ met with a
cool Reception. After I had been there a little while, I told him, That I was
informed, he had some Questions to propose to me, and that I was now come to
give him all the Satisfaction I could in answering them. Upon this I
immediately perceived Passion begin to arise in his Heart, -- Yes Sir, says he,
I have several Questions to put to you, but, added he, you are got above us, or
something to that Purpose. Then he charged me with Enthusiasm and Pride, for
speaking against the Generality of the Clergy, and desired I would make my
Charge good. I told him, I thought I had already; but, as yet, I had scarce
begun with them. He then asked me, Wherein were the Clergy so much to blame? I
answered, they did not preach up Justification by Faith alone: And, upon
talking with the Commissary, I found he was as ignorant of it as any of the
rest. He then sneered me, with telling me of my Modesty, expressed in my Letter
to the Bishop of Gloucester. He charged me with breaking the Canons and my
Ordination Vow: And notwithstanding I told him I was ordained by Letters
Dimissory from the Bishop of London; yet in a great Rage he told me, if I
preached in any public Church in that Province, he would suspend me. I
replied, I shall regard that as much as I would a Pope's Bull. But, Sir, says
I, why should you be offended at my speaking against the Generality of the
Clergy, for I always spoke worthily of you? -- I might as well be offended,
added my Brother, at your saying, the Generality of People were notorious
Sinners, and might come to accuse you, for speaking Evil of me, because I was
one of the People. I further added, Sir, you did not behave thus, when I was
with you last. No, says he, you did not speak against the Clergy; or some such
Thing. Because, replied I, more Light has been given me since that time: But if
you will make an Application to yourself, be pleased, Sir, to let me ask you
one Question. Have you delivered your Soul, by exclaiming against the
Assemblies and Balls here? What, Sir, says he, must you come to catechize me?
No, says he, I have not exclaimed against them; I think there is no Harm in
them. Then, Sir, said I, I shall think it my Duty to exclaim against you. Then,
Sir, replied he, (in a very great Rage) get you out of my House. Upon which I
made my Bow, and, with my Friends, took my Leave, pitying the Commissary, who I
really though it was more noble than to give such Treatment. After this, we went to
public Prayer, dined at a Friend's House, drank Tea with the Independent
Minister, and preached about 4 in the Afternoon, to a large Auditory in his
Meeing-House. GOD was pleased to favor us with his Presence, during Sermon;
and I spent the remainder of the Evening with my dear Brother and Companions,
Who I trust will be all knit in one Communion and Fellowship, by Faith in a
crucified GOD. Amen, So be it.

Saturday, March 15. Breakfasted, sung a Hymn, and had some religious
Conversation on board my Brother's Ship. Preached in the Baptist Meeting House,
and was much pleased, when I heard afterward, that from the same Pulpit, a
Person not long ago, had preached, who denied the Doctrine of Original Sin, the
Divinity and Righteousness of our dear LORD, and the Operations of GOD's
blessed Spirit upon the Heart. I was led out to show the utter Inability of Man
to save himself, and the absolute Necessity of his depending on the rich and
sovereign Grace of GOD in CHRIST JESUS, in order to be restored to his
primitive Dignity. Some, I observed, were put under Concern, and most seemed
willing to know, whether those Things were so. In the Evening I preached again,
in the Independent Meeting House, to a more attentive Auditory than ever: And
had the Pleasure afterward of Finding, that a Gentlewoman, whose whole Family
has been carried away for some time with Deistical Principles, began now to be
unhinged, and to see that there was no Rest in such a Scheme, for a fallen
Creature to rely on. LORD JESUS, for thy Mercy's Sake, reveal thyself in her
Heart, and make her willing to know the Truth as it is in thee! Amen, and Amen.

Sunday, March 16. Preached at Eight in the Morning at the Scotch
Meeting House, to a large Congregation; visited a sick Person; went to Church;
heard the Commissary represent me under the Character of the Pharisee,who came
to the Temple, saying, GOD, I thank thee that I am not as other Men are. But
whether I do what I do out of a Principle of Pride, or Duty, the Searcher of
Hearts will discover 'ere long, before Men and Angels. Found myself very sick
and weak at Dinner; went to Church again, and preached about Five, in the
Independent Meeting House Yard, the House itself not being near capacious
enough to hold the Auditory.

With restless and ungoverned Rage,
Why do the Clergy storm?
Why in such rash Attempts engage,
As they can never perform?
The great in Council and in Might,
Their various Forces bring,
Against the LORD they all unite,
And his anointed King.
Must we submit to their Commands,
Presumptuously they say?
No, let us break their slavish Bands,
And cast their Chains away.
But GOD who sits enthroned on high,
And sees how they combine;
Does their conspiring Strength defy.
And mocks their vain Designs.
Felt much Freedom after Sermon in talking to a large Company at a Merchant's
House, and then supped with another Friend. Expounded Part of the Chapter;
prayed and went to our Lodgings with my dear Companions, praising and blessing
GOD. Hasten that Time, O LORD, when we shall join the heavenly Choir that is
now about thy Throne!

Monday, March 17. Preached in the Morning at the Independent Meeting House;
and was more explicit than ever, in exclaiming against Balls and Assemblies, to
which the People seemed to hearken with much Attention.

Preached again in the Evening; and, being excited thereto by some of the
Inhabitants, spoke in Behalf of my poor Orphans: GOD was pleased to give it his
Blessing; and I collected upwards of Seventy Pounds Sterling for them, the
largest Collection I ever yet made on that Occasion. A further Earnest to me,
that we shall yet see great Things in America; and that GOD will carry on and
finish the Work begun in his Name at Georgia.

Tuesday, March 18. Preached twice again to Day, and took an affectionate Leave
of, and gave Thanks to my Hearers for their great Liberality. Many wept, and my
own Heart yearn'd much toward them: -- For I believe a good Work is begun in
many Souls. Gene rally every Day, several came to me, telling me with weeping
Eyes, how GOD had been pleased to convince them, by the Word preached; and how
desirous they were of laying hold on, and having an Interest in the complete
and everlasting Righteousness of the LORD JESUS CHRIST. Numbers desired
privately to converse with me. Many sent me little Presents as Tokens of their
Love, and ^arnestly entreated that I would come amongst them again. Invitations
were given me from some of the adjacent Villages, and People daily came to Town
more and more from their Plantations, to hear the Word. Providentially many of
my Sermons and Journals, and my Answer to the Bishop of London, lately printed,
were sent from Philadelphia, which gave me an Opportunity of doing the more
Good. The Congregations grew larger on the Week Days; and many Things concurred
to induce us to think, that GOD intended to visit some in Charlestown with his
Salvation. Grant this O Father, for thy dear Son's Sake CHRIST JESUS our LORD!
Amen, Amen.

SAVANNAH.
Friday, March 21. Breakfasted at a Friend's House on Wednesday Morning; went
on board the Sloop, prayed, sung an Hymn, and took a most affectionate Leave of
my dear Brother and other Friends. Got over the Bar about Noon; and reached
Savannah about Noon this Day, to the great Joy of my Friends and Family, who
immediately joined with me in giving Thanks to GOD, for the signal Mercies
vouchsafed unto us since our last parting. Oh how plentiful is thy Goodness, O
LORD, which thou have laid up for them that fear thee, even before the Sons of
Men!

Thursday, March 27, 1740. Went this Day to Bethesda; and with fall Assurance
of Faith, laid the first Brick of the great House. The Workmen attended, and
with me kneeled down and prayed: Afterward we sung an Hymn suitable to the
Occasion; and then I gave a Word of Exhortation to the Laborers, and bid them
remember to work heartily, knowing that they worked for GOD and not for Man.
Much Satisfaction seemed to be amongst them, and blessed be GOD's holy Name,
his Work prospers much in our Hands. Near Twenty Acres of Land are cleared, and
almost ready for planting. Two Houses are already raised, and one near upon
being finished. All the Timber for the Frame of the great House is sawn, and
most of it brought to the Place where it is to be built. A good Part of the
Foundation is dug, and many Thousands of Brick ready for Use. Near Forty
Children are now under my Care, and near an Hundred Mouths are daily supplied
with Food from our Store. The Expense is great, but our great and good GOD, I
am persuaded, will enable me to defray it. As yet I am kept from the least
Doubting: The more my Family increases, the more Enlargement and Comfort I
feel. And though, what has been hitherto done, comparatively speaking, may be
only as a Grain of Mustard Seed; yet I believe it will, in GOD's due Time, take
Root and fill the Land; and many poor distressed Souls will come and lodge
under the Branches of it. Set thy Almighty Fiat to it, O gracious Father! and
for thy own Name Sake, let the unbelieving World know, that thou never will
forget those that put their Trust in thee.

Sunday, March 30. Found myself very sick and weak in Body, but was
strengthened, notwithstanding, to go through most of the Duties of the Day, and to
take an affectionate Leave of my dear Parishioners, because it appeared, that
Providence called me at this Time to the Northward. An unspeakable Trouble and
Agony of Soul did I feel most Part of the Day, and was enabled to wrestle with
my LORD, in Behalf of the People in general and those belonging to the
Orphan-House in particular. Blessed be GOD, he has already, I trust, in a great
Measure heard my Prayer. All Things belonging to the Orphan-House succeed far
beyond Expectation; and some of my little Flock have lately, as far as I can
judge, been effectually called of GOD. One Woman that had been a constant
Attender on the Means of Grace, and thought herself a Christian for many Years,
came to me, acknowledging, that she had been a Self-Deceiver, and knew Nothing
of the Righteousness of, or true Living Faith in JESUS CHRIST. A Tradesman of
the same Stamp, having; felt the Power of the same Doctrines of Grace, sent me
Seventeen Volumes of Archbishop Ti^lotson's Sermons, of which he had been a
great Admirer, to do what I would with them. A Captain of a Ship, who had been
a strong Opposer of the Truth, both wrote and came to me under great
Convictions, confessing his Sin, and desirous to be a Christian indeed. Some
also there are who have received the Love of GOD in the Truth of it, so that I
hope, if Ten Saints could preserve S^dom, the few Righteous Souls left behind,
will prevent the utter Desolation of declining Savannah. Blessed JESUS, let our
Extremity be thy Opportunity; and for thy Mercy's Sake, take the Colony into
thine own Hands; so shall we sing and praise thy Power.

Wednesday, April 2. Read Prayers, as usual, as soon as 'twas Light. Expounded
the Lesson, and then went on Board with several of my Family and my
Parishioners, whose Hearts GOD has touched by his Grace. The Weather was very
pleasant, and we spent the Day to our mutual Edification and Comfort. In the
Evening we wept over, and took Leave of each other: And the Searcher of Hearts
only knows, what Yearnings I felt in my own Soul. I have always observed, that
I am under a greater Concern when leaving Savannah, than any other Place in the
World; for, it has proved a blessed Place for my Soul: And leaving my
Companions, and, more particularly, familiar Friends, gives Nature a deeper
Wound than any other outward Trial. Dearest Redeemer, guide and preserve them
in my Absence, for thy infinite Mercies Sake! Amen, Amen.

PENNSYLVANIA. New Castle.
Sunday, April 13. After a short Passage of Ten Days (in which GOD was pleased
to exercise my Body with Sickness, and my Soul with great spiritual Conflicts)
we cast Anchor about Eight in the Morning at New Castle in the Province of
Pennsylvania. Mr. G. at whose House I lodged when last there, very courteously
received both me and my Friends. The Minister of the Parish, who has been an
Advocate for me, but was now Sick, readily accepted my Offer to officiate for
him. I read Prayers and preached twice in his Church. In the Morning I was much
carried out, and in the Evening the Word came with Power. People were
surprised, but much rejoiced at the News of my Arrival, which they expressed,
by flocking, as soon as apprized of my Coming, to hear the Afternoon's Sermon.
Mr. Charles Tennent, mentioned in my last, came with great Part of his
Congregation: And People began to invite me several Ways to come and preach to
'em, but being in haste to go to Philadelphia, I appointed to preach on the
Morrow at Wilmington, which lay in the Way thither. I went with Mr. Tennent and
other Friends, after Evening Service. My Soul was much rejoiced, in hearing how
mightily the Word of GOD had prevailed since I was at Pennsylvania last. The
LORD was also pleased to give new Strength to my Body. I wanted Words to
express my Gratitude for this and all his other innumerable Mercies from time
to time, show'red down upon me.

My Soul inspired with sacred Love,
GOD's holy Name forever bless;
Of all his Favors mindful prove,
And still thy grateful Thanks express,
It Is he that all thy Sins forgives,
And after Sickness makes thee sound:
From Danger he thy Life retrieves,
By him with Grace and Mercy crowned.
The LORD abounds with tender Love,
And unexampled Acts of Grace:
His wakened Wrath does slowly move,
His willing Mercy flows apace.
Let every Creature jointly bless
The mighty LORD, and thou my Heart,
With grateful Joy thy Thanks express,
And in this Concert bear thy Part.
Wilmington and Philadelphia.
Monday, April 14. Had sweet Visitations from above, and found much of the
divine Presence, and Refreshings of GOD's holy Spirit, in my Soul. Preached to
near 3000 People about Eleven in the Morning, and GOD was pleased to be amongst
us, as in the holy Place of Sinai. Many went away refreshed and comforted; and
several importunate Visitations were given me, to preach in several. Country
Places round about. After Sermon, I and my Friends dined at a Quaker's, who
seemed to have the Root of the Matter in his Heart, and could cry Shibboleth.
Numbers embraced me with the tenderest Affection, and blessed the LORD of all
LORDS for sending me back to them again. As soon as Dinner was over we took
Horse, baited at Ch^ster (where the Landlord of the House would take Nothing
either for the Entertainment of ourselves or Horses) and reached Philadelphia
about Eight in the Evening. GOD was here again pleased to vouchsafe me great
Enlargements of Heart; and it is impossible to express the Joy many felt when
they saw my Temptations. Oh! how did they comfort my Heart with the Account of
what GOD had done for their own and many other People's Souls, by the Doctrine
I had delivered when here last. The Baptist Minister in particular, who has
been made instrumental to water what GOD had planted, recounted to me many
noble Instances of GOD's sovereign Grace, shown in the Conviction and
Conversion of some Ministers as well as common People. Oh that the LORD may
revive his Work in the midst of the Years! The World is now up in Arms; blessed
JESUS, do thou now put the Sword upon thy Thigh, and whilst the Kings of the
Earth are striving to extend their Dominions, do thou secretly carry on thy
Kingdom in Believers Hearts, 'till the Earth be filled with the Knowledge of
thee our LORD, as the Waters cover the Sea.

PHILADELPHIA.
Tuesday, April 15. Paid my Respects to the Governor and Proprietor. Went to
the Commissary's House, who was not at Home, but afterward speaking to him in
the Street, he soon told me, that he could lend me his Church no more, because
I had not treated the Bishop of London well in my Answer to his late Pastoral
Letter; and also had misquoted and misrepresented Archbishop Tillotson, in a
Letter published in the last Week's Gazette I told him he had best show that in
Public. He replied, the Printers would not publish any Thing for them, and
that the Press was shut up against them. I answered, it was without my
Knowledge. Upon this we parted; and in the Afternoon I was much pressed in
Spirit to preach upon the blind Beggar, to whom the Scribes and Pharisees said,
Do thou teach us? I stood upon a Balcony on Society Hill, from whence I
preached my Farewel-Sermon last Fall: And felt somewhat of that Divine Fire and
inward Support, which, I am persuaded, the poor Beggar felt, when bearing his
Testimony for the blessed JESUS, before a Bench of Wolves in Sheep's Clothing.
Toward the Conclusion of my Discourse, I read to the People some Extracts I
had taken from Dr. Edwards against Archbishop Tillotson's Writings, and then
appealed to them, Where was the Presumption in pretending to teach even him. It
cannot be expressed how many carnal Hearts were disturbed by my Testimony
against the Archbishop, that great and good Man, as they call him. But before I
have done, I do not despair of seeing People bring his Works, as they once
brought the Books of curious Arts, and burnt them before all Men. It Is
difficult to determine which has done the most Mischief. Have Compassion, sweet
JESUS, on thy Flock, and suffer them no longer to be given over to such Guides,
who had the Form of Religion, but never felt the effectual Power of it in their
Hearts!

Wednesday, April 16. Talked in the Morning with Three or Four who were
convicted, and, I believe I can say, converted by my Ministry. In the Afternoon
Two Men came to me, one of which cried out, blessed be GOD, for you under him
have begotten me again unto a lively Hope. Preached upon Society Hill twice: In
the Morning to about Six, in the Evening to about Eight Thousand People. GOD
was much with me in both Exercises. In the Afternoon I was particularly
assisted in speaking to those Words, Yea, and all that will live Godly in
CHRIST JESUS, must suffer Persecution. The Storm, I find, is gathering apace.
As the Word of GOD increases, so will the Rage and Opposition of the Devil.
LORD, support us in a suffering Hour, and evershadow us by thy Wings, till the
Tyranny of our Adversaries shall be overpast. Amen, LORD JESUS, Amen.

Abington and Philadelphia.
Thursday, April 17. Rode last Night about Eight Miles after Sermon. Lay at a
Friend's House, and preached this Morning to near Three or Four Thousand People
at Abington, a District under the Care of one Mr. Treat, a dissenting Minister,
to whom GOD has been pleased lately to show Mercy. He has been a Preacher of
the Doctrines of Grace for some Years, but was deeply convinced when I was here
last, that he had not experienced them in his Heart: And soon after I went
away, he attempted to preach, but could not: He therefore told his Congregation
how miserably he had deceived both himself and them, and desired them that were
gifted, to pray for him. Ever since he has continued to seek JESUS CHRIST
sorrowing, and is now under deep Convictions, and a very humbling Sense of Sin.
He prea^hes as usual, though he has not a full Assurance of Faith, because it was
best, he said, to be found in the Way of Duty. I believe God is preparing him
for great Services, and I hope he will also be a Means of awakening some false
dead-hearted Preachers among the Dissenters, who hold the Form of sound Words,
but never felt the Power of them in their own Souls. I observed a great
Presence of God in our Assembly, and the Word, as I was informed afterward,
came with a Soulconvicting and comforting Power to many. When I had done, I
took a little Refreshment, baptized a Child, and hasted to Philadelphia, where
I preached to upwards of Ten Thousand People, upon the Woman that was cured of
her bloody Issue. Hundreds I found were graciously melted; and many, I hope,
not only thronged round, but also touched the LORD JESUS CHRIST by Faith. Near
Ten came to me after Sermon, laboring under deep Convictions; and could tell
me the Time when, and Manner how the LORD JESUS made himself manifest to their
Souls. What gives me greater Hopes that this Work is of GOD, is, because these
Convictions have remained on many ever since I was here last. Some have not
only Righteousness and Peace, but also Joy in the Holy Ghost. Blessed be GOD,
there is a most glorious Work begun in this Province: The Word of GOD every Day
mightily prevails, and Satan loses Ground apace. LORD JESUS stretch out thy
Arm, and let not this Work be stopped, till we see that new Heaven and new
Earth wherein dwells Righteousness.

German-Town and Whitemarsh.
Friday, April 18. Was employed for Two Hours this Morning in giving Answers to
several that came to me under Convictions, amongst whom was a Negro or Two, and
a young Girl of about Fourteen Years of Age, who was turned out of the House
where she boarded, because she would hear me, and would not learn to dance. Set
out about Nine a Clock for Whitemarsh, about Twelve Miles from Philadelphia.
Had near Forty Horse in Company, before we reached the Place. Preached to
upwards of Two Thousand People, and perceived great Numbers much melted down
and brought under C^^victions, when I made free Offers to (...) of JESUS and
his Benefits, if they would believe on him. Took a little Refreshment at a
Quaker's: Baptized two Children belonging to the Church of England. Returned
back and preached at German-town with much of the divine Presence, to near Four
Thousand Hearers; and came to Philadelphia about Seven in the Evening,
refreshed both in Body and Soul. Blessed be the LORD GOD of Israel, who seems
to be building up his spiritual Jerusalem, and to be gathering together the
Outcasts of Israel.

PHILADELPHIA.
Saturday, April 19. Was still much engaged in giving Answers to, and praying
with diverse, that applied to me, under deep Convictions of their damnable
Condition by Nature. Preached Morning and Evening to Seven or Eight Thousand
People each Time: And it much rejoiced my Heart to see with what Order and
Devotion they constantly attend. Scoffers seem to be at a Stand what to say;
they mutter in Coffee-Houses, give a Curse, drink a Bowl of Punch, and then cry
out against me, for not preaching up more Morality. Poor Men! Where is the
Morality they so much boast of? If GOD judges them, as he certainly will do, by
their Morality, on which they so much rely, out of their own Mouths will he
condemn them: Their Morality, falsely so called, will prove their Damnation.
They say, but do not. And how can they, since they are Ignorant of a Living
Faith in JESUS CHRIST, which alone can enable us to do any Thing acceptable in
the Sight of GOD? From such profane Moralists may I turn away! My Soul, come
not nigh their Dwellings; mine Honor, be not thou united to them.

Sunday, April (...). Preached this Morning at Seven a Clock, with much
Clearness and Freedom, to about Ten Thousand People, and collected One Hundred
and Ten Pounds Sterling for my poor Orphans. The People threw in their Mites
willingly, and thereby reminded me much of what GOD had done for me at
Moorfields and Kennington-Common, when last in England. Went to Church Morning
and Evening, and heard the Commissary preach a Sermon upon Justification by
Works, from James ii. 18. Many People seeing me go in, followed me, and Numbers
of them told me afterward, the Commissary, though undesignedly, had confirmed
them more and more in the Truths which I had delivered. In the Evening I
preached from the same Words, to about Fifteen Thousand People, and consuted
the false Doctrines and many fundamental Errors contained in the Commissary's
Discourse; for he all along took Faith to be only an Assent to the Truths of
the Gospel. He said St. Paul and St. James spoke of the same Kind of
Justification; that Works mentioned by St. Paul, were only the Works of the
ceremonial Law; that the Doctrine of an imputed Righteousness had done much
Harm, and hindered the Conversion of the Heathens; that we were to be justified
by our Works at the last Day, and consequently were to be justified in the same
Manner now. To all these Things I endeavored to answer distinctly, and was
obliged, in the Conclusion of my Discourse, to tell the People, since CHRIST
was not preached in the Church, they might go hear him preached where they
could. After Sermon we collected Eighty Pounds Currency, for my Children at
Georgia; and came Home rejoicing in Spirit, to see how Satan was continually
bruising his own Head. Little do my Enemies think what Service they do me; if
they did, one would think, out of Spite they would even desist from opposing
me. Oh what a good Master is JESUS CHRIST!

Greenwich and Gloucester, in West-Jersey.
Monday, April 21. Had fresh Application made to me by Persons under
Convictions. Went by Water about Four Miles, and then rode in Company with many
others, who came to meet me at Greenwich, in the West-Jerseys, and about Twelve
Miles from Philadelphia. There being a Mistake made in the News about the Place
where I was to preach, I had not above Fifteen Hundred Hearers. At first I
thought I was speaking to Stocks and Stones; but before I had done, the Power
of the LORD came on the Congregation, the Holy Ghost overshadowed them, and a
gracious Melting was visible in most that heard. Sermon being ended, I dined
with my Friends, was taken very ill in the Way, lay down for about an Hour,
rode back to Gloucester where I took Horse in the Morning. I preached with some
Power to about Fifteen Hundred People. It being but Four Miles distant from
Philadelphia, many came in Boats from thence; and the Moon shining very bright,
we went back to Town very pleasantly. GOD was pleased to communicate fresh
Strength to my Soul; we sung Hymns good Part of the Way, and GOD enabled me to
second it by a warm Exhortation. About Eight at Night we reached Philadelphia,
with no small Satisfaction in my own Soul, that I had this Day been plowing up
some Fallow Ground, and opening a Way into a Place where I find there has been
a great Famine of the Word of GOD. I must confess I am in that Respect like
minded with St. Paul, and desire to go chiefly where CHRIST has not been named.
Oh that the LORD may endue me with his Meekness, Holiness and Zeal; and then,
after I preach to others, I shall not be a Castaway myself. Amen, LORD JESUS,
Amen.

PHILADELPHIA.
Tuesday, April 22. Hearing a Sloop was going to Georgia, I shut up myself for
some time in the Morning, in order to write some Letters to my dear Friends at
Savannah. Preached both Morning and Evening to rather larger Congregations than
I have yet seen in a Weekday. There were not less than Ten Thousand People. A
sweet Power was amongst them, and when I came to take my Farewell, being about
to depart for New York on the Morrow, a great Number was quite dissolved into
Tears, and wept sorely. Many of the Negroes were also much affected, and, I
trust, some will now experimentally know the LORD JESUS, and feel the Power of
his Resurrection. This Day I bought Five Thousand Acres of Land on the Forks of
Delaware. Ordered a large House to be built thereon for the Instruction of
those poor Creatures. The Land, I hear, is exceeding rich. It Is a Manor, and
pays only a White Rose yearly for chief Rent. I took up so much, because I
intend settling some English Friends there, when I come next from England. I
have called it NAZARETH. And, I trust, in a few Years the LORD will let us see
much good come out of it. Amen, LORD JESUS, Amen.

Went in the Evening to visit a young Woman under deep Convictions. She was
struck down by the Power of GOD's Word on Sunday, and has continued ever since
sick in Body, and under great Agony of Soul. I talked and prayed with her, and
with near Twenty more in the Room. My Soul was exceedingly carried out, and the
Power of the Holy Ghost descended in a wonderful Manner, upon most that were
there. I also gave them a strong Exhortation. They wept sorely and prayed
earnestly; and I have not seen Circumstances more like those of the Apostles,
when the Holy Ghost shook the Room where they were lifting up their Voices with
one Accord to the most high GOD. By this we know, O LORD, that thou art the
same Yesterday, Today and forever! -- Grant that the Holy Ghost may in like
Manner fall on all them that shall hear the Word from, or pray with me at any
other Time. Amen and Amen.

NESHAMINY.
Wednesday, April 23. Was more than ordinarily employed the first Part of the
Morning in writing Letters, and preparing for my Journey. Set out about 8 in
the Morning with many Friends. Baited at a Friend's House in the Midway*
Reached Neshaminy about Three in the Afternoon, and preached to upwards of Five
Thousand People in old Mr. Tennent's Meeting - House Yard. When I came there,
my Body, through Heat and Labor, was so weak and faint that my Knees smote one
against another. My Visage changed, and I was ready to drop down as soon as I
had finished my Prayer: But GOD was pleased so to revive me by Communications
from himself, that I spoke with great Demonstration of the Spirit, and with
Power. A very great Commotion was in the Hearts of the Hearers. Great Numbers
were much melted; and one in particular, after Sermon, came to me with strong
Cryings and Tears, saying, you have brought me under deep Convictions; What
shall I do to be saved? I gave him the Apostle's Answer, Believe on the LORD
JESUS, and thou shall be saved. Upwards of Fifty, I hear, have lately been
convicted about this Place. The LORD grant his Arrows may stick fast in them,
till they have got a closing Interest in JESUS CHRIST: For many, I find,
receive the Word with Joy for a Season; but, having no true Root in themselves,
soon fall away. -- Better for such, that they had never been convicted at all.
LORD, if it be thy Will, have Mercy on such Apostates, and let them be renewed
again unto Repentance. Amen and Amen.

Montgomery and Shiphack.
Thursday, April 24. Was hospitably entertained with my Friends last Night, at
Montgomery, about eight Miles from Neshaminy, whither I came to make this Day's
Journey the easier. -- Wrote some more Letters to my Flock and Family at
Savannah. Preached at Shiphack, six Miles from Montgomery; where the Dutch
People live. -- It was seemingly a very Wilderness Part of the Country; but
there were not less, I believe, than 2000 Hearers. GOD was with ^e much in the
latter End of the Sermon: And when I had done, Peter Bochler, a Deacon of the
Moravian Church, a dear Lover of our LORD JESUS CHRIST, preached to his
Countrymen in Dutch. -- Traveling and Preaching in the Sun, again weakened me
much, and made me very sick; But by the divine Assistance, I took horse, rode
twelve Miles, and preached in the Evening to about 3000 People, at a Dutchman's
Plantation; who seemed to have drank deeply of GOD's Holy Spirit. Here GOD much
strengthened and quickened me. The German Brethren were exceeding loving to me,
and I spent the Evening with many of them, in a most agreeable Manner. The
Order, Seriousness and Devotion of of these People in Common Life, is most
worthy of Imitation. I never saw so much Simplicity as in them: Surely GOD was
with us this Night. They prayed and sung; in their own Language; and then GOD
enlarged my Heart to pray in ours. I know not when I have prayed with much
greater Power. Many Tears trickled down my Face; and afterward I was in a
great Agony in the Field. Do thou, O blessed JESUS, who wast in an Agony in the
Garden, hearken unto the Petitions thou did in that Hour enable me to send up!

AMWEL, in East-Jersey.
Friday, April 25. Rose before Day. Sung and prayed with my own Friends and the
German Brethren. Set out before Sunrising, and reached Amwel, Thirtyfive Miles
from Skippack, (where I had appointed to preach) by Six at Night. Some
Thousands of People were gathered together, expecting I would have been there
by Noon: But Mr. Gilbert Tennent and Mr. Rowland, mentioned in my last Journal,
coming there to meet me, the former had given the People Two Sermons. In my Way
thither, the LORD was pleased to bring me low, by inward Trials and very great
Weakness of Body, occasioned by the Heat of the Sun, Want of Sleep, and the
Length of the Journey: -- But before I had preached Six Minutes, bodily and
spiritual Strength was given me; and the LORD was pleased to set his Seal to
what he enabled me to deliver. After Sermon, a Friend took me in his Chair. An
old Christian invited me and my Company to his House, Five Miles Distant from
the Place where I preached. We were comfortably refreshed under his Roof: And
though my Body was weak, yet my Soul was strong in the LORD, and in the Power of
his Might. Oh that I may wax stronger and stronger every Day! Amen and Amen.

BRUNSWICK.
Saturday, April 26. Was much comforted and refreshed, both in Body and Soul,
last Night after I went to Rest. Sung Psalms, and prayed, and set out for
NewBrunswick about Eight in the Morning. Reached thither by Four in the
Afternoon, and preached to about Two Thousand Hearers in the Evening. Many were
affected. Here also my true Christian Friend and Host, Mr. Noble from New York,
gave me the Meeting, and brought me a Packet of Letters from Savannah, which,
in a most especial Manner, affected me. Blessed be GOD, I hope my Friends
belonging to the Orphan-House, will be Friends of GOD.

Sunday, April 27. Was told last Night by Mr. Gilbert Tennent, of Two that were
savingly brought Home by my Ministry, when I was here last. Got a little Time
to write to my English Friends, giving them a short Account of what GOD was
doing here. Preached Morning and Evening to near Seven or Eight Thousand
People. And GOD's Power was so much amongst us in the Afternoon Sermon, that
had I proceeded, the Cries and Groans of the Congregation I believe, would have
drowned my Voice. One Woman was struck down, and a general Cry went through the
Assembly. The Power of GOD descended into my Heart, and I believe the Word was
sharper than a two-edged Sword. We collected both Times upwards of Twenty
Pounds Sterling. for my Orphans: And at Night a Woman came to me under strong
Convictions; she told me she had been often somewhat moved, but now she hoped
that GOD had struck her Home; she cried out, I can see Nothing but Hell before
me. -- Oh that all were in as good a Way to Heaven!

Woodbridge and Elizabeth-Town.
Monday, April 28. Underwent great Conflicts in my Soul last Night, and this
Morning rose early to write some Letters to my dear English Friends, who are
continually upon my Heart. Took a sorrowful Leave of Capt. Gladman and my dear
Brother and Fellow-Traveller Mr. Seward, whom I have dispatched to England to
bring me over a Fellow Laborer, to transact several other Affairs of the last
Importance. Capt. Gladman is the Person mentioned in my last Journal, who was
cast away at the Gulf of Florida, and whom GOD made me an Instrument in
converting, in my last Passage to England. Hitherto he has had the Command of
our Sloop; but being obliged to send him on Business to England, I have
committed the Care of it to his Mate, whom GOD was pleased to bring Home to
himself, when I was last at Philadelphia. This Mate, not long since, was an
abandoned Prodigal and Ringleader in Vice: -- But GOD struck him to the Heart
last Fall at Philadelphia. Capt. Gladman had prayed, that GOD would send him a
Mate. This young Man was strongly drawn to come and offer himself. The Captain
hired him, and now I believe he is a Child of GOD. Numbers at Philadelphia
cannot but see the New Creature in him: And, yet the Doctrine of Free
Justification by Faith in CHRIST JESUS does Harm to the Christian World! Surely
such Talkers plainly (...), that they never know what it was to believe on the
LORD JESUS CHRIST with their whole Heart!

Set out about Eight in the Morning, and reached Woodbridge by Ten, where ^
preached to about Two Thousand People. Here again I perceived my bodily
Strength was small, but GOD enabled me to speak Home to many Hearts, for many
were affected: Blessed be GOD! After Sermon I and my Friends dined at the
Dissenting Minister's House, who invited me to preach; and then we hasted to
Elizabeth-Town, where the People had been waiting for me some Hours. I preached
in the Meeting House, as when I was there last: It was full, and was supposed
to contain Two Thousand People; near Ten Dissenting Ministers were present; and
Two Church Ministers, but they did not tarry very long. GOD gave me much
Freedom of Speech. I dealt very plainly with the Presbyterian Clergy, many of
whom, I believe, preach the Doctrines of Grace to others, without being
converted themselves. No Doubt, some were offended; but I care not for any Set
or Party of Men. As I love all that love the LORD JESUS, of what Communion
soever; so I Will reprove all, whether Disse^ters or not Dissenters, who take his
Word into their Mouths, but never felt him dwelling in their Hearts. Such
close-hearted Hypocrites are the Bane of the Christian Church. LORD JESUS
convert or confound them for thy Mercies Sake. Amen and Amen.

After Sermon I took leave of Mr. Gilbert Tennent and Mr. Cross, another
Minister mentioned in my last Journal, who accompanied me thus far, and told me
their Souls were much refreshed by this Day's Work. LORD, not unto me, but unto
thy Name be all the Glory!

After I parted from them, I intended to ride Six Miles; but being overruled
by the Advice of Friends, I stopped and lay at an Inn all Night near the Water
Side, where People take Boat to go to New York. Our Conversation tended to the
Use of Edifying; and GOD was pleased to give me an Appetite to my bodily Food,
which I have not had before for some time. Surely this frail Body cannot hold
me long. When, O LORD, will thou set my imprisoned Soul at Liberty? When shall
I be dissolved and be with thee, O CHRIST! LORD give me Patience to wait till
that blessed Change come.

NEW YORK.
Tuesday, April 29. Took Boat about Nine in the Morning; was blessed with a
fair Gale of Wind, which brought us to New York before Noon. Here my dear
Friends kindly received me; and here also I met with Mr. William Tennent, who
refreshed my Heart, by telling me what the LORD was doing for Numbers of Souls
in the High-Lands, where he had lately been. JESUS CHRIST, is getting himself
the Victory indeed. About Five in the Evening, I preached, in the Common to
Five or Six Thousand People; but^ observed no Scoffers, as when I was here
last. The People were still and quiet after I began, and though I did not
perceive much Power in the Congregation, yet GOD enabled me to speak with all
Boldness. Oh that I may never be ashamed of CHRIST or of his Gospel, for it has
been the Power of GOD to my Salvation! Grace Grace!

Wednesday, April 30. Preached this Morning from a Scaffold erected for that
Purpose, to a somewhat less Congregation than the Night before, but with a much
greater Power; for toward the Conclusion of my Discourse, GOD's Spirit came
upon the Preacher and the People in such a Manner, that they were melted down
exceedingly. Afterward I began to collect Money from private Hands, for my
Orphans, and met with Success. Blessed be GOD, who has the Hearts of all Men in
his Hands! -- Dined at Mr. P's, but was obliged to retire as soon as Dinner was
over; for my Body was weak, and my Soul was in an unspeakable Agony for near an
Hour. At length I dropped asleep, but rose about Five in the Evening, and
preached to upwards of Six or Seven Thousand People on our LORD's Temptations.
Oh that I may follow the Captain of my Salvation, and be willing in all Things
to be tempted like unto my Brethren, that I may be able experimentally to
succ^^r such as apply to me when tempted! Amen, LORD JESUS, Amen.

Flat-Bush on Long Island.
Thursday, May 1. Went in a Ferry-Boat this Morning over to Flat-Bush on
Long Island; on the East Part of which, GOD has lately begun a glorious Work by
the Ministry of two young Dissenting Ministers, who have walked in the Light of
GOD's Countenance for a long while together. Prosper thou, O LORD, more and
more, the Work of their Hands upon them! Oh prosper thou their handy Work!

At our coming to Flat-Bush the Dutch Ministers received me with all Civility,
and gave me the Use of their Church. There were also Seven or Eight Dissenting
Ministers present. I fearce was ever enabled to speak of the Doctrines of Grace
with greater Freedom and Clearness. I continued discoursing on the Knowledge we
ought to have of JESUS CHRIST, near an Hour and an half. GOD's Spirit went
through the Congregation. Many People and some Ministers wept. My own Soul was
much carried out, and at last I applied myself to the Ministers themselves. Oh
that we all were a Flame of Fire!

NEW YORK.
About Two in the Afternoon, having a fair Wind, we returned to New York, where
I received another comfortable Packet of Letters from Charlestown and
Savannah, amongst which were Two or Three from my little Orphans, which gave me
no small Pleasure. Here GOD was again pleased to humble me both in Body and
Soul, and caused me to mourn like a Sparrow sitting alone upon the Housetop. I
preached in the Evening to as large a Congregation as ever: But my Spirits
being exhausted, and GOD being pleased to suspend his w^nted Assistance, I
preached, as I thought, but heavily. But I have been apt to build on my Frames,
and think I do no good, or do not please GOD, only because I have not pleased
myself. Whereas I have often found, that my seemingly less powerful Discourses
have been much owned by GOD, And I find it absolutely necessary, that Gospel
Ministers should meet with such Thorns in the Flesh, that both Ministers and
Hearers may know themselves to be but Men LORD, show that thou do love me, ^
humbling and keeping me humble as long as live. The Means I leave to thee. I am
thy Clay, thou art the Potter, mould me as it seems good to thy sovereign
good Will and Pleasure. Amen and Amen.

Friday, May 2. The Weather being we^, and my Body much out of order, by reason
of a Cold, I did not preach in the Morning; but redeemed some Time to write my
Journal, which I could not do before for this Week past. However in the Evening
GOD enabled me to preach in the Meeting House; and many, I observed, were much
affected. Oh that the LORD may not only affect, but effectually convert them,
for his infinite Mercies sake!

Saturday, May 3. Preached twice in the Field, and once in the Meeting House;
and was agreeably refreshed in the Evening with the Company of one Mr.
Davenport, whom GOD has lately highly honored, by making use of his Ministry
for the Conversion of many at the East End of Long Island. His Soul seemed to
be much wrapped up in GOD, and he told me, that GOD had brought home several
Children about Eleven or Twelve Years old, as well as many other grown Persons.
He has been favored with large Communications from the blessed JESUS, and is
looked upon as an Enthusiast and Madman, by many of his Rev. Pharisaical
Brethren. As far as I can find, there is as great an Enmity against the Work of
GOD, in the Hearts of most that preach the Doctrines of Grace, as there is in
our Clergy, who for the generality, entirely disown them. As Jannes and Jambres
withstood Moses, so do these also resist the Truth: Men of corrupt Minds,
Reprobate concerning the Faith. But I trust they will not proceed much further:
For their Folly shall be manifest unto all Men, as theirs also was. -- Hasten
that blessed Time, my LORD and my GOD!

Sunday, May 4. Preached by Seven in the Morning in the Meeting House. Went to
the English Church twice, and heard two legal Sermons, though not quite so bad as
those I heard when here last. Preached in the Evening to about Eight Thousand
in the Field, and had a comfortable Evidence, that the LORD was amongst us. I
had much of the divine Presence in my Soul, though I have not felt such continual
Enlargement of Heart, as when I was here before: I believe it is because my
Adversaries have been much more silent, and have not so openly opposed the
Truths of GOD; though their secret Enmity is as great, nay, I believe, greater
than ever. To speak against their favorite Writings of Archbishop Till^ts^n
and the Author of The Whole Duty of Man, grieves them to the Heart; and yet
Fear of the People, restrains their Fury for the present. By and by the Number
of our LORD's Disciples will be gathered in, and then they must be permited to
bruize our Heel. LORD prepare me, LORD strengthen me against a suffering Time!
-- Thou Son of GOD, take me by thy Hand, and then, I care not if I am thrown
into a fiery Furnace, or cast into a D^n of devouring Lions.

Give me thy Strength, O GOD of Power,
Then let or Men or Fi^^ds ^ssail;
Strong in thy Strength I Will stand a Tower,
I^pregnable to Earth or Hell.
After Evening Sermon, Numbers came to me, giving GOD Thanks for what they had
heard. They were desirous of my Return amongst them again, and brought several
large Contributions for my poor Orphans. Blessed be GOD, by public Collections
and private Donations I have got upwards of Three Hundred Pounds since I came
hither; and I doubt not but my dear LORD, will always provide for them. Oh what
a blessed Thing is it to live upon GOD! I believe Elijah never lived more
comfortably, than when fed by the Ravens. LORD increase my Faith, and accept of
my poor Thanks for what thou have done for me and thy People, during my short
stay here. Amen, LORD JESUS, Amen.

Staten-Island, Freehold and Amboy.
Monday, May 5. Prayed with and parted in an affectionate Manner from my dear
Friends at New York last Night. About Ten a Clock took Boat with my worthy
Host, Mr. Noble, and some others, and came by Midnight to Staten-Island, where
we were kindly received by one of our LORD's true Disciples. Not long after our
coming on Shore, the Wind blew, and the Weather grew very tempestuous, and so
continued all the Morning; but GOD strengthened my weak Body. About Eleven I
set out, preached at a Place appointed on the Island about Seven Miles distant;
and afterward hastened to Amboy, about Twelve Miles further, where I preached
about Six in the Evening. I sent to the Minister of the Place, for the Use of
his Pulpit, but he was very Angry, and said, he wondered at my Assurance in
asking such a Favor. It being such rainy Weather, only a few People came, and
I did not feel much Power in Preaching to them. After Sermon my Friends advised
me to stay at Amboy all Night; but my dear Brother and Fellow Laborer, Mr.
William Tennent, coming to fetch me, I passed over a Ferry with him and his
Brother Gilbert, who also came to Amboy to meet me, With them I set out for
Freehold, Twenty Miles from Amboy, the Place where GOD has more immediately
called Mr. William Tennent, Oh how sweetly did the Time glide on, and our
Hearts burn within us, whilst we opened the Scriptures, and communicated our
Experiences to each other! Our LORD was with us, as with the two Disciples
going to Emaus. -- About Midnight we reached Freehold, and about Two in the
Morning retired to rest, my Body being weak, but my Soul much comforted. I
think I sleep with double Satisfaction, when lying in a good Man's House; for
the Angels of the LORD encamp about the Dwellings of the righteous. Oh that we
may, like them, be unwearied in administering to, and watching over those, who
are to be Heirs of everlasting Salvation!

Freehold and Burlington.
Tuesday, May 6. Preached at Freehold in the Morning, to about Three Thousand;
and the Power of GOD was much manifested, and many I believe brought under
Convictions. Took a little Refreshment. and went in Company with several of
GOD's Children to Allenstown, about 16 Miles from Freehold: Preached with Power
to about Three Thousand more, and afterward reached Burlington, about Twenty
Miles further, by Midnight. As I came along, a Man, who has been dissuaded from
coming to hear me, came to me under strong Convictions, and desired to follow
me whithersoever I went. I scarce know a Day wherein I have not had many apply
to me for the same Purpose, and under the same Circumstances. It Is natural for
Persons to be desirous of being with those, who have, under GOD, brought them
from Darkness to Light. Thus the Man, out of whom the Devil had been cast,
desired to go with the blessed JESUS; but our LORD's Answer I find best to be
given: Go Home to thy House, and tell what great Things the LORD has done for
thee. Dearest Redeemer, teach me in this and all other Respects, to follow thy
unerring-Example! Amen and Amen.

Bristol and Philadelphia.
Wednesday, May 7. Had a little refreshing Sleep. Crossed a Ferry over into
Pennsylvania. Preached to about Four Thousand at Bristol; and made all possible
haste to Philadelphia, Twenty Miles from Bristol. Here I was received with
great Joy and Satisfaction, by my kind Host, Mr. B -- t, and many other
Friends. After dispatching some private Affairs, I went and heard Mr. Jones,
the Baptist Minister, who preached the Truth as it is in JESUS. He is the only
Minister that I know of in Philadelphia, who speaks feelingly and with
Authority. The poor People are much refreshed by him, and I trust the LORD will
bless him more and more. Pity, O dearest JESUS, thy poor People, and suffer
them no longer to be scattered abroad, as Sheep having no Shepherds.

PHILADELPHIA.
Thursday, May 8. Had what my Body much wanted, a thorough Night's Repose. Was
much refreshed in Spirit, and was called up very early in the Morning, as I am
always, to speak to poor Souls under Convictions. The first I think was an
Indian Trader, whom GOD was pleased to bring home by my Preaching, when here
last. The Account he gave of GOD's dealing with him, was very satisfactory. He
is just come from the Indian Natives, where he has been praying with and
exhorting all he met with, that were willing to hear. Some of the Indians he
had Hopes of, but his Brother Traders endeavored to prejudice them against
him: However, by my Advice, he proposes visiting them again next Fall; and I
humbly hope the LORD will open a Door amongst the poor Heathen. The Conversion
of one of their Traders, I take to be one great Step toward it. LORD carry on
the Work begun; fulfill thy ancient Promises, and let thy Son have the Heathen
for his Inheritance, and the utmost Parts of the Earth for his Possession.
Come, LORD JESUS, come quickly.

Conversed also with a poor Negro Woman, who has been visited in a very
remarkable Manner. GOD was pleased to convert her by my Preaching the last
Fall; But being under Dejections on Sunday-Morning, she prayed that Salvation
might come to her Heart, and that the LORD would be pleased to manifest himself
to her Soul that Day. While she was at Meeting, hearing one Mr. M -- n, a
Baptist Preacher, whom the LORD has been pleased lately to send forth, the Word
came with such Power upon her Heart, that at last she was obliged to cry out;
and a great Concern also fell upon many in the Congregation, so that they
betook themselves to secret Prayer. The Minister stopped, and several persuaded
her to hold her Peace; but the Glory of the LORD shone so brightly round about
her, that she could not help blessing and praising GOD, and telling how GOD was
revealing himself to her Soul. After some time, she was taken out of the
Meeting House, but she fell upon her Knees praising and blessing GOD. She
continued in an Agony for some considerable Time, and afterward came in and
heard the remaining Part of the Sermon. Many, since this, have called her mad,
and said she was full of new Wine: But, the Account she gave me of herself, was
rational and solid; and I believe, in that Hour the LORD JESUS took greater
Possession of her Soul. Such Cases are not very common; but when an
extraordinary Work is carrying on, GOD generally manifests himself to some
Souls in this extraordinary Manner. And I doubt not, but when the poor Negroes
are to be called, GOD will highly savor them, to wipe off their Reproach, and
to show that he is no Respecter of Persons: -- But, that whosoever believes in
him shall be saved.

Preached in the Morning, about 11, to 6 or 7000 People. Had great Freedom of
Spirit, and cleared myself from some Aspersions that had been cast upon my
Doctrine, as though it tended to Antinomianism: But I abhor the Tho'ts of it;
and, whosoever entertains the Doctrines of Free Grace in an honest Heart, will
find, that they will in their own Nature cause him to be fruitful in every good
Word and Work. Many expressed how the Power of GOD was amongst them; and I
believe GOD has much People in Philadelphia City. The Congregations are very
large and serious, and I have scarce preached this Time among them, but I have
seen a stirring among the dry Bones. At Five in the Evening I preached again,
rather to a larger Audience; and after Sermon rode Ten Miles to a Friend's
House, that I might be in Readiness to preach, according to Appointment, the
next Morning. How differently am I treated by my Master. He taught the People
by Day, -- and abode all Night in the Mount of Olives. He had not where to lay
his Head; but go where I will, I find People with great Gladness receiving me
into their Houses. LORD, I lack for Nothing: Oh prepare me so suffering Time,
and make me willing, n^ to follow a naked CHRIST! Amen, men.

Pennypack andPhiladelphia.
Friday May 9. Preached at Pennyp^^^ about Three Miles distant from the H^^^
where I lay, to about Two Thous^^^ People. Eat a little Dinner: Came (...)
Philadelphia about Two in the Af^^^noon. Agreed with Persons to build^^^
Negro-Schools on the Land which I h^^^ lately purchased; and preached in (...)
Evening with great Freedom and Pow^^^ and afterward began a Society of yo^^^
Men. LORD make them good Soldier JESUS CHRIST! Amen, LORD ^^SUS, Amen.

Saturday May 10. Though GOD shown me great Things already in Place, yet to Day
I have seen grea^^ I preached twice with Power, and larger Congregations than
ever; and the Evening went to settle a Society young Women, who I hope will
p^^^ wise Virgins. As soon as I entered Room, and heard them Singing, my (...)
was uncommonly delighted; when Hymn was over, I desired to pray be I began to
converse; but, contrary to Expectation, my Soul was so carried out, that I had
not Time to talk at all. A wonderful Power was in the Room, and with one Accord
they began to cry out, and weep most bitterly, for the Space of half an Hour.
They seemed to be under the strongest Convictions, and did indeed seek JESUS
sorrowing. Their Cries might be heard a great Way off. When I had done, I
thought proper to leave them at their Devotion. They continued in Prayer (as I
was informed by one of them afterward) for above an Hour, confessing their
most secret Faults; and at length the Agonies of some were so strong, that Five
of them fell into Convulsion Fits. The present Captain of our Sloop going near
the Waterside, was called into a Company almost in the same Circumstances: And
at Midnight I was desired to come to one, who was thrown into strong
Convulsions; but felt somewhat of Peace and Joy, after I had prayed with her
several Times. -- Her Case put me in Mind of the young Man whom the Devil tore
when he was coming to JESUS CHRIST. These bodily Convulsions, I believe, come
from the Devil, who, now the Work of GOD is going on, wants to bring an evil
Report upon it. But, O LORD, for thy Mercies Sake, rebuke him; and, though he
may be permitted to bruise thy Peoples Heels, fulfill thy Promise, and let the
Seed of the Woman bruise his accursed Head! Amen, Amen.

Sunday, May 11. Preached in the Morning to about Fifteen Thousand People, and
observed a great Melting to follow the Word. Went twice to Church, and heard
myself lashed by the Commissary, who preached from these Words, I bear them
Record, they have a Zeal of GOD, but not according to Knowledge. I could have
wished he had considered the next Words, For they being ignorant of GOD's
Righteousness, and going about to establish their own Righteousness, have not
submitted themselves unto the Righteousness of GOD. Had he considered these, I
might justy have said, Speaks Mr. Commissary of this false Zeal, in reference
to himself, or of some other Man? In the Afternoon, the Tenth of the Romans,
out of which his Text was taken, was appointed for the Lesson; and had he not
been more perverse than Balaam, it must have restrained the Bitterness of this
false Prophet. But he exclaimed loudly against me in the Pulpit; and, as I soon
found, obliged many of his Hearers to do what they before were much inclined
to, I mean, resolve to leave him entirely. I bear him Record, that Experience
will soon convince him, that whatever mine be, his own Zeal is by no means
according to Knowledge. After he had done, I preached my Farewel-Sermon, to I
believe very near Twenty Thousand Hearers. As the Commissary's Sermon was
chiefly full of personal Reflections, I did not render Railing for Railing:
However, I thought it my Duty, in an especial Manner, to recommend Messrs.
Tennents and their Associates, being most worthy Preachers of our dear LORD
JESUS. One Passage out of the second Lesson in the Morning much affected me,
And the LORD had Compassion on the Multitude, because they were scattered
abroad, as Sheep having no Shepherd. I then reminded them of our LORD's
Command, Pray ye therefore the LORD of the Harvest, that he may thrust out
Laborers into his Harvest; for though the Harvest is so great, yet the Laborers
are very few. The poor People were much concerned at my bidding them farewell:
And after I had taken my Leave, Oh how many came to my Lodgings sorrowing, most
of all, that they were likely to see my Face no more for a long Season. I
believe near Fifty Negroes came to give me Thanks, under GOD, for what has been
done to their Souls. Oh how heartily did those poor Creatures throw in their
Mites for my poor Orphans. Some of them have been effectually wrought upon, and
in an uncommon Manner. Many of them have now begun to learn to read; and one
that was free, said, she would give me her two Children, whenever I settled my
School. I believe Masters and Mistresses will shortly see, that Christianity
will not make their Negroes worse Slaves. I intended, had Time permitted, to
have settled a Society for Negro Men and Negro Women; but that must be deferred
till it shall please GOD to bring me to Philadelphia again. I have been much
drawn out in Prayer for them, and have seen them exceedingly wrought upon,
under the Word preached. I cannot well express, how many others, of all Sorts,
came to give me a last Farewell: And, indeed, I never yet saw a more general
Awakening in any Place. Religion is all the Talk; and, I think, I can say, the
LORD JESUS has gotten himself the Victory in many Hearts. I have scarce had
time to eat Bread, from Morning till Evening. Some one or other was generally
applying to me under deep Soul-Concern, and others continually pressing upon
me, to baptize their little Infants. I did comply with as many as I could; but
I was obliged sometimes to say, The LORD sent me not to baptize, but to preach
the Gospel. Many of the Quakers have been most powerfully convinced of the
Righteousness of JESUS CHRIST, and openly profess the Truth as it is in JESUS;
for which, I believe, they will be shortly thrust out of their Synagogues. Some
of their head Men are zealous against me, and are much afraid their Foundation
will be sadly shaken. Great Numbers of the Inhabitants would have immediately
built me a very large Church, if I would have consented; but I am persuaded,
the LORD would have the Gospel preached in the Fields, and building a Church,
would, I believe, insensibly lead the People into Bigotry, and make 'em place
the Church again, as they have done for a long Time, in the Church Walls: --
For these Reasons I declined it, though notwithstanding, I believe they will
build some Place or another. What I mostly fear is, now there is such a general
Awakening, People will not know where to go for proper Food (for they will no
longer take up with Husks, as they have done) and then fall into different Sets
and Parties. LORD JESUS look upon them, let not Satan divide them again, but
raise them up Pastors after thy own Heart, for thy infinite Mercies Sake! Amen,
Amen.

With Preaching, Praying and Advising, I was truly weary by Eight at Night:
However, I went and baptized Two Children: took my Leave of both the Societies;
and I had not prayed long in the Women's Society, but two of them fell again
into violent Fits, so that I was obliged to leave them. At my Return Home, I
supped with a Christian Friend, and went to Bed astonished at, and desirous to
be humbly thankful for the great Things the LORD has done for me at
Philadelphia. Blessed be the LORD GOD of Israel, for he has wonderfully
visited this People, and raised up for them Means of Salvation, from whence it
was least expected! Oh Grace, Grace!

Darby, Chester and Wilmington.
Monday, May 12. Rose very early, to answer those who came for private Advice.
Visited Three Persons, one of which was under such violent Convictions, that
she had not eat above an Ounce of Bread for near a Fortnight; another had a
Prospect of Hell set before her last Night, in the most terrifying Colors; but
before the Morning, received Comfort. When I came to my Lodgings, my Friends
were waiting to accompany me on Horseback, and great Numbers of the common
People were crowding at the Door. About Nine I left Philadelphia; and when I
came to the Ferry, was told, People had been crossing over, as fast as Two
Boats could carry them, ever since Three in the Morning: After we had waited
some Time, I and my Friends got over, and preached at Darby, Seven Miles from
Philadelphia, to about Four Thousand Hearers. Sweetly did the LORD assist me in
speaking to them, and I believe many of the Hearers Hearts* were ready to
break, for they wept much. After Sermon, and eating a little Food, I took Leave
of many, then preached at Chester, about 9 Miles off, to about Two Thousand;
and collected there and at Darby upwards of Forty Pounds for the Orphans. Here
also I parted with more Friends; but several went with me, after Sermon, to
Wilmington, Fifteen Miles from Chester. We got in about Eleven at Night. My
Body was somewhat weak, but GOD strengthened me to pray, sing Psalms with, and
exhort a Room full of People, for about an Hour; and then I lay at a Quaker's
House, who, I believe, was a Christian indeed, and, as I observed before, could
say Shibboleth. Oh that all of the like Denomination were like minded!

Wilmington and Whiteclaycreek.
Tuesday, May 13. Preached at Wilmington in the Morning, to about Five
Thousand; and at Whiteclaycreek, Ten Miles distant, in the Evening, to about
Three Thousand. A great Presence of GOD was in both Places, especially at
Whiteclaycreek, a Place under the Care of Mr. Charles Tennent. The Word, I
believe, was both like a Fire and a Hammer, for many were exceedingly melted,
and one cried out most bitterly under Agonies of Soul. At both Places we
collected about Twenty-four Pounds for the Orphan-House; and the People were
very sollicitous for me to bring our Sloop up their Creek the next Time I came,
that they might put in Provisions. Never did I see a more plentiful Country
than Pennsylvania. I have seen but very few poor Objects since my Arrival;
every one almost enjoys Peace and Plenty; the Rich do not swallow up the Poor,
as in other Provinces, but there seems to be a proper Balance. After Sermon I
rode toward Nottingham, in Company with Mr. Tennent, Mr. Craighead and Mr.
Blair, all worthy Ministers of the dear LORD JESUS; the last especially, has
been remarkably owned of GOD, and for that has been despised by his Pharisaical
letter-learned Brethren. Many others belonging to Philadelphia, accompanied us,
and we rode through the Woods most sweetly, singing and praising GOD. We were
all rejoiced to see our dear LORD's Kingdom come with such visible Power, and
endeavored to strengthen one another against a suffering Time should come. --
May the great Shepherd make us willing, when called to it, to lay down our
Lives for his Sheep. Amen, Amen.

NOTTINGHAM.
Wednesday, May 14. Got to a Quaker's House, which lay in our Way to
Nottingham, about Midnight, and met with an hospitable Reception. Received
fresh Power from above in the Morning, and preached both Morning and Evening at
Nottingham, but with such Demonstration of the Spirit, and such a wonderful
Moving amongst the Hearers, as few ever saw before. I was invited thither in
the strongest Terms, by some of the Inhabitants, who had a good Work begun
amongst them* some time ago, by the Ministry of Mr. Blair, Mr. Tennents and Mr.
Cross, the last of which had been denied the Use of the Pulpit by one of his
own Brethren, and was obliged to preach in the Woods, where the LORD manifested
forth his Glory, and caused many to cry out, What shall we do to be saved? It
surprised me to see such a great Multitude gathered together at so short a
Warning, and in such a Desart-Place. I believe they were near Twelve Thousand
Hearers. I had not spoke long but I perceived Numbers melting. As I proceeded,
the Power increased, till at last, both in the Morning and Afternoon, Thousands
cried out, so that they almost drowned my Voice. Never before did I see a more
glorious Sight. Oh what strong Crying and Tears were shed and poured forth
after the dear LORD JESUS! Some fainted, and when they had gotten a little
Strength, they would hear and faint again. Others cried out as though somebody
was murdering them: And after I had done in the Morning, a Woman, under the
deepest Convictions, threw herself upon the Ground, and hung round my Feet, so
that I thought she would have pulled me down. Never was my Soul filled with
greater Power. Oh what Thoughts and Words did GOD put into my Heart! And after
I had finished my last Discourse, I was so struck with GOD's Love, that some
thought, I believe, that I was about to give up the Ghost. Oh how sweetly did I
lie at the Feet of my JESUS! With what Power did a Sense of his sovereign free
everlasting Love flow in upon my Soul! It almost took away my Life: However, at
length I revived, and having taken a little Meat, was strengthened to go with my
Brothers Blair, Tennent, and some other Friends, to Brother Blair's House,
about Twenty Miles from Nottingham. In the Way we refreshed our Souls, by
singing Psalms and Hymns; and got to our Journey's End about Midnight, where,
after we had taken a little Food and recommended ourselves to GOD by Prayer, we
went to rest, and slept, I believe, in the Arms of our dear LORD JESUS. Oh
LORD, was ever Love like thine!

FORKS-MANOR.
Thursday, May 15. Preached at Forks-Manor, Three Miles from Mr. Blair's House,
where I was earnestly invited to come, by dear Mr. Blair. And here also the
LORD was pleased to cause much of his Glory to pass before us. The Congregation
was about as large as that Yesterday at Nottingham. As great, if not a greater
Commotion was in the Hearts of the People. Look where I would, most were
drowned in Tears. The Word was sharper than a two-edged Sword: And their bitter
Yellings and Groans put me much in Mind of the Shriekings and Howlings of the
Damned in Hell. Oh what different Visages were then to be seen! -- Some had
their Mouths half open; others pale as Death; others wringing their Hands;
others lying on the Ground; others sinking into the Arms of their Friends; and
most lifting up their Eyes toward Heaven, and crying out to GOD. I could think
of Nothing when I looked upon them so much as the Great Day. They seemed like
Persons awak'ned by the last Trump, and coming out of their Graves to Judgment.
One would imagine none but a Devil incarnate could have withstood the Power, or
avoid crying out. Surely GOD is in this Place. -- And yet one Mr. Al -- son, a
Dissenting Minister, a virulent Opposer of Mr. Tennent and his Brethren, after
Sermon was over, whilst Thousands were under the deepest Distress of Soul,
came, desiring to have a public Disputation. I told him I was going to
New Castle, and that the Place we now were in, was by no Means proper to
dispute in. But he thinking that was only to evade the Trial, I desired him to
begin, and I would endeavor to answer such Questions as he should propose. He
then charged me with saying, That such who had only a Faith of Adherence were
in a damnable. Condition. I answered, Such a Thing never entered my Tho'ts; I
only said, A Faith of Adherence was not to be rested in, but that all should
ask for and labor after a full Assurance of Faith. He then brought a Passage
out of Isaiah, Chap. l. ver. 10. to prove, That a Person might be in CHRIST,
and yet not know it. I told him, if he was a spiritual Person, he would have
known there was a Time, when GOD withdraws his sensible Presence from a
Believer's Soul; and yet, that Soul might be kept from Doubting of his Interest
in CHRIST. He was then about to quote some other Passage of Scripture; but by
this Time the People were exasperated at his ill Treatment of me, and one cried
out in his Haste, That he would take Mr. Al -- son out of the Place: For this,
I rebuked him sharply, saying, That was not the Spirit of CHRIST; and, at the
same time, blamed Mr. A -- n, for coming at such an improper Time to dispute,
when he saw the Power of GOD so visibly amongst us. I also told him, that I
believed he was an Enemy to GOD; but if he had any Objections to make, I would
answer them as I rode to New Castle, or in a Letter, if he would send his
Objections to me. Upon this he seemed sensible of his Fault, and said, he
thought 'twas best to withdraw. With great Difficulty I got upon a Horse, for
the poor convicted Souls hung upon me; and after I had given them a short
Exhortation, to answer those that opposed themselves with Meekness and Fear, I
rode to a Friend's House, who had invited me to Dinner, where we all rejoiced,
to find what a Fool the Devil and his Servants prove^ themselves to be: For Mr.
A -- n did his Cause so much Hurt by this Action, and discovered his Enmity
against the Work of GOD so evidently, that even his Friends began to suspect
him. Blessed be GOD, I trust all of his Stamp, will show themselves as clearly,
ere it be long: -- For I hate to have Communion with ungodly, unconverted
Ministers. I care not, if they all, with one Accord, were set in Opposition
against me. And I pray GOD, those that he does not intend to convert, that he
would be pleased to confound: For, by being suffered to worry our LORD's Sheep,
they will but increase their Torment in a future State. I would, says the great
St. Paul, they were even ^ut off that trouble you. After this Contest, the LORD
gave me fresh Manifestations of his Love. I dined comfortably with my Friends;
rode, at the Rate of Eight Miles an Hour, to New Castle, about Twenty-four
Miles from Forks-Manor. Preached to about Four Thousand, and wrote some
Letters; dispatched some other Affairs; gave a Word of Advice, and prayed with
several who came many Miles under violent Convictions; and then went and supped
on board our Sloop with my Friends. -- Here GOD was again pleased to fill me
with a Sense of his Love; my Soul was ready to burst; Tears trickled
plentifully down my Cheeks; and I was much carried out, in Behalf of those poor
Souls whom I had left behind hungering and thirsting after the Righteousness of
JESUS CHRIST, LORD, for thy Mercies Sake, let them be filled!

After Supper, and singing an Hymn and Prayers, many, who have accompanied me
ever since I left Philadelphia, as also Mr. Tennent, Blair and Craighead, took
their final Leave: Their Hearts were melted with Love toward me, but being
much weakened by Expense of Spirits, I could only sigh out my Heart's Desire for
them, commend them to GOD, and then, as soon as possible, betook myself to
Rest, ashamed that I could be no more affected with a Sense of the Blessings I
had received on Shore. LORD, whatever thou deniest me, deny me not a thankful
humble Heart. Amen, LORD JESUS, Amen.

On Board the Savannah Sloop.
Friday, May 16. Rose by Break of Day. Parted with 2 more dear Friends, and put
my Things and little Family in Order, as soon as I could. Was pleasingly
surprised, to see what a Variety of Provisions and Sea-Store, had been sent on
board by Philadelphia People; and found, that in Goods and Money, I had got
near Five Hundred Pounds Sterling. -- Blessed be the LORD GOD of Israel, who
alone brings mighty Things to pass. I am now going to make an Addition to my
Family of half a Dozen Persons, a Bricklayer, a Tailor, Two Maidservants, and
two little Girls, whose Father kept a Dancing-School, and Assembly- and
Concert-Room, in Philadelphia. Their Mother, I believe, had a Work of Grace
upon her Heart, was well bred, and concerned much, for some Time, at the
Business in which her Husband was engaged. When last at Philadelphia, I did
what I could for her; but now GOD opened Mr. Seward's Heart to relieve the
Parents; I took these two Children; and, blessed be GOD, an End will be
entirely put to the Assembly, etc. at least in that House. Many of the young
Ladies have been much affected by the Word preached: And I believe those
Entertainments will never be so much countenanced again. It is a Shame they
should be permitted in any Christian Country. They corrupt People's Minds;
unfit them for Business as well as Religion; and grieve the Holy Spirit
exceedingly. Cursed are those false Prophets, who frequent such Entertainments
themselves, or any Way encourage others. The LORD will call them to Account for
it, at the last Day. Oh that I could lament my past Misconduct in this Respect,
with Tears of Blood!

Saturday, May 17. Both Yesterday and Today perceived the blessed Spirit
moving on the Faces of some Souls in the Vessel. Felt much of the Presence of
GOD in my Heart; and had several Captains of Ships (the Wind being contrary)
come to hear me pray and exhort. The LORD being with me, I observed the Tears
trickling down their stern Faces, plentifully. Three seemed under very strong
Convictions; and one especially, not long since most remarkably wicked, I am in
great Hopes will be effectually brought home. Grant it, O LORD, for thy dear
Son's Sake. Amen and Amen.

On board the Sloop and at Reedy-Island.
Sunday, May 18. The Weather not permitting us to sail, at the People's and
Sailors Request, I went on Shore, and preached twice at Reedy-Island, near
which our Sloop and several other Ships came to an Anchor. Having but a few
Hours Notice, not above Two Hundred came together, but there was a sweet Power
of the LORD amongst us; and it pleased me to see the Ships Companies haste in
their Boats to hear the Sermon* Many People wept bitterly; and in the Evening I
returned to my Sloop, with much of GOD's Presence; and was enabled to finish my
Journal to this Day, not having Time to write a Word of it, before I came on
board, for a Fortnight. Blessed be GOD, our dear LORD JESUS fulfils his
Promise, and his blessed Spirit brings all Things to my Remembrance. Thanks be
to GOD for this unspeakable Gift.

Monday, May 12. Was much refreshed to Day, by Reading the Indian-Trader's
Journal, mentioned a little before; and could not but think GOD would open a
Door, for preaching the Gospel among the Alleganian-Indians. Being much pressed
thereto, in Spirit, I wrote them a Letter, wherein I laid down the Principles
of our Holy Religion, told them the Promises of the Gospel, and cautioned them
about such Things, which I thought might be an Hindrance to their Embracing
Christianity. The Head of them is well inclined, and the white People
thereabout have heard of me, and have gotten my Sermons: Who knows but GOD may
now now begin to give his Son the Heathen for his Inheritance, and the
uttermost Parts of the Earth for his (...)? This Trader, I really believe, is
called of GOD; and GOD never sends any of his Servants on a needless Errand.
Hereafter, Gospel Ministers may be sent also: -- But the Gospel must be first
preached to our baptized Heathens. When a sufficient Number of them are called,
and the Self-Righteous reject the Kingdom of GOD against themselves, then,
(...), we turn to the Gentiles. I long to see that Time, when the Earth shall
be (...) with the Knowledge of the LORD, as the Waters covers the Sea. Even so;
Come LORD JESUS, come quickly.

Wednesday, May 21. Preached for these Three Days last past, once every Day, on
Shore at Reedy-Island. and perceived the Congregations increased much every
time. Felt much of the divine Assistance, both on Shore and on Board; and was
enabled to exhort and pray, with great Power, to the Captains and Sailors that
came to our Sloop. One Captain and a Pilot were wonderfully affected. I find
they all had made an Agreement, to come constantly, so long as the Wind
continued against us; But after Evening Sermon, the Weather clearing up, and
the Wind being some what fair, we weighed Anchor, and wen^ some few Miles
toward the Bay. Blesse^ be GOD for retarding us at Reedy-Island Though I long to
see my dear Flock an^ Family at Georgia, yet I rejoice in (...) Delay, because
I hope some Servants GOD have been refreshed, and other brought into a fair Way
of coming JESUS CHRIST. Draw them, O LORD with the Cords of thy Love, and then
(...) cannot fail of following after thee. (...) Love of CHRIST is a
constraining Love. Oh shed it abroad into the Hearts of all (...) unbelieving
Sinners. Amen and Amen

LEWES-TOWN.
Friday, May 23. Came this Morn to Old-Kill. Road. Dropped Anchor, Wind being
contrary. Went on Shor^ Lewes-Town, and read Prayers and preached in the
Church, to a small and as unaffected a Congregation as any I have spoke to
since my Arrival in America. The Minister hearing our Sloop was coming, stayed
to give me the Meeting: But I quickly found he was one of those, who subscribed
to the Articles of the Church of England in his own Sense. He inveighed
bitterly against the Doctrines of Grace in private, but was seemingly struck
Dumb, after he heard me in Public; for he did not open his Lips about the
Doctrines afterward. Oh how will divine Truths make their own Way, when
attended by a divine Power! -- They will either convict or confound Gainsayers.
-- As for my own Part, I am in Love with the Doctrines more and more, every
Day. I find few others, besides carnal, earthly, sensual, devilish Men, oppose
them. And I think the Church of England is by no means beholden to Bishop
Burnet, for his Exposition on her Articles. He has opened a Door for a most
detestable Equivocation; and, was it possible for the Compilers of our Articles
to rise again from the Dead, I am persuaded they would insist on their being
taken in the Grammatical Sense. -- They cannot, in my Opinion, admit of a
twofold Interpretation. But how is our once faithful Church become an Harlot?
Her own Sons have been her Betrayers; and, I fear, if GOD does not speedily
prevent, will prove her Murderers. Father, for thy Mercies Sake, purify her
Sons, the Clergy; and grant, that all, who serve at her Altars, may be clothed
with the Righteousness of thy dear Son; and preach and live according to the
Truth as it is in JESUS!

Saturday, May 24. Wrote some Letters to England the Way of Lisbon. Read
Prayers and preached Twice in the Church, to a much larger and abundantly more
affected Auditory than Yesterday. Many People stood without the Church Doors;
and I was enabled to speak, especially in the Morning, with such abundant
Freedom and Power, that I cannot believe any one Hearer could avoid being
affected in some Degree or another. I was carried out for a long Time, and saw
the Word strike the Hearers like so many pointed Arrows. It came with such
Demonstration of the Spirit, that carnal Reasoning could not resist it; Blessed
be GOD! In the Evening I retired, and looked toward Georgia; but this Text was
much pressed upon my mind, We essayed to go into Bythynia, but the Spirit
suffered us not. -- LORD, I submit, thy Will be done; I desire not to move,
till that which now lets be taken out of the Way. Oh, when shall I learn to
have no other Will but thine!

Sunday, May 25. Preached Twice from a Balcony, to about Two Thousand People,
the Church being not capable of Holding them. In the Morning I had not much
Freedom, but in the Evening* discoursing on Abraham's Faith, a great many, and
some even of the most polite, wept much: But alas! When I come to turn from the
Creature to the Creator, and to talk of GOD's Love, in sacrificing his only
begotten Son JESUS CHRIST, their Tears dried up. -- I told them of it, and
could not but from thence infer the dreadful Depravity of human Nature. We can
weep at the Sufferings of a Martyr, a Man like ourselves; but when are we
affected at the Relation of the Sufferings of the Son of GOD? Mons. Paschal, I
have been informed, always wept, whenever he read of our dear LORD's Passion.
And though Weeping be not always a Sign of Grace; yet, I think, it is an Evidence
of the Hardness of our Hearts, and a Want of a due Sense of Sin, when we can
weep at any other melancholy Relation, and yet be unmoved at the Account of
the Sufferings of a dying GOD. The divine Herbert, modernized by my dear
Brother, Mr. Charles Wesly, furnished me with a sweet Prayer on this Occasion.

Sin is still pressing over my Heart,
A Hardness void of Love:
Let suppling Grace, to cross her Heart,
Drop gently from above.
After Evening Service, thinking it time to visit my little Family (in all 17
Souls) I went on board, and GOD was with us of a Truth. I prayed with and
exhorted them. My Eyes gushed out with Water, my Soul was full of a Sense of
the divine Love, and my little Flock wept bitterly too. I was much carried out
for them and my dear Savannah Friends; and had some Thoughts, that the LORD
would now send me to them; whether that be his good Pleasure, I desire to be
resigned, and thankful for this Delay. It has been made very beneficial to many
Souls, especially to some of our own Sloop, and one more, once a profligate
Sinner, who I trust will make an eminent courageous Saint. -- I think I have
now preached Sixty-Eight Times since my Arrival at New Castle, and have been
near Forty Days on Shore. The LORD has been much both with me and his People:
And whether he is pleased to detain me longer here, or permit me to return to
my dear Charge, I hope his Name will be glorified, and the Salvation of Souls
promoted.

Whilst in these Regions here below,
No other Good will I pursue;
I Will bid this World of Noise and Show,
With all its flattering Snares, Adieu.
That Path, with humble Speed, I Will seek,
Wherein, dear LORD, thy Footsteps (shine:
Nor will I hear, nor will I speak
Of any other Love than thine.
Tyby-Island, 15 Miles from Savannah.
Wednesday, June 4. Cast Anchor about Midnight at Tyby-Island, Fifteen Miles
from Savannah, after a short Passage of Nine Days, a Thing very extraordinary
at this Time of the Year: But our GOD is a GOD hearing Prayer. LORD, give me
evermore to exercise Faith on thy Promises; and then all things, whatsoever I
ask in thy dear Son's Name, I know I shall receive.

SAVANNAH.
Thursday, June 5, Took Boat at Tyby, about One in Morning, and arrived at
Savannah about Eight. But, Oh what a sweet Meeting I had with my dear Friends.
What GOD has prepared for me I know not; but surely I cannot well expect the
like till I embrace the Saints in Glory. When I parted, my Heart was ready to
break with Sorrow, but now it almost bursts with Joy. All Things concurred to
make our Meeting exceeding happy. None of my Letters had come to hand, so that
my Family did not expe^t me of a long Season. They had also been informed, that
I was cast away, so that they received me as one rising from the Dead. Oh how
did each in his Turn hang upon my Neck, kiss and weep over me with Tears of
Joy! And my own Heart was so full of a Sense of GOD's Love, when I embraced one
Friend in particular, that I thought I should have even expired in the Place.
All that Jose^* ^t when he wept over his Brother Benjamin, or David when making
a Covenant with Jonathan, did I feel, and I could almost say infinitely more.
In short, my Soul was quite big with Peace, with Love and Joy; and I took the
first Opportunity of kneeling down with my dear Family, and venting my Heart
before them. Several of my Parishioners came with great Joy to see me; and
after we had wept, and prayed, and gave Thanks* for a considerable Time, I took
a little Refreshment for my Body, but felt my Soul so full of a Sense of the
divine Love, that I wanted Words to express myself. Oh dearest JESU, why am I
thus highly favored! Oh free, distinguishing, sovereign, everlasting Love! And
yet these are only Ernests and Prelibations of future Bliss. Hasten, dearest
LORD, hasten that happy Time, when I shall arrive at Abraham's Harbor, and
praise thee to all Eternity for what thou have done for our Souls. Even so,
come LORD JESUS! Make no long Tarrying, O my GOD!

Tuesday, June 10. Blessed be the LORD of all Grace, who still continues to do
for me marvelous Things. This Day I hope Salvation is come to many in my House.
Long have I interceeded for poor Savannah People; intense Wrestling have I had
with GOD, time after time, both in public and private, in their Behalf; and
Friday-Night GOD most remarkably answered my Request. Ever since my Arrival, my
Soul has been quite carried out with a Sense of GOD's Love, in bringing me back
so opportunely; and all this Day, one or two of my Friends perceived a divine
Power coming gradually amongst us. In the Afternoon one of the Men that I
brought over, was enabled to wrestle with GOD exceedingly, both for himself and
others. About Four GOD gave me to pray intensly and particularly, with strong
Crying and Tears, for my Friends who were in the Room with me. Many came into
the Passage near us, and wept much before the LORD, laboring much in their
Souls. After this I went up and prayed, for near half an Hour, with some of the
Women of the House, and three Girls, who seemed to be weary with the Weight of
their Sins. But when we were at public Prayer, the HOLY GHOST seemed to come
into the Congregation, like a mighty rushing Wind, carrying all before it. I
was so carried out in my Exposition, that the Sweat poured most plentifully
from my Face, till my Animal-Spirits were almost exhausted. I had not begun
long, before several began to cry sorely, and the Number still increased, till
young Men and Maidens, old Men and Children, were all dissolved into Tears, and
mourning after JESUS. I believe there was scarce half a Dozen in the whole
Congregation, but what were deeply affected. I think I never saw the like
before; it amazed me, and I think it must have affected the Heart of any one,
not quite dead to GOD, to behold the little Lambs crying most bitterly: And
what was more extraordinary, after Church several of my Parishioners, all the
Family, and my little Children, came crying along the Street; and many could
not avoid Praying very loud. Being come Home, I laid myself on the Bed, weak in
Body and astonished at the Power of GOD; but finding so many come up in such a
Condition, I rose from the Bed, and betook myself unto Prayer again; but had
not I lifted up my Voice like a Trumpet, the Groans and Cries of the Children
and People would have prevented my being heard. This continued for near an
Hour, till at last, finding their Concern rather increase than abate, I desired
all to retire. -- But Oh! how was I delighted afterward, to hear some or other
praying most intensively to GOD in every Corner of the House; and it surprised
me to hear what a Spirit of Supplication was put into the Hearts of some of the
Boys and Girls. It happened also to thunder and lighten, which added much to
the Solemnity of the Night, and reminded us more of the Coming of the Son of
Man. After my Parishioners were gone, and my Family retired for about an Hour;
when I thought their Spirits were composed, I called all together, and sung an
Hymn to our dear LORD JESU whose Hand alone had brought su^^ mighty Things to
pass. My exerting (...) myself so much threw my Body into strong Fever; but
GOD's Comforts (...) refreshed my Soul, that I slept but litt^^ the whole
Night. The next Day the Concern still continued, especially among^^ the Girls,
Four of whom, I have great Reason to believe, are coming home trul^ to JESUS
CHRIST, with as many Boys The next Day after this Awakening, so near two Hours
they cried out as violent a^ they did the Night before. One has bee^ so filled
with Love, Peace and Joy, tha^ she has continued almost whole Nights (...)
Prayer. Her Heart burns with Desire for the Salvation of her dear Relations and
Fellow Creatures. She surprizingly is enabled to pray to GOD for them; and ha^
wrote such Truths, as, I am persuaded none could write, without an inward
Feeling of the Spirit of GOD in their Hearts. The Boys also go on well. I walk
out with them, or the Girls, under Conviction, once every Day; and am delighted
to find what a rational Account they give me of the Work of GOD; and how they
are let to see the Corruptions of their Nature. They are observed frequently to
retire; and some of them have prayed extempore sweetly before me; and at other
Times they have been overheard wrestling with GOD in the strongest Manner, and
praying to JESUS CHRIST to deliver them from the Bottomless Pit. Several also
of my Parishioners are under great Concern, but I mention my Orphans in
particular, that their Benefactors may rejoice, in seeing what GOD is doing for
their Souls. Blessed be His holy Name, our Affairs are now carried on with
Decency and Order; and I really believe, Savannah will yet become the Joy of
the Earth. Ever long, I trust, the LORD will take it into his own Hands, and
then the Curse, which, I believe, has hitherto been lying on it, will be taken
off. I am now beginning to build a Church; and when Matters are brought to a
sufficient Extremity, then, I believe, will be the LORD's Opportunity to save
and deliver us. He seems to be purging the Province apace. The Sword will sweep
away the Refuse of Lies; and, I trust, a Place will yet be prepared in this
despised Place, for our dear LORD's own People. Blessed be GOD, my Children are
industrious: We have now in the House near 100 Yards of Cloth, spun and weaved;
I have also, several Tradesmen belonging to my House; much Cattle on our
Plantation: And, I hope, 'ere long we shall live amongst ourselves. I have
several Masters for the Children, who watch over them both in and after
School-Hours: Generally, once a Day, they walk with their respective Charges,
tell them of the Glory of GOD in the Creation; and praise him by singing a
Hymn. -- But I shall defer giving a more particular Account, till I send my
next Journal. As it is uncertain when I shall return to my native Country, I
thought it my Duty to send this in the mean while, that my dear Friends may
give Thanks in my Behalf, and by their Prayers strengthen my Hands; For an
effectual Door is Opening in America for Preaching the Gospel. We hear of Wars,
and Rumors of Wars, but let not the Servants of JESUS CHRIST be troubled: --
For the LORD generally ushers in his Kingdom with dreadful Pomp, and destroys
those with the Sword of the Enemy, who would not be wounded with the Sword of
the Spirit. May the LORD be glorified in all his Dispensations; and may that
happy Time now hasten on, wherein the Leopard shall lie down with the Kid, and
the Lion eat Straw like the Ox, and the People learn War no more! -- The
Concern I have for Savannah, and the Orphan-House in particular, ^^es much upon
my Heart, Day and Night. But I commit myself to GOD in a Hymn, composed by the
Great LUTHER, and translated by my Friend Mr. WESLY,

I.
Commit thou all thy Griefs,
And Ways into his Hands;
To his sure Truth and tender Care,
Who Earth and Heaven commands.
II.
Who' points the Clouds their Course,
Whom Winds and Stars obey:
He shall direct thy wandering Feet,
He shall prepare thy Way.
III.
Thou on the LORD rely,
So safe shall thou go on;
Fix on his Work thy steadfast Eye,
So shall thy Work be done.
IV.
No Profit can thou gain,
By self-consuming Care;
To him commend thy Cause, his Ea^
Attends the softest Prayer.
V.
Thy everlasting Truth,
Father, thy ceaseless Love,
Sees all thy Children's Wants, and kn^^^
What best for each will prove.
VI.
And whatsoever thou will'st,
Thou do, O King of Kings!
What thy unerring Wisdom chose,
Thy Power to Being brings.
VII.
Thou every where have Way,
And all Things serve thy might;
Thy every Act pure Blessing is,
Thy Path unsullied Light.
VIII.
When thou arisest, LORD,
What shall thy Work withstand;
When all thy Children want, thou (...):
Who, who shall s^^y thy Hand^*
IX.
Give to the Winds thy Fears,
Hope, and be und^smay'd;
GOD (...) thy Sighs and (...) thy (...).
GOD shall lift up thy Head.
X.
Thr^' Waves, and Clouds, and Sto^^s,
He gently clears thy Way:
Want thou his Time, s^ shall this Night
Soon end in j^y^us Day.
XI.
Still heavy is thy Heart,
Still sink thy Spirits down;
Cast off the Weight, let Fear depart,
And every Tear be gone.
XII.
What though thou rul^st not:
Yet Heaven, and Earth, and H^ll,
P^^claim, GOD sits on the Throne,
And rules all Things well.
XIII.
Leave to his sovereign Sway,
To choose and to command:
So shall thou, wondering, own his Way,
How wise, how strong his Hand.
XIV.
Far, far above thy Thought,
His Coursel shall appear;
When fully ^e the Wor^ ^^th wrought,
That caused thy needless Fe^^.
XV.
Thou see our Weakness, LORD,
Our Hearts are known (...);
O lift thou up the sinking (...),
Confirm the (...) Kn^^.
XVI.
Let us in Life, in (...),
Thy (...) Truth (...):
And (...).
Thy Love and (...)*
FINIS.

