A CONTINUATION Of the Reverend Mr. Whitefield's JOURNAL During the Time he was
detained in England, by the Embargo.

VOL. II.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed and Sold by B. Franklin, in Market-street, 1740

To the Reverend Mr. GEORGE WHITEFIELD.
I.
SERVANT of GOD, the Summons hear,
Thy Master calls, arise, obey!
The Tokens of his Will appear,
His Providence points out thy Way.
II.
Lo! we commend thee to his Grace!
In Confidence go forth! be strong!
Thy Meat his Will, thy Boast his Praise,
His Righteousness be all thy Song.
III.
Strong in the LORD's Almighty Power,
And armed in Panople Divine,
Firm may thou stand in Danger's Hour,
And prove the Strength of JESUS thine.
IV.
Thy Breast-Plat^ be his (...)
His sacred Truth [thy (...)
Shod be thy beauteous Feet (...)
Spring forth, and spread the Gospel (...)
V.
Fight the good Fight, and stand secure
In Faith's impenetrable Shield;
Hell's Prince shall tremble at its Power;
With all his fiery Darts repel'd.
VI.
Prevent thy Foes, nor wait their Charge,
But call their lingering Battle on.
But strongly grasp thy Sevenfold Targe,
And bear the World, and Satan down.
VII.
The Helmet of Salvation take,
The Lord's, the Spirit's conquering Sword,
Speak from the Word, -- In Lightning speak,
Cry out, and thunder -- from the Word.
VIII.
Champion of GOD, thy LORD proclaim,
JESUS alone resolve to know;
Tread down thy Foes in JESU's Name:
Go -- Conquering, and to conquer go.
IX.
(...) (...) and Fires pursue thy Way,
Be mind^^ of a dying GOD;
Finish thy Course, and win the Day:
Look up, -- And seal the Truth with Blood
CHARLES WESLEY
A CONTINUATION OF Mr. Whitefield's JOURNAL, etc.
BLACKHEATH in KENT.
Monday, June 4. WENT a second Time to pay my Respects to the Archbishop of
Canterbury, but his Grace was gone out as before. -- Waited upon the Bishop of
London, who used me very civilly. -- Finished all my Affairs according to my
Mind. -- (...) Leave of my weeping Friends, and went in Company with many of
them to Blackheath, where was near as large a Congregation, as there was at
Kennington the last Lord's Day. I think I never was so much enlarged since I
have preached in the Fields. -- My Discourse was near two Hours long, and the
People were so melted down, and wept so loud, that they almost drowned my
Voice. I could not but cry out, Come, ^e Pharisees, come and s^e the Lord JESUS
getting himself the Victory. Afterward went to an Inn upon the Heath, where
many came drowned in Tears to take a last Farewell. The Remainder of the Evening
I spent most comfortably with several of my Brethren, and went to Bed about 12
o'Clock. -- I hope, in some Measure, thankful for the great Things we had seen
and heard.

Blendon.
Tuesday, June 5. Went in the Morning to Blendon, five Miles from Blackheath,
and enjoyed a sweet Retreat at the House of Mr. Delamot. -- Preached with
unusual Power at Bexley Common, at 11 in the Morning, to about 300 People, and
in the Evening, near Woolwich, to several Thousands -- My Word, I believe, came
with the Demonstration of the Spirit. I returned to Blendon rejoicing, and
spent the Evening most delightfully with many dear Christian Friends, who came
from London to see me. Oh! how does their sweet Company cause me to long for
Communion amongst the Spirits of just Men made perfect! Accomplish, O LORD, I
beseech thee, the Number of thine Elect, and hasten thy Kingdom.

Bexley and Gravesend.
Wednesday, June 6. Breakfasted with many Friends, and gave a Word of
Exhortation to many more that came from London to bid me adieu. -- Their Hearts
were ready to break with Sorrow. -- But GOD, I hope, will supply my Absence, by
raising up more Ministers to go in and out before them. About 10 in the
Morning, read Prayers and preached at Bexley Church, Mr. Peers, the Vicar, my
Brother and Fellow Laborer in CHRIST, having given me a pressing Invitation.
-- The Congregation was large, and my Soul was so filled with GOD, that the
Word came with very great Power to all that heard me. Blessed be GOD. After
Sermon we dined with Mr. Peers, and having taken a Farewell, we left our Friends
in Tears, and hasted to Gravesend, where I read Prayers, and preached in a
Church near the Town to about (...). I have no Objection against, but highly
approve of the excellent Liturgy of our Church, would Ministers lend me their
Churches to use it in. -- If not, let them blame themselves, that I pray and
preach in the Fields.

Gravesend, Bexley, and Blendon.
Thursday, June 7. Received two Letters from Persons confessing, that they came
to hear me out of a bad Motive, but were apprehended by the free Grace of JESUS
CHRIST. -- Answered them, and some others. -- Read Prayers, and preached in the
same Church as I did last Night. -- Took some Refreshment, and returned in the
Evening, and preached at Bexley Church, being much excited so to do, by the
kind Solicitations of Mr. Peers. -- The Congregation was much larger than we
could expect, and most, I believe, were much affected. -- Here some of Mr.
Delamot's Family gave us the Meeting. -- After Sermon I returned to their House
at Blendon, praising and blessing GOD, that we had once more an Opportunity of
building up each other in our (...) Faith. -- Oh! how sweet is this Retirement
to (...) Soul! GOD is pleased to meet me in it, and vouchsafe me great Measures
of his Divine Presence. -- I must expect some fresh Trials. Dearest LORD,
sweeten all thy Dispensations with a Sense of thy Love, and then deal with me
as it ^^^eth good in thy Sight!

Friday, June 8, Preached at Bexley in the Morning, and at Charleton in the
Afternoon, whither I was invited by the Earl and Countess of Egmont. Both
before and after Sermon they entertained me with the utmost Civility. -- My
Heart was much comforted by GOD, and at Night I returned with my Friends to my
sweet Retreat at Blendon, Oh! the Comforts of having all of one Mind in a
House! It begins our Heaven upon Earth. -- Was I left to my own Choice, here
would be my Rest. -- For I have Delight herein. -- But a Necessity is laid upon
me, and (...) unto me if I preach not the Gospel.

Saturday, June 9. Was much pleased and edified in reading Bishop Hall's Christ
M^s^i^^al, and E^skin's Sermons, both whose Wor^^, with Boehm's Sermons, I
would earnestly recommend to every one. -- Preached in the Evening at Du^wich,
^o not a very large Congregation, and went afterward to Blackheath, and spent
a most agreeable Evening with many Christian Friends, who came thither on
Purpose to give me the Meeting. Blessed be GOD, all behaved, as though their
Conversation was in Heaven.

Blendon, Bexley, and Blackheath.
Sunday, June 10. Hastened back to Blendon, where more of our Brethren came
last Night to see me. -- Preached with more Power than ever and assisted in
administering the Sacrament to about 200 Communicants in Bexley Church. --
Dined, gave Thanks, and sung Hymns at Mr. Delamot's. -- Preached with great
Power in the Evening on Blackheath, to above 20000 People, and collected
sixteen Pounds seven Seven Shillings for the Orphans. After Sermon I went to
the Green Man, near the Place where I preached, and continued till Midnight
instant in Prayer, Praise and Thanksgiving, and Christian Conversation. -- I
believe there were near 50 or 60 of us in all. -- Great Decency and much
Devotion was to be seen. -- Numbers stood by as Spectators. GOD e^^rged my
Heart much in Prayer and Exhortation. And in short, every Thing was so well
regulated, that all unprejudiced Persons that came in must say, Surely GOD is
in this Place.

Many of them watched unto Prayer and Praise all Night. I think it every
Christian's Duty to be particularly careful to honor and glorify GOD in Places
where he is most dishonored. Some can sing the Songs of the Drunkard in
Public Houses; Others can spend whole Nights in Chambering and Wantonness, why
should Christian be ashamed to sing the Songs of the Lamb, and spend Nights, as
their LORD did before them, in Exercises of Devotion?

Silent have we been too long,
Awed by Earth's rebellious Throng,
Thee if we should still deny,
LORD, the very Stones would cry,
Hallelujah.
Blackheath, Bexley, Dulwich, and Blendon.
Monday, June 11. Prayed, sung with, and gave a warm Exhortation to those that
continued at Blackheath all Night. -- Read Prayers at Bexley Church. Dined with
Mrs. S -- at Le^^isham, a Gentlewoman, who gladly received both me and my
Friends into her House* -- Preached in the Evening to a much larger Audience
than before at Dulwich, and then hastened back to Blendon, in Company with some
who Love our LORD JESUS in Sincerity. Oh how swiftly and delightfully do those
Hours pass away, which are spent in Christian Conversation!

Blendon, Bexley, and Blackheath.
Tuesday, June 12. Read Prayers at Bexley Church. -- Begun (being pressed
thereto both in Spirit and by my Friends) to put some of my Extempore
Discourses in Writing. -- Preached at Blackheath in the Evening to about 20000
People and spent the remaining Part of the Night, with rather more Friends, and
as much Cheerfulness, Decency and Devotion as on Sunday Night last Several
People of different Ranks stood by, as before. Some, I hope, went away edified,
for GOD gave me great Enlargement of Soul, and the Exhortation which was long
and powerful* I believe, reached their Hearts. GOD grant we may thus always
continue to let our Light shine before Men. It cannot but bring Glory to our
Father which is in Heaven.

Wednesday, June 13. Retired in the Morning to Blendon. Preached, as usual, at
Blackheath, and went with my Fellow-Travellers to Lewisham, about a Mile off,
to the House of Mrs. S^, who has frequently pressed me to abide there. How does
GOD raise me up Friends unsought for in every Place! Who would but naked follow
a naked CHRIST? After Supper I expounded to, and prayed with several Gentlemen
and Ladies, whom Mrs. S -- had invited to hear the Word. Oh that it may take
de^p ^^oot in their Hearts!

Thursday, June 14. Spent the whole Day in my pleasant and profitable Retreat
at Blendon. And in the Evening had the Pleasure of introducing my Honored
Friend Mr. John Wesley to preach at Blackheath. The LORD give him ten thousand
times more Success than He has given me! After Sermon we spent the Evening most
agreeably together with many Christian Friends at the Green Man. About ten we
admitted all to come in that would: The Room was soon filled. GOD gave me
Utterance. I exhorted and prayed for near an Hour, and then went to Bed,
rejoicing that another fresh Inrode was made into Satan's Territories, by Mr.
Wesley's following me in Field-Preaching, as well in London as in Bristol.
LORD, give the Word, and great shall be the Company of such Preachers* Amen.
Amen.

Friday, June 15. Continued at Blendon all Day. Preached with great Power in
the Evening at Blackheath to about as many (...), and after retired to (...),
where I and my Friends were again most kindly (...) Mr. S -- May the Lord bless
her House, as he did the House of (...), and make each of our (...) an (...) of
the Holy Spirit.

Saturday, June 16. Returned in the Morning to Blendon. Finished some Writings
I had in Hand, and preached in the Evening at Blackheath, on Abraham's Offering
up his Son Isaac. GOD make us Partakers of such a working Obedient Faith!

Sunday, June 17. Preached with much Power in Bexley Church, and helped to
administer to near 300 Communicants, most of which came from London. --
Baptized a Person of 28 Years of Age, whom GOD had worked upon by my Ministry.
Dined at Blendon, and took sweet Counsel with many Christian Friends. Preached
to above 20000 People at Blackheath, and afterward supped again at the Green
Man. There were near 300 in the Room. GOD was pleased to give me extraordinary
Assistance in exhorting and Prayer, which I continued till Eleven o'Clock, and
then retired to Bed, much pleased to think Religion, which had long been
sculking in Corners, and was almost laughed out of the World, should now begin
to appear abroad, and openly show herself at Noonday. Let them count us
Vainglorious for thus confessing CHRIST before Men. It is a small Thing with
us to be judged of Men's Judgment. To our own Master we stand or full. What we
are the last Day will show.

Hertford.
Monday, June ^^. An Embargo being laid (...) ^^^pping for some Weeks, I had
time to go to ^^^^ord, whither I was invited by (...) pressing Letters,
declaring how GOD had worked by my Ministry, when I was there last. -- We dined
and prayed with Madam Cook of Newington, and her Family, and reached the Place
intended by seven at Night. A most kind Reception I met (...) from many
Christians. At eight I preached, according to Appointment, with Freedom of
Spirit, to about 4000 People, who were quite silent and attentive. Blessed be
GOD, I found myself much stronger than when I was here last. GOD grant I may so
live that my Progress may be made known unto all Men!

Tuesday, June 19. Preached this Morning about seven o'Clock to near 3000
People with uncommon Enlargement of Heart, and apparent Success. Many came to
me under strong Convictions of their fallen Estate, and their Want of a GOD-MAN
to be their Mediator. -- Many I heard of besides who had been much worked upon
by my Preaching. -- Several Christian Families, I find, had been comforted, and
such immediate Effects produced, that I could not help rejoicing in Spirit
exceedingly. Breakfasted, dined, prayed and sung Hymns with Mr. S --, a
Dissenting Minister; was visited by some Quakers, and in the Afternoon waited
upon Mr. Th -- ^od, a Baptist Teacher, who, unknown to me, had sent a Horse to
fetch me from London. Preached about seven in the Evening to about five
Thousand Souls upon the Faith of Abraham, in which GOD was pleased to give me
great Freedom, and the People great Attention. I believe GOD has much People in
and near Hertford. His especial Providence which detains me in England sent me
hither. -- I trust they have received a second Benefit, Not unto me, O LORD,
not unto me, but unto thy Name, unto thy free Grace in CHRIST JESUS our LORD,
be all the Glory.

Broad-oaks in Essex.
Wednesday, June 20. Set out about five in the Morning, and hasted to
Broad-oaks, about 20 Miles from Hertford. About Midway at Bishop-St^rford, as
we were passing through, a Person entirely unknown, constrained both me and my
Friends to come and refresh ourselves a little at his House. -- We accepted of
his Offer, and found he was Son to a Gentleman, who had sent to engage me to
preach at this Place on Friday Night next. -- Having spent an Hour very
agreeably with some Christian Friends, he went with us, and brought us on our
Way to Broad-oaks, the Way being intricate. About 12 we got thither, and
perceived that Providence had sent us most opportunely to a Family, some of
whom being born after the Spirit, are, for that Reason, most violently opposed
and persecuted by those Foes of their own Household, who are only born after the
Flesh. A Clergyman has been employed to divert them from their present Madness,
as they call it; and has done them the Honor of Preaching against them. -- For
this Week past, they have been continually beset with Numbers of such, who are
Lovers of Pleasure more than Lovers of GOD, and who would tell them, that a
decent, genteel and fashionable Religion, is sufficient to carry them to
Heaven. They knew nothing of my paying them this Visit, which made them more
thankful. -- No one can tell what a comfortable Meeting GOD gave us. -- Surely
it was Heaven begun upon Earth. -- We found the Sweets of Opposition, and
rejoiced greatly in the Prospect of suffering for CHRIST's Sake. To increase
our Satisfaction Mr. Delamot, a Convert of Mr. Ingham's, came from Cambridge to
meet us. -- He is scandalously opposed at that University. -- The Students make
him a Proverb of Reproach, and abuse him in the rudest Manner. -- He has been
forbid coming in to one College, and two or three that associate with him have
been threatened much by their Tutors for keeping him Company. And here I cannot
but remark what wonderful Mercies GOD has shown this Mr. Delamot's Family. --
About three or four Years ago, GOD was pleased to touch the Heart of his
Brother Charles, who hearing that Mr. Wesley was going to Georgia (though his
Father would have settled him in a very handsome Way) offered to go Abroad with
him as a Servant. -- His Parents Consent was asked, but they, and almost all
their Relations, opposed it strenuously. However, the young Man being resolute,
and convinced that GOD called him, at length they somewhat consented. He went
abroad, lived with Mr. Wesley, served under him as a Son in the Gospel, did
much good, and endured great Hardships for the Sake of JESUS CHRIST. Behold,
how GOD rewarded him for leaving all. Whilst he was absent, GOD was pleased to
make Use of the Ministry of Mr. Ingham, and Mr. Charles Wesley, in converting
his Mother, two Sisters, and this young Gentlemen beforementioned at
Cambridge, who, I pray GOD, may stand as a Barrier against the Profaneness,
Debauchery, Lukewarmness and Deism of that Seat of Learning, and prove both a
Barnabas and Boanerges in the Church of England! But to return, -- After having
spent some comfortable Hours together, we went to Wimbish Green, where Mr.
Charles Wesley had preached some Time ago. I rode thither in a Chaise, and
preached from it to about 400 People, with great Freedom and Power. About 9 we
returned to Broad-oaks, and spent the most heavenly Night I have known for a
long While. Oh! how doubly sweet are Opportunities when we have been debarred
of them for some Time! I believe the Saints of old had never so much Comfort,
as when they were obliged to shut the Doors for Fear of the Jews, and to hide
themselves in Dens and Cave^^ of the Earth. The LORD prepare us all for such an
Hour.

Saffron-Walden.
Thursday, June 21. Was much refreshed by last Night's Rest. Preached at
Saffron-walden, eight Miles from Broad-oaks, to about 2000 People: Dined with
my Friends at Mr. F -- r's. Preached at five in the Evening to a like
Congregation as before, and returned to Broad-oaks, singing and praising GOD.
Wherever I go, People fly to the Doctrine of JESUS CHRIST, as the Doves to the
Windows. My Sheep, says our LORD, hear my Voice. A Stranger will they not hear.

Thaxted and Bishop-stortford.
Friday, June 22. Read Part of Jenks's Submission to the Righteousness of
CHRIST, a most excellent Book. Preached at Nine in the Morning at Thaxted,
about two Miles from Broad-oaks, to upwards of 1000 People, but with such
Sweetness and Power, as I have not felt since I came into Essex. All around me
were melted into Tears. -- My own Heart was so filled with Love, that I think I
could then have laid down my Life for their Sakes. After Sermon, Mr. S -- g,
kindly entertained me, and my Fellow-Travellers, and many others that came to
hear me. -- We spent our Time most Christianly together, and afterward went to
Bishop-stortford, about 12 Miles from Thaxted; where I promised, GOD willing,
to preach as Tonight. About five we got thither, and at six, GOD enabled me to
preach with Power to near 4000 People. Many devout Souls were present, and
several Invitations were given me in the Name of CHRIST, to other Parts of
Essex, which I promised to do, supposing the Embargo on the Shipping continued.
Blessed be GOD, this itinerant Preaching brings me acquainted with Numbers of
his Children, which otherwise I might never have seen or heard of in this Life.
The united fervent Prayers of so many righteous Souls, undoubtedly will avail
much in my Behalf! Lord, was ever Love like thine!

Blackheath.
Saturday, June 23. Set out betimes from Bishop-stortford, and reached
Blackheath about three in the Afternoon. Preached at seven in the Evening to
about 1000 People. The Smallness of the Congregation was occasioned by a Report
that I was dead. -- Wherever I came I found the People much surprised and
rejoiced to see me alive. GOD knows I long to be dissolved and to be with
CHRIST, but as I have scarce begun my Testimony, I believe I shall not yet die,
but live, and declare the Works of the LORD. Hereafter I hope he will enable me
to say, I have fought a good Fight, I have finished (...) Course, I have kept
the Faith. Henceforth there is laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness, which
the LORD, the righteous Judge, shall give me at that Day, and not to me only,
but unto all them also that love his appearing.

Bexley.
Sunday, June 24. Read Prayers, assisted in Administering (...) Sacrament at
Bexley Church. Many came from far, and expected to hear me, but the Diocesan
had been pleased to insist on the Vicar's denying me the Pulpit. Whether for
just Cause GOD shall judge at the last Day. If we have done any Thing worthy
the Censures of the Church, why do not the Right Reverend the Bishops call us
to a public Account? If not, why do they not confess and own us? It is well we
can appeal to the great Bishop of Souls. They say, it is not regular our going
out into the Highways and Hedges, and compelling poor Sinners to come in. We
ought not so to beseech them to be reconciled to GOD. They desire to know by
what Authority we preach; and ask, what Sign show thou that thou do these
Things? But, alas! what further Sign would they require? We went not into the
Fields till we were excluded the Churches: And has not GOD set his Seal to our
Ministry in an extraordinary Manner? Have not many that were spiritually Blind
received their Sight? Many that have been Lame strengthened to run the Way of
GOD's Commandments? Have not the Deaf heard? The Lepers been cleansed? The Dead
raised? And the Poor had the Gospel preached unto them? That these notable
Miracles have been wrought, not in our own Names, or by our own Power, but in
the Name and by the Power of JESUS of Nazareth, cannot be denied. And yet they
require a Sign? But verily there shall no other Sign be given to this evil and
adulterous Generation!

Preached in the Afternoon to about 300 People in Justice Delamot's Yard, and
in the Evening on Blackheath, to upwards of 20000, on these Words, And they
cast him out. I recommended to the People the Example of the blind Beggar,
reminded them of preparing for the gathering Storm, and exhorted them in the
Name of CHRIST JESUS to follow the Example of this meek Lamb of GOD, supposing
my Enemies should think that they did GOD good Service to kill me. I dread
nothing more than the false Zeal of my Friends in a suffering Hour. GOD grant
we may learn when we are reviled, not to revile again; when we suffer, may we
threaten not, but commit our Souls into the Hands of him that judges
righteously. LORD, endue us with the Spirit of thy first Martyr, St. Stephen,
that we may pray most earnestly even for our ^very Mu^der^^s!

LONDON.
Monday and Tuesday, June 25. Came hither privately last Night. Went to a
Love-Feast in Fetter-lane, and intended setting out the next Morning, being
greatly importuned thereto, for Gloucester in the Stage-Coach, but there were
no vacant Places. Spent the Day in writing Letters, and settling some Affairs.
Preached in the Evening to about as many as usual at Kennington Common, with
great and visible Success. Spent a delightful Hour with many Christian Friends.
Took Coach about 11 at Night, and reached Cirencester by 10 the next Evening.
Justly may I say, I am a Stranger and Pilgrim upon Earth: For I have here no
continuing City. May I always be preparing myself f^^ that which is to come, a
City not made with Hands, eternal in the Heavens* wh^^ Builder and Maker is GOD!

Cirencester and Gloucester.
Wednesday, June 27. Waited on the Minister of the Parish, and asked him for
the Use of his Pulpit, but he refused it, because I had not my Letters of
Orders. Went to public Worship at 11, and preached to about 3000 People in a
Field near the Town about 12. Was afterward visited by several gracious Souls
of the Baptist's Congregation, who brought me five Guineas for the
Orphan-house. Set out about 4 in the Afternoon, and reached Gloucester about 7
in the Evening, to the inexpressible Joy of many. The late Report of my being
dead has only served to make my present Visits more welcome. Thus all Things
work together for Good to those that love GOD. Soon after I came into Town, I
visited the Society, and expounded for the Space of an Hour, to more People
than the Room (though it was large) could contain. Blessed be GOD, all heard the
Word most gladly. -- I now see the Seed sown when I was here last, was not all
sown on stony thorny Ground: No, some has been received into honest and good
Hearts. This is the LORD's doing; to him ^e all the Glory through JESUS CHRIST.

Gloucester.
Thursday, June 28. Preached in the Morning to about 1000 People in my
Brother's Field. Went to public Prayers at the Cathedral. Waited upon the
Bishop, who received me very civilly. Visited some sick Persons in the
Afternoon who sent for me. Preached at Night to upwards of 3000. GOD was
pleased to give me uncommon Freedom and Liberty in speaking. -- Much Power from
above was amongst us. Great Numbers were melted into Tears, and most, I
believe, went convicted away. Thanks be to GOD, who thus gives us the Victory
through our LORD JESUS CHRIST.

Gloucester and Painswick.
Friday, June 29. Preached in my Brother's Field in the Morning to a large and
very affected Congregation, went to the Cathedral Service, visited some
religious Friends, and preached (at the earnest Invitation of many who had
heard me before) to above 3000 Souls in Painswick-Street. All was hushed and
silent. The Divine Presence was amongst us. Many Children of GOD were fed with
the sincere Milk of the Word. All rejoiced to see me alive again, and thanked
GOD abundantly in my Behalf. It well becomes the Righteous to be thankful.

Stroud and Gloucester.
Saturday, June 30. Spent the Evening with some Christian Friends, lay at
Painswick, and preached about 10 in the Morning to near 2000 People, in the
Bowling-Green belonging to the George-Inn in Stroud, 3 Miles from thence. GOD
was with us. After Sermon, I went in Company with many Friends to Gloucester,
where I preached at 7 in the Evening to a larger and more affected Congregation
than ever, Blessed be GOD, the Word has free Course. Oh! that it may ^un and be
glorified through all the Earth.

Gloucester, Randwick and Hampton common.
Sunday, July 1. Preached at 7 in the Morning to a much increased Audience in
my Brother's Field. Breakfasted at Gloucester, and preached at 11 in the
Morning, read Prayers in the Afternoon, and preached again in the Afternoon at
Randwick Church, about 7 Miles from Gloucester. The Church was quite full,
about 2000 were in the Churchyard, who, by taking down the Window that lay
behind the Pulpit, had the Convenience of Hearing. Many wept sorely.

After Evening Service I hastened to Hampton-Common, and to my great Surprise,
sound no less than 20000 on Horseback and Foot ready to hear me. New Strength
was imparted to me from abo^e. I spoke with greater Freedom than I had done all
the Day before. About (...) at Night I reached Gloucester much (...) than when
I left it in the Morning. Surely JESUS CHRIST i^ a gracious Master. They that
wait upon him shall renew their Strength.

Monday, July 2. Preached this Morning in my Brother's Field, to a larger
Audience than ever. Found my Spirits much exhausted by Yesterday's Labors, but
notwithstanding a ^we^^ ^ower was amongst us. After Dinner I went to
T^^ekesbury, where I found much Opposition had been made by the Bailiff against
my coming. Upon my Entrance into the Town, I found the People much alarmed, and
as soon as I was got into the Inn, four Constables came to attend me: But a
Lawyer being there who was my Friend, he demanded the Constable's Warrant, who
being not able to produce one, he sent them about their Business. At eight
o'Clock I went into a Field lent me by one Mr. H -- ds, which lay without the
Liberties of the Town. My Audience consisted of 2 or 3000 People. I spoke with
Freedom, and most, as I afterward heard, went satisfied and affected away. The
Remainder of the Evening I spent most agreeably with many Christian Friends who
accompanied me on my Journey. I perceived a fresh supply of Spirits to be given
me from above, and rejoiced that GOD leads me on from conquering to conquer.

Tweksbury and Evesham.
Tuesday, July 3. Waited this Morning upon Mr. J -- s, one of the
Town-Bailiffs, and asked him* Meekness, For what Reason he sent the Constables
after me? He said, It was the Determination not of himself, but of all the
Council. He then said, The People were noisy, and reflected upon the Bailiffs.
I answered, that was owing to their sending the Constables with their Staves to
apprehend me, when I should come into Town. Upon this he began to be a little
angry, and told me, A certain Judge said, he would take me up as a Vagrant, was
I to preach near him. I answered, he was very welcome to do as he pleased. But
I apprehended no Magistrate had Power to stop my Preaching, even in the
Streets, if I thought proper. No, Sir, says he, if you preach here Tomorrow,
you shall have the Constables to attend you. -- After this I took my Leave,
telling him, I thought it my Duty as a Minister to inform him, that Magistrates
were intended to be a Terror to evil Doers, and not to those who do well. And I
desired, he would be as careful to appoint Constables to attend at the next
Horse Race, Balls and Assemblies, etc.

About nine in the Morning we left Tweksbury, and reached Evesham about Noon.
-- The poor People were much alarmed, hearing I had been abused at Tweksbury.
And the Magistrates of Evesham had threatened to apprehend me if I preached
within their Liberties. Upon this, Mr. Benjamin Seward thought it advisable to
preach near his House, which I did from a Wall to near 1000 Hearers, and, I
believe, to good Effect. -- At my Return to the Inn, I could not but observe to
my Friends how gradually the Opposition increased. At present, it seems to be
like the Cloud which Elijah's Servant saw; no bigger than a Man's Hand; but, by
and by, it will gather apace, and break upon the Church of GOD. But the GOD
whom we serve is able to deliver us.

About 8 at Night I preached again from the same Place; but had the
Satisfaction of seeing my Morning Congregation trebly increased: After this I
went to a Friend's House to eat Bread; and came to my Inn, wishing that all
felt the Love of GOD shed abroad in their Hearts, as I did then.

Evesham, Pershore, Tweksbury and Gloucester.
Wednesday, July 4. Preached by 7 in the Morning at Evesham and perceived the
People's Hearts most nearly knit to me -- Breakfasted at an Hospitable Quaker's
House, and went in Company with about 30 to Pershore, where I was kindly
invited by Mr. Parks, the present Incumbent. -- He gave me the Meeting as I was
going to the Church -- I read Prayers, and preached with Power. Several
Clergymen were present, and after Sermon Mr* Parks sent me his Thanks, and gave
me another Invitation to Pershore. The Inhabitants were much affected, and I
was received gladly into some of their Houses, and requested to come to Others.
About five in the Evening I took an affectionate Leave of Evesham. Friends, and
in Company with about 120 on Horseback went to Tweksbury, and never saw a Town
so much alarmed. The Streets were crowded with People from all Parts. I rode
immediately through the Town, preached to about 6000 Hearers in a Field lent us
by Mr. P --, but saw no Constables that came either to molest or attend on me.
My hour is not yet come -- By and by it will be given me, not only to believe
on, but to suffer for CHRIST's Name sake. LORD grant* I may not deny him in any
wise.

Immediately after Sermon I took Horse, and reached Gloucester near Midnight.
The Weather was very pleasant. GOD was pleased to refresh me with fresh
Communications from himself, and we went on our Way rejoicing in the LORD, who
still causes us to triumph in every Place. Oh! forever adored be his free Grace
in CHRIST!

Gloucester and Chefford.
Thursday, July 5, Preached about 10 in the Morning, as usual, to a numerous
and exceedingly affected Audience. My own Heart was full of Love to my dear
Countrymen, and they sincerely sympathised with me. Many Friends after this
came to take Leave of me, and told me what GOD had done for their Souls. --
Having wrote my Journal, and dispatched my private Business, after joining in
Prayer, and singing with many, I left Gloucester. About 5 in the Evening I
reached Chefford Common, at 7 preached till it was near dark to upwards of of
10000 People. A glorious Increase since I was there last. Blessed be the Lord
God of Israel, who delights in the Prosperity of his Servant.

BRISTOL.
Friday, July 6. Lay at the House of Mr. Wa -- n, a Clothier, 2 Miles from
C^^^ord. Rose at Six; after Family Duty, and tak^ (...) little Breakfast, we
set forwards toward Bristol. At Petty France some Friends met us, afterward
more joined us, and before we came within 2 Miles of Bristol, our Company
increased very considerably. The People were much rejoiced at the News of my
coming. Their Hearts seemed to leap for Joy, and many Thanksgivings were
rendered to GOD in my Behalf. The Bells rang unknown to me. I was received as
an Angel of GOD. At 7 in the Evening I preached at Baptist-Mills, to about 6 or
(...) People, who were much melted by the Power of GOD's Word. I hope they will
receive a second Benefit.

Saturday, July 7. Breakfasted with Mr. ^ -- y. Settled some Affairs concerning
our Brethren, and had a useful Conference about many Things with my Honored
Friend Mr. John Wesley. Dined at my Sister's; gave the Sacrament to a sick
Sister, paid another Visit upon a Matter of Importance. Preached at
Baptist-Mills, to near the same Number of People as last Night, and found that
Bristol had great Reason to bless GOD for the Ministry of Mr. John Wesley. The
Congregation I observed to be much more serious and affected than when I left
them: And their loud and repeated Amens, which they put up to every Petition,
as well as the Exemplariness of their Conversation in common Life, plainly show
that they have not received the Grace of GOD in vain. Ye Hypocrites, ye can
discern the Face of the Sky (...) but how is it that you cannot discern the
Sign of these Times? That Good, great Good is done, is evident: Either this is
done by an Evil or good Spirit. If you say by an Evil Spirit, I answer in our
LORD's own Words. (...) Satan be divided against Satan, how can (...) Kingdom
stand? If by a good Spirit, why do not the Clergy, and the rest of the
Pharisees believe our Report? What is it, but little less than Blasphemy
against the Holy Ghost, to impute the great Work that has been in so short a
Time wrought in this Kingdom, to Delusion and the Power of the Devil?

Sunday, July 8. Preached at the Bowling-Green to about 10000 People, greatly
affected indeed. -- About Eleven, I preached again at Hannam-Mount, to near as
many Hearers, and at 7 in the Evening to about 20000 at Rose-Green. My Power I
find much increased since I was here last. And such a visible Alteration in the
Congregation for the better, therein convinces me more and more that GOD is
with us of a Truth. As our Opposition increases, I doubt not but the
Manifestations of GOD's Presence amongst us, will increase also.

Monday, July 9. On Thursday I received a Letter from the Bishop of Gloucester,
in which his Lordship affectionately admonished me, to exercise my Authority I
received in the Manner it was given me. His Lordship being of Opinion, that I
ought to preach the Gospel only in the Congregation wherein I was lawfully
appointed thereunto.

Today I sent his Lordship the following Answer.

The ANSWER.
My LORD
I Thank your Lordship, for your Lordship's (...) kind Letter. -- My frequent
Removes from Place to Place prevented my answering it sooner. -- I am greatly
obliged to your Lordship, in that you are pleased to watch over my Soul, and to
caution me against acting contrary to the Commission given me at Ordination. --
But if the Commission we then receive, obliges us to preach no where but in
that Parish which is committed to our Care, then all Persons act contrary to
their Commission when they preach occasionally in any strange Place. And
consequently your Lordship equally offends when you preach out of your own
Diocese. As for inveighing against the Clergy (without a Cause) I deny the
Charge. What I say I am ready to make good when ever your Lordship pleases. Let
those that bring Reports to your Lordship about my Preaching, be brought Face
to Face, I am ready to give them an Answer. St. Paul exhorts Timothy, not to
receive an Accusation against an Elder under two or three Witnesses. And even
Nicodemus could say, the Law suffered no Man to be condemned unheard. I shall
only add, that I hope your Lordship will inspect into the Lives of your other
Clergy, and censure them for being Over-remiss, as much as you censure me for
being Over-righteous: It is their falling from their Articles, and not
preaching the Truth as it is in JESUS, that has excited the present Zeal of
(whom they in ^^^ision call) the Methodist Preachers. (...) ^^bing's Sermon
(for which I thank your Lordship) confirms me more and more in my Opinion, that
I ought to be instant in Season, and out of Season. For to me, he seems to know
no more of the true Nature of Regeneration, than Nicodemus did, when he came to
JESUS by Night. -- Your Lordship may observe, that he does not speak a Word of
Original Sin, or the dreadful Consequences of our Fall in Adam, upon which the
Doctrine of the New Birth is entirely founded. No; like other polite Preachers,
he seems to think, in the very Beginning of his Discourse, that St. ^aul's
Description of the Wickedness of the Heathen is only to be referred to them of
past Ages: whereas I affirm, we are all included as much under the Guilt and
Consequences of Sin as they were, and if any Man preach any other Doctrine, she
shall bear his Punishment whosoever he be. Again, my Lord, the Doctor entirely
mistakes us when we talk of the sensible Operations of the Holy Ghost. He
understands as just as those carnal Jews understood JESUS CHRIST, who, when our
LORD talked of giving them that Bread which came down from Heaven, said, How
can this Man give us his Flesh to eat? Indeed I know not that we do use the
Word sensible, when we are talking of the Operations of the Spirit of GOD: But
if we do, we do not mean, that GOD's Spirit does manifest itself to our Senses,
but (...) it may be perceived by the Soul, as rea^^^ (...) is any sensible
Impression made upon the Body. But to disprove this, the Doctor brings our
LORD's Allusion to the Wind in the third of St. John, which is one of the best
Texts he could urge to prove it. For if the Analogy of our LORD's Discourse be
carried on, we shall find it amounts to thus much; That although the Operations
of the Spirit of GOD can no more be accounted for, than how the Wind comes and
whither it goes; yet may they be as easily felt by the Soul as the Wind may be
felt by the Body. -- My Lord, indeed we speak what we know. But, says the
Doctor, "These Men have no Proof to offer for their inward Manifestations."
What Proof, my Lord, does the Doctor require; would he have us raise dead
Bodies? Have we not done greater Things than these? I speak with all Humility,
has not GOD by our Ministry raised many dead Souls to a spiritual Life. Verily,
if Men will not believe the Evidence GOD has given that he sent us, neither
would they believe though one rose from the Dead. Besides, my Lord, the Doctor
Charges us with Things we are entire Strangers to, such as the denying Men the
Use of GOD's Creatures; Encouraging Abstinence, Prayer, etc. to the Neglect of
the Duties of our Stations. Lord lay not this Sin to his Charge. Again, he
says, I suppose Mr. Benjamin Seward to be a Person believing in CHRIST, and
blameless in his Conversation, before what I call his Conversion. But this is a
direct Untruth. For it was through the Want of a living Faith in JESUS CHRIST,
which he now has, that he was not a Christian before, but a a mere Moralist.
Your Lordship knows that our Article says, Works done without the Spirit of
GOD, and true Faith in JESUS CHRIST have the Nature of Sin. And such were all
the Works done by Mr. Benjamin Seward before the Time mentioned in my Journal.
Again, my Lord, the Doctor represents That as my Opinion concerning Quakers* in
general, which I only meant of those I conversed with in particular. But the
Doctor, and the rest of my Reverend Brethren, are welcome to judge me as they
please. Yet a little while, and we shall all appear before the great Shepherd
of our Souls. There, there, my Lord, shall it be determined, who are true
Ministers, and who are Wolves in Sheep's Clothing. Our LORD, I believe, will
not be ashamed to confess us publicly in that Day. I pray GOD we all may
approve ourselves such faithful Ministers of the New Testament, that we may be
able to lift up our Heads with Boldness. As for declining the Work in which I
am engaged, my Blood runs chill* at the very Thoughts of it. I am as much
convinced it is my Duty to act as I do, as that the Sun shines at Noonday. I
can foresee the Consequences very well. They have already in one Sense thrust
us out of the Synagogues. By and by they will think it is doing GOD Service to
kill us. But, my Lord, if you and the rest of the Bishops cast us out, our
(...) and common Master will take us up. Though all Men should deny us, yet will
not he. And however you may censure us as evil Doers, and Disturbers of the
Peace, yet if we do suffer for our present Way of acting, your Lordship at the
Great Day will find, that we suffer only for Righteousness Sake. In Patience
therefore do I possess my Soul. I willingly tarry the LORD's Leisure. In the
mean while I shall continually bear your Lordship's Favors upon my Heart, and
endeavor to behave, so as to subscribe myself,

My LORD, Your Lordship's obedient Son, And obliged Servant, GEORGE WHITEFIELD.


Tuesday, July 10. Preached Yesterday Evening at the Brick-Yard to about 8000
People. Dined today with my honored Fellow Laborer, Mr. Wesley, and many
other Friends, at Two-Mill-Hill in Kingswood, and preached afterward to
several Thousand People, and Colliers, in the School-House, which has been
carried on so successfully, that the Roof is ready to be put up. The Design I
think is good. Old as well as young are to be instructed. A great and a visible
Alteration is made in the Behavior of the Colliers. Instead of Cursing and
Swearing, they are heard to sing Hymns about the Woods; and the rising
Generation, I hope, will be a Generation of Christians. They seem much affected
by the Word. They melt into Tears, and are observed to attend the Churches and
Societies when Mr. Wesley is absent from them. The Prospect of their future
Welfare filled me with Joy unspeakable. They took a most affectionate Leave of
me. LORD put thou their Tears into thy Bottle!

Went immediately after Sermon was ended with Mr. Wesley, and several other
Friends, to Bath, and preached there to about 3000 People at 7 in the Evening.
It rained a little all the while, but the People were very patient and
attentive, and ^^ever had such Power given me to speak to the polite Scoffers
before. Oh! that the Scales were removed from the Eyes of their Minds!

Heard to Day the Town Clerk of Bristol did my Brother Wesley and me the
Honor, to desire the Grand Jury, at their Quarter Sessions, to present our
Meetings, and to have the Riot-Act read, but they did not regard him. Nay one,
that was called to serve on the Petty-Jury, offered to submit to any Fine,
rather than do any thing against us; who, he said, were true Servants of JESUS
CHRIST. May he meet with that Reward which our LORD has promised to all th^se
that shall confess him before Men! The Hour of Persecution is not yet come.
These are some distant Proofs of it, I really wonder it comes on no faster.
Satan, why sleep thou?

Bath and Bristol.
Wednesday, July 11. Preached at 11 in the Morning, to a larger Audience than
last Night, and almost with equal Power. Hastened to Bristol, and preached in
the Evening at Baptist-Mills to a large Congregation. It rained much: But,
blessed be GOD, the People's Hearts are so far influenced by the Gospel of
CHRIST, that they care but little whether it rains or shines.

After this, my Brother Wesley and I went to the Women and Men's Societies,
settled some Affairs, and united the two leading Societies together. A great
Harmony and Sweetness of Soul was amongst us all. My Heart was full of Love for
them, and they wept most sorely at my Farewel-Exhortation and Prayer. How can I
be thankful enough to GOD, for sending me hither to see, that the Seed has been
sown on good Ground; and that by the Ministry of Mr. Wesley it has received
great Increase. May it still increase with all the Increase of GOD.

Thursday, July 12. Was busied most of the Day in sitting a Sermon for the
Press On the Indwelling of the Spirit, which I would recommend to all. Preached
in the Evening to (...) or 9000 People in the Bowling-Green, with great Freedom
and Power, and afterward spent an Hour most delightfully with some Christian
Friends. Blessed be GOD for the Communion of Saints! Oh! when shall I be
translated to the Communion of the Spirits of just Men made perfect! As the
Heart ^a^teth after the Water Brooks, so does my Soul long after that perfect
Fellowship with the Sons of GOD.

Friday, July 13. Preached my Farewell Sermon at 7 in the Morning to a weeping
and deeply affected Audience. My Heart was full, and I continued near two Hours
in Prayer and Preaching. The poor People shed many Tears, and sent up Thousands
of Prayers in my Behalf, and would scarce let me go away. Their Mites they most
cheerfully contributed to the School-House at Kingswood, and proved, I think,
to a Demonstration, that they had not received the Word of GOD in vain. Blessed
be GOD for seeing this Increase of his Mercy. Blessed be GOD for my coming
hither to behold some Fruits of my Labors. Many Souls have been strengthened
and comforted, many convinced of Sin, and myself also more established and
strong in the LORD. As Oppositions abound, so do my Consolations much more
abound! Who is so good a Master as JESUS CHRIST.

Retired after Sermon to vent my Heart, which was ready to burst with a Sense
of GOD's especial, distinguishing, repeated Mercies. Dined with and took a most
affectionate Leave of a whole Roomful of weeping Friends. Set out about 4
o'Clock, and reached Thornbury about 8 in the Evening. It raining exceeding
hard most part of the Day, there were but few Country People. -- However, I
preached to about 600 from a Table in the Street. I hope GOD gave it his
Blessing.

Thornbury and Gloucester.
Saturday, July 14. Preached at 8 this Morning to an attentive Congregation.
Breakfasted at a Quaker's, and reached Gloucester with my honored Friend, Mr.
John Wesley, and some others, by 3 in the Afternoon. Went to the Cathedral
Prayers, dined, and afterward preached to a Congregation a third Part larger
than I have had in this Place before. Blessed be GOD, wherever I go, I find my
Audiences are always more numerous by far at the last than at the first. --
LORD make me truly humble and thankful.

Sunday, July 15. Left my honored Friend Mr. Wesly, to preach to about 7000
Souls in Gloucester. And had the Pleasure afterward of hearing that the People
heard him gladly. -- Preached twice in Randwick Church, and assisted in
administering the Sacrament to 270 Communicants. -- The Congregations were
larger than when I preached last. -- My Body being weak, and GOD being pleased
to withdraw himself, I spoke with very little Power in the Morning; but in the
Afternoon, GOD caused my Strength to return again, and I preached with much
Freedom and Power in the Evenin^^; and at Hampton Common, I was enabled to lift
up my Voice like a Trumpet, and to preach to about 20000 Souls. -- All which
behaved with great Reverence and Devotion. -- After I had done, I received
fresh Invitations to different Places, which I proposed to comply with, if the
LORD should permit. Never did I see People more eager after the Milk of the
Word. Their Souls were much rejoiced when I told them Mr. John Wesley intended
to come after to feed them. LORD grant he may be preferred before me wherever
he goes!

Monday, July 16. Lay last Night at the House of Mr. E- s of Ebly, and had a
most comfortable Time of it. Went to Tedbury, about six Miles from thence,
having been earnestly invited several Times and preached at Noon to about 4000
People. -- Many gracious Souls of diverse Denominations came to meet me, with
whom I took sweet Counsel. -- The Scoffers, before I came, had threatened to do
something. -- But the Power of GOD's Word overcame them. Visited in the
Afternoon, Mr. O --, a Baptist Teacher, and went afterward, in Company with
several Friends, to Malmsbury in Wiltshire, about 3 Miles from Tedbury, whither
I had been invited by a Letter signed by 52 Persons. At 7 I preached to about
3000 People, who, I believe, felt the Power of GOD's Word. Much Opposition had
been made by the Pharisees against my coming; and the Minister in particular
had wrote to the Churchwarden to stop me; but he was more noble. Numbers, as I
heard afterward, who were vastly prejudiced against me by lying Reports, went
away convinced that I spoke the Words of Truth and Soberness. Thou shall answer
for me, O LORD my GOD.

Tuesday, July 17. Lay with my Fellow-Travellers at the House of Mr. Line, who
most gladly received us for our Master's Sake. I had a Thorn in the Flesh sent
to buffet me, was weak in Body, deserted in Mind, and felt myself to be what I
often say we all are by Nature, half a Devil, and half a Beast. With great
inward Reluctance I rose and preached to about 2000 Souls at 8 in the Morning,
then I retired to my Bed again, with an unspeakable Pressure upon my Heart till
Noon. Was something better after Dinner, and much revived to see what an
effectual Door was like to be opened in Wiltshire for Preaching the Gospel.
Went and paid my Respects to the chief Magistrate, who was my Friend, and
reached Cirencester about six in the Evening.

Here also Men breathed out Threatenings against me, but were not empowered to
put them in Execution. Numbers came from Neighboring Towns. My Congregation
was as large again as when I preached here last. GOD enabled me, weak as I was,
to speak boldly, as I ought to speak. Every Thing was carried on with Decency
and Order, and my inward Comforts began to return again. GOD will not always be
chiding, neither keeps He his Anger for ever. How heavily do I drive when GOD
takes off my Chariot Wheels. O that I may learn to be meek and lowly in my own
Eyes. -- LORD give me Humility, or I perish.

Cirencester and Abingdon.
Wednesday, July 18. Found more than ever the Truth of the wise Man's Saying,
Woe be to him that is alone, for when he falls, he has not another to help
him up. Breakfasted with one Mr. H -- r, and preached at 7 in the Morning to
about as numerous a Congregation, but with much greater Spirits than last
Night. -- The Place where I preached was exceeding convenient. -- I stood in
the Valley, and the People on an Ascent that formed a most beautiful
Amphitheatre. -- After I had done, GOD gave me some most extraordinary
Instances of the Power of his Word. LORD, not unto me, but unto thy Name be all
the Glory.

Left Cirencester about 11, dined at Leatchlade, where the Inhabitants were
very importunate to hear me, would Time have permitted. I reached Abington, 22
Miles from Cirencester, about 7, and preached to several Thousands soon after I
came in. Much Opposition had been made against my Coming. -- The Landlord,
whose House we offered to put up at, genteelly told us, he had not Room for us;
and numberless Prejudices had been industriously spread to prevent my Success;
but GOD strengthened me after my Journey, and enabled me to speak, I trust, to
the Hearts of many. GOD's Word will make its own Way, let Men say what they
please. Our Weapons are not carnal, but mighty through the Divine Power, to the
pulling down Satan's Strongholds.

Abingdon and Basingstoke.
Thursday, July 19. At the Request of several well-disposed People, preached
again this Morning, though not to so great a Number as before.- A sweet Power was
amongst us. -- The Hearers melted into Tears under the Word. My Heart was full
of Love, and theirs also were much affected. Oh! what a sudden Alteration does
this Foolishness of Preaching make in the most obstinate Hearts! It Is but for
GOD to speak the Word, and the Lion is turned into a Lamb. Oh! that we were
like that dear Lamb of GOD, who died to take away the Sins of the World!

Breakfasted with Mr. F -- ^, who with many other Friends expressed great
Tokens of Friendship for me and my Fellow-Travellers. Set out at 11, dined at
Ilsly, and reached Basingstoke about 7 at Night. Perceiving myself languid and
weary, I lay down upon the Bed soon after our coming into the Inn, but was soon
refreshed with the News, that the Landlord, one of whose Children was wrought
upon when I was there last, would not let us stay under his Roof; upon which I
immediately rose and went to another Inn; but the People made a Mock of both me
and my Friends as we past along, and shot out their Arrows, even bitter Words
against us, and Fire-Rockets were thrown around the Door. It was now near 8 of
Clock, and too late to preach; I therefore retired from my Friends, gave GOD
Thanks for accounting me worthy to suffer Reproach for his Name Sake, and about
an Hour after received the following Letter by the Hands of the Constable from
Mr. Mayor.

SIR,
Being a Civil Magistrate in this Town, I thought it my Duty, for the
Preservation of the Peace, to forbid you, or at least dissuade you, from
preaching here. If you persist in it, in all Probability, it may occasion a
Disturbance, which I think is your Duty, as a Clergyman, as well as mine, to
prevent. If any Mischief should ensue (whatever Pretense you may afterward
make in your own Behalf) I am satisfied will fall on your own Head, being
timely cautioned it by me, who am, Sir,

Basingstoke, July 19, 1739. Your most humble Servant, JOHN ABBOT.
P. S. The Legislator has wisely made Laws for the Preservation of the Peace,
therefore, I hope, no Clergyman lives in Defiance of them.




To this I immediately sent the following Answer.

Honored Sir,
I think you for your kind Letter, and I humbly hope a Sense of your Duty, and
not a Fear of Man, caused you to write it. If so, give me Leave to remind you,
Honored Sir, as a Clergyman, you ought to be a Terror to evil Do^rs, but a
Praise to them that do well. I know of no Law against such Meetings as mine. If
any such Law be existing, I believe you will think it your Duty, Honored Sir,
to apprize me of it, that I may not offend against it. If no Law can be
produced, as a Clergyman, I think it my Duty ^o inform you, that you ought to
protect, and not any Ways to discourage, or permit others to disturb an
Assembly of People meeting together, purely to worship GOD. Tomorrow, Honored
Sir, I hear there is to be an Assembly of anoth^r Nature; be pleased to be as
careful to have the public Peace preserved at that, and to prevent profane
Cursing and Swearing, and Persons breaking the sixth Commandment, by bruising
each others Bodies by Cudgelling and Wrestling; and if you do not this, I shall
rise up, against you at the great Day, and be a swift Witness against your
Partiality.

I am, Honored Sir, Your very humble Servant, GEORGE WHITEFIELD.


Friday, July 23. After Breakfast waited in Person upon Mr. Mayor, to see what
Law could be produced against my Meetings. As Soon as I began to talk with him,
I perceived he was a little angry -- and said, Sir, you sn^^red me in the
Letter you sent last Night, -- Though I am a Butcher, yet Sir, says he, I -- I
replied, I honored him as a Magistrate, and only desired to know what Law
could be produced against my Preaching: In my Opinion there could be none,
because there was never such a Thing as Field-Pre^ching before. I then
instanced the Trial of P -- the Quaker, where the Jury, notwithstanding they
were so hardly used, brought a Verdict in Favor of him. Sir, says he, you
ought to preach in a Church -- And so I would, replied I, if your Minister
would give me Leave. Sir, said he, I believe you (...) some sinister Ends in
view; why do you go about making a Disturbance? I answered, I make no
Disturbance: And it was hard I could not come into Town without being insulted.
It was your Business, Sir, said I, to wait, and if there was any Riot in my
Meetings, then, and not till then, it is your Duty to interpose. Then said he,
Sir, you wrote to me about the Revel to Da^; I have declared against it. But,
said I, Sir, you ought to go and read the Riot-Act, and put an entire Stop to
it. I then pressed him, to show me a Law against Meetings; urging, if there had
been any Law, they would have been stopped long since. He answered, It was an
odd Way of preaching. -- But, Sir, says he, I must go away to a Fair; before
you came I had wrote you another Letter, which I will send you yet, if you
please. Upon this I thanked him, paid him the Respect due to a Magistrate, and
took my Leave. Soon after I was returned to my Company, he sent me the
following Letter:

Rev. Sir. Basingstoke, July 20* 1739.
I received your extraordinary Letter, and could expect no other from so
uncommon a Genius.

I apprehend your Meetings to be unlawful, having no Toleration to protect you
in it. My Apprehensions of Religion always was, and I hope always will be, that
GOD is to be worshipped in Places consecrated, and set apart for his Service,
and not in Brothels, and Places where all Manner of Debauchery may have been
committed; but how far this is ^onsistent with your Actions, I leave you to
judge.

As for the other Assembly you are pleased to mention, it is contrary to my
Will, having never given my Consent to it, nor approved of it, but discouraged
it before your Reverendship came to this Town; and if these Cudgellers persist
in it, I shall set them upon the same Level with you, and think you all
Breakers of the public Peace. You very well know there are Penal-Laws against
Cursing and Swearing, and I could wish there were the same against Deceit and
Hypocrisy. Your appearing against me as a swift Witness at the Day of Judgment,
I must own, is a most terrible Thing, and may serve as a Bugbear for Children,
or People of weak Minds; but believe me, Reverend Sir, those Disguises will
have but little Weight amongst Men of common Understanding.

I told you I had a Letter wrote, I made bold to send it. Yours, JOHN ABBOT.


To this I sent the following Answer:

Honored Sir,
Does Mr. Mayor do well to be angry? Alas, what Evil have I done! I honor you
as a Magistrate; but as a Minister I am obliged to have no Respect of Persons.
Your apprehending my Meetings to be unlawful, does not make them to be (...).
There Is no need of a Toleration^ to protect me, when I do not act ^^nformable
to any Law, Civil or Ecclesiastical. He pleased to prove that my Meetings are
Schismatical. Seditious or Riotous, and then I will submit. But you say they
are upon unconsecrated Ground. Honored Sir, give me Leave to inform you, that
GOD is not now confined to Places, but seeks such to worship him, who worship
him in Spirit and in Truth; and where two or three are gathered together in
CHRIST'S Name, there will CHRIST* be in the Midst of them. The Church, by our
Ministers in their Prayer before their Sermons, is defined not to be the
Church-Walls, but a Congregation of Christian People; such is mine. As for
judging me, -- To my own Master I stand or fall; at his dreadful Tribunal I
will meet you, and then you shall see what is in the (...) of, Honored Sir,

Your very humble Servant. G. WHITEFIELD.
Basingstoke, July 20, 1739.

About 8 o'Clock I went into a Field, lent me by Mr. H -- n; and though one said,
I should not go alive out of Basing stoke if I preached there, and another
said, the Drum should beat just by me, yet I had little or no Interruption, and
GOD gave me such great Power in speaking against Revelling, and those few
Scoffers that were there, that they were not able to gainsay, or resist it. As
I came from the Field, passing through the Churchyard, the Boys, headed by
some of the ba^er Sort, saluted me as before, called me strange Names, which, I
trust, was received in the Spirit of our dear Master.

After this I prayed and sung Psalms at the Inn with some few Disciples, and
then took my Leave. -- As I passed by on Horseback, I saw a Stage built for the
Cudgellers and Wrestlers; and as I rode farther, I met diverse coming to the
Revel, which affected me so much, that I had no Rest in my Spirit. And
therefore having asked Counsel of GOD, and perceiving an unusual Power and
Warmth enter into my Soul, though I was gone above a Mile from the Town, I
could not bear to see so many dear Souls for whom CHRIST died, ready to perish,
and no Minister or Magistrate interpose. Upon this I told my dear Fellow
Travelers that I was resolved to follow the Example of Howel Harris in Wales,
and to bear my Testimony against such lying Vanities, let the Consequences, as
to my own private Person, be what they would. They immediately consenting, I
rode back to the Town, got upon the Stage erected for the Wrestlers, and began
to show them the Error of their Ways. -- Many seemed ready to hear what I had
to say, but one more zealous for his Master than the rest, and fearing
Conviction every Time I so much as attempted to speak, set the Boys upon
repeating their Uzza's. -- My Soul, I perceived, was in a sweet Frame, willing
to be offered up, so that I might save some of those, to whom I was about to
speak; but all in vain. While I was on the Stage, one struck me with his
Cudgel, which I received with the utmost Love; till at last finding the Devil
would not permit them to give me Audience, I got off, and after much thronging
and pushing me, I mounted my Horse with unspeakable Satisfaction w^^hin myself,
that I had now begun to attack the Devil in his strongest Holds, and had borne
my Testimony against the detestable Diversions of this Generation. -- Ye
Masters of Israel, what are you doing? Ye Magistrates, that are called Gods in
Scripture, why sleep you? Why do you bear the Sword in vain? Why count you me a
Troubler of Israel; and why say you I teach People to be idle, when you can
connive at, if not subscribe to such hellish Meetings as these, which not only
draw People from their bodily Work, but directly tend to destroy their precious
and immortal Souls; surely I shall appear against you at the Judgment Seat of
CHRIST; for these Diversions keep People from true Christianity as much as
Paganism itself. And I doubt not, but it will require as much Courage and*
Power to divert People from these Things, as the Apostles were obliged to exert
in converting the Heathen from their dumb Idols. However, in the Strength of my
Master, I will now enter the Lists, and begin an offensive War with Satan, and
all his Host. If I perish, I perish; I shall have the Testimony of a good
Conscience, I shall be free from the Blood of all Men.

From Basingstoke I intended to go to Wind^or, but having not sent to any in
that Place, and longing for a little Retirement, I lay at Stains, and spent
some Hours in sweet Fellowship with my dear Fellow-Travellers. O what a blessed
Thing it is for Brethren to dwell together in Unity!

LONDON.
Saturday, July 21* Set out a little after four in the Morning, and reached
London by Breakfast Time. Settled my A^^^ur, rejoiced with my dear Friends, and
preached in the Evening to upwards of ten thousand at Kennington-Common: The
poor Souls were ready to leap for Joy at my Return amongst them. The Word sun^^
deep into their Hearts. Great Numbers melted into Tears, and my own Heart
overflowed with Love toward them. Blessed be GOD for what has been done here
since I left London, by my honored Friend and Fellow Labourer Mr. Charles
Wesley. Surely, we can see the Fruits of our Labors. All Love, all Glory be to
GOD, for giving so great an Increase!

Sunday, July 22. Ever since I was abused at Basingstoke, I have had great
Communications from GOD. When Men cast us out, then does JESUS CHRIST chiefly
take us up. Who would not be a Christian? There is nothing I des^re on Earth in
Comparison of that. -- Received a Letter from Mr. Ralph Erskine of Scotland.
Some may be offended at my corresponding with him, but I dare not but confess
my LORD's Disciples. -- Had a pressing Invitation to come into Lincol^shire.
Blessed be GOD, the Word runs very swiftly. In vain do our Adversaries stand
against the Most High. -- Preached at Seven ^n the Morning to about Twenty
Thousand at Mcor^u^ld^. A greater Power than ever was amongst us. Scoffers and
curious Persons daily drop off. Most that come now, I hope, do not come out of
Curiosity. Never were Souls more melted down by the Power of GOD's Words. Never
did People offer their Mites more willingly. I collected 24 l. 17 s. for the
School-House that is erecting at Kingswood, and all seemed sollicitous how to
express their Affection. Ye Scoffers, ye blind Pharisees, come and see, and
then call these tumultuous, seditious Assemblies if you can. Would to GOD, they
behaved so decently in any Church in London. Went to St. Paul's, and received
the blessed Sacrament, and preached in the Evening at Kennington-Common to
about 30,000 Hearers, and collected 15 l. 15 s. 6 d. for the Colliers. GOD gave
me great Power, and I never opened my Mouth so freely against the
Letter-learned Clergymen of the Church of England. Every Day do I see the
Necessity of speaking out more and more -- The most learned of our modern
Rabbis, I find now by their Writings, and by their Conferences with me and my
Friends, either make our Sanctification a Cause of, whereas it is the Effect of
our Justification before GOD, of they entirely interpret away the meaning of
all the Doctrines of the Spirit, so as to make Regeneration consist only in a
Desire and good Disposition to do the Will of GOD; or, in other Words, in an
outward Decency of Life, and a Morality falsely so called. This is the Sum and
Substance of the Generality of our modern Doctrine. And therefore, was I to die
immediately for speaking, yet I should not die in Peace, unless I bore my
Testimony against them. GOD knows my Heart, I do not speak out of Resentment --
I heartily wish all the LORD's Servants were Prophets -- I wish the Church of
England was the Joy of the whole Earth. But I cannot see her sinking into
Papistical Ignorance, and Deism refined, and not open my Mouth against those,
who by their sensual lukewarm Lives, and unscriptural superficial Doctrines,
thus cause her to err -- O Lord, send out, we beseech thee, send out thy Light,
and thy Truth. Even so come, LORD JESUS, come quickly!

Monday, July 23. This Day I received the following Letter from the Quaker at
Basingstoke, at whose House I lodged.

Basingstoke, July 21. 1739. My Dear FRIEND,
When I Yesterday went up to thy Inn, and found thee just gone, I was sorry
that I missed an Opportunity, both of taking my Leave of thee, and expressing
the Sense I had of the Power and Presence of GOD that was with thee, more
especially in the latter Part of thy Sermon, and in thy Prayer after it;
However, I am truly glad, that thou were preserved out of the Hands of cruel
and unreasonable Men. Thou heardst of the Threatenings of many, but the Malice
and blind Zeal of some went further. For had thou went to my Friend H -- to
Bed, or elsewhere toward that Part of the Town, which I believe was expected,
there were 10 or 12 Men lying in wait to do thee a private Mischief, which I
know by the Testimony of one of those very Men, who boasted to me, We would
have given him a secret Blow, and prevented his making Disturbances. This
Confession (...) me out to me in the Warmth of his Zeal, as thinking, perhaps,
that I could hate, at least, if not destroy (like him) all that were not of my
own Party.

O thy noble Testimony against the Profaneness and Vanity of the Age. It
rejoiced me not a little. But when thou came to the Necessity, the Nature and
the Rewards of the New Birth, the true Seed, thou were carried beyond thyself,
the Fountain of Life was opened, and flowed around amongst the Living. I am,
for one, a Monument of free Grace and Mercy. O GOD how boundless it thy Love!
He has not hid his Mercies from me. I have often drank of the spiritual Rock,
and been a Witness of the Joys of GOD's Salvation. Ay, those Joys, that sweet
Presence of CHRIST, that carries Men above the Fear of the World, and enables
them to overcome the World; that baptizeth into the Spirit and Nature of the
SON OF GOD, and makes Disciples indeed. It is a Sense of GOD ever near the
Influences of his quickening Spirit, that is only able to deter from Evil,
crucify the old Nature, create again to GOD, and perform his good and
acceptable Will. This will make a thorough Reformation, beginning at the Heart,
sanctifying that, guarding of it, and malting it a holy Temple for the holy
Spirit to dwell in, then producing holy Thoughts, Longings after divine
Enjoyments, Love, Joy, Solidity, Watchfulness, etc.

But, why this to thee? Thou have drank deep of divine Love; only I know that
the good Experiences of GOD's Children are often Causes of mutual Comfort. I
have often been sensible of it myself, and therefore, not only thus privately,
but publicly have I been strengthened to tell to others, that GOD is good, and
that he has done great Things for my Soul. Ministers not thus qualified, and
thus sent, may indeed be Ministers of those who sent them, but Ministers of
CHRIST they cannot be.

May we, my dear Friend, though absent i^ Body be present in Spirit, in him who
is omnipresent. May we unitedly go on in the Cause of our common LORD and
Master, to promote his Honor in winning Souls to him! May we bear a faithful
and undaunted Testimony to him before all Men, in the midst of a perverse
Generation! May we not flinch, but declare the Truth as it is in JESUS, not
daubing, nor daring to make the Way to the Kingdom of GOD wider than it is. And
may we finally be received up into the Mansions of Glory, there to live with
all the righteous Generations, with those that have washed their Garments white
in the Blood of the Lamb, and with those that have laid down their Lives for
the Testimony of JESUS, and to sing with them, Hallelujahs, Glory and Praise,
forever and ever! May the Ancient of Days, the Alpha and Omega, keep thee in
his Arms, direct thee by his Spirit, support, comfort and watch over thee, is
the fervent Prayer, of my dear Friend, thine in great Sincerity.

J. PORTSMOUTH.


My Friend, Mr. William Seward, received also a Letter from his Brother, in
which were the following Paragraphs.

I had a Letter per last Post from Mr. -- wherein he speaks of one Mr. -- of
Corpus Christ College, whom his Uncle, a Clergyman, has entirely discarded,
and wrote to the College to expel him for his Methodistical Notions.

The old Clerk at Breferton, whom I before spoke of, having heard Mr.
Whitefield at Bads^y, was so affected, that he told me, he could have no rest
in his Spirit; but after searching the Church-Homilies, Articles, etc. and
finding the Doctrine every way agreeable to them, he met with the Landlord of
Contercup, who discoursing about Mr. Whitefield, told him he had some old Books
that set forth the very same Doctrine. Soon after this he went to Work, being a
Tailor by Trade, and asking for one of these Books, the others being lent out,
he said he had not read above a Page or two, before the Truth broke in upon his
Soul like Lightning. He said he could not go on with his Work with any
Satisfaction, but (...) ^^^gers itched to be at his Book again, which the Man
lent him home with him; a few (...) after, he got the other, which so
strengthen^^ and confirmed him, that he could lay his Life down in Defense of
the Truth as it is in JESUS. He says, the Gospel appears to him, as though he
never read a Line in it before; and it is a greater Miracle to him, that he, an
old Sinner, with one Foot in the Grave, should be called at these Years, than
if he had seen the Dead raised. He always, by what I can learn, bore a fair
Character, and was esteemed by his Neighbors, but now threatened with the Loss
of his Bread, for coming to Badsey Society, and declaring his Testimony to the
Truth of Mr. Whitefield's Doctrine, or rather I should say, the Doctrine of the
Gospel. The Books he met with are very oil, and, he says, were thrown by as
waste Paper out of a Clergyman's Library, that was sold after his Death,
whereby the Contercup Man met with them, and they seemed very providentially
reserved for his Use.

Persons wonder at me, because I talk of Persecution, now the World is become
Christian; but alas! was JESUS CHRIST to come down from Heaven at this Time, he
would he treated as formerly. And whoever goes forth to preach the Gospel in
his Spirit, must expect the same Treatment as his first Apostles met with.
LORD, prepare us for all Events.

Preached this Evening at Hackney-Marsh to about two thousand People. -- I
prayed and discoursed for above two Hours, and with greater Demonstration of
the Spirit than ever. -- Floods of seemed Tears were shed by the Hearers, and
the Doctrine seemed to make its own Way into their Hearts. Every Day have I
more and more Reason to rejoice in what GOD has done for my own, and others
Souls. Thousands at the great Day will have Reason to bless GOD for
Field-Preaching. Then our Pharisees will believe. But LORD, grant the Veil may
be taken from their Hearts, and the Scales from their Eyes, before that
dreadful Day! For then Convictions will come too late.

Tuesday, July 24. Dispatched my private Affairs, and preached in the Evening
at Kennington-Common, to about 15000. The Doctrine, I believe, distilled like
the Dew. May the Lord JESUS water their thirsty Souls!

Wednesday, July 25. Preached this Evening at Edmonton, at the Desire of many.
The Congregation was large and attentive, and I rejoiced in having an
Opportunity of offering Salvation freely to the Rich. Oh, that all in high
Stations were rich toward GOD!

Thursday, July 26. Preached to upwards of ten Thousand at Hackney-Marsh, where
I appointed purposely to preach, because there was to be an Horse-Race in the
same Field. Blessed be GOD, I had the Pleasure of bearing my Testimony against
such unchristian Entertainments. Very few left the Sermon to see the Race, and
some of those returned back again quickly, to whom I took Occasion of speaking
with something of the Love and Simplicity of CHRIST, To him be all the Glory. I
think this is a manifest Proof of the Success of our Doctrine. By the Help of
GOD I will still go on to attack the Devil in his strongest Holds. The common
People go to these Diversions for Want of knowing better. If we can once draw
them from these, their Minds will be better prepared to receive the Gospel.
Prosper, O LORD, this Work of my Hands upon me!

Friday, July 27. Preached at Kennington-Common to my usual Number of Hearers;
went to Lewisham, was kindly entertained by Mrs. -- and lay at the House of Mr.
-- both which received me and my Friends with Joy. Blessed be GOD for all his
Mercies.

Saturday, July 28. Spent a comfortable Hour with my Friends in the Morning;
went to pay a Visit to the Family of Justice Delamotte, at Blendon, where we
exhorted and built up each other in the Knowledge and Fear of GOD. Preached at
Blackheath in the Evening, and came home rejoicing that I saw great Fruits of
my Ministry. The Bills which are sent to me, plainly prove, that GOD has worked
on Numbers of Souls. At the Judgment Day you shall see, O Pharisees, what Good
has been done by this Foolishness of Preaching. Many I believe, come to the
Fields to worship the Father in Spirit and in Truth. GOD se^keth such to
worship him.

Sunday, July 29. Preached this Morning in Moorfields to a much larger
Congregation than we had last Sunday, and collected 24 l. 9 s. for the School
at Kingswood. Received the Sacrament at St. Paul's, and preached at
Kennington-Common in the Evening, where 20 l. was collected. GOD sent us a
little Rain; but that only washed away the curious Hearers. -- Near thirty
Thousand stood their Ground, and GOD, I believe, watered them with the Dew of
his heavenly Blessing. A more visible Alteration for the better is made in the
People daily, a good Work is wrought in the Hearts of Numbers. It would be
endless to recount how many come to me under strong Convictions of their lo^t
Estate. GOD has begun, GOD will carry on the good Work in their Souls; -- Even
so, Lord JESUS!

Monday, July 30. Was busied all the Morning in directing those to believe in
JESUS CHRIST, who came asking me, What they should do to be saved? Preached at
Plaistow, about 6 Miles from London, and an uncommon Power was in the
Congregation. -- My own Heart was much enlarged, and I returned home much
rejoiced within myself that the Lord JESUS was pleased still to manifest
himself more and more amongst us.

Tuesday, July 31. Preached at Newington near Hackney, to about twenty thousand
People, many of whose Hearts, as well as my own, were warmed under the Word. I
preached upon Genesis iii. 15. and I hope the Seed of the Woman is now bruising
the Serpent's Head to some Purpose. Amen, Lord JESUS, Amen!

Wednesday, August 1. Preached this Evening at Mary Le Bone Fields, at the
other End of the Town, to near thirty Thousand, and went afterward to take my
Leave of Fetter-lane Society. We parted in Love, and I hope the next Time we
meet, we shall be in or at least nearer Heaven. Oh, that we may comfort one
another with the Prospect of this Thing.

Thursday, August 2. Preached at Newington to upwards of twenty Thousand
People, and came home much rejoicing to see what a great Work GOD has done in
this City. Thousands and I believe ten Thousands, come constantly to hear.
Scoffers seem afraid to show their Heads, being frequently overpowered by GOD's
Word. I hope the Time is coming which the Prophet speaks of: Behold ye
Despisers, and wonder, and perish; for I will work a Work in your Days, which
you shall in no wise believe, though a Man declare it unto you.

Friday, August 3. Spent the Day in completing my Affairs, taking my Leave of
my dear Friends, and preached in the Evening to near twenty Thousand at
Kennington-Common. I chose to discourse on St. Paul's parting Speech to the
Elders at Ephesus, Acts xx. at which the People were exceedingly affected, and
almost prevented my making any Application. Many Tears were shed, when I talked
of Leaving them. I concluded all with a suitable Hymn, but could scarce get to
the Coach, for the People's thronging me, to take me by the Hand, and give me a
parting Blessing. And here I cannot but shut up this Part of my Journal with a
Word or two of Exhortation to my dear Brethren, whosoever they are, whom GOD
shall stir up to go forth into the Highways and Hedges, into the Lanes and
Streets, to compel poor Sinners to come in. You see, my dear Brethren, what
great Things GOD has already done. -- It is unknown how many have come to me
under strong Convictions of their fallen Estate, and what Numbers of Bills I
have received from Persons seeking CHRIST, desiring to be awakened to a ^ense
of Sin, and giving Thanks for the Benefits GOD has imparted to them by my
Ministry. Letters of Invitation have been sent me from different Parts of the
Kingdom. O my dear Brethren, have Compassion on our dear LORD's Church, which
he has purchased with his own Blood. -- Suffer none of them to be as Sheep
having no Shepherd, or worse than none, those blind Leaders of the Blind, who
let them perish for Lack of Knowledge, and are no better than Wolves in Sheep's
Clothing. If you are found faithful, you must undergo a strong Persecution. A
Person in Power told me, nothing but the Fear of Strengthening my Interest.
kept off the Storm. But the Enmity of the natural Man is so great against GOD,
that if the Good Work, which is begun is carried on, it will soon break through
all Restraints, though thereby our Enemies will confound themselves; but the
Scriptures must be fulfilled. Oh arm People against a Suffering Time; exhort
them always to be obedient to the higher Powers; remind them again and again,
that our Kingdom is not of this World, and that it does not become Christians
to resist the Powers that are ordained of GOD, but patiently to suffer for the
Truth's Sake. At present GOD calls me to Trials of a different Nature; but I am
persuaded, ever long, it will be given me not only to believe, but also to
suffer for our LORD's Sa^^. Oh let us strive together in our Prayers, that we
may fight the Good Light of Faith, that we may have that Wisdom which comes
from above, that we may never suffer for our own Faults, but only for
Righteousness Sake. Then will the Spirit of CHRIST and of Glory (...) upon our
Souls, and being made perfect by suffering here, we shall be qualified to reign
eternally with JESUS CHRIST hereafter. Amen, Amen!

Eternal Universal LORD,
Maker of Heaven and Earth art Thou.
All Things sprang forth to obey thy Word,
Thy powerful Word upholds them now*
Why then with unavailing Rage,
Did Heathen with thy People join,
And impotently fierce engage,
To execute their vain Design?
Indignant Kings stood up to oppose,
The LORD, and his Messiah's Reign,
And Earth's confederate Rulers rose,
Against their GOD in Council vain.
Surely against thy Holy Son,
( Son of thy Love and sent by Thee,
One with the anointing Spirit, One
With thy coequal Majesty.)
Herod and Pilate both combined,
Thy Sovereign Purpose to fulfill,
Gentiles and Jews unconscious joined,
(...) accomplish thy Eternal Will.
And now their idle Fury view,
And now behold their Threatenings, LORD,
Behold Thy faithful Servants too,
And strengthen us to speak thy Word,
Emboldened by thine outstretch'd Arm,
Fill us with Confidence Divine,
With Heavenly Zeal our Bosom warm,
That all may own the Work is Thine.
May see the Tokens of thy Hand,
Its Sovereign Grace its healing Power,
(...) Happiness withstand,
And fight against their GOD no more.
Now let their Opposition cease,
Now let them catch the quickening Flame,
And for^'d to yield, the Signs increase,
The Wonders wrought by JESU's Name.
A CONTINUATION Of the Reverend Mr. Whitefield's JOURNAL FROM His Embarking
after the Embargo. To His Arrival at Savannah in Georgia.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed and Sold by B. FRANKLIN, in Market-street, 1740.

A CONTINUATION OF Mr. Whitefield's JOURNAL, etc.
Lewisham, Deptford and Blendon.
SATURDAY, August 4. Lay last Night at the House of one Mrs. S -- w, being
strongly invited. Went in the Morning to Deptford. Prayed, sung Psalms, and
gave a Word of Exhortation at 2 or 3 Houses. Re^urn'd to dine with Mrs.
Sparrow. Expounded to a Room full of People. Preached at Blackheath to about
10,000; and went and lay at Blendon, to the great Comfort and Rejoicing of my
Soul. Oh that my Mouth was ^ver filled with the Divine Praise!

Blend^n, Bexley and Blackheath.
Sunday, August 5. Rose much strengthened and refreshed in the inner Man.
Expounded, prayed and sung Psalms at Mr. Delamotte's Door, with a great Number
of Souls that came from London. Read Prayers and assisted in Administering the
Sacrament to several hundred Communicants at Bexley Church. Preached to about
15,00, in Justice Delamotte's Yard: And again in the Evening to about 20,000 at
Blackheath. -- The Weather was wet but only a few were driven away by it. --
Great Power came upon me from above, and I opened my Mouth with all Boldness.
-- GOD watered us with the Dew of his Heavenly Blessing. Oh that we may all
grow in Grace, and in the Knowledge of the LORD JESUS CHRIST!

Blendon and Chatham.
Monday, August 6. Spent the former Part of the Day most agreeably at Blendon,
and preached in the Evening at Chatham, about 18 Miles from thence, to above
12,000 People. -- I never, observed more Decency and Order in any Place, at my
first preaching, than at that. Had a Conference, after Sermon, with one, who, I
fear, with some others maintains Antinomian Principles. -- From such may all
that know them turn away! For though, to use the Words of our Church Article,
Good Works do not justify us, yet they follow after Justification; so that a
true Faith may be known by them, as a Tree by its Fruits.

Chatham, Blendon, Blackheath and Lewisham.
Tuesday, August 7. Left Chatham early this Morning. Dined at Blendon; and
preached in the Evening at Blackheath. -- It rained very much the whole Day. --
We expected but little Company: However there were about 2000, whom GOD richly
rewarded for waiting in the Rain. -- I discoursed on the Conversion of Zach^us
the Publican, -- and I hope there was Joy in Heaven over some of my Hearers
repenting. -- Out of the Abundance of my Heart my Mouth spoke. -- They received
my Doctrine as the Thirsty Ground receives the former and the latter Rain. -- I
know not when I have been more delighted. LORD, in doing thy Commandments there
is great Reward!

Lewisham, Deptford and Blackheath.
Wednesday, August 8. Lay at Lewisham. Went on board the Ship now fallen down
to Deptford, and sanctified it by the Word of GOD, and by Prayer. Dined at Mr.
W -- s of Lewisham, and preached at Blackheath, to near 20,000 People, on the
Pharisee and the Publican. I felt much Freedom in myself, and could not but
take Notice of a Fundamental Mistake his Lordship of London was guilty of, in a
Pastoral Letter published this Day; for in it he exhorts his Clergy so to
explain the Doctrine of Justification by Faith alone, as to make our good Works
a necessary Condition of our Justification in the Sight of GOD. -- St. Paul in
his Epistle to the Galatians, pronounces a dreadful ANATHEMA against the
Maintainers of such Doctrines. -- I pray GOD his Lordship may see his Error,
and thereby be freed from so tremendous a Sentence.

On board Ship, Lewisham and Blackheath.
Thursday, August 9. Went this Morning, and continued on Board till Afternoon,
settling my little Family. Dined at Lewisham: Preached at Blackheath, to a very
large Congregation. Took a little Refreshment, and went and lay on Board, in
order to be ready to finish my Affairs in the Morning. Several Companies of
Friends came to see me in my floating Habitation; and some continued with me
all Night. In answer to their Prayers, I doubt not but we shall be as safe as
Noah was in the Ark. Every Place is alike to those who have the Presence of GOD
with them.

Heaven is, dear LORD, wherever thou art,
O never then from me depart,
For to my Soul it is Hell to be
But for one Moment void of thee.
Lewisham, Blackheath and Blendon.
Friday, August 10. Finished my Ship Business. Breakfasted at Lewisham. Spent
the Remainder of the Day most comfortably at Blendon; and preached in the
Evening to a yet greater Congregation at Blackheath. The People expecting it
would be the last Time, were much affected with Sorrow; but a great Shout of
Rejoicing was heard amongst them, when I told them of my continuing to preach
till Monday. GOD has made himself a willing People in the Day of his Power. Oh
all ye Servants of the LORD, bless ye the LORD, praise him and magnify him for
ever.

Blendon and Blackheath.
Saturday, August 11. Began in the Spirit of Love and Meekness, to answer the
Bishop of London's Pastoral Letter. -- I pray GOD give it his Blessing.
Continued all Day at Blendon. Preached in the Evening at Blackheath, and
returned to Blendon, with an earnest Desire to fit and prepare my Soul for the
approaching Sabbath. O how do I long for that Rest, which awaits the Children
of GOD in a future State! LORD give me Patience to wait 'till my wished for
Change comes!

Blendon, Bexley, Blackheath, and Lewisham.
Sunday, August 12. Preached early in the Morning, to some Hundreds, in Justice
Delamotte's Yard; most of which came thither last Night, Singing and Praising
GOD. Read Prayers. Heard an excellent and truly Christian Sermon from Mr.
Piers* and assisted him in administering the blessed Sacrament at his own
Church, to near Six Hundred Communicants. Preached at Three in the Afternoon,
to near 3000 in Mr. Delamotte's Yard, and to near 40,000 at Blackheath: At each
Place the People were exceedingly affected. Much Devotion and due Reverence was
to be seen during the time of administering the Holy Eucharist. And in the
Afternoon particularly, at Blackheath, when I said, Finally Brethren Farewell;
Thousands immediately burst into strong Crying and Tears. The Sight, I think
must have melted down the most hardened Heart; My own was so full that I did
not know when to leave off: I continued my Discourse 'till it was near Dark,
and collected near Fifteen Pounds for Kingswood School: And with great
Difficulty got away in a Coach to Lewisham, where an hospitable Entertainment
was prepared for me and my Friends. -- Their Company was sweet to my Soul; but
my Body being Weak, and GOD being pleased to visit me with some inward Trials,
I retired to Bed with a deeper Sense of my own Vileness, than I have felt for
some Time. LORD increase it for thy Mercies sake!

Monday, August 13. Rose very early and hafted to Blendon. Finished and sent to
the Press, my Answer to my Lord of London's Pastoral Letter, which is as
follows, viz.

The ANSWER.
MY LORD,
I NEED make no Apology for troubling your Lordship with this. As your Lordship
was pleased to make me the chief Subject Matter of your last Pastoral Letter, I
think it my Duty to answer it in the best Manner I can.

Your Lordship is to be highly commended, for the Care you have taken in
Watching over the Souls of those who are committed to your Lordship's Charge.
-- Luke-warmness and Enthusiasm are the two Rocks, against which even
well-meaning People are in Danger of sp^^ting. All ought to be Thankful to that
Pilot, who will teach them to steer a safe and middle Course. I would gladly
hope, that a Zeal for GOD in the Discharge of your Duty, and a hearty Concern
for the Safety of Souls, moved your Lordship to write. -- These are the
Principles, I trust, which now excite me to direct this Answer to Your
Lordship. And, blesse^ (...) GOD, that I can write with somewhat of (...) Love
and Meekness which becomes a Disci^^^^ JESUS CHRIST, and with all that Humility
(...) Reverence, which is due from a Presbyter (...) Bishop of the Church of
GOD.

Lukewarmness and Enthusiasm, my Lord, are certainly the Bane of true
Christianity. I thank Your Lordship again for your kind Cautions against them.
The only Query is, Whe^^ (...) there was any Occasion for Your Lordship's
warning the People of your Diocese against running into either of these
Extremes, upon account of any Thing I have either spoken or wrote? Your
Lordship thinks there was, and you quote Passages out of my Journal to prove
it; if it can be proved, I will ask public Pardon, both of Your Lordship and
Them, with all my Heart.

As for your Cautions against Lukewarmness, I am not much concerned in them.
You do not seem to point at me in particular; unless it is where your Lordship
( Page 10) informs your People, That a diligent Attendance on the Duties of the
Station wherein Providence has placed them, is in the strictest Sense, the
Serving of GOD. None but those who condemn me unheard, can justly charge me
with affirming to the contrary.

However, I beg Leave to observe, that your Lordship ( Page 8) calls that a
very imperfect State of Christianity, which is no State of Christianity at all.
St. Paul writing to (...) Corinthians, 2 Cor. Chap. 13. v. 5. (...) Examine
yourselves whether ye be in the Faith, Prove your own selves. And that they
might have a certain Rule, whereby to judge whether they were in the Faith,
truly so called, or not, immediately adds, Know ye not your ownselves how that
CHRIST JESUS is in you, except ye be Reprobates? So that according to St.
Paul's Rule, He that finds, he has hitherto contented himself with a bare
bodily Attend^nce upon the ^ublick Worship of GOD, and following his daily
Employment on other Days, and with abstaining from the more gross and notorious
Acts of Sin, and from doing any Hurt or Injury to his Neighbor, and has rested
finally upon these as the Whole that Christianity requires of him, is so far
from being in a very imperfect State, as your Lordship is pleased to affirm, (
page 8) that he is in no State of Christianity at all. No, my Lord, he is a
Reprobate, i e. one who at present is out of a State of Salvation; no^ can he
ever have any Assurance that he is in a State of Salvation, till he Knows that
JESUS CHRIST is in him, by the Indwelling of his Holy Spirit. (...) I have
mistaken your Lordship's Expression, I will freely (...) your (...).

Another Thing, my Lord, to me (...) darkly expressed in ( page 8) (On! let not
your Lordship (...) angry* for indeed I will endeav^ur to speak with all
Gentleness and Humility) Your Lordship's Words are these, Nor need they any
other Evidence besides those Good Dispositions (...) find in their Hearts, that
the Holy Spirit of GOD co-operates with their honest Endeavors to subdue Sin
and grow in Goodness. If by Good Dispositions, your Lordship only means Good
Inclinations or Desires, I deny that to be a sufficient Evidence, that the
Spirit of GOD co-opera^^s with their honest Endeavors to subdue Sin and grow
in Goodness. For there is a great Difference between Good Desires and Good
Habits* Many have One, who never attain to the Other. Many have good Desires to
subdue Sin, and yet resting in those good Desires, Sin has always had Dominion
over them. A Person sick of a Fever may desire to be in Health, but that Desire
is not Health itself. In like Manner many have good Dispositions or Desires to
be good, but that is not Goodness itself. And consequently Men need more
Evidence than good Dispositions, to prove to themselves or others, That the
Holy Spirit of GOD co-operates with their honest Endeavors to subdue Sin. If
by good Dispositions Your Lordship means good Habits wrought in the Heart by
the Spirit of GOD, such as Peace, Love, Joy, Long-suffering, Goodness, Truth,
etc. I then agree a Man needs no other Evidence. For these are the proper and
genuine Fruits of the Spirit itself.

Your Lordship immediately adds, Nor that, persevering in their Course, and
praying to GOD for his Assistance, and relying upon the Merits of CHRIST for
the Pardon of all such Sins, Failings, and Imperfections as are more or less
unavoidable in this mortal State. I beg Leave to ask your Lordship, whether
this does not savor too much of the common Divinity, viz. That we are to do
something for ourselves; or, in other Words, that we have partly a
Righteousness of our own, and that JESUS CHRIST is to MAKE UP the Deficiencies
of that Righteousness? What else can your Lordship mean, by saying, That we
must rely on the Merits of CHRIST, for the Pardon of all such Sins as are more
or less unavoidable in this mortal State?' Did JESUS CHRIST come into the
World, my Lord, only to save us from the Guilt of such Sins as are more or less
unavoidable in this mortal State? The Scriptures every where affirm, That Man
has no Righteousness of his own: That there is none Righteous, no not one:
That all our Righteousness is as filthy Rags; and that JESUS CHRIST died not
only to save us from the Guilt of all such Sins, Failings and Infirmities, as
are more or less unavoidable in this mortal State, but from all wilful Sins,
and also from that original Corruption, which every Man naturally engendered of
the Offspring of Adam, brings into the World with him. I hope I have not
misunderstood or overstrained Your Lordship's Expression.

I come now to Your Lordship's Caution against Enthusiasm. For that I suppose
Your Lordship^ intended more particularly against me.

And here, my Lord, I ^eg Leave to observe, That in my Opinion, your Lordship
has by no Means been clear enough in your Definition of the Word Enthusiasm.

According to the fair Rules of Writing, was it not first incumbent on your
Lordship to show, that the Word Enthusiast had a good as well (...) bad
Meaning? that it signifies no more than a Person in GOD, and consequently every
Christian, in the proper Sense of the Word, is an Enthusiast? For St. Peter
writes, That to us are given exceeding great and precious Promises, that by
these we might be Partakers of the Divine Nature. And our Church says, If we
receive the Sacrament worthily, we are one with CHRIST and CHRIST with us, we
dwell in CHRIST and CHRIST in us. For which she has sufficient Warrant from our
LORD'S Prayer, John 17. 20. Neither pray I for these alone, but for them also
which shall believe on Me through their Word. Ver. 21. That they all may be
one, as thou Father art in me, and I in thee, that they also may be one in us.
Ver. 23. I in them and they in me, that they may be made perfect in one. Ver.
26. That the Love wherewith thou have loved me, may be in them and I in them.

But indeed your Lordship's Definition of Enthusiasm, when examined, does not
convey any ill Idea at all. Enthusiasm is a strong Persuasion on the Mind, that
they are guided in an extraordinary Manner, by immediate Impulses and
Impressions of the Spirit of GOD. Had Your Lordship said, a strong, but
groundless Persuasion, that they are guided in an extraordinary Manner, it
would have been to your Lordship's Purpose. But to affirm without any
Restriction, that a strong Persuasion that we are guided in an extraordinary
Manner by immediate Impulses, is Enthusiasm in the worst Sense of the Word,
when your Lordship yourself says, ( p. 54) There is no Doubt but GOD, when he
pleases, can work upon the Minds of Men by extraordinary Influences, to me
seems a little inconsistent.

Your Lordship proceeds thus: And this is owing chiefly to the Want of
distinguishing aright between the ordinary and extraordinary Operations of the
Holy Spirit. The extraordinary Operations were those by which the Apostles and
Others, who were entrusted with the first Propagation of the Gospel, were
enabled to work Miracles, and speak with Tongues, in Testimony, that their
Mission and Doctrine were from GOD.

I suppose, by extraordinary Operations, Your Lordship means the same as being
guided in an extraordinary Manner just above. And if so, according to your
Lordship's own Definition, I am no Enthusiast. For I never did pretend to these
extraordinary Operations of working Miracles or speaking with Tongues, in
Testimony that my Mission and Doctrine were from GOD; I only lay Claim to the
ordinary Gifts and Influences of the Spirit, which your Lordship ( page 20)
says, 'still continue.' And what Need was there then, my Lord, that the People
of your Diocese should be cautioned against Enthusiasm on my Account?

But your Lordship farther adds, the ordinary Gifts, however real and certain
in themselves, are no otherwise discernable than by their Fruits and Effects.
Had your Lordship said, no otherwise discernible to others than by their Fruits
and Effects, it would have been right. But if your Lordship means they are no
otherwise discernible to ourselves, in my Opinion it is wrong: For it is
possible, my Lord, for a Person to feel and discern these ordinary Gifts and
Influences of the Spirit in himself, when there is no Opportunity of
discovering them to others. For Instance, on Supposition that your Lordship was
assisted by the blessed Spirit in writing your Pastoral Letter, -- might not
your Lordship be sensible of an inward Joy and Complacency, wrought by that
self same Spirit, which was not then discernible to others? So likewise it is
possible for another to feel Joy in the Holy Ghost* with the rest of his
Fruits, which at that Time* may not be discernible to others; and which they
who have never experienced the like may not believe, though a Man declare it
unto them. I hope, my Lord, these Reasonings carry with them their own Evidence.

But to proceed ( Page 20,21,22,23,24,25). Your Lordship has taken Pains to
collect several Passages out of the public Liturgy, to prove the Doctrine of
Regeneration or our New Birth, to be the Doctrine of the Church of England.
Your Reason for so doing, appears ( page 23) to (...) your People against any
Suggestions, as of our (...) were regardless of the (...) (...) of Regeneration
and New Birth, as if there (...). Need for any Member of it to see^^ elsewhere
for (...) spiritual Service. I^ this, my Lord, was Intended to arm your People
against any such Suggestions made by me; indeed your Lordship does not do me
Justice. As your Lordship, I find, has done me the Honor to peruse my third
Journal, your Lordship may remember this Observation ( Page 206) that, after I
had baptized an Adult, I proved the Necessity of the New Birth, from the Office
of our Church.

In my Sermon upon the Indwelling of the Spirit of GOD, which I have made bold
to send your Lordship with this Letter, you will find I have quoted the
Expressions of our own Church Offices, to prove the Doctrine of the New Birth,
as your Lordship does in your Pastoral Letter. My constant Way of Preaching is,
first, to prove my Propositions by Scripture, and (...) to illustrate them by
the Articles and Collects of the Church of England. Those that have heard me,
can witness, how often I have exhorted them to be constant at the public
Service of the Church. I attend on it myself, and would read the public Liturgy
every Day, if your Lordship's Clergy would give me Leave. What further
Satisfaction can your Lordship require, that I do not suggest to your
Lordship's People, as if our Church were regardless of the Doctrine of
Regeneration and New Birth, and as if there were Need for any Member of it, to
seek elsewhere for a more spiritual Service?

In the following Paragraph, your Lordship has the same Insinuation, as though
I wanted to introduce Extempore Prayer, (...) to lay aside the public Liturgy
of our Church. For after your Lordship had been speaking against Praying by the
Spirit, and affirming that the Scripture no where tells us, that Prayer is the
single Work of the Spirit your Lordship says to your People, You have great
Reason to be thankful to God for a public Service prepared to your Hands. My
Lord, I never said to the Contrary. But does not your Lordship seem to
insinuate at the same Time, that we are not to depend on the Spirit of GOD to
enable us to pray Extempore, either in public or private? That Prayer is not
the single Work of the Spirit, without any Cooperation of our own, I readily
confess. But that the Spirit of GOD does assist true Christians to pray
extempore now, as well as formerly, is undeniable if the Scriptures be true.
For what says the Apostle? We know not what to pray for as we ought, but the
Spirit itself helps our Infirmities, and makes Intercession for us with
Groanings that cannot be uttered. And this is (...) upon a general Promise made
to all GOD's People. Zacharias 12. 10. I will pour upon the House of David, and
upon the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, the (...) of Grace and of Supplication. And
I believe, my Lord, we may appeal to the Experience of all true Christians,
whether or no they did not find the Spirit of Supplication, or a Power of
Praying without a Form, increase in Proportion to the Increase of GOD's Grace
or Holy Spirit in their Hearts. This is all, my Lord, that I pretend to: And
where is the Impropriety of this, when your Lordship confesses in the some
Page, that the Spirit of GOD does particularly assist us, in a due Performance
of Religious Offices?

Farther, as your Lordship seems to deny the immediate Assistance of the Holy
Spirit in our particular Addresses at the Throne of Grace, so your Lordship
seems to deny it also in our particular Actions. In like Manner, your Lordship
says, we are firmly persuaded in general, that we live under he gracious
Influence of GOD's Holy Spirit, and that he both excites and enables us to do
Good. But that this or that Thought or Action is an ^^^ct of the sole Motion or
immediate Impulse of the Spirit, without any Cooperation of our own Mind. --
My Lord, who ever affirmed that there was no Cooperation of our own Minds,
together with the Impulse of the Spirit of GOD? Your Lordship adds, Or that the
Holy Spirit, and our natural Conceptions, do respectively contribute to (...)
or that Thought or Action, in such a Measure, or to such a Degree; these are
Things we dare not say. Indeed, my Lord, I dare say them. For i^ there be any
such Thing as a particular Providence, why may we not expect particular
Directions from GOD's Holy Spirit in particular Cases? Does not our Church, my
Lord, teach us to pray, that GOD's Holy Spirit may (...) Things direct and rule
our Hearts? But your Lordship says, We dare not say this, because our Savior
has told us, that we know no (...) of the Workings of the Spirit, than we know
of the (...) from whence it comes or whither (...) (...). Neither ^eed we know
any more of them; but you must allow, that we know as much. Cannot your
Lordship feel the Wind then? Does not your Lordship know when it (...) an
Impression upon your Body? So easy is it for a spiritual Man to know when the
Holy Spirit makes an Impression upon his Soul. With out acknowledging this, all
the Expressions (...) being, led by the Spirit, walking by the Spirit and such
(...), must be only (...) many Word (...) any real Meaning. (...) Lordship
acknowledges, that the Holy Spirit does act i^ general, and (...) not in the
particular Action^ of our (...) also? For can the One ^e without the (...)
^^^ppen, my Lord, that (...) Happiness of our where I was depend on one
particular Action? (...), my Lord, is the Absurdity of saying, that the Holy
Spirit may, even in the ^^^^est Circumstance, direct and rule our Hearts? I
have been the more particular, my Lord, on this Part of your Lordship's (...),
because if this (...) (...), many of your Lordship's Objections against my
Journals will (...) to the Ground.

Page 27, Your Lordship has the following Paragraph. GOD forbid that in this
prof^^e (...) (...) Age, every Thing (...) (...) (...) that it is (...) of. But
at the ^^me (...) surely very (...), that Men should (...) reasonable Evidence
or it Divine (...).

I take it for granted, that I am one of those Men whom your Lordship thinks
should be called upon for some reasonable Evidence of a Divine Commission.

But, my Lord, what reasonable Evidence does your Lordship require? Did I not
receive Letters dimissory from your Lordship's own Hands to be ordained Priest?
Did I not, when ordained Deacon affirm, That I was inwardly moved by the Holy
Ghost, to take upon me that Office and Ministration? Did not my Lord of
Gloucester, when he ordained me Priest, say unto me, Receive thou the Holy
Ghost, now committed unto thee by the Imposition of our Hands, in the Name of
the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost? And is not this, my Lord* a
reasonable Evidence that I act by a Divine Commission? If this be not true,
must not all those whom your Lordship, or the other Bishops ordain, act only by
a human Commission? Nay (to use the Words of Bishop Burnet in his Pastoral
Letter) Must not they who are ordained, Lie, not only unto Man but unto GOD, by
saying, They are inwardly moved by the Holy Spirit?

If your Lordship in any wise disputes my acting by a Divine Commission, you
disclaim your own Divine Right and Authority; nor can you possibly avoid the
Dilemma, of either allowing my Divine Commission, or denying your own.

After Your Lordship has insinuated a Demand for the Evidences of my Divine
Commission, immediately follows these Words, When they tell us of extraordinary
Communications they have with GOD.

If by extraordinary Communications, your Lordship means the extraordinary
Operations of the Holy Spirit, as Working Miracles, and Speaking with Tongues;
your Lordship may assure yourself, I never pretend to any such Thing. -- If, by
extraordinary Communications, your Lordship means more Assistances and Comforts
from GOD at some Times than I have at others (which is all I mean by
extraordinary Communications) I own the Charge. And what is there* my Lord,
extraordinary in that?

Again, Your Lordship says ( Page 28) When they talk in the Language of those
who have a special and immediate Mission from GOD.

And does your Lordship, and the rest of the Bishops, ordain any, without
obliging them first to give good Proofs, that they have a special Call or
immediate Mission from GOD to the Work of the Ministry? If ever you so do, my
Lord, does not your Lordship lay Hands too suddenly upon Men?

( Page 29) Your Lordship writes thus. -- When they profess to think and act
under the immediate Guidance of a Divine Inspiration.

And does not your Lordship think and act* by the same Rule? Why otherwise does
your Lordship pray, when you administer the Holy Communion, that GOD would
cleanse the Thoughts of our Hearts by the Inspiration of his Holy Spirit.

( Page 31) Your Lordship says, When they speak of their Preaching and
Expounding, and the Effects of them, as the sole Work of a Divine Power.

And would your Lordship have me ascribe any Thing in the least to myself?

The Good that is done upon Earth, does not GOD do it himself? Does not the
Apostle say, Not that we are sufficient of ourselves to think any Thing as of
ourselves, but our S^^^cienc^ is of GOD? And where then, my Lord is the
Absurdity of ascribing the Effect^ of Expounding and Preaching to the sole Work
of a Divine Power?

Again* Page 33) (...) sudden and surprising Effects as wrought by the Holy
Ghost, in Consequence of their Preaching.

Where, my Lord, is the Enthusiasm of such a Pretension? Has your Lordship been
a Preacher in the Church of England, for so many Years, and have you never seen
any sudden or surprising Effects consequent upon your Lordship's Preaching? Was
this my Case, should I not have Reason to doubt, my Lord, whether I had any
more than a bare human Commission? Or might I not take up the Prophet's
Lamentation, Oh my Leaness, my Leaness! My Lord, the Gospel, like its Author,
is the same Yesterday, to Day and forever; and, if preached as it ought to be,
will prick Numbers to the Heart, and extort the Cry of the trembling Goa^er,
What must I do to ^e saved? as surely Now, as it did Seventeen Hundred Years
ago.

These then are the sudden and surprising Effects, my Lord, I always desire to
have, and heartily pray GOD your Lordship and all your Clergy may always see
such Effects in Consequence of their Preaching.

( Page 34) When they claim the Spirit of Prophecy.

What I have said about my Success, GOD has been pleased to fulfill already.
What I have said about Sufferings, they who without Cause are my Enemies, are
fulfilling daily. And as for the Promises mentioned in my Journal, I freely own
there are some particular Promises which GOD has so strongly impressed and does
still impress on my Heart, that I verily believe they will be fulfilled.

( Page 35) When they speak of themselves in the Language, and under the
Character of Apostles of CHRIST, and even of CHRIST himself.

If I am not to speak in an Apostolical Language, why did my Lord of Gloucester
give me an Apostolical Commission, Whose Sins thou d^st forgive, they are
forgiven; and whose Sins thou do retain, they are retained. And I hope* my
Lord, using the Words which JESUS CHRIST used, is not taking upon me the
Character of CHRIST.

( Page 36) When they profess to plant and propagate a New Gospel, as unknown
to the Generality of Ministers and People in a Christian Country.

It Is true, my Lord, in one Sense, mine is a New Gospel, and always will be
unknown to the Generality of Ministers and People, even in a Christian Country,
if your Lordship's Clergy follow your Lordship's Directions. For what says your
Lordship (Page 46) I hope that when Ministers preach to you of Justification by
Faith alone, which is asserted in the strongest Manner by our Church, they
explain it in such a Manner as to leave no Doubt upon your Mind, whether good
Works are a necessary Condition of your being justified in the Sight of GOD.

But pray, my Lord, where has the Scripture made good Works a necessary
Condition of our being justified in the Sight of GOD? St. Paul says, By Grace
ye are saved, through Faith, not of Works, and that lost any Man should boast;
for Eternal Life is the Gift of GOD through JESUS CHRIST our LORD. Your
Lordship exhorts your Clergy to preach Justification by Faith alone, and quotes
the 11th Article of our Church, which tells us, we are justified by Faith only,
and not for our own Works or Deservings. See the 11 th, 12 th and 13 th
Articles of our Church.
At the same Time your Lordship bids them, explain it in such a Manner as to
leave no Doubt upon their Minds, whether good Works are a necessary Condition
of their being justified in the Sight of GOD, Your Lordship, in my Opinion,
could not well be guilty of a greater Inconsistency. This, my Lord, is truly a
New Gospel. I am sure it is not what the Apostles preached; and it is as
contrary to the Doctrine of the Church of England, and the whole Tenor of the
Gospel, as Darkness is contrary to Light. Had your Lordship insisted on your
Clergy's preaching up good Works (...) a necessary Fruit and Consequence,
instead of a necessary Condition of our being justified, your Lordship would
have used your Authority aright. For we are commanded to show forth or declare
to others, that we have a True Faith by our Works. And the 12th Article of our
Church says, that good Works follow after Justification; and how then, my Lord,
are they a necessary Condition of our Justification? No, my Lord, Salvation (if
the Gospel be true) is the free Gift of GOD through JESUS CHRIST. Faith is the
Means whereby that Salvation is applied to our Hearts, and good Works are the
necessary Fruits and Proof of that Faith.

This, my Lord, is the Doctrine of JESUS CHRIST, this is the Doctrine of the
Church of England, and it is because the Generality of the Clergy of the Church
of England do not preach this Doctrine, that I am resolved, GOD being my
Helper, to continue instant in Season and out of Season, to declare IT unto all
Men, let the Consequences, as to my own private Person, be what they will.

As for your Lordship's blaming me ^^r rashly censuring the Clergy for their
Practice, none are concerned but my Indolent, Earthly-minded, Pleasure taking
Brethren ( Page 39) And surely Your Lordship will not stand up in their
Defense. No, -- I hope your Lordship will not fail to rebuke Them sharply. And
as for your Lordship's Suspicions ( Page 50) (For your Lordship's Sake I would
not mention them) I hope my Life and Doctrine -- will always prove them to be
groundless.

Would Time permit, I could now proceed to satisfy your Lordship more
particularly about the Case of Mr. Benjamin Seward; but as that is done in a
Letter sent to my Lord of Gloucester, and published in my last Journal; and as
I am now to embark in a few Hours, I hope Your Lordship will excuse me, if I
only add my hearty Prayers for Your Lordship's temporal and eternal Welfare,
and subscribe myself,

My LORD, Your Lordship's Obedient, Though unworthy, Son and Servant, GEO.
WHITEFIELD.
Blendon, Monday, Aug. 13. 1739.

Dined, and took leave of my (...) ^^^ping Friends. Rode with many of them
(...) ^rith. Gave them a final and sorrowful Farewell; and from thence went in
a Boat with my (...) Fellow-Travellers to Gravesend, where our ^^hip was fallen
down. In the way I was much ^^^^fied by reading an Extract out of Bishop
Hopkin^^ his and (...) Hammond's Sermons on the New Birth, and th^^e it my Duty
to recommend them publicly to (...). Blessed be GOD, for detaining (...) by
the Embargo: Many, as (...), I hope, have Reason to rejoice (...) (...). LORD!
^^ach me daily in all (...) thy Will, without pres^^ing (...) my Heart, What
^^est thou?

^
^
^
^
On board the Elizabeth, Capt. Stevenson, bound from England to Philadelphia.
Tuesday, August 14. Got on board about Eight last Night, and received the
following Letter from Thomas Webb, Clerk of the Parish of Bretforton in
Worcestershire; whom Mr. Benj. Seward mentioned in a Letter, published in my
last Journal.

Reverend and Worthy SIR,
Although I am unknown to you in Person, yet as I trust I am, by the Grace of
GOD, awakened to a New and Spiritual Life, through the powerful Influence of your
Ministry, I think myself under an Obligation to give my Testimony to the Truth
as it is in JESUS; and to pay my grateful Acknowledgments to the Freedom of
that Divine Grace which has made you so wonderfully instrumental in Calling me,
a most unworthy Sinner, at this last Hour of the Day, from a state of Darkness
and Insensibility, to the mavelous Light of his glorious Gospel. The
Circumstances of my Conversion were as follows. I heard you was to preach on
Thursday the 19th of (...) last at Mr. Seward's of (...): and living at
Bretforton, a Village about a Mile from thence (where I have been Clerk of the
Parish for about thirty Years, being now in the Sixty-third Year of my Age) my
Curiosity, as I then should have termed it; but, as it is since evident by the
Consequence, the wonderful Goodness and Providence of Almighty GOD, led me to
hear you, which I did with great Attention, and was much affected. The next Day
being Good Friday, I attended your Ministry again, with great Warmth, when you
spoke with such Demonstration of the Spirit, and with Power, from these Words,
Watch therefore, etc. That I soon was convinced I was in the State of the
foolish Virgins, who were unprepared to meet the Bridegroom, having all my Life
long taken up with the Lamp of an outward Profession, thinking it sufficient,
that I duly and constantly attended the public Worship, Sacraments, etc. but I
soon found, to my great Confusion, that I had all my Life long been offering to
GOD the Sacrifice of Fools; being destitute of the pure Oil of Grace in the
Heart, which could alone make me meet to attend the Marriage Feast of the
Supper of the Lamb. The New Birth, Justification by Faith only, the want of
free Will in Man to do good Works without the special Grace of GOD, and the
like, was as it were new Language to me: For though I remembered the Letter of
these Doctrines, yet the spiritual Sense thereof, I was an utter Stranger to:
But being very much oppressed in Thought, concering most important Truths which
you delivered, as soon as I returned home, I searched an old Exposition of the
Catechism, the Church Articles, and Book of Homilies, which I found exactly to
correspond with what I had heard delivered by you. -- Some Days after this, I
being a Tailor by Trade, was sent for to Work at a little Alehouse, called
Conter^up, where (though one of the ^^st Places I should have expected Food for
the Soul) the Man of the House told me he had some old Books which he had of
one Mr. F -- a Glazier and Plumber in Tweksbury, who had thrown them by, in
order to send them to the Paper Mill, as fit for no other purpose; but he
begged they might be given to him; that he had heard Mr. Whitefield; had got
his Sermons on the New Birth, and that these old Books spoke to the very same
Purpose as Mr. Whitefield did: Upon which I desired to see one of them (the
other being then lent out) the Title whereof was General Directions for a
comfortable Walking with GOD, by Robert Bolton an old Divine of our own Church.
I had not read long, before the Light broke in upon my Soul, with such powerful
Evidence, that I was from that Instant clearly convinced, and, I hope by the
Grace of GOD, determined not to know any Thing, save JESUS CHIRST and him
crucified. Upon this I avoided all carnal Acquaintance and Reasoning, as much
as possible; constantly attended the Religious Society at Badsey; where, by
hearing your Sermons, and other Religious Exercises, I daily was strengthened
and comforted. Soon after this I got the other old Book, which was so
providentially preserved from the Paper-Mill: The title whereof was as f^llows,
Six Evangelical Histories, Water turned into Wine. The Temple's Purgation.
Christ and Nicodemus. John' s last Testimony. Christ and the Woman of Samaria:
The Ruler's Son healed: Contained in the second, third and fourth Chap of St.
John' s Gospel: Opened and handled by the late faithful Servant of GOD, Daniel
Dyk^, Bachelor in Divinity. Printed Anno Domini 1617.

This old Book has been a very grateful Cordial to my Soul; and though I have
lived under the Sound of the Gospel for so many Years, and thought I did not
want to be taught the first Principles of Christianity at this Age, being, as I
apprehended, well thought of, and esteemed by all my Neighbors* yet I am fully
convinced, that I knew nothing as I ought to know; and that the Gospel was to
me a sealed Book; but by the wonderful free Grace of GOD, though before I had
Eyes that saw not, Ears, and heard not, I now received it as a Savor of Life
unto Life; and can say experimentally, that the Word of GOD is a Light unto my
Feet, and a Lanthorn to my Paths. -- For this Declaration of the Truth, I have
suffered the Reproach and Derision of them that were round about me: But I
trust, that the Grace of GOD, which has called me when so old and dead in
Trespasses and Sins, will also touch the Hearts of my Opposers, and work in
them both to will and to do of his good Pleasure. I have been even threatened
with the loss of my Bread, for the Profession of the Truth; but I hope GOD will
turn the Hearts of my Enemies; if not, and it were his blessed Will, I hope I
should be enabled to lay down my Life in Defense of the Gospel, which I can
truly say, is glad Tidings of great Salvation to my Soul; and could, I think,
be content with old Simeon, to ^ry out in transport, LORD, now let thou thy
Servant Depart in Peace. The inward Light and Comfort I have felt, being to me
more Miraculous than if I had seen one ^ose from the Dead. -- May the LORD
prosper your Labors, and make them successful to the turning many Souls to
Righteousness: And as you know in whom you have believed, so I am confident you
will join with me in giving all Glory to that GOD, who I trust has created us
anew in CHRIST JESUS; in whom I most humbly and thankfully beg leave to
subscribe myslef,

Your most unworthy Servant, THOMAS WEBB.
Aug. 11. 1739.

Rose early this Morning and reduced my Family into order. Wrote some Letters,
and, after much Entreaty, went to Gravesend: Read Prayers and preached at
Milton Church, near the Town, -- The Congregation was large. -- I spoke with
Freedom; and returned back to the Ship about (...) in the Evening. Blessed be
GOD, I was much rejoiced at my Retiring from the World. Oh that GOD may now
show me my self!

Search, try, O LORD, my Reins and Heart,
If Evil lu^ks in any Part,
Correct me where I go astray,
And guide me in thy perfect Way.
Wednesday, August 15. Began to put those of my Family who were prepared for
it, into Bands. In all we are 8 Men, 4 Women, 1 Boy and 2 Children, besides Mr.
Seward and myself. The Conversion of one of the Men was particularly
remarkable. -- Not long since he was Master of a Ship which was lost near the
Gulf of Florida. Providence was pleased to throw him and his Crew upon an
Island, where they continually expected the Waters to overflow them. At the End
of ten Days, they saw a Ship, and gave a Signal of Distress: The Ship made
toward them. The Captain, now with me, went out with his Boat, and begged for
a Passage for himself and Men. -- It was granted him on Condition he would
leave some of his Crew behind upon the Island; but he would not consent: At
length the other Commander agreed to take all. But as soon as ever my Friend
put off the Boat to fetch his Men, the Commander made Sail and lest them. All
this seemed quite against, but in the End GOD showed it was intended for the
Good of my Friend. After 30 Days Continuance upon the Island, having fitted up
the Boat with some ^lanks they took out of a Ship which had been lost 5 Months
before, Nine of them committed themselves to the Providence of GOD: The others
cared not to venture themselves in so small a Boat. Having failed about 140
Leagues, they came at length to Ty^e Island* 15 Miles off Savannah. An
Inhabitant being near the Place, espied them, and brought them Home with him. I
being informed what had happened, invited the Captain to Breakfast with me; and
reminded him of the Goodness of GOD: He then seemed serious; and coming very
providentially in the same Ship with me, when I returned from Georgia, GOD was
pleased to work more effectually upon his Soul. And he is now returning with me
to Georgia again. Many Offers have been made him to go into the World; but he
rather chooses to suffer Affliction with the People of GOD. Most of my other
Assistants have left good Places, and are willing freely to spend and be spent
for the Good of the Orphan House. Several of them have already found, all I
hope are seeking, CHRIST. We seem perfectly settled already; and whatever
Storms GOD may permit to attack us without, I hope we shall have a constant
Peace within and among ourselves. -- Blessed be GOD, I find myself composed,
and perfectly resigned; nay, much rejoiced at my present Situation. Oh that I
could always have no other Will but GOD's!

Thursday, August 16. Had still greater Reason to rejoice at the Regulation of
my Family. Wrote several Letters; and began to have public Prayers Morning and
Evening; and spent above an Hour in exhorting and examining into the Interiours
of my Fellow-Travellers, and went to Bed almost forgetful that I had ever been
out in the World. Forever blessed be GOD's Holy Name, through CHRIST.

Friday, August 17. Had a brisk, but favorable Gale, which carried us directly
through the Downs. -- Sent some Letters on Shore, and rejoiced much in my happy
Settlement on board. In the Morning most of my Family were sick; I did not
entirely escape: GOD enabled us to give Thanks; and as we came to sail more
directly before the Wind, our Disorder gradually went off. Thus is humane Life
checkered. I bless GOD we are in good Order; And if the Voyage ends as happily
as it begins, we shall have abundant Reason to bless GOD for it. Grant this, O
LORD, for thy dear Son's sake!

Saturday, August 18. Made but small Advances in our Way, there being but
little Wind, and that not very fair, till about 6 this Evening, at which Time
it favored us very much. Was enlightened in Reading GOD's Word. Had my Heart
warmed with a Sense of his Love and distinguishing Mercies. Was enlarged in
Praying several Times with and for my Friends; and was very earnest with GOD to
give me Grace to improve my present Retirement to his Glory, the Good of his
Church, and the Edification of my own Soul. Perceived also my bodily Strength
to increase, and enjoyed such unspeakable Peace and Tranquillity within, that I
was often filled with a Holy Confusion, and was obliged to retire to give my
Soul vent. -- Our LORD, I am sure, sails with us. O infinitely condescending
GOD!

Sunday, August 19. Administered the Holy Sacrament early this Morning. Sung an
Hymn and continued in Prayer for near an Hour afterward, in Behalf of
ourselves and absent Friends. My Heart was much melted down (...) enlarged. The
Power which was given me was soon communicated to my Companions: They
sympathized and wept with me. A Spirit of Love seemed to be sent forth amongst
us. May it increase ever more and more.

Both at Morning and Evening Prayers the Captain and Ships Company attended
very orderly. The Remainder of the Day was spent in Reading, Prayer, Singing
and Praising GOD. The Ship continued sailing directly before the Wind, at the
Rate of about 5 or 6 Miles an Hour: -- Most seemed sensible of, and thankful
for the Divine Mercies. Thanks be to GOD for this unspeakable Gift. Amen, Lord
JESUS.

Monday, August 20. Fair Wind all Night, by which our Ship was carried to the
Bay of Biscay, and went before the Wind at 6 Miles an Hour, almost the whole
Day. The Wind being brisk, and a great Swell coming out of the Bay, most of us
grew sick, and could do little else but lie down upon our Beds. This rejoiced
me much; for I had a glorious Opportunity of spending many Hours in strict
Communion with GOD, to ask Pardon for the Defects of my public Ministry, and
to pray for Strength against future Work and Trials. My Soul was frequently
dissolved into Tears. -- A Sense of my actual Sins and natural Deformity,
humbled me exceedingly: And then the Freeness and Riches of GOD's Everlasting
Love, broke in with such Light and Power upon my Soul, that I was often awed
into Silence, and could not speak any more. -- A dear Companion was with me,
and helped me to lament, pray, and give Praise. Oh the Comforts of Religious
Friendship! Sanctify it, O LORD, to me, for thy dear Son's sake!

Tuesday, August 21. Contrary Winds all Day, and the Swell continuing, kept all
my Family, as well as myself, a little sickish. I conversed with GOD by Prayer
and his Word most of the Time, and felt Enlargement of Heart in the Evening. Oh
that by Conversing with GOD I may be changed from Glory to Glory, and fitted
for whatever he has appointed for me to do or suffer, during my Pilgrimage here
on Earth!

Saturday, August 25. Had but little regular Sleep since Tuesday; the Winds
continuing contrary: -- Last Night it blew a hard Gale. Most of my Family still
continues sick; -- I waited on them as well as I could, and prayed to GOD to
make me willing to become the Servant of ALL. Frequently interceded for absent
Friends, and remembered those in particular, who by their kind Presents
administered much to our Comfort on Board. Had two or three providential
Conferences with the Captain of the Ship, and some of the Men. Read Dr. Guise
his Paraphrase on the Evangelist St. Matthew; I think it the best I ever met
with. Endeavored to keep close to GOD, by Watching unto Prayer, for Direction
and Help in Time of Need. Frequently was enlightened to see the Pride and
Selfishness of my Heart; and as frequently longed for that perfect Liberty
wherewith JESUS CHRIST sets his Servants free. The Sea was calmer to Day than
before. -- My Family grew better, and we spent near two Hours this Evening, in
talking of the inward State of our Souls, and preparing for the Reception of
the blessed Sacrament. LORD, grant that we all may have on a Wedding Garment.

Sunday August 26. Administered the Holy Sacrament early this Morning. -- Spent
the Remainder of the Day in Reading, Intercession, etc. GOD was pleased to
enlighten me in Reading his holy Word, -- and gave me Satisfaction in the
Behavior of those about me. The Wind was still contrary, and the Sea rough,
but I had a great Calm and Joy in my Soul. How can I be thankful enough for the
glorious Opportunity I now enjoy for Self-Improvement. Let all that is within
me, praise GOD's holy Name.

Monday, August 27. Had the Pleasure of seeing three Jamaica Ships come
altogether: Two of which spoke to us, and by them we sent News of our Situation
to England. Was much assisted in Writing an Account of GOD's Dealings with me
in my infant Days, which I have prayed for Strength to do these three Years,
but never had Power given me till this Day. Blessed be GOD, the Weather was
more calm, the Wind more fair, and my Family better and better; so that I trust
we shall get Strength against future Crosses. -- As yet this is the most
comfortable Voyage I have made. Oh that I may grow in Grace, and then my
Happiness will increase daily!

Tuesday, August 28. Calm Weather and smooth Sea. Was assisted in Reading the
holy Scriptures. Rejoiced much in the good Behavior of those about me. One
Part of the Day selt some irregular Passion (...) in my Heart, but in the
Evening (...) so vi^ited from above that my Soul was quite confounded with a
(...) of the Divine Goodness. This Day (...) left Savannah. LORD, how (...)
(...) multiplied thy Mercies upon me (...) that (...)! and (...) th^^ (...)
(...) delight (...) m^, and (...) this Retirement so sweet and profitable (...)
my Soul, that my only Fear is (...) should be over (...). But my Times are in
GOD's Hands. LORD let me have no Will of my own, for thy dear Son's sake!

Friday, August 31. Very light Winds for two Days last pas^, and an entire Calm
to Day; but GOD was pleased to send me many inward Strugglings. -- I could do
Nothing but lay myself down, and offer my Soul up to GOD. -- At Night I prayed
with strong Cryings and many Tears before all my Family, for them and all those
dear People who have recommended themselves to my Prayers. -- Afterward my
Soul received Comfort. Oh that these inward (...) may purge, humble and purify
my polluted, (...) and treacherous Heart! Let all that love me, (...) Amen.

I observe these inward Trial alway^ follow inward Communications: For these
two Days (...) pas^ I have been ^^ch assisted; and lest I should be p^ssed up,
and that my Mind may be prepared to receive greater Degrees of ^ight, GOD out
of Love has sent me a Thorn in the Flesh. LORD grant this loving Correction of
(...) may make me truly great! Amen, LORD JESUS, Amen.

Sunday, September 2. Still very light Winds and fair Weather. Weak and (...)
(...) Body these two Days. Administered the Holy-Sacrament in the Morning. (...)
public Prayers as (...): all (...) very orderly; (...) something of a (...), as
I (...) (...), was to be seen through the whole Ship. (...) particularly, in the
Evening, into the Interiors of my (...). Blessed be GOD, I hope we grow in
(...), and (...) more and more, to ^ear one (...). -- Grant we may thus for
ever fulfill thy Law, O CHRIST!

Saturday, September 8. Advanced about 100 Leagues this Week, in our Way to
Philadelphia. (...) Weather most Part of the Time, which (...) many of us to be
(...) afresh. (...) the Account of my Life before mentioned, and was much
pressed in Spirit to print it. (...) bless i^ for thy dear Son's sake. (...) as
pungent a Sense of Sin and my inbred Corruptions as ever I had in my Life. -- I
groan daily to be (...) at Liberty. Dearest (...) (...) (...)!

Sunday, September 9 (...) Sacrament, (...) we were not (...) to pray for (...)
Friends (...) Shore. Read (...) expounded as usual to the Ship's Company in the
Morning; but (...) at his Desire, the (...) afternoon. -- All attended very
(...) chiefly concerning the false Pretenses and Education of those who run
before they are called of GOD, into the Ministry of the Church of England. Woe
be to those that give the Adversaries Leave thus to speak reproach fully of us;
it had been better for them if they had never been born.

Saturday, Sept. 15. Had a pleasant Prospect to Day of some of the Western
Islands. Gave myself to Reading the Word of GOD, and Prayer, the most Part of
this Week. Was visited with frequent inward Trials. Had many Things on my Heart
to write, but am as yet withheld. Ended the Week comfortably with my Family,
and was exceedingly strengthened in reading Professor Frank's Account of the
Orphan-house of Glaucha in Hall. -- It seems in many Circumstances, to be so
exactly parallel to my present Undertaking for the Poor of Georgia, that I
trust the Orphan-house about to be erected there, will be carried on and ended
with the like Faith and Success. Amen, Amen.

Sunday, Sept. 16. Administered the Sacrament, and had a Love-Feast afterward.
Expounded as usual at Morning and Evening Prayers. -- GOD's Power was amongst
us. The Day was calm and clear; and though we do not go forwards much in our
Course, yet I trust we shall every Day be fitted more and more, for those
various Turns of Providence which I expect we shall meet with when we come to
Shore. Let thy Grace, O LORD, be more than sufficient for us. Amen, LORD JESUS,
Amen.

Saturday, Sept. 22. Underwent inexpressible (...) (...) Soul for two or three
Days, at the Remembrance of my Sins, and the bitter Consequences of them. --
Surely my Sorrows were so great, that had not GOD in the Midst of them,
comforted my Soul, the Lord would have been insupportable. -- All the While, I
was assured GOD had forgiven me, but I could not forgive myself, for sinning
against so much Light and Love. -- Methought I felt something of that which
Adam felt when turned out of Paradise: David when he was convicted of his
Adultery; and Peter when with Oaths and Curses he thrice denied his Master. --
I then, if ever, did truly smite upon my ungrateful Breast, and cry, GOD be
merciful to me a Sinner. I eat but very little, and went mourning all the Day
long. -- At length my LORD looked upon me, and with that Look melted my rocky
Heart, and Floods of contrite Tears flowed out before my whole Family; and
indeed I wept most bitterly. -- When in this Condition, I wondered not at
Peter's running so slowly to the Sepulcher, when loaded with a Sense of Guilt.
-- Alas! a Consideration of aggravated Crimes quite took off my Chariot-Wheels,
and I drove so exceeding heavily, that was I always to see myself such a Sinner
as I am, and as I did then, I should not be able so much as to look up. This
latter Part of the Week, blessed be the LORD, he has restored me the Light of
his Countenance, and enlarged my Heart to write freely, and praise him with
joyful Lips. Our Ship being got Southwardly into the Trade Winds, and the
Weather warm. I and some of my Companions lay upon Duck. We had the Holy
Sacrament on the Festival of St. Matthew; and though we are like to have a long,
yet I trust it will be a profitable Voyage to our Souls. ^lessed be GOD, that
(...) and correct me, and not give me (...) Death. It is good for me to b^ thus
(...), for thereby I ^et an experimental Knowledge of GOD's Love. Praise the
LORD, O my Soul!

Sunday, Sept. 23. Had a sweet Sacrament, and Love Feast afterward. Was much
strengthened both in my Morning and Evening Exercises; and selt such
Intenseness of Comfort, and Warmth of Heart toward my absent Friends, as made
me for a while forget the Anguish I lately felt; but at Night a Sense of my
Sins weighed me down again, and I mourned in my Prayers and was vexed. -- Alas!
how are they mistaken, that go out of the World to avoid Temptations. -- I
never am so much tempted as when confined on Shipboard: -- A Mercy, this, ^n
GOD, to keep me in Action, and prepare me for future Blessings. Luther says, He
never undertook any fresh Work, but he was either visited with a Fit of
Sickness, or some strong Temptation. Prayer, Meditation and Temptations are
necessary Accomplishments in his Account, for every Minister. May I follow him
(...) ^e followed CHRIST!

Saturday, Sept. 29. Administered the Holy Sacrament this Morning. Had fair
Winds, and (...) upon Deck with my Companions the greatest (...) of the Week.
Have been much strengthened and assisted in Writing every Day: -- An ample
Recompense for the Trials of the last Week. -- Thus does GOD sometimes humble
and sometimes exalt; all his Dispensations perfect the Regenerate Soul. Had
little Time for Reading, but this Afternoon was exceedingly strengthened by
perusing some Paragraphs out of the Book called (...) Preacher, written by Dr.
Edwards of Cambridge, and extracted by Mr. Jonathan Warn, in his Books
entitled, The Church of England Man (...), and (...) the Backdoor to (...).
There are such noble Testimonies given before that University, of (...) by
Faith alone; the (...) CHRIST; our having no (...), etc. that they deserve to
be written in (...) of Gold. I (...) more and more the Benefit of leaving
Testimonies behind us, concerning these important Points: They not only profit
the present, but will also (...) edify the (...) Age LORD (...) thou m^ (...),
that I may (...) more boldly and explicitly as I ought ^o (...)!

Sunday, September 30. Administered the Holy Sacrament, and had a Love-Feast.
Expounded with Power in the Morning to the Sailors, and lent my Cabin in the
Afternoon to the Quaker Preacher. -- He (...) with much Earnestness; but in my
Opinion, his Foundation was (...). He seemed to make the Light of natural
Conscience, and the Holy Spirit one and the same Thing, and represented CHRIST
within, and not CHRIST without, for the Foundation of our Faith: -- Whereas the
outward Righteousness of JESUS CHRIST imputed to us, I believe, is the sole
Foundation and Cause of all the inward Communications which we receive from the
Spirit of GOD. Oh that all of that Persuasion were convinced of this. -- Till
they are, they cannot preach the Truth as it is in JESUS!

Saturday, October 6. Contrary Winds most Part of this Week, and made a very
slow Progress toward Philadelphia. Had great Assistance in Writing, and strong
Convictions of my past Sins. Held a close Band for some Hours this Evening,
with my whole Family, wherein we opened our Hearts, confessed our Faults to,
and prayed for one another. Do thou, O great and mighty Physician of Souls,
hear and heal us. -- Amen and Amen.

Sunday, October 7. Administered the Holy Sacrament, had a Love-Feast and
expounded as usual. The Wind blowing very fresh, the Ship Men were obliged to
attend the Sails, and so could not come to public Worship. Sailed sometimes 9
Miles an Hour, for which we endeavored to praise the LORD. Had comfortable
Communion with GOD, in interceding for our dear Friends on Shore; and at Night
felt such Freedom in my Spirit, from a Load I labored under, as caused me to
break out into many Thansgivings to GOD. Every Day more and more convinces me,
that the LORD will fulfill the Desires of them that fear him: He is the Father
of Mercies; He is the GOD of all Consolation; He can create Comfort out of
Nothing, and bring Comfort out of the greatest Confusion. This my Soul knows
right well. O my Soul, be not slack to praise him!

Tuesday, Oct. 9. This Morning our whole Ship's Company was brought to an
Allowance of Bread, two Biskets a Day for each Person. Blessed be GOD, through
the Bounty of Friends in England, as yet my Family have got Provision enough.
The LORD in return feed our Benefactors with that Bread which comes down from
Heaven!

Friday, October. 12. Kept a Family Fast this Day, that we might afflict
ourselves before our GOD; to seek of him a right Way for us and for our little
Ones, and for all our Substance: I trust it was such a Fast as the LORD would
choose: His Divine Presence was amongst us, and we had good Reason to hope and
believe, that the LORD was entreated of us, Oh that we may find more and more
Reason to say so, when we come on shore. I dread going into the World. But
wherefore do I fear? LORD, I beli^^e, O help my Unbelief, that thou will keep
me unspotted from it.

Saturday, October. 13. Still GOD is pleased to send us contrary Winds, but very
warm and pleasant Weather. The Power of Writing has been in a great Measure
taken from me; but GOD has been with me in Reading, Expounding and my other
Exercises of Devotion. Have experienced some blessed Teachings of his Holy
Spirit, in convicting me of the Pride, Sensuality and Blindness of my own
Heart, and of the Advantages Satan has gained over me by working on them. I
have also been more enlightened into the Knowledge of that Mystery of
Godliness, GOD manifest in the (...); and saw more and more of GOD's Goodness
in letting me have this Time of Retirement, to search out my Spirit. I would
not but have come this Voyage for a Thousand Worlds: It has been sweet and
profitable to my Soul: The Length and Continuance of it highly delights me.
LORD, I want to kn^w myself and thee. O let not the Hurry of Business which
awaits me on shore, prevent my hearing the small still Voice of the Holy
Spirit. Enable (...) as thou did^^ thy Servant Enoch, whether in public or
private Life, to walk with thee, my GOD.

Sunday, October 14. Felt GOD's Power with us both at Sacrament and public
Worship, Morning and Evening Was enlarged in Intercession, and had reason to
believe there was a sweet Communion kept up between us and our Friends on
shore. -- The Thought of their Prayers often li^ts up my I (...) when they hang
down, and strengthens my feeble Knees: The Prospect of the many Changes and
Trials which I must necessarily be exposed to undergo, sometimes fills me with
Fear and Trembling; but when I reflect that GOD has stirred up the Hearts of
his choicest Servants to pray for me, my Fears vanish: Methinks I could then
leap into a burning fiery Furnace, or bear to be thrown into a Den of devouring
Lions. LORD make me thus minded in the Hour of Trial! My dear Friends, continue
to pray for me, that my Faith fail not.

Saturday, Oct. 20. On Tuesday and Wednesday had the roughest Weather we have
yet met with, but the latter Part of the Week has been warm and calm. All our
fresh live Stock of every kind is now gone, but through the Divine Bounty in
raising us Friends, we have not only Food enough for ourselves, but some to
spare to the Ship's Company. My being on board is every Day more and more
comfortable. I experience fresh Teachings and Communications from GOD's holy
Spirit, and have received some remarkable Answers to Prayer, both in respect to
myself and Family. We are most of us l^sty as Eagles, and eat our ^read with
Gladness and Singleness of Heart. The LORD is pleased to fill me out of his
Divine Fullness, and to show me more of the Glories of the Upper World. I can
never be thankful enough for this sweet Retreat. How wonderfully does the great
and in^^itely wise GOD cause every Thing to work together for our Good. I want
a Thousand Tongues to praise him. Let every Thing that has Breath praise the
LORD.

Saturday, October. 27. Came into Soundings on Sunday last; saw Land on Monday,
and were within a few Leagues of Ca^e Hinlop^n, which opens into the Bay
whither we are bound; but Providence was pleased to keep us back by contrary
Winds. Met with a Jamaica Brigg on Thursday, and had an Opportunity of sending
a Packet by her to my dear Friend Mr. N -- of New York. Came within Sight of
Land again to Day, but still are kept back. Blessed be GOD, I am quite
resigned, -- I like my Retirement too well to be fond of leaving it, till the
LORD obliges me. Our Provisions are grown pretty scanty; the People are put to
an Allowance of about half a Pound of Beef for each in a Day, and we have
diminished our own Stock by helping them, -- in this we rejoice, -- However,
blessed be GOD, we have got plenty of Water, and very fair Weather; and my
Family I think was never in better Order in respect to their Bodies or Souls.
The LORD has been especially gracious unto me, as he always is in Time of any
Necessity: He has been pleased to give me great Freedom in Writing, and has
vouchsafed me such plentiful Communications from himself, that I have abundant
Reason to cry out, Surely GOD is in this Place.

Lo! GOD is here, my Soul adore,
And own how dreadful is this Place!
Let all within thee feel his Power,
In Silence bow before his Face.
To Him let all thy Thoughts arise,
Ceaseless accepted Sacrifice.
Sunday, October 28. Felt more of the Divine Assistance to Day, than I have
since I came on Board: I have been engaged in Writing my extempore Sermon on
the Marriage of Cana, -- The Holy Ghost brought many Things to my Remembrance;
and though I have well drunk of Divine Comforts since my Retirement already, yet
I may say, with the Governor of the Feast, LORD, thou have kept the good Wine
til now. Hasten that Time, O Lord, when I shall drink it n^w in thy heavenly
Kingdom.

Monday, October. 29. Had a sweet Opportunity offered me to Day, of giving a few
Sermons and something out of my little Stock, to a Captain of a Sloop and his
Company, who had been driven to great Extremity, Oh how gently does GOD deal
with me and mine; how has he considered our Weakness, and not permitted us to
fall into great Dangers and Wants. Blessed be his Name for evermore! Amen, Amen.

PENNSYLVANIA. Lewes-Town.
Tuesday, October 30. Had sweet Communion with GOD last Night. Prayed with,
exhorted and solemnly recommended my Family to the Grace of our dear LORD
JESUS, expecting to go on Shore. This Morning, being near Cape Hinlopen, a
Pilot came on board, in whose Boat Brother Seward, myself, and another dear
Friend, went to Lewes-Town, in Order that we might go to Philadelphia by Land,
and get a House in Readiness before the Ship arrived in that Place. -- Whilst
in the Boat, I hope each of our Hearts was filled with a Sense of GOD's Love;
and when we reached Lewes-Town, which was about Evening, I took the first
Opportunity of retiring to vent my Heart in Praise and Thanksgiving, for his
abundant Mercies conferred on me and mine. -- Oh how can I be thankful enough
for this blessed Voyage! I have been on board just Eleven Weeks, but they have
seemed to me only as so many Days; -- My inner Man has been much bettered by
it; my Knowledge, I trust, in spiritual Things increased; my Understanding
enlightened to see my Corruptions, and my Heart much enlarged in writing Letters
and other Things. The Remembrance of my Humiliation is sweet unto my Soul; and
the Freedom which GOD has given me over some darling Failings, fills me with
Joy unspeakable and full of Glory. My Family also have great Reason to be
thankful: GOD has been pleased to work upon many of their Hearts, and I believe
none of them repent Leaving their Native Country. A remarkable Alteration is to
be seen in two Friends Children, a Boy and a Girl, which I brought with me: --
They are little more than 3 Years old, and can read in the Primer, and sing
Part of Kenn's Hymns very prettily; they have born the Voyage better than any
in the Ship, and are under great Discipline; they are both generally employed
either in Working or Reading, and are taught to make Work their Diversion; the
little Boy picks Pease, and the little Girl sews with her Needle; the
Proficiency they have made gives me great Satisfaction, and I hope is an
Earnest of the Improvement that will be seen in the poor Children that are
shortly to be committed to my Care. I cannot say any remarkable Conversions
have been wrought on board, but many have had strong Convictions. LORD, cause
them to end in a (...) Conversion. Amen.

But to return: About 5 in the Evening we landed at Lewes-Town, situated in the
Southern Parts of the Province of Pennsylvania, and about 150 measured Miles
from Philadelphia, -- The Houses are most of them built of Wood; it is not
above half so big, but more plentiful in respect of Provision, than Savannah in
(...). We had not been long in the (...), but GOD soon showed us (...) had
pr^p^^'d our Way; for News had been brought a (...), of my coming hither. Two
or Three of the Head-Inhabitants being apprized who I was, came and spent the
Evening with us, and desired me to give them a Sermon on the Morrow, which I
promised to do. We s^^pped very comfortably together, and after Singing and
Praying with the Family, I and my dear Companions went to rest, admiring to see
more and more of the Goodness and Providence of the all-wi^e GOD. He is the
great Householder of the whole World; and I look upon all Places as so many
little Parts of his great Family. I pray to him before I go; and I find, in
Answer to my Prayers, he always commands some or other of his Household to take
Care of, and provide for me. As here is the same Sun, so here is the same GOD in
America as in England. I bless GOD all Places are equal to me, so I am where
GOD would have me to be. I hope I never shall count myself a^ home, till I
arrive at my heavenly Father's House above, -- My Heart is there already, -- I
long to s^ake off this Earthly Tabernacle; it sadly confines my Soul: However,
I desire patiently to tarry till my blessed Change comes: I would not desire
to reign till I had suffered with my Master: -- Heaven will be doubly sweet
when I am worn out with Distresses and Persecutions for the Sake of JESUS
CHRIST. LORD grant I may continually be looking up to the Glory which is to be
revealed hereafter, and then deal with me as it seems Good in thy Sight,
during my Pilgrimage here.

If rough and thorny be my Way,
My Strength proportion to my Day,
Till Toil and Grief, and Pain shall cease,
Where all is calm, and Joy and Peace.
Wednesday, October 31. Spent the Morning in Writing, and sent some Provisions
on board for my Fellow-Travellers. Wrote some Letters, and preached in the
Afternoon to a serious and attentive Congregation: Persons of different
Denominations were present, and, as I heard afterward were very much affected;
some I observed to weep, and the Congregation was larger than might be expected
in so small a Place, and after such short Notice. After Sermon, the
High Sheriff, Collector and Head Men of the Place, came and took an
affectionate Leave of me: And by their Means being provided with Horses, and a
Guide for our Journey, at a very reasonable Expense; about 5 in the Evening we
left Lewes-Town, and rode very pleasantly near 27 Miles through the Woods;
about 10 we stopped at what they call a Tavern, which was not very commodious,
but the Host and Hostess were plain well-meaning People; they made us a Cake of
unleavened Bread; let us have a little Cider and a few Eggs, and we went to Bed
rejoicing exceedingly. I know not that I have felt more Intenseness of Love,
Peace and Joy in my Soul, since I left England. How does GOD delight to visit
when we are out of the World! Oh that my Heart may be made meet for such a
Divine Guest to reside in! Amazing, that the HIGH and LOFTY ONE, who inhabiteth
Eternity, should condescend to dwell in Earthly Tabernacles! What shall I say
unto Thee, O thou Preserver of Men! I am lost in Wonder! A Sense of thy Mercies
strikes me dumb.

A guilty, weak, and helpless Worm,
Into thy Arms I fall:
Be Thou my Strength and Righteousness,
My JESUS, and my All.
Thursday, November 1. Set out from our little Inn about 8. Dined at Dover, a
little Town about 19 Miles distant from our Lodging. Left (...) Books, and rode
as pleasantly, and with as much Ease, as though we were Riding through Hyde-Park.
About 8 we came to a more polite Inn, near 50 Miles distant from where we lay
last Night. Our LORD was with us as we came on our Way; our Hearts burned
within us whilst we talked to one another, in Psalms, and Hymns, and spiritual
Songs. Oh how gloriously must the Children of Israel pass through the
Wilderness, when they saw GOD's Presence go along with them. O LORD let it
always accompany thy unworthy Servants, in as sure, though not visible Manner!
for without it we can do nothing.

Friday, November 2. Rode near 60 Miles without Fatigue, and reached
Philadelphia before 11 at Night. As I traveled I observed the Country was more
open, and many plentiful Plantations lay on each Side the Road* so that I
frequently thought I was, as it were, in England. Going abroad, if duly
improved, cannot but enlarge our Ideas, and give us exalted Thoughts of the
Greatness and Goodness of GOD. Lord enable me to learn this, and every other
good Lesson, for thy dear Son's sake.

PHILADELPHIA.
Saturday, November 3. Delivered the Letters committed to my Charge. Went on
board the Elizabeth, to see my Family, who arrived last Night. Visited the
Proprietor, Commissary, and some others; was received very civilly, and
perceived the Town was in great Expectation of seeing me. (...) with some
gracious Souls, who discoursed with me sweetly concerning the Things which
belong to the Kingdom of Heaven. Hired a House at a very cheap Rate, and was
entirely settled in it before 9 at Night. Methinks going thus from Place to
Place, with my Friends, somewhat resembles the Patriarch Abraham's frequent
Removes, when called to leave his Kindred and his native Country. Oh that, like
him, we may erect an Altar for GOD, whithersoever we go! Blessed be his holy
Name, he has sent his Angel before ^s to prepare our Way. All Things have been
ordered for us far above our Expectations, and every Thing is so convenient,
that I fear we shall be tempted to say, It is good for us to be here. But,
(...) be GOD, we must move soon, and learn to endure Hardness as good Soldiers
of JESUS CHRIST. LORD, for thy infinite Mercies sake, keep us striving till we
die.

Sunday, November 4. Read Prayers and assisted at the Communion in the Morning:
Dined with one of the Churchwardens, and preached in the Afternoon to a large
Congregation. Went in the Evening to the Quakers Meeting, and felt somewhat of
a Sympathy with the Man that spoke; but I heartily wish they would talk of an
outward, as well as inward CHRIST; for otherwise we make our Holiness, and not
the Righteousness of JESUS CHRIST, the Cause of our being accepted by GOD. From
such Doctrine may I always turn away.

Monday, November 5. Read Prayers and Preached to a large Auditory. Dined with
the other Churchwarden; and had some close and edifying Conversation, about
our Justification by Faith in JESUS CHRIST. -- Was visited in the Afternoon by
the Presbyterian Minister. Went afterward to see the Baptist Teacher, who
seems to be a Spiritual Man: And spent part of the Evening most agreeably with
two loving Quakers. Had remarkable Instances of GOD's answering our Prayers,
which we put up on board Ship, in the minutest Manner. O that I may watch GOD's
particular Providence more and more! It comforts and builds up my Soul How
unhappy mu^^ they be who would exclude it out of the World! Surely such must
wan^^r about in worse than Egyptian (...). To live without a Sense of GOD's
particular Providence, is, in Effect, to live without GOD in the World. From
such a State, good LORD deliver me!

Tuesday, November 6. Read Prayers and Preached in the Morning; having the Use
of the Pulpit granted me for the whole Week. Went, at the Invitation of its
Father, to the Funeral of a Quaker's Child; and thought it my Duty, as there
was a great Concourse of People at the Burying Place, and no one of the Quakers
spoke, to give a Word of Exhortation. I hope this will be a Means of making
them more free in coming to hear the Word, though preached within a Church Wall.
Oh that Bigotry and Prejudice were banished out of the Christian World! LORD,
if it be thy Will, let it not be once named among us, as becomes Saints. Amen,
LORD JESUS, Amen!

Was visited again in the Evening, by the Presbyterian and Baptist Ministers,
who were much rejoiced to hear JESUS CHRIST preached in the Church. Whilst I
was conversing with them, some Women came, desiring they might be admitted to
Evening Prayers with my Family: I looked on this as a Hint from Providence;
called them up, and found much Enlargement of Heart in exhorting them, and
pouring out my Heart before GOD in their Behalf. Many came up afterward, whom
I desired, if they thought proper, to come again every Night. Who knows but the
LORD may be about to open a yet more effectual Door? O prepare me to do thy
Will, O GOD!

Wednesday, November 7. Read Prayers and preached in the Church. Dined with Mr.
Penn the Proprietor; and prayed with, and gave a Word of Exhortation to more
than a Roomfull of People, who came as last Night, to hear the Gospel of
CHRIST. Blessed be GOD, I found much Freedom of Spirit; but having taken Cold,
was obliged to leave off sooner than otherwise I should have done: However, in
the midst of the Weakness and Purging of my Body, the Thoughts of seeing People
come so gladly to hear the Word, refreshed and comforted my Soul. LORD make it
my only Joy to see thy Kingdom advanced and carried on. Amen and Amen.

Thursday, November 8. Read Prayers and Preached, rather to a more numerous
Congregation than I have seen yet. Dined with an honest, open-hearted, true
Israelitish Quaker. Had a sweet Opportunity with him and his Family, of talking
about JESUS CHRIST, and him crucified: And preached from the Courthouse
Stai^s, to about 6000 People, at Six in the Evening Blessed be GOD, I find, the
Number that came ^n Tuesday to my House, greatly increased and multiplied. The
Inhabitants were very sollicitous for my Preaching in another Place beside the
Church: For it is quite contrary here, to what it is in England: There the
generality of People think a Sermon cannot be preached well without, here they
do not like it so well, if delivered within the Church Walls. LORD, grant I may
become all Things, to all Men; and preach the Gospel in every Place, and in any
Manner, as well as to every Creature; that by all Means I may save some!

Friday, November 9. Read Prayers and Preached as usual in the Morning, and
perceived the Congregation still increased. Visited a sick Person, to whom I
was sent for, and perceived the Power of the LORD was present, both with the
sick Person and those that attended around the Bed. Most wept sorely at the
Preaching of Faith. Was visited in a kind Manner by the Minister of the Parish:
And preached again at Six in the Evening, from the Courthouse Steps. I believe
there were near 2000 more present to Night than last Night. Even in London, I
never observed so profound a Silence before my Coming. All was exceeding hushed
and quiet. The Night was clear, but not Cold. Lights were in most of the
Windows all around us, for a considerable distance. The People did not seem
weary of standing, nor was I weary of speaking. The LORD endued me with Power
from on high. My Heart was enlarged and warmed with divine Love. My Soul was
carried out in Prayer, that I thought I could have continued my Discourse all
Night. After I came home, some desired to join in Family Prayers; and in that
Exercise the divine Presence was manifest amongst us. Surely God has a Favor
unto this People! At present they seem most gladly to receive, and sweetly to
melt under the Word. LORD, I beseech thee, manifest forth thy Glory more and
more: And grant that much People in this City may be enabled to believe on
thee! Even so LORD JESUS. Amen and Amen.

Saturday, November 10. Before it was light, came a young Person whom I
observed to be much affected last Night, desiring to join in Prayer; and after
our Devotions were ended, she put into my Hand the following Letter.

Oh! what shall I say to express my Thanks I owe to my good GOD, in and from
you, through JESUS CHRIST; which you have been the happy Instrument of beginning
in my Soul: And if you have any Regard to a poor, miserable, blind and naked
Wretch, that is not only Dust, but Sin, as I am confident you have, you will in
no wise reject my humble Request; which is, that I, even I who am the most
unworthy, may lay hold on this blessed Opportunity of forsaking all, in order
to persevere in a virtuous Course of Life: Despise not thou thine Hand-Maiden;
but O let me say, as Ruth the Moabitess said to her Mother-in-Law, Entreat me
not to leave thee, or to return from following after thee; for whither thou
go I will go, and whither thou art there will I be also; thy People shall be
my People, and thy GOD my GOD. Thus am I fully determined. I pray and beg that
you would not despise thy poor, forlorn and destitute Fellow Creature; and the
LORD recompense thy Work, and a full Reward be given unto thee of the Lord
JESUS CHRIST, under whose Wings I am come to trust.

Soon after came a little Maid, about 7 Years of Age, telling me, she heard I
took little Children to Georgia, and desired me to take her. In the remaining
Part of the Morning several gracious Souls of different Communions, paid me a
most loving Visit, and my Heart was much refreshed with their pious
Conversation. About 11 I read Prayers and preached in the Church, to a larger
Audience than before. Dined with the Minister of the Parish; and at my Return
Home, was much comforted by the Coming of one Mr. Tennent, an old, grey-headed
Disciple and Soldier of JESUS CHRIST. He keeps an Academy about 20 Miles off
Philadelphia, and has been blessed with four gracious Sons, three of which have
been, and still continue, to be eminently useful in the Church of CHRIST: -- He
brought three pious Souls along with him, and rejoiced me, by letting me know
how they had been evil spoken of for their Master's sake: -- He is a great
Friend to Mr. Erskine of Scotland; and as far as I can find, both he and his
Sons are secretly despised here, by the Generality of the Synod, as Mr. Erskine
and his Brethren are hated by the Judicatories of Edinburgh, and as the
Methodist Preachers (as they are called) are by their Brethren in England. Though
we are but few, and stand, as it were, alone, like Elijah; and they, like the
Priests of Baal, are many in Number; yet I doubt not but the LORD will appear
for us, as he did for that Prophet, and make us more than Conquerors over all.

About 3 went to the Prison, and preached on the Trembling Jailor. -- The Place
was crowded, and many wept. Returned home with the Swedish Minister and old Mr.
Tennent. Conversed of the Things of GOD for a considerable Time; then preached
in the Evening to as large a Congregation as there was last Night, from the
Courthouse Stairs. Satan endeavored to interrupt us about the Middle of the
Discourse; for the People were frightened with they knew not what, but they were
soon at Peace. I preached above an Hour; and when I had finished, the People
seemed unwilling to go away, so I began to pray afresh, and I hope the LORD
sent them Home with his Blessing. Many to my Knowledge, have been already
quickened, and awakened to see that Religion does not consist in outward
Things, but Righteousness, Peace and Joy in the Holy Ghost. Oh that they may
not only receive the Word with Joy for a Season, but bring forth Fruit unto
Perfection!

After Preaching, my House was filled with People, who came in to join in
Psalms and Family Prayer: My Body was somewhat weak, but the LORD strengthened
and enlarged my Heart. Many wept most bitterly whilst I was praying; their
Hearts, I believe, were loaded with a Sense of Sin, the only Preparative for
the Soul-refreshing Visitations of JESUS CHRIST. Blessed be the LORD for
sending me hither: This has been a Day of fat Things. LORD, give me Humility,
and make me truly thankful. Amen, LORD JESUS.

Sunday, November 10. Read Prayers in the Morning. Dined with the Collector.
Preached in the Afternoon to a very thronged Congregation. Visited one sick
Person; and administered the holy Sacrament to another, who has received no such
Peace and inward Comfort for these 12 Years, as GOD has been pleased to
communicate to her Soul at this Time. Not unto me, O Lord, not unto me, but
unto thy Name be all the Glory. For ever adored be the Divine Goodness, the
Gospel has taken Root in many Hearts. As soon as I come Home, my House is
generally filled with People, desirous to join in Psalms and Prayers; they are
so eager after the Bread of Life, that they scarce can give me Time to take
bodily Refreshment, and proper Retirement in my Closet: GOD, I am persuaded,
has a Favor unto them. My Power and Freedom of Speech increases daily, and
this Afternoon I was carried out much, in Bearing my Testimony against the
Unchristian Principles and Practices of the Generality of our Clergy. Three of
my Reverend Brethren were present; I know not whether they were offended; I
endeavored to speak with Meekness as well as Zeal; and I find the Necessity
more and more, of Discovering those that are only Wolves in Sheep's Clothing.
Was I to convert Papists, my Business would be to show they were misguided by
the Priests; and if I want to convince Church of England Protestants, I must
prove, that the Generality of their Teachers do not preach or live the Truth as
it is in JESUS: For in vain we hope to set People right, till we demonstrate,
that the Way they have been taught, is wrong Perhaps this may cost me my Life;
but what have I to do with that?

GOD's Gifts, if called for, I resign;
Pleased to receive, pleased to restore.
Gifts are his Work, it shall be mine
The Giver only to adore.
Philadelphia, Burlington and Trent-Town, in the Jerseys.
Monday, November 12. Le^t a large Packet of Letters, and some Things for the
Press, to be sent by the Constantine, Capt. Wright, to London. Had a Man come
to me this Morning, telling me what GOD had done for his Soul by my Preaching
of Faith: He seemed deeply convicted of Sin; and said, he was drawn out by
GOD's Spirit to pray last Night, so that he lifted up his Voice like a Trumpet;
for which he was immediately looked upon by his Master and the Family as a
Madman. I never yet knew one truly awakened, who did not quickly commence a
Fool for CHRIST'S sake. Was pleased to see several tender Souls come to Family
Prayer. Indeed I have great Reason to believe, a good Work is begun in many
Hearts. LORD, carry it on for thy dear Son's sake! At my first Arrival at
Philadelphia, I received a Letter which had been left for me 3 Months, and in
which there was a pressing Invitation sent me by one Mr. Noble, a spiritual
Man, in the Behalf of many others, to come to New York. -- On Friday received
another ^^om the same Person, which looking like the Call given St. Paul, when
the Man appeared to him, saying, Come over to Macedonia, and help us; I this
Morning* in the Name and Strength of GOD; set out for that Place: Four choice
Horses were lent to me and my Friends; and more we might have had, had there
been Occasion. About (...) we got safe to Burlington, in the Jerseys* (...)
Miles from Philadelphia, where I had been importuned to preach as I went along.
The Gentleman who gave me the Invitation, received me and my Friends in as
sweet a Manner as can well be imagined: Immediately after Dinner I read Prayers
and preached in the Church, to a mixed, but thronged and attentive
Congregation. I scarce know the Time when I have spoken with greater Simplicity
and Freedom: The holy Spirit sweetly gave me Utterance, and I perceived several
much affected. -- The poor Creatures were very importunate for my staying with
them all Night, and giving them another Discourse; but it being inconsistent
with my Business, with great Regret, about 5 in the Evening we took our Leaves,
and by 8 a Clock reached Trent-Town in the Jerseys. It being dark, we went out
of our Way a little in the Woods; but GOD sent a Guide to direct us aright.
Whilst I was Riding, I felt the Spirit of GOD infusing fresh Supplies of Grace
into my Heart. We had a comfortable Refreshment when we reached our Inn, and
went to Rest in Peace and Joy in the Holy Ghost. LORD, teach me (...) be
thankful, Amen and Amen.

New-Brunswick.
Tuesday, November 13. Left Trent-Town about 6 in the Morning; had a sweet and
pleasant Journey, and reached Brunswick, about 30 Miles distant, about 1. Here
we were much refreshed with the Company of Mr. Gilbert Tennent, an eminent
Dissenting Minister, about 40 Years of Age, Son to that good old Man who came
to see me on Saturday at Philadelphia. GOD, I find, has been pleased greatly to
own his Labors: He and his Associates are now the burning and shining Lights
of this Part of America. He recounted to me many remarkable Effusions of the
Blessed Spirit which have been sent down amongst them; and one may judge of
their being true and faithful Soldiers of JESUS CHRIST, because they are every
where spoken evil of by natural Men. The Devil and carnal secure Ministers rage
horribly against them. Several pious Souls came to see me at his House, with
whom I took sweet Counsel. At their Request, and finding there was a general
Expectation of hearing me, I read the Church Liturgy and preached in the
Evening, at Mr. Tennent's Meeting House; for there is no Place set apart for
the Worship of the Church of England; and it is common for Dissenters and
Conformists to worship at the same Place. Oh! that the Partition Wall was
broken down, that we all with one Heart and one Mind, might glorify the Lord
JESUS CHRIST! At my first getting up I was somewhat weak and dry; but GOD
renewed my Strength, and enabled me to speak with Freedom and Power. I was
above an Hour in my Sermon; and I trust I shall hear it was not preached in
vain. Paul may plant, and Apollos may water; thou, LORD, only can give the
Increase.

NEW YORK.
Wednesday, November 14. Set out early from Brunswick, in Company with my dear
Fellow-Travellers, and r^y worthy Brother and Fellow Laborer Mr. Tennent. As
we passed along, we spent our Time most agreeably in telling one another what
GOD had done for our Souls. He recounted to me many sweet Instances of GOD's
striving with his Heart, and how Grace at last overcame all his Fightings
against GOD. About Noon we got to Elizabeth-Town, 22 Miles from Brunswick. Here
we took Boat, and about 4 reached New York, where we were most affectionately
received by the Family of Mr. Noble. As soon as we had refreshed our Bodies by
Eating a little Food, and our Souls by giving of Thanks, I waited upon Mr.
Vesey, the Commissary, but he was not at Home; then I went to the
Meeting House, to hear Mr. Gilbert Tennent preach, and never before heard such
a searching Sermon; he went to the Bottom indeed, and did not daub with
untemper'd Mortar: He convinced me more and more, that we can preach the Gospel
of CHRIST no farther than we have experienced the Power of it in our own
Hearts. Being deeply convicted of Sin, and driven from time to time off his
false Bottom and Dependencies, by GOD's holy* Spirit, at his first Conversion,
he has learned experimentally to dissect the Heart of a natural Man. --
Hypocrites must either soon be converted or enraged at his Preaching: -- He is
a Son of Thunder, and does not regard the Face of Man: -- He is deeply sensible
of the Deadness and Formality of the Christian Church in these Parts, and has
given noble Testimonies against it. After Sermon we spent the Evening together
at Mr. Noble's House; at their Request, I expounded and prayed, and after we
had sung a Psalm, we took our Leaves of each other, and went to rest. My Soul
was humbled and melted down with a Sense of GOD's Mercies; and I found more and
more, what a Babe and Novice I was in the Things of GOD. Blessed JESUS, grant I
may make continual Advances, till I come to a perfect Man in Thee!

Thursday, Nov. 15. Had several come to see me at my Lodgings, who also gave me
kind Invitations to their Houses. Waited upon Mr. Vesey; but could wish for his
own Sake, he had behaved in a more Christian Manner. He seemed to be full of
Anger and Resentment; and before I asked him the Use of the Pulpit, denied it.
He desired to see my Letters of Orders. I told him they were left at
Philadelphia. He asked me for my License: I told him, I never heard that my
Lord of London, as yet, gave any License to any one that went to preach the
Gospel in Georgia; but that I was presented to the Living of Savannah by the
Trustees; and upon that Presentation had Letters dimissory from my Lord of
London, which I thought was Authority sufficient. But this was by no Means
satisfactory. He charged me with Breaking my Oath, for Breaking the Canons,
which enjoins Ministers and Churchwardens not to admit Persons into their
Pulpits without a License. Alas! how can I break that, when I am neither a
Churchwarden, nor have any Church hereabouts to admit any one into? Upon this,
hearing he was a Frequenter of Public Houses, I reminded him of that Canon
which forbids the Clergy to go into any such Places. -- This, though spoke in the
Spirit of Meekness, stirred up his Corruptions more and more. He charged me
with making a Disturbance at Philadelphia, and sowing and causing Divisions in
other Places; But, says he, with a Sneer, you have a Necessity laid upon you to
preach. I told him, I had; for the Clergy and Laity of our Church seemed to be
settled on their Lees; but my End was not to sow Divisions, but to propagate
the pure Gospel of JESUS CHRIST. He said, they did not want my Assistance. I
replied, if they did preach the Gospel, I wished them good Luck in the Name of
the LORD; but as he had denied me the Church without my asking for the Use of
it, I would preach in the Fields, for all Places were alike to me. Yes, says
he, I find you have been used to that. After that, he taxed me with Censuring
my Superiors. I told him, I was no Respecter of Persons; if a Bishop committed
a Fault, I would tell him of it; if a common Clergyman did not act aright, I
would be free with him also, as well as with a Lay man, -- Whilst we were
talking he called for some Wine, and I drank his Health. Soon after he rose up;
said he had Business to do; and, as we were going out, full of Resentment he
said to Mr. Noble, who accompanied me and Brother Seward, Mr. Noble, as you
have sent for this Gentleman, so I desire you will find him a Pulpit. Alas!
alas! what Manner of Spirit are the Generality of the Clergy possessed with? Is
this the Spirit of the meek Lamb of GOD? Are these the Fruits of the Holy
Ghost, which they pretended to be moved with, when they took Holy Orders? It
cannot be. Surely the Kingdom of GOD will be taken from them: The Curse which
fell on Eli's Sons, I fear, will light on them: They cause the Sacrifice of GOD
to be abhorred: Their Bigotry, if it was nothing else, in Time would destroy
them. LORD! for thy Mercies sake, lighten their Darkness; and grant that some
of the Priests also may be obedient to the Truth.

Dined with Mr. Pemberton, the Presbyterian Minister. Preached in the Fields to
upwards of 2000, as Three in the Afternoon, and expounded at Six in the Evening
to a very thronged and attentive Audience at Mr. Pemberton's Meeting House. At
first for the sake of my weak Brethren, I was unwilling to Preach there; but
hearing that Mr. Vesey, the Commissary himself, had preached in the Dutch
Calvinistical Meeting House, when there was no Place of Worship for the People
of our own Community; and the Dutch Meeting House being denied me, as well as
the Church, I thought it my Duty to accept of the kind Offer made me by Mr.
Pemberton and his Friends. In the Field, some few Mocked; but GOD gave me Power
to speak to them, and they grew more serious. At Night, the People seemed
exceedingly attentive; and I have not felt greater Freedom in Preaching, and
more Power in Prayer, and a stronger Indwelling of the Spirit, since I came
into America, than I have at New York. I find it has been a secure Place, and
but little of the Work of GOD seen in it for many Years. Oh that this may be
the accepted Time! LORD, let this be the Day of their Salvation!

Friday, November 16. Preached at Three in the Afternoon, to a lovely
Congregation, in the Meeting House, it being too cool to go into the Fields. --
Expounded again in the Evening at the same Place to a far greater Congregation
than I have seen yet. Great Multitudes returned home for want of Room. GOD
enabled me to Preach with Power; and I hope some Good will be done here,
because Satan is disturbed. After Evening Service, I was told by several
Persons, that the Constables of the Town had been placed at the Door of the
English Church, lest my Adherents, encouraged by me, should break it open and
take it by Force. Well may the Heads of our Church People be said to reject the
Kingdom of GOD against themselves. I fear GOD will shortly take it from them.
They imitate the Scribes and Pharisees in their Crimes: (...) fear they will be
made Partakers of their Punishments. Oh that they would see in this their Day
the Things that belong to their Peace!

Saturday, November 17. Preached as usual in the Afternoon at the Meeting House
to a pretty Congregation: And again at Night, to a great Multitude, standing
round the Doors, beside those that were within. Woe be to those, who by their
Bigotry, Prejudice and Party Zeal, oblige us to Preach the Gospel in so
confined a Place: But no Matter; this as well as every Thing else shall be
overruled for the good of CHRIST'S Church. -- Had the Pleasure of Hearing that
some blessed Effects had been produced by the Preaching of the Word; and
several expressed a strong Inclination to go with me. When GOD will work, who
can hinder? Praised be the LORD, who daily shows me this is the Way wherein I
should go. LORD, make me humble and thankful!

Sunday, November 18. Preached this Morning by Eight a Clock, unto a very
attentive Auditory. Went to the English Church, both Morning and Evening, and
felt my Heart almost bleed within me, to consider what blind Guides were sent
forth into her. If I have any Regard for the Honor of CHRIST, and the good of
Souls, I must lift up my Voice like a Trumpet, and show how sadly our Church
Ministers are fallen from the Doctrines of the Reformation. Her Prophets
prophesy Lies, and I fear many of the People love to have it so. It is high
Time, O LORD, that thou have Mercy upon Sion. Oh let that Time shortly come!

In the second Lesson in the Morning, were these Verses, and some I found made
an immediate Application of them, by looking on me. John, Chap. X. Ver. 19, 20,
21. There was a Division therefore again among the Jews, for these Sayings. And
many of them said, he has a Devil, and is mad; why hear ye him? Others said,
these are not the Words of him that has a Devil. In the Evening vast Numbers
flocked to hear the Word. Some petitioned the Mayor to have the use of the
Town Hall; but it was denied: Then we thought of expounding out of a Window,
and to let the People stand in the Street; but at last, with much Difficulty, I
got into the Meeting House; and the People being prevailed on to open the
Windows, Numbers could hear that stood on the outside. GOD was pleased to
enlarge my Heart, and I was pressed in Spirit to bear my Testimony against the
Doctrines delivered in the English Church, both Morning and Evening. Though it
may seem a hard Saying to many, yet our People have need to be cautioned
against the Generality of the Scribes and Pharisees of our Communion, as much
as the Jews were cautioned to beware of the Scribes and Pharisees, by our dear
LORD JESUS. After Sermon, many People came to pray with me, and take a last
Farewell. They also gave me Tokens of Love, and I had great Reason to believe
GOD has begun a good Work in New York. I have not felt such Freedom and
Sweetness of Soul since I have been in America; one Reason I believe is,
because I have been here uncommonly opposed. Saw my Sermon on Regeneration
advertised in the New England Paper. Gave leave for my Answer to my Lord of
London to be printed at New York.

About Ten at Night, having spent some time in Prayer, I took Boat with my
Friends, and had a pleasant Passage to a Place about Halfway to Elizabeth-Town,
where we lay down with Joy and Thankfulness for the great Things the LORD had
shown us. Oh that I was duly sensible of his distinguishing Mercies!

Monday, November 19. Took Boat about Five in the Morning, and reached
Elizabeth-Town about Seven. Spent the Morning in writing Letters and Journal,
and in Religious Conversation with dear Mr. Tennent, Mr. Noble, and other
Friends, who accompanied me. Paid a Visit to Mr. Vaugh^^ the Minister of the
Church of England in Elizabeth-Town; who, as I afterward heard, had preached
against me, and said, I should not have the Use of his Pulpit. Dined with Mr.
Dickinson the Dissenting Minister, who had sent a Letter of Invitation to
New York, and offered me the Use of his Meeting House; About Twelve I preached
in it according to Appointment, to upwards of 700 People, many of which seemed
much affected; and GOD was pleased to open my Mouth against both Ministers and
People among the Dissenters, who hold the Truth in Unrighteousness, contenting
themselves with a bare speculative Knowledge of the Doctrines of Grace, but
never experienced the Power of them in their Hearts. These shall receive the
greater Condemnation.

NEW-BRUNSWICK.
Tuesday, Nov. 20. Reached hither about 6 last Night, and preached about Noon,
for near 2 Hours in worthy Mr. Tennent's Meeting House, to a large Assembly
gathered together from all Parts; and amongst them, as Mr. Tennent told me,
there was a great Body of solid Christians. About Three in the Afternoon I
preached again; and at seven* Baptized two Children; and preached a third Time,
with greater Freedom than at either of the former Opportunities. It is
impossible to tell with what Pleasure the Children of GOD heard these Truths
confirmed by a Minister of the Church of England, which for many Years have
been preached to them by their own Pastor Mr. Tennent. Opposers Mouths were
stopped; several were brought under strong Convictions; and our LORD'S dear
Disciples were ready to leap for Joy. To me, the Meeting seemed to be like the
Meeting of the twelve Tribes, when they came from different Parts to Worship
the LORD at Jerusalem. Among others that came to hear the Word, were several
Ministers, whom the LORD has been pleased to honor, in making them Instruments
of bringing many Sons to Glory. The one was a Dutch Calvinistical Minister,
named Freelinghausen, Pastor of a Congregation about four Miles off
New-Brunswick: He is a worthy old Soldier of JESUS CHRIST, and was a Beginner
of the great Work, which I trust the LORD is carrying on in these Parts. He has
been strongly opposed by his carnal Brethren; but GOD has always appeared for
him in a surprising Manner, and made him more than Conqueror over all. through
his Love: He has long since learned to Fear him only, who can destroy both Body
and Soul in Hell. Another was one Mr. Cross, Minister of a Congregation at
Baskinridge, about 20 Miles from Brunswick: A most remarkable Outpouring of the
Spirit has been frequently seen in his Congregation, for which he has been much
opposed by natural Men: He himself told me of many wonderful Effects, and
sudden Conversions that had been wrought by the LORD under his Ministry. For
some time eight or nine used to come to him together in deep Distress of Soul;
and I think he said, two Hundred of his Congregation, which is not very large,
were effectually brought home to CHRIST: But though they are the excellent Ones
of the Earth, they are looked upon as Enthusiasts and Madmen, and treated as
such by those that know not GOD, and are ignorant of the hidden Life of JESUS
CHRIST in their Hearts: He indeed is one, who, I believe would rejoice to
suffer for the LORD JESUS. Oh that I may be like minded! A third Minister was
one Mr. Camphel, who has been a Preacher of the Doctrines of Grace for these
four Years; was a regular moral Liver, and accounted a very good Man; but
within these few Months, being convinced of Sin, and that he knew nothing
experimentally of JESUS CHRIST, though he had pretended to preach him so long;
after many Struggles with himself, he told the Presbytery he was unconverted,
and therefore durst not preach till he was converted: Accordingly he has le^t
off Preaching these two Months, and h^s labored under unspeakable Anguish and
Distress of Soul. By some he is looked upon as melancholy, and besides himself;
but I had much Discourse with him, and really believe these Humiliations will
prepare him for great and eminent Services in the Church of GOD. -- His Case
puts me in mind of Professor Frank, who being on Easter Day to preach on the
Nature of Divine Faith, and finding he had not that Faith himself, was
convicted by GOD of his unregenerate State, upon which he ran into the Woods,
was there deeply humbled, and at last became a most exalted Instance of Faith.
At our Persuasion, Mr. Campbell promised to preach next Sunday* and, I believe,
will be instrumental of convicting many Heart-Hypocrites among the Dissenting
Ministers: For that there are such, is evident from this; though they have been
bred up in, and preach the Doctrines of Grace, yet whenever the Power of GOD
appears in any Congregation, they cry it down, as much as our Ministers of the
Church of England. Oh that the LORD may Comfort poor Mr. Campbell, and cause
him to detect these Wolves in Sheep's Clothing! With these Ministers, and many
other Disciples of our dear LORD JESUS, I took sweet Counsel. We eat our Bread
with Gladness and Singleness of Heart; and comforted ourselves with this
Consideration, that, though we must be separated from each other on this Earth,
yet we should sit down to eat Bread with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, in the
Kingdom of Heaven. Hasten, O LORD, th^^ blessed Time* Oh when (...) thy Kingdom
come!

Maidenhead, and Trent-Town.
Wednesday, November 21. Set out early with about 20 in Company, for
Maidenhead, a little above 20 Miles from Brunswick, where, at Mr. Tennent's
Request, I had appointed to preach as to Day. At Noon we got there, and
preached from a Wagon to about 1500 Persons, on the Conversion of St. Paul;
and GOD was pleased to direct my Words, and enable me to preach so suitably to
the poor despised Christians in these Parts, that they knew not well how to
express their Satisfaction. The LORD is gracious in all his Ways, and wonderful
in all his Works. Oh that I could praise him as I ought! Here one Mr. Rowland,
another faithful Minister of JESUS CHRIST, gave us the Meeting. -- He has been
a Preacher about 2 Years; has gone about doing Good, and had many Seals to his
Ministry: -- Much of the Simplicity of CHRIST was discernable in his Behavior.
Blessed be GOD, for sending such burning and shining Lights in this dark and
dead Generation! Thou, LORD of the Harvest, send forth more such Laborers into
thy Harvest. After Sermon we were kindly (...) attained at a House near the
Place where I preached; and being strongly desired by many, and hearing a
condemned Malefactor was to suffer that Week, in Company with about 30 more, I
went to Trent-Town, 10 Miles from Maidenhead, and reached thither by 5 in the
Evening. (...) GOD was please^ to (...) (...) thy Soul, and bring my Sins to
Remembrance, so that I could scarce hold up my Head; -- however, knowing that
GOD called, I went out trusting in his Divine Strength, and preached in the
Courthouse; and though I was quite barren and dry at the Beginning of the
Discourse; yet GOD enabled me to speak with great Sweetness, Freedom and Power,
before I had done. The unhappy Criminal seemed hardened; but I had great Reason
to believe some Good was done in the Place. LORD, send forth others to carry it
on, for thy dear Son's sake.

Trent-Town and Neshaminy.
Thursday, Nov. 22. Set out for Neshaminy, 20 Miles distant from Trent-Town,
where old Mr. Tennent lives, and keeps an Academy, and where I was to preach to
Day, according to Appointment. About 12 we came thither, and found about 3000
People gathered together in the Meeting House Yard. -- Mr. William Tennent, an
eminent Servant of JESUS CHRIST, because we staid beyond the Time appointed,
was preaching to them. When I came up, he soon stopped; sung a Psalm, and then I
began to speak as the LORD gave me Utterance. At first, the People seemed
unaffected; but in the Midst of my Discourse, the Power of the LORD JESUS came
upon me, and I felt such a Struggling within myself for the People, as I scarce
ever felt before. -- The Hearers began to be melted down immediately, and cry
much; and we had good Reason to hope the LORD intended good for many. After I
had finished, Mr. Gilbert Tennent gave a Word of Exhortation, to confirm what
had been delivered. At the End of his Discourse we sung a Psalm, and then
dismissed the People with a Blessing. Oh that the LORD may say Amen to it!
After our Exercises were over, we went to old Mr. Tennent's, who entertained us
like one of the ancient Patriarchs: His Wife to me seemed like Elizabeth, and
he like Zachary; both, as far as I can find, walk in all the Ordinances and
Commandments of the LORD, blameless. Though GOD was pleased to humble my Soul, so
that I was obliged to retire for a while; yet we had sweet Communion with each
other, and spent the Evening in Concerting what Measures had best be taken, for
Promoting our dear LORD's Kingdom. It happened very providentially, that Mr.
Tennent and his Brethren, are appointed to be a Presbytery, by the Synod; so
that they intend Breeding up gracious Youths, and sending them out, from time
to time, into our LORD's Vineyard. -- The Place wherein the young Men study
now, is, in Contempt, called, The College: It is a Log-House, about 20 Foot
long, and near as many broad; and to me it seemed to resemble the School of the
old Prophets; for that their Habitations were mean, and that they sought not
great Things for themselves, is plain from those Passages of Scripture wherein
we are told, that each of them took a Beam to (...) them a House, and that at
the Feast of the Sons of the Prophets, one of them put on the Pot. Whilst the
others went to fetch some Herbs (...) of the Field. And that can be said of
most of our public Universities, is, they are glorious without. From this
despised Place, 7 or 8 worthy Ministers of JESUS have lately been sent forth;
more are almost ready to be sent; and a Foundation is now Laying for the
Instruction of many others. The Devil will certainly rage against them; but the
Work I am persuaded is of GOD, and therefore will not come to naught. Carnal
Ministers oppose them strongly; and because People, when awakened by Mr.
Tennent or his Brethren, see through, and therefore leave their Ministry; the
poor Gentlemen are loaded with Contempt, and looked upon (as all faithful
Preachers will be) as Persons that turn the World upside down. A notable War, I
trust, is Commencing between Michael and the Dragon. We may easily guess who
will prevail. The Seed of the Woman shall bruise the Serpent's Head.

Neshaminy, Abington and Philadelphia.
Friday, November 23. Parted with dear Mr. Tennent, and his other worthy fellow
Labourer; but promised to remember each other publicly in our Prayers. Rode to
Abington, about 10 Miles from Neshaminy, and preached to above 2000 People,
from a Porch Window belonging to the Meeting House, whither I was invited
yesterday, after I had preached at Neshaminy. Many of the People seemed
affected, and I think I have not seen greater Things, no not in England. It is
surprising how such vast Bodies of People, so scattered abroad, can be gathered
at so short a Warning. -- I believe at Neshaminy there might be about 1000
Horses, which the People do not sit on to hear the Sermon as at England, but
tie them to the Hedges, and thereby much Disorder is prevented. As soon as I
had done, fresh Invitations were made me, to come to several Places, would Time
and Business permit. Though it was Cold, the People stood very patiently in the
open Air, and seemed in no Hurry to return home after the Discourses were
ended. What are outward Things to a Soul intent on GOD? less than nothing.

As soon as I had finished, I hastened to Philadelphia; and blessed be GOD,
found my Family in good order, and all Things carried on according to my
Desire. Oh how can I express my Thankfulness for this little Every Son! The
LORD has done great Things for us in it; whereat the People of GOD are much
rejoiced. Oh that I may now begin to do something for CHRIST! not to justify my
Person, but my Faith, and to show my Love and Gratitude for what GOD has done
for my Soul!

Saturday, November 24. Preached this Morning in the Church, with much Freedom
and Power. -- Several came to me, enquiring about inward Feelings, and the
receiving the Holy Ghost; and I found many began to be awakened out of their
carnal Security, by the Word preached. Received an excellent Letter from one
grievously vexed with Temptations, whom GOD has been pleased to make me an
Instrument of Comforting. Preached again at four in the Afternoon, in the
Church, that being judged more convenient than the Market Place, as the Weather
was so cold. A vast Concourse of all Denominations were present. GOD gave me,
particularly toward the close of my Sermon, to speak with divine Energy. --
After Sermon, I visited two sick Persons. Supped comfortably with my Family;
and laid me down, with a strong Desire to see my own Unworthiness, and the
Freeness and Riches of that Grace, which alone has made me to differ from the
most abandoned of Men. Whatever others may see in themselves I know not; this
one Thing I know, I see nothing but Hell in my Soul. And therefore, whenever I
do glory, I desire only to glory in thee O LORD!

Sunday, November 25. Had great Travail of Soul, and Struggle within myself,
about a Text to preach on; and could not conceive the reason of such uncommon
Perplexity. At last I fixed on one for the Morning; and trusted to GOD to
direct me to one for the Evening: But before I came from Church, GOD showed ^ne
what I should do; for after I had done Preaching, a young Gentleman, once a
Minister of the Church of England, but now a Secretary to Mr. (...), stood up
with a loud Voice, and wanted the People against the Doctrine I had been
delivering; urging, that there was (...) such (...) as imputed Righteousness in
holy Scripture; that such Doctrine puts a Stop to all Goodness; that we were to
be judged for our good Works and Obedience, and were commended to Do and Live.
When he had ended, I denied his first Proposition, and brought a Text to prove
an imputed Righteousness was a scriptural Expression. But thinking the Church
an improper Place for Disputation, I said no more at that Time. The Portion of
Scripture appointed for the Epistle was, Jer. xxiii. wherein were these Words,
THE LORD OUR RIGHTEOUSNESS. Upon these I discoursed in the Afternoon. I showed
how the LORD JESUS was to be our whole Righteousness; proved how the contrary
Doctrine overthrowed all Divine Revelation; answered all Objections, that were
made against an imputed Righteousness; produced the Articles of our Church to
illustrate it; and concluded with an Exhortation to all, to lay aside a
Reasoning Infidelity, and to submit to JESUS CHRIST, who is the End of the Law
for Righteousness, to every one that believes. The Verses at the beginning of
the Chapter, out of which the Text was taken, were very remarkable. Jer. Chap.
XXIII. Ver. 1,2,3,4. Woe be unto the Pastors th^^ destroy and scatter the Sheep
of my Pasture, says the LORD. Therefore thus says the Lord God of Israel
against the Pastors that feed my People, Ye have scattered my Flock, and driven
th^^ away, and have not visited them; Behold, I will visit upon you the Evil of
your Doings, says the LORD. And I will gather the Remnant of my Flock, out of
all Countries whither I have driven them, and will bring them again to their
Folds, and they shall be fruitful and increase. And I will set up Shepherds
over them, which shall feed them, and they shall fear no more, nor be dismayed;
neither shall they be lacking, says the LORD. GOD was pleased to fulfill the
Promise in me, for, blessed be his Name, I was not dismayed. The Word came with
Power. The Church was thronged within and without, and all wonderfully
attentive; and many, as I am informed convinced that the LORD CHRIST was our
Righteousness. -- In the Evening the Gentleman came to me; but alas! was so
very dark in all the Fundamentals of Christianity; and such an entire Stranger
to Inward Feelings, that I was obliged to say to him, Art thou a Master of
Israel and know not these Things? LORD, convict and convert him, (...) thy
infinite Mercies sake!

Went to the Quakers Meeting, for a little Time. Gave the Sacrament a^ a
private House; and came home, exhorted, prayed and ^ung Psalms with a Roomfull
of People. -- They follow me wherever I go, as they used to do in London; and I
believe a noble Gathering of Souls might be in this Place* H^re, as elsewhere,
they only went Somebody to preach the Truth as it is in JESUS. Dearest LORD,
remember thy Church, and revive thy Work amongst them, in the midst of thy
Years!

Monday, November 26. Read Prayers, and preached twice in the Church* to very
(...) and attentive (...) perceive, came with great Power; and People new apply
to me so fast for Advice under Convictions, and so continually cloud in upon me
(...) I have not Time so much as to write a Letter to my English Friends. --
Some little Presents have been sent for the Orphan-House; and a large
Collection, I believe, might be made; but I choose to defer that 'til my Return
hither again. As yet it seems absolutely necessary for the good of the Church
in general, and my Orphan-House in particular, that I should visit every Place
in (...), whither I have been before. Good LORD, direct my Goings in thy Way!

Philadelphia and Germantown.
Tuesday, November 27. According to Appointment preached at Germantown, six
Miles from Philadelphia, off a Balcony, to about 6000 People. Before I began, I
retired, and was humbled at the Throne of Grace; but GOD strengthened m^ to
speak very near two Hours, with such Demonstration of the Spirit that great
Numbers continued Weeping for a considerable Time. I have not ^een a more
gracious Melting for a long Season. After I had done, People came to me,
S^^^^ing me by the Hand, and inviting me to their Houses, and fresh Places. A
German most kindly entertained ^e. I had sweet Converse, and felt a sweet Union
and Communion with many Souls, though of (...) I (...) (...) are no less (...)
fifteen particular (...) of Christians in Germantown, and yet all agree (...)
(...) Thing, viz. to (...) JESUS CHRIST as their Head, and to (...) in Spirit
and (...) Truth. (...) been (...) out of Switzerland* (...) CHRIST; and Numbers
are scattered (...) about the Town, who were driven out of their Native
Countries for the sake of their Holy Religion. About four in the Afternoon we
went in Company with many dear Disciples of the LORD to see one Conrad
Matthews, an aged Hermit, who has lived a solitary Life near 40 Years; he was
an Heir to a great Estate, but chose a voluntary Poverty; he has worked hard,
but would always work without Wages; he is now unable to do much, but GOD sends
Somebody or another to feed him: A Friend built him the little House wherein he
lives, and JESUS, I am persuaded, dwells with him: He talked most feelingly of
inward Trials, and when I asked him if he had not many such in so close
Retirement, he answered, No wonder that a (...) Tree, that stands alone, is
more exposed to Storms than one that grow among others. After about (...) an
(...), Conversation, we took (...) Leave; he kissed me and my Friends, and was
much voiced to hear what was doing in England. -- (...) Germans, I find, are
translating my Journal^ into (...) Dutch. Our Hearts were knit together, and
the GOD of Love was with us of a Truth. About eight in the Evening we reached
Philadelphia, and sound great Numbers waiting about say Door, to hear the Word
of Life. After I had paid a Visit, and talked closely to two Persons, who were
doubting of the Principles of the Quakers, I returned home; and though I was
(...), I could not bear to let so many Souls go away without a Spiritual
Morsel; I therefore gave them a Word of Exhortation, as the Spirit gave me
Utterance. Sung a Hymn, prayed, and dismissed them with a Blessing. Many wept
bitterly, and the Peoples Behavior more and more convinces me that GOD has
begun a good Work in many Souls. Was there proper Encouragement given, I am
persuaded Georgia might soon be peopled. Many would gladly go with us thither.
I cannot but hope that it will be in time a fruitful Soil for Christians. One
great reason why Pennsylvania flourishes above other Provinces, I take to be
the Liberty of Conscience, which is given all, to worship GOD in their own Way:
By this Means, it is as it were an Asylum, or Place of Refuge, for all
persecuted Christians. And Methinks they live here as so many Guardian Angels.
-- I want to go up in the Woods to see more of them, but Time will not permit.
Oh when shall the Children of GOD sit down together in the Kingdom of their
Father! There we shall all speak one Language, and join in Singing the Song of
the Lamb. LORD, set my Soul a Thirsting more and more after that blissful
Communion of Saints!

PHILADELPHIA.
Wednesday, November 28. Redeemed a little Time before it was Light, to write a
Letter or two to my dear Friends in England. -- I have not had a Moment's Time
before, since my Return from New York. People are continually coming in, and
enquiring with strong Cryings and many Tears. how they must come to CHRIST. It
grieves me to send them away with such short Answers, but Necessity compells
me. Oh that the LORD may send forth more Labour^^^ into his Harvest! Read
Prayers and preached in the Morning as usual, to a thronged Congregation. Heard
of more that were under Convictions; and as I was walking out to Dinner, a
German came to me, saying, Thou did sow some good Seed yesterday in
Germantown, and a Grain of it fell into my Daughter's Heart: She wants to speak
with thee, that she may know what she must do to keep and increase it. The
young Woman being near at Hand, came at her Father's Call. -- Both melted into
Tears immediately; and after I had exhorted her to watch and pray, and keep
close to CHRIST by Faith, I took my Leave, beseeching GOD to water the good
Seed his own Right Hand had planted in her Heart. In the Morning, Notice had
been given, that I should preach my Farewel-Sermon in the Afternoon; but the
Church being not capable, though as large as most of our London Churches, to
contain a fourth Part of the People, by the Advice of Friends we adjourned to
the Fields; and I preached for an Hour and half from a Balcony, to upwards of
10,000 Hearers, very attentive, and much affected with what GOD enabled me to
deliver. I endeavored to come in all Plainness of Speech, without any Respect
of Persons. -- The Mention of my Departure was a Grief to many; and it almost
melted me down, to see with what Eagerness and earnest Affection they followed
after the Preaching of the Word: -- If I could preach they would attend all the
Day long, Blessed be GOD, for this effectual Door! I wonder we have no more
Adversaries: By and by I expect Satan and his Emissaries will rage horribly. I
endeavored to forewarn my Hearers of it. LORD, prepare us against a Day of
spiritual Battle. Took my Leave of the Governor and Proprietor. Supped with one
of the Churchwardens and his Friends; and when I came Home, exhorted, sung
Psalms and prayed with a great Company of People, who were waiting at my Door.
After I was in Bed I received the following Letter from New York.

Reverend and Dear SIR,
I was heartily sorry that a Cold should hinder me from accompanying you into
the Jerseys, but am in Hopes it was ordained by Divine Providence for the best.
I found the next Day, you had left the Town under a deep and universal Concern.
-- Many were greatly affected, and I hope abiding* Impressions are left upon
some. -- Some that were before very loose and profligate, look back with Shame
upon their past Lives and Conversations, and seem resolved upon a thorough
Reformation. I mention these Things* to strengthen you in the blessed Cause you
are engaged in, and to support you under your abundant Labors. When I heard so
many were concerned for their eternal Welfare, I appointed a Lecture (...)
Wednesday Evening; though it was not a usual Season; and though the Warning was
short, we had a numerous and attentive Audience. In short, I cannot but hope,
your Coming amongst us has been a Means of Awakening some among us, to a
serious Sense of practical Religion, and may be the Beginning of a good Work in
this secure and sinful Place. Dear Sir, let your Prayers be joined with mine,
for this desirable Blessing: I desire your Prayers for me in particular; that I
may be faithful to my Master's Work; that I may be an Instrument in the Hands
of CHRIST, of pulling down the strongest Holds of Sin and Satan, and building
up the Redeemer's Kingdom in this Place. Pray for us, that the good Impressions
any have received, may not wear off, and prove as the Morning Cloud and as the
early Dew; but that he would grant a Resurrection of Religion in the Midst of
us; that many may flock to CHRIST, as Doves to the Windows. I pray GOD take you
under his Protection, sustain you under your many Trials, and make you
gloriously successful to convert Sinners from the Error of their Ways, and
turning them to the Wisdom of the Just. My Wife joins with me in affectionate
Regard to you, Mr. Seward, and your other Friends, whom we love in Sincerity.

I am, Your affectionate Brother, and Humble Servant, E. PEMBERTON.


Blessed be GOD for such Success at New York: Nor is He working less here. --
One of the Printers has told me he has taken above two Hundred Subscriptions
for printing my Sermons and Journals. -- Another Printer told me, he might have
sold a Thousand Sermons if he had them; and by the Persuasions of my Friends, I
gave out two of my extempore Discourses to be published, Dearest LORD, give
them thy Blessing! Numbers of Letters have been sent me from Persons under
Convictions; and it is unknown what deep Impressions have been wrought in the
Hearts of Hundreds. An Opposer told me, I had unhinged many good sort of
People: And indeed I believe, many that contented themselves with good Desires,
are now convinced they must have good Habits also, and must be thoroughly born
again, ever they can see the Kingdom of GOD. -- Many poor Sinners have, I
trust, been called home, and great Numbers are under strong Convictions. And as
I have sown spiritual Things, People are willing I should reap carnal Things;
they have therefore sent me Butter, Sugar, Chocolate, Pickles, Cheese and
Flour, for my poor Orphans, and indeed I could almost say, they would pluck out
their own Eyes and give me. Blessed be GOD, for the great Work begun in these
Parts. The Word has run very swiftly, and been much glorified. Oh that what GOD
says of the Church of Philadelphia, in the Revelations, may be now fulfilled in
this City, called after her Name, I know thy Works: Behold, I have set before
thee an open Door, and none can shut it. Behold, I will make them of the
Synagogue of Satan, behold, I will make them to come and worship before thy
Feet; and to know that I have loved thee.

Philadelphia, Chester and Wilmington.
Thursday, November. 29. Had the Satisfaction of settling all my Family Affairs
according to my Desire. Got considerably, by the Goods sold, for the Poor. --
Had a Sloop lent me which Mr. Seward bought, named the Savannah, in which I
left Orders for my Family to set sail, immediately after my leaving
Philadelphia. -- My Friend Gladman, mentioned in the Beginning of this, has
been a Help meet for me, and done every Thing, without giving me any, or but
little Trouble. Blessed be GOD. About Eleven in the Morning, having corrected
two Sermons for the Press, I took an affectionate Leave of my Family and
Philadelphia People. From seven in the Morning they thronged round the Door;
and when we parted, Oh! how bitterly did the poor Souls weep. -- As I passed
along the Street, they came running out to the Doors, and discovered the
Concern that was in their Hearts, by the Sorrow of their Countenance. Near 20
Gentlemen accompanied me on Horseback out of the Town: About seven Miles off
another Company waited to join us; so that at last we were near 200 Horses. By
Three we reached Chester, a Town 15 Miles distant from Philadelphia; and after
we had taken a little Food, I preached to near five Thousand People from a
Balcony. It being Court Day, the Justices sent Word, they would defer their
Meeting till mine was over; and the Minister of the Parish, because the Church
would not contain the People, took Care himself to provide the Place from which
I spoke. The People were very quiet and attentive; and as I was told, near 1000
came from Philadelphia. After Sermon many of them took their last Farewell, and
wished me Good Luck in the Name of the LORD. About six in the Evening we left
Chester, and came to Wilmington, 13 Miles, before Nine. The Evening was warm;
the Moon shone bright, and the pious Discourse we had on the Road, made the
Time imperceptibly slide away. Two loving Quakers received us into their
Houses. GOD was pleased also to refresh my Heart with a Sense of his Divine
Love; and after I had given a Word of Exhortation, prayed with my own Friends,
and some others that came in, I went to Bed, admiring the great Work that was
begun by GOD in these Parts: I have not seen greater Things, considering the
Places, no not in England. Oh! that the LORD, in answer to the People's
Prayers, in his due Time, may bring me back hither again! I hope then to see
some substantial Fruits of my present weak Endeavors. Dearest Redeemer, make
me humble; prepare me for thy future Mercies, and whenever thou see me in
Danger of being puffed up above Measure, graciously send me a Thorn in the
Flesh; so shall thy Blessings not prove my Ruin!

Wilmington.
Friday, Nov. 30. Had a sweet Retirement this Morning. Preached at Noon, and
again at 3 in the Afternoon, to near 4000 People each Time. Received several
fresh and pressing Invitations to preach at several different Places, but was
obliged to withstand them all. Oh that I had a Hundred Tongues and Lives, they
should all be employed for my dear LORD JESUS! Spent the Evening in sweet
Conversation with Mr. Charles Tennent, Brother to Mr. Gilbert Tennent, a
faithful Minister of JESUS CHRIST, and with several ^^^ans, whose Hearts GOD
has been pleased to knit to me in a close intimate Union. Blessed be GOD, for
the Communion of Saints. LORD, why am I thus highly favored! Even so, Father,
for so it seems good in thy Sight. Was ever such a Monument of GOD's free
Grace! Who dares despair, when such Mercies are daily poured on such a Wretch
as I am!

New Castle and Christian-Bridge.
Saturday, December 1. Reached New Castle* seven Miles from Wilmington, by Ten
in the Morning; was met on the Way by Mr. Ross, the Minister of the Place, and
was kindly entertained by Mr. G --, one of the principal Inhabitants, who sent
to invite me and my Friends yesterday. Preached to about 2000 People from a
Balcony about 1 a Clock, but did not speak with so much Freedom and Power as
usual, by reason GOD was pleased to humble my Soul by inward Visitations and
Bodily Indispositions. Lay on the Bed after Sermon, which refreshed me much.
Rode to, and preached at Christian-Bridge, near five Miles off, to about the
same Number as was at New Castle. -- I believe 200 Horse came on the Road with
us. -- I had some edifying Discourse with some Children of GOD, as we came on
the Way: And a great Power from GOD descended on me and the Congregation, at
the latter Part of the Sermon. I always observe inward Trials prepare me for,
and are the certain Forerunners of fresh Mercies. Oh what a gracious Melting
of Souls was there! Enough to convince, one would imagine, the greatest
Infidels. Oh with what Earnestness did People beseech me to visit other Places!
Surely Herbert's Prophecy is now fulfilling.

Religion stands a Tip-toe on our Land,
Ready to pass to the American Strand.
Sunday, December 2. Returned last Night after Sermon to New Castle, that I
might once more see my dear Family, who came thither in the Sloop just after I
had left it. Lay at the House of Mr. G -- n; and this Morning went on board;
prayed, sung Psalms, gave a Word of Exhortation, and rejoiced much to see all
Things in such excellent Order. My dear Friend, the Captain, told me how kind
the People of Philadelphia had been to my Family after my Departure; one
brought them Butter, another Beer, Sweetmeats, etc. and the Collector would not
take his Perquisite for Clearing the Sloop. -- The two Children the People were
particularly fond of, and gave them so many Things, that I was obliged to
desire them to hold their Hands. Oh how plentiful are those Mercies which GOD
has laid up for them that fear him, even before the Sons of Men! About Ten we
came to Christian Bridge again, where we left some of our Friends last Night.
Here we took a little Refreshment, and by Twelve reached Whitec^ry-Creek, the
place appointed for my Preaching. The Weather was very rainy; but upwards of
8,000 People were assembled together to hear the Word. It surprised ^^e to see
such a Number of Horses; I believe there were several Thousands of them. I
preached from a Tent erected for me by Order of Mr. Charles Tennent, whose
Meeting House lay near the place where I preached. I continued in my first
Discourse for an Hour and half: Afterward we went into a Log House near
adjoining; and having taken a Morsel of Bread, and warmed ourselves, I preached
a second Time from the same Place. My Body, I perceived, was a little weak; but
GOD magnified his Strength, and caused his Power to be known in the
Congregation; many Souls were melted down. And here I had the Pleasure of
meeting with one Mr. Galaspey, mother faithful Minister of JESUS CHRIST, of he
Dissenting Interest. He, as well as Mr. Tennent, was very solicitous for my
going to his House; but being pre-engaged, I rode three Miles, and was kindly
and hospitably entertained at one Mr. H -- 's, who came with his Family some
Years ago from Cardi^^ in (...)* -- One in the House had heard me preach in
Kingswood; and every Thing was carried on with so much Freedom and Love, that I
rejoiced much that GOD had sent us hither. I staid up as long as I could; but
finding my Body weak, from the Posture in which I stood to preach, about 10 a
Clock, after Family Prayer, I went to Bed, thoroughly weary, but full of that
Peace which the World cannot give, but which I wish the whole World were
Partakers of.

MARYLAND. North-East.
Monday, December 3. Parted with some more Friends who accompanied me from
New Castle. Eat our Bread with Gladness and Singleness of Heart. Came to
North-East in Marlyand, where I appointed to preach to Day. -- Little Notice
having been given, there were not above 1500 People; but GOD was with us, and I
observed many were deeply affected. Several repeated Invitations were sent me
to preach at other Places. Immediately after Sermon, we set forwards, and
crossed S^^^^ehannah Ferry, about a Mile bre^^d, and were received at a
Gentleman's House that lay in the Way. Though we were Eight in Company, yet all
Things were carried on with great Freedom and Generosity: And I hope GOD sent
us providentially thither; for the Gentleman told us, he had been a little
melancholy, and had therefore sent for some Friends to drive it away. -- The
Bottle and the Bowl, I found, were the Means that were to be made use of; but,
blessed be GOD, the Design was, in some good Measure, prevented by our coming
in. Another Turn was soon given to their Conversation: I endeavored to talk of
GOD as much as I could. -- Most joined in Family Prayer. -- I went to Bed,
pitying the miserable Condition of those who live a Life of Luxury and Lust,
and are led Captive by the Devil at ^his Will: They are afraid to look into
themselves; and if their Consciences are at at any Time awakened, they must be
lulled asleep again by Drinking and evil Company. None but a sincere Christian
can with Pleasure practice the Duty of Self-Examination. LORD, grant I may
always so live, as to keep a Conscience void of Offense both toward Thee and
toward Men; then I shall never be less alone, than when alone; Thou Father of
Mercies* and GOD of all Consolations, will be every where with me!

JOPPA.
Tuesday, December 4. Set out about eight in the Morning, and took Leave of two
more dear Friends, who parted from us with weeping Eyes. Baited at Joppa, a
little Town about fifteen Miles off the Place where we lay; and gave a Word of
Exhortation to about 40 People in the Church. Oh that the Holy Ghost may fall
on them that heard the Word, in as real, though not in so extraordinary a Manner,
as it did on Cornelius, and his Household! But Maryland, as far as I can hear,
seems to be a Place as yet unwater'd with the true Gospel of CHRIST; and (...)
likelihood of doing much good in it, unless one could abide in it for some
time. They have (...) ^hy Town worth mentioning, because, almost every Planter
has a Landing Place, from which he exports his Tobacco from his own House,
which generally lies very near the River: By this means, the People are much
dispersed, and consequently cannot be gathered together, without much previous
Notice, which, notwithstanding, is difficult to be given, because there are
many large Ferris between Place and Place, and no Newspapers, as I hear of,
amongst them. However, I trust, the Time will come, when GOD will visit these
dark Corners of the Earth. I long to see the New Heavens and New Earth, wherein
dwell^th Righteousness.

Newtown and Annapolis.
Wednesday, December 5. Lay last Night at Newtown, fifteen Miles from Joppa.
Eat of what was set before us. Joined in Family Prayer; and, a^ often a^ I
found Opportunity, put in a Word ^or GOD. -- In the Morning we sung and prayed.
(...) (...), we Baited at a House lying about (...) Miles off; and by four in
the Afternoon reached Annapolis, a little Town, but the Metropolis of Maryland.
The House we lodged at was very commodious, considering it was in Maryland; but
the People of it seemed surprised, when we talked ^o them of ^OD and of CHRIST;
notwithstanding* both they, and the other Strangers, attended very orderly at
Family Prayers; and I endeavored to recommend them, as far as I was enabled,
to the Mercy of our gracious and good GOD* Oh that I may prevail in their
Behalf! It grieves me to my Soul to see poor Sinners hanging as it were by a
single Hair, and dancing (insensible of their Danger) over the Flames of Hell.
Oh that GOD may make me instrumental of plucking them as Firebrarnds out of the
Fire! For here is the Misery of fallen Man; he is miserable, poor, and blind,
and naked, and yet knows it not. LORD JESUS, send forth, we beseech thee, thy
Light, and lighten our Darkness, for thy Mercies sake!

ANNAPOLIS.
Thursday, December 6. Had a providential Opportunity of writing some Letters
last Night and this Morning to England. Waited on Governor Ogle, and was
received with Civility. Went to pay my Respects to Mr. Sterling, the Minister
of the Parish, who happened not to be within; but whilst we were at Dinner, he
came, and with the greatest Civility offered me his Pulpit, his House, or any
Thing he could supply me with. About sour he came and introduced me and my
Friends to a Gentleman's House, where we had some useful Conversation: Our
Discourse ran chiefly on the New Birth, and the Folly and Sinfulness of those
Amusements, whereby the polite Part of the World are so fatally diverted from
the Pursuit after the One Thing needful. Some in Company, I believe, thought me
too strict, and were very strenuous in defense of what they call innocent
Diversions; but when I told them every Thing was sinful, which was not done
with a single Eye to GOD's Glory; and that such Entertainments not only
discovered a Levity of Mind, but were contrary to the whole Tenor of the
Gospel; by this they seemed somewhat convinced, at least it set them upon
Doubting: And I pray GOD they may doubt more; for Cards, Dancing, and such
like, draw the Soul from GOD, and lull it asleep, as much as Drunkenness and
Debauchery. And had a Minister the Authority of an Apostle, he could not employ
it better, than in exclaiming against the Entertainments of the polite Part of
the World. For Ladies are as much wedded to Quadrille and Ombre, as Gentlemen
are to their Bottle, and their Hounds: Self-pleasing, self-seeking, is the
ruling Principle in both; and therefore, such Things are to be spoken against,
not only as so many trifling Amusements, but as Things that show that the whole
Heart is alienated from the Life of GOD. For if I may speak by my own, as well
as others Experience, as soon as ever the Soul is born of GOD, it cannot away
with any such Thing: Nothing but what leads toward GOD, can then delight it.
And therefore, when in Company, I love to lay the Ax to the Root of the Tree;
show the Necessity of a thorough Change of Heart, and then all Things fall to
the Ground at once. My (...) Charles Wesley, excellently describes the Misery
of a Lady of Pleasure.

I TIMOTHY chap. V. ver. 6. She that lives in Pleasure, is Dead while she
lives.
How hapless is the applauded Virgin's lot,
Her GOD forgetting; by her GOD forgot!
Stranger to Truth, unknowing to obey:
In Error nursed, and disciplined to stray:
Swol'n with Self-will, and principled with Pride:
Sense all ^e, Good, and Passion all her Guide:
Pleasure its Tide, and Flattery lends its Breath,
And smoothly waft her to eternal Death.
A Goddess here she seems; her Vot'ries meet,
Crowd at her Shrine, and tremble at her Feet;
She hears their Vows; believes their Life and Death
Hangs on the Wrath and Mercy of her Breath:
Supreme in fancied State, she reigns her Hour,
And glories in her Plenitude of Power:
Herself, the only Object worth her Care,
Since all the kneeling World was made for her.
For her, Creation all its Stores displays,
The Silk Worm's Labor, and the Diamond's blaze;
Air, Earth and Sea conspire to tempt her Taste;
And ransacked Nature furnishes the Feast.
Life's gaudiest Pride attracts her willing Eyes,
And Balls, and Theaters, and Courts arise:
Italian Songsters pant her Ear to please;
Bid the first Cries of infant Reason cease,
Save her from Thought, and lull her Soul to Peace.
Deep sunk in Sense, the imprisoned Soul remains,
Nor knows its Fall from GOD, nor feels its Chains;
Unconscious still, sleeps on in Error's Night,
Nor strives to rise, nor struggles into Light:
Heaven-born in vain, degenerate cleaves to Earth:
( No Pangs experienced of the second Birth.)
She only fallen, yet unawaken'd found,
While all the enthralled Creation groans around.
Friday, December 7. Observed two Persons came in with the Family to Prayer
last Night; and a visible Alteration was made in the Behavior of the People of
the House. Preached in the Morning and Evening to small, but polite Auditories.
The Governor put by his Court to come to Morning Sermon; and at Noon, upon an
Invitation sent last Night to me and my Friends, we dined with him; he treated
us very humanly: And in the Evening two of the Head Inhabitants favored me
with a Visit. The Minister seemed somewhat affected, and under Convictions: But
I fear a false Politeness, and the Pomp and Vanities of the World, eat out the
Vitals of Religion in this Place. I bless GOD, I did not spare to tell my
Hearers of it in my Discourses; and the Minister told me they took it kindly.
At Night four Persons came to join in Family Prayer; to whom I gave a warm
Exhortation, for GOD was pleased to enlarge and shed abroad his Love in my
Heart. Oh that GOD may open the Heart of some Lydia! Here are few Inhabitants,
but GOD, I hope, will show that he has some chosen Ones out of this People.

Upper-Marlborough.
Saturday, December 8. Had more come last Night to Family Prayers. Left
Annapolis this Morning. Baited at Upper-Marlborough, about 15 Miles distant;
and intended to go further* but being desired by some Gentlemen, to stay and
preach on the Morrow, I was prevailed upon, and spent the Remainder of the Day
in sweet Conversation with my Friends; in Writing Letters to some under
Convictions at Philadelphia, and at Supper with a Gentleman who kindly
entertained both me and my dear Fellow-Travellers. -- Our Talk ran upon the
Fall o^ Man; but I fear Deism has spread much in these Parts. I cannot say, I
have yet met with above one who seems truly to have the Fear of GOD before his
Eyes. Satan does here particularly reign in the Children of Disobedience.
Dearest Redeemer, once more lead Captivity captive, and send thy Holy Spirit
amongst the Men of these Parts! And as thou did drive the Devils out of the
Country of the Gadareens, drive them out of this also, for thy Mercies sake!
Amen, Amen.

Upper-Marlborough and Port-Tobacco.
Sunday, December 9. Preached at Upper-Marlborough, to a small, polite and
seemingly very curious Audience. Dined with the Gentleman with whom we supped.
Parted with a dear Friend who came from Philadelphia. Took Horse, there being
no Sermon in the Afternoon, and went a Sabbath-Day's Journey, as far as
Piscataway, where we were kindly entertained, and filled with Joy. Wrote some
Letters to our English Friends. Conversed to the Use of Ed^^ying, and felt an
uncommon Freedom and Sweetness in each others Spirits. -- Well (...) LORD say,
the Kingdom of GOD is wit* for they who are truly born again of carry Heaven in
their Hearts.

Piscataway, Tobacco and Potom^
Monday, December 10. Was sweetly (...) with the Rest GOD gave us. Wrote* a
Letter to England. Baited at Port Tobac^ reached Potomack by three in the After
Potomack is a River which parts the t^^ vinces, Maryland and Virginia: It is
six broad. We attempted to go over it; (...) we had rowed about a Mile, the
Wind (...) violent, and Night was coming on so fast we were obliged to go back
and lie* Person's House who kept the Ferry, where brought out such Things as
they had. GOD was pleased to humble my Soul by (...) Trials. -- I retired as
soon as possible, and be my Wretchedness before Him that is of Eyes than to
behold Iniquity. Afterward Heart was more at Ease: And GOD she^ the Benefit of
Returning back; for the was very boisterous, and the Night snowy that without a
Miracle, which in such a we had no Right to expect, both we and Horses must
have been lost. LORD, gran^ may always keep between the two Extrea^ Distrusting
or Tempting Thee!

VIRGINIA. Seal's Church.
Thursday, December 11. Had a short delightful Passage over the River this
Morr^^ which we could not pass last Night. Rejoiced that GOD had brought us
into another Province. Observed the Country to be much more open, and the Road
^^^ter than in Maryland. Passed over two more Ferries in the Day's Journey; but
were put to some little Inconveniency for want of finding a public House in
the Way. However at last we met a poor Woman in our Road, who was going ^o sell
Cakes to the Trained Bands, of whom we bought one Cake apiece. A few Miles
further, a Planter let us have some Provender for our (...); and after several
Intimations, a little Milk and Small Beer for ourselves; by the Strength of
which, by six a Clock, we got to a Place called Seal's Church, 29 Miles from
Potomack. Here we called at a Person's House, to which we were recommended* but
the (...) of it not being at home, the Overseer, at first, (...) unwilling to
receive it: However (...) we were we^, and (...), ^e was at last (...) (...) to
(...) all Night; and (...) with a good Fire, (...) on thy Hearth, which (...),
and aff^^ded us no small Matter for Praise and Thanksgiving. Oh that we may
(...) (...) in that Duty more and more!

Wednesday, December 12. Took a little Breakfast. Went on, having pleasant
^^^ads and a warm Day, till we came to Piscataway (...), 18 Miles off; where
the M^n of the House spared us some Corn and Sheav^^ for our Ho^ses; but had
neither Milk nor (...) in the House for ourselves: However I endeavored to
feed him with Spiritual Bread: But he seriously asked one of us, If I was not a
Quaker? because, I suppose, he heard me talk of the Necessity of being born
again of the Spirit. If I talk of the Spirit, I am a Quaker: -- If I say Grace
at Breakfast and behave serious, I am a Presbyterian. Alas! what must I do to
be accounted a Member of the Church of England? About one we set out, and
before four in the Afternoon we reached an Ordinary. Here we were most
opportunely refreshed with what Meat there was in the House. There being no
other public* House for some Miles, and we being wearied more than common, for
want of usual Sustenance, we tarried all Night. In the Evening some Gentlemen
came disordered in Liquor; but the Woman of the House kept them from us, so we
slept very comfortably on the Beds that she made us in the Kitchen. I talked of
Religion as much as I could; but the Woman thought GOD was very merciful; that
it would be no Harm to swear by her Faith; that we were to be born again after
Death, and such like. However she was very sollicitous to please us. And I
could not help remarking* how the Devil loves to represent GOD as all Mercy or
all Justice: -- When Persons are awakened, he would, if possible, tempt them to
despair; when dead in Trespasses and Sins, he tempts them to presume. LORD,
preserve us from making Ship wreck against either of these Rocks! Give us such
a Sense of thy Justice, as to convince us, that we cannot be saved if we
continue in Sin; and such a Sense of thy Mercy, as may keep us from Despair, if
we have a living Faith in thy dear Son, and are (...) born again of thy blessed
Spirit.

Thursday, Dec. 13. Set out just as the Sun rose. Got to an Ordinary by Noon.
Eat of what was set before us with Comfort, and some Degree of Thankfulness;
and reached the House of Col Whiting, Father to my dear Friend Capt. Whiting,
long before Night. Here GOD spread a plentiful Table for us, and, what was
still more desirable, sent to us a well inclined Person, to whom, I trust, my
Conversation was much blessed. That Passage in St. John, wherein it is said,
that our LORD must needs go through Sama^ia, when the poor Woman was to ^e
converted, has often been affecting to my Mind. The same good Providence, I
trust, (...) me through these Parts for the sake of the (...) before mentioned.
Oh that like the (...) at the Well, he may (...) in his Heart, and be filled
with a (...) Zeal, to go and invite his Neighbors! Amen. So be it.

Gloucester, York and Williamsburg.
Friday, December 14. (...) about seven in the Morning. (...) (...) Gloucester
Town, a very little Place, and crossed in Ferry a Mile over. Dined at York, a
Place somewhat larger; and reached Williamsburg, the Metropolis of Virginia, by
the Evening. The Gentleman before mentioned, was so kind as to accompany us. --
With him I discoursed much of the Things pertaining to the Kingdom of GOD. He
seemed to be one to whom GOD had given a hearing Ear and an obedient Heart. I
have not met with a Temper more resembling that of Nathaniel, a great while. Oh
that the LORD may make him an Israelite indeed!

Saturday, December 15. Waited on, and afterward, at his Invitation, dined
with the Governor, who received me most courteously. Paid my Respects to Mr.
^^^ir, Commissary of Virginia, and by far the most worthy Clergyman I have yet
conversed with in all America; his Discourse was savory, such as tended to the
Use of Edifying. He received me with Joy; asked me to Preach; and wished my
Stay was to be longer. Under GOD (...) has been chiefly instrumental in raising
a beautiful College in Williamsburg, in which is a Foundation for about eight
Scholars, a President, two Masters, and Professors in the several Sciences.
Here the Gentlemen of Virginia send their Children; and as far as I could learn
by Inquiry, they are near in the same Order, and under the same Regulation and
Discipline as in our Universities at Home. The present Masters came from
Oxford: Two of them, I find, were my Contemporaries. I rejoiced in ^eeing such
a Place in America. It may be of excellent Use, if learning CHRIST be made the
Foundation of their Study, and other ^rts and Sciences only introduced and
pursued a^ subservient to that: For want of this, most of our English Schools
and Universities are sunk into mere Seminaries of Paganism; young Men's Heads
are stuffed with Heathen Mythology: CHRIST, or Christianity, is scarce so much
as named amongst them; so that when they come to be converted, they are
obliged, Penelope like, to undo what they have been doing for many Years; and
they are the most happy, who can soonest forget their Education. Revive, O
LORD, a primitive Spirit; and then we may hope for some primitive Schools to be
erected and encouraged amongst us.

Sunday, December. 16. Preached in the Morning, and as I was afterward informed,
to the Satisfaction and Profit of many. Several Gentlemen came from York,
fourteen Miles off, to hear me, and were desirous of my going back to preach at
their Town, on the Morrow. A large Audience might have been expected, I found,
could timely Notice have been given; but being in great haste, there being no
Sermon customarily in the Afternoon, I dined with the Commissary, who
entertained me and my Friends with great Civility, and left Williamsburg in the
Afternoon, promising, i^ possible, to visit these Parts again, some Time in the
Summer. About three Miles off the Town, we took ^eave of our dear Friend from
Gloucester; whose Heart GOD has much melted, by the Foolishness of Preaching.
Here also, as well as at Williamsburg, we left some Letters to be sent to
England. And I could not but think, that GOD intended, in his own Time, to work
a good Work in these Southern Parts of America. At present, they seem more dead
to GOD; but far less prejudiced than in the Northern Parts of America. At his
Request, I gave the Printer leave to print my Journals and Sermons; and I
trust, that GOD, who loves to work by the meanest Instruments, will be pleased
to bless them to the Conviction and Edification of these his People. Visit
them, O dearest LORD, with thy Salvation!

Stretch out thine Arm, victorious King
Their ^eig^ing Sins subda^:
Drive the old Dragon from his Seat,
With his infernal Crow.
Monday, December 17. Got over a Ferry three Miles broad, the last Night; and
providentially met with a young Man, who showed us the Way to one Capt. R -- s,
who entertained (...) with Simplicity and Freedom: He seemed well disposed, and
was so kind as to go with us this Morning 14 Miles on our Way. At my first
getting up, I perceived myself much indisposed; but GOD was pleased to
strengthen me* I h^ld out my Journey till I came to an Ordinary above 30 Miles
from the Place where we lay la^^ Night: Here we met with what some would
account very indifferent Entertainment; but GOD enabled us to be resigned and
thankful. Bashfulness and a Fear of being Troublesome has kept us from
embracing Offers of Gentleman's Houses; but we have heard a good Report of the
Generosity of the Virginia Gentlemen, and I have great reason to believe what
is reported; for I find they are so willing and accustomed to entertain
^trangers, that f^w think it worth their while to keep public Ordinaries. It Is
good to find People given to Hospitality.

Tuesday, December 18. Was very restless and indisposed with a Fever all Night;
which continuing upon me, and one of our Horses being foundered, it was thought
advisable to stay at the Ordinary all the Day. Being very weak, I could scarce
list up my Head, or eat any Food; but GOD caused me to rejoice in it, so that
my greatest Concern was about the Trouble I gave my dear Friends. I never feel
the Power of Religion more than when under outward or inward (...); it is that
alone can enable any Man to sustain* with Patience and Thankfulness his bodily
Infir^^^. LORD, let me feel the Power of it more and (...), though thou ^ill me,
yet will (...) in thee.

NORTH CAROLINA.
(...), December 19. Finding myself (...), and the Horse also being in better
order, we took a short Day* Journey of above, 26 Miles, and were most
affectionately received by one Mr. (...), in (...)-Carolina. A little after ^ar
coming in, I beg^d Leave to lie down to (...) my weary (...). And some way or
other in my (...), my Friends acquainted our (...) who I was; upon which he was
so rejoiced that (...) could not tell how to express his Satisfaction; his Wi^e
also seemed most (...) to oblige, and they were only concerned that they could
do no more for us. The honest old Man told us, that his Son-in-Law, who lived
about three Miles off, ever since he heard of me in the News, wished that I
could come thither. This is not the first Time (by many) that I have found the
Advantage of the Things my Adversaries have inserted in the public Papers.
They do but excite People's Curiosity. There must be something to raise their
Attention. Besides all Men of Seriousness and Candor, naturally infer, that
some Good must be doing, where such Stories and Falsities are invented. It
often gives me unspeakable Comfort, to see how wisely GOD over rules every
Thing for the good of his Church: And how he never more effectually bruises the
Serpent's Head, than when he permits him, most cruelly to bruise our Heel.

The World, Sin, Death, oppose in vain:
Christ, by his Dying, Death has slain.
My great Deliverer, and my God!
In vain does the old Dragon rage,
In vain all Hell its Power engage,
Naught can withstand Christ's conqu^^ing Blood.
EDEN-TOWN.
Tuesday, December 30. Better this Morning, than I have been for some Days
past. Took our Leave of our kind Host, and traveled cheerfully on. About Noon
we lighted off in the Woods, to give our Horses Provender, and to take a little
Refreshment ourselves, which we have done every Day this Week, because there
are no Ordinaries in the Way. No one can tell with what Gladness we eat our
Food; and how comfortably we praised God, for spreading a Table for us in the
Wilderness. By four in the Afternoon we reached Eden-Town, a little Place, but
beautifully situated by the Waterside. Here we were well entertained at a
public House; and though GOD was pleased to humble my Body by Weakness, and my
Soul by Convictions of past Sins, yet before we went to Rest, he was pleased to
refresh me with much Peace in the midst of my Humiliations; and exalt me, by
giving me a more lively Sense of his Favor and loving Kindness. I think, I
often feel what our LORD means, when he says, The Publican went down to his
House justified, rather than the Pharisee. I doubt not, but while he was
pouring out his Soul and smiting upon his Breast, the Holy Spirit overshadow'd
and sealed to him his Pardon. It is a dreadful Mistake, to deny the Doctrine of
Assurance, or to think, it is confined to a Time of Persecution, or the
Primitive Ages of the Church. Not only Righteousness and Peace, but Joy in the
Holy Ghost (which is the Consequence of Assurance) is a necessary Part of the
Kingdom of GOD within us. And though all are not to be condemned, who have not an
immediate Assurance, yet all ought to labor after it. And I really believe,
one great Reason why so many go mourning all their Life long, is owing to their
^gnorance of their Christian Privilege. They have not Assurance, because they
ask it not; they ask it not, because they are taught, that it does not belong
to Christians of these last Days; whereas, I know Numbers, whose Salvation is
written upon their Hearts, as it were with a Sunbeam: They can rejoice in GOD
their Savior; and give Men and Devils the Challenge to separate them if they
can from the Love of GOD in CHRIST JESUS their LORD. Dearest Redeemer,
enlighten all thy Followers, to see their Privilege; and never let them cease
Wrestling with thee, till thou do bless them, by assuring them of their
Salvation.

Why should the Children of a King
Go ^^^^ing all their Days?
Great Comforter descend, and bring
Some Tokens of thy Grace.
Assure their Conscience of their Part
In the Redeemer's Blood,
And bear thy Witness with their Heart
That they are born of GOD.
Bell's Ferry.
Friday, Dec. 21. Was refreshed much both in Body and in Spirit, and the
Weather being too hazy to pass over the Sound, I had a sweet Opportunity given
me, of Writing some Thing that lay upon my Mind. I intended, had staid, to
preach to those few People that were (...) the Town; but about Noon the Sun
shinin^ bright, and dispelling the Mist, at three a Cloc^ we went in a
Pettiauger over the Sound; an^ were near seven Hours in our Passage. It (...)
about Twelve Miles over. GOD favored (...) with a calm and pleasant Night. We
praise him as we went over, by singing Hymns; (...) met with a convenient
Ordinary when we ca^^ on the other Side. How (...) a (...) a (...) go in a long
Time, when there is (...) (...) or (...) to carry it forwards! Thus it is with
the Soul, when GOD with^^^ the gentle Gales and Breathings of his blessed
Spirit from (...), we sail but (...) toward the Heaven of eternal Rest. Happy
the Man who gets out of himself, and lives upon the Promises (...) the Gospel:
He is (...) whether he is becalmed or in a Storm, that all shall work together
for his (...).

Path-Town.
Saturday, December* 22. Set out by Break of Day, and came by E^ght at Night, to
Bath-Town, near 50 Miles from B^ll's Ferry. -- It is by far the longest Stage
and the worst Roads we have had since we began our Journey. They Ground most
part of the Way was wet and wampy; the Land in^^ habited, and a very ensible
Alteration was discernible in the Weaher. -- It was as hot as it generally is
about May (...) England; but we had a sweet Breeze of Wind ^ermix'd, which made
our Riding through the ^oods in the Day Time exceeding pleasant. about Midway
we met with an Ordinary, here we refreshed ourselves and Beasts. We observed a
Variety of Birds: and in the Even^^g heard the Wolves on one Side of us,
barking (...) a Kennel of Hounds: Which made me ^lect on what the Psalmist
says, "The Lions ^^^ing after their Prey, do seek their Meat from GOD".

They range all Night, on Slaughter bent,
'Till summoned by the rising Morn,
To skulk in Dens, with one Consent
The conscious Ravagers return.
GOD's Providence sent us a Guide, and better Entertainment at our Inn than we
have had for some Time. As we rode along, one of my Friends said, How dreadful
must it be for a natural Man to be placed in such a howling Wilderness,
surrounded with those many Wolves, Bears and Tigers, which come forth at Night,
Reading upon him; but then, added he, how infinitely more dreadful must it be,
to be cast into Hell, and surrounded continually with the Howlings of demand
Spirits! When we came to our Inn we were told of a Man and Woman, who were one
Night surrounded with a Kennel of these Wolves, and pursued by them a long Way.
This made me think of another Expression of Mr. Gilbert Tennent's, The
Creatures are up in Arms against us, to revenge their Maker's Quarrel. Thanks
be to GOD, for the Death and Resurrection of our dear Lord JESUS, who has not
only delivered us from the Power of wild Beasts, but from Death and Hell itself.

Though in the Paths of Death I tread,
With gloomy Horrors overspread;
My steadfast Heart shall fear no Ill,
For thou, O LORD, art with me still:
Thy friendly Crook shall give me Aid,
And guide me through the dreadful Shade.
T^^ in a (...) and rugged Way,
Through (...) (...) ^^lds I stray;
Thy Bounty shall my Pains beguile.
The barren Wilderness shall smile,
With sudden (...) and Herbage crowned:
The Streams shall murmur all around.
Sunday, December. 23. Sent to the Minister of the Place, and had some
Conversation with him last Night. Preached about Noon to about 100 People,
which, as I found, was an extraordinary Congregation; there being seldom more
than a Score at Church. In my Preaching I felt (...) Divine Presence: I did not
spare to tell the Hearers, how I thought GOD was angry with them, because he
had sent them for a long Time a Famine of the Word, and not given them a
teaching Priest. All seemed attentive to what was spoken. After Sermon one poor
Woman came with a full Heart, desiring my Prayers. I asked her, whether she had
been convicted by the Sermon, or whether she knew CHRIST? She answered, she had
been seeking him for some Time; but wanted to find a Minister who had
Understanding in divine Things. -- Poor Woman! thy Case is common. Most that
handle the Law, know not what they say, nor whereof they affirm. LORD JESUS! in
thy Mercy puri^y the Sons of Levi; accomplish the Number of thing Elect, and
hasten thy Kingdom. O make no long Tarrying, our LORD and our GOD!

New-Bern-Town.
Monday, December. 24. Crossed Pamplico River Yesterday Evening, about 5 Miles
wide. Lay at an Ordinary near the Waterside. Set out by Break of Day. Crossed
New-River about four in the Afternoon; and reached New-Bern-Town, 32 Miles from
Bath-Town, by six at Night. Perceived my Appetite to grow better. Experienced
some inward Teachings of GOD's Spirit by the Way; and had a sweet Communion in
Spirit, after I came to the Inn, with my dear Friends at England, who, I
supposed, were joining with one Accord in fervent Prayer, and ushering in the
Festival of our dear LORD's Nativity, by singing of Hymns and spiritual* Songs.
This Time Twelve-Months, I was with them; and even now I am absent from them,
my Soul is deeply united with theirs, and all GOD's Children, by the Spirit of
his dear Son; and however separated here, this is my Comfort, Men or Devils
cannot keep us from meeting and dwelling together eternally hereafter. Oh that
the Cry was made, Behold the Bridegroom comes! As the Heart pants after the
Waterbrooks, so does my Soul long for that Time wherein I shall ^e summoned to
go forth to meet him.

Tuesday, December 25. Endeavored still to keep my Mind as much as possible in
Union with all those pious Souls, who I knew were Rejoicing in the glad Tidings
of Salvation by JESUS CHRIST. Went to public Worship, and received the Holy
Sacrament, which was celebrated in the Courthouse; but was somewhat
discomposed, and mourned much in Spirit, to see in what an indifferent Manner
every Thing was carried* on. I cried mightily to the LORD in my secret
Devotions: And in the Afternoon, when I read Prayers and preached, He was
pleased to show that he had heard me; for I scarce knew when we have had a more
visible Manifestation of the Divine Presence, since our Coming into America.
The People were uncommonly attentive. -- Most melted into Tears, and showed
what a great Impression the Word made upon their Hearts. -- I myself was much
carried out. -- I felt the Power of GOD ^ome upon me, and spoke with
Demonstration of the Spirit, to the Hearers Souls. After Sermon, a poor Woman
with a full Heart, ran to me, desiring me that I would come and preach where
she lived. Another told me I had given him a home Stroke. And indeed, I
believe, all ^elt an uncommon Power upon their Minds. The Woman where we lodged
would take Nothing for our Christmas Dinner; and wished we could stay with them
longer. This unexpected Success rejoiced me the more, because I looked upon it,
as an Earnest of future and more plentiful Effusions of GOD's Spirit in these
Parts. I really believe, whenever the Gospel is preached with Power in these
Parts, it will be remarkably blessed. For I have not heard of one faithful
Minister's being sent over amongst them. And how shall they believe on him of
whom they have not heard? And how shall they hear without a Preacher? And how
shall they (...), unless they are sent by and taught of GOD? Oh how will it
rejoice me, to hear that some poor Soul this Day was born again! Then it would
^e a Christmas Day (...). And why should I doubt? I have great (...) to think

I (...) a Soul the Savouir strived,
I (...) and believed.
Soon after Evening Service, I and my Friends took Horse, and rode about 8
Miles* and were sweetly entertained at a German'^ House, who kept an Ordinary,
and had been one of my Hearers. I observe the People of that Nation, as far as
I can find, are the most industrious as well as serious People, that ever came
into America. -- I doubt not but the LORD will ^^^ss them more and more. Wrote
this Morning to the Minister of New-Bern, who countenanced a Dancing Master, by
suffering his own Son to be one of his Pupils. Several of the Inhabitants, I
was (...), had subscribed to it; and their Meetings were generally attended
with ill Consequences; which made me the more desirous to leave my Testimony
against it. It grieves me to ^ind that in every little Town there is a settled
Dancing Master, but scarce any where a settled Minister to be met with. Such a
Proceeding must be of dreadful Consequence to any, especially a new settled
Providence. -- All Governors, merely out of a Principle of Human Policy, ought
to put a Stop to it. -- For (...) Entertainments enervate the (...) of People,
and insensibly (...) them into E^feminacy, and unfit them to endure those
Hardships, and go through those Fatigues, which must necessarily be undergone
in order to bring a Province to Perfection. True Religion alone exalts a Nation
-- Such sinful Entertainments are a Reproach to, and will, in Time, be the Ruin
of any People.

Wednesday, December 26. Set out early, and rode very pleasantly till Dinner
Time. Me with some comfortable Refreshment at an Ordinary upon the Road; and
lodged at a little House in the Woods, about 35 Miles off where we lay last
Night. The People were appris'd of my Coming, and got such Things as they had,
in a decent Manner. We endeavored to receive all the Divine Blessings with
Thankfulness. I had a good deal of Discourse with the People of the House; and
after much previous and suitable Conversation, I baptized two Stranger's
Children, who providentially lay at the same House that Night. -- I believe
there may be Hundreds of Children in this Province unbaptised, for want of a
Minister. Oh that the LORD would send forth some, who like John the Baptist,
might preach, and baptize in the Wilderness! I believe, they would flock to
them from all the Countries round about!

Thursday, December 27. Set out about eight in the Morning. Crossed Trent
River, a Ferry about a half Mile wide; and got to an Ordinary, a little way off
the Road, and about 33 Miles Stage, before six at Night: As soon as I came in,
a young Man welcomed me into America, who, upon enquiry, I found had been one
of my Parishioners at Savannah: This gave me an immediate Opportunity of
falling into Religious Conversation; and after I had done with the Governors, I
went, as my usual Custom is, among the Negroes belonging to the House: One was
sick in Bed, and two of his Children, said their Prayers after me very well.
This more and more convinces me, that the Negroes Children, if early brought up
in the Nurture and Admonition of the LORD, would make as great a proficiency ^s
any white People's Children whatsoever. I do not despair, if GOD spares my
Life, to see a School of young Negroes, singing the Praises of him that made
them, in a Psalm of Thanksgiving. LORD, thou have put into my Heart a good
Design to educate them; I doubt not, but thou will enable me to bring it to
good Effect. All that truly love thy Name, I am confident will*say, Amen.

New-Town on Cape-Fear River.
Friday, December 28. Had a very blusterous Night, and the Weather continued
very rainy most part of the Day. However, the LORD strengthened us to go on our
Way. After about 15 Miles Ride, we comfortably refreshed both ourselves and
Horses, at a poor Widows Ordinary, who a few Days agone had buried her Husband;
which made her more thoughtful, and better prepared for Religious Discourse.
After Dinner we had a pleasant Ride to Newtown on Cape-Fear River, near 18
Miles from the Place where we baited: It is a little, but thriving Place for
Trade; and we rejoiced greatly, that the LORD had brought us thus far on our
Journey, and had not suffered us to go out of our Way, through so many almost
uninhabited Woods, nor so much as to hurt our Feet against a Stone. The little
wet Weather to Day, made our Inns the more acceptable; and we could not help
reflecting, that it is in our spiritual as in our temporal Journeys, sometimes
the Sun of Righteousness arises with great Luster upon our Hearts; sometimes a
Cloud overshadows us, and Storms surround us. LORD, enable us, through b^th,
continually to press forward; and suffer us not to grow (...) in our Minds: For
we know, that one (...) of the bea^^^ick Vision, will make amends for all.

Saturday, December 29. Thought proper to Rest to Day, for the Ease of our
Beasts. -- Had another Opportunity of writing some Letters to England. Dined
with one Mr. May, the Naval-Officer, who gave us an Invitation last Night to
his House: And spent the remainder of the Day in putting down some Things that
lay upon my Heart. Sanctify them, O LORD, to the promoting thy Glory, and the
Good of Mankind.

Sunday December 30. Wrote some more Letters to my Friends in England. Read
Prayers and preached, both Morning and Evening, in the Courthouse, to as many
as could be expected at so short a Warning. There being many of the Scotch
amongst the Congregation, who lately came over to settle in North Carolina, I
was led out in the Afternoon to make a particular Application to them, and ^o
remind them of the Necessity of living (...) Live^, if they intended to prove a
Blessing to the Province, and thereby give a Proof of their, (...) in assenting
to those (...) which I (...) been delivering and which they had heard preached
to them with great Purity (...) Charnels in their native Country. After
Service, a Gentleman told me, that several were affected: Two other Gentleman
came, and pressed me to stay longer; but being intent on my Journey, about five
in the Evening, I and my Friends passed a Ferry, about three Miles, and lay
comfortably at the House of the High Sheriff of the County. Here we met with
some other Persons, whom I prayed with, and instructed, to the best of my
Power; for which they seemed thankful. Much good night he done, by artfully
bringing in Religious Conversation. Our LORD did so wherever he (...). And
every true Minister of JESUS CHRIST ought to live so ex^mpla^^ly, that
wheresoever he comes the People should expect some ^^^^ying Discourse
immediately to deep from his Mouth. The Scripture says, The (...) Lot entered
into ^our. So ought every good Man to bring Light and Heat with him,
wheresoever he comes. Wicked Men may lead us an Example of Boldness.

They can brave the eternal Laws,
Zealous in their Master's Cause.
JESU, shall thy Servants be
Less resolved and bold for thee!
Monday, December 31. Set out early, and met with more Perils by Land, than we
have been exposed to yet. It having rained almost the whole Night; the Swamps
and Creeks which lay in the Way, were filled with Water: And the Bridges being
out of Repair, rendered Traveling very dangerous. In one Place we were obliged
to swim our Horses. In many, the Water was so very high that they could not be
passed without much Difficulty. I was such a Coward, as to be sometimes a
little fearful. GOD sent us two Guides, by whose Assistance we were carried
through all, and brought at Night to a little House, where with Pleasure we
reflected on the Dangers of the Day; and reminded one another of the
unspeakable Satisfaction we might expect hereafter, from a View of those many
Crosses, Difficulties and Temptations, which we must necessarily endure whilst
here on Earth. Oh that we may learn to endure any Pain, despise any Shame,
submit to any Difficulties, out of a believing Prospect of what we shall
hereafter reap from them, when placed in Glory at the Right Hand of GOD.

SOUTH CAROLINA.
Tuesday, January 1. Rode about 10 Miles, and to my great Comfort, where we
baited, met with one, who, I had great Reason to believe, was a Child of GOD.
It somewhat grieved me, that I could stay no longer; but being in Haste, we
passed over a Half-Mile Ferry, and about sunset came to a Tavern lying near
five Miles in the Province of South Carolina. Here I immediately perceived the
People were more polite than those we generally met with. But I believe the
People of the House, at first, could have wished I had not come to be their
Guest that Night: For it being New-Years-Day, several of the Neighbors were
met together, in order to divert themselves by dancing Country Dances. By
Advice of my Friends, I went in amongst them, while a Woman was Dancing a Jigg.
At my first Entrance I endeavored to show the Folly of such Entertainments,
and to convince her how well pleased the Devil was with every Step she took: --
For some Time she endeavored to out-brave me; neither the Fiddler nor she
desisted; but at last she gave over, and the Musician laid aside his
Instrument. It would have made any one smile, to see how the Rest of the
Company, one by one, attacked me, and brought, as they thought, Arguments to
support their Wantonness. But CHRIST triumphed over Satan: They were all put to
Silence; and were for some Time so overawed, that after I had discoursed with
them on the Nature of Baptism, the Necessity of being born again, in order to
enjoy the Kingdom of Heaven; at their Entreaty, I baptized one of their
Children; and prayed afterward, as I was enabled, and as the Circumstances of
the Company required. Then I and my Companions took a little Refreshment. But
the People were so bent on their Pleasure, that notwithstanding all that had
been said, after I was gone to Bed, I heard their Music and Dancing; which
made me look back on my own past Follies, with Shame and Confusion of Face; for
such a one not long since, was I myself. LORD, for thy Mercies sake, show all
unhappy Formalists the same Favor, and suffer them not to go on in such a
carnal Security till they lift up their Eyes in Torments. Draw them, O ^^aw
them from Feeding upon such Husks. Let them know what it is to feed upon the
fatted Calf: Even the Comforts of the blessed Spirit. Amen. Amen.

January 2. Rose very early; prayed, sung a Hymn, and gave a sharp Reproof to
the Dancers. They were very attentive, and took it in good Part. At break of
Day we mounted (...) Horses, and I think never had a more pleasant Journey in
all my Days: For near 20 Miles we Rode over the Shore of a most beautiful Bay,
as plain as a Terras Walk; and as we passed along were wonderfully delighted to
see Porpusses taking their Pastime, and Shore resounding to Shore the Praises
of him who has set Bounds to the Sea that it cannot pass, and has said, Here
shall your proud Waves be stayed. At Night we thought to call at a Gentleman's
House, where we had been recommended, about 40 Miles distant from our last
Night's Lodging; but the Moon being totally eclipsed, we missed the Path that
turned out of the Road. We then thought it most advisable, as we were in the
main Road, to go on our Way, trusting to the Almighty to strengthen both our
Beasts and us. We had not gone far, but we saw a Light; two of my Friends went
up to it, and saw a Hut full of Negroes: They enquired after the Gentleman's
House whither we were directed; but the Negroes seemed surprised, and said they
knew no such Man, and that they were but new Comers. From these Circumstances,
one of my Friends inferred, that these Negroes might be some of those who
lately had made an Insurrection in the Province, and were run away from their
Masters. When he returned, we were all of his Mind; and therefore thought it
best to mend our Pace. Soon after we saw another great Fire near the Road Side;
but imagining there was another Nest of such Negroes, we made a Circuit into
the Woods. -- One of my Friends, at a Distance, observed them Dancing round the
Fire. The Moon shining bright, we soon found our Way into the great Road again;
and after we had gone about a Dozen Miles, expecting to find Negroes in every
Place, we came to a great Plantation, the Master of which, to our great
Comfort, gave us Lodging and our Beasts Provender. Upon our relating the
Circumstances of our Travels, he gave us Satisfaction about the Negroes;
informed us whose they were, and upon what Occasion they were in those Places
in which we found them. This afforded us much Comfort, after we had rode near
Threescore Miles, and, as we thought, in great Peril of our Lives. Blessed be
thy Name, O LORD, for this and all other thy Mercies through JESUS CHRIST our
LORD.

Thursday, January 3. Had a hospitable Breakfast set before us by the Gentleman
who last Night received us into his House. Set out late in the Morning. Passed
over a Three Mile Ferry, near George-Town: And, for the Ease of our Beasts,
rode not above 18 Miles the whole Day. A good Man, says Solomon, is merciful to
his Beast. How they will answer it at the great Day, who abuse the inferior
Creatures, as though they had a License to use them as they please, I know not;
sure I am, that for every such Abuse GOD will bring them into Judgment.

Friday, January 4. Lay at a little House on Santee River; where I met with one
of my Red-coat Catechumens, who had been discharged, but retained a grateful
Sense of the Instructions that had been given him. Passed over two Ferries in
the Morning. Baited at Dinnertime, after we had rode 18 Miles, and were then
obliged to ride 25 Miles more, there being no proper Place to stay by the Way.
About Eight in the Evening we came to a Tavern, within Eight Miles of
Charlestown, where we comfortably were refreshed with Food convenient for us.
We had Family Prayer; and therein endeavored to express our Thankfulness to
GOD, for thus causing us to renew our Strength, and bringing us so near a Place
where we would be. Oh! that our Hearts may be excited, more and more, to praise
the LORD, for these and all other Mercies, which he daily pours down upon the
unworthiest of the Sons of Men!

CHARLESTOWN.
Saturday, January 5. Left our Lodgings before Daylight, and reached
Charlestown, after we had passed over a three Mile Ferry, about ten in the
Morning. Went to the House of one Mr. L -- re, where we dined, and were
entertained with great Civility. In the Afternoon, several Gentlemen of the
Town were so kind as to come and see me, and expressed a great Willingness to
hear me preach. Letters and Papers were also brought me from New York,
informing me how mightily the Word of GOD grew and prevailed there. The
Accounts in the English Papers of the War being daily carried on there, betwixt
CHRIST and Belial, afforded us fresh Matter for Praising that GOD, who, we
hoped, would in his Kingdom of Grace bring mighty Things to pass; while the
World was buried in Wars and Rumors of Wars. -- In the Evening I wrote some
Letters to my English and New York Friends. -- Felt such Comfort within myself
as the World cannot give, and verified what the Psalmist says, They shall be in
perfect Peace, whose Minds are staid on thee. Oh that all were Partakers of it!

Sunday, January 6. Went to public Service in the Morning; but did not preach,
because the Curate had not a Commission to lend me the Pulpit, unless Mr. G --
n, then out of Town, had been present: However, most of the Town being very
eager to hear me, in the Afternoon I preached in one of the Dissenting
Meeting Houses: But was grieved to find so little Concern in the Congregation
after the Sermon was over. The Auditory was large, but very polite: And I
question, whether the Court-End of the Town at London, could equal or exceed
them in affected Finery and Gaiety of Dress: A Deportment ill becoming Persons
who have had such Divine Judgments lately sent abroad amongst them: I reminded
them of it in my Sermon; but I thought at first, I seemed to them as one that
mocked: This made me more importunate in secret Prayer; and I hoped GOD would
let me see that he intended to Visit the Inhabitants with Mercy, as well as
Judgment. For nothing is a greater sign of People's being hardened, than their
continuing unreformed under divine Visitations. Thus it was with Pharaoh and
the Egyptians. LORD, for thy Mercies sake, let it not be the case of this
People. Amen, LORD JESUS, Amen.

Monday, January 7. Finding the Inhabitants were desirous to hear me a second
Time, about eleven in the Morning I preached in the French Church; and blessed
be GOD, saw a glorious Alteration in the Audience; which was so great that many
stood without the Door. And I felt much more Freedom in myself, than I did
yesterday. Many were melted into Tears; and one of the Town, the most
remarkably gay, was observed to weep. And instead of the People's going out, as
they did yesterday, in a light, airy, unthinking Manner, a visible Concern was
in most of their Faces, as though they could not resist the Power, with which GOD
enabled me to speak. Not unto me, O LORD, not unto me, but unto thy Name alone,
^e all the Glory. After Sermon, I and my Friends, dined at a Merchant's in
Town: And as I was passing along, a Letter was put into my Hands, wherein were
these Words* Remember me in your Prayers, for CHRIST'S sake, who died for me a
Sinner. I appeal to you for Help in the way to Salvation. Pray fail me not: And
I beseech you, to pray for my Soul. And the LORD bless you; and grant you may
win many Souls to GOD by your sincere Preaching. -- Many also of the
Inhabitants, with full Hearts, entreated me to give them one more Sermon: Which
I looked upon as a Call from Providence; and therefore, though I was equipped for
Departure, and just about to take Boat, yet I thought it my Duty to comply with
the People's Request, and to put off my Journey 'til the Morrow. -- Notice was
immediately given, and in about half an Hour a large Congregation was assembled
in the Meeting House, where I preached yesterday, because it was the largest
Place. GOD strengthened me to speak, I trust, as I ought to speak. In the
Evening, I supped at another Merchant's House: where I had an Opportunity, for
near t^ollours, to converse of the Things of GOD, to a large Company. And
afterward retired to my Lodgings, full of Joy, at the Prospect of having a
good Work begun in this Place. It grieves me to see People humane, hospitable,
willing to oblige, and every way polite; yet ignorant of the one Thing needful.
LORD, send forth thy Servants. Let there be a Cry made, Behold, the Bridegroom
comes! and incline all formal Professors, all polite and foolish Virgins, to
trim their Lamps, that they may be ready to go forth to meet Thee!

Beaufort in Port Royal.
Tuesday, January 8. Rose a good while before Day. Left our Horses at
Charlestown. Set out for Georgia in an open Canoe, having five Negroes to row
and steer us; and GOD was pleased to give us, for the most part, fair Weather:
The Slaves were very civil, diligent and laborious. We lay one Night upon the
Water; and about five on Wednesday Evening, arrived at Beaufort in Port Royal,
a Hundred Miles from Charlestown, within the Province of South Carolina; and
after we drank a little Tea at our Inn, we waited upon the Reverend Mr. Jones,
the Minister of the Place, who received us with great undissembled Civility,
and was very desirous I should take a Bed at his House, as I did when I passed
through the Place, when I left Georgia last; but intending to set out by two in
the Morning, we thought it best to lie at our Inn; and therefore* after Supper,
and a little friendly Conversation, we took our Leave, rejoicing, as we always
do on such Occasions, that we had met with another Clergyman who seemed to have
the Fear of GOD before his Eyes. LORD, increase the Number of them, for thy
dear Son's sake! Amen, Amen.

Thursday, January 10. The Wind being very high, and thereby Sailing being
rendered impr^^^icable, I and my Friends staid at Beaufort all the Morning.
Dined, at his Invitation, with kind Mr. Jones; and afterward, the Weather
being fair and the Tide serving, we took Boat, and refreshed ourselves at a
Plantation in the Way, made a Fire on the Shore, and slept round It for about
four Hours. A little after Midnight we prayed with the Negroes, took Boat
again, and reached SAVANNAR before Noon the next Day, and had a joyful Meeting
with my dear Friends, who I found had been arrived Three Weeks; and also was
much refreshed with a most comfortable Packet of Letters from England,
New York, etc. Bl^ssed be GOD, the Work of our Blessed EMANUEL is every where
carrying on. Ever long I expect that mighty Things will be brought to pass. Oh
that the LORD may strengthen me, to make full Proof of my Ministry in this
Place, to the Glory of his great Name, and the Good of his dear Church!

HERE I would stop: But I think it may not be amiss to put down some few
Remarks I have made on the State of Religion, in these Provinces which I have
lately passed through. And here I cannot but give the JERSEYS and PENNSYLVANIA
the Preference: For to me they seem to be the Garden of America; their Oxen are
strong to labor, and there seems to be no Complaining in their Streets: What
is best of all, I believe they (...) the LORD fir their GOD. -- (...) I infer
from their having so many faithful Ministers sent forth amongst them: and,
except Northampton in New England, the Work of Conversion has not been carried
on with so much Power, in any Part of America, as I can hear of, as under the
Ministry of Messrs. Tennents, Cross, and the other Laborers before mentioned.
The Constitution is far from being arbitrary; the So^l is good; the Land
exceeding fruitful; and there is the greatest Equality between the Poor and the
Rich, as perhaps can be found any where in the known World. -- And for my Part,
I like them so well, that, GOD willing, I propose taking up some Land to erect
a School for Negroes, in the latter of them, and settle some of my English
Friends, whose Hearts GOD shall stir up, or whom the Fury of their Enemies
shall oblige, to depart from their Native Country. PHILADELPHIA is one of the
most regular Towns I ever saw: Above Seventy new Houses were built in it the
last Year; and it is likely to increase in Inhabitants every Day. -- It^
rightly called Philadelphia, i. e. Brotherly love. For, by their Charter, all
are permitted to worship GOD their own Way, without being branded as
Schi^^aticks, Dissenters, or Disturbers of the established Constitution. The
Quakers have the Pre-eminence in the Government. -- The Assembly, as I am told,
is made up of them, except about four; which prevents all Preparations for
ma^^ial Defense against the Spania^^s, it being one of their Principles not to
fight at all. -- Much of the Simplicity of Dress and Manners, which may be
observed among the Inhabitants, I think, is in a great Measure owing to them.
And I saw less of the Pride of Life in Pennsylvania than elsewhere: But it has
happened to them, as it will to all other Religious Societies whatsoever, when
they flourish and have the Upper-hand; I mean, many, for Profit's sake, have
been known to dissemble with them; and I fear, Numbers amongst them, as amongst
us, can give no other Reason why they are Quakers, than that their Fathers were
so before them. I say this, because I find but little of a Divine Power
stirring amongst them; and most of them are too st^ff and rigid about external
Things: And, as I was informed by credible Hands, one of their own Preachers
warned them lately of their Backsliding, and told them, without a Reformation,
GOD would remove their Candlestick from them, and not work by their Hands any
more. In the City of Philadelphia they have two large Meeting Houses* they
assemble frequently together, and, all Things considered, are the most regular
Society of Men in the World. Besides this, there is a Baptist and Presbyterian
Meeting. -- I had the pleasure of being acquainted with the Ministers of both,
and found there was some in their Congregations, particularly in that of the
Baptists, who loved the LORD JESUS in Sincerity. The Church of England is but
at a low (...) in Pennsylvania. in general, and in Philadelphia in particular.
In all the Places I passed through, the Presbyterians and Quakers had larger
Congregations than any of our Missionaries, -- And we may guess how the Love of
many of the Church of England in Philadelphia, must have waxed cold, because
the Church, which has been begun, if I mistake not, some Years ago, is far from
being finished within: However, many of late have been convinced what true
Christianity is; and I hope a Party for JESUS CHRIST, will ever long be
selected out of the Members of our own Communion. The little Time I was at
NEW YORK would not permit me to make so many Observations, of the Situation of
the Affairs of Religion in that Province, as otherwise I might have done. -- A
great Complaint was made to me, by some of the most serious Inhabitants, that
it was a very secure Place, and that a Work of GOD had never be (...) carried
on in it, since its first Settlement. -- The Heads of the Church of England
^eem'd resolved to shut out the Kingdom of GOD from amongst them: -- But our
LORD JESUS has been pleased to get himself the Victory; and though I was mostly
opposed in New York, yet if I may judge of what I saw myself, and have heard
since my Departure, as much, if not more, Good has been done there, as in any
other Place where I have been, for so short a Time. At MARYLAND Religion seems
to be at a very ^ow Ebb. -- There are Roman Catholics in some Parts, four
Congregations of Presbyterians, and a few Quakers; but far the greatest Part
call themselves of the Church of England, which might, no doubt, greatly
flourish, were their Ministers found faithful: But the Government, I fear,
spoils them, by giving them too much Tobacco; for some, I hear, have 30,000,
others 50,000, others 60,000 Pounds of Tobacco, per Annum. It is gathered by
the High Sheriff of the County, and every Taxable is obliged to pay 40 lb. of
Tobacco yearly to the Ministers, though great Numbers never hear or see them. In
VIRGINIA Matters are not quite so bad: The Ministers Stipends are not so large:
The Commissary seems to have more Power, and to exercise more Discipline: --
But almost all are quite settled upon their Lees; and I could not hear of any
true vital Piety subsisting in that Province. In Maryland I was told of one Mr.
C^lebatch, a Godly Minister, who died five Years ago. And I heard of another, a
Layman, in Virginia, who has been dead 25 Years, that did make Religion his
chief Business. In Virginia are no Dissenters from the established Church,
except one Meeting or two of Quakers. The Importation of so many Negroes and
Convicts, is one great Reason why so little Religion is to be seen: But the
main Cause of Irreligion, both in Virginia and Maryland, I take to be their not
Incorporating into Towns; for hereby People living at a Distance from the
Church, are apt to make every little Thing serve as an Excuse, to keep them
from public Worship; Religious Societies cannot well be settled, and wicked
Men may more easily revel and get drunk without contro^l; Ministers, had they a
Will, cannot visit from House to House; and, what is as bad as any Thing,
Schools for the Education of Children, cannot be so conveniently erected when
the Houses are so far separate. The greatest Probability of doing Good in
Virginia, is among the Scotch-Irish, who have lately settled in the mountainous
Parts of that Province; they raise little or no Tobacco, but Things that are
useful for common Life: And I hear the Governor has given Leave for a Minister
of their own Way of Thinking, to come whenever he can be procured. In
NORTH CAROLINA there is scarce so much as the Form of Religion. There are two
Churches begun ^or some Time, but neither finished. There are several
Dancing-Masters; but scarce one regularly settled Minister; so that in most
Places they have Readers, who read a Sermon every Sunday to the People, who pay
five Shillings a Quarter, of their Currency, which is Ten Shillings for One of
Sterling. -- However, the Government, I hear, has made Proposals to the Society
for Propagating the Gospel in Foreign Parts, to send Missionaries; but I should
rather that People had no Ministers, than such as are generally sent over: And
I cannot see the Charity of contributing toward ^^ending out Missionaries,
unless greater Care be taken in the Choice of those that are sent; for it is
notorious, the Generality of them walk directly contrary to the Gospel of our
LORD JESUS CHRIST. All the Accounts most of them have given for some Time, is,
that they have baptized so many, and that so many received the Sacrament* And
upon the Whole, if it be asked, Why there is so little Religion in the Church
of England? It may be answered, the Missionaries for the most Part, lead very
bad Examples. I think there was a visible Difference as soon as we came into
SOUTH CAROLINA. The People there seemed to study to be polite. They have many
Ministers amongst them, both of our own and other Persuasions; but I hear of no
stirring among the dry Bones. Mr. Garden, the present Commissary, is strict in
the outward Discipline of the Church: The Clergy have an Annual Me^ting; and
most of them, I believe, are kept from open Immoralities. And now I am come to
GEORGIA, What shall I say of thee, poor SAVANNAH? Many of thy Inhabitants have
left thee since we were here last; but still I hope Blessings are yet in
reserve. Oh that thy Inhabitants would acquaint themselves with GOD, and be at
Peace with him! Then would thou be more than Conqueror over all thy Enemies.
-- Thus have I put down a few Thoughts that have occurred to my Mind. May GOD
enlighten me where I am in the Dark, correct me where I am wrong, and bless
this further Account of his Dealings with me, to the Conviction of Gainsayers;
the Comfort of Saints, and to the Edification of all that shall read it. Even
so, LORD JESUS, Amen* and Amen.

I cannot express my Desire for the Advancing of our dear LORD's Kingdom, both
in the Hearts of my Friends, and all Mankind, better than in the Hymn altered
from Dr. Moore, by one of the Rev. Mr. Wesleys.

I.
When Christ had left his Flock below,
The Loss his faithful Flock deplored:
Him in the Flesh, no more they know,
And languish for their absent Lord.
II.
Not long: For he gone up on High,
Gifts to receive, and claim his Crown:
Beholds them sorrowing from his Sky,
And poured the mighty Blessing down.
III.
He, for the Presence of his Flesh,
The Spirit's Sevenfold Gifts imparts:
And living Streams their Souls refresh:
And Joy divine o'^rflows their Hearts.
IV.
While all, in sweet Devotion joined,
Humbly to wait for God, retire:
The promised Grace, in rushing Wind
Descends, and cloven Tongues of Fire.
V.
God's mighty Spirit fills the Dome;
The feeble Dome beneath him shook:
Trembled the Crowd, to feel him come,
Soon as the Sons of Thunder spoke.
VI.
Father! if justly still we claim
To us and ours the Promise made;
To us be graciously the same,
And crown, with living Fire, our Head.
VII.
Our Claim admit; and from above,
Of Holiness, the Spirit shower,
Of wise Discernment, humble Love,
And Zeal, and Unity, and Power.
VIII.
The Spirit of convincing Speech,
Of Power demonstrative impart;
Such as may every Conscience reach,
And sound the unbelieving Heart.
IX.
The Spirit of refining Fire,
Searching the inmost of the Mind;
To purge all fierce and foul Desire,
And kindle Life more pure and kind.
X.
The Spirit of Truth, in this thy Day,
To break the Power of cancelled Sin;
Tread down its Strength, o'erturn its Sway;
And still the Conquest more than win.
XI.
The Spirit, Breath of inward Life,
Which in our Hearts thy Laws may write;
Then Grief expires, and Pain, and Stri^e,
It Is Nature all, and all Delight.
XII.
On all the Earth, thy Spirit shower,
The Earth in Righteousness renew:
Thy Kingdom come, and Hell's o'erpow'r,
And to thy Scepter all subdue.
XIII.
Like mighty Wind, or Torrent fierce,
Let it Opposers all o'erturn,
And every Law of Sin, reverse;
That Faith and Love may make all one.
XIIII.
Yea, let thy Spirit in every Place,
Its richer Energy declare:
While lovely Tempers, Fruits of Grace
The Kingdom of thy Christ prepare.
XV.
Grant this, O Holy God and true!
The ancient Seers thou did inspire:
To us perform the Promise due:
Descend and crown us* now with ^ire.
The END of the Second Volume.
BOOKS sold by B. FRANKLIN.
Just Published,
THE CHARACTER, PREACHING, etc. of the Reverend ^. GEORGE WHITEFIELD,
Impartially represented and supported, In a SERMON Preached at CHARLESTOWN,
SOUTH CAROLINA, March 26. Anno Dom. 1740. By J. SMITH, V. D. M

2 COR. 3. 6. Who also has made us able Ministers of the New Testament, not
(...) Letter, but of the Spirit. 2 COR. 6. 4, etc. But in all Things (...)
ourselves the Ministers of GOD, (...) Patience, in Labors, in Watch^^ (...)
^^ings: By Pureness* by Knowledge, (...) suffering, by Kindness, by the Holy
(...) (...) Love unfeigned, by the Word of (...) Honor and Dishonor, by evil
(...) and go^^ Report; as Deceivers, and yet true.
Lately Published,
THE DANGER OF AN UNCONVERTED MINISTRY. Considered in a SERMON On MARK VI. 34.
Preached at NOTTINGHAM, in Pennsylvania, March 8. ANNO 1739, 40.

By GILBERT TENNENT, A. M. And Minister of the Gospel in New-Brunswick,
New Jersey.

JEREM. V. 30, 31. A wonderful and horrible Thing is committed in the Land: The
Prophets prophesy falsely, and the Priests bear Rule by their Means, and my
People love to have it so; and what will they do in the End thereof?
Now in the Press, and will speedily be published.
GOSPEL SONNETS, OR SPIRITUAL SONGS. In Six PARTS. I. The Believer's Espousals.
II. The Believer's Jointure. III. The Believer's Riddle, IV. The Believer's
Lodging. V. The Believer's Soliloquy. VI. The Believer's Principles,
CONCERNING Creation and Redemption, Law and Gospel, Justification and
Sanctification, Faith and Sense, Heaven and Earth.


By RALPH ERSKINE, M. A.

Every Man his own Doctor. OR, The Poor PLANTER's Physician. PRESCRIBING, Plain
and Easy Means for Persons to cure themselves of all, or most of the Distempers
incident to this Climate, and with very little Charge, the Medicines being
chiefly of the Growth and Production of this Country.


Where also may be had, Bibles of various sizes, Testaments, Common Prayers,
Psalters, Catechisms, and Variety of other Books, and Stationary Ware.


