THE FLOURISH OF THE Annual Spring, Improved in a SERMON Preached at the
ancient THURSDAY LECTURE in Boston, May 3. 1739.

By MATHER BYLES, A.L.M. Pastor of a Church in Boston.

Numb. xvii. 8. -- Behold, the (...) AARON -- budded, and brough^ (...) Buds,
and bloomed Blossoms, and yielded Almonds. BOSTON, Printed and Sold by ROGERS
and FOUL at the Printing-Office over against the South-East Corner of the Town
House. 1741.

THE FLOURISH OF THE Annual Spring.
CANTICLES II. 10 -- 13. -- Rise up -- and come away. For lo, the Winter is
past, the Rain is over and gone. The Flowers appear on the Earth, the Time of
the singing of Birds is come -- arise -- and come away.


OF all the mere Men who have lived since the Fall of Adam, the Author of this
beautiful Passage is pronounced the wisest, by the GOD of Heaven. And of all
the Books which he wrote, this is, without Dispute, the most elegant, sublime
and devout. The three Books which Solomon wrote, are resembled to the three
Divisions of the Temple which he built; of which the Holy of Holies is compared
to this admirable Song. His Proverbs contain an excellent Scheme of Morality;
and to this answers the outward Enclosure, called the Court of the Gentiles.
His Ecclesiastes contains the Disquisitions of a philosophical and religious
Genius after true Happiness; and the solemn Reflections and pious Arguments
render it a holy Place. But this Divine Song is all consecrated Rapture; it is
the Holy of Holies: It must be approached with Reverence and Trembling, and it
admits of no unhallowed Feet to tread its awful Recesses.

The Title of the Book is, The Song of Songs; and it well deserves the Name,
for it is the finest poetical Composure now extant in the World. It is not
every where over-nice and exact in its Metaphers and Allusions; but they are
bold and grand, elevated and lofty, all Fire, all consecrated Rapture and
Inspiration!

The Critics in the Art of Poetry will presently see that it is a Dramatic
Composition of that kind to which perhaps the Moderns would give the Name of a
Pastoral Opera. That it is a Dramatic Performance is easily discerned, inasmuch
as it consists whol^^ of Action, Dialogue, and Character: (...) is a personal
Representation of Passion and History, all which are the exact Description and
Character of the Drama. It is an Opera; it seems to confist of three Acts; The
Numbers are of the Lyrick Kind; and it has in it the evident Intimations of
Music, and a Chorus. And it is a Pastoral; for the Scenes are mostly laid in
the Country; and the Characters and Images are principally rural.

But more than this, ^is a Divine Poem I purposely avoid the vain Disputes of
late raised, about the Canonicalness of this Book. The Testimony of the Jewish
Church, and the Fortyfifth Psalm are a sufficient Vindication of it, if we had
not other abundant Evidence.
. It contains a ^^e Picture of the Loves of CHRIST and his Church. He is the
heavenly Bridegroom, and she the beautiful Shepherdess, that are the principal
Speakers in the Song. With how much Admiration doe^ the sacred Spouse look up
to the lovely JESUS, and how full of Passion and Transport are her Expressions
about him! And on the other Hand, with what Tenderness and Delight does the
blessed SAVIOR overlook the Defects of his Church, and applaud the Graces
which he had before lighted up in her smiling Form? Who is she that looks
forth as the Morning? Fair as the Moon, clear as the Sun, and awful as an Army
with Banners?

Among the many fond and endearing Sentences, my Text is none of the least
remarkable. There are a thousand Beautiful glowing in the Sentiments and
Expressions. It Is a Speech that well suits with the graceful Lips of him, who
spoke so as never Man spoke; that well suits with the heavenly Form of her, who
is the chosen Bride of JESUS CHRIST -- O thou fairest among the most elegant of
the Works of GOD!

The Words are a Description of the Spring of the Year, in the Land of Canaan.
Great Part of it may be literally applied to our Spring: But in some Respects
it varies. The Winter there, as in our Mother Country, used to be cloudy and
rainy, and a steady fair Weather used to smile on the Face of the Spring.
Indeed it is otherwise in our inconstant Climate, where we see the Clouds so
frequently returning after the Rain.

Without going into the mystical or prophetical Way of explaining these Words,
I shall only observe, That they are the Invitation of CHRIST to his beloved
Church. Every true Believer in JESUS, and Follower of the Lamb, may apply the
Address to himself. He may take up his Bible, and say, I hear the dear Words of
my LORD JESUS, Arise up, and come away. -- Besure when the Flowers appear on
the Earth; when the Rain and Cold of the Winter is past, and the Spring begins
to blossom and flourish, and renew the Face of the Ground, this Call is in a
peculiar Manner to be heard, from our blessed Redeemer, Arise and come away.

The Doctrine then that I shall offe^ from the Words, is this.

DOCTRINE.
When we see the Spring open upon (...) Earth, we may hear the Cal^ (...)
CHRIST to us, to rise up from t^^ Earth, and repair to him. In the Illustration
of this Point (...) Doctrine, I shall do two Things. I. Show what is implied in
the Call (...) CHRIST, Rise up, and come awa^ II. Why this Call is in a
peculiar Manner seasonable when the Winter is pas^ and the Spring opens.

I. What is implied in the Invitati^^ of CHRIST, Rise up, and come away^

I shall be but brief here, that I m^^ hasten to a more seasonable and u^common
Set of Meditations. And (...) short then, when we hear the Cal^ (...) CHRIST,
Rise up, and come away, (...) presently discover the Condition (...) those who
are addressed! They are i^dolent and supine and sleepy Creature^. They want to
be roused and quickne^ and are by Nature bowed down, (...) ^ure and dead. The
Voice is, Rise up. Shake off the mortal Lethargy that hangs upon your Eyelids.
Arise from the dead, and CHRIST shall give thee Life. A wake thou that
sleep, and call upon thy GOD. And indeed, all Mankind need such a Call as
this, for ^hey are dead in Trespasses and Sins. They are cold and lifeless
Corpses, unable to help themselves, and can do nothing spiritually Good. They
are not able as of themselves, to think so much as a good Thought: And they
have only a Power of choosing which Sin to commit. They may if they please talk
of a Free Will, and amuse themselves with the idle Notion. But alas, they are
free amongst the dead: Free it is true, in their Choice of Wickedness, but it
must be the infinite Power of GOD that can incline them to any Thing
spiritually good. Our preaching to them is indeed only prophesying over dry
Bones: Though this sometimes does Wonders. In one Word, they act entirely from
selfish Principles, negligent and forgetful of the Glory of GOD. They are ^owed
down to Earth and Creatures, and their own abject Will; and have need to be
awaked, Rise up.

And what is implied in this Phrase, when it is spoken by our Lord CHRIST to
his People? In a few Words, It comprises in it, our Duty to our LORD JESUS. We
are called to believe in CHRIST. To rise up from a vain Earth, and raise our
Eyes to invisible and eternal Realities. To walk by Faith, and not by Sight.

Rise up; it is a Call to Repentance that we are by Nature so bowed down. It
comes with a Voice of Conviction and Awakening; to rouse our drowsy Faculties,
and shake us from our Security and Indifference. Rise up, or we shall lie down
among the dead; slide down to the Congregation of the damned.

It Is a Call to Holiness and Obedience. Rise up and walk: It demands a holy
Walk of us; and tells us that our Conversation should be in Heaven; that we
should seek the Things which are above, and carry our Treasure over into the
other World. The Path of the Just -- shines brighter as it rises higher.

Rise up, it bespeaks our Meditation and Prayer. Lift up your Eyes and Hands,
your Hearts and your Souls. Is it not a Shame that this Earth should ^eize our
Thoughts and Affections, and GOD and CHRIST have so little of them. There is
not an Object we ^ee, but may serve to raise our Thoughts ^o GOD. His glorious
Name is di^inely impressed upon all his Works; and with one Voice, they all
call out ^o us, GOD! GOD! I was made by GOD! I am supported by GOD! I am a
Servant of GOD! and an Instrument in his Hand! Rise up! Arise and adore GOD.
Contemplate him, pray to him, adore and bless him.

But to finish this Point, It will be the Call of CHRIST to us quickly to leave
this World; Rise up and come away. Death shall arrive with this welcome
Message, The Master calls for ^hee. This will finish our Life upon this
Earth, the Voice of CHRIST inviting us to his Kingdom and Glory. Rise up and
come away, the Winter is past, the Rain is over and gone. Every Evil will be
concluded forever, and we shall enter into Rest: The Winter of Affliction,
Temptation and Sin, will no more molest us: The Evils of this World, which fell
on us like a continual dropping in a very rainy Day, will descend no more about
us. The Rain is over and gone. No more Storms will roar in our Air; nor Clouds
intercept our Sunshine. The last Tempest of Death will beat after us but a
little Way; and rapid we shall leave it behind. And now, welcome everlasting
Delights! Welcome the opening Dawn of Paradise! The Time of the singing of
Birds is come. Angels tune their Harps, and join their Voices about us. The
Flow^rs appear upon the Earth; and the everlasting Hills lift up their flowery
Tops before us. Joys unfelt till this blessed Moment, will now seize our
beating Hearts, and our Souls will leap out, obedient to the dear Voice that
calls us, Rise up, and come away.

These, I think, are natural Heads for Meditation from the Words: But that
which I principally intend to allude to, in the Process of this Discourse, is,
that when we see the annual Spring open upon the Earth, we have a Call to Rise
up to CHRIST in holy Medi^ations: To come away from lower Objects to him the
highest and most ^orthy of all. The Be^^ties which mile around us, at this
lovely Season of the Year, unite to lead our Thoughts to CHRIST. And this is
the second Point to be spoken to.

II. How is the Invitation of our blessed Savior to rise up and come away,
pecu^iarly adapted to the Spring of the Year?

1. The Spring looks like the natural Beginning of the Year: And besure ^e are
to begin our Year with GOD. The Demand and Expectation of the lessed GOD is,
for the first-ripe Fruits. And it is reasonable that our ^rst Care should be to
please him, our ^rst Hours consecrated to him. He ^emands of us the first Day
in every ^eek, and why should he not for the ^ost part have the first Hour in
every ^ay; and the first Season in every Year. Seek first the Kingdom of GOD,
(...) the Direction of CHRIST. A Year ^gun with GOD, is a Year well be^n, and
it will yield a comfortable Reflection all the Year, for us to call to Mind how
we have been enabled to spend the first Months of it.

2. The Temptations of the Spring afford another Argument for us to obey the
Call of CHRIST, Rise up, and come away. That the Spring is attended with many
Circumstances to tempt away our Minds from GOD and Duty, will very easily be
rendered plain and evident. Then it is that the Face of Nature puts on the most
gay and alluring Smiles; and the beautiful Prospects about us are apt to catch
away our Thoughts, and possess and fill up our Minds. Then it is too, that our
animal Spirits are most sprightly and vigorous; and our fermented Blood pours
along its rapid Current more warm and impetuous. The Chains of the Winter are
melted off: and the Bands of Orion are loosed: And from this Flush of Blood and
Spirits, there arises a Variety of Temptations. Our Appetites are most raging
and violent and our inferior Faculties most apt t^ usurp the Throne of Reason
and Conscience. We are now most easily deceived with the tempting Prospects of
Futurity; and we presume upon a vain Earth, and Happiness here below, from a
Warmth of Temper, and the Disposition of our Blood and animal Spirits. Thus we
see the Temptations of the Spring both external and internal. External, from
the alluring Face of Nature; Internal, from our own Frame and Constitution. How
proper then the Call? Rise up and come away. Does the low Face of the Ground
tempt us? Rise up. Get above the Earth. Leave the Molehill for the Emmits to
inhabit; but let us take to our selves Wings, as Angels, and fly away. Have we
our Temptations in our selves? Come away then; let us get out of our selves
into CHRIST; separate our selves from our selves, and mortify and root out the
corrupted selfish Principle in us.

And indeed nothing will have a greater Tendency to demonstrate our Sincerity
in Religion, than our Resolution to defeat the strongest Temptations which
assault us in this World. When Sin spreads all its Snares, and lays all its
alluring Bates in our Way, if we have then Power to overcome all, and pass
unhurt amidst all, it will be a good Evidence that we are inspired with a Power
superior to our own: That the Holy Spirit is in us; and that we are in good
Earnest in Religion. The same Arguments to persuade Youth to serious Piety, are
in the same Sense proper to persuade us to Religion in the Spring. Because we
may all the Year look back on it with this concomitant Satisfaction, When
Temptations were most universal, and most impetuous, I stood the Shock, and was
carried graciously through them.

And what an Honor will it be for us to overcome Temptations when they are at
the strongest; and regulate our Appetites when they are most raging and
lawless? So Joseph, fortified with the Grace of GOD, withstood Satan and
himself together, joined in the most dangerous League; he broke loose from the
Toils of Death, and by a wise Retreat, rushed away, pursued by Victory and
Triumph. This is more to the Honor of young Joseph, than a Monument of Brass,
and the Trophies of conquered Nations! When the Caesar's and the Alexanders, and
(...) Conquerors of the East, blush and ^de, Joseph shall stand applauded by
(...) Judge of the World, and saluted by ^outing Armies of Men and Angels. ^d
it will be an Honor of the same nature, for us to be most firm and re^ute,
when Temptations are most fre^ent and violent. So that if it has been ^ved,
that the Spring of the Year, is Season lying most open to Tempta^ns, it plainly
follows, that Religion this precarious Season, is attended ^th additional
Honors.

Besides, the Rewards of our future ^ory, will be proportioned to our ^bours
and Difficulties. We know ^t he who sows sparingly shall reap ^ingly; and
they who take the greaPains, shall reap the fullest Harvest. ^w he who stands
his Ground against ^st Opposition, who beats through (...) thickest Temptations
best, shall ^ive the brightest Crown, and hear ^loudest Applause. So that if we
^ld attain the highest Degrees of ^ry, one Way is to spend that Time (...),
which is fullest of Temptations. ^en it was asserted, that the Spring is the
Season fullest of Temptations, a vain Mind would perhaps have drawn another
Consequence: Let me then wait for a more convenient Season for the Duties of
Religion and Holiness. But it is you see easily retorted. Is the Spring of the
Year fullest of Temptations, sure then we have most need of gracious Hearts.
This will be attended with the highest Pleasure in the Reflection here; This
will be followed with the amplest Rewards of Heaven hereafter. This will prove
our Sincerity to us with the fullest Evidence. For, as one speaks, if there is
no Enemy, there can be no Fight; if no Fight, no Victory; if no Victory no
Crown. And on the contrary, if there be powerful Enemies, there will ensue a
sharper Fight, a greater Victory, and a brighter Crown. But to take the
Objectors in their own Way --

3. The Advantages of the Spring afford another Argument why we should obey the
Call of CHRIST, Rise up and come away. Rise up and come away, for the Winter is
past, the Rain is over and gone; many Disadvantages are over and gone: The Time
of the singing of Birds is come, and the Flowers appear upon the Earth; many
Advantages ^ome pouring round us, and call, and awaken, excite and quicken us.

If it can be proved that there are ^eculiar Advantages in the Spring for ^he
Duties and the Delights of Piety, ^t will follow of Course that we ought (...)
make Use of these Advantages, and improve them while they last: For they are
all but so many Talents committed to us by the GOD of Nature, which he will
call us to a strict Account for, and miserable we, if we can give no good
Account of them.

And that the Spring of the Year is indeed attended with such Advantages for
the Labors and Delights of Piety, ^ll be evident upon a very little Refection.
Now it is that the Days lengthen apace, and the Light increases over ^s. The
Morning awakes us early; and the Dayspring from on high, the rising Sun, calls
us betimes from our Slumbers, Rise up, and come away. Now it is also, that the
Weather grows moderate, and we bless the Indulgence of the mild Skies, and the
temperate Air. We are not chained up with Cold, or confined by the bleak Winds.
We may live more in one Day now, than in many that are numbed with Frost, and
chilled by the Rigor of the Winter. Now it is also that our Spirits awaken,
and our Blood has a cheerful and lively Flow, so that our Souls are most
sprightly, vigorous and active. Our Bosoms kindle with new Delights, and we
enjoy the smiling Hours that glide smoothly by us. It is a most happy Season to
revive the Joys of Piety, and raise our Satisfactions in the blessed GOD to a
renewed Ardor and Vehemence. Add to this, now it is that our Health is at its
best Estate, unmolested by the cold Rheums of the Winter, or the faint Heats of
the Summer-Noons. Besides, the opening of the Earth by the Plough, and the
Odours of the various Blossoms scattered from every glowing Tree around,
conspire to call back the declining Health, or establish the sound
Constitution. So that we see new Advantages arise in every Light, and are
convinced how many Opportunities we have for the Service of GOD, and the
Raptures of Devotion, let us look where we will. Whether we consider the
lengthened Days, and the many Hours of Light and Business: The moderate
Weather, and fine Temperature of the Air and Skies: The Cheerfulness of our
Spirits, and our confirmed Health; -- they all with one Voice agree in the
Call, Rise up, and come away. Rise up to GOD; serve him in these golden
Seasons, these smiling Moments, which though they dance along so smoothly, wing
away so swiftly. Lovely as they are, they will be quickly gone and over. Let
them not pass without this additional Delight in the Reflection, that we served
GOD in them, and tasted the sub^mest Transports of Devotion, while we ^lled
them up in Communion with GOD.

Besides, in the Spring of the Year, we have many Advantages for Medi^ion, and
are surrounded with Objects for this holy and blessed Employment. Now the Works
of GOD shine in our Eyes, with the most finished Beauty, and raise our Thoughts
to the infinite Artificer, who has poured out such a Profusion of Charms and
Graces ^n the wide Creation. The Flowers appear upon the Earth, and the Time of
the singing of Birds is come, rise up, and come away. To be particular here, I
shall offer a Set of Meditations peculiarly adapted to the Spring of the Year,
and raised out of the Objects which then smile around us.

First of all, See the Perfections of the glorious GOD. Who gave the Face o^
Nature these flowery Charms? How beauteous then, and how divine the Being whose
scattered Rays so adorn the blooming Earth? The glowing Raptures of divine Love
and sacred Meditation may well be lighted up by these wondrous Works which we
behold about us. See the Glories of creating Power displayed in the Flourish of
the Spring! Genesis i. 11, 12.
And GOD said, Let the Earth bring forth Grass, the Herb yielding Seed, and the
Fruit Tree yielding Fruit after his Kind, whose Seed is in it self, upon the
Earth. And the Earth brought forth Grass, -- and Herbs, -- and Trees, -- and
GOD saw that it was good. And it is his unwearied Providence that still demands
our Ascriptions, Psalm civ. 30.
Thou renewest the Face of the Earth.

Look abroad in the Spring, and see the Beauty and Beneficence of Divine
Providence, and learn to adore and trust GOD. Matthew. vi. 25. --
Therefore I say unto you, take no Thought for your Life, what ye shall eat,
nor for your Body, what ye shall put on -- Behold the Fowls of the Air -- Your
Father provides for them -- Consider the Lillies of the Field, how they grow;
they toil not, nor do they spin, and yet I say unto you, that Solomon in all
his Glory was not arrayed like one of these. Wherefore if GOD so cloth the
Grass of the Field, which to Day is, and Tomorrow is cast into the Oven, shall
he not much more cloth you, O ye of little Faith? How proper such a Trust in
GOD, and such a consecrated Meditation, when the Time of singing of Birds is
come and the Flowers appear upon the Earth? My GOD feeds the Birds, and adorns
the Flowers, shall he not much rather feed and cloth me? Does he not love me
better than these?

Look abroad in the Spring and rise our Thoughts to the Resurrection of the
Dead at the last Day. These Fields were once covered with Snow like the Pale of
Death. These Trees were disrobed of their flowery Honors, and appeared bare and
naked. The Roses droped away, and the Lillies hung down their Heads and died,
but see how the Year revives again, and blossoms, and brightens, and lives.
Isaiah lxvi. 14.
And when ye see this, your Heart shall rejoice, and your Bones shall flourish
like an Herb. Just as these Groves revive, and as this Grass renews its Green,
so shall our scattered Bones flourish from their prolifick Graves. When CHRIST
the Judge shall descend from Heaven, our dead Bodies shall hear his Call, Rise
up, and come away, for lo, the Winter is past, the Rain is over and gone, the
Flowers appear on the Earth, the Time of the singing of Birds is come. Psalm
lxxii. 6. --
He shall come down like Rain upon the mown Grass: as Showers that water the
Earth. In his Days shall the Righteous flourish -- They that dwell in the
Wilderness -- the burying Place -- the wild and solitary Retreats of Death and
the Grave, -- shall how before him. Psalm lxxii. 16.
In what a living Representation do we see the Resurrection of the Dead,
exemplified in the Resurrection of the Year. Psalm lxxii. 16.
They of the City, shall flourish like the Grass of the Earth. Who can count it
a Thing incredible that GOD should raise the Dead, who sees him so renew the
flowery Fields, and the blooming Trees! Cannot he as easily make our Graves, as
our Gardens to blossom? The Wilderness and the solitary Place shall be glad for
them, and the Desert shall rejoice, and blossom as a Rose. It shall blossom
abundantly, and rejoice even with singing; the Glory of Lebanon shall be given
to it, the Excellency of Carmel and Sharon: They shall see the Glory of the
LORD, and the Excellency of our GOD. Isaiah xxxv. 1, 2.


Again, See the fair Scenes about you, and lead your Meditations to the final
Judgment of the World. Psalm xcvi. 11, --
Let the Heavens rejoice, and let the Earth be glad: let the Sea roar, and the
Fullness thereof. Let the Field be joyful, and all that is therein: then shall
all the Trees of the Wood rejoice. Before the LORD; for he comes, for he
comes to judge the Earth: he shall judge the World with Righteousness, and the
People with his Truth. And indeed, well may the Earth, and Fields, and Woods
rejoice, which are to be renewed, and bloom in a perpetual Spring. All the
Creatures Groan, for this Restitution of all Things. II. Pet. iii. 13.
Nevertheless, we according to his Promise, look for new Heavens and a new
Earth, wherein dwells Righteousness.

See the Flowers appear upon the Earth in the Spring, and rise up to
Meditations on the swift Progress of the Gospel through the World. The Sun of
Righteousness so arose with healing in his Wings; and the Church of GOD
sprouted and sprung up, and flourished at the reviving Heat. So was the
Prophesy of the mystical Israel, Isaiah xxvii. 6.
Numb. xvii. 8.
Israel shall blossom and bud, and fill the Face of the World with Fruit. So
the typical Rod of Aaron, budded, and brought forth Buds, and bloomed Blossoms,
and yielded Almonds. So the Sower goes out in the Spring, to sow; and O what a
large Harvest covers the Fields around him. This World lay in the Cold and
Darkness of a long Winter-Night, till the Gospel, like the Dayspring from on
high, visited the Nations, and a sudden Spring covered the Face of the Ground.
Ezekiel. xvii. 22, -- 24.
Thus says the LORD GOD, I will also take of the highest Branch of the high
Cedar, and will set it, I will crop off from the top of his young Twigs a
tender one, and will plant it upon an high Mountain and eminent. In the
Mountain of the height of Israel will I plant it: and it shall bring forth
Boughs, and bear Fruit, and be a goodly Cedar: and under it shall dwell all
Fowl of every Wing: in the Shadow of the Branches thereof shall they dwell. And
all the Trees of the Field shall know that I the LORD have brought down the
high Tree, have exalted the low Tree, have dried up the green Tree, and have
made the dry Tree to flourish: I the LORD have spoken a have done it. The GOD
of He ven called to the Nations that lay Ignorance and Wickedness, Rise up, a
come away, and at once the Sha^ scattered, and the Darkness fled away and the
Nations of them who are say walked in open Light.

See the gay Appearance of the Sprin and learn the Destruction of the wicked.
T. beautiful annual Flourish which now charmingly guilds the Fields, shall
quickly fade away, and die. So the last Spri^ was scorched by the Summer-Sun,
a^ frozen by the Winter-Cold. And (...) we not here behold the lively Emble of
a wicked Man, and the sudden, a^ the dreadful Change which must pa^ upon him.
Psalm xcii. 7.
When the Wicked spir^ as the Grass, and when all the Work of Iniquity do
flourish, it is that they she be destroyed for ever. So Nebucha^ ^^zzar stood
Dan. iv.
flourishing in his Pala and at once fell down deprived of h^ mane Reason, and
howled like a wi^ Beast, through the blasted Defar How often does it happen
that the in^ pious Youth is cut off at once, like a sudden Frost, withering the
whole Spring in its Infant-Bud? Ezekiel. vii. 10.
It shall be accomplished before its Time, and (...) Branch shall not be green.
He shall shake off his unripe Grape as the Vine; and shall cast off his Flower
as the Olive. What though the wicked Man glitters in all his gaudy Pride, and
has every Beauty smiling round him; what though his silken Apparel be gay like
the Spring; and like the flowery Crown on every waving Tree, yet is Destruction
from GOD nigh to the unhappy Criminal. Isai. xxviii. 1.
Woe to the Crown of Pride, -- whose glorious Beauty is a fading Flower, on the
Head of the fat Valleys. This is the great Woe of an almighty GOD, denounced
against the most pompous Sons of Earth; and as it is denounced it shall come
on. Ezekiel. vii. 10.
Behold the Day, behold it is come, the Morning is gone forth, the Rod has
blossomed, Pride has budded; Violence has risen up into a Rod of Wickedness:
None of them shall remain, -- the Time is come, the Day draws near, let not
the Buyer rejoice, nor the Seller mourn; for Wrath is upon all the Multitude
thereof. Let the Wicked then look fresh as the green Herb, and cheerful as the
opening Spring, yet, rise up, and come away our Thoughts from his present Glory
to his future Ruins. The Epitaph on the most flourishing wicked Men, will be
that, II. Kings xix. 26.
They were as the Grass of the Field, and as the green Herb, as the Grass on
the House Tops, and as Corn blasted before it be grown up.

Look abroad upon the opening Spring and behold a beautiful Emblem of humane
Life. For all Flesh is Grass, and the Glory of Man as the Flower of Grass, the
Grass withers, and the Flower fades away. I. Pet. i. 24
See the glowing Blossoms, how soon they drop to the Ground; and what are we
ourselves better than they? Job xiv. 2.
He comet^ forth as a Flower, and is cut down. I^ the Spring we see the verdent
Grass and the blushing Flowers; but to fad^ and die is common to both, and
equal^ ly to us with them. Psalm ciii. 15.
As for Man his Days are as Grass, as a Flower of the Field so he flourishes;
for the Wind passes over it and it is gone, and the Place thereof shall know
it no more. Nay, should we escape Death in our Youth, and out live the Spring
of our Time, yet Old Age will come on, when our hoary Heads shall be covered
like the Groves with white Blossoms. So is the beautiful and accurate
Description of Old Age by Solomon, Eccl. xii. 5.
The Almond Tree shall flourish. And in a little Time must the Silver Crown be
thrown at the Feet of Death, and the Blossom go up as Dust. Isaiah v. 24.
Here then is the Life of Man exactly; no more than a fading Spring. Psalm xc.
5.
In the Morning they are like Grass that grows up. In the Morning it
flourishes and grows up, in the Evening it is cut down and withers. When
the Winter is past then, and the Flowers appear, and the Birds sing, do we not
hear the Voice of CHRIST to us? A Voice that calls us to rise up? Isaiah xl. 6.
The Voice said, Cry, and he said, What shall I cry? All Flesh is Grass, and
all the Goodliness thereof as the Flower of the Field. The Grass withers, and
the Flower fades. Surely the People is Grass.

The Winter is ^ast, the Flowers appear, the Time of the singing of Birds is
come. Rise up, and come away. Consider the blessed and happy Condition of the
holy; they are under the mild Influence of a perpetual Spring; and Paradise it
self breathes in their transported Breasts. Psalm xcii. 12.
The Righteous shall flourish like the Palm Tree, he shall grow like the Cedar
in Lebanon. Those that be planted in the House of the LORD, shall flourish in
the Courts of our GOD. They shall still bring forth Fruit in Old Age: They
shall be fat and flourishing. The good Man himself shall be cheerful and
prosperous as the youthful Spring. Prove. xi. 28.
The Righteous shall flourish as a Branch. And even the House of the good Man
shall be blessed, even his Children shall shoot up as Olive-Plants about his
Table.

Prove. xiv. 11.
The Tabernacle of the Upright shall flourish. O happy Man, thrice, yea, four
Times happy; -- Blessed art thou, and blessed are thy Children, and thy
Servants. Job v. 24*
Thy Tabernacle shall be in Peace. -- Thy Seed shall be great, and thy
Offspring as the Grass of the Earth. Thou shall come to thy Grave as a Shock
of Corn in its Season. This is the Man beloved by his GOD, the Darling of
Heaven, and fair and beauteous as an immortal Spring. He shall grow as the
Lilly, and cast forth his Roots as Lebanon; his Branches shall spread, and his
Beauty shall be as the Olive Tree, and his Smell as Lebanon. And the descending
Dews of Heaven, shall still refresh and cherish him. Hosea xiv. 5.
He shall revive as the Corn, and blossom as the Vine. This is your Portion, ye
holy People, and shall we not rise up from the lower Spring, and rejoice in our
GOD, who gives us to vie with it, and assert our superior Beauty. Hab. iii. 17.
Although the Fig Tree shall not blossom, neither shall Fruit be on the Vines,
the Labor of the Olive shall fail, and the Field shall yield no Meat, yet will
I r^ joice in the LORD, I will joy in the GOD of my Salvation. This GOD may the
good Man say, will show his Blessings round me with a layis^ Hand, and though
the Year die in the Spring, I shall be satissied with goo^ Things. Psalm xxiii.
2.
He makes me lie down i^ green Pastures, he leads me beside the still
Waters. Genesis xxvii. 26, 27.
See! the Smell of my So is as the Smell of a Field which the LORD has
blessed. GOD shall gi^ thee the Dew of Heaven, and the Fa^ ness of the Earth,
and plenty of Cor^ and Wine.

Again, See the Spring; and what proper Meditation rises out of it, o^ the
Sufferings of our LORD JESUS The Flowers appear on the Earth Rise up and come
away: Contempla^ the Bitterness and Sorrows of the bleeding JESUS, in the
Garden of his Ag^ ny. We behold the charming Aspe^ of Nature all about us; and
are ra^ vished with the Beauty of Prospect from the green Grass, and the Rosey
and the Silver Blossoms: He had something else to do, when he lay weeping on
the Ground, and cried, My Days are like a Shadow that declineth: and I am
withered like Grass Psalm cii. 11.
. So the Lilly of the Valley lay, hung down his Head, drooped and languished.
He bowed his Head, and gave up the Ghost. Blessed SAVIOR! Is not this the Call
we hear from thee, in the Spring, To rise up and consider, If these Things be
done to the green Tree, what shall be done to the dry? Adam sinned in a Garden,
and for this our LORD suffered in a Garden.

Look on the amiable Landscape, and remember the Eden we have lost. The Timeof
the singing of Birds is past; and of flowery Fields. The very Ground is under
the Curse. Thorns also and Thistles shall it bring forth unto thee.

To conclude, The Winter is past, the Rain is over and gone; the Time of the
singing of Birds is come, and the Flowers smile over the Gronnd: Rise up, and
come away: Lift up your Eyes to the Joys prepared for good Men after Death. The
Glories and Delights of Paradise, how sublime and magnificent are they, when
even this lower World can look so beauteous from the Flowers of the Spring!
This Earth, polluted by Sin, and devoured by the Curse of GOD, does yet retain
so much of its Ornament and gay Aspect. But, O the ravishing Glories of the
Place where no Curse lays waste, no Sin defiles! The Paradise of holy Souls;
the Mansion of blessed Angels; the imperial Seat and Residence of GOD! In our
low Spring of Earth, all our Senses are agreeably entertained with a Variety of
Delights and Satisfactions. The Winter is past, and as the Cold decays, a
moderate Warmth diffuses through the Air, we feel it, and are refreshed by it.
The Time of the singing of Birds is come, and our Ears are regaled by all the
Harmony of the Groves and Forests. The idle Musicians of the Spring f^ll the
Fields and the Skies with their artless Melody. A thousand Odours are thrown
from every Bough; and scatter through the Air, to gratify our Smell. The
Flowers appear on the Earth; and the opening Buds, and the rising Grass dress
the rich Landscape, and paint the Scene to delight and charm our Eyes. These
are the Pleasures of an earthly Spring: But, O the Joys of the upper Paradise!
There the Eyes are delighted with Sunshine ever bright, and Fields ever fair,
and never sading. The Angels, and not the Birds, sing; and nothing addresses
the Ear but Hallelujahs and Anthems to GOD: The Fruits of the Tree of Life
satisfy the Taste; and Rivers of Pleasures and the Breath of GOD, banish
Thirst, and cool the deathless Region. From the Things that we see then all
below us, Rise up, and come away, to the future State of eternal Rewards,
reserved in Heaven for us. -- Arise, let us go hence.

And now what remains but the Exhortation and the Motives in my Text. Rise up,
and come away, for the Winter is past, the Rain is over, and gone, the Flowers
appear on the Earth, the Time of the singing of Birds is come. Lo, the Season
of the Year, and every fragrant Breeze of Air, conspire to awaken us to
Thoughts on GOD, and to quicken our Love to him, and trust in him. Universal
Nature about us with one Voice, sings Hallelujah aloud. Glory to GOD in the
Highest, is resounded by every tuneful Bird, every warbling Brook, and bubling
Fountain. Incense to the GOD of Heaven is offered by every opening Lilly, and
glowing Blossom, which perfume the Air with their ambient Sweets. The wide
Earth we tread on seem: but one great Altar, covered with Incense and Offerings
to GOD its Maker. And shall not we also offer ourselves upon it? Rise up, and
come away. It belongs to us, as the Priest of GOD below, to express the Praise
of the subordinate Creatures in articulate Sounds, and utter their silen Voice
in intelligible Language. For all thy Works praise thee, O LORD and thy Saints
bless thee.

But the Application may more particularly be directed to young People who
exult under the Indulgence of double Spring. To you, my Brethren turn my
Address; and suffer, I pray ^ou, the Word of Exhortation. Will ^ou as waste
these golden Moments, that glitter in the Spring of Life, which ^nce fled away,
can never return more? Rise up, and come away; leave the low^r Objects that
allure and tempt you. Give your selves up to GOD. Seek ^st the Kingdom of GOD
and his Righ^onsness, and all other Things shall be ^dded unto you. Rise up,
for lo, the ^inter [ -- is past shall I say? Nay] it (...) coming on, and the
evil Days of Rain and Tempest are hastening over you. Remember now thy Creator
in the Days (...) thy Youth, before the evil Days come, (...) the Years draw
nigh, when thou ^alt say I have no Pleasure in them. Rise up, out of the Way of
these de^ending Evils, by a Flight to the dear ^AVIOUR, who invites you with
his ^racious Voice, and opens his tender Arms to receive you. My Brethren, Your
Life will decay, like the fading ^pring, O let it not before your eter^al
Well-being is secured, and a sure ^oundation for happy Reflection laid (...)
these pleasant Hours.

Thus have I taken you with me to meditate in the Fields. We have been
surveying the beautiful Scenes of the Spring: And shall we have no good Effect
of the soft Prospects? Shall not a rival Glory open and dawn in our ravished
Hearts, while all the Fields flourish about us? O for a Spring now! and that
even while I am speaking, every consenting Breast may feel new Delights in GOD
kindle with a sudden Flame, and glow with immortal Ardor! That is the Design as
of all the Messages from the Pulpit, so particularly of this Discourse on the
springing Year. I would call your Souls in to flourish like the Earth about
you. Deuteronomy. xxxii. 2.
My Doctrine shall drop as the Rain, my Speech shall distill as the Dew; as the
small Rain upon the tender Herb; and as the Showers upon the Grass. Away! thou
North Wind, and come thou South, blow upon my Garden, that the Spices thereof
may flow out.

Those of us who have recovered from the Sickbed, methinks, may hear the loud
Call, Rise up, -- Arise, and walk! Taste the renewed Bounties of Heaven with
redoubled Pleasure, while we redouble our Labors for GOD, and his Kingdom.
But, ah! Let us not think the Danger is all past, and the Rain is over and
gone; for the Clouds return after the Rain; Death shall quickly shut the
pleasing Scene, and the Days of Darkness shall be many. Do therefore with thy
Might, what thy Hand finds to do. If all the Care of Heaven to manure and
cultivate you be lost, the Voice quickly will be that, No Fruit be found on
thee for ever! Cu^ it down! -- Ah! rejected and nigh unto Cursing, thy End is
to be burned.

And indeed, The Address of Heaven is proper for us all: For we are all in the
Spring of our Being, while we are in this Life. Eternity is like an endless
Year, of which this Life is like the budding Spring. And, as the Spring is, the
Year will be more or less fruitful and blessed. If in this Life we disobey GOD;
the Spring of this Life will end in the Heat of a withered Summer, the Flames
of eternal Fire. If, on the contrary, we serve GOD from a Principle of Faith in
CHRIST, our Spring will end in a blessed Harvest: And we shall enter upon the
Feast of the Fruits that adorn Paradise. Death it self will but convey us to
the Regions of immortal Life: And our LORD JESUS CHRIST the good Shepherd, will
lead us through the dark Valley, to the green Pastures, and the still Waters.
There the Groves ever blossom, the Flowers ever flourish, and the Fields are
ever green. There JESUS himself blooms in unveiled Charms, and invites us to
him, with his dear Voice. We may lie upon the Bed of Death, and see the endless
Glories shine behind the Glooms, and guild and break away the awful Shadows. We
may see our dear SAVIOR at a Distance, encouraging our defired Flight. We may
hear his Voice sound charming through the dark Length of the Vale of Death;
Rise up, and come away! And the last Words we utter, when we leave the Flourish
of the lower Spring may be like that, Cant. ii. 8, 9.
It is the Voice of m^ Beloved: He flourishes through the Windows, showing
himself through the Lattess. Then shall be completely fulfilled to you, that
blessed Promise, Isai. lv. 10 -- 13.
For as the Rain comes down, and the Snow from Heaven, and returns not
thithor, but waters the Earth, and makes it bring forth and bud, that it may
give Seed to the Sower, and Bread to the Eater: So shall my Word be that goes
forth out of my Mouth: it shall not return unto me void, but it shall
accomplish that which I please, and it shall prosper in the Thing whereto I
sent it. For ye shall go out with Joy, and be led forth with Peace: the
Mountains and the Hills shall break forth before you into singing, and all the
Trees of the Field shall clap their Hands. Instead of the Thorn shall come up
the Fir Tree, and instead of the Brier shall come up the Myrtle-Tree: and it
shall be to the LORD for a Name, for an everlasting Sign, that shall not be cut
off. Isai. xxxv. 6. --
-- In the Wilderness shall Waters break out, and Streams in the Desert. And
the parched Ground shall become a Pool, and the thirsty Land Springs of Water:
In the habitation of Dragons, where each lay, shall be Grass with Reeds and
Rushes. -- No Lion shall be there, nor any ravenous Beast shall go up thereon,
it shall not be found there: but the redeemed shall walk there. And the
ransomed of the LORD shall return and come to Zion with Songs, and everlasting
Joy upon their Heads: they shall obtain Joy and Gladness, and Sorrow and
Sighing shall flee away.

FINIS.

