Advice to Sinners UNDER CONVICTIONS. To prevent their Miscarrying in
Conversion. To which is added, Some Scruples of the Tempted Resolved.

By Samuel Corbin, M. A.

Isa. 1.18. Come now and let us reason together says the Lord: though your
Sins be as Scarlet, they shall be as white as Snow; though they be red like
Crimson, they shall be as Wool.

Isai. 66.9. Shall I bring to the Birth, and not cause to bring forth, says
the Lord.

BOSTON: Reprinted and Sold by S. KNEELAND, and T. GREEN, in Queen Street.
1741.

Advice to Sinners under Convictions, to prevent their Miscarrying in
Conversion.
Poor Sinners!
I Send these Truths from the Eternal GOD to you in Love and Faithfulness;
unfeignedly desiring that you may be convinced of your Unbelief, and of all
your Sins, and of your present accursed and condemned State, and that you may
be taught of God to rely upon Christ, who died for the ungodly. If you continue
unregenerate, you will certainly ere long be the most miserable of the whole
Creation, and Monuments of divine Justice, although you now enjoy the World in
its Glory. Since diverse of you are awakened, I hope that God may have Thoughts
of everlasting Love to some of your Souls: therefore as I have warned you to
flee for Refuge from the Wrath of God which is coming upon you and without
delay, presently to come out of this dreadful Condition, to Christ, who will
embrace you; so I write to you, and to all others to whom these Truths may be
communicated, to prevent their miscarrying in Conversion.

1. Seek to know and be convinced by the Spirit through the Scriptures, that you
are born dead in Sins and Children of Wrath, without Christ, and without Hope:
Ephesians 2 3, 12. And that you lie every Moment under God's Curse and Wrath; in
danger of eternal Condemnation; Gal 3 10 The Wicked shall be turned into Hell,
Psalm 9.17 The Soul thas sins it shall die, Ezekiel 18 4. Unbelievers shall not
see Life, but the Wrath of God abides on them, though they are insensible of
it. The Lord says Except a Man be born again, he cannot see the Kingdom of
God: And he that believes not is condemned already, Joh. 3.3, 18, 36. Consider
seriously then, each of you, I beseech you, What will become of me, who am not
born again, nor ever had the Experience of a Work of Grace? O that your Eyes
were open to behold all the Sins of your Hearts and Lives, in order before you,
which may cry aloud continually for Vengeance against your guilty Souls! 'Twere
enough to make you tremble, who are now most senseless. Retire alone quickly,
and reflect upon your Ways as in the Sight of God. Put these Questions to your
selves, -- Have not I sometimes Lied, or Stole, or swore an Oath? Have I not
profaned the Lord's Day? Was I never Proud, nor Wanton, nor Malicious? Have I
never taken the Lord's Name in vain? Have I not been disobedient to my Parents?
Have I not a carnal, unclean, hard and unbelieving Heart? Did I never break
God's Laws? Am not I dead in Sins to this Day? Yea surely I must cry out,
Guilty, guilty: My Conscience condemns me. What will become of me if I die in
this dreadful Condition? For the righteous God has said, Cursed is every one
that continues not in all Things which are written in the Book of the Law to
do them He that spared not the Angels when they sinned, but cast them down to
Hell: He that spared not the old World, nor the Cities of Sodom and Gomorrah,
but condemned them with an overthrow, making them an Example unto those which
after should live ungodly, will not spare me long. Does not Hell gape for me?
Is there any hopes that such a Sinner as I have been, may be washed in the
Blood of Christ? God may righteously damn me for these Sins, or for the least
Sin; Romans 3 23. It is of the Lord's Mercy that I am not consumed, and now in
Hell, howling among the damned, crying out for a Drop of Water to cool my
Tongue; Lam. 3 22 Luke 16.24.

2 Seek the Lord in secret for his Spirit while he may be found; Isai. 55.6.
Cry out each of you for the Blood of Christ, as condemned Malefactors do for
Mercy: As they did, Act. 2 37. Or as the Keeper of the Prison said trembling,
What must I do to be saved? Act. 16 30 Rest not one Day nor one Hour longer
quietly or securely, till you have some Hopes that Faith is wro't in you by the
Spirit, and that Jesus Christ will plead your Cause at the Day of Judgment; for
without the imputation of his Righteousness there is no Remission. Follow
Christ, crying after him as the blind Man did, Lord, that our Eyes may be
opened, Mat. 20 30. Pray as the Leper did, Mat. 8.2. Lord, if thou will, thou
can make me clean. Plead importunately for the Spirit which is promised in
these last Days to be poured out upon all Flesh, Act. 2.17. Isai. 44.3. If the
Lord by his Word and Spirit makes you sensible of your fearful undone
Condition; beware of resting short of a through Work of Grace; lest you fall
short of union with Christ, through the teachings and drawings of the Father;
lest you rest in a false Peace, Luk 11.21. compassing yourselves about with
Sparks of your own kindling, through slight wounding, or slight healing, Isai
50.11 Take heed of building foolishly upon the Sand, Mat. 7.26, 27. And lest
thou prove at best but a foolish Virgin walking with the wise, Mat. 25. Fear
lest you make a Christ of Duties, of Praying, Weeping, Purposing or Reforming;
for the Sacrifice of the Wicked is an Abomination to the Lord, Prove. 15.18.
There is a Way that seems right to a Man. but the End thereof are the Ways of
Death, Prove. 14.12. There is a Generation that are pure in their own Eyes, and
yet are not washed from their filthiness, Prove 30.12. A Person may go very far
under the awakenings of Conscience, and have a Zeal of God, and yet being
ignorant of God's Righteousness, go about all his Life time to establish his
own Righteousness, and get nothing at last but the Hypocrites Hope, which shall
perish. Thou that spinnest a covering for thy Nakedness out of thine own
Bowels, thy Trust shall be like a Spider's Web in the Day of thy Calamity: This
thou shall have at the Hand of God, thou shall lie down in Sorrow: For Christ
is the End of the Law for Righteousness to every one that believes, Joh. 8.13,
14. Romans 10.2, 3, 4. By the Deeds of the Law there shall no Flesh be justified
in the Sight of God, Romans 3 20. If ever thou find Mercy, thou must be justified
freely by the Grace of God, through the Redemption which is in Christ Jesus by
Faith without the Deeds of the Law, ver. 24, 28. It Is true, Faith comes by
hearing, and it is our Duty to attend on God's Appointments, where the Spirit
works; but if Righteousness come by any Work of the Law, then Christ is dead in
vain, Gal. 2.21. To him that works not in the Point of Justification, but
believes on him that justifyeth the ungodly, his Faith is counted for
Righteousness: Blessed is that Man to whom God imputes Righteousness without
Works, Rom 4.5, 6

3. Lock to the Lord to convince you of Sin, because you believe not in Jesus
Christ, which is promised, John 16 7.8, 9. In your Attendance on the Means of
Grace, be willing to be convinced by the Comforter, that your Hearts are so
desperately wicked that you will not come to Christ; and to seel your
Impotency, that you cannot believe in him, unless the Lord put forth the
exceeding Greatness of his Power, Bph. 1.19.

5. Know assuredly, and welcome these glad Tidings, that Christ is come of a
Truth into the World on purpose to save Sinners, and the chiefest of them, 1 Timothy 1.15. God so loved the World that he gave his only begotten Son, that
whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have everlasting Life. John
3.19. Christ havh once suffered sins, the Just for the Unjust, that he might
bring us to God, 1 Pet. 3.18 Fice to this Refuge when thou see thyself
ungodly, and accursed by the Law of God, and searest thou shall be condemned.
Consider with thy self, though I am ungodly, yet Christ died for the Ungodly,
Romans 5 6. Though I am an Enemy, yet Christ has reconciled Enemies to God by
his Death. Verse 10. Though I am rebellious, and so abominable, that I fear
lest the Earth should open and swallow up such a Wretch, and God should
righteously sink me to Hell, living, and in his Wrath; yet here is good News and
Encouragement for me, that Jesus Christ when he ascended on high received Gists
for Men, yea, for the rebellious also, that the Lord might dwell among the
Rebellious, Psalm. 68.18. Though I am accursed, and I fee evidently God threatens
to damn me in many Scriptures, yet is there Hopes for such a condemned sinner,
since Christ has redeemed accursed sinners from the Curse of the Law, being
made a Curse for them, that they might receive the Blessing of Abraham, and the
Promise of the Spirit, Gal 3.13, 14.

6. Believe in Jesus Christ, because it is the Command of God and pleasing in
his Sight, and thy Duty, though thou can see no other Warrant or Ground of
Encouragement. It is not only thy Privilege, but thy Duty to believe. This is
his Commandment, that we should-believe on the Name of his Son Jesus Christ, 1
John 3 22, 23. Believe on the Lord Jesus and thou shall be saved, Act. 16.31.
Christ tells Hypocrites that sought him for their Bellies, This is the Work of
God, that ye believe on him whom God has sent, Joh. 6 28, 29. Apply the Word
thus for thy self; the righteous God that knows all my heinous Sins, instead of
condemning me for them, commands me to believe on his Son, and assures me that
I shall be saved. The Lord give thee the Spirit of Wisdom and Revelation in the
Knowledge of Christ, and the Obedience of Faith. The Voice of the Lord Jesus is
powerful, and his Sheep hear it; pray earnestly that his Commands may come with
Power to thy Soul.

7. Rejoice to hear that Jesus Christ is become an earnest Suitor for thy Love.
The Lord that was crucified for the chiefest Sinners, now says to thee, Behold
I stand at the Door and knock, if any Man hear my Voice and open the Door, I
will come in to him, Rev 3.20. I am not come to call the Righteous, but
Sinners, says the Lord, Mat. 9.13. Come unto me all ye who labor and are
heavy laden, and I will give you Rest, Mat. 11.28. Ho, every one that
thirsts, come ye to the Waters, and he that has (...) Money, come, Isai.
55.1. The Spirit and the Bride say come, and let him that hears say come, and
let him that is a thirst come, and whosoever will, let him take the Water of
Life freely, Rev. 22 17. Hearken therefore to the ravishing Voice of Christ,
although thou may judge thyself the vilest and chiefest of Sinners, and may
verily think there may be Marcy for others, but there is none for such a great
monstrous Sinner as thou have been; yet here is the joyful Sound, that the Son
of Man, God manifest in the Flesh, is come to seek and save that which was
lost, Luk 19.10

How dreadful soever thy Condition may be in thy own Thoughts, yet Christ
says, Him that comes to me I will in no wise cast out, Joh. 6.37. Though you
therefore feel hard and dead Hearts, yet come as Sinners unto Christ, who came
to seek and save such. The Lord calls stout-hearted Sinners who are far from
Righteousness to hearken unto him Isai. 46.12, 13

8 When your Hearts are sinking under the Sense of God's Wrath, then resolve in
the Strength of Christ to rely upon him, to cast and roll your selves upon him,
whatever be the Issue. If I perish, I will perish at the Feet of Christ, for
otherwise I am sure to perish: If he condemn me, he is righteous; if he save
me, 'twill be Riches of free Grace for ever to be admired. Venture thus upon
Christ against a thousand Discouragements, as the Lepers ventured into the
Tents of the Syrians, 2 Kings 7.4, 5, 6. Press in upon Christ, resolving to
take no Denial, as the Woman of Canaan did, Mat. 15.22 etc. These had a blessed
Issue out of their Difficulties; and thou shall find at length that the Bowels
of Christ will yearn over thy fainting Soul, lying at his Feet for a Crumb, and
he will embrace thee with unspeakable Love. Thus let the Kingdom of Heaven
suffer Violence; press thou into it, and take it by Force.

9. Never attempt to believe or repent in thy own Strength, but look unto Fesus
in whom it has pleased the Father all Fullness should dwell, Col. 1.19 As thou
would not prove a rotten Hypocrite, beware of a dead Faith of thy own
forming, which is not the Faith of the Operation of God, Col 2 12. Look not for
that in thy self which is to be found in Christ, nor for that in the Law which
is to be found in the Gospel: This has been the Cause of the long Troubles of
many precious Souls. When thou fear thou shall die eternally because thou
canit not believe, look out of thy self onto Christ, who is full of Grace, and
behold his Glory, Joh. 1.14. Look unto me and be ye saved all the Ends of the
Earth, Isai. 45.22. Look unto Jesus the beginner and finisher of Faith, Heb.
12.2. Christ never comes expecting to find Faith or Repentance, but looks upon
a filthy Soul polluted in his own Blood, and says unto him, Live; and this
Time is the Time is the Time of Love, Ezekiel. 16 6.8. The Grace of the Lord is
exceeding abundant to the chiefest of Sinners; with Faith and Love which is in
Christ Jesus, 1 Timothy 1.14. When thou turnest thine Eyes inward, and fear
that the Hardness and Impenitency of thy Heart will surely be thy ruin; flee to
that reviving Word, Acts 5.30, 31. God has raised up Jesus, and exalted him
with his right Hand, to be a Prince and a Savior, to give Repentance to
Israel, and Remission of Sins. The Lord has promised in the latter Days to
destroy the Veil of Unblief which is spread over all Nations, Isai. 25.7. Do
thou find by Experience that Word true, No Man can come to me, except the
Father which has sent me draw him; behold in the next Verse what a full
Promise of Help is made to thee; They shall be all taught of God; every Man
therefore that has heard and learned of the Father comes unto me, Joh. 6 44,
45. Good and upright is the Lord, therefore will he teach Sinners in the Way.
Psalm. 25 8 Christ says, I am the Way unto the Father, Joh 16.4. Follow the
Lord at the Throne of Grace with Cries and Groans unutterable, without ceasing;
O draw me to Christ, help me to close with, and to rely upon Him! If thou
find still it is impossible for thee to believe, hear the Lord saying to
thee; Let him (...) my Strength that be may make (...) with me, and he shall
make Peace with me Isai 27 5. He gives Power to the Faint and to them that
have no Might, be increases Strength, Chap 40 29. Therefore trust in the Lord
for ever, for in the Lord Jehovah is ever lasting Strength, Chap. 26 4. It is
my earnest Desire and Prayer that this may be the Time of God's special Love,
and the Day of his Power; that you may be united to Christ by Faith wrought in
you by the Power of God's Spirit; that you may thirst after, and receive a full
Assurance of God's Love, and that you may have the Love of Christ shed abroad
in your Hearts; and may abide in Christ being strong in the Grace which is in
him, which is sufficient for you in your greatest Straits; and that you may be
taught of God to sing his Praises, and to rejoice with trembling; and may never
lose your first Love, or fall into a Spirit of Slumber or Delusion; but may
grow in the Knowledge of Christ, and being planted in the House of God may
bring forth much Fruit; denying yourselves and taking up the Cross of Christ,
walking worthy of the Lord all your few Days, to the Praise of his Free Grace,
who has called you into his Kingdom and Glory.

O that these Lines may not hereafter rise up in Judgment at the last Day
against any of you which slight them, and condemn you; but that they may be the
Voice and Call of God, his Arm and Power revealed to your Salvation. The
Presence of the Comforter be with you for ever.

More Advice to Sinners under Convictions.
QUESTION,

I Beseech you since my present Condition is so dreadful as God's Word reveals
it, tell me, if there be any Hopes for such a Sinner, and what Course I must
take?

Ans. WHen the Keeper of the Prison asked Paul and Silas, Sirs, What must I do
to be saved? they said, Believe on the Board Jesus Christ, and thou shall be
saved and thy House, Act. 16.30, 31. Therefore immediately under the Means of
Grace, wait for the Spirit to draw thee by the Gospel. Thou will there ear that
Christ has redeemed us from the Curse of the Law, being made a Curse for us,
Gal, 3.13. God has sent forth his Son made under the Law, to redeem them that
were under the Law. God so loved the World, that he gave his only begotten Son,
that whosoever believes on him should not perish, but have everlasting Life,
Joh. 3.16. Go not therefore about to establish thy own Righteousness; for
Christ is the End of the Law for Righteousness to every one that believes, Rom
10 34 Thou will there hear the joyful Sound that the chiefest of Sinners have
believed and are saved; and that it is not the highest Aggravation of thy Sins,
nor thy present accursed State, shall hinder thee from Mercy, if thou art made
willing in the Day of God's Power to come out of thy Sins and Self to Jesus
Christ. The Lord will pardon abundantly, Isai. 55. The Grace of Christ does
superabound; he has Gifts for the Rebellious, Psalm. 68.18. This is a faithful
Saying, and worthy of Acceptance, that Jesus Christ came into the World to
save Sinners, of whom I am chief, (says Paul) 1 Timothy 1.15 Him that comes to
me, I will in no wise cast out, says CHRIST, Joh. 6 37. Therefore don't take a
desperate Course, because thou think no Sins are like thine; For the Blood
of Jesus Christ bis Son cleanses from all Sin, 1 John 1 7. God does justify
Sinners freely by his Grace, through the Redemption which is in Christ Jesus,
Rom 3 24 Let it overcome thy Heart to consider how freely Christ proclaimed
himself to Sinners when he dwelt among us. Jeb. 7.37. when he stood and cried,
If my Man thirst, let him come unto me, and drink: His precious Blood is more
able to justify, than thy crying Sins are to condemn thee. Come, says Christ
to thee, for all Things are now ready. The Spirit says, Come, and the Bride
says Come, and let him that hears say Come; and let him that is a thirst
Come, and whosoever will, let him take of the Water of Life freely, Rev 22 17.
There is Righteousness in Christ to cover thee, and Faith to receive it too.
God will have Mercy on them that have not obtained Mercy, and makes them his
People, which were not his People, Hos. 2.23. Christ is exalted to give
Repentance, and why not to thee that need'st it? Has not Christ called, and
waited long till his Locks were wet with Dew?

Poor condemned Sinner! How can thou choose but be overcome with his Love,
who still beseeches thee to be reconciled, though he could glorify himself in
thy Destruction? 2 Cor. 5 20. If God would show thee a little of the Love of
his Heart, and of the Heart of Christ to Sinners, it would dissolve thy frozen
Heart, and make thee admire it, that there should be Forgiveness of the
greatest Sins still for so vile a Wretch. Cry in secret to God, that thou
may know what it is to find Mercy, since he delights in Mercy. When Christ
(...) here upon Earth, see what a winning Sermon he preached to Publicans and
Sinners, Luke 15. When he insinuated into them their lost Estate, and that he
was come to seek and save them: And to encourage returning Prodigals, who are
ready to fear there is no Mercy for them; he shows them though they are far off,
his Bowels shall yern toward them, and he will run to them leaping over
Mountains to embrace them. I assure thee there is as much Love and Bowels in
the Heart of Christ now he is ascended, as when he was upon the Earth. Though
thou art a Scorner at Christ's Spirit, yet says the Lord, How long ye Soorners
will ye delight in your Scorning, turn you at my Reproof, behold I will pour
out my Spirit upon you, Prove. 1 23. Thus do thou hearken to the alluring and
ravishing Voice of Christ, till thou art overcome with his Love, and art
compelled and necessitated to come in, Luke 14 23.

Quest. I have had some Convictions, but I sear no thorough Conversion. I find
many are called but sew are chosen: What Counsel can you give me that I may not
miscarry for ever?

Ans. Besides what is written in my Advice to Sinners, which I shall have
Reference to; take these Directions.

1. Work out thy Salvation with Fear and Trembling. Cherish the godly Fears of
coming to the Birth without Strength to be bro't forth: Beware lest thy
Convictions die and come to nothing; rest not in Ease without Healing through
the Sprinkling of Christ's Blood.

2. Rest not in legal Horror, short of godly Sorrow: Dig deep that thou may
build upon a Rock. If God turn thine Eyes inward; and show thee what an open
Sepulcher full of deadly Poison thou art, thou will then justify God though he
should spurn thee into Hell immediately, and wilt wonder what has held the
Hand of revengeful Justice from comsuming thee long since. The Lord will not
crush under his Feet such a Prisoner of the Earth, Lam 3 34. Nor will he
condemn thee that do thus justify him, and condemn thy self, and lie at his
Feet longing to be found in Christ. Wait therefore for the Spirit's Conviction
of Sin, because thou believe not on Jesus Christ, Joh. 16 8, 9. When the
Comforter is come, he will reprove the World of Sin, because they believe not
on me, (i e.) shall convince them of this Sin chiefly: The Spirit does
aggravate this Sin of Unbelief, where he comes to work with Power savingly.
This is promised in the latter Days, that the chiefest of Sinners shall look
upon Christ whom they have pierced, and mourn for him, as one mourns for his
only Son, Zech, 12 10.

3. Long insatiably to be found in Christ, not having thine own Righteousness,
which is of the Law, but the Righteousness which is through the Faith of Christ;
Phil. 3 9 Never expect to be healed by the Law; but through the Righteousness of
Christ without the Deeds of the Law: For the Law can only wound thee, and give
thee the Knowledge of Sin, Romans 3.20, 28. And there it leaves thee in a
helpless and perishing Condition; it only works Wrath, and curses thee, and
judges and condemns thee. It is very usual with troubled Souls to run to
their Duties, or Tears, or Purposes to Sin no more; in their own Strength;
instead of looking to Christ who was made Sin for them who knew no Sin, that
they may be made the Righteousness of God in him, 2 Cor. 5.21. They should come
without Money, as unworthy and empty Sinners to Christ, whom it pleased the
Father to bruise, Isai. 53. Christ has finished Transgression and made an End
of Sins, and made Reconciliation for Iniquity, and brought in everlasting
Righteousness, Dan. 9.24 Herein Christ's Ambassadors need to be faithfully
warned, when they press Duties upon awakened Sinners, to teach them to look for
Justification by Faith, without the Deeds of the Law, lest they make a
Generation of Self-righteous Hypocrites, instead of sound Believers. Maledicta
sit omnis doctrine, vita, religio, quae conatur lege aut operibus parare
justitiam coram 'Deo. All that Teaching, Doctrine, Life and Religion is
accursed: which labors to provide a justifying Righteousness before God, by
the Law or the Works thereof. Lutheri Anathema.

4. Therefore if thou would be accepted of Christ, come as ungodly, as
unrighteous unto him, who died for Sinners as such, and finds them dead in
Sins when be comes to call them. The Work of the Law is only to convince us
that we are ungodly, dead in Sins, having no Righteousness, not Strength If
thou would not be rejected and prove a Pharisee, come as a Sinner helpless,
and hopeless. Though thou feeleft thy self dead, senseless, asleep, nay, though
thou know not that thou art wretched, and miserable and poor, and blind, and
naked; yet says Christ, I counsel thee to buy of me Gold and white Raiment,
that thou may be clothed, and that the shame of thy Nakedness do not appear,
Rev. 3.27, 28. Instead of refusing Christ by Infidelity upon Apprehensions of
unworthiness, or the want of this, or the other Work of the Law, Qualification,
or Preparation, thou should rather wonder that there should be justification
by free Grace tendered to such a Rebel; that thou being an Enemy should be
commanded and invited to come to Christ.

5. Let the Threatenings against Unbelief awaken thee not to dare to refuse
Christ offered to thee. It is a most heinous, dreadful Sin, to make light of
one Tender of free Pardon of Sins by the Blond of Christ, which the Devils
never had: For this Sin will Jesus Christ are long break through the Clouds, in
flaming Fire, with his holy Angels; 2 Thef. 1, 7, 8

6. Fear Unbelief chiefly; Heb. 3 12. Many awakened Persons are troubled with
groundless Fears, lest there is no Remission for such abominable Wretches; they
sear that such hard, filthy, secure Sinners shall not be accepted. But O Fear
least thou should refuse Christ, or not welcome him: Fear lest a Promise
being lest thee of entering into Rest, thou should seem to come short of it
through Unbelief, Heb. 4.6.

Object. You know not what a Wretch I have been: I cannon but Fear, that my
heinous Sins will ruin me:

Ans. If thy Conscience often smites thee with tormenting Fears, that thy
Uncleanness, Self Pollution, Gluttony, Passion, Pride, or Covetousness, or the
like, (...) be thy Ruin; there is a greater Sin, which is Unbelief; thy not
coming to Christ, not welcoming the glad Tidings of free Remission of Sins by
Christ's Blood, for the chiefest Sinners with all Acceptance. It is this Soul
damning Sin thou have most cause to fear; it is he only that believes not the
Son, that shall not see Life. Joh 3.36.

7. Be assured it is not Presumption, but thy Duty to believe though thou
apprehendest thy self to be the chiefest of Sinners: For God will account
himself glorified by thy believing in Hope against Hope, Rom 4 20

Object Why do you put me thus upon believing, since you grant I have no Power?

Ans Because the Lord causes his Commands to come with Almighty Power upon his
Elect, and does convey his Spirit, and Strength in the Use of his instituted
Ordinances, 1 These. 1.4, 5.

8. Destroy not thy precious Soul, by minding Mortification before
Regeneration. There is no Communion before Union; first make the Tree good, and
then its Fruit will be good; Mat. 12.33. Many Persons know they must perform
this and the other Duty; this and the other Grace they want; and set upon the
Work in their own Strength, and are always learning: Many shall thus seek and
shall not be able. If thou would not miss the narrow Way here then, seek to
be first planted (...) Christ by the Power of his Resurrection, and then let
thy Faith work by Love abundantly. Mr. Cotton observes upon the Revelations
that the Romish Priests in their Doctrine, like the Locusts, do sting the
Conscience with the Law, and heal the Wound, by urging upon Persons external
Works of Mortification; being ignorant of the Doctrine of Justification by
Faith, without the Deeds of the Law.

Let Christ's Ministers beware of putting awakened Sinners preposterously first
upon Works before Faith, and to bring forth good Fruit, before they press them
to look for a Principle by their Union with Christ through the Teachings of
God. This is to put a Man upon building a Superstructure without a Foundation:
I fear many thousands perish by such Preaching: Consult Dr. Owen of
Mortification.

9. Especially beware of resting short of Union with Christ. There is a
glorious and mysterious Union with God manifest in the Flesh by the Spirit.
When Christ betroths a Sinner to himself for ever in Righteousness, and in
Loving Kindness, and in Judgment, and in Faithfulness, then shall be know the
Lord; Hosea 2.19, 20. Then is Christ's Prayer answered, That they all may be
one, as thou Father, art in me, and I in thee, that they also may be one in us,
Joh. 17.21. It is he that has the Son has Life, and he that has not the Son
has not Life; but the Wrath of God abides on him. The vilest Wretches will
Love Christ's Benefits, especially when they come to die. The sound Believer
falls in Love with Christ himself; thou must be cut out of the Olive Tree,
which is wild by Nature, by the Hand of God, and graffed contrary to Nature
into the good Olive Tree; else Christ will not own thee as his Member, but thou will wither as a rotten Branch, and be gathered of Men, and cast into the Fire;
Joh. 25.6. Thou must eat Christ's Flesh, and drink his Blood; else thou can
have no spiritual Life in thee: Joh. 6 53.

Some Scruples of the Tempted Resolved.
Object I Am still sensible that I cannot believe:

Ans. 1. May not Christ rather complain of thee, as of those, John 5 40. Ye
will not come to me that ye might have Life.

2. Under the Sense of thine Impotency, pray and wait continually for the
experimental Knowledge of the Power of Christ's Resurrection, Phil. 3 10 That
God may put forth the exceeding Greatness of his Power, enabling thee to go to
Christ's Fullness, that Grace may reign in thee, Ephesians 1.7.

3. The Spirit's End in convincing thee of thine Impotency, is chiefly to teach
thee to look unto Christ, who is full of Grace, and in all God's Appointments
to wait for the Drawings of the Father, who has promised his Teachings, John 6
44 45.

4 Jesus Christ has purchased and promised the Spirit, the Comforter, to
convince the World of Unbelief, and to beget Faith, John 16.8, 9, 10, 14.
Therefore instead of unbelieving Despondencies, look for the Effusion of the
Spirit, under the Means of Grace, to enable thee to believe.

Object What have I to do to come to Christ, who am ungodly, asleep,
unprepared, the chiefest of Sinners? Alas, I am condemned, and expect nothing
but Hell.

Ans. 1. It is the Lord who has begun to open thine Eyes, and to show thee thy
present Condition, according to his Promise, Isa. 25.5.

2. Thou only art the Person that art called, and shall be welcome to Jesus
Christ, notwithstanding all thy Guilt, and want of Preparations, and
Qualifications in thy own Sense and Apprehension. God does command thee not to
Work (i.e.) for thy Peace, but to believe in God, who justifies the ungodly,
and thy Faith shall be accounted for Righteousness; thou art to believe in God,
who quickens the dead, Romans 4.5. 17. God who is rich in Mercy, for the great
Love wherewith he loved dead Sinners quickneth them together with Christ, that
he might show forth the exceeding riches of his Grace, Ephesians. 2.7. Christ
commands and invites Sinners and no other to come to him; and professes
plainly that he will have Mercy, and not Sacrifice, and that he came not to
call the Righteous, but Sinners to Repentance, Mat. 9.11.

Quest. This rejoices my Heart that such a Wretch as I may come to Christ: But
may I now come to Christ so soon after I am awakned?

Ans. Come and welcome now to Christ. Christ gave great Encouragement to
Nathanael because he embraced the first Offer. Jesus said to him, Because I
said to thee, I saw thee under the Fig Tree, believe thou? Thou sbalt see
greater Things than these, John 1.50

Object The Lord is withdrawn from me, says a distressed Soul, and I fear my
Experiences are a Delusion of the Devil, and Sparks of my own kindling.

Ans. 1. After thou have sung the Praises of God, do not thus soon forget his
wonderful Works, as the Israelites of old did, Psalm. 106.12, 13.

2. Cast not away thy Confidence. Christ's Love Tokens are Pledges of his
Faithfulness in his Absence. When Asaph was at a loss, he said, I will remember
the Years of the Right Hand of the most High: sure I will remember thy Wonders
of Old, Psalm. 77.10, 11. Has not the Lamb that was slain rent the Vail of
Unbelief, and opened the sealed Book, and showed thee plainly of the Father?
Did he never Seal his Love in one Promise? Did never triumph over one Lust?
Have thou not met with the Smiles of Goa's Countenance then, when thou
expectedst to be consumed in a Moment, being caught as it were out of the Belly
of Hell, and laid in Christ's Bosom? Why do thou thus unworthily and
ingratefully forget the Day, when thy Lord delivered thee not from one, but
from all thy Fears? Then thou fattest under Christ's Shadow with great Delight,
and his Fruit was pleasant to thy Taste, Cant, 2.3. Then his Banner over thee
was Love; then thy could Sing, My Beloved is mine, and I am his: O the
height and depth, the length and breadth of the Love of Christ to my Soul,
that passes Knowledge? Can thou not remember the Day, when Christ came
leaping over the Mountains, and skipping over the Hills to thy fainting Soul;
then thy Beloved spoke, and said to thee, Rise up my Love, my fair One, and
come away; for to the Winter is past, the Rain is over and gone. Let not the
Consolations of God be small with thee. Reflect upon the Time of thy first
Espousals, when Christ discovered himself and opened the everlasting Love of
his Heart to thee; when thou wast in a doleful and forlorn Condition, and then
ravished away thy Heart. Thy Love then was as strong as Death, and many Waters
could not quench it; then thy Language was, Stay me with Flaggons, Comfort me
with Apples, for I am Sick with Love; then perfect Love did cast out Fear, and
by his Light thou walkedst through Darknefs. Call to mind the Days of Old, when
thou rested thy weary Soul in everlasting Arms, rejoicing as more than a
Conqueror over Sin and Law, Death, Hell and the Devil, through Christ who
loved thee. Look to a full Christ, thou empty nothing Creature; thy Lord will
turn again, he will not cast thee off for ever, Lam. 3.31. Resolve with Joh,
Though be slay me I will Trust in him, be also shall be my Salvation, Joh.
13.15, 16. The Lord has appeared unto me of Old saying, Yea, I have loved thee
with an everlasting Love, therefore with loving Kindness have I drawn thee,
Jer. 31 3 What though I am now in Darkness in the Deeps, in the lowest Pit,
like the slain in the Grave, whom God remembers no more, yet does he not show
Wonders to the dead? The Lord will command his loving Kindness in the Day Time;
he will bring me forth to the Light, and I shall behold his Righteousness,
Micah 7.9. Though thou now go Mourning without the Sun, yet abida in Christ
by the Power of God, that raised him from the dead; the Day will dawn, and the
Shadows flee away; thou shall shine forth, thou shall be as the Morning, thy
Light shall rise in Obscurity, and thy Darkness be as the NoonDay, the Lord
shall be thine everlasting Light, and the Days of thy Mourning shall be ended,
Isa. 60.20. Pray for new Bottles to hold the new Wine upon thy Lord's return.
The Lord has had a long Controversy with many of his dear Children in these
Nations for the spilling of it.

3. Consider God's gracious Ends in withdrawing. It is chiefly in Love to teach
thee to live by Faith in Christ, and not upon thy Enjoyments, to lean upon thy
Beloved in the Wilderness. If one should have asked Paul, how it was with his
Soul; see the Account, Gal. 2 20. The Life I now live is the Flesh, I live by
the Faith of the Son of God. Though thou walk in Darkness, and have no
Light, yet thou art commanded to trust and stay on thy God, Isai 50.10. Blessed
is he that has not seen, and yet has believed, Joh 20 29.

Object. But I am a Backslider, and the Lord has righteously hid his Face

Ans. It is very supporting to consider, the Heart of God and Christ toward
his Children under Backslidings, which appears in the many Gospel-Calls, and
Promises of Remission, and Healing, made to tempted Souls, when gone astray,
and cast out of God's Sight: read Isai. 54 Jer. 3.30, 31. Hosea, 14. Luke 15.

Object. Surely it were better for me to destroy my self, (says another) under
Temptation, than to live only to aggravate my Damnation. I am condemned
already, God has set me up as a Monument of his Wrath; why should I live any
longer in this Torment?

Ans. 1. Take heed of Soul wounding Sins, and least you run away from Christ by
Unbelief, after falls into them. Some fin against Light, and then instead of
flying to the Blood of sprinkling, they depart away farther by their Unbelief,
than they did by their backsliding into Sin; and entertaining hard Thoughts of
God and Christ in the Pride of their Hearts, they will rather attempt to take a
desperate Course, than submit to the Righteousness of God, and fall down at the
Feet of Christ, whose Arms are open to reseive the chiefest of Sinners.

2. If thou had lain scorching in everlasting Burnings, thou would think it a
rich Mercy to be on this side Hell again: There are done to sympathize with
thee, or to pray for thee or to give thee a Drop of Water to cool thy Tongue.

3. Although thy present Condition be deplorable, yet be not thine own
Executioner, if God will give thee a Reprieve in the World. When thou are
tempted to it, I solemnly Charge thee to remember that God has forbidden it,
saying, Thou shall not kill.

4. In the Hour of Temptation go not out in thine own Strength; look to Christ,
and keep thine hold of him, who is able to keep thee from falling. The Lord
has laid Help upon one that is Mighty, Psalm. 89.19.

5. Give no Place to the Devil. Be not affrighted from continuing in thy
Calling: the Lord has promised to keep thee in all thy Ways, and his Angels
shall have Charge over thee, Psalm 91.11, 12.

6. Thou art grossly mistaken in thinking no Case like thine, for no Temptation
has taken you, but such as is common to Ma^^ 1 Cor. 10 13. Many of God's dear
Children have been as vehemently assaulted with such hellish Temptations, though
thou think thy Case cannot be paralleled, and have been recovered, and their
Unbelief, and all their sad Conclusions confuted.

7. When thou art tempted to Sin, flee to that Promise, Isai. 54.17. No Weapon
that is formed against thee shall prosper. The God of Peace shall bruise Satan
under thy Feet shortly, Rom 16 20. God is faithful, who will not suffer thee to
be tempted above that thou art able, but will with the Temptation, also make a
way to escape, that thou may be able to bear it.

Object. I fear I shall faint in an Hour of Trial.

Ans. 1. This godly Fear is a special Preservative promised in the New Covenant
against all Temptations to Sin, and Apostasy, Jer. 32.40.

2. Watch and Pray always that thou may be accounted worthy to escape all
Things, that shall come to pass, and to stand before the Son of Man, Luke 21.36.

3. Go not out in thine own Strength; for the eternal God is thy Refuge, and
underneath are everlasting Arms. Be thou Partaker of the Afflictions of the
Gospel according to the Power of God. Be strong in the all-sufficient Grace,
which is in Christ Jesus. 2 Timothy 2 1. Look to Christ to strengthen thee with
all Might according to God's glorious Power unto all Patience and
Long-Suffering with joyfulness. The Archers sorely grieved Joseph, and shot at
him, but his Bow abode in Strength, and the Arms of his Hands were strong by
the Hands of the mighty God of Jacob, Genesis 49, 23, 24.

4 God's Word is a tried Word. Behold the great Cloud of Witnesses from the
beginning of the World to this Day, all setting their Seals of the Faithfulness
of God to his exceeding great and precious Promises.

5 Behold Christ's wonderful Love in leaving his Throne of Glory and his
Father's Bosom, and hanging upon the Cross in thy Nature, bearing the Wrath of
God for all thy monstrous Sins. This will constrain thee to follow God fully,
to follow the Lamb whithersoever he goes, and to continue with him in his
Temptations. Look to Christ to shed abroad his Lovs in thy Heart by his Spirit.
Love is strong as Death; many Waters cannot quench Love, nor Floods drown it.

Object. Says another, I have been long under fearful Temptations to foul and
damnable Sins, surely I am an Hypocrite, I live an Hell upon Earth.

Caution. I would not have any self deceived Hypocrite, who allows himself
delightfully in a Course of secret Sinning to cheat himself with this, that his
reigning Sins are but Infirmities, because his Conscience stings him after the
commission of Sin.

Ans. 1. Flee to the Blood of Christ, to wash away the Guilt of thy scarlet
Sins; and the Sense of God's pardoning Love shed abroad in thy Heart, will be
one of the most effectual Means in the World to keep thee from returning again
to Folly. It is most evident from Paul's Experience, Gal. 2 20. that looking to
Christ crucified for thy Sins and Backslidings, is the most expedite help to be
crucified together with him, that the Body of Sin may be destroyed. The
Corinthians experienced, that by beholding as in a Glass the Glory of the Lord
(i. e.) the Riches of God's Grace and Forgiveness through the Blood of Christ
they were changed into the same Image, 1 Cor. 3.14. The Manifestations of God's
pardoning Love to thee, will constrain thee; This will be thy practical
Judgment; if Christ died for thee, when thou wast an Enemy, therefore thou that
live should not henceforth live unto thy self, but unto him that died for
thee and rose again, 2 Cor. 5. If the Grace of God which brings Salvation
appear to thee, 'twill teach thee to deny ungodliness and worldly Lusts; it
will work evangelical Repentance in thee; it will dissolve thy frozen Heart
that thou shall remember thy Ways and be confounded and never open thy Mouth
because of thy Shame, when thou be hold that God is pacified toward thee,
for all that thou have done, Ezekiel, 16.61.

Therefore after thy Falls, though thy Heart be dead and stupid, yet run quickly
to Christ with confusion of Face, who is exalted to give Repentance, and
Remission of Sins, Act, 5.31. Believe steadfastly, though thou have Sinned, yet
thou have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the Righteous, who ever
lives to make Intercession for Transgressors, 1 John 2.2. Do not Work at all
for Peace, or Healing, thereby frustrating the Death of Christ, but believe in
Christ who was delivered for our Offenses, Romans 4.25.

2. When thou have Sinned, run not farther from God by Unbelief, than thou have
done by thy Backslidings. Pluck not up the Foundation presently. This is one of
Satan's Subtilties, by enticing thee to Sin, to break thy Peace, to torment and
bewilder thee, and to take thee off thy Work, and Usefulness for God. Many Sins
may cause matter of Humiliation, but not of questioning our Estates.

3. Go out in the Strength of Christ, and thou shall overcome at last, Ephesians. 6
9, 10. etc. One Cause of our Falls in the Hour of Temptations, is our going
forth in the Confidence of received Grace. Therefore live continually under the
actual Conviction, and Sense of thine inability to resist the least Temptation,
and abide in Christ, in whom all Fullness dwells

4. It will be distinguishing Love from God; if thou through the Injection of
fiery Darts and other Temptations, thou art kept awake from Luke-warmness and
from a Spirit of Slumber and Security, the epidemical Sin of this Hour of
Temptation which prevails exceedingly upon Saints, and the World, not
withstanding all awakening Dispensations, according to Christ's Prediction,
Mat. 34.25.

5. It may be thy Temptations may continue all thy Life: Long not so much for
Deliverance as for Strength to resist. Out of a slothful Principle, we often
cry earnestly for Victory; therefore Temptations still continue. Observe
Christ's Answer to Paul, 2 Cor. 12. There was no Deliverance from the Thorn in
the Flesh; but my Grace is sufficient for thee, for my Strength is made perfect
through Weakness. Be confident of this; Sin shall not have Dominion over thee,
Romans 6. Because thou art not under the Law, but under the Reign of Grace; and
that God will give thee Power when thou art faint, and will increase thy
Strength when thou bast no might, Isai. 40. And in the Faith of the sull
Promises, purchased by Christ's Blood, take Courage: Glory in thine
Infirmities, because of the Power of Christ, which shall rest upon thee.
Rejoice not against me, O mine Enemy; when I fall I shall arise, when I sit in
Darkness the Lord shall be a Light unto me. Rejoice in Christ Jesus, by, and in
whom thou have already overcome the World, and art more than a Conqueror, and
art raised up together, and made to sit together in heavenly Places in Christ
Jesus.

Fight against Sin, the World, the Law, Death, and the Powers of Darkness, as
against conquered Enemies. Pray believingly for that Purchase of Christ, Romans
5. that as Sin has reigned unto Death in thee, Grace may now reign through
Righteousness to eternal Life. Rejoice in Hope of everlasting Rest; where thou
will more admire the Power and Wisdom of God in leading and unholding a poor
weak Worm through such sad Desertions, and Temptations, and inextricable
Labyrinths, than if thou had a calm Way to Glory. To him that overcomes,
says Christ, will I grant to sit with me in my Throne, even as I overcome, and
am set down with my Father in his Throne, Rev. 3.21.

Now unto Him, who is able to keep us from falling, and to present us faultless
before the Presence of his Glory, with exceeding Joy, be Honor and Dominion
for ever.

THE END.

