THE Door of Salvation Opened: OR, A Voice from Heaven, TO Unregenerate Sinners.

Plainly showing the Necessity of opening your Hearts to CHRIST; or else He
will open Hell's Mouth to devour you. With sweet Invitations to come to Him,
that you might have Life, and be hidden from the Wrath of GOD, which is worse
than Death.

Together with the dreadful Condition of the stubborn and hard-hearted Sinners,
dealing impartially with their Souls, propounding Blessing and Cursing, Life
and Death; SALVATION if you open to CHRIST; DAMNATION if you refuse.

By Dr. Pede.

BOSTON, Printed and Sold by ROGERS and FOUL at the Head of Queen Street, near
the Townhouse. 1741.

THE Door of Salvation Opened.
Revelations III. 20. Behold, I stand at the Door, and knock: If any Man hear
my Voice, and open the Door, I will come in to him, and will sup with him, and
he with me.


IT has pleased the most wise Disposer of all Things, out of the Riches of his
Free Grace, to tender Jesus Christ to poor, lost and undone Sinners; and also
it pleased the Lord Jesus, not only to die for Sinners, to redeem them from
Death, and the Curse of the Law, that he might open a Way for poor lost
Sinners, to return to God, but is pleased to stand knocking at the Door of
their Hearts, to woo, to beseech and entreat poor Souls to be reconciled to God.

These Words now read, are very full of Matter, and upon each Word might be
almost written an entire Volumn; but my narrow scantling will not permit me to
explain the Terms, only come to the main Thing intended. I might hence raise
many Observations, but I shall name but one, and insist on it.

DOCTRINE.
That Jesus Christ waits and calls long upon Sinners, and earnestly labors
with them for Admission: He stands at the Door and knocks.

An Hundred and twenty Years waited he upon the old World; thirty Years upon
the Jews; forty Years in the Wilderness by Signs and Wonders; these one hundred
Years well nigh has he waited upon England. Twenty Years he waits upon one
Sinner, forty Years upon another. How often does he say to us, Open to me, my
Sister, my Love, my Dove, my Undenied; for my Head is filled with the Dew, and
my Locks with the Drops of the Night, Cant. 5.2. Mat. 23.37. How often would I
have gathered thy Children as a Hen gathers her Chickens, but ye would not?
What does these Passages hold forth but the Love of Christ? But to enlarge a
little,

Frist, Christ gives not Sinners over, though they have given him no Answer at
all, though they lie in the Bed of Ignorance, and mind not the Dignity of his
Person, nor the Heavenliness of his Voice, nor the Excellency of his Salvation,
and though he call louder and louder, and knock harder and harder, ( Romans 3.11)
It is high Time to awake out of Sleep, the Night is far spent, the Day is at
hand; yet Christ waits still to be gracious.

Secondly, Christ has continued knocking and calling though Sinners have made
light of his Invitations. Though the Soul be lazy, and has put off his Coat, and
cannot put it on, and has washed his Feet, and is loath to defile them; yet for
all this, Christ puts his Hand in by the Hole of the Door.

Thirdly, Christ has not given over knocking, though Sinners have opened their
Mouths against him, and reviled him yet he stands thrusting at the Post of the
Sinners Hearts, and he waits and labors much to reconcile the Soul to God. He
sends his Ministers who entreat and exhort, though all to no Purpose.

But to give you the Reasons why Christ is thus gracious to such graceless
Souls.

Reason I. Christ continues knocking at the Sinners Heart, that he might
glorify his free Grace and Love in converting some poor Soul to himself. That
the Soul might be brought to see the tender Care of Christ and his vehement
Desire to bestow himself upon him: That he might at Length see the free Bounty
of Christ in his long calling, Open to me, Open to me: That it might see
Salvation to be had no where else. That the Heart at length sees it must open
to Christ or else it must perish; that it might see its lost Condition without
Christ: That it might see Christ's Travelings, and Sufferings, Torments and
Tortures, and all to redeem and save them which was lost and undone forever
without him.

Reason II. Christ continues knocking and inviting that in the End he might
gain the Soul to esteem him as the only and desirable Object in the World. That
the Sinner at length may confess it is better to let Christ in, than keep
Christ out. That the Soul may see him whom he has reviled, yea, crucified, all
his Life, see him to be the sweetest Savior, liveliest Man in the World, and
delight in him, and as it were be ravished with his Excellencies.

Reason III. Christ knocks long at the Door of the Sinners Hearts, that thereby
he might magnify the Glory of his Justice, in their mere Ruin and Destruction.
For, O Soul, will thou be left without Excuse? Thou stout Rebel, that stood'st
it out against the Lord, that though he called again and again, thou wast
resolved thou would not hear, though Mercy were upon his Knee before thee, and
begged thee to give Admission to the Lord of Life; yet Impenitent thou were, and
Impenitent thou would be; ay, and miserable were, and miserable, thou
would be.

Therefore will he magnify the Glory of his Justice upon thee, and make thee
smart to Purpose, because thou would not hear the Voice of the Charmer, though
he charmed never so wisely. Now you have no longer any Cloak for your Sins, now
take what falls, and expect a Reward according to your Works; For the righteous
Lord loves Righteousness, but the Wicked his Soul hates: As it is in Psalm
11.5, 6, 7. Verses, No marvel now if the Lord rain Fire and Brimstone, and an
horrible Tempest; for this shall be the Portion of their Cup, who have despised
the rich Grace of GOD, and abused his Patience and Long-suffering toward them:
Mal. 4.1. For the Day is coming that shall burn as an Oven, and all the Proud,
yea, and all that do wickedly shall be as Stubble; and the Day comes that
shall burn them up, says the Lord; and shall leave them neither Root nor
Branch.

But to proceed to the APPLICATION which is the main Thing intended. The USES I
shall make are these:

First, Exhortation to Sinners.

Secondly, Terror and Affrightment.

Thirdly, Encouragement. And then close all with some Directions.

USE I. Of EXHORTATION, to exhort and stir up, if possible every secure Sinner
to stand it out no longer, but to set open your Hearts, that the King of Glory
may enter in. O Sinner, now Christ is standing and calling to thy Soul, If thou
hear and open, I will come in unto thee. Now Christ is saying, I know thy Work,
I know well enough what thou have been, and what thou have done. I know thou
have been a Blasphemer, or a Drunkard, or a Whore-monger, or a Thief, or a
Liar, or a Sabbath-breaker, or a Scorner: Yet I stand at the Door this Day, and
knock, I will receive thee unto Mercy, I will forgive thee all thy Sins, I will
accept, I will heal, I will save thy Soul, if thou will open thy Heart this Day
unto me, and let me in. O Brethren, for Christ's Sake refuse not Christ, Do not
reject, nor neglect so great a Salvation, so ample a Salvation, so waiting a
Salvation, lest you perish.

1. Consider, The Necessity you have of him, 'Give me Children or else I die,'
says Rachel: O give me Christ, or else I perish forever. Can you be saved
without Christ? And if you may have Christ, but for opening the Door; Then
while he is calling to day, hear and open to him. If the Door of Grace should
be shut, thou would be shut up with a Vengeance forever.

2. Consider, What Answers thou will be able to make at the great Day if thou will harden thy Heart and not open. Why, what will thou? Why, what can thou
plead for thy self at the Day of Judgment? Will thou say, the Gospel never
offered thee Christ? Why thou have heard this Day, If any Man will hear and
open, I will come in and sup with him. Will thou say, I would have opened my
Heart, had it not been for the Love of Sin, or for Ease, or Liberty, or Honor,
or Friends, or Companions! Oh! how will Men and Angels hiss at thee This is the
Person who for Lusts Sake, forsook his Mercies! Who for a little Vanity,
rejected his own Salvation! O how will thou curse thy self for Nothing: Nay,
for that which is worse than Nothing: Thou have put off Christ and his
Salvation; therefore Men and Brethren and Fathers, hearken unto me. As Moses
said to the Israelites, so this Day I propound unto you Blessings and Cursings,
Life and Death; Salvation if you open to Christ, and Damnation if you refuse
Christ.

For the Lord's Sake, choose not Cursing, but Blessing; choose not Death but
Life; choose not Hell, but Heaven, choose not Sin, but Christ. Though you have
formerly slighted him, if you will now regard, though you have formerly contemned
him, yet if you will now praise him; though if you have formerly resisted, if yet
you will yield, if yet you will consent, if yet you will become willing to open
unto Christ, Christ will be yours, Mercy will be yours, and Salvation will be
yours.

And what would you have more? What, will not this do? Will not Mercy allure
you? Will not Love constrain you: Then give me leave to reprove you, and
affright you, (if it be possible) out of those Depths of Satan, unto which you
are fallen. However, I am resolved whether you will or no; and the Lord fasten
it upon your Souls.

USE II. Of TERROR, To you who have no Communion with Christ, that have refused
to let in the King of Glory. Oh! seriously lay to Heart your unspeakable Misery
forever.

And here I know not how to begin; If Non-Communion with the Church of God, be
so direful a Curse, that makes Cain cry out; Thou have driven me out this Day
from the Face of the Earth, and from thy Face shall I be hid, I shall be a
Fugitive and a Vagabond on the Earth; and every one that finds me shall slay
me, Genesis 4.14. Oh; then, what is Non-Communion with Jesus Christ? Luther did
profess, that he would not be in Heaven if God were not there, but he would
rather choose to dwell in Hell if God were there.

O Soul, where will thou abide after Death? Let me beg of thee to ask thy Soul
the Questions following.

In the Bowels of Love and Mercy let me beg thee to ask thy Soul this Question;

Q. I. How long will this Life and the Comforts of it last? Thy Soul is
immortal and must never die; but it must have a Being somewhere to all Eternity.

This Worlds Happiness is it everlasting? No surely; thy Money, and thy Corn,
and thy Land will do the no Good in the great Day. Oh! what have thou done for
hereafter? what have thou laid up for the World to come? Is the Door of thy
Heart open to Christ? Alas! Is thy poor Soul Un-armed all this while?

Q. II. What will become of thee when this Life and the Comforts thereof are
gone? O hard hearted Sinner, this broad Way which thou walk on, will never
lead thee to the promised Land. Thy Gold and Silver Key will never open Heavens
Gate for thee: Thy Care of this World's Goods will not plead for thee before
the Judge; all thy careful Friends, Acquaintance, with whom thou had spent many
joyful Hours, will stand thee in no stead.

Then thou will be ready to cry, O where is the Christ that I have despised? O
where is the Jesus which I have resisted? Will he plead for me? No surely: But
go to the God's whom thou have chosen: Oh what will become of me? Must I not
die? O whither will Death carry me? Into which of the Regions of the World will
my Death land me? either of Light or Darkness? To which of these two Regions am
I now traveling? Certainly the Way of Pleasure, or worldly Profit, the broad
Way of the World, its not the Way to transport me to Heaven and everlasting
Happiness. Say, O Sinner to thy Soul, What must I be taken from all my Glory
and Greatness, from all my Delights and Dalliances, and be thrown like Lucifer,
Son of the Morning, from all my Brightness into Blackness and Darkness forever?
When Death has closed up my Eyes, must I awake in everlasting Flames? Ay
Sinner, Thou shall without Remedy, unless thou open to the Lord Jesus Christ.

Q. III. Ask thy Soul on which Hand thou art like to stand in the Day of
Judgment; on the Right Hand or on the left: Among the Sheep, or among the
Goats? If thou will not hear and open now; if thou will not open thy Heart now,
be assured the Devil will open Hell's Mouth for thee. What will be the End of
those Joys which now makes glad thy Heart; you who are in the broad Way to
Destruction and utter Separation from God's Presence for ever? Thy Pleasures
here we may judge of: Oh! but who can tell the Thousand part of those fiery
Torments, to which thou art liable unto in the other World.

While thou live here, thou art a cursed Sinner, and when thou die, thou
shall be a damned Creature: While thou live, thou art fed like a Beast by
common Providence, and art a mere Stranger to never fading Promises. If thou
look Upwards, God is frowning, and his Wrath is revealed from Heaven against
thee, Romans 1.18. The Heavens and their Hosts are ready every Moment to
discharge God's Curses, like Thunderbolts against thee. If thou look
downwards, thou may see Hell gaping and opening its Mouth to swallow thee up
quick, many Dangers attend thee every Day, many Miseries every Moment; Legions
of Devils stand about thee, watching for thee; and waiting only for leave from
God, to drag thy Soul into the Lake of Fire.

Ah! when thou die Man, what must thou then do? When the Captain Death
strikes, whole Armies of Wolves will fall upon thee. Look to, it and remember
thou were once warned; for if thou die naturally, before thou live
spiritually, thou die eternally. Augustine's Prayer was, O Lord, hack me, hew
me, burn me here; but spare me hereafter. As long as thou refusest to hear
Christ's Voice, thou have a Hell upon Earth. It is not the Multitude of thy
Companions that go thither, shall any whit lessen thy Torments, but rather
increase them. Thy Life that has been full of worldly Joy, shall end in deadly
Woe.

All you into whose Hands this little Book shall come; O let me beg you to
consider, if you have any Bowels of Love to your own Souls, how your Hearts can
endure to think of being shut out of Heaven, out of Blessedness for ever. Ask
your Hearts these Questions; Can I burn? Can I endure the Vengeance of eternal
Fire? Will boiled Oil, burning Brimstone, scalding Lead, a glowing Oven, a
scorching Furnace be an easy Lodging for me? Oh! Why my Soul, will thou not be
persuaded to repent? Is there too much Pain in that? Thou art ready to say,
Thou can not bear a Cross, nor an Affliction, a Scoff, or a Reproach. Talk to
thee of the crucifying of the Flesh, of parting with thy Lust, with thy worldly
Companions, of entering in at the strait Gate? O these are hard Sayings, who can
bear them? But how will thou do to dwell with devouring Fire, how will thou
dwell with everlasting Burnings? Whatsoever thou think now, think what Hell
will be when the Day comes thou must descend into it? Thou may drink or
laugh away the Fear of it, but what will it be to thee when thou feel thy
self wrapped in the Flames of it, and not a Drop of Water to cool thy Tongue?
Think on Hell, O Soul, and then think on Christ; and consider if a Redeemer
from such a Misery, be not worth the accepting of? Think on Hell, and think on
Sin, and carnal Pleasures and Delights; consider how they will relish with
thee, when thus salted with everlasting Fire. Are these the Price for which
thou sellest thy Soul to Hell, Oh! bid these Lusts and Pleasures be gone, bid
your Companions and Sin be gone; and though you loved them well, and have spent
your time sinfully with them; yet tell them you must not burn for them; that
you will not damn your Soul to please your Flesh.

Having thus briefly as may be, laid down the Use of Terror, which I hope will
awaken some poor Souls, out of the Depths of carnal Security: Now I shall
proceed to the last Use of Encouragement; To encourage poor secure Sinners, to
venture to lay fast hold on Christ, before that it be too late.

USE III. Oh! poor Soul, have thou kept Christ out a long Time, and art thou
not yet resolved to open thy Heart to him? What shall I say to thee! Let me say
this, Christ waits still for thee; Christ is willing still to receive thee.
Then why will thou undo thy self by neglecting so great a Salvation? Let the
Consideration of the Message Christ brings you, of the Errand he comes on; it
is not a dismal one he brings, it is not a dreadful Errand: If Christ had come
to destroy thy Soul, could he have had less Welcome than you give him? Oh! for
your Souls Sake receive him. Oh ye Fools, when will you be Wise' Come unto
Christ, and he will have Mercy on you, and heal all your Backslidings, and love
you freely.

But some poor Souls will be ready to say, I have a Desire to come to Christ,
but I am afraid Christ will never receive such a wretched Sinner as I, who have
stood it out against him so long? For Answer to this, give me leave to give you
some Directions.

Direct. 1. Ah poor Soul, art thou willing to come to Christ? Then Christ will
in no wise cast thee out, if thou come to him poor, miserable, blind and
naked. O Sinner, come not to him in thy own Strength; but come thus and say, O
Lord, here is a poor Soul not worth a Farthing; O Lord, make me rich in Faith:
O Lord, here is a miserable Soul; Lord, show Mercy to me: Here is a poor blind
Soul, Lord, enlighten me from above: Here is a poor naked Wretch, O Lord cloth
me with thy Son's Righteousness: Lord help me, O Lord save me, lest I perish;
for I cannot help myself.

Direct. 2. Come to Christ by believing in him. Ah, when the poor Soul is
sinking headlong into Hell, and thou see no Way to escape the fearful Wrath
of God, hanging over thy Head, catch thou then at such a Time, fast on Christ.
Oh then apprehend and apply all his Benefits to thy poor Soul. Come this Way,
and grasp him in the Arms of thy Faith; and say, O Lord, I believe in thee,
help thou mine Unbelief: And the Answer which thy Lord will give thee will be
thus; 'Be it according as thou will.' Let Christ be in your Hand, and the
Promise in your Eye, and do not doubt though thou have been a Rebel and a
Traitor, yet Jesus Christ having received Gifts for the Rebellious, will show
Mercy to thee, and receive thee.

Direct. 3. Come to Jesus Christ by repenting and forsaking all thy Sins. Thou
can never come to the Wedding Supper, without the Wedding Garment: The old
Man must be done away, before all Things can be made new: Jer. 3.14. Oh!
Jerusalem, wash thy Heart from Wickedness, that thou may be saved. Ezekiel.
18.31. Make you a new Heart, for why will you die? Acts 16.31. Says Paul to
the Jailer, Repent and be baptized, and thou shall be saved and thy House.
Christ will never enter into an unclean Heart. O get thy Heart washed by the
Tears of true and hearty Repentance, and then Christ will come in, and dwell
with thee.

By this Time, I hope you see the absolute Necessity of closing with Christ,
and of opening the Door to him.

And having given you some Directions, suffer me now in the Conclusion, to
persuade you by all the Bowels of Love and Mercy, which Christ does exercise
toward you. If Christ had come to destroy your Souls, he could not have had
less Welcome: Will you not believe Christ? Will you never believe his
Messengers? If the Ministers of the Gospel had been Messengers sent up from the
bottomless Pit, to deceive Nations, to destroy Souls, to drag them down to
everlasting Darkness, there could hardly been a greater Hate and Outcry against
them. Oh! Has Jesus Christ sweated, groaned, traveled, labored in Pain, and
all to bring forth a Lie? Did he die to purge, cleanse and wash his People, and
when all comes to all, is it but a Cheat? What do you mean Sinners, by your
wilful Neglect? See what is the Reason of this Abuse of God's Grace, Mercy and
Patience; comes it not from Sin? O it is Sin that has made Men Devils; Devils
against God, Devils against one another. There is but one, and let his
Wickedness have its full Course, he would do his utmost to damn all the World:
It is SIN.

O Friends; let me beg of you, to consider what SIN has done: Go to Mount
Calvary, and see what it has done there. What was it that slew the Lord of
Glory; that put Christ to Death; was it not those Sins which were laid upon
him? These were his Betrayers, his Murderers: These were the Thorns, the
Nails, the Spear, that wounded HIM. Let the Sweat, the Cries, the Groans, the
Blood, the Soul that was pierced and poured out by Sin, let these speak. Turn
aside from Mount Calvary, and go down to the Valley of Hinnom, lay your Ear to
the Mount Tophet and hearken O poor Soul, what Work SIN has done there. What
is it that has filled Hell so full already? What sent down Cain, Judas,
Ananias and Saphira, with those Millions of dead Souls that are already
tormented in those Flames? Stand and admire, O thou that art not there to bear
them Company! It Is merely the Mercy of God that spares thee: Oh therefore, Be
not high-minded, but fear. Did God punish so many damned Souls for nothing, for
a Trifle; inflict so great Torments for so small Offense? What was it that cast
them thither? Was it their Righteousness, or rather, was it not their
Iniquities? If you step down to those Chambers of Death, and ask those wretched
Creatures, 'Friends how came you hither'? What would they answer? Oh! It is our
SINS brought us into this Place of Torment. Oh, says one, 'Twas my Covetousness
bro't me hither. Oh, says another It Was my Pride, my Wantonness, and my
Slothfulness: Oh! SIN! SIN! SIN! This is that for which we burn, we roar, we
rave, we die, we die eternally. O therefore Sinners, despise not the Riches of
his Grace any longer, least his Wrath break forth, and he tear you in Pieces,
and there be none to Help. But let me beg of you to open the Door of your
Hearts, that the King of Glory may enter in. Take the Yoke of Christ upon you,
for that is easy, and his Burden, for it is light. Wash your Hearts from your
Iniquities, that you may be saved: Oh! How long shall vain Thoughts lodge
within you? And my Prayer to God for you shall be, That the God of Peace, would
sanctify you wholly; and I pray God, That your whole Spirit, Soul and Body, may
be preserved blameless, unto the Coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. Now the God
of Peace make you perfect in every good Work, to do his Will, working in you
that which is well pleasing in his Sight; that after you have run with Joy the
Race which is set before you, you may possess a Kingdom, and a Crown which is
Incorruptible, which fades not away, reserved in Heaven for you.

FINIS.
Divine Wrath and Mercy.
ADore and tremble, for our God
Is a Consuming Fire,
His jealous Eyes his Wrath inflame,
And raise his Vengeance higher.
Almighty Vengeance, how it burns!
How bright his Fury glows!
Vast Magazines of Plagues and Storms
Lie treasured for his Foes.
Those Heaps of Wrath by slow Degrees
Are forced into a Flame,
But kindled, oh! how fierce they blaze!
And rend all Nature's Frame.
At his Approach the Mountains flee,
And seek a watery Grave;
The frighted Sea makes have away,
And shrinks up every Wave.
Through the wide Air the weighty Rocks
Are swift as Hailstones hurled:
Who dares engage his fiery Rage,
That shakes the solid World?
Yet, mighty God, thy sovereign Grace
Sits Regent on the Throne,
The Refuge of thy chosen Race
When Wrath comes rushing down.
Thy Hand shall on rebellious Kings
A fiery Tempest pour,
While we beneath thy sheltering Wings
Thy just Revenge adore.

