A CATALOGUE OF BOOKS BELONGING TO THE LIBRARY COMPANY OF PHILADELPHIA.

Communiter bona profundere Deum est.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed by B. Franklin, 1741.

A CATALOGUE OF BOOKS.
BOOKS in FOLIO.
PAlladio's Architecture, in 4 Books; Containing a short Treatise of the Five
Orders, and the most necessary Observations concerning all Sorts of Building.
As also the different Constructions of private Houses, Highways, Bridges,
Marketplaces, Xystes, and Temples, with their Plans, Sections, and Uprights.
Exemplified in a great Number of Copper Cuts. 2 Vols.

A Collection of the Works, Divine, Moral and Political, of Mr. WILLIAM PENN. 2
Vols. To which is prefixed a Journal of his Life, and many original Letters an^
^apers not before published.

The Annals and History of Tacitus, translated by Mr. Gordon. With some fine
political Discourses prefixed by the Translator. 2 Vols. 1728.

Helvicus's Chronology, in which the Time of the most remarkable Events in the
World is assigned, and when the most famous Men lived, etc.

Wood's Institutes of the Laws of England; Published (in their natural Order,
according to the common Use) for the Direction of young Beginners, or Students
in the Law; and of others who desire to have a general Knowledge in our common
and statute Laws. 1728.

Sidney's Discourses on Government; which, being found in his Closet, cost him
his Life, in the Reign of King Charles II.

Puffendorff's Law of Nature and Nations, with Mr. Barbeyrac's Notes. To which
is prefixed Mr. Barbeyrac's Historical and Critical Account of the Science of
Morality, and the Progress it has made in the World from the earliest Times
down to the Publication of this Work. 1729.

Bailey's Universal English Dictionary; containing not only the Words and their
Explanation, but their Etymologies from 14 or more Languages, and Accents
directing their Pronounciation. Also explaining the Terms of Art in all
Sciences and Mysteries, illustrated with near 500 Cuts. 1730.

The Gardiners Dictionary, by F. Miller, F.R.S. containing the Methods of
cultivating and improving the Kitchen, Fruit, and Flower-Garden, according to
the Practice of the most experienced Gardiners of the present Age; interspersed
with a great Deal of curious Natural Philosophy, and adorned with Copper
Plates. 1731. [ Given to the Library by P. Collinson, Esquire; of London. F. R. S.]
2 Vol.

The History of Philosophy, containing the Lives, Opinions, Actions, and
Discourses of all the ancient Philosophers. By Tho. Stanley, Esquire;

All the Works, Moral, Political, Historical, etc. of Sir William Temple, Bart.
2 Vols.

Parkinson's Paradisus Terrestris; or, A Garden of rare Flowers; with their
Natures, Place of Birth, Time of Flouring, Names and Virtues. To which is
annexed a Kitchen-Garden, with an Account of all Manner of Herbs, Roots and
Fruits, etc. with the Art of planting an Orchard, the Nature of Grafting,
Inoculating, etc. illustrated with a Multitude of Cuts.

An Essay toward a real Character and a Philosophical Language; by John
Wilkins, D. D. and F. R. S. Containing a Distribution of all Things in Nature
into their proper Genuses, Differences, Species, etc. with a Natural Grammar,
and a most excellent English Dictio^^^y.

Salmon's English Herbal, or History of Plants; containing their Names,
Species, Descriptions, Places of Growth, Times of Flowering and Seeding,
Qualities, Specifications, Preparations Galenick and Chymick, Virtues and Uses;
with the Culture and Management of all Sorts of Flowers: With a Multitude of
Cuts, representing to the Life all the Plants, Flowers, etc. 1710.

Penmanship in its utmost Beauty and Extent, in a new Copy-Book, wherein are
revived and comprised all the most useful, and ornamental Pieces, of the best
Matters in Europe. Engraved by George Bickham, 1731.

Mr. Bayle's Historical and Critical Dictionary, newly and accurately printed;
containing the Lives, Actions and Works of all the most famous Men, with a vast
Variety of other Knowledge; the Author being, for his prodigious Learning and
Industry, esteemed the Wonder of this latter Age. 6 Vols, 1733.

The History of the World, by Sir Walter Raleigh; to which is added the Life of
the Author, newly compiled, and also his Trial. 1733.

A complete Collection of State Trials, and Proceedings upon High Treason, and
other Crimes and Misdemeanors, from the Reign of King Richard II. to the End of
the Reign of King George I. 6 Vols.

The Royal Commentaries of Peru; In two Parts. 1. Treating of the Original of
their Incas or Kings; of their Idolatry; of their Laws and Government both in
Peace and War; of the Reigns and Conquests of the Incas: With many other
Particulars relating to their Empire and Policy before such Time as the
Spaniards invaded their Countries. 2. Describing the Manner by which that n^w
World was conquered by the Spaniards. Also the Civil Wars between the
Picarrists and the Almagrians, occasioned by Quarrels arising about the
Division of that Land; of the Rise and Fall of the Rebels; and other
Particulars contained in that History. Written originally in Spanish, by the
Inca Garcilasso de la Vega, and rendered into English by Sir Paul Rycaut, Knt.
[ Given to the Library by the Hon. James Logan, Esq]

The Holy Bible, with the Apocrypha. [ Given to the Library by Mr. Robert
Grace.]

Plutarch's Morals, in English. [ Given by Mr. Joseph Breintnal.]

Fox's Acts and Monuments of the Church, from the primitive Age to these Times
of ours; with the bloody Times, horrible Troubles, and great Persecutions
against the true Martyrs of Christ, both by Heathen Emperors and Popish
Prelates. 3 Vols. [ Given by Mr. Robert Grace.]

The Merchant's Map of Commerce, handling the universal Matter and Manner of
Trade, with the Coins, Weights and Measures of all Places of Traffic. By L.
Roberts. 1637. [ Given by Mr. Joseph Breintnal.]

A Natural History, in Ten Centuries; written by Sir Francis Bacon. Whereto is
added, his History of Life and Death, and the new Atlantis. [ Given by Mr.
Francis Richardson.]

Decades Duae, continentes Vitas Theologorum exterorum and Principum, qui
Ecclesiam Christi superiori Seculo propagaarunt and propugnarunt: Coactae a
Melchiore Adamo, Silesio. [ Given by Mr. Lewis Timothy; together with two old
and curious Manuscripts in Rolls, in some unknown Language and Character.]

The Lives of the Popes, from the Time of our Savior Jesus Christ, to the
Reign of Sixtus IV. Written originally in Latin, by Baptista Platina, and
translated into English by Sir Paul Rycaut, Knt. Land. 1688. [ Given, to the
Library by the Hon. James Logan, Esq]

The Antiquities of ancient Britain, derived from the Phenicians; together with
a Chronological History of Britain, from the first traditional Beginning to the
Year 800, when it received the Name of England. By Aylett Sammes. Land. 1676. [
Given by Mr. Samuel Hale.]

Bishop Burnet's History of his own Time. Vol. I. From the Restoration of King
Charles II. to the Settlement of King William and Queen Mary, at the
Revolution. To which is prefixed a summary Recapitulation of Affairs in Church
and State, from King James I. to the Restoration in the Year 1660. Land. 1724.
Vol. II. From the Revolution to the Conclusion of the Treaty of Peace at
Utrecht, in the Reign of Queen Anne. To which is added the Author's Life, by
the Editor, 1734.

The Works of Flavius Josephus; translated into English by Sir Roger Lestrange,
Knt. viz. 1. The Antiquities of the Jews, in 20 Books. 2. Their War with the
Romans, in 7 Books. 3. The Life of Josephus, written by himself. 4. His Book
against Apion, in Defense of the Antiquities of the Jews. 5. The Martyrdom of
the Maccabees. 6. Philo's Embassy from the Jews of Alexandria to Caius
Caligula. To which is added, Discourses, and Observations on Josephus; with
Maps, Sculptures, and accurate Indexes. Land. 1733.

Ten Epistles in Verse, by Mr. Pope; containing his Essay on Man, with that on
the Use of Riches, and that on false Taste, etc. Land. 1733.

The History of the Wars of Flanders; written in Italian by Cardinal
Bentivoglio: With a Map of the Seventeen Provinces. Land. 1678.

The Bible in English. Ouersene at the Commandment of King Henrye viii.
1541. [ Given by Mr. William Fry.]

Biblia Sacra, or, The Bible in Latin. By Tremellius and Junius. With Notes. [
Given by Peter Evans, Esq]

The Britannic Constitution; or, The Fundamental Form of Government in Britain;
Demonstrating the Original Contract entered into by King and People. Wherein is
proved, That the Placing on the Throne King William III. was the natural Fruit
and Effect of the Original Constitution, etc. By Roger Acherly, Esquire Land. 1727.

The History of the Reformation of the Church of England. By Gilbert Burnet, D.
D. 3 Vols. The 4th Edition, with Amendments. Land. 1715.

A new Version of the Psalms of David. By Sir Richard Blackmore, Knt. M. D.
Land. 1721.

Burchet's Naval History; or, A complete History of the most remarkable
Transactions at Sea, from the earliest Accounts of Time, to the Conclusion of
the last War with France. Adorned with Sea-Charts adapted to the History. By
Josiah Burchet, Esquire Secretary of the Admiralty. Land. 1720.

The History of the Council of Trent. In which, besides the o^^^^ary Acts of
the Council, are declared many notable Occurrences which happened in
Christendom during the Space of 40 Years and more; and particularly the
Practices of the Court of Rome, to hinder the Reformation of their Errors, and
to maintain their Greatness. Written in Italian by Father Paul, and translated
by Sir Nathanael Brent. Whereunto is added the Life of the learned Author, and
the History of the Inquisition. Land. 1676.

A Treat^se of the fifth general Council, held at Constantinople Anno 553.
under Justinian the Emperor, in the Time of Pope Vigilius. By Richard
Cracanthorp, D. D. and Chaplain in Ordinary to King James I.

Camden's Britannia; or, A Description of Great Britain and Ireland, together
with the adjacent Islands. Written in Latin by William Camden; illustrated with
Maps and Cuts. Translated into English, with Additions and Improvements. 2d
Edit. Land. 2 Vols.

Chambers's Universal Dictionary of Arts and Sciences: Containing, An
Explanation of the Terms; the Rise, Progress and State of Things,
Ecclesiastical, Civil, Military, and Commercial; the several Systems, Sects,
Opinions, etc. among Philosophers, Divines, Mathematicians, Physicians,
Antiquaries, Critics, etc. The Whole intended as a Course of ancient and
modern Learning. The 2d Edition, corrected and amended, with some Additions. 2
Vols. Land. 1738.

Dialing, by William Leybourn: Showing how to make all Sorts of Dials, and to
adorn them with all useful Furniture relating to the Course of the Sun. Adorned
with Sculptures. Land. 1682.

The Civil Law in its natural Order; together with the Public Law. Written in
French by Monsieur Domat, the late French King's Advocate in the Presidial
Court of Clermond in France. Translated into English by William Strahan, LL. D.
With additional Remarks on some material Differences between the Civil Law and
the Law of England. 2 Vols. 2d Edition with Additions. Land. 1737.

The History of England, from the first Entrance of Julius Caesar and the
Romans, to the Conclusion of the Reign of King James II. and the Establishment
of King William and Queen Mary upon the Throne, in the Year 1688. By Lawrence
Echard, A. M. Archdeacon of Stowe. 3d Edition with Additions. Land. 1720.

A general Chronological History of France; beginning before the Reign of King
Pharamond, and ending with the Reign of K. Henry IV. Containing both the Civil
and Ecclesiastical Transactions of that Kingdom. By the Sieur de Mezeray.
Translated by John Bulteel, Gent. Land. 1683.

History of the Civil War of France. Written in Ital. by H. C. D^vila.
Translated out of the Original. 2d Impression. Land. 1678.

The Lives of Pope Alexander VI. and his Son Caesar Borgia. Comprehending the
Wars in the Reigns of Charles VIII. and Lewis XII. Kings of France; and the
chief Transactions and Revolutions in Italy, from the Year 149^, to the Year
1506. With an Appendix of Original Pieces referred to in the Work. By Alexander
Gordon, A. M. Land. 1729.

The Rights of War and Peace; in 3 Books: Wherein are explained, the Law of
Nature and Nations, and the principal Points relating to Government. Written in
Latin by the learned Hugo Grotius, and translated into English* To which are
added all the large Notes of Mr. J. Barbeyrac. Land. 1738.

History of the City and State of Geneva. By Isaac Spon, D. M. Land. 1687. [
Given by Mr. Alexnder Graydon.]

Cosmography, in 4 Books: Containg the Chorography and History of the whole
World, and all the principal Kingdoms, Provinces, Seas and the Isles thereof.
By Peter Heylyn, D. D. Improved with an Historical Continuation to the present
Times, by Edmund Bohun, Esquire Land. 1703.

The Works of that learned and judicious Divine, Mr. Richard Hooker, in VIII.
Books, of the Laws of Ecclesiastical Polity. To which are added several other
Treatises by the same Author: Together with the Life of the Author, written by
Isaac Walton. Land. 1723.

Historia Insignium Illustrium, seu Operis Heraldici Pars Specialis, etc.
Authore Philippo Jacobo Spenero. Francofurti ad Moenum, 1680. [ Given to the
Library by Mr. Gustavus Hesselius.]

A new Law-Dictionary. The 3d Edition, with large Additions, and the
Law-Proceedings done in English, by Giles Jacob, Gent. Land. 1736.

The Works of John Lock, Esquire In 3 Vols. Vol. I. Containing an Essay concerning
Human Understanding; a Letter to the Right Rev. Lord Bishop of Worcester
concerning some Passages relating to Mr. Locke's Essay of Human Understanding;
Mr. Locke's Reply, etc. Vol. II. Containing some Considerations of the
Consequences of the lowering of Interest, and raising the Value of Money; short
Observations on a printed Paper, entitled, For encouraging the Coining
Silver-Money in England, and after for keeping it here: Farther Observations
concerning raising the Value of Money; Two Treatises of Government; Three
Letters concerning Toleration: The Reasonableness of Christianity as delivered
in the Scriptures; a Vindication of the Reasonableness of Christianity; a
second Vindication. Vol. III. Some Thoughts concerning Education; a Paraphrase
and Notes on the Epistles of St. Paul. Posthumous Works, 1. Of the Conduct of
the Understanding. 2. An Examination of P. Malbranche's Opinion of seeing all
Things in God. 3. A Discourse of Miracles. 4. Part of a Fourth Letter for
Toleration. 5. Memoirs relating to the Life of Anthony, first Earl of
Shaftesbury. 6. A new Method of a Common-Place-Book. Some familiar Letters
between Mr. Lock and several of his Friends. 4th Edit. Land. 1740.

History of the Conquest of Mexico by the Spaniards. Done into English from the
Original Spanish of Don Antonio de Solis, by Thomas Town^e^d, Esquire Land. 1724.

History of the Knights of Malta: By Mons. L' Abbe de Vertot. Illustrated with
LXXI. Heads of the Grand Masters, etc. Engraved by the best Hands in France. 2
Vols. Land. 1728.

A Collection of Maps, in large Folio.

A complete Collection of the Historical, Political, and Miscellaneous Works of
Mr. John Milton. With an Historical and Critical Account of the Life and
Writings of the Author. 2 Vols. Land. 1738.

The Memoirs of Sir James Melvil: Containing an impartial Account of the most
remarkable Affairs of State, during the last Age, not mentioned by other
Historians; more particularly relating to the Kingdoms of England and Scotland,
under the Reigns of Queen Elisabeth, Mary Queen of Scots, and King James. By
George Scott, Gent. Land. 1683.

Antiquity explained, and represented in Sculptures. By the learned Father
Montfaucon. 7 Vols. Translated into English by David Humphreys, M.A. Land. 1725.

The Antiquities of Italy: Being the Travels of the Learned and Rev. Bernard de
Montfaucon, from Paris through Italy, in the Years School, 1699. Made English from
the Paris Edition of the Latin Original. Adorned with Cuts, 2d Edit. Revised by
John Henley, M. A. Land. 1725.

The Civil History of the Kingdom of Naples. 2 Vols. Written in Italian by
Pietro Giannone, Civilian and Advocate in Naples, and published 1723.
Translated into English by Capt. James Ogilvie. Land. 1729.

The History of the Growth and Decay of the Othman Empire. Written originally
in Latin, by Demetrius Cantemir, late Prince of Moldavia. Translated into
English, from the Author's own Manuscript, by N. Tindal, M. A. Adorned with
Heads of the Turkish Emperors. Land. 1734.

Historical Collections, of private Passages of State, weighty Matters in Law,
remarkable Proceedings in Five Parliaments, beginning the 16th Year of King
James, A. 1618, and ending the 5th Year of King Charles, A. 1629. Digested in
Order of Time, and published, by John Rushworth, of Lincoln's Inn, Esquire 8 Vols.
Land. 1721.

The Roman History: With Notes, Historical, Geographical, and Critical; and
illustrated with Copper Plates, Maps, and a great Number of authentic Medals.
Done into English, from the Original French of the Rev. Fathers Catrou and
Rouille. To which is prefixed a new and connected Summary of the Work. Land.
1728.

Shaw's Travels; or, Observations, relating to several Parts of Barbary and the
Levant. By Thomas Shaw, D.D. Fellow of Queen's College in Oxford, and F. R. S.
Oxford, printed at the Theater, 1738.

The History of the Rise, Increase, and Progress of the Christian People called
QUAKERS: Intermixed with several remarkable Occurrences. Written originally in
Low Dutch, and also translated into English, by William Sewell. 3d Edit.
corrected. Philad. 1728.

The General History of Spain, from the first Peopling of it by Tubal, till the
Death of King Ferdinand, who united the Crowns of Castille and and Aragon. With
a Continuation to the Death of King Philip III. Written in Spanish by John de
Mariana. To which are added two Supplements, the first by F. Ferdinand Camargo
de Salcedo, the other by (...) Basil Varen de Soto, bringing it down to the
pre^^nt Reign. The Whole translated from the Spanish, by Capt. John Stevens.
Land. 1699.

Ship-Building unvailed. Being a general Director for Building and completing
the said Machines. By William Sutherland, Author of the Ship-Builders
Assistant. Land. 1717. [ Given by Mr. Thomas Godfrey.]

The Horse-Hoing Husbandry: Or, An Essay on the Principles of Tillage and
Vegetation. Wherein is shown a Method of introducing a Sort of Vineyard-Culture
into the Cornfieldsd, in order to increase their Produce and diminish the
common Expense; by the Use of Instruments, described in Cuts. By J. T. Land.
1733.

The Works of the Most Reverend Dr. John Tillotson, late Lord Achbishop of
Canterbury. 3 Vols. 10th Edit. Land. 1735.

The History of the Affairs of Europe, but more particularly the Republic of
Venice. Written in Italian by Battista Nani, Cavalier and Procurator of St.
Mark. Englished by Sir Robert Honywood, Knt. Land. 1673.

Vitruvius Britannicus; or, The British Architect: Containing the Plans,
Elevations and Sections of the regular Buildings, both public and private, in
Great Britain. With Variety of new Designs in 200 large Folio Plates, engraven
by the best Hands. 2 Vols. To which is added the Geometrical Plans of the most
considerable Gardens and Plantations; with large Views in Perspective of the
most remarkable Edifices in Great Britain, engraven by the best Hands in 100
large Folio Plates. By Colin Campbell, Esquire Architect to His Royal Highness the
Prince of Wales. Land. 1731.

Memorials of the English Affairs; or, An Historical Account of what passed
from the Beginning of the Reign of King Charles I. to King Charles II. his
happy Restoration. Containing the public Transactions, Civil and Military.
To^^ther with the private Consultations and Secrets of the Cabinet. By Mr
Whitelock. With a complete Index. A new Edition, with many Additions. Land.
1732.

A brief Narrative of the Case and Trial of John Peter Zenger, Printer of the
New York Weekly Journal. [ Given by Mr. Henry Pratt.]

Wood's Athenae Oxoniensis; or, An exact History of all the Writers and Bishops
who have had their Education in the most ancient and famous University of
Oxford, from the 15th Year of King Henry VII. 1500, to the Author's Death in
November 1695: Representing the Birth, Fortune, Pre^erment, and Death, of all
those Authors and Prelates, the great Accidents of their Lives, and the Fate
and Character of their Writings. To which are added, The Fasti, or Annals of
the said University. By Thomas Wood, M. A. 2 Vols. 2d Edit. corrected and
enlarged with the Addition of above 500 new ^^^es from the Author's Original
Manuscript. Land. 1721.

The Oceana, and other Works of James Harrington, Esquire collected, methodiz'd,
and reviewed, with an exact Account of his Life prefixed, by John Toland. To
which is added an Appendix, containing all the Political Tracts wrote by this
Author, omitted in Mr. Toland's Edition. Land. 1737.

The Universal Traveller, or, A complete Account of the most remarkable Voyages
and Travels of eminent Men, of our own, and other Nations, to the present Time.
Containing a Relation of the Successes or Misfortunes that attended them in
their various Attempts; intermixed with many entertaining Descriptions of the
Curiosities in Art and Nature; together with the Manners, Customs. etc.
observable in the Countries they visited. Collected from the best Authorities,
printed or Manuscript. By Pat^ick Barkley, D. D. Lon. 1735.

The Works of Nicholas Machiavel; Containing, The History of Florence, The
Prince, Art of War, Discourses on Livy, etc.

BOOKS in QUARTO.
REasons for Establishing the Colony of Georgia, with Regard to the Trade of
Great Britain, with Proposals for raising raw Silk, and the great Probability
of succeeding therein. By Benjamin Martyn. 1733.

The Practice of Perspective: Or, An easy Method of representing natural
Objects according to the Rules of Art, applied and exemplified in all the
Variety of Cases; as Landskips, Gardens, Buildings of diverse Kinds, their
Appendages, Parts, Furniture, etc. With Rules for the Proportions, Positions,
etc. of Figures, both in Draught and Relievo, etc. A Work highly necessary for
Painters, Engravers, Architects, Embroiderers, etc. Illustrated with 150 Copper
Plates. Written in French by a Jesuit of Paris, and translated into English.

The History of the Royal Society of London, for propagating Natural Knowledge.
By Thomas Sprat. Land. 1667. ( Given by Mr. J. Robinson)

The Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society, the Experiments they have
tried, Improvements they have made, and Accounts they have received from
Foreign Parts, to the Year 1720. Abridged by Lowthorp and Jones. With many
Cuts. 5 Vols.

A View of Sir Isaac Newton's Philosophy; By Henry Pemberton: Beautifully
printed. (Given to the Library by Pet. Collinson, Esquire of London.)

An Analytick Treatise of Conick Sections, and their Use for Resolving of
Equations in determinate and indeterminate Problems. By the Marquis De l'
Hospital, Honorary Fellow of the Royal Academy of Sciences. 1723.

Atlas Geographus; or, A complete System of Geography, ancient and modern:
Giving an Account of the Situation, Trade, Manufactures, Religion, Customs and
Manners, etc. of all the Countries in the World; improved by the latest
Accounts of the best Travelers of all Nations. 5 Vols. Illustrated with about
100 Maps. Land. 1717.

A New Method of Chemistry; including the Theory and Practice of that Art, laid
down on mechanical Principles, and accommodated to the Uses of Life; the Whole
making a clear and rational System of Chemical Philosophy. To which is prefixed
a Critical History of Chemistry and Chemists, from the Origin of the Art to the
present Time. Written by the very learned H. Boerhaave, Professor of Chemistry,
etc. in the University of Leyden, and Member of the Royal Academy of Sciences
at Paris. Land. 1727.

A Dictionory Italian and English, and English and Italian: Containing all the
Words of the Vocabulary della Crusca, and many more taken from the most
approved Authors, with Proverbs and familiar Phrases, etc. By Ferdinand
Altieri, Professor of the Italian Tongue in London. 2 Vols. 1727.

A Dictionary Spanish and English, and English and Spanish, much more copious
than any yet extant. By Capt. John Stevens. Land. 1726.

The Philosophical Works of Francis Bacon, Lord High-Chancellor of England;
methodized, and made English from the Originals: With occasional Notes to
explain what is obscure, and show how far the several Plans of the Author for
the Advancement of all the Parts of Knowledge have been executed to the present
Time. 3 Vols. By Peter Shaw, M.D. 1733. Containing the following Pieces: 1. De
Augmentis Scientiarum, or, The Arrangement and general Survey of Knowledge,
with its particular Defects and Ways of supplying them for the Advancement of
Arts and Sciences. 2. The New Atlantis, or, A Plan of a Society for the
Promotion of Knowledge. 3. The Beginning of a History of Great Britain. 4. The
Lives or Civil Characters of Julius Caesar, Augustus Caesar, K. Henry VII. and
Q. Elizabeth. 5. Select Speeches on particular Occasions, Civil, Judicial and
Moral. 6. Select Letters on various Occasions. 7. A Collection of Apothegms. 8.
The Mythology, or concealed Knowledge of the Ancients, decypher'd and
explained. 9. A Specimen of the Persian Magic 10. A Specimen of animated
Astronomy. 11. A free Censure or Critique of the most eminent Philosophers. 12.
Interiora Rerum; or, Essays upon Moral, Oeconomical and Political Subjects. 13.
A Discourse of War, 14. The prudent Tradesman, or the Office of Prime
Ministers. 15. A Proposal for a new Digest of the Law of England. 16. A History
of the Nature, Use, and Proceedings of the Laws of England. 17.
Characteristicks of a Believing Christian. 18. An Attempt to promote the Peace
of the Church. 19. A new Machine for Rebuilding the Sciences, or a particular
Logic for discovering Arts* 20. Sylva Sylvarum; or, The Phoenomena of the
Universe. 21. Memoirs for a General History of Nature and Art. 22. Scala
Intellectus; or, The Progress of the Understanding. 23. The History of Life and
Death. 24. A Draught for the particular History of the Wind. 25. A Plan for the
History of Condensation and Rarefaction. 26. An Essay toward a Scientifical
History of Natural Philosophy, etc.

A Tutor to Astronomy and Geography: Or, An easy and speedy Way to know the Use
of both the Globes Celestial and Terrestrial. By Joseph Noxon. 1659. [ Given by
Mr. D. Bush.]

The Thirteen Books of Aeneidos. Translated into English Verse. 1607. [
Given by Mr. D. Bush.]

Dialling Universal; showing by an easy and speedy Way, how to describe the
Hour Lines upon all sorts of Planes, in any Latitude whatsoever. By George
Serle. 1664. [ Given by Mr. D. Bush.]

Moses and Aaron; or, The Civil and Ecclesiastical Rites of the ancient Hebrews
explainded and described. By Thomas Goodwin, B. D. Together with

An English Exposition of the Roman Antiquities; and Archaeologia At^ica, or
the Grecian Antiquities. Bound together in one Vol. 4 to. [ Given by Mr. Joseph
Breintnal.]

A Voyage to the South Sea, and along the Coasts of Peru, in the Years 1712,
1713, and 1714; particularly describing the Genius and Constitution of the
Inhabitants, as well Indians as Spaniards; their Customs and Manners; their
natural History, Mines, Commodities, Traffic with Europe, etc. By M. Frezier,
Engineer to the French King. Illustrated with 37 Copper Plates. 1717.

Certain learned Tracts: Written by John Gregory, M. A. and Chaplain of
Christ-Church, Oxford, 1649. [ Given by Mr. Joseph Breintnal.]

The Orphan's Legacy; being a Collection of Cases relating to L^st Wills and
Testaments, and the Offices of Executors and Administrators; necessary to be
understood by all Persons. By Godolphin.

The American Library; being a Catalogue of Books, Papers and Writings,
relating chiefly to America; given to the Society for the Propagating of the
Gospel in Foreign Parts. 1713.

A System of Experimental Philosophy, proved by Mechanics: Wherein the
Principles and Laws of Physics, Mechanics, Hydrostaticks and Optics, are
demonstrated and explained at large, by a great Number of curious Experiments;
with a full Description of the Air-Pump, and the several Experiments thereon;
as also of the different Species of Barometers, etc. Illustrated with
Copper Plates. By J. T. Desaguliers. To which is added,

Sir Isaac Newton's Colors; The Description of the Condensing Engine with its
Apparatus: And Rowley's Horary, a Machine representing the Motion of the Moon
about the Earth, etc.

The Philosophical Works of the Hon. Robert Boil, Esquire Abrigded, methodized,
and disposed under the general Heads of Physic, Statics, Pneumatics, Natural
History, Chemistry and Medicine. Illustrated with Notes, containing the
Improvements made in the several Parts of natural and experimental Knowledge,
since his Time. 3 Vols. By Peter Shaw, M. D. 2d Edit. Land. 1738.

A Collection of Charters, in Manuscript: Containing viz. The Charter of
Pennsylvania, granted by King Charles II. to William Penn, Esquire; The Charter
granted by William Penn, Esquire to the Freemen of the said Province. The Charter
of the City of Philadelphia, granted by William Penn, Esquire;

The British Carpenter; or, A Treatise on Carpentry: Containing the most
concise and authentic Rules of that Art. 2d Edition, enlarged. By Francis
Price. Land. 1735.

The Present State of Europe; or, The Historical and Political Monthly Mercury:
Giving an Account of all public and private Occurrences, etc. Land. School. [
Given by Mr. Francis Richardson.]

The Hero, from the Spanish of Balthazar Gracian: With Remarks, Moral,
Political and Historical, of the learned Father J. de Courbeville. By a
Gentleman of Oxford. Land. 1736.

A Dictionary English, German and French. 2 Vols. By Christian Ludwig. Leipzig
and Francfurt. 1736. 2d Edition.

The History of the Inquisition. By Philip a Limborch, Professor of Divinity
amongst the Remonstrants. Translated into English by Samuel Chandler. 2 Vols.
To which is prefixed a large introduction, concerning the Rise and Progress of
Persecution, and tha real and pretended Causes of it. Land. 1731.

Liberty; a Poem. By Mr. Thomson. Land. 1735.

A complete History of Druggs; written in French, by Mons. Pomet. To which is
added what is further observable in Messirs. Lemery and Tournefort; divided
into three Classes, Vegetable, Animal, and Mineral; with their Use in Physic,
Chemistry and Pharmacy, and several other Arts. Illustrated with above 400
Copper Cuts. Done into English from the Originals. London 1712.

A General History of Printing, from the first Invention of it in the City of
Mentz, to its Propagation and Progress through most of the Kingdoms in Europe. By
S. Palmer, Printer. London 1733.

Les Provinciales; ou, Les Lettres e'crites par Louis de Montalte, a un
Provincial de ses Amiss, and aux RR. PP. Jesuits, sur le Sujet de la Morale,
and de la Politic de ces Peers. A Cologne, chez Pierre de la Vallee. 1657.

Person's Varieties. Land. 1631. [ Given by Mr. Samuel Kirk.]

A short Account of the first Settlement of the Provinces of Virginia,
Maryland, New York, New Jersey and Pennsylvania, by the English. To which is
annexed a Map of Maryland, according to the Bounds mentioned in the Charter,
and also of the adjacent Country, Anno 1630. Land. 1735. [ Given by Mr. Benj.
Eastburn.]

The Religion of Nature delineated. By ^^lliam Wollaston. Land. 1726. [ Given
by Mr. John Bard.]

A Voyage into the Levant; performed by the Command of the late French King.
Containing the ancient and modern State of the Islands of the Archipelago; as
also of Constantinople, the Coasts of the Black Sea, Armenia, Georgia, the
Frontiers of Persia and Asia Minor. With Plans of the principal Towns and
Places of Note; an Account of the Genius, Manners, Trade, and Religion of the
respective People inhabiting in those Parts. By M. Tournefort, of the Royal
Academy of Sciences, chief Botanist to the late French King, etc. To which is
prefixed the Author's Life. 2 Vols. Land. 1718.

An Enquiry into the Nature of the Human Soul; wherein the Immortality of the
Soul is evinced from the Principles of Reason and Philosophy. Land. [ Given by
Archibald Home, Esquire;]

Stanley's Lives of the Philosophers, in Latin. Lipsiae 1711. [ Given by Mr.
Isaac Greenwood, of New England.]

BOOKS in OCTAVO.
AN Introduction to the History of the principal Kingdoms and States of Europe.
By S. Puffendorff, Counselor of State to the late King of Sweden. 1728.

The History of England, as well Ecclesiastical as Civil, from the earliest
Times down to the Revolution. 15 Vols. By Mr. De Rapin Thoyras. -- The Author
employed Seventeen Years in composing it, and as he had (by consulting the
ancient Records of the Tower) much better Helps than any Historian that went
before him, it is esteemed the best History of England yet published. 1731.

The History of the Revolutions that happened in the Government of the Roman
Republic. By Vertot. 2 Vols.

The History of the Revolution in Sweden, occasioned by the Change of Religion
and Alteration of Government in that Kingdom. By Vertot.

The History of the Revolutions in Spain, from the Decadence of the Roman
Empire, and the first Foundation of the Monarchy, to the Renunciation of King
Philip V. and the Accession of Lewis I. to the Crown of Spain. Including
likewise the History of the late War. 5 Vols.

The Revolutions of Portugal. By Vertot.

A Critical History of the Establishment of the Bretons among the Gauls, and of
their Dependence upon the Kings of France and Dukes of Normandy. By Vertot. 2
Vols.

Plutarch's Lives of the most famous Lawgivers, Generals, etc. among the Greeks
and Romans, with Comparisons. 8 Vols. With the Author's Life by Mr Dryden, and
Madam Dacier's Notes. 1727.

Geography anatomized; or, The Geographical Grammar: Being a short and exact
Analysis of the whole Body of modern Geography, after a new and curious Method;
comprehending, 1. A general View of the Terraqueous Globe, being a compendious
System of the true Fundamentals of Geography, etc. 2. A particular View of the
Terraqueous Globe, being a clear and present Prospect of all remarkable
Countries upon the Face of the whole Earth; showing their Situation,
Government, Manners, Religion, etc. By Patrick Gordon, F. R. S. 1730.

A new Practice of Physic; wherein the various Diseases incident to human
Body, are orderly described; their Causes assigned; their Diagnosticks and
Prognostics enumerated, and the Regimen proper in each delivered: With a
competent Number of Medicines for every Stage and Symptom thereof prescribed
after the Manner of the most eminent Physicians among the Moderns, and
particularly those of London. By Peter Shaw, M. D. 2 Vols. 1730.

New Improvements of Planting and Gardening, both Philosophical and Practical.
In 3 Parts. 1. Containing a new System of Vegetation, etc. 2. The best Manner
of Improving Flower-Gardens, etc. 3. Of Improving Fruit Trees, Kitchen-Gardens,
etc. To which is added a Tract, entitled, Herefordshire-Orchards. Illustrated
with Copper Plates. By Richard Bradley, Professor of Botany in the University
of Cambridge, and F. R. S. 1730.

The Young Mathematician's Guide: Being a plain and easy Introduction to the
Mathematics. In 5 Parts; viz. Arithmetic, Algebra, Geometry, Conic Sections,
Fluxions. With an Appendix of practical Gauging.

Cursus Mathematicus: Or, A complete Course of the Mathematics. Written in
French by Mr. Ozanam, Professor of the Mathematics at Paris, viz. Algebra,
Arithmetic and Geometry, and Fortification, Mechanics and Perspective,
Geography and Dialling. With 200 Copper Plates. 5 Vols.

An Introduction to the true Astronomy; or, Astronomical Lectures, read in the
Astronomical School of the University of Oxford. By John Keill, M.D. F.R.S. and
Professor of Astronomy in that University.

A new System of Anatomy: Describing the Animal Economy, and a short Rationale
of many Distempers incident to human Bodies. Illustrated with above four-score
Figures drawn after the Life. By James Drake, M. D. late Fellow of the College
of Physicians, and F. R. S. 2 Vols. With an Appendix.

A new Treatise of the Art of Thinking; or, A complete System of Reflections,
concerning the Conduct and Improvement of Mind. Illustrated with variety of
Characters and Examples drawn from the ordinary Occurrences of Life. Written in
French, by M. Crousaz, Professor of Philosophy and Mathematics in the Academy
of Lausane. 2 Vols.

Memorable Things of Socrates: With the Life of Xenophon.

Mathematical Elements of Natural Philosophy confirmed by Experiments; or, An
Introduction to Sir Isaac Newton's Philosophy. With a great many Cuts. 2 Vols.

The Complete Tradesman. 2 Vols. Treating of the several Points necessary to be
known, both by the younger and more experienced Tradesman; with regard to
Diligence, Over-Trading, expensive Living, too ealy Marrying, Diversion,
Credit, Partnership, Punctuality, Projects, Engrossing, etc. I732.

A New Medicinal Dictionary; explaining the difficult. Terms used in the
several Branches of the Profession, and in such Parts of Natural Philosophy as
are introductory thereto. By John Quincy, M. D. 1730.

The Practical Farmer: Containing many new Improvements in Husbandry. 1. Of
Meliorating the different Soils, and all other Branches of Business relating to
a Farm. 2. Of the Nature of the several Sorts of Wheat, and the Soil proper for
each. 3. Of the great Improvement of Barley, by Brining the Seed, after an
entire new Method, and without Expense. 4. Of increasing Crops of Pease and
Beans, by Horse-Howing. 5. Of Trefoyle, Clover, Lucerne, and other foreign
Grasses. 6. A new Method to improve Land at a small Expense, with burnt Clay.
7. Of the Management of Sows, Sheep, Suckling of Calves, Lambs, etc. With Means
to prevent, and Remedies to cure Rottenness in Sheep. 8. How to keep Pigeons,
and tame Rabbits to Advantage. 9. A new Method of planting and improving
Fruit Trees in ploughed Grounds. By W. Ellis. 1732.

A Dissertation of the true Cithisus of the Ancients: Showing that it may be
successfully made use of for the Improvement of the most dry, barren and hilly
Land: Also an Accout of the great Profits that may arise from sowing Lucerne,
and burning of Clay. With a Catalogue of the best Seeds, and the Season of
sowing them. By J. Switzer. 1731.

Dr. Allen's Synopsis Medicinae; or, A brief and general Collection of the
whole Practi^e of Physic. Containing the Opinions and Judgments (...) most
celebrated Authors, concerning Diseases, their Causes and Remedies; with most
Cases in Surgery; and some Observations very rare and uncommon; and a curious
Treatise of all Sorts of Poisons. 2 Vols. 1730.

The Travels of Cyrus: Full of fine Reflections, moral and political; with a
Discourse upon the Theology and Mythology of the Ancients. By the Chevalier
Ramsay. 2 Vols. 1728.

Ray's Wisdom of GOD, manifested in the Works of the Creation. 1728.

An Enquiry into the Original of our Ideas of Beauty and Virtue: In 2
Treatises. 1. Concerning Beauty, Order, Harmony and Design. 2. Concerning moral
Good and Evil. By Francis Hutcheson, Professor of Morality at the University of
Glasgow. Also,

An Essay on the Conduct of the Passions. By the same Hand.

The Works of Monsieur De la Bruyere. 2 Vols. Containing, 1. The moral
Characters of Theophrastus. 2. The Characters and Manners of the present Age;
with an Account of Bruyere's Life and Writings, by Mr. Corte. With an Original
Chapter of the Manner of Living with Great Men, by N. Row, Esquire 1723.

Seenca's Morals, by Way of Abstract. By Sir Roger Lestrange, Knt. 13th Edit.
1729.

The Old and New Testament, connected in the History of the Jews and
neighboring Nations. By Dean Prideaux. 4 Vols.

The Sacred and Profane History of the World, connected from the Creation of
the World to the Dissolution of the Assyrian Empire, and Declension of the
Kings of Judah. 2 Vols. By Sam. Shuckford. 1731.

Physico-Mechanical Experiments, on various Subjects; with Explanations of all
the Machines (the Figures of which are curiously engraved on Copper) used in
making the Experiments. By F. Hawkshee, F.R.S. 1719.

Burnet's Letters; containing an Account of what seemed most remarkable in
traveling through Switzerland, Italy, and some Parts of Germany, in the Years
1685, and 1686.

Chiltern and Vale-Farming, explained according to the latest Improvements;
necessary for all Landlords and Tenants of either Ploughed- Grass- or
Wood-Grounds. By William Ellis.

Astro-Theology; or, A Demonstration of the Being and Attributes of GOD from a
Survey of the Heavens. Illustrated with Copper Plates. By W. Derham, F.R.S. 6th
Edit. 1731.

Physico-Theology; or, A Demonstration of the Being and Attributes of GOD from
his Works of Creation; with large Notes and many curious Observations. By W.
Derham, F. R. S. 1732.

A complete English Dispensatory; in 4 Parts. By John Quincy, M. D. To which is
added an Account of the common Adulterations both of Simples and Compound
Medicines, with the Marks to detect them by. 1730.

The Italian Master; or, The easiest and best Method for attaining that
Language. By Signor Veneroni. To which is added, a Dictionary Italian and
English, and English and Italian. 1729.

A new Spanish Grammar, more perfect than any hitherto published. To which is
added, a Vocabulary of the most necessary Phrases and Words, etc. By Capt. John
Stevens. 1725.

The Mathematical and Philosophical Works of Bishop Wilkins; in 5 Parts. To
which is prefixed the Life of the Author. 1708.

Mathematical Principles of Natural Philosophy. By Sir Isaac Newton. Translated
into English by Andrew Motte. To which is added, Machin's Laws of the Moon's
Motion, according to Gravity. 2 vols. 1729.

The Life of Mahomet, by Boulainvilliers. 1731.

Trials per Pais; or, the Law of England concerning Juries by Nisi prius, etc.
With a complete Treatise of the Law of Evidence. By Giles Duncomb, Esquire 1725.
Very necessary for all to read that practice in Courts, or are likely to be
Jurymen.

A complete History of the late War in the Netherlands, Germany, Italy and
Spain; together with an Abstract of the Treaty at Utrecht. Illustrated with
well-engraved Plan^ of all the besieged Towns, and of each remarkable Battle.
By I. Brodrick. 1732.

The Art of Surgery; In which is laid down such a general Idea of the same, as
is founded upon Reason, confirmed by Practice, and further illustrated with
many singular and rare Cases Medico-chi^^rgical. 2 Vols. By D. Turner, of the
College of Physicians. Lon. 1732.

The History of the Republic of Holland, from its first Foundation to the
Death of K. William; As also, a particular Description of the united Provinces:
Giving an Account of the Cities, fortified Places, Universities, Commodities,
Customs and Manners of the Inhabitants, etc. With an exact Map. 2 Vols. Land.
1703.

The Elements of Astronomy, Physical and Geometrical. By David Gregory, M. D.
Professor of Astronomy at Oxford, and F.R.S. To which is added Dr. Halley's
Synopsis of the Astronomy of the Comets. 2 Vols. 1715. [ Given by Mr. B.
Eastburn.]

An Essay of Health and long Life. By Geo. Cheyne, M.D. F.R.S. Land. 1725. [
Given by Mr. Alex. Ouchterloney.]

The Elements of Euclid, with select Theorems out of Archimedes, by the learned
Andrew Tacquet. To which are added, Practical Corollaries, showing the Uses of
many of the Propositions; by William Whiston. With an Appendix of practical
Geometry. Dublin 1728. [ Given by Mr. D. Bush.]

A Collection of several Pieces of Mr. John Lock, never before printed, or not
extant in his Works, viz. 1 The fundamental Constitutions of Carolina. 2 A
Letter giving an Account of the Debates in the House of Lords 1675, relating to
the Test Act. 3 Remarks upon some of Mr. Norris's Books. 4 Elements of Natural
Philosophy. 5 Some Thoughts concerning Reading and Study for a Gentleman. 6
Letters to Anthony Collins and others. 7 Rules of a Society which met once a
Week for the Improvement of useful Knowledge, and the Promoting of Truth and
Charity. Land. 1720. [ Given by B. F.]

The Christian Philosopher. A Collection of the best Discoveries in Nature,
with religious Improvements. By (...) Mather, D.D. F.R.S. [ Given by Mr. D.
Bu^^]

A Collection of Miscellany Letters, selected out of the Weekly Journal. 2
Vols. Land. 1722. [ Given by Mr. Francis Richardson.]

De Jure Maritimo and Navali: Or, A Treatise of Affairs maritime and of
Commerce. Very necessary to be read and understood by all such as trade and
have any Dealings at Sea. By Charles Molloy. 1722.

Love of Fame the universal Passion; in 7 charecteristical Satyrs. By Mr.
Young. 1730.

Spectacle de la Nature; or, Nature displayed: Being Discourses on such
Particulars of Natural History, as were thought most proper to excite the
Curiosity, and form the Minds of Youth. Illustrated with Copper Plates. The
Whole consisting of Dialogues concerning Insects, Birds, terrestrial Animals,
Fishes, Plants; etc. l733.

The Roman History, from the Building of the City to the perfect Settlement of
the Empire by Augustus Caesar, containing the space of 727 Years. Designed as
well for the understanding of the Roman Authors, as the Roman Affairs. By
Lawrence Echard, A. M. of Christ-Church College in Cambridge. ^ Vols. 1724.

Caius Julius Caesar's Commentaries of his Wars in Gaul, and Civil War with
Pompey; to which is added a Supplement to his Commentary of his Wars in Gaul;
as also Commentaries of the Alexandrian, African, and Spanish Wars, by Aulus
Hirtius or Oppius, etc. With the Author's Life. Adorned with Sculptures, from
the Designs of the famous Palladio. Translated by Col. Martin Bladen. 1732.

An Essay concerning Human Understanding. By John Lock. 2 Vols. Esteemed the
best Book of Logic in the World.

The Canon of the New Testament vindicated, in answer to the Objections of J.
Toland in his Amyntor. By J. Richardson. Land. 1719. (Given by Charles Read,
Esquire)

P. Ovidii Nasonis Epistolarum Liber: Interpretatione and Notis illustravit
D.C.Helvetius; Jussu Christianissimi Regis ad usum Serenissimi Delphini. Land.
1727. (Given by Mr. J. Roberts.)

A Treatise of the Corruption of Scripture, Councils, and Fathers, by the
Prelates, Pastors and Pillars of the Church of Rome, for Maintenance of Popery.
By Tho. James. Land. 1688. (Given by J. Rabinson, Gent.)

The History and present State of Virginia, in 4 Parts. 1 Of the first
Settlement and Government thereof, to the present Time. 2 The natural
Production and Conveniences of the Country, suited to Trade and Improvement. 3
The native Indians, their Religion, Laws and Customs in War and Peace. 4 The
present State of the Country, as to the Polity of the Government, and the
Improvements of the Lands. By a Native and Inhabitant of the Place. Adorned
with Sculptures. Land. 1705. (Given by Mr. D. Bush.)

The Hermit; or, The unparalled Sufferings and surprising Adventures of Mr.
Philip Qaurll, an Englishman, who lived above 50 Years alone on an uninhabited
Island, etc. Adorned with Cuts. Land. 1727. (Given by Mr. D. Bush.)

Voyages and Descriptions, in 3 Parts, 1 A Supplement of the Voyage round the
World, describing the Countries of Tonquin, Achin, Malacca, etc. their Product,
Inhabitants, Manners, Trade, Policy, etc. 2 Two Voyages to Campeachy, with a
Description of the Coasts, Product, Inhabitants, Logwood-cutting, Trade, etc.
of Jucatan, Campeachy, New-Spain. 3 A Discouse of Trade, Winds, Breezes,
Storms, Seasons of the Year, Tides, and Currents of the torrid Zone throughout
the World: With an Account of Natal in Africa, its Product, etc. By Capt.
Dampier. Illustrated with Maps and Draughts. Land. 1699. (Given by Mr. John
Sober.)

Letters of Wit, Politics and Morality, Love, Friendship and Galantry, ancient
and modern. 1701. (Given by Mr. John Sober.)

The complete History of the Affairs of Spain,from the first Treaty of
Partition to this present Time; containing the glorious Actions of Queen Anne
and her Allies in Spain, the Netherlands, Italy, etc. to secure Spain to the
House of Austria. Land. 1709. (Given by Mr. John Sober.)

Titus Lucretius Carus, his 6 Books of Epicurean Philosophy; done into English
Verse, with Notes, by Mr. Creech. 1699. (Given by Mr. J. Sober.)

The History of New England; containing an impartial Account of the Civil and
Ecclesiastical Affairs of the Country to the Year 1700. To which is added, The
present State of New England; with a new and accurate Map of the Country, and
an Appendix containing their present Charter, their ecclesiastical Discipline,
and their municipal Laws. By Daniel Neal. 2 Vols. Land. 1720.

Miscellaneous Observations in the Practice of Physic, Anatomy and Surgery;
with new and curious Remarks in Botany: Adorned with Copper Plates. To which is
prefixed a Letter to the late Dr. Baynard, with new and considerable
Improvements in the Use of the cold Bath. By Pat. Blair, M.D. F.R.S. Land. 1718.

The Builder's Dictionary, or Gentleman's and Achitect's Companion; containing
the Theory and Practice of the various Branches of Architecture, together with
the Quantities and Proportions of all Kinds of Materials, and Directions for
choosing and preparing them; Rules for the Valuation of Houses, and the Expense
calculated of erecting any Building, great or small. 2 Vols. Illustrated with
200 Figures, many of them on Copper Plates. Land. 1734.

Recreations Mathematical and Physical; laying down and solving many profitable
and delightful Problems of Arithmetic, Geometry, Optics, Gnomonicks,
Cosmography, Mechanics, Physics and Pyrotechny. By Mr. Ozanam. Illustrated
with very many Cuts. Land. 1708.

The History of the Grecian War, in eight Books, written by Thucydides.
Translated by T. Hobbes, of Malmsbury; with Maps describing the Country. 2
Vols. Land. 1723.

A Collection of Papers which passed between the late learned Mr. Leibnitz and
Dr. Clark, relating to the Principles of Natural Philosophy and Religion. To
which are added Letters to Dr. Clark concerning Liberty and Necessity, with his
Answers; and Remarks on a Book, entitled, A Philosophical Enquiry concerning
Human Liberty. Land. 1717.

A Reflection upon Accuracy in Style; containing the chief Rules to be observed
for obtaining an accurate Style; and Observations upon all the Faults and
Beauties of Writing. By Mr. Constable. Land. 1734.

A new Method of Studying History, Geography, and Chronology; with a Catalogue
of the chief Historians of all Nations, the best Edition of their Works, and
Characters of them. By M. Languet du Fresnoy, Librarian to Prince Eugene. 2
Vols. 1730. (Given by B. F.)

The present State of Great Britain; with diverse Remarks upon the ancient State
thereof. By John Chamberlayne, Esquire The 30th Edit. 1729. (Given by Mr. Robert
Grace.)

Essays of Michael de Montaigne: With an Account of the Author's Life. 2 Vols.
1685. (Given by B. F.)

Two Treatises of Government; in the latter an Essay concerning the true
Original, Extent and End of civil Government. By J. Lock, Esquire School. (Given by
B. F.)

The History of Persia; containing the Lives and memorable Actions of their
Kings, from the first erecting of that Monarchy to this Time; an exact
Description of all its Dominions; and an Account of India, China, Tartary,
Arabia, etc. With the Manners and Customs of the People, etc. By Capt. Stevens.
(Given by Mr Joseph Breintnal.)

The Acts of Tonnage and Poundage, and Rates of Merchandise; with a Collection
of such Statutes and Parts of Statutes as relate to the Customs. 1702. (Given
by Mr. Phil. Sing.)

The excellent Poems of Mr. Thomson, on the Four Seasons, with that on Sir
Isaac Newton, and his Britannia: To which is added the Tragedy of Sophonisba.
Land. 1733.

Gay's Moral Fables, in Verse; for the Use of Prince William: With fine Cuts.
Land. 1732.

Sn^lgrave's new Account of Guinea and the Slave Trade. With the History of the
late terrible Downfall of the Kingdom of Whedaw. Land. 1733.

Satyrs upon the Jesuits, written 1679; and some other Pieces by the same Hand.
(Given by Mr. Dering.)

Jure Divino, a Satyr; in 12 Books. By the Author of the True-Born Englishman.
(Given by Mr. S. Rhodes.)

Present State of the Republic of Letters. Several Vols.

P^ilipis's Pastorals.

Arbuthnot upon Air; being an Essay concerning the Effects of Air on human
Bodies. Land. 1733.

Arbuthnot upon Aliment; being an Essay concerning the Nature of Aliments and
the Choice of them, according to the different Constitutions of human Bodies.
In which the different Effects, Advantages and Disadvantages of animal and
vegetable Diet, are explained. The 3d Edit. To which are added practical Rules
of Diet in the various Constitutions and Diseases of human Bodies. By John
Arbuthnot, M. D. Land. 1735.

Athenian Sports. Land. 1707. (Given by Mr. Samuel Coats.)

The Works of Monsieur Boileau; Englished by several Hands. To which is
prefixed his Life, written by Mr. Maizeaux. Land. 1736.

Buchanan's History of Scotland, in 20 Books: Containing 1 An Account of its
several Situations, and the Nature of its Soil and Climate. 2 The ancient
Names, Manners, Laws and Customs of the Country, etc. 3 A Chronicle of all its
Kings, from Fergus the first Founder of the Scottish Monarchy, to the Reign of
King James VIth of Scotland and Is It of England. The 3d Edit. revised and
corrected from the Latin Original, and adorned with Cuts. 2 Vols. Land. 1733.

Burnet's Theory of the Earth; containing an Account of the Original of the
Earth, and of all the general Changes which it has already undergone, and
shall undergo till the Consummation of all Things. As also the Author's Defense
of the Work. 2 Vols.

Batavia illustrata; or, A View of the Policy and Commerce of the United
Provinces, particularly of Holland. With an Enquiry into the Alliances of the
States General with the Emperor, France, Spain, and Great Britain. By Onslow
Burrish, Esquire Land. 1728.

The History of the Buccaniers of America; containing 1 The Exploits and
Adventures of Lolonois, Roche Brassiliana, Batt the Portugueze, Sir Henry
Morgan, etc. 2 The dangerous Voyage and bold Attempt of Capts. Barth. Sharp,
Watlin, Sawkins, Coxon, and others, in the South Sea. 3 A Journal of a Voyage
into the South Sea, by the Free-booters of America. 4 A Relation of a Voyage of
the Sieur de Montauban, Captain of the Freebooters in Guinea, Illustrated with
Copper Plates. 3d Edit. Land. 1704.

Botanick Essays; in two Parts. 1 Containing the Structure of Flowers, and the
Fructification of Plants, with their various Distributions into Method. 2 The
Generation of Plants, with their Sexes and Manner of impregnating the Seed,
etc. Together with the Nourishment of Plants, and Circulation of the Sap in all
Seasons, etc. Adorned with Cuts. By Patrick Blair, M. D. F. R. S. Land. 1720.

The Works of John Sheffield, Duke of Buckingham, etc. 2 Vols. 2d Edit. Land
1729.

A Discourse concerning the Being and Attributes of God; the Obligations of
Natural Religion, and the Truth and Certainty of the Christian Religion; in
answer to Hobbes, Spinosa, the Author of the Oracles of Reason, and other
Denyers of Natural and revealed Religion. Being 16 Sermons, preached at Boyle's
Lecture, etc. By Samuel Clark, D. D. late Rector of St. James's Westminster.
8th Edition. Land. 1732.

A Critical History of England, Ecclesiastical and Civil; wherein the Errors of
the Monkish Writers, and others before the Reformation, are exposed and
corrected; as are also the Deficiency and Partiality of later Historians. To
which is added an Essay on Criticism; as it regards Design, Thought, and
Expression, in Prose and Verse. Land. 1728.

The History of the Rebellion and Civil Wars in England, begun in the Year
1641, with the precedent Passages and Actions that contributed thereunto; and
the Conclusion thereof by the Restoration and Return of King Charles II. the
29th of May 1660. Written by the Right Honorable Edward, Earl of Clarendon,
late Lord Chancellor of England, etc. 6 Vols. Oxford 1732.

The Life of Oliver Cromwell, Lord Protector of the Common-Welth of England,
Scotland and Ireland. 3d Edition, with Additions. Land. 1731. (Given by Mr.
Robert Greenway.)

The History of Charles XII. King of Sweden. By Mr. De Voltaire. Translated
from the French. Land. 1732.

The Tales and Fables of the late Archbishop and Duke of Cambray, Author of
Telemachus; in French and English. To which is prefixed an Account of the
Author's Life. With a particular and curious Relation of the Method observed in
training up a young Prince to Virtue and Learning. Illustrated with
Copper Plates. Land. 1736.

An Account of Denmark as it was in the Year 1692. 1st Edit. Land. 1694.

An Account of Denmark as it was in the Year 1692. 4th Edit. To which is added,
An Account of Sweden as it was in the Year 1688. Together with an Extract of
the History of that Kingdom; with several Pieces relating to those Accounts.
Land. 1738.

A Collection of Voyages, in 4 Vols. Containing, 1. Capt. Wm. Dampier's Voyages
round the World. 2. The Voyages, of Lyonel Wafer, giving an Account of his
being left on the Isthmus of America among the Indians, with a particular
Description of the Country, etc. Also a natural History of those Parts, by a
Fellow of the Royal Society; and Davis's Expedition to the Golden Mines. 3. A
Voyage round the World, containing an Account of Capt. Dampier's Expedition
into the South-Seas; together with a Voyage from the West Coast of Mexico to
East India. By Wm. Funnel, Mate to Capt. Dampier. 4. Capt. Cowley's Voyage
round the Globe. 5. Capt. Sharp's Journey over the Isthmus of Darien, and
Expedition to the South-Seas. 6. Capt Wood's Voyage through the Straights of
Magellan. 7. Mr. Robert's Adventures and Sufferings amongst the Corsairs of the
Levant; his Description of the Archipelago Islands, etc. Illustrated with Maps,
Draughts, etc. Lon. 1729.

Hibernicus's Letters, or, A Philosophical Miscellany; containing Essays on
various useful and entertaining Subjects, interspersed with several original
Poems and Translations. Written by several eminent Hands in Dublin. 2 Vols.
Land. 1734.

Epictetus's Morals, with Simplicius his Comment. Made English from the Greek,
by George Stanhope, D. D. Dean of Canterbury, and Chaplain in ordinary to His
Majesty. 4th Edit, corrected. With the Life of Epictetus from Mons. Boileau.
Land. 1721.

The History of the Empire; Containing its Rise, Growth, Revolutions,
Government, Policy, Alliances and Negotiations: Continued from the Time of
Charlemagne, down to the present Emperor Charles VI. Being an Appendix to the
History of the Roman Empire. 2 Vols. By the Sieur Heiss. Done into English from
the best Edition, with diverse Remarks, and new authentic Pieces, by P.
Chamberlain, Gent. Lon. 1730.

Sermons on various Subjects, by James Foster. 2 Vols. 3d Edit. Land. 1736.

Franco-Gallia; or, An Account of the ancient Free State of France, and most
other Parts of Europe, before the Loss of their Liberties. Written originally
in Latin by the famous Civilian Francis Hotoman, in the Year 1574. And
translated into English by the Author of the Account of Denmark. 2d Edit. with
Additions, and a new Preface by the Translator. Land. 1721.

Fires improved; or, A new Method of building Chimnies, so as to prevent their
Smoking. In which a small Fire shall warm a Room much better than a large one
made the common Way. By Mons. Gauger. Made English from the French Original, by
J. T. Desaguliers, LL. D. and F. R. S. 2d Edit. with an Appendix containing
several farther Improvements. Land. 1736. (Given by Mr. R. Grace.)

The Motion of Fluids, natural and artificial; in particular that of Air and
Water. With plain Draught^ of such Experiments and Machines, which, by
Description only, might not readily be comprehended. By M. Clare, A. M. and F.
R. S. 2d Edit. corrected and improved. Land. 1737.

The History of Genghizoon the Great, first Emperor of the ancient Moguls and
Tartars. In 4 Books; containing his Life, Advancement and Conquests. With a
short History of his Successors to the present Time; the Manners, Customs and
Laws of the ancient Moguls and Tartars; and the Geography of the vast Countries
of Mogolistan, Turquestan, Caps^hac Yugurestan, and the Western Part of
Tartary. By the late M. Petis de la Croix. Translated into English. Land. 1722.

A new German Grammar. By Benedictus B^iller. 2d Edit* with Additions and
Emendations. Lon. 1736.

An Enquiry into the Life and Writings of Homer. 2d Edit. Land. 1736.

Miscellanies, by the late Lord Marquis of Halifax; viz. 1. Advice to a
Daughter. 2. The Character of a Trimmer. 3. The Anatomy of an Equivalent. 4. A
Letter to a Dissenter. 5. Cautions for Choice of Parliament Men. 6. A rough
Draught of a new Model at Sea. 7. Maxims of State, etc. Land. 1704.

L. Henepin's Travels; or, A Discovery of a vast Country in America between
New-France and New-Mexico; with a Description of the great Lakes, Cataracts,
Rivers, Plants, and Animals: Also the Manners, Customs and Languages of the
several Nations, etc. Land. School.

An Introduction to Natural Philosophy; or, Philosophical Lectures, read in the
University of Oxford, Anno Dom. 1700; To which are added the Demonstrations of
Mons. Huygens's Theorems, concerning the Centrifugal Force and Circular Motion.
By John Keill, M.D. 3d Edit. Land. 1733.

New Voyages to North America: Written in French by the Baron Lahontan:
Containing an Account of the several Nations of that vast Continent; their
Customs, Commerce and Way of Navigation upon the Lakes and Rivers; a
geographical Description of Canada, and a natural History of the Colony, etc.
Illustrated with Maps and Cuts. Done into English. 2 Vols. 2d Edit. Land. 1735.

Memoirs of Edmund Ludlow, Esquire Lieutenant General of the Horse, Commander in
Chief of the Forces in Ireland, one of the Council of State, and a Member of
the Parliament which began on November 3. 1640. 2 Vols. Switzerland, printed at
Vivay in the Canton of Bern, School.

Lockhart's Memoirs concerning the Affairs of Scotland, from Queen Anne's
Accession to the Throne, to the Commencement of the Union of the Two Kingdoms
of Scotland and England in May 1707. With an Account of the Origin and
Progress of the designed Invasion from France in March 1708; and some
Reflections on the ancient State of Scotland. 2d Edition, with an Appendix.
Land. 1714.

A practical Treatise upon Christian Perfection. By William Law, A. M. 4th
Edit. Land. 1737.

W. Law's Serious Call to a devout and holy Life; adapted to the Condition of
all Orders of Christians. 2d Edit. corrected. Land. 1732.

The Life of John Duke of Marlborough, Prince of the Roman Empire. Illustrated
with Maps, Plans of Battles, Sieges, and Medals; and a great Number of original
Letters and Papers, never before published. By Thomas Lediard, Gent. 3 Vols.
Land. 1736.

Alciphron; or, The Minute Philosopher: In 7 Dialogues; containing an Apology
for the Christian Religion, against those who are called Free-Thinkers, 2 Vols.
2d Edit. Land. 1732.

The Manners of the Age, in 13 Moral Satyrs. Written with a Design to expose
the vicious and irregular Conduct of both Sexes, in the various Pursuits of
Life. Land. 1733.

The London Magazine. Several Volumes.

Sir Thomas M^r^'s Utopia.

The Life of Sir Thomas More, Knt. By his Great Grahdson, Thomas More, Esquire
Land. 1726.

The History of the Rise and Fall of Massanello, the Fisherman of Naples;
containing an exact and impartial Relation of the Tumults and popular
Insurrections that happened in that Kingdom (in the Year 1647) on account of
the Tax upon Fruits. By F. Midon, jun. Land. 1729.

Memoria Technica; or, A new Method of Artificial Memory. Land. 1730. (Given by
Mr. Robinson.)

A new Voyage to Italy; with curious Observations on several other Countries,
as Germany, Switzerland, Savoy, Geneva, Flanders and Holland; together with
useful Instructions for those who shall travel thither. 4 Vols. By Maximilian
Misson. 5th Edit. Land. 1739.

The History of the Revolutions in the Empire of Morocco, upon the Death of the
late Emperor Muley Ishmael; being a most exact Journal of what happened in
those Parts, in the last, and Part of the present Year. With Observations,
natural, moral and political, relating to that Country and People. By Capt.
Braithwaite. Land. 1729.

Explanatory Notes and Remarks on Milton's Paradise Lost. By J. Richardson,
Father and Son: With the Life of the Author, and a Discourse on the Poem, by J.
R. sen. Land. 1734.

A Treatise of Ecclesiastical Benefices and Revenues. Containing, among several
other curious Particulars, 1. That the Church has been taught the Manner of
possessing and administering her Temporals by Jesus Christ. 2. That
Ecclesiastics become too greedy in acquiring Estates, and that their Avarice
ought to be restrained. 3. That the Bishops becoming Judges in Civil Affairs,
neglect to teach the Doctrine of Christ. 4. The Original of Tithes, whether of
human or divine Right. 5. The Original of the Church-Democratical. 6. The
detestable Popes and p^^^ane Bishops described. 7. The Usurpations of several
Bishops upon the Temporal Princes. 8. The Original of Commendams, etc. Written
originally in Italian, by the learned Father Paul, Author of the History of the
Council of Trent. Translated by Tobias Jenkins, Esquire and illustrated with Notes.
3d Edition. To which is prefixed the Life of Father Paul, by Mr. Lockman. Land.
1736.

The History of Poland under Augustus II. In 2 Vols. Translated from the French
of Abbe de Parthenay, by John Stacie, Esquire Land. 1736.

An Account of the Earl of Peterborow's Conduct in Spain, chiefly since the
raising of the Siege of Barcelona 1706. To which is added the Campaign of
Valencia. With Original Papers. 2d Edit. corrected. Land. 1707.

The Memoirs of Charles Lewis, Baron de Pollnitz; being the Observations he
made in his late Travels from Prussia through Poland, Germany, Italy, France,
Spain, Flanders, Holland, England, etc. Discovering not only the present State
of the chief Cities and Towns, but the Characters of the principal Persons at
the several Courts. 4 Vols. Land. 1737 and 1738.

The History of Polybius, the Megalopolitan: Containing a general Account of
the Transactions of the World, and principally of the Roman People during the
first and second Punick Wars. Translated by Sir H. S. To which is added a
Character of Polybius and his Writings, by Mr. Dryden. 2 Vols. 2d Edit. Land.
School.

M. Accii Plauti Comoediae; accedit Commentarius ex variorum Notis and
Observationibus, ex recension^ Joh. Frederici Gronovii. Amstelodami 1684.

B. Martin's Philosophical Grammar: Being a View of the present State of
experimented Physiology, or natural Philosophy. In 4 Parts: 1. Samotology,
treats of the universal Nature and Properties of Matter or Substance, and the
specific Qualities of natural Bodies. 2. Cosmology, exhibiteth a general View
of the Universe, and its great constituent Parts; the Sun, Moon, Planets,
Comets, fixed Stars, etc. 3. Aerology, compriseth the Philosophy of the
Atmosphere, showing the wonderful Nature and Properties of the Air, Wind,
Meteors, and other Phenomena therein. 4. Geology, contains a philosophical
View of the Terraqueous Globe, in all its Parts and Productions; as Minerals,
Metals, Stones, etc. the Laws of Fluids; the Sea, its Tides, etc. Of Rivers,
Springs, etc. Of Vegetation, and the Nature of Trees and Plants, etc. Of the
Parts of Animal Bodies; and a Survey of the Nature of Beasts, Birds, Fishes,
Insects, Reptiles, Shell-Animals, etc. 2d Edit, with Alterations, Corrections,
and very large Additions by Way of Notes. Land. 1738.

The History of the Revolutions of Persia; taken from the Memoirs of Father
Krusinski, Procurator of the Jesuits at Ispahan: Done into English from the
Original, by Father Du Cerceau, who has prefixed a Map of Persia, and a short
History of the Sophies; with curious Remarks on Tavernier, Sir John Chardin,
and other Writers that have treated particularly of that Government and
Country, etc. 2 Vols. 2d Edit. Land. 1733.

Memoirs of Philip de Comines: Containing the History of Lewis XIth and Charles
VIIIth of France; and of Charles the Bold, Duke of Burgundy: To which Princes
he was Secretary. As also the History of Edward IV* and Henry VII. of England;
including that of Europe for almost half the 15th Century. With a Supplement.
As also several original Treatises, Notes, and Observations; And lastly, The
secret History of Lewis XIth, out of a Book, called, The scandalous ^hronicle:
And the Life of the Author prefixed to the Whole, with Notes upon it, by the
famous Sleidan. Translated from the late Edition of Monsi^ur Godefroy,
Historiographer Royal of France. To which are added Remarks on all the
Occu^rences relating to England. By Mr. Vuedale. 2 Vols, 2^ Edit. Land. 1723.

Medicina Statica: Being the Aphorisms of Sanctorius; Translated into English,
with large Explanations. To which is added Dr. Keill's Medicina Statica
Britannica; with comparative Remarks and Explanations. As also Medico-Physical
Essays, on 1. Agues, 2. Fevers, 3. an Elastic Fiber, 4. the Gout, 5. the
Leprosy, 6. the King's Evil, 7. the Venereal Discase. By J. Quincy, M. D. 5th
Edit. Land. 1737.

The Method of Teaching and Studying the Belles Lettres; or, An Introduction to
Languages, Poetry, Rhetoric, History, Moral Philosophy, Physics, etc. With
Reflections on Taste; and Instructions with regard to the Eloquence of the
Pulpit, the Bar, and the Stage. The Whole illustrated with Passages from the
most famous Poets and Orators, ancient and modern; with critical Remarks on
them. By Mr. Rollin, late Principal of the University of Paris, etc. Translated
from the French. 4 Vols. 2d Edit. Land. 1737.

A cruising Voyage round the World: First to the South Sea, thence to the
East Indies, and homewards by the Cape of Good Hope. Begun in 1708, and
finished in 1711. Containing a Journal of all the remarkable Transactions;
particularly of the Taking of Puna and Guiaquil, of the Acapulca Ship, and
other Prizes: An Account of Alex. Selkirk's living alone 4 Years and 4 Months
in an Island; and a brief Description of several Countries noted for Trade,
especially in the South Sea. With Maps of all the Coast, from the best Spanish
Manuscripts and Draughts; and an Introduction relating to the South Sea Trade.
By Capt. Woods Rogers, Commander in Chief in this Expedition with the Ships
Duke and Duchess of Bristol. 2d Edition, corrected. Land. 1718.

Spectacle de la Nature; or, Nature displayed: Being Discourses on such
Particulars of Natural History, as were thought most proper to excite the
Curiosity, and form the Minds of Youth. 3 Vols. Illustrated with Copper Plates.
Translated from the Original French, by Mr. Humphreys. 3d Edition, corrected,
Land. 1736.

Discourses delivered in the public Assemblies of the People called Quakers.
By Thomas Story. Taken in short Hand, and after being transcribed at length,
examined by the said T. Story. Land. 1738.

The whole Works of that excellent practical Physician Dr. Thomas Sydenham.
Wherein not only the History and Cures of acute Diseases are treated of, after
a new and accurate Method, but also the shortest and safest Way of curing most
Chronical Diseases. Corrected from the original Latin, by J. Pechy, M. D. of
the College of Physicians in London. 10th Edit. L^nd. 1734.

Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times. 3 Vols. By the Right Hon.
Anthony, Earl of Sha^te^bury. 5th Edit. corrected; with the Addition of a
Letter concerning Design. Land. 1732.

The History of Timur-Bec, known by the Name of Tamerlane the Great, Emperor of
the Moguls and Tartars: Being an Historical Journal of his Conquests in Asia
and Europe. Written in Persian, by Cherefedin Ali, Native of Yezd, his
Contemporary. Translated into French by the late M. Petit de la Croix, Arabic
Professor in the Royal College, and Secretary and Interpreter to the King in
the Oriental Languages. With Historical Notes, and Maps. Now faithfully
rendered into English. 2 Vols. Land. 1733.

Tully's five Books De Finibus; or, concerning the last Object of Desire or
Aversion. Done into English, by S. P. Gent. Revised and compared with the
Original, with a recommendatory Preface, by Jer. Collier, M.A. Together with an
Apology for the Philosophical Writings of Cicero, in a Letter to the
Translator, by Henry Dodwell. Land. 1702.

A general History of the Turks, Moguls, and Tartars: Together with a
Description of the Countries they inhabit. 2 Vols. With two Maps, exhibiting
the ancient and present State of Grand Tartary. Made English from the French
Editions, with several Improvements and Additions. Land. 1730.

A Preservative against Popery; or, The Church of England defended against the
Calumnies and false Reasonings of the Church of Rome: In answer to a late
sophistical and insolent Popish Book, entitled, England's Conversion and
Reformation compared, etc. By Joseph Trapp, M. A. Land. 1727.

A new Theory of the Earth, from its Original to the Consummation of all
Things. Wherein the Creation of the World in six Days, the universal Deluge,
and the general Conslagration as laid down in the Holy Scriptures, are shown to
be perfectly agreeable to Reason and Philosophy. With a large introductory
Discourse, concerning the genuine Nature, Style and Extent of the Mosaic
History of the Creation. 2d Edit. With an Appendix, entitled, The Cause of the
Deluge demonstrated: Wherein is proved, that the famous Comet of A. D. 1680.
came by the Earth at the Deluge, and was the Occasion of it. By William
Whiston, M. A. Cambridge, 1708.

Memoirs of the Reign of King Charles I. Containing the most remarkable
Occurrences of that Reign, and setting many secret Passages thereof in a clear
Light. With impartial Characters of many great Persons on both Sides. Together
with a Continuation to the happy Restoration of King Charles II. By Sir Philip
Warwick, Knt. 3d Edit. Land. 1703.

Poems on several Occasios; written by Dr. Thomas Parnell, late Archdeacon of
Clogher. To which is added the Life of Zoilus, and his Remarks on Homer's
Battle of the Frogs and Mice. Land. 1737.

BOOKS in DUODECIMO.
EUclid's Elements of Geometry, explained in a new, but easy Method; with the
Use of every Proposition through every Part of the Mathematics. By De Chales.

Moral Essays, contained in several Treatises on many important Duties. By
Messirs. Port Royal. 4 Vols. 1724.

Spectators, 8 Vols. Tattlers, 4 Vols. Guardians, 2 Vols. Written by some of
the most ingenious Men of the Age, for the Promotion of Virtue, Piety and good
Manners.

Horae Lyricae; or, Poems chiefly of the Lyric Kind, sacred to Devotion and
Piety, to Virtue, Honor and Friendship, and to the Memory of the Dead. By I.
Watts, D. D. 6th Edit. Land. 1731.

The Ladies Library; containing excellent Discourses upon several Vices and
Virtues relating to the Sex; and Instructions for their Conduct, applied to the
several States, of the Daughter, the Wife, the Mother, the Widow, the Mistress,
etc. Written by a Lady, and published by Sir Rich. Steel. 3 Vols. Land. 1732.

The Gentleman's Library; containing Rules for Conduct in all Parts of Life. By
a Gentleman. Lon. 1734.

The Odes, Satyrs and Epistles of Horace. Done into English, by Mr. Creech.
Land. 1730.

Hudibras, in Three Parts. Written in the Time of the Civil Wars. Adorned with
a new Set of Cuts, by Mr. Hogarth, Land. 1732.

Tully's two Essays of Old Age, and of Friendship, with his Stoical Paradoxes,
and Scipi^s Dream. Done into English by Mr. Parker. 3d Edit. Land. 1727.

The Miscellaneous Works of Nicholas Row, Esquire in Prose and Verse. 3 Vols.
Land. 1733.

The Works of Mr. Abraham Cowley; in Prose and Verse. 2 Vols. Land. 1721.

The Works of Edmund Waller, Esquire in Verse and Prose. Land. 1730. Published by
Mr. Fenton, with large Observations and Notes on the Poems, etc.

An Essay upon Study; wherein Directions are given for the due Conduct thereof,
and the Collection of a Library proper for the Purpose, consisting of the
choicest Books in all the several Parts of Learning, By J. Clarke. Land. 1731.

Steel's Dramatick Works. London 1730.

The Northern Worthies; or, The Lives of the (...) Czar Peter the Great, and
the Princess his Wife. London 1732.

The Life of the Emperor Theodosius the Great, By the Abbot Kerchier. 1693.
(Given by Mr. Jos Breintnal.)

Medicina Statica, or, Rules of Health; in 8 Sections of Aphorisms: Originally
written by Sanctorius, chief Professor of Physic at Padoua. Land. 1676. (Given
by Mr. D. Bush.)

An exact Survey of the United Provinces of the Netherlands; of their Cities,
Castles, Fortresses, and other Dominions there. With some Remarks of their
Government, Antiquities and memorable Actions. Land. 1673. (Given by Mr. D.
Bush.)

Dr. Burnet's Travels; or Letters, containing an Account of what seemed most
remarkable in Switzerland, Italy, France and Germany. Land. 1687. (Given by Mr.
D. Bush.)

Country-Conversations, on various Subjects, viz. Comedies, Drinking,
translated Verse, Painters, Poets, and Poetry. Land. 1694. (Given by Mr. Bush.)

The Mystery of Jesuitism, displaying the mischievous Maxims of the late
Casuists. Land. 1658. (Given by Mr. D. Bush.)

History of the Heathen Gods, etc. Very useful for understanding the Greek and
Roman Writers. (Given by Mr. D. Bush.)

Cato's Letters, 4 Vols. (Given by Charles Read, Esquire

The Works of Mr. Edmund Spencer, in 6 Vols. With a Glossary, explaining the
old and obscure Words. Published by Mr. Hughes, adorned with Cuts. 1705. (Given
by Mr. William Rawle.)

Tully's Offices, 3 Books, in English: With Notes, explaining the Method and
Meaning of the Author. 1716. (Given by Mr. Francis Richardson.)

Logic, or, The Art of Thinking; containing, besides the common Rules, many new
Observations, that are of great Use in forming an Exactness of Judgment. By
Messirs. Port Royal. Translated by Ozell. 1707. (Given by B.F.)

An Abstract and Translation of Burgersdicius's Logic; by a Person of Quality.
1097. (Given by B.F.)

The Eight Volumes of Letters written by a Turkish Spy, who lived 45 Years
undiscovered at Paris: Giving an impartial Account to the Divan at
Constantinople, of the most remarkable Transactions of Europe; and discovering
several Intrigues and Secrets of the Christian Courts, (especially of that of
France) continued from the Year 1637, to the Year 1682. Written originally in
Arabic, and translated into English. Land. 1730.

A Continuation of Letters written by a Turkish Spy at Paris, from 1688, to
1693. Land. 1718. (Given by Mr. Joseph Brointnal.)

Infallibility of human Judgment, its Dignity and Excellency; being a new Art
of Reasoning and Discovering Truth, by reducing all disputable Cases to general
and self-evident Propositions. By Mr. Lions. 1725. (Given by Mr. Joseph
Breintnal.)

An Epiteme of the whole Art of War. Adorned and exemplified with Copper-Cuts.
1692. (Given by Mr. D. Bush.)

The Lay-Monastery; consisting of Essays, Discourses, etc. Published single
under the Title of the Lay-Monk. Land. 1714.

A rational Grammar, with easy Rules in English to learn Latin; compared with
the best Authors in most Languages on this Subject. By J. T. Philips, Preceptor
to his Royal Highness Prince William, Duke of Cumberland. Land. 1731.

Mil^on's Paradise lost and regained: To which is added Samson Agonistes, and
Poems on several Occasions; with a Tractite of Education, and an Account of the
Author's Life prefixed. Land. 1730.

La Faussete des Vertus humaines; par Monss Esprit* Amst. 1709. (Given by Mr.
J. Sober.)

Florus Hungaricus; or, The History of Hungary and Transylvania, deduced from
the Original of that Nation, and their Settling in Europe in the Year of our
Lord 461, to the Year 1664. (Given by Mr, Bush.)

A Discourse concerning Time, with Application of the Natural Day, and Lunar
Month, and Solar Year, as natural, for the better understanding of the Julian
Year and Calendar, etc. By William Holder, D. D. 1694. (Given by Mr. Bush.)

The Philosophical Epitaph of W. C. Esquire; being a Book of Alchemy, with a
Catalogue of Chemical Books. Lon. 1670. (Given by Mr. Bush.)

Reflections on Aristotle's Treatise of Poesy; containing the necessary Rules
for all Sorts of Poetry. By R. Rapin. Land. 1674. With which is bound up, The
Policy of the Clergy of France to destroy the Protestants of that Kingdom:
Land. 1681. (Given by Mr. Bush.)

The Adventures of Telemachus, the Son of Ulysses: With the Adventures of
Aristonous. Written by the Archbishop of Cambray. Adorned with 24 Plates. 2
Vols. 12th Edition, 1728.

Miscellany Poems, by Mr. Pope. 2 Vols. 6th Edit. 1732.

Fables of AEsop, newly done into English, with an Application to each Fable;
illustrated with Cuts. By Mr. Croxall. 3d Edit. 1731.

Poems on several Occasions, by Mr. Pomfret. With some Account of his Life and
Writings. 8th Edition, 1731.

Poems on several Occasions, by Matthew Prior. 2 Volumes.

Creation, a Philosophical Poem: Demonstrating the Existence of a GOD. In 7
Books. By Sir Richard Blackmore. 4th Edit. 1718.

The Dispensary, a Poem; by Dr. Garth. With a complete Key.

Select Fables, in English Verse, by Dryden.

Addison's Miscellaneous Works, in Verse and Prose, 3 Vols. Land. 1726.

Addison's Remarks on several Parts of Italy, etc.

The Travels of an English Gentleman, from London to Rome. Land. 1718. (Given
by Mr. Bush.)

Sallust the Historian, translated into English. To which are added, the Life
and Character of the Author and his Works. By J. Row, Esquire 3d Edit. 1726.

The Satyrs of Juvenal and Persius; translated by Dryden. To which is prefixed
a Discourse concerning the Original and Progress of Satyr. Adorned with
Sculptures. 5th Edition, 1726.

The Works of Mr. H. Needler; consisting of original Poems, Translations,
Essays, and Letters. 2d Edition, 1728.

An Essay upon Education of Children, by Mr. Lock.

The Gazetteer; or, Newsman's Interpreter: Being an Index of the Names of all
the considerable Provinces, Cities, Towns, Forts, etc. in the known World; of
special Use for understanding modern History. By L. Echard, A. M. 1731.

A Letter to the Bishop of Litchfield and Coventry. By T. S. 1733.

Philosophia, per Argumenta brevi^er explicata; ad usum and exemplum hujus
scientiae studio vacantium. Authore P. Guilhelmo Chabrono, e Societate Jesu.
Paris 1650. 3 Vols. (Given by Mrs. Sarah Read.)

Greenwood's English Grammar.

Brightland's English Grammar; with the Arts of Rhetoric, Logic, and Poetry.
The Whole making a complete System of English Education.

Historia Literaria. Several Volumes.

Animadversions upon Hobbes's Leviathan; together with some Observations on Sir
Walter Raleigh's History of the World: By Alex. Rosse. London 1653. (Given by
Mr. Joseph Breintnal.)

Apothegmatum Loci Communes; Conrado Lycosth^ne Collectore. (Given by Mr.
Joseph Watkins.)

The Craftsman; by Caleb d' Anvers, of Gray's Inn, Esquire Containing a great
Variety of Discourses, on Political and Moral Subjects, etc. 14 Vols. to the
Year 1737.

The Works of Mr. William Congreve; in 3 Vols. consisting of his Plays and
Poems. 5th Edit. London 1730

A Demonstration of the Existence and Attributes of God; drawn from the
Knowledge of Nature, from Proofs purely intellectual, and from the Idea of the
Infinite Himself. 2d Edition, with large Additions. By Mons. Fenelon, the late
famous Archbishop of Cambray, Author of Telemachus. London 1720.

Sure and certain Methods of attaining a long and healthful Life, with Means of
correcting a bad Constitution, etc. Written originally in Italian, by Lewis
Cornaro, a Noble Venetian, when he was near 100 Years of Age; and made English.
5th Edition, London 1737.

The Works of Virgi^; containing his Pastorals, Georgicks, and AEn^is:
Translated into English Verse, by Mr. Dryden. To which is added the Life of
Virgil. 6th (...), Land. 1730.

Don Quixote [in Spanish] by Miguel de Cervantes Saavedra. En Amberes, 1719. 2
Vols.

Don Quixote, translated into English by several Hands. 4 Vols. Adorned with
Cuts. 6th Edition, revised by J. Ozell, London 1733.

Memoirs of the Cardinal de Retz; Containing the Memoirs of his own Life, with
the most secret Transactions at the French Court, during the Administration of
Cardinal Mazarine; and the Civil Wa^s occasioned by it. To which are added some
other Pieces written by the Cardinal de Retz, explanatory to these Memoirs. 4
Vols. Translated from the French, with Notes. London 1723.

Instructions for the Education of a Daughter; by the Author of Telemachus. To
which is added a small Tract of Instructions for the Conduct of young Ladies of
the highest Rank, with suitable Devotions annexed. Done into English by Dr.
Geo. Hickes. 4th Edition; corrected, with Additions, London 1721.

The complete Family-Piece, and Country-Gentleman, and Farmer's best Guide:
Containing, 1 A val^able Collection of above 1000 practical Family-Receipts, in
Physic, Surgery, Cookery, etc. 2 Instructions to be observed in Hunting,
Coursing, Setting, Shooting, Fishing, etc. A complete Calendar for all Work
necessary in Gardens, Green-Houses, etc. 3 Practical Rules and Methods for the
improving of Land and managing a Farm, etc. 2d Edition, improved, Land. 1737.

Farriery improved; or, A complete Treatise upon the Art of Farriery: Wherein
is explained the Nature, Structure, and Mechanism of a Horse; the Diseases and
Accidents he is liable to, and Methods of Cure, etc. By Henry Bracken, M. D.
Author of the Notes on Burdon. 2d Edition, London 1739.

The Dunciad, by Alexander Pope, Esquire With the Prolegomena of S^rible^us, and
Notes Variorum. Land. 1736.

In Hugonis Grotii De Jure Belli and Pacis, Lib. II. cap. priora VII, ad
illustrissimum Baronem Biornebergium, Commentatio, J. Henrici Boechleri.
Argentorati 1664.

Poems on several Occasions, by Mr. John Gay. 2 Vols. London 1737.

The Celestial Worlds discovered; or, Conjectures concerning the Inhabitants,
Plants and Productions of the Worlds in the Planets. Written in Latin by
Christianus Huygens; and inscribed to his Brother Constantine Huygens, late
Secretary to King William. 2d Edition, corrected and enlarged. London 1722.

Homer's Odyssey; translated by Mr. Alexander Pope. 5 Vols. London 1735.

Homer's Iliad; translated by the same Hand. 6 Vols. London 1731.

The Independent Whig; or, A Defense of Primitive Christianity, and our
Ecclesiastical Establishment, against the exorbitant Claims and Encroachments
of Fanatical and dissaffected Clergymen. 6th Edition, with Additions and
Amendments. 3 Vols. Lon. 1735.

Leonidas, a Poem; by R. Glover. 3d Edition, Land. 1738.

Lady's Travels into Spain; describing the Devotions, Nunneries, Humor,
Customs, Laws, Militia, Trade, Diet and Recreations of the People, etc. 10th
Edition, with the Addition of a Letter of the State of Spain as it was in the
Year 1700, by an English Gentleman. 2 Vols. London 1735.

Lucan's Pharsalia, translated into English Verse by Nicholas Row, Esquire 2 Vols.
^d Edit. Land. 1722.

The History of the League; Written in French by Mons. Maimbourg: Translated
into English by Mr. Dryden. Land. 1684. (Given by Mr. Isaac Williams.)

Titus Livius in Nuce. High Dutch.

Memorials* for the Government of the Royal Burghs in Scotland; with some
Overtures laid before the Nobility and Gentry of the several Shires in this
Kingdom; as also a Survey of the City of Aberdeen; with the Epigrams of Arthur
Johnston upon some of our chief Burghs, translated into English. Aberdeen 1685.

The young Student's Memorial Book, or Pocket Library; containing, 1 The
Rudiments of Logarithms, Decimals, and Algebra. 2 A very large Collection of
Theorems, and Canons for solving Questions, and Problems in the various Parts
of Arithmetic, Algebra and Fluxions. 3 Rules, Theorems and Canons resolving
all the useful and common Problems in the Mathematical and Mechanical Arts and
Sciences, viz. Mensuration, Gauging, Conics, plain and spherical Trigonometry,
Navigation, Fortification, Gunnery, Astronomy, Dialling, Optics, Perspective,
Architecture, Mechanics, Geometry, etc. 4 A large Collection of Mathematical
Tables, with a perpetual Almanac, adjusted to the Year 1735. 5 An Apparatus of
the common Mathematical Lines, for the Operation of any Question or Problem, as
it is performed by the plain Scale, etc. By Benj. Martin. London 1736.

The Lives of all the Princes of Orange, from William the Great, Founder of the
Common Wealth of the united Provinces. Written in French by the Baron Maurier,
in the Year 1682, and published at Paris by Order of the French King. To which
is added the Life of King William III. from his Birth to his Landing in
England, by Mr. Thomas Brown. Together with all the Princes Heads taken from
original Draughts. Land. 1693.

The Works of Plato abridged: With an Account of his Life, Philosophy, Morals
and Politics. Together with a Translation of his choicest Dialogues. 2 Vols.
Illustrated with Notes by M. Dacier. Translated from the French by several
Hands. 2d Edition, corrected. Land. 1720.

Letters of Mr. Pope, and several eminent Persons, from the Year 1705, to 1735.
Land. 1735.

Pope's and Swift' Miscellanies. 6 Vols. Land. 1736.

Table-Talk: Bei^^ ^he Discourses of John Seldom, Esquire or his Sense of various
Matters of Weight and high Consequence, relating especially to Religion and
State. 3d Edit. Land. 1716.

The Reign of Sultan Orchan, second King of the Turks. Translated out of Hojah
Essendi, an eminent Turkish Historian; by William Seaman. Land. 1652.

The Tale of a Tub. To which is added an Account of the Battle between the
ancient and modern Books in St. James's Library. 8th Edition, with the Author's
Apology, and explanatory Notes by W. W -- tt -- n, B. D. and others. Land. 1733.

M. Tully Cicero's five Books of Tusculan Disputations; viz. 1. Of the Contempt
of Death. 2. Of the Enduring bodily Pain. 3. Of Moderating Grief of Mind. 4. Of
other disorderly Motions of the Mind. 5. Whether Virtue alone be sufficient to
a happy Life. Done into English, by a Gentleman of Christ-Church College,
Oxford. Land. 1715.

Cicero's three Books touching the Nature of the Gods: Setting forth (from all
Antiquity) what Perceptions Man, by the only Light of Reason, may entertain
concerning a Deity. Done into English, with Notes and Illustrations. Land. 1683.

FOLIO'S added.
Eliza, an Epick Poem: In 10 Books. By Sir Richard Blackmore. To which is
annexed an Index, explaining Persons, Countries, Cities, Rivers, etc. (Given by
Mr, Samuel Rhodes)

C. Corne^^ Taciti Opera, quae extant; Commentariis J. Lipsii illustrata. ^em,
C. Velleius Paterculus, cum N^tis J. Lipsii. 1648. (Given by Capt. Mackenny.)

A short Account of the LIBRARY.
THE Library-Company was formed in 1731, by Constitutions or Articles entered
into by 50 Persons, each obliging himself to pay 40 (...) for purchasing the
first Parcel of Books, and 10 s. per annum to defray Charges and increase the
Library.

Ten Directors or Managers of the Library, and a Treasurer, are chosen yearly
by Vote, at a General Meeting of the Com^^^y.

The Number of Members are now increased to (...) of 70. Persons enclining to
be admitted, apply to any one of the Dire^tors, who nominates them at the next
monthly Meeting of D^^^ctors; and being allowed, and paying to the Treasurer
the Value of a Share at the Time, and signing the Articles, they become Members.

Any Member may borrow a Book for 2, 3, or 4 Weeks, leaving his Note for double
Value, an^ paying a small Penalty if it is not returned at the Time agreed;
which Penalties are applied to d^fray^ng Charges, or purchasing more Books.

Every Member has an absolute Property in his Share; may devise it in his Will,
or d^spose of it when he pl^^ses to any P^^son the D^rectors approve. And
Shares so sold have always hitherto y^^ded as much as they had cost. As Shares
encreas^ yearly in Value 10 s. so much being yearly added by each Subscriber to
the Stock of Books, a Share which at first was worth but 40 s. is now valued at
6 l. 10 s. But for this small Sum, which, laid out in Books, would go but a
(...) Way, every Member has the Use of a Library now worth upwards of ^00 l.
whereby Knowledge is in this City rendered more ch^^p and ^^sy to be come at,
to the great Pleasure and Advantage of the (...) Part of the Inhabitants.

Those who are not Subsc^^bers may no^withsta^ding bo^^o^ Books, leaving in the
Hands of the Librarian, as a Pledge, a Sum of Money proportioned to the Value
of the Book borrowed, and paying a small Acknowledgment for the Reading, which
is applied to the Use of the Library.

The Library is open and Attendance given every Saturday Afternoon from 4 a
Clock 'til 8.

Besides the Books in this Catalogue given to the Library, the Company have
been favored with several generous Donation^; as, a curious Air-Pump, with its
Apparatus, a large double M^cr^scope, and ^^her valuable In^^^ments, from the
Hon. JOHN PENN, Esquire A handsome Lot of Ground whereon to bu^ld a House for the
Library, from the Hon. THOMAS PENN, Esquire Propriet^ries of the Prov^nce; and the
S^^ of 34 l. Ste^l. (to be laid out in Books) from D^* Sy^^erse, late of
Antigua.

At present the Books are depos^ted in the West W^ng of the State-House, by
Favor of the General Assembly.

It is now T^n Years since the Company was first estab^^sh^d; and we have the
Pleasure of observing, That though 'ts comp^^^d of so many Persons of different
Sects, Parties and Ways of (...), yet ^o (...) relating to the Af^^irs of the
(...), have (...) us; but every Thing has been conducted with great Ha^^ony,
and to general Satisfaction. Which happy Circumstance will* we hope, al^^ys
continue.

Note, A Copy of the Articles o^ Constitutions is l^ft in the L^^rary, for the
Perusal of all that desire to be more ^ully (...).

THE END.

