A Zeal for Good Works Excited and Directed; In a SERMON At the public
Thursday Lecture, in Boston, March 25th 1742.

Printed at the general Desire of the Hearers.

By JOHN BARNARD, A. M.

Pastor of a Church in Marblehead.

They zealously affect you, but not well; -- but it is good to be zealously
affected, always, in a good Thing.

Gal. iv. 17, 18. BOSTON, Printed by G. ROGERS for S. ELIOT in Cornhill. 17^^.

A ZEAL for GOOD WORKS Excited, and Directed.
Titus II. 14.
Zealous of good Works.


THE main Design of the Apostle ^aul in this Epistle to Titus seems to be
summed up in the 8th Verse of the 3d Chapter; This is a faithful Saying, and
these Things I will that thou affirm constantly, that they which have believed
in GOD, might be careful to maintain good Works: These Things are good and
profitable unto Men. And therefore the Epistle is chiefly spent, in directing
how the various Orders, or forts of Persons, ought to carry themselves, in
their several Relations, so as that they might adorn the Doctrine of GOD our
Savior in all Things.

And this he presses upon them, from the Consideration of the grand Intention
of the Gospel Revelation, and of CHRIST'S Incarnation and Death. As to the
grand Intention of the Gospel Revelation it is evidently to make all Men good,
and put them upon doing Good in their several Relations; for, says he Ver. 11,
12.
, The Grace of God, that brings Salvation, has appeared unto all Men; that
is, The Gospel which is a manifest Display of the Grace of GOD, in the Offer of
Salvation to a guilty World, teaches us, that denying Ungodliness, and worldly
Lusts, we should live soberly, righteously, and godly, in this present World;
that is, It teaches us to abandon all Profaneness and Immorality, to deny all
false Doctrines, and vicious Practices, arising from the Lusts of the Flesh,
the Lust of the Eye, or the Pride of Life; which stimulate and excite Men to do
such Things as they ought not to do; and that we should live soberly, by
keeping our Appetites, and Passions under due Regulation, that we may not be
hurried away, by the Impetuosity of them, to do those Things which are
offensive to GOD, or injurious to our selves, or others; that we live
righteously, by rendering unto all Men their Du^s, and giving no just Occasion
unto any to complain of our ill Treatment of them, in Word, or Deed; and that
we live godly, by upholding an inward Awe and Reverence of the Divine Being
upon our Hearts, and carefully attending the Duties of Religion, natural, and
instituted, which we owe to our supreme Lord and Master. And who sees not that
such a Walk would have a vast Influence upon all forts of Persons, faithfully
to discharge the several Duties of their various Relations, so as to be
profitable unto themselves, and Blessings to all about them.

And as this is the great End of the Gospel Revelation, to bring Persons to
such a sober, virtuous, and religious Life, so is it the great Design of the
Incarnation and Death of JESUS CHRIST, who the Apostle tells us, in the Verse
where my Text is, gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all
Iniquity, and purify unto himself a peculiar People, zealous of good Works.

So that herein we may see who they are that are effectually wrought upon by
the Grace of GOD, and who they are that are redeemed by CHRIST, even those that
are purified from Iniquity, a peculiar People, zealous of good Works.

The Grace of GOD appearing in the Gospel is not calculated to cherish and
embolden Men in their sinful Practices, but to recover them from the Dominion
of Sin over them, and excite them to the Practice of that which is Good: And
the' CHRIST died to redeem Sinners, yet it was not to encourage them in their
Sins, in Hopes of Impunity, but to bring them over to the Side of Virtue, and
render them zealous of good Works.

Having thus introduced the Words of my Text, The plain Truth agreeable to them
is this,

DOCT. The Redeemed of the LORD are zealous of good Works.
In speaking to this Text and Doctrine, I shall endeavor, by divine Assistance
to explain and confirm the Truth under these Heads.

I. I shall offer something upon the Nature of Zeal, that we may not be
mistaken in our Conceptions about it.

II. I shall consider what are the good Works we are to be zealous of.

III. Show what it is to be zealous of good Works.

IV. Evidence that the Redeemed of the LORD are zealous of good Works. And then
I shall make some suitable Application of the whole.

I. I shall offer something upon the Nature of Zeal, that we may not go into
any Mistakes in our Conception about it. For there is a Zeal falsely so called;
as most, if not all, Virtues have their Counterfeits; and a Mistake here will
be of fatal Consequence, and lead us to conceive, that our irregular,
ungoverned Passions, are the Fervor of our Mind for the Glory of GOD.

Observe therefore, that Zeal is an AEquivocal Word, of a double Meaning; and
they that have their Minds very much exercised with the View of the bad Sense
of it, are ready to start at the mention of it, as at the Cry of Fire; and they
that have their Minds dwelling upon the good Sense of it, are ready to leap for
Joy at the Sound of it. Both may be in the wrong. We ought to consider what it
is, before we either approve, or condemn it. Zeal is not properly speaking, any
particular Affection, or Passion, belonging to the human Nature, but rather the
Heat and Fervor of them. The Word, in the Original, signifies, exceeding hot,
which points to us, our Passions, and Affections, wrought up to their Height.
Hence Zeal is not, in its own Nature, good; but, is either good, or bad,
according as it is directed, and governed; and therefore had need to be
skilfully handled, even by wife and good Men themselves, least it hurry them,
beyond Bounds, to the doing of those Things, which are irregular and unjust;
and prove only the raging of their own Passions, and one of the worst of Vices,
instead of a Christian Virtue. Though Zeal is sometimes used in a good Sense,
in the sacred Scriptures, as in my Text, and some other Places, yet, I think,
it is used oftener in a bad one. Such was Readiness Zeal in persecuting the Church
Philip. iii. 6.
that is, in the Height of Fury and Rage; and hence it is reckoned among the
Works of the Flesh. Gal. iv. 19, 20.
Now the Works of the Flesh are these, -- Hatred, Variance, Emulation, or Zeal.
So I Cor. iii. 3.
there is among you Envying, or Zeal -- So what we render James iii. 14.
bitter Envying, is, in the Original, Zeal: And again, V. 16.
Where there is Envying or Zeal, and Strife, there is Confusion and every evil
Work. And so in many other Places. And the Reason why it is put among the Works
of the Flesh, seems to be, because most usually the Height of human Passions,
and Affections, are irregularly placed, upon improper Objects, and carried out
after them in an undue Manner, and Degree; and in this Sense, in which we find
it often used, it seems to be a Complication of Pride and Passion.

Nevertheless, Zeal becomes a Virtue, when our Affections are placed upon
proper Objects, and conversant about them, in a suitable Manner, and Degree,
answerable to the Nature and Importance of those Objects to us. And hence it is
apparent, that in order to our Zeal's being good and laudable, and ranked among
Christian Virtues, it necessarily has these Qualifications, viz. It must be
guided by Knowledge, tempered with Prudence, and accompanied with Charity.

I. First, Our Zeal must be guided by Knowledge. Otherwise a Man is zealous for
he knows not what: Which is really no other than to be governed by a blind
Impetus, and wild Fury; than which, what is there that will be more likely to
precipitate a Man into those Things, which, whatever his Pretensions be, will
be highly dishonorable to GOD, and injurious to his Fellow Creatures: because
^e that walks in Darkness knows not whether he goes John xii. 35.
. And stumbleth because there is no Light in him John xi. 10.
. A dark Mind, or weak Understanding, and strong Passions, very ill agree
together: and it is no Wonder if such an one fall into Mischief. He had need to
see very clearly, who runs swiftly upon the Edge of a Precipice.

If a Man be mistaken in the Object of his Zeal, and think that to be for the
Glory of GOD, and Interest of Religion, which really is a Dishonor to GOD, and
tends to undermine Religion, it is evident, that the more vigorously he lays
himself out, and the more Fervor he spends about it, he does but so much the
more cast Contempt upon GOD, and sap the Foundation of Religion. Or if a Man
imagine that to be sinful, which is really commendable, and a Duty, it is
apparent, that by how much greater Heat he prosecutes and endeavors the
Suppression of that Thing, by so much he establishes Vice upon the Ruins of
Virtue. Zeal is our Passion set on Fire, and if there be not a suitable Measure
of Knowledge to direct us when, and upon what Occasion, and how far, this Fire
should be enkindled in us, it will be but a strange Fire before the LORD; and
the Effects of it wild and raging. Where there is all Heat, and no Light, it
does not look like the illuminating Fire, which descends from above, but like
that which fumes from beneath, which is earthly, sensual, devilish James iii.
15.
. Such was the Zeal which animated the Jews of old; therefore the Apostle said
of them Romans 10. 2.
I bear them Record, that they have a Zeal for GOD, but not according to
Knowledge. They truly had a very great Fervor of Mind to assert and maintain
the Rites of the Law, which GOD himself gave unto them, by the Hand of Moses,
and could not bear it that any one should slight and neglect them; and this
they looked upon as a Zeal of GOD, and in their Heat rejected the Lord JESUS
CHRIST himself; but all of this was a Zeal without Knowledge, not considering
that CHRIST is the End of the Law for Righteousness to every one that believes
Romans x. 4.
: And because they thus acted without Knowledge they stumbled, at that
stumbling Stone, and their rejecting of CHRIST was no other, in GOD's Account,
than their Unbelief, and Hardness of Heart; and all the Sufferings they laid
upon their Fellow Creatures, for their embracing the Religion of JESUS, by whom
came Grace and Truth, were really but their persecuting of them: so that
instead of Zeal, truly so called, it was their own Passion; as it always will
be, if it be not accompanied with Knowledge, to direct and guide it. Zeal is
one of the best, or worst Things in the World, according as it is directed to
its Object, and otherwise suitably managed. There must be therefore a clear
Knowledge of the Goodness of what we so eagerly pursue, and the Evil of what we
so vehemently oppose, or we shall be led blind -- sold, by our own lawless
Passions, and be thrown into an unbridled Rage. And then,

2. Zeal must be tempered with Prudence. Zeal is the Fervor of our Passions
and therefore though the Object it is conversant about be good, yet if there be
not Prudence to temper, and allay, the Heat, and direct its Course, it will
become a lawless Fire, and an ungovernable Madness, and soon produce wild
Effects, even in a good Cause. If the Passions be ever so keen, Prudence is
profitable to direct. So that, in the midst of our Zeal, there is need of that
Caution, Matthew. x. 16.
Be ye wise as Serpents, and Harmless as Doves. There is need of the Serpent's
Eye in the Dove's Head.

Thus, Prudence must temper our Zeal in Proportion to the Nature, Weight, and
Importance of Things; le^t, while we are carried away with an undue Heat about
lesser, and more trifling Matters, the very Out-Lines of Religion, we are
forgetful of the more essential Parts thereof, or cold, and indifferent, about
Matters of the greatest Importance; and so, like the Pharisees, we become very
strict, and rigid, about tithing Mint, Annice, and Cummin, and, at the same
Time, neglect the weightier Matters of the Law.

As all Things are not of equal Worth, and Value, so neither do all Things
require, or deserve, equal Heat and Fervor of Mind; nor could our Nature bear
it to be constantly screwed up to the utmost Pitch; it is Prudence, therefore,
to reserve our Strength, and Vigor, for that which most demands them, and is
worthy of them. A great Heat about Matters of Indifferency, and a Coldness
about the Substantials of Religion, will argue rather very gross Ignorance, or
fullsom Hypocrisy.

Prudence also must be tempered with our Zeal, in our Choice of the Means we
fix upon to accomplish our End, that we may not allow our selves in any
unjustifiable Methods to obtain what we are so eager in the Pursuit of, or
suppress what we are so hotly set against: For no pretended Zeal for GOD, and
Religion, can vindicate a bad Action. It Is the highest Dishonor to GOD to
violate any of his Laws, and therefore, let Men pretend what they will, it is
but a vicious, and not a virtuous, Zeal to do Evil that Good may come of it.
Whosoever breaks one of these least Commandments, and shall teach Men so,
said our blessed LORD, Matthew. v. 19.
shall be called least in the Kingdom of Heaven. To violate Truth, and Faith,
and trample upon Justice, and moral Honesty, that we may accomplish our
pretended Ends, of defending any religious Principle, or Practice, or of
suppressing any Evils we are violently set against, is ourselves to become
guilty of Sin, under a Cloak of Holiness. Hence Job spoke of it as a Thing to
be abhorred, Job xiii. 7.
Will ye speak wickedly for GOD? Or talk deceitfully for him? Men may pretend
the Cause of GOD, and Religion, in such a Conduct; but really all their Zeal
herein is no other than their own unbridled Passions of Wrath, Anger, Malice,
Envy, Revenge, and the like. And therefore Prudence must direct us in the
Choice of lawful, and justifiable Means, in our Zeal even for GOD, and Religion.

And, again, Prudence must temper our Zeal, to prevent our throwing all Things
into Disorder, and Confusion, Though the End we propose should be ever so
right, and the Means we make Use of, in the Prosecution of it, be ever so
justifiable, yet, such is the Weakness of the human Nature, that, the Hurry of
our Passions, when wrought up to any great Height, will greatly endanger the
throwing of our selves, and all about us, into the utmost Disorder, without a
due Guard upon ourselves, and the Manner of our Conduct. As it is said of
Anger, so must it be said of Zeal, which carries Anger in the Composition of
it, that it is a Fit of Madness, when it is let loose, and without Restraint;
and the best Cause in the World will render it nevertheless so.

Therefore the Apostle speaking of their Zeal, though about spiritual Things,
in the xivth Chapter of the First Epistle to the Corinthians, yet reproved them
for what was disorderly in their Church Assemblies, as their speaking with
Tongues, and one singing, another teaching, a third uttering a Revelation, and
their Women speaking in the Church, and taking upon them to teach; and said he,
V. 9.
if a Stranger should come in among you, Will he not say that ye are mad; and
he proceeded to exhort them, V. 26.
Let all your Things be done to edifying; V. 33.
For GOD is not the Author of Confusion, but of Peace, as in all Churches of
the Saints; and concluded his Discourse to them by saying, V. 40.
Let all Things be done decently, and in Order. That is, let your Zeal be
tempered with Prudence.

3. Zeal must be accompanied with Charity. Charity is one of the main, and most
amiable Branches of the Christian Religion; yea, all Religion is nothing
without it I Cor. xiii.
; and it is never to be parted with, but upon absolute Necessity; and then it
is not, properly, a Want of Charity in us, but rather there is no Room for the
Exercise of it. Hence Charity is not to be broken in upon, and destroyed, upon
every little and frivolous Occasion, no, nor upon any, for the gratifying our
own Humor, or Passions. We are commanded, to follow Peace, with all Men, Heb.
xii. 14.
and Holiness; Peace is to be followed so far as it is consistent with real
Holiness; where Holiness and Peace cannot go Hand in Hand, we must break
Friendship with such a Peace; but yet even this does not destroy our Charity,
which is far more extensive than Peace, and Friendship, but only those that are
evidently unholy are unworthy of it, in some particular Instances.

It is not therefore a virtuous, but a vicious Zeal, that is an Enemy to
Charity, and upon groundless, Surmises, and upon the Account of human
Weaknesses, and small and indifferent Matters, will destroy the Peace, and
Love, and Charity, among Neighbors, and Friends. A furious and out-ragious
Zeal, that is injurious and abusive to our Neighbors, is at best, but human
Passion, not religious Zeal: And for Persons to take away their Neighbors good
Name unjustly, had sacrifice their Reputation to their own private Resentment,
and bring grievous Evils upon them, upon their Interests, or upon their Bodies,
under a Pretense of doing Service for GOD, and his Churches, may, indeed, have
a Show of Zeal for GOD, but is really not a Fervor of GOD's kindling. So Saul
in his Zeal, persecuted the Churches, and verily thought that he ought to do
many Things contrary to the Name of JESUS, of Nazareth Acts xxvi. 9.
. So the Jews, in their Zeal, persecuted the Disciples of CHRIST, of which our
LORD forewarned them, saying, John xvi. 2.
They shall put you out of the Synagogue, yea, the Time comes when, whosoever
kills you, will think that he does GOD Service. And so too, sometimes,
professed Christians have persecuted one another, with their Anathema's and
Curses, and with corporal Punishment, and Death; and all for the Sake of some
Difference in Sentiments, or Modalities in Religion, wherein real Holiness has
been little or nothing concerned: And most usually, under the Influence of such
an ungovernable Zeal, the best of Men have been liable unto the worst of
Treatment.

And now, unless we can tell how to cancel a very great and essential Part of
the Divine Law, and convert the most out-ragious Vices of Anger, and Wrath, and
Ma^^ce, and Envy, and Revenge, into the most amiable Grace of Charity, this
can, by no Means, be looked upon as a religious Zeal; but when our Zeal for
GOD, and Religion, is accompanied with our Charity to others, and our
maintaining Love, and Peace, and Unity, among Fellow Christians, then is it a
religious and virtuous Zeal.

From all of which we see the very great Danger of a blind mistaken Zeal, and
what Need there is, in Order to it is becoming a Virtue in us, or, if you will,
a Grace of the Divine Spirit, that our Zeal be guided by Knowledge, tempered
with Prudence, and accompanied with Charity.

And having said these Things, to guard us against the Danger, I shall now
proceed unto the other Heads of Discourse, in which there will be no great
Difficulty.

Wherefore,

II. I am to consider what are the good Works we are to be zealous of, or what
our Zeal is to be employed about. And, in general, good Works are comprehensive
of our whole Duty; and so our Faith, which is but in Order to Practice, is
remotely included in them, for that Faith is vain, and dead, that is without
them. But then good Works more directly, and immediately intend, the whole of
our moral Conduct, that we be good, and that we do good; or, all the Duties of
moral Obedience.

Let no Man, now, be so vain as to imagine, that this is such a Preaching of
Morality, as is inconsistent with the Tenor of the Gospel Dispensation; for
though we do not preach up good Works, as meritorious of Salvation, yet we do,
and must preach them, as necessary to Salvation: These we are commanded to
maintain Tit. iii. 8.
; these our blessed LORD Himself has taught us, and summed them up in the two
general Heads, of Love to GOD, and Love to our Neighbor Matthew. xxii. 37, 39.
; and they are such an essential Part of Christianity, that our great Master
assures us, he will not dispense with; therefore said He Matthew. v. 17.
, Think not that I am come to destroy the Law, or the Prophets; I am not come
to destroy but fulfill; for, verily, I say unto you, till Heaven and Earth pass,
one Jot, or one Tittle, shall in no wise pass from the Law, till all be
fulfilled. So that this Morality is the same with Christian Graces; only, as
bare Morality consists in the doing of what is, in it is Nature, virtuous and
good, without any Regard to the Principle, and End, so, the Grace of
Christianity lies in the Practice of the same Duties, with a single Eye to the
Glory of GOD, and from Principles of Love, and Obedience to GOD, and Faith in
CHRIST, and so are the Fruits, and Effects, of the Operation of the Holy Spirit
upon the Soul. But to be more particular.

I. Good Works intend our sincere Endeavor to do the Will of GOD, made known
to us. The Law of GOD written on our Hearts, and more plainly revealed to us in
his Word, is given to us to be an everlasting Rule of our Conduct and
Behavior; and teaches us how we are to live unto GOD; and it remains
indispensibly obligatory upon us, after that we are brought to the Faith of the
SON of GOD, as well as before, and it never will, it never can, be abolished.

Now, our good Works are our Conformity unto this Rule, and careful Observation
of it, in all its Parts, in our daily Practice, and throughout the whole of our
Walk. If our Works do, in any Article, fall short of this Rule, they are not
perfectly good, in a legal Sense; and such is the Weakness^ and Imperfection of
the very best of Men, in this Life, as that they do not come up to what the Law
requires of them, but are defective in their best Services. But then, our
sincere Endeavor to conform to the Will of GOD, made known to us, is that
Evangelical Perfection which a gracious GOD, will mercifully accept of, in the
Room of a sinless Obedience, through the spotless Obedience, and bitter
Sufferings of his own dear SON: And such an Evangelical Perfection, or sincere
and honest Endeavor to live up to what is required of us, in the Divine Law,
from a Principle of Love to GOD, and Faith in CHRIST, is, the good Works which
we are to be zealous of; and they are the Fruits of the SPIRIT, produced by his
blessed Influences in our Hearts, that our heavenly Father may be glorified.

These good Works are chiefly contained in the two Tables of the Divine Law,
and denote, our sincere Endeavor to worship, honor, and serve GOD, in all the
Duties of a more strictly religious Nature, and our serving our Generation,
according to the Will of GOD, by doing unto all Men as we would they should do
unto us. And though many may be our unallowed Defects, in these good Works, yet
if we sincerely aim at Perfection, in doing the Will of GOD, and mourn over our
short Comings in Duty, and repair to the Blood of CHRIST for the Pardon of
them, GOD will graciously accept them, as good Works, and be highly pleased
with them. So, the Prayer of the Upright, the great Duty of the first Table, is
his Delight Prove. xv. 8.
: And so, Charity, the great Duty of the second Table, is a Sacrifice well
pleasing unto GOD Heb. xiii. 16.
.

2. Good works, more particularly, mean such Things, whereby Mankind may be
bettered by us, in any of their Interests. These are, by Way of Eminency,
called good Works, in the sacred Scriptures. Thus our Savior said to the Jews
John x. 32.
, Many good Works have I showed you; which intends the many Acts of Service he
had done amongst them, to better them in all their Interests. And in this
Epistle to Titus, good Works are spoken of, a^ as of those Things which are
some Way, or other, beneficial to Mankind: As Titus. iii. 1.
be ready to every good Work; which is explained in the following Words, Speak
evil of no Man, be no Brawlers, but gentle, showing all Meekness unto all Men.
So, Ver. 8.
maintain good Works, for these Things are good and profitable unto Men; and
again, and again, Ver. 14.
Learn to maintain good Works for necessary Uses, that ye be not unfruitful. So
that good Works specially denote, our being, some Way or other, useful and
beneficial to those about us, and so they are comprehensive, of our doing good
to the Souls of Men, and endeavoring to promote their spiritual and eternal
Interests, and our doing good to the Bodies of Men, or promoting their temporal
Interest.

Thus, good Works are a doing Good to the Souls of Men, and promoting their
spiritual and eternal Interest. And this we do, by teaching and instructing of
them, in the Things that pertain to their everlasting Welfare. So our blessed
LORD went about doing Good: And though, this is the more peculiar Office of the
Ministers of the Gospel, which may not be invaded by others, to be the Guides,
Teachers, and Instructers of others, in the great Affairs of their Souls, yet,
every Christian, according to his Ability, and Opportunity, may, with Delight,
and without Arogancy, do something in this blessed Work. So Parents, and
Masters, are to teach their Children, and Servants, the good Knowledge of the
LORD, and excite and encourage them to the Practice of Virtue and Religion; and
every private Christian may, at Times, have the Opportunity of directing, and
assisting, and encouraging others in the Duties of the Christian Life, by their
wise Counsel, Advice, and Persuasion, by their meek Admonition and Reproof, and
more especially, by the good Example, which they set before others, of every
amiable Virtue; that, as one expresses it, Dr. Tillotson.
By the secret and powerful Influence of a living Rule, which teaches Men
without Trouble, and lets Men see their Faults without open Reproof and
Upbraiding, they may allure them to the Practice of Sobriety, and Temperance,
Meekness, and Humility, Kindness, and the Fear of the LORD.

And thus good Works are a doing good to the Bodies of Men, and promoting their
temporal Interest. This includes in it, to be sure, our not hurting any in
their Person, Name, or Estate, by Strife, or Reproach, or Unrighteousness; but
then, it further includes positive Duties in it, in our Acts of Kindness to our
Neighbors, whereby we are helpful and serviceable to them, in any Business
they are engaged in, or assisting to them, under any Difficulties and Burdens
that lie upon them, or, our Acts of Charity, in A^ms-giving, for the Relief of
the Distressed, ^eeding the hungry, clothing the naked, comforting the
afflicted, and brightning up the Countenances of those that are ready to
perish. Thus Dorcas is commended for her good Works and Alms-deeds which she
did Acts ix. 36.
: And the Apostle directed Timothy 1 Timothy vi. 17, 18.
to charge them that are rich in this World, that they do Good, be rich in good
Works, ready to distribute: And not only is this the Duty of the wealthy, and
great, who are surrounded with the Affluance of worldly good Things, but even
the Poorest may, out of their deep Poverty, abound unto the Riches of
Liberality. So the Widow's two Mites Mark xii. 42.
, cast into the LORD's Treasury, has rendered her famous unto this Day.

By such good Works as these, doing all the Good we can, to the Souls, and
Bodies, of others, we become the good Men, which are amiable in the Eyes of
GOD, and the Delight of Mankind: And these are the good Works we are to be
zealous of. But then, there are two Rules we must observe in our being Zealous
of these good Works.

1. That the Works done by us are in the Nature of them good, and required of
us. It Is essential to a good Work that it be a Duty, and required of us: For
Christianity knows no Works of Supererrogation. The Works we are zealous of
must be good in their Nature, Use, and End; that is, they must be what the LORD
our GOD has required, in the ten Commandments, or in some other positive Law.
For that which is contrary to what GOD has appointed, by his Command, or
Prohibition, is Sin, as being a Transgression of his Law. And the Works must be
required of us in particular; that is, we must not go out of our own Line, and
invade that of another, under a Pretense of Zeal for good Works: For GOD does
not require us to do another Man's Business, but our own 1 Theff. iv. 11.
; and we shall but show our selves to be busy Bodies, by taking upon us what
does not belong to us. To be over religious beyond the Commandment is to be
superstitious; and our Alms Deeds are but mere Prodigality if not required of
us, at the Time, and in the Degree, in which we dispense them.

2. Another Rule is, that we be careful as to the Manner of our doing our good
Works; and that both with Respect unto ourselves, and others. With Respect unto
ourselves; our Frames must be suitable to the Nature of the Thing to be done,
our Principles must be the Authority of GOD commanding us, the Love of GOD
alluring us, the Faith of CHRIST exciting and assisting of us, in the
Performance of our Duty, and our great End must be the Glory of GOD in all. For
bad Frames, Principles, and Ends, will spoil the best Action. Levity of Spirit,
or a Mind following after the World, in the Time of divine Worship, will turn
our Sacrifices into Abominations. A J^h^ may drive on furiously, pretending
Zeal for GOD, when it is all Self. A Pharisee may run about praying in the
Streets, or in ever House, and take Care to distribute his Alms when others
observe him, and all to be seen of Men. The great Rule is I Cor. x. 30.
Whatever we do, do all to the Glory of GOD. And then, with Respect unto
others; we must be careful not to give any just Cause of Offense unto any, or
put a stumbling Block in their Way, nor needlessly break in upon the Peace and
Comfort of human society, or of particular Persons, or deprive them of any of
their just Rights: And here the Rule is, Let all Things be done to edifying 1
Cor. xiv. 26.
.

Having thus considered the good Works we are to be zealous of, I may now pass,

III. To show what it is to be zealous of good Works. I have said, That Zeal is
the Heat and Fervor of our Affections and Passions, and then only is it good
and laudable when it is guided by Knowledge, tempered with Prudence, and
accompanied with Charity, and the Object of it must be Duty required by GOD,
and required of us. These Things being observed, it is easy now to say what it
is to be zealous of good Works; namely, That it is the Heat and Fervor of our
Affections, under a due Regulation, about the Things that are good, whereby GOD
may be honored, and our selves and others edified, and against all that is
opposite thereto.

Particularly;

1. To be zealous of good Works is to have the Affections warmed, in the
Pursuit of every Thing that is truly good. It is to have the Soul enflamed with
earnest Desires after, Love to, and Delight in, good Works. Thus it is to be
earnestly desirous of the best Gifts, and to do the best Things. Not that this
Fire burns with equal Heat in all true Christians, but something of it there is
in every Christian. This is what his soul breathes, and thir^teth, and longs
after, that he may be better, and do better; for this he earnestly strives, and
prays with the Psalmist, O that my Ways were directed to keep thy Statutes;
open mine Eyes, that I may behold the W^nders out of thy Law; teach me to do
thy Will, O GOD; and lead me in the Way everlasting. His Heart's Desire is,
that he may abound in the Fruits of Righteousness, which are to the Praise and
Glory of God, by JESUS CHRIST. Thus Zeal is an inflamed Love to the Things that
are good; a supreme Love to GOD and CHRIST, an ardent Love to the Truths of
GOD, and a contending earnestly for the Faith once delivered unto the Saints, a
servent Love to the Worship of GOD, to his Sabbaths, his House, his Word, his
Ordinances, and to the Purity and Holiness of them; and an universal Charity to
Mankind, unseigned Love to one another, especially to the Household of Faith; a
glowing Affection to the Prosperity and flourishing of the Kingdom and Interest
of our LORD JESUS CHRIST in the world; and an hearty bewailing the melancholy
Condition of Sion, when her Gold is changed and become dim, and the precious
Sons thereof, comparable to fine Gold, are esteemed as earthen Pitchers. Thus
Zeal is a raised Delight in doing good; the Soul standing ready bent therefore,
and prepared to every good Work, taking Pleasure in being servent in Spirit
serving the LORD, and in laying itself out in the Works of Piety and Devotion,
Righteousness and Truth, Charity and Beneficence, and never better satisfied
than when i^ is improving it is Strength, and Time, and Talents, in Services for
GOD, and our Generation, and so to be always abounding in the Work of the LORD.

2. To be zealous of good Works is, to have the Affections warmed, and strongly
set against every Thing that is really opposite to good Works. Zeal goes into
our seperating Affections, as well as closing Ones. It Is not only the Heat of
our Desire, Love, Delight, and Joy, but the Heat of our Fear, Aversion, Anger,
Resentment, and the like; and when these are duly warmed against all that
stands in Opposition to that which is truly good, then are we zealous of good
Works. Zeal is the burning of our Affections against a Thing, as well as for
it; and therefore carrys in it an Heat of Sorrow, Grief, Anger, and
Indignation, at every Thing that is really sinful, when it appears so to us.
Zeal, in the Christian, will to be sure, in the first Place, fill him with
Grief, and Indignation, at his own Sins: He will be exceeding sorry, and deeply
humbled, that ever he has acted so foolish and mad a Part, as to rebel against
the God that made him, that he has been so base and ungrateful to his kind
Benefactor and merciful Redeemer; the Thoughts of it pierces him to the Heart,
and makes him to walk softly, and in the Bitterness of his Soul, and fires him
with an holy Anger against himself, and Indignation at his Sin, and Revenge
upon it. The Language of our LORD is that, Be^zealons and repent Rev. iii. 19.
: He that is truly zealous of good Works is a true Penitent: His Soul is on
Fire to mortify Sin in him, and subdue the corrupt Workings of his depraved
Mind; he strives earnestly to gain the Mastery over the Flesh, and can be
contented with nothing less than the Death of Sin in him. So the Apostle
observed of the penitent Corinthians, 2 Cor. vii. 11.
What Carefulness it wrought in them, yea, what Indignation, yea, what Fear,
yea, what vehement Desire, yea, what Zeal, yea, what Revenge. And then, the
zealous Christian, having reformed his own Heart, and Life, is filled with
Indignation at Sin in others, and can say with the Psalmist, I beheld
Transgressors and was grieved Psalm cxix. 158.
. It is a Grief of Heart to him to see others transgressing the holy and
righteous Laws of GOD, and it inflames him with Revenge, in his holy Endeavors
to suppress growing Wickedness, in the Place where he lives; it fires his soul
to see any setting themselves in Opposition to the Work of GOD, and vexes him
to see or hear, their filthy, unrighteous, and ungodly Conversation, and he
openly bears his Testimony against all their ungodly Deeds. This is, in short,
to be zealous of good Works. I am now, in the last Place,

IV. To evidence that the Redeemed of the LORD are zealous of good Works. It is
said in my context, CHRIST gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from
all Iniquity, and purify us unto himself a peculiar People, zealous of good
Works; they then that are redeemed by CHRIST are a People zealous of good
Works. Not that every true Christian is equally zealous, nor ought they to be
so, because every one is not of equal Capacity; yet every true Christian will
have in him, at least when his Graces are in Exercise, which they should be
continually, more or less of a holy Fervor of Soul for good Works; and needs
must it be so. Because,

1. Our Redemption by CHRIST does not free us from our Obligation to obey the
Law of GOD, but renders our Obligation the stronger. He has not the Heart of a
Christian in him, who thinks, that CHRIST, by redeeming of him, meant to
release him from his Obedience to GOD: Which made the Apostle say, with some
Warmth of Indignation, Romans iii. 31.
Do we then make void the Law, through Faith? GOD forbid; yea, we establish the
Law. Indeed, the Christian is not under the Law, as a Covenant of Works, and so
bound to every Iota as that the least Failure therein shall procure his
Condemnation, for CHRIST has taken him under a Dispensation of Grace, and has
provided for him a perfect Righteousness, by his own sinless Obedience, as well
as bitter Sufferings, wherein he may be accepted. But though the perfect
Righteousness of CHRIST be imputed unto him, yet it is not to release him from
his Obedience to the Divine Law, but to render his defective Obedience, as well
as his Person, acceptable unto GOD. It would be to undermine the great Design
of CHRIST'S Incarnation and Death, to suppose, that he came to free us from
moral Obedience, because this would at once take away our Obligations to
glorify GOD, and lead holy Lives. So that the Redeemed of the LORD are still
left under Obligations to obey the Divine Law; and their Obligations are so far
from being weakened, that they really become the stronger for their being
redeemed by CHRIST: Because, over and beyond the Authority of our Sovereign
commanding us, here is superadded the Injunction of our dear Redeemer, and the
bright Example which he has set us, and the constraining Force and Power of
his redeeming Love. CHRIST has loved us, and died for us, that he might wash
away our Sins in his own Blood; he has purchased Pardon, Grace, and Life, for
us, and that at the Expense of his own Life; and what is the necessary Fruit,
and Consequence, of this Love and Grace, respecting the Redeemed of the LORD,
but to draw forth their servent Affection to him, that, in the Warmth of their
Affections to him, they may heartily mourn that ever they have pierced him, and
may be studious to please him? That is, to be zealous of good Works. Hence the
Apostle thus argues, The Love of CHRIST constrains us; because we thus
judge, that if one died for all then were all dead; and that he died for all,
that they which live should not hence forth live unto themselves, but unto him
that died for them. 2 Cor. v. 14, 15.


2. A Zeal for good Works is a Proof of the Truth of our Faith, and therefore
the Redeemed of the LORD will be zealous of good Works. The Redeemed of the
LORD, and the true Believer, mean the same Person. But there can be no true
Believer where there is not, in some Measure at least, a Zeal for good Works;
because good Works are the genuine Effects, and Proof of our Faith. The Apostle
therefore said, Gal. v. 6.
Faith works by Love; Acts xv. 9.
and purifieth the Heart. Our good Works, indeed, cannot justify us before GOD,
because the best of them are imperfect, and as filthy Rags; so that no Man can
be justified, in the Sight of GOD, by the Deeds of the Law. The only procuring
Cause of our Justification, before GOD, is the meritorious Obedience and
Sufferings of the LORD JESUS CHRIST, by whom we are provided of a Righteousness
every Way equal to the Demands of the Law, and Justice of GOD: And it is by
Faith that we apprehend, or lay hold on, or receive, this Righteousness of
CHRIST, in which we appear before GOD as without Fault.

But then, there is a counterfeit and false Faith, as well as a true one, a
Faith that is but a mere Fancy, or a bold Presumption: And what have we to
prove the Truth of our Faith? Truly, nothing but our good Works, without which
all our Pretensions to Faith are vain and fruitless. Therefore the Apostle
James said, James ii. 18, 20.
Show me thy Faith without thy Works, [That is, if thou can,] I will show
thee my Faith, by my Works: -- will thou know, O vain Man, that Faith without
Works is dead. He therefore that has true Faith, will be, in some Measure
zealous of good Works: His Faith in CHRIST will operate in him, to purify him
from the Love of Sin, and produce in him a Love to Holiness, and so inflame
him, more or less, with a Zeal for good Works.

It will be but a vain Plea, another Day, I am a Christian, I believe in
CHRIST, and I trust to be saved by the Merits of his Obedience and Suffering,
if there be not this Proof of our Faith, that it sanctifies us, and purifies
our Hearts; that it deriveth Grace from CHRIST to serve GOD now in
Righteousness and Holiness, as well as Grace to find Acceptance with GOD
hereafter. So that unless our Faith makes us zealous of good Works, it is after
all but the Faith of Hypocrites, and will stand us in no Stead in the Day of
Reckoning, as it is of no real Service to us in the Day of Trial.

3. Good Works are absolutely necessary to, and a great Part of, our eternal
Redemption, and therefore the Redeemed of the LORD are, and will be, zealous of
them. That good Works are absolutely necessary to our Redemption is evident,
from the whole Scope and Design of the Gospel-Revelation, which is calculated
to direct, and excite us, to the Performance of them. The Grace of GOD
appearing in the Gospel teaches them, demands them, enforces them with many and
weighty Arguments; our very Faith, and Regeneration, are but in Order to them,
and cannot subsist without them. We are his Workmanship, created in CHRIST
JESUS, unto good Works, which GOD has foreordained that we should walk in
them Ephesians. ii. 10.
Whomsoever GOD has foreordained unto Life and Salvation, by JESUS CHRIST, he
has also foreordained that they should walk in good Works; he has chosen us,
in CHRIST, that we should be holy, and without Blame before him; and we must
walk worthy of the LORD unto all well-pleasing, being fruitful in all Goodness,
if we would be made meet to partake of the Inheritance of the Saints in Light.
There is no getting to Heaven without Holiness. Without Holiness no Man shall
see the LORD Heb. xii. 14.
. Heaven is too pure and holy a Place for the unholy, the profane, the
unrighteous, the unmerciful, ever to partake of the Joys, the Society, the
Employments, thereof.

No Man is or can be redeemed without good Works, which are an essential Part
of our Redemption. CHRIST gave himself for us to redeem us from all Iniquity,
and purify us unto himself; till therefore we are purified from Iniquity, and
are become a peculiar People, zealous of good Works, we are not redeemed. To be
redeemed without good Works, is a perfect Contradiction. We shall remain under
the Power of our ghostly Enemies, Slaves to Sin and Satan, and bound over to
suffer the Vengeance of eternal Fire, until there is produced in us, more or
less, a Zeal for good Works.

Let no Man deceive you, my Brethren, with vain Words; good Works go into the
very Nature and Essence of your Redemption; and your Hearts are not enlarged,
nor are you vindicated into the Liberties of the Children of GOD, unless you
run the Way of the Divine Commandment; and serve GOD in Righteousness and true
Holiness. The Work of the divine Spirit upon your Hearts is, to deliver you
from the Powers of Darkness, and translate you into the Kingdom of GOD's dear
SON; that ye may be a chosen Generation, a royal Priesthood, an holy Nation, a
peculiar People, that ye should show forth the Praises of him, who has called
you out of Darkness, into mavelous Light.

From all which it sufficiently appears, that the Redeemed of the LORD are, and
will be a People zealous of good Works. But it is Time that I proceed to make
some Application of what has been said, and I crave your Patience while I bring
it down to ourselves, and our own Time, in three Uses.

USE I. The Want of a Zeal of good Works should be Matter of deep Humiliation
and Abasement of Soul to us. Because where there is no Zeal of good Works, such
have upon them no comfortable Tokens of their being the Redeemed of the LORD:
And if any Thing in the World can be Matter of deep Humiliation, and inward
Grief and Mourning of Soul to us, surely, this must needs be so, to see our
selves, or our Neighbors, our Acquaintance and Friends, our near Relations,
and bosom Companions, destitute of the Tokens of Salvation, without CHRIST, and
without GOD, and without all comfortable Hope in this World, of their being
happy in the next. And is not this the Case of many among us? We all call our
selves Christians, indeed, and entertain some Hope that we are among the
Redeemed of the LORD; but should we not be ashamed of our Hope, if we did but
seriously consider, that, with Respect to many of us, we are at so great a
Distance from a Zeal of good Works, as that either we are Lukewarm, cold and
indifferent, concerning them, or are zealously set for the contrary?

If we look about us, may we not plainly see, that a very great Part, if not
the most, of our People, have a Fervor of Mind carrying them out after that
which is evil, and sinful, whether they think so or no? Whence else is their
eager Pursuit of the World, at all Hazard^^ their Unrighteousness, Oppression,
Tricking, Cheating, False-dealing, Breach of Promise, and the like? Whence else
is their Revelling, Intemperance, Lewdness, and Debauchery? Whence is their
Profanation of the LORD's Name, and Day, their Slight of his Ordinances, and
their Scoffs at serious Godliness, and their Opposition to vital Religion?
Whence the ill Carriage of Persons in their several Relations, together with
the Spirit of lying, Censoriousness, Rash-judging, Reviling, and calumniating
one another? Whence the many deep laid Plots to accomplish wicked Devices, to
alienate Friends, to inflame Neighbourhoods, to embroil Families, and to kindle
Strife and Division in Church and State? I say, whence are these, and many
other Evils, that are rise in the World, but from a Zeal in many to do
wickedly? They are not only unto every good Work reprobate, but they study to
do Mischief, they follow after it with Greediness, and are never better pleased
than when they are gratifying their Lusts. So, as the Prophet speaks, They draw
Iniquity with Cords of Vanity, and Sin as it were with Cart Ropes Isa. v. 18.
.

Oh! What Pains do many take to damn themselves! If they would but take the
same Pains to get to Heaven, which they do to go to Hell; if they would but
serve GOD and CHRIST, with as much Zeal as they serve the Devil; Happy, happy
might it be with them forever. And can we see this Madness in the Hearts of
Men, our Neighbors, and Friends; can we see them impiously contending with
their Maker, and madly cutting and wounding, and damning their own Souls, and
not pity them, and pray for them, and mourn over them, and lament the dismal
Effects of the Apostasy of the human Nature?

And as for those that do not run the same Length with others in their Excesses
of Riot, is there not a Lukewarmness,^ a cold Indifferency, upon them as to the
Things of GOD and Religion? How cold are their Affections in their Regards to
spiritual, divine, and heavenly Objects? How unconcerned are they about an
Interest in CHRIST, and the Salvation of their own Souls? How backward are they
to the spiritual Duties of reading, and hearing, the Word of GOD, of
Meditation, and Prayer? Or how off-handedly do they perform them? Upon what
trifling Excuses, and vain Pleas, do they absent themselves from the House of
GOD, and turn their Backs upon his holy Ordinances? Or if they attend upon
them, is it not, often, more for Fashion Sake, to do as others do; or to see,
and be seen, in their Finery, or, it may be, pleased with the sounding Voice,
and agreeable Gesture, of him that ministers in holy Things, and without any
serious Regard to the Honor of GOD, and their own spiritual and eternal
Welfare?

And may we not observe the same Spirit of Indifferency, and want of Zeal, in
Acts of Beneficence and Kindness to one another? How coldly do many receive the
Proposals of doing Good to their Neighbors? And if it call for their Thought,
their Labor, or their Interest, how loath are they to be brought to any Expense
about it? Verily, such a Want of Zeal for good Works is that Luke warmness
which is peculiarly offensive to the holy LORD JESUS CHRIST, and for which he
has threatened to spew such out of his Mouth Rev. iii. 16.
. And wherever we see such a Want of Zeal in others, and much more if we find
the Want of it in ourselves, it is a Lamentation, and should be for a
Lamentation; especially, when we consider ourselves the Descendants of those
brave Men, who were remarkably eminent for their being zealous of good Works,
as the Fathers, and first Planters of this Land were.

USE II. Let this serve to put us upon the Trial of our Zeal whether it be
good, or no; and truly a Zeal for good Works, or otherwise. That there is a
Spirit of Zeal fallen upon many Persons, in various Parts of our Land, is too
evident to be denied. But when we consider, that Zeal is, in itself, no other
than the humane Passions and Affections greatly heated, and stirred up, we may
plainly see, that there is something more requisite, than barely the Fervor of
the Passions, to denominate it a religious and good Zeal. And I think the great
Criterion,^ to which we must bring it, is this of the Apostle, Zealous of good
Works. For, though it be good to be zealously affected, always, in a good
Things; yet Persons may be zealously affected, and not well.

And, I readily acknowledge, That so far as there is to be found, upon any, a
warm Indignation against Sin, a strong Desire to be delivered from the Guilt,
and Pollution of it, and the Curse that belongs to it; an enflamed Thirst of
Soul after CHRIST, the only Savior from Sin, and Wrath, and a deep Concern of
Mind to be interested in his great Salvation; a ^ervent Love to Mankind; and an
exceeding Carefulness to walk according to the Rules of the Gospel, in a sober,
righteous, and godly Life; so far this Zeal is justly to be termed, a religious
Zeal; and I doubt not but it is from the special Operation of the Holy Spirit
of GOD, who works in us, to will and to do. And I bless GOD, that there are
so many Instances of this Zeal to be found among us, possibly more than usual,
both, in the Ministers of the LORD being more ^ervent, and abundant, in their
Labors, laying themselves out in the Service of the Gospel of CHRIST, and for
the Salvation of the precious immortal Souls committed to their Charge; and in
many Persons earnestly inquiring what they shall do to be saved, willing to
submit themselves to the Instruction of the Word, and therefore more diligently
attending upon the House and Ordinances of GOD, as the blessed Means of
conveying CHRIST, and his saving Benefits, unto their Souls. And I pray the
good LORD of his abundant Mercy, to increase them yet more and more.

Nevertheless, forasmuch as there is a false Zeal, and all is not a Zeal for
GOD and Religion, that at first seems to be so, suffer me, my dear Brethren,
with all Calmness, and without Offense unto any, to make Trial of some Things
that are, or have been common among us, (if we are not all imposed upon by
uncertain Rumors,) whether they are to be termed Zeal, in the religious and
good Sense of the Phrase, yea, or no.

And here, be pleased to call to Mind, that to render our Zeal right, or reduce
the Fervor of our Affections and Passions under due Regulation, which is a
great Part of the Business of true Religion, not only must the Object, about
which our Zeal is conversant, be good, but it must be Duty required of us, and
be guided by Knowledge, tempered with Prudence, and accompanied with Charity.

And now, my Brethren, Is it Zeal, I mean Zeal for GOD, and Religion, rightly
so called, to set up an unlearned, and ignorant Ministry in the Church of
CHRIST, that have no Pretensions to any extraordinary Call from GOD, only
because, it may be, they are good Men, can read English, speak tolerable
Sense, and give a good Exhortation, and have Assurance enough to go into the
awful Desk, or gather Crowds around them elsewhere? Or, is it Zeal in our
People to flock after them in Droves, and turn their Backs, with Contempt
enough upon their own able and faithful Ministers, which are of CHRIST'S
Appointment, that they may gratify their vain Curiosity, or, to speak in the
Language of the Apostle 2 Timothy iv. 3.
, After their own Lusts to heap up to themselves Teachers, having itching Ears?
Sure I am, that the Divine Law has drawn a sacred Enclosure about the
ministerial Office, both under the Old Testament, and the New: And therefore
this cannot be a Zeal guided by Knowledge.

Or, is it Zeal, in Ministers of the Gospel, to ramble from Place to Place,
where the golden Candlesticks are illuminated with burning and shining Lights,
and where the true Doctrines of the Gospel are dispensed, in Simplicity, and
with Power, and unasked, yea, without their Knowledge, invade other Shepherds
Flocks, and play the Bishop in another Man's Office; at the same Time leaving
their own Flocks destitute of the ordinary Means of Grace? Sure I am, that such
Things are contrary to the plain Laws of the Gospel; and therefore cannot be a
Zeal according to Knowledge.

But stay, Sir, will some Men say, here is nothing meant in all this but Good;
and may not a great deal of Good be done by it?

In Answer to which, I say, I very well know that GOD can bring Good out of
Evil, and I trust he will do so. But will this vindicate us, or any Men, in
doing what they, or we, ought not to do. I thought the Apostle had sufficiently
determined Romans iii. ^.
, That no Man may do Evil, that Good may come of it. Nor will any distant Hope
of doing Good vindicate our going out of our own Line, without a plain Call of
Providence; because this is to go out of GOD's Way: and I don't know what Right
we, or any Men, have to hope that any Good will follow upon going out of GOD's
Way.

Or, Is it Zeal, in any Preachers artfully to wind themselves into the
Affections of the People, and stir up their Passions, by the Powers of Oratory,
without conveying due Light into the reasonable Minds of their Hearers,
(without which they will never be Christians, let their Passions burn ever so
fiercely,) and to take Pains to puzzle them in their Religion, and at the same
Time reproach their faithful Ministers, whom they know not, as Pharisees,
Hypocrites, and carnal Formalists? What deeper Scheme can be laid to lead a
People where such Men please? And truly, my Brethren, had I not, at present,
more charitable Thoughts of some such, I should be ready, from this alone,
immediately to conclude, that they were designing to overthrow the pure
Religion of the Country.

Or, Is it a Zeal for GOD, personally to address such as are deservedly of good
Reputation for Religion, both by their Profession and their Lives, and such as
it may be they never saw before, and know nothing of unbecoming the Gospel of
CHRIST, and surprise them with the shocking Sound, You are Unconverted, you are
Unregenerate, you are in a damnable State; when, it may be, the Persons they so
Address are really good and holy Persons, and so what they affirm is false in
Fact, or, if they should not happen to be real serious Christians, it is never
the less false in them, because they know it not? Whose Name do such Teachers
come in? Whose Spirit are they influenced by? Verily, This is not a Zeal
governed by Knowledge, Prudence, or Charity.

Again, Is it Zeal in Persons, when their Fervor breaks out in such Things as
are really no Part of Religion, or wherein Religion is but little concerned; I
mean, if their Neighbors are not just of their Opinion, and Practice, yea, and
Experience too, in Religion; if they do not speak, exactly in the same Strain,
about the New Birth, if they have not felt the same violent Pangs and Twinges
of Conscience, and been affected with the same Measure of Humiliation, and
Sorrow of Soul for Sin, which, they say, they have felt, and been affected
with; presently to conclude, and pronounce, that they are unconverted, and in a
damnable State, having never truly repented of Sin, and come to CHRIST that
they may be saved by him? Such Persons may think, that they of all Men are sure
of Heaven, and damn all whom they imagine are not cast in the same Mould with
them: But let me tell you, this Zeal looks more like the wild Fire of human
Passions, Pride, and Self-Conceit, to say no worse, than a true Zeal for GOD;
because it is destitute of the Christian Graces, of Meekness, and Humility,
Love, and Charity, which are so essential to the Christian Religion: Nor know I
any Spirit more opposite to the Spirit of the Gospel.

Again; Is it Zeal to practice unlawful Methods to propagate a Cause, wherein,
even, Religion, and the Honor of GOD, may be concerned? May we kill our
Neighbor to do GOD Service? Or, may we reproach and stain his Character, and
blast his Name under a Pretense of advancing the Glory of GOD? Is the Spirit of
Calumny, and Reproach, and Reviling, and Slander, and Lying, which, it is to be
feared, has very much prevailed among many of those that have been very
zealous, in the present Affair, by the great Complaints of it, (something of
which also I have known, and felt,) I say, is this Spirit a Token of the Work
of GOD upon them, and their being truly zealous in his Cause? Verily, my
Neighbors, all the Pretensions in the World, to Zeal for GOD, will not alter
the Nature of Good and Evil. Lying will be Lying, and Calumny will be Calumny;
let Men do what they will. And do not such Things look like the Heat of human
Passions, of Men having an high Opinion of themselves, and a low Opinion of
others? And where Zeal breaks out so furiously in the unjust Censures of the
Tongue, is it not very probable, that it is only the Want of Power that
prevents their being as furious in the Cruelty of their Actions? And their
greatest Fondness for those of their own Party, if I may use the phrase, will
not atone for this Spirit toward them that differ from them.

Or, is it Zeal, in ignorant and weak People, who, possibly, may have some good
Dispositions, to run about, filling their Neighbor's Ears with passionate
Outcries, and enflaming their Passions, till their Breasts swell, and are ready
to burst, and their Blood is ready to fly out in their Faces, and they are
almost entirely berest of their Reason, and, it may be, join with them in one
hideous Exclamation, and the best Account they can give of it is, that they
cannot help it? Or is it Zeal for such Persons to pretend Trances, and Visions
of CHRIST, and Heaven, and Hell, and the State of Persons in the unseen World?
I wonder they have not yet pretended Inspiration also! Hearken, my beloved
Brethren, do we not distinguish the human Passions, by the Manner of their
working, and the Effects of them; and the working of the Spirit, of GOD, upon
the human Passions, by his Manner? Is it not the natural Working of the human
Passions, more or less, to put us beside ourselves, and out of our own
Government, by hindering the free Exercise of our Reason? And is it not the
Working of the Holy Spirit, upon our Passions, to direct, and regulate them, to
convey clearer Light to our Minds, that we may act as Men? Does the Holy Spirit
design to deprive us of our Reason, to make Christians of Us? Does not he ever
adapt himself to our rational Nature, in all his open Offers, and inward
Strivings with us? Which necessarily suppose the free Exercise of our Reason;
or how should we comply with his Motions and Strivings with us? Or, be faulty
if we did not? Would it not look more like the workings of the Spirit of GOD,
upon the Hearts of People, for them, under a deep Concern of Soul for their
eternal Salvation, to retire to their secret Devotions, and humble themselves
before GOD, in a Sense of their Sins, and earnestly beg Help from him, that
they may be lead to a saving Closure with the Lord JESUS CHRIST, by a true and
a lively Faith, and to an unseigned Repentance, and Life of Holiness, and go to
their Minister to direct them wherein they need Direction, and improve their
most serious Thoughts upon what they shall do to be saved, and immediately set
upon the doing of it? And does it not look like an heated Imagination, warm
Passions, and the Spirit of a Pharisee, who prayed in the Streets, and gave
Alms to be seen of Men, and to have Honor from them, for Persons to neglect
their Business, and run about, from House to House, and from Town to Town, to
tell the World what they feel, and what they do?

And, that I may not quite tire you, finally; Is it Zeal to disturb and
interrupt the Worship of GOD, with the Ungovernableness of human Passions, and
such confused Clamours, and Disorders, as have been in some Places, which it is
a Shame to speak of, and shocking to think of? Has GOD no Right to his Worship
because some are acted by lawless Passions? Or, is the End of Worship answered
by such Disorders? Or, if we were all generally thrown into like Disorders,
must we forever give up all Worship for the future, because the End is
answered? Or, have the Rest of the Community no Acknowledgments to make, no
Blessings to ask, or receive, because some are in such a Condition, that they
have no Command of themselves? And if, indeed, they have no Command of
themselves, as such a Time, what Spirit acts them? Verily; it is to be feared,
that there is but little true solid Religion, at the Bottom, where the Passions
of Men are so turbulent, and furious; for the Wrath of Man works not the
Righteousness of GOD Jam. i. 20.
. And indeed, how should it? The more a Man's Passions are let loose upon him,
the less Reason will ^e have in Exercise, and therefore be the less sit for
that which is the most sober, and rational, Things in the World. While we
suffer our Passions to cloud our Understandings, and that they will do, if we
give Scope to them, we shall not be very likely to form a true Judgment,
neither of Things, nor Persons, neither of our selves, nor others: and no
Wonder, then, if Persons under the Influence of strong Passions, and weak
Reasoning, are left to take such Methods, as pour the utmost Contempt upon
Religion, and turn it into Farce, and Ridicule, while they pretend to promote
it.

I have not said these Things, my Brethren, to discourage any real Work of GOD
among us, which I trust I do, and shall, labor, according to my Ability, and
Discernment, to promote with my whole Heart; but I fear many weak People are
led into great Mistakes of the Nature of Religion, and a true Zeal about it,
and I have sincerely aimed at the rectifying some Mistakes, and the seperating
of the vile from the Holy.

And one Thing, that has greatly swayed with me to say any Thing about these
Affairs, is the fearful Apprehensions I am under of the fatal Consequence of
such Mistakes, in the present State of Affairs among us, if it be not wisely
managed; I mean, lest the present Heat, about Religion, sink into total
Irreligion, from the ill Use, which the Enemies of all true Religion, will make
of what they observe, in the irregular Conduct, of some that are very zealous;
and from the natural Swing of the human Passions.

The World has had many Instances of apparent Zeal for Religion, and good Men
have been carried away with the strong Current, which have evidently proved, in
the Conclusion, to be nothing more than human Passions, heated Imagination,
accompanied with satanic Delusions, who knows how, and when, and upon what
Occasion, and after what Manner, to transform himself into an Angel of Light:
And they have generally, if not always, been so, when they have been attended
with Noise, and Tumult, with Apparitions, and Visions, and Trances, with
passionate Desires of seeing CHRIST, and Heaven, and conversing with Angels,
with the Pretensions of low, and mean, and ignorant People to be influenced by
the Divine Spirit, in taking upon them to be Preachers of the Gospel, and
Teachers of others, and these admired, and followed in Crowds, from Place to
Place, and with a general Clamor against the the standing Ministers, though
sound in their Doctrine, and exemplary in their Lives, as Pharisees,
Formalists, Hypocrites, and the like.

The human Passions rarely swing so forcibly, and far, one Way, but they recoil
as far an other. Extremes are nearer meeting than many are aware of. An
over-boiling Zeal for Religion, and no Religion at all, have often met in the
same Person. The Preacher mentions the two Extremes of, overmuch
Righteousness, and overmuch Wickedness, as bringing to the same End Ecel. vii.
16, 17.
. The Memory of some of us can furnish us with a flagrant Instance, of such as
lay many Months, if not Years, under the Terrors of Conscience, and, at length,
came out of that Frame with Light, and Comfort, and Joy, and were for several
Years, apparently virtuous, and godly, and religious in their Lives, and
peculiarly zealous in their Way about Religion, They kept the soberest Company,
frequented the Ministers, held their private Meeting with others at their
Places of Abode, had often the Ministers to preach to them; I have my self
preached to them, now, above Forty Years ago.
and yet alas, after all proved very wicked Persons.

O the Depths of Satan! We had need take Care not to be ignorant of his
Devices! and guard against the threatening Danger of mistaking human Passions,
for the working of the Spirit of GOD; and the burning Zeal, and hot Fervor of
these Passions, operating humanly if not worse, for a Zeal for GOD, and good
Works. And however a prudent Guard against foreseen Danger may be scoffed at,
as if we were to be laughed out of our Reason, and Religion, at once, yet I
pray GOD make us all, especially his Ministers, wise as Serpents, and harmless
as Doves. But I have done, when I have said,

USE III. And now, let us all be persuaded to become truly zealous of good
Works. This is a Zeal that is laudable, commendable, before GOD and Man; a Zeal
which GOD will approve of, and plentifully reward. Let it, therefore, be the
^ervent Desire, the earnest and unsatisfied Longings of our Souls, to be our
selves good, and to do all the good, we can. Until we are good, we can do no
good Work; The Tree must be first made good, before it will bring forth any
good Fruits Mat. xii. 33.
. And this we had need of all Things to be zealous about; because there is
nothing of so great Concernment to us, and we have but a little uncertain Inch
of Time, to get this great Work accomplished in. Our eternal Interest turns
upon our being good, truly so. If we are not recovered from the Apostasy of our
Natures, if we are not brought home to GOD, by a Work of his Spirit upon us,
converting had changing our Hearts, and forming of us anew, after the Divine
Likeness, we are yet under Adam's Covenant, the Sentence of Condemnation is out
against us, and we have no possible Way of escaping the tremendous Wrath of an
Almighty GOD; without this Divine Workmanship upon us, the Gates of Heaven will
be fast shut against us, and Hell, from beneath, will gape wide to receive us,
and it will not be in the Power of all created Nature to prevent our sinking
down into the Damnation of Hell Mat. xxiii. 33.
. And, alas! how little and uncertain a Time have those of us, who are yet in
their unregenerate State, lest us, to get the Disorders of our Hearts cured,
our vicious Habits rectified, the Errors of our Lives corrected, and the Divine
Life produced in us: A Year, a Month, or a Night, may put an End to all
Opportunities herefor forever. Here, therefore, we have Reason to lay out our
Zeal, and Fervor, and be in Earnest, in Agony of Soul, 'till we have some good
Grounds to hope, that the new Man is formed in us.

Therefore, I beseech you, my Brethren, stir up your selves to take hold on
CHRIST, and his offered Salvation, how, while the Day of Grace lasts with
you. Oh! delay not, but make speed, haste to the City of Refuge, least the
Avenger of Blood overtake you. Don't think that your Tears, and Cries, will
save you; don't imagine that your own Fig-leaf'd Righteousness will cover your
Deformity from an all-seeing GOD, and render you comely, and acceptable in his
Sight: but get into CHRIST, who gives Repentance, and Remission of Sins.

You will never be able to do any one good Thing, acceptable and pleasing to
GOD, 'till you are in CHRIST JESUS, and derive of his Fullness, and Grace for
Grace. Without me, said CHRIST, John xv. 5.
ye can do nothing; but he that abides in me, and I in him, the same brings
forth much Fruit. If you are in CHRIST, then will he, of GOD, be made unto you,
Wisdom, and Righteousness, and Sanctification, and Redemption; and though your
Sins have been ever so many, and great, yet GOD, for CHRIST'S Sake, will freely
overlook, and forgive them all; and though your Corruptions be ever so strong,
yet Sin shall not have Dominion over you.

CHRIST, now, graciously invites you to come to him, and partake of his blessed
Fullness; He faith to you, (...) 28.
Come unto me, all ye that labor, and are heaven laden, and I will give you
Rest; He says, Isaiah xlv. 22.
Look unto me, and be ye saved, all the Ends of the Earth. Oh! then, look, Oh!
come to him, and partake of Grace, and Pardon, and Life from him!

But take heed, you don't deceive your selves with a vain Fancy, a bold
Presumption, a carnal Dependence upon the Merits of CHRIST, without submitting
your selves to his Terms; but be exceeding careful, in this Matter, that you
sincerely yield a hearty Consent of your Souls to the Proposals of the Gospel,
and comply with the Demands thereof, that CHRIST shall be your Prophet, to
teach you, your Kin^, to rule you, by his Word, and Spirit, as well as your
(...) to make Atonement for you; and then may you, (...) Comfort, depend upon
his infinite Merits as yours, and say, with an holy Complacency of Soul, My
Beloved is mine, and I am his, and his Desire is toward me.

To this End, diligently wait upon GOD, in the Use of all appointed Means, with
a Soul thirsting after the blessed Benefits that are wont to be communicated in
them; and cease not Day and Night, to pray with the greatest Fervency and
Importunity, that GOD would create in you a clean Heart, and renew a right
Spirit within you; and humbly protest before the LORD, that you will not let
him go, except he bless you.

And then, be zealous of every good Work. Zealously pursue the Death of Sin, in
thy own Soul, being more watchful against the corrupt Workings of thy own
Heart, and more strenuously resist the Allurements of the World, and the
Temptations of the Devil, and his Instruments. Zealously set your self to the
Performance of the good, perfect, and acceptable Will of GOD, in all Things,
and be very holy in all Manner of Conversation and Godliness. Embrace every
Opportunity, of serving GOD, and doing Good, to all about you, that comes
within your Sphere, and Capacity: And let your Light so shine before Men, so
that they may see your good Works, and glorify your Father which is in Heaven.
Be more truly devout and pious toward GOD, walking in all his Ordinances and
Commandments blameless; more strictly just, and true, and charitable, kind and
beneficent, to your Fellow Creatures; and more sober, temperate, pure and
circumspect in your whole Walk. Let every one cease judging the Hearts of
others, and look more into their own Hearts. It is a shrewd Sign that they
dwell but little at home, who are ever rambling abroad. Be more therefore in
communing with your own Hearts, and rectifying all that is amiss there; and, in
a Word, abhor that which is Evil, and cleave to that which is Good.

Set therefore, the Example of CHRIST before your Eyes, who always went about
doing Good, and let the View thereof fire you with a noble Ambition to be, and
do, like him: for he, that faith, be a^ideth in him, ought so to walk, even as
he walked ^ John ii. 6.
. Can there be a ^righter Pattern set before us than that of our blessed LORD
and Master? Alas! There will be many Blurs, in the Copies which the best of Men
set us, and we shall be in very great Danger of imitating their Foibles, and
Defects, if we have our Eyes too much fixed upon them; but CHRIST'S Example is
wholly void of all Defect, and we need not fear the nearest Imitation of him,
wherein soever he is imitable by us. Let the same Mind, therefore, be in you,
which was in CHRIST JESUS; and Evidence that you are his Disciples, by your
sincere Endeavors that, as he was in this World, so ye may be also.

Then, may you have Boldness, in a dying Hour, and at the Day of Judgment. It
will administer no real Comfort to you, at the Hour of Death, to reflect upon
your fair Estates, and large Possessions, your Posts, and Title^ of Honor,
your great Accomplishments, and the Esteem the World has for you; but to be
able, in Sincerity, to reflect upon this Fruit and Proof of your Faith in
CHRIST, and Interest in him, that you have been zealous of good Works, that you
have made Conscience of doing your Duty to GOD, and Man, that you have acted
with an holy Fervor of Soul, in doing the Will of GOD, and serving your
Generation, in all their Interests according to your Station, and Capacity; how
will this refresh thy Soul, and alleviate the Pangs of Death, and make the
Prospect thereof tolerable to you? so Hezekiah, in his Sickness, comforted
himself, saying Isa. xxxviiii. 3.
Remember now, O LORD, I (...) thee, how I have walked before thee, in Truth,
and with a perfect Heart, and have done that which was Good in thy Sight. So
the holy Apostle Paul comforted himself, in the View of his Departure out of
this World, saying ^ Tim. iv. 6, 7, 8.
I am now ready to be offered, and the Time of my Departure is at Hand; I have
fought the good Fight. I have finished my Course, I have kept the Faith;
henceforth there is laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness. And so too our
glorious Redeemer fortified himself against his approaching (...) and Death,
saying, John ^vii. 4, 5.
I have glorified thee on the (...), I have finished the Work which thou gave
me to do; and now, O Father, glorify me with thin^ own self.

While the Wicked and Ungodly encounter Death, with trembling Joints, and
aching Hearts, and take a Prospect of the approaching Judgment with utmost
Horror, and Confusion of Mind, at the fearful Expectation of (...) Indignation
to devour them: he, that has been truly zealous of good Works, may look upon
the great Day of the LORD, with an holy Composure of Soul, and with the
Comfortable Thought, that it will be the Day of his (...) to the SON of GOD,
the Day wherein all his good Deeds shall be openly acknowledged and abundantly
rewarded.

And, Oh! the matchless Rewards that are reserved for such an one! Sometimes
GOD is pleased greatly to reward his zealous Servants, with temporal Blessings
in this World; but however, if they should meet with little or no, Rewards
here, yet great shall be their Reward in Heaven? Great beyond what any Tongue
can now tell, or Heat conceive! By their being zealous of good Works, they have
made to themselves Friends, which shall receive them into everlasting
Habitations! For them is reserved the Inheritance incorruptible, undefiled,
which fades not away! For them are prepared the Throne and Kingdom! For them
are laid up the Joys of their LORD, even the Joys of the Marriage of the Lamb!
For them awaits the Resurrection of the Just, and the (...) of immortal Life,
and Glory!

Well then, Let us all take the Encouragement, and from this Time forward, make
it the fixed Resolution of our Souls, to become zealous of good Works, to be
(...), immovable, always ^^^unding in the Work of the LORD, being assured that
our blessed Savior will make good (...) unto us, John v. 29.
They that have done Good shall (...) the Resurrection of Life.

which GOD, of His infinite Mercy, grant may be the happy Portion of us all,
through JESUS CHRIST, our LORD, to whom be Glory for ever. Amen.

FINIS.

