A TRUE and HISTORICAL NARRATIVE Of the COLONY of GEORGIA In America, From the
first Settlement thereof until this present Period: CONTAINING The most
authentic Facts, Matters and Transactions therein; TOGETHER WITH His Majesty's
Charter, Representations of the People, Letters etc. AND A Dedication to his
Excellency General OGLETHORPE.

By PAT (...), ^.D. (...), M.A. DA. (...)
Land-holders in Georgia (...) Charlestown in South Carolina

^
^
^
^
^
^
(...) (...)

To his Excellency James Oglethorpe, Esquire General and Commander in chief of his
Majesty Forces in South Carolina and Georgia; and one of the honorable
Trustees for establishing, the Colony of Georgia in America, etc.
May it please your Excellency,
AS the few surviving Remains of the Colony of Georgia find it necessary to
present the World (and in particular Great Britain) with a true State of that
Province from its first Rise to its present Period. (...) Excellency (of all
Mankind) is best entitled to the Dedication, as the principal Author of its
present Strength and Affluence, Freedom and Prosperity: And though incontestable
Truths will (...) the following NARRATIVE to (...) attentive Reader; yet your
Name, (...) will be no little Ornament to the Frontis^^^ and may possibly
engage some courteous (...) beyond it.

That Dedication and Flattery are synonimous, is the Complaint of every
Dedicator who concludes himself ingenious and fortunate, if he can discover a
less trite and direct Method of flattering than is usually practiced; but we
are happily prevented from the least Intention of this kind, by the repeated
Offerings of the Muses and News Writers to your Excellency in the public
Papers: 'Twere prefumptuous even to dream of equalling or increasing them; we
therefore flatter ourselves, that nothing we can advance will in the least
shock your Excellency's Modesty; not doubting but your Goodness will pardon any
Deficiency of Elegance and Politeness on account of our Sincerity, and the
serious Truths we have the Honor to approach you with.

We have seen the ancient Custom of sending forth Colonies for the Improvement
of any distant Territory, or new Acquisition, continued down to ourselves; but
to your Excellency alone it is owing, that the World is made acquainted with a
Plan, highly refined from those of all former Projectors. They fondly imagined
it necessary to communicate to such young Settlements, the fullest Rights and
Properties, all the Immunities of their Mother Countries, and Privileges rather
more extensive: By such Means indeed these Colonies flourished with early Trade
and Affluence; but your Excellency's Concern for our perpetual Welfare could
never permit you to propose such transitory Advantages for us: You considered
Riches like a Divine and Philosopher, as the irritamenta malorum, and knew that
they were disposed in inflate weak Minds with Pride, to pamper the Body with
Luxury, and introduce a long Variety of Evils. Thus have you protected us from
our selves, as Mr. Walter says, by keeping all earthly Comforts from us. You
have afforded us the Opportunity of arriving at the Integrity of the Primitive
Times, by entailing a more than Primitive Poverty on us: The Toil that is
necessary to our bare Subsistence must effectually defend us from the Anxieties
of any further Ambition: As we have no Properties to feed Vainglory and beget
Contention, so we are not puzzled with any System of Laws to ascertain and
establish them: The valuable Virtue of Humility is secured to us by your Care,
to prevent our procuring, or so much as seeing any Negroes, (the only human
Creatures proper to improve our Soil) lest our Simplicity might mistake the
poor Africans for greater Slaves than ourselves: And that we might fully
receive the Spiritual Benefit of those wholesome Austerities, you have wisely
denied us the Use of such Spiritous Liquors as might in the least divert our
Minds from the Contemplation of our happy Circumstances.

Our Subject swells upon us; and did we allow ourselves indulge our
Inclination, without considering our weak Abilities, we should be tempted to
launch out into many of your Excellency's extraordinary Endowments, which do
not so much regard the Affair in Hand; but as this would lead us beyond the
Bounds of a Dedication, so would it engross a Subject too extensive for us, to
the Prejudice of other Authors and Panegyrists; we shall therefore confine
ourselves to that remarkable Scene of your Conduct, whereby Great Britain in
general, and the Settlers of Georgia in particular, are laid under such
inexpressible Obligations.

Be pleased then, Great SIR, to accompany our heated Imaginations, in taking a
View of this colony of Georgia, this Child of your auspicious Politics,
arrived at the utmost Vigor of its Constitution, at a Term when most former
States have been struggling through the Convulsions of their Infancy. This
early Maturity, however, lessens our Admiration that your Excellency lives to
see (what few Founders ever aspired after) the great Decline and almost final
Termination of it. So many have finished their Course during the Progress of
the Experiment, and such Numbers have retreated from the Phantoms of Poverty
and Slavery, which their cowardly Imaginations pictured to them, that you may
justly vaunt with the boldest Hero of them all, Like Death you reign
Over Silent Subjects and a desert Plain.
BUSIRIS.

Yet must your Enemies (if you have any) be reduced to confess, that no
ordinary Statesman could have digested in the like Manner so capacious a
Scheme, such a copious Jumble of Power and Politics, We shall content
ourselves with observing, that all those beauteous Models of Government which
the little States of Germany exercise, and those extensive Liberties which the
Boors of Poland enjoy, were designed to concenter in your System; and were we
to regard the Modes of Government, we must have been strangely unlucky to have
missed of the best, where there was the Appearance of so great a Variety; for
under the Influence of our Perpetual Dictator we have seen something like
Aristocracy, Oligarchy, as well as the Triumvirate, Decemvirate, and Consular
Authority of famous Republics, which have expired many Ages before us. What
Wonder then we share the same Fare? Do their Towns and Villages exist but in
Story and Rubbish? We are all over Ruins; our Publick-works, Forts, Wells,
Highways, Light-house, Store and Water-mills, etc. are dignified like theirs
with the same venerable Desolation. The Log-house indeed is like to be the last
forsaken Spot of your Empire; yet even this, through the Death or Desertion of
those who should continue to inhabit it must suddenly decay; the bankrupt
Jailor himself shall be soon denied the Privilege of human Conversation; and
when this last Moment of the S^ell expires, the whole shall vanish like the
Illusion of some Eastern (...).

But let not this (...) Prospect impress your Excellency with any Fears of
having your Services to Mankind, and to the Settlers of Georgia in particular,
buried in Oblivion; for if we diminutive Authors are allowed to prophesy, (as
you know Poets in those Cases formerly did) we may confidently presage. That
while the Memoirs of America continue to be read in English, Spanish, or the
Language of the Scots Highlanders, your Excellency's Exploits and Epoch will
be transmitted to posterity.

Should your Excellency apprehend the least Tincture of Flattery in any thing
already hinted, we may sincerely assure you we intended nothing that our
Sentiments did not very strictly attribute to your Merit; and in such
Sentiments we have the Satisfaction of being fortified by all Persons of
Impartiality and Discernment.

But to trespass no longer on those Minutes, which your Excellency may suppose
more significantly employed on the Sequel, let it suffice at present to assure
you, that we are deeply affected with your Favors; and though unable of
ourselves properly to acknowledge them, we shall embrace every Opportunity of
Recommending you to higher Powers, who (we are hopeful) will reward your
Excellency according to your MERIT.

May it please your Excellency, Your Excellency's Most devoted Servants. The
Land-holders of GEORGIA. Authors of the following Narrative.

PREFACE
THE Colony of Georgia has afforded so much subject of Conversation to the
World, that it is not to be questioned, but a true and impartial Account of it
from its first Settlement to its present Period, will be generally agreeable;
and the more so, that the Subject has hitherto been so much disguised and
misrepresented in Pamphlets, Poems, Gazettes and Journals.

If it is asked, Why this NARRATIVE has not been published to the World sooner?
We assign two Reasons, which (we doubt not) will be satisfactory.

First, A Number of Honorable Gentlemen accepted the Charge of Trustees for
executing the Purposes in his Majesty's most gracious CHARTER; Gentlemen, whose
Honor and Integrity we never did, nor yet do call in question: But, to our
great Misfortune, none of that honorable Body (excepting Mr. OGLETHOTPE) ever
had Opportunity of viewing the Situation and Circumstances of the Colony, and
judging for themselves as to the Necessities thereof. How far Mr. Oglethorpe's
Schemes were consistent with the Welfare or Prosperity of it, will best appear
from the following Narrative.

When Experience gradually unfolded to us the Alterations we found absolutely
requisite to our subsisting, we made all dutiful and submissive Applications to
these our Patrons, in whom we placed so much Confidence: This Course we judged
the most proper and direct, and therefore repeated these our dutiful
Applications, both to the Body of the Trustees and to Mr. Oglethorpe; but alas!
our Miseries could not alter his Views of things, and therefore we could obtain
no Redress from him; and the honorable Board we found were prejudiced against
our Petitions (no don'^) through Misinformations and Misrepresentations; an^ his
(we are confident) a further Enquiry and Time will convince them of.

The inviolable Regard we paid to the honorable Board kept us from applying to
any other Power for Redress, whilst the least Hopes could be entertained of any
from them: And we make no doubt, but that our Moderation in this respect will
recommend us to all Persons of Humanity.

A second Reason is, That as we had daily Occasion of seeing our supreme
Magistrates, who ruled over us with unlimited Power, exercising illegal Acts of
Authority, by Threatenings, Imprisonments, and other Oppressions; therefore we
had just Reason to apprehend, that any further Steps to obtain Relief might
subject us to the like Effects of arbitrary Power; so, until now, that a
handful of us have made our Escape to a Land of Liberty, (after having made
Shipwreck of our Time and Substance in that unhappy Colony) we had it not in
our Power to represent the State of that Settlement to the World, or make our
Application to higher Powers for Redress.

We are hopeful that the Perusal of the following Sheets will rectify two sorts
of Readers in their Surprise in relation to the Colony of GEORGIA, viz. Those
of Great Britain, who have never known this Part of the World but by
Description; and those of America The First are no doubt surprised to think it
possible, that so pleasant and temperate a Crime, so fruitful a Soil, such
extensive Privileges, all which were publicly given out, and such considerable
Sums of public and private Benefactions, have not satisfied and enriched us:
Them we refer to the following Narrative for Satisfaction. The American Reader,
on the other hand, must be equally surprised to find that such Numbers should
have been so fooled and blindfolded, as to expect to live in this Part of
America by Cultivation of Lands without Negroes, and much more without Titles
to their Lands, and laid under a Load of Grievances and Restrictions: And though
these were redressed, how could Persons in their Senses ever imagine, that
Fifty Acres of Pine-Barren, not value Fifty Sixpences in Property, (and whereof
many Thousands may be purchased at half that rate in the neighboring Province)
could maintain a Family of White People, and pay such Duties and Quit-rents in
a few years, as the richest Grounds in Carolina, or other Provinces in America,
will never bear? To these last we shall only beg Leave to observe, that such
fatal Artifice was used, (we shall not say by whom) such specious Pretenses
were made use of, and such real Falsities advanced, and the smallest
Foundations of Truth magnified to Hyperbole; that we, who had no Opportunity of
knowing otherways, or means of learning the real Truth, and being void of all
Suspicion of Artifice or Design, easily believed all these, and fell into the
Decoy.

The Mind of Man is naturally curious and enterprizing; we easily seed our
Wishes into Realities, and affect and look upon every Novelty in the most
favorable Light; how easy then is it for Cunning and Artifice to lay hold on
the weak Sides of our Fellow Creatures, as we catch Fish with a Hook baited to
their particular Gout?

To prove this Charge, we shall only transcribe some Passages from a Piece of
Prose, and some from a Piece of P^^sie; by which specimens the Reader may judge
of some considerable Number which were dispersed and vended of the same Stamp.

The First are from a Pamphlet printed at London 1733, entitled, A new and
accurate Account of the Provinces of SOUTH CAROLINA and GEORGIA. The Author has
not thought fit to favor us with his Name; but it is easy to conceive that we,
who suspected no Artifice or Design, must conclude that it came from the best
Authority, from the Circumstances of its being dispersed publicly, and not
being contradicted, and from the Author's intimate Acquaintance (at least so
pretended) with all the Trustees Measures and Designs. After a high Encomium
upon the Trustees, Page 7, he says, The Air of GEORGIA is healthy, being always
serene and pleasant, never subject to excessive Heat or Cold, or sudden Changes
of Weather; the Winter is regular and short, and the Summer cooled with
refreshing Breezes; it neither feels the cutting North-west Wind that the
Virginians complain of, nor the intense Heats of Spain, Barbary, Italy, and
Egypt. The Soil will produce any thing with very little Culture. -- Page 19,
All Sorts of Corn yield an amazing Increase; one Hundredfold is the common
Estimate, though their Husbandry if so slight, that they can only be said to
scratch the Earth, and merely to cover the Seed: All the best Sort of Cattle
and Fowls are multiplied without Number, and therefore without a Price: Vines
are Natives here. -- Page 21, The Woods near Savannah are not hard to be
cleared, many of them have no Under-Wood, and the Trees do not stand generally
thick on the Ground, but at considerable Distances asunder: When you fell the
Timber for Use, or to make Tar, the Root will rot in four or five Years; and in
the mean time you may pasture the Ground; but if you would only destroy the
Timber, it is done by half a Dozen Strokes of an Ax surrounding each Tree a
little above the Root, in a Year or two the Water geting into the Wound rots
the Timber, and a brisk Gust of Wind fells many Acres for you in an Hour, of
which you may make one bright Bon-fire. Such will be frequently here the Fate
of the Pine, the Walnut, the Cypress, the Oak and the Cedar. Such an Air and
Soil can only be described by a Poetical Pen, because there is no Danger of
exceeding the Truth; therefore take WALLER's Description of an Island in the
Neighborhood at CAROLINA, to give you an Idea of this happy Climate: The
Spring, which but salutes us here,
Inhabits there, and courts them all the Year:
Ripe Fruits and Blossoms on the same Tree live;
At once they promise what at once they give.
So sweet the Air, so moderate the Clime,
None sickly lives, or dies before his Time.
Heaven sure has kept this Spot of Earth uncurst,
To show how all things were created first.


Page27, The Indians bring many a Mile the whole Deers Flesh, which they sell
to the People who live in the Country for the Value of Sixpence Sterling; and a
Wild Turkey of Forty Pound Weight for the Value of Two Pence. -- In page 32,
the Author when recommending the Georgia Adventure to Gentlemen of decayed
Circumstances, who must labor at home or do worse, states the following
Objection, viz. If such People cannot get Bread here for their Labor, how will
their Condition be mended in GEORGIA? Which he solves in the following Manner,
-- The Answer is easy; Part of it is well attested, and Part Selfevident; they
have Land there for nothing, and that Land so fertile, that, as is said before,
they receive an Hundredfold Increase, for taking a very little Pains. Give here
in England ten Acres of good Land to one of those helpless Persons, and I doubt
not his Ability to make it sustain him, and by his own Culture, without letting
it to another; but the Difference between no Rent and racked Rent, is the
Difference between eating and starving. Page 32, These Trustees not only give
Land to the Unhappy who go thither, but are also empowered to receive the
voluntary Contributions of charitable Persons, to enable to furnish the poor
Adventurers with all Necessaries for the Expense of their Voyage, occupying the
Land, and supporting them till they find themselves comfortably settled; so
that now the Unfortunate will not be obliged to bind themselves to a long
Servitude to pay for their Passage, for they may be carried gratis into a Land
of Liberty and Plenty, where they immediately find them selves in the
Possession of a competent Estate, in an happier Climate than they knew before,
and they are unfortunate indeed, if here they cannot forget their Sorrows. --
Nay, as if such Assertions as these were not powerful enough to influence poor
People, Calculations are subjoined, to demonstrate, that a Family consisting of
one poor Man, his Wife, and Child of seven years old, may in Georgia earn sixty
Pounds Sterling per Annum, and this abstracted from Silk, Wine, etc. Page 41,
Now this very Family in Georgia, by raising Rice and Corn sufficient for its
Occasions, and by attending the Care of their Cattle and Land (which almost
every one is able to do in some tolerable Degree for himself) will easily
produce in gross Value the Sum of sixty Pounds Sterling per Annum; nor is this
to be wondered at, because of the valuable Assistance it has from a fertile Soil
and a Stock given gratis; which must always be remembered in this Calculation.

The Calculation of one Hundred such Families when formally extended, stands
thus, -- Page 43, l. s. d In London one Hundred poor Men earn 500 00 00 One
Hundred Women and One Hundred Children, 500 00 00 1000 00 00 In Georgia an
hundred Families earn, One Hundred Men for Labor, 1200 00 00 Di^to for Care of
their Stock at Leisure Hours, 1200 00 00 One Hundred Women and One Hundred
Children, 2400 00 00 Land and Stock in themselves, 1200 00 00 Total, 6000 00 00

Q. E. D.

But we must conclude this Head, lest we tire the Reader. We shai^ now beg
Leave to quote a few Poetical Accounts of this Paradise of the World, and of
the Fatherly Care and Protection we might depend on from Mr. Oglethorpe. An
hundred Hackney Muses might be instanced; but we shall confine ourselves to the
celebrated Performance of the Rev. Mr. Samuel Wesley, where we might will
expect a sufficient Stock of Truth and Religion, to counter-ballance a Poetical
License. Vide a Poem ent^tuled, GEORGIA, Verses upon Mr.OGLE^^RPE'S second
Voyage to GEORGIA. Printed London, 1736.

SEE where beyond the spacious Ocean lies
A wide waste Land beneath the Southern Skies;
(...) kindly S^^s for Ages rolled in vain,
(...) the Vintage saw, or ripening Grain;
(...) into wild Lux^iance ran,
(...) the Aid of Man.
In this sweet Climate and prolisick Soil,
He bids the eager Swain indulge his Toil;
In free Possession to the Planter's Hand,
Consigns the rich uncultivated Land.
Go you, the Monarch cries, go settle there,
Whom Britain from her Plenitude can spare:
Go, your old wonted Industry pursue;
Nor envy Spain the Treasures of Peru.
But not content in Council here to join,
A Further Labor, OGLETHORPE, is thine:
In each great Deed thou claim'st the foremost Part,
And Toil and Danger charm thy generous Heart:
But chief for this thy warm Affections rise,
For oh! thou view'st it with a Parent's Eyes:
For this thou tempt'st the vast tremenduous Main,
And Floods and Storms oppose their Threats in vain. --
He comes, whose Life, while absent from your View,
Was one continued Ministry for you;
For you were laid out all his Pains and Art,
Won every Will, and softened every Heart.
With what paternal Joy shall he relate
How views its Mother Isle your little State:
Think while he strove your distant Coast to gain,
How often he sighed and chid the tedious Main!
Impatient to survey, by Culture graced,
Your dreary Wood-land and your rugged Waste.
Fair were the Scenes he feigned, the Prospects fair;
And sure, ye Georgians, all he feigned was there.
A Thousand Pleasures crowd into his Breast,
But one, one mighty Thought, abso^bs the rest,
And gives me Heaven to see (the Patriot cries)
Another BRITAIN in the Desert rife. --
Again, With nobler Products see thy GEORGIA teems,
Ch^ar'd with the genial Sun's directer Beams;
There the wild Vine to Culture learns to yield,
And purple Clusters ripen through the Field.
Now bid thy Merchants bring thy Wine no more,
Or from the Iberian or the Tuscan Shore:
No m^re they need the Hungarian Vineyards drain,
And France herself may drink her best Champaign.
Beh^ld! at last, and in a subject Land,
Nectar sufficient for thy large Demand:
Delicious Nectar, powerful to improve
Our hospitable Mirth and social Love:
This for thy jovial Sons. -- Nor less the Care
Of thy young Province, to oblige the FAIR;
Here tend the Silkworm in the verdant Shade,
The ^^ugal Matron and the blooming Maid.
From the Whole, we doubt not, the Reader will look (...) us as sufficiently
punished for our Credulity: And (...), who would not have been caught with
such Promises, such Prospects? What might not the Poor Man (...) himself with,
from such an Alteration in his (...)? And how much more might a Gentleman
expect (...) plentiful Stock of his own, and Numbers of Servants to set up
with? Could a Person with the least (...), questioned the Committing his
Interests to (...) Guardians, and such a tender Father as Mr. Oglethorpe was
believed to be? Whether he has acted that (...) was, that humane, that fatherly
Part, the following (...) ^ust determine.

(...) for these Poetical Licenses touching the Wine and (...) we do not
transcribe them as a Reflection upon the (...) as a Satyr upon Mismanagement of
th^se (...), since no Measures were taken that seemed (...) their Advancement.

We no wise question the Possibility of advancing such Improvements in GEORGIA,
with far less Sums of Money, properly applied, than the Public has bestowed:
But not even the Flourishing of Wine and Silk, can make a Colony of British
Subjects happy, if they are deprived of the Liberties and Properties of their
Birthright.

We have endeavored to the Utmost to be tender of Characters; but as we
undertake to write an Account of Facts and Truths, there is no help for it,
when those Facts and Truths press home.

It is a common Satisfaction to Sufferers, to expose to the Public the Rocks
upon which they split, and the Misfortunes by which they suffered; and it may
well be allowed us, to publish the Causes to which we attribute the Ruin of
that Settlement and ourselves; and more especially as we are Prosecutors for
Justice from higher Powers; which we doubt not receiving as the Case deserves.

We hope the Truth of the following Narrative will recommend itself to the
Perusal of the candid Reader. The fatal Truths of this Tragedy has already
been sealed with the Death of Multitudes of our Fellow Creatures; but still
(Thanks to the Providence of the Almighty) some survive to attest and confirm
the Truth of what is here in contained, against any Persons or Names, however
great, however powerful. Our Circumstances and Sincerity will excuse our want
of that Politeness and Accuracy of Style, which might have represented our Case
to greater Advantage to the Courteous Reader, whom we shall no longer detain^
from the subject in hand.

A true and historical NARRATIVE, etc.
NOTHING is more difficult for Authors than to divest themselves of Bias and
Partiality, especially when they themselves are Parties or Sufferers in the
Affair treated of.

It is possible this may be supposed the Case with us (...) Publishers of this
Narrative; it may be imagined, (...) the Hardships, Losses and Disappointments
we have (...) with in the Colony of Georgia, will naturally sour (...) Humors,
and engage us to represent every thing (...) worst Light.

(...) the Probability of those Surmises is very obvious (...) we have, to the
utmost of our Power, guarded (...) the weak Side of ourselves; and to convince
the (...) our Sincerity, shall no further descend into the (...) of particular
Persons, than is absolutely (...) for making our General Narrative
intelligible; (...) faithful Detail of public Vouchers, Records, (...),
Memorials and Representations, shall (...) so much of History as may be
necessary to (...) material Events, and complete the Co^^

We are hopeful, that an information founded upon the strictest Truth will
effectually introduce any further Steps that Providence shall enable us to take
toward procuring the Redress of our Grievances. While we had the least Hopes
of Redress from our immediate Superiors and Patrons, we would not; and when we
began to despair of Relief by that Channel, we durst not make Application to
any other Tribunal, unless we would expose ourselves to the dreadful Effects of
the Resentment of those who had before reduced us to Poverty by Oppression: And
indeed, in all the Applications we made for Redress, we were brow-beat,
obstructed, threatened, and branded with opprobrious Names, such as prou^, idle,
lazy, discontented and mutinous People, and several other Appellations of that
kind, and were always afterward harrassed by all Means whatsoever; several
Instances of which will appear to the Reader in the Sequel.

Our late Retreat from that Confinement to a Land of Liberty puts it in our
Power to speak the Truth; and though our Endeavors are too late to relieve the
dead, the dying, and those many now dispersed in all the Corners of his
Majesty's Dominions; yet they may be the Means of ushering in Sympathy and
Assistance to the Survivors, and to Multitudes of Widows and Orphans of the
deceased from the humane and generous.

As our sole Design is to give A plain Narrative of the Establishment and
Progress of the Colony of GEORGIA, from its Rise to its present Period, we
shall court no other Ornaments than those of Truth and Perspicuity, and shall
endeavor to carry the Reader's Attention regularly from the first to the last
Motions we make mention of.

In the year 1732 his Majesty was pleased to erect, by his ROYAL CHARTER, into
a separate Province, distinct from South Carolina, that Space of Land lying
between the Rivers Savannah and Alatamaha, under the Name of GEORGIA.

As this gracious Charter is the Basis and Foundation of all the Transactions
relating to this Province, which (...) so much amused and perplexed the World,
and which our Endeavor is to set in a true Light, we can^^^ dispense with
inserting the Charter at large, which, (...) are confident, for many Reasons,
will be acceptable to the Reader.

GEORGE the Second, by the Grace of GOD, of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
KING, Defender of the Faith, etc. To all to whom these Presents shall come
Greeting. WHEREAS we are credibly informed, That many of Our poor Subjects are,
through Misfortunes, and Want of Employment, reduced to great, Necessity,
insomuch as by their Labor they are not able to provide a Maintenance for
themselves and Families; and if they had Means to defray their Charges of
Passage, and other Expenses incident to new Settlements, they would be glad to
settle in any of Our Provinces in America; where, by cultivating the Lands at
prese^^ waste and desolate, they might not only gain ^^comfortable Subsistence
for themselves and Families, but also strengthen Our Colonies, and increase the
Trade, Navigation and Wealth of these Our Realms. (...) whereas Our Provinces
in North America have been frequently ravaged by Indian Enemies, more
especially that of South Carolina, which in the la^e War (...) the neighboring
Savages was laid waste by Fire of (...) Sword, and great Numbers of the English
Inhabi^^^^, miserably massacred; and Our loving Subjects (...) now inhabit
there, by reason of the Smallness of (...) Numbers, will, in case of a new War,
be exposed to the late Calamities, inasmuch as their whole (...) Frontier
continues unsettled, and lies open (...) Savages. AND whereas we think it
high^^^ (...) our Crown and Royal Dignity to protoct (...) Subjects, be they
never so distant from (...) Our fatherly Compassion even to the meanest and
most insatuate of Our People, and to relieve the Wants of Our above mentioned
poor Subjects; and that it will be highly conducive for accomplishing those
Ends, that a regular Colony of the said poor People be settled and established
in the southern Territories of Carolina: AND whereas We have been well assured,
That if We would be graciously pleased to erect and settle a Corporation for
the receiving, managing and disposing of the Contributions of Our loving
Subjects, diverse Persons would be induced to contribute to the Purposes
aforesaid, KNOW YE therefore, That We have, for the Considerations aforesaid,
and for the better and more orderly carrying on the said good Purposes, of Our
special Grace, certain Knowledge, and mere Motion, Willed, Ordained,
Constituted and Appointed, and by these Presents, for Us, Our Heirs and
Successors, do Will, Ordain, Constitute, Declare and Grant, That Our Right
trusty and Well-beloved John Lord Viscount Purcival of Our Kingdom of Ireland,
Our Trusty and Well-beloved Edward Dig^y, George Carpenter, James Oglethorpe,
George Heathcote, Thomas Tower, Robert Moor, Robert Hucks, Roger Holland,
William Sloper, Francis Eyles, John Laroche, James Vernon, William Bcletha,
Esqrs. A. M. John Burton, B. D. Richard Bundy, A. M. Arthur Bedford, A. M.
Samuel Smith, A. M. Adam Anderson and Thomas Coram, Gentlemen, and such other
Persons as shall be elected in the Manner herein after mentioned, and their
Successors to be elected in the Manner herein after directed, be, and shall be
one Body Politic and Corporate, in Deed and in Name, by the Name of The
Trustees for Establishing the Colony of Georgia in America; and them and their
Successors by the same Name, We do, by these Presents for Us, Our Heirs and
Successors, really and fully Make, Ordain, Constitute and Declare, to be one
Body Politic in Deed and in Name for ever; and that by the same Name they and
their Successors shall and may have perpetual Succession; and that they and
their Successors, by that Name, shall and may for ever hereafter, be Persons
able and capable in the Law, to purchase, have, take, receive and enjoy, to
them and their Successors, any Manors, Messuages, Lands, Tenements, Rents,
Advowsons, Liberties, Privileges, Jurisdictions, Franchises, and other
Hereditaments whatsoever, lying and being in Great Britain, or any Part
thereof, of whatsoever Nature, Kind or Quality, or Value they be, in Fie and in
Perpetuity; not exceeding the yearly Value of One thousand Pounds, beyond
Reprises; also Estates for Lives, and for Years; and all other manner of Goods,
Chattels and Things whatsoever they be, for the better settling and supporting,
and maintaining the said Colony, and other Uses aforesaid; and to give, grant,
let and demise the said Manors, Messuages, Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments,
Goods, Chattels and Things whatsoever aforesaid, by Lease or Leases, for Term
of Years, in Possession at the time of granting thereof, and not in Reversion,
not exceeding the Term of Thirty one Years, from the time of granting thereof;
on which in case no Fine be taken, shall be reserved the Full; and in case a
Fine be taken, shall be reserved at least^a Moiety of the Value that the same
shall reasonably and bona fide be worth at the time of such Demise; and that
they and their Successors, by the Name aforesaid, shall and may for ever
hereafter, be Persons able, capable in the Law, to purchase, have, take,
receive and enjoy, to them and their Successors, any Lands, Territories,
Possessions, Tenements, Jurisdictions, Franchises and Hereditaments whatsoever,
lying and being in America, of what Quantity, Quality or value whatsoever they
be, for the better settling and supporting, and maintaining the said Colony;
and that by the Name aforesaid they shall and may be able to sue and be sued,
plead and be impleaded, answer and be answered unto, defend and be defended in
all Courts and Places Whatsoever, and before whatsoever Judges, Justices and
other Officers, of Us, our Heirs and Successors, in all and singular Actions,
Plaints, Pleas, Matters, Suits and Demands, of what Kind, Nature or Quality
soever they be; and to act and do all other Matters and Things in as ample
Manner and Form as any other Our Liege Subjects of this Realm of Great Britain,
and that they and their Successors for ever hereafter, shall and may have a
Common Seal, to serve for the Causes and Businesses of them and their
Successors; and that it shall and may be lawful for them and their Successors,
to change, break, alter and make new the said Seal, from time to time and at
their Pleasure, as they shall think best. AND We do further grant, for Us, Our
Heirs and Successors, That the said Corporation, and the Common Council of the
said Corporation herein after by Us appointed, may from time to time, and at
all times, meet about their Affairs when and where they please, and transact
and carry on the Business of the said Corporation. And for the better Execution
of the Purposes aforesaid, We do, by these Presents, for Us, Our Heirs and
Successors, give and grant to the said Corporation, and their Successors, That
they and their Successors for ever, may, upon the third Thursday in the Month
of March yearly, meet at some convenient Place to be appointed by the said
Corporation, or major Part of them who shall be present at any Meeting of the
said Corporation, to be had for the appointing of the said Place; and that
they, or two Thirds of such of them that shall be present at such yearly
Meeting, and at no other Meeting of the said Corporation, between the Hours of
Ten in the Morning and Four in the Afternoon of the same Day, Choose and elect
such Person of Persons to be Members of the said Corporation, as they shall
think beneficial to the good Designs of the said Corporation. And our further
Will and Pleasure is, That if it shall happen that any Persons herein after by
Us appointed as the Common Council of the said Corporation, or any other
Persons to be elected or admitted Members of the said Common Council in the
Manner hereafter directed, shall die or shall by Writing under his or their
Hands respectively resign his or their Office or Offices of Common Council Man
or Common Council Men; the said Corporation, or the major Part of such of them
as shall be present, shall and may at such Meeting, on the said third Thursday
in March yearly, in manner as aforesaid, next after such Death or Resignation,
and at no other Meeting of the said Corporation, into the room or place of such
Person or Persons so dead or so resigning, elect and choose one or more such
Person or Persons, being Members of the said Corporation, as to them shall seem
meet: And Our Will is, That all and every the Person or Persons which shall
from time to time hereafter be elected Common Council Men of the said
Corporation as aforesaid, do and shall, before he or they act as Common Council
Men of the said Corporation, take an Oath for the faithful and due Execution of
their Office; which Oath the President of the said Corporation for the Time
being, is hereby authorized and required to administer to such Person or
Persons elected as aforesaid. And Our Will and Pleasure is, That the first
President of the said Corporation is and shall be Our Trusty and Well-beloved
the said John Lord Viscount Purcival; and that the said President shall, within
Thirty Days after the passing this CHARTER, cause a Summons to be issued to the
several Members of the said Corporation herein particularly named, to meet at
such Time and Place as ^e shall appoint, to consult about and transact the
Businesses of the said Corporation. And Our Will and Pleasure is, and We, by
these Presents, for Us, Our Heirs and Successors, grant, ordain and direct,
That the Common Council of this Corporation shall consist of Fifteen in Number;
and We do, by these Presents, nominate, constitute and appoint Our Right Trusty
and Well-beloved John Lord Viscount Purcival, Our Trusty and Beloved Edward
Digby, George Carpenter, James Oglethorpe, George Heathcote, Thomas Laroche,
James Vernon, William Beletha, Esqrs. and Stephen Hales, Master of Arts, to be
the Common Council of the said Corporation, to continue in the said Office
during their good Behavior. AND whereas it is Our Royal Intention, That the
Members of the said Corporation should be increased by Election, as soon as
conveniently may be, to a greater Number than is hereby nominated; Our further
Will and Pleasure is, and We do hereby, for Us, Our Heirs and Successors,
ordain and direct,That from the Time of such Increase of the Members of the
said Corporation, the Number of the Common Council shall be increased to Twenty
four; and that at the same Assembly at which such additional Members of the
said Corporation shall be chosen, there shall likewise be elected, in the
Manner herein before directed for the Election of Common Council Men, Nine
Persons to be the said Common Council Men, and to make up the Number Twenty
four. And Our further Will and Pleasure is, That Our Trusty and Well-beloved
Edward Digby, Esquire shall be the first Chairman of the Common Council of the said
Corporation; and that the said Lord Viscount Purcival shall be and continue
President of the said Corporation; and that the said Edward Digby shall be and
continue Chairman of the Common Council of the said Corporation, respectively,
until the Meeting which shall be had next and immediately after the first
Meeting of the said Corporation, or of the Common Council of the said
Corporation respectively, and no longer: At which said second Meeting, and
every other subsequent and future Meeting of the said Corporation, or of the
Common Council of the said Corporation respectively, in order to preserve an
indifferent Rotation of the several Offices of President of the Corporation,
and of Chairman of the Common Council of the said Corporation; We do direct and
ordain, That all and every the Person and Persons Members of the said Common
Council for the time being, and no other, being present at such Meetings, shall
severally and respectively in their Turns, preside at the Meetings which shall
from time to time be held of the said Corporation, or of the Common Council of
the said Corporation respectively: And in case any Doubt or Question shall at
any time arise touching or concerning the Right of any Member of the said
Common Council to preside at any Meeting of the Said corporation, or at the
Common Council of the said Corporation, the same shall respectively be
determined by the major Part of he said Corporation, or of the Common Council
of the said Corporation respectively, who shall be present at such Meeting.
Provided always, That no Member of the said Common Council having served in the
Offices of President of the said Corporation, or of Chairman of the Common
Council of the said Corporation, shall be capable of being or of serving as
President or Chairman at any Meeting of the said Corporation or Common Council
of the said Corporation, next and immediately ensuing that in which he so
served as President of the said Corporation, or Chairman of the said Common
Council of the said Corporation respectively; unless it shall so happen, that
at any such Meeting of the said Corporation there shall not be any other Member
of the said Common Council present. And our Will and Pleasure is, That, at all
and every of the Meetings of the said Corporation or of the Common Council of
the said Corporation, the President or Chairman for the time being, shall have
a Voice and shall vote and shall act as a Member of the said Corporation, or of
the Common Council of the said Corporation, at such Meeting; and in case of any
Equality of Votes, the said President or Chairman for the time being, shall
have a lasting Vote. And Our further Will and Pleasure is, That no President of
the said Corporation, or Chairman of the Common Council of the said
Corporation, or Member of the said Common Council or Corporation, by Us by
these Presents appointed, or hereafter from time to time to be elected and
appointed in Manner aforesaid, shall have, take or receive, directly or
indirectly, any Salary, Fee, Perquisite, Benefit or Profit whatsoever, for or
by Reason of his or their serving the said Corporation, or Common Council of
the said Corporation, or President, Chairman or Common Council Man, or as being
a Member of the said Corporation. And Our Will and Pleasure is, That the said
herein before appointed President, Chairman or Common Council Men, before he
and they act respectively as such, shall severally take an Oath for the
faithful and due Execution of their Trust, to be administered to the President
by the Chief Baron of Our Court of Exchequer for the Time being, and by the
President of the said Corporation to the rest of the Common Council, who are
hereby authorized severally and respectively to administer the same. And Our
Will and Pleasure is, That all and every Person and Persons who shall have, in
his or their own Name or Names, or in the Name or Names of any Person or
Persons in Trust for him or them, or for his or their Benefit, any Office,
Place or Employment or Profit, under the said Corporation, shall be incapable
of being elected a Member of the said Corporation; and if any Member of the
said Corporation, during such Time as he shall continue a Member thereof, shall
in his own Name, or in the Name of any Person or Persons in Trust for him, or
for his Benefit, have, hold, exercise, accept, possess or enjoy any Office,
Place or Employment of Profit under the said Corporation, or under the Common
Council of the said Corporation, such Member shall, from the Time of his
having, holding, exercising, accepting, possessing and enjoying such Office,
Place and Employment of Profit, cease to be a Member of the said Corporation.
And We do, for Us, Our Heirs and Successors, grant unto the said Corporation
and their Successors, That they and their Successors, or the major Part of such
of them as shall be present at any Meeting of the said Corporation, conveen'd
and assembled for that Purpose by a convenient Notice thereof, shall have Power
from time to time, and at all times hereafter, to authorize and appoint such
Persons as they shall think fit, to take Subscriptions, and to gather and
collect such Moneys as shall be by any Person or Persons contributed for the
Purposes aforesaid, and shall and may revoke and make void such Authorities and
Appointments as often as they shall see Cause so to do. And We do hereby, for
Us, Our Heirs and Successors, ordain and direct, That the said Corporation
every Year lay an Account in Writing before the Chancellor, or Speaker, or
Commissioners for the Cus^oay of the Great Seal of Great Britain, of Us, Our
Heirs and Successors, the Chief Justice of the Court of King's Bench, the Master
of the Rolls, the Chief Justice of the Court of Common Pleas, and the Chief
Baron of the Exchequer, of Us, Our Heirs and Successors, for the Time being, or
any Two of them, of all Moneys and Effects by them received or expended for the
carrying on the good Purposes aforesaid. And We do hereby, for Us, Our Heirs
and Successors, give and grant unto the said Corporation and their successsors,
full Power and Authority to constitute, ordain, and make such and so many
Bylaws, Constitutions, Orders and Ordinances, as to them, or the greater Part
of them, at their General Meeting for that Purpose, shall seem necessary and
convenient for the well ordering and governing of the said Corporation, and the
said Bylaws, Constitutions, Orders and Ordinances, or any of them, to alter
and annul as they, or the major Part of them then present, shall see requisite;
and in and by such Bylaws, Rules, Orders and Ordinances, to set, impose and
inflict reasonable Pains and Penalties upon any Offender or Offenders who shall
transgress, break or violate the said Bylaws, Constitutions, Orders and
Ordinances, so made as aforesaid, and to mitigate the same as they, or the
major Part of them then present, shall think convenient; which said Pains and
Penalties shall and may be levied, sued for, taken, retained and recovered by
the said Corporation and their Successors, by their Officers and Servants from
time to time to be appointed for that Purpose, by Action of Debt, or by any
other lawful Ways or Means, to the Use and Behoof of the said Corporation and
their Successors; all and singular which Bylaws, Constitutions, Orders and
Ordinances, so as aforesaid to be made, WE WILL, shall be duly observed and
kept, under the Pains and Penalties therein to be contained; so always as the
said Bylaws, Constitutions, Orders and Ordinances, Pains and Penalties, from
time to time to be made and imposed, be reasonable, and not contrary or
repugnant to the Laws or Statutes of this Our Realm; and that such Bylaws,
Constitutions and Ordinances, Pains and Penalties, from time to time to be made
and imposed; and any Repeal or Alteration thereof, or any of them, be likewise
agreed to, be established and confirmed by the said General Meeting of the said
Corporation, to be held and kept next after the same shall be respectively
made. And whereas the said Corporation intend to settle a Colony, and to make
an Habitation and Plantation in that Part of Our Province of South Carolina in
America, herein after described; KNOW YE, That We greatly desiring the happy
Success of the said Corporation, for their further Encouragement in
accomplishing so excellent a Work, Have, of Our foresaid Grace, certain
Knowledge, and mere Motion, Given and Granted, and by these Presents, for Us,
Our Heirs and Successors, Do Give and Grant to the said Corporation and their
Successors, the Reservation, Limitation and Declaration hereafter expressed,
Seven undivided Parts, the Whole in Eight equal Parts to be divided, of all
those Lands, Countries and Territories situate, lying, and being in that Part
of South Carolina, in America, which lies from the most northern Part of Stream
or River there, commonly called The Savannah, all along the Seacoast to the
Southward, unto the most southern Stream of a certain other great Water or
River called The Alatamaha, and westerly from the Heads of the said Rivers
respectively in direct Lines to the South Seas; and all that Share, Circuit and
Precinct of Land within the said Boundaries, with the Islands on the Sea lying
opposite to the eastern Coast of the said Lands, within Twenty Leagues of the
same, which are not inhabited already, or settled by any Authority derived from
the Crown of Great Britain, together with all the Soils, Grounds, Havens,
Ports, Gulfs and Bays, Mines, as well Royal Mines of Gold and Silver as other
Minerals, precious Stones, Quarries, Woods, Rivers, Waters, Fishings, as well
Royal Fishings of Whale and Sturgeon, as other Fishings, Pearls, Commodities,
Jurisdictions, Royalties, Franchises, Privileges and Preeminencies within the
said Frontiers and Precincts thereof, and thereunto in any sort belonging or
appertaining, and which We by Our Letters Patent may or can grant; and in as
ample Manner and Sort as We may, or any Our Royal Progenitors have hitherto
granted to any Company, Body Politic or Corporate, or to any Adventurer or
Adventurers, Undertaker or Undertakers of any Discoveries, Plantations or
Traffic of, in, or unto any Foreign Parts whatsoever, and in as legal and
ample Manner as if the same were herein particularly mentioned and expressed:
To have, hold, possess and enjoy the said Seven undivided Parts, the whole into
Eight equal Parts to be divided as a aforesaid, of all and singular the Lands,
Countries and Territories, with all and singular other the Premises herein
before by these presents granted, or mentioned or intended to be granted to
them the said Corporation and their Successors for ever, for the better Support
of the said Colony; to be holden of Us, Our Heirs and Successors, as of Our
Honor of Hampton Court, in Our County of Middlesex, in free and common
Soccage, and not in Capite; Yielding and Paying therefore to Us, Our Heirs and
Successors, yearly for ever, the Sum of Four Shillings for every Hundred Acres
of the said Lands which the said Corporation shall grant, demise, plant or
settle; the said Payment not to commence or to be made until Ten Years after
such Grant, Demise, Planting or Settling, and to be answered and paid to Us,
Our Heirs and Successors, in such Manner, and in such Species of Money or Notes
as shall be current in Payment by Proclamation from time to time in Our said
Province of South Carolina; all which Lands, Countries, Territories and
Premises hereby granted, or mentioned and intended to be granted, We do, by
these Presents, make, erect and create, One independent and separate Province
by the Name of GEORGIA, by which Name WE WILL the same henceforth be called;
and that all and every Person or Persons who shall at any time hereafter
inhabit or reside within Our said Province, shall be and are hereby declared to
be free, and shall not be subject to, or be bound to obey any Laws, Orders,
Statutes or Constitutions which have been heretofore made, ordered and enacted,
or which hereafter shall be made, ordered or enacted by, for, or as the Laws,
Orders, Statutes or Constitutions of Our said Province of South Carolina, (save
and except only the Command in chief of the Militia of Our said Province of
Georgia, to Our Governor for the Time being of South Carolina, in Manner
hereafter declared) but shall be subject to and bound to obey such Laws,
Orders, Statutes and Coustitutions as shall from time to time be made, ordered
and enacted, for the better Government of the said Province of Georgia, in the
manner herein after declared. And We do hereby, for Us, Our Heirs and
Successors, ordain, will and establish, That for and during the Term of Twenty
one Years, to commence from the Date of these Our Letters Patent, the said
Corporation assembled for that Purpose, shall and may form and prepare Laws,
Statutes and Ordinances, fit and necessary for and concerning the Government of
the said Colony, and not repugnant to the Laws and Statutes of England, and the
same shall and may present, under their Common Seal, to Us, Our Heirs and
successors, in Our or Their Privy Council, for Our or Their Approbation or
Disallowance; and the said Laws, Statutes and Ordinances being approved of by
Us, Our Heirs and Successors, in Our or Their Privy Council, shall from
thenceforth be in full Force and Virtue, within Our said Province of Georgia.
AND FORASMUCH as the good and prosperous Success of the said Colony, cannot but
chiefly depend, next under the Blessing of GOD and the Support of Our Royal
Authority, upon the provident and good Direction of the whole Enterprise; and
that it will be too great a Burden upon all the Members of the said
Corporation, to be convened so often as may be requisite to hold Meetings for
the Settling, Supporting, ordering and Maintaining the said Colony: Therefore
We do will, ordain and establish, That the said Common Council for the time
being, of the said Corporation, being assembled for that Purpose, or the major
Part of them, shall from time to time, and at all times hereafter, have full
Power and Authority to dispose of, extend and apply all the Moneys and Effects
belonging to the said Corporation, in such Manner and Ways, and such Expenses
as they shall think best to conduce to the carrying on and effecting the good
Purposes herein mentioned and intended: And also, shall have full Power, in the
Name and on the Account of the said Corporation, and with and under their
Common S^al, to enter under any Co^enants or Contracts for carrying on and
effecting the Purposes aforesaid. And Our farther Will and Pleasure is, That
the said Common Council for the time being, or the major Part of such Common
Council which shall be present and assembled for that Purpose from time to
time, and at all times hereafter, shall and may nominate, constitute and
appoint a Treasurer or Treasurers, Secretary or Secretaries, and such other
Officers, Ministers Servants of the said Corporation, as to them or the major
Part of them as shall be present, shall seem proper or requisite for the good
Management of their Affairs; and at their Will and Pleasure to displace, remove
and put out such Treasurer or Treasurers, Secretary or Secretaries, and all
such other Officers, Ministers and Servants, as often as they shall think fit
so to do, and others in the Room, Office, Place or Station of him or them so
displaced, removed or put out, to nominate, constitute and appoint; and shall
and may determine and appoint such reasonable Salaries, Perquisites and other
Rewards for their Labor, or Service of such Officers, Servants and Persons, as
to the said Common Council shall seem meet; and all such Officers, Servants and
Persons shall, before the acting their respective Offices, take an Oath, to be
to them administered by the Chairman for the time being of the said Common
Council of the said Corporation, who is hereby authorized to administer the
same, for the faithful and due Execution of their respective Offices and
Places, And Our Will and Pleasure is, That all such Person and Persons who
shall from time to time be chosen or appointed Treasurer or Treasurers,
Secretary or secretaries of the said Corporation, in manner herein after
directed, shall, during such times as they shall serve in the said Offices
respectively, be incapable of being a Member of the said Corporation. And We do
further, of Our special Grace, certain Knowledge and mere Motion, for Us, Our
Heirs and Successors, grant, by these Presents, to the said Corporation and
their Successors, That it shall be lawful for them and their Officers or
Agents, at all times hereafter, to transport and convey out of Our Realm of
Great Britain, or any other Our Dominions, into the said Province of Georgia to
be there settled, and so many of Our loving Subjects, or any Foreigners that
are willing to become Our Subjects and live under our Allegiance in the said
Colony, as shall be willing to go to inhabit or reside there, with sufficient
Shipping, Armor, Weapons, Powder, Shot, Ordnance, Munition, Victuals,
Merchandise and Wares, as are esteemed by the wild People, Clothing,
Implements, Furniture, Cattle, Horses, Mares, and all Other Things necessary
for the said Colony, and for the Use and Defense, and Trade with the People
there, and in passing and returning to and from the same. Also We do, for Our
Selves and Successors, declare, by these Presents, That all and every the
Persons which shall happen to be born within the said Province, and every of
their Children and Posterity, shall have and enjoy all Liberties, Franchises
and Immunities of Free Denizons and Natural Born Subjects, within any of Our
Dominions, to all Intents and Purposes, as if abiding and born within this Our
Kingdom of Great Britain, or any other Dominion. AND for the greater Ease and
Encouragement of Our loving Subjects, and such others as shall come to inhabit
in Our said Colony, We do, by these Presents, for Us, Our Heirs and Successors,
grant, establish and ordain, That for ever hereafter there shall be a LIBERTY
OF CONSCIENCE allowed in the Worship of GOD, to all Persons inhabiting, or
which shall inhabit or be resident within Our said Province, and that all such
Persons, except Papists, shall have a free Exercise of Religion; so they be
contented with the quiet and peaceable Enjoyment of the same, not giving
Offense or Scandal to the Government. And Our further Will and Pleasure is, and
We do hereby, for Us, Our Heirs and Successors, declare and grant, That it
shall and may be lawful for the said Common Council, or the major Part of them
assembled for that Purpose, in the Name of the Corporation, and under the
Common Seal, to distribute, convey, assign and set over such particular
Portions of Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments by these Presents granted to the
said Corporation, unto such of Our loving Subjects Naturally born or Denizons,
or others, that shall be willing to become Our Subjects, and live under Our
Allegiance in the said Colony, upon such Terms, and for such Estates, and upon
such Rents, Reservations and Conditions as the same may be lawfully granted,
and as to the said Common Council, or the major Part of them so present, shall
seem fit and proper. Provided always, That no Grant shall be made of any Part
of the said Lands unto any Person being a Member of the said Corporation, or to
any other Person in Trust for the Benefit of any Member of the said
Corporation; and that no Person having any Estate or Interest in Law or Equity
in any Part of the said Lands, shall be capable of being a Member of the said
Corporation, during the Continuance of such Estate or Interest. Provided also,
That no greater Quantity of Lands be granted, either entirely or in Parcels, to
or for the Use or in Trust for any one Person than Five Hundred Acres; and that
all Grants made contrary to the true Intent and Meaning hereof, shall be
absolutely null and void. And We do hereby grant and ordain, That such Person
or Persons for the time being, as shall be thereunto appointed by the said
Corporation, shall and may at all times, and from time to time hereafter, have
full Power and Authority to administer and give the Oaths appointed by an Act
of Par^ament made in the First Year of the Reign of Our late Royal Father, to
be taken instead of the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy; and also the Oath of
Abjuration, to all and every Person and Person which shall at time be
inhabiting or residing within Our said Colony; and in like Cases to administer
the solemn Affirmation to any of the Persons commonly called Quakers, in such
manner as by the Laws of Our Realm of Great Britain the same may be
administered. And We do, of our further Grace, certain Knowledge and mere
Motion, grant, establish and ordain, for Us, Our Heirs and Successors, That the
said Corporation and their Successors shall have full Power and Authority for
and during the Term of Twenty one Years, to commence from the Date of these Our
Letters Patent, to erect and constitute Judicatories and Courts of Record, or
other Courts, to be held in the Name of Us, Our Heirs and Successors, for the
Hearing and Determining of all manner of Crimes, Offenses, Pleas, Processes,
Plaints, Actions, Matters, Causes and Things whatsoever, arising or happening
within the said Province of Georgia, or between Persons of Georgia; whether the
same be criminal or civil, and whether the said Crimes be capital or not
capital, and whether the said Pleas be real personal or mixed; and for Awarding
and Making out Executions thereupon; To which Courts and Judicatories, We do
hereby, for Us, our Heirs and Successors, give and grant full Power and
Authority, from time to time, to administer Oaths for the Discovery of Truth,
in any Matter in controversy or depending before them, or the solemn
Affirmation to any of the Persons commonly called Quakers, in such manner as by
the Laws of Our Realm of Great Britain the same may be administered. And Oar
Further Will and Pleasure is, That the said Corporation and their Successors do
from time to time, and at all Times hereafter, register or cause to be
registered all such Leases, Grants, Plantings, Conveyances, Settlements and
Improvements whatsoever, as shall at any Time hereafter be made by or in the
Name of the said Corporation, of any Lands, Tenements or Hereditaments within
the said Province; and shall yearly send and transmit, or cause to be sent or
transmitted, authentic Accounts of such Leases, Grants, Conveyances,
Settlements and Improvements respectively, unto the Auditor of the Plantations
for the Time being, or his Deputy, and also to Our Surveyor for the Time being
of Our said Province of South Carolina, to whom We do hereby grant full Power
and Authority from time to time, as often as Need shall require, to inspect and
survey such of the said Lands and Premises as shall be demised, granted and
settled as aforesaid, which said Survey and Inspection, We do hereby declare to
be intended to ascertain the Quit-Rents which shall from time to time become
due to Us, Our Heirs and Successors, according to the Reservations herein
before mentioned, and for no other Purposes whatsoever; hereby, for Us, Our
Heirs and Successors, Strictly en-joining and commanding, That neither Our or
their Surveyor, or any Person whatsoever, under the Pretext and Color of
making the said Survey or Inspection, shall take, demand or receive any
Gratuity, Fee or Reward of or from any Person or Persons inhabiting in the said
Colony, or from the said Corporation or Common Council of the same, on the Pain
of Forfeiture of the said Office or Offices, and incurring Ou^ highest
Displeasure. Provided always, and Our further will and Pleasure is, That all
Leases, Grants and Conveyances to be made by or in the Name of the Said
Corporation, of any Lands within the said Province, or a Memorial containing
the Substance and Effect thereof, shall be registered with the Auditor of the
said Plantations, of Us, Our Heirs and Successors, within the Space of One
Year, to be computed from the Date ther^^^ otherwise the same shall be void.
And Our further Will and Pleasure is, That the Rents, Issues and all other
Profits which shall at any Time hereafter come to the said Corporation, or the
major Part of them which shall be present at any Meeting for that Purpose
assembled, shall think will most improve and enlarge the said Colony, and best
answer the good Purposes herein before mentioned, and for defraying all other
Charges about the same. And Our Will and Pleasure is, That the said Corporation
and their Successors shall from time to time give in to one of the principal
Secretaries of State, and to Commissioners of Trade and Plantations, Accounts
of the Progresses of the said Colony. And Our Will Pleasure is, That no Act
done at any Meeting of the said Common Council of the said Corporation shall be
effectual and valid, unless Eight Members at least of the said Common Council,
including the Member who shall sever as Chairman at the said Meeting, be
present, and major Part of them consenting thereunto. And Our Will and Pleasure
is, That the Common Council of the said Corporation for the Time being, or the
major Part of them who shall be present being assembled for that Purpose, shall
from time to time, for and during and unto the full End and Expiration of
Twenty one Years, to commence from the Date of these Our Letters Patent, have
full Power and Authority to nominate, make, constitute, commission, ordain and
appoint, by such Name or Names, Style or Styles, as to them shall seem meet and
fitting, all and singular such Governors, Judges, Magistrates, Ministers and
Officers, Civil and Military, both by Sea and Land, within the said Districts,
as shall by them be thought fit and needful to be made or used for the said
Government of the said Colony; (...) and except such Officers only as shall by
Us, Our Heirs and Successors, be from time to time constituted and appointed
for the managing and collecting and receiving such Revenues as shall from time
to time arise within the said Province of Georgia, and become due to Us, our
Heirs and Successors, Provided always, and it is Our Will and Pleasure, That
every Governor of the said Province of Georgia, to be appointed by the Common
Council of the said Corporation, before he shall enter upon or execute the said
Office of Governor, shall be approved by Us, Our Heirs or Successors, and shall
take such Oaths, and shall qualify himself in such Manner in all Respects as
any Governor or Commander in chief of any of Our Colonies or Plantations in
America are by Law required to do; and shall give good and sufficient Security
for observing the several Acts of Parliament relating to Trade and Navigation;
and to observe and obey all Instructions that shall be sent to him by Us, Our
Heirs and Successors, or any acting under Our or their Authority, pursuant to
the said Acts, or any of them. And We do by these Presents, for Us, Our Heirs
and Successors, will, grant and ordain, That the said Corporation and their
Successors shall have full Power, for and during and until the full End and
Term of Twenty one Year, to commence from the Date of these Our Letters Patent,
by any Commander or other Officer or Officers by them for that Purpose from
time to time appointed, to train, instruct, exercise and govern a Militia for
the special Defense and Safety of Our said Colony, to assemble in Martial-array
the Inhabitants of the said Colony, and to lead and conduct them, and with them
to encounter, expulse, rep^i, resist and pursue, by Force of Arms, as well by
Sea as by Land, within or without the Limits or Our said Colony; and also to
kill, slay and destroy, and conquer, by all fighting Ways, Enterprises and
Means whatsoever, all and every such Person or Persons as shall at any Time
hereafter in any hostile Manner attempt or enterprise the Destruction,
Invasion, Detriment or Annoyance of Our said Colony; and to use and exercise
the Martial-Law in Time of actual War and Invasion or Rebellion, in such Cases
where by Law the same may be used or exercised; and also from time to time to
erect Forts, and forti^y and Place or Places within Our said Colony, and the
same to furnish with all necessary Ammunition, Provisions and Stores of War of
Offense and Defense, and so commit from time to time the Custody or Government
of the same to such Person or Persons as to them shall seem meet; and the said
Forts and Fortifications to demolish at their Pleasure; and to take and
surprise, by all Ways and Means, all and every such Person or Persons, with
their Ships, Arms, Ammunition and other Goods, as shall in an hostile Manner
invade or attempt the invading, conquering or annoying of Our said Colony, And
Our Will and Pleasure is, and We do hereby, for Us, Our Heirs and Successors,
declare and grant. That the Governor and Commander in chief of the Province of
South Carolina, of Us, Our Heirs and Successors for the Time being, shall at
all Times hereafter have the chief Command of the Militia of Our said Province
hereby erected and established; and that such Militia shall observe and obey
all Orders and Directions that shall from time to time be given or sent to them
by the said Governor of Commander in chief, any Thing in these Presents before
contained to the Contrary hereof in any wife notwithstanding. And, of Our more
special Grace, certain Knowledge and mere Motion, We have given and granted,
and by these Presents, for Us, Our Heirs and Successors, do give and grant unto
the (...) Corporation and their Successors, full Power and Authority to import
and export their Goods at and from any Port or Ports that shall be appointed by
Us, Our Heirs and Successors, within the said Province of Georgia for that
Purpose, without being (...) to touch at any other Port in South Carolina. And
we do by these Presents, for Us, Our Heirs and Successors, will and declare,
That from and after the Determination of the said Term of One and twenty Years,
such Form of Government and Method of making Laws, Statutes and Ordinances, for
the better governing and ordering the said Province of Georgia, and the
Inhabitants thereof, shall be established and observed within the same, as We,
Our Heirs and Successors, Shall hereafter ordain and appoint, and shall be
agreeable to Law; and that from and after the Determination of the said Term of
One and twenty Years, the Governor of Our said Province of Georgia, and all
Officers Civil and Military within the same, shall from time to time be
nominated and constituted and appointed by Us, Our Heirs and Successors. AND
LASTLY, We do hereby, for Us, Our Heirs and Successors, grant unto the said
Corporation and their Successors, That these Our Letters Patent, or the
Enrolments or Exemplification thereof, shall be in and by all Things, good,
firm, valid, sufficient and effectual in the Law, according to the true Intent
and Meaning thereof, and shall be taken, construed and adjudged in all Courts
and elsewhere, in the most favorable and beneficial Sense, and for the best
Advantage of the said Corporation and their Successors, any Omission,
Imperfection, Defect, Matter of Cause or Thing whatsoever to the contrary in
any wise notwithstanding. IN WITNESS We have caused these Our Letters to be
made Patent. Witness Ourself at Westminster, the Ninth Day of June, in the
Fifth Year of Our Reign.

By Writ of Privy Seal. COOKS.


The gracious Purposes and ample Privileges contained in the foregoing CHARTER,
are so obvious to every Reader, that we need only say they were suitable to a
most generous and humane British Monarch; and had the Settlement of the Colony
of Georgia been carried on conformable thereto, and no other Restrictions or
Reservations made than what are therein mentioned, then would the Colony at
this Time have been in a flourishing Condition, answerable to all those
glorious Ends that were proposed and expected from it: But on the contrary,
Laws and Restrictions being made, such as were never heard of in any British
Settlement, the Colony is brought to the present melancholy Situation. But we
shall say no more at present on this Head than what Mr. Oglethorpe said in
Parliament relating to the Charitable Corporation, viz. V^^e Land. Mag. p. 379.
The better the Design was, the more those deserve to be punished who have
disappointed the Public of reaping the Benefits that might have accrued from
it.

Inhabitants of all sorts, Roman Catholics only excepted, from all Parts of
the World, were invited to possess this promised Land, and large Sums of Money
from the Parliament, as well as Contributions from private and public Charity,
were collected; the Country was laid out as an Earthly Paradise, the Soil ^ar
surpassing that of England, the Air healthy, always serene, pleasant and
temperate, never subject to excessive Heat or Cold, nor to sudden Changes.

It was Particularly set forth, and with a Show of Reason enough, that this
proposed Settlement could not fail of succeeding when the Nation was so
bountiful, the King so gracious, V^^e a Pamphlet, entitled, A new and accurate
Account of the Provinces of South Carolina andGeorgia.
the Trustees so disinterested and honorable, who had, for the Benefit of
Mankind, given up that Ease and Indolence to which they were entitled by their
Fortunes, and the too prevalent Custom of their Native country; and withal
being able, by seeing the Mistakes and Failures of other Colonies, both to
avoid and rectify them; and lastly, the universal Report of Mr. Oglethorpe's
matchless Humanity and Generosity, who was to conduct the first Embarkation,
and who was, in all Appearance, to undergo the greatest Hardships, without any
other View than to succor the distressed; and, despising Interest or Riches,
was to venture his Life, his All, in establishing the intended Settlement.
Glorious Presages of the future Happiness of that Colony!
Irresistable-Temptations to those whose Genius or Circumstances led them to
leave their native Country!

No wonder then that great Numbers of poor Subjects, who lay under a Cloud of
Misfortunes, embraced the Opportunity of once more tasting Liberty and
Happiness; that Jews, attracted by the Temptation of Inheritances, ^lock'd
over; that Germans, oppressed and dissatisfied at home, willingly joined in the
Adventure, some as Settlers, and others as Servants to the Trustees; and
lastly, that great Numbers of Gentlemen of some Stock and Fortune, willingly
expended Part of the same in purchasing Servants, Tools commodities and other
Necessaries to entitle them to such respective Proportions of Land as the
Trustees had thought proper to determine, and such Liberties and Properties as
they had Reason to expect from his Majesty's most gracious Charter: But how
much they were all disappointed the Sequel will show. The first Thing that was
done was the circumseribing the Rights and Titles given by his Majesty, and
making many other various Restrictions, Services and Conditions, impossible for
any human Person to perform; a few of which we shall here enumerate: in the
first Place, there was an excessive Quit-Rent laid upon the Land, being a great
deal more than his Majesty's Subjects in the other British Colonies pay, viz.
Twenty Shillings (...) for every Hundred Acres, to be paid yearly and i^ it, or
any Part thereof, should be behind and unpaid by the Space of Six Calendar
Months next after any Day of Payment on which the same became due, then the
Land was forfeited, and returned to the Trustees; as it likewise did upon
Failure in any of the Following Conditions, viz. One Thousand Mulberry-Trees
always to be growing on every Hundred Acres; no Partnership or Company to be
entered into for making Pot-Ash; not to assign or transfer the Land, or any Part
or Parcel thereof, or any Estate or Interest in the same for any Terms of
Years; not to hire, keep, lodge, board or employ within the Limits of the
Province, any Black or Negro; and if the Person holding Land should die without
Issue Male, or his Heirs at any Time should die without Issue Male, in that
Case likewise the whole Land was forfeited and reverted to the Trustees; and if
any Part or Parcel of any of the Five hundred A^re-Tracts should remain not
cultivated, cleared planted and improved after the Space of Eighteen Years,
such Part to return to the Trustees. These were the chief Restrictions in all
the Grants of Lands, which appeared very hard even to Strangers, who had not
yet felt them, and who were ignorant of the Climate and Nature of the Place;
but when any one complained of the Hardships of them, to palliate the Matter,
it was given out, that Negroes were entirely useless and unprofitable, Wine,
Silk, Olives, Gardens, and Manufactures for Women and Children, were the
intended Improvements of the Colony; that the Restriction of the Rights of
Lands were only temporary, to prevent the bartering or selling them by the
unthinking People at an Undervalue; and concerning the Want of Male Issue it
was asserted, that the Trustees being duly petitioned, would grant Continuation
of the Land to the eldest Daughter, if any etc. upon their good How precarious
must this Security be to such unfortunate Persons, when their behavior must be
judged of by information and Representation.
Behavior: That the Laws England, and the Administration of Justice, in the
most impartial Manner, and most adapted to the Nature of the a free British
Government, Should be ever secured to the Inhabitants.

The First of February 1732-3, Mr. Oglethorpe arrived at Georgia with the first
Embarkation, consisting of Forty Families, making upwards of One hundred
Persons, all brought over and supported at the public charge. The FIRST Thing
he did after he arrived in Georgia was to make a kind of solemn Treaty with a
Parcel of Fugitive Indians, who had been formerly banished their own Nation for
some Crimes and Misdemeanors they had committed, and who had, some Months
before this, got Liberty from the Governor of South Carolina to settle there
They built a small Number of Huts on a Bluff called ^amacraw. Savannah now
stands on the same Bluss.
Some of these he afterward carried home with him under the Title of Kings,
etc and all of them have been ever since maintained at the public Charge, at
vast Expense, when many poor Christians were starving in the Colony for Want of
Bread; and we may safely affirm, (and appeal to the Store-books for the Truth
of it) that a larger Sum of Money has been expended for the Support of those
useless Vagrants, than ever was laid out for the Encouragement of Silk, Wine,
or any other Manufacture in the Colony.

SECONDLY, He prohibited the Importation of Rum, under Pretense that it was
destructive to the Constitution, and an Incentive to Debauchery and Idleness.
However specious these Pretenses might seem, a little Experience soon convinced
as that this Restriction was directly opposite to the Well-being of the Colony:
For in the first Place, we were cut off from the most immediate and probable
Way of exporting our Timber (the only poor Prospect of Export that we could
ever flatter ourselves with) to the Sugar Islands, Rum being the Principal
Return they make. In the Second Place, the Experience of all the Inhabitants of
America will prove the Necessity of qualifying Water with some Spirit, (and it
is very certain, that no Province in America yields Water that such a
Qualification is more necessary to than Carolina and Georgia) and the
Usefulness of this Experiment has been sufficiently evident to all the
Inhabitants of Georgia who could procure it, and use it with Moderation. A
third Reason which made this Restriction very hurtful to the Colony was, That
though the Laws were in force against it, (which put it in the Power of the
Magistrates to lay Hardships upon every Person who might be otherwise under
their Resentment) yet great Quantities were imported Viz. From Carolina and New
England, who would take Money only
, only with this Difference, that in place of Barter or Exchange, the ready
Money was drained from the Inhabitants: And likewise, as it is the Nature of
Mankind in general, and of the common sort in particular, more eagerly to
desire, and more immoderately to use those Things which are most restrained
from them, such was the Case with Respect to Rum in Georgia,

The THIRD Thing he did was regularly to set out to each Freeholder in Savannah
Lots of Fifty Acres, in three distinct Divisions, viz. The Eight Part of One
Acre for a House and Garden in the Town; Four Acres and 7 Eighths at a small
Distance from the Town; and Forty five Acres at a considerable Remove from
thence. No Regard was had to the Quality of the Ground in the Divisions, so
that some were altogether Pine-Barren, and some swamp and Morass, far
surpassing the Strength and Ability of the Planter: And indeed what could be
done at any Rate with such small Parcels of Land Separate from one another?
These Loss were likewise shaped in long pointed Triangles, which considerably
increased the Extent of Enclosure, and rendered great Part of each Lot entirely
useless. But these and many other Hardships were scarcely felt by the few
People that came there, so long as Mr. Oglethorpe Staid, which was about
Fifteen Months: They worked hard indeed in building some Houses in Town; but
then they labored in common, and were likewise assisted by Negroes from
Carolina, who did the heaviest Work: But at Before he departed, a Vessel with
about twenty Families of Jews arrived, all of whom had Lots assigned them; and
likewise a Vessel with Forty transported Irish Convicts, whom he purchased,
although they had been before refused at Jamaica, and who afterward occasioned
continual Disturbance, in the Colony.
Mr. Oglethorpe's going to England, the growing Fame of the Colony was thereby
greatly increased, so that, as it has been before observed, People in abundance
from all parts of the World stocked to Georgia. Then they began to consider,
and endeavor, every one according to his Genius or Abilities, how they might
best subsist themselves: Some, with great Labor and Expense, essayed the
making of Mr. Causton, the Trustees Store-keeper, mostly at their Charge, made
a Tar-kiln, which turned out to no Advan^^^^.
Tar: This, as it is well known to the Trustees, never quitted Costs: Others
tried to make Plank and Saw-Boards; which, by the great Price they were obliged
to sell them at, by reason of the great Expense of white Servants, was the
chief Means of ruining those who thought to procure (...) Living by their
Buildings in Town; for Boards of all kinds could always be bought in Carolina
for half the Price that they were able to sell them at; but few were capable to
commission them from thence, and those who were so were prevented from doing
it, upon pretense of discouraging the Labor of white People in Georgia. Those
who had Numbers of Servants and Tracts of Land in the Country, went upon the
Planting of Corn, Pease, Potatoes, etc. and the Charge of these who succeeded
the best, so far exceeded the Value of the Produce, that it would have saved
three Fourths to have bought all from the Carolina Market. The Felling of
Timber was a Task very unequal to the Strength and Constitution of white
Servants, and the Hoeing the Ground, they being exposed to the sultry Heat of
the Sun, insupportable; and it is well known, that this Labor is one of the
hardest upon the Negroes, even though their Constitutions are much stronger
than white People, and the Heat no way disagreeable nor hurtful to them; but in
us it created inflammatory Fevers of various kinds both continued and
intermittent, wasting and tormenting Fluxes, most excruciateing Cholicks, and
Dry-Belly-A^hs; Tremors, Vertigoes, Palsies, and a long Train of painful and
lingering nervous Distempers; which brought on to many a Cessation both from
Work and Life; especially as Water without any Qualification was the Chief
Drink, and salt Meat the only Provisions that could be had or afforded: And so
general were these Disorders that during the hot Season, which lasts from March
to October, hardly one half of the Servants and working people were ever able
to do their Masters or themselves the least Service; and the yearly Sickness of
each Servant, generally speaking, cost his Master as much as would have
maintained a Negroe for four Years. These Things were represented to the
Trustees in Summer 1735, in a Petition for the Use of Negroes, signed by about
Seventeen of the better sort of People in Savannah: In this Petition there was
also set forth the great disproportion betwixt the Maintenance and Clothing of
white Servants and Negroes. This Petition was carried to England and Presented
to the Trustees by Mr. Hugh Stirling, an experienced Planter in the Colony; but
no Regards was had to it, or to what he could say, and great Resentment was
even shown to Mr. Thompson, the Master of the Vessel in which it went.

Whilst we labored under those Difficulties in supporting ourselves, our Civil
Liberties received a more terrible Shock: For, instead of such a free
Government as we had Reason to expect, and of being judged by the Laws of our
Mother Country, a Mr. THOMAS C^USTON.
Dictator, (under the Title of Bailiff and Store-keeper) was appointed and lest
by Mr. Oglethorpe at his Departure, which was in April 1734 whose Will and
Pleasure were the only Laws in Georgia: In regard to this Magistrate, the
others were entirely nominal, and in a Manner but Ciphers: sometimes he would
ask in public their Opinion, in order to have the Pleasure of showing his
Power by contradicting them. He would often threaten Juries, and especially
when their Verdicts did not agree with his Inclination or Humor. And in order
the more fully to establish his absolute Authority, the Store and Disposal of
the Provisions, Money and public Places of Trust, were committed to him; by
which Alteration in his State and Circumstances he became in a Manner
infatuated, being before that a Person of no Substance or Character, having
come over with Mr. Oglethorpe amongst the first Forty, and left England upon
account of something committed by him concerning his Majesty's Duties: However,
he was sit enough for a great many Purposes, being a Person naturally proud,
covetous, cunning and deceitful, and would bring his Designs about by all
possible Ways and Means.

As his Power increased so did his Pride, Haughtiness and Cruelty, insomuch
that he caused eight Freeholders, with an Officer, to attend at the Door of the
Court every Day it sat, with their Guns and Bayonets, and they were commanded
by his Orders to rest their Firelocks as soon as he appeared; which made People
in some Manner afraid to speak their Minds, or Juries to act as their
Consciences directed them. He was seldom or never uncovered on the Bench, not
even when an Oath was administered and being perfectly intoxicated with Power
and Pride, he threatened every Person without Distinction, Rich and Poor,
Strangers and Inhabitants, who in the least opposed his arbitrary Proceedings,
or claimed their just Rights and Privileges, with the Stocks, Whiping-Post and
Log-House, and many times put those Threatenings in Execution; so that the
Georgia Stocks, Whipping-Post and Log-House, soon were famous in Carolina, and
every where else in America where the Name of the Province was heard of, and
the very Thoughts of coming to the Colony became a Terror to People's Minds.
And now the Province of Carolina, who had, in private and public Donations,
given us upwards of 1300 l. Sterling, seeing these Things, and how the public
Money was thrown away, began to despise the Colony, and out of a Regard to the
Welfare of their Fellow Creatures, dissuaded every Body they could from
settling in it. That this absolute Power might be exercised without the least
Interruption, the other Magistrates were such, that they either were unable or
incapable to oppose it: It is true, in December 1734, Mr. Causton met with a
little Interruption; for the Trustees then sent over to savannah one Mr.
Gordon, as chief Magistrate, who being a person of a very winning Behavior,
a^^able and fluent in Speech, soon got the Good Will of every Body, and a great
many of the People laid their Grievances and Hardships open to him, which
seemed a little to eclipse Mr. Causton; but he soon found out an Expedient to
remove this Adversary, viz. by refusing him Provisions from the Store, which in
a little Time rendered him incapable to support himself and Family, whereby he
was obliged, after about six Weeks Stay, to leave the Place, in order, as he
said, to represent our Grievances to the Trustees, and soon after returned to
London; but he did not perform his Promise, for what Reason we shall not
pretend to determine; and some time thereafter he either resigned or was
dismissed from his Office of First Bailiff, and Mr. Causton was appointed in
his stead. As to Mr. Henry Parker, who was appointed Third Bailiff when Mr.
Gordon came over, he was, in the first Place, a Man who had nothing to support
himself and large Family but his Day-Labour, which was Sawing, and consequently
as soon as his Time was otherwise employed he must be entirely dependent on the
Store for his Subsistence. In the second Place, he was a Man of no Education;
so that Mr. Causton soon molded him to his own liking, and infused into him
what Notions he Pleased. Thirdly, he was and is an absolute Slave to Liquor,
and he who plies him most with it (which Causton always took care to do, and
whose Example has been since followed by his Successor Jones) has him, right or
wrong, on his Side. As to Mr. Christie the Recorder, he was easily overruled
by the other two, and the same Practice was always continued; for he who was
appointed Third Bailiff after Gordon's Dismission or Resignation, was one Darn,
nigh Seventy Years of Age, crazed both in Body and Mind, who died not long
after his Appointment, and his Successor R. Gilbert could neither read nor
write; so that Causton had never after Gordon's Departure any Opposition made
by the other Magistrates to his arbitrary Proceedings. It we should allow
ourselves to enter into a Detail of the Particular Instances of such
Proceedings, we should exceed much our proposed Bounds; we shall therefore
confine ourselves to two only, which may serve as a Specimen of the many
others. ONE is that of Capt. Joseph Watson: This Person having incurred Mr.
Causton's Displeasure, was indicated for stirring up Animosities in the Minds
of the Indians, etc. tending to the Ruin and Subversion of the Colony. Upon his
Trial the Jury in their Verdict found him only guilty of some unguarded
Expressions, (although twice returned and hectored by Mr. Causton, who acted both
as Witness and Judge in the Matter) and verbally recommended him by their
Foreman to the Mercy of the Court, imagining or supposing he might be lunatic;
(however, as it afterward appeared, it was represented to the Trustees that
the Jury found him guilty of Lunacy in their Verdict) whereupon he was
immediately confined by Mr. Causton, (although sufficient Bail was offered) and
kept Prisoner near three Years, without any Sentence. But, as we are informed
this Affair now lies before a proper Judicature, we shall say no more of it.

The other Instance is that of Mr. Odingsell, who was ^n Inhabitant of
Carolina, and had been a great Benefactor to the infant Colony of Georgia,
having given several Head of Cattle and other valuable Contributions toward
the promoting it. This Person having come to Savannah to see how the Colony
succeeded, after he had been there a few Days, being abroad some time af^^^ it
was Night, as he was going to his Lodgings was taken up in the Street for a
Stroller, carried to the Guard-House, and threatened with the Stocks and
Whipping-Post; the Terror and Fright of which (he being a mild and peaceable
Man) threw him into a high Fever with a strong Delirium, crying out to every
Person who came near him, that they were come to carry (...) to the
Whipping-Post; and after lying two or three Days in this distracted Condition,
he was carried aboard his Boat in order to be sent home, and died in the Way
somewhere about Dawfuskee Sound.

Thus, while the Nation at home was amused with the Fame of the Happiness and
Flourishing of the Colony, and of its being free from Lawyers of any kind, the
poor miserable Settlers and Inhabitants were exposed to as arbitrary a
Government as Turkey or Muscovy ever felt. Very Looks were criminal, and the
grand Sin of withstanding, or any way opposing Authority, (as it was called,
when any Person insisted upon his just Rights and Privileges) was punished
without Mercy. Nevertheless, we bore all these Things patiently, in full Hopes
th^^ the Trustees Eyes would soon be opened, and then our Grievances be
redressed, and still continued exhausting our Substance in pursuing an
impracticable Scheme, namely cultivating Land to Advantage in such a Climate
with white Servants only, not doubting but that the parliament, who yearly
repeated their Bounty, would make up our Damages: But alas! their Bounty was
applied in Georgia rather to the Hurt than Benefit of the Colony, as we shall
here briefly relate. First, a LightHouse was set about; but before the Frame
was erected it was almost half rotten, and has not been carried on any further,
nor never even covered, which has likewise greatly contributed to its Decay;
and now that lofty Fabric, so highly useful to Vessels which make that Coast,
is either fallen or must fall very soon. LogHouses and Prisons of various Sorts
were built and erazed successively, and most Part of them were fitter for
Dungeons in the Spanish Inquisition than British Goals, Irons, Whipping-Posts,
It was a very usual Thing with General OGLETHORPE, when any Person had incurred
his Displeasure, to threaten to hang them.
Gibbets, etc. were provided to keep the Inhabitants in perpetual Terror; for
Innocence was no Protection; and for some time there were more Imprisonments,
Whippings, etc. of white People in that Colony of Liberty, than in all British
America besides. CornMills, Saw-Mills, Public Roads, Trustees Plantations, (as
they were called) Wells and Forts, in different Places were all set about, but,
as is evident from the Event, with no Design to serve the Public, but only to
amuse the World, and maintain some Creatures who assisted in keeping their
Neighbors in Subjection; for few or none of these Things were ever brought to
Perfection; some of them were left off half finished, and of those that were
finished some were erazed, (being found of no Service) and others fell of
themselves for Want of proper Care. To carry on the Manufactures of Silk, and
Wine, a Garden was planted with Mulberries and Vines, which was to be a Nursery
to supply the rest of the Province: But this was as far from answering the
proposed End as every Thing else was; for it is situated upon one of the most
barren Spots of Land in the Colony, being only a large Hill of dry Sand: Great
Sums of Money were thrown away upon it from Year to Year to no Purpose. This
was remonstrated to the Trustees, and they seemed to be sensible of the Error,
and gave Order to choose another Spot of Ground; but the ruling Powers in
Georgia took no Notice thereof. And now, after so great Time and Charge, there
are not so many Mulberry-Trees in all the Province of Georgia as many one of
the Carolina Planters have upon their Plantations, nor so much Silk made there
in one Year as many of those Planters do make: Nor could they ever in that
Garden raise one Vine to the Perfection of bearing Fruit. And here it may be
observed, That the Silk Mr. Oglethorpe carried over for a Present to Queen
CAROLINE, was most of it, if not all, made in Carolina. Though no proper Measures
were ever taken for advancing the Silk and Wine Manufactures, yet private
Persons made several Essay toward the Culture of European Grapes; but even
such Attempts met with no suitable Encouragement from Mr. Oglethorpe, as will
appear from the following Fact. Abraham De Leon, a Few, who had been many Years
a Vineron in Portugal, and a Freeholder in Savannah, cultivated several kinds
of Grapes in his Garden, and, amongst others, the Port^ and Malaga to great
Perfection; of this he sent home an attested Account to the Board of Trustees,
proposing further, That if they would lend him, upon such Security as he
offered, Two hundred Pounds Sterling for three Years without Interest, that he
would employ the said sum, with a further S^^^k of his own, in sending to
Portugal, and bringing (...) and Vinerons; and that he should be bound to repay
the Money in three Years, and to (...) growing within the (...) F^^ty Thousand
such (...), which he would furnish the (...) at moderate Rates.

The Trustees were satisfied with the Security, and accepted the Proposal, and
wrote him, That they had remitted the Two hundred Pounds by Mr. Oglethorpe for
his Use; which he did not deny when applied to by the said Leon for the same,
but said, that he could not advance more than Twenty or Thirty Pounds, in
regard he had other Uses for the Money; and so that Design dropped.

In February 1735-6 Mr. Oglethorpe arrived in Georgia for the second Time, with
great Numbers of People, in order to settle to the southward, where he soon
after carried them. Upon the Island of St. Simons he settled a Town, which he
called Frederica; and about five Miles Distance from thence, toward the Sea,
he placed the independent Company which he removed from PortRoyal in Carolina,
their former Station. On one of the Branches of the Alatamaha he settled the
Highlanders, in a Village which was called Darien. Then he settled a Fort on
Cumberland, which he named St. Andrews; and some time after he caused a
Garrison of about Fifty Men to be placed on a sandy Island (without fresh
Water) in the Mouth of St. John's River, opposite to a Spanish Look-out, where
Possession was kept for about six Months, and several Fortifications built; but
at last he was obliged to abandon it, after several People had lost their Lives
by the Inconveniences of the Place, besides great Sums of Money thrown away in
vain.

Whilst Things thus passed in the southern Part of the Province, Mr. Causton
was not idle at Savannah; and one would have thought, that he made it his
particular Design further to exa^perate the People of Carolina: He stopped their
Boats who were going up to New-Windsor; and not content with that, he caused
them to be searched, and whatever Rum was found therein was directly staved, in
pursuance of an Act, as he alleged, entitled, An Act against the Importation
of Rum into the Colony of Georgia. To complain of this, and to represent the
bad State of the Indian Trade, a Committee from the Assembly of South Carolina
arrived at Savannah in July 1736 where Mr. Oglethorpe then was: But their
coming was of little Consequence; for after this the Differences and
Animosities betwixt the two Provinces rather increased than diminished; and we
shall only observe, that one Thing is certain, that ever since Mr. Oglethorpe
intermeddled in the Indian Trade, it has decayed apace, and at this time is
almost entirely good-for-nothing either to the one or the other Province.

Thus while the Province of Carolina resented the bad Treatment they had met
with from the Leading Powers in Georgia, against the Colony in general; the
poor Inhabitants were doubly unfortunate, being ill looked upon by their
nearest Neighbors and Friends, for the Actings of their Governors, while they
themselves were still the greatest Sufferers by those very Actings.

Whil^t Mr. Oglethorpe staid in Georgia, great Complaints were made against the
arbitrary Proceedings of Mr. Causton; but to no purpose: Likewise several
Persons endeavored to show the Impossibility of the Colony's succeeding,
according to its then present Constitution: But if this was done in his
Hearing, he either always brow-beat the Person or evaded the Discourse; if by
Letters, he never made any Answer to them; even although he had given public
Orders, that every Person should give in their Grievances and Complaints to him
in Writing, and that he would consider and answer the same. But that we might
not be entirely ignorant of his Thoughts, Mr. Causton, who always spoke his
Sentiments, publicly declared, That we had neither Lands, Rights or
Possessions; that the Trustees gave, and that the Trustees could freely take
away: And a gain, when he was told, that the Light-house wanted a few
Spikenails to fasten some of its Braces which were loose, and which might
occasion the Downfall of the Whole Fabric; he answered, That he would say as
Mr. Oglethorpe said, It might fall and be d -- d. Mr. Oglethorpe Staid in
Georgia until November 1736, most of which Time he spent to the Southward, and
then embarked for England, leaving Mr. Causton with the same Authority he had
formerly invested him with, and in the same Power he then exercised, and the
Colony under the same Difficulties and Hardships.

In March thereafter we had Advice of the Spaniards Intentions of attacking the
Colony from the Havannah. This put the whole Province in great Consternation,
especially the Town of Savannah; they having neither Fort, Battery, or any
other Place to Shelter themselves in, in case of any actual Attack: Therefore
they immediately set about building a Wooden Fort, and all sorts of People
labored continually until it was in some measure finished; only Mr. Causton
never came to the Work, but did all he could to retard it, making light of the
Information, although it was sent Express by Commodore Dent, with a Letter
directed to the Commander in Chief of Georgia; and has since been put out of
all manner of Doubt, the Spaniards having at that time Four thousand Men
embarked and ready to sail, if an extraordinary Accident had not prevented
They were detained eight Days at the Havannah, by contrary Winds; (the Land
Forces being on board all that Time) at the End of the which there came Orders
from Old Spain, to forbear Frostilities, the Convention being then agreed upon.
them. People now seeing the little Care that was likely to be taken in case of
a real Attack; and likewise finding, to their Cost, that the Improvement of
Land was a vain and fruitless Labor with white Servants only, and with such
Restrictions and precarious Titles, many began to withdraw and leave the
Colony, and very little was planted this Season.

And Now to make our Subjection the more complete, a new kind of Tyranny was
this Summer begun to be imposed upon us; for Mr. John Wesly who had come over
and was received by us a Clergyman of the Church of England, 1737.
soon discovered that his Aim was to enslave our Minds, as a necessary
Preparative for enslaving our Bodies. The Attendances upon Prayers, Meetings
and Sermons inculcated by him, so frequently, and at improper Hours,
inconsistent with necessary Labor, especially in an infant Colony, tended to
propagate a Spirit of Indolence, and a Hypocrisy amongst the most abandoned; it
being much easier for such Person, by an affected Show of Religion, and
Adherence to Mr. Wesly's Novelties, to be provided by his Procurement from the
public Stores, than to use that Industry which true Religion recommends: Nor
indeed could the Reverend Gentleman conceal the Designs he was so full of,
having frequently declared That he never desired to see Georgia a Rich, but a
According to his System.
Religious Colony.

At last all Persons of any Consideration came to look upon him as a Roman
Catholic, for which the following Reasons seemed pretty convincing. I st,
Under an affected strict Adherence to the Church of England he most
unmercifully damned all Dissenters of whatever Denomination, who were never
admitted to communicate with him until they first gave up their Faith and
Principles entirely to his Moulding and Direction, and in Confirmation thereof
declared their Belief of the Invalidity of their former Baptism, and then to
receive a new one from him: This was done publicly on the Persons of Richard
Turner, Carpenter, and his Son. Another Instance was that of William Gaff, who
had once communicated and always conformed to his Regulations, but was at last
found out by Mr. Wesly to have been baptized by a Presbyterian Dissenter, the
same thing was proposed to him; but Mr. Gaff not inclinable to go that length,
was ever thereafter excluded from the Communion.

2 dly, While all Dissenters (whereof a considerable Number was in the Colony)
were thus unmercifully damned, and shut out from Religious Ordinances, contrary
to that Spirit of Moderation and Tenderness which the Church of England shows
toward them; Person suspected to be Roman Catholics were received and
caressed by him as his First-rate Saints.

3 dly, A third Confirmation of this Suspicion arose from his Endeavors to
establish Confession, Penance, Mortifications, Mixing Wine with Water in the
Sacrament, and Suppressing in the Administration of the Sacrament the
Explanation adjoined to the Words of the communicating by the Church of
England, to show that they mean a Feeding on Christ by Faith, Saying no more
than "The Body of Christ; The Blood of Christ;" by appointing Deaconesses, with
sundry other Innovations, which he called Apostolic Constitutions.

4 thly, As there is always a strict Connection betwixt Popery and Slavery; so
the Design of all this fine Scheme seemed to the most Judicious to be
calculated to debase and depress the Minds of the People, to break any Spirit
of Liberty, and humble them with Fastings, Penances, Drinking of Water, and a
thorough Subjection to the Spiritual Jurisdiction which he asserted was to be
established in his Person; and when this should be accomplished the Minds of
People would be equally prepared for the receiving Civil or Ecclesiastical
Tyranny.

All Jes^tical Arts were made use of to bring the well concerted Scheme to
Perfection; Families were divided in Parties; Spies were engaged in many
Houses, and the Servants of others brid'd and decoyed to let him into all the
Secret^ of the Families they belonged to; nay, those who had given themselves
up to his Spiritual Guidance (more especially Women) were obliged to discover
to him their most secret Actions, nay even their Thoughts and the Subject of
their Dreams: At the Same time he gave Charge to Juries; gave his Opinion in
all Civil Causes that came before the Court: Nor could we imagine what all this
would end in: Complain we might; but to no purpose: And Mr. Causton and he went
hand-in-hand.

But the merciful Providence of GOD disappoints frequently those Designs that
are laid deepest in Human Prudence.

Mr. Wesly at this time repulsed Mrs. Sophia Williamson, Neice to Mr. Causton,
from the Sacrament. This young Lady was by her Friends put under the Ghostly
Care of Mr. Wesly, who was pleased to make Proposals of Marriage to her: These
she always rejected; and in some little time married Mr. William Williamson of
Savannah, much contrary to Mr. Wesly's Inclinations: After the said Marriage
Mr. Wesly used all Means to create a Misunderstanding betwixt Mrs. Williamson
and her Husband, by persuading her, that Mr. Williamson had no Right to
regulate her Behavior as to conversing with him, or attending Meetings as
formerly; but at last finding he could gain nothing upon her, and that Mr.
Williamson had forbid him any conversation with his Wife out of his Presence;
he took the foresaid Means, by repelling her from the Holy communion, of
showing his Resentment. Mr. Williamson thought himself well founded in an
Action of Damages; and Mr. WESLY (being no longer supported by Mr. Causton, Who
was highly nettled at the Affront put upon his Neice, and could now declaim as
fluently against spiritual Tyranny as any Person) was indicated before a GRAND
JURY of Forty four Freeholders, and Thirteen Indictments were found against
him; one concerned Mr. Williamson and his Spouse; the others concerning the
Grievances we felt by his Measures, and the Exercise of his Ecclesiastical
Functions, as above related: These last were given into the Magistrates, to be
by them laid before the Trustees, that these our Grievances might in time
coming be properly redressed, (we having no other jurisdiction, either Civil or
Ecclesiastical, that we could make Application to:) Then the Grand Jury began
to consider and think, that as it was not probable a greater Number of the
better Sort of People could ever be legally met together; so this was a fit
Time to represent their Grievances and Hardships to the Trustees: which they
did in the following Manner.

An Abstract of the Representation of the Grand Jury of SAVANNAH to the
Honorable the Trustees.
We the Grand Jury duly sworn on the 22 d of the last Month, and having diverse
Matters laid before us, which we humbly conceive cannot properly be presented
to this Court, because several of the said Matters touch the Proceedings of the
Magistrates of the said Court, and contain sundry Articles, setting forth many
public Necessities and Hardships, which can only be remedied by your Honors
Authority: THEREFORE, We the said Grand Jury having examined several Witnesses,
do, upon our Oaths, represent to your Honors the following Grievances,
Hardships and Necessities.

That as the Inhabitants of this Town and County have been and are still
subject to many Inconveniences, for Want of a Body of the Laws and
Constitutions of this Province; it being exceeding difficult in many cases,
both for Grand and Petit Juries, to discharge in a proper manner the great
Duties that are incumbent on them by their Oaths; so we hope your Honors will
assist us, that we may be enabled well and truly to execute our Duties as
aforesaid.

That Thomas Causton, by his arbitrary Proceedings, has endeavored to render
the Power and Proceedings of Grand Juries ineffectual, especially this Grand
Jury, by intruding upon it when enclosed and about Business, and using the
Members thereof with great Haughtiness and Ill Nature, and threatening to
dissolve them.

That the said Thomas Causton, by his Office of Storekeeper, has the dangerous
Power in his Hands of alluring weak minded People to comply with unjust
Measures; and also over-awing others from making just Complaints and
Representations to your Honors; and the known Implacability of the said
Causton and his frequent threatening of such People, is to many weakminded though
well-disposed Persons, a strong Bulwark against their seeking Redress, by
making proper Complaints and just Representations to You their Benefactors,
Patrons and Protectors.

That the said Causton has made great Advancements on Provisions and Goods sold
out of the Trustees Store to the Inhabitants, contrary to Mr. Oglethorpe's
Promise when he first settled this Colony, and contrary, as we apprehend, to
your Honors good Intentions, and greatly detrimental to the Prosperity of the
Colony; and that he has refused to pay the Public Debts otherwise than in
Provisions at those dear Rates, and sometimes bad and unwholesome, out of the
Public Store, whereby the Inhabitants were greatly distressed, and some have
been obliged to leave the Province.

That whereas one John White, who had been committed for Felony, at the Suit of
William Aglionby, and he the said Aglionby was bound to prosecute the same at
next Court: Notwithstanding he the said white was removed before that time by a
Warrant under the Hand and Seal of Thomas Christie, and as we think, by the
Advice and Command of Thomas Causton; by which means we imagine the Criminal
has escaped Justice, to the great Encouragement of enormous Offenders,
contrary, as we conceive, to the Laws of our Country, the Peace of our
Sovereign Lord the King, his Crown and Dignity, and particularly to the Welfare
of this your Colony.

That the said Causton, did greatly discourage the Inhabitants of this Town and
County, in the Measures they had taken for the Defense and Safety of this Place
in the late Alarm from the Spaniards; for although almost every Body, Masters and
Servants, labored continually in making a Fort to defend themselves, in case
of Necessity; yet he the said Causton never came nigh the Work, but by his
Words and Behavior did all he could to prevent it; until at last the People
were obliged to leave off the Work unfinished, contrary to the Welfare and
Safety of this Colony.

That the said Causton has greatly prevented and discouraged the Cultivation
of Lands, by his hindering People to settle on the Tracts that were allotted to
them by the Trustees; whereby several People have been greatly distressed, and
some almost ruined contrary (as we humbly conceive) to your Honors good
Intention, and the principal Part of your glorious Undertaking.

That the said Thomas Causton, in order to color his illegal Proceedings, has
uttered Words to this or the like Purpose, we do not stand upon our Feet; we do
not know either our Laws or Liberties, nor what the Trustees intend; a
Magistrate cannot act to strict Forms, but may dismiss Matters of Petty Felony
in the easiest Manner; thereby claiming to himself (as we humbly conceive) a
dispending Power, fatal to the Liberties of British Subjects, and contrary, etc.

The Want of Public Roads has been greatly detrimental to many who have
Settlements at any Distance from this Place; and some have lost, and are still
liable to lose a great part of their Crops, through the Difficulty of passing
to and from their Plantations.

That the great Want of Servants in this Town and Country, does render the
Freeholders thereof incapable of proceeding with proper Vigor in the
Cultivating their Lands; and as the Honorable James Oglethorpe, Esquire did
generously promise, that your Honors would be pleased to give this Colony
continual Assistance, by sending over Servants to the said Freeholders at
reasonable Rates: Therefore, we do, with all Humility, lay before your Honors
the great and general Want of Servants in this Town and Country; not ^oubting
your timely Assistance therein.

That the Town of Savannah stands in the utmost Need of having a good Wharff
and Crane, for the Convenience of both Strangers and Inhabitants, they being at
double Pains and Costs in landing and getting their Goods up the Bluff.

That the Light-House of Tybee, which with great Labor and, as we humbly
conceive, vast Expense to your Honors, remains unfinished and uncovered; by
reason of which, that most necessary and lofty Structure is subject to all the
Injuries of Weather, and may totally decay if not in time prevented, which will
be greatly detrimental to the Trade, Navigation and Welfare of this Colony.

That the Inhabitants of this Town and County are at vast Expense in time of
Sickness, especially they who have most Servants; it being a general
Misfortune, that during the hot Season of the Year, hardly one half of the
Servants are able to do their Masters any Work, by reason of the violent
Sicknesses; which has very much prevented the Inhabitants from making
Improvements.

It is without the least personal Resentment to Mr. Causton, or any other
person, that we do, with the most profound Respect and Duty, lay before your
Honors the foregoing Grievances, Hardships and Necessities; and it is not the
Persons or personal Infirmities of any of the Magistrates we blame; but such of
their Actions and Words as, we humbly conceive, tend to the Subversion of our
Laws and Liberties; and we are firmly persuaded, that Mr. Causton would not
have impannelled this Grand Jury, on an Affair that so nearly concerned him as
that of his Niece's did, if he had not believed the several Persons of this
Grand Jury, to be Men of strict Integrity, and no way prejudiced against him;
and as we the said Grand Jury are, for the time being, appointed for the solemn
Representation of Truth, we humbly hope your Honors will consider this our
Representation, as proceeding from a strict impartial and found Enquiry.

In Witness, etc. -- this first Day of September, 1737.

The Original of this was signed by all the Forty four, and sent home; but was
taken no notice of by the (...) stees for any thing ever we heard; and we hope
it will appear evident to every judicious Reader, that his Jury was neither
biased nor intimidated by Causton, to the Prejudice of any Person whatsoever,
as Mr. Wesly asserts in his Journal printed at Bristol, 1739. He likewise says,
there were a professed Atheist and Deist in the Number; but for our Parts we
know of neither: But a Man of Mr. Wesly's Principles, who makes no Scruple of
writing wilful Falsehoods (as may be seen by any Body that compares this
Narrative with his Journal) and of damning every Person of a contrary Opinion
with himself, may, without Hesitation, give People what Appellations come in
his Head: However this put an End to any further Prosecution of Mr. Wesly's
Schemes; for soon after this, he departed the Colony privately by Night, and
went to Charlestown, and from thence to England.

Mr. Wesly had Address enough (as he says in his forementioned Journal) to
persuade several Persons who were Members of the Grand Jury, to retract (by
some Paper which he drew up for them to sign) their former Sentiments; but
this, it is was at all, proceeded entirely from the solemn Assurances which he
gave them, that his main Design home was to represent the Grievances and
Oppressions which the poor Colony labored under; and upon this Account was
charged with diverse Letters and Papers from private Persons, relating to the
Colony; which he undertook faithfully to deliver: But as we have since found,
that all Mr. Oglethorpe's Interest was employed to protect Mr. Wesly, it is no
Wonder those Promises were never fulfilled; nor indeed could it ever be
ascertained that even the private Letters which he carried were so much as
delivered.

On the other Hand Mr. Causton ever after bore a mortal Hatred to the Members
of this Grand Jury, and took every Opportunity to show his Resentment; and we
doubt not but he prevailed upon three or four of them to make a Recantation,
having either terrified or starved them into a Compliance: But we bore these
Things the more patiently, as being satisfied the Trustees were Gentlemen who
had our Interest at Heart, and who would hear and redress our Grievances in due
Time, and that Mr. Oglethorpe might still be a Friends to the Colony; but at
last we heard He had procured a Regiment for its Defense, of which he was made
Colonel, and that He was likewise made General and Commander in chief over all
his Majesty's Forces in South Carolina and Georgia. This News was confirmed by
William Stephens, Esquire who was sent over as Trustees Secretary, to represent the
State and Condition of the Colony as it really was, and to assist and consult
with the Magistrates: But Mr. Causton soon found the Means to bring over the
old Gentleman to his Interest, or at least to acquiesce in every Thing he said
or did; for he had still the Command of the Cash and Stores, and Mr. Stephens
had nothing to live upon but his Salary, which he could stop the Payment of at
Pleasure; so our Secretary remained passive until Causton's Government ended.

At last Mr. Oglethorpe comes over for the third time, in September with the
Remainder of his Regiment, the other Part having come with Colonel Cochran in
May; but alas! this Regiment was of no Service, otherwise than to strengthen us
in case of an Attack; for we could neither furnish them in Clothes, Provisions,
nor any one Thing they wanted: And to put us out of all Hopes of bettering our
Condition, Mr. Oglethorpe was pleased to declare in the Courthouse of Savannah
That as long as he had any thing to do with the colony, there should neither be
Allowance of Negroes, nor Alteration in the Titles of Land; and if any such
thing should happen, he would have no farther Concern with it. The People thus
seeing there was no Hope of Redress, left the Colony daily; and the Trustees
Credit receiving a great Shock by their refusing Mr. Causton's certified
Accounts, and an entire Stop being put to the public Store, many poor Wretches
died of Hunger; for at this Time Mr. Causton was turned out of all his Places,
and the Store was ordered to be sold, in order, as was said, to pay off the
Trustees Debts. One Thomas Jones, a Favorite of Mr. Oglethorpe, whose
Character we shall have Occasion to give afterward, was put in his Place as
Cash and Store-keeper, only with a different Title, viz. that of
Magazine-keeper; for none but the Trustees Servants were to be supplied from
it: But the contrary soon appeared; for the Sola Bills that were sent over were
ordered to be issued out in the Names of William Stephens, Esquire Mr. Thomas
Christie and Mr. Thomas Jones, or any two of them; but the other two agreeing
together entirely excluded Christie, and paid them to whom, and for what
purpose they thought convenient: They bought New York Cargoes, and any other
Commodities that could be got in Quantities, and put them into the Magazine,
where they were sold out by Jones in Wholesale and Retail for ready Money, at
^xorlitant Rates. This Trade they have carried on ever since to their vast
Advantage, but to the no small Distress of the poor People, who are obliged to
give at the Rate almost of cent* Per cent. for their Provisions. Thus, under
the Color of no Store, these two keep as open a one as ever Causton did; and
by having the public Money at their Disposal, the Payment of all Salaries and
Pensions coming through their Hands, they are become as absolute; with this
Difference, that Mr. Causton's Power in every Respect extended over the whole
Colony, when it was most populous and Money most plenty; but theirs seems only
to affect the wretched Remains of Savannah.

We might have imagined that the Trustees were somewhat moved with our repeated
Complaints, and that Mr. Causton's Removal was owing thereto; but alas! in this
we were mistaken; nothing (as ever we could understand) was laid to his Charge
on our Account; and it was of small Benefit to us whether the Mismanagement of
Money, which was the Reason of his Dismission, lies at his or Mr. Oglethorpe's
Door: And we cannot but here take notice, that Mr. Causton's Cafe fortifies the
common Observation, That those who prostitute themselves to carry on illegal
and oppressive Schemes, when they have once stack in the M^re, they are
forsaken by their Employers, and despised by all the World besides.

Mr. Oglethorpe staid not long at Savannah, his common Residence being at
Frederica, where they had, in Imitation of us, built a few Houses, and cleared
some Land; but finding Planting not answer, they left it off, and as soon as
the Regiment came, almost every Body betook themselves to the keeping public
Houses; and in this Manner do the few that now remain live.

All the public Work being put a Stop to, and clearing of Land being found
impracticable, by which most of us had ruined ourselves, we were in a miserable
Condition; and all Hope from Mr. Oglethorpe being at an End, we could hardly
tell what to do: But still thinking that the Trustees might be ignorant or
misinformed of the present Condition of the Colony, we at last resolved to set
forth our Grievances in a short and general Representation, to be signed by all
the Freeholders in the Colony, of which the following is an exact Copy.

To the honorable the Trustees for establishing the Colony of Georgia in
America
May it please your Honors,
WE whose Names are underwritten, being all Settlers, Freeholders and
Inhabitants in the Province of Georgia, and being sensible of the great Pains
and Care exerted by you in endeavoring to settle this Colony since it has been
under your Protection and Management, do unanimously join to lay before you,
with the utmost Regret, the following Particulars: But in the first Place, we
must beg leave to observe, that it has afforded us a great deal of Concern and
Uneasiness, that former Representations made to you of the same Nature have not
been thought worthy of due Consideration, nor even of an Answer. We have most
of us settled in this Colony in pursuance of the Description and Recommendation
given of it by you in Britain; and from the Experience of residing here several
Years, do find that it is impossible that the Measures hitherto laid down and
pursued for making it a Colony can succeed. None of all those who have planted
their Land have been able to raise sufficient Produce to maintain their
Families in Bread-kind only, even though as much Application and Industry have
been exerted to bring it about, as could be done by Men engaged in an Affair on
which they believed the Welfare of themselves and Posterity so much depended,
and which they imagined required more than ordinary Pains to make succeed; so
that by the accumulateed Expenses every Year of Provisions, Clothing and
Medicines, for themselves, Families and Servants, se^^^^ have expended all
their Money, nay even run (...) in Debt, and so been obliged to leave off
Planning and making further Improvements; and those (...) continue are daily
exhausting more and more of their Money, and some daily increasing their Debt,
without (...) Possibility of being reimbursed, according to the p^^se^t
Constitution. This being now the general State (...) the Colony, it must be
obvious that People cannot (...) by their Land according to the present
Establishment; and this being a Truth resulting from Trial, Practice and
Experience, cannot be contradicted by any theorical Scheme or Reasoning. The
Land then, according to the present Constitution, not being capable to maintain
the Settlers here, they must unavoidably have Recourse to, and depend upon
Trade; but to our woeful Experience likewise, the same Causes that prevented the
first obstruct the latter; for though the Situation of this Place is exceeding
well adapted for Trade, and, if it was encouraged, might be much more improved
by the Inhabitants, yet the Difficulties and Restrictions which we hitherto
have, and at present do labor under, debar us of that Advantage. Timber is the
only Thing we have here which we might export, and notwithstanding we are
obliged to fell it in planting our Land, yet we cannot manufacture it for a
foreign Market but at double the Expense of other Colonies: As for Instance,
the River of May, which is but twenty Miles from us, with the Allowance of
Negroes, load Vessels with that Commodity at one half of the Price that we can
do; and what should induce Persons to bring Ships here, when they can be loaded
with one Half of the Expense so near us? Therefore the Timber on the Land is
only a continual Charge to the Possessors of it, though of very great Advantage
in all the Northern Colonies where Negroes are allowed, and consequently Labor
cheap. We do not in the least doubt but that in time Silk and Wine may be
produced here, especially the former; but since the Cultivation of Land with
white Servants only cannot raise Provi^^^^^ (...) our Families, as before
mentioned, therefore (...) impossible to carry on these Manufactures according
to the present Constitution. It is very well known that Carolina can raise
every thing that his Colony can, and they having their Labor so much cheaper,
will always ruin our Market, unless we were in some Measure on a Footing with
them; and as in both the Land is worn out in four or five Years, and then fit
for nothing but Pasture, we must be always at a great deal more Expense than
they in clearing new Land for Planting. The Importation of the Necessaries of
Life come to us at the most extravagant Rate, Merchants in general, especially
of England, not being willing to supply the Settlers here with Goods upon
Commission, because no Person here can make them any Security of their Lands or
Improvements, as is very often practiced in other Places to promote Trade, when
some of the Employers Money is laid out in necessary Buildings and Improvements
fitting for the Trade intended, without which it cannot be carried on: The
Benefit of Importation therefore is all to transient Persons, who do not lay
out any Money amongst us, but on the contrary carry every Penny out of the
Place; and their chief Reason for enhancing the Price is because they cannot
get any Goods here either on Freight or Purchase for another Market: If the
Advantage accruing from Importation centred in the Inhabitants, the Profit
thereof would naturally circulate amongst us, and be laid out in Improvements
in the Colony. Your Honors, we imagine, are not insensible of the Numbers that
have left this Province, not being able to support themselves and Families any
longer; and those still remaining, who had Money of their own and Credit with
their Friends, have laid out most of the former in Improvements, and lost the
latter for doing it on such pre^^^ious Titles. And upon account of the present
Establishment, not above two or three Persons, except those brought on Charity
and Servants sent by you, have come here for the Space of two Years past,
either to settle Land or encourage Trade, neither do we hear of any such likely
to come until we are on betterTerms. It is true his Majesty has been graciously
pleased to grant a Regiment for the Defense of this Province and our
neighboring Colony, which indeed will very much assist us in defending
ourselves against all Enemies, but otherwise does not in the least contribute
to our Support; for all that part of their Pay which is expended here is laid
out with transient People, and our Neighbors in Carolina, who are capable to
supply them with Provisions and other Necessaries at a moderate Price, which
we, as before observed, are not at all capable to do upon the present
Establishment. This then being our present Condition, it is obvious what the
Consequences must be.

But we for our Parts have entirely relied on, and confided in your good
Intentions, believing you would redress any Grievances that should appear; and
now by our long Experience, from Industry and continual Application to
Improvement of Land here, do find it impossible pursue it, or even to subsist
ourselves any longer, according to the present Nature of the Constitution; and
likewise believing you will agree to those Measures that are found from
Experience capable to make this Colony succeed, and to promote which we have
consumed our Money, Time and Labor; we do, from a sincere Regard to its
Welfare, and in Duty both to you and ourselves, beg leave to lay before your
immediate Consideration the Two following chief Causes of these our present
Misfortunes, and this deplorable State of the Colony, and which, we are
certain, if granted, would be an infallible Remedy for both

1st, The Want of a free Title or Fie-simple to our Lands, which, if granted,
would both induce great Numbers of new Settlers to come amongst us, and
likewise encourage those who remain here cheerfully to (...) in making Further
Improvement^, as well to retrieve their sunk Fortune as to make Provisions for
their Posterity.

2 d, The Want of the Use of Negroes, with proper Limitations; which, if
granted, would both occasion great Numbers of white People to come here, and
also render us capable to subsist ourselves, by raising Provisions upon our
Lands, until we could make some Produce fit for Export, and in some Measure to
balance our Importation. We are very sensible of the Inconveniences and
Mischiefs that have already, and do daily arise from an unlimited Use of
Negroes, but we are as sensible that these may be prevented by a due
Limitation, such as so many; to each white Man, or so many to such a Quantity
of Land, or in any other Manner which your Honors shall think most proper.

By granting us, Gentlemen, these Two Particulars and such other Privileges as
his Majesty's most dutiful Subjects in America enjoy, you will not only prevent
our impending Ruin, but, we are fully satisfied, also will soon make this the
most flourishing Colony possessed by his Majesty in America, and your Memories
will be perpetuated to all future Ages, our latest Posterity sounding your
Praises, as their first Founders, Patrons and Guardians; but if, by denying us
these Privileges, we ourselves and Families are not only ruined, but even our
Posterity likewise, you will always be mentioned as the Cause and Authors of
all their Misfortunes and Calamities; which we hope will never happen.

Savannah, 9 th Dec. 1738 We are, with all due Respect, your Honors Most
dutiful, and obedient Servants, Magistrates. Henry Parker, His Robert R G
Gilbert, Mark. Thomas Christie,

John Fallowfield, John Brownfield, William Woodroose, Patrick Tailfer, Andrew
Grant, Robert Williams, Samuel Mercer, Patrick Grhame, David Douglass, Thomas
Bailie, Hugh Anderson, James Williams, Edward Jenkins, Thomas Ormston, Joseph
Wardrope, George Bunckle, Adam Loyer, Peter Joubart, John Burton, Robert Hows,
Williams Meers, Thomas Salter, James Bailow, James Anderson, Thomas Trip,
Samuel Holins, James Muer, William Parker, John Grhame, James Papot, John
smith, William Calvert, stephen Marrauld, Richard Mellechamp, Isaac Young, sen,
James D^rmer, William Carter, Henry Moulton, Jac^^ Wal^^, Henry Ma^ley, Samuel
Parker, Stephen Mounfoord, David Gender, James Chainsae, James Landry, Lowis
Stamon, William Starflichet, Simon Rie^were, John Young, Samuel L^acy, Peter
Bailow, Peter Emry, William Elbert, William Greenfield, Christopher Greenfield,
Thomas Young, Sen. Henry Green, Peter Tector, Hugh Frazer, John Sallie, James
Carwells, John Lyndall, Joseph Fitzwater, ^^isha Foster, Walter Fox, John
Penrose, David Snook, Edward Townsend, John Desborough, -- Gorsand, Andrew
Duchee, James Gallway, John Kelly, Joseph Stanley, Thomas Young, Thomas Cross,
Richard Davis, Thomas Tibbet, James Dean, Donald Stewart, John Dudding, William
Ewen, Henry Loyd, John Amory, James Houston, Isaac Young, Robert Hanks,
Archibald Glen, Thomas Neal, Stephen Tarrien, James Smith, Samuel Ward, Pierre
Morelle, John Desborough, jun. Edward Bush, Benjamin Adams, Charles Britain,
John Rae, William Colthred, Thomas Wattle, Thomas Bailie, James Corneck, James
Burnside, John Teasdale, Giles Becou, Francis Brooks, John Clark, George Rush,
Andrew Walker, John Miller, Thomas Andrews, William Sterling, Thomas Gantlet,
Richard Rogers,

In all 117.

This Representation was signed with the greatest Willingness by the above One
hundred and seventeen Freeholders in the Country of Savannah, and only a very
few of the General's Favorites declined to subscribe the same, so strong
appeared to all of them the Truths therein contained, and the absolute
Necessity of such an Application. The Jews applied for Liberty to sign with us,
but we did not think it proper to join them in any of our Measures: We likewise
did not allow Widows and Orphans to subscribe, because, as the Representation
contained the absolute Necessities of the Colony, it might be objected to us,
that they were no proper Judges. As for the People of Ebenezer, the Subscribers
did particularly appoint some of their Number to wait upon Mr. Boltzius their
pastor, and show him the Representation, which was done; and Mr. Boltzius
declared, That the saltzburghers were equally dissatisfied with their Rights
and Restriction as the other Freeholders, and he doubted not their Willingness
to join petitionning for Redress, engaging to consult them, and to bring their
Answer, which he never did; and being thereafter questioned thereupon by Mr.
Anderson (one of the Persons commissioned to commune with him as is above
related) in the Presence of several Gentlemen, he the said Boltzius, after some
frivolous Excuses, con^essed that the honorable Mr. Oglethorpe had both given
them Satisfaction, and engaged him to write home to Germany for a further
Supply of his Countrymen.

This Gentleman (we observe it with Regret) has been made the Instrument of
imposing upon many British Subjects, by publishing Journals and Letters (to
which we refer) most inconsistent with Truth.

Neither did we admit of servants to sign the same, lest it should be objected,
that they were under the Influence of their Masters. By this our Conduct it
will appear to every person of Impartiality how far we were from using Arts
(...) Trustees Answer
to extort by Clamor a Redress of our Grievances.

A copy of the Representation was immediately sent to Frederica and another to
Darien; the last was sent to Mr. John More M'Intosh, and under the same Cover a
Letter to Mr. Benjamin M'Intosh but the first kept up the other's Letter, and
sent his own with the Representation to the General, who immediately dispatched
Lt. George Dunbar (Who speaks the Highland Language, and has a very fluent and
artful Way of talking) who, with the Assistance of More M'Intosh and Promises
to the poor People of Cattle, (Which they afterward got) with several other
Considerations, soon persuaded them to sign a paper, the Design of which, they
were told, was to oppose the People of savannah, who being Enemies to the
General, were petitioning against him. As for their Leader M'Intosh, he was
immediately set up in a Store, and plentifully supplied with all Kinds of
Goods, and has often declared, That if, by acting as he did, he could live well
himself, he did not care what became of the rest of the Colony; and as for his
Children, they might go wander in the Woods with the Indians. As soon as it was
heard that the Representation was come to Frederica, the Inhabitants were
called together, and told, That the People of Savannah were going to throw off
the Government of the Trustees, and had associated together for that Purpose;
and therefore advised them to beware of any snare that might be laid by these
People, which if they were caught in would ruin them. And thus was the Design
of the Representation quashed both in Darien and Frederica. Some time after
this a Copy of the Representation was sent to Mr. Oglethorpe, together with the
following Letter, which was wrote by an anonymous Author; which we think is
partly an Explanation of the Representation, and likewise a true View of the
Situation of the Colony at that time, with the Character Mr. Oglethorpe then
bore in it; and for these Reasons we here insert it: It was directed,

To the Honorable James oglethorpe, Esquire General and commander in Chief over
all his Majesty's Forces in South Carolina and Georgia, etc;.- at Frederica.
SIR
IT is the common Misfortune of all who act in the higher Stations of Life to
be surrounded with Flatterers, who consult rather the Humors, Passions and
Prejudices of their Patrons, than their Honor and Interest: This should induce
every Person in such Station, who regards his own Honor, Interest or Fame, to
lend an open and attentive Ear to Truth, in whatever Shape or from whatever
Hand delivered. I who use this Freedom with your Excellency, being an anonymous
Author, have no other Bias, Motive or Interest in view, further than as I am a
Member of the colony, and a Well-wisher to the Happiness of Society, unless a
real and sincere Regard to your Honor and Welfare, and an earnest Desire to
restore you to that Quiet of Mind and the now suspended Affections of the
People, which the present State of Affairs must necessarily deprive you of; it
is not therefore of consequence to enquire who writes, but what is wrote: I am,
Sir, a Plain-Dealer, and shall, with the greatest Respect, use you with more
Sincerity than Ceremony; and if my Arguments can attain the desired Effect, you
will, I doubt not, think me your and the Colony's real Friend. When a skilful
Physician would relieve his Patient of a Disease, he traces it from the
Beginning, and examines the Sources and Progress of it, in order that by
finding out the Cause, he may the more certainly apply a Remedy: In the Body
Politic the fame process is necessary to effect a Cure. The present
languishing and almost desperate Condition of the Affairs of this Province, is
too obvious to your Excellency to need a Description: Be pleased then, laying
aside Prepossession and Prejudice, to retire unto your self, and examine
impartially whence the present Misfortunes take Rise; in order to which, let me
present your Excellency with a View of the Nation's Designs in establishing
this Colony; and indeed they were and are nothing unsuitable to a British or
Roman Spirit; to wit, The establishing a strong and numerous Settlement as a
Barrier and Safeguard of British America: To employ those Persons in effecting
this End who were least useful at home, and others who from the Reasonableness
of the Proposals, should voluntarily profer their service: To restore Liberty
and Happiness to those who, oppressed by the common Misfortunes of Mankind,
were groaning under the Conferences of these Misfortunes, and incapable to
(...) or Country at home: And lastly, to sit a-foot such new Manufactures as
might be most useful to support the Colony, or tend to rectify the Balance of
Trade of Great Britain with neighboring Nations. A Design truly great, founded
on the juste^t Policy, and practicable: To suggest that any low private Design
was ever laid down, that might tend to make the Adventurers Slaves, or, at
best, Tenants at Will; or that it was a Concert to leave the Industry and
Substance of the Settlers exposed to satisfy the Ambition or Covetousness of an
After-Governor, or any particular Courtier or Party; or to imagine that the
Honorable Board of Trustees, or any of them, could be capable of such a
Concert, I say, Sir, that such a Thought were impious. What Wonder then, if
Numbers of Persons, encouraged by his Majesty's most ample Rights and
Privileges granted in his Royal Charter to the Honorable Trustees, for the
Behalf of the Inhabitants; from the beautiful Description of the Fertility of
the Soil and Happiness of the Climate; and lastly, from a View that Mr.
Oglethorpe, a Gentleman of the greatest Humanity and Generosity, was willing to
sacrifice his Ease, and all those Pleasures and Enjoyments which his easy
Circumstances of Life entitled him to, in order to be the Patron and Father of
the Distressed, and the distinguished Friend of his Country, Society and human
Nature; I say, Sir, no Wonder, if Numbers, upon those Views, embarked their
Persons, Families and Fates in such an Adventure. Shall anything then intervene
to render such a noble Design abortive, and frustrate those of their expected
Happiness, or your Excellency of your deserved Honor? GOD FORBID!

This Colony consists of two Sorts of People; either those whom the Public
sent over and supported, or (...) those persons who settled in (...) on th^^
own (...)
Volunteers, who were not burdensome to the public; both now I look upon in
the same Light; as either Party have exhausted their Support or private Stocks
in endeavoring to prosecute the intended Plan; but it shall suffice for my
Argument, that so many of each Kind have applied themselves to this Purpose, as
are sufficient to confirm the Experiment, that it is impossible, for us with
British or Foreign Servants to afford the lowest Necessaries of Life, much less
to increase our Stocks, or defray the many Exigencies and Disappointments that
this Soil and Climate are inevitably exposed to: This I take to be granted; and
would to God the Success of the Colony depended on the laying the most
satisfying Proof of it! And as for Persons who, from selfish Views, have
imposed upon the Credulity of the Honorable Trustees, by representing Things
in Colors distant from Truth, it were superfluous to curse them. I do not say,
but in time Manufactures my be founded more suitable to the Strength and
Constitution of British Servants, that might support and enrich the Colony; I
heartily pray for that happy Period; and should then condemn and dissent from
any who would not be content with the present Regulation; but as in the Interim
Production of Necessaries is absolutely requisite, and under the present
Establishment impracticable, it follows of course, that either the Scheme must
be altered, or the Design abandoned: At the first it was a Trial, now it is an
Experiment; and certainly no Man or Society need be ashamed to own, that from
unforeseen Emergencies their Hypothesis did misgive; and no Person of Judgment
would censure for want of Success where the Proposal was probable; but all the
World would exclaim against that Person or society who, through mistaken
Notions of Honor or Positiveness of Temper, would persist in pushing an
Experiment contrary to all Probability, to the Ruin of the Adventurers. How
many Methodsmay be found out by the Wisdom on the Trustees for remedying this
Inconvenience, I know not; One only occurs to me, which is, the Admitting a
certain Number of Negroes, sufficient to ease the white Servants from those
Labors that are most fatal to a British Constitution: I am very sensible of
the Inconveniences of an unlimited Use of them in a Frontier Colony; but am as
sensible, that those Inconveniences may be prevented by prudent Regulations;
and their Admission for executing the more laborious Parts of Culture made the
Means to attract Numbers of white Servants, who would otherwise fly the Place
as a Purgatory or Charnel-House. If our Labor and Toil is not capable of
producing mere Necessaries by Cultivation of Land, much less by Trade: For as
all the neighboring Colonies, by reason of their Negroes, prosecute all
Branches of it at a sixth Part of the Expense we can, they would for ever
preclude us of any Benefit therefrom. And supporting what cannot, be admitted,
that the Nation would consent to give a prepetual Fund for making up all those
Deficiencies, What Benefit could ever accrue to the Nation? or What to the
Settlers but a present bare Sustenance? and What the certain Consequence but
the bequeathing a numerous Legacy of Orphans to the Care of Providence, since
no Period of Time can be affixed when such a Support would enable us to provide
for ourselves? A second Reason which disables us to improve either by Land or
Trade, is our Want of Credit: You know very well, that both the mercantile and
mechanic Part of Mankind live more by Credit than Stock; and the Man who has a
probable Scheme of improving Credit, is naturally entitled to it: As we have no
Stock further to dispense, (...) in Cultivation or Trade, we are reduced to
need the Support of Credit, which the present Restrictions of our legal Rights
and Titles to our Lord (...) us of: it is true indeed the Trustees have assured
us, That (...) and (...) R^firi^tions are only temporary, and for the Welfare
of the first Settlement, until a proper Body of Laws, which was upon the
Carpet, should be perfected; and I am far from disputing the Reasonableness of
that Resolution, while either the public Support or private Stocks kept us
from needing Credit; but that now the Case is altered, the Necessity of
removing those Restrictions is arrived, to preserve the Remains of the Colony
not yet dissolved, and far too late for Hundreds whom Necessity has dispersed
in other Corners of the world: This is a Truth, sir, too obvious to need
further Enlargement.

Hence it is clear, we can insist on demanding our Privileges as British
Subjects from the Trustees Promises; but we likewise claim them as Law, justice
and Property. Your Excellency was pleased, in the CourtHouse of Savannah, to
use a Comparison to satisfy the Minds of the People, of a Man who would lend
his Horse but not his Saddle, which one refusing, another accepted of: This, I
humbly take it, no ways meets the Case; the King's Majesty was Owner both of
Horse and saddle, of Lands and Rights, and gave us both in his charter; we ask
but what is there given us. The Reliance on the Public Faith brought us to
this colony; and to endeavor to obviate or disappoint the Effects of those
Promises which tempted us here, were to justify the decoying us to Misery,
under the Sanction of the Royal Authority, than which nothing could be more
injurious to the Fountain of Honor. I shall suppose, that were full and ample
Rights given, that some idle Persons, who had no Judgment to value or
Inclination to improve their Properties, no Affections for their Families or
Relations, might dispose of their Rights for a Glass of Rum; but I absolutely
deny, that Colony could lose by such an Exchange: I own such Persons were much
safer is bound than at Liberty; but where the Affection of the Parent and the
Reason of the Man die, the Person is a fitter Inhabitant for Moorfields than
Georgia. I must notice further, That not only are Parents incapable, for want
of Credit, to provide for themselves, being necessitated to dispose of their
Servants for want of Provisions; but if they could, only their eldest Son could
reap the Benefit, their younger Children, however numerous, are left to be fed
by Him who feeds the Ravens; and if they have no Children, their Labor and
Substance descends to Strangers: How, sir, could you, or indeed any freeborn
Spirit, brook such a Tenor? Are not our younger Children and Daughters equally
entitled to our Bowels and Affections? And does human Nature end with our
Firstborn, and not extend itself to the rest of our Progeny and more distant
Relations? And is it not inverting the Order of Nature, that the eldest Son
should not only enjoy a double Portion, but exclude all the younger Children?
and having an Interest independent of the Parents, how natural is it he should
withdraw that Obedience and Subjection which proceeds from paternal Authority
and filial Dependence! The Trustees are but a Channel to convey to us the
King's Rights, and cannot in Law or Equity, and, I dare say, will not abridge
those Rights. Can we suppose that we are singled out for a State of Misery and
Servitude, and that so many Honorable Personages are Instruments of it? Far be
the Thoughts from us! The Genius of the British Nation, so remarkably zealous
for Liberty and the Rights of Mankind, will never suffer British Subjects, who
have not fled their Country for Crimes, but voluntarily proffered their
Service, and risked their ALL, upon the Confidence of the Public (...) and the
Trustees Honor, to accomplish a Settlement upon the most dangerous Point of
his Majority's Dominions; I say, it will never allow such to be deprived of
Public promises, or the natural Liberties of British Subjects, As we are on a
Frontier. where our Lives and Fortunes may more frequently come into dispute
than other People's, our Privileges and Supports should be proportionably
greater; for who would venture his Life to secure no Property, or fight to
secure to himself Poverty and Misery? And no doubt our cunning and vigilant
Adversaries, the French and Spaniards, would know how to make their own
Advantage. The King has been very gracious, and your Endeavors generous and
useful, in procuring a Regiment for our Protection; but let me add a Truth
equally certain, that only the Flourishing of the Colony can support that
Regiment; and not only the Support of the Soldiers, but your own Honor, Glory
and Reputation are intermixed with the Fate of the Colony, and must stand or
fall with it.

To come closer to the Point, please to consider the Consequences of refusing
the Representation of the Colony, whereof your Excellency, as one of the
honorable Board, will be furnished with a Copy, and how these Consequences may
affect the COLONY, (...) NATION, the TRUSTEES, the MILITARY ESTABLISHMENT in
this Province, the INDIANS, and YOUR EXCELLENCY.

As to the COLONY, the deferring hitherto the necessary Relief has already too
tragically affected it, by dispersing a great Part of the Inhabitants, the
Remainder, in a languishing Condition, supported more with saint Hopes, and a
continued Reliance on the Honor of the Nation and Trustees, than Victuals,
while Want and meagre Famine guard the Door of many, and render them equally
incapable to stay or go: The Town, so beautifully situated to the Honor of the
Contriver, bearing the most visible Signs of Decay and Mortality before it is
fully born; and the once cultivated Plantations now overgrown with Weeds and
Brush, are so many (...)-jacets of such and such Persons and Families! I with
it were possible to draw a Veil over this tragic Scene! But, Sir, our Case is
more clamant than a thousand Tongues, and will reach the Ears and pierce the
Hearts of every TRUE BRITON. If such are the Effects of Delay, what will the
total Dissolution of the Colony produce? Such a Body of miserable People,
Orphans and Suppliants, will be heard by the Justice of the Nation; and if it
shall appear, that the too positively adhering to an impracticable Scheme, and
the refusing those obvious Means that Would answer the proposed End, or
withholding those just Rights which we are entitled to, have been the Cause, we
should have Right to recover Damages from the Authors of our Miseries. In all
Places where Settlements were attempted by the English and found untenable, the
Settlers were taken home upon public Charge, their Losses recompensed, and
they made otherwise useful to the Community; while we are neither allowed to do
for ourselves here or elsewhere. As to the second Point, how the NATION would
be affected by it, it is first obvious, that all the noble Ends and Advantages
they proposed are lost, and Sums of Money expended to no Purpose but to inform
the French and Spaniards of the Importance of a Pass which they would not fail
to possess. It were impossible to make a second Settlement upon the present
Plan, and if it is to be altered in the Favors of others, why not of us who
have risqued and spent our All in the Adventure? How the TRUSTESS may be
affected by it in all Respects I shall not say; a Parliamentary Enquiry into
their Management I no ways question but they could entirely satisfy; but all
good Men will regret that so honorable a Body should lose that Glory and Fame
which the Prosperous Success of the Colony would have crowned them with. I have
formerly asserted, that only the flourishing State of the Colony can support
the MILITARY; and indeed without a Colony it were easier to maintain a Garrison
in Tangier on the Coast of Africa than in the South of Georgia. One Regiment
would little suffice to withstand the Enemy; and yet so small an Handful may be
reduced to Discontent, Straits and Wants notwithstanding all the Bounty of a
King, or Prudence of a General. As to the INDIANS, what could we expect less
than being scorned and despised? That they should immediately fall in with the
tempting Proffers of the French and Spaniards, and so Great Britain cut off
from that valuable Branch of the Indian Trade; for how indeed could they expect
Execution of Treaties or Protection from People who, without the Force of any
Enemy, could not preserve their own Schemes of Government from falling to
Pieces? How the Tragedy must affect YOUR EXCELLENCY would be Presumption in me
to determine, I only know, that to see Those you honor with the Name of
children in Want and Misery, that Settlement which should have perpetuated your
Name to Posterity with the greatest Honor, become the (...) all your great
Undertakings; and the Expectations of all the World, from your promising
Endeavors, setting in a Cloud and Obscurity, must affect your Excellency in a
Way suitable to your humane and generous Disposition.

Sir, we still love, honor and respect you, (whatever low selfish-minded
Persons, the Bane of Society, may surmise to the contrary) and will continue to
do so while we can have any Hopes of your pursuing Measures consistent with our
Prosperity: But Sir, Smiles cannot be expected amidst Disappointments and
Wants, and there is no altering the Course of Nature: Love and Gratitude are
the Tribute of Favors and Protection, and Resentment the Consequence of
Injuries received; and in Disappointments of this Nature much more reasonably
than in those of Love, do the contrary Passions take place in the same Degree.
What then remains, but that you embrace those obvious Measures that will
retrieve our desperate Affairs; r^sl^re to us, in Mr. Oglethorpe, our Father
and Protector, whose (...) and Affection was depended upon; secure to your self
a Society that loves and honors you, and who will always be ready to sacrifice
both Life and Fortune to your Honor and Protection, and your Name with
Blessings will be perpetuated. If in this I have, by a sincere and well-meant
Freedom, given Offense, I heartily ask Pardon, none was intended; and I only
request, that, while Truth keeps the Stage, the Author may be allowed to remain
incog. behind the Scenes.

I am, Sir, your, etc. The PLAIN-DEALER.


This Year there was promised a Bounty of Two Shillings Sterling on every
Bushel of Corn, and One Shilling on every Bushel of Pease and Potatoes, raised
in the County of Savannah: This induced some few to plant, but they were
miserably deceived, for few or none of them ever received their full Bounty,
and not many any Part thereof, (although if they had received it twice over it
could not have answered the End.) People being thus, by a Chain of
Disappointments and Miseries, most of them rendered incapable to subsist, and,
toward the End of this Summer, beginning to despair of having any favorable
Answer to their Representation, or Hopes of Redress, left the Colony faster
than ever; and when the Answer (or rather Denial) came over, they went in such
Numbers, that the whole Province of South Carolina was overspread with them,
and in and about the Town of Charlestown alone, this Autumn above Fifty
Georgians died in Misery and want, most of whom were buried at the public
Charge.

In September a printed Paper, entitled, An Answer to the Representation, etc.
was sent over, and arrived at Savannah, and of which this is an exact Copy.

The Answer of the Trustees for establishing the Colony of Georgia in America,
to the Representation from the Inhabitants of Savannah, the 9th of December
1738, for altering the Tenure of the Lands, and introducing Negroes into
Georgia.
To the Magistrates of the Town of Savannah in the Province of Georgia.
THe Trustees for establishing the Colony of Georgia in America, have received
by the Hands of Mr. Benjamin Ball of London, Merchant, an attested Copy of a
Representation, signed by you the Magistrates and many of the Inhabitants of
Savannah, on the 9th of December last, for altering the Tenure of the Lands,
and introducing Negroes into the Province, transmitted from thence by Mr.
Robert Williams.

The Trustees are not surprised to find unwary People drawn in by crafty Men,
to join in a Design of extorting by Clamor from the Trustees an Alteration in
the fundamental Laws, framed for the Preservation of People, from those very
Designs.

But the Trustees cannot but express their Astonishment, that You the
Magistrates, appointed by them to be Guardians of the People by putting those
Laws in Execution, should so far forget your Duty, as to put yourselves at the
Head of this Attempt.

However they direct you to give the Complainants this Answer from the
Trustees, That they should deem themselves very unfit for the Trust reposed in
them by his Majesty on their Behalf, if they could be prevailed upon, by such
an irrational Attempt, to give up a Constitution, ^ramed with the greatest
Caution for the Preservation of Liberty and Property, and of which the Laws
against the Use of Slaves, and for the Entail of Lands, are the surest
Foundations.

And the Trustees are the more confirmed in their Opinion of the
Unreasonableness of this Demand, that they have received Petitions from the
Darien, and other Parts of the Province, representing the Inconvenience and
Danger which must arise to the good People of the Province from the
Introduction of Negroes. And as the Trustees themselves are fully convinced,
that, besides the Hazard attending that Introduction, it would destroy all
Industry among the white Inhabitants; and that by giving them a Power to alien
their Lands, the Colony would soon be too like its Neighbors, void of white
Inhabitants, filled with Blacks, and reduced to be the Precarious Property of a
few, equally exposed to domestic Treachery and foreign Invasion; and therefore
the Trustees cannot be supposed to be in any Disposition of granting this
Request; and if they have not before this signified their Dislike of it, this
Delay is to be imputed to no other Motives but the Hopes they had conceived,
that Time and Experience would bring the Complainants to a better Mind: And the
Trustees readily join Issue with them in their Appeal to Posterity, who shall
Judge between them who were their best Friends, Those who endeavored to
preserve for them a Property in their Lands, by tying up the Hands of their
unthristy Progenitors, or They who wanted a Power to mortgage or alien them:
Who were the best Friends to the Colony, Those who with great Labor and Cost
had endeavored to form a Colony of his Majesty's Subjects, and persecuted
Protestants from other Parts of Europe; had placed them on the fruitful Soil,
and strove to secure them in their Possessions by those Arts which naturally
tend to keep the Colony full of useful and industrious People, capable both to
cultivate and desend it; or Those who, to gratify the greedy and ambitious
Views of a few Negroe Merchants, would put it into their Power to become sole
owners of the Province, by introducing their baneful Commodity, which, it is
well known by sad Experience, has brought our Neighbor Colonies to the Brink
of Ruin, by driving out their white Inhabitants, who were their Glory and
Strength, to make room for Black, who are now become the Terror of their
unadvised Masters.

Signed by Order of the Trustees, this 20 th Day of June, 1739. BENJ. MARTYN
Secretary

We shall not in this Place detain the Reader, to show the Absurdity and
Insufficiency of the Reasons made use of in the above Paper, or how improperly
it is called An Answer to the Representation, but refer them to the whole Tenor
of this Narrative. With this Paper came over new Commissions for Magistrates,
viz. Messrs. Thomas Christie, First, John Fallowfield, Second, and Thomas
Jones, Third Bailiffs, and Mr. William Williamson, Recorder: And, as if the
Inhabitants had not been sufficiently punished before by the arbitrary
Government of Causton, the Two Offices of Store-Keeper and Magistrate were
again joined in One Person, which infallibly renders him, whoever he is,
absolute in Savannah. And indeed if the Miseries and Hardships of the People
could have received any Addition, they must have done so from the Person
appointed to execute those Offices, namely, Mr. Thomas Jones Third Bailiff, as
before mentioned, who surpassed Mr. Causton in every Thing that was bad,
without having any one of his good Qualifications: And that he might the more
easily govern at Pleasure, Mr. Oglethorpe thought proper to supersede the
Commissions of Messrs. Thomas Christie and William Williamson, and continued
Mr. Henry Parker as First Magistrate, being sure he was a Person that would
always be in the Interest of Whoever was Store-Keeper; and having no other
Magistrate to cope with but Mr. Fallowfield, they were certain of overruling
him, though his Sentiments were never so just. And when the General heard that
some People justly complained that the Trustees Commissions were of none
effect, he threatened an armed Force if they refused to comply.

William Stephens, Esquire Messrs. Thomas Christie and Thomas Jones. were likewise
appointed to inspect into Causton's Accounts; but Christie was altogether
rejected by the other two; nor did they ever do any thing to the Purpose:
Indeed Jones would sometimes hector and domineer over Causton, in as haughty a
Manner as ever he had formerly done over the meanest Person in Savannah.

Although the Trustees say in their Answer to the Representation, That they
should think themselves very unfit for the Trust reposed in them, should they,
by an irrational Attempt, alter the Entail of Lands; yet not one Month after we
had received the aforesaid Answer, over comes the following Paper, viz.

The Resolutions of the Trustees for establishing the Colony of Georgia in
America, in Common Council assembled this 28th Day of August, in the Year of
our Lord 1739, relating to the Grants and Tenure of Lands within the said
Colony.
WHereas the Common Cou^ (...) of the said Trustees, assembled for that
Purpose, in the Name of the Corporation of the said Trustees, and under their
common Seal, have, in pursuance of his Majesty's most gracious Letters Patent,
and in Execution of the Trusts thereby reposed in them, granted and conveyed
diverse Portions of the Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments in the said Letters
Patent mentioned, to many of his Majesty's (...) Subjects, natural ^orn, and
Denizens, and others (...) to become his Subjects, and to live under (...) to
his Majesty in the said Colony, to held to then respectively, and to the Heirs
Male of their respective Bodies, lawfully begotten or to be begotten, under the
several Rents, Reservation, Conditions and Provisoes therein contained: And
whereas it has been represented to the said Trustees, that many of the Persons
to whom such Grants have been made have no Issue Male of their respective
Bodies, and that an Alteration in the Grants and Tenure of the said Lands upon
Failure of such Issue, and likewise a known certain Provision for the Widows of
Tenants in Tail Male, would not only encourage all such Persons cheerfully to
go on with their several Improvements, but also be ^n Inducement and Means of
inviting diverse other Persons to resort to and settle in the said Colony, and
greatly tend to the Cultivation of the Lands, the Increase of the people, and
the Defense, Strength and Security of the said Colony, which the said Trustees
most earnestly desire to promote as far as in them lies: It is therefore this
Day unanimously resolved by the Common Council of the said Corporation,
assembled for that Purpose, That the Grants of Lands or Tenements within the
said Colony, heretofore made and hereafter to be made by the said Trustees to
any Person or Persons whatsoever, shall be altered, made and established in
Manner and Form following; that is to say, That,

If Tenant in Tail Male of Lands or Tenements in the said Colony, not having
done or suffered any Act, Matter or Thing, whereby his Estate therein may be
forfeited or determined, shall happen to die, leaving a Widow and one or more
Child or Children, that then and in such Case the Widow of such Tenant shall
hold and enjoy the Dwelling House and Garden, (if any such there be) and one
Moiety of such Lands and Tenements for and during the Term of her Life; the
said Moiety to be set out and divided, in case the Parties interested therein
do not agree within the Space of three Months, by the Magistrates of the
Town-Court in Georgia nearest thereunto, or any one of them, And in case such
Division be made by one of such Magistrates only, then any Person or Persons
finding him, her or themselves aggrieved thereby, may within the Space of three
Months appeal to the other three Magistrates of the said Town-court, whose
Determination thereof shall be final. And if such Tenant shall happen to die,
leaving only a Widow, and no Child or Children, then that such Widow shall hold
and enjoy the said Dwellinghouse, Garden, and all such Lands and Tenements, for
and during the Term of her Life, And in case the Widow of any such Tenant,
whether he die without Issue by her or not, shall marry again after his
Decease, then such Person to whom she shall be so married, shall, within the
Space of Twelve Months after such Marriage, give Security to the said Trustees,
and their Successors, whether personal or otherwise, agreeable to such
Instructions as shall be given by the Common Council of the said Trustees, for
maintaining and keeping in repair, during such Marriage, the said
Dwelling House, Garden, and other the Premises, to which she shall be so
entitled in right of her former Husband: And if such Security shall not be
given in manner aforesaid, within the Space of Twelve Months after such
Marriage, that then, and in such Case, the Provision hereby made or intended to
be made for the Benefit of such Window, shall cease, determine and be
absolutely void, to all Intents and Purposes; and the said Dwelling House and
Garden, and all and singular the Premises, shall be, and endure to such Child
or Children, or to such other Person or Persons, who would be entitled to the
same, in case the said Widow was naturally dead.

And if Tenant in Tail Male of Lands or Tenements in the said Colony, not
having done or suffered any Act, Matter or Thing, whereby his or her Estate
therein may be forfeited or determined, shall happen to die leaving one or more
Daughter, or Daughters, and no Issue Male; then that such Lands Tenements, if
not exceeding eighty Acres, shall be holden in Tail Male by any one of the
Daughters of such Tenant; and if exceeding eighty Acres, by any one or more of
the Daughters of such Tenant in Tail Male, as such Tenant shall by his or her
last Will and Testament in Writing, duly executed in the Presence of three or
more credible Witnesses, direct and appoint; and in Default of such Direction
or Appointment, then that such Lands and Tenements shall be holden in Tail Male
by the eldest of such Daughters; and in Default of Issue Male and Female,
either born in the Lifetime of such Tenant in Tail Male, or within nine Months
after his Decease, then that such Lands and Tenements, if not exceeding eighty
Acres, shall be holden in Tail Male by any one such Person; and if exceeding
eighty Acres, by any one or more such Person of Persons, a such Tenant in Tail
Male by his other last Will and Testament in Writing, executed as aforesaid,
shall direct and appoint; and in Default of such Direction or Appointment, then
that such Lands and Tenements shall be holden in Tail Male by the Heir at Law
of such Tenant; subject nevertheless, in all and every the said Cases, to such
Right of the Window (if any) as aforesaid, Provided that such Daughter or
Daughters, and all and every such Person or Persons so entitled to hold and
enjoy and' such Lands and Tenements, do within the Space of Twelve Months after
the Death of such Tenant, personally appear, if residing in America, and claim
the same in any of the Town-courts in Georgia; and if residing out of America,
then within the Space of eighteen Months next after the Death of such Tenant.
And Provided also, That no such Devise or Appointment shall be made by any such
Tenant of Lands exceeding eighty Acres, in any lesser or smaller Portion or
Parcel than fifty Acres to any one Daughter, or other Person. And that no
Daughter; or other Person shall be capable of enjoying any Devise, which may
thereby increase his or her former Possession of Lands within the said Colony
to more than Five hundred Acres; but such Devise to be void, and the Lands
thereby given to descend in such manner as if no such Devise had been made. And
in Default of such Appearance and Claim as aforesaid, That all and singular the
said Lands and Tenements shall be and remain to the said Trustees and their
Successors for ever. Provided also, That all and every such Estates hereby
created or intended to be created, shall be subject and liable to the several
Rents, Reservations, Provisoes and Conditions, as in the original Grants
thereof are particularly mentioned and contained; save and except so much
thereof as is hereby altered, or intended to be altered, in case of Failure of
Issue Male, and the Provision hereby made or intended to be made for Windows.

And that in every Grant hereafter to be made by the said Trustees or their
Successors of any Lands or Tenements in the said Colony, all and every Grantee
therein named, not doing or suffering any Act, Matter or Thing whereby his or
her Estate therein may be forfeited or determined, shall have good Right, full
Power, and lawful Authority to give and devise the same by his or her last Will
and Testament in Writing, duly executed in the Presence of three or more
credible Witnesses, in Manner and Form following; that is to say, Every Grantee
of Lands not exceeding eighty Acres, to any one Son or any one Daughter in Tail
Male; and every Grantee of Lands exceeding eighty Acres, the whole, or any part
thereof, but not in lesser Lots or Portions than fifty Acres to any one
Devisee, to his or her Son or Sons, Daughter or Daughters in Tail Male; and in
Default of such Devise as aforesaid, then that such Lands and Tenements shall
descend to the eldest Son in Tail Male; and in Default of Issue Male, to the
eldest Daughter in Tail Male; and in Default of Issue Male and Female, then
that such Lands and Tenements shall be holden in Tail Male, if not exceeding
eighty Acres, by any one such Person; and if exceeding eighty Acres, by any one
or more such Person or Persons, but not in any smaller Lot or Portion than
fifty Acres to any one Person, as such Grantee shall by his or her last Will
and Testament in Writing, executed as aforesaid, direct and appoint; and in
Default of such Direction or Appointment, then that such Lands and Tenements
shall be holden in Tail Male by the Heir at Law of such Grantee; subject
nevertheless to such Right of the Window (if any) as aforesaid. Provided
always, That no Son, Daughter, or other Person shall be capable of enjoying any
Devise which may thereby increase his or her former Possession of Land within
the said Colony, to more than Five hundred Acres; but such Devise to be void,
and the Lands thereby given to descend in such manner as if no such Devise ha^
been made. Provided also, That such Son or Sons, Daughter or Daughters, and all
and every such Person or Persons entitled to hold and enjoy any such Lands and
Tenements, do, within the Space of Twelve Months after the Death of such
Grantee, or of those under whom they claim, personally appear, if residing in
America, and claim the same in any of the Town-courts in Georgia; and if
residing out of America, then within the Space of eighteen Months next after
such Death; and in Default of such Appearance and Claim as aforesaid, That all
and singular the said Lands and Tenements shall be and remain to the said
Trustees, and their Successors for ever. And Provided also, That all and every
such Estates shall be subject and liable to the like Rents, Reservations,
Provisoes and Conditions, as in the former Grants of Lands heretofore made,
save and except so much thereof as is hereby altered, or intended to be
altered, upon the Failure of Issue Male.

And it is hereby required, That public Notice of these Resolutions be
forthwith given by the Magistrates of the respective Town-courts in Georgia,
and also by the Secretary of the said Trustees in London, that all and every
the Grantees of Lands or Tenements within the said Colony may enter their
respective Claims, either at the Georgia-Office near Old Palace Yard in
Westminster, or in any of the Town-courts in Georgia, within the Space of
twelve Months form the Date hereof, to the end that they may receive the
Benefit hereby intended, and that proper Grants and Conveyances in the Law may
be forthwith prepared and executed for that Purpose. And it is hereby expressly
declared, That no Fee or Reward shall be taken for the Entering of any such
Claim, directly or indirectly, by any Person or Persons whatsoever.

Signed by Order of the said Common Council, BENJ. MARTYN, Secretary.

We believe this Paper will perplex most People, who have not thoroughly studied
the Law, to make Sense of it; and as there were no Lawyers in Georgia, it would
seem as if it had been sent over with no other End, than that it should not be
understood; and indeed it rather tended to add to the Con^usions in the Colony,
than to promote the Benefit of it: We can only assure the Reader, that it had
no good Effect in Georgia, and that it was kept up there as much as possible
from the People, only a fictitious Abridgment thereof, with the same Title and
the same Way signed, being publicly exhibited in Writing: But this was
needless Caution; for not One in Twenty of them would have understood any one
Paragraph of it. In October 1739, the General issue, out his Proclamation for
granting Letters of Marque and (...); and the Inhabitants being called together
in the Courthouse, he there makes them a very elaborate speech, and, amongst
other Things, tells them, That he was designed against St. Augustine, and if he
did not take it, he would leave his Bones before the Walls thereof: But he is
now at Frederica, and, as we have too much Reason to believe this Castle is
still in the Hands of the Spaniards. A little after this we had another
Instance how much our Benefactors had our Interest and Welfare at heart; for at
this Time it was given out, That all the Cattle that were unmarked belonged to
the Trustees as Lords of Mann^r; and Orders were given that they should be
marked accordingly: But People ^^renuously insisting to the contrary, the
Design was dropped for that Time. On the 4 th of November Mr. oglethorpe departed
from Savannah; and he now seems to have entirely forgot it: And it is certain,
that ever since the Affair of the Representation, according to his own Words,
the very Name of the Place is become hateful to him, as are all those who he
thought were Ringleaders in that Affair; some of whom he endeavored to
threaten and bribe to a Recantation, but to little purpose; two or three being
the most (to the best of our Knowledge) that he could gain, and even those, we
believe, never gave any thing under their Hands. One flagrant Instance of the
indirect Practices he used to draw People into his Measures was as follows:
There are particular (...)
in Summer 1739, when it was thought the Representation would have succeeded,
Mes^rs. Grant, Douglass, Stirling and Baillie, who had been old Settlers in the
Colony, and who had in a manner ruined themselves, as others had done, either
by Planting or Building, wrote to the Trustees for an Island, and at the same
time applied to Mr. oglethorpe for it; he appeared mighty glad at their
Resolution, and told them, That if they would agree to what he had to propose,
the granting of an Island should be nothing in respect to what he would do for
them: They told him, They would do any thing that was consistent with their
knowledge and Conscience: Then they were dismissed, and the next Day they were
to know his Mind; that being come, two of his Emissaries were sent separately
with Proposals, which they afterward wrote in order to be signed, but refused
a Copy thereof: These Proposals were to the following Effect, viz. To
acknowledge they were in the wrong for having any Hand in the making or signing
the Representation; to ask the General's Pardon for so doing; and to assert
that they believed the Colony might flourish according to the then present
Constitution: These Things complied with, they should have what Money they were
pleased to ask for, with Horses, Cattle and every Thing else they wanted,
together with the General's perpetual Friendship and Assistance; if not
complied with, they might expect nothing but his highest Resentment. They
answered, That they never expected, nor did they think they ever asked for any
Favors from the General; and as for his Resentment, they believed they had
already felt the utmost of it. In whatever Shape the General wrote home of this
Affair is not known, but however, from what he wrote, the Trustees thought fit
at first positively to deny their Request, in a Letter which came to their
Hands in July 1740, of which this is an exact Copy.

To Messrs. Grant, Douglass and Billie, at Savannah in Georgia.
Gentlemen, Georgia-Office, March 25, 1740.
T HE Trustees for establishing the Colony of Georgia have received and read
your Letter of May 26, 1739, by which they find you have abandoned your
Settlements upon the Ogeeche River, for the following Reasons, Because you are
not allowed to have black Servants to cultivate your Lands; and because you
disliked the Tenure of your Grants.

As to the First, You must have seen by the Trustees Answer to the
Representation of some of the People, that they cannot, and will not break into
the Constitution of the Province, by such an Introduction of Slavery in Blacks,
and that upon the most mature Deliberation, and for the strongest Reasons,
which indeed are obvious to every considering Man, and which they are confirmed
in by the Danger which has lately threatened South Carolina by the Insurrection
of the Negroes, and would be more imminent in Georgia, it being a Frontier.

As to the Last, relating to the Tenure of Lands, the Trustees suppose you may
have seen the Alteration which they have made since the writing of your Letter,
and they have no doubt but you are satisfied therewith, as the rest of the
colony are.

The Trustees have likewise received and considered your Petition to General
Oglethorpe for a Settlement on Willmington-Island, and his Answer thereto,
which they think are of great Force, and therefore they cannot make you a Grant
there, but hope you will go on improving your Settlements on the Ogeeche River,
which they perceive by your Letter May 26, that you had made a great Progress
in.

I am, Gentlemen, Your very humble Servant, BENJ. MARTYN Secretary.


To this they returned the following Answer.

To the honorable the Trustees for establishing to Colony of Georgia in
America, at their Office near Old-Palace-Yard, Westminster.
Honorable Gentlemen,
WE have received a Letter signed by your Secretary, of the 25th March last,
owning the Receipt of ours to the Trustees for establishing to Colony of
Georgia, dated the 26th May 1739, in which we set forth the Expense we had been
at in prosecuting our Settlement on the Ogeeche River, together with the
Impossibility of carrying on any settlement with success in this Colony
according to the present Constitution; as an additional Confirmation of which
we then presented your Honors With an Account current, carried on from the
Commencement of our Settlement on the Ogeeche, and continued till we were drove
thence by the strongest Appearances of Destruction, arising from the having
expended our All in the strenuous Prosecution of an impracticable Scheme: And
here we must beg leave to observe, That it appears to us you have neither
considered our Letter or Account, otherwise you never would have advised us to
return to a Place on which we have already in vain consumed so much Time and
Money.

We have seen and seriously considered every Paragraph of a printed Paper,
entitled, The Answer of the Trustees for establishing the Colony of Georgia in
America, to the Representation from the Inhabitants of Savannah; which, in our
humble Opinion, is no Answer at all, but rather an absolute Refusal of Demands
to which we are legally entitled, under the specious Pretenses of Guardianship
and fatherly Care, without having answered one Sentence, or confuted by
Strength of Argument any Part of our Assertions.

Because our neighboring Province (of which you are pleased to take notice)
has by an introduction of too great Numbers abused the Use of Negroes; or
because an undoubted Property in out Land-Possessions might prove detrimental
or hurtful to idle, profligate or abandoned People; it does not at all follow
that we should be debarred the Use of Negroes for the Field, or the more
laborious Parts of Culture, under prudent Limitations; or that sober and
virtuous Men Should be deprived of just Titles to their Properties.

We are surprised that your Honors mention the Representations of the People
of the Darien, as a Confirmation of the Unreasonableness of our Demands: For
did your Honors know the Motives by which these People were induced to present
you with one or more Petitions contradictory to our Representation, the Welfare
of the Colony and their own Consciences, we are petswaded you never would have
offered them as Reasons for rejecting the Representation from Savannah. They
were bought with a Number of Cattle, and extensive Promises of future Rewards;
a little present Interest made them forget or neglect their Posterity; whereas
the People of this Place, duly sensible of the Miseries and Calamities they
have suffered, and do still labor under, freely and voluntarily put their
Hands to the Representation of this Part of the Province: No artful Means were
used to induce them to it; no artful Man or Men, Negro-Merchants or others,
persuaded them to its: Dismal Poverty and the most absolute Oppression were the
true Fountains from whence our Complaints proceeded. But how miserably were
these inconsiderate deluded Wretches rewarded? They were soon after carried
against St. Augustine, placed on a dangerous Post, where they were all or most
of them cut off or taken Prisoners by the Enemy, which has put a Period to the
Settlement of Darien, of which so many great Things have been falsely reported.

With regard to our Representation, we shall only beg leave to make one
Supposition, which it is almost impossible can have happened, viz. That this
and all the other Representations, Letters, Suits or Petitions, made to the
Trustees by private or a joint Number of Persons, have been entirely false and
groundless: What can have reduced the Colony to the Situation in which it now
is? What can have reduced its Inhabitants to one sixth Part of the Number which
we have known to reside here? Or, lastly, to what is the starving and
despicable Condition of the few are now left owing? Is it not, as well as every
other Matter which we have before urged, owing to, and occasioned by the
unanswerable Reasons at different Times given and laid before your Honors, by
honest Men (independent of you) who were and are the chief Sufferers in this
Colony, and who could not be bribed to conceal, or terrified from declaring
their Sentiments?

Your Honors may readily and safely join Issue with us in our Appeal to
Posterity, who were their best Vide Answer to the Representation
Friends, etc. for it is certain and obvious, that if the Trustees are resolved
to adhere to their present Constitution, they or their Successors are in no
great Danger of being called to any Account by our Posterity in Georgia

We have likewise seen and read the Alterations Mr. Martyn mentions to have
been made by your Honors with regard to the Tenure of Lands, together with a
fictitious Abridgment of the same affixed to the most public Places at Savannah

Mr. Martyn in his Letter is pleased to tell us, That your Honors imagine we
are satisfied therewith, as the rest of the Colony are. Some few perhaps may
have expressed themselves satisfied; but we will say no worse of such few, than
that your Honors will soon be sensible that even they are Deceivers. It is
true such Alterations, and the Paper entitled, An Answer to our Representation
above mentioned, are artfully penned, and will doubtless for a Time amuse even
Men of the best Sense in Europe, or elsewhere, who are Strangers to the Colony
of Georgia; but any Man of common Understanding, or the least Penetration, who
by an unfortunate Experience has been well acquainted with that Colony, can
easily demonstrate that those very Papers are further Snares to increase our
Miseries, as it is impossible we can be enabled by these Alterations to subsist
ourselves and Families any more than before, far less to put us in Capacity of
recovering our already sunk Fortunes and Loss of Time. Some time in the Summer
1739, (whilst we still expected agreeable Alterations to have succeeded our
Representation) we applied more than once to General Oglethorpe, as one of the
Trustees, for the same Tract of Land which we have since been refused by your
Honors; but our Petitions and Applications were rejected; and for what Reason?
because indeed we refused to contradict what we had before set forth in our
Representation, and so become Villains, as, we have too much Reason to believe,
some others on the same Occasion were: We would not accept of Settlements, Sums
of Money, Horses, Cattle and other valuable Considerations, at the Expense of
betraying our Country and contradicting our Consciences, by signing a Paper,
which was prepared and offered to us, purporting a Repentance of the Measures
we had taken for our own and the Relief of other distressed British Subjects;
and consequently an Approbation of a Scheme, which, by all Appearance, seems to
have been calculated and prepared to form a Colony of Vassals, whole Properties
and Liberties were at all times to have been disposed of at the Discretion or
Option of their superiors.

Such and many other Methods of Corruption have been too often practiced in
this Colony; but we refused and scorned such Actions, from Principles of which
every honest Man ought to be possessed.

We are not surprised to find, that we have in vain applied to your Honors in
several Affairs, when we see you have been hitherto prepossessed by a Gentleman
of superior Interest, with Informations and Assertions full of Resentment, and
which we well kno^^ (...) stand the Test of an impartial Examination, but we
are amazed and sorry to find, that he has had for so many Years together the
Interest of nominating Those who have been appointed from time to time for the
Administration of Justice, and making an impartial Enquiry into, and informing
your Honors of the real Situation of the Colony of Georgia; we say, such who
have been implicitly obedient in carrying on his arbitrary Schemes of
Government, and oppressing the Inhabitants, as well as conniving at the
deceiving your Honors and the Nation.

Gentlemen, as we have no Favors to ask, or Resentments to fear, we may with
the greater Freedom observe, that we are in full Hopes, that all we can
justlyask will be granted us by a British Parliament, who, we doubt not, will
soon make an Enquiry into the Grievances of oppressed Subjects, which have
formerly inhabited, or do now inhabit the Colony of Georgia; that colony which
has cost so great an Expense to the Nation, and from which so great Benefits
were promised and expected.

We are sensible of the Freedoms which have been used with our respective
Characters in the Misrepresentations sent your Honors by partial Men; nor are
we less sensible that the Majority of the Trustees have been kept in the dark
with regard to our just Complaints and Representations, or that such Complaints
have been communicated to them in Lights distant from Truth, insomuch that we
have Reason to believe two Thirds of the honorable Board are either
misinformed of, or are entire Strangers to the barbarous and destructive
Schemes carried on in this miserable Colony.

We hope it will ere long appear to your Honors and the World, (whatever has
been advanced to the contrary) that we are honest Men, free from any base
Design, free from any mutinous Spirit, who have only stood firm for the
Recovery of our lost Privileges, which have been secretly and under the most
specious Pretenses withdrawn from us by some designing and self-interested Men.

We should be sorry to write disrespectfully of any one of the Trustees; but
when distressed and oppressed People arrive at the last Extremities, it must be
supposed they will neither be ashamed to publish their misfortunes, or afraid
of imputing their Calamities to the Fountain from whence they spring.

Far be it from us in any Shape to reflect in general on the honorable Board,
who we still believe are Gentlemen of Honor and Reputation, who would not be
accessory to any sinister or base Designs; but we cannot help thinking that
they are deluded, and brought to pursue Measures inconsistent with the Welfare
and Prosperity of the Colony, by some who of the whole Corporation are only
acquainted with the particular Situation of it, and who must therefore
wilfully, and from Design, from and prepare destructive Schemes for the
perishing Inhabitants of Georgia, and, by unfair Representations of Persons and
Things, draw the Approbation of the greater Part of the honorable Board to
such Measures for the Oppression of his Majesty's Subjects, which they would,
if they were impartially informed, scorn to think of, far less agree to.

General Oglethorpe with all his Forces has been obliged to raise the Siege of
St. Augustine, and we have Reason to believe the impending Ruin of this Colony
will be thereby determined; for the Spaniards are reinforced, the General's
Army harrassed and weakened, and the Indians provoked and discontented; so that
every Thing looks with the most dismal Aspect. But as his Conduct in, and the
Consequences of these Affairs, will be soon published to the World, and as we
doubt not we have already incurred your Honors Displeasure, by reciting thus
freely the many Hardships which we have here and formerly asserted to have been
the Causes of our Ruin, we shall now forbear, and conclude by adding, That the
Extremity of our Misfortunes has at last rendered us utterly incapable of
staying here any longer; and though all the Money we have expended on
Improvements in the Colony is now of no Advantage to us here, nor can be
elsewhere, yet, poor, as we are, we shall think ourselves happy when we are
gone from a Place, where nothing but Poverty and Oppression Subsists: Therefore
we hope, if ever this or any other Paper or Letter of ours shall appear in
Public, your Honors will impute such Publication to have proceeded from no
other Motives besides a thorough Knowledge of our Duty to ourselves, our
Fellow Subjects and Sufferers, and to prevent others for the future from being
deluded in the same Manner as we have been, who are, with the greatest Respect,

Honorable Gentlemen, Your most humble Servants, Signed, Da. Douglas, Win.
Sterling, Tho. Baillie.

Georgia, Savannah, 10 August 1740.

About the latter End of May 1740, Mr. Oglethorpe set out with his Regiment for
Florida, and soon after the Carolina Forces, consisting of about Six hundred
Men, joined him, with about Three hundred Indians, and Sixty Highlanders
Volunteers from Darien, who were buoyed up by the General with the mighty Hopes
of Reward, besides several Stragglers and Boatmen from other Parts of the
Province and elsewhere; so that, exclusive of Seven Men of War, there might be
about Fifteen hundred effective Men assisting at the Siege, as it was called,
of the Castle of St. Augustine. But we shall take no further Notice of this
Affair, than as it has affected or may still affect the Colony of Georgia: The
Place being alarmed, the Highlanders, with some others, making in all One
hundred and forty one Men, were posted at Musa, (this was a ^^^all Fort about a
Mile distant from the Castle which had been abandoned by the Spaniards at the
General's first Approach) where they were soon after attacked by a Superior
Force of the Enemy, and a miserable Slaughter ensued, scarcely one Third of the
Number escaping, the others being either killed or taken Prisoners. Thus these
poor People, who, at the Expense of their Consciences, signed a Representation
contrary to their own Interest and Experience, and gave themselves entirely up
to the General's Service, by their Deaths at once freed his Excellency from his
Debts and Promises, and put an End to the Settlement of Darien; for there are
now in that Place not one Quarter Part of the Number who settled there at
first, and that is made up chiefly of Women and Children; and a Scout-Boat is
stationed before the Town to Prevent any of them from going off.

This Siege was raised about the Beginning of July; the General with the
Remainder of his Regiment returned to Frederica; the Carolina Forces were
shipped off for that Province; the few Georgians that were left repaired, as
soon as they were allowed, to their several Homes in a miserable Condition; and
the Indians marched toward their respective Countries, very much weakened and
discontented; the Cherokees returned, as they came, by Savannah, and of One
hundred and ten healthy Men only about Twenty got to their Nation, the rest
either perished by Sickness or were slain: And thus ended the Campaign in
Florida.

During these Transactions Savannah decayed apace; and in August and September
the same Year People went away by Twenties in a Vessel, insomuch that one would
have thought the Place must have been entirely forsaken; for in these two
Months about One hundred Souls out of the County of Savannah left the Colony;
many others have since left it, and, we believe, more will leave it very soon.

The Boats with their Hands which the General employed at that unfortunate
Expedition he neither will pay, subsist, or let depart from that Place; however
they are stealing away by Degrees We are now informed they are all got away,
some of them being paid and some not.
: And at this Time of about Five thousand Souls, that had at various
Embarkations arrived in the Colony of Georgia, October 1740.
exclusive of the Regiment, scarce as many Hundreds remain, and these consist
of the Saltzburghers at Ebenezer, who are yearly supported from Germany and
England; the People of Frederica, who are supported by means of the Regiment;
the poor Remainder of the Darien; a few Orphans, and others under the
Denomination, supported by Mr. Whitefield; together with some Dutch Servants
maintained for doing nothing by the Trustees, with Thirty or Forty necessary
Tools to keep the others in Subjection: And Those make up the poor Remains of
the miserable Colony of Georgia It is here to be observed, that we have
excluded the Settlement of Augu^ia, it being upon a quite different Footing.


Having now brought down this Work to the Month of October 1740, being about
the Time most of the Authors of this NARRATIVE were obliged to leave that fatal
Colony, we shall conclude the whole with a geographical and historical Account
of its present State.

GEORGIA lies in the 30 and 31 Degrees of North Latitude: The Air generally
clear, the Rains being much shorter as well as heavier than in England; the
Dews are very great; Thunder and Lightning are expected almost every Day in
May, June, July, and August; they are very terrible, especially to a Stranger:
During those Months, from Ten in the Morning to Four in the Afternoon, the Sun
is extremely scorching; but the Seabreeze sometimes blows from Ten till Three
or Four: The Winter is nearly of the same Length as in England; but the Midday
Sun is always warm, even when the Mornings and Evenings are very sharp, and the
Nights piercing cold.

The Land is of Four Sorts, Pine-Barren, Oak-Land, Swamp and Marsh. The Pine
Land is of far the greatest Extent, especially near the Seacoasts: The Soil of
this is a dry whitish Sand, producing Shrubs of several Sorts, and between them
a harsh coarse kind of Grass, which Cattle do not love to feed upon; but here
and there is a little of a better kind, especially in the Savannas, so they
call the low watery Meadows which are usually intermixed with Pine Lands: It
bears naturally two Sorts of Fruit, Hurtle-Berries much like those in England,
and Chinquopin-Nuts, a dry Nut about the Size of a small Acorn: A labo^ious Man
may in one Year clear and plant four or five Acres of this Land: It will
produce the first Year from two to four Bushels of Indian Corn, and from four
to eight of Indian Pease per Acre; the second Year it usually bears much about
the same; the third less; the fourth little or nothing. Peaches it bears well;
likewise the White Mulberry, which serves to feed the Silkworms; the Black is
about the Size of a Black Cherry, and has much the same Flavor.

The Oak-Land commonly lies in narrow Streaks between Pine-Lands and Swamps,
Creeks or Rivers: The Soil is a blackish sand, producing several Kinds of Oak,
Bay, Laurel, Ash, Walnut, Sumach and Gum Trees, a sort of Sycamore Dog Trees
and Hickory: In the Choicest Part of this Land grow Parsimon Trees, and a few
Black Mulberry and American Cherry Trees: The Common wild Grapes are of two
Sorts, both red; the Fox-Grape grow two or three only on a Stalk, is
thick-Skin'd, large stoned, of a harsh Taste, and of the Size of a small
Cherry; the Cluster-Grape is of a harsh Taste too, and about the Size of a
white Curran. This Land requires much Labor to clear; but when it is cleared,
it will bear any Grain for three, four or five Years sometimes without laying
any Manure upon it: An Acre of it generally produces ten Bushels of Indian
Corn, besides five of Pease, in a Year; so that this is justly esteemed the
most valuable Land in the Province, white People being incapable to clear and
cultivate the Swamps.

A Swamp is any low watery Place, which is covered with Trees or Canes: They are
here of three Sorts, Cypress, River and Cane Swamps: Cypress Swamps are mostly
large Ponds, in and round which Cypresses grow. Most River Swamps are overflown
on every Side by the River which runs through or near them; if they were
drained they would produce good Rice; as would the Cane Swamps also, which in
the mean time are the best Feeding for all Sorts of Cattle.

The Marshes are of two Sorts; soft wet Marsh, which is all a Quagmire, and
absolutely good for nothing, and hard Marsh, which is a firm Sand, but however
at some seasons is good for feeding Cattle. Marshes of both Sorts abound on the
Sea-Islands, which are very numerous, and contain all Sorts of Land, and upon
these chiefly near Creeks and Runs of Water, Cedar Trees grow.

We shall only add to the above, That considering no Land can be sowed (or at
least what is sowed preserved) till the same is enclosed, that five Acres is
the utmost a very able and laborious Man can propose to manage, this being the
quantity allotted for the Task of a Negro in the neighboring Province, which
Negro works four Hours each Day more than a white Man can do.

It must next be noticed, that with regard to the above Returns, (suppose a
prosperous Season without Disappointments, which is not the Case in such small
Improvements as can be expected in an infant Colony one Year in five either
Drought burns, or Rain drowns the Corn, and makes the Pease fall out of the
Pod; Dear, which no Fences can exclude, devour those little Settlements in a
Night; Rats and Squirrels do the same; Birds eat the Seed out of the Ground,
and dig up the Blade after it is spired; and Variety of Worms and Insects
devour the one half of it: But let us suppose none of those Evils happened, let
us view the Amount of the Produce valued at the highest Rate.

The Produce of five Acres of Pine-Land raised by one Hand the first Year.

L. s. d. Sterling. Indian Corn, 20 Bushels, at 10 s. Currency per Bushel, 1 05
0 Indian Pease, 40 Bushels, at ditto, 2 10 0 Total of first Year's Produce, 3
15 0

The secondYear the same; the third less; the fourth little or nothing.

Best Oak-Land, five Acres, at 15 Bushels of Corn and Pease per Acre, is 75
Bushels at ditto Price, is 4 l. 13 s. 9 d. Sterling.

Let us next consider the Maintenance of every single white Servant per annum
at the lowest Rate, and then the Reader will be able to judge whether white
People can get their Livelihood by planting Land in this Climate without
Negroes; and the Allowance to the Trustees Dutch Servants being the least at
which any white Servant could be maintained in Georgia, we shall therefore take
our Estimation from it, which is Eight Pence Sterling per Day, or 12 l. 3 s. 4
d. Sterling. per annum; so that at a Medium the Expense is three Times greater
than the Produce, besides Tools, Medicines and other Necessaries.

We must likewise observe, that the Proportion of Pine-Barren to either good
Swamp or Oak and Hickory Land, is at least six to one; that the far greater
Number of the small Lots have none, or very little Oak Land; and if they had
Swamp that would bear Rice, white People are unable to clear them if they are
covered with Trees, and though only with Canes, which is the easiest to
cultivate, it were simply impossible to manufacture the Rice by white Men, the
Exercise being so severe, that no Negro can be employed in any other Work or
Labor comparable to it, and many Hundreds of them, notwithstanding all the
Care of their Masters, yearly lose their Lives by that necessary Work.

Savannah stands on a flat Bluff, (so they term a high Lands hanging over a
Creek or River) which rises about Forty Feet perpendicular from the River, and
commands it several Miles both upwards and downwards; and, if it was not for a
Point of Woods which, about four Miles down the River, stretches itself out
toward the Southeast, one might have a View of the Sea and the Island of (...)
The Soil is a white Sand for above a Mile in Breadth South-east and North-west;
beyond this, eastward, is a River Swamp; westward a small Body of Wood-land,
(in which was the old Indian Town) separated by a Creek from a large Tract of
Land, which runs upwards along the Side of the River for the Space of about
five Miles, and being by far the best near the Town, is reserved for the
Indians, as General Oglethorpe declares, as are also some of the Islands in the
River Savannah, and the three most valuable Islands upon all the Coast of that
Province, viz. Oss^^^, St. Katharine and (...). South-West of the Town is a
Pine-Barren that C^^^ends about fourteen Miles to V^rn^n River.

On the East Side of the Town is situated the Public Garden, being ten Acres
enclosed, on a barren Piece of Land, where it is hardly possible for what is
planted to live, but impossible to thrive; and from this Garden (...) all the
Planters to have been furnished with Mulbe^^^, Trees, etc.

The plan of the Town was beautifully laid out inWards, Tithing, and public
Squares left at proper (...) for Markets and public Buildings, the whole (...)
an agreeable Uniformity.

The public Works in this Town are, (...) being one handsome Room with (...):
This likewise serves for a Church (...) vice, none having been ever built,
notwithstanding the Trustees in their public Acts acknowledge the Receipt of
about Seven hundred Pounds Sterling from charitable Persons for that express
Purpose.

2 dly,Opposite to the Courthouse stands the Log-house or Prison, (which is
the only one remaining of five or six that have been successively built in
Savannah) that Place of Terror and Support of absolute Power in Georgia.

3 dly, Nigh thereto is a House built of Logs, at a very great Charge, as was
said, for the Trustees Steward; the Foundation below Ground is already rotten
In August 1740 a new Foundation was begun.
, as the whole Fabric must be in a short Time; for the Roof being flat, the
Rain comes in at all Parts of it.

4 th, The Storehouse, which has been many times altered and amended at a very
great Charge; and it now serves as a Store for the private Benefit of one or
two, as before mentioned.

5 th, The Guard-house, which was first built on the Bluff, soon decayed, as
did a second through improper Management, this now standing being the third.
Several Flag-staff's were likewise erected, the last of which, according to
common Report, cost 50 l. Sterling.

6 th, A Public Mill for grinding Corn was first erected at considerable
Expense in one Square of the Town; but in about three Years Time, without doing
the least Service, it fell to the Ground. In another Square of the Town a
second was set up, at a far greater Expense, but never finished, and is now
erazed and converted into a House for entertaining the Indians, and other such
like Uses.

7 th, Wells and Pumps were made at a great Charge; but they were immediately
choked up, and never rendered useful, though this Grievance was frequently
represented both to the General and Magistrates, the want of Wells obliging the
Inhabitants to use the River Water, which all the Summer over is polluted with
putrid Marshes, and the numberless Insects that deposite their Ova there,
together with putrified Carcases of Animals and corrupted Vegetables; and this
no doubt occasioned much of the Sickness that swept off many.

Several of the House which were built by Freeholders, for want of Heirs-male,
are fallen to the Trustees, even to the Prejudice of the lawful Creditors of
the deceased, and are disposed of as the General thinks proper.

At least Two hundred Lots were taken up in Savannah, about One hundred and
seventy of which were built (...) had more than one House upon them.
upon; a great many of these are now ruinous, and many more shut up and
abandoned; so that the Town appears very desolate, scarce one quarter Part of
its Inhabitants being left, and most of those in a miserable Condition for want
of the proper Necessaries of Life.

St. Simon's Island having on the East the Gulf of Florida, on the other Sides
Branches of the Alatamaha, is about One hundred Miles South of Savannah, and
extends in Length about Twenty, in Breadth from two to five Miles; on the
West Side of it, on a low Bluff, stands Frederica, having Woods to the North
and South, to the East partly Woods, partly Savannas and partly Marsh.

The Soil is mostly blackish Sand; the Fortifications are augmented since the
Retreat from Auguatine, and here^ly most of the Remains of General Oglethorpe's
Regiment. Frederica was laid out in Form of a Crescent divided into One hundred
and forty four Lots, whereof about Fifty were built upon; the Number of the
Inhabitants, notwithstanding of the Circulation of the Regiment's Money, are
not above One hundred and twenty, Men, Women and Children, and these are daily
steal^^^^ (...) all possible Ways. On the Sea-Point, (...) South-east of the
Town, were three Companies of the Soldiers stationed before the Attempt upon
St. Augustine, several pretty Houses were built by the Officers, and many Lots
set off to the Soldiers, and entered upon by them, most, if not all, now
desolate. Several of the Officers of the Regiment brought over Servants to
cultivate Land, Col. Cochran 20 Servants, Lt. Horton at Jekyl 16 Servants,
Capt. Gascoign at least as many, all gone, and, according to the best of our
Information, about Two hundred of the Regiment are diminished.

About Twenty Miles North-west from St Simon's is DARIEN, the Settlement of the
Scots Highlanders; the Town is situate on the Main-Land, close to a Branch of
the Alatamaha River, on a Bluff Twenty Feet high; the Town is surrounded on all
Sides with Woods, the Soil is a blackish Sand: Here were upwards of Two hundred
and fifty Persons settled, who in Spring 1736 built a large Fort for their own
Protection; and the poor Remains of these are now no more than Fifty three,
(above Two Thirds of which are Women and Children) besides eleven of the
Trustees Servants inlisted as Soldiers, and stationed there under the Command
of an Officer, in order to keep the others from going away, who are
nevertheless making their Escape daily.

The southermost Settlement in Georgia is FORT ST. ANDREWS, Fifty Miles South
from Frederica, on the South-west Side of Cumberland Island, upon a high Neck
of Land which commands the River both Ways; the Walls are of Wood, filled up
with Earth, round which are a Ditch and Pallisade; two Companies of General
Oglethorpe's Regiment were formerly stationed there, but are now mostly drawn
to Frederica.

Opposite to Frederica, on the Main, were settled Messieurs Carr and Carteret,
with above Twenty Servants, where they cleared a considerable Tract of Land;
but that Plantation is now quitted, and their Servants either dead or
dispersed. We have lately heard from Frederica, that the General having
station'd ten or twelve Men upon this Place, they were attacked by Spaniards or
Spanish Indians, four were killed, four carried off, and two left wounded.

NEW EBENEZER, to which the Saltzburghers removed from their former Habitation
at Old Ebenezer, consists of about One hundred Persons, under the Government of
Mr. Boltzius their Pastor; they live and labor in a kind of Community, and
never commix or associate with Strangers; they have been hitherto liberally
supported both from Germany and England, and their Rights and Privileges have
been much more extensive than any others in the Colony: This Town lies six
Miles Eastward from the Old, on a high Bluff upon the Side of Savannah River,
and forty Miles from Savannah. Near to this Place, on a Creek of the same
River, was built a Saw-Mill, which cost of the Public Money above Fifteen
hundred Pounds Sterling; but, like most other public Works, is now entirely
ruinous.

About ten Miles East of Ebenezer, on a Creek three Miles from the River, was
the Village of ABERCORN; in the year 1733 there were ten Families settled
there, and several afterward: In the Year 1737, Mr. John Brodie with twelve
Servants settled there: But all those are gone, and it is now a Heap of Ruins.

Four Miles below Abercorn, upon the River side is Joseph's Town, which was the
Settlement of some Scots Gentlemen with thirty Servants; but they have now left
it, most of their Servants having died there.

A Mile below, on the River Side, is the Settlement where Sit Francis Bathurst,
with twelve in Family and Servants, was placed, now in Ruins, without an
Inhabitant.

A quarter of a Mile below was the Settlement of Walter Augustine with six in
Family: Within this Settlement was another Mill erected, at the Charge of above
800 l. Sterling, all now in Ruins, Without an Inhabitant.

A Mile below is Landiloe, the Settlement of Mr. Robert Williams, with forty
Servants, who made large Improvements there, and continued for the space of
four Years, planting each Season with great Industry in various Shapes, still
expecting (with the other Settlers) an Alteration in the Constitution; but at
last having sunk a great deal of Money, he was obliged to leave it, with the
Loss of above Two thousand Pounds Sterling; and it is now uninhabited, and very
much decayed. Next below that is the Five hundred Acre Tract belonging to Dr.
Patrick Tailfer; which was settled, but found impracticable to proceed upon, by
reason of the Hardships and Restrictions in the Colony. Next to that is Mr.
Jacob Matthews's Plantation (formerly Mr. Musgrove's) called the Cow-pen, who
lived there some time with ten Servants; but has now left it, and keeps only
two or three to look after his Cattle. Adjoining to this was Mr. Cooksey's
Settlement, with five in Family; now entirely abandoned. Next to this was
Captain Watson's Plantation, with a good House, now in Ruins. All these lie
upon the side of the River. And upon the East and Southward were the
Settlements of Young, Emery, Polhil and Warwick; all forsaken. Next upon the
River side is the Indian Land before mentioned, separated from the foregoing
Settlements by a Creek, and running all along to the Town. A little below this
Creek is a Place called Irene, where Mr. John Wesly built a pretty good House
for an Indian School; but he soon wearied of that Undertaking, and left it. A
little below this is the Indian Town called New-Yamacra, where the Remainder of
Tomo Chachi's Indians reside.

Five Miles South-west of Savannah, on a small Rise, Stands the Village of
Highgate: Twelve Families were settled here in 1733, mostly French, now reduced
to Two. A Mile Eastward of this is Hampstead, where several German Families
were settled in 1733, and some others since, now reduced to none.

Five Miles South-east of Savannah is THOUSANDBOLT, where there was a good
Timber Fort, and three Families with twenty Servants were settled; but it is
now all in Ruins and abandoned.

Four Miles South of this is the Island of skiddoway, on the North-east Point
whereof ten Families were settled in 1733; now reduced to none.

A Creek divides skiddoway from TYBEE Island, on the South-east Part of which,
fronting the Inlet, the Light-House is built: Twelve Families were settled here
in 1734, who have now forsaken it.

Twelve Miles Southward by Land from Savannah is Mr. Houston's Plantation, kept
with one Servant. And,

About thirty Miles from that, up the River Ogeeche, was the Settlements of
Messrs. Stirlings, etc. with twenty five Servants: This Place, when they went
there, was the Southermost Settlement in the Colony, and very This was the only
Spot allowed them to settle upon, any other Place being refused
remote; so that they were obliged to build at their own Expense and at a
considerable Charge, a strong Wooden Fort for their Defense. And the said
Messrs. Stirlings having resided there about three Years with the Servants,
they were obliged to leave it, after having exhausted their Fortune to no
purpose in the Experiment.

Twenty Miles above this, on a high Bluff on the same River, stands Fort
Argyle: This is the Place where a Body of Horse called the Southern Rangers,
under the Command of Capt. James Ma^ph^r^on, were station'd for several Years.
They were paid by the Government of Carolina but have been discharged for some
time by^ass.
It Is a small square Wooden Fort, Musket-proof: Ten Families were settled here
and about it, now all gone; and the Fort itself garrisoned by oneofficer one
Dutch Servant, and one Woman, who were lately surprised, in the Officer's
Absence, by twoPrisoners that broke out of the Loghouse in Savannah, and both
murdered.

Near the Mouth of Vernon River, upon a kind of an Island, which is called Hope
Isle, are the Settlements of Messrs. John Fallowfield, Henry Parker and Noble
Jones: They have made some Improvements there, but chiefly Mr. Fallowfield, who
has a pretty little convenient House and Garden, with a considerable stock of
Hogs, and some Cattle, etc and where he generally resides with his Family. Near
adjoining to this, upon a piece of Land which commands the This is a narrow
(...), through which Boats are obliged to pass and (...) from the South^ard.
Narrows, is a Timber Building called Jones's Fort; which serves for two Uses,
namely, to support Mr. Noble Jones, who is Commander of it, and to prevent the
poor People of Frederica from getting to any other Place, where they might be
able to support themselves.

About three Miles south-east of Savannah, upon Augustine Creek, lies Oxstead,
the Settlement of Mr. Thomas Causton, improven by many Hands, and at a great
Charge, where he now resides with a few Servants. Betwixt Oxstead and the Town
of Savannah lie, I st, Hermitage, the Settlement of Mr. Hugh Anderson, who had
Seventeen in Family and Servants; but he was obliged both to leave that and
retire from the Colony about two Years ago, upon account of the general
Hardships. 2dly, The Settlements of Mr. Thomas Christi^, and six others
belonging to the Township of Savannah; all now forsaken. 3 dly, The Settlements
of the Germans of Count Zinzendorff, who were twenty Families; which are
likewise now entirely abandoned, they having all gone to other Colonies.

Upon the West Side of Savannah lie the Township Lots of the Jews, now
deserted, they having all gone to other colonies, except three or four; as are
all others on that Quarter, excepting one or two

About three Miles from Savannah, on the South, the Settlement of Mr. William
Williamson is in the same Condition: And also,

The Settlement belonging to the Trustees adjoining to Mr. Williamson's; which
was committed by them to the Care of Mr. William Bradly their Steward, to be
cultivated and improved by him at their Charge, as an Example to others, and to
satisfy themselves what Improvements in Land were practicable by white
Servants. The Event might have opened the Eyes of any that would see: Upwards
of twenty, sometimes thirty Servants were employed; above Two thousand Pounds
Sterling expended in the Experiment; and never so much of any kind of Grain
raised from it, as would have maintained the Numbers employed about it six
Months: It now lies on a par with the most ruinous Plantation in Georgia. Part
of their Dutch Servants have been employed last Year by Mr. Thomas Jones, upon
a new Plantation about a Mile to the Southward of Savannah: They were twenty
five in Number, and maintained at the Expense of (...) d. Sterling. each per diem;
and we have lately been credibly informed, the whole Produce did not exceed One
hundred Bushels of corn.

The Orphan-House is situated about fourteen Miles South-east of Savannah: This
famous Work was begun in March 1740; and during the Space of six Months there
were about One hundred People, Men, Women and Children, maintained and employed
about it; and, according to their own Calculation, they have expended near Four
thousand Pounds Sterling: But ever since Mr. Whitefield left Georgia the latter
End of August, in the same Year, it has decayed apace; for, besides those he
then carried to the Northward with him, a great many have since left them; and
their Money growing short, they were soon obliged to discharge most of the
Workmen; besides, of late, many Divisions have arisen amongst them: In short,
the Design seems to be dra^ing near a Period, although at this Time the House
itself is scarcely half finished: It is built upon a low Pine Barren,
surrounded one Side with a large Tract of Salt Marsh, extending to Vernon
River, to which they have a Passage by Water, when the Tides are up, for small
Craft; on the other Side it is Surrounded with Woods: They have cleared about
ten Acres of Ground, and have built several Houses and Huts. The Frame of the
Orphan-House is up, the Roof Shingled Shingles are small Pieces of Wood sawed,
or more usually cl^s^ to about an inch thick at one End, and made like Wedges
four or five (...), br^ad and eight or nine Inches long. This Covering is
expensive but if made of good Oak and cl^^t, not sawn is preferable to Thatch.
, and the Sides weather boarded: it is sixty Feet in length, forty Feet wide:
It has two Stories besides Cellars and Garrets; the Cellars are built of Brick,
which likewise serves for a Foundation to the whole Building: It would
certainly be a fine Piece of Work, is finished: but if it were finished, where
is the Fund for its Support? and what Service can an Orphan-House be in a
Desert and a forsaken Colony?

About three or four Miles from the Orphan-House, on the Side of Vernon River,
William Stephens, Esquire formerly mentioned, has a Plantation with five or six
Servants, who have cleared about seven or eight Acres: However, if he reaps no
Benefit from them, he is at as little Charge to maintain them The Trustees
allow him So many Servants, and their Maintenance.


As it would be too tedious to mention particularly the Township or five and
forty five Acre Lots, being in all about One Hundred that were settled, we need
only therefore in general say, that there are few or none of them but what are
in the same Condition with those before specified, viz. ruinous and desolate.

The last Place we shall mention is AUGUSTA, distant from Savannah two hundred
Miles up the River, on the same Side: It was founded in 1737, at a considerable
Charge, under the Direction of one Mr. Roger Lacy, being at that time Agent to
the Cherokee Nation: It is principally, if not altogether, inhabited by Indian
Traders and Store-keepers, the Number of whom may now be about thirty or
upwards; and a considerable Quantity of Corn has been raised there. To account
for this singular Circumstance, we shall only assign two Reasons; the first is
the Goodness of the Land, which as so great a Distance from the Sea is richer
than in the maritime Parts; the second and chief one is, that the Settlers
there are indulged and connived at in the Use of Negroes, by whom they execute
all the Laborious Parts of Culture; and the Fact is undoubted and certain, that
upwards of eighty Negroes are now in the Settlements belonging to that Place:
We do not observe this, as if it gives us any Uneasiness that our
FellowPlanters are indulged in what is so necessary for their Well-being; but
we may be allowed to regret, that we and so many British Subjects, who stood
much more in need of them, should have been ruined for want of such Assistances.

Having now taken a (...) of the Colony of Georgia, we shall conclude this
Treatise, by taking Notice of two or three of the most remarkable Transactions
in it since Octoberlast.

On the 10 th Day of November a Court was called at Savannah, where Colonel
Stephens read a Paragraph of a letter, which he said was from the Trustees,
desiring the Inhabitants to set forth their Miseries, Hardships and
Difficulties in Writing, in order to have the Seal of the Colony annexed
thereto, and to transmitted to the Trustees: Whereupon Mr. Stephens gave the
Recorder a Paper to read, in which the Colony was represented in a most
flourishing Condition, (in the Town of Augusta alone there we^^ represented to
be 600 white People, and (...) Pack-horses belonging thereto, who were employed
in the (...) Trade) enumerating the many useful, fine and curious Productions
of it, such as Hedges with Pomegranates growing upon them, Wine, Silk, Oil,
Wheat, etc. with many other Hyperboles. This Paper Mr. Stephens said he had
been at great Care and Pains about, and which he took to a just Answer to the
Trustees Letter with the true State of the Colony: But the poor People seeing
the Absurdity and Fal^eness of it, soon discovered their Dislike thereof by
their leaving the Courthouse, and only eighteen Persons signed the same, every
one of whom were supported in one Shape or other by the Public. Mr.
Fallowfield, then on the Bench, used what Arguments he could to persuade him,
that it was reasonable every Person should represent his own Case to the
Trustees, and he apprehended the Design of the Trustees was such; but Stephens
in a Passion said, Except they would sign this, they should have the public
Seal to no other Paper; so it was to no Purpose what either he or the Recorder
Mr. John Py could urge, who very soon left the Court, declaring their Dislike
and Abhorrence of such Proceedings; but immediately they, with the rest of the
Inhabitants, to the Number of above sixty, drew up a Remonstrance to the
Trustees, in which they fully set forth the true State of the Colony, with
their own miserable Condition in it: This Paper, and soon after a Petition to
the King and Council etc. were lately transmitted to the Authors hereof, who
immediately forwarded them for London; but as the Issue thereof is now
depending, we do not think it proper to expose them to the Public.

On the 2d of April last a Fire broke out by Accident in the Smith's Forge in
Savannah, which consumed almost one whole Square; and in the highest Rage of
the devouring Flames Mr. Thomas Jones stood an idle Spectator with his Hands in
his Bosom, and with the utmost Unconcernedness; insomuch that when he was
applied to by several of the miserable People for a small Quantity of
Gunpowder to blow up an adjoining House in order to prevent the Fire from
spreading, his Answer was, I can do nothing in it, I have no Orders concerning
such Matters.

We have lately been informed from Frederica, that the General having stationed
twelve Men upon the Place which was the Settlement of Messrs. Carr and Carteret
before mentioned, they were attacked by Spaniards or Spanish Indians, and four
were killed, four carried off, and two wounded.

A good many of the People have come away from Frederica lately, and in order
to get off were obliged to make use of Stratagems, such as going a hunting upon
the Islands, etc. We are informed that some Differences have happened betwixt
the General and some of the Magistrates there, and that in the Place of one of
them he has appointed one of his Waiting-boys. Several of the poor Remainder of
the Darien People have likewise escaped, notwithstanding the Body of Forces
stationed there to prevent them.

Having thus brought this historical NARRATIVE within the Compass proposed, and
endeavored to dispose the Materials in as distinct a Method and Series as the
necessary Conciseness would allow, we readily admit that the Design is far from
being complete. to have acquainted the World with all the Hardships and
Oppressions which have been exercised in the Colony of Georgia, must have
required both a larger Volume than we are capable of publishing, and more Time
than we could bestow: We therefore satisfy ourselves that we have with care and
sincerity executed so much of the Design as may pave the Way to any others who
can descend more minutely to Particulars; and those who are best acquainted
with the Affairs of that Colony will be most capable of judging how tenderly we
have touched both Persons and Things.

(...) Only remains that we in a few Paragraphs endeavor to exhibit to the
View of the Reader the REAL. Causes of the Ruin and Desolation of the Colony,
and these briefly are the following.

1. the representing the Climate, Soil, etc;. of Georgia in false and too
flattering Colors; at least the not contradicting those Accounts when
publicly printed and dispersed, and satisfying the World in a true and genuine
Description thereof.

2. The restricting the Tenure of Lands from a Fie-sample to Tail Male, cutting
off Daughters and all other Relations.

3. The restraining the Proprietor from selling, disposing of, or leasing any
Possession.

4. The restricting too much the Extent of Possessions, it being impossible
that fifty Acres of good Land, much loss Pine-Barren, could maintain a white
Family.

5. the laying the Planter under a Variety of Restraints in clearing, fencing,
planting, etc. which was impossible to be complied with.

6. The exacting a much higher Quit-Rent than the richest Grounds in
North America can bear

7. But chiefly the denying the Use of Negroes, and persisting in such Denial,
after by repeated Applications we had humbly remonstrated the Impossibility of
making Improvements to any Advantage with white Servants.

8. The denying us the Privilege of being judged by the Laws of our
Mother Country, and subjecting the Lives and Fortunes of all People in the
Colony to one Person or Set of Men, who assumed the Privilege, under the Name
of a Court of Chancery, of acting according to their own Will and Fancy.

9. General Oglethorpe's taking upon him to nominate Magistrates, appoint
Justices of the Peace, and to do many other such Things, without, without over
exhibiting to the People any legal Commission or Authority for so doing.

10. The neglecting the proper Means for encouraging the Silk and Wine
Manufactures, and disposing of the liberal sums contributed by the Public and
by private Persons, in such Ways and channels as have been of little or no
Service to the colony.

11. The misapplying or keeping up Sums of Money which have been appointed
(...) particular Uses; such as building a Church, etc. several Hundreds of
Pounds sterling, as we are informed, having been lodged in Mr. Oglethorpe's
Hands for some Years by past for that Purpose, and not one Stone of it yet laid.

12. The assigning certain fixed Tracts of Land to those who came to settle in
the Colony, without any Regard to the Quality of the Ground, Occupation,
Judgment, Ability or Inclination of the Settler, etc etc etc

By these and many other such Hardships the Poor Inhabitants of Georgia are
scattered over the Face of the Earth; her Plantations a Wild, her Towns a
Desert, her Villages in Rubbish, her Improvements a Byword, and her Liberties
a jest; an Object of Pity to Friends, and of Insult, Contempt and Ridicule to
Enemies.

THE END.

