Mr. John Wesley's SERMON On Free Grace.

Free Grace.

A SERMON PREACHED AT BRISTOL.

By JOHN WESLEY, M. A.

Fellow of Lincoln-College, OXFORD.

BRISTOL, Printed.

Philadelphia, Reprinted by Ben. Franklin:

BOSTON: Again Reprinted, and sold by T. Fleet, at the Heart and Crown in
Cornhill. 1741.

TO THE READER.
NOTHING but the strongest Conviction, not only that what is here advanced, is
the Truth as it is in JESUS, but also that I am indispensably obliged, To
declare this Truth to all the World, would have induced me openly to oppose the
Sentiments of those, whom I highly esteem for their Works sake: At whose Feet
may I be found, in the Day of the LORD JESUS?

Should any believe it his Duty to reply hereto, I have only one Request to
make, Let whatsoever you do be done in Charity, in Love, and in the Spirit of
Meekness. Let your very Disputing show, That you have put on, as the Elect of
GOD, Bowels of Mercies, Gentleness, Long-suffering: That even according to this
Time it may be said, "See how these Christians love one another.

Romans VIII. 32. He that spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for us
all, how shall he not with him also freely give us all Things?
1. HOW freely does God love the World? While we were yet Sinners, Christ died
for the ungodly. While we were Dead in Sin, GOD spared not his own Son, but
delivered him up for us all. And how freely with Him does he give us all
things! Verily free Grace is all and all!

2. The Grace or Love of God, whence comes our Salvation, is free in all, and
free for all.

3. First, It is free in all to whom it is given. It does not depend on any
Power or Merit in Man: No, not in any Degree: neither in whole nor in part. It
does not in any wise depend either on the Good Works or Righteousness of the
Receiver: Not on any thing he has done, or any thing he is. It does not depend
on his Endeavors. It does not depend on his good Tempers, or good Desires, or
good Purposes and Intentions: For all these flow from the Free Grace of GOD:
They are the Streams only, not the Fountain. They are the Fruits of Free Grace,
and not the Root. They are not the Cause, but the Effects of it. Whatsoever
Good is in Man, or is done by Man, GOD is the Author and Doer of it. Thus is
his Grace Free in all; that is, no Way depending on any Power or Merit in Man:
But in GOD alone, who freely gave us his own Son, and with him freely gives us
all Things.

4. But is it Free for All, as well as in All? To this some have answered, No:
It is free only for those whom GOD has ordained to Life; and they are but a
little Flock. The greater Part of Mankind GOD has ordained to Death; and it is
not Free for them. Them GOD hates; and therefore before they were born,
decreed they should die Eternally. And this he absolutely decreed; because so
was his good Pleasure: Because it was his sovereign Will. Accordingly, they are
born for this, To be destroyed, Body and Soul, in Hell. And they grow up under
the irrevocable Curse of GOD, without any Possibility of Redemption. For what
Grace GOD gives, he gives only, for this, To increase, not prevent, their
Damnation.

5. This is That Decree of Predestination. But methinks I hear one say, This is
not the Predestination which I hold. I hold only, The Election of Grace. What I
believe is no more than This, That GOD, before the Foundation of the World, did
elect a certain Number of Men, to be justified, sanctified, and glorified. Now
all these will be saved, and none else. For the rest of Mankind GOD leaves to
themselves. So they follow the Imaginations of their own Hearts, which are only
evil continually, and waxing worse and worse, are at length justly punished
with everlasting Destruction.

Is this ALL the Predestination which you hold? Consider. Perhaps this is not
ALL. Do not you believe, GOD ordained them to this very Thing? If so, you
believe the Whole Decree; you hold Predestination in the full Sense, which has
been above described. But it may be, you think you do not. Do not you then
believe, GOD hardens the Hearts of them that perish? Do not you believe, He
(literally) hardened Pharoah's Heart, and that for this End he raised him up (or
created him?) Why this amounts to just the same Thing. If you believe Pharaoh,
or any one Man upon the Earth, was created for this End, to be damned, you hold
all that has been said of Predestination. And there is no need you should add,
that GOD seconds his Decree, which is supposed unchange^^^^ and irresistible,
by hardening the Hearts of (...) Vessels of Wrath, whom that Decree had before
fitted for Destruction.

6. Well; but it may be, you do not believe even this. You do not hold any
Decree of Reprobation. You do not think GOD decrees any Man to be damned, nor
hardens, irresistibly fits him for Damnation. You only say, GOD eternally
decreed, That ALL being dead in Sin, he would say to some of the Dry Bones,
Live, and to others he would not. That consequently, These should be made
alive, and Those abide in Death: These should glorify GOD by their Salvation,
and Those by their Destruction.

7. Is not this what you mean by the Election of Grace? If it be, I would ask
one or two Questions. Are any who are not thus Elected, saved? Or were any,
from the Foundation of the World? Is it possible any Man should be saved,
unless he be thus Elected? If you say No, you are but where you was. You are
not got one Hair's-breadth further. You still believe, that in consequence of
an unchangeable, irresistible Decree of GOD, the greater part of Mankind abide
in Death, without any Possibility of Redemption: Inasmuch as none can save them
but GOD; And He will not save them. You believe He has absolutely decreed, Not
to save them; And what is this but decreeing to damn them? It is, in effect,
neither more nor less: It comes to the same thing. For if you are dead, and
altogether unable to make your self alive; then if GOD has absolutely decreed,
He will make others only alive, and not you; He has absolutely decreed your
everlasting Death; you are absolutely consigned to Damnation. So then, though you
use softer Words than some, you mean the self-same Thing. And GOD's Decree
concerning the Election of Grace, according to your own Account of it, amounts
to neither more nor less, than what others call, GOD's Decree of Reprobation.

8. Call it therefore by whatever Name you please, Election, Preterition,
Predestination or Reprobation, it comes in the End to the same Thing. The Sense
of all is plainly this; By virtue of an Eternal, Unchangeable, Irresistible
Decree of GOD, One Part of Mankind are infallibly saved, and the rest
infallibly damned: It being impossible that any of the former should be damned,
or that any of the latter should be saved.

9. But if this be so, then is all Preaching Vain. It is needless to them that
are Elected: For they, whether with Preaching or without, will infallibly be
saved. Therefore the End of Preaching, "To save Souls, is void with regard to
them. And it is useless to them that are not Elected: For they cannot possibly
be saved. They whether with Preaching or without, will infallibly be damned.
The End of Preaching is therefore void with regard to them likewise. So that in
either case, our Preaching is vain, as your Hearing is also vain."

10. This then is a plain Proof, that the Doctrine of Predestination is not a
Doctrine of GOD, because it makes void the Ordinances of GOD: And GOD is not
divided against himself. A Second is, That it directly tends to destroy that
Holiness, which is the End of all the Ordinances of GOD. I do not say, "None
who hold it are Holy:" (For GOD is of tender Mercy to those who are unavoidably
entangled in Errors of any kind.) But that the Doctrine it self, That every Man
is either Elected, or not Elected, from Eternity; and that the one must
inevitably be saved, and the other inevitably damned, has a manifest Tendency
to destroy Holiness in general. For it wholly takes away those first Motives to
follow after it, so frequently proposed in Scripture, the Hope of future
Reward, and Fear of Punishment, the Hope of Heaven and Fear of Hell. That these
shall go away into everlasting Punishment, and those into Life eternal, is no
Motive to him to struggle for Life, who believes his Lot is cast already. It is
not reasonable for him so to do, if he thinks he is unalterably adjudged either
to Life or Death. You will say, But he knows not, whether it is Life or Death.
What then? This helps not the Matter. For if a sick Man knows that he must
unavoidably die, or unavoidably recover, though he knows not which, it is not
reasonable for him to take any Physic at all. He might justly say, (and so I
have heard some speak, both in Bodily Sickness and in Spiritual) If I am
ordained to Life, I shall live; If to Death, I shall die: So I need not trouble
myself about it. So directly does this Doctrine tend, to shut the very Gate of
Holiness in general, to hinder unholy Men from ever approaching thereto, or
striving to enter in thereat.

11. As directly does this Doctrine tend to destroy several particular Branches
of Holiness. Such are Meekness and Love: Love I mean of our Enemies, of the
Evil and Unthankful. I say not, That none who hold it, have Meekness and Love:
(For as is the Power of GOD, so is his Mercy.) Put that it naturally tends to
inspire or increase, a Sharpness or Eagerness of Temper, which is quite
contrary to the Meekness of CHRIST: As then especially appears, when they are
opposed on this Head. And it as naturally inspires Contempt or Coldness toward
those, whom we suppose Outcasts from GOD. O (but you say) I suppose no
particular Man a Reprobate. You mean, you would not, if you could help it. You
cannot help sometimes applying your General Doctrine to Particular Persons. The
Enemy of Souls will apply it for you. You know how often he has done so. "But
you rejected the Thought with Abhorrence." True: As soon as you could. But how
did it sour and sharpen your Spirit in the mean time? You well know, it was not
the Spirit of Love, which you then felt toward that poor Sinner, whom you
supposed or suspected, whether you would or no, to have been hated of GOD from
Eternity.

12. Thirdly, This Doctrine tends to destroy the Comfort of Religion, the
Happiness of Christianity: This is evident as to all those who believe
themselves to be reprobated, or who only suspect or fear it. All the great and
precious Promises are lost to them. They afford them no Ray of Comfort: For
they are not the Elect of GOD. Therefore they have neither Lot nor Portion in
them. This is an effectual Bar to their finding any Comfort or Happiness even
in that Religion, whose Ways were designed to be Ways of Pleasantness, and all
her Paths Peace.

13. And as to you who believe yourselves the Elect of GOD, what is your
Happiness? I hope, not a Notion, a speculative Belief; a bare Opinion of any
Kind: But a feeling Possession of GOD in your Heart, wrought in you by the Holy
Ghost; or, The Witness of GOD's Spirit with your Spirit, that you are a Child
of GOD. This otherwise termed the full Assurance of Faith, is the true Ground
of a Christian's Happiness. And it does indeed imply, a full Assurance, that
all your past Sins are forgiven, and that you are now a Child of GOD; But it
does not necessarily imply, a full Assurance of our future Perseverance. I do
not say, This is never joined to it: But that it is not necessarily implied
therein; for many have the one, who have not the other.

14. Now this Witness of the Spirit, Experience shows to be much obstructed by
this Doctrine: And not only in those, who believing themselves Reprobated, by
this Belief thrust it far from them: But even in them that have tasted of that
good Gift, who yet have soon lost it again, and fallen back into Doubts and
Fears, and Darkness, Horrible Darkness that might be felt. And I appeal to any
of you who hold this Doctrine, to say between GOD and your own Hearts, whether
you have not often a Return of Doubts and Fears concerning your Election or
Perseverance? If you ask, Who has not? I answer, Very Few of those that hold
this Doctrine. But many, very many of those that hold it not, in all Parts of
the Earth: Many of those who know and feel, they are in CHRIST to Day, and take
no Thought for the Morrow; who abide in him by Faith from Hour to Hour, or
rather from Moment to Moment. Many of these have enjoyed the uninterrupted
Witness of his Spirit, the continual Light of his Countenance, from the Moment
wherein they first believed, for meny Months or Years to this Day.

15. That Assurance of Faith which these enjoy, excludes all Doubt and Fear. It
excludes all Kind of Doubt and Fear, concerning their future Perseverance: Though
it is not properly (as was said before) and Assurance of what is Future; but
only of what now is. And this needs not for its Support, a speculative Belief,
That whoever is once ordained to Life, must live. For it is wrought from Hour
to Hour, by the mighty Power of GOD, by the Holy Ghost which is given unto
them. And therefore that Doctrine is not of GOD, because it tends to obstruct,
if not destroy, this Great Work of the Holy Ghost, whence flows the chief
Comfort of Religion, the Happiness of Christianity.

16. Again, How uncomfortable a Thought is This, That Thousands and Millions of
Men, without any preceding Offense or Fault of theirs, were unchangeably doomed
to everlasting Burnings? How peculiarly uncomfortable must it be, to those who
have put on Christ! To those who being filled with Bowels of Mercy, Tenderness
and Compassion, could even wish themselves accursed for their Brethren's Sake.

17. Fourthly, This uncomfortable Doctrine directly tends to destroy our Zeal
for Good Works. And this it does first, as it naturally tends (according to
what was observed before) to destroy our Love to the greater Part of Mankind,
namely, the Evil and unthankful. For whatever lessens our Love, must so far
lessen our Desire to do them Good. This it does, secondly, as it cuts off one
of the strongest Motives to all Acts of Bodily Mercy, such as Feeding the
Hungry, Clothing the Naked, and the like, viz. The Hope of saving their Souls
from Death. For what avails it to relieve their Temporal Wants, who are just
dropping into Eternal Fire? Well; but run and snatch them as Brands out of the
Fire. Nay, this you suppose impossible. They were appointed thereunto, you say,
from Eternity, before they had done either Good or Evil. You believe, it is the
Will of GOD they should die. And who has resisted his Will? But you say, You
do not know, whether these are elected or not. What then? If you know they are
the one or the other, that they are Elected or not Elected, all your Labor is
void and vain. In either Case, your Advice, Reproof, or Exhortation, is as
needless and useless as our Preaching. It is needless to them that are Elected;
for they will infallibly be saved without it. It is useless to them that are
not Elected; for with (...) without it they will infallibly be damned.
Therefore you cannot, consistently with your Principles, take any Pains about
their Salvation. Consequently, those Principles directly tend to destroy your
Zeal for Good Works; for all Good Works; but particularly for the Greatest of
all, The Saving of Souls from Death.

18. But, fifthly, This Doctrine not only tends to destroy Christian Holiness,
Happiness, and Good Works, but has also a direct and manifest Tendency to
overthrow the whole Christian Revelation. The Point which the wisest of the
modern Unbelievers most industriously labor to prove, is, That the Christian
Revelation is not necessary. They well know, could they once show this, the
Conclusion would be too plain to be denied, If it be not Necessary, it is not
True. Now, this Fundamental Point you give up. For supposing That Eternal,
Unchangeable Decree, One Part of Mankind must be saved, though the Christian
Revelation were not in Being: And the other Part of Mankind must be damned,
notwithstanding that Revelation. And what would an Infidel desire more? You
allow him all he asks. In making the Gospel thus unnecessary to all Sorts of
Men, you give up the whole Christian Cause. O tell it not in Gath! Publish it
not in the Streets of Askelon! Lest the Daughters of the Uncircumcised rejoice,
lest the Sons of Unbelief triumph!

19. And as this Doctrine manifestly and directly tends to overthrow the whole
Christian Revelation so it does the same Thing, by plain Consequence, in making
that Revelation contradict itself. For it is grounded on such an Interpretation
of some Texts (more or fewer it matters not) as flatly contradict all the other
Texts, and indeed the whole Scope and Tenor of Scripture. For Instance; The
Asserters of this Doctrine, interpret that Text of scripture, "Jacob have I
loved, but Esau have I hated," as implying that GOD in a literal Sense hated
Esau, and all the Reprobated, from Eternity. Now, what can possibly be a more
flat Contradiction than this, not only to the whole Scope and Tenor of
Scripture, but also to all those particular Texts, which expressly declare, "
GOD is LOVE?" Again, they infer from that Text, I will have Mercy on whom I
will have Mercy, (Romans ix. 15.) That GOD is Love only to some Men, viz. The
Elect, and that he has Mercy for those only: Flatly contrary to which, is the
whole Tenor of the Scripture, as is that express Declaration in particular, The
Lord is loving unto EVERY Man, and his Mercy is over all his Works.( Psalm.
cxiv. 9.) Again, They infer from that and the like Texts, It is not of him that
wills, neither of him that runs, but of GOD that shows Mercy, that he
shows Mercy only to those whom he had Respect to from all Eternity. Nay, but
who replieth against GOD now? You now contradict the whole Oracles of GOD,
which declare throughout. GOD is no Respecter of Persons, (Acts x. 34.) " There
is no Respect of Persons with him." (Romans ii. 11.) Again, from that Text," The
Children being not yet born, neither having done Good or Evil, that the Purpose
of GOD according to Election, might stand, not of Works, but of him that
calls* It was said unto her (unto Rebecca) The Elder shall serve the
Younger." You infer, that our being Predestined or Elect, no way depends on
the Foreknowledge of GOD: Flatly contrary to this, are all the Scriptures; and
those in particular, " Elect, according to the Foreknowledge of GOD." (1 Pet.
i. 2.) Whom he did Foreknow, he also did Predestinate. ( Romans viii. 29.)

20. And, The same Lord over all, is rich in Mercy to all that call upon him.
(Romans x. 12.) But you say, No, He is such only to those for whom Christ died.
And those are not All, but only a Few, Whom GOD has chosen out of the World:
For he died not for All, but only for those who were chosen in him before the
Foundation of the World. ( Ephesians. i. 2.) Flatly contrary to your Interpretation
of those Scriptures also, is the whole Tenor of the New Testament; as are in
particular those Texts, Destroy not him with thy Meat, for whom Christ died. (
Romans xiv. 15.) A clear Proof that Christ died, not only for those that we
saved, but also for them that perish. He is " the Savior of the World," ( John
iv. 42.) He is the Lamb of GOD that takes away the Sins of the World. ( John
i. 29.) He is the Propitiation, not for our Sins only, but also for the Sins of
the whole World. (1 John ii. 2.) He (the living GOD) is the Savior of all Men.
(1 Timothy iv. 10.) He gave himself a Ransom for All. (^ Tim. ii. 6.) " He tasted
Death for all Men." ( Heb. ii. 9.)

21. If you ask, Why then are not all Men saved? The whole Law and the
Testimony answer, first, not because of any Decree of GOD, not because it is
his Pleasure they should die: For, as I live says the Lord GOD, I have no
Pleasure in the Death of him that dies. ( Ezekiel. xviii. 32.) Whatever be the
Cause of their perishing, it cannot be his Will, if the Oracles of GOD are
true; for they declare, He is not willing that any should perish, but that all
should come to Repentance. (2 Pet. iii. 9.) He wills that all Men should be
saved. And they, secondly, declare, What is the Cause why all Men are not
saved; namely, that they will not be saved: So our LORD expressly, They will not
come unto me that they may have Life. ( John v. 40.) The Power of the LORD is
present to heal them; but they will not be healed. They reject the Counsel, the
merciful Counsel of GOD, against themselves, as did their Stiff-necked
Forefathers. And therefore are they without Excuse, because GOD would save
them, but they will not be saved: This is the Condemnation, How often would I
have gathered you together, and ye would not. ( Mat. xxiii. 37.)

22. Thus manifestly does this Doctrine tend to overthrow the whole Christian
Revelation, by making it contradict itself; by giving such an Interpretation of
some Texts, as flatly contradicts all the other Texts; and indeed the whole
Scope and Terror of Scripture. An abundant Proof that it is not of GOD. But
neither is this all. For seventhly, It is a Doctrine full of Blasphemy; of such
Blasphemy as I should dread to mention, but that the Honor of our gracious
GOD, and the Cause of his Truth, will not suffer me to be silent. In the Cause
of GOD then, and from a sincere Concern for the Glory of his Great Name, I will
mention a few of the Horrible Blasphemies, contained in this Horrible Doctrine.
But first, I must warn every one of you that hears, as ye will answer it at the
Great Day, not to charge me (as some have done) with Blaspheming, because I
mention the Blasphemy of others. And the more you are grieved with them that do
thus blaspheme, see that ye confirm your Love toward them the more; and that
your Heart's Desire, and continual Prayer to GOD be, Father forgive them, for
they know not what they do.

23. This premised, let it be observed, That this Doctrine represents our
blessed Lord, JESUS CHRIST the Righteous, the only begotten Son of the Father,
full of Grace and Truth, as an Hypocrite, a Deceiver of the People, a Man void
of common Sincerity. For it cannot be denied, that he every where speaks, as if
he was willing that all Men should be saved. Therefore to say, He was not
willing that all Men should be saved, is to represent him as a mere Hypocrite
and Dissembler. It cannot be denied that the gracious Words which came out of
his Mouth, are full of Invitations. To say then, He did not intend to save all
Sinners, is to represent him as a gross Deceiver of the People. You cannot
deny, that he says, Come unto me all ye that are weary and heavy laden. If then
you say, He calls those that cannot come, those whom he knows to be unable to
come; those whom he can make able to come, but will not; how is it possible to
describe greater Insincerity? You represent him as mocking his helpless
Creatures, by offering what he never intends to give. You describe him as
saying one Thing, and meaning another: As pretending the Love which he had not.
Him, in whose Mouth was no Guile, you will make full of Deceit, void of common
Sincerity: Then especially, when drawing nigh the City, He wept over it, and
said, O Jerusalem! Jerusalem! Thou that killest the Prophets, and stonest them
that are sent unto Thee; How often WOULD I have gathered thy Children together
-- and YE WOULD NOT. ['Ethelesa kai 'uk 'ethelesate.] Now, if you say, They
would, but He would not, you represent him (which who could hear?) as weeping
Crocodiles Tears, weeping over the Prey which himself had doomed to Destruction.

24. Such Blasphemy this, as one would think might make the Ears of a Christian
to tingle. But there is yet more behind; for just as it honors the Son, so
does this Doctrine honor the Father. It destroys all his Attributes at once.
It overturns both his Justice, Mercy and Truth. Yea, it represents the most
holy GOD as worse than the Devil; as both more false, more cruel and more
unjust. More False; because the Devil, Liar as he is, has never said, He
wills all Men to be saved. More Unjust, because the Devil cannot, if he
would, be guilty of such Injustice as you ascribe to GOD, when you say, That
GOD condemned Millions of Souls to everlasting Fire prepared for the Devil and
his Angels for continuing in Sin, which for want of that Grace he will not give
them, they cannot avoid; And more Cruel, because that unhappy Spirit seeks
Rest and finds none; so that his own restless Misery is a kind of Temptation
to him to tempt others. But GOD rests in his high and Holy Place: So that to
suppose him of his own mere Motion, of his pure Will and Pleasure, happy as he
is, to doom his Creatures, whether they will or no, to endless Misery; is to
impute such Cruelty to him, as we cannot impute even to the great Enemy of GOD
and Man. It is to represent the most High GOD (He that has Ears to hear, let
him hear!) as more Cruel, False, and Unjust than the Devil.

25. This is the Blasphemy clearly contained in the Horrible Decree of
Predestination. And here I fix my Foot. On this I join Issue with every
Assertor of it. You represent GOD as worse than the Devil: More False, more
Cruel, more Unjust. "But, you say, you will prove it by Scripture." Hold! What
will you prove by Scripture? That GOD is worse than the Devil? It cannot be.
Whatever that Scripture proves, it never can prove this. Whatever its true
Meaning be, this cannot be its true Meaning. Do you ask, What is its true
Meaning then? If I say, I know not, you have gained Nothing. For there are many
Scriptures, the true Sense whereof neither you not I shall know, till Death is
swallowed up in Victory. But this I know, Better it were to say, It had no
Sense at all; than to say it had such a Sense as this. It cannot mean, whatever
it mean besides, that the GOD of Truth is a Liar. Let it mean what it will, it
cannot mean that the Judge of all the World is unjust. No Scripture can mean,
that GOD is not Love, or that his Mercy is not over all his Works. That is,
Whatever it prove beside, no Scripture can prove Predestination.

26. This is the Blasphemy for which, (however I love the Persons who assert
it) I abhor the Doctrine of Predestination. A Doctrine, upon the Supposition of
which, if one could possibly suppose it for a Moment, (call it Election,
Reprobation, or what you please, for all comes to the same Thing) one might say
to our Adversary the Devil, Thou Fool, why do thou roar about any longer? Thy
lying in Wait for Souls is as needless and useless as our Preaching. Hear
thou not, that GOD has taken thy Work out of thy Hands? And that he does it
much more effectually? Thou, with all thy Principalities and Powers, can only
so assault, that we may resist thee: But he can irresistibly destroy both Body
and Soul in Hell! Thou can only entice; but his unchangeable Decree, to leave
Thousands of Souls in Death, compels them to continue in Sin, 'till they drop
into everlasting Burnings. Thou temptest. He forces us to be damned. For we
cannot resist his Will. Thou Fool, why go thou about any longer, seeking
whom thou may devour? Hear thou not, that GOD is the devouring Lion, the
Destroyer of Souls, the Murderer of Men? Moloch caused only Children to pass
through the Fire; and that the Fire was soon quenched* or the corruptible Body
being consumed, its Torment was at an End. But GOD, thou art told, by his
Eternal Decree, fixed before they had done Good or Evil, causes not only
Children of a Span long, but the Parents also to pass through the Fire of Hell:
That Fire which never shall be quenched; and the Body which is cast thereinto,
being now incorruptible and immortal, will be ever consuming, and never
consumed: But the Smoke of their Torment, because it is GOD's good Pleasure,
ascends up for ever and ever.

27. O how would the Enemy of GOD and Man rejoice to hear these Things were so!
How would he cry aloud and spare not! How would he lift up his Voice and say,
To your Tents, O Israel! Flee from the Face of this GOD, or ye shall utterly
perish. But whither will ye flee? Into Heaven? He is there. Down to Hell? He is
there also. Ye cannot flee from an omnipresent almighty Tyrant. And whether ye
flee or stay, I call Heaven his Throne, and Earth his Footstool to witness
against you, ye shall perish, ye shall die eternally. Sing, O Hell, and rejoice
ye that are under the Earth! For GOD, even the mighty GOD, has spoken, and
devoted to Death Thousands of Souls from the Rising up of the Sun, unto the
Going down thereof. Here, O Death is thy Sting! They shall not, cannot Escape.
For the Mouth of the LORD has spoken it. Here, O Grave, is thy Victory!
Nations yet unborn, or ever they have done Good or Evil, are doomed never to
see the Light of Life, but thou shall gnaw upon them for ever and ever. Let all
those Morning-Stars sing together, who fell with Lucifer, Son of the Morning.
Let all the Sons of Hell shout for Joy! For the Decree is past, and who shall
disannul it?

28. Yea, the Decree is past. And so it was before the Foundation of the World.
But what Decree? Even this; I will set before the Sons of Men Life and Death,
Blessing and Cursing. And the Soul that chooses Life, shall live, as the Soul
that chooses Death shall die. This Decree, whereby " whom GOD did foreknow, he
did predestinate, was indeed from everlasting: This, whereby all who suffer
CHRIST to make them alive, are Elect, according "to the Foreknowledge of GOD,
now stands fast, even as the Moon, and as the faithful Witness in Heaven: And
when Heaven and Earth shall pass away, yet this shall not pass away; for it is
as unchangeable and eternal, as is the Being of GOD that gave it. This Decree
yields the strongest Encouragement, to abound in all Good Works, and in all
Holiness: And it is a Well spring of Joy, of Happiness also, to our great and
endless Comfort. This is worthy of GOD. It is every Way consistent with all the
Perfections of his Nature. It gives us the noblest View both of his Justice,
Mercy, and Truth. To this agrees the whole Scope of the Christian Revelation,
as well as all the Parts thereof. To this Moses and all the Prophets bear
Witness, and our Blessed LORD and all his Apostles. Thus Moses, in the Name of
his LORD, "I call Heaven and Earth to record against you this Day, that I have
set before you Life and Death, Blessing and Cursing; therefore choose Life that
thou and thy Seed may live." Thus Ezekiel (to cite one Prophet for all) " The
Soul that sins it shall die: The Son shall not bear (eternally) the Iniquity
of the Father (xviii. 20.) The Righteousness of the Righteous shall be upon
him, and the Wickedness of the Wicked shall be upon him." Thus our blessed
LORD, "It any Man thirst, let him come to me and drink." ( John vii. 37.) Thus
his great Apostle St. Paul ( Acts xvii. 30.) " GOD commands ALL MEN, every
where, to repent." "ALL MEN, every where:" Every Man in every Place, without
any Exception, either of Place or Person. Thus St. James, " If any of you lack
Wisdom, let him ask of GOD, who gives to all Men liberally, and upbraideth
not, and it shall be given him." ( James 1. 5.) Thus St. Peter (2 Pet. iii. 9.)
" The LORD is -- not willing that any should perish, but that all should come
to Repentance." And thus St. John, "If any Man sin, we have an Advocate with
the Father, -- and he is the Propitiation for our Sins: And not for ours only,
but for the Sins of the whole World; (1 John ii. 1, 2.)

29. O hear ye this, ye that forget GOD! Ye cannot charge your Death upon him.
" Have I any Pleasure at all, that the Wicked should die, says the Lord GOD?
(Ezekiel. xviii. 23, etc.) Repent and turn from all your Transgressions: So
Iniquity shall not be your Ruin. Cast away from you all your Transgressions,
whereby ye have transgrest, -- for why will ye die, O House of Israel? for I
have no Pleasure in the Death of him that dies, says the Lord GOD. Wherefore
turn yourselves and live ye." " As I live, says the Lord GOD, I have no
Pleasure in the Death of the Wicked. Turn ye, turn ye from your Evil Ways: For
why will ye die, O House of Israel? (Ezekiel. xxxiii. 11.)

Universal Redemption.
HEAR, Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord,
Father of all Mankind;
Spirit of Love, Eternal Word,
In mystic Union joined.
Hear and inspire my stammering Tongue,
Exalt my abject Thought,
Speak from my Mouth a sacred Song,
Who spak'st the World from naught.
Thy darling Attribute I praise,
Which all alike may prove;
The Glory of thy boundless Grace,
Thy universal Love.
Mercy, I sing; transporting Sound!
The Joy of Earth and Heaven!
Mercy, by every Sinner found,
Who takes what GOD has given.
Mercy for All thy Hands have made,
Immense and unconfined,
Throughout thy every Work displayed,
Embracing all Mankind.
Whose Eye surveyed the fallen Race
Where sunk in Sin they lay;
Their Misery called for all thy Grace,
But Justice stopped the Way.
Mercy the fatal Blow removed,
Thy only Son it gave,
To save a World so dearly loved,
A sinful World to save.
For every Man he tasted Death,
He suffered once for All,
He calls as many Souls as breathe,
And all may hear the Call.
A Power to choose, a Will to obey,
Freely his Grace restores;
We all may find the Living Way,
And call the Savior ours.
Whom his eternal Mind fore-knew,
That they the Power would use,
Ascribe to GOD the Glory due,
And not his Grace refuse;
Them, only them, his Will decreed;
Them did he choose alone,
Ordained in JESUS' Steps to tread,
And to be like his Son.
Them the Elect, though seeming few
Who yield to proffered Love,
Justified here he forms anew,
And glori^^es Above.
For as in Adam All have died,
So All in CHRIST may live,
May (for the World is justified)
His Righteousness receive.
Whoever to GOD for Pardon fly,
In CHRIST may be forgiven.
He speaks to All, "Why will ye die,
And not accept my Heaven?
No! in the Death of him that dies,
(GOD by his Life has sworn)
He is not pleased; but ever cries,
Turn, O ye Sinners, turn.
He would that All his Truths should own,
His Gospel all embrace;
None are excluded, no, not one,
Of Adam's sinful Race.
O! boundless Mercy! Love immense!
Infinite GRACE! and free!
Join all my Powers with Zeal intense
TO adore eternally.
FINIS.

