THE CHARTERS OF THE Province of PENSILVANIA AND City of PHILADELPHIA.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed and Sold by B. FRANKLIN. MDCCXLII.

THE ROYAL CHARTER Granted to WILLIAM PENN, Esquire Proprietary and Governor of
Pensilvania.
CHARLES, by the Grace of GOD, King of England, Preamble
Scotland, France, and Ireland, Defender of the Faith. etc. To all to whom
these Presents shall come, Greeting. WHEREAS Our Trusty and Well-beloved
Subject WILLIAM PENN, Esquire Son and Heir of Sir WILLIAM PENN deceased, (out of a
commendable Desire to enlarge our English Empire, and promote such useful
Commodities as may be of Benefit to us and our Dominions, as also to reduce the
savage Natives by gentle and just Manners to the Love of Civil Society and
Christian Religion) has humbly besought Leave of Us to transport an ample
Colony unto a certain Country herein after described, ^n the Parts of America
not yet cultivated and planted; and has likewise so humbly besought Our Royal
Majesty to Give, Grant, and Confirm all the said Country, with certain
Privileges and Jurisdictions, requisite for the good Government and Safety of
the said Country and Colony, to him and his Heirs for ever:

SECT. I.
KNOW YE THEREFORE, Considerati^^ of the Gra^^
That We (savouring the Petition and good Purpose of the said William Penn, and
having Regard to the Memory and Merits of his late Father in diverse Services,
and particularly to his Conduct, Courage, and Discretion under our Dearest
Brother JAMES Duke of York, in that signal Battle and Victory fought and
obtained against the Dutch Fleet, commanded by the Here Van Opdam, in the Year
1665: In Consideration thereof, of Our special Grace, certain Knowledge, and
mere Motion) have Given and Granted, and by this Our present Charter, for Us,
Our Heirs and Successors, do Give and Grant unto the said William Penn, his
Heirs and Assigns, all that Tract or Part of Land in America, with the Islands
therein contained, as the same is bounded on the ^ast by Dela^^r River, (...)
of G^ant.
from Twelve Miles Distance Northwards of New^astle Town unto the Three and
Fortieth Degree of Northern Latitude, if the s^id River does extend so far
Northward; but if the said River shall not extend so far Northward, then by the
said River so far as it does extend; and from the Head of the said River, the
Eastern Bounds are to be determined by a Meridian Line, to be drawn from the
Head of the said River, unto the said Forty-third Degree. The said Land to
extend Westward Five Degrees in Longitude, to be computed from the said Eastern
Bounds; and the said Lands to be bounded on the North by the Beginning of the
Three and Fortieth Degree of Northern Latitude, and on the South by a Circle
drawn at Twelve Miles Distance from Newcastle Northward, and Westward unto the
Beginning of the Fortieth Degree of Northern Latitude, and then by a straight
Line Westward to the Limits of Longitude abovementioned.

SECT. II.
Free Passage etc. granted.
WE do also Give and Grant unto the said William Penn, his Heirs and Assigns,
the free and undisturbed Use and Continuance in, and Passage unto, and out of
all and singular Ports, Harbors, Bays, Waters, Rivers, Isles, and Inlets,
belonging unto, or leading to and from the Country or Islands aforesaid, and
all the Soils, Soils, Isles, Bays, etc.
Lands, Fields, Woods, Underwoods, Mountains, Hills, Fenns, Isles, Lakes,
Rivers, Waters, Rivulets, Bays, and Inlets, situated or being within, or
belonging to the Limits or Bounds aforesaid, Fisheries.
together with the Fishing of all Sorts of Fish* Whales, Sturgeon, and all
Royal and other Fishes, in the Seas, Bays, Inlets, Waters, or Rivers within the
Premises, and all the Fish therein taken; Mines, Gems, etc.
and also all Veins, Mines, Minerals, and Quarries, as well discovered as not
discovered, of Gold, Silver, Gemmes, and precious Stones, and all other
whatsoever, be it Stones, Metals, or of any other Thing or Matter whatsoever,
found or to be found within the Country, Isles, or Limits aforesaid.

SECT. III.
AND him, the said William Penn, his Heirs and Assigns, We do by this Our Royal
Charter, William Penn, etc. made absolute Proprietary; saving the Faith and
Allegiance of Proprietary and Inhabitants, and the Sovereignty.
for Us, Our Heirs and Successors, Make, Create, and Constitute the True and
Absolute Proprietary of the Country aforesaid, and of all other the Premises;
Saving always to Us, Our Heirs and Successors, the Faith and Allegiance of the
said William Penn, his Heirs and Assigns, and of all other Proprietaries,
Tenants, and Inhabitants, that are or shall be within the Territories and
Precincts aforesaid; and saving also, unto Us, Our Heirs and Successors, the
Sovereignty of the aforesaid Country; TO HAVE, hold, possess, and enjoy the
said Tract of Land, Country, Isles, Inlets, and other the Premises, unto the
said William Penn, his Heirs and Assigns, to the only proper Use and Behoof of
the said William Penn, his Heirs and Assigns, for ever, To be holden in common
Soccage, etc.
to be holden of Us, Our Heirs and Successors, Kings of England, as of Our
Castle of Windsor in Our County of Berks, in free and common Soccage, by Fealty
only for all Services, and not in Capite or by Knights Service: Yielding and
paying therefore to Us, Our Heirs and Successors, Two Beaver Skins, to be
delivered at Our Castle of Windsor on the First Day of January in every Year;
One Fifth of all Gold and Silver Ore reserved.
and also the Fifth Part of all Gold and Silver Oar, which shall from Time to
Time happen to be found within the Limits aforesaid, clear of all Charges. And
of Our further Grace, certain Knowledge, and mere Motion, We have thought fit
to erect, and We do hereby erect the aforesaid Country and Islands into a
Province and Seigniory, Name.
and do call it PENSILVANIA, and so from henceforth will have it called.

SECT. IV.
AND forasmuch as We have hereby made and ordained the aforesaid William Penn,
his Heirs an^ Assigns, the true and absolute Proprietaries of all the Lands and
Dominions aforesaid, KNOW YE THEREFORE, That We (reposing special Trust and
Confidence in the Fidelity, Wisdom, Justice, and provident Circumspection of
the said William Penn) for Us, Our Heirs and Successors, do grant free, full,
Power to mak^ Laws, etc. with the Consent of the Freemen.
and absolute Power (by Virtue of these Presents) to him and his Heirs, to his
and their Deputies, and Lieutenants, for the good and happy Government of the
said Country, to ordain, make, and enact, and under his and their Seals to
publish any Laws whatsoever, for the raising of Money for public Uses of the
said Province, or for any other End, appertaining either unto the public
State, Peace, or Safety of the said Country, or unto the private Utility of
particular Persons, according unto their best Discretion, by and with the
Advice, Assent, and Approbation of the Freemen of the said Country, or the
greater Part of them, or of their Delegates or Deputies, whom for the Enacting
of the said Laws, when, and as often as Need shall require, We will that the
said William Penn and his Heirs, shall assemble in such Sort and Form, Assembly.
as to him and them shall seen best, and the same Laws duly to execute, unto
and upon all People within the said Country and Limits thereof.

SECT. V.
AND We do likewise Give and Grant unto the said William Penn, and to his
Heirs, and their Deputies and Lieutenants, Power to make Judges and other
Officers for Probate of Wills, etc.
full Power and Authority, to appoint and establish any Judges and Justices,
Magistrates and other Officers whatsoever, for what Causes soever, (for the
Probates of Wills, and for the Granting of Administrations within the Precincts
aforesaid) and with what Power soever, and in such Form as to the said William
Penn or (...) Heirs shall seem most convenient: Also to remit, release, pardon,
Power of Pardoning or Reprieving.
and abolish (whether before Judgment or after) all Crimes and Offenses
whatsoever committed within the said Country against the sai^ Laws, (Treason
and wilful and malicious Murder only excepted, and in those Cases to grant
Reprieves, until Our Pleasure may be known therein) and to do all and every
other Thing and Things, which unto the complete Establishment of Justice, unto
Courts and Tribunals, Forms of Judicature, and Manner of Proceedings do belong,
although in these Presents express Mention be not made thereof; and by Judges
by them delegated, to award Process, hold Pleas, and determine in all the said
Courts and Tribunals all Actions, What may be done by the Judges.
Suits, and Causes whatsoever, as well Criminal as Civil, Personal, Real and
Mixed; which Laws, so as aforesaid to be published, Our Pleasure is, and so We
enjoin, require, and command, shall be most absolute and available in Law;
Obedience to the Laws enjoined.
and that all the Liege People and Subjects of Us, Our Heirs and Successors, do
observe and keep the same inviolably in those Parts, so far as they concern
them, under the Pain therein expressed, Proviso, that the Laws be not repugnant
to the Laws of England.
or to be expressed. PROVIDED nevertheless, That the same Laws be consonant to
Reason, and not repugnant or contrary, but (as near as conveniently may be)
agreeable to the Laws and Statutes, and Rights of this Our Kingdom of England;
and saving and reserving to Us, Our Heirs and Successors, the Receiving, The
Hearing of Appeals reserved.
Hearing, and Determining of the Appeal and Appeals of all or any Person or
Persons, of, in, or belonging to the Territories aforesaid, or touching any
Judgment to be there made or given.

SECT. VI.
Power to make Ordinances, on emergent Occasions.
AND forasmuch as in the Government of so great a Country, sudden Accidents do
often happen, whereunto it will be necessary to apply Remedy before the
Freeholders of the said Province, or their Delegates or Deputies, can be
assembled to the making of Laws; neither will it be convenient that instantly
upon every such emergent Occasion, so great a Multitude should be called
together: Therefore (for the better Government of the said Country) We will,
and ordain, and by these Presents, for Us, Our Heirs and Successors, do Grant
unto the said William Penn and his Heirs, by themselves or by their Magistrates
and Officers, in that Behalf duly to be ordained as aforesaid, to make and
constitute sit and wholesome Ordinances, from Time to Time, within the said
Country to be kept and observ^d, as well for the Preservation of the Peace, as
for the better Government of the People there inhabiting; and publicly to
notify the same to all Persons, whom the same does or may anyways concern.
Which shall be ^inding* except in Cases of Liberty and Property.
Which Ordinances, Our Will and Pleasure is, shall be observed inviolably
within the said Province, under the Pains therein to be expressed, so as the
said Ordinances be consonant to Reason, and be not repugnant nor contrary, but
so far as conveniently may be) agreeable with the Laws of Our Kingdom of
England, and so as the said Ordinances be not extended in any Sort to bind,
change, or take away the Right or Interest of any Person or Persons, for or in
their Life, Members, Freehold, Goods, or Chattels. And Our father Will and
Pleasure is, That the Laws for Regulating and Governing of Property within the
said Province, Property* etc. regulated by the Laws of England, till altered,
etc.
as well for the Descent and Enjoyment of Lands, as likewise for the Enjoyment
and Succession of Goods and Chattels, and likewise as to Felonies, shall be and
continue the same, as they shall be for the Time being by the General Course of
the Law in Our Kingdom of England, until the said Laws shall be altered by the
said William Penn, his Heirs or Assigns, and by the Freemen of the said
Province, their Delegates or Deputies, or the greater Part of them.

SECT. VII.
AND to the End that the said William Penn, or his Heirs, or other the
Planters, Owners, or Inhabitants of the said Province, may not at any Time
hereafter (by Misconstruction of the Power aforesaid) through Inadvertency or
Design depart from that Faith and due Allegiance, which by the Laws of this Our
Realm of England, they and all Our Subjects, in Our Dominions and Territories,
always owe to Us, Our Heirs and Successors, by Color of any Extent or
Largeness of Powers hereby given, or pretended to be given, or by Force or
Color of any Laws hereafter to be made in the said Provinc^, by Virtue of any
such Powers; OUR farther Will and Pleasure is, Duplicate of all Laws ^o be
transmitted to the Privy Council, within four Years*
That a Transcript or Duplicate of all Laws, which shall be so as aforesaid
made and published within the said Province, shall within Five Years after the
making thereof, be transmitted and delivered to the Privy Council, for the Time
being, of Us, Our Heirs and Successors: And if any of the said Laws, within the
Space of Six Months after that they shall be so transmitted and delivered, be
declared by Us, Our Heirs and Successors, in Our or Their Privy Council, If
repealed within six Months, to be void; otherwise in Force.
inconsistent with the Sovereignty or lawful Prerogative of Us, Our Heirs or
Successors, or contrary to the Faith and Allegiance due to the Legal Government
of this Realm, from the said William Penn, or his Heirs, or of the Planters and
Inhabitants of the said Province, and that thereupon any of the said Laws shall
be adjudged and declared to be void by Us, Our Heirs and Successors, under Our
or Their Privy Seal, that then and from thenceforth, such Laws, concerning
which such Judgment and Declaration shall be made, shall become void: Otherwise
the said Laws so transmitted, shall remain, and stand in full Force, according
to the true Intent and Meaning thereof.

SECT. VIII.
FURTHERMORE, Grant of Liberty to the King's Subjects, to transport themselves,
etc.
that this New Colony may the more happily increase, by the Multitude of People
resorting thither; Therefore We, for Us, Our Heirs and Successors, do Give and
Grant by these Presents, Power, License, and Liberty unto all the Liege People
and Subjects, both present and future, of Us, Our Heirs and Successors,
(excepting those who shall b^ especially forbidden) to transport themselves and
Families unto the said Country, with such conv^nient Shipping as by the Laws of
this Our Kingdom of England they ought to use, and with fitting Provision,
paying only the Customs therefore due, and there to settle themselves, dwell
and inhabit, and plant* for the public and their own private Advantage.

SECT. IX.
AND FURTHERMORE, that Our Subjects may be the rather encouraged to undertake
this Expedition with ready and cheerful Minds, KNOW YE, That We, of Our special
Grace, certain Knowledge, and mere Motion, do give and grant by Virtue of these
Presents, as well unto the said William Penn* and his Heirs, as to all others,
who shall from time to time repair unto the said Country, with a Purpose to
inhabit, or trade with the Natives of the said Country, full License to lade
and freight in any Ports whatsoever, of Us, Our Heirs and Successors, ac^ording
to the Laws made or to be made within Our Kingdom of England, and unto the said
Country, by them, their Servants or Assigns, And their Goods, Mercha^dizes, etc.
to transport all and singular their Goods, Wares and Merchandises, as likewise
all Sorts of Grain whatsoever, and all other Things whatsoever, necessary for
Food or Clothing, not prohibited by the Laws and Statutes of Our Kingdom and
Dominions to be carried out of the said Kingdom, without any Let or Molestation
of Us, Our Heirs or Successors, Paying the Customs.
or of any of the Officers of Us, Our Heirs or Successors; saving always to Us,
Our Heirs and Successors, the Legal Impositions, Customs, or other Duties and
Payments, for the said Wares and Merchandises, by any Law or Statute due or to
be due to Us, Ours Heirs and Successors.

SECT. X.
The Proprietor may divide the Country into Towns, Hundreds, and Counties,
incorporate Towns, constitute Fairs, grant Privil^ges, etc.
AND We do further, for Us, Our Heirs and Successors, Give and Grant unto the
said William Penn, his Heirs and Assigns, free and absolute Power, to divide
the said Country and Islands into Towns, Hundreds and Counties, and to erect
and incorporate Towns into Buroughs, and Buroughs into Cities, and to make
and constitute Fairs and Markets therein, with all other convenient Privileges
and Immunities, according to the Merits of the Inhabitants, and the Fitness of
the Places, and to do all and every other Thing and Things touching the
Premises, which to him or them shall seem meet and requisite; albeit they be
such as of their own Nature might otherwise require a more special Commandment
and Warrant than in these Presents is expressed.

SECT. XI.
WE Will also, and by these Presents, for Us, Our Heirs and Successors, We do
give and grant License by this Our Charter, unto the said William Penn, his
Heirs and Assigns, and to all the Inhabitants and Dwellers in the Province
aforesaid, License granted to import the Produce of the Country into England;
both present and to come, to import or unlade, by themselves or their
Servants, Factors or Assigns, all Merchandises and Goods whatsoever, that shall
arise of the Fruits and Commodities of the said Province, either by Land or
Sea, into any of the Ports of Us, Our Heirs or Successors, in Our Kingdom of
England, And to export them from thence within one Year;
and not into any other Country whatsoever: And We give him full Power to
dispose of the said Goods in the said Ports; and if need be, within One Year
next after the Unlading of the same, to lade the said Merchandise and Goods
again into the same or other Ship^, and to transport the same into any other
Countries, either of Our Dominions or Foreign, according to Law; Paying
Customs, and observing the Acts of Navig^tion.
provided always, that they pay such Customs and Impositions, Subsidies and
Duties for the same, to Us, Our Heirs and Successors, as the rest of Our
Subjects of Our Kingdom of England, for the Time being, shall be bound to pay,
and do observe the Acts of Navigation, and other Laws in that Behalf made.

SECT. XII.
AND FURTHERMORE, of Our ample and special Grace, certain Knowledge, and mere
Motion, We do, for Us, Our Heirs and Successors, grant unto the said William
Penn, The Proprietary empowered to constitute Ports*
his Heirs and Assigns, full and absolute Power and Authority, to make, erect,
and constitute, within the said Province and the Isles and Inlets aforesaid,
such and so many Seaports, Harbors* Creeks, Havens, Keys, and other Places,
for Discharging and Unlading of Goods and Merchandises out of the Ships, Boats,
and other Vessels, and Landing the^ unto such and so many Places, and with such
Rights, Jurisdictions, Liberties and Privileges unto the said Ports belonging,
as to him and them shall seem most expedient; and that all and singular the
Ships, Boats, W^ere all Vessels must lade and unlade.
and other Vessels, which shall come for Merchandise and Trade into the said
Province, or out of the same, shall be laden or unladen only at such Ports as
shall be created and constituted by the said William Penn, his Heirs or
Assigns, (any Use, Custom, or Thing to the contrary notwithstanding.) Provided,
Proviso, that the Officers of the King's Customs be admitted.
that the said William Penn and his Heirs, and the Lieutenants and Governors
for the Time being, shall admit and receive in and about all s^^h Havens,
Ports, Creeks and Keys, all Officers and their Deputi^s, who shall from time to
time be appointed for that P^rpose by the Farmers or Commissioners of Our
Customs for the Time being.

SECT. XIII.
AND We do further appoint and ordain, Power to the Proprietary and People to
assess Customs on Goods, etc.
and by these Pr^^^nts, ^or Us, O^r Heirs and Successors, We do grant unto the
s^id William Penn, his Heirs and Assigns, That he, the said William Penn, his
Heirs and Assigns, may from time to time for ever, have and enjoy the Customs
and Subsidies, in the Ports, H^r^ours, and other Creeks and Places aforesaid,
within the Province afor^said, payable or due for Merchandise and Wares there
to be laded and unladed, the said Customs and Subsidies to be reaso^abl^
assessed upon any Occasion, by themselves and the People there as aforesaid to
be assembled, to whom We give Power by these Presents, for Us, Our Heirs and
Successors, Saving to the Crown such Customs as are appointed by Act of
Parliament.
upon just Ca^se and due Proportion, to assess and impose the same; saving unto
Us, Our Heirs and Successors, such Impositions and Customs, as by Act of
Parliament are and shall be appointed.

SECT. XIV.
AND it is Our farther Will and Pleasure, That the said William Penn, his Heirs
and Assigns, The Proprietary shall appoint an Attorney, to reside in (...):
shall from time to time constitute and appoint an Attorney or Agent, to reside
in or near Our City of London, who shall make known the Place where he shall
dwell or may be found, unto the Clerks of Our Privy Council for the Time being,
or one of them, and shall be ready to appear in any of O^r Courts at
Westminster, to answer for any M^sd^meanor that shall be committed, To an^^^^
for any Mis^emeanor. Def^ult, (...).
or by any wilful Default or Neglect permitted by the said William Penn, his
Heirs or Assigns, against the Laws of Trade and Navigation; and after it shall
be ascertained in any of Our said Courts, what Damages We or Our Heirs or
Successors shall have sustained by such Default or Neglect, the said William
Penn, his Heirs or Assigns shall pay the same within One Year after such
Taxation, and Demand thereof from such Attorney: In Case of Failure, the Crown
may resume the Government;
Or in case there shall be no such Attorney by the Space of One Year, or such
Attorney shall not make Payment of such Damages within the Space of a Year, and
answer such other Forfeitures and Penalties within the said Time, as by Acts of
Parliament in England are and shall be provided, according to the true Intent
and Meaning of these Presents; then it shall be lawful for Us, Our Heirs and
Successors, to seize and resume the Government of the said Province or Country,
and the same to retain until Payment shall be made thereof: But the Property of
the People shall not be affected by such Resumption.
But notwithstanding any such Seizure or Resumption of the Government, nothing
concerning the Propriety or Ownership of any Lands, Tenements, or other
Hereditaments, or Goods or Chattels of any of the Adventurers, Planters, or
Owners, other than the respective Offenders there, shall any ways be affected
or molested thereby.

SECT. XV.
No Correspondence shall be maintained with the Enemies of the Crown; nor shall
War be made on any State in Amity.
PROVIDED always, and Our Will and Pleasure is, That neither the said William
Penn, nor his Heirs, or any other the Inhabitants of the said Province, shall
at any Time hereafter have or maintain any Correspondence with any other King,
Prince, or State, or with any of their Subjects, who shall then be in War
against Us, Our Heirs and Successors; nor shall the said William Penn, or his
Heirs, or any other Inhabitants of the said Province, make War or do any Act of
Hostility against any other King, Prince, or State, or any of their Subjects,
who shall then be in League or Amity with Us, Our Heirs and Successors.

SECT. XVI.
AND, because in so remote a Country, and situate near many barbarous Nations,
the Incursions as well of the Savages themselves, as of other Enemies, Pirates
and Robbers, may probably be feared; Power of a Captain General granted.
Therefore We have given, and for Us, Our Heirs and Successors, do give Power
by these Presents to the said William Penn, his Heirs and Assigns, by
themselves or their Captains or other their Officers, to levy, muster and train
all Sorts of Men, of what Condition soever, or wher^so^ver born, in the said
Province of Pensilvania, for the Time being, and to make War, and to pursue the
Enemies and Robbers afor^said, as well by Sea as by Land, even without the
Limits of the sa^^ Province, and by God's Assistance to vanquish and take them,
and being taken to put them to Death by the Law of War, or to save them, at
their Pleasure, and to do all and every other Thing which unto the Charge and
Office of a Captain General of an Army belongs or has accustomed to belong,
as fully and freely as any Captain General of an Army has ever had the same.

SECT. XVII.
AND FURTHERMORE, of Our special Grace and of Our certain Knowledge and mere
Motion, We have given and granted, and by these Presents, for Us, Our Heirs and
Successors, do give and grant unto the said William Penn, his Heirs and
Assigns, full and absolute Power, License and Authority, Power to the
Proprietary to alien the Premises.
that he, the said William Penn, his Heirs and Assigns, from time to time
hereafter for ever, at his or their own Will and Pleasure may assign, alien,
grant, demise, or enfeoff of the Premises so many and such Parts and Parcels to
him or them that shall be willing to purchase the same, as they shall think
fit, to have and to hold to them the said Person and Persons willing to take
and purchase, their Heirs and Assigns, in Fee-simple or Fee-tail, or for the
Term of Life, Lives or Years, to be held of the said William Penn, his Heirs or
Assigns, as of the said Seigniory of Windsor, by such Services, Customs or
Rents, as shall seem meet to the said William Penn, his Heirs or Assigns, and
not immediately of Us, Our Heirs or Successors.

SECT. XVIII.
AND to the same Person or Persons, and to all and every of them, We do give
and grant by these Presents, for Us, Power to the Purchasers to hold by the
Proprietary's Grants.
Our Heirs and Successors, License, Authority and Power, that such Person or
Persons may take the Premises, or any Parcel thereof, of the aforesaid William
Penn, his Heirs or Assigns, and the same hold to themselves, their Heirs and
Assigns, in what Estate of Inheritance soever, in Fee-simple or in Fee-tail, or
otherwise, as to him, the said William Penn, his Heirs or Assigns, shall seem
expedient: The Statute made in the Parliament of EDWARD, Son of King HENRY,
late King of England, Our Predecessor, (commonly called The Statute QUIA
EMPTORES TERRARUM, lately published in Our Kingdom of England) in any wise
notwithstanding.

SECT. XIX.
AND by these Presents We give and grant License unto the said William Penn,
and his Heirs, Leave to erect Manors;
and likewise to all and every such Person or Persons to whom the said William
Penn or his Heirs shall at any Time hereafter grant any Estate or Inheritance
as aforesaid, to erect any Parcels of Land within the Province aforesaid into
Manors, by and with the License to be first had and obtained for that Purpose,
under the Hand and Seal of the said William Penn or his Heirs; and in every of
the said Manors to have and to hold a Court Baron, with all Things whatsoever
which to a Court Baron do belong, And to hold Courts therein; etc.
and to have and to hold View of Frank-Pledge for the Conservation of the Peace
and the better Government of th^se Parts, by themselves or their Stewards, or
by the Lords for the Time being of the Manors to be deputed when they shall be
erected, and in the same to use all Things belonging to the View of
Frank-Pledge. The Person erecting a Manor may grant his Land to others, in any
Estate, so as no farther Tenure be created, etc.
AND We do further grant License and Authority, That every such Person or
Persons who shall erect any such Manor or Manors, as aforesaid, shall or may
grant all or any Part of his said Land to any Person or Persons, in Fee-simple,
or any other Estate of Inheritance to be held of the said Manors respectively,
so as no farther Tenure shall be created, but that upon all further or other
Alienations thereafter to be made, the said Lands so aliened shall be held of
the same Lord and his Heirs, of whom the Aliener did then before hold, and by
the like Rents and Services which were before due and accustomed.

SECT. XX.
AND FURTHERMORE Our Pleasure is, and by these Presents, for Us, Our Heirs and
Successors, We do covenant and grant to and with the said William Penn, No
Taxes etc. to be imposed on the People, without their Consent, or Act of
Parliament.
his Heirs and Assigns, That We, Our Heirs and Successors, shall at no Time
hereafter set or make, or cause to be set or made, any Imposition, Custom or
other Taxation, Rate or Contribution whatsoever, in and upon the Dwellers and
Inhabitants of the aforesaid Province, for their Lands, Tenements, Goods or
Chattels within the said Province, or in and upon any Goods and Merchandises
within the Provincs, or to be laden or unladen within the Ports or Harbors of
the said Province, unless the same be with the Consent of the Proprietary, or
chief Governor, or Assembly, or by Act of Parliament in England.

SECT. XXI.
AND Our Pleasure is, and for Us, Our Heirs and Successors, We charge and
command, That this Our Declaration shall from henceforth from time to time be
received and allowed in all Our Courts, This Declaration shall be deemed an
Acquittance;
and before all the Judges of Us, Our Heirs and Successors, for a sufficient
lawful Discharge, Payment and Acquittance; commanding all the Officers and
Ministers of Us, Our Heirs and Successors, And all Officers etc. are enjoined
not to withstand the Premises, but to aid the Proprietary and People, etc. in
the full Enjoyment of this Charter.
and enjoining them upon Pain of Our highest Displeasure, that they do not
presume at any Time to attempt any thing to the contrary of the Premises, or
that do in any sort withstand the same, but that they be at all Times aiding
and assisting, as is fitting, to the said William Penn, and his Heirs, and unto
the Inhabitants and Merchants of the Province aforesaid, their Servants,
Ministers, Factors and Assigns, in the full Use and Fruition of the Benefit of
this Our Charter.

SECT. XXII.
Twenty of the Inhabitants petitioning the Bishop of London, may have a
Preacher, who shall reside in the Province unmolested
AND Our farther Pleasure is, and We do hereby, for Us, Our Heirs and
Successors, charge and require, That if any of the Inhabitants of the said
Province, to the Number of Twenty, shall at any Time hereafter be desirous, and
shall by any Writing, or by any Person deputed by them, signify such their
Desire to the Bishop of London for the Time being, That any Preacher or
Preachers, to be approved of by the said Bishop, may be sent unto them for
their Instruction; that then such Preacher or Preachers shall and may reside
within the said Province, without any Denial or Molestation whatsoever.

SECT. XXIII.
AND if perchance hereafter any Doubt or Question should arise, concerning the
true Sense and Meaning of any Word, If any (...) concerning the true Sense of
this Charter, should arise, it shall be construed in favor of William Penn.
(...)
Clause, or Sentence contained in this Our present Charter, We will, ordain,
and command, That at all Times and in all Things, such Interpretation be made
thereof, and allowed in any of Our Courts whatsoever, as shall be adjudged most
advantageous and favorable unto the said William Penn, his Heirs and Assigns:
Provided always no Interpretation be admitted thereof by which the Allegiance
due unto Us, Our Heirs and Successors, may suffer any Prejudi^e or Diminution;
although express Mention be not made in these Presents of the true yearly
Value, or Certainty of the Premises, or any Part thereof, or of other Gifts and
Grant^ made by Us and Our Progenitors or Predecessors unto the said William
Penn: Any Statute, Act, Ordinance, Provision, Proclamation, or Restraint
heretofore had, made, published, ordained or provided, or any other Thing,
Cause, or Matter whatsoever, to the contrary thereof in any wise
notwithstanding. IN WITNESS whereof We have caused these Our Letters to be made
Patent: Witness OUR SELF, at Westminster, Date.
the Fourth Day of March, in the Three and thirtieth Year of Our Reign, Annoque
Domini One Thousand Six Hundred and Eighty-one.

By Writ of Privy Seal, PIGOTT.

CERTAIN CONDITIONS or CONCESSIONS Agreed upon by WILLIAM PENN, Proprietary and
Governor of the Province of Pensilvania, and those who are the Adventurers and
Purchasers in the same P^ovince; the Eleventh of July, One Thousand Six Hundred
and Eighty-one.
FIRST.
THAT so soon as it pleases God, Ground for a (...) to be (...)
that the abovesaid Persons arrive there, a certain Quantity of Land or Ground
Plat shall be laid out for a large Town or City, in the most convenient Place
upon the River for Health and Navigation; and every Purchaser and Adventurer
shall, by Lot, have so much Land therein as will answer to the Proportion which
^e has bought or taken up upon Rent: But it is to be noted, that the Surveyors
shall consider what Roads or Highways will be necessary to the Cities, Towns,
or through the Lands. Great Roads from City to City not to contain less than
Forty Foot in Breadth, Highways and Streets not to be less than 40 Feet wide.
shall be first laid out and declared to be for Highways, before the Dividend
of Acres be laid out for the Purchaser, (...) the like Observation to be had
for the Streets in the Towns and Cities, that there may be convenient Roads and
Streets preserved, not to be incroached upon by any Planter or Builder, that
none may build irregularly to the Damage of another. In this, Custom gov^^ns.

II.
Land in Town to be laid out in Proportion to the Land taken up in the Country,
etc.
THAT the Land in the Town be laid out together afte^ the Proportion of Ten
Thousand Acres of the whole Country, that is, Two Hundred Acres, if the Place
will bear it: However, that the Proportion be by Lot, and entire, so as those
that desire to be together, especially those that are by the Catalogue laid
together, may be so laid together both in the Town and Country.

III.
No Purchaser to hold above 1000 Acres in a Place, unsettled, etc.
THAT when the Country-Lots are laid out, every Purchaser, from One Thousand to
Ten Thousand Acres, or more, not to have above One Thousand Acres together,
unless in Thre^ Years they plant a Family upon every Thousand Acres; but that
all such as purchase together, lie together* and if as many as comply with this
Condition, that the whole be laid out together.

IV.
Purchaser^ of 5^00 or 10000 Acres, des^ring to be together, shall be s^^ted
near navig^ble Water, and^.
THAT where any Number of Purchasers, more or less* whose Number of Acres
amounts to Five or Ten Thousand Acr^^, desire to sit together in a Lot or
Township, they shall have their Lot or Township cast together, in such Places
as have convenient Harbors or navigable Rivers attending it, if such can be
found; and in Case any one or more Purchasers plant not according to Agreement
in this Concession, to the Prejudice of others of the same Township, upon
Complaint thereof made to the Governor or his Deputy, Purchasers not planting,
others may be invested in their Land^, etc.
with Assistance, they may award (if they see Cause) that the complaining
Purchaser may* paying the Survey-Money, and Purchase-Money, and Interes^
thereof, be entitled, enrolled and lawfully invested in the Lands so not seated.

V.
Ten Acre^ in the City to be laid out for every Purchaser of ^00.
THAT the Proportion of Lands that shall be laid out in the first great Town or
City, for every Purchaser, shall be after the Proportion of Ten Acres for every
Five Hundred Acres purchased, if the Place will allow it.

VI.
THAT notwithstanding there be no mention made in the several Deeds made to the
Purchasers, Grant of P^^^iculars not mentioned in the Purchase-Deeds.
yet the said William Penn does accord and declare, that all Rivers, Rivulets,
Woods and Underwoods, Waters, Watercourse, Quarries, Mines and Minerals
(except Mines Royal) shall be freely and fully enjoyed, and wholly, by the
Purchasers into whose Lot they fall.

VII.
THAT for every Fifty Acres that shall be allotted to a Servant at the End of
his Service, Quit-rent on the 50 Acres allotted to Servants, etc.
his Quit-Rent shall be Two Shillings per Annum, and the Master or Owner of the
Servant, when he shall take up the other Fifty Acres, his Quit-Rent shall be
Four Shillings by the Year, or if the Master of the Servant (by Reason in the
Indentures he is so obliged to do) allot out to the Servant Fifty Acres in his
own Division, the said Master shall have on Demand allotted him, from the
Governor, the One Hundred Acres at the chief Rent of Six Shillings per Annum.

VIII.
AND for the Encouragement of such, Gold-and Silver-Mines, how to be divided.
as are ingenious and willing to search out Gold-and Silver-Mines in this
Province, it is hereby agreed, that they have Liberty to bore and dig in any
Man's Property, fully paying the Damage done; and in Case a Discovery should be
made, that the Discoverer have one Fifth, the Owner of the Soil (if not the
Discoverer) a Tenth Part, the Governor Two Fifths, and the rest to the public
Treasury, saving to the King the Share reserved by Patent.

IX.
IN every Hundred Thousand Acres, Reservation of 10 Acres in every 100000.
the Governor and Proprietary, by Lot, reserveth Ten to himself, what shall lie
but in one Place.

X.
THAT every Man shall be bound to plant or man so much of his Share of Land as
shall be set out and surveyed, (...)
within Three Years after it is so set out and surveyed, or else it shall be
lawful for new Comers to be settled thereupon, paying to them their
Survey-Money, and they go up higher for their Shares.

XI.
THERE shall be no Buying and Selling, Buying and Selling to be in public
Market only.
be it with an Indian, or one among another, of any Goods to be exported, but
what shall be performed in public Market, when such Places shall be set apart
or erected, where they shall pass the public Stamp or Mark. If bad Ware, and
prized as good, Forfeitures in Case of Deceit.
or deceitful in Proportion or Weight, to forfeit the Value as if good and full
Weight and Proportion, to the public Treasury of the Province, whether it be
the Merchandise of the Indian, or that of the Planters.

XII.
AND FORASMUCH as it is usual with the Planters, to overreach the poor Natives
of the Country in Trade, by Goods not being good of the Kind, or debased with
Mixtures, with which they are sensibly aggrieved, it is agreed, whatever is
sold to the Indians, Goods sold to the Indians, shall be examined, etc.
in Consideration of their Furs, shall be sold in the Marketplace, and there
suffer the Test, whether good or bad; if good, to pass; if not good, not to be
sold for good, that the Natives may not be abused nor provoked.

XIII.
Indians not to be abused.
THAT no Man shall, by any Ways or Means, in Word or Deed, affront or wrong any
Indian, but he shall incur the same Penalty of the Law, as if he had committed
it against his Fellow-Planter; Planter abused by Indians, shall complain to the
Governor, etc.
and if any Indian shall abuse, in Word or Deed, any Planter of this Province,
that he shall not be his own Judge upon the Indian, but he shall make his
Complaint to the Governor of the Province, or his Lieutenant or Deputy, or some
inferior Magistrate near him, who shall, to the utmost of his Power, take Care
with the King of the said Indian, that all reasonable Satisfaction be made to
the said injured Planter.

XIV.
Differences between Planters and Natives, to be ended by 6 of each.
THAT all Differences between the Planters and the Natives, shall also be ended
by Twelve Men, that is, by Six Planters and Six Natives, that so we may live
friendly together as much as in us lies, preventing all Occasions of
Heart-burnings and Mischief.

XV.
Indians have Liberty to improve their own Ground, etc.
THAT the Indians shall have Liberty to do all Things relating to Improvement of
their Ground, and providing Sustenance for their Families, that any of the
Planters shall enjoy.

XVI.
The Laws in several Cases to be as in England, till altered.
THAT the Laws, as to Slanders, Drunkenness, Swearing, Cursing, Pride in
Apparel, Trespasses, Distresses, Replevins, Weights and Measures, shall be the
same as in England, till altered by Law in this Province.

XVII.
All Cattle shall be marked, or else forfeited.
THAT all shall mark their Hogs, Sheep and other Cattle, and what are not marked
within Three Months after it is in their Possession, be it young or old, it
shall be forfeited to the Governor, that so People may be compelled to avoid
the Occasion of much Strife between Planters.

XVIII.
One Acre of Wood to be left for every 5 cleared.
THAT in clearing the Ground, Care be taken to leave One Acre of Trees for every
Five Acres cleared, especially to preserve Oak and Mulberries, for Silk and
Shipping.

XIX.
Ship-Masters shall give an Account of their Circumstances, etc. to an Officer,
etc.
THAT all Ship-Masters shall give an Account of their Countries, Names, Ships,
Owners, Freights and Passengers, to an Officer to be appointed for that
Purpose, which shall be registered within Two Days after their Arrival; and if
they shall refuse so to do, that then non^ presum^ to trade with them, upon
Forfeiture thereof; and that such Masters be looked upon as having an evil
Intention to the Province.

XX.
THAT no Person leave the Province, without Publication being made thereof, in
the Marketplace, Three Weeks before, and a Certificate from some Justice of
the Peace, of his Clearness with his Neighbors and those he has dealt withal,
so far as such an Assurance can be attained and given: And if any Mas^er of a
Ship shall, contrary hereunto, receive and carry away any Person that has not
given that public Notice, the said Master shall be liable to all Debts owing
by the said Person so secretly transported from the Province. Lastly, that
these are to be added to, or corrected, by and with the Consent of the Parties
hereunto subscrib^d.

Sealed and delivered in the Presence of WILLIAM PENN.
William B^elham,
Harbert Springet.
Thomas Prudyard,
Sealed and delivered in the Presence of all the Proprietors who have hereunto
subscribed, except Thomas Farrinborrough and John Goodson, in the Presence of
Hugh Chamberlen,
R. Murray,
Harbert Springet,
Humphry South,
Thomas Barker,
Samuel Jobson,
John Joseph Moore,
William Powel,
Richard Davie,
Griffith Jones,
Hugh Lamb,
Thomas Far^inborrough,
John Goodson.

THE CHARTER of PRIVILEGES Granted by WILLIAM PENN, Esquire to the Inhabitants of
Pensilvania and Territories.
WILLIAM PENN, Proprietary and Governor of the Province of Pensilvania and
Territories thereunto belonging, To all to whom these Presents shall come,
sends Gree^^ng. Preamble.
WHEREAS King CHARLES the (...), by His L^tters Pa^ents, under the Great Seal
of England, (...) D^te the (...) Day of M^rch, in the Year One Thousand (...)
Hundred and ^igh^y, was graciously pleased to give and grant unto me, and my
Heirs and Assigns for ever, this Province of Pensilvania, with diverse great
Powers and Jurisdictions for the well Government thereof.

AND WHEREAS the King's dearest Brother, JAMES Duk of YORK and ALBANY, etc. by
his Deeds of ^eoffment, under his Hand and Seal duly perfected, bearing Date
the Twenty-Fourth Day of August, One Thousand Six Hundred Eighty and Two, did
grant unto me, my Heirs and Assigns, all that Tract of Land, now called the
Territories of Pensilvania, together with Powers and Jurisdictions for the good
Government thereof.

AND WHEREAS for the Encouragement of all the Freemen and Planters, that might
be concerned in the said Province and Territories, and for the good Government
thereof, I the said WILLIAM PENN, in the Year One Thousand Six Hundred Eighty
and Three, for me, my Heirs and Assigns, did grant and confirm unto all the
Freemen, Planters and Adventurers therein, diverse Liberties, Franchises and
Properties, as by the said Grant, entitled, The FRAME of the Government of the
Province of Pensilvania, and Territories thereunto belonging, in America, may
appear; which Charter or Frame being found in some Parts of it, not so suitable
to the present Circumstances of the Inhabitants, was in the Third Month, in the
Year One Thousand Seven Hundred, delivered up to me, by Six Parts of Seven of
the Freemen of this Province and Territories, in General Assembly met,
Provision being made in the said Charter, for that End and Purpose.

AND WHEREAS I was then pleased to promise, That I would restore the said
Charter to them again, with necessary Alterations, or in lieu thereof, give
them another, better adapted to answer the present Circumstances and Conditions
of the said Inhabitants; which they have now, by their Representative^ in
General Assembly met at Philadelphia, requested me to grant.

KNOW YE THEREFORE, That for the further Well-being and good Government of the
said Province, and Territories; and in Pursuance of the Rights and Powers
beforementioned, I the said William Penn do declare, grant and confirm, unto
all the Freemen, Planters and Adventurers, and other Inhabitants in this
Province and Territories, these following Liberties, Franchises and Privileges,
so far as in me lies, to be held, enjoyed and kept, by the Freemen, Planters
and Adventurers, and other Inhabitants of and in the said Province and
Territories thereunto annexed, for ever.

FIRST.
BECAUSE no People can be truly happy, though under the greatest Enjoyment of
Civil Liberties, No Person believing in One GOD, etc. shall be molested on
Account of his Religious Persuasion*
if abridged of the Freedom of their Consciences, as to their Religious
Profession and Worship: And Almighty God being the only Lord of Conscience,
Father of Lights and Spirits; and the Author as well as Object of all divine
Knowledge, Faith and Worship, who only does enlighten the Minds, and persuade
and convince the Understandings of People, I do hereby grant and declare, That
no Person or Persons, inhabiting in this Province or Territories, who shall
confess and acknowledge One almighty God, the Creator, Upholder and Ruler of
the World; and profess him or themselves obliged to live quietly under the
Civil Government, shall be in any Case molested or prejudiced, Nor be compelled
to frequent or maintain any Worship contrary to his Mind, etc.
in his or their Person or Estate, because of his or their conscientious
Persuasion or Practice, nor be compelled to frequent or maintain any religious
Worship, Place or Ministry, contrary to his or their Mind, or to do or suffer
any other Act or Thing, contrary to their religious Persuasion.

AND that all Persons who also profess to believe in Jesus Christ, the Savior
of the World, Christians of all Denominations are capable of Offices, promising
Allegiance to the King, etc.
shall be capable (notwithstanding their other Persuasions and Practices in
Point of Conscience and Religion) to serve this Government in any Capacity,
both legislatively and executively, he or they solemnly promising, when
lawfully required, Allegiance to the King as Sovereign, and Fidelity to the
Proprietary and Governor, and taking the Attests as now established by the Law
made at New Castle, in the Year One Thousand and Seven Hundred, entitled, An
Act directing the Attests of several Officers and Ministers, as now amended and
confirmed this present Assembly.

II.
FOR the well governing of this Province and Territories, An Assembly shall be
chosen yearly.
there shall be an Assembly yearly chosen, by the Freemen thereof, to consist
of Four Persons out of each County, of most Note for Virtue, Wisdom and
Ability, (or of a greater Number at any Time, as the Governor and Assembly
shall agree) upon the First Day of October for ever; and shall sit on the
Fourteenth Day of the same Month, at Philadelphia, unless the Governor and
Council for the Time being, shall see Cause to appoint another Place within the
said Province or Territories: Their Powers and Privileges.
Which Assembly shall have Power to choose a Speaker and other their Officers;
and shall be Judges of the Qualifications and Elections of their own Members;
sit upon their own Adjournments; appoint Committees; prepare Bills in order to
pass into Laws; impeach Criminals, and redr^ss Grievances; and shall have all
other Powers and Privileges (...) an Assembly, according to the Rights of the
freeborn Subjects of England, and as is usual in any of the King's Plantations
in America.

AND if any County or Counties, shall refuse or neglect to choose their
respective Representatives as aforesaid, or if chosen, Two Thirds met shall
have the Power of the whole.
do not meet to serve in Assembly, those who are so chosen and met, shall have
the full Power of an Assembly, in as ample Manner as if all the Representatives
had been chosen and met, provided they are not less than Two Thirds of the
whole Number that ought to meet.

The Qualifications of Electors and Elected.
AND that the Qualifications of Electors and Elected, and all other Matters and
Things relating to Elections of Representatives to serve in Assemblies, though
not herein particularly expressed, shall be and remain as by a Law of this
Government, made at New Castle in the Year One ^^ousand Seven Hundred,
entitled, An Act to ascertain the Number (...) M^mbers of Assembly, and to
regulate the Elections.

III.
Power to choose Sheriffs and Coroners.
THAT the Freemen in each respective County, at the Time and Place of Meeting
for Electing their Representatives to serve in Assembly, may as often as there
shall be Occasion, choose a double Number of Persons to present to the Governor
for Sheriffs and Coroners, to serve for Three Years, if so long they behave
themselves well; out of which respective Elections and Presentiments, the
Governor shall nominate and commissionate one for each of the said Offices, the
Third Day after such Presentment, or else the First named in such Presentment,
for each Office as aforesaid, shall stand and serve in that Office for the Time
before respectively limited; and in Case of Death or Default, such Vacancies
shall be supplied by the Governor, to serve to the End of the said Term.

PROVIDED ALWAYS, That if the said Freemen shall at any Time neglect or decline
to choose a Person or Persons for either or both the aforesaid Offices, then and
in such Case, the Persons that are or shall be in the respective Offices of
Sheriffs or Coroners, at the Time of Election, shall remain therein, until they
shall be removed by another Election as aforesaid.

Clerk of the Peace to be nominated by the Justices, etc.
AND that the Justices of the respective Counties shall or may nominate and
present to the Governor Three Persons, to serve for Clerk of the Peace for the
said County, when there is a Vacancy, one of which the Governor shall
commissionate within Ten Days after such Presentment, or else the First
nominated shall serve in the said Office during good Behavior.

IV.
Style of the Laws.
THAT the Laws of this Government shall be in this Style, viz. By the Governor,
with the Consent and Approbation of the Freemen in General Assembly met; and
shall be, after Confirmation by the Governor, forthwith recorded in the Rolls
Office, and kept at Philadelphia, unless the Governor and Assembly shall agree
to appoint another Place.

V.
THAT all Criminals shall have the same Privileges of Witnesses and Council as
their Prosecutors. Criminals may have Council, etc.


VI.
THAT no Person or Persons shall or may, at any Time hereafter, be obliged to
answer any Complaint, Matter or Thing whatsoever, relating to Property, None
shall be be obliged to answer, but in ordinary Course of Justice.
before the Governor and Council, or in any other Place, but in ordinary Course
of Justice, unless Appeals thereunto shall be hereafter by Law appointed.

VII.
THAT no Person within this Government, shall be licensed by the Governor to
keep an Ordinary, Tavern keepers, etc. to be recommended before licensed.
Tavern or House of public Entertainment, but such who are first recommended
to him, under the Hands of the Justices of the respective Counties, ^igned in
open Court; which Justices are and shall be hereby empowered, to suppress and
forbid any Person, keeping such Publick-House as aforesaid, upon their
Misbehaviour, on such Penalties as the Law does or shall direct; and to
recommend others from time to time, as they shall see Occasion.

VIII.
IF any Person, through Temptation or Melancholy, The Estate of Persons
destroying themselves, shall descend to their Heirs.
shall destroy himself; his Estate, real and personal, shall notwithstanding
descend to his Wife and Children, or Relations, as if he had died a natural
Death; and if any Person shall be destroyed or killed by Casualty or Accident,
there shall be no Forfeiture to the Governor by Reason thereof.

AND no Act, Law or Ordinance whatsoever, shall at any Time hereafter, be made
or done, to alter, No Law, etc. shall alter this Charter, without etc.
change or diminish the Form or Effect of this Charter, or of any Part or
Clause therein, contrary to the true Intent and Meaning thereof, without the
Consent of the Governor for the Time being, and Six Parts of Seven of the
Assembly met.

BUT because the Happiness of Mankind depends so much upon the Enjoying of
Liberty of their Consciences as aforesaid, The Article relating to Liberty of
Conscience, shall be inviolable for ever.
I do hereby solemnly declare, promise and grant, for me, my Heirs and Assigns,
That the First Article of this Charter relating to Liberty of Conscience, and
every Part and Clause therein, according to the true Intent and Meaning
thereof, shall be kept and remain, without any Alteration, inviolably for ever.

AND LASTLY, I the said William Penn, Proprietary and Governor of the Province
of Pensilvania, and Territories thereunto belonging, for myself, my Heirs and
Assigns, have solemnly declared, granted and confirmed, and do hereby solemnly
declare, grant and confirm, That neither I, my Heirs or Assigns, The
Proprietary solemnly confirms this Charter.
shall procure or do any Thing or Things whereby the Liberties in this Charter
contained and expressed, nor any Part thereof, shall be infringed or broken:
And if any thing shall be procured or done, by any Person or Persons, contrary
to these Presents, it shall be held of no Force or Effect.

IN WITNESS whereof, I the said William Penn, at Philadelphia in Pensilvania,
have unto this present Charter of Liberties, set my Hand and broad Seal, Date.
this Twenty-Eighth Day of October, in the Year of Our Lord One Thousand Seven
Hundred and One, being the Thirteenth Year of the Reign of King WILLIAM the
Third, over England, Scotland, France and Ireland, etc. and the Twenty-First
Year of my Government.

Proviso, that the Province and Territories may separate in Legislation;
AND NOTWITHSTANDING the Closure and Test of this present Charter as aforesaid,
I think fit to add this following Proviso thereunto, as Part of the same, That
is to say, That notwithstanding any Clause or Clauses in the abovementioned
Charter, obliging the Province and Territories to join together in Legislation,
I am content, and do hereby declare, that if the Representatives of the
Province and Territories shall not hereafter agree to join together in
Legislation, and that the same shall be signified unto me, or my Deputy, in
open Assembly, or otherwise from under the Hands and Seals of the
Representatives, for the Time being, of the Province and Territories, or the
major Part of either of them, at any Time within Three Years from the Date
hereof, that in such Case, the Inhabitants of each of the Three Counties of
this Province, shall not have less than Eight Persons to represent them in
Assembly, for the Province; and the Inhabitants of the Town of Philadelphia
(when the said Town is incorporated) Two Persons to represent them in Assembly;
and the Inhabitants of each County in the Territories, shall have as many
Persons to represent them in a distinct Assembly for the Territories, as shall
be by them requested as aforesaid.

And shall nevertheless enjoy separately the Privileges granted to them jointly.
NOTWITHSTANDING which Separation of the Province and Territories, in Respect of
Legislation, I do hereby promise, grant and declare, That the Inhabitants of
both Province and Territories, shall separately enjoy all other Liberties,
Privileges and Benefits, granted jointly to them in this Charter, any Law,
Usage or Custom of this Government heretofore made and practiced, or any Law
made and passed by this General Assembly, to the Contrary hereof,
notwithstanding.

WILLIAM PENN.
Acceptance.
THIS CHARTER of PRIVILEGES being distinctly read in Assembly; and the whole
and every Part thereof, being approved of and agreed to, by us, we do
thankfully receive the same from our Proprietary and Governor, at Philadelphia,
this Twenty-Eighth Day of October, One Thousand Seven Hundred and One. Signed
on Behalf, and by Order of the Assembly,

per Joseph Growdon, Speaker.
Edward Shippen, Proprietary and Governor's Council.
Phineas Pemberton, Proprietary and Governor's Council.
Samuel Carpenter, Proprietary and Governor's Council.
Griffith Owen, Proprietary and Governor's Council.
Caleb Pusey, Proprietary and Governor's Council.
Thomas Story. Proprietary and Governor's Council.



THE CHARTER of the City of PHILADELPHIA.
WILLIAM PENN, Proprietary and Governor of the Province of Pensilvania, etc. To
all to whom these Presents shall come, sends Greeting. KNOW YE, That at the
humble Request of the Inhabitants and Settlers of this Town of Philadelphia,
Philadelphia incorporated at the Request of the Inhabitants.
being some of the first Adventurers and Purchasers within this Province, for
their Encouragement, and for the more immediate and entire Government of the
said Town, and better Regulation of Trade therein, I have, by Virtue of the
King's Letters Patent under the Great Seal of England, erected the said Town
into a Borough, and by these Presents do erect the said Town and Borough of
Philadelphia into a CITY; which said City shall extend the Limits and Bounds as
it is laid out between Delaware and Skuylkill. Bound.


AND I do for me, my Heirs and Assigns, grant and ordain, The Streets shall
continue as laid out, and the Ends on Delaware free, etc.
that the Streets of the said City shall for ever continue as they are now laid
out and regulated; and that the End of each Street extending into the River
Delaware, shall be and continue free for the Use and Service of the said City,
and the Inhabitants thereof, who may improve the same for the best Advantage of
the City, and build Wharfs so far out into the River there, as the Mayor,
Aldermen and Common Council, herein after mentioned, shall see meet.

AND I do nominate Edward Shippen to be the present Mayor, who shall so
continue until another be chosen, First Mayor named*
as is herein after directed.

AND I do hereby assign and name Thomas Story to be present Recorder, Recorder.
to do and execute all Things which unto the Office of Recorder of the said
City does or may belong.

AND I do appoint Thomas Farmar to be the present Sheriff, Sheriff and Clerk,
and Robert Assheton to be the present Town Clerk, and Clerk of the Peace, and
Clerk of the Court and Courts.

AND I do hereby name, Alderm^n*
constitute and appoint Joshua Carpenter, Griffith Jones, Anthony Morris,
Joseph Wilcox, Nathan St^^bury, Charles Rea^, Thomas Masters and William
Carter, Citizens and Inhabitants of the said City, to be the present Aldermen
of the said City of Philadelphia.

And Common-Council-Men.
AND I do also nominate and appoint John Parsons, William Hudson, William Lee,
Nehemiah Allen, Thomas Paschal, John Bud, Junior, Edward Smout, Samuel Buckley,
James Atkinson, Pentecost Teague, Francis Cook and Henry Badcocke, to be the
Twelve present Common-Council-Men of the said City.

Incorporating Clause.
AND I do by these Presents, for me, my Heirs and Successors, give, grant and
declare, that the said Mayor, Recorder, Aldermen and Common-Council-Men for the
Time being, and they which hereafter shall be Mayor, Recorder, Aldermen and
Common-Council-Men within the said City, and their Successors, for ever
hereafter, be and shall be, by Virtue of these Presents, one Body corporate and
politic in Deed, and by the Name of the Mayor and Commonalty of the City of
Philadelphia, in the Province of Pensilvania: And them by the Name of Mayor and
Commonalty of the City of Philadelphia, one Body politic and corporate in Deed
and in Name, I do for me, my Heirs and Successors, fully create, constitute and
confirm, by these Presents; and that by the same Name of Mayor and Commonalty
of the City of Philadelphia, they may have perpetual Succession; and that they
and their Successors, by the Name of Mayor and Commonalty of the City of
Philadelphia, be and at all Times hereafter shall be Persons able and capable
in Law, Power to hold Lands, etc.
to have, get* receive and possess Lands and Tenements, Rents, Liberties,
Jurisdictions, Franchises and Hereditaments, to them and their Successors, in
Fee-simple, or for Term of Life, Lives, Years or otherwise; and also Goods,
Chattels and other Things, of what Nature, Kind or Quality soever.

And to sell or dispose of the same, etc.
AND also to give, grant, let, sell and assign the same Lands, Tenements,
Hereditaments, Goods, Chattels, and to do and execute all other Things about
the same, by the Name aforesaid; and also, that they be and shall be for ever
hereafter Persons able and capable in Law, to sue and be sued, plead and be
impleaded, answer and be answered unto, defend and be defended, in all or any
the Courts and other Places, and before any Judges, Justices, and other Persons
whatsoever within the said Province, in all Manner of Actions, Suits,
Complaints, Pleas, Causes and Matters whatsoever, and of what Nature or Kind
soever.

Seal.
AND that it shall and may be lawful to and for the said Mayor and Commonalty of
the said City of Philadelphia, and their Successors, for ever hereafter, to
have and use one common Seal for the Sealing of all Businesses touching the
said Corporation, and the same from time to time at their Will and Pleasure to
change or alter.

AND I do for me, my Heirs and Successors, give, and by these Presents grant
full Power and Authority unto the Mayor, Power of ch^sing a Mayor y^^rly.
Recorder and Common Council of the said City of Philadelphia, or any Five or
more of the Aldermen, and Nine or more of the Common-Council-Men, the Mayor and
Recorder for the Time being, or either of them, being present, on the First
Third Day of the Week, in the Eighth Month yearly for ever hereafter, publicly
to meet at a convenient Room or Place within the said City, to be by them
appointed for that Purpose, and then and there nominate, elect and choose one of
the Aldermen to be Mayor for that ensuing Year.

AND also to add to the Number of Aldermen and Common-Council-Men, And adding
to the Number of Aldermen and Common Council.
such and so many of those, that by Virtue of these Presents shall be admitted
Freemen of the said City from time to time, as they the said Mayor, Aldermen
and Common Council shall see Occasion.

AND that such Person who shall be so elected Mayor as ^foresaid, shall, within
Three Days next after such Election, Mayor to be qualified before the Governor
be presented before the Governor of this Province, or his Deputy for the Time
being, and there shall subscribe the Declarations and Profession of his
Christian Belief, according to the late Act of Parliament made in the First
Year of King William's Reign, entitled, An Act for exempting Their Majesty's
Subjects, dissenting from the Church of England, from the Penalties of certain
Laws; and then and there the Mayor so presented, shall make his solemn
Affirmation and Eng^gement for the due Execution of his Office.

AND that the Recorder, Sheriff, Recorder, etc. to be qualified before the Mayor
Aldermen and Common-Council-Men, and all other Officers of the said City,
before they or any of them shall be admitted to execute their respective
Offices, shall make and subscribe the said Declarations and Profession
aforesaid before the Mayor for the Time being, and at the same time shall be
attested for the due Execution of their Offices respectively; which
Declarations, Promises and Attestations, the Mayor of the said City for the
Time being, is hereby empowered to take and administer accordingly.

AND that the Mayor, Mayor, Recorder and Aldermen, shall be Justices of the
Peace, and of Oyer and Terminer.
Recorder and Aldermen of the said City, for the Time being, shall the Justices
of the Peace and Justices of Oyer and Terminer; and are hereby empowered to act
within the said City and Liberties thereof accordingly, as fully and amply as
any Justice or Justices of the Peace or Oyer and Terminer, can or may do within
the said Province.

AND that they or any Four or more of them (whereof the Mayor and Recorder of
the said City for the Time being shall be Two) shall and may for ever hereafter
have Power and Authority, And have Power to hea^ and enquire into all Crime^.
and^.
by Virtue of these Presents, to hear and enquire into all and all Manner of
Treasons, Murders, Manslaughters, and all Manner of Felonies and other Crimes
and Offenses, Capital and Criminal, what^oever, according to the Laws of this
Province and of the Kingdom of England, And to determine petty Larcenies, etc.
and punish Drunkenness, etc.
with Power also to hear and determine all petty Larcenies, Routs, Riots,
unlawful Assemblies; and to try and punish all Persons that shall be convicted
for Drunkenness, Swearing, Scolding, Breaking the Peace, or such like Offenses,
which are by the Laws of this Province to be punished by Fine, Imprisonment or
Whipping; with Power also to award Process against all Rioters and Breakers of
the Peace, and to bind them, and all other Offenders and Persons of evil Fame,
to the Peace or good Behavior, as any Justice or Justices of the Peace can do,
Without being accountable to the Proprietary for the Fines.
without being accountable to me or my Heirs, for any Fines or Amerciaments to
be imposed for the said Offenses or any of them.

Power to hold Courts.
AND I do hereby empower them or any Four of them (whereof the Mayor and
Recorder for the Time being shall be Two) with the City-Sheriff and Town Clerk,
to hold and keep a Court of Record Quarterly, or oftener, if they see Occasion,
for the enquiring, hearing and determining of the Pleas and Matters aforesaid;
and upon their own View, or after a legal Procedure in some of those Courts, to
cause all Nuisances and Encroachments in the Streets of the said City to be
removed, and punish the Parties concerned, as the Law and Usage in such Cases
shall require.

AND I do by these Presents assign and appoint, that the present Mayor,
Recorder and Aldermen herein beforementioned, be the present Justices of the
Peace, and Oyer and Terminer, within the said City; and that they and all
others that shall be Mayors, Recorders and Aldermen of the said City for the
Time being, shall have full Power and Authority, and are hereby empowered and
authorized, without any further or other Commission, to be Justices of the
Peace, and of Oyer and Terminer, within the said City for ever; and shall also
be Justices of the Peace, Mayor, Recorder and Aldermen shall be of the Quorum
of the County-Courts, etc.
and the Mayor and Recorder shall be of the Quorum of the Justices of the
County-Courts, Quarter Sessions, Oyer and Terminer, and Jail-delivery in the
said County of Philadelphia; and shall have full Power to award Process, bind
to the Peace or Behavior, or commit to Prison, for any Matter or Cause arising
without the said City and within the Body of the aforesaid County, as Occasion
shall require; and to cause Kalenders to be made of such Prisoners, which,
together with all Recognizances and Examinations taken before them for or
concerning any Matter or Cause not determinable by them, shall be duly returned
to the Judges or Justices of the said County, in their respective Courts where
the same shall be cognizable.

Power to erect a Goal- and Courthouse.
AND that it may be lawful to and for the said Mayor and Commonalty and their
Successors, when they see Occasion, to erect a Goal or Prison and Courthouse
within the said City.

AND that the Mayor and Recorder for the Time being, Power to take Recognizance
of Debts*
shall have, and by these Presents have Power to take Recognizance of Debts
there, according to the Statute of Merchants, and of Action Burnel; and to use
and affix the common Seal thereupon, and to all Certificates concerning the
same.

AND that it be lawful to and for the Mayor of the said City for the Time
being, for ever hereafter to nominate, And to appoint a Clerk of the Market,
etc.
and from time to time appoint the Clerk of the Market, who shall have Assize
of Bread, Wine, Beer, Wood and other Things; and to do, execute and perform all
Things belonging to the Clerk of the Market within the said City.

AND I will that the Coroners to be chosen by the County of Philadelphia for
the Time being, Coroners chosen by the County, shall be Coroners of the City,
etc.
shall be Coroners of the said City and Liberties thereof; but that the Freemen
and Inhabitants of the said City shall from time to time, as often as Occasion
be, have equal Liberty with the Inhabitants of the said County, to recommend or
choose Persons to serve in the respective Capacities of Coroners and Sheriffs
for the County of Philadelphia, who shall reside within the said City.

AND that the Sheriff of the said City and County for the Time being shall be
the Water-Bailiff, The Sheriff shall be the Water-Bailiff, etc.
who shall and may execute and perform all things belonging to the Office of
Water-Bailiff upon Delaware River, and all other navigable Rivers and Creeks
within the said Province.

AND in Case the Mayor of the said City for the Time being, shall, during the
Time of his Mayoralty, misbehave himself, Power of Removing the Mayor for
Misbehaviour*
or misgovern in that Office, I do hereby empower the Recorder, Aldermen and
Common-Council-Men, or Five of the Aldermen and Nine of the Common-Council-Men
of the said City of Philadelphia for the Time being, to remove such Mayor from
his Office of Mayoralty; and in such Case, or in Case of the Death of the said
Mayor for the Time being, And choosing another.
that then another fit Person shall, within Four Days next after such Death or
Removal, be chosen in Manner as is above directed for electing of Mayors, in
the Place of him so dead or removed.

AND lest there should be a Failure of Justice or Government in the said City,
in such Interval, I do hereby appoint, The eldest Alderman to act as Mayor in
the Interval.
That the eldest Alderman for the Time being shall take upon him the Office of
a Mayor there, and shall exercise the same till another Mayor be chosen as
aforesaid; and in Case of the Disability of such eldest Alderman, then the next
in Seniority shall take upon him the said Office of Mayor, to exercise the same
as aforesaid.

AND in Case the Recorder, or any of the Aldermen or Common-Council-Men of or
belonging to the said City, for the Time being, shall misbehave him or
themselves in their respective Offices and Places, Power of Removing the
Recorder, Aldermen, or Common-Council-Men; and choosing others.
they shall be removed and others chosen in their stead, in Manner following,
that is to say, The Recorder for the Time being may be removed (for his
Misbehaviour) by the Mayor, and Two Thirds of the Aldermen and
Common-Council-Men respectively; and in Case of such Removal or of the Death of
the Recorder, then to choose another fit Person skilled in the Law, to be the
Recorder there, and so to continue during Pleasure, as aforesaid. And the
Alderman so misbehaving himself, may be removed by the Mayor, Recorder and Nine
of the Aldermen and Common-Council-Men; and in Case of such Removal or Death,
then within Four Days after, to choose a fit Person or Persons to supply such
Vacancies; and the Common-Council-Men, Constables, and Clerk of the Market, for
Misbehaviour, shall be removed and others chosen, as is directed in the Case of
Aldermen.

Penalties on Refusing to serve in theOffices of Mayor, Recorder,
Common-Council-Men, etc.
AND I do also, for me and my Successors, by these Presents, grant to the said
Mayor and Commonalty, and their Successors, that if any of the Citizens of the
said City, shall be hereafter nominated, elected and chosen to the Office of
Mayor, Aldermen and Common-Council-Men as aforesaid, and having Notice of his
or their Election, shall refuse to undertake and execute that Office to which
he is so chosen, that then, and so often it shall and may be lawful for the
Mayor and Recorder, Aldermen and Common-Council-Men, or the major Part of the
Aldermen and Common-Council-Men for the Time being, according to their
Discretion, to impose such moderate Fines upon such Refusers, so as the Mayor's
Fine exceed not Forty Pounds, the Alderman's Five and Thirty Pounds, and
Common-Council-Men Twenty Pounds, and other Officers proportionably, to be
levied by Distress and Sale, by Warrant under the common Seal, or by other
lawful Ways, to the Use of the said Corporation. And in such Cases it shall be
lawful to choose others to supply the Defects of such Refusers, in Manner as is
above directed for Elections.

Power of Summoning aCommon-Council.
AND that it shall and may be lawful to and for the Mayor, Recorder, and at
least Three Aldermen for the Time being, from time to time, so often as they
shall find Occasion, to summon a Common Council of the said City.

No Meeting shall be deemed a Common Council, unless etc.
AND that no Assembly or Meeting of the said Citizens shall be deemed or
accounted a Common Council, unless the said Mayor and Recorder, and at least
Three of the Aldermen for the Time being, and Nine of the Common-Council-Men be
present.

AND also that the said Mayor, Recorder, Aldermen and Common-Council-Men for
the Time being, from time to time, at their Common Council, shall have Power to
admit such and so many Freemen into their Corporation and Society as they shall
think fit.

AND to make (and they may make, ordain, Power to make Laws and Ordinances*
constitute and establish) such and so many good and reasonable Laws,
Ordinances and Constitutions (not repugnant to the Laws of England and this
Government) as to the greater Part of them at such Common Council assembled
(where the Mayor and Recorder for the Time being, are to be always present)
shall seem necessary and convenient for the Government of the said City.

AND the same Law, Ordinances, And to put them in Execution, revoke them, etc.
Orders and Constitutions so to be made, to put in Use and Execution
accordingly, by the proper Officers of the said City; and at their Pleasure to
revoke, alter and make anew, as Occasion shall require.

AND also impose such Mulcts and Amerciaments upon the Breakers of such Laws
and Ordinances, And to impos^ Mulcts, etc.
as to them in their Discretion shall be thought reasonable; which Mulcts, as
also all other Fines and Amerciaments to be set or imposed by Virtue of the
Powers granted, shall be levied as above is directed in Case of Fines, to the
Use of the said Corporation, without rendering any Account thereof to me, my
Heirs and Successors; with Power to the Common Council aforesaid, to mitigate,
remit or release such Fines and Mulcts, upon the Submission of the Parties.
Provided always, What Persons have Right to elect or be elected.
That no Person or Persons hereafter shall have Right of Electing or being
elected, by Virtue of these Presents, to any Office or Place judicial or
ministerial, nor shall be admitted Freemen of the said City, unless they be
free Denizens of this Province, and are of the Age of Twenty-One Year^ or
upwards, and are Inhabitants of the said City, and have an Estate of
Inheritance or Freehold therein, or are worth Fifty Pounds in Money or other
Stock, and have been resident in the said City for the Space of Two Years, or
shall purchase their Freedom of the Mayor and Commonalty aforesaid.

AND I do further grant to the said Mayor and Commonalty of the City of
Philadelphia, Market-Days.
that they and their Successors shall and may for ever hereafter hold and keep
within the said City, in every Week of the Year, Two Market-Days, the one upon
the Fourth Day of the Week and the other upon the Seventh Day of the Week, in
such Place or Places, as is, shall, or may be appointed for that Purpose, by
the said Commonalty or their Successors, from time to time.

AND also Two Fairs therein every Year, Fair^.
the one of them to begin on the Sixteenth Day of the Third Month, called May,
yearly, and so to be held in and about the Marketplace, and continue for that
Day and Two Days next following; and the other of the said Fairs to be held in
the aforesaid Place on the Sixteenth Day of the Ninth Month yearly, and for Two
Days next after.

AND I do for me, my Heirs and Assigns, Philadelphia constituted a Port.
by Virtue of the King's Letters Patent, make, erect and constitute the said
City of Philadelphia, to be a Port or Harbor for discharging and unlading of
Goods and Merchandise out of Ships, Boats and other Vessels; and for lading and
shipping them in or upon such and so many Places, Keys and Wharfs there, as by
the Mayor, Aldermen and Common Council of the said City shall from time to time
be thought most expedient for the Accommodation and Service of the Officers of
the Customs, in the Management of the King's Affairs and Preservation of His
Duties, as well as for Convenience of Trade.

Extent of the Port.
AND I do ordain and declare, that the said Port or Harbor shall be called the
Port of Philadelphia, and shall extend and be accounted to extend into all such
Creeks, Rivers and Places within this Province, and shall have so many Wharfs,
Keys, Landing-Places and Members belonging thereto, for Landing and Shipping of
Goods, as the said Mayor, Aldermen and Common Council for the Time being, with
the Approbation of the chief Officer or Office^s of the King's Customs, shall
from time to time think ^it to appoint.

The Landing-Places left open, with Liberty to dig Docks, etc.
AND I do also ordain, that the Landing-Places now and heretofore used at the
Penny-Pot-House and Blue Anchor, saving to all Persons their just and legal
Rights and Properties in the Land so to be open, as also the Swamp between
Bud's Buildings and the Society-H^ll, shall be left open and common for the Use
and Service of the said City and all others, with Liberty to dig Docks and make
Harbors for Ships and Vessels in all or any Pa^^ of the said Swamp.

Vacant Land to re^ain open for Pasture, until, etc.
AND I do hereby grant, that all the vacant Land within the Bounds and Limits of
the said City, shall remain open as a free Common of Pasture, for the Use of
the Inhabitants of the said City, until the same shall be gradually taken in,
in order to build or improve thereon, and not otherwise. Provided always, that
nothing herein contained, shall debar me or my Heirs in time to come, from
fencing in all the vacant Lands that lie between the Center-Meeting-House and
the Skuylkil, which I intend shall be divided from the Land by me allotted for
Delaware Side, by a straight Line along the Broad-Street from Edward Shippen's
Land through the Center-Square by Daniel Pegg's Land; nor shall the fencing or
taking in of any of the Streets, happening to be within that Enclosure on
Skuylkil, be deemed or adjudged to be an Incroachment, where it shall not
interfere or stop any of the Streets or Passages leading to any of the Houses
built or to be built on that Side, any thing herein contained to the contrary
notwithstanding.

This Charter to be construed in favor of the Corporation.
AND I do grant, that this present Charter shall in all Courts of Law and Equity
be construed and taken most favorably and beneficially for the said
Corporation.

IN WITNESS whereof I have hereunto set my Hand and caused my Great Seal to be
a^fixed. Dated at Philadelphia the Five and Twentieth Day of October, Anno
Domini One Thousand Seven Hun^red and One, Date.
and in the Thirteenth Year of the Reign of King WILLIAM the Third, over
England, etc. and the One and Twenti^th Year of my Government.

WILLIAM PENN.

A COLLECTION OF ALL THE LAWS Of the PROVINCE of PENNSYLVANIA: NOW IN FORCE.

Published by Order of ASSEMBLY.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed and Sold by B. FRANKLIN. M, DCC, XLII.

ANNO REGNI GULIELMI III. REGIS DUODECIMO.
At a GENERAL ASSEMBLY begun at New Castle, the Fourteenth Day of October, and
continued by Adjournment until the Twenty-seventh Day of November, in the
Twelfth Year of the Reign of King WILLIAM, and in the Year of our LORD 1700. On
which Day the following ACTS were passed by WILLIAM PENN, Esquire absolute
Proprietary and Governor in Chief of the Province of Pennsylvania, etc. That is
to say,
CHAP. I. The Law concerning Liberty of Conscience.
Repealed by the Queen's Order in Council the 7th of February 1705: But in the
same Year amended and re-enacted in the Words following, viz.

The LAW concerning Liberty of Conscience.
ALMIGHTY GOD being only LORD of Conscience, Preamble.
Author of all divine Knowledge, Faith and Worship, who can only enlighten the
Minds and convince the Understanding of People; in due Reverence to his
Sovereignty over the Souls of Mankind, and the better to unite the Queen's
Christian Subjects in Interest and Affection, BE IT ENACTED by JOHN EVANS, Esquire
by the Queen's Royal Approbation Lieutenant Governor under WILLIAM PENN, Esquire
absolute Proprietary and Governor in chief of the Province of Pennsylvania, and
Counties annexed, by and with the Advice and Consent of the Freemen of the said
Province, in General Assembly met, and by the Authority of the same, That no
Person, now, To whom allowed.
or at any time hereafter, dwelling or residing within this Province, who shall
profess Faith in GOD the Father, and in JESUS CHRIST His only Son, and in the
Holy Spirit, One GOD blessed forevermore, and shall acknowledge the Holy
Scriptures of the Old and New Testament to be given by Divine Inspiration, and,
when lawfully required, shall profess and declare that they will live peaceably
under the civil Government, shall in any Case be molested or prejudiced for his
or her conscientious Persuasion, nor shall he or she be at any time compelled
to frequent or maintain any religious Worship, Place or Ministry whatsoever,
contrary to his or her Mind, but shall freely and fully enjoy his or her
Christian Liberty in all Respects, without Molestation or Interruption.

CHAP. II. An ACT against Riots, Rioters, and riotous Sports, Plays and Games.
Repealed.

CHAP. III. An ACT against Adultery, Fornication, etc.
Repealed.

CHAP. IV. An ACT against Rape or Ravishment.
Repealed.

CHAP. V. An ACT against Incest, Sodomy and Bestiality.
Repealed.

CHAP. VI. An ACT against Bigamy.
Repealed.

CHAP. VII. An ACT against Robbing and Stealing.
Repealed.

CHAP. VIII. An ACT about Boats and Canoes.
BE IT ENACTED by the Proprietary and Governor, by and with the Advice and
Consent of the Freemen of this Province and Territories, in General Assembly
met, and by the Authority of the same, That if any Person or Persons within
this Province or Territories, shall fairly take up any Man's Boat or Canoe, the
same being adrift, he shall receive, as a Reward, from the Owner thereof, the
Sum of Five Shillings for a Boat, and Two Shillings and Six Pence for a Canoe.
Five Shillings for taking up a Boat, and Two Shillings and Six Pence for a
Canoe.
AND if any Person or Persons shall, at any time after Publication of this Law,
take, carry away or set adrift a Vessel, Boat or Canoe, from any Landing within
this Province or Territories, without Leave or Consent first had and obtained
from the Owner thereof, Penalty for taking a Boat, etc. from a Landing, etc.
shall pay double the Value of such Vessel, Boat or Canoe; and the Property of
the Vessel, Boat or Canoe so taken away or set adrift, as aforesaid, shall
still remain in the Master or Owner thereof, and the Master or Owner of the
same to have one half of the Penalty or Forfeiture.

CHAP. IX. An ACT against breaking into Houses.
Repealed.

CHAP. X. An ACT against firing of Houses.
Repealed.

CHAP. XI. An ACT against forcible Entry.
BE IT ENACTED, etc. That whosoever shall violently and forcibly enter into the
House or Possession of any other Person within this Province or Territories,
being duly convicted thereof, shall be punished as a Breaker of the Peace, and
make such Satisfaction to the Party aggrieved, as the Circumstances of the Fact
will bear.

CHAP. XII. An ACT against Menacing, and Assault and Battery.
Repealed.

CHAP. XIII. An ACT against Murder.
Repealed.

CHAP. XIV. An ACT against Sedition, spreading false News, and Defamation.
Repealed.

CHAP. XV. An ACT against removing Landmarks.
FOR the greater Security and Certainty of the Boundaries of Land, BE IT
ENACTED, etc. That no Person in this Province or Counties annexed, shall cut,
sell, alter or remove any certain bounded Tree, or other allowed Landmark, to
the Wrong of his Neighbor or any other Person; under the Penalty of any Sum
not less than Ten Pounds.

CHAP. XVI. An ACT against Defacers of Charters, etc.
WHEREAS the Security of Titles and Property in a great Measure depends upon
the Safety and Certainty of Writing and Records, BE IT ENACTED, etc. That
whosoever shall forge, deface, corrupt or imbezel any Charters, Gifts, Grants,
Bonds, Bills, Wills, Conveyances or Contracts, or shall deface or falsify any
Inrolment, Registry or Record, within this Province or Territories, Forgery,
and* how punished
shall forfeit double the Value of the Damage thereby sustained, one half
thereof shall go to the Party wronged; and the Person so offending shall be
discarded from all Places of Trust, and publicly disgraced, as a false Person,
in the Pillory, or otherwise, at the Discretion of the Court before whom the
Cause shall be tried.

CHAP. XVII. An ACT for County Seals, and against counterfeiting Hands and
Seals.
Repealed.

CHAP. XVIII. An ACT for regulating the Interest of Money.
Altered and supplied.

CHAP. XIX. An ACT of Privileges to a Freeman.
Repealed.

CHAP. XX. An ACT against buying Land of the Natives.
BE IT ENACTED, etc. That if any Person shall presume to buy any Land of the
Natives, within the Limits of this Province and Territories, without Leave from
the Proprietary thereof, every such Bargain and Purchase shall be void and of
none Effect.

CHAP. XXI. An ACT directing how petty Offenses shall be punished.
WHEREAS many Times, Persons for Misdemeanors, the Fine of which is but small,
being presented by the Grand-Juries (which has been the usual Course of Trials
in such Cases heretofore) have been put to great Charges by Reason of the Fees
that have accrued thereupon: For Prevention whereof, BE IT ENACTED by the
Proprietary and Governor, by and with, etc. That where the Fine does not exceed
Twenty Shillings, One Justice may determine.
one or more Justices of the Peace, upon due Proof of the Offense, or being
committed in his or their Presence, may determine and give Judgment in every
such Case, and issue Warrants to the Constable to levy the said Fine upon the
Offender's Goods and Chattels by Distress and Sale thereof; or may commit the
Offender to Prison, as the Law shall direct or require, except in such Cases
where the Law leaves the Fine to the Discretion of the County Court.

CHAP. XXII. An ACT for the Names of Days and Months.
Repealed.

CHAP. XXIII. An ACT for the better Provision of the Poor, etc.
Obsolete.

CHAP. XXIV. An ACT about the Recording of Deeds.
Repealed.

CHAP. XXV. An ACT for preventing clandestine Marriages.
Repealed.

CHAP. XXVI. An ACT about binding to the Peace.
BE IT ENACTED, etc. That whosoever shall threaten the Person of another, to
wound, kill or destroy him, or do him any harm in Person or Estate, and the
Person so threatened shall appear before a Justice of the Peace, One Justice may
bind to Peace.
and attest, That he believes that by such Threatening he is in Danger to be
hurt in Body or Estate; such Person so Threatening as aforesaid, shall be bound
over, with one sufficient Surety, to appear at the next Sessions or County
Court, to be holden for the County where such Offense was committed, to be
proceeded against according to Law; and, in the mean time, to be of his good
Behavior, and keep Peace toward all the King's Subjects.

CHAP. XXVII. An ACT limiting the Presentiments of the Grand-Iury.
Repealed.

CHAP. XXVIII. An ACT to ascertain the Number of Members of Assembly, and to
regulate Elections.
Repealed.

CHAP. XXIX. The LAW about Attachments.
Repealed.

CHAP. XXX. An ACT for Naturalization.
Repealed.

CHAP. XXXI. An ACT for Ascertaining the Descent of Lands, and better
Disposition of the Estates of Persons intestate.
Repealed.

CHAP. XXXII. An ACT for raising County Levies.
Altered and supplied.

CHAP. XXXIII. An ACT directing the Attests of several Officers and Ministers.
Repealed.

CHAP. XXXIV. An ACT for the better Attendance of the Justices on the several
Courts of Judicature within this Province and Territories.
TO the End that the respective Justices of the several Counties within this
Province and Territories, may give their due Attendance at the same Courts,
that Business may speedily be effected, and People dispatched to follow their
respective Callings and Affairs, BE IT ENACTED, etc. That the Justices of the
Peace, shall, at their respective County Courts, Penalty on Justices not
attending on Courts.
give their Attendance, under the Penalty or Forfeiture of Thirty Shillings,
one half to the Poor of the County, and the other to the Proprietary and
Governor; to be levied by Distress and Sale of the Offender's Goods and
Chattels, by Warrant under the Hands and Seals of the Majority of the Justices
at the next subsequent Court, to be directed to the Sheriff of the County;
unless such absent Justice shall give a sufficient Reason for such his Absence,
to be allowed of by the said Court, at the next Sitting thereof.

CHAP. XXXV. An ACT against Jurors Absenting, being lawfully summoned to attend
the several Courts of Judicature within this Province and Territories.
BE IT ENACTED, etc. That all Persons, Freemen within this Province and
Territories, being duly and legally summoned to appear at any Court, to serve
upon the Jury, or any Inquest required by Law, and shall neglect or omit to
give their Attendance, shall be fined by the respective Courts, Twenty Shilling
Penalty for not appearing on Juries.
where they were summoned to attend, in any Sum not exceeding Twenty Shillings,
for the Use of the Poor of the County where such Offense shall be committed;
unless, at the next succeeding Court, they render a reasonable Excuse for such
their Absence, to be allowed of by the Judges or Justices then present.

CHAP. XXXVI. An ACT for Determining of Debts under Forty Shillings.
Repealed.

CHAP. XXXVII. An ACT to prevent immoderate Fines.
Repealed.

CHAP. XXXVIII. An ACT about Defalcation.
Repealed.

CHAP. XXXIX. An ACT against Speaking in Derogation of Courts.
Repealed.

CHAP. XL. An ACT for the Appraisement of Goods.
BE IT ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That the respective County Courts
within this Province and Territories, shall, and hereby have Power, as often as
they shall see meet, to nominate and appoint three sufficient honest and
discreet Persons, County Courts to nominate three Persons to be Appraisers.
whom they shall attest to be Appraise^s, in their several and respective
Counties, to value and appraise all such Goods and Chattels as shall be taken
upon Executions, by any Process out of the respective Courts of this
Government, or as need shall require; which Goods shall not be sold till such
Appraisement be made by them, as aforesaid, or any two of them, The Goods not
to be sold within seven Days.
nor till seven Days after the said Appraisement, to the End the Party or
Parties concerned may be present at the Sale thereof, if they think fit; which
Sale shall be made openly, and in public Way and Manner, and the Overplus to
be returned to the Owner. AND in Case the Goods appraised will not sell for so
much as the same are appraised and valued to be worth by the said Appraisers,
or any two of them as aforesaid, the Creditor shall receive them for his Pay,
according as the same are valued and appraised, returning the Overplus as
aforesaid. AND the said Appraisers shall have, as a Fee, Two Pence per Pound,
and Two Pence per Mile, Journey-Fees.

CHAP. XLI. An ACT against Barrators.
BE IT ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Person within this
Province and Territories, in any Court within the same, be indicted, proved and
adjudged a common Barrator, vexing others with unjust and vexatious Suits; he
shall be adjudged a common Barrator, and his Suits and Actions rejected if the
Court see Cause for the same, and be punished for his Barratry.

CHAP. XLII. An ACT to oblige Witnesses to give Evidence, and to prevent false
Swearing.
Repealed.

CHAP. XLIII. An ACT confirming Devises of Lands and Validity of nuncupative
Wills.
Repealed.

CHAP. XLIV. An ACT to prevent the grievous Sin of Cursing and Swearing within
this Province and Territories.
WHEREAS the Sins of Cursing and Swearing are odious and abominable to Almighty
GOD, and all good Men, and may draw down GOD's Judgments upon any Nation,
Country or Province, where such grand Offenses go unpunished: For the
Prevention whereof, and to deter and punish all such Persons, within this
Province and Territories, as shall swear or accustom themselves to Swearing and
Cursing;

BE IT ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Person or Persons within
this Province and Territories, Common Swearers how convicted.
from and after the Publication hereof, shall swear in his or her common
Conversation, by the Name of GOD, CHRIST or JESUS, and shall be legally convict
thereof, by one or more credible Witnesses, before any one Justice of the Peace
of the Town or County where such Offense was committed; Five Shillings for the
first Offense, or five Days Imprisonment, etc.
shall, for the first Offense, forfeit and pay the Sum of Five Shillings, for
the Use of the Poor of the County where such Offense was committed, or suffer
five Days Imprisonment, in the House of Correction, at hard Labor, and be fed
with Bread and Water during that time; and for the second Offense, Six
Shillings, or six Days Imprisonment as aforesaid; For the second Six Shillings,
etc.
and for the third Offense, Ten Shillings, or ten Days Imprisonment as
aforesaid; and for the fourth Offense, shall be fined at the Discretion of the
County Court, in any Sum not exceeding Five Pounds, or be compelled to work in
Prison, at hard Labor, not exceeding two Months, and shall be deemed a common
Swearer, and shall be liable to be whipped and to receive Twenty-one Lashes
once in every three Months, during the Sitting of the County Courts, for seven
Years.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That whosoever shall
swear by any other Name or Thing, and is legally convict thereof, shall pay,
for every such Offense, half a Crown, or suffer three Days Imprisonment in the
House of Correction, at hard Labor, and be fed with Bread and Water as
aforesaid.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That whosoever shall
wilfully, Blaspheme^^ of the Almighty, etc. forfeit Ten Pounds, and suffer
Imp^^sonment.
premeditately or despitefully blaspheme or speak loosly and profanely of
Almighty GOD, or CHRIST JESUS, or the HOLY SPIRIT, or the SCRIPTURES of TRUTH,
and shall be legally convict thereof, shall forfeit and pay the Sum of Ten
^ounds, for the U^e of the Poor of the County where ^uch Offense shall be
committed, and suffer three Months Impri^^nment, at hand Labor as aforesaid,
for the Use of the Poor. Cu^sers of themselves of others, forfeit 5 ^. etc.
AND whosoever shall at any time curse himself, or any other, or any thing
belonging to himself or any other, and is legally convicted thereof, shall pay,
for every ^uch Offense, Five Shillings, or suffer five Days Imprisonment as
aforesaid.

CHAP. XLV. An ACT to prevent Duelling, and Fighting of Duels, within this
Province and Territories.
FOR the Prevention of Duelling and Fighting of Duels, within this Province and
Territories, BE IT ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Person,
within this Government, challenge the Person of another, to fight at Sword,
Pistol, Rapier, or any other dangerous and destructive Weapon, ^uch Person, so
challenging, shall forfeit and pay (being lawfull^ convict thereof) the Sum of
Twenty Pounds, or suffer th^ee Months Imprisonment, at hard Labor: Twenty
Pound Fine for him that gives, and also for him that accepts ^ Challenge, etc.
And the Person accepting such Challenge shall forfeit and pay the like Sum of
Twenty Pounds, or suffer Imprisonment as aforesaid. The said Forfeitures or
Payments to be to the U^e and Behoof of the Proprietary and Governor, and to no
other Use whatsoever.

CHAP. XLVI. An ACT for impowering Widows and Administrators to sell so much of
the Lands of Intestates as may be sufficient to clear their Debts, etc.
Repealed.

CHAP. XLVII. An ACT for the Preservation of the Person of the Proprietary and
Governor.
Repealed.

CHAP. XLVIII. An ACT for taking Lands in Execution for the Payment of Debts,
where the Sheriff cannot come at other Effects to satisfy the same.
TO the End that no Creditor may be defrauded of their just Debts, due to them
by Persons of this Province and Territories, who have sufficient real Estates,
if not personal, to satisfy the same, BE IT ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid,
That all Lands and Houses what^oever within this Government, Real Estates
liab^e to Sale for Payment of Debts.
shall be liable to Sale, upon Judgment and Execution obtained against the
Defendant, the Owner, his Heirs, Executors or Administrators, where no
sufficient personal Estate is to be found; with this due Proviso, That the
Message and Plantation, with its Appurtenances, How to proc^ed upon Judgment
obtained, etc.
upon which the Defendant is chiefly seated, shall not be exposed to Sale
before the Expiration of one whole Year after Judgment is obtained; to the
Intent that the said Defendant, or any other, on his Behalf, may endeavor the
Redemption of the same: And before any such Lands, Messuages or Houses, or any
other Lands, or Houses whatsoever, taken in Execution, shall be sold, they
shall be duly appraised by twelve honest and discreet Men of the Neighborhood;
and that then it shall and may be lawful for the Sheriff to make Sale of and
convey the same under his Hand and Seal. After which Sale and Appraisement made
as aforesaid, such Land and Houses shall be and remain a free and clear Estate
to the Purchaser or Creditor to whom they are so made over or sold, his Heirs
and Assigns forever, as amply and fully as ever they were to the Debtor.

PROVIDED ALWAYS, AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That lawful Interest shall be
allowed to the Creditor for the Sum or Value he obtained Judgment for, In^erest
shall be allowed the Creditor till Sale, etc.
from the time the said Judgment was obtained till the time of Sale, or till
Satisfaction made.

PROVIDED ALSO, The Creditor not obliged to take the whole Plantation, etc.
That the chief Plantation or Message shall last be taken in Execution; and
that where the Appraisement of the Lands taken in Execution amounts to more
than the Debt, Co^ts and Damages, the Creditor shall not be obliged in such
Case to take the Whole, and pay the Overplus; but only to take so much as to
satis^y the Execution, and no more.

CHAP. XLIX. An ACT for the better Regulation of Servants in this Province and
Territories.
FOR the just Encouragement of Servants in Discharge of their Duty, and the
Prevention of their Deserting their Masters or Owners Service, BE IT ENACTED by
the, etc. That no Servant, No Servant to be sold out of this Government,
without his Consent, under Penalty of Ten Pounds, forfeited by the Seller.
bound to serve his or her Time in this Province or Counties annexed, shall be
sold or disposed of to any Person residing in any other Province or Government,
without the Consent of the said Servant and two Justices of the Peace of the
County wherein he lives or is sold, under the Penalty of Ten Pounds, to be
forfeited by the Seller.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, Nor assigned over except
before a Justice.
That no Servant shall be assigned over to another Person, by any in this
Province and Territories, but in the Presence of one Justice of the Peace of
the County, under the Penalty of Ten Pounds; which Penalty, with all others in
this Act mentioned, shall be levied by Distress and Sale of Goods of the Party
offending.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That every Servant that
shall faithfully serve four Years, or more, shall, The Allowance to Servants at
the Expiration of their Servitude.
at the Expiration of their Servitude, have a Discharge, and shall be duly
clothed with two complete Suits of Apparel, whereof one shall be new, and
shall also be furnished with one new Ax, one Grubbing-Hoe, and one Weeding-Hoe,
at the Charge of their Master or Mistress.

AND for Prevention of Servants quitting their Masters Service, BE IT ENACTED
by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Servant shall absent him or herself
from the Service of their Master or Owner, for the Space of one Day, Servants
shall serve five Days for every Days Absence from their Master, etc.
or more, without Leave first obtained for the same, every such Servant, shall,
for every such Day's Absence, be obliged to serve five Days, after the
Expiration of his or her Time, and shall further make such Satisfaction to his
or her Master or Owner, for the Damages and Charges sustained by such Absence,
as the respective County Courts shall see meet, who shall order, as well the
Time to be served, as other Recompense for Damages sustained.

AND whoever shall apprehend or take up any runaway Servant, The Reward for
taking up Run-aways, etc.
and shall bring him or her to the Sheriff of the County, such Person, shall,
for every Servant, if taken up within ten Miles of the Servant's Abode, receive
Ten Shillings; and if ten Miles, or upwards, Twenty Shillings Reward of the
said Sheriff; who is hereby required to pay the same, and forthwith to send
Notice to the Master or Owner, of whom he shall receive Five Shillings,
Prison-Fees, upon the Delivery of the said Servant, together with all other
Disbursements and reasonable Charges for and upon the same.

AND to prevent the clandestine Employing of other Men's Servants, BE IT
ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That whosoever shall conceal any Servant of
this Province or Territories, Penalty for concealing Servants.
or entertain him or her Four-and-twenty-Hours, without his or her Master's or
Owner's Knowledge or Consent, and shall not, within the said time, give Notice
thereof to some Justice of the Peace of the County, every such Person shall
forfeit Twenty Shillings for every Day's Concealment. AND in case the said
Justice shall not, within Twenty-four Hours after Complaint made to him,
Penalty on the Justice for Neglect.
issue his Warrant, directed to the next Constable, for Apprehending and
Seizing the said Servant, and commit him or her to the Custody of the Sheriff
of the County, such Justice, shall, for every such Offense, forfeit Five
Pounds. AND the Sheriff shall by the first Opportunity, As also on the Sheriff.
after he has received the said Servant, send Notice thereof to his or her
Master or Owner; and the said Sheriff neglecting or omitting, in any case, to
give Notice to the Owner or Master of the Servant being in his Custody as
aforesaid, shall forfeit Five Shillings for every Day's Neglect after an
Opportunity has offered; to be proved against him before the next County Court,
and to be there adjudged.

AND for the more effectual Discouragement of Servants Imbezeling their Masters
or Owners Goods, BE IT ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, Persons dealing
clandestinely with Servants or Slaves, forfeit treble the Value of the Goods
dealt for, etc.
That whosoever shall clandestinely deal or traffic with any Servant, White or
Black, for any kind of Goods or Merchandises, without Leave or Order from his
or her Master or Owner, plainly signified and appearing, shall forfeit treble
the Value of such Goods to the Owner; and the Servant, if a White, shall make
Satisfaction to his or her Master or Owner by Servitude, after the Expiration
of his or her Time, to double the Value of the said Goods: And if the Servant
be a Black, he shall be severely whipped in the most public Place of the
Township where the Offense was committed.

CHAP. L. An ACT for the Erecting and Establishing a Post Office.
Supplied by an Act of Parliament.

CHAP. LI. An ACT for the Assize of Bread.
FOR the better Regulation of Bakers, and the Assize of Bread, BE IT ENACTED by
the Authority aforesaid, Every Baker to set his Mark on Bread.
That henceforth every Baker who makes any Bread for Sale, shall have a
distinct Mark to be set on all the Bread he shall bake, and shall make it of
the t^^e Assize hereafter expressed, That is to say, When Wheat is ordinarily
sold for Money at any of these several Rates hereafter mentioned, the several
Sorts of Bread shall be respectively according to the following Table, by
Troy-Weight. Price of ^heat per Bu^^el. Penny white Br^^d* Penny wheaten Bread
Penn^ hous^old Bread s. d. Uz. Qr. Uz. Qr. Uz. Qr. 3 0 10 0 15 2 23 0 3 6 9 1
14 0 21 0 The Weight Bakers shall make their Bread.
4 0 8 2 12 3 19 0 4 6 7 3 12 0 17 0 5 0 6 3 11 1 16 0 5 6 6 0 10 2 14 3 6 0 5
2 9 3 13 3 6 6 5 0 9 1 12 0 And so proportionably, On Penalty, etc.
under the Penalty of Forfeiting all such Bread as shall not be of the several
Assizes beforementioned, to the Use of the Poor where the Offense is
committed, and otherwise, as is herein after expressed. And that each Bake^
shall bake but three Sorts of Bread, And to make no more than three Sorts of
Bread, etc.
viz. White, Wheaten and Household, and no more; and the Loaves shall be a Penny
Loaf or Roll, a Five Penny Loaf, and a Ten Penny Loaf; and that if any of these
exceed the Assize in Fineness or Weight, it shall be equally seizable as if it
were under the Fineness or Weight. And each Baker of soft Bread shall be
allowed Six Pence on the Bushel above the Assize, That is to say, When Wheat is
at Five Shillings per Bushel, they shall make their Bread as if Wheat were at
Five Shillings and Six Pence. And Wheat being at Five Shillings per Bushel, the
Penny white Bread shall weigh six Ounces, the Wheaten ten Ounces and a half,
and the Household fourteen Ounces and three Quarters, and so proportionably, as
if the Wheat were sold at Five Shillings and Six Pence.

AND for the better Execution of this present Law, BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the
Authority aforesaid, In every Town needful a Clerk of the Market shall be
appointed;
That there shall be in every Market Town, and in all other Towns needful, one
Person commissionated by the Proprietary and Governor, to be Clerk of the
Market for each Market, who shall be attested duly to perform his Office
therein. All which Officers are hereby authorized to enter into all Houses,
either with a Constable, Who are to try the Weight of Bread and Butter* which
if too ligh^ shall be forfeited.
or without, where they shall suspect or be informed of any Bread baked for
Sale, as also to weigh all such Bread, as often as they shall see cause, and to
seize all such as they shall find deficient; as also to weigh all Butter made
up for Sale, or brought unto or being in the Town or Market to be sold by
Weight, which, if found light a second time, once after Notice is given, shall
be in like Manner forfeited; as also all Bread, made for Sale, not being duly
marked as aforesaid: How the Forfeitures shall be disposed of.
Of all which Forfeitures, the said Officer shall have one third Part for his
Trouble; the other two Thirds to the Use of the Poor as aforesaid.

AND for the more effectual Prevention of ^rauds herein, BE IT FURTHER ENACTED
by the Authority aforesaid, That all Persons within this Province and
Territories, who bake any Bread for Sale, shall, at all Times hereafter, have
all their Bread that they bake, either for Sale, or to spend in their Houses,
made of the due Assize, marked and yielded to Trial of the said Officer, as is
directed in this Act, under the Penalty of forfeiting all such Bread whatsoever
as aforesaid.

CHAP. LII. An ACT for Priority of Payment to the Inhabitants of this
Government.
Repealed.

CHAP. LIII. An ACT for the Regulating of Streets and Watercourse in the
Cities and Towns of this Government.
Repealed.

CHAP. LIVE. An ACT for preventing Accidents that may happen by Fire in the
Towns of Bristol, lately called Buckingham, Philadelphia, Germantown, Darby,
Chester, New Castle and Lewis, within this Government.
Repealed.

CHAP. LV. An ACT to empower the Justices in each County to lay out and confirm
all Roads, except the King's Highways and public Roads.
BE IT ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That all the King's Highways or
public Roads, The King's Highways to be laid out by Order of the Governor and
Council.
within this Province or Counties annexed, shall be laid out by Order of the
Governor and Council for the time being; which Roads shall be recorded in the
Council Book, with the Courses thereof, as near as may be done.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That the Justices of
each County Court, within this Government, shall, and by Virtue of this Act,
have Power, as often as they find needful, in open Court, to order and appoint
six sufficient Housekeepers of the Neighborhood inhabiting near the Place
where Complaint is made, for Want of a Road or Cart-way unto the public Road,
who shall view the said Place; and if the said Housekeepers, And where it is
necessary for a Cart ^ay to the public Road, upon Complain^, by order of the
Justices of the County Court.
or any four of them, are satisfied that there is Occasion for a Road or
Cart-way to be laid out, according to the Complainant or Complainants Desire,
then they shall and may lay out the same in and through such convenient Places
as they shall think may be least to the Damage and Inconveniency of the
Neighbors or Parties concerned, and least injurious to the Settlements
thereabouts; and of such a Breadth as the Justices shall order and appoint, The
Breadth not to exceed fifty Foot.
so that it exceed not fifty Foot; and shall make Return thereof, under their
Hands, to the next County Court, after it is laid out: And if then and there
the Justices approve the same, If approved of, to be entered upon Record.
it shall, at the same Court, be entered upon Record, and, from thenceforth, be
taken, deemed and allowed to be a lawful Road or Cart-way, from that time
forward. Provided, That no such Road shall be carried through any Man's
improved Lands, If through improved Lands to be paid for by theCounty.
but where there is a Necessity for the same; and where that appears, the
respective County Court shall appoint six indifferent Men to view and adjudge
the Value of so much of such improved Lands as shall be taken up for the Use
aforesaid, and the Value thereof shall be paid to the Owner of the said Lands
out of the respective County Stock.

AND to prevent any Difference that may arise among Neighbors, about Roads or
Cart-ways laid out by Order of the Governor and Council, or any of the County
Courts in this Government, and which are or shall be entered upon Record,
either before or after the making and publishing of this Act, BE IT ENACTED by
the Authority aforesaid, Such Roads shall be free and open.
That all such Roads and Cart-ways, as beforementioned, shall be taken, deemed
and allowed to be free, open and lawful Roads and Cart-ways, from the time they
are so laid out and recorded as aforesaid.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, Persons presuming to
stop any laid ou^- Road, by falling Trees, etc. forfeit Five Pounds.
That if any Person or Persons shall presume to stop or hinder any of the said
Highways, or other Roads heretofore laid out, or hereafter to be laid out and
allowed of as aforesaid, and shall commit any Nuisance therein, by falling of
Trees, making Fences, or any other Way, and do not remove the same forthwith,
such Person or Persons shall be fined in the Sum of Five Pounds, to be levied
by Distress and Sale of the Offender's Goods and Chattels, to be employed by
the County Court for the clearing and removing of the said Nusances; and the
Remainder thereof shall be employed by the said Court in Repairing and Clearing
other Roads within the Township where the Offense was committed, any Law,
Custom or Usage to the Contrary hereof in anywise notwithstanding.

CHAP. LVI. An ACT for regulating and maintaining of Fences.
FOR preventing of all Disputes and Differences that may arise through the
Neglect or Insufficiency of Fences in this Province and Counties annexed, BE IT
ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That all Cornfieldsd and Grounds kept for
Enclosures within the said Province and Counties annexed, A lawful Fence shall
be five Foot high.
shall be well senced with Fence at least five Foot high, of sufficient Rail or
Logs, and close at the Bottom; and whosoever, not having their Grounds enclosed
with such sufficient Fence as aforesaid, shall hurt, kill or do Damage to any
Horse, Kine, Sheep, Hogs or Goats of any other Person, by hunting them or
driving them out of or from the said Grounds, shall be liable to make good all
Damage sustained thereby to the Owner of the said Cattle. Provided, That all
Sorts of Swine going at large, Swine ^unning at large not within this Act.
contrary to the Intent of an Act made and passed this present Sessions,
entitled, An ACT for restraining of Swine from running at large, shall not
fall nor be deemed within the Construction of this Act. But if any Horse, Kine,
Sheep, Hogs or Goats, or any kind of Cattle, shall break into any Man's
Enclosure, the Fence being of the aforesaid Height and Sufficiency, and by the
View of two Persons, for that Purpose appointed by the County Court, found and
approved to be such, then the Owner of such Cattle shall be liable to make good
all Damages to the Owner of the Enclosure: For the first Offense single Damages
only, and ever after double the Damages sustained. AND all Persons having any
unruly Horses, Mares or Cattle, that are not to be kept off by such Fences as
aforesaid, are ordered, and shall be obliged to take effectual Care to restrain
the same from trespassing on their Neighbors Enclosures.

AND for the better ascertaining and regulating of Partition-Fences, BE IT
FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That where any Neighbors shall
improve Lands adjacent to each other, or where any Person shall enclose any
Land adjoining to another's Land already fenced in, A Division-Fence to be
maintained by both Parties.
so that any Part of the first Person's Fence becomes the Partition-Fence
between them; in both these Cases the Charge of such Division-Fence (so far as
enclosed on both Sides) shall be equally born and maintained by both Parties.
To which End, and the others in this Act mentioned, The County Courts to
nominate Persons to be Judges of the Sufficiency of all Fences.
each County Court, within this Province, shall nominate, and is hereby
empowered and required to nominate and appoint so many honest and able Men as
they shall think fit, for each County respectively, to view all such Fence and
Fences about which any Difference may happen to arise; and that the aforesaid
Persons, in each County respectively, shall be the sole Judges of the Charge to
be born by the Delinquent, or by both or either Party; and of the Sufficiency
of all Fences, whether Partition-Fences or others. And where they judge any
Fence to be insufficient, How the aforesaid Judges are to proceed.
they shall give Notice thereof to the Owners or Possessors; and if any one of
these Owners or Possessors, upon the Request of the other, and due Notice given
by the said Viewers, shall refuse to make or repair the said Fence or Fences,
or to pay the Moiety of the Charge of any Fence before made (being a
Division-Fence) within ten Days after Notice given, that then, upon Proof
thereof before two Justices of the Peace of the respective County, it shall be
lawful for the said Justice to order the Person aggrieved and suffering
thereby, to repair the said Fence or Fences, who shall be reimbursed his Cost
and Charges from the Person so refusing to make good the said Partition-Fence
or Fences; and that the said Costs and Charges shall be levied upon the
Offender's Goods and Chattels, by Warrant from the said Justice, by Distress
and Sale thereof, the Overplus (if any be) to be returned to the Party
offending.

CHAP. LVII. An ACT for the Erecting of Bridges and maintaining Highways.
FOR the greater Convenience and Ease of Traveling in and through this
Province and Counties annexed, BE IT ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid,
CountyCourts to order Bridges to be erected over small Creeks and Rivulets.
That within twelve Months after the Rising of this General Assembly, Bridges
shall be built and maintained over all small Creeks and Rivulets, where the
respective County Courts shall see cause, from the Falls of Delaware to the
utmost Parts of Sussex County, on the King's Road, ten Foot broad, with Rails
on each Side; [ Altered by the County Levy-Act
which County Courts shall with the Concurrence of the Grand-Iury] agree with
and appoint some Person or Persons to build such Bridges in their respective
Counties, who shall be paid for the same out of the respective County Stocks.
Where a Creek is the Bounds of two Counties, the Bridge to be ordered by the
Governor and Council.
AND where any Creek is the Bounds or Limits of two Counties, the Charge of a
Bridge over such Creek shall be equally paid by each of the said Counties: And
to that End it shall be lawful for the Governor and Council to appoint and
agree with Workmen to build such Bridges as aforesaid; and when built to
certify the same, with the Charges thereof, to each of the said County Courts
respectively, to be held next after such Bridges are finished; upon which the
said Courts shall forthwith order the County-Treasurer to pay such Undertaker
or Undertaker^ their respective County Moieties for the same.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That all Trees, Stumps
of Trees, and other Encumbrances, that lie in or cross any Highways, All R^^ds
to be kept clear.
shall be cleared; and all Passages in or out of all Creeks, Runs and Branches
in the King's Road, and all Passages in and out of all other Creeks, Runs and
Branches, where other Roads are or shall be established, shall be made safe and
easy both for Horse and Cart: Overseers of the Highways to be appointed yea^ly
for each Precinct.
And to that End each respective County Court shall divide their County into as
many Precincts as they shall think fit, and shall, every seventh Month yearly,
nominate and appoint one Overseer of the Highways over every such Precinct,
under the Penalty of Ten Pounds. AND every such Overseer shall summon all the
Inhabitants of his respective Precinct, The Duty of such Overseers.
as from time to time he shall see Occasion, upon the Penalty of Five Pounds,
to come to such Place or Places as he shall appoint, and be there ready at or
before the Sun be one Hour high, and continue at Work thereat till within an
Hour of Sunset (Meal-Times excepted) upon the Penalty of Twenty Shillings for
each wilful Absence or Neglect; and in case of Non-Payment, to be levied by
Warrant from the Justices at the next County Court, directed to such Person as
the said Court shall order and appoint, by Distress and Sale of Goods; which
Distress shall be returned to next Court ensuing, to the Benefit of that
Precinct, toward the defraying of the Charge of the Highways and Bridges
therein.

PROVIDED ALWAYS, That the said Overseer shall give each of the Inhabitants six
Days Notice before they are to go out as aforesaid. Bridges over Mill-Races by
whom to be erected.
AND if any public Road now is or hereafter shall be laid out by Authority
over any Mill-Race, which was cut before such Road was laid out, in such case,
if it be the King's Road, there shall be a Cart-Bridge built and maintained
over the said Mill-Race at the Charge of the County in Manner aforesaid. And if
it be any other than the King's Road, then the Overseer of the Precinct wherein
it is, shall order the making and maintaining such Bridge: But if any Mill-Race
be cut through any public Road, which was by Authority laid out before the
cutting thereof, then the Owner or Owners of the said Mill-Race shall build
such Bridge or Bridges as aforesaid, at his or their proper Cost or Charges.

CHAP. LVIII. An ACT against Wears cross Creeks and Rivers.
TO the End that all Persons inhabiting upon or near any Creeks or Rivers in
this Province or Counties annexed, may enjoy all Privileges and Advantages that
from them are to be reaped, BE IT ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That
whosoever shall make a Wear or Wears from one Side of any Creek, in this
Province or Counties annexed, to the other Side thereof, shall, for every such
Offense, pay Ten Shillings, and the Wear or Wears shall be destroyed. Provided,
That this Act shall not extend to Mill-Dams or Races, not to such as make Wears
on their own Lands, so as they shall not be injurious to others.

CHAP. LIX. An ACT against unseasonable Firing of Woods.
FOR Prevention of Dangers and Damages that may ensue upon firing of Woods at
unseasonable Times of the Year, BE IT ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That
whosoever shall presume to set on Fire any Woods, Lands or Marshes in this
Province or Territories, before the first Day of the first Month, yearly, o^
after the first Day of the third Month, shall make good all Damages that shall
thereby happen to any the Inhabitants thereof.

CHAP. LX. An ACT about Erecting and Regulating the Prices of Ferries.
Supplied.

CHAP. LXI. An ACT for the Trial of Negroes.
Repealed.

CHAP. LXII. An ACT to prevent sickly Vessels coming into this Government.
WHEREAS it has been found by sad Experience, that the Coming and Arriving of
unhealthy Vessels at the Ports and Towns of this Province and Territories, and
the Landing of their Passengers and Goods before they have lain some time to be
purified, has proved very detrimental to the Health of the Inhabitants of this
Province, BE IT THEREFORE ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That from and
after the Publication hereof, no unhealthy or sickly Vessels, Sickly Vessels
not to come within a Mile of Philadelphia, or other Town, without License, on
1^0 l. Penalty.
coming from any unhealthy or sickly Place whatsoever, shall come nearer than
one Mile to any of the Towns or Ports of this Province or Territories, without
Bills o^ Health; nor shall presume to bring to Shore such Vessels, nor to land
such Passengers or their Goods, at any the said Ports or Places, until such
time as the^ shall obtain a License, for their Landing at Philadelphia, from
the Governor and Council; or from any two Justices of the Peace of any other
Port or County of this Province or Territories, under the Penalty of One
Hundred Pounds, for every such unhealthy Vessel so Landing as aforesaid, to the
Use of the Proprietary and Governor. AND that suitable Provision be ordered by
the Governor and Council for their Reception, if they be permitted to land or
come on Shore.

CHAP. LXIII. An ACT for the Sitting of the Orphans Courts.
Supplied.

CHAP. LXIV. An ACT requiring all Masters and Commanders of all Ships and
Vessels, to make Report at the Town of New Castle, that are or shall be bound
to and from the Sea.
Repealed.

CHAP. LXV. An ACT for the Levying of Fines.
Repealed.

CHAP. LXVI. The LAW about Departers out of this Province.
Repealed.

CHAP. LXVII. An ACT against Mixing and Adulterating strong Liquors.
Repealed.

CHAP. LXVIII. The LAW against Scolding.
Repealed.

CHAP. LXIX. An ACT about killing of Wolves.
Repealed.

CHAP. LXX. An ACT concerning Bills of Exchange.
BE IT ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Person or Persons within
this Province or Territories, shall draw or indorse any Bill or Bills of
Exchange, upon any Person or Persons in England, or other Parts of Europe, and
the same be returned back unpaid, with a legal Protest, the D^awer thereof, and
all others concerned, shall pay and discharge the Contents of the said Bill or
Bills, 20 per Cent. on protested Bills of Exchange.
together with Twenty Pounds per Cent. Advantage for the Damage thereof, and so
proportionable for greater or less Sums, in the same Specie the same Bill or
Bills were drawn, or current Money of this Province, equivalent to that was
first paid by the Drawer or Indorser.

CHAP. LXXI. An ACT for Regulating Money Weights, etc.
Obsolete.

CHAP. LXXII. An ACT appointing the Rate of the Money or Coin in this Province,
etc.
Repealed by Her Majesty's Order in Council, the 30th Day of July, 1703.

CHAP. LXXIII. An ACT for Regulating Weights and Measures.
BE IT ENACTED, etc. Standards of Weights and Measures to be kept in each
County.
That in each County of this Province and Territories, there shall be had and
obtained, within two Years after the making of this Law, at the Charge of each
County, to be paid out of the County Levies, Standards of Brass for Weights and
Measures, according to the King's Standards for the Exchequer; which Standards
shall remain with such Officer in the Counties aforesaid as shall be from time
to time appointed by the Governor, with the Advice of the Council: And an
Officer to be appointed, etc.
And every Weight, according to its Scantling, His Duty.
and every Measure, as Bushels, Half-Bushels, Pe^ks, Gallons, Pottles, Quarts
and Pints, shall be made just Weights, and Measures, and marked by him that
keeps the Standards. All Weight^ to be sealed, on Penalty of Five Shillings.
And no Person within this Province and Territories, shall presume to buy and
sell by any Weights or Measures not sealed or marked in Form aforesaid, and
made just according to the Standards aforesaid, by the Officers in whose
Possession the Standards remain, on Penalty of forfeiting Five Shillings to the
Prosecutor, being convicted by one Justice of the Peace, of the Unjustness of
his Weights and Measures. AND that once a Year, at least, the said Officer,
with the Grand Jury, or the major Part of them, The Officer to try all Weights
once a Year.
or for Want of the Grand Jury, with such as shall be allowed and appointed by
the respective County Court aforesaid, for Assistance, shall try the Weights
and Measures in the Counties aforesaid: And those Weights and Measures that are
defective, to be seized by the said Officer and Assistants; His Fees.
which said Officer shall have, for his Fees, for making each Bushel,
Half-Bushel and Pe^k just Measure, and marking the same (that i^ large enough
when brought to his Hands, shall have T^n Pence; and for every lesser Measure
Three Pence: For every Yard Three Pence: For every Hundred and half Hundred
Weight, being made just and marked, Three Pence; for every lesser Weight, One
Penny. And if the Weights and Measures be made just before they be brought to
him, then to have but half the Fees aforesaid for marking the same. And if the
Officer shall refuse to do any thing that is injoined by this Law, The Penalty
on the Officer for Misbehaviour.
for the Fees appointed, and be duly convicted thereof, shall ^orfeit ^ive
Pounds, to the Use of the Proprietary and Governor.

PROVIDED ALWAYS, AND IT IS HEREBY ENACTED, What shall be deemed law^ful
Measures and Weights.
That the brass Half-Bushel, now in the Town of Philadelphia, and a Bushel and
Peck proportionable, and all lesser Measures and Weights coming from England,
being duly sealed in London, or other Measures agreeable therewith, shall be
accounted and allowed to be good by the aforesaid Officers, until the said
Standards shall be had and obtained.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, Altered by a later Act.
That no Person shall sell Beer or Ale by Retail, but by Beer-Measure,
according to the Standard of England.

CHAP. LXXIV. An ACT to prevent the Sale of ill-tann'd Leather, and working the
same into Shoes and Boots.
Repealed.

CHAP. LXXV. An ACT for keeping a Registry in Religious Societies.
BE IT ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That the Registry n^w kept, or which
shall be hereafter kept by any religious Society, in their respective
Meeting-Book or Books, of any Marriage, Birth or Burial, within this Province
or Territories thereof, shall be held goo^ and authentic, and shall be allowed
of upon all Occasions whatsoever.

CHAP. LXXVI. An ACT for Viewing Pipe-Staves.
Repealed.

CHAP. LXXVII. An ACT for the preventing of Swine Running at large.
Repealed.

CHAP. LXXVIII. An ACT that no Publick-House or Inn within this Government be
kept without License.
Repealed.

CHAP. LXXIX. An ACT for the better Assessing and Raising of County-Levies for
this present Year.
Expired.

CHAP. LXXX. An ACT for the Ascertaining the Dimensions of Cask, and for the
true Packing of Meat for Transportation.
WHEREAS it is the Interest of all Governments to exercise Truth and
Uprightness in all their Trade and Dealings, which many Persons, for their
private Interest, too often violate: To the End therefore that the same may be
observed in the Traffic and Commerce of this Province and Territories, and
especially that the Commodities generally exported to foreign Markets, may be
good, in respect of their Quality, and complete in respect of their Quantity,
BE IT ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That all tight Cask for Beer, Ale,
Cider, Po^k, Beef and Oil, and all such Commodities, shall be made of good,
sound, well-seasoned White-Oak Timber, and shall contain as follows, viz. The
Puncheon, The Contents of Cask.
eighty four Gallons; the Hogshead, sixty three Gallons; the Tierce, forty two
Gallons; the Barrel, thirty one Gallons and a half; and the Half-Barrel,
sixteen Gallons, Wine-Measure, according to the Practice of our neighboring
Colonies: And that all Coopers set their Marks on the said Casks respectively,
on Penalty of forfeiting the same.

AND to prevent the Exportation of un^ound and unmerchantable Beef, BE IT
ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, Altered and supplied b^ an Act (...) the 13
th of George ^.
That no Person, after the Publication hereof, shall presume to ship any Beef
or Pork before it be first viewed and packed or repacked by an Officer or
Packer, to ^e for that Purpose appointed; which shall, after the Officer's View
and Approbation, be marked with the said Officer's Mark: And any Person or
Persons that shall ship on board any Vessel, any Beef or Pork, in order to be
transported, without the said Officer's Mark as aforesaid, he or they, for
every such Cask, shall forfeit and pay the Sum of Ten Shillings. AND the
Justices of the respective County Courts, within this Government, shall
nominate and appoint such Officer or Packer as aforesaid; which Officer shall
have Nine Pence for the Packing, Pickling and Heading of every Barrel.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, etc. That all Biscuit and Flower, Altered and
supplied by the 12 th of George I.
made for Transportation, shall be well made, and honestly and truly packed,
for the Encouragement of our Trade and Credit; that those who purchase the same
may not be cheated or defrauded. And all such Persons that make Flower or
Biscuit for Transportation shall set their several Brand-Marks on each Cask
before shipped, on Penalty of Five Shillings for every Cask by them sold and
unmarked as aforesaid. And if any Bread or Flower shall pass out of this
Province or Territories false packed, and the same happen to be returned, in
all such Cases the Persons offending shall pay to the Party wronged double
Damages for the same.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That every Cooper, Baker
or Bolter shall enter, or cause their respective Brand-Marks to be entered in a
Book for that Purpose, to be kept by the said Officer or Packer.

AND for the better enabling Coopers to comply with this Act, BE IT ENACTED by
the Authority aforesaid, Dimensions of Hogshead-^taves.
That all Hogshead-Staves shall be three Foot and a half long, and three Inches
broad, clear of Sap: Barrel-Staves, two Foot and four Inches long, and three
Inches broad, clear of Sap; and that all Hogshead and Barrel-Staves, that are
not of the aforesaid Dimensions, shall not be accounted merchantable, but be
reckoned two for one.

AND that the Tobacco made and raised in this Government, may be, at least,
Tobacco to be honestly handled and packed.
in equal Reputation abroad with those of other Colonies, it is necessary that
the Planters and Makers thereof use Honesty in the Handling, and Faithfulness
in the Packing thereof: BE IT THEREFORE ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid,
That all Tobacco-Hogsheads shall be made of good seasoned Timber, four Foot
long, or within an Inch more or less, Of what Size Tobacco-Hogsheads shall be,
etc.
and thirty two Inches in the Head, equal with the Gauge of M^ry^and; four of
which Hogshead: shall be accounted ^ Ton, and every Cask in which Tobacco is to
be pack^^, shall be first ^ared and marked with the true Tare thereof, by the
Planter or Packer of such Tobacco, under the Penalty of Twenty Shillings, to be
forfeited by the said Planter to the Person that may be wronged thereby.
Provided, That by reason of the Difference often sound between Steelyards and
Scales, no Person shall be liable to pay the Penalty aforesaid, where the
Difference, in one Draught, is not above five Pounds Weight. And for every
Tobacco-Hogshead, of the Dimensions aforesaid, the Buyer shall allow to the
Planter or Seller Five Shillings, current Money of Pennsylvania.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Person after
the Publication hereof, wilfully and fraudulently pack, Penalty on Tobacco not
being honestly packed.
or cause to be packed into Hogsheads, and offer to Sale, any Tra^h or Seconds,
rotten o^ ^rost-bitten Tob^cco, or such as shall be altogether unmerchantable,
or otherwise than what shall appear upon the He^d or Outside of the said
Tobacco when packed, and the same be discovered and found out before it be
removed from the Place of Sale, being duly convicted thereof, shall pay for
every such Hogshead so packed Forty Shilling^, current Money of this
Government, to the Poor of the County where the Offense shall be committed, any
Law, Usage or Custom to the Contrary notwithstanding.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, Dimension^ of
Flower-C^sk.
That no Bread of Flower Cask shall be made ^or Transportation of larger
Dimensions than double the Gauge os Wine-Measure abovementioned, viz. The
Half-Barrel not to exceed thirty one Gallons and a half; the Barrel sixty three
Gallons, and so proportionably.

PROVIDED ALWAYS, That any Person may make Cask as much less as they please to
suit any Market.

CHAP. LXXXI. An ACT about cutting Timber Trees.
BE IT ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Person or Persons within
this Province or Territories, shall be convict of Cutting or Falling any
Black-Walnut-Trees upon another Person's Land, without Leave, he shall forfeit
to the Owner thereof Five Pounds for every Tree so falled and cut; and for
other Timber Fifty Shillings each Tree; and for Fire or Under-Wood double the
Value thereof, to the Use aforesaid.

CHAP. LXXXII. The LAW against Drunkenness and Healths-Drinking.
Repealed.

CHAP. LXXXIII. An ACT for Bailing of Prisoners, and about Imprisonment.
Repealed.

CHAP. LXXXIV. An ACT against Pirates and Sea Robbers.
Repealed.

CHAP. LXXXV. An ACT for granting an Impost upon Wines, Rum, Beer, Ale, Cider,
etc. imported, retailed and sold in this Province and Territories.
Expired.

CHAP. LXXXVI. An ACT for raising of one Penny per Pound, and Six Shillings per
Head, for Support of Government, and Payment of Debts, and Defraying the
necessary Charge thereof.
Expired.

CHAP. LXXXVII. An ACT for Granting and Raising to the Proprietary and Governor
the Sum of Two Thousand Pounds, upon the real Value of all real and personal
Estates, and upon the Polls of all Freemen within this Province and Counties
annexed.
Expired.

CHAP. LXXXVIII. An ACT for the effectual Establishment and Confirmation of the
Freeholders of this Province and Territories, their Heirs and Assigns, in their
Lands and Tenements.
Repealed.

CHAP. LXXXIX. An ACT for Erecting a Bridge over the Creek at Chester in the
County of Chester.
Repealed.

CHAP. XC. An ACT about Country Produce to be current Pay in the Territories of
the Province of Pennsylvania.
WHEREAS there is a Necessity, for the Sake of Commerce, that the Growth of
Produce of the Territories annexed to the Province of Pennsylvania shall pass
in the Lieu of Money: BE IT ENACTED, etc. That all merchantable Wheat, Rye,
Indian-Corn, Barley, Oats, Pork, Beef and Tobacco, shall be accounted current
Pay, at the Market-Price, within the said Territories; except where Contract is
made for Silver-Money, or other Specie. Provided, That where the Debtor has
diverse S^^ts of such Country Produce as aforesaid, it shall be in the Election
of the Creditor which of them he will accept for his Debt.

CHAP. XCI. The LAW for continuing and confirming the Laws hereafter expressed.
Repealed.

CHAP. XCII. The LAW about Court Proceedings and Summons.
Any Person may appear to plead his own Cause in all Courts.
BE IT ENACTED, etc. That in all Courts, all Persons of all Persuasions may
freely appear in their own Way, and according to their own Manner, and there
personally plead their own Cause themselves, or if unable, by their Friends:
And that the first Process shall be the Exhibition of Complaint, The Method of
proceeding.
fourteen Days before the Trial: And that the Defendant may be prepared for his
Defense, he or she shall be summoned no less than ten Days before, and a Copy
of the Complaint delivered him or her, at his or her Dwelling House, to answer
unto. But before the Complaint of any Person shall be received, he or she shall
solemnly declare, in open Court, That he or she believes in his or her
Conscience that his or her Cause is just. And if the Party complained against,
shall, notwithstanding, refuse to appear, the Plaintiff shall have Judgment
against the Defendant by Default.

CHAP. XCIII. The LAW about Summoning of Iuries.
THAT due Preparation may be made for Dispatch of Justice, BE IT ENACTED, etc.
That the Sheriff of every County, shall, ten Days before the Sitting of the
ordinary Courts of Justice, summon a sufficient Number of Freemen, to attend
the said Court, for the Service of the said County; and upon Neglect of his
Duty herein, to pay double Damages to the Party or Parties grieved.

CHAP. XCIV. The LAW about Forms of Writs.
TO the End that Plainness and Brevity may be used, BE IT ENACTED, etc. That
all Arrests and Summons to answer, etc. made according to the following Forms,
shall be held legal and authentic within this Government. An ARREST.
THESE are in the King's Name to command thee to arrest the Body of A. B. if
found in thy Bailiwick, The Form of Writs.
and him safely keep, and have at the next County Court, to be held, etc. on
the -- Day of the -- Month next, as well to answer the Complaint of C. D. as to
abide the Judgment of the said Court; and make Return thereof, and of thy Doing
therein, at the said Court: Fail not at thy Peril; and for thy so Doing this
shall be thy sufficient Warrant. Given under my Hand and Seal this -- Day of
the -- Month, in the -- Year of the Reign of William the IIId, etc. Annoque Dom.

SUMMONS.
THESE are in the King's Name to require thee A. B. to be and appear at the
next County Court, And Summons.
to be held at (...) on the (...) Day of the (...) Month next, to answer the
Complaint of C. D. and hereof fail not at thy Peril. Given under my Hand and
Seal this Day (...) of the Month, in the Year of the Reign of (...) over
England, Annoque Dom.



CHAP. XCVI. The LAW about Indian-Traders.
WHEREAS great Complaints have been made, that diverse Persons who are
Non-Residents and unsettled, come into this Province, and privately and
clandestinely deal and trade with the Indians; who by reason of their
Non-Residence as aforesaid, and frequent Removal from one Province to another,
are not careful to maintain a fair Correspondence with the said Indians, and
often oppress and abuse them in their Way of Trading and Dealing with them;
which may provoke and stir up the Indians to a Revenge of the said Abuses, to
the great Prejudice and Disquietude of the Inhabitants of this Province, who
are fixed therein, and have been instrumental in the settling, promoting and
advancing the Welfare and Well-being thereof; BE IT ENACTED, etc. That no
Person, Non-Resident, Non Residents not to trade with the Indians on Penalty of
5 l. etc.
either on Shore or on board any Vessel (except such as come here with their
Families with an Intent to settle) deal or trade with any Indians within this
Government, upon any Pretense whatsoever, upon the Forfeiture of Five Pounds,
for every such Offense, and the Goods so purchased, one half to go to the
public Use of the County, and the other half to the Discoverer.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That no Inhabitant within this Province or
Territories, Nor the Inhabitants in the Woods, etc.
from henceforth, under the Penalty aforesaid, presume to deal or trade with
the Indians in the Woods, at their Towns or Wigwams after any private or
clandestine Manner, but at their respective Mansion-Houses; which said
Dwelling-Houses shall be adjudged so to be by the respective Court in each
County, any Law, Custom or Usage to the contrary notwithstanding.

CHAP. XCVII. An ACT about Officers Fees.
Supplied.

CHAP. XCVIII. An ACT for Establishing Courts of Judicature.
Repealed.

CHAP. XCIX. An ACT directing the Punishment of Larceny under Five Shillings.
Supplied.

CHAP. C. An ACT aboat Attachments under Forty Shillings.
See other Attachments 4 Annae and 1 Georgii.
WHEREAS by the Twenty-ninth Law of this Government, made at New Castle, in the
Year 1700, It was Enacted, That the Justices of the respective Counties should
grant Writs of Attachment, which were to be served by the Sheriffs or Coroners:
But forasmuch as by that Law no Attachments can be granted for a Debt under
Forty Shillings; which could it be, the Charges thereof would amount to more
than the Debt itself before the Creditor receives the same: Therefore, for the
Ease and Benefit of the People, BE IT ENACTED, etc. That if any Person shall
absent him or herself out of this Government, not taking care to satisfy and
pay his or her just Debts, it shall and may be lawful for any Justice of the
Peace, where such Person's Effects are, to grant a Writ of Attachment for any
Debt under Forty Shillings, directed to the Constable to attach the Goods and
Chattels, or other Effects of such Person, to answer the Creditor: And if he or
she shall make Proof of his or her said Debt, the Just^^e shall award Execution
for the same; to be executed by the Constable, who shall have Two Shillings for
serving the Writ of Attachment, and Three Shillings for serving the Execution;
which said Goods or other Effects shall be brought to an Appraisment, but not
sold until the Expiration of three Months next after, to the End that the
Debtor may have time to redeem them, if he see cause; any Act or Law in this
Government to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

CHAP. CI. An ACT for the Preventing of clandestine Marriages.
FOR the Preventing of clandestine, loose and unseemly Proceedings in Marriage,
within this Provi^ce and Counties annexed, BE IT ENACTED, etc. That all
Marriages not forbidden by the Law of GOD, How to be done.
shall be encouraged; but the Parents or Guardians shall, if conveniently they
can, be first consulted with, and the Partie^ Clearness of all Engagements,
signified by a Certificate from some credible Person where they have lived, or
do live, produced to such religious Society to which they relate, or to some
Justice of the Peace of the County in which they live, and by their Affixing
their Intentions of Marriage on the Courthouse or Meeting House Door in each
respective County where the Parties do reside or dwell, one Month before
Solemnization thereof; Marriage by Justice of the Peace.
the which said Publication, before it be so affixed as aforesaid* shall be
brought before one or more Justices of the Peace in the respective Counties to
which they respectively belong, which Justice shall subscribe the said
Publication, Witnessing the Time of such Declaration, and Date of the said
Publication so to be affixed as aforesaid. AND that all Marriages shall be
solemnized by taking each other for Husband and Wise before twelve sufficient
Witnesses; and the Certificate of their Marriage under the Hands of the Parties
and Witnesses, at least Twelve, and one of them a Justice of the Peace, shall
be brought to the Register of the County where they are married, and registered
in his Office. AND if any Servant or Servants shall procure themselves to be
married without Consent of his or her Master or Mistress, If S^rvants m^^ry,
they serve one whole Year more, etc.
such Servant or Servants, shall for such their Offense, each of them, serve
their respective Master or Mistress one whole Year, after the time of their
Servitude by Indenture or Engagement is expired. Penalty on a free Person's
marrying a Servant, etc.
AND if any Person being free, shall marry with a Servant as aforesaid, he or
she ^o Marrying shall pay to the Master or Mistress of the Servant, if a Man,
Twelve Pounds, and if a Woman, Six Pounds, or one Year's Service; and the
Servant so being married, shall abide with his or her Master or Mistress
according to Indenture or Agreement, Penalty on Marrying contrary to this Act.
and one Year after as aforesaid. AND if any Person shall presume to marry, or
be Witnesses to any Marriage, contrary to this Act, such Person so married,
shall forfeit Twenty Pounds to the Proprietary and Governor; and the Witnesses
being present at such Marriage shall forfeit and pay each of them Five Pounds,
to the Use of the Proprietary and Governor as aforesaid, and pay Damages to the
Party grieved, to be recovered in any Court of Record within this Government.

Marriages in religious Societies, etc. excepted.
PROVIDED, That this Law shall not extend to any who shall marry or be married
in the religious Society to which they belong, so as Notice shall be given by
either of the Parties to the Parents, Masters, Mistresses or Guardian, one full
Month, at least, before any such Marriage be solemnized.

AND IT IS FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That no License or
Dispensation shall hinder or obstruct the Force or Operation of this Act, in
respect of Notice to be given to Parents, Masters, Mistresses or Guardians as
aforesaid.

CHAP. CII. An ACT for preventing Accidents that happen by Fire in the Towns of
Bristol (formerly called Buckingham) Philadelphia, Germantown, Derby, Chester,
New Castle and Jews, within this Government.
BE IT ENACTED by the Authority af^resaid, That if within ten Days after the
Publication hereof, Forty Shillings Penalty for Chimnies taking Fire* etc.
any Person or Persons, within any of the said Towns, set on fire their
Chimnie^ to cleanse them, or shall suffer them, or any of them to be so ^oul as
to take Fire and blaze out at the Top, and be duly convicted thereof, by two
c^e^ible Persons of the Neighborhood, before some one Justice of the Peace,
such Person or Persons shall forfeit, for ^very such Offense, Forty Shillings.

AND for the further securing of Houses, and Preventing of Fire from Destroying
them in the said Towns, BE IT ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That every
Owner or Tenant of every Dwelling House within the said Towns, shall, Buckets,
etc. to be kept by every Owner of a dwelling House* on Penalty, etc.
within ten Days after the Publication hereof, provide and keep in or by his or
her House a Swab* at least fou^teen Foot long, as also two Leather Buckets,
within six Months at farthest after the Publication aforesaid, to be always
ready against any Accidents of Fire, under the Penalty of Ten Shillings for
every respective Neglect hereof, to be convicted a^ aforesaid.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That if any Person shall presume to smoke Tobacco
in the Streets of Philadelphia, either by Day or Night, shall forfeit, One
S^illing Fine for Smo^king in the Street.
for every such Offense, Twelve Pence; all which said Fines shall be paid to
the respective Justices of each Township, for the Use of the Town, and are to
be employed for buying and providing Leather-Buckets, Hooks and other
Instruments and Engines against Fires, for the public Use of each Town
resp^ctively.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That no Person, This
Claus^ altered by the Law for Erecting a Powder-House in Phil^delphia
within the Town of Philadelphia, after six Months, next following the
Publication hereof, presume to keep in their Houses, Shops or Warehouses more
than six Pounds of Gunpowder, at one time, unless it be forty Perches distant
from any Dwelling House, under the Penalty of Ten Pounds, for every such
Offense, to the Use aforesaid, to be convicted in Manner above expressed.

AND IT IS HEREBY FURTHER ENACTED, Hooks to be provided, and by whom, etc.
That it shall and may be lawful for any one or more Justices of the Town of
Philadelphia, to procure or cause to be made, four or six good sufficient Hooks
for pulling down Houses in case of Fire (the said Justice or Justices taking to
his or their Assistance two or more of the skilful Freeholders, for that
Purpose.) The said Hooks to be paid for out of the Fines that shall or may
accrue by this Act; or for Want thereof, out of any other Money that is or
shall be raised in Philadelphia for the Use of said Town.

CHAP. CIII. An ACT against Swine running at large in several Townships, etc.
Repealed.

CHAP. CIV. An ACT for the Destruction of Black-Birds and Crows.
WHEREAS it manifestly appears, by the innumerable Quantities of Black-Birds
and Crows, that continually haunt in this Province and Territories, to the
great Prejudice, Hurt and Annoyance of the Inhabitants thereof, being very
destructive to all Sorts of Corn and Grain that is raised therein, so that the
People's Labor is much destroyed thereby: And that the People may for the
Future be the better encouraged in their Labor and Industry, by Destroying
such Birds, thereby to hinder the great Increase, BE IT ENACTED by the
Authority aforesaid, Reward for killing Black-Birds, and Crows.
That whosoever shall at any time hereafter kill either Black-Birds or Crows,
shall, for all such Black-Birds that he or they shall so kill, have Three Pence
the Dozen; and for every Crow Three Pence: Provided, Vid^ County Levy-Act.
That such Person or Persons do and shall bring the Head^ of all such
Black-Birds or Crows to such Person or Persons as shall, by the respective
County Courts in each County within this Province and Territories, be appointed
to receive and take an Account of the same; which said County Courts are hereby
empowered and required yearly to appoint, from time to time, as many Persons as
they think convenient for that Service. And that such Person or Persons who
shall be appointed to receive and take an Account of all such Black-Birds and
Crows as aforesaid, shall have and receive for the same after the Rate of Ten
per Cent. All which said Sum or Sums of Money, as the same shall amount unto,
shall be defrayed and paid out of the public Stock; to be levied and raised in
such Manner and Form, in each County, as other public Charges of this
Government are used to be raised and discharged.

PROVIDED, That all and every such Person and Persons who are so appointed to
receive and take an Account of the Heads of all such Black-Birds and Crows that
shall be brought to them by the Inhabitants as aforesaid, be attested to the
faithful Discharge of their Duty therein, and to keep an exact Account thereof,
which Account shall be deemed good and effectual: And that such Persons shall
yearly bring their Accounts to the Court and Grand Jury at such time as is by
the Law appointed for Calculating the public Charges of the County.

CHAP. CV. An ACT for the Sale of the Courthouse and Prison in the County of
Chester.
Approved.

CHAP. CVI. An ACT against selling Rum and other strong Liquors to the Indians.
WHEREAS our Proprietary and Governor, and the Representatives of the Freemen
of this Province and Territories in General Assembly met, are still desirous to
induce the Indian Nations to the Love of the Christian Religion, by the gentle,
sober and just Manners of prosest Christians (under this Government) towa^^s
them: And it being too obvious that diverse Person^ within this Province, have
used and practiced the selling of Rum, Brandy and other strong Liquors in such
Quantities to the Indians; many of whom are not yet able to govern themselves
in the Use thereof (as by sad Experience is too well known) that they are
generally apt to drink to great Excess; whereby they are not only liable to be
cheated, and reduced to great Poverty and Want, but sometimes inflamed to
destroy themselves and one another, and terrify, annoy and endanger the
Inhabitants. The Reason of this Act.
AND forasmuch as several Sachims or Sachamacks, Kings of the Indian Nations,
have, in their Treaties with the Proprietary and Governor, earnestly desired
that no European should be permitted to carry Rum to their Towns, because of
the Mischiefs before expressed. AND since these evil Practices tend to the
great Dishonor of GOD, Scandal of the Christian Religion, and Hindrance to the
Embracing thereof, as well as drawing the Judgments of GOD upon the Country, if
not timely prevented: For the Prevention whereof for the future, BE IT ENACTED*
by the Authority aforesaid, Ten Pound^ Forfeiture for se^ling Rum, to the
Indians.
That if any Person inhabiting in this Province, or others, shall, after the
Publication hereof, directly or indirectly sell, barter, give or exchange, by
themselves or others, any Rum, Brandy or other Spirits, mixed or unmixed, to or
with any Indian within Province, and be lawfully convicted thereof, shall, for
every such Offense, forfeit Ten Pounds, one half to the Use of the County
wherein he is convicted, and the other half to the Discoverer and Prosecutor;
to be recovered in any Court of Record within this Government, any Law, Usage
or Custom to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

AND WHEREAS it has been very difficult to prevent this Evil, for Want of
Proof against the Offenders, because they privately deal with the Indians, and
very often back in the Woods, out of the View of any but themselves: THEREFORE
BE IT ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, How to convict the Offende^s.
That the Evidence of one professed Christian, with other probable
Circumstances, to the Satisfaction of the Court and Jury, shall be sufficient
to convict the Offenders herein.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That all Rum, Brandy or
other strong Liquors, Rum, etc. carried to their Towns to be forfeited.
that shall be carried or offered to Sale or Disposal to or at any of the
Indian Towns or Habitations, within the Bounds of this Province, the same shall
be forfeit, and is hereby declared to be forfeited, one Third to the Governor,
and two Thirds to such Person or Persons as shall seize the same. AND all
Persons (as well Indians as others) are hereby empowered to seize and secure
all such Rum, Brandy, and other strong Liquors, so found at any Indian Towns or
Settlements as aforesaid.

AND WHEREAS some Persons in this Province have heretofore taken Match-Coats,
Guns, Kettles and other Necessaries of Hunting and Clothing in Pawn from the
Indians; whereby (being disabled to hunt) they have been deprived of a
necessary Subsistence: For Prevention whereof for the future, BE IT ENACTED by
the Authority aforesaid, That no Person within this Province, No Person to take
any Pawn of an Indian:
shall, at any time hereafter, take or receive of any Indian any Pawn
whatsoever, for any Rum, Brandy or other strong Liquors, or other Goo^s, under
any Pretense whatsoever, under the Penalty of forfeiting of such Pawn to the
Indian or Indians so Pawning the same as aforesaid, over and above the Fine of
Ten Pounds aforesaid: The said Pawn, forfeited as aforesaid, to be seized by
Warrant from the next Justice of the Peace, directed to the Constable of the
Place where such Offenders shall live, upon Complaint and sufficient Proof made
thereof to him as aforesaid.

ANNO REGNI ANNAE REGINAE QUARTO.
At a GENERAL ASSEMBLY begun at Philadelphia, in the Province of Pennsylvania,
the Fourteenth Day of October, in the Fourth Year of the Reign of our Sovereign
Lady ANNE, Queen of Great Britain, etc. Annoque Domini One Thousand Seven
Hundred and Five, and continued by Adjournments till the Twelfth Day of
January, then next ensuing: On which Day the following ACTS were passed by JOHN
EVANS, Esquire Lieutenant Governor under WILLIAM PENN, Esquire absolute Proprietary and
Governor in chief of the said Province of Pennsylvania, etc. That is to say,
CHAP. CVII. The LAW concerning Liberty of Conscience.
[See Page 4.]

CHAP. CVIII. An ACT against Murder and Manslaughter.
Altered and supplied by the Act for the Advancement of Justice, passed the 4
Georgii.

CHAP. CIX. An ACT against Burglary.
Supplied by 4 Georgii.

CHAP. CX. An ACT against Robbing and Stealing.
Supplied by 4 Georgii.

CHAP. CXI. An ACT to restrain People from Labor on the First Day of the Week.
TO the End that all People within this Province may with the greater Freedom
devote themselves to religious and pious Exercises, BE IT ENACTED, etc. That
according to the Example of the Primitive Christians, and for the Ease of the
Creation, every First Day of the Week, commonly called Sunday, all People shall
abstain from Toil and Labor, that whether Masters, Parents, Children,
Servants, or others, they may the better dispose themselves to read and hear
the Holy Scriptures of Truth at Home, and frequent such Meetings of religious
Worship abroad as may best suit their respective Persuasions. And that no
Tradesman, Artificer, Penalty on Working upon the First Day of the Week.
Workman, Labourer, or other Person whatsoever, shall do or exercise any
worldly Business or Work of their ordinary Callings, on the First Day, or any
Part thereof (Works of Necessity and Charity only excepted) upon Pain that
every Person so offending, shall, for every Offense, forfeit the Sum of Twenty
Shillings, to the Use of the Poor of the Place where the Offense was committed;
being thereof convicted before any Justice, either upon his View, Confession of
the Party, or Proof of one or more Witnesses. And the said Justice shall give
Warrant, under his Hand and Seal, to the next Constable where such Offense
shall be committed, to levy the said Forfeitu^^ or Penalty by Distress and Sale
of the Offender's Goods and Chattels, rendering to the said Offender the
Overplus of the Money raised thereby.

Exception.
PROVIDED ALWAYS, That nothing in this Act contained shall extend to prohibit
the Dressing of Victuals in Families, Cooks-Shops or Victualing-Houses, or to
Watermen landing their Passengers on the First Day of the Week; nor to Butchers
their Killing and Selling of Meat, or Fishermen from selling Fish on the First
Day of the Week, in the fourth, fifth and sixth Months, called June, July and
August; nor to the Crying of Milk, before Nine of the Clock in the Morning, or
after Five in the Afternoon.

No Person to be impeached ten Days after the Offense committed.
PROVIDED ALSO, That no Person shall be impeached, presented or molested for any
Offense beforementioned in this Act, unless he or they be prosecuted for the
same within ten Days after the Offense committed.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, No Writ to be served,
except for Treason, etc.
That no Person or Persons upon the First Day of the Week, shall serve or cause
to be served or executed any Writ, Precept, Warrant, Order, Judgment or Decree,
except in Case of Treason, Felony or Breach of the Peace; but that the serving
of any such Writ, Precept, Order, Judgment or Decree shall be void to all
Intents and Purposes whatsoever: And the Person or Persons so serving or
executing the same, shall be as (...) to the Suit of the Party grieved, and to
answer (...), to him for doing thereof, as if he or they had done the same
without any Writ, Precept, Warrant, Order, Judgment or Decr^e at all.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, Penalty on Persons who
sit Tippling in Taverns, etc. on the first Day of the Week.
That all Persons who are found Drinking and Tippling in Alehouses, Taverns,
or other public House or Place, on the First Day of the Week, commonly called
Sunday, or any Part thereof, shall, for every Offense, forfeit and pay One
Shilling and Six Pence, to any Constable that shall demand the same, to the Use
of the Poor: And all Constables are hereby empowered, and by Virtue of their
Office, required to search public Houses and Places suspected to entertain
such Tipplers, and them, when found, quietly to dispe^se; but in case of
Refusal, to bring the Persons so refusing before the next Justice of the Peace,
who may commit such Offenders to the Stocks, and bind them to their good
Behavior, as to him ^^all seem requisite. AND the Keepers of such Ale-Hou^^^,
Penalty on Innholders, etc. suffering Persons to ^it Tippling on First Days.
Taverns, or other public House or Place, as shall countenance or tolerate any
such Practices, being convicted thereof, by the View of a single Magistrate,
his own Confession, or the Proof of one or more credible Witnesses, shall, for
every Offense, forfeit and pay T^n Shillings, to be recovered for the Uses
abovesaid.

PROVIDED ALWAYS, Exception:
That nothing in this Act be const^ued to prevent Victualing-Houses, or other
public House or Place from supplying the necessary Occ^sions of Travelers,
Inmates, Lodgers, or others, on the First Da^ of the Week, with Victuals and
Drink, in Moderation, for Refreshment only; of which necessary Occasion for
Refreshment, as also Moderation, the Magistrate before whom Complaint is made,
shall be Judge; any Law, Usage or Custom, in this Province, to the contrary
notwithstanding.

CHAP. CXII. An ACT against Rape or Ravishment.
Supplied by 4 Georgii.

CHAP. CXIII. An ACT against Incest.
FOR the Preventing of incestuous Marriages within this Province, BE IT
ENACTED, etc. That all Marriages hereafter made within the Degrees of
Consanguinity or Affinity, according to the following Table, Penalty on
Marrying within the Degrees herein mentioned.
are hereby declared to be void, to all Intents and Purposes; and it shall be
lawful for the Governor for the time being, to grant a Divorce from the Bond of
Matrimony, and the Parties shall be fined to the Value of one third Part of
their Estates.

AND if any Person or Persons shall be convicted of incestuous Fornication or
Adultery, he, Imprisonment and Forfeiture on incestuous Fornicators.
she or they so convicted, shall suffer such Punishments as are by Law against
Fornication and Adultery, and be fined to the Value of one third Part of their
Estates; to be paid to the Proprietary and Governor, for the time being, for
the Support of the Government and Defraying the contingent Charges thereof.

The Table of Degrees of Consangui^ity and Affinity, is as follows, viz.
Degrees of Consanguinity. Degrees of Affinity. A Man may not marry His Mother.
A Man may not marry His Father's Wife. His Father's Sister. His Son's Wife. His
Mother's Sister. His Son's Daughter. His Sister. His Wife's Daughter. His
Daughter. The Daughter of his Wife's Son or Daughter. The Daughter of his Son
or Daughter. Degrees of Consanguinity. Degrees of Affinity. A Wom^n may not
marry Her Father. A Woman may not marry Her Mother's Husband. Her Father's
Brother. Her Mother's Brother. Her Daughter's Husband. Her Brother. Her Son.
Her Husband's Son. The Son of her Son or Daughter. The Son of her Husband's Son
or Daughter.

CHAP. CXIV. An ACT against Adultery and Fornication.
FOR the Preservation of Virtue, Chastity and Purity amongst the Inhabitants of
this Province, and Prevention of the heinous Sins of Adultery and Fornication,
BE IT ENACTED, and^. That if any Person or Persons shall commit Adultery,
Penalty on Committing Adultery.
and be thereof legally convict, such Person or Persons, shall, for the first
Offense receive, on his or her bare Back, Twenty-one Lashes, well laid on, at
the common Whipping-Post, and suffer Imprisonment for one whole Year, at hard
Labor, or be fined Fifty Pounds, one half to the Use of the Governor, and the
other Half to the Use of the Poor, at the Election of the Party offending: And
the injured Husband or Wife, shall have a Bill of Divorce, from Board and Bed,
granted him or her, by the Governor or Lieutenant Governor for the time being,
if required, within one Year after Conviction. AND if such Person or Persons
shall offend a second time, and shall again be thereof convicted, such Person
or Persons shall receive, on his or her bare Back, Twenty-one Lashes at the
common Whipping-Post, and be imprisoned Seven Years at hard Labor, or pay One
Hundred Pounds as aforesaid: And for the third, and every Offense after, the
same Punishment, and be branded with the Letter A.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, Penalties on Fornicators.
That if any Person or Persons shall commit Fornication, and be thereof legally
convicted, such Person or Persons shall receive Twenty-one Lashes on his or her
bare Back, well laid on, at the common Whipping-Post, or otherwise shall
forfeit and pay, to the Proprietary and Governor, for the Support of the
Government of this Province, and Defraying contingent Charges thereof, the Sum
of Ten Pounds, at the Election of such Person convicted as aforesaid.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, What shall be Proof.
That any single or unmarried Woman having a Child born of her Body, the same
shall be sufficient Proof to convict such single or unmarried Woman of
Fornication; and the Man by such Woman charged to be the Father of such Child,
shall be the reputed Father; and she persisting in the said Charge in the time
of her Extremity of Labor, or afterward in open Court, upon the Trial of such
Person so charged, the same shall be given in Evidence, in order to convict
such Persons of Fornication.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, A married Woman having a
Child in the Absenc^ of her Husband, how to be punished.
That if any married Woman within this Province shall be convicted of having a
Child born of her Body, in the Absence of her Husband, and shall not be able,
by credible Evidence, to prove that her Husband has cohabited or been in
Company with her, or has been in some of the Queen's Colonies or Plantations on
this Continent, betwixt the Eastermost Parts of New England and the Southermost
Parts of North Carolina, within Twelve-months before the Birth of such Child,
such Woman shall be punished as an Adultress.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, Any Woman bearing a
Bast^rd Child, to be punished in the County where the Child is born, and^.
That if an unmarried Woman absenting herself from the Place where she usually
lived, shall come into any County within this Government, and there bear a
Bastard-Child, she shall be liable to be punished in the County where the said
Child is born, as she should or might have been, had the Child been there
begotten. And whosoever, within this Government, shall knowingly entertain or
shelter any such Woman, Penalty on Persons entertaining such Women.
without giving Notice thereof to some one Justice of the Peace, within three
Days after her coming into his or her House to lodge, shall forfeit Five Pounds
for every such Offense.

Judgment against such m^rried Wom^n not to be pu^ in Execution till 12 Months
after, etc.
PROVIDED ALWAYS, That the Judgment or Sentence against such married Woman shall
not be put in Execution till after the Expiration of Twelve-months, next after
such her Condition, and shall remain in Prison during that time, unless she
give Security to abide the Judgment. And in case her Husband shall, within the
said Term, come and declare, That he had cohabited with his Wife within the
said Term of Twelve-months, next before the Birth of the said Child, and own
and declare himself to be the Father thereof, Execution shall be stopped, and
the Woman discharged.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That if any single
Woman, being a Servant by Indenture or Covenant, A Servant Woman h^ving a
Bastard Child shall serve, etc.
bear a Bastard-Child within the time of her Servitude, she shall serve such
further time beyond the Term in her Indenture or Covenant mentioned, as the
Justices of the Peace, in their Quarter Sessions shall think fit, as a
Compensation to her Master or Mistress, for the Loss and Damage they had (...)
by Reason of her bearing such Bastard in the time of (...) Servitude; Provided,
it be not more than two Years, nor less than one.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That every Person being
legally convict to be the reputed Father of a Bastard-Child, The reputed
Father, etc to maintain the Child.
shall give Security to the Court, Town or Place where such Child was born, to
perform such Order for the Maintenance of such Child, as the Justices of the
Peace in their Session shall direct and appoint.

CHAP. CXV. An ACT against Bigamy.
BE IT ENACTED, etc. How punished.
That whosoever shall be convicted of having two Wives or two Husbands, at one
and the same time, shall be whipped on his or her bare Back Thirty-nine Lashes,
and be imprisoned during Life, at hard Labor; and the second Marriage shall be
void. AND if any Man or Woman, being unmarried, shall knowingly marry the
Husband or Wife of another Person, such Man or Woman shall be punished as
aforesaid; and the first Wife or Husband of the Person offending against this
Act, shall have a Bill of Divorce, from Board and Bed, granted by the Governor
for the time being, against the Husband or Wife so offending, if desired,
within one Year after Conviction.

CHAP. CXVI. An ACT against Sodomy and Buggery.
Supplied by 4 Georgii.

CHAP. CXVII. An ACT against Burning of Houses, etc.
Supplied by 4 Georgii.

CHAP. CXVIII. An ACT against Drunkenness and Drinking of Healths.
FOR the Discouragement and Punishment of Drunkenness, BE IT ENACTED, etc.
Punished by Fine or Imprisonment.
That every Person disordering or abusing him or herself with excessive
Drinking unto Drunkenness; as also (...) who are instrumental thereto, by
imposing strong Liquors, with drinking Healths, or otherwise, to provoke to the
same; and every Person suffering any such Excess in their Houses, being
convicted thereof, by one or more credible Witnesses, shall, for the first
Offense, pay Five Shillings, or suffer five Days Imprisonment, at hard Labor;
and for the Second, and every Offense after* Ten Shillings, or ten Days
Imprisonment as aforesaid.

CHAP. CXIX. An ACT against riotous Sports, Plays and Games.
Repealed.

CHAP. CXX. An ACT against Riots and Rioters.
Punished according to the Laws of England.
BE IT ENACTED, etc. That if any Persons, to the Number of three, or more, shall
meet together with Clubs, Staves, or any other hurtful Weapon^, to the Terror
of any the peaceable People or Inhabitant^ of this Province, and shall commit,
or design to commit Violence or Injury upon the Person or Goods of any of the
said Inhabitants, and shall be convicted thereof, such Persons shall be reputed
and punished as Rioters, according to the Laws of England; and such Act of
Terror or Violence, or Design of Violence, shall be deemed and accounted a Riot.

CHAP. CXXI. An ACT for Limiting the Presentiments of Grand-Iuries.
Repealed.

CHAP. CXXII. An ACT for Determining of Debts under Forty Shillings.
Supplied.

CHAP. CXXIII. An ACT for further securing the Administration of the Government
of this Province.
Repealed.

CHAP. CXXIV. An ACT for the better Confirmation of the Owners of Lands, and
Inhabitants of this Province, in their just Rights and Possessions.
WHEREAS the late King Charles the Second, by his Royal Charter to William
Penn, Proprietary and Governor of this Province, did declare, That the Laws for
Regulating and Governing of Property within this Province, for Descent and
Enjoyment of Lands, as likewise for the Enjoyment and Succession of Goods and
Chattels, should be and continue the same as they should be for the time being
by the general Course of the Law in England, until the said Laws should be
altered by the said William Penn, his Heirs or Assigns, and the Freemen of the
said Province, their Delegates or Deputies, or the greater Part of them.

AND WHEREAS diverse Laws have been enacted in this Province, that made all
Lands and Tenements (without any regard to the Fee-simple, or other Tenures by
which they were held) as liable to pay Debts as Chattels, and be taken and sold
upon Executions, or by Decrees in Courts of Equity, or to be sold by such
Executors as had no Power by their Testators Wills for so doing, and in certain
Cases to be sold by Administrators, as also to be divided, allotted and
distributed amongst the Widows and Children of Intestates. In Pursuance of
which Laws diverse Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments in this Province have been
sold, delivered, assigned, allotted or distributed accordingly. Now, to the End
that those Sales, Deliveries, Assignments and Allotments, or Distributions, may
have Effect according to the Tenor and true Meaning of the said Laws, and that
the Possessors and Owners of the said Lands and Hereditaments so sold,
delivered, assigned and distributed, and their Heirs and Successors may
quietly, have, hold and enjoy the same;

BE IT ENACTED, etc. That all and singular the Bargains and Sales being made,
bona fide, All Bargain S^les, etc. made according to the Tenor of sundry Laws,
etc. are declared good.
and for valuable Consideration, as all Assignments, Grants and Allotments or
Distributions made to any Person or Persons whatsoever, of any Lands, Ten^^ents
or Hereditaments, in this Province, according to the Tenor and Direction, or
the true Intent and Meaning of the said Laws in those Cases made and provided,
shall be, and are hereby declared to be good and effectual, and shall stand and
be taken, deemed and adjudged good, sure and available in Law, against all
Persons whatsoeve, according to the Tenor and Effect of the same Bargains,
(...), Assignments, Grants and Allotments or Distributions; And every Person
claiming by the said La^s, etc shall quietly enjoy, etc.
and that every Person or Persons, Bodies politic and corporate, their Heirs
and Successors, and all claiming by, from or under them, or any of them, for
and according to their and every of their several Estates and Interests of, in
and to the said Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, with their Appurtenances,
so as aforesa^d sold, delivered, assign^d or allotted, shall and may quietly or
peaceably have, hold and enjoy the same Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments and
Premises, and every Part thereof, against all and every Person and Persons,
their Heirs and Assigns, having, claiming or pretending to have any Estate,
Right, Title, Interest, Claim or Demand whatsoever, of, in, or to the same:
Saving nevertheless to all Persons, etc.
SAVING NEVERTHELESS, To all and every Person and Persons, Bodies politic and
co^porate (others than to the Person or Persons for Payment of whose Debts, and
Maintenance of whose Widows and Children, any of the said Lands, Tenements,
Hereditaments have been sold, delivered or conveyed as aforesaid, and his and
their Heirs; and others than to the Heirs at Law of the said Intestates, or any
claiming under them, who shall attempt to avoid or annul the said Divisions,
Allotments or Distributions which have been made of the said Intestates Lands
and Hereditaments amongst their Widows and Children by Virtue or in Pursuance
of the said Laws) all such Actions, Estates, Possessions, Rights, Titles,
Interests, Rents, Profits and Demands, as they or any of them have, shall, may
or ought to have of, in or to all or any the said Lands, Tenements and
Hereditaments, or any Part thereof, in such Manner and Form as if this Act had
never been made: So that they do pursue their said Rights, Titles, Claims and
Interest, by Way of Action or lawful Entry, before the first Day of October,
which will be in the Year of our LORD, One Thousand Seven Hundred and Ten.

L^nds, etc. which have been distributed according to these Law^ shall be held
by the Partie^ as Tenant^ in common.
PROVIDED ALWAYS, That all and every the Widows and Children of Intestates, to
or amongst whom any Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments have been allotted or
distributed by Virtue of the said Laws, and all and every Person and Persons to
whom any Parts or Purparts of Lands, Tenements or Hereditaments have, as
aforesaid, been, or hereafter shall be sold or delivered upon Executions, shall
hold and enjoy their said respective Parts, Purparts or Allotments, in
Severality, or as Tenants in common, and not as Joint-Tenants.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That no Deed, Grant, No
Deed to be avoided for Want of Form, etc.
Conveyance or Assurance hereto^ore made of any Lands, Tenements or
Hereditaments whatsoever, shall be judged or taken to be defective, avoided or
prejudiced, for or by Reason of any Want of Form, or formal or orderly Parts of
a Deed, as, the Premises, Habendum, Tenendum, Reddendum, the Clause of
Warranty, the Conclusion, In Witness whereof, and Date, or for Mis-naming,
Mis-recital o^ Non-recital of any of the said Lands or Hereditaments, or for
Mis-recital or Non-recital or not mentioning, or not true mentioning of the
Grantor's Estates, of, in, or to the Premises, O^ Livery and Seisin, etc.
or for Want of Livery and Seizin or Attournment, or Proofs of the
Consideration-Money actually paid, or for not producing in Court, upon Trial,
any of the Deeds or Grants recited in the said Conveyances, or for not being
recorded in the Rolls-Office: But that all and every the said Deeds, But are
declared to be good notwithstanding.
Grants and Conveyances, Releases and Assurances shall be and are hereby
declared and enacted to be good and available in Law, and shall be expounded as
the Law of this Province was when they were made, and shall conclude all
Strangers, as well as Privies to the same; Saving to every Person and Persons,
Saving to all Persons such Rights, etc.
other than to the said Grantors, their Heirs and Successors, all such Rights,
Titles, Estates, Claims and Interests as they or any of them had, or ought to
have, of, in or to the said Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, or any Part
thereof, at the time when such Deeds or Conveyances were sealed and delivered,
so as they do pursue their said Rights, Titles, Claims or Interests by Way of
Action or lawful Entry, before the first Day of October, which will be in the
Year of our LORD, One Thousand Seven Hundred and Ten.

CHAP. CXXV. An ACT concerning the Probates of written and nuncupative Wills,
and for confirming Devises of Lands.
Wills proved in this Province,
BE IT ENACTED, etc. That all Wills in Writing, wherein or whereby any Lands,
Tenement^ or Hereditaments, within this Province, have been, are or shall be
devised, being proved by two or more credible Witnesses, Or (...) in the
Chanc^ry in England, etc. and the Copy and P^obate transmitted hither, etc.
shall be good, etc.
upon their solemn Affirmation, or by other legal Proof, in this Province; or
being proved in the Chancery in England, and the Bill, Answer and Depositions
transmitted hither, under the Seal of that Court, or being proved in the
Hustings or Mayor's Court in London, or in some Mannor-Court, or before such as
have or shall have Power in England, or elsewhere, to take Probates of Wills
and grant Letters of Administration, and a Copy of such Will, with the Probate
thereof annexed or endorsed, being transmitted hither, under the public or
common Seal of the Courts or Offices where the same have been or shall be taken
or granted, and recorded or entered in the Register-General's Office in this
Province; shall be good and available in Law, for the granting, conveying and
assuring of the Lands or Hereditaments thereby given or devised, as well as of
Goods and Chattels thereby bequeathed; And the Copies of all Wills, etc. under
the Seals of, etc. where the same was taken, are to be taken and deemed Matter
of Record.
and that the Copies of all Wills and Probates, under the public Seals of the
Courts or Offices where the same have been or shall be taken or granted
respectively (other than Copies or Probates of such Wills as shall appear to be
annulled, disproved or revoked) shall be judged and deemed, and are hereby
declared and enacted to be Matter of Record, and shall be good Evidence to
prov^ the Gift or Devise thereby made; and that all such Probates, as well as
all Letters of Administration granted out of this Province, being produced here
under the Seals of the Courts or Offices granting the same, shall be as
sufficient to enable the Ex^cutors or Administrators, by themselves or
Attorneys, to bring their Actions in any Court within this Province, as if the
same Probates or Letters Testamentary or Administrations were granted here and
produced under the Seal of the Register-General's Office of this Province.

PROVIDED ALWAYS, I^ any Will shall happen to be revoked or altered, the
Parties aggrieved may have their Action, etc.
That if any of the Wills (whereof Copies or Probates shall be so as aforesaid
produced and given in Evidence) shall, within seven Years after the Testator's
Death, appear to be disproved or annulled before any Judge or Officer, having
Conusance thereof, or shall happen to be revoked or altered by the Testator,
either by a latter Will or Codicil in Writing, duly proved as aforesaid; that
then and in every such Case, it shall and may be lawful for the Party
aggrieved, or his or their Heirs, Executors or Assigns, to have their Action
for what shall be taken or detained from them by Occasion of such Wills, or
have their Writ or Writs of Error for Reversing the judicial Proceedings
thereupon, as the Case shall require, any thing herein contained to the
Contrary notwithstanding.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That from henceforth no
nuncupative Will be good where the Estate thereby bequeathed shall exceed the
Value of Thirty Pounds, Sundry Cases where a nuncupative Will is, and is not
good.
that is not proved by two or more Witnesses, who were present at the making
thereof, nor unless it be proved that the Testator at the time of pronouncing
the same, did bid the Persons present, or some of them, bear witness, That such
was his Will, or to that Effect, nor unless such nuncupative Will be made in
the time of the last Sickness of the Deceased, and in the House of his or their
Habitation or Dwelling, or where he or she has been Resident for the Spa^e of
ten Days, or more, next before the Making of such Will, except where such
Person was surprised or taken sick, being from his own Home, died before he
returned to the Place of his or her Dwelling.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That after six Months
past after speaking of the pretended testamentary Words, no Testimony shall be
received to prove any Will nuncupative, except the said Testimony, or the
Substance thereof, were committed to Writing within six Days after the Making
of the said Will.

AND BE IT ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, Nuncupative Will not to pass the
Seal, etc within 14 Days.
That no Letters Testamentary or Probate of any nuncupative Will shall pass the
Seal of the Register-General's Office, in the respective Counties of this
Province, till fourteen Days, at the least, after the Death of the Testator be
fully expired; nor shall any nuncupative Will be at any time received to be
proved unless Process be first issued out to call in the Widow or next of
Kindred to the Deceased, to the End they may contest the ^ame if they please.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, No written Will ^o be
altered, etc. by Words only, except, etc.
That no Will in Writing concerning any Goods or Chattels, or personal Estate,
shall be repealed, nor shall any Clause, Devise or Bequest therein be altered
or changed by any Words or Will by Word of Mouth only, except the same be in
the Life of the Testator committed to Writing, and after the Writing thereof
read unto the Testator, and allowed by him, and proved to b^ so done by two or
more Witnesses.

PROVIDED ALWAYS, That notwithstanding this Act, Any Mariner, etc. being
absent, may dispose of his personal Estate, etc.
any Mariner or Person being at Sea, or Soldier, being in actual military
Service, may dispose of his Movables, Wages and personal Estate, as he or they
might have done before the Making of this Act.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That there shall be an
Officer, called Register-General, A Register-General constituted, and to keep
his Office in Philadelphia; and shall appoint a Deputy in each County, etc.
to be commissionated by the Governor from time to time, for the Probate of
Wills and granting Letters of Administration in this Province; which
Register-General shall keep his Office at Philadelphia, and shall, from time to
time, constitute a sufficient Deputy to officiate for him in each of the other
Counties of this Province; who, being by him deputed, shall be and are by this
Act empowered to take Probates of Wills, and grant Letters of Administration in
the respective Counties, as fully and amply as the Register-General himself
ever could, or can do, according to the Powers granted by the Royal Charter of
the late King Charles the Second. Which Deputies shall have and use a common
Seal, to be provided at the Char^e of the respective Counties where they serve,
with the like Inscriptions as is or shall be upon the Receiver-General's Office
at Philadelphia. Provided, That no Person who shall prove any Will, No Person
obliged to prove Wills* or take Letters of Administration in more than one
County.
or take Letters of Administration, in any one of the Counties of this
Province, shall be obliged to prove the same Will, or take Letters of
Administration in any other of the said Counties, wherever such Testator's or
Intestate's Estates may lie or be. But before any Register-General, or his
Deputies shall enter upon their respective Offices, they shall be duly
qualified, either before the Governor, TheRegister-General, and (...) Deputies
(...) be qualifi^^; how and when; and shall give 200 l. Security.
or the Orphans-Court of the County where they respectively officiate. And
every Register-General, and every of his Deputies, shall find one or more
sufficient Su^^eties with himself, to become bound to the Governor for the time
being, in a Bond of Two Hundred Pounds, for the true and faithful Execution of
his Office, and for the Delivering up the Records, and other Writings belonging
to the said Office, by him, his Heirs, Executors and Administrators, to his
Successor in the said Office, whole and undefaced; which said Bond shall be
recorded in the Orphans-Court, and be kept by one of the Justices of the said
Court, as the Majority of the Justices for the time being shall order; to be
made use of for making Satisfaction to the Parties that shall be damnified or
aggrieved, as is, or shall be directed by the Laws of this Province in such
Cases. AND if the Register-General, or his Deputies, If the Register-General,
o^ his Deputies, shall act without giving Security, or he refuse to constitute
Deputie^* he or they shall forfeit 200 l.
or any of them shall officiate in the said Office before he has given such
Security, or if the Register-General for the time being, shall refuse or
neglect to constitute a Deputy-Register in each County, according to the
Direction of this Act, then and in every such Case he or they so offending
shall forfeit the Sum of Two Hundred Pounds, to be recovered in any Court of
Record in this Province; and the one Half thereof shall go to the Governor, for
Support of Government, and the other Half to him or them that shall sue for the
same.

CHAP. CXXVI. An ACT directing the Order of Payment of Debts of Persons
deceased.
FOR the Preventing Disputes and Contests at Law, or otherways concerning the
Order of Payment of Debts of Persons deceased, within (...) Province, BE IT
ENACTED, The M^nner and Order (...) the same.
etc. That all ^ebts owing by any Person within this Province, at ^he (...) his
or her Decease, shall be paid by his or her (...) Administrators (so far as
they have Assets) in Manner and Order following, That is to say, First, Physic
and Funeral Expenses: Secondly, Debts and Duties to the Queen: Thirdly, Debts
due to the Proprietary and Governor: Fourthly, Judgments: Fifthly, Debts due by
Recognizances: Sixthly, Rents: Seventhly, Obligations, Bills penal, and
protested Bills of Exchange: Eighthly, Single Bills: Ninthly, Servants and
Workmen's Wages: Tenthly, Merchants and Traders Book-Debts, and Promises by
Word, A^rears of Accounts, and such like. Which said Payments shall be good and
available in Law against all Persons whatsoever.

PROVIDED ALWAYS, AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That
nothing in this Act contained shall prevent or damnify any Executors or
Administrators for discharging the Decedent's just Debts, Twelve-Months after
theParties decease, no ^riority ofDebts, etc.
as the same shall come to his, her or their Knowledge, without Regard to the
Priority of the same, in Payment, after the Expiration of Twelve-Months from
the time of the said Decedent's Decease.

CHAP. CXXVII. An ACT for the better Settling of Intestates Estates.
Every Administrator to give Bond, etc.
BE IT ENACTED, etc. That the Register-General and his Deputies, having Power to
grant Letters of Administration of the Goods and Chattels of Persons dying
Intestate, within this P^ovince, shall, upon their granting such Letters of
Administration, take sufficient Bonds, with two or more able Sureties (respect
being had to the Value of the Estate) in the Name of the Register-General, with
the Condition in Manner and Form following, mutatis mutandis, viz. THE
Condition of this Obligation is such, That if the within ^ounden A. B.
Administrator of all and singular the Goods, With Condition, and^.
Chattels and Credits of C. D. deceased, do make or cause to be made, a true
and perfect Inventory of all and singular the Goods, Chattels and Credits of
the said Deceased, which have or shall come to the Hands, Possession or
Knowledge of him the said A. B. or unto the Hands and Possession of any other
Person or Persons for him; and the same, so wade, do exhibit, or cause to be
exhibited into the Register's Office, in the County of -- at or before the --
Day of -- next ensuing; and the same Goods, Chattels and Credit^ of the said
Deceased, at the time of his Death, or which at any time after shall come to
the Hands or Possession of the said A. B. or into the Hands and Possession of
any other Person or Persons for him, do well and truly administer according to
Law: And further, do make or cause to be made a true and just Account of his
said Administration, at or before the -- Day of -- And all the Rest and Residue
of the said Goods, Chattels and Credits which shall be found remaining upon the
said Administrator's Account (the same being first examined and allowed of by
the Orphans-Court of the County where the said Administration is granted) shall
deliver and pay unto such Person or Persons respectively, as the said
Orphans-Court, in the respective County, by their Decree or Sentence, pursuant
to the true Intent and Meaning of this Act, shall limit and appoint. And if it
shall hereafter appear that any last Will and Testament was made by the said
Deceased, and the Executor or Executors therein named do exhibit the same into
the Register's Office, making Request to have it allowed and approved
accordingly: If the said A. B. within bounden, being thereunto required, do
render and deliver the said Letters of Administration (Approbation of such
Testament being first had and made in the said Register's Office) Then this
Obligation to be void and of none Effect, or else to remain in full Force and
Virtue.

WHICH Bonds are hereby declared and enacted to be good, to all Intents and
Purposes, and pleadable in any Courts of Justice; and also, that the said
Orphans Court, And render Account to Orphan's Court.
in the respective Counties, shall and may, and are hereby enabled to proceed
and call such Administrators to Account for and touching the Goods of any
Person dying Intestate; and upon Hearing, and due Consideration thereof, Who
shall make Distribution of the (...) after (...), etc. (...) discharged, in
this Manner.
to order and make just and equal Distribution of what remains clear (after
all Debts, Funeral, and just Expenses of every Sort, first allowed and
deducted) amongst the Wife and Children, and Children's Children (if any such
be) or otherwise to the next of Kindred to the dead Person, in equal Degree, or
legally representing their Stocks, to every one his Right, according to the
Laws in such Cases, and to the Rules and Limitations hereafter set down: And
the same Distributions to decree and settle, and to compel such Administrators
to observe and pay the same, by the due Course of the Laws of this Province:
Saving to every one their Right of Appeal.
Saving to every one (supposing him or themselves aggrieved) their Right of
Appeal to the Provincial or Supreme Court of this Province.

PROVIDED ALWAYS, The Manner and Form how Distributions shall be made.
That the said Orphans Court in each County, which is by this Act enabled to
make Distribution of the Surplusage of the Estate of any Person dying
Intestate, shall distribute the whole Surplusage of such Estate or Estates in
Manner and Form following, That is to say, One third Part of the said
Surplusage to the Wife of the Intestate, and all the Residue, by equal
Portions, to and amongst the Children of such Persons dying Intestate (allowing
the eldest Son two Shares:) And to such Persons as shall legally represent such
Children, in case any of the said Children be then dead (other than such Child
or Children who shall have any Estate by the Settlement of the Intestate, or
shall be advanced by him in his Lifetime, by Portion or Portions, equal to the
Share which shall, by such Distribution, be allotted to the other Children) to
whom such Distribution is to be made. And in Case any Child who shall have any
Estate by Settlement from the Intestate, or shall be advanced by the said
Intestate in his Lifetime by Portion not equal to the Share which will be due
to the other Children by such Distribution as aforesaid, then so much of the
Surplusage of the Estate of such Intestate to be distributed to such Child or
Children as shall have any Land by Settlement from the Intestate, or where
advanced in the Lifetime of the Intestate, as shall make the Estate of all the
said Children to be equal as near as can be estimated, the eldest Son being
allowed two Shares as aforesaid. And in case there be no Children, nor any
legal Representatives of them, then one Moiety of the said Estate to be
allotted to the Wife of the Intestate, and the Residue of the said Estate to be
distributed equally to every of the next Kindred of the Intestate, who are in
equal Degree to those who legally represent them. Provided, That there be no
Representatives admitted amongst Collaterals after Brothers and Sisters
Children. And in case there be no Wife, then all the said Estate to be
distributed equally to and amongst the Children, the eldest Son to have two
Shares as aforesaid. And in case there be no Child, then to the next of
Kindred, in equal Degree of or unto the Intestate, and their legal
Representatives as aforesaid, and in no other Manner whatsoever.

No Distribu^^^n to be ^^de till one (...) after the ^^^th of the ^^^estate,
and (...) to give (...) to re^^^^, etc.
PROVIDED ALSO, And to the End that a due Regard be had to Creditors, that no
such Distribution of the Goods of any Person dying Intestate be made till after
one Year be fully expired after the Intestate's Death. And that such and every
one to whom any Distribution and Share shall be allotted, shall give Bond, with
sufficient Sureties, in the said Orphans-Court, that if any Debt or Debts truly
owing by the Intestate shall be afterward sued for and recovered, or otherwise
duly made to appear, that then, and in every such case, he or she shall
respectively refund and pay back to the Administrator his or her rateable Part
of that Debt or Debts, and of the Costs of Suit and Charges of the
Administrator, by reason of such Debts, out of the Part or Share so as
aforesaid allotted to him or her, thereby to enable the said Administrator to
pay and satisfy the said Debt or Debts so discovered, after the Distribution
made as aforesaid.

PROVIDED ALWAYS, AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid,
Administration to be granted, with the Testament annexed as usual.
That in all Cases where the Register-General has used heretofore to grant
Administration, with a Testament annexed, he shall continue so to do; and the
Will of the Deceased, in such Testament expressed, shall be performed and
observed in such Manner as it should have been if this Act had never been made.

PROVIDED ALSO, No Claim to be good after seven Years.
That all such of the Intestate's Relations, and Persons concerned, who shall
not lay legal Claim to their respective Shares within seven Years after the
Decease of the Intestate, shall be debarred from the same forever.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, Lands, etc. of
Intestates may be sold for Payment of Debts. etc. as the Orphans-Court shall
direct.
That if any Person or Persons shall die Intestate, being Owners of Lands or
Tenements within this Province at the time of their Death, and leave lawful
Issue to survive them, but not a sufficient personal Estate to pay their just
Debts and maintain their Children, in such case it shall be lawful for the
Administrator or Administrators of such Decedents to sell and convey such Part
or Parts of the said Lands or Tenements, for Defraying their just Debts,
Maintenance of their Children, and for putting them Apprentices, and Teaching
them to read and write, and for Improvement of the Residue of the Estate (if
any be) to their Advantage, as the Orphans-Court of the County where such
Estate lies, shall think fit to allow, order and direct, from time to time.

PROVIDED ALWAYS, Except Marriage-Settlements.
That no Lands or Tenements, contained in any Marriage Settlement, shall, by
Virtue of this Act, be sold or disposed, contrary to the Form and Effect of
such Settlement; nor shall any Orphans-Court allow or order any Intestate's
Lands or Tenements to be sold, But not till the Administrator exhibits an
Inventory, etc.
before the Administrators, requesting the same, does exhibit one or more true
and perfect Inventories and conscionable Apprisements of all the Intestate's
personal Estate whatsoever, as also a just and true Account, upon his or her
solemn Affirmation, of all the Intestate's Debts which shall be then come to
his or her Knowledge; and if thereupon it shall appear to the Court that the
Intestate's personal Estate will not be sufficient to pay the Debts and
maintain the Children until the Eldest of them attains to the Age of Twenty-one
Years, And then how the Orphan's Court shall proceed and order, etc.
or to put them out to be Apprentices, and teach them to read and write, then,
and in every such case, and not otherwise, the Court shall allow such
Administrator to make public Sale of so much of the said Lands, as the Court,
upon the best Computation they can make of the Value thereof, shall adjudge
necessary for the Purposes aforesaid, reserving the Mansion House and most
profitable Part of the Estate till the last. But before any such Sale be made,
the Court shall order so many Writings to be made by the Clerk, upon Parchment
or good Paper, as the Court shall think fit, to signify and give Notice of such
Sales, and of the Day and Hour when, and the Place where the same will be, and
what Lands are to be so sold, and where they lie; which Notice shall be
delivered to the Sheriff or Constables, in order to be fixed in the most
public Places of the County or City, at least ten Days before the Sale; and
the Sheriffs or Constables are hereby required to make Publication accordingly;
and the Administrator that makes such Sale, shall bring his or her Proceedings
therein to the next Orphans-Court after the Sale made. AND if it shall happen
that any Lands be sold by Virtue of this Act for more than the Court's
Computation of the Value thereof, And how the Administrator.
then the Administrator shall be accountable for the same, as by this Act is
required for Intestate's personal Estates.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, And the Surplusage of
Lands, etc. not sold, etc. to be divided amongst, etc.
That the Surplusage or remaining Part of the Intestate's Lands, Tenements and
Hereditaments not sold or ordered to be sold by Virtue of this Act, and not
otherwise limited by Marriage-Settlement, shall be divided between the
Intestate's Widow and Children, or the Survivors of them, who shall equally
inherit and make Partition as Tenants in common may or can do. In what Method,
and to whom.
But if the Intestate leaves a Widow and no Child, then such Widow or Relict
shall inherit one Moiety, or half Part of the said Lands and Tenements, and the
other Mo^ety shall des^^nd and come to the Intestate's next Heir, according to
the Course of the common Law. But i^ the Intestate leaves no Widow nor Child
living at the time of his D^^th, or if the Chil^ren all die in their Minority,
without Issue, the^ the said Lands and Tenements shall descend and come to the
(...) Heir at Law, according to the Course a^oresaid. But if any of the
Intestate's Children dying (...) the Int^^^ate, shall leave lawful Issue, such
Issue shall equally inherit the Intestate's Lands and Tenement^, with their
Uncle^ or Aunts, and make Partition as aforesai^.

PROVIDED ALWAYS, The Widow or Child of any I^testate being provided for, etc.
^o h^ve no ^hare of the (...), and^.
That no (...) or Child of any Intestate having so much Land by Settl^^ent from
the said Intestate, as by the said Court's Computation of the Value thereof,
shall be ^qual to the Share or Purpart of the Intestate's Lands, which by this
Act are to be allotted to any of the ^ther Children in Manner aforesaid; then
such Widow or Child, so p^ovided for, shall have no Share of the said
Surplusage of the Int^^tate's other Lands. But if the Value of the La^^s, so
settl^^ by the Intestate, shall not, by the Comp^tation (...), amount to an
equal Sha^^, then the said Count shall allot to the Party so much (...) the
said other Land as (...) make the Shares or Estate of the Wi^ow, and all the
said Children, equal, as near as c^n be estimated, the eld^st Son having a
double Share as afo^e^aid.

PROVIDED ALSO, The Widow to have no (...) to (...) but (...) vita.
That nothing in this Act contained shall give any Wid^w a Right (...) Claim to
any Part of such Lands or Tenements ^or her Dower or (...), as shall yield
yearly Rents or Profits whereof her Hu^band died s^ized, for any longer time
than the Term of her natu^al (...); which Dower (...) shall hold as Tenants in
Dower do in England. And the said profitable Lands or Tenem^nt^, and the
unimproved (...) ^ough Land next a^jacent thereto, shall not be sold but ^or
Payment of the Intestate's Debts.

PROVIDED ALSO, No Parti^ion (...) of (...) the (...) Sha^es.
That no Partition of the Lands or Ten^ments which are to be divided by this
Act* shall be made by or for the Relict or younger Children of the Intestate,
if the Heir at Law will, within the Space of Twelve-months, pay so much Money,
or other Effects, to the Person or Persons demanding such Partition, as their
respective Shares (...) Purparts shall amount unto, by the Valuation of four or
more Persons indifferently chosen by ^oth Parties, or by an Inqu^st appointed
by the Orphans-Court, to value the same, where the Parties cannot o^herwise
agree. And then the Hei^ shall enjoy the same.
And the Person or Persons (whether Minor^ or others) to whom or for whose Use
Payment or Satisfaction shall be made for their respective Purpa^ts, by the
Heir at Law, in Manner aforesaid, shall be forever debarred of all the Right,
Title and Demand which he or they can or may have of, in or to such Share or
Purparts, by Vi^tue of this Act; but the same shall be held and enjoyed by the
Heir at Law, as freely and fully as the Intestate held the same.

AND in case such Intestate shall have no known Kindred, And if the Intest^te
have no Kindred his Lands, etc. shall es^che^t to the L^ndlord, etc. and his
Goods, etc. to the Proprieta^y, etc.
then all this Lands, Tenements and Hereditament^ shall escheat or go to the
immediate Landlord of whom such Lands are held, his Heirs and Assigns; and if
immediately held of the Proprietary, then to the Proprietary, hi^ Heirs and
Assigns; and all the Goods, Chattels and personal Estate whatsoever of such
Pesron dying intestate, and without Kindred as aforesaid, shall go to the
Proprietary and Governor, his Executors or Administrators. But if any of the
said Intestat^'s Relations shall appear and make their Claims to such
Intestate's personal Estate within seven Years after the Decease of the
Intestate, they shall be restored thereunto.

But if the Heir at Law t^ such Lands shall appear in 21 Years, he may recover
the same.
AND if the lawful Heir to any such Lands or Tenements shall at any time, within
Twenty-one Years, after the Intestate's Decease, appear, he may traverse the
Inquisition or Office ^ound for the Land so escheated, and recover the same,
paying the Lord or Person in Possession for the Improvements made thereupon,
according to the Valuation of twelve Men.

CHAP. CXXVIII. An ACT for the Acknowledging and Recording of Deeds.
Repealed.

CHAP. CXXIX. An ACT to ascertain the Number of Members of Assembly, and to
regulate the Elections.
BE IT ENACTED, etc. The Freeme^ and Inhabitants to meet on the first Day of
Octob^r yearly to choose Representatives, (...).
That for the Well-governing of this Province, there shall be an Assembly
yearly chosen, and for that End it shall and may be lawful to and for the
Freemen and Inhabitants of the City of Philadelphia, as also for the Freemen
and Inhabitants of the respective Counties of this Province, without any Writ
or Summons, to meet on the First Day of October yearly, forever, at the most
usual Place of Elections in the said respective Counties, That is to say, For
the City and County of Philadelphia, Two for Philad^lphia, and eight for each
County.
in or near the present Marketplace in the said City; and for the County of
Bucks, upon the Courthouse Ground in the Town of Bristol; and for the County
of Chester, at or near the Courthouse in the Town of Chester; and then and
there choose their Representatives or Delegates, to serve them in Assembly,
which shall consist of not less than two Persons for the said City of
Philadelphia, and eight Persons for each County of this Province; or a greater
Number, as the Governor and Assembly shall at any time hereafter agree.

AND that the Members, so to be, Who shall sit in Assembly on the 14th Day of
October, at Philade^phia.

Except.


shall meet and sit in Assembly on the Fou^teenth Day of October, yearly,
forever, at the City of Philadelp^ia, unless the Governor and Council, for the
time being, shall see cause to appoint another Place, within this Province, to
sit at. But when any of the said Days of Elections or Meeting of Assembly shall
happen to fall on the first Day of the Week, called Sunday, then such Election
and Meeting shall be the next Day following.

PROVIDED ALWAYS, Who is qualified to elect or be elected in the Countie^.
That no Inhabitants of this Province shall have Right of Electing, or being
elected as aforesaid, unless he o^ they be nat^^al-born Subjects of Englan^, or
be naturalized in England, or in this Government, and unles^ such Person or
Persons be at the Age of Twenty-one Years, (...) upwards, and ^e a Freeholder
or Freeholders in this Provi^^^, (...) have (...) Acres of Land, or more, well
seated, and twelve Acres ^^^reof, or more, cleared and improved* or be
o^^^^wise worth Fifty Pounds, lawful Money of this Province, clear Estate, and
have been resident therein for the Space of two Years before such Election.

AND to the End that Elections, upon which the Good of the Government so much
depends, may not be corruptly managed or obtained, BE IT ENACTED by the
Authority aforesaid, That all the Elections of the said Representatives shall
be free and voluntary, by Persons having Estates and being qualified as
aforesaid, in the respective County or Counties for which he or they shall
elect or be elected; And who in the City of Philadelphia.
Provided, that the Electors and Elected for the said City of Philadelphia,
shall have a Freehold Estate, or be worth Fifty Pounds, clear, personal Estate
within the same City, and be otherwise qualified as aforesaid. And that the
Elector who is not so qualified as aforesaid, or that shall receive any Reward
or Gift for his Vote, shall forfeit his Right of Electing for that Year, and
shall pay the Sum of Five Pounds, Penalty.
one Half thereof to the Governor, and the other Half to him or them that shall
sue for the same in any Court of Record within this Province.

AND that he or they who shall give, offer or promise any Reward to be elected,
Buying of Vot^s or offering to se^ve for nothing, is 5 l. Penalty.
or shall offer to serve for nothing, or less Allowance than the Law
prescribes, shall forfeit Five Pounds, the one Half thereof to the Governor,
and the other to him or them that will sue for the same, in Manner aforesaid,
and be incapable to serve for that Year.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, The Method and Manner
how the said Elections are to be made and carried on.
That every Sheriff, or in his Absence, his Undersheriff, or such as he shall
depute, or for Want of such Deputati^n, the Coroner, or such as he shall
appoint, or for Want of such Appointment, any two of the Freeholders, who by
the major Part of the Electors then and there present, shall be nominated and
appointed Judges of the said Elections in the Absence of the Sheriff or
Coroner, shall attend at the said Elections, and shall appoint such Number of
Clerks for taking the Poll or Votes of the Electors, as the Inspectors
hereafter-mentioned shall appoint; who shall all take their said Poll or Names
of the Electors in the Presence of the said Sheriff, Vide, 13 of King George.
Coroner or other Judges, so nominated as aforesaid, or such as any of them,
shall depute o^ appoint, and shall make as many distinct Columns, on ^air
Paper, as there shall be Candidates voted for, as is herein after expressed;
but before they begin every Clerk so appointed shall, by the said Sheriff or
Coroner, or by some Magistrate then present, be attested or charged upon his
solemn Affirmation, The Qualification of the Clerks who take the Poll.
Truly and indiff^rently to take the said Poll, and set down the Names of each
Freeholder and Elector and the Place of his Freehold or Estate, and to poll no
Elector, who is not attested, if so required by the Inspectors of such Clerks.
Which Inspectors are to be nominated by the major Part of the Electors as
aforesaid.

AND every Person coming to elect Members for the City of Philad^lphia, Vide,
Cou^ty Levy-Act of 11 th of King George I.
and also every Person coming to elect Members for the said respective
Counties, shall deliver in Writing the Names of those Persons for whom they
vote, to the Sheriff, or some other of the said Persons so as aforesaid
appointed Judges of the said Elections, who shall open the Paper, if the
Elector be illiterate, and read the Persons Names contained therein, ask such
Electors, Whether these are the Persons for whom he votes? Which Paper, upon
his Affirmative, shall be received and put with the rest of the Electors Papers
in a Box, which every Sheriff is hereby required to provide for that Purpose.

BUT if the Elector brings no such Paper or Ticket, or if the illiterate
Elector will not vote for the Persons contained in his Paper, then and in all
such Cases the Elector shall verbally give in the Names of the Persons he
mostly desires should be chosen, which Names shall be entered down by the said
Clerks.

PROVIDED ALWAYS, That every Elector, before he be admitted to Poll (if
required by any of the said Inspectors) shall, upon his solemn Affirmation
declare, That he is Twenty-one Years of Age, and a Freeholder for the County of
-- and has fifty Acres of Land, or more, The Qualification of the Electors.
well seated, and twelve Acres thereof, or more, cleared: Or, That he is
otherways worth Fifty Pounds, Money of this Province, clear Estate, and has
been resident therein for the Space of two Years, and that he has not been
before polled at that Election.

AND in case any Person, taking the said Affirmation, Penalty of making a false
Affirmation.
shall be lawfully convicted of wilfully and corruptly making a false
Affirmation therein, or if any shall suborn any Person to take such false
Affirmation, he or they shall incur the same Penalties and Forfeiture as by the
Laws and Statutes of England a^e provided against Persons convicted of wilful
and corrupt Perjury, and Subornation of Perjury respectively.

AND that the said Poll shall not be delayed, nor the Election adjourned to
another Place or Part of the County, The Poll not to be delayed or adjourned*
other than where the same begins, but shall continue from Day to Day till the
F^eeholde^s and ^lectors then and there present shall be polled, And when the
Poll is over, how to be c^st up, etc.
and no longer. And when all the El^ctors then appearing shall have delivered
in all their Papers or Names, the said Box shall be opene^ by the Sheriff, or
some other of the Persons appointed by this Act to officiate as Judges of the
said Elections, and the said Papers taken out in the Presence of the said
Inspectors, and delivered, one by one, to the said Clerk or Clerks to enter the
Names therein expressed in fair Columns, or otherwise, so that they shall cast
up how many Times each Person's Name is repeated in the same, and set it down;
and shall then pronounce publicly to the People, him whose Name is oftenest
mentioned in the said Papers to be first elected, and so the next highest
Number successively until the whole eight Persons for the County be pronounced
elected by Majority as aforesaid. And the same Method shall be used concerning
the two Members to be elected for the City of Philad^lp^ia.

AnyDeceit in ^ Ticket, the same to be rejected.
BUT if, when the said Papers are opened, there appears more Names in any one of
them, or more than one Paper deceitfully folded together, containing more Names
than by this Act is allowed any one Elector to vote for, such Papers shall be
rejected, and not accounted amongst the Votes.

The Names of the Representatives to be written in Indentures, and^.
AND after the said Representatives are so chosen as aforesaid, their Names (be
they present or absent) shall be written in a Pair of Indentures, sealed,
between the said Sheriffs, or other Persons officiating as Judges of the said
Elections, and six, or more, of the said Choosers.

One of which Indentures to be delivere^ to the Governor, and the other to the
House.
AND every Sheriff, or other Person, officiating as Judges of the said
Elections, shall, on the first Day of the Meeting of every Assembly, in Person,
or by Deputy, present one Part of the said Indentures to the Governor for the
time being, and the other Part thereof to the House of Representatives: Which
said Indentures shall be deemed and taken to be the Sheriff's Return of the
Representatives or Delegates of the Freemen of this Province, to serve and act
in the Legislative or General-Assemblies of the same Province from time to
time. And the Representatives so as aforesaid chosen shall yield their
Attendance accordingly.

AND if any Person or Persons so chosen and returned to serve as aforesaid, Any
Person so chosen, etc. refusing to serve forfeits 10 l.
shall be absent from the Service for which he or they shall ^e so elected, he
or they shall forfeit any Sum not exceeding (...), current Money; the one Hal^
thereof to the Governor, and the other Half to him or them that shall sue for
the same in Manner aforesaid; unle^s his o^ (...) Excuse for such Absence shall
be allowed of by the (...).

AND if any Person ^o chosen and returned as aforesaid shall (...) to di^, or
be wilfully absent, Vacancies by Death or otherwise to be supplied by ^ new
Choice, etc. and the Method of Proceeding in such Cases.
or by Vote of the (...) disabled to sit or serve in Assembly, then and in
ev^ry (...) Case the Secretary for the time being, shall, by the Speaker's
Order, issue out Writs to the respective Sh^riff, of the County where there
shall be occasion for elec^ing such new Members: But in Case the Secretary
shall delay the Making (...) such Writs for the Space of two Days, next after
he has Notice of the Speaker's Order in that Behalf, it shall be lawful for the
Speaker of the Assembly for the time being, to issue forth the said Writs,
which shall be made in the Governor's Name, under the Hand and Se^l of the
Speaker; whereupon every Sheriff, or other Officer to whom such Writ or Writs
are directed, shall indorse the Day of his Receipt thereof on the Back, and
with all convenient Speed, after he receives such Writ, shall cause public
Notice to be given of the Time and Place of Election, and proceed to elect
thereupon in Manner aforesaid, within the Space of five Days after his Receipt
of the said Writ, and give two Days Notice, at least, of the Day appointed for
Election: Which Notice shall be given in Writing, and shall be proclaimed in
the most public Places of the capital Town or Place where such Election is to
be, and the said Sheriff or other Officer shall cause Copies of such Notice or
Advertisement to be posted upon some Tree or House in the Way leading from
every Township or Precinct to the Town or Place where the said Election is to
be, as also upon the Court-Houses and public fixed Meeting Houses for
religious Worship in the said respective Counties.

AND when those Elections are made by Virtue of the said Writs in Manner
aforesaid, the Sheriff, The Election being made, etc. the Names to be returned
as before.
or other Officer who shall officiate as Judges of the said Elections, shall
write down the Names of the Persons so elected in a Pair of Indentures, sealed,
and present one Part thereof to the Governor, and the other Part to the
Assembly, on the Day of the Return of such Writs, which said Indentures shall
be deemed to be the Sheriff's Return of such Representatives.

All which Elections to begin between ten in the Morning and two in the
Afternoon.
ALL which said Elections shall begin between the Hours of ten in the Morning,
and two in the Afternoon; and that no Person or Persons whatsoever, by Force o^
Arms, or Menacing, shall disturb the Freemen of this Province in the free
Election of their said Representatives, but that the same Election shall be
freely and indifferently made.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Sheriff
shall refuse or neglect to give Notice of the said Election, The Sheriff
forfeits 100 l. for Refusal, etc to give Notice of such Elections; and the
Coroner 50 l.
by Writs, shall forfeit One Hundred Pounds, Money aforesaid, one Half to the
Governor, and the other Half to him that shall sue for the same in Manner
aforesaid. AND upon such Neglect or R^fusal, the Coroner of the respective
County where the same shall happen, is hereby required, by himself or his
Deputy, to officiate and perform all that the said Sheriff or his Deputy ought
to have done and performed at the said Elections, according to the Tenor and
Directions of this Act, under the Penalty of Fifty Pounds, to be recovered as
aforesaid, one Half to the Governor, and the other Half to him that shall sue
for the same.

AND every Sheriff, or other Officer, not making good and true Returns of the
said Elections of Representatives, And on not making true Returns, etc.
forfeits 100 l
or Members of Assembly, according to the Direction of this Act, or refusing,
or wilfully neglecting to do and perform what is hereby required to be done at
and after the said Elections, shall forfeit, for every such Offense, the Sum of
One Hundred Pounds, Money aforesaid; one Half thereof to the Governor, and the
other Moiety to him that will sue for the same in Manner aforesaid.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, The Powers andPrivileges
of an Assembly.
That the Representatives so chosen and met, according to the Direction of this
Act, shall be the Assembly of this Province, and shall have Power to choose a
Speaker and other their Officers, and shall be Judges of the Qualifications and
Elections of their own Members, sit upon their own Adjournments, appoint
Committees, prepare Bills in order to pass into Laws, impeach Criminals and
redress Grievances, and shall have all other Powers and Privileges of Assembly,
according to the Rights of the Freeborn Subjects of England, and as is usual in
any of the Qu^en's Plantations in Ameri^a.

AND if any County or Part of this Province shall refuse or neglect to choose
their respective Representatives as aforesaid, or if chosen, do not meet to
serve in Assembly, If any County should refuse to choose, and^.
those who are so chosen and met shall have the full Power of an Assembly in as
ample Manner as if all the Representatives had been chosen and met; Provided,
they are not less than two Thirds of the Whole that ought to meet.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, No Membe^ to vote, and^.
in the House till qualified.
That no Person who shall be hereafter a Member of the Assembly, or House of
Representatives of this Province, shall be capable to vote in the said House,
or sit there during any Debate, after their Speaker is chosen, until he shall
make and subscribe the following Declarations and Profession of his Christian
Belief, viz. I A. B. do sincerely promise, The Qualification of every Member of
Assembly.

Alter^d by an Act passed in the 11 Geo. I. entitled, An Act prescribing the
Forms of the Declaration of Fidelity, etc.


and solemnly declare before GOD and the World, That I will be faithful and
bear true All^giance to Queen Anne. And I do solemnly profess and declare, That
I do, from my Heart, abhor, detest and renounce, as impious and hereti^al, that
damnable Doctrine and Position, That Prin^^^ excommunicated or deprived by the
Pope, or any Authority of the Sea of Rome, may be deposed or murdered by their
Subjects, or any other whatsoever.

AND I do declare, That no foreign Prince, Person, Prelate, State or Potentate
h^th, or oug^t to have, any Power, Jurisdiction, Superiority, Pre-eminence or
Authority ecclesiastical or spiritual, within the Realm of England, or the
Dominions thereunto b^longing.

AND I A. B. do solemnly and sincerely, in the Presence of GOD, profess,
testify and de^lare, That I do believe that in the Sacram^nt of the LORD's
Supper there is not any Transubstantiation of the El^ments of Bread and Wine
into the Body and Blo^d of CHRIST, at or after the Consecration th^reof, ^y any
Person whatsoever; and that the Invocation or Adora^ion of the Virgin Mary, or
any other Saint, and the Sa^rifi^e ^f the Mass, as they are now used in the
Church of Rome, are superstitious and Idolatrous.

AND I do solemnly, in the Presence of GOD, profess, testify and d^^lare, That
I do make this Declaration, and every Part ther^of, in the plain and ordinary
Sense of the Words read unto me, as they a^e (...) und^rstood ^y English
Protestants, without any Ev^sion, Equivo^ation or mental Reser^ation
whatsoever, and wit^out any Dispensation already granted me for this Pur^ose ^y
t^^ ^ope, or any other Aut^ority or Person whatsoever, or without any H^pe of
any such Dispensation from any Person or Authority (...), ^r wit^out thinking I
am or may be acquitt^d (...) GOD or M^n, or absolved of this Declaration, or
any ^art ther^^f, although the Pope, or any other Person or Persons, or ^ower
whatsoev^r, should dispense with or annul the same, or d^^lare that it was null
or void from the Beginning.

AND I A. B. profess ^aith in GOD the Father, and in JESUS CHRIST his eternal
Son, the true GOD, and in the HOLY SPIRIT, one GOD, blessed ^er ev^rmore; and
do acknowledge the Holy Scriptures of the Old and New Testament to be given by
^ivine Inspiration.



WHICH said Declarations and Profession of Faith shall be, How the same shall
be made and when and where.
in the next and every succeeding Assembly, to be held in this Province,
solemnly and publicly made and subscribed, betwixt the Hours of Nine in the
Morning and Four in the Afternoon, by every such Member of the House of
Representatives, at the Table, in the Middle of their House, and while a full
House of Representatives is there Sitting with their Speaker in his Chair; and
during the Making and Subscribing thereof, all Business and Debates in the said
House shall cease.

AND the Clerk of the Assembly is hereby required to record the same in Rolls
or Books prepared for that Purpose; Which Qualifications shall be recorded by
the Clerk of the Assembly.
and every Member of Assembly shall pay the Clerk for recording thereof Five
Pence, and no more. And that the Manner and Method of making the said
Declarations shall be as follows, to wit, The Speaker shall first read and
subscribe the same, and after him every Member, as he is called over, shall
either read and subscribe the said Declarations, or else subscribe them as they
shall be read unto him by the Clerk of the Assembly.

AND BE IT ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, No Member shall be de^ni^d to
sit, etc that makes and subscribes the same.
That no Person whatsoever, who at any time shall be elected Member of Assembly
in this Province, and who shall make, and be willing and offer to make and
subscribe the said Declarations in Manner and Form aforesaid, shall be rejected
or denied to sit, debate and act in the House of Representatives or General
Assembly of this Province.

PROVIDED NEVERTHELESS, That nothing he^ein contained shall extend to debar or
hinder the House of Representatives to reject such Persons as are or shall be
unduly elected Members to serve in Assembly, Except such as shall be unduly
elected, etc.
such as the ^ssembly, or major Part of them, shall see cause from time to
time, by Vote, to expel, or disable to sit or serve there, by reason of ill
Practice in Elections, or Misbehaviour in the House.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That every Member
chosen, Members Allowance per Diem* Altered by an Act made the 9 th Geo. I*
entitled, An Act for Regulating, etc. Fees.
or to be chosen, to serve in Assembly as aforesaid, shall be allowed the Sum
of Six Shillings per Day, and the Speaker Ten Shillings per Day, during his and
their Attendance in the Service thereof; and that every Member of Assembly
shall be allowed toward his traveling Charges after the Rate of T^ree-Pence a
Mile coming to and going from the Place where the Assembly is or shall be held.

See this A^t altered and explain^d, by an Act passed in the 13 Geo. I. Chap.
CCXCIV. Entitled, A Supplementary Act to the Act for Ascertaining the Number
of the Members of Assembly, etc.

CHAP. CXXX. An ACT for selling Beer and Ale by Wine-Measure.
WHEREAS by a Law of this Province, for Regulating the Dimensions of Casks,
etc. it is enacte^, amongst other Things, That a Barrel shall contain
Thirty-one Gallons Wine-Measure. And whereas by another Law of this Province,
for Regulating of Weights and Measures, it is, amongst other Things, enacted,
That none shall sell Beer or Ale by retail, but by Be^r-Measure, according to
the Standard of England; by reason whereof the R^tailers of Beer and Ale are
obliged to sell the same by far greater M^^^ure than they buy it: For Remedy
whereof, BE IT ENACTED, etc. That from and after the Publication of this Act,
all Persons which now are or which at any time or times hereafter shall be
licensed to keep any Tavern, Taverns to sell Beer or Ale by Wine-Measure in
their Houses, and Beer-Measure out of Doors, on 10 s. Penalty.
Inn, Alehouse or Victualing-House within this Province, shall sell Beer and
Ale by Wine-Measure to all Persons as drink it in their Houses, and by
Beer-Measure to all such Persons as carry the same out of their Houses, under
the Penalty of Ten Shillings, to the Use of the Poor, for every Offense, being
convict thereof by one or more Witnesses, before one or more of the Justices of
the Peace of the County where the Offense is committed, any Law, Custom or
Usage to the Contrary in anywise notwithstanding.

PROVIDED ALWAYS, AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That
the above recited Law, entitled, An Act for regulating Weights and Measures,
and every Part and Proviso therein contained, except the last Cause thereof,
relating to selling Beer and Ale by Beer-Measure, shall be and remain in full
Force, any think herein contained to the Contrary notwithstanding.

CHAP. CXXXI. An ACT for the more easy and effectual Collecting of the
Proprietary's Quit-Rents.
WHEREAS since the first Location of Lands in this Province, the Quit-Rents
reserved upon the several Grants, as well before the Date of the Royal Charter
to the Proprietary as since, have been very irregularly and uncertainly
collected, not only to the great Loss of the Proprietor himself, who has
thereby been kept out of his just Rights, but also to the great Inconveniency
of the Freeholders, by having no certain and exact Ac^ounts of their Quit-Rents
kept; and being suffered, upon their Negligence, to run far in Arrears, that
the Payment of what would be easy yearly, becomes more grievous and burdensome
when to be paid in one Sum. And further, that upon the Transferring of Lands
encumbered with Quit-Rents, the whole Arrears often become an entire Loss to the
Purchaser. For Remedy whereof, BE IT ENACTED, etc. That there shall be always
in this Province a Receiver-General appointed by the Proprietary, his Heirs and
Assigns, or (upon Failure thereof, A Receiver-General to be appointed by the
Proprietary; who shall keep an Office, etc.
or in case of Death or Removal) by those that represent the Proprietor, his
(...) or Assigns in this Province, in Matters of Property, who shall hold an
Office, which shall be called the Receiver-G^neral's Office for Pennsylvania;
and either by himself or su^^icient Deputies, or other Persons appointed by the
Pro^^^^tary, his Heirs or Assign^, or such as do or shall represent him or them
in Matters of Property as aforesaid, by Commissions or Deputations, which with
the present Receiver-General's Commission, and his Deputations to the several
Collectors of Quit-Rents, shall be recorded in the Office of Inrolment in each
County of this Province, shall sit on some certain Day or Days in the first
Month, And in March, yearly, (...) in each County, and give ten Days Notice
thereof, to receive allQuit-rents*
called Mar^h, yearly, at such Place or Places in the respective Counties as is
by the Proprietor's Patents appointed, of which Time and Place ten Days Notice
shall be, by the respective Receiver, given and published, by fixing Notes or
Advertisements in Writing upon the Door of every public Meeting House for
religious Worship in each County; and then and there receive all Quit-Rents due
for such Lands in each County from all and every the Freeholders and others
that possess and claim the same, who shall pursuant to their Tenures, be hereby
obliged, at such Time and Place, to appear in Person, or by their Friends, and
pay their Arrears of Rent. And shall enter, in a fair Roll, the several
Payments, which Roll shall be subject to View, etc.
And the said several Payments shall be duly entered in a fair Roll, made and
kept for every County within each Township in every County, and all the Lands
therein according to the said Patents, in distinct Entries; which shall be
subject to the View of every Person, as far as they relate to any particular
Tract that such Person is or may be in anyways concerned, either in his own
Right, or for or in Right of others.

AND in Case any Person, On Refusal of Payment may levy the same by Distress.
who so holds and claims any Lands or Lots in this Province, shall neglect to
appear as aforesaid and pay their Quit-Rents (Notice being as aforesaid given)
the Receiver or respective Collector may levy the same by Distress, according
as the Law of England impowers and directs to dis^^ain for Rents. And if no
Distress can be found, the Proprietary, his Heirs or Assigns, may sue for the
Rent or Arrearages thereof in an Action of Debt at the respective County Court,
and shall recover the same as any other Debt may be recovered by the Laws of
this Government.

PROVIDED ALWAYS, That no such Action, if the Defendant fail of fully answering
the Debt, shall afterward be a Bar to the Proprietary, his Heirs or Assigns,
against recovering the same Arrears that were sued for, of the Land or Lots
from whence they accrued, by all such lawful Means as might be done if such
Action had not been commenced.

BUT where any Person holding Lands of the Proprietary is not by Patent, Deed
or Contract obliged to pay his Rent at any certain Place, and after such Notice
of Time and Place given by the Receiver or Collector as aforesaid, refuses to
pay the same accordingly, it shall be lawful for such Receiver or Collector to
distrain for the Rent due before such Demand; or for Want of Distress, the same
shall be sued for as aforesaid.

SAVING to all Persons that shall be wrongfully destrained upon or sued by
Color of this Act, Saving to all Pe^s^n^ their legal P^eas.
all their legal Pleas and Remedies prescribed or allowed in such Cases by the
Laws of England.

PROVIDED ALWAYS, AND IT IS HEREBY ENACTED, That every Renter who is by Patent
or Contract to pay his Rent in Wheat, Renters who are to pay Wheat, shall
deliver the ^^me into a Mill within a Mile of ^^vigable Water.
shall deliver the same in good merchantable Wheat into some convenient Mill
within a Mile of any navigable Water, which may best suit the said Renter; and
the Miller's Receipt for the same being produced to the Receiver or Collector,
shall be accounted and taken as sufficient Payment for so much as shall be
therein mentioned, and the Renter shall be discharged thereupon accordingly.

Arrears of Rent not to be sued for till six Months after Demand or Notice
given, etc.
PROVIDED ALSO, That no Person shall be distrained upon or sued for any Rent, or
Arrears of Rent heretofore due, until six Months be expired after the first
Demand thereof shall be made, or Notice given as aforesaid, to the End that
every one may have time to provide his Receipts and Proofs of Payments, if any
be made; and for that Purpose he shall have Recourse to all Rent-Rolls, Books
and Accounts of all the Receivers or Collectors of Quit-Rents that can be
found, to make out the Payments where Receipts cannot be produced: Which said
Receivers and Collectors, their Executors and Administrators, shall and are
hereby required, before the Twenty-fourth Day of the Month called June, in the
Year of our LORD One Th^usand S^v^n Hundred and Six, to bring into the
Receiver-General's Office, at Philad^lphia, al^ the Accounts of Rents gathered,
received or had by the said respective Receivers or Collectors, or by their
Order, or true Copies of such Accounts not already br^ught in; Where Receipts
cannot be ^ound the Accounts of theReceivers, etc* shall be allowed by the
Receiver-General.
and if any Rents be thereby discovered, or otherwise made appear to be paid,
or ^^cured by Obligation, or other Specialty for that Purpose, the same shall
be allowed by the Receiver-General or his Deputy for the time being, or by such
other Person as shall be appointed to collect the Proprietary's Rents a^
aforesaid.

PROVIDED ALSO, No Proof appearing, and the Party declare the Sum paid, etc. no
Distress to be made, but the Pa^ties Affirmation, etc* to be Proof.
That where Receipts cannot be produced, nor any apparent Credit in or by any
of the said Receiver's Rolls, Books or Accounts, or no other P^oof can be made
of the Payment of the Rents, or Arrears of Rents heretofore due, to the
Satisfaction of such Receiver or Collector, and yet the Party declares the same
is paid or secu^ed as aforesaid, in Part or in all; then, and in such Cases,
the Receiver or Officer shall not make Distress for such Rents or Arrears, but
may sue for the same; and the Tenant or Debtor shall be allowed to give his own
Affirmation, backed with probable Circumstances, or Proof of others, in
Evidence to the Jury, for his Discharge; and if such Evidence be not to the
Satisfaction of the Jury, they shall find for the Plaintiff.

PROVIDED ALSO, And every Obligation given for Rent, (...) shall disch^^ge, and
That every Obligation or Specialty which has been or shall be given for
Arrears of Quit-Rents, shall discharge the Oblig^rs of so much thereof, and be
a Bar to any Action or Avowry for the same.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, The Rent first re^e^ved
shall be ^ppo^tioned on the Division of Lands, etc.
That none of the said Quit-Rents shall be multiplied, but the Rent or Sum
first reserved shall be appo^tio^ed; and no Person after he has given the
Receiver or Collector a due Account of what Land he has alienated, and the same
is entered in the Roll as is herein after directed, shall ^e charged, distrained
or sued for any more of the said Quit-Rents than what shall be really due, or
ought of Right to be required or had, for the Quantity of Ground or Number of
Acres which he or s^e resp^c^ively holds. No Person to pay more than his Share
of Quit Rents.
And no Person shall be charged or obliged to pay any Quit-Rents for such Pa^ts
of his or her Lands or Lots as he o^ she shall have alienated or conveyed to
another who resides upon any Lands adjoining, upon the Account of which he or
she was before entered into the said Roll; which the Receiver or Officer, upon
due Notice had thereof, is hereby required to do.

No Proportions of Rents to be less than 12 d. Ster* for new, and a Bushel of
Wheat for old Rente^s.
PROVIDED ALWAYS, That no Proportions or Parts of Quit-Rents for Lots or Lands
sold or alienated after the Twenty-fifth of the Month called March, in the Year
One Thousand Seven Hundred and Six, shall be less than twelve Pence Sterling
for new Renters, and one Bushel of Wheat for old Renters; and upon Alienations
before the said Twenty-fifth Day of March, the Receiver, or his Deputies, shall
not be obliged to receive for any Part or Parcel of Lots or Lands, less than
Three Pence Sterling yearly, or one Peck of Wheat. The Receiver to enter into
hisRent-Rolls every Alienation.
And the said Receiver, or his Deputies, are hereby required to enter into the
respective Rent-Rolls every such Alienation as aforesaid; for which the under
Purchaser, who shall be so entered, shall pay One Shilling.

AND WHEREAS diverse Persons, who are not resident in this Province, have
procured their Lands to be located; where the same, by the Settlement of the
neighboring Inhabitants, are greatly improved in Value, and yet have not paid
Quit-Rents nor public Charges, for Want of some Person in the Place to answer
for them; BE IT THEREFORE ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That from and
after the Twenty-fi^th of the Month called March, which shall be in the Year
One Thousand Seven Hundred and Eight, Lands, etc in A^^ears for three Years
Quit Rents, or County-Levies, may be levied on in Manner as other Lands, etc.
for Payment of Debts.
where any Tracts of Lands or Lots shall be in Arrears for Quit-Rents, yearly
arising thereupon, or for the Provincial or County Rates assessed, or to be
assessed, or made payable for the same, it shall be lawful for the Clerk of the
County where such Land lies, in the Name of the Proprietor, to sue such
Non-Resident in the respective County Court, as well for the Arrears of
Quit-Rent as Taxes unpaid, for the Space of three Years, or more, next before
such Suit; and if the Defendant does not, by himself, or any other, appear to
defend such Suit, and pay the said Arrears of Quit-Rents and Taxes, Judgment
shall be given against the Defendant, and Execution shall be awarded, to be
levied on so much of the said Lands as shall satisfy the Judgment, in the same
Manner as other Lands, by the Laws of this Province, are to be taken and sold
upon Execution for the Payment of Debts; and so much of the Money raised by
such Sale as shall be due for Quit-Rents, shall be, by the Sheriff, paid to the
Proprietor or his Receiver; and what shall be due for Taxes shall be paid to
the Provincial or County Treasurer respectively.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, W^its of Replevin
grantable*
That it shall and may be lawful for the Justices of each County of this
Province, to grant Writs of Replevin in all Cases whatsoever where Replevins
may be granted by the Laws of England, taking Security as the said Law directs,
and make them returnable to the next respective Courts of Common Pleas in the
proper County, there to be determined according to Law.

CHAP. CXXXII. An ACT about Departers out of this Province.
BE IT ENACTED, etc. That every Person intending to depart or leave this
Province, shall publish his or her Intentions in Writing, under one Justice's
Hand, affixed on the Door of the County Courthouse where he or she inhabits,
thirty Days before his or her Departure; and shall have a Pass under the
Province or County Se^l. AND if any Master of Ship or Vessel, s^all presume to
convey or transport any Person inhabiting in this Province out of this
Government without such Pass, such Master or Person shall pay all Damages that
shall happen thereby.

CHAP. CXXXIII. An ACT for the better Improving a good Correspondence with the
Indians.
Expired.

CHAP. CXXXIV. An ACT about Attachments.
WHEREAS the Laws of this Government have hitherto been deficient in respect of
Attachments, Proceedings on Attachments rectified by the 9th Ge^. I. Chap. 251
(...).
(so that the Effects of Persons absenting are not ^^^ally liable with those of
Persons dwelling upon the Spot, (...) make Satisfaction for Debts contracted or
owing within this Province) to the great Injury of the Inhabitants thereof, and
Encouragement of such unworthy Persons as frequently, by Absconding, make an
Advantage of the Defect aforesaid: To prevent which Inconveniency, BE IT
ENACTED, etc. That the Justices of the respective County Courts within this
Province shall, and are hereby empowered to grant Writs of Attachment; which
Attachments so granted shall be duly served by the respective Sheriffs or
Coroners, as the Case may require, upon the Goods and Chattels of such Person
or Persons against whom the same shall be awarded, in whose Hands or Possession
the same shall be found, returnable to the next succeeding Court respectively,
where the Party may proceed to Trial, and shall have Judgment granted the third
Court after the Effects are seized.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, The Manner of Proceeding
on Attachments.
That the Person or Persons whose Goods or Effects are so attached, shall be
called The Defendant in the Attachment; and the Person in whose Hands or
Possession the same Goods or Effects are attached shall be called The
Garnishee, and shall be obliged to appear in Court at the Return of the
Attachment, and answer what shall be objected against him, and abide the
Judgment of Court, and shall be allowed, out of the Effects attached,
reasonable Satisfaction for his Attendance. And that the Manner of Executing
the said Writs shall be by the Officers going to the House, or to the Person in
whose Hands or Possession the Defendant's Goods or Effects are supposed to be,
and then and there declare, in the Presence of one or more credible Persons of
the Neighborhood, That he attacheth the same Goods or other Effects: From and
after which Declaration the Goods, Money or Effects so attached, shall remain
in the Officer's Power, and be by him secured, in order to answer and abide the
Judgment of Court in that Case, unless the Garnishee will give Security
therefore. And if the Plaintiff obtain a Verdict, Judgment and Executi^n for the
Money and Goods in the Garnishee's Possession; yet the Defendant, in the
Attachment, may, at any time before the Money paid, put in Bail to the
Plaintiff's Action, upon which the Attachment is grounded; whereby the
Garnishee will and shall be immediately discharged. And if an Attachment shall
be made for Goods or Effects, and the Garnishee plead he had no Goods or
Effects in his Hands at the time of the Attachm^^^, or at any time after, and
the Plaintiff prove the Contrary, the Jury in such Case being satisfied that
the Proof is plain and full, shall find for the Plaintiff, and say what Goods
or Effects they find in the Garnishee's Hands; whereupon Judgment shall be
entered, that Appraisement may be made of the said Goods or Effects so found by
the Jury, and a Precept shall be granted requiring the Sheriff to get the same
appraised; and if the Garnishee will not produce them, Execution shall be
forthwith awarded for the Value thereof according to Appraisement; to be levied
of the Lands, Tenements, Goods and Chattels of the Garnishee.

PROVIDED ALWAYS, No Attachment to be granted against a Resident, etc.
T^^t no Writ of Attachment shall hereafter be granted against any Person or
Persons Effects, but such only as at the time of Granting such Writs are not
resident or residing within this Province, or are about to remove or make their
Escape out of the same, and shall refuse to give sufficient Security to the
Complainant for his Debt or other Demand before he departs the said Province.

PROVIDED ALSO, That after Judgment obtained by the Plaintiff upon any
Attachments against Non-Residents, the Plaintiff shall before Sale, The
Plaintiff after Judgment obtained shall find Security, that if the Defendant,
etc.
and after Execution is awarded, find Security, who shall undertake for the
Plaintiff, That if the Defendant in the Attachment shall, within a Year and a
Day next following, by himself or Attorney, come into Court and disprove or
avoid the Debt recovered by the Plaintiff against him, or shall discharge the
same, with Costs, that then the Plaintiff shall restore to the Defendant the
Goods or Effects, or the Value thereof, by the Plaintiff attached and
condemned, or so much thereof as shall be disproved or discharged, or else that
they shall and will do it for him.

CHAP. CXXXV. An ACT for the Trial of Negroes.
WHEREAS some Difficulties have arisen within this Province, Vide po^^ea, An
Act, enti^uled* An Act for ^he better Regulating of Negroes, etc. 12 th Geo. I.
Chap. 287.
about the Manner of Trial and Punishment of Negroes committing Murder,
Manslaughter, Buggery, Burglary, Rapes, Attempts of Rapes, and other high and
heinous Enormities and capital Offenses: For Remedy thereof, and for the speedy
Trial and condign Punishment of such Negroe or Negroes offending as aforesaid,
BE IT ENACTED, etc. That it shall and may be lawful for two Justices of the
Peace of this Province, Two Justices commissionated by the Governor, with the
Assistance of six Freeholders, to tryNegroes for Murder, etc.
who shall be particularly commissionated by the Government for that Service,
within the respective Counties thereof, and six of the most substantial
Freeholders of the Neighborhood, to hear, examine, try and determine all such
Offenses committed by any Negroe or Negroes: Which said Freeholders shall be by
Warrant under the Hands and Seals of the respective Justices, commissionated as
aforesaid, directed to the next Constable, summoned to appear at such Time and
Place as the said Justices shall therein appoint: Their Qualification, and
Manner of Proceeding ther^on.
Which Freeholders the said Justices shall solemnly attest, Well and truly to
give their Assistance and Judgment upon the Trial of such Negroe or Negroes:
Who shall hold a Court for the Hearing, Trying, Judging, Determining and
Convicting of such Negroe or Negroes as shall be before them charged or accused
of committing any Murder, Manslaughter, Buggery, Burglary, Rapes, Attempts of
Rapes, or any other high or heinous Offense committed, acted or done in any of
the respective Counties within this Province as aforesaid.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, Their Duty and Power, to
acquit or condemn, etc.
That upon the Holding of such Court by the said Justices and Freeholders as
aforesaid, it shall and may be lawful for the said Justices and Freeholders to
examine, try, hear, judge, determine, convict, acquit or condemn, according to
Evidence and full Proof, any Negroe or Negroes, for any the Crimes or Offenses
aforesaid, or any other high or capital Offense; and, upon due Proof and
Conviction, to pronounce such Judgment or Sentence in the Premises, as is
agreeable to Law and the Nature of the Offense; or otherwise to acquit, free
and discharge such Negroe or Negroes, in Case the Evidence shall not be
sufficient for a Conviction therein.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, HowSentence shall be
given and Execution done, etc*
That where such Negroe or Negroes shall be convict, and Judgment or Sentence
shall be pronounced by the respective Justices and Freeholders as aforesaid,
and a Warrant by them signed and sealed, to be directed to the High Sheriff of
the County where the Fact was committed or tried, for the Execution of such
Negroe or Negroes, the same shall be duly executed, or caused to be duly
executed by the said Sheriff, on Pain of being disabled to act any longer in
that Post or Office.

AND if any of the said Justices or Freeholders neglect or delay to do their
Duty therein, Penalty:
they shall be liable to be fined by the Governor and Council, in any Sum not
exceeding Five Pounds; to be levied by Distress and Sale of the Goods and
Chattels of such Justices or Freeholders so refusing as aforesaid.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, Rape, etc punished by
Death, and an Attempt* etc. by Whipping, etc.
That if any Negroe or Negroes within this Province, shall commit a Rape or
Ravishment upon any white Woman or Maid, or shall commit Murder, Buggery or
Burglary, they shall be tried as aforesaid, and shall be punished by Death. And
for an Attempt of Rape or Ravishment on any white Woman or Maid, and for
Robbing and Stealing, or fraudulently taking and carrying away any Goods,
living or dead, above the Value of Five Pounds, every Negroe, upon Conviction
of any of the said Crimes, shall be whipped with Thirty-nine Lashes, and
branded on the Forehead with the Letter [R] or [T] and exported out of this
Province by the Master or Owner, within six Months after Conviction, never to
return into the same, upon Pain of Death, and shall be kept in Prison till
Exportation, at their Masters or Owners, or their own Charge. Stealing under 5
l. Value, by Whipping only, and the Master to pay, etc.
And for Robbing or Stealing any Goods as aforesaid, under the Value of Five
Pounds, every Negroe, upon Conviction thereof, shall be whipped at the
Discretion of the Justices, with any Number of Lashes not exceeding
Thirty-nine; and the Master or Owner of such Negroe shall make Satisfaction to
the Party wronged for the Value, and pay all Costs; to be levied by Distress
and Sale of the said Master's or Owner's Goods, if he or they refuse or delay
to answer it otherwise.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, Negroes not allowed to
carry a Gun, etc.
That if any Negroe shall presume to carry any Guns, Sword, Pistol,
Fowling-Piece, Clubs or other Arms or Weapons whatsoever, without his Master's
special License for the same, and be convicted thereof before a Magistrate, he
shall be whipped with Twenty-one Lashes on his bare Back.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, Nor to me^^ above four
its Company, on Penalty of Whipping.
That for preventing Negroes meeting and accompanying together on the
First-Days of the Week, or any other Day or Time, in great Companies or
Numbers; that if any Person or Persons give Notice thereof, and to whom they
respectively belong, to any Justice of the Peace within this Province, the same
being above the Number of four in Company, and upon no lawful Business of their
Masters or Owners, such Negroes so offending shall be publicly whipped, at the
Discretion of one Justice of the Peace, not exceeding Thirty-nine Lashes.

CHAP. CXXXVI. An ACT to prevent the Importation of Indian Slaves. Vid. pos^ea
Cap. 288.

WHEREAS the Importation of Indian Slaves from Carolina, or other Places, has
been observed to give the Indians of this Province some Umbrage for Suspicion
and Dissatisfaction, BE IT ENACTED, etc. No Indian Slaves to be imported into
this Province, on Penalty of being forfeited*
That if, after the Twenty-fifth Day of March, in the Year One Thousand Seven
Hundred and Six, any Person shall import, or cause to be imported, any Indian
Slaves or Servants whatsoever, from any Province, or Colony in America into
this Province, by Land or Water, such only and their Children (if any)
excepted, as for the Space of one Year before such Importation, shall be proved
to have been menial Servants in the Family of the Importer, and are brought in
together with the Importer's Family; every such Slave or Servant so here landed
shall be forfeited to the Government, and shall be either set at Liberty or
otherwise disposed of as the Governor and Council shall see cause.

PROVIDED ALWAYS, That no such Indian Slave as Deserting his Master's Service
elsewhere (that shall fly into this Province) shall be understood or be
construed to be comprehended within this Act.

CHAP. CXXXVII. The LAW about seven Years quiet Possession.
BE IT ENACTED, etc. That seven Years quiet Possession of Lands within this
Province, which were first entered on upon an equitable Right, shall forever
give an unquestionable Title to the same against all, during the Estate whereof
they are or shall be possessed; except in Cases of Infants, married Women,
Lunaticks, and Persons not resident within this Province and Territories.

CHAP. CXXXVIII. An ACT for the Killing of Wolves.
Supplied.

CHAP. CXXXIX. An ACT against mixing and adulterating strong Liquors.
FOR the Preventing of Fraud in mixing and adulterating Rum, Brandy, or such
like Spirits, BE IT ENACTED, etc. The mixing Water with Rum, etc. to sell, is
Forfeiture thereof.
That if any Person within this Province shall presume to sell Rum, Brandy, or
such like Spirits, that is adulterated or mixed with Water or any other Liquor,
knowing the same to be so adulterated or mixed, being convict thereof, by one
or more credible Witnesses, he or she shall, for every such Offense, forfeit
the said Rum, Brandy or Spirits to be exposed to Sale, and pay treble the Value
thereof; one Moiety to the Support of Government and the other Moiety or Half
to him that shall discover or sue for the same.

CHAP. CXL. An ACT for Mariners not to be trusted.
TO the End that no Mariners shall be arrested to hinder their Voyage in any
Ship or other Vessel to which they belong, bound out to Sea, BE IT ENACTED,
etc. That no Person, Ordinary-keepers or others, Mariners not to be trusted
above 5 ^ on 5 l. Penalty, etc.
within this Province, shall trust any Mariner, belonging to any Vessel, above
Five Shillings, unless the Master of the Ship or Vessel to whom such Mariner
belongs, engage for the same; upon the Penalty of Losing what they so trust,
and of the Sum of Five Pounds, over and above, for each Offense; one Moiety
thereof to the Master or Merchant injured, and the other to the Governor; and
shall further forfeit their License; except such Mariner have Goods on board
the said Vessel, or otherways to answer the same.

CHAP. CXLI. An ACT for County Seals, and against counterfeiting Hands and
Seals.
BE IT ENACTED, etc. That there shall be a County Seal in every County in this
Province, for the Use of each County; The Penalty on counterfeiting Hand or
Seal.
and if any Person within the said Province shall be convicted of
counterfeiting the Hand or Seal of another, with Intent to defraud such Person,
shall suffer three Months Imprisonment, and be fined treble the Value he or she
shall have defrauded, or attempted to have defrauded thereby, to the Use of the
Party wronged. Or the Privy or Broad Seal.
AND whosoever shall counterfeit the Privy or Broad Seal of the said Province,
being convicted thereof, shall suffer seven Years Imprisonment as aforesaid,
and be fined at the Discretion of the Court where such Party shall be
convicted, in any Sum not exceeding One Hundred Pounds, for the Support of
Government.

CHAP. CXLII. An ACT for Defalcation.
Any Person sued upon Bond, Bill, etc may plead Payment of Part or the whole
Debt, etc.
BE IT ENACTED, etc. That if any two or more Dealing together, be indebted to
each other upon Bonds, Bills, Bargains, Promises, Accounts, or the like, and
one of them commence an Action in any Court of this Province, if the Defendant
cannot gainsay the Deed, Bargain or Assumption upon which he is sued, it shall
be lawful for such Defendant to plead Payment of all or any Part of the Debt or
Sum demanded, and give any Bond, Bill, Receipt, Account or Bargain in Evidence;
and if it shall appear that the Defendant has fully paid or satisfied (...)
Debt or Sum demanded, the Jury shall find for the Defendant, and Judgment shall
be entered, that the Plaintiff shall take nothing by his Writ, and shall pay
the Costs. And if it shall appear that any Part of the Sum demanded be paid,
then so much as is found to be paid shall be desaulked, and the Plaintiff shall
have Judgment for the Residue only, If the Jury find the Plaintiff is overpaid,
the Verdict shall be given for the Defendant.
with Costs of Suit, But if it appear to the Jury that the Plaintiff is
overpaid, then they shall give in their Verdict for the Defendant, and withal
certify to the Court how much they find the Plaintiff to be indebted or in
Arrear to the Defendant more than will answer the Debt or Sum demanded, and the
Sum or Sums so certified shall be ^ecorded with the Verdict, and shall be
deemed as a Debt of Record; and if the Plaintiff refuse to pay the same, And
how the Court shall proceed upon the same.
the De^endant, for Recovery thereof, shall have a Scire facias against the
Plaintiff in the said Action, and have Execution for the same, with the Costs
of that Action.

PROVIDED ALWAYS, Where a Tender is made, and the Party refuses, and afterward
sues, he shall recover no Costs.
That in all Cases where a Tender shall be made, and full Payment offered by
Discount, or otherwise, in such Specie as the Party by Contract or Agreement
ought to do; and the Party to whom such Tender shall be made does refuse the
same, and yet afterward will sue for the Debt or Goods so tendered, the
Plaintiff shall not recover any Costs in such Suit.

PROVIDED ALSO, The award of Referrees chosen in Court, by Consent of Parties,
shall have the same Effect as a Verdict.
That in all Cases where the Plaintiff and Defendant having Accounts to produce
one against another, shall, by themselves, or Attorneys, or Agents, consent to
a Rule of Court, for Referring the Adju^^ment thereof, to certain Persons,
mutually chosen by them in open Court, the Award and Report of such Referees
being made according to the Submission of the Parties, and approved of by the
Court, and entered upon the Record or Roll, shall have the same Effect, and
shall be deemed and taken to be as available in Law as a Verdict given by
twelve Men; and the Party to whom any Sum or Sums of Money are thereby awarded
to be paid, shall have Judgment, or a Scire facias, for the Recovery thereof,
as the Case may require, and as is herein before directed concerning Sums found
and settled by a Jury; any Law or Usage to the Contrary of this in anywise
notwithstanding.

CHAP. CXLIII. An ACT for Bailing of Prisoners, and about Imprisonment.
BE IT ENACTED, etc. All Perso^^ bailable, except for Felonies of Death.
That all Prisoners shall be bailable by one or more sufficient Sureties, to be
taken by one or more of the Judges or Justices that have Cognizance of the
Fact, unless for such Offenses as are or shall be made Felonies of Death by the
Laws of this Province. And, at least every half Year, there shall be a
Jail-delivery in every County of this Province, where Imprisonment is not the
Punishment: And that Goalers shall not oppress their Prisoners; The Liberty of
P^isone^s, and their Allowance.
and that all Prisoners shall be free as to Room; and all Prisoners shall have
Liberty to provide themselves with Bedding, Food and other Necessaries during
their Imprisonment. And that the Publick-Allowance shall be Two Pence per Day,
and no more. And that the respective Prisons shall be Workhouses (until others
are provided) for Felons, Thieves, Vagrants and loose and idle Persons; whereof
one shall be in each respective County of this Province. And that no Person or
Persons shall be obliged to answer to any Indictment or Presentment, unless the
Prosecutor's Name be inserted thereon. And if any Person or Persons shall be
imprisoned or prosecuted without probable Cause, he, she or they shall have
double Damages against the Informer or Prosecutor; to be recovered by Action at
common Law.

CHAP. CXLIV. An ACT for taking Lands in Execution for Payment of Debts. Vide
13 Geo. I. post. Cap. 295.
See Chap. 48. Anno 1700.
TO the End that no Creditor may be defrauded of their just Debts due to them
from Persons who have sufficient real if not personal Estates to satisfy the
same, Lands Tenements, etc. may be sold for the Payment of Debts.
BE IT ENACTED, etc. That all such Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments
whatsoever, within this Province, where no sufficient personal Estate can be
found, shall be liable to be seized and sold, upon Judgment and Execution
obtained.

PROVIDED ALWAYS, That when any Debt is hereafter recovered, Except the Rents
thereof will sati^fy such Debts in seven Years.
and Damages awarded, or when any Debt is acknowledged before such as have or
shall have Power to take Cognizance thereof, and Executions awarded thereupon,
to be levied upon the Lands, Tenements or Hereditaments of any Person or
Persons whatsoever, it shall not be lawful for any Sheriff, or other Officer,
by Virtue of such Executions, or of any Writ or Writs thereupon, to sell or
expose to Sale any such Lands, Tenements or Hereditaments, in this Province,
which shall or may yield yea^ly Rents or Profits, beyond all Reprizes,
sufficient, within the Space of seven Years, to pay or satisfy such Debts or
Damages, with the Costs of Suit; but that all those Lands, And then to be
extended.
Tenements and Here^itaments shall, by Virtue of the Writ or Writs of
Execution, be delivered to the Party obtaining the same, until the Debt or
Damages be levied by a reasonable Extent, in the same M^nner and Method as
Lands are delivered upon Writs of E^^git in England.

PROVIDED NEVERTHELESS, That if the clear Profits of such Lands or Tenements
shall not be sound by Inquest of twelve Men to be sufficient, And if not, and
before the said Extent be out any Debts shall be recovered which cannot be
satisfied out of the said yearly Profits, then said Lands shall be sold.
within seven Years, to satisfy the Debt or Damages in such Executions; or if,
before the Extent be out, any other Debts or Damages shall be recovered against
the same Debtor or Defen^ant, his Heirs, Executors or Administrators; which,
with what r^mains due upon that Extent, cannot all be satisfied out of the
yearly Profits of the Lands and Tenements so extended, within seven Years,
then, and in every such Case, the Sh^riff, or other Officer, shall accordingly
certify the same, upon the Return of such Executions; whereupon Writ or Writs
of Venditioni exponas shall issue forth to sell such Lands or Tenements, for
and toward Satisfaction of what shall so remain due upon such Extent, as also
toward Satisfaction of all the rest of the said Debts or Damages, in Manner as
is herein alter directed concerning the Sale of other Lands.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That it shall and may be
lawful for the Sheriff, or other Officer, How the Sheriff is to proceed therein.
by a Writ of Levari facias, to seize and take all other Lands, Tenements and
Hereditaments in Execution, and thereupon, with all convenient Speed, either
with or without any Writ of Venditioni exponas, to make public Sale thereof
for the most they will yield, and pay the Price or Value of the same to the
Party, toward Satisfaction of his Debt, Damages and Costs. But before any such
Sale be made, the Sheriff, Notice to be gi^en ten Days before such Sales.
or other Officer, shall cause so many Writings to be made, upon Parchment, or
good Paper, as the Debtor or Defendant shall reasonably desire or request, or
so many, without such Request, as may be sufficient to signify and give Notice
of such Sales or Vendues, and of the D^y and Hour when, and the Place where the
same will be, and what Lands or Tenements are to be so sold, and where they
lie, which Notice shall be given to the Defendant; and the said Parchments or
Papers fixed by the Sheriff, or other Officer, in the most public Places of
the County or City, at least ten Days before Sale; And after the S^le the
Sheriff to give the Buyer a Deed, etc.
and upon such Sale, the She^^ff, or other Officer, shall make Return thereof,
indor^ed or annexed to the said Levari facias; and give the Buyer a Deed, duly
executed and acknowledged in Court for what is sold, as has been heretofore
used upon the Sheriff's Sale of Lands. But in Case the said Lands and
Hereditaments so to be exposed, If the Lands, etc cannot be sold how the
Sheriff shall proceed.
cannot be sold, then the Officer shall make Return upon the Writ, That he
exposed such Lands or Tenements to Sale, and the same re^ained in his Hand
uns^ld for Want of Buyers. Which Return shall not make the Officer liable to
answer the Debt or Damages contained in such Writ, but a Writ, And how the
Debtor shall be satisfied, and hold the said Lands, etc.
called Liberari facias, shall forthwith be awarded and directed to the proper
Officer, commanding him to deliver to the Party such Part or Parts of those
Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments as shall satisfy his Debt, Damages and
Interest, from the time of the Judgment given, with Costs of Suit, according to
the Valuation of twelve Men; to hold to him as his free Tenement, in
Satisfaction of his Debt, Damages and Costs, or so much thereof as those Lands,
by the Valuation thereof as aforesaid, shall amount unto: And if it fall short,
the Party may afterward have Execution for the Residue against the Defendant's
Body, Lands or Goods, as the Laws of this Province shall direct and appoint
from time to time, concerning other Executions. All which said Lands,
Tenements, Hereditaments and Premises so as aforesaid to be sold or delivered
by the Sheriff or Officer aforesaid, with all their Appurtenances, shall and
may be quietly and peaceably held and enjoyed by the Person or Persons, or
Bodies politic, to whom the same shall be sold or delivered, and by his and
their Heirs, Successors or Assigns, as fully and amply, and for such Estate and
Estates, and under such Rents and Services as he or they for whose Debt or Duty
the same shall be so sold or delivered, might, could or ought to do at or
before the taking thereof in Execution.

PROVIDED ALWAYS, That the Message, Lands or Tenements upon which the
Defendant is chiefly seated, The chief Message, etc. not to be ^old within a
Year after Judgment, etc.
shall not be exposed to Sale before the Expiration of one whole Year after
Judgment is given, to the Intent that the Defendant, or any other for him, may
redeem the same.

AND forasmuch as diverse Persons have mortgaged their Lands and Tenements in
this Province for securing the Payment of Moneys, and some of them have died
before the time of Payment, and left others to succeed them, that have proved
Insolvent; and others have neglected to pay the Mortgage-Money, and so
Mortgages are become no effectual Security, considering how low the annual
Profits of Tenements and improved Lands are here, and the Discouragements which
the Mortgagees meet with, by Reason of the ^quity of Redemption remaining in
the Mortgagers: BE IT THEREFORE ENACTED by the Auth^rity aforesaid, The
Mortgager, upon Non-Payment of the Mortgage-Money, may, after one Y^ar, sue
forth a Writ of S^ire facias, and^.
That where Default or Defaults have been or shall be made or suffered by any
Mortgager or Mortgagers of any Lands, Tenements, or other Hereditaments, within
this Province, or by his, her or their Heirs, Executors, Administrators and
Assigns, of or in Payment of the Mortgage-Money, or Performance of the
Condition or Conditions which they or any of them should have paid or
performed, or ought to pay or perform, in such Manner and Form, and according
to the Purport, Tenor and Effect of the respective Provi^oes, Conditions or
Covenants comprised in their Deeds of Mortgage or Defeazance, and at the Days,
Times and Places in the same Deeds respectively mentioned and contained; that
in every such Case it shall and may be lawful to and for the Mortgagee or
Mortgagee^, and him, her or them that grant the Deeds of Defeazance, and his,
her and their Heirs, Executors, Administrators and Assigns, at any time after
the Expiration of twelve Months next ensuing the last Day whereon the said
Mortgage-Money ought to be paid, or other Conditions performed as aforesaid, to
sue forth a Writ or Writs of Scire facias, which the Clerk of the Court of
Common Pleas for the County or City where the said Mortgage-Lands or
Hereditaments lie and be, is hereby empowered and required to make out and
dispatch, directed to the proper Officer, requiring him, by honest and lawful
Men of the Neighborhood to make known to the Mortgager or Mortgagers, his, her
or their Heirs, Executors or Administrators, that he or they be and appear
before the Magistrates, Judges or Justices of the said Court or Courts, to show
if any thing he or they have to say wherefore the said mortgaged Premises ought
not to be seized and taken in Execution for Payment of the said Mortgage-Money,
with Interest, or to satisfy the Damages which the Plaintiff in such Scire
facias shall, upon the Record, suggest, for the Breach or Nonperformance of
the said Conditions. And if the Defendant, in such Scire facias, appears, he or
they may plead Satisfaction or Payment of Part or all the Mortgage-Money, or
any other lawful Plea, in Avoidance of the Deed or Debt, as the Case may
require: But if the Defendants, in such Scire facias, will not appear on the
Day whereon the same Writ shall be made returnable, then, if the Case be such
as Damages only are to be recovered, an Inquest shall be forthwith charged to
enquire thereof, and the definitive Judgment therein, as well as all other
Judgments, to be given upon such Scire facias, shall be entered, that the
Plaintiff in the Scire facias shall have Execution by Levari facias, directed
to the proper Officer; by Virtue whereof the said mortgaged Premises shall be
taken in Execution, And take out Execution and expose to Sale the mortgaged
Premises as above directed.
and exposed to Sale in Manner aforesaid; and upon Sale, conveyed to the Buyer
or Buyers thereof, and the Money or Price of the same rendered to the Mortgagee
or Creditor; but for want of Buyers, to be delivered to the Mortgagee or
Creditor in Manner and Form as is herein before directed concerning other Lands
and Hereditaments, to be sold and delivered upon Executions for other Debts or
Damages; and when the said Lands and Hereditaments shall be so sold or
delivered as aforesaid, the Person or Persons to whom they shall be so sold or
delivered, shall and may hold and enjoy the same, with their Appurtenances, for
such Estate or Estates as they were sold or del^^ered, clearly discharged and
freed from all Equity and Benefit of Redemption, and all other Encumbrances
made and suffered by the Mortgagers, their Heirs or Assigns; and such Sales
shall be available in Law, And such Sales shall be available in Law, etc.
and the respective Vendees, Mortgagees or Creditors, their Heirs and Assigns,
shall hold and enjoy the same, freed and discharged as aforesaid; but before
such Sales shall be made, Notice shall be given, in Writing, in Manner and Form
as is he^ein above directed concerning the Sales of Lands upon Executions; any
Law or Usage to the Contrary notwithstanding.

PROVIDED ALSO, AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That when
any of the said Lands, Overplus to be returned to the Debtor where Lands, etc.
are sold for more than will satisfy the Debts, etc.
Tenements or Hereditaments which, by the Direction and Authority of this Act,
are to be sold for Payment of Debts and Damages in Manner aforesaid, shall be
sold for more than will satisfy the same Debts or Damages, and reasonable
Costs, then the Sheriff, or other Officer who shall make the Sale, must render
the Overplus to the Debtor or Defendants; and then, and not before, the said
Officer shall be discharged thereof upon Record, in the same Court where he
shall make Return of his Proceedings concerning the said Sales.

PROVIDED ALSO, Such Sale not to create any further Estate th^n, etc.
That no Sale or Delivery which shall be made by Virtue of this Act shall be
extended to create any further Term or Estate to the Vendees, Mortgagees or
Creditors than the Lands or Hereditaments so sold or delivered shall appear to
be mortgaged for by the said respective Mortgagees or defeazible Deeds.

PROVIDED ALSO, The Lands, etc not to be restored upon the Reve^sion of such
Judgments* etc. but the Price of such Lands, etc. shall be repaid.
That if any of the said Judgments which do or shall warrant the Awarding of
the said Writs of Execution, whereupon any Lands, Tenements or Hereditaments
have been or shall be sold, shall, at any time hereafter, be reversed for any
Error or Errors, then, and in every such Case, none of the said Lands,
Tenements or Hereditaments so as aforesaid taken or sold, or to be taken or
sold upon Executions, nor any Part thereof, shall be restored, nor the
Sheriff's Sale or Delivery thereof avoided, but Restitution in such Cases only
of the Money or Price for which such Lands were or shall be sold.

CHAP. CXLV. An ACT about Arrests, and making Debtors pay by Servitude.
Repealed, by an Act passed 3 Geo. II. entitled, An Act for Relief of
insolvent Debtors.

CHAP. CXLVI. An ACT for the Relief of the Poor.
FOR the better Relief of the Poor of this Province, BE IT ENACTED, etc. The
Justices of the Peace of the respective Counties to appoint Overseer^ of the
Poor; how and when.
That the Justices of the Peace of the respective Counties of this Province, or
any three, or more of them, shall, upon the Five-and-Twentieth Day of March,
yearly, (unless that shall happen on the First Day of the Week) and then on the
Day following, meet at some convenient Place within their County, and there
nominate and appoint one, two, or more (as the Case may require) of substantial
Inhabitants of the respective Townships, and where Townships are small and
Inhabitants few, two or more (as the Justices think fit) may be joined together
within their County, to be Overseers of the Poor of the said Townships for the
Year ensuing.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, Said Overseers to lay a
R^te of 1 d. per Pound.
That it shall and may be lawful for the Overseer or Overseers of the Poor so
nominated and appointed, to make or lay a Rate or Assessment, after the Rate of
One Penny per Pound, clear Value, of the real and personal Estates of all and
every the Freeholders and Inhabitants within their respective Townships, to be
employed for the Relief of poor, indigent and impotent Persons inhabiting
within the said Township, in such Manner as by this Act is directed and
appointed; and Four Shillings per Head on all Freemen not otherwise rated.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, To be allowed by three
or more of s^id Justices.
That the said Overseers, before they proceed to the Collecting of the said
Rate, shall procure the same to be allowed by three or more Justices of the
Peace of the County wherein the said Tax is made. And if any Person or Persons,
How the said Overseers are to proceed (...) collecting the some.
so rated or assessed, shall refuse to pay the Sum or Sums on them charged,
that it shall and may be lawful to and for the said Overseer or Overseers
(having first obtained a Warrant, under the Hands and Seals of two Justices of
the Peace of the County where the said Assessment is made, who are hereby
empowered to grant such Warrant) to levy the same on the Goods and Chattels of
the Person or Persons so refusing; and in Case such Person shall not, within
three Days next after such Distress made, pay the Sum or Sums on him ass^ssed,
together with the Charge of such Distress, that the said Overseer or Overseers
may proceed to the Sale of the Goods distrained, rendering to the Owner the
Overplus (if any) that shall remain on such Sale, reasonable Charges first
deducted: And in Case such Person or Persons have no Goods or Chattels whereby
they may be distrained, that then it shall be lawful for the said Justices to
commit the Offenders to Prison, there to remain without Bail or Mainprize until
they have paid the same.

In Case of Aggrievances to appeal to the said Justices.
PROVIDED ALWAYS, That if any Person or Persons find themselves aggrieved with
such Rate or Assessment, that then it shall be lawful for the Justices of the
Peace, at their next General Quarter Sessions, upon Petition of the Party, to
take such Order therein as to them shall be thought convenient, and the same to
conclude and bind all Parties; and the Overseer or Overseers shall forbear such
Distress till the same be determined in the Quarter Sessions.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, The Overseers to be
guided by the County Assesment.
That the said Overseers shall lay the said Rate according to the best of their
Skill and Judgment, wherein they shall be guided by the County Assessment on
other Occasions, having due Regard to every Man's Estate, without Favor or
Affection to any.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, F^thers, etc. are
obliged to maintain poor, etc.
That the Father and Grandfather, Mother and Grandmother, or the Children of
every poor, old, blind, lame and impotent Person, or other poor Person not able
to work, being of sufficient Ability, shall, at their own Charges, relieve and
maintain every such poor Person, as the Justices of the Peace, at their General
Quarter Sessions shall order and direct, on Pain of forfeiting Forty Shillings
for every Month they shall fail therein.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, Overseers to set to work
poor Children and put them out App^^ntice.
That it shall and may be lawful for the said Overseers of the Poor, by the
Approbation and Consent of two or more Justices of the Peace, to set on work
the Children of all such whose Parents shall not be, by the said Justices,
thought able to maintain them; and also to put such Children out Apprentices,
for such Term as they, in their Discretion, shall see meet.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, No Person to receive
Relief without Order, etc.
That no Person or Persons shall be admitted or entered into the Poor's Books,
or receive Relief from the Overseers of the Poor, before such Person or Persons
have p^o^cured an Order from two Justices of the Peace for the same: And in
Case the said Overseers shall enter into their Books, or relieve any such poor
Person or Persons, without such Orders, they shall forseit all such Money or
Goods paid or distributed, unless the Justices shall approve and allow them the
same upon making up their Accounts.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That the Justices of the
Peace of the said respective Counties shall, Overseers to settle their Accounts
yearly and return the Name^ of two or more to succeed them.
at least ten Days before the Twenty-f^^th Day of March, yearly, issue out
their Warrants, directed to the Overseers of the Poor of the respective
Townships, within their County, commanding their said Overseers to appear
before them on the said Day, and produce their Accounts of what Money they
received and disburs^d for the Use of the Poor, and also to return the Names of
one, two or more (as the Place may require) of the sufficient Inhabitants of
the respective Townships, to succeed them in that Office for the Year ensuing:
Or serve another Year* o^ forfeit, etc.
And in Case the Overseers shall neglect to bring in such their Accounts, as
also their Names of such suf^^cient Persons to succeed them in that Office the
Year ensuing, such Person or Persons so neglecting shall serve in that Office
one Year longer, or otherwise forfeit any Sum not exceeding Fifty Pounds, And
if any Person so chosen refuse to ser^e sh ll forfeit 5 l. and how to be
recovered.
as the said Justices shall think fit and direct. And in Case the Person or
Persons approved on and appointed by the said Justices to be Overseers of the
Poor o^ any Township within the respective Counties, shall refuse to take upon
him or them the said Office, and to do his or their Duty therein, he or they
shall forseit the Sum of Five Pounds each; which said Forfeitures shall go and
be to the Use of the Poor of the Town or Place where such Neglect or Refusal
shall be made, and shall be levied by the Constable, by Warrant from any two
Justices of the Peace of the said County, under their Hands and Seals, on the
Goods and Chattels of such Person or Persons so neglecting or refusing, and by
the Constable sold within three Days next after such Distress made: And if
there happen any Overplus upon Sale thereof, the same shall be paid to the
Person or Persons to whom the same shall belong, reasonable Charges first
deducted. And if such Person or Persons so neglecting or refusing as aforesaid,
shall not have Goods or Chattels whereby he or they may be distrained as
aforesaid, that then the said Justices may commit the Offender or Offenders to
Prison, there to remain without Bail or Mainprize till the said Forfeitures
shall be by them fully satisfied and paid.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, The Mayor and Aldermen
of the City of Philadelphia have the same Power within, etc. as the said
Justices.
That the Mayor and Aldermen of the City of Philadelphia shall have the same
Power and Authority, by Virtue of this Act, within the Limits and Precincts of
their Jurisdictions, as well out of their Sessions as at their Sessions, as is
herein limited, prescribed and appointed to the Justices of the Peace of the
County.

CHAP. CXLVII. An ACT for confirming the Sales of Lands by Attorneys or Agents,
and for ascertaining the Proof of Instruments or Writings made out of this
Province.
WHEREAS diverse Persons living out of this Province, are and have been Owners
of Lands within the same, and such Persons have usually appointed Attorneys to
sell and dispose thereof: To the End therefore that those who have so
purchased, and their Heirs and Assigns, forever hereafter be secured in their
Titles and Estates, BE IT ENACTED, etc. That all Sales of Lands, Sale of Lands,
etc. by Attorneys, shall be effectual in Law.
Tenements and Hereditaments formerly made by any Attorneys or Agents who have
been appointed by any Person or Persons, who had Right so to do, and especially
giving them Power or Directions therein to sell or convey Land, are and shall
be deemed and adjudged good and effectual in Law to all Intents, Constructions
and Purposes whatsoever, as fully as if the said Owners of such Lands had, by
their own Deeds, Bargains and Sales, actually and really sold and conveyed the
same; and all and singular the Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments sold and
conveyed as aforesaid shall be and remain to such Purchasers respectively,
their Heirs and Assigns forever, as they were or ought to have been to the
Owner or Owners of such Land and Premises so employing his or their Attorneys
or Agents as aforesaid.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That all and every
Bonds, Bonds, etc. proved by two Witnesses before any Mayor, etc. and certified
under common or public Seal, etc. sufficient in Law.
Specialties, Letters of Attorney, and other Powers in Writing, which shall be
produced in any Court, or before any Magistrate in this Province, the Execution
whereof being proved by two or more of the Witnesses thereunto, before any
Mayor or chief Magistrate or Officer of the Cities, Towns or Places where such
Bonds, Letters of Attorney, or other Writings, are or shall be made or
executed, and accordingly certified under the common or public Seal of the
Cities, Towns or Places where the said Bonds, Letters of Attorney, or other
Writings, are so proved respectively, shall be taken and adjudged as sufficient
in Law as if the Witnesses therein named had been present, and such
Certification shall be sufficient Evidence to the Court and Jury for the Proof
thereof.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, Sales of Lands* etc.
hereafter by Power of Attorney, proved in this Province, shall be good.
That all Sales or Conveyances of Lands, Tenements or Hereditaments which shall
hereafter be made by Virtue of any Letters or Powers of Attorney or Agency duly
executed, which do or shall expressly give Power to sell Lands or other Estates,
and be certified to have been proved as aforesaid, or shall be proved in this
Province before any Justice of the Peace, by one or more of the Witnesses
thereto, shall be good and effectual in Law to all Intents, Constructions and
Purposes whatsoever as if the said Constituent or Constituents had by their own
Deeds, Bargains and Sales actually and really sold and conveyed the same.

If such Sale be made while such Power be in Force.
PROVIDED ALWAYS, That no Sale of Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments made by
Virtue of such Power or Powers of Attorney or Agency as aforesaid, shall be
good and effectual, unless such Sale be made and executed while such Power is
in force; and all such Powers shall be accounted, deemed and taken to be in
force until the Attorney or Agent shall have due Notice of a Countermand,
Revocation or Death of the Constituent.

CHAP. CXLVIII. An additional ACT for the better preserving the Highways. See
Chap. 55, and Chap. 57.
FOR the better Amending, Repairing and Preserving of the Highways, now
generally spoiled by the extraordinary and unreasonable Lading of Wagons and
other Carriages, and drawing the same with Horses at length, BE IT ENACTED,
etc. That from and after the first Day of May, No Wagon, Cart, etc. to be
drawn by more than three Horses at length.
in the Year of our Lord One Thousand Seven Hundred and Six, no traveling
Wagon, Wain, Cart, or other Sort of Carriage whatsoever, going from, or coming
to the City of Philadelphia, between the Rivers of Delaware and S^huylkil, in
the County of Philadelphia, wherein any Burdens, Goods or Wares are or shall be
carried, shall at any one time travel, or be drawn, or go in any common or
public Highway or Road with above three Horse Beasts at length. And if any
Person or Persons shall cause any such Wagon, Wain, Cart or Carriage to be
drawn with a greater Number of Horses or Oxen, then and in such Case the Horses
or Oxen shall all draw in Pairs, That is to say, Two abreast, for such a
Number as they shall use, except one Horse; any Law, Statute or Usage to the
Contrary notwithstanding.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, On Penalty of Forty
Shillings.
That every Owner of any Wagon, Cart, Carriage, Horse Beasts or Oxen offending
contrary to this Act, being legally convicted before any one Justice of the
Peace, by Proof of one credible Witness, or upon View of the Justice himself,
shall forfeit for every such Offense the Sum of Forty Shillings, one half Part
thereof to the Surveyor of the Highways where the Offense shall be committed,
to be employed in Repair of the said Highway, and the other Moiety to him that
shall discover the same: Which Fine shall be levied by the Constable of such
Place or Division, or by any other Officer, by Warrant under the Hand and Seal
of such Justice of the Peace, upon the Goods and Chattels of the Person so
offending, rendering the Overplus to the Owner thereof, all necessary Charges in
Levying the same being first deducted.

CHAP. CXLIX. A Supplementary ACT to that about raising County Levies.
Supplied, by the 11 Geo. I.

CHAP. CL. An ACT to prevent the Running of Swine at large.
WHEREAS the Freeholders and Owners of Lands and Plantations, within this
Province, have received great Damages and Spoil in their Cornfieldsd, Meadows
and Out-Lands, by Swine running at large without Rings and Yokes: For the
Prevention whereof for the future, BE IT ENACTED, etc. That from and after the
first Day of the twelfth Month, called February, next ensuing the Publication
hereof, No Swine to run at large withoutRings and Yokes, within fourteen Miles
of Delaware, on Forfeiture of such Swine.
no Swine shall be suffered to run at large without Rings and Yokes, under the
Penalty of forfeiting Half the Value thereof, to the Use hereafter expressed:
Therefore if any Person or Persons who shall find on his, her or their Lands,
within fourteen Miles of the navigable Parts of the River Delaware, any Swine,
Hog or Hogs, Shoat or Shoats, or Pigs, without Rings in their Noses, sufficient
to prevent their turning up the Ground, and triangular or three cornered Yokes
or Bows about their Necks, and to extend at least six Inches from the angular
Point or Corner, sufficient to keep them from Breaking through Fence, it shall
and may be lawful for him, her or them, all such Swine, Hogs, Shoats or Pigs,
to kill and take, or drive and take away, or cause them to be killed, taken,
driven or carried away; and being so taken and carried away, How to act herein.
the said Takers shall forthwith acquaint a Justice of the Peace thereof, and
being by him legally attested, that the said Swine were taken as aforesaid
without Yokes or Bows and Rings, the said Justice shall immediately appoint and
order two indifferent Persons of the Neighborhood to view and make a just and
reasonable Appraisement of all such Swine, Hogs, Shoats or Pigs, and to make
Return of their Value, Number and Marks unto the said Justice of the Peace, as
soon as conveniently it may be done after such Appraisement, one Moiety or Half
the Value whereof shall be forfeit to the Person or Persons Owners or
Possessors of such Lands where found and taken; and he or they that shall take
up such Swine as aforesaid shall pay unto the said Justice of the Peace, for
the Use of the Owner or Owners of such Swine, the one Moiety or half Part
thereof; and thereupon the Property of all such Swine shall be and remain in
the said Owner or Possessor of Land as aforesaid, to his and their own proper
Use forever.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, The Justices of Peace
shall make Publication of Swine taken up, etc.
That such Justice of Peace shall make Publication thereof by a Paper affixed
on his House, and on some Tree near the High-Road Side, declaring the Number,
Marks and Appraisement of all such Swine, and by whom taken up, to the End that
the Owners may have Notice thereof, unto whom the said Justice of the Peace
shall pay the other Moiety or Half the Value of such Swine taken and appraised,
he first Deducting out of the same Two Shillings for the Appraisers, and Two
Shillings for the Justice's Clerk, for their Trouble therein. But if it so
happen that the Moiety or half Part, as appraised, will not pay the said Four
Shillings, then such Takers up shall pay what shall be wanting thereof.

PROVIDED NEVERTHELESS, And if no Owner appear in 12 Months, etc.
That if no Person appear within twelve Months after Appraisement as aforesaid
to claim the Moiety or half Part of such Swine, that then the said Justice
shall pay what Money he has received (the Charges as aforesaid first deducted)
unto the Overseer or Overseers of the Poor of the Township where taken up, for
the Use of the Poor of the said Township, and the Owner of such Swine shall be
thereupon debarred from any Claim or Right to the same; any Law, Usage or
Custom to the Contrary in anywise notwithstanding.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, No Swin^ to go at large
in Philadelphia, etc. on Forfeiture.
That it shall not be lawful for any Swine, Hogs, Shoats or Pigs to go at large
in the Towns of Philadelphia, Chester or Bristol, whether yoked or ringed or
not; but if any such shall be found Running at large after the first Day of the
twelfth Month next ensuing, such Swine, Hogs, Shoats or Pigs shall be
forfeited, one Half to him or them that shall take up the same, and the other
Half to the Use of the Poor of the respective Towns, to be paid to the Overseer
or Overseers accordingly, to the Use aforesaid: The said Town of Bristol being
all the Space contained within half a Mile square from the Mill-Creek up the
River Delaware.

CHAP. CLI. An ACT for Collecting the Arrears of Two Thousand Pounds granted to
the Proprietary.
Expired.

CHAP. CLII. An ACT directing the Qualifications of Magistrates and Officers,
as also the Manner of giving Evidence.
Repealed.

See the Act passed the 3 Geo. II. entitled, An Act for the Relief of
insolvent Debtors, etc.
CHAP. CLIII. An ACT for Regulating Elections of Sheriffs and Coroners.
BE IT ENACTED, etc. That the Freemen and Inhabitants of the City and County of
Philadelphia, Freeholders to elect Sheriffs and Coroners for the respective
Counties; how and when.
as also of the other Counties of this Province, at the Time and Place of
Meeting for Electing their Representatives to serve in Assembly, shall, or may,
yearly, choose a double Number of Persons to present to the Governor for
Sheriffs and Coroners, in Manner following, That is to say, The Coroner of
every County of this Province, or, in his Absence, the Persons appointed by the
Electors of the said Representatives as Judges of their said Elections, without
any other Warrant or Precept, as soon as the Elections of the Members of the
Assembly is ended, shall, by the Consent of the said Freemen and Electors, or
the greatest Part of them, cause a double Number of Persons to be chosen for
Sheriff, by Majority of Votes; who shall be returned by Indentures between the
Coroners or some other of the said Persons so officiating as Judges of the said
other Elections, and six, or more of the Electors: Which Persons so elected for
Sheriffs shall present themselves to the Governor, And a double Number being
chosen shall present themselves to the Governor, who shall nominate one on or
before the third Day, or the first named shall stand.
within two Days next after such Elections; and if the Governor will not, on or
before the third Day after such Presentment, commissionate one of them so
chosen and presented to him, the first Person named in the Return shall, by
Virtue of this Act, stand and serve in the Office of Sheriff for one Year next
after such Election, if he so long behave himself well, without any further or
other Commission.

In Case of Refusal, Misbehaviour, etc. the Governor shall commissionate, etc.
BUT in Case the Persons elected for Sheriffs shall refuse to accept of the
Office, or if, after any Sheriff does accept, he shall be convicted for
Misbehaviour in his Office, or shall depart this Life before the End of the
Term for which he is or shall be chosen, then another sufficient Person shall
be commissionated by the Governor from time to time to supply the Place of such
as shall so refuse, misbehave himself, or be deceased as aforesaid, who shall
act and continue in the Office of Sheriff to the End of the said Term of one
Year, from the time he was commissionated, or until another be as aforesaid
chosen in his stead.

AND that the Sheriff of every County of this Province, A double Number shall
be chose for Coroners, etc. and present themselves, etc.
or such other Person as shall be concerned to officiate as Judges of the said
Election of Representatives, as soon as the Elections of the said
Representatives and Sheriffs are ended, shall, in Manner aforesaid, cause a
double Number of Persons to be chosen for Coroners, who shall be returned and
presented to the Governor within two Days after such Elections; and if the
Governor will not commissionate one of them so presented, the first named in
the Return shall, by Virtue of this Act, stand and serve in the Office of
Coroner, for one Year next after such Election, if he so long behave himself
well, without any further or other Commission: But in Case the Persons so
elected for Coroner r^fuse to accept of the Office, or if the Coroner accepting
shall be convicted of official Misbehaviour, or be deceased before the End of
the Term for which he is or shall be chosen, then another sufficient Person
shall be commissionated by the Governor from time to time, to supply those
Defects in Manner aforesaid.

BUT if the Freemen or Electors aforesaid shall at any time neglect or decline
to ch^se Persons for either or both the said Offices, If the Freeholders
neglect to choose, the old Sheor Coroner shall stand.
then the Persons that are or shall be in the respective Offices of Sheriff and
Coroner at the time of the said Elections shall remain therein until they shall
be respectively removed by another Election, to be made in Manner aforesaid.

PROVIDED ALWAYS, The ^heriff shall give Security, (...).
That before any Sheriff shall receive his Commission, or exercise any Part of
his said Office, he shall, by himself or his Deputy put in sufficient Sureties
into the Office of the Master of the Rolls of this Province, and there shall
enter into Bond or Obligation, t^ wit, The Sheriff of the City and County of
Philadelphia, in the Sum of Six Hundred Pounds, current Money of Pennsylvania;
the Sheriff of the County of Bucks, in the Sum of Two Hundred Pounds, Money
aforesaid; and the Sheriff of the County of Ch^ster, in the Sum of Two Hundred
Pounds, of like Money, upon Condition, That he will well and faithfully perform
his Duty and Trust in the said Office of Sheriff, according to the Tenor of the
Affirmation, which he shall make for the due Execution of his Office. AND that
all the Bonds so to be given for Security as aforesaid shall be taken in the
Queen's Name, How the said Bonds shall be taken, etc. and sued.
and entered upon Record in the Master of the Rolls-Office aforesaid; but are
hereby declared to be only in Trust to and for the Use of the Person or Persons
c^ncerned; and that when any of the said Bonds shall be put in Suit, and
Judgment thereon obtained, the Judgment shall remain in the same Nature the
Bond^ were; and that no Execution shall issue out thereupon before the Person
or Persons grieved shall, by Scire facias, or other Process, summon the Person
or Persons against whom the Judgment aforesaid is obtained, to appear and show
Cause why Execution should not issue upon the said Judgment. And if the
Plaintiff in the Scire facias shall prove what Damage he has sustained, and
thereupon a Verdict be sound for him, the Justices, in such Cases, shall award
Execution for so much as the Jury shall then find, and no more; and the former
Judgment is hereby declared still to remain cautionary, for the Satisfaction of
such other Person or Persons as shall legally prove themselves damnified, and
recover their Damages as aforesaid by due Course of Law.

Every Sheriff and Coroner shall make and subscribe the Declarations and
Professions, etc. before theGovernor, or in openQuarter-Sessions, etc.
AND moreover, no Sheriff or Coroner whatsoever shall enter upon or exercise any
Part of their said respective Offices until they shall respectively make and
subscribe the Declarations and Profession of their Christian Belief in the Act,
entitled, An Act to ascertain the Number of Members of Assembly, and to
regulate the Elections, mentioned and required to be taken by Members of
Assembly, and the solemn Affirmations and Declarations for the due Execution of
their respective Offices, in Manner and Form as Sheriffs and Coroners by a Law
of this Province, entitled, An Act directing the Attests of Officers, etc. are
respectively required to take. All which Declarations, Tests and Affirmations
shall be made, subscribed and taken before the Governor in chief, or Deputy for
the time being, or in open Quarter Sessions, or before any two Justices of the
Peace out of Sessions in the respective Counties, where there may be Occasion
to take the same. And the same Declarations, Tests and Affirmations so made and
taken out of Sessions shall be, by the Justices, delivered into Court; and the
Clerk of such Sessions is hereby required to record the same, as also those
taken in Court, in Rolls or Books prepared for that Purpose.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, Sheriff of the County of
Philadelphia shall be Sheriff of the said City, and Water Bailiff throughout
the Province.
That the Sheriff and Coroner of the County of Philadelphia, shall be Sheriff
and Coroner of the said City; and the Sheriff of the City and County of
Philadelphia for the time being, shall be Water-Bailiff, and may execute and
perform all Things belonging to the Office of Water-Bailiff upon Delaware
River, and all other navigable Rivers and Creeks within this Province; and
shall reside within the City of Philadelphia aforesaid.

PROVIDED ALSO, AND IT IS HEREBY DECLARED, That no Elections shall be made for
any Sheriff or Coroner before the time limited for those who are at present in
those Offices respectively shall be expired.

CHAP. CLIV. An ACT for the better Proportioning the Rates of Money in Payments
made upon Contracts, according to the former Regulation.
Repealed.

CHAP. CLV. An ACT for selling the old Courthouse and Building a new
Courthouse and Prison in the County of Bucks.
Obsolete.

CHAP. CLVI. An ACT for Raising a Supply of Two Pence Halfpenny per Pound, and
Ten Shillings per Head: Also for Granting an Impost and Laying an Excise on
sundry Liquors, and Negroes imported into this Province, for Support of
Government and Defraying the necessary public Charges in the Administration
thereof.
Expired.

ANNO REGNI ANNAE REGINAE SEPTIMO.
At a GENERAL ASSEMBLY begun at Philadelphia, in the Province of Pennsylvania,
the Fourteenth Day of October, in the Seventh Year of the Reign of our
Sovereign Lady ANNE, Queen of Great Britain, etc. Annoque Domini One Thousand
Seven Hundred and Eight, and continued by Adjournments: The following ACTS were
passed by CHARLES GOOKIN, Esquire Lieutenant Governor under WILLIAM PENN, Esquire
absolute Proprietary and Governor in chief of the said Province of
Pennsylvania, etc. That is to say,
CHAP. CLVII. An ACT for Ascertaining the Rates of Money for Payment of Debts,
and preventing Exactions on Contr^cts and Bargains made before the first Day of
May, in this present Year One Thousand Seven Hundred and Nine.
Repealed.

CHAP. CLVIII. An ACT for the better enabling diverse Inhabitants of the
Province of Pennsylvania to hold and enjoy Lands, Confirmed by the Queen in
Council, February 20. Anno 1713.
Tenements and Plantations in the said Province.
WHEREAS by the Royal Charter to the Proprietary, for this Province, License is
granted to all such as are not specially forbidden to transport themselves and
Families unto the said Province, in such Shipping as, by the Laws of England,
they ought to use, and fitting Provision, paying only the Customs therefore
due; and here to settle themselves, dwell and inhabit, and plant for the
Public and their own private Advantage. And by the same Charter, the said
Proprietary has full and absolute Power to alien, grant or enseoff such Parts
and Parcels of this Country as ^e should think fit, to him or them that should
be willing to purchase the same, To hold in Fee-simple, or oth^rwise, with
License, Authority and Power to take the Premises so purchased of the said
Proprietary, hold the same to themselves, their Heirs and Assigns, in what
Estate of Inheritance soever, as to him the said Proprietary should ^eem
expedient, as by the said Royal Charter more fully appears.

AND WHEREAS diverse of the Protestant or reformed Religion, who were
Inhabitants of High and Low Germany, above Five-and-Twenty Years ago (out of a
Desire to come under the Power and Protection of the Crown of England, and
partake of the Advantages proposed for the Encouragement of the Adventurers to
settle in this new Colony) embraced the Invitations they had from the said
Proprietary, to transport themselves and Estates here; and (...) they came, did
contribute the utmost of their Power to e^la^ge this (...) of the English
Empire, and always behave^ t^^mselves as dutiful and peaceable Subjects, and
several of them have m^de and subscribed the Declarations and T^^t by Law
app^int^d, instead of the Oaths of Supremacy: The Rest are ready and willing to
do it when they are required or admitted so to do.

NOW, forasmuch as the Value of Lands in this Province being generally but the
Effect of the People's Labor, their Plantations are deemed, by our Laws, but
as Chattels to pay Debts, and Strangers have been rendered capable to hold what
they purchased as fully and freely as if they had been natural-born Subjects of
this Province; but since the Repeal of the late Laws, made after the Example of
other Governments, for Encouragement of the Peopling and Settling of this
Colony, some Doubts and Questions have arisen, whether the said Germans are
capable to hold what they purchased as before: For Removing of which Doubts, BE
IT ENACTED by CHARLES GOOKIN, Esquire by the Queen's Royal Approbation Lieutenant
Governor under WILLIAM PENN, Esquire Proprietor and Governor in chief of the
Province of Pennsylvania, etc. by and with the Advice and Consent of the
Freemen of the said Province in General Assembly met, and by the Authority of
the same, The Name^ of the Persons naturalized by this Act.
That Francis Daniel Pastorius, John Iawart, Cas^er Hoodt, Dennis Kunders, and
his three Sons, Cunra^ Cunrads, Matthis Cunrads and John Cunrads, Dirk Keyser,
and his Son Peter Keyser, John Lucken, William Strepers, Abraham Tunes, Lenart
Arrets, Reiner Tysen, John Lenson, Isaac Dilbeck, and his Son Iacobus Dilbeck,
John Doed^^, Cornelius Siorts, Henry Sellen, Walter Simons, Dirk Iansen, jun.
Richard Vander Werf, and his son John Ro^loffs Vander Werf, John Str^p^rs, sen.
Peter Shoemaker, Jacob Shoemaker, George Shoemaker, Isaac Shoemaker, Matthis
van Bebber, Cornelius ^ander G^^ge, Peter Clever, George Gottshick, Paul
Engell, and his Son Jacob Engell, Hans Neus, Reinier vander Sl^ys, and his Son
Adrian vander Sluys, Jacob Gaetshal^k, Vander Heggen, and his Son Gaetshal^k
Vander Heggen, Casper Kleinhoof, Henry Buchultz, H^rmon Tuynen, Paul Klinupg^s,
and his Son John Klinupges, John News, and his Sons Matthis News and Cornelius
News, Claus Ruttinghuysen, Casper Stalls, Henry Tubben, William Hendricks, and
his Sons Hendrick Hendricks and Lawrence Hendricks, Henry Kess^bery, Johannes
Rebenstork, Peter Verbynen, John Henry Kirsten, John Radwitzer, John Conrads,
sen. John Gorgages, Senwes B^^tells, and his Son Henry Bartells, John Krey, and
his Son William Krey, Cunrad Iansen, Claus Iansen, and his Son John Iansen,
William Iansen, Evert In H^ff, and his Sons Gerhard In Hoff, Herman In Hoff,
and Peter In Hoff, Peter Iansen, John Smith, Thomas Eckleswick, Johannes
Scholl, Peter Scholl, Gabriel Schuler, William Putts and Matthis Tysen, all of
the County of Philadelphia; and Johannes Bleikers, of the Country of Bucks, in
the said Province of Philadelphia; and every of them, who shall, within six
Months after the first Day of September, Oone Thousand Seven Hundred and Nine,
at some Court of Quarter Sessions of the Peace for the County of Philadelphia,
between the Hours of Nine and Twelve in the Forenoon, make and subscribe the
Declarations and Profession of Faith, allowed to those that cannot swear,
instead of Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance* or shall otherwise qualify
themselves as the Court shall require and the Law directs in such Cases (the
Taking of which Qualifications, and the Making and Subscribing of the said
Declarations and Professions, shall be entered on Record in the same Court; for
the Doing whereof One Shilling shall be paid to the Clerk, and no more) all and
every such Persons shall be enabled, and are, and every of them, are hereby
enabled and adjudged able and capable to all Intents, Constructions and
Purposes whatsoever, as well to demand, ask, have, hold and enjoy and Lands,
Tenements, Plantations, Rents and Hereditaments, in this Province, to which
they or any of them may or might in anywise be entitled, as if they were free
and natural born Subjects and People of this Province: As also, that they and
every of them shall and may be enabled to maintain, prosecute, avow, justify
and desend all and all Manner of Actions, Suits, Pleas, Plaints, and other
Demands whatsoever, in the said Province, as freely and fully, lawfully and
^ecu^ely as if they and every of them had been natural-born Subjects and People
of the same, or any other Person or Persons born within this Province may
lawfully do; any Law or Usage to the Contrary notwithstanding.

ANNO REGNI ANNAE REGINAE NONO.
At a GENERAL ASSEMBLY begun at Philadelphia, in the Province of Pennsylvania,
the Fourteenth Day of October, in the Ninth Year of the Reign of our Sovereign
Lady ANNE, Queen of Great Britain, etc. Annoque Domini One Thousand Seven
Hundred and Ten, and continued by Adjournments to the Twenty-eighth of
February: On which Day the following ACTS were passed by CHARLES GOOKIN, Esquire
Lieutenant Governor under WILLIAM PENN, Esquire absolute Proprietary and Governor
in chief of the said Province of Pennsylvania, etc. That is to say,
CHAP. CLIX. An ACT for Establishing Courts of Judicature in this Province.
Repealed.

CHAP. CLX. An ACT for Regulating and Establishing Fees.
Repealed.

CHAP. CLXI. An ACT for the Acknowledging and Recording of Deeds.
Repealed.

CHAP. CLXII. An ACT directing an Affirmation to such who for Conscience Sake
cannot take an Oath.
Repealed.

An ACT that no Publick-House or Inn within this Province be kept without
License. This Act was confirmed by the Queen in Council 28 February 1^13.
[See postea Chap. 234.]
FOR preventing of Disorders and Mischiefs that may happen by Multiplicity of
Publick-Houses of Entertainment, BE IT ENACTED by CHARLES GOOKIN, Esquire by the
Queen's Royal Approbation Lieutenant Governor under WILLIAM PENN, Esquire true and
absolute Proprietary and Governor in chief of the Province of Pennsylvania, by
and with the Advice and Consent of the Freemen of the said Province in General
Assembly met, and by the Authority of the same, That no Person or Persons
whatsoever, within this Province, shall hereafter have or keep any public Inn,
Tavern, No Person to keep a public House, etc. without Recommendation to the
Governor for License, on Penalty of 5 l. nor suffer Disorder, etc. under
Penalty of 40 ^.
Alehouse, Tipling-House or Dram-Shop, Victualing-House or Publick-House of
Entertainment, in any County of this Province, or in the City of Philadelphia,
unless such Person or Persons shall first be recommended by the Justices in the
respective County Courts, and the said City in their Quarter Sessions or Court
of Record for the said Counties and City respectively, to the Lieutenant
Governor for the time being for his License for so doing, under the Penalty of
Five Pounds. And that no Person so licensed as aforesaid shall knowingly suffer
any Disorder, as Drunkenness or unlawful Games whatsoever, in such his, her or
their Houses, under the Penalty of Forty Shillings, for the first Offense; and
for the second Offense, to be suppressed by the said Justices of the respective
Courts; and that no such Innkeeper, Taverner, or other Person as aforesaid,
shall presume to continue such public House of Entertainment of his own Accord
after such Suppression, or the Expiration of his License, without new License
as aforesaid, under the Penalty of Five Pounds, one Half thereof to the
Governor for the time being, toward the Support of this Government, and the
other Half to the Use of the Poor of the respective Township or City where the
Offense shall be committed.

This Act not to debar the Magistrates of the City of Philadelphia of Fines,
etc.
PROVIDED ALWAYS, That nothing herein contained shall extend to debar or hinder
the Magistrates of the City of Philadelphia to claim, have and enjoy all such
Fines, Penalties and Forfeitures as shall be due or forfeited in the
Quarter Sessions or Court of Record to be held for the said City, which are
granted them by Charter.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, Innkeepers to keep good
Entertainment, etc.
That all such Innkeepers as aforesaid shall keep good Entertainment for Man
and Horse, under the Penalty of forfeiting Forty Shillings, for the Use
aforesaid.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, The Governor to receive
for Licenses, etc.
That the Governor shall have and receive for every License to be granted by
him, pursuant to this Act, to any Person to sell Wine, and other Liquors, in
the City of Philadelphia, Three Pounds; and to sell all other Liquors in the
said City (except Wine) the Sum of Forty Shillings. And for every License to
any Person to sell Wine, and other Liquors, in the Towns of New-Bristol,
Frankford, Germantown, Darby, Chester and Chichester, the Sum of Forty
Shillings. And for every License to sell Wine, and other Liquors, in any other
Part of this Province, the Sum of Thirty Shillings, and no more. And the
Secretary shall have for Drawing such License, with the Seal, Six Shillings,
and no more.

CHAP. CLXIV. An ACT of Privileges to a Freeman, etc.
Repealed.

CHAP. CLXV. An ACT against riotous Sports, Plays and Games.
Repealed.

CHAP. CLXVI. An ACT to prevent Disputes which may hereafter arise about the
Dates of Conveyances, and other Instruments and Writings.
WHEREAS the Generality of the Inhabitants of this Province do conscientiously
scruple to call the Names of the Months as they are usually called; but the
Month which others call March, they call the First Month, and the Month,
commonly called April, the Second Month, and so of the rest of the Months of
the Year; and the Dates of many Deeds, Conveyances, and other Writings, as well
as the Times of Payment of Money, are accordingly mentioned and expressed. Now
forasmuch as Disputes and Controversies may hereafter arise concerning the
Premises, BE IT THEREFORE ENACTED, etc. That all Deeds, Conveyances, Mortgages,
The Names of Months distinguished by first, second and third, etc. to be good
and effectual in Law.
Letters of Attorney, or Powers of Agency, Commissions, Bonds, Bills,
Charter-Parties, Leases, Releases, Contracts, Articles, Receipts, and all other
Instruments and Writings whatsoever, wherein the Names of the Months are called
First, Second, Third, Fourth, instead of March, April, May, June, and so of the
rest, always accounting the Month called March to be the first Month of the
Year, shall and are hereby enacted and declared to be as good and available,
and may be pleaded, and shall be deemed, adjudged and taken in all Courts of
Judicature, and elsewhere within this Province, to be as valid and effectual in
Law, to all Intents, Constructions and Purposes, as if the Months in such
Writings had been set down and expressed by their usual Names; any Law, Custom
or Usage to the Contrary thereof in anywise notwithstanding.

CHAP. CLXVII. An ACT for Priority of Payment of Debts to the Inhabitants of
this Province.
Repealed.

CHAP. CLXVIII. An ACT for the better Improving a good Correspondence with the
Indians.
Expired, 28 February 1723.

CHAP. CLXIX. An ACT for Regulating of Party-Walls and Buildings in
Philadelphia.
Repealed.

CHAP. CLXX. An ACT impowering Commissioners to compel the Collecting of all
Arrearages of former Taxes.
Expired.

CHAP. CLXXI. An ACT for Raising a Supply of Two Pence per Pound, and Eight
Shillings per Head.
Expired.

CHAP. CLXXII. An ACT for laying a Duty on Negroes, Wine, Rum, and other
Spirits, Sider and Vessels.
Repealed and Expired.

An ACT passed in the Tenth Year of Her Majesty's Reign, in August, One
Thousand Seven Hundred and Eleven, viz.
CHAP. CLXXIII. An ACT for Raising Two Thousand Pounds for the Queen's Use, by
a Tax of Five Pence Halfpenny per Pound, and Twenty Shillings per Head.
Supplied by another Act passed the 27th of March, One Thousand Seven Hundred
and Thirteen. Confirmed by the Queen.

ANNO REGNI ANNAE REGINAE DECIMO.
At a GENERAL ASSEMBLY begun at Philadelphia, in the Province of Pennsylvania,
the Fifteenth Day of October, in the Tenth Year of the Reign of our Sovereign
Lady ANNE, Queen of Great Britain, etc. Annoque Domini One Thousand Seven
Hundred and Eleven, and continued by Adjournments to the Seventh of June, One
Thousand Seven Hundred and Twelve: On which Day the following ACTS were passed
by CHARLES GOOKIN, Esquire Lieutenant Governor under WILLIAM PENN, Esquire absolute
Proprietary and Governor in chief of the said Province of Pennsylvania, etc.
That is to say,
CHAP. CLXXIV. An ACT confirming Patents and Grants.
Repealed.

CHAP. CLXXV. An ACT for the better ascertaining the public Debts, and
Collecting the Arrears of County Levies.
Repealed, by an Act passed the II Geo. I. postea Chap. 259.

CHAP. CLXXVI. An ACT for raising Money on the Inhabitants of the City of
Philadelphia, This Act was confirmed by the Queen in Council 20 February 1713.
for the public Use and Benefit thereof.
WHEREAS there is a great Occasion of a public Stock to pay the just Debts,
and defray the necessary Charges of the said City, for building a Workhouse of
Correction, building and repairing Free-Wharffs and Bridges, Pitching, Paving
and Regulating the Highways, Streets and Watercourse, making and erecting new
and convenient Stalls and Shambles to accommodate Butchers, and all others that
bring Goods to sell in the said City: And forasmuch as the Incorporating the
said City has so far limited the Magistracy of the County of Philadelphia that
the Laws for Raising of the County-Levies cannot, without the Help of this Act,
be so aptly and effectually put in Execution within the said City as before,
and the Rule and Government of the said City requiring a Charge which may not
immediately concern the rest of the County; BE IT THEREFORE ENACTED, etc. The
Freeholders of Philadelphia to choose six Assessors, etc.
That from henceforth the Inhabitants and Freeholders of the said City of
Philadelphia, who are qualified by the Laws of this Province to elect or be
elected Members of Assembly, at the Time and Place by Law appointed, or to be
appointed for Electing their Representatives to serve in Assembly, or the Day
following, unless it happen on the First Day, and then on the Day next ensuing,
shall or may choose six of the said Inhabitants and Freeholders to be the
Assessors of the said City; and when so chosen the Sheriff of the said City
shall take their Names in Writing, under the Hands and Seals of at least six or
more of the said Inhabitants and Freeholders, and return or certify the same to
the Mayor, Recorder and Aldermen of the said City for the time being at their
General-Sessions of the Peace next after such Election.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That the Mayor, The
Mayor, etc. with the Assessors shall calculate the public Debts, etc. and what
Sums of Money are necessary, etc.
Recorder and Aldermen of the said City, at their General-Sessions of the
Peace, to be held in the Month called April, yearly, or oftener, if occasion be,
with the Assistance of the said Assessors for the time being, or any four of
them, shall calculate the public Debts and Charges of the City, allowing all
just Dues and Demands wherewith the Persons and Estates within the said City
are or may be chargeable from time to time; as also shall calculate what Sum or
Sums of Money may be needful and necessary to be raised upon the Persons and
Estates aforesaid from time to time, for the Building, Repairing, Regulating or
Amending of any Houses, Bridges, Wharffs, Watercourse, or other Uses, for the
public Service and Benefit of the said City; and shall also agree and settle,
from time to time, as Occasion may require, what Sum or Sums of Money, or other
Effects, shall be applied to the Service of every particular Matter or Thing
which they, or the major Part of the said Magistrates, with any four of the
said Assessors, shall agree on to be necessary to be raised for the Year
ensuing: Which said respective Sums, with the particular Uses whereunto they
shall be agreed on to be appropriated as aforesaid, shall be entered in a Book
to be kept for that Purpose by the Clerk of the Peace of of the said City, who
is hereby obliged to make such Entry from time to time, for which he shall be
allowed what the Magistrates and Assessors shall think reasonable: And that the
said Assessors shall, and then in six Weeks after lay a Rate, etc.
within six Weeks after every such Calculation, make or lay a Rate or
Assessment upon themselves, and all other Persons and Estates aforesaid, to and
for the aforesaid Uses, by Poll and Pound Rate, according to the Manner and
Method now used in making Assessments in this Province for Raising of County
Levies.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, The Constables to bring
in Returns, etc. and their Allowance for the same.
That the Constables of the said City shall bring in Returns in Writing to the
said Assessors, within five Days after Notice given them, of the Names and
Estates of all Persons within their Wards; for which they shall be allowed Two
Pence per Pound upon every Sum assessed in their said respective Wards: Which
Assessment being equally and impartially laid and signed by at least four of
the said Assessors, The Assessment to be allowed by the Mayor, etc.
shall be allowed and confirmed by the said Mayor, Recorder, and any two of the
Aldermen for the time being, under their Hands and Seals, and shall be paid by
every Person and Estate so assessed, upon Demand thereof, by the Collectors;
who shall, by the said Assessors, or in Case they neglect, then by the said
Mayor, Recorder and Aldermen, be appointed to gather the same; and in Case of
Refusal or Neglect, shall, by Warrant under the Hands and Seals of any three or
more of the said City-Magistrates, be levied by Distress and Sale of the Goods
of every Person so assessed, and not paying the same within fourteen Days after
Demand; rendering the Overplus of the Value of the Goods so distrained to the
Owner or Owners thereof, Deducting the Charge of such Distress: But for want of
Distress the said Assessments to be levied by Imprisonment of the Person so
refusing or neglecting to pay as aforesaid.

Vide County-L^^y Act.
PROVIDED ALWAYS, That no such Assessment or Assessments to be made in any one
Year shall exceed the Value of Two Pence in the Pound of the clear Value of the
Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments and personal Estate so assessed; and Four
Shillings per Head, in Proportion to One Penny per Pound Tax, on all single
Men, Inhabitants of the said City, not otherwise rated by this Act.

PROVIDED ALSO, That those who are not rateable or liable to be taxed for
Relief of the Poor, within the said City, shall not be rated or assessed by
this Act.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, The Assessors to appoint
a Treasurer; and his Duty.
That the said Assessors shall appoint a Treasurer in the said City; who shall
keep a distinct Book, containing a particular Account of all the Rates and
Assessments made as aforesaid; as also all Disbursments and Payments, which he
shall make by order of the Mayor, Recorder, and any four of the said
City-Magistrates, whose Order to the said Treasurer from time to time shall be
sufficient for the Payment of such Moneys as shall come into his Hands from the
said Collectors.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That the said Treasurer
shall, on the Twenty-fifth Day of the Month called March, Who shall, yearly,
adjust his Accounts The Magistrates, etc. to allow for his Trouble.
yearly, or oftener, if Occasion be, bring in his Accounts, and settle and make
them up before the said Magistrates and Assessors, or such as they shall
appoint: At the Auditing of which Accounts, all or any of the said Inhabitants
and Freeholders, that are willing, may be present. And the said Treasurer shall
have for his Trouble therein as much as the said Magistrates and Assessors
shall agree to allow him. Allowance to the Assessors.
And the said Assessors shall be allowed Three Pence per Pound for all the Sums
levied, and to be collected by Virtue of this Act.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, Collectors to pay the
Money, etc. they gather, to the Treasure^.
That the Money and Effects gathered and received by the said Collectors,
within their respective Limits, by Virtue of this Act, shall from time to time
be duly paid to the said Treasurer or Treasurers, whose Receipts shall be the
Collectors sufficient Discharges.

PROVIDED ALWAYS, That the said Collectors shall forthwith, And giveNotice to
the Freeholders of the Day of Appeal, and^.
after every such Assessment made as aforesaid, give Notice to the said
Freeholders and Inhabitants of the said City, or in their Absence, to some or
one of their Families or Neighbors, of the respective Sums they are rated, and
acquaint them with the Day and Place of Appeal, in Case they shall be aggrieved
with such Assessment: Which said Day of Appeal shall be at some convenient
Place in the said City, to be appointed by the Assessors that laid the said
Tax, the same Day four (...) after the said Assessment is laid. And the said
Assessors shall have due Regard to all such Appeals, and thereupon to abate or
increase the said Assessment, according as the Appealants shall appear to be
worth, either upon their own Attest, or Proof of others.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, After the Day of Appeal
the Collectors to proceed to levy the said Rates. Their Allowance.
That from and immediately after the said Appeals have been heard and
considered as aforesaid, it shall and may be lawful to and for the said
Collectors to proceed in Collecting and Levying the said Rates and Assessments;
for the Collecting whereof they shall retain and keep in their Hands Six Pence
in the Pound of all such Money as they shall so collect, and no more. And if
the said Collectors, or any of them, The Penalty on Refusal or Neglect.
shall refuse or neglect to collect the said Assessments respectively, or any
Part thereof, and pay the same unto the Treasurer, within three Months after
the said Appeals have been heard and considered as aforesaid, every ^uch
Collector so refusing or neglecting shall forfeit and pay to the said
Treasurer, for the Use of the said City, the Sum of Five Pounds, and shall also
pay all the Arrearages of such Assessments which he was appointed to collect:
Which shall be levied by a Warrant under the Hand of the Mayor for the time
being, and Seal of the said City, directed to the Sheriff, who is hereby
empowered and obliged to execute such Warrant upon the Goods and Chattels of
the Party so offending. And in case Goods and Chattels, sufficient to make
Satisfaction, cannot be found, then to imprison such Offender until Payment
made. And every Collector being so distrained on, and having made full
Satisfaction as aforesaid, is hereby empowered, without any other Warrant, to
distrain, for his own Use, upon all such as shall refuse or neglect to pay the
said Arrearages.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, On Neglect of choosing
Assessors the Mayor, etc. shall act.
That if at any time the Inhabitants and Freeholders of the said City shall
neglect to choose Assessors as aforesaid, or if when chosen, they do not attend
their Service as above directed, then the Mayor, Recorder and Aldermen of the
said City for the time being, together with the Grand-Inquest of the said City,
may and shall perform the respective Offices and Duties of the said Assessors,
as fully and amply as they might or could do by Virtue of this Act.

The Inhabitants of Philadelphia, to be rated in Proportion with the County, in
County-Taxes.
PROVIDED ALWAYS, That nothing herei^ contained shall exempt the Inhabitants of
the said City from being rated or assessed in Proportion with the Inhabitants
of the County of Philadelphia, to pay what is or shall be due for making and
repairing of Bridges, in the Queen's High-Road, over any Rivers or Water where
the Tide flows, within the said County, or from paying their Proportion of
Assembly-Men's Wages due or to be due from the Inhabitants of the said County
from time to time, over and besides their paying the two Members of Assembly
chosen to represent the said City; or from paying for the Moiety of the
Arrearages now due for Wolves Heads, wherewith the said County shall be justly
chargeable; but that all Persons and Estates as aforesaid, within the said
City, shall be liable to pay the respective Rates hereafter ^o be assessed on
them from time to time, for the Purposes aforesaid; any thing herein contained
to the Contrary notwithstanding.

CHAP. CLXXVII. An ACT for the better Government of the City of Philadelphia.
Repealed.

CHAP. CLXXVIII. An ACT concerning the Register-General s Office. This Act wa^
confirmed by the Queen in Council* the 20th of the 12th month 171^.
[ Vide Chap. 125, 188.]
WHEREAS by a Law of this Province made in the Year One Thousand Seven Hundred
and Five, entitled, An Act concerning the Probates of written and nu^cupative
Wills, and for confirming Devices of Land, it is among other Things enacted,
that there should be an Officer called Register-General, to be commissionated
by the Governor from time to time, for the Probate of Wills, and Granting
Letters of Administration in this Province; which Register-General should keep
his Office at Philadelphia; and should from time to time constitute a
sufficient Deputy to officiate for him in each of the other Counties of this
Province: But inasmuch as no Register has been commissionated and Deputies
constituted in each County, as the said Act directs: BE IT THEREFORE ENACTED,
etc. The Proprietary to commissionate a Register-General.
That the said Proprietary and Governor in chief, or his Lieutenant Governor
for the time being, shall, on or before the first Day of the Month called
August next, commissionate a Register-General for the Probate of Wills and
Granting Letters of Administration in this Province. But in case of the Removal
of such Register-General, by Death or otherwise, then another fit Person shall,
within three Weeks after such Removal, be commissionated as aforesaid, in the
Room of the Register-General so removed, who shall keep his Office at
Philadelphia, Who shall keep his Office in Philadelphia, and appoint a Deputy
in each County.
as the said Act directs, and shall from time to time constitute ^ sufficient
Deputy to officiate for him in each of the said other Counties; who, being by
him deputed, shall be and are hereby empowered to take Probate of Wills and
grant Letters of Administration in the respective Counties, and to have a
common Seal, according to the Tenor and Direction of the said Act.

PROVIDED ALWAYS, The Proprietary refusing to commissionate, then his
Commissioners, etc shall.
That if the said Proprietary, or his Lieutenant Governor, shall refuse or
neglect to commissionate a Register-General from time to time, as this Act
directs, then the Commissioners, Agents or Stewar^^ of the said Proprietary,
his Heirs or Assigns, who are or shall be empowered to act for him or them in
Matters relating to the Seigniory or Propriety of this Provin^ shall
commissionate a Register-General, within three Weeks after the time hereby
appointed for the Governor to do the same. And if they refuse, then the
Justices shall.
But if the said Commissioners, Agents or Stewards shall refuse or neglect to
do their Duty therein, according to the Direction of this Act, then the
Justices of the Court of Common Pleas for the said County of Philadelphia for
the time being, or the major Part of them, shall, as often as there may be
Occasion, commissionate the said Officer, called Register-General, at
Philadelphia; who shall be, and is hereby empowered and required to officiate
as fully and effectually as any Register-General ever could or can do,
according to the Powers granted by the Royal Charter, or by Virtue of the said
Act.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, The Register-General
shall give 500 l. Security, etc.
That before any Register-General, or his Deputy, shall enter upon their
respective Offices, he shall find one or more sufficient Sureties together with
himself, to become bound to the said Proprietary, his Heirs and Assigns,
Proprietaries of this Province, in a Bond of the Penalty of Five Hundred
Pounds, for the true and faithful Execution and Discharge of his Office, and
for the Delivery of the Records, and other Writings, belonging to the same, by
him, his Heirs, Executors or Administrators, to his Successor in the said
Office, whole and undefaced: Which said Bond shall be entered on Record in the
Office of the Prothonotaries or Clerks of the said Court of Common Pleas in the
said respective Counties, And the Bond to be entered upon Record.
to be safely kept by them, and to be made Use of as the said Act directs.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, The Register, with two
or more Justices, shall decide Caveats, settle Accounts and make Distributions.
That where Objections are made, or Caveats entered against the proving of any
Will or Granting Letters of Administration; and where there is or shall be
Occasion to take the final Accounts of Executors or Administrators, or make
Distribution of Decedents Estates, the Register-General, and his Deputies,
respectively, shall, in every such Case, call to their Assistance two or more
of the Justices of the said Courts of Common Pleas for the County where they
are concerned, who are hereby empowered and required to give their Assistance
accordingly, to decide the said Caveats and Matters in Controversy, settle the
said Accounts, make Distributions, and do all other judicial Acts as do or
shall belong, or ought of Right to be done by any Person or Persons having
Power by Law to take Probate of Wills, and grant Administration.

AND when the Register-General or his Deputies for the time being are, by the
Duty of their Office, Where the Register cannot administer Oaths, he may apply
to any Justice, etc.
required to administer Oaths in any Case, and shall happen to be such who for
Conscience Sake cannot administer Oaths, they shall apply to some of the said
Justices in the proper County, who are hereby empowered and required to
administer the same; which shall be as effectual in Law as if it had been
administered by the Register-General or his Deputies respectively.

PROVIDED ALWAYS, That nothing in this Act contained shall extend or be
construed to extend to annihilate or make void the above recited Act, or any
Part thereof, save only what is hereby expressly altered and supplied, but that
the same Act, in every other Respect, shall remain and be in full Force and
Virtue as the same ought to have been in, if this Act had not been made; any
thing herein before contained to the Contrary in anywise notwithstanding.

CHAP. CLXXIX. An ACT for impowering Religious Societies to buy, hold and enjoy
Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments.
Repealed.

CHAP. CLXXX. A Supplementary ACT to a Law about the Manner of giving Evidence.
Repealed.

CHAP. CLXXXI. An ACT for Establishing the Lower-Ferry on the River Skuylkil.
Expired.

CHAP. CLXXXII. An ACT for Establishing and Regulating of of Ferries over
Delaware-River and Neshaminy-Creek.
Expired, but supplied by other Acts.

CHAP. CLXXXIII. An ACT to prevent the Importation of Negroes and Indians unto
this Province.
Repealed.

CHAP. CLXXXIV. An ACT for the further securing the Administration of the
Government. This Act was confirmed by an Order of the Queen in Council, the
20th of the 12th month 1713.

WHEREAS it is of the greatest Importance to Well-being of any Country, to be
provided of a regular and plenary Administration of Government in all
Emergencies; and considering the Uncertainty of human Life renders all
Government liable to Changes that may carry great Inconveniences with them,
unless due Provision be made against the same; BE IT THEREFORE ENACTED, Upon
the Death of the Lieutenant Governor, the eldest Counselor, with other four
shall have the full Power of a Governor, Legislation excepted.
etc. That in Case it shall please Almighty GOD at any time, in the Absence of
the Governor-in-chief of this Province, to remove his Lieutenant by Death, or
otherwise, before such sufficient Provision be made by the Governor-in-chief
for the full Administration of Government; the Governor's Council, that are in
Place at the time of such Lieutenant's Death or Departure out of this
Government, or so many of them as conveniently can, shall forthwith meet at
Philadelphia; and the first named or eldest Counselor, or in case of his
Absence or Refusal, such other Member of Council as a Majority then present
shall choose and appoint, with any four more of the said Counselors, shall be a
Quorum; and shall have the full Power and Authority of a Governor of this
Province, as effectually as any Deputy or Lieutenant, commissionated by the
Governor-in-chief, may or ought to have; and shall accordingly act and exercise
all the Powers of Government as fully and amply as any Deputy or Lieutenant
Governor of this Province may, can or ought to do, Legislation excepted, until
the said Lieutenant Governor's Return again, or until another Person or Persons
shall be duly commissionated and empowered by the said Governor in chief, or
his Heirs, to act in their Stead.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That the President, And
the President, or eldest Counselor shall cause due Notice thereof to be
transmitted home.
or first named Member of Council, that shall succeed at the time of such Death
or Absence as aforesaid, shall, at their first Meeting, order that due Notice
thereof be transmitted by the first Opportunity to one of the Secretaries of
State in Great Britain, and to the Board of Trade and Plantations; and also to
the Governor-in-chief of this Province.

PROVIDED ALWAYS, That in case the Governor-in-chief shall not, If no Governor
be nominated by, etc. in six Months, the Power of Lieutenancy to be lodged in
theCouncil until, etc.
within six Months after such Death or Absence of the Lieutenant Governor,
nominate another Person to be his Lieutenant Governor, and obtain his
Approbation from the Queen, o^ her Successors; then the Power of Lieutenancy
intended by this Act to be lodged in the Council, shall remain and continue,
until the Governor-in-chief make further Provision as aforesaid, or until the
Queen's Pleasure be known therein, and no longer.

PROVIDED ALSO, If the Governor-in-chief die, thePower to continue to his
Lieutenant until, etc.
That in case the said Governor-in-chief shall happen to be removed by Death,
or otherwise, then it shall and may be lawful for his Deputy or Lieutenant for
the time being, to exercise all the Powers of Government as fully and amply as
before, till further Order from her Majesty, her Heirs or Successors, or the
Heirs of the said Proprietary and Governor-in-chief, which shall first happen.

CHAP. CLXXXV. A Supplementary ACT to an Act, entitled, An Impost Act, laying
a Duty on Negroes, Rum, Wine, Spirits, Syder and Vessels, etc.
Expired.

ANNO REGNI ANNAE REGINAE UNDECIMO.
At a GENERAL ASSEMBLY begun at Philadelphia, in the Province of Pennsylvania,
the Fourteenth Day of October, in the Eleventh Year of the Reign of our
Sovereign Lady ANNE, Queen of Great Britain, etc. Annoque Domini One Thousand
Seven Hundred and Twelve, and continued by Adjournments to the Twenty-seventh
of March, One Thousand Seven Hundred and Thirteen: On which Day the following
ACTS were passed by CHARLES GOOKIN, Esquire Lieutenant Governor under WILLIAM
PENN, Esquire etc. That is to say,
CHAP. CLXXXVI. An ACT for reviving, explaining and continuing several Laws in
this Act mentioned.
Expired.

CHAP. CLXXXVII. An ACT for Limitation of Actions.
BE IT ENACTED by CHARLES GOOKIN, Esquire Lieutenant Governor, etc. by and with the
Advice and Consent of the Freemen of the said Province in General Assembly met,
and by the Authority of the same, That all Actions of Trespass Quare clausum
fregit, all Actions of Detinue, Trover and Replevin, for taking away Goods and
Cattle, all Actions upon Account and upon the Case (other than such Accounts as
concern the Trade of Merchandise between Merchant and Merchant, their Factors
or Servants) all Actions of Debt, grounded upon any Lending, or Contract
without Specialty, all Actions of Debt for Arrearages of Rent (except the
Proprietaries Quit-Rents) and all Actions of Trespass, Assault, Menace,
Battery, Wounding and Imprisonment, or any of them, which shall be sued or
brought at any time after the Five-and-Twentieth Day of April, which shall be
in the Year of our LORD One Thousand Seven Hundred and Thirteen, shall be
commenced and sued within the Time and Limitation hereafter expressed, and not
after, That is to say: The said Actions upon the Case (other than for Slander)
ar^ the said Actions for Account, and the said Actions for Trespass, These
Actions to be sued within six Years after the Cause of such Actions, and not
after.
Debt, Detinue and Reple^in for Goods or Cattle, and the said Actions of
Trespass Quare clausum fregit, within three Years after the said
Five-and-Twentieth Day of April next, or within six Years next after the Cause
of such Actions or Suit, and not after.

AND the said Actions of Trespass, of Assault, Menace, And those within one
Year.
Battery, Wounding, Imprisonment, or any of them, within one Year next after
the said Twenty-fifth Day of April next, or within two Years next after the
Cause of such Actions or Suit, and not after; and the said Actions upon the
Case for Words within one Year next after the Words spoken, and not after.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, If judgment be given for
the Plaintiff, and reve^sed, he may commence a new Action within one Year.
That if in any of the said Actions or Suits, Judgment be given for the
Plaintiff, and the same be reversed by Error, or a Verdict pass for the
Plaintiff, and upon Matter alleged in Arrest of Judgment, the Judgment be
given against the Plaintiff, that he take nothing by his Plaint, Writ or Bill,
then, and in every such Case the Party Plaintiff, his Heirs, Executors or
Administrators (as the Case may require) may commence a new Action or Suit from
time to time, within a Year after such Judgment reversed or given against the
Plaintiff as aforesaid, and not after.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, Where a Disclaimer shall
be allowed.
That in all Actions of Trespass, Quare clausum fregit, hereafter to be
brought, wherein the Defendant or Defendants shall disclaim in his or their
Plea to make any Title or Claim to the Land in which the Trespass is by the
Declaration supposed to be done, and the Trespass be by Negligence or
involuntary, the Defendant or Defendants shall be admitted to plead a
Disclaimer, and that the Trespass was by Negligence or involuntary, and a
Tender or Offer of sufficient Amends for such Trespass, before the Action
brought, whereupon or upon some of them, the Plaintiff or Plaintiffs shall be
enforced to join Issue; and if the said Issue be found for the said Defendant
or Defendants, or if the Plaintiff or Plaintiffs shall be nonsuited, the
Plaintiff or Plaintiffs shall be clearly barred from the said Action or
Actions, and all other Suit concerning the same.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, In Action^ of Slander
where the Damages is found under 40 ^* the Costs shall be the same.
That in all Actions upon the Case for slanderous Words, to be sued or
prosecuted by any Person or Persons, in any Court within this Province, after
the said Twenty-fifth Day of April next, if the Jury upon Trial of the Issue in
such Action, or the Jury that shall enquire of the Damages, do find or assess
the Damages under Forty Shillings, then the Plaintiff or Plaintiffs in such
Action shall have and recover only so much Costs as the Damages so given or
assessed do amount unto, without any further Increase of the same; any Law or
Usage to the Contrary notwithstanding.

An Action may be brought against one under Age, etc. within the time limited,
after he come to Age, etc.
PROVIDED NEVERTHELESS, That if any Person or Persons, who is or shall be
entitled to any such Action of Trespass, Detinue, Trover, Replevin, Actions of
Account or Debt, Actions for Trespass, for Assault, Menace, Battery, Wounding
or Imprisonment, Actions upon the Case for Words, be, or at the Time of any
Cause of such Action, given or accrued, fallen or come, shall be, within the
Age of Twenty-one Years, Feme Covert, Non compos mentis, imprisoned or beyond
Sea, that then such Person or Persons shall be at Liberty to bring the same
Actions, so as they take the same within such Times as are hereby before
limited, after their coming to or being of full Age, Discoverture, of sound
Memory, at large, or returning into this Province, as other Persons.

CHAP. CLXXXVIII. An ACT for Establishing Orphans Courts.
WHEREAS by certain Laws of this Province now in force, See Chap 127. Act for
settling Intestates Estates.
several Matters of great Importance are directed to be done by the Orphans
Courts, which being discontinued by the Repeal of the former Law of Courts, and
not hitherto revived, nor effectually supplied by another Law, diverse Orphans
and Persons concerned for them, or entrusted with their Estates, labor under
great Inconveniences; BE IT THEREFORE ENACTED, etc. That the Justices of the
Court of General Quarter Sessions of the Peace in each County of this Province,
The Justices of the Court of Quarter Sessions to hold the Orphans Court. Their
Power and Duty.
or so many of them as are or shall be from time to time enabled to hold those
Courts, shall have full Power, and are hereby empowered, in the same Week that
they are or shall be by Law directed to hold the same Courts, or at such other
Times as they shall see Occasion, to hold and keep a Court of Record in each of
the said Counties; which shall be styled, The Orphans Court, and to award
Process, and cause to come before them, all and every such Person and Persons,
who, as Guardians, Trustees, Tutors, Executors, Administrators, or otherwise,
are or shall be entrusted with or anywise accountable for any Lands, Tenements,
Goods, Chattels or Estate belonging or which shall belong to any Orphans or
Persons under Age, and cause them to make and exhibit, within a reasonable
Time, true and perfect Inventories and Accounts of the said Estates; and to
cause and oblige the Register-General, or such Person or Persons as for the
time being shall have the Power of Probates of Wills and Granting Letters of
Administration in this Province, or their Deputies, upon Application made in
that Behalf, to bring or transmit into the Orphans Court true Copies or
Duplicates of all such Bonds, Inventories, Accounts, Actings and Proceedings
whatsoever, now or hereafter remaining or being in the respective Offices or
elsewhere within the Limits of their Authority, as do or shall concern or
relate to the said Estates, or any of them; and to order the Payment of such
reasonable Fees for the said Copies, and for all other Charges, Trouble and
Attendance which any Officer or other Person shall necessarily be put upon in
the Execution of this Act, as they shall think equitable and just. And if upon
Hearing or Examination thereof it appears to the Justices of the said Court,
that any of the said Officers have misbehaved themselves to the Prejudice of
any Minor, or others concerned for them as aforesaid, the said Justices are
hereby required to certify the same accordingly, which shall be good Evidence
for the Party grieved to recover his Damages at common Law.

Letters of Administration, without giving Bond, are void. The Penalty for
doing the same
AND where any Letters of Administration shall be granted, and no Bond with
Sureties given as the Law in that Case requires, such Letters of Administration
shall be and are hereby declared to be void and of none Effect, and that the
Officer or Person that grants the same, and his Sureties, shall be, ipso facto,
liable to pay all such Damages as shall accrue to any Person or Persons by
Occasion of Granting such Administration. And the Party to whom the same shall
be so granted, may be sued as Executor in his own Wrong, and shall be so taken
and deemed in any Suit to be brought against him for or by Reason of his said
Administration. Or if, upon such Examination, it appears that any of the said
Officers have not taken sufficient Sureties, Where the Security appears to the
OrphansCourt not sufficient, they shall compel such Administrators to give
bette^.
where the Administrators may not be of Ability to answer or make good the
Value of what the Decedent's Estate does or shall amount to, then the said
Justices of the Orphans Court are hereby required and empowered to cause all
such Administrators to give better Security to the Register-General, by Bonds,
in Manner and Form as the Law prescribes, and under such Penalties, and with
such Sureties as the said Justices, after they have heard the Objections of
Creditors or Persons concerned (if any such be made to the Court) shall approve
of. And if it appears that any of the said Administrators have imbezelled,
wasted or misapplied or suffered so to be, any Part of the Decedent's Estates,
or shall neglect or refuse to give Bonds, with Sureties as aforesaid, then, and
in every such Case, the said Justices shall forthwith, by their Sentence,
revoke or repeal the Letters of Administration granted them, and thereupon the
said Register-General, or other Person then empowered to grant Administration
as aforesaid, where such Occasion happens, are hereby required to grant Letters
of Administration to such Person or Persons (having Right thereunto) as will
give Bonds in Manner and Form aforesaid, who may have their Actions of Trover
or Detinue for such Goods or Chattels as came to the Possession of the former
Administrators, and shall be detained, wasted, imbezelled or misa^plied by any
of them, and no Satisfaction made for the same.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, In case Minors Estates
be in Danger by Executors, etc. the Orphans Court shall cause such to give
Security.
That when any Complaint is made to any of the said Justices, that an
Executrix, having Minors of her own, or being concerned for others, is married,
or like to be espoused to another Husband, without securing the Minors Portions
or Estates, or that an Executor, or other Person, having the Care and Trust of
Minors Estates, is like to prove insolvent, or shall refuse or neglect to
exhibit true and perfect Inventories, or give full and just Accounts of the
said Estates come to their Hands or Knowledge, then and in every such Case the
same Justices are hereby required forthwith to call an Orphans Court; who shall
cause all and every such Executors and Trustees, as also such Guardians or
Tutors of Orphans or Minors as have been formerly appointed, or shall at any
time hereafter be appointed by the said Court, to give Security to the Orphans
or Minors, by Mortgage or Bonds, in such Sums, and with such Sureties as the
said Courts shall think reasonable; conditioned for the Performance of their
respective T^usts, and for the true Payment or Delivery to and for the Use and
Behoof of such Orphans as they are concerned for (or such as shall legally
represent them) the Legacies, Portions, Shares and Dividends of Estates, real
and personal, belonging to such Orphans or Minors, so far as they have Assets,
as also for their Maintenance and Education, as the said Court shall think fit
to order, for the Benefit and Advantage of such Orphans, as is usual in such
Cases.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That any of the said
Executors, Minors Money may be put to Interest,
Administrators, Guardians or Trustees, may by the Leave and Direction of the
Orphans Court, put out their Minors Money to Interest, upon such Security as
the said Court shall allow of; and if such Security so taken bona fide, and
without Fraud, shall happen to prove insufficient, it shall be the Minors Loss.
But if no Person who may be willing to take the said Money at Interest, with
such Security, can be found by the Persons so as aforesaid concerned for the
Minors, no^ by any others, then the said Executors, Administrators, Guardians
or Trustees, shall, in such Case^, be responsible, for the Principal-Money
only, until it can be put out at Interest as aforesaid.

Not exceeding 12 months at one time.
PROVIDED ALWAYS, That the Day of Payment of the Money so to be put out to
Interest, at any one time, shall not exceed Twelvemonths from the Date of the
Obligation, or other Security given for the same, and so Toties Quoties, when
and so often as the said Money shall be paid or come to the Hands of the said
Executors, Guardians or Trustees.

PROVIDED ALSO, That no Executors, Administrators or Guardians, shall be liable
to pay Interest, but for the Surplusage of the Decedents Estates remaining in
their Hands or Power, and belonging to the Minors, when the Accounts of their
Administration are or ought to be settled and adjusted before the Orphans Court
or Register-General respectively.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, Further Authority of the
Orphan^ Court.
That the Justices of the said Orphans Court in the said respective Counties,
shall, by Virtue of this Act, have full Power and Authority to exercise all the
Powers, Authorities and Jurisdictions granted or mentioned, or intended to be
granted to the Orphans Court, in and by a Law of this Province, entitled, An
Act for the better settling Intestates Estates, and to do, execute and perform
all such Matters and Things as the Orphans Court in the said Act, or in any
other Act or Law of this Province mentioned, might or ought to have done or
performed, according to the true Intent and Meaning thereof; with Power also to
admit Orphans or Minors, when, and as often as there may be Occasion, to make
choice of Guardians or Tutors, and to appoint Guardians, next Friends or
Tutors, over such as the said Court shall judge too young or incapable,
according to the Rules of the common Law, to make choice themselves; and, at
the Instance and Request of the said Executors, Administrators, Guardians or
Tutors, to order and direct the binding or putting out of Minors Apprentices to
Trades, Husbandry, or other Employments, as shall be thought fit. And that all
Guardians and Prochein Amiss, which shall be appointed by any of the said
Orphans Courts, shall be allowed and received, without further Admittance, to
prosecute and defend all Actions and Suits relating to the Orphans or Minors,
as the Case may require, in any Court or Courts of this Province.

AND if any Person or Persons, Persons summoned and not appearing, etc. may be
punished by Imprisonment, etc.
being duly summoned to appear in any of the said Orphans Courts ten Days
before the time appointed for their Appearance, shall make Default, the
Justices may send their Attachments for Contempts, and may force Obedience to
their Warrants, Sentences or Orders concerning any Matter or Thing cognizable
in the same Courts, by Imprisonment of Body, or Sequestration of Lands or
Goods, as fully as any Court of Equity may or can do.

PROVIDED ALWAYS, Persons aggrieved may appeal to the Supreme Court.
That if any Person or Persons shall be aggrieved with any definitive Sentence
or Judgment of the said Orphans Court, it shall be lawful for them to appeal
from the same to the Supream-Court; which Appeal, upon Security given, as is
usual in such Cases, shall be granted accordingly.

AND if any of the said Executors, Administrators, Discharges for Money, etc.
by Executors, etc. are binding to the Orphans.
Guardians or Trustees did or shall receive and give Discharges for any Sums of
Money, Debts, Rents or Duties belonging to any Orphan or Minor for whom they
were or are entrusted, IT IS HEREBY DECLARED AND ENACTED, That all such
Discharges or Receipts shall be binding to and upon the Orphan or Minor when he
or she attains to full Age, and shall be most effectual in Law to discharge the
Person or Persons that take the same.

AND when any of the said Minors attain to full Age, Bonds how to be cancelled.
and the Person or Persons so as aforesaid entrusted or concerned for them
having rendered their Accounts to the Orphans Court according to the Direction
of this and the said other Acts, and paid the Minors their full Due, then such
Minors shall acknowledge Satisfaction in the said Court: But in Case any of
them refuse so to do, then the said Court shall certify how the said Persons
concerned have accounted and paid; which shall be a sufficient Discharge to the
Guardians or Tutors, and to the Trustees, Executors or Administrators who shall
so account and pay, and thereupon all Bonds entered into, for Payment of such
Orphans Portions shall be delivered up and cancelled.

PROVIDED ALWAYS, AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, What
Persons may have the Charge of Orphans or Minors.
That none of the said Orphans Courts shall have any Power to order or commit
the Tuition or Guardianship of any Orphans or Minors, or bind them Apprentices
to any Person or Persons whose religious Persuasion shall be different from
what the Parents of such Orphan or Minor professed at the Time of their
Decease, or against the Minors own Mind or Inclination, so far as he or she has
Discretion and Capacity to express or signify the same; or to Persons that are
not of good Repute, so as others of good Credit, and of the same Persuasion,
may or can be found.

Due Regard to be had to Wills, etc.
PROVIDED ALSO, That the Justices of the said Courts, and all others concerned
in the Execution of this Act, shall have due Regard to the Direction of all
Last Wills, and to the true Intent and Meaning of the Testators, in all Matters
and Things that shall be brought before them concerning the same.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, Bonds directed to be
given by any Law, etc. to be for the Use of the Persons concerned, etc.
That all such Bonds or Obligations as are by this Act, or by any other Law of
this Province, directed and required to be given to the Register-General, and
all such Bonds as by any Law are directed to be given by the Register-General,
or by any other Officers or Persons in Office whatsoever in this Province, for
the due Execution of his or their respective Offices or Employments, are hereby
declared to be to and for the Use of and in trust for the Person or Persons
concerned, and that the Benefit thereof shall be extended from time to time,
for the Relief and Advantage of the Party grieved by the Misseazance or
Nonseazance of the Officers that did or shall give the same.

AND that when any of the said Bonds shall be put in Suit and Judgment
thereupon obtained, the Judgment shall remain in the same Nature the Bonds
were, and that no Execution issue out thereupon before the Party grieved shall,
by Writ of Scire facias, summon the Person or Persons against whom the said
Judgment is obtained, to appear and show cause why Execution shall not issue
upon the said Judgment. And if the Party grieved shall prove what Damages he
sustained, and thereupon a Verdict be found for him, the Court of Common Pleas
where such Suit is, shall award Execution for so much as the Jury shall then
find, with Costs, and no more; and the former Judgment is hereby declared still
to remain cauti^^ary, for the Satisfaction of such others as shall legally
prove themselves damnified, and recover their Damages in Manner aforesaid.

AND the said Register-General, and all others in whose Hands the said Bonds
shall be deposited or lodged, The Register-General, etc. required to give
Copies of such Bonds, etc.
are hereby required to give any Person injured, that requests the same, a true
Copy of any of the said Bonds, he paying Three Shillings for the same, and to
produce the Original in Court, upon any Trial that shall be had for the Breach
of any of them, if required by the Court; and if the Person in whose Hands the
said Bonds shall be lodged or come, shall refuse or delay to give Copies
thereof, and produce the Original in Court as aforesaid, he or they shall
forfeit and pay to the Party grieved treble Damages, to be recovered against
the Officer that gave such Bonds, or his Sureties, by Action of Debt, Bill,
Plaint or Information in any Court in this Province, where no Essoin,
Protection or Wager of Law, or any more than or Imparlance shall be allowed.

CHAP. CLXXXIX. An ACT for Amending diverse Laws therein mentioned.
Repealed.

CHAP. CXC. An ACT for the laying a Duty or Excise upon sundry Liquors; and
also upon Hops, to answer several Exigencies of this Government.
Expired.

ANNO REGNI GEORGII REGIS PRIMO.
At a GENERAL ASSEMBLY begun at Philadelphia, in the Province of Pennsylvania,
the Fourteenth Day of October, in the First Year of the Reign of His present
Majesty King GEORGE, over Great Britain, France and Ireland, etc. Annoque
Domini One Thousand Seven Hundred and Fourteen, and continued by Adjournments
to the Twenty-eighth of May, One Thousand Seven Hundred and Fifteen: On which
Day the following ACTS were passed by CHARLES GOOKIN, Esquire Lieutenant Governor
under WILLIAM PENN, Esquire etc. That is to say,
CHAP. CXCI. An ACT of Privileges to a Freeman.
Repealed.

CHAP. CXCII. An ACT directing Appeals to Great Britain. See the Act for
Establishing of Courts, poste^ Chap. 245.

BE IT ENACTED by CHARLES GOOKIN, Esquire by the King's Royal Approbation
Lieutenant Governor under WILLIAM PENN, Esquire Proprietor and Governor in chief of
the Province of Pennsylvania, etc. by and with the Advice and Consent of the
Freemen of the said Province in General Assembly met, and by the Authority of
the same, That no Judgment, Persons finding themselves aggrieved by Judgment,
etc. of the Supreme or Admiralty Courts may appeal home.
Sentence or Decree of any of the Supream-Courts, or Courts of Admiralty in
this Province, shall be so final, but that the Party grieved therewith may
appeal to the King, his Heirs and Successors, so that such Appellant does
deposit the Sum or Sums recovered or decreed against him, or become bound, with
one or more sufficient Sureties, to the Party for whom such Judgment or
Sentence is given by Recognizance in double the Sum adjudged to be recovered by
the Sentence, Decree or Judgment of the said Courts, or any of them, With
Condition, That the Person or Persons appealing shall and will, within eighteen
Months next after, prosecute his or their Appeal in Great Britain, with Effect;
If the Judgment, etc. be affirmed, etc. the Appellant shall pay all Debts,
Damages, etc.
and if the Judgment or Decree be affirmed there, or that the Appellant fails
in the Prosecution of his said Appeal within the time aforesaid, then the said
Appellant, or Party in whose Name the Appeal is made, shall pay all the Debts,
Damages and Costs adjudged upon the former Judgment, Sentence or Decree, and
all such Costs and Damages as shall be awarded for delaying Execution; or they
the Sureties shall do the same for him, whereto the Judges, before whom the
Recognizance is given, shall subscribe their Hands; and then Execution shall
stay, and the Appellant, if taken in Execution, shall be discharged.

CHAP. CXCIII. An ACT for establishing the Courts of General Quarter Sessions
in this Province.
Repealed.

CHAP. CXCIV. An ACT for Impowering religious Societies to buy, hold and enjoy
Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments.
Repealed.

CHAP. CXCV. An Affirmation ACT for such who for Conscience Sake cannot take an
Oath.
Supplied.

CHAP. CXCVI. An ACT for Corroborating the Circular-Line between the Counties
of Chester and New Castle.
Repealed.

CHAP. CXCVII. An ACT for the better Recovery of Fines and Forfeitures due to
the Governor and Government of this Province.
TO the End that all Fines, Forfeitures, Issues and Amerciaments, which were
designed, and ought to be applied toward Defraying the necessary Charge of
Supporting the Administration of this Government, may be duly estreated, levied
and brought into the Provincial-Stock or Treasury, that so the same may go to
the Uses intended; BE IT ENACTED by CHARLES GOOKIN, All Fines due after March
25. 1715. to be certified into the Supreme Court at Philadelphia, Sept. 24.
1716.
Esquire etc. That all Fines, Issues, Amerciaments forfeited Recognizances, Sum and
Sums of Money to be paid in Lieu and Satisfaction of them, or any of them, and
all other Forfeitures whatsoever, which after the Twenty-fifth Day of March,
One Thousand Seven Hundred and Fifteen, shall be set, imposed, lost or
forfeited in the Supream-Court of this Province, or in any Courts of
Common Pleas, General Quarter Sessions of the Peace and Jail-delivery, or
before any special Commissioners of Oyer and Terminer, in any County of this
Province, Vide postea Chap. 245* An Act for establishing Courts, etc.
shall, by the Justices, Prothonotaries and Clerks of the said Courts
respectively, be certified and estreated in and into the said Supream-Court, to
be held at Philadelphia, on the Twenty-fourth Day of September, One Thousand
Seven Hundred and Sixteen, expressing the Cause of the Loss, the Court, the
Nature of the Writ, and the Names of the Parties betwixt whom the said Issues
and Amerciaments are lost.

AND that all Fines, Issues and Amerciaments, All Fines, etc. to be ^streated,
into the Supreme Court, on Penalty, etc.
forfeited Recognizances, Sum and Sums of Money to be paid in Lieu or
Satisfaction of them, or any of them, and all other Forfeitures whatsoever
arising in any of the said Courts, from the said Twenty-fourth Day of
September, One Thousand Seven Hundred and Sixteen, in every Year, to the Tenth
Day of April, in every Year, shall be, and are hereby ordained and required to
be certified and estreated in and into the said Supream-Court the last Day of
every April Court, to be held at Philadelphia, in every Year, and from the
Beginning of every April Court, in every Year, to the Beginning of every
September Court there; on Pain that every Officer or Minister of or belonging
to the said Courts, or any of them, who by this, or any other Law of this
Province, ought to make Certificates or Estreats of any of the said Fines,
Issues, Amerciaments and Forfeitures, making Default or offending therein,
Penalty on Neglect.
shall forfeit and pay Thirty Pounds, current Money of this Province, for every
such Default that shall be made in Certifying and Estreating as aforesaid, the
one Moiety to the Use of the Governor, for Support of Government, and the other
Moiety to such Person or Persons as will sue for the same, to be recovered in
any Court of Record in this Province, by Action of Debt, Bill or Information,
wherein no Essoin, Protection or Wager of Law, and but one Imparlance shall be
allowed.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That all Clerks of the
Peace, Clerks of the Peace, etc. to deliver, yearly, to the Sheriff, a Schedule
of Fines, etc.
Town-Clerks, and every of them within this Province, shall make and deliver,
yearly, to the Sheriff of the respective County, City or Town corporate, where
the Sessions of the Peace is or shall be kept, within ten Days after the first
Day of November, in every Year, a true and perfect Estreat or Schedule of all
Fines, Issues, Amerciaments, forfeited Recognizances, Sum and Sums of Money,
and other Forfeitures whatsoever, which shall happen to be imposed, set, lost
or forfeited in any of the said Sessions of the Peace respectively, which shall
be held before the said first Day of November, by or upon any Person or Persons
whatsoever, due to the Governor or Government of this Province.

AND also, shall yearly and every Year, A Duplicate of all Schedules to be
delivered into the Supream-Court
on or before the tenth Day of April, make and deliver into the said
Supream-Court a true and perfect Duplicate, Certificate and Estreat of all the
Schedules so delivered to the said respective Sheriffs, that so they, on their
Opposals in the said Supream-Court, may be charged with the Money levied and
received by them respectively upon such Schedules delivered as aforesaid, on
Pain that every Person and Persons offending herein, for every such Default or
Failure made, Penalty on Neglect.
shall forfeit and pay Thirty Pounds, current Money of this Province, the one
Moiety to the Use of the Governor for Support of Government, and the other
Moiety to such Person or Persons as will sue for the same, to be recovered as
aforesaid.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, Justices of the Supreme
Court shall award P^^cess for le^^ing Fines, etc.
That the Justices of the said Supream-Court shall award Process for levying,
as well of such Fines, Forfeitures, Issues and Amerciaments as shall be
estreated into the said Supream-Court, as of all Fines, Forfeitures, Issues and
Amerciaments which shall be lost, taxed and set there, and not paid to the Uses
they shall be appropriated.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, No Justice, etc. of the
said Cou^t^, to spa^e, con^cea, etc. any In^ictment, etc. unless it be by Rule
of Court; nor miscertify any Fine* etc. o^ Penalty of treble the Value.
That no Justice, Officer or Minister of or belonging to any of the said
Courts, nor any Prothonotary or Clerk of the said Supreme, or other Courts,
Clerk of the Peace, Town Clerk, nor any Officer or Minister, under them, or any
of them; nor other Person or Persons whatsoever; shall spare, take off,
discharge, or wittingly or willingly conceal any Indictment, Fine, Issue,
Amerciament, forfeited Recognizance, or other Forfeiture whatsoever, exhibited,
set, imposed, lost or forfeited in any of the Courts abovementioned, or before
any of the Judges, Justices or Commissioners of or belonging to the same; o^
any Sum or Sums of Money paid, or to be paid to any Officer or Officers, in
Lieu or Satisfaction of any Fine or Forfeiture (unless it be by Rule or Order
of Court where such Indictment, Fine, Issue, Amerciament, forfeited
Recognizance or other Forfeiture is or shall be exhibited, set, imposed, lost
or forfeited) nor shall any of the said Justices, Officers or Ministers
aforesaid, or any other, wittingly or willingly miscertify or estreat in or
into any of the said Supream-Courts, any Fine, Issue, Amerciament, forfeited
Recognizance or other Forfeiture whatsoever, whereby the Process of the said
Supream-Courts, for the levying thereof, may be made invalid and of none
Effect: But every such Justice, Officer and Minister, and all and every other
Person and Persons offending herein, shall, for every such Offense, forfeit and
pay treble the Value of such Fin^, Issue, Amerciament, forfeited Recognizance,
Sum or Sums of Money, or other Forfeiture so spared, taken off, discharged,
concealed, not certified, or miscertified, or estreated as aforesaid; the one
Moiety thereof to the Governor, for Support of Government, and the other Moiety
to such Person or Persons as will sue for the same; to be recovered as
aforesaid.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, Estreats to be delivered
into the ^upream-Courts upon Oath or Affirmation.
That all Clerks and Prothonotaries of the said Courts, Clerks of the Peace,
Town-Clerks, and others to whom it belongs to make Return of Estreats into the
said Supream-Court, shall deliver in all and every such Estreat and Estreats,
upon their Oaths or Affirmations, to be administered by one or more of the
Judges of the same Court, to the Effect following, That is to say, YOU shall
declare, That these Estreats now by You delivered, are truly and carefully made
up and examined; and that all Fines, Issues, Ame^^^^ments, Recognizances and
Forfeitures which were set, cost, imposed or forfeited, and in right and due
Course of L^w ought to be estreated in the Supream-Court of Pennsylvania, are
(to the best of Your Knowledge and Understanding) herein contained; and that in
the same Estreats are also contained and expressed all such Fines and
Amerciaments as have been paid into the Court from which the said Estreats are
made, without any wilful or fraudulent Discharge, Omission, Misnomer or Defect
whatsoever.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, Estreats shall be viewed
by any two Judges of the Supream-Court; who in immode^^te Fines, etc. may give
Relief.
That any two of the Judges of the said Supream-Court for the time being shall
view all the said Estreats, and cause their Clerk to inrol them in the said
Court; and shall hear and determine all Complaints brought before them
concerning immoderate Fines, Issues or Am^rciaments estreated as aforesaid, and
to give Relief to the Party grieved, as the Laws in Great Britain in such Cases
does or shall direct.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That where any Fine or
Fines, Where any Fine, etc. shall be paid to any Sheriff, etc. and estreated,
Process shall issue out of the Supream-Court against them.
Sum or Sums of Money, or other Forfeitures, due to the Governor or Government
of this Province, after the said Twenty-fifth Day of March, One Thousand Seven
Hundred and Fifteen, shall be paid to any Sheriff, Clerk, or other Officer or
Minister whatsoever, belonging to any Court or Courts in this Province, and be,
according to the Intent and Directions of this Act, ce^tified and estreated in
or into the said Supream-Court; then, and in such Case, Process shall issue out
of the said Supream-Court directed to the Sheriff or Coroner of the proper
County, against such Officers and other Persons to whom such Fine or Fines, Sum
or Sums of Money, or other Forfeiture is or shall be so paid, for levying and
receiving the same, that so it may appear when, to whom, and how such Moneys
are received, answered and paid.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, All Fine^, levied,
except for the Poor, Highways, Bridges, etc. shall be paid to the
Provincial-Treasurer; who shall pay to the Uses appropriated.
That all and every the said Fines, Sums of Money, or other Forfeitures
(excepting such as are by Law appropriated to the Poor, or for Repairing
Highways and Bridges, or any other particular Uses in the said respective
Counties, or City of Philadelphia) which from henceforth shall be levied or
received according to the Intent and Directions of this Act, shall be paid by
the Sheriff, or other Officer or Minister who levied or received the same, to
such Person as the Assembly of th^^ Province shall from time to time appoint
Provincial-Treasurer; who shall pay the same to the Uses the same are or shall
be respectively appropriated: And the said Treasurer shall from time to time
lay an Account thereof before the Governor and Assembly for the time being; and
shall deduct Five per Cent. for his Trouble in receiving and paying the same.
His Allowance.


This Act shall not prejudice the City-Charter.
PROVIDED ALWAYS, That nothing in this Act contained shall extend to be anyways
prejudicial to the Charter of the City of Philadelphia; but that the said City
may have and enjoy the Fines and Forfeitures granted them by the said Charter
as if this Act had not been ^ade.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, The Secretary shall,
yearly, give an Account to the said Treasurer of Licenses to publick-Houses,
under Penalty of Twenty Pounds.
That the Secretary, or his Deputy, who draws Licenses for keeping
Publick-Houses, and selling Wine or other Liquors in any Town or Place of this
Province, shall keep a true and just Account of the said Licenses, expressing
the Time when, the Persons Names to whom the same were granted, and where they
live; and shall certify the same to the said Treasurer for the time being, on
the first Day of November, in every Year, upon Pain of forfeiting and paying
the Sum of Twenty Pounds, Money of thi^ Province, for every Default or Neglect
in that Behalf; the one Moiety thereof to the Governor for Support of
Government, and the other Moiety to him or them that will sue for the same, to
be recovered as aforesaid.

CHAP. CXCVIII. An ACT for the Assigning of Bonds, Specialties and
Promisory-Notes.
WHEREAS it has been held, That Bonds and Specialties under Hand and Seal, and
Notes in Writing, signed by the Party who makes the same, whereby such Party is
obliged, or promises, to pay unto any other Person, or his Order or Assigns,
any Sum of Money therein mentioned, are not, by Law, assignable or indorsable
over to any other Person, so as that the Person to whom the said Bonds,
Specialties, Note or Notes is or are assigned or indorsed may, in their own
Names, by Action at Law, or otherwise, recover the same; therefore, to the
Intent to encourage, Trade, Commerce and Credit; BE IT ENACTED by CHARLES
GOOKIN, Esquire etc. That all Bonds, Specialties and Notes in Writing, Bonds, etc.
may be assign^ed to another Person.
made or to be made, and signed by any Person or Persons, whereby such Person
or Persons is or are obliged, or does or shall promise to pay to any other
Person or Persons, his, her or their Order or Assigns, any Sum or Sums of Money
mentioned in such Bonds, Specialties, Note or Notes, may, by the Person or
Persons to whom the same is or are made payable, be assigned, indorsed and made
over to such Person or Persons as shall think fit to accept thereof.

AND that the Person or Persons to whom such Bonds, Such Assignee may assign
again.
Specialties or Notes are or shall be assigned, indorsed or made over, their
Factors, Agents, Executors or Assigns, may, at his, her or their Pleasure,
again assign, indorse and make over the same, and so Tuties Quoties.

AND that it shall and may be lawful for the Person or Persons to whom the said
Bonds, And sue in his own Name
Specialties or Notes are assigned, indorsed or made over as aforesaid, in his,
her or their own Name or Names, to commence and prosecute his, her or their
Action at Law, for Recovery of the Money mentioned in such Bonds, Specialties
or Notes, or so much thereof as shall appear to be due at the Time of such
Assignment in like Manner as the Person or Persons to whom the same was or were
made payable, might or could have done.

Plaintiff shall recover Damages and Costs; but if nonsuited, etc. the
Defendant shall have Costs.
AND in every such Action the Plaintiff or Plaintiffs shall recover his, her or
their Damages and Costs of Suit* and if such Plaintiff or Plaintiffs shall be
nonsuited, or a Verdict be given against him, her or them, the Defendant or
Defendants shall recover his, her or their Costs against the Plaintiff or
Plaintiffs.

And may sue out Execution, etc.
AND every such Plaintiff or Plaintiffs, Defendant or Defendants respectively
recovering, may sue out Execution for such Damages and Costs in the like Manner
as is usual for Damages and Costs in other Cases.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, Within what Time Actions
on Promisory-Notes shall be brought.
That all and every such Actions on such Promisory-Notes shall be commenced,
sued and brought within such Time as is appointed for commencing or suing
Actions upon the Case by an Act of this Province, passed in the Eleventh and
Twelfth Years of the late Queen Anne, entitled, An Act for Limitation of
Actions.

No Power given by this Act to issue Notes than, etc.
PROVIDED ALWAYS, That no Person or Persons shall have Power by Virtue of this
Act to make, issue or give out any Bonds, Specialties or Notes by themselves or
Servants, than such as they might have made, issued and given out if this Act
had never been made.

Assignments, etc. under Hand and Seal, etc.
AND that all Assignments to be made of Bonds and Specialties shall be under
Hand and Seal, before two or more credible Witnesses.

After Assignment the Assignor not to release.
PROVIDED ALSO, That it shall not be in the Power of the Assigners, after
Assignment made as aforesaid, to release any of the Debts or Sums of Money
really due by the said Bonds, Specialties or Notes.

CHAP. CXCIX. An ACT for Acknowledging and Recording of Deeds.
BE IT ENACTED by CHARLES GOOKIN, Esquire etc. An Office of Record in each County
for recording of Deeds.
That there shall be an Office of Record in each County of this Province,
called and styled, The Office for Recording of Deeds; and shall be kept in some
convenient Place in the said respective Counties; and the Recorder shall duly
attend the Service of the same, and, at his own proper Costs and Charges, shall
provide Parchment, or good large Books of Royal, or other large Paper, well
bound and covered, wherein he shall record, in a fair and legible Hand, all
Deeds and Conveyances which shall be brought to him for that Purpose, according
to the true Intent and Meaning of this Act.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That all Bargains and
Sales, All Deeds and Conveyances may be recorded in the said Office after the
Grantor, etc. have proved the Execution thereof, etc.
Deeds and Conveyances of Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments in this Province,
may be recorded in the said Office; but before the same shall be so recorded,
the Parties concerned shall procure the Grantor or Bargainer named in every
such Deed, or else two or more of the Witnesses (who were present at the
Execution thereof) to come before one of the Justice^ of the Peace, of the
proper County or City where the Lands lie, who is hereby empowered to take such
Acknowledgment of the Grantor, if one, or one of of the Grantors, if more.

BUT in case the Grantor be dead, or cannot appear, If theGrantor be dead, the
Witnesses to be uponOath, etc.
then the Witnesses brought before such Justice shall be by him examined upon
Oath or Affirmation, to prove the Execution of the Deed then produced:
Whereupon the same Justice shall, under his Hand and Seal, The Acknowledgment
to be certifi'd on the Back of such Deed, by the Justice; and the Day and
Number of theRoll by the Recorder.
certify such Acknowledgment or Proof upon the Back of the Deed, with the Day
and Year when the same was made, and by whom: And that after the Recorder has
recorded any of the said Deeds, he shall certify, on the Back thereof, under
his Hand and Seal of his Office, the Day he entered it, and the Name or Number
of the Book or Roll and Page where the same is entered.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, Deeds made out of this
Province, proved and recorded, shall be valid, etc.
That all Deeds and Conveyances made and granted out of this Province, and
brought hither and recorded in the County where the Lands lie (Execution
thereof being first proved by the Oath or Affirmation of one or more of the
Witnesses thereunto, before one or more of the Justices of the Peace of this
Province, Vide (...). Cha. 14^^ (...) for confirm^^^ Sales of Lands, etc.
or before any Mayor or chief Magistrate or Officer of the Cities, Towns or
Places where such Deeds or Conveyances are or shall be made or executed, and
accordingly certified under the Common or Publick-Seal of the Cities, Towns or
Places where such Deeds or Conveyances are so proved respectively) shall be as
valid as if the same had been made, acknowledged and proved in the proper
County where the Lands lie in this Province.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, Deeds so acknowledged
and recorded shall be of the same Force as Deeds of Feoffment, or enrolled in
Great Britain.
That all Deeds and Conveyances made or to be made, and proved or acknowledged
and recorded as aforesaid, which shall appear so to be by Indorsment made
thereon according to the true Intent and Meaning of this Act, shall be of the
same Force and Effect here, for the giving Possession and Seizin, and making
good the Title and Assurance of the said Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, as
Deeds of Feoffment, with Livery and Seizin, or Deeds enrolled in any of the
King's Courts of Record at Westminster, are or shall be in the Kingdom of Great
Britain. Copies, etc. of such Deeds being certified by the Recorder, shall be
as valid as the Originals.
And the Copies or Exemplifications of all Deeds so enrolled being examined by
the Recorder, and certified under the Seal of the proper Office (which the
Recorder, or Keeper thereof, is hereby required to affix thereto) shall be
allowed in all Courts where produced, and are hereby declared and enacted to be
as good Evidence and as valid and effectual in Law as the Original Deeds
themselves, or as Bargains and Sales enrolled in the said Courts at
Westminster, and Copies thereof, can be; and the same may be sued, pleaded and
made Use of accordingly.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, In Deeds in Fee-simple,
the Words Grant, Bargain, Sell, to be an express Covenant that the Estate was
free from Encumbrances, etc.
That all Deeds to be recorded in Pursuance of this Act, whereby any Estate of
Inheritance in Fee-simple shall hereafter be limited to the Grantee and his
Heirs, the Words [ Grant, Bargain, Sell] shall be judged an express Covenant to
the Grantee, his Heirs and Assigns, to wit, That the Grantor was seized of an
indefeazable Estate in Fee-simple, freed from all Encumbrances done or
suffered from the Grantor (excepting the Rents and Services due to the Lord of
the Fee) as also for quiet Enjoyment against the Grantor, his Heirs and Assigns
(unless limited by express Words contained in such Deeds) and that the Grantee,
his Heirs, Executors, The Grantee may assign Breaches, etc.
Administrators and Assigns may, in any Action, assign Breaches, as if such
Covenants were expressly inserted.

PROVIDED ALWAYS, Leases at Rack-Rent, and not exceeding 21 Years excepted.
That this Act shall not extend to Leases at Rack-Rent, or to Leases not
exceeding One-and-Twenty Years, where the actual Possession goes with the Lease.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, The Penalties against
Forgers of said Acknowledgments, and Persons guilty of Perjury.
That if any Person shall forge any Entry of the said Acknowledgments,
Certificates or Indorsements, whereby the Freehold or Inheritance of any Man
may be charged, he shall be liable to the Penalties against Forgers of false
Deeds, etc. And if any Person shall perjure himself in any of the Cases herein
abovementioned, he shall incur the like Penalties as if the Oath or
Affirmation had been in any Court of Record.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That no Deed or
Mortgage, No Mortgage good unless acknowledged and recorded in six, Months.
or defeazable Deed, in the Nature of Mortgages, hereafter to be made, shall be
good or sufficient to pass any Freehold or Inheritance, or to grant any Estate
therein for Life or Years, unless such Deed be acknowledged or proved, and
recorded within six Months after the Date thereof, where such Lands lie, as
herein before directed for other Deeds.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, Mortgagee having
received his Money shall enter Satisfaction on the Margin of the Record.
That any Mortgagee of any real or personal Estate in this Province, having
received full Satisfaction and Payment of all such Sum and Sums of Money as are
really due to him by such Mortgage, shall, at the Request of the Mortgager,
enter Satisfaction upon the Margin of the Record of such Mortgage recorded in
the said Office; which shall forever thereafter discharge, defeat and release
the same; and shall likewise bar all Actions brought or to be brought thereupon.

AND if such Mortgagee, by himself or his Attorney, Penalty on not making such
Acknowledgment, etc.
shall not, within three Mon^^^ after Request and Tender made for his
reasonable Charges, repair to the said Office, and there make such
Acknowledgment as aforesaid, he, she or they neglecting so to do, shall, for
every such Offense, forfeit and pay unto the Party or Parties aggrieved any Sum
not exceeding the Mortgage-Money, to be recovered in any Cout of Record in this
Province, by Bill, Plaint or Information.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, What Persons shall be
Recorders of Deeds, until a Majority of the Justices appoint others.
That Charles Bro^kden, shall be Recorder of Deeds for the City and County of
Philadelphia, and the several Prothonotaries or County-Clerks of Buck^ and
Chester, in this Province, shall be Recorders of Deeds for the said respective
Counties, who shall continue in their said Office until a Majority of the
Justices of the Courts of Quarter Sessions, in the said respective Counties,
shall s^^ Occasion to remove them, and appoint others in their Places. But
before any of the said Recorders enter upon their repective Offices, Recorders
to give Security, etc.
they shall find Sureties as follows, viz. The said Recorder of Deeds for the
County and City of Philadelphia shall become bound to the Governor of this
Province for the Time being, with one or more sufficient Sureties, in a Bond of
Five Hundred Pounds, conditioned for the true and faithful Execution of his
Office, and for Delivering up the Records and other Writings belonging to the
said Office whole, safe and undefaced, to his Successor in the said Office: And
the said County-Clerks of Bucks and Chester, shall each of them, with one or
more Sureties, become bound as aforesaid, in a Bond of Two Hundred Pounds,
conditioned as aforesaid. And to be filed in the Secretary's-Office, etc.
Which said respective Bonds shall be filed in the Secretary's Office, and
there safely kept in order to be made Use of for making Satisfaction to the
Parties that shall be damnified or aggrieved, as is or shall be in such Cases
directed by the Laws of this Province.

Penalty on the Recorder for entering on his Office before Security given.
AND no Recorder of Deeds whatsoever, now or hereafter appointed as aforesaid,
shall enter upon or officiate in the said Office, before he has given such
Security as aforesaid, upon Pain of forfeiting the Sum of One Hundred Pounds,
the one Half to the Governor, for Support of Government, and the other Half to
him or them that shall sue for the same, to be recovered as aforesaid.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, Fees allowed to the said
Recorders.
That the said Recorders, respectively, shall have and receive for Recording,
and for Copying or Exemplifying all Deeds, Conveyances and Writings entered in
the said Office, One Halfpenny for every Line, containing not less than twelve
Words; and for (...) Search One Shilling; and for every Acknowledging
Satisfaction, in the Margin of a Mortgage, recorded as aforesaid, One Shilling;
and shall have and receive for affixing the Seal to every Exemplification, One
Shilling; and for the Seal of the Office and Indorsement of Certificate on each
^eed acknowledged, and his Hand thereto, One Shilling and Sixpence.

AND if any of the said Recorders shall exact or take more or greater Fees, he
or they offending, shall, Penalty on Exacting.
for every Offense, forfeit and pay the Sum of Five Pounds, one Half thereof to
the Governor, for Support of Government, and the other Half to him or them that
shall sue for the same, to be recovered as aforesaid.

CHAP. CC. An ACT for the Ease of such as conscienciously scruple to take the
solemn Affirmation formerly allowed in Great Britain.
Repealed.

CHAP. CCI. An ACT for continuing a friendly Correspondence with the Indians.
Expired.

CHAP. CCII. An ACT for better Determining of Debts and Demands under Forty
Shillings, and for laying aside the two Weeks Court in the City of Philadelphia.
WHEREAS the several Laws of this Province for Determining of small Debts,
without Formality of Trial, were designed for the Ease and Convenience of the
Subject; but Complaint is made by many of the Inhabitants of the City and
County of Philadelphia, tha^ the Manner of putting the same in Execution by
some of the said City-Magistrates and Officers, proves very chargeable and
inconvenient: For Remedy whereof, BE IT ENACTED by CHARLES GOOKIN, Esquire etc.
That upon Complaint made to any Justice of the Peace in this Province against
any Person or Persons, Any Justice on Complaint may issue his W^rrant to the
Constable for ^^bts under Forty Shillings.
for any Debt or Demand under Forty Shillings, it shall and may be lawful for
such Justice, and he is hereby empowered and required to issue forth his
Warrant, in the Nature of a Summons, Capias or Attachment, as the Case may
require, directed to the Constable of the Township or District where the
Defendant dwells or can be found, commanding him to bring, or cause such
Defendant to come, with the Plaintiff, And may give Judgment, which shall be
final.
before him, or the next Justice, forthwith; and when such Justice has heard
the Proofs and Allegations of both Parties (or such of them as will be present)
he shall forthwith give Judgment in the Matter, which shall be final and
conclusive to both Complainant and Defendant, without further Appeal. Justices
to keep Entries of such Judgments.
But the Justice that gives such Judgment, shall keep fair Entries of the Names
of the Complainants and Defendants, and the Debt or Sum contained in such
Judgment, with the Day and Year when the same was given. Execution to be
awarded against Body and Goods.
And Execution, if required, shall be awarded by the Justice, against the Body
and Goods or Effects of the Defendant or Person refusing to comply with such
Judgment, directed to the Constable; but if the Defendant produces Effects
sufficient to satisfy the Sum contained in such Execution, If Effects be
produced, the Body not to be h^ld.
his Body shall not be held any longer: But for want of such Effects, the
Constable is hereby required to take such Defendant into the Goal of the proper
County; For want of Effects to be imprisoned, etc.
and the Sheriff or Keeper of such Goal is hereby required to receive the
Person so taken in Execution, and him safely keep, till the Sum recovered, with
Costs, be paid, or Satisfaction made by Goods, or otherwise; which Goods shall,
Goods to be ^^ld in three (...), returning the Overplus.
within three Days after, be sold at public Vend^e, and the Overplus, if any,
after reasonable Charges deducted, returned to the Owner.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, No Court to have
Cognizance of any Debts under 4^^ nor be be determined any other way than this
Act directs.
That no Court in this Province shall have Cognizance of any of the said Debts
or Demands under Forty Shillings, nor shall the same be determined by any
Justice or Magistrate any other way than this Act directs; any Law, Ordinance
or Usage to the Contrary in anywise notwithstanding.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, Repe^l of the City
Ordinances, etc.
That all and every the Ordinances and Bylaws of the said City, made, or
pretended to be made, for the better executing the said Laws for Determining of
small Debts, and for Erecting a Court or Courts for that Purpose, shall be and
are hereby declared to be null and void; Forty Shillings Court dissolved.
and that all and every the said Courts so erected, usually held by the Mayor
or Recorder, with one or more of the Aldermen of the said City, commonly called
The Forty Shillings, or T^o W^^ks Court, or by what Name soever the same may be
called; and all Jurisdiction and Authority belonging to or exercised in the
said Courts, or by any of the Mag^^trates or Ministers thereof, in Hearing and
Determining Debts or Demands therein of Forty Shillings and under be clearly
and absolutely dissolved, taken away and abolished.

AND that all the Laws or Acts of Assembly of this Province heretofore made for
determining Debts of Forty Shillings or under (save a Law entitled, Repeal of
all Laws for determining Debts under Forty Shillings, except, etc.
An Act about Attachments under Forty Shillings, passed in the Twelfth Year of
the late King William the Third) and every Matter, Clause and Thing therein
contained, shall be, and are hereby declared to be repealed, annulled, and
forever made void, any thing in the said Acts to the Contrary in anywise
notwithstanding.

PROVIDED ALWAYS, No Justice to hear any Debt for Rents or Contracts for real
Estate.
That nothing herein contained shall extend to enable any of the said Justices
of the Peace within the respective Counties of this Province, nor any of the
Magistrates of the City of Philadelphia, within the same City, to hear any Debt
for Rents or Contracts for real Estates.

CHAP. CCIII. An ACT for Erecting a Supreme Court or Provincial Court of Law or
Equity in this Province.
Repealed.

CHAP. CCIV. An ACT for Establishing the several Courts of Common Pleas in this
Province.
Repealed.

CHAP. CCV. An ACT for the better Ascertaining the Practice of the Courts of
Judicature within this Province.
Repealed.

CHAP. CCVI. An ACT for Raising a Supply of One Penny in the Pound, and Four
Shillings a Head; and for Reviving other Acts therein mentioned.
Expired.

CHAP. CCVII. An ACT for Regulating and Establishing Fees.
Supplied.

CHAP. CCVIII. An ACT for laying a Duty on Wine, Rum, Brandy and Spirits, Cider
and Hops, imported into this Province.
Expired.

CHAP. CCIX. An ACT for laying a Duty on Negroes imported into this Province.
Expired.

Two ACTS passed in the Second Year of His Majesty's Reign, in October, One
Thousand Seven Hundred and Fifteen, viz.
CHAP. CCX. An ACT to enlarge the Time for putting in Execution a Law passed in
the last Sessions of Assembly, held for this Province, entitled, An Act for
raising a Supply of One Penny in the Pound, and Four Shillings a Head; and for
Reviving other Acts therein mentioned.
Obsolete.

CHAP. CCXI. An ACT for Reviving of Actions and Process, lately depending in
the Courts of the County of Chester, and for Supplying other Defects, relating
to Proceedings at Law in all the Courts of Common Pleas in this Province.
--

ANNO REGNI GEORG II REGIS QUARTO.
At a GENERAL ASSEMBLY begun at Philadelphia, in the Province of Pennsylvania,
the Nineteenth Day of August, in the Fourth Year of the Reign of our Sovereign
Lord GEORGE, King of Great Britain, etc. Annoque Domini One Thousand Seven
Hundred and Seventeen, and continued by Adjournment until the Twenty-fourth of
the same Month: On which Day the following ACTS were passed by WILLIAM KEITH,
Esquire by the Royal Approbation Lieutenant Governor under WILLIAM PENN, Esquire
absolute Proprietary and Governor in chief of the said Province, That is to say,
CHAP. CCXII. An ACT for Raising a Supply of One Penny per Pound, and Four
Shillings a Head.
Expired.

CHAP. CCXIII. An ACT for the better Regulating of Elections of Sheriffs, Of
the Duty of Sheriffs, and their Elections, See postea 3 Geo. II. Chap. 303. i^
the latter Part of the Act for Relief of insolvent Debtors.
Coroners and Assessors.
WHEREAS the Manner of carrying on the said Elections, differing from the
peaceable Method established for choosing Members of Assembly, has occasioned
some Disorders and Tumults, which should be avoided for the future: THEREFORE
IT IS ENACTED by WILLIAM KEITH, Esquire by the King's Royal Approbation Lieutenant
Governor under WILLIAM PENN, Esquire Proprietor and Governor in chief of the
Province of Pennsylvania, by and with the Advice and Consent of the Freemen of
the said Province in General Assembly met, and by the Authority of the same,
Who have Right of Electing or being elected Sheriffs, Coroners and Assessors.
That such Persons as have no Right to elect or to be elected, according to a
Law of this Province, made in the Fourth Year of the late Queen Anne's Reign,
entitled, An Act to ascertain the Number of Members of Assembly, and to
regulate the Elections, shall not have any Right of electing or being elected
Sheriffs, Coroners or Assessors in or for any County of this Province.

Altered by the 11 th Geo. I.
AND that all and every Person and Persons who, by Virtue of the said Act, shall
from time to time come to elect Representatives to serve in Assembly, shall
deliver, in Writing, to the Judges of those respective Elections, in one Piece
of Paper, distinctly written, as well the Names of eight Persons for whom they
vote to serve in Assembly, as also the Names of a double Number of such Persons
as they would have to be Sheriffs and Coroners; and also the Names of six
Persons to be Assessors, for each County in this Province.

Persons chosen to be Sheriffs, etc. how to be qualified.
AND that the Persons who, by Majority of Votes given, according to the
Direction of this Act, shall be chosen for Sheriffs and Coroners in the said
respective Counties, shall be returned, presented and empowered to serve and
act in their respective Offices, in Manner and Form, and under the Penalties,
Qualifications and Directions specified in a Law of this Province, entitled,
An Act for regulating Elections of Sheriffs and Coroners: And the Persons so as
aforesaid chosen to be Assessors for the said respective Counties, shall be
returned and entered on Record at the Court of Quarter Sessions in the proper
County, next after every such Election, according to the Tenor and Intent of
the Law, entitled, An Act for raising County Levies, and shall be enabled to
act as Assessors, pursuant to the Powers given them by that or any other Act or
Law of this Province.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, City of Philadelphia how
to choose their Assessors.
That the Inhabitants and Freeholders of the City of Philadelphia, shall
observe and use the same Method in choosing their Assessors, as is herein above
directed for the Choice of other Assessors.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, The Acts recited herein
concerning Elections to continue in Force.
That all and every the abovementioned Acts, and all other Acts of Assembly
relating to the said Elections, and all the Powers, Provisions, Penalties,
Clauses, Matters and Things therein contained (except only such Part and Parts
thereof touching which other Provision or Alterations are hereby made) shall
continue and be in full Force as if the same were repeated and re-enacted in
the Body of this Act.

CHAP. CCXIV. An ACT for laying a Duty upon sundry Liquors retailed in this
Province.
Expired.

CHAP. CCXV. An ACT for the more effectual Raising of County Rates and Levies.
Supplied.

CHAP. CCXVI. An ACT for the Advancement of Justice, and more certain
Administration ther^of.
WHEREAS King Charles the ^^^ond by his Royal Charter to William Penn, Recital
of the Royal Char^ter.
(...) erecting this Country into a Province, did declare it to be his Will and
Pleasure, That the Laws for Regulating and Governing of Property within the
said Province, as well for the Descent and Enjoyment of Lands, as for the
Enjoyment and Succession of Goods and Chattels, and likewise as to Felonies,
should be and continue the same as they should be for the time being by the
general Course of the Law in the Kingdom of England, until the said Laws shall
be altered by the said William Penn, his Heirs or Assigns, and by the Freemen
of the said Province, their Delegates or Deputies, or the greater Part of them.

The common Law of England extends hither.
AND WHEREAS it is a settled Point, as the the common Law is the Birthright of
English Subjects, so it ought to be their Rule in British Dominions: But Act^
of Parliament have been adjudged not to extend to these Plantations, unless
they are particularly named in such Act.

NOW forasmuch as some Persons have been encouraged to transgress certain
Statutes against capital Crimes, and other Enormities, because those Statutes
have not (...) hitherto fully extended to this Province:

Trials of High Treason.
THEREFORE lest there should be an^ further Failure in that Behalf, may it
please the Governor, that it may be enacted, AND BE IT ENACTED by WILLIAM
KEITH, Esquire by the King's Royal Approbation Deputy-Lieutenant and Governor under
the said WILLIAM PENN, Esquire Proprietary and Governor in chief of the Province of
Pennsylvania, etc. by and with the Advice and Consent of the Freemen of the
said Province in General Assembly met, and by the Authority of the same, That
all Inquests and Trials of High Treason shall be according to due Order and
Course of the Common Law, observing the Directions of the Statute-Laws of Great
Britain, relating to the Trials, Proceedings and Judgments in such Cases.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, Trials of Pety Treason,
Murder, and other capital Crimes.
That the Inquiries and Trials of all Petty-Treasons, Misprisions of Treasons,
Murder, Manslaughters, Homicides, and all such other Crimes and Misprisions, as
by this Act or any other Act of Assembly of this Province, are or shall be made
capital, or Felonies of Death (which have been or shall be done, committed,
perpetrated or happen within this Province) shall be as by this Act is directed.

Trials in England upon Oath.
AND WHEREAS the several Crimes declared by this Act to be Felonies of Death,
are by the Course of the Laws of that Part of Great Britain called England, to
be enquired of and tried by Justices, Juries and Witnesses upon their Oaths.

BUT forasmuch as the greater Part of the Inhabitants of this Province are such
who for Conscience Sake cannot take an Oath in any Case; As the greater Part of
the Inhabitants cannot ^ake Oaths, all C^imes may be tried upon Oath o^
Affirmation.
yet without their Assistance Justice cannot be well administered, and too great
a Burden will fall upon the other Inhabitants: BE IT THEREFORE ENACTED by the
Authority aforesaid, That all and all Manner of Crimes and Offenses, Matters
and Causes whatsoever, to be enquired of, heard, tried and determined by Virtue
of this or any other Act or Law of this Province, or otherwise, shall and may
be enquired of, heard, tried and determined by Judges, Justices, Inquests and
Witnesses qualifying themselves according to their conscientious Persuasion
respectively, either by taking a corporal Oath, or by taking the solemn
Affirmation allowed by Act of Parliament to those called Quakers in Great
Britain.

WHICH Affirmation of such Persons as concientiously refuse to take an Oath,
Affirmation to have the Effect of an Oath.
shall be accounted and deemed in the Law to have the full Effect of an Oath,
in any Case whatsoever in this Province.

AND that all such Persons as shall be convicted of falsely and corruptly
affirming or declaring any Matter or Thing, which, if the same had been upon
Oath, False Affirmations to be punished as Perjury.
would by Law amount to wilful and corrupt Perjury, shall incur the same
Penalties, Disabilities and Forfeitures as Persons convicted of wilful Perjury
do incur by the Laws of Great Britain.

AND that upon all Trials of the said capital Crimes, UponTrial of
capitalCrimes Challenges to be allowed and Council assigned to Prisoners, and
P^oc^ss to bring in Witnesses for them.
lawful Challenges shall be allowed, and learned Council assigned to the
Prisoners, and shall have Process to compel Witnesses to appear for them upon
any of the said Trials. But before such Witnesses shall be admitted to depose
or give any Manner of Evidence, they shall first take an Oath or Affirmation,
To say the Truth, the whole Truth, and nothing but the Truth, in such Manner as
the Witnesses for the King are by the Laws of this Province obliged to do: And
if convicted of any wilful Perjury in such Evidence, If such Witnesses be
convicted of Perjury to be punished, etc.
shall suffer all the Punishments, Penalties, Forfeitures and Disabilities
which by any of the Laws and Statutes of Great Britain are or may be inflicted
upon Persons convicted of wilful Perjury.

BUT if any of the said Prisoners shall upon their Arraignment for any of the
said Crimes stand mute, Mute Persons suffer as Felons convict, etc.
or not answer directly, or shall peremptorily Challenge above the Number of
Twenty Persons returned to serve of the Jury, he or they so offending shall
suffer as a Felon convict; and shall lose the Benefit of Clergy, and of this
Act, in the same Manner as he or they should have done if they had been
indicted, arraigned and found Guilty, if it appear to the Justices, before whom
such Felons be arraigned, by Evidence given before them, or by Examination,
that the same Felonies whereon they are so arraigned, had been such Felonies,
by Reason whereof they should have lost the Benefit of their Clergy.

Persons convict to suffer as in England.
AND when any Person or Persons shall be so as aforesaid convicted or attainted
of any of the said Crimes, they shall suffer as the Laws of Great Britain now
do or hereafter shall direct and require in such Cases respectively.

The Justices to give Judgment accordingly.
AND it shall and may be lawful for the Justices of the Court where any of the
said Attainders or Convictions shall happen, to give and pronounce such
Judgment or Sentence against the Persons so attainted or convicted, as their
Crimes respectively require, according to the Manner, Form and Direction of the
Laws of that Part of Great Britain called England in the like Cases; and
thereupon to award and order Execution to be done accordingly.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, Persons convict of
Sodomy, etc. to suffer as Felons.
That if any Person or Persons shall commit Sodomy or Buggery, or Rape or
Robbery; which Robbery is done by assaulting another on or near the Highway,
putting in Fear, and taking from his Pers^^ Money or other Goods, to any Value
whatsoever, he or they so offending or committing any of the said Crimes within
this Province, their Counselors, Aiders, Comforters and Abettors being
convicted thereof as abovesaid, shall suffer as Felons, according to the Tenor,
Direction, Fo^^ and Effect of the several Statutes in such Cases respectively
made and provided in Great Britain; any Act or Law of this Province to the
Contrary in anywise notwithstanding.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, It shall be Murder in
Women to conceal the Death of their Bastards.
That if any Woman shall be delivered of any Issue of her Body, Male or Female,
which, being born alive, should, by the Law, b^ deemed a Bastard, and that she
endeavor privately, either by drowning of secret Burying thereof, or any other
Way, either by herself or the procuring of others, so to conceal the Death
thereof as that it may not come to Light, whether it were born alive or not,
but be concealed; in every such Case the Mother so offending being convicted
thereof, according to the usual Course of Proceeding in capital Crimes within
this Province, shall suffer Death, as in Case of Murder; except such Mother can
make Proof, by one Witness at the least, that the Child (whose Death was by her
so intended to be concealed) was born dead.

AND if any Person or Persons shall counsel, Access^ries to such Murder.
advise or direct such Woman to kill the Child she goes with, and after she is
delivered of such Child, she kills it, every such Person so advising or
directing, shall be deemed accessory to such Murder, and shall have the same
Punishment as the Principal shall have.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That the Statute against
Stabbing, The Statute against Stabbing extended hither.
made in the first Year of the Reign of King James the First, Chapter the
Eighth, entitled, An Act to take away the Benefit of the Clergy for some kind
of Manslaughter, shall be duly observed and put in Execution in this Province,
and be of like Force and Effect as if the same Act were here repeated and
enacted; Access^ries.
but that all such Persons as shall happen to be present and Aiding to the
Stabbing another, which by the said Act is made Murder, shall not be deemed
Principals, but Accessaries to such Stabbing.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Person or
Persons, Persons convicted of putting out an E^e, or disabling any Member shall
suffer as Felons.
on Purpose, and of Malice-forethought, and by laying in Wait, shall unlawfully
cut out or disable the Tongue, put out an Eye, slit the Nose, cut off the Nose
or Lip, or cut off or disable any Limbs or Members of any of the King's
Subjects, with Intention in so doing to maim or disfigure in any of the Manners
beforementioned, such his Majesty's Subjects, that then and in every such Case
the Person or Persons so offending, their Counselors, Aiders and Abettors,
knowing of and privy to the Offense as aforesaid, shall suffer Death, as in
Cases of Felony, without Benefit of Clergy.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That another Statute,
Note, The Act of Parliament o^ the 1 st Jac. ^. is r^pea^^d.
made in the first Year of the Reign of King James the First, Chapter the
Twe^^th, entitled, An Act against Conjuration, Witchcr^^t and Dealing with
evil and wicked Spirits, shall be duly put in Execution in this Province, and
of like Force and Effect as if the same were here repeated and enacted.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, Persons convict of
Burglary shall suffer Death, without Benefit of Clergy.
That if any Person or Perso^^ shall be so as aforesaid convict of Burglary;
which is a Breaking and Entering into the Dwelling House of anoth^^ in the
Nightime, with an Intent to kill some reasonable Creature, or to commit some
other Felony within the same House, whether the felonious Intent be executed or
not, h^ or they so offending within this Province, being convicted thereof as
aforesaid, shall suffer Death, without Benefit (...) Clergy; any Law of this
Province to the Contrary notwithstanding.

Persons convicted of burning Houses, etc. shall suffer Death:
AND if any Person or Persons shall be so as aforesaid convicted of maliciously
and voluntarily burning the Dwelling House, Barn, Stable or Out-House of
another, having Corn or Hay therein, he or they so offending within this
Province, shall suffer Death; any Law of this Province to the Contrary
notwithstanding.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, If the Principal
Offender stands mute, or challenges above 20 of the Jury, Access^ries may
nevertheless be proceeded against, etc.
That if any Principal Offender in any capital Crime (which by the Laws of this
Province for the time being is made Felony of Death) shall be convicted of any
such Felony, or shall stand mute, or peremptorily challenge above the Number of
Twenty Persons returned to serve of the Jury, it shall and may be lawful t^
proceed against any Accessory, either before or after the Fact, in the same
Manner as if such Principal Felon had been attainted thereof, notwithstanding
any such Principal Felon shall be admitted to the Benefit of his Clergy,
pardoned or otherwise delivered before Attainder; and every such Accessory
shall suffer the same Punishment, if he (...) she be convicted, or stand mute,
or peremptorily challenge above the Number of Twenty Persons returned to serve
of the Jury, as he or she should have suffered if the Principal had been
attainted.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, Concealers of Robbers,
etc. if they pray the Benefit of this Act, not to suffer Death
That if any Person or Persons shall receive, harbor or conceal any of the
said Robbers or Burglars, Felons or Thieves, or shall receive or buy any Goods
or Chattels that shall be feloniously taken or stolen by any such Robbers or
Burglars, Felons or Thieves, knowing the same to be stolen, and being so as
aforesaid convicted of either of the said Offenses; if he or they pray to have
the Benefit of this Act, in Lieu of Clergy, Judgment of Death shall not be
given against them upon such Conviction, nor Execution awarded upon any
Outlawry for such Offense, but they shall be burnt in their Hands, in Manner as
herein after directed.

PROVIDED ALWAYS, Though the principal Felon is not taken, Accessaries may be
prosecuted.
That if any such Principal Robber or Burglar, Felon or Thief cannot be taken
so as to be prosecuted and convicted for any such Offense, nevertheless it
shall be lawful to ^^osecute (...) punish every such Person and Persons, buy^^g
or receiving any Goods stolen by any such Principal Felon, knowing the same to
be stolen, as for a Misdemeanor, to be p^nished by Fine and Imprisonment, or
other such corporal Punishment as the Court shall think fit to inflict, although
the Principal Felon be not before convict of the said Felony: Which Punishment
shall exempt the Offender from being p^nished as Accessory if such Principal
Felon shall afterward be taken and convicted.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, If Persons indicte^,
etc. will not appear, Capias shall be awarded.
That if any Person or Persons who have been indicted or appealed, or hereafter
shall be indicted or appealed for any of the said Crimes, did not, or will not
appear to answer such Indictment or Appeal, the Justices before whom the same
has been or shall be taken, shall award a Writ called Capias against every
such Offender, directed to the Sheriff of the County where the Party indicted
or appealed are, by such Indictment or Appeal, supposed to be conversant or
inhabit, returnable before the Justices of that Court where such Party is or
shall be so indicted or appealed, at the Supreme or Provincial Court next after
the taking of such Indictment or Appeal; by which Writ of Capias the same
Sheriff shall be commanded to take the Body of him or them so indicted or
appealed, if he or they can be found in his Bailiwick: If not found, the
Sheriff to make Proclamation in Quarter Sessions, etc.
And if he or they cannot be found, the Sheriff shall make Proclamation in
every Court of Quarter Sessions which shall be held for she said County where
the said Party indicted or appealed (...) supposed to inhabit or be conversant
as aforesaid, That he or they being so indicted or appealed shall appear before
the said ^ustices at the said Supream-Court, on the Day of the Return of the
said Writ of Capias, to answer our Lord the King, or to the Party, of the
Treason, Felony or Trespass whereof he or they are so indicted or appealed.
Which Writ shall be delivered to the said Sheriff or Sheriffs three Months
before the Return thereof; How the Justices, after such Writ being served and
returned, and the Offender does not appear, shall proceed, etc.
after which Writ of Capias so served and returned, if he who is so indicted or
appealed comes not at the said Day of Return of the said Capias, and yield his
Body to the Sheriff, he shall be, by the Justices of the said Supream-Court,
pronounced Out-lawed, and attainted of the Crime whereof he is so indicted or
appealed as aforesaid. And from that Time shall forfeit and lose all his Lands
and Tenements, All Forfeifeitures herein mentioned shall, after the Criminals
Debts are paid, go, one Half to the Governor, and the other Half to the
Criminals Wife and Children.

If no Wife and Children, to the next of Kin; and if not claimed in; Years to
the Governor.


Goods and Chattels. Which Forfeiture, and all other Forfeitures expressed or
implied by the Judgment to be given upon the said capital Offenses mentioned in
this Act, after such Criminals just Debts and reasonable Charges of their
Maintenance in Prison are deducted, shall go, one Half to the Governor for the
time being, toward Support of this Government, and for Defraying the Charges
of Prosecution, Trial and Execution of such Criminals; and the other Half or
Residue thereof shall go to such Criminal's Wife and Children equally: But if
he leaves no Wife or Children, then to the next of his Kindred, not descending
lower than the second Degree; to be cl^imed within three Years after the Death
of such C^iminals; otherwise the same shall go to the Governor as aforesaid;
any Law or Usage to the Contrary notwithstanding.

PROVIDED ALWAYS, AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, Persons
convicted of capital Crimes liable to be arrested by their Creditors, and
Execution may go against their Lands, etc.
That where any Person or Persons charged, committed to Prison, or convicted of
any of the said capital Crimes, being justly indebted to any other Person or
Persons, he or they so indebted may be arrested, or their Go^ds and Chattels
attached to answer the Suits of their respective Creditors, who making due
Proof that the Debts or Sums demanded are really and without Fraud due, shall
recover Judgment for the same, and Executions may be awarded against the Lands,
Goods and Chattels of such Defendants, as is usual in other Cases.

Breakers of Prisons.
PROVIDED ALSO, That he or they who shall happen to break Prison, shall not have
Judgment of Life or Member for breaking of Prison only, except the Cause for
which he or they were taken and imprisoned did require such Judgment, had he
been convict according to Law.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, Persons convicted of
capital Felonies, in which they ought to have the Benefit of the Clergy, may
pray the Benefit of this Act; and, without Reading shall be as Clerks convict,
and burnt in the Hand.
That if any Person be convicted of any such Felony as is hereby made capital,
for which he ought by the Laws of Great Britain to have the Benefit of his
Clergy, and shall pray to have the Benefit of this Act, he shall not be
^equired to read, but without any Reading shall be allowe^ taken and reputed to
be and punished as a Clerk Convict, and burnt, if for Murder, with an [M] upon
the Brawn of the left Thumb; and if for any other Felony, with a [T] in the
same Place of the Thumb: Which Marks are to be made by the Jailer in open
Court, as is usual in Great Britain; which shall be effectual to all Intents
and Purposes, and be as advantageous to him as if he had read as a Clerk; any
Law or Usage to the Contrary notwithstanding.

AND that the said Justices before whom such Offender or Offenders shall be
tried and convicted, shall also, The Justices may award such Offenders to some
House of Correction, etc.
at their Discretion, award and give Judgment, That such Offender and Offenders
shall be committed to some House of Correction, or Public Workhouse within
the County, City, Town or Place where such Conviction shall be, there to remain
and be kept without Bail or Mainprize for such Time as such Justices shall then
judge and award, not less than six Months, and not exceeding two Years, to be
accounted from the Time of such Conviction, and an Entry thereof shall be made
of Record, pursuant to such Judgment and Award; and such Offender and Offenders
so judged and awarded to remain and be kept in such House of Correction or
Public Workhouse, shall be there set at Work and kept at hard Labor, for and
during such Time as shall be so adjudged and recorded: If the Offenders refuse
to Work, then to be corrected.
And in Case such Person or Persons shall refuse or neglect to work and labor
as they ought to do, the Master or Keeper of such House of Correction, or
Public Workhouse respectively, is hereby required to give such Persons such
due Correction as shall be fit and necessary in that Behalf.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, If Offenders escape and
be re-taken, not to be committ^^, etc. for less than Twelve-Months, no^ above 4
Years
That in case any such Offender or Offenders shall, after such Judgment given,
escape out of Prison, or out of such House of Correction or Public Workhouse
as he, she or they shall be committed unto as aforesaid, such Person or Persons
being afterward re-taken shall be brought before one or more of the Provincial
Judges, or before two or more of the Justices of the Peace of such County,
City, Town or Place where such Offender or Offenders shall be so re-taken;
which Judge or Justices are hereby required to commit such Offender and
Offenders to some House of Correction, or Public Workhouse, within such
County, City, Town or Place where he, she or they shall be so re-taken, there
to remain without Bail or Main-prize, for any Time not less than twelve Months,
and not exceeding four Years, to be accounted from the Time of such Re-taking,
and there be set at Wo^k, and kept at hard Labor, and receive such due
Correction as aforesaid.

If the Master of such ^ouse of Correction neglect his Duty, any Provincial
Judge may remove him.
AND in case any Master or Keeper of any House of Correction, or Public
Workhouse, shall neglect to do his Duty as above directed, any Judge or
Justice of Goal Delivery, upon Complaint, and due Proof thereof, upon the Oath
or Affirmation of one or more Witnesses, to him made, shall be and is hereby
empowered to remove such Person from his said Office.

AND BE IT ^URTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, A Woman convicted of
Felony, may pray the Benefit of this Act, be (...) in the Hand, and kept in
Prison, etc.
That (...) a Man being convicted of any Felony, for which he (...) the Benefit
of his Clergy; if a Woman be (...) same, or like Offense, upon her Prayer to
have (...) of this Act, Ju^^me^t of D^^th shall not be (...) her upon such
Conviction or Execution awarded (...) Outlawry for such Of^^nce, but s^all
su^^er the same Punishment as a Man should suffer that has the Benefit o^ hi^
Clergy all^wed him in the like Case, That is to say, (...) be burnt in the Hand
in Manner aforesaid; and further to be kept in Prison for such Time as the
Justices in their Discretion shall think fit, so as the same do not exceed one
Year.

Persons who had once the Benefit of this Act being again convicted, etc shall
suffer Death.
BUT if any Man or Woman who have once the Benefit of this Act as aforesaid, and
shall be again convicted of any other Felony hereby made Capital or Felony of
Death, for which a Man might have the Benefit of his Clergy, every such Man and
Woman shall be and are hereby t^tally excluded from having any Benefit or
Advantage of this Act, but shall suffer Pains of Death as in Cases where the
Benefit of Clergy is by Law taken away.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, Felonies committed in
one County, and Accessaries in another, Indictment against such Access^ry shall
be effectual.
That where any Murder or Felony has been or hereafter shall be committed in
one County of this Province, and one or more Persons shall be Accessory or
A^cessaries to any such Murder or Felony in another County; that then an
Indictment found or taken against any such Accessory or Accessaries, upon the
Circumstance of such Matter before Justices of the Peace, or other Justices or
Commissioners, to enquire of Felonies in the County where such Offenses of
Accessory or Accessaries in any Manner have been or (...) be committed or done,
shall be as good and effectual in Law, as if the said principal Offense had
been committed or done within the same County where the Indictment against such
Accessory has been or shall be found.

AND that the Justices of the said Supream-Court, Justices of the (...)
Supream-C^urt shall (...) to the (...) of the Records, to know whether such
(...) h^s been convicted, etc. And it appe^ring that such Princip^l is (...),
etc. they may proceed (...) the Accessory.
or two of them, upon Suit to them made, shall write to the Keepers of the
Records where such Principal is or shall be hereafter attainted or convict, to
certify them, whether such Principal be attainted, c^nvicted, or otherwise
discharged of such principal ^elony: Who upon such Writing to them, or any of
them directed, shall make sufficient Certificate in Writing, under their Seal
or Seals, to the said Justices, whether such Principal be attainted, convicted,
or otherwise discharged or not. And after they who so have the Custody of such
Records, do certify, that such Principal is attainted, convicted, or otherwise
discharged of such Offense by the Law, then the Justices of Jail-delivery or
Over and Terminer shall proceed upon every such Accessory in the County where
he or they became Accessory, in such Manner and Form as if both the said
principal Offense and Accessory had been committed and (...) in the same County
where the Offense of Accessory was or shall be committed or done.

AND that every such Accessory, Every such Accessory to (...) and 3 d of Ed VI.
Chap. 24.
and other Offenders above expressed, shall answer upon their Arraignments, and
receive such Trial, Judgment, Order and Execution, and suffer such Forfeitures,
Pains and Penalties, as is used in other Cases of Felony; and as the Statute
made in the Second and Third Years of King Edward the Sixth, Chapter the
Twenty-fourth, entitled, An Act for the Trial of Murders and Felonies
committed in several Counties, does direct in such Cases; which Statute shall
be observed in this Province; any Law or Usage to the Contrary notwithstanding.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, Penalties, etc. on (...)
of Pe^jury.
That every Person who shall unlawfully and corruptly procure any Witness to
commit wilful and corrupt Perjury in any Matter or Cause depending in Suit and
Variance in any of the Courts of Judicature within this Province, or shall
unlawfully and corruptly procure and suborn any Witnesses to testify upon Oath
or Affirmation, in any Matter, Cause or Thing whatsoever, such Offender shall
forfeit the Sum of Forty Pounds, one Half thereof to the Governor, for the
Support of this Government, and the other Half to the Party grieved: But for
want of Lands, Goods or Chattels to satisfy the said Forty Pounds, every such
Offender, being convicted or attainted of Perjury or Subornation aforesaid,
shall, for his said Offense, suffer Imprisonment by the Space of six Months,
without Bail, and stand on the Pillory the Space of one whole Hour, in some
Market or public Place where the Offense was committed; and shall suffer all
the other P^nishments, Penalties, Forfeitures and Disabilities which are
inflicted upon such Offenders by any Law or Statute of Great Britain.

The Statute of 5 th of Eliz. Chapter 9. against Perjury shall be observed here.
AND that the Statute made in the Fifth Year of Queen Elizabeth, Chapter the
Ninth, entitled, An Act for Punishment of such Persons as shall procure or
commit any wilful Perjury, shall be observed in this Province, and be duly put
in Execution, as well against those who shall falsify their Affirmations, as
those who shall falsify, their Oaths or be convicted of Subornation or Perjury.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That in all Cases where
any Person or Persons have been or shall be found guilty of any of the said
Crimes, Justices of Jail-delivery to give Judgment of Death against Persons
reprieved.
for which Judgment of Death should or may ensue, and shall be reprieved to
Prison without Judgment at that Time given him, her or them so found guilty;
that those who now are, or hereafter shall be assigned Justices, or deliver the
Goal where any such guilty Persons shall remain, are hereby empowered and
authorized to give Judgment of Death, and award Execution against such Persons
so found guilty and reprieved, as the same Justices before whom such Person or
Persons was or were found guilty, might have done before such Reprieve.

No Process to be discontinued by, etc.
And that no manner of Process or Suit made, sued, or had before any of the
King's Justices of the Supreme or Provincial Court, Jail-delivery, Oyer and
Terminer, Justices of the Peace, or other the King's Commissioners, in this
Province, shall not in any wise be discontinued by the making and publishing of
any new Commission or Association, or by altering the Names of the Justices of
the said Supream-Court, Jail-delivery, Oyer and Terminer, Justices of the
Peace, or other the King's Commissioners; but that the new Justices of the
Supream-Court, Jail-delivery and of the Peace, and other Commissioners, may
proceed in every respect as if the old Commissions and Justices, and
Commissioners, h^d still remained and continued unaltered.

AND that no Proc^ss, Pleas, Plaints, Suits, Nor by the Death or Removal of the
Proprietary, etc.
Actions or Proceedings whatsoever, which now are, or at any Time hereafter
shall be commenced, sued, brought or depending before any of the said Justices
of the Supream-Court, Justices of the Courts of Common Pleas, or other the
King's Justices, Commissioners or Magistrates in this Province, shall be
discontinued or put without Day, by Reason of the Death or Removal of the
Proprietary or his Lieutenant Governor of this Province, or by the Death, new
Commission, or not coming of the said Justices or Commissioners, or any of
them; but shall stand good and effectual in Law to all Intents and Purposes,
notwithstanding the Death or Removal of the said Proprietary and Governor, or
of the Death, new Commission, Association, or not coming of the said Justices,
or any of them.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Person or
Persons, The Punishment of Persons convicted of Larcenies; for the first
Offense.
after the First Day of October, in this present Year One Thousand Seven
Hundred and Eighteen, shall commit any simple Larceny, which is not by this Act
made Felony of Death, and be duly convicted thereof at the Court of
Quarter Sessions of the Peace, to be held for the respective County where such
Offense is committed, or where the Offender becomes Accessory in this Province,
he, she or they so offending, their Aiders, Comforters and Abettors, shall, for
the first Offense, restore the Goods and Chattels so stolen to the right Owner
or Owners thereof, or shall pay him or them the full Value of such Goods, or so
much of them as cannot be restored; which Value shall be set by such Persons as
the Court, before whom such Offenders are convicted, shall appoint to do the
same, upon their Oaths or Affirmation; and the said Offenders shall also ^ay
the Costs of Prosecution, with all such other Sums of Money as the same Court
shall allow for such Owner or Owners Loss of Time, Charges and Disbursement in
the Apprehending and Prosecution of such Offender.

Further Punishment for the first O^fence.
AND moreover shall forfeit and pay the like Valu^ of the Goods to the Governor,
for the Support of this Government, and shall be committed to the common Goal
of the County where they are convicted, there to remain till they make
Satisfaction for all the Sums so to be adjudged or recovered against them, and
moreover shall be public^ly whipped on his or their bare Back with Stripes
well, (...) on, not exceeding Twenty-one.

For the Second.
AND that he or they who shall so as aforesaid be convicted of the second
Offense, and his and their (...) Comforters and Abettors, shall pay to the
right Owner* (...) Owners of the Goods and Chattels so stolen, the full Valu^
of such Goods and Chattels, or of so much of them (...) are not restored; which
Value shall be set as aforesaid^ and the said Offenders shall also pay the
Costs and Charg^^ aforesaid; to be allowed as abovementioned.

AND moreover, shall forfeit and pay the double Va^^^ of the said Goods to the
Governor, for the Support of (...) Government, and shall be committed in the
common (...) the County where they are convicted, there to remain (...) they
make Satisfaction as aforesaid, and shall be publicly whipped on their bare
Backs, with Stripes well laid (...) not less than Twenty-one, nor exceeding
Forty.

For the third.
AND he or they who shall be so as aforesaid convicted of the Third Offense, and
his or their Aiders or Abetto^^ shall pay to the right Owner or Owners of such
(...) Goods the full Value thereof, to be set as aforesaid, and (...) said
Offenders shall also pay the Costs and Charges aforesaid to be allowed as
aforesaid; and shall also forfeit and pay (...) like treble Value to the
Governor, for the Support of (...) Government, and shall be committed to the
County Goal there to remain till they make Satisfaction as aforesaid, and shall
be publicly whipped on his or their bare Ba^^^* with Stripes well laid on, not
less than Thirty-nine, not exceeding Fifty.

Justices may send the Offenders to the House of Correction.
AND that the said Justices before whom such Offender^ shall be tried and
convicted of the Third Offense, shall also* at their Discretion, award and give
Judgment, that such Offenders shall be sent to some House of Correction, or
Public Workhouse, and there to be set at Work, corrected, and remain without
Bail for such Time as the said Justices shall then judge and award, not less
than twelve Months, and not exceeding four Years, to be accounted from the Time
of such Conviction, and an Entry shall be thereof made accordingly, as is
herein above directed in other Cases.

PROVIDED ALWAYS, AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That
none of the said Imprisonments hereby awarded, Imprisonments, etc. not to stop
Execution against their Estates.
as Part of the Punishment of the said Offenders, or any of them, shall stop or
avoid the Awarding or Taking out of Execution to levy so much of the respective
Sums recovered against them as aforesaid, as such Offenders refuse or neglect
to pay when such Writs are taken out. Which Executions are directed to the
Sheriffs, etc. returnable to the Quarter Sessions, and Lands sold as in
otherCases.
Which Executions shall be directed to the Sheriff or Coroner of the proper
County, requiring him to levy the Sums due upon such Recoveries as aforesaid,
of the Lands and Tenements, Goods and Chattels of such Offenders, returnable to
the Court of Quarter Sessions, next after the Date or Tests of such Writs;
which shall be executed accordingly, and the Lands, Goods and Chattels thereby
seized, shall be sold and conveyed by the said Officers; and such Sales shall
be as available and (...) in Law as any other Sales of Lands taken and sold for
Payment of Debts by Virtue of Writs of Execution, awarded out of the Courts of
Common Pleas in the said respective Counties.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, The Forfeitures arising
from Simple-Larcenies for Support of Government, shall be paid to the
Provincial Treasurer.
That all the said Forfeitures (...) from Offenders who shall be convicted of
the said S^^ple-Larcenies, and by this Act directed to be applied for ^upport
of Government, shall be duly levied by the Sheriff^ of the respective Counties,
and shall be paid into the Treasury of this Province from time to time, as soon
as the same be levied; and the Provincial-Treasurer for the time being shall
keep true and just Accounts thereof, and shall issue and pay the same to the
Use and public Service of this Government.

PROVIDED, Excepting Philadelphia.
That the Forfeitures arising from the said Simple-Larcenies committed within
the City of Philadelphia, shall go as their Charter directs.

PROVIDED ALSO, AND IT IS HEREBY ENACTED AND DECLARED, The Testimony of Owners
of stolen Goods to be Evidence.
That the Testimony of the said Owners of stolen Goods shall be allowed and
taken to be good Evidence to convict the said Felons for such Stealing: Repeal
of two Laws.
And that the Law of this Pr^vince, entitled, An Act against Robbing and
Stealing, p^ssed in the Fourth Year of the late Queen Anne; and another Act
directing the Punishment of Petty-Larceny under Five Shillings, shall be and
are hereby repealed.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, Such as compound for
stolen Goods forfeit twice the Value, etc. But may take the Goods back, etc.
That if any Person or Persons shall agree or compound to take Satisfaction for
any S^^^ing, or Goods stolen, such Person shall forfeit twice the Value of the
Sums agreed for or taken: But no Person shall be debarred from taking his Goods
back which are stolen, provided he prosecute th Felons.

PROVIDED ALWAYS, AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, No
Indictment, etc. now depending shall be discontinued.
That no Indictment, Presentment, or Inquisition, or any Process whatsoever,
now depending in any Court within this Province for any of the Crimes or
Offenses mentioned in this Act, shall be discontinued, abated or quashed for or
by Reason of this Act, or any thing therein contained; but that the Judges and
Justices of the respective Courts within this Province shall proceed to hear,
try and determine the said Offenses in such Indictments, P^^sentments and
Inquisitions, mentioned to be commi^^ed against any Act or Acts of Assembly of
this Province as were in force at the Time of finding, making or taking the
said Indictments, Presentiments and Inquisitions, and thereupon to give
Judgment, and award Execution, accord^^^ to the Direction of the said
respective Act^ of Assemb^^, upon which the said Indictments, Presentiments or
Inq^^^^tions are founded, as if the same Act or Acts of Assem^^^ were by a
special Clause in this Act continued for that Purpose; any thing herein
contained to the Con^^^y notwithstanding.

AT the Council Chamger Whitehall the Twenty-sixth Day of May, One Thousand
Seven Hundred and Nineteen: PRESENT Their Excellencies the Lords Justices,
A. B. of Canterbury. L. President. L. Steward. D. of Marlborough. E. of
Sunderland. Mr. Secretary Craggs. E. of Westmoreland. B. of London. General
Wills. L. Chancellor. L. Privy Seal. L. Chamberlain. D. of Roxbury. E. of
Barkley. D. of Manchester. E. of Ilay. Mr. C. of the Duchy. E. of Halifax.


UPON Reading this Day at the Board a Representation from the Lords
Commissioners of Trade and Plantations, dated the First of this Instant,
setting forth their having had under their Consideration an Act passed at an
Assembly in Pennsylvania, held in May, One Thousand (...) Hundred and Eighteen,
entitled, An Act for the Advancement of Justice, and more certain
Administration thereof; and the said Commissioners, having taken the Opinion of
Council learned in the Law touching the same, do humbly present the said Act as
proper to be confirmed: Their Excellencies the Lords Justices in Council taking
the same into their Consideration, are pleased (pursuant to the Powers reserved
to his Majesty in the Charter of Propriety granted to William Penn, Esquire) to
declare their Approbation of the said Act, and according to their Excellencies
Pleasure thereupon expressed, the said Act is hereby Confirmed, finally Enacted
and Ratified: Whereof the Deputy Governor, Council and Assembly of the said
Province, and all others whom it may concern are to take Notice and govern
themselves accordingly.

ROBERT HALES.
CHAP. CCXVII. An ACT for Supplying some Defects in the Law for the Relief of
the Poor. Vide Chap. 146. antea, and Chap. 329. 3 Geo. II. postea*

WHEREAS by a Law of this Province, entitled, An Act for the Relief of the
Poor, it is provided; That the Overseers of the Poor for the respective
Townships shall make Rates or Assessments for the Relief of the Poor, indigent
and impotent Persons within the said Townships: But it is not ascertained what
Settlement shall render one an Inhabitant relieveable by the said Act? BE IT
THEREFORE ENACTED by WILLIAM KEITH, Esquire by the King's Royal Approbation
Deputy-Lieutenant and Governor under WILLIAM PENN, Esquire Proprietary and Governor
in chief of the Province of Pennsylvania, etc. by and with the Advice and
Consent of the Freemen of the said Province in General Assembly met, and by the
Authority of the same, That where any unmarried Person, not having Child or
Children, If an unmarried Person be hired as a Servant, and abide in the same
Service one Year, it is a Settlement.
is or shall be lawfully hired as a Servant into any City, Township or District
in this Province, and did or shall continue and abide in the same Service
during the Space of one whole Year, such Service shall be adjudged and deemed a
good Settlement therein.

Apprenticeship a good Settlement.
AND if any Person shall be bound an Apprentice by Indenture, and inhabit in any
City or Township in this Province, such Binding or Inhabiting shall be adjudged
^ good Settlement.

He that bears an Office for a Year, pays Taxes, etc. gains a Settlement.
AND if any Person who hereafter shall come to inhabit in any of the said
Townships or Districts, shall for himself, and on his own Account execute any
public annual Office or Charge in the said Township or District during one
whole Year, or shall be charged with and pay his Share toward the County Taxes
or Levies for the Poor of the said Township or District, then he shall be
adjudged and deemed to have a legal Settlement in the same.

AND that no other Person or Persons whatsoever who shall come into any County,
City, No other Person shall be deemed to have gained a Settlement, unless he
take a Lease of a Tenement of 5 l. per Ann. or give Security.
Township or District within this Province, shall be adjudged to have procured
a legal Settlement in such County, City, Township or District, unless he or
they shall really and bona fide take a Lease of a Tenement or Plantation, of
the yearly Value of Five Pounds, or unless he or they give sufficient Security
for the Discharge of the said County, City, Township and District, to be
allowed by any two Justices of the Peace or Magistrates of such County or City.

PROVIDED ALWAYS, Persons come out of other Counties, etc. if required to
return, etc. not to be deemed to acquire a Settlement by their continuance.
That where any Person or Persons are come into any County, City, Township or
District in this Province, out of any other County, City, Township or District,
or out of any other Place or Province, and being likely to become chargeable to
the Place where they are so come to inhabit; have been or shall be required by
the Overseers of the Poor to return from whence they came, or give Security for
the Discharge of the County, Township or Place where they are come to inhabit;
he, she or they refusing or neglecting so to do, shall not be deemed to have
acquired a legal Settlement by their Continuance in the Place or Places where
they are so come to inhabit; Such Persons refusing to return, etc. two Justices
may, by their Warrant, remove them to the Place where they last settled.
but that upon Complaint made by the Overseers of the Poor of the proper
Township or District, to any one or more of the Justices of Peace or
Magistrates of the proper County or City respectively, where any of the said
Persons (refusing or neglecting to return or give Security, or coming to settle
in any Tenement or Plantation under the said yearly Value of Five Pounds, or
not otherwise obtaining a lawful Settlement, according to the true Meaning of
this Act) shall reside or be found at the Time of such Complaint, it shall and
may be lawful to and for any two Justices of the Peace of the County or City
where any of the said Persons who are likely to be chargeable to the Township
or Place where they reside or shall come to inhabit, by their Warrant, to
remove and convey such Person or Persons to the County, City, Township or Place
where he, she or they were last legally settled, either as Native, Householder,
Sojourner, Apprentice or Servant, unless he or they give sufficient Security
for the Discharge of the said County, City or Township; to be allowed by the
said Justices.

TheParty aggrieved by such Order may appeal to the next Session^.
PROVIDED ALWAYS, That if any Person or Persons shall find, him, her or
themselves aggrieved by any Order or Determination which any of the said
Justices of the Peace or Magistrates shall make in any of the Cases abovesaid,
such Person or Persons shall have Liberty to appeal to the next General
Quarter Sessions of the Peace for the County or City where such Determination
shall (...) made: Who (...) ^^nally determi^^ the sam^, and award (...) etc.
Who upon Hearing of such Appeal shall have (...) Power finally to determine
the same, and to award (...) as the Justices of the Peace at their
Quarter-Session^ (...) Great Britain, by a Statute made in the Eighth and (...)
Year of King William the Third, are empowered and ^^quired to do in such Cases.

TheOverseers whereto any shall be removed, are to receive them, on Penalty,
etc.
AND if any Person be removed by Virtue of this (...) from one County, City,
Township or Place to another (...) Warrant under the Hands and Seals of two
Justice^ of (...) Peace or Magistrates as aforesaid, that the Overseers of
(...) Poor of the Township or District to which the said Perso^^ shall be so
removed are hereby required to receive the (...) Persons: And if any of the
said Overseers shall refuse (...) neglect so to do, he or they so offending,
upon Proo^ thereof by one or more credible Witnesses, upon Oath (...)
Affirmation before any one of the Justices of the Supream-Court of this
Province, shall forfeit for each Offense the Sum of Five Pounds, to the Use of
the Poor of the Township or District from which such Person was removed; to be
le^ied (...) Distress and Sale of the Offender's Goods, by Warrant under the
Hand and Seal of the Justices of the said Supream-Court, which they are hereby
empowered and required (...) make, directed to the Constable of the Township
where such Offender or Offenders dwell, returning the Overp^^^, if any be, to
the Owner or Owners: And for want of ^^^ficient Distress, then the Offender to
be committed to the Goal of the County where he dwells, there to remain wit^out
Bail or Mainprize for the Space of Forty Days.

Persons aggrieved with Judgment of the two Justices may appeal to the
Quarter Sessions, who may determine, etc
PROVIDED ALWAYS, That all such Persons who think themselves aggrieved with any
such Judgment of the said two Justices, may appeal to the next Gene^^l
Quarter-Session^ of the Peace to be held for the County (...) City from which
the said Person was so removed: And th^^ the Appeal against any Order for the
Removal of (...) po^^ Person out of any Township ^or Place shall be had,
prosecuted and determined at the General or Quarter Sessions of the Peace for
the County, City or Place from whence such poor Persons shall be removed, does
lie, and not elsewhere.

AND to the End that the Money raised only for the Relief of such as are
impotent and poor may not be misapplied and consumed by the idle, sturdy and
disorderly ^eggars, BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, Poor
Persons relieved by any County, etc. to (...) a Badge, etc.
That every such Person as from the Twenty-fourth Day of June, in this present
Year (...) T^^usand Seven Hundred and Eighteen, shall be upon the Collection,
and receive Relief of any County, City or Place, and the Wife and Children of
any such Person cohabiting in the same House (such Child only excepted as shall
be by the Overseers of the Poor permitted to live at Home, in order to have the
Care of, and attend an impotent and ^elpless Parent) shall, upon the Shoulder
of the right Sleeve of the upper Garment of every such Person, in an open and
visible Manner, wear such Badge or Mark as is he^^inafter mentioned and
expressed, That is to say, a large Rom^n [P] together with the first Letter of
the Name of the County, City or Place whereof such poor Person is an
Inhabitant, cut either in red or blue Cloth, as by the Overseers of the Poor it
shall be directed and appointed.

AND if any such poor Person shall at any time neglect (...) refuse to wear
such Badge or Mark as aforesaid, Punishment on such poor Persons not wearing a
Badge.
and in Manner aforesaid, it shall and may be lawful for any Justice of the
Peace of the County, City or Place where any ^uch Offense shall be committed,
upon Complaint to him for that Purpose made, to punish every such Offender for
every ^uch Offense, either by ordering of his or her Relief, or (...) Allowance
on the Collection, to be abridged, suspended or withdrawn; or otherwise, by
committing such Of^ender to the House of Correction, there to be whipped and
kept at hard Labor for any Number of Days not exceeding Twenty-one, as to the
said Justice shall seem meet.

AND if any such Overseer of the Poor shall relieve any such poor Person not
having and wearing such Badge or Mark as aforesaid, being thereof convicted, If
the Overseers relieve such as (...) not the said Badge, shall forfe^^, and^.
upon the Oath or Affirmation of one or more credible Witnesses, before any
Justice of the Peace of the County or City where such O^^ence shall be
committed, shall forfeit, for every such Offense the Sum of Twenty Shillings;
to be levied by Distress and Sale of the Goods of every such Offender, by
Warrant under the Hand and Seal of any such Justice* One Moiety thereof to the
Informer, and the other to (...) Poor of the Township or Place where the
Offense shall (...) committed.

CHAP. CCXVIII. An ACT to supply some Omissions in a (...) passed at the last
Sessions of Assembly, h^ld for this Province, entitled, An Act for Raising ^
Duty of Tonnage upon Ships and Vessels.
Exp.

CHAP. CCXIX. An ACT for the better Encouraging the Trade of this Province.
Obsolete.

CHAP. CCXX. An ACT for laying a Duty on Wine, (...) Brandy and Spirits, Cider,
Hops and Flax, i^ported into this Province.
Expired.

CHAP. CCXXI. An ACT concerning Feme-Sole Traders.
WHEREAS it often happens, That Marin^^^ and others, whose Circumstances as
well as V^cations oblige them to go to Sea, leave their Wives in a Way of
Shop-keeping; and such of them (...) are industrious, and take due Care to pay
the Merch^^t^ they gain so much Credit with, as to be well supplied with
Shop-Goods from time to time, whereby they get a competent Maintenance for
themselves and Children, and have been enabled to discharge considerable Debts
left ^npaid by their Husbands at their going away: But some of those Husbands
have so far lost Sight of their Duty to th^^^ Wives and tender Children, that
their Affections are turned to those who in all Probability will put them upon
Me^sures not only to waste what they may get abroad, bu^ misapply such Effects
as they leave in this Province: For Preventing whereof, and to the End that the
Estates belonging to such absent Husbands may be secured for the Maintenance of
their Wives and Children, and the Goods and Effects which such Wives acquire or
are entrusted to ^ell in their Husband's Absence, may be preserved for
Satisfying of those who so entrust them, may it please the Governor that it may
be Enacted, AND BE IT ENACTED by WILLIAM KEITH, Esquire by the King's Royal
Approbation Lieutenant Governor under WILLIAM PENN, Esquire Proprietary and
Governor in chief of the Province of Pennsylvania, etc. by and with the Advice
and Consent of the Freemen of the said Province in General Assembly met, and by
the Authority of the same, That where any Mariners or others are gone or
hereafter shall go to Sea, leaving their Wives at Shop-keeping, Who shall be
adjudged to be Feme-s^le-Traders, and may sue and be sue^.
or to work for their Livelihood at any other Trade in this Province, all such
Wives shall be deemed, adjudged and taken, and are hereby declared to be as
Feme-sole-Traders, and shall have Ability, and are by this Act enabled to sue
and be sued, plead and be impleaded at Law in any Court or Courts of this
Province, during their Husbands natural Lives, without naming their Husbands in
such Suits, Pleas or Actions: Debts being contracted by the Wife, in the
Absence of the Husband, unless for Maintenance of herself and Children,
Execution to be awarded against her Goods and Chattels.
And when Judgments are given against such Wives for any Debts contracted or
Sums of Money due from them since their Husbands left them, Executions shall be
awarded against the Goods and Chattels in the Possession of such Wives, or in
the Hands or Possession of others in trust for them, and not against the Goods
and Chattels of their Husbands; unless it be made appear to the Court where
those Executions are returnable, that such Wives have, out of their separate
Stock or Profit of their Trade, p^id Debts which were contracted by their
Husbands, or laid out Money for the necessary Support and Maintenance of
themselves and Children; then, and in such Case Execution shall be levied upon
the Estate real and personal of ^^ch Husbands, to the Value so paid or laid
out, and no more.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, Sales, etc. ^. Lands
made abroad by absent Husbands are void, unless sufficient Provision ^e made
for, and^.
That if any of the said absent Husbands, being Owner of Lands, Tenements, or
other E^tate in this Province, have ^liened, or hereafter shall give, grant,
mortgage or alienate from his Wife and Children any of his said Lands,
Tenements or Estate, without m^^ing an equivalent Provision for their
Maintenance, in Lieu thereof, every such Gift, Grant, Mortgage or Alienation
shall be deemed, adjudged and taken to be null and void.

The Husband being Shipwrecked may fell so much as to bring him home.
PROVIDED NEVERTHELESS, That if such absent Husband shall happen to suffer
Shipwr^c^ or be by Sickness or other Casualty disabled to maintai^ himself,
then and in such Case, and not otherwise, it shall be lawful for such
distressed Husband to sell or (...) so much of his said Estate as shall be
necessary to (...) him and bring him home again to his Family, any (...) herein
contained to the Contrary notwithstanding.

The Lands of the Husband staying away, or living inAdultery, may be seized and
taken in Execution.
BUT if such absent Husband, having his Health (...) Liberty, stays away so long
from his Wife and Childr^^, without making such Provision for their Maintenance
^^fore or after his going away, till they are like to bec^^^ chargeable to the
Town or Place where they inhabit (...) in case such Husband does or shall live
in Adultery, (...) cohabit unlawfully with another Woman, and refuses (...)
neglects, within seven Years next after his going to (...) departing this
Province, to return to his Wife and (...) with her again, then and in every
such Case the (...), Tenements and Estate belonging to such Husbands, (...) and
are hereby made liable and subject to be seized (...) taken in Execution, to
satisfy any Sum or Sums of (...) which the Wives of such Husbands or Guardians
of (...) Children shall necessarily expend or lay out for their ^^^port and
Maintenance: Which Execution shall be (...) upon Process of Attachment against
such Estate, (...) the absent Husband shall be made Defendant; any Law (...)
Usage to the Contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

CHAP. CCXXII. An ACT for continuing the Duty on N^g^^^ brought into this
Province.
Expired.

CHAP. CCXXIII. An ACT for Raising a (...) upon Tonnage of Ships and Vessels.
Expired.

CHAP. CCXXIV. An ACT for Erecting of Houses of Correction and Workhouses in
the respective Counties of this Province.
WHEREAS the Proprietary, and first Adventurers, in their Principal Model of
this Government, Preamble.
proposed, That for Crimes inferior to Murder, the Punishment might be by Way
of Restriction, Fine, Imprisonment, and such like; and where the Offender
proved not of Ability to make such Satisfaction, then he should be kept in
Prison or House of Correction at hard Labor: But no effectual Care has been
yet taken to erect such Houses; by Reason whereof many Evildoers e^cape
unpunished, and Servants, who, for Neglect and Abuses, should be kept to Work
in such Houses, are become incor^igible: Therefore may it please the Governor
that it may be Enacted, AND BE IT ENACTED by WILLIAM KEITH, Esquire by the Royal
Approbation Deputy-Lieutenant and Governor under WILLIAM ^ENN, Esquire Proprietary
and Governor in chief of the Province of Pennsylvania, etc. by and with the
Advice and Consent of the Freemen of the said Province in General Assembly met,
and by the Authority of the same, That from and after the First Day of May,
Justices of the Peace at the Quarter Sessions have Power to make Orders for
Building of Houses of Correction, etc.
which will be in the Year of our LORD, One Thousand Seven Hundred and
Eighteen, from time to time, it shall and may be lawful to and for the Justices
of the Peace of the City of Philadelphia, i^ Conjunction with the Justices of
the Peace of the County of Philadelphia, and for the Justices of the Peace of
other respective Counties of this Province, assembled at any Quarter Sessions
of the Peace within the same respective Counties, or major Part of them, to set
down and make Orders for Building, Erecting, or Causing to be built and erected
or provided, one or more Houses of Correction and Workhouses, with convenient
Back-sides or Yards thereunto adjoining, in some convenient Places within their
several Counties or Towns corporate: For the Doing and Performing whereof, and
for the providing Stocks of Money, Goods, and all other Things necessary for
the same, all such Orders as the said Justices, or the major Part of them,
shall, from time to time, take, reform or set down in any of the said
Quarter Sessions, for Erecting or Providing such Houses, Raising the said
Stocks, and Governing the same, as also for the Correcting and Punishment of
Offenders to be committed there, shall be of full Force, and be duly performed
and put in Execution. Their Use.
Which said Houses shall be purchased, conveyed or assured unto such Person or
Persons as by the Justices of the Peace, or the major Part of them, in the
Quarter Sessions of the Peace, to be holde^ within every County of this
Province, upon Trust, to the the Intent the same shall be used and employed for
the Keeping, Correcting and Setting to Work of all Rogues, Vagabonds, sturdy
Beggars, and idle and disorderly Persons, who, by the Laws and Usage of Great
Britain, or by the Laws of this Province, are to be kept, corrected or set at
Work, in such Houses and Backsides.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, The Time limited for
the Building the said Houses in each of said Counties.
That within the Space of three Years, after the Twenty-fifth Day of March, in
the Year of our LORD, One Thousand Seven Hundred and Eighteen, a House of
Correction or Workhouse shall be built in the City of Philadelphia, at the
Charge of the said City and County of Philadelphia; and a House of Correction
or Workhouse shall be built in Chester, at the Charge of the the County of
Chester; and another House of Correction or Workhouse shall be built in
Bristol, at the Charge of the County of Bucks.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, The Officers to be
elected and chosen.
That by the major Part of the Justices of the Peace for the said City and
County of Philadelphia, and for the Counties of Chester and Bucks respectively,
in their respective Quarter Sessions assembled, there shall be elected and
chosen out of the most able and honest Inhabitants and Freeholders of the said
City and County of Philadelphia, and of the said Counties of Chester and Bucks,
respectively, a President, a Treasurer and Assistants for the Houses of
Correction, Workhouse or Workhouses in the said City and respective Counties;
and that upon the Vacancy, by Death or otherwise, of any of the said
Presidents, Treasurers or Assistants in the said respective Counties, the Power
to elect others in their Room^ shall be in the major Part of the respective
Justices of the Peace, who in their General Quarter Sessions, from time to
time, shall accordingly supply vacant Places.

Who shall be accountable yearly, etc.
AND the said President, Treasurer and Assistants for the Time being, shall be
accountable for all their Disbursment^ and other Proceedings, to the said
Justices or the major Part of them, who, at every Quarter Sessions, are hereby
directed and required to examine and inspect the Accounts and all other
Proceedings of the said President, Treasurer and Assistants; and in case any
notorious Neglect, Imbezzlement or Breach of Trust, shall at any time appear to
the Justices against all or any one of the said Officers by them appointed as
aforesaid, then the said Justices are hereby empowered to dismiss and displace
all such Offenders, and to elect others in their Room.

AND that nothing may be wanting to render effectual the good Intent of this
Act in all its Parts, may it please the Governor to condescend that it may be
further Enacted, AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That the
said President, And are made Bodies politic and corporate in Law; and have a
perpetual Succession; may sue and be sued, etc and may receive Lands to the
V^lue 300 l. per Ann. etc.
Treasurer and Assistants for the Time being, respectively, shall, forever
hereafter, in Name and Fact, be Bodies politic and corporate in Law, to all
Intents and Purposes; and shall have a perpetual Succession, and may sue or be
sued, and plead or be impleaded, by the Name of the President, Treasurer and
Assistants for the Poor of the said respective Counties, in all Courts of
Judicature within this Province, and by that Name every of the said
Corporations shall and may purchase or receive any Lands, Tenements or
Hereditaments, not exceeding the yearly Value of Three Hundred Pounds per
Annum, of the Gift, Alienation or Devise of any Person or Persons, who are
hereby enabled to transfer and grant the same, and any Goods and Chattel^
whatsoever into or for the Use and Benefit of the Corporations aforesaid.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That the said President,
And shall give punctual and constant Attendance, to receive and execute all
Orders, etc.
Treasurer and Assistants, or one of them, at least, in each County aforesaid,
respectively, shall give punctual and constant Attendance at the Workhouses
and Houses of Correction to which they respectively belong, there to receive
and execute the Orders given by the Commitments which shall happen to be made
from time to time by any Justice of the Peace, or other Magistrate, having
legal Power to commit and send to the said Workhouses all Vagabonds, unruly
Servants, and other idle or disorderly Persons, and the said Officers, in each
County respectively, shall make Return to every Court of Quarter Sessions,
duly, of their Proceedings in the Premises.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, Upon their certifying
the Want of Stock* etc the said Justices may cause the same to be raised as
County-Levies, to the Value of, etc.
That when the President, Treasurer and Assistants of any of the said
Corporations shall certify, under their Hands and Seals, their Want either of
present Stock for the Beginning of the Work, or for Supply thereof for the
Future, and what Sum or Sums of Money they shall think fit for the same, to the
Justices of the Peace of the said respective Counties, assembled in their
Quarter Sessions; the said Justices are hereby required from time to time to
set down and ascertain such Sum and Sum^ of Money as they shall deem competent
for the Purposes aforesaid, and to cause the same to be raised as County Rates
are usually levied, so that they do not exceed, for the City and County of
Philadelphia, the yearly Value of Four Hundred Pounds; for the County of
Chester, the yearly Value of Two Hundred Pounds; and for the County (...)
Bucks, the yearly Value of One Hundred Pounds.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, Under-Office^s to be
chosen, etc. who are to be Aiding and Assisting, etc.
That the President, Treasurer and Assistants of any of the said Corporations,
or Houses of Correction or Workhouses, are hereby empowered (...) choose and
entertain all such Officers as shall be needful to be employed in and about the
Premises, and them, or any of them to remove as they shall see cause, and upon
such Removal or Death of any of them, to choose others, and to make them
reasonable Allowances for their Services out ^f the said Stock; and that all
Sheriffs, Constables, and all other Officers and Ministers of Justice, shall be
Aiding and Assisting to the said Corporation or Corporations, and to all such
Officers as shall be employed by them in the Execution and Performance of the
said Service.

CHAP. CCXXV. An ACT for Erecting a Ferry to the Landing at or near the Land
late of Daniel Cooper, deceased, and also to Gloucester, in the
Western-Division of New Jersey.
Supplied.

CHAP. CCXXVI. An ACT for establishing a Ferry over Delaware, at the Falls.
Expired.

CHAP. CCXXVII. An ACT for the Continuing the Ferry from Bristol, in the County
of Bucks, to Burlington, in the Western-Division of the Province of New Jersey.
Expired.

CHAP. CCXXVIII. An ACT impowering the Justices to settle the Prices of Liquors
in Publick-Houses, and Provender for Horses in Publick-Stables.
WHEREAS it has been the Practice of Tavern-keepers, Ale-House-keepers and
Innholders, to exact excessive Rates for their Wine, Beer, Cider and other
Liquors, and also Provender for Horses, without Regard to the Plenty and
Cheapness thereof: BE IT THEREFORE ENACTED by WILLIAM KEITH, Esquire by an^ with
the King's Royal Approbation Deputy-Lieutenant and Governor under WILLIAM PENN,
Esquire Proprietary and Governor in chief of the Province of Pennsylvania, etc. by
and with the Advice and Consent of the Freemen of the said Province in General
Assembly met, and by the Authority of the same, That the Justices of the Peace
of the respective Counties of this Province, as also the Mayor, Who are
appointed by this Act to set Prices on Liquors, etc. the Method how and when.
Recorder and Aldermen of the City of Philadelphia, shall have full Power, four
Times in the Year, to wit, at the General-Sessions of the Peace held for the
said Counties and City respectively, to set such reasonable Prices on all
Liquors retailed in Publick-Houses, and Provender for Horses in Publick-Stables
from time to time as they shall see fit: Which Prices shall be proclaimed by
the Crier at the Conclusion of their respective Sessions, and fixed upon the
Court-Houses Doors, for public View.

AND if any public Ale-house-keeper, Tavern-keeper, Penalties on offending
against their Orders.
Innholder or public Stable-keeper, exceed the Prices so set by the Justices,
and be convict thereof, by Oath or Affirmation of one or more Witnesses, before
one or more Justices of the Peace of the respective Counties of this Province
or City of Philadelphia, every such Offender shall, for the first Offense, be
fined in any Sum not exceeding Twenty Shillings, and for the second Offense
Forty Shillings, and give Security for their good Behavior; and for the third
Offense, upon Conviction in the Quarter Sessions of the respective Counties or
City of Philadelphia, Five Pounds, and not be recommended to keep a
Publick-House or T^vern for the Space of three Years after such Conviction.

An ACT passed in the Fifth Year of His Majesty's Reign, in April, One Thousand
Seven Hundred and Nineteen, viz.
CHAP. CCXXIX. An ACT laying an Excise or Duty on all Wine, Rum, Brandy, and
other Spirits, retailed in this Province.
Expired.

ANNO REGNI GEORG II REGIS SEPTIMO.
At a GENERAL ASSEMBLY begun at Philadelphia, in the Province of Pennsylvania,
the Fourteenth Day of October, in the Seventh Year of the Reign of our
Sovereign Lord GEORGE, King of Great Britain, etc. Annoque Domini One Thousand
Seven Hundred and Twenty, and continued by Adjournments until the Twenty-fifth
Day of February following: On which Day the following ACTS were passed by
WILLIAM KEITH, Esquire Lieutenant Governor under WILLIAM PENN, Esquire absolute
Proprietary and Governor in chief of the said Province of Pennsylvania, etc.
That is to say,
CHAP. CCXXX. An ACT for continuing several Acts therein mentioned, laying a
Duty on Wine, Rum, Brandy, Spirits, Cider, Hops and Flax, Negroes and Vessels,
until the Fourteenth Day of May, in the Year 1722.
Expired.

CHAP. CCXXXI. An ACT for Erecting and Maintaining of Pownds.
Repealed.

CHAP. CCXXXII. An ACT for Regulating Party-Walls, Buildings and
Partition-Fences in the City of Philadelphia.
WHEREAS diverse Inconveniences, Irregularities and Controversies have lately
been, and still frequently happen, in Relation to Party-Walls and laying the
Foundation of Buildings in the City of Philadelphia: For the Remedying whereof
for the Future, BE IT ENACTED by WILLIAM KEITH, Esquire by the Royal Approbation
Deputy-Lieutenant and Governor under WILLIAM PENN, Esquire Proprietary and Governor
in chief of the Province of Pennsylvania, etc. by and with the Advice and
Consent of the Freemen of the said Province in General Assembly met, and by the
Authority of the same, No Foundation of any Building to be laid by any Person
before applying to the Regulators; who are to be appointed by the Mayor, etc.
That no Person or Persons, Builder or Builders whatsoever shall, from and
after the Twenty-fifth Day of March, One Thousand Seven Hundred and Twenty-one,
lay the Foundation of any Building or Party-Wall within the said City, before
they have applied themselves to the Surveyors or Regulators, to be appointed by
the Mayor and Commonalty of the said City in their Common Council; who are
hereby empowered to appoint two or more discreet and skilful Persons for that
Purpose.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That the said Surveyors
or Regulators, Their Power.
upon Application to them made, shall have full Power and Authority to enter
upon the Land of any Person or Persons in order to set out the Foundations, and
regulate the Walls to be built between Party and Party, as to the Breadth or
Thickness thereof: Which Foundation shall be laid equally upon the Lands of the
Persons between whom such Party-Wall is to be made; and the first Builder shall
be reimbursed one Moiety of the Charge of such Party-Wall, or for so much
thereof as the next Builder shall have occasion to make use of before such next
Builder shall anyways use or break into the said Wall. The Charge or Value
thereof to be set by the said Regulators.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, Penalty on laying a
Foundation without being viewed, etc.
That if any Person or Persons shall, of their own Authority, presume to begin
or lay the Foundation of any Party-Wall before the same be viewed and directed
by the said Regulators, or some two of them, every such Person, as well
Imployer as Master Builder, shall forfeit the Sum of Five Pounds* one Half to
the Prosecutor or Informer, and the other Half to the public Use and Benefit
of the said City; to be recovered by Bill, Plaint or Information in the Court
of Common Pleas, to be held for the City and County of Philadelphia, wherein no
Protection or Wager of Law shall be allowed, nor any more than one Imparlance.

PROVIDED ALWAYS, AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, Persons
finding themselves aggrieved, etc. may apply to the Mayor, etc.
That if either Party between whom such Foundation or Party-Wall is to be made,
shall find themselves anyways aggrieved, by Order or Direction of the said
Regulators, he or they may appeal to the Mayor and Commonalty of the said City
at their next Common Council, who shall finally adjust and settle the same;
which shall conclude and bind all Parties; the Costs whereof to be paid as the
Mayor and Commonalty shall direct and appoint.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That the said Regulators
or Surveyors, attending the said Service, The Regulators Reward.
for their Pains and Trouble in and about the Premises, shall be paid by the
Party or Parties concerned in such Foundation or Erecting such Party-Wall, the
Sum of Three Shillings each.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That the Surveyors or
Regulators, or any two of them, Who have Power to regulate Partiti^on Fences,
and
shall have full Power to regulate Partition-Fences within the said City; and
where the adjoining Parties do improve or enclose their Lots, such Fences shall
be made in the Manner generally used, and kept in good Repair, at the equal
Cost of the Parties, so that the Price for Making exceed not Forty Shillings
for every Hundred Feet; unless the Owners or Possessors between whom such Fence
is or shall be erected do agree otherwise.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That if either Party
between whom such Partition-Fence is or shall be made, shall neglect or refuse
to pay his Part or Moiety for the Repairing or Setting up of such
Partition-Fence as aforesaid, Action at Law may be had against the Party
refusing to repair, etc.
that then the Party at whose Cost the same was so repaired or set up, may have
either his Action at Law, or have the same determined as in Cases of Debts
under Forty Shillings, as the Case may require.

CHAP. CCXXXIII. An ACT for the Trial and Punishment of Larceny under Five
Shillings.
Preamble.
WHEREAS small or Petty-Larcenies are frequently committed within this Province,
by Persons unable to maintain themselves in Prison till Prosecution can be
made, or to pay the Costs of such Prosecution, or to make such Restitution and
Forfeiture, upon Conviction, as by Law is now required; by Mean^ whereof a
public Charge is created, with many other great Inconveniences: For the
better preventing whereof, BE IT THEREFORE ENACTED by WILLIAM KEITH, Esquire by the
King's Royal Approbation Deputy-Lieutenant and Governor under WILLIAM PENN, Esquire
Proprietary and Governor in chief of the Province of Pennsylvania, etc. by and
with the Advice and Consent of the Freemen of the said Province in General
Assembly met, and by the Authority of the same, That if any Person or Persons,
Punishment, etc. on any Person stealing under the Value of 5 ^.
from and after the Publication hereof, shall be convicted, either by his, her
or their own Confession, or the Testimony of other credible Evidence, before
any two Magistrates of the City of Philadelphia, or before any two Justices of
the Peace in their respective Counties within thisProvince, of having
feloniously stolen any Money, Goods or Chattels, the same being under the Value
of Five Shillings, such Person shall have Judgment to be immediately and
publicly whipped upon his or her bare Back not exceeding Fifteen Lashes, or be
fined, for the first Offense, at the Discretion of the said Magistrates, in any
Sum not exceeding Twenty Shillings, and to make Restitution, if able, to the
Party wronged; and shall also pay the Charge of the Prosecution and Whipping,
or shall be sent to the Workhouse, to be kept at hard Labor: And for Want of
such Workhouse, to be committed to Prison for such Charges, for any Time not
exceeding twelve Days; any Act of this Government to the Contrary
notwithstanding.

PROVIDED ALWAYS, AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That if
the Person or Persons charged with such Larcenies be free, If Security be given
for Appearance, and they request to be tried at the General-Sessions, it shall
be granted.
and shall request to be tried at the General-Sessions or Court of Record, to
be held for the said City or Counties respectively, the same shall be granted
by the said Magistrates, he or they giving Security for their Appearance to
answer, or the Person so appealing shall be committed, as usual in such Cases.
But if the Person charged with such Larcenies be a Servant, he or she shall not
have any Appeal, unless the Master, Mistress or Friend of such Servant shall
become Security for his or her Appearance at the next Court, as is usual in
such Cases.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, Fair Records of
Proceedings herein to be kept, etc.
That one or more of the Magistrates, who shall give Judgment by Virtue of this
Act, shall keep fair Records of his or their Proceedings therein.

ANNO REGNI GEORG II REGIS OCTAVO.
At a GENERAL ASSEMBLY begun at Philadelphia, the Fourteenth Day of October, in
the Seventh Year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord GEORGE, King of Great
Britain, etc. Annoque Domini One Thousand Seven Hundred and Twenty, and
continued by Adjournments until the Twenty-fifth Day of February following; and
from thence, by Adjournments, till the Twenty-sixth Day of August One Thousand
Seven Hundred and Twenty-one, in the Eighth Year of His said Majesty's Reign:
On which Day the following ACTS were passed by WILLIAM KEITH, Bart. Lieutenant
Governor under WILLIAM PENN, Esquire absolute Proprietary and Governor in chief of
the Province of Pennsylvania, etc. That is to say,
CHAP. CCXXXIV. A Supplementary ACT to a Law of this Province, See before Caps
163.
entitled, An Act that no Publick-House or Inn within this Province be kept
without License.
WHEREAS diverse Persons within this Province, Preamble.
under Color of retailing Rum and other strong Liquors without Doors, for the
Convenience and Supply of the Inhabitants in their Families; and for that End
having obtained Permits from the Collector of the Excise, do fell in or about
their Houses Drams and strong Liquors by small Measures, as well to Servants as
others, contrary to the true Intent and Meaning of the Law^ of this Province.
AND WHEREAS diverse Innholders or Tavern-keepers do ^^equently entertain and
suffer Minors and Servants to be Tippling in their Houses: All which being to
the great Damage of the Inhabitants, and manifestly tending to the Corrupting
of Youth, and Promoting Vice and Immorality: For preventing thereof, BE IT
ENACTED by Sir WILLIAM K^ITH, Bart. by the King's Royal Approbation
Deputy-Lieutenant and Governor under WILLIAM PENN, Esquire Proprietary and Governor
in chief of the Province of Pennsylvania, etc. by and with the Advice and
Consent of the Freemen of the said Province in General Assembly met, and by the
Authori^y of the same, No Recommendation to issued, etc. before Security given,
etc.
That no Recommendation shall be issued by the Justices of the respective
Counties of this Province, or the City of Philadelphia, in order to obtain
License from the Governor for the Keeping any Tavern or Publick-House, as
directed by an Act of this Province, entitled, An Act that no Publick-House or
Inn within this Province be kept without License, before the Person or Persons
desiring such Recommendation shall become bound in the Prothonotary's-Office
unto the Governor for the Time being, with Security, if required, in any Sum
not exceeding One Hundred Pounds, That he or she, on obtaining such License,
shall, at all Times b^ of good Behavior, and observe all the Law^ and
Ordinances which are and shall be made relating to Innkeepers or Taverners
within this Province.

AND whosoever shall keep a Tavern, Inn, or public House of Entertainment
before he or she has given Bond as aforesaid, such Person shall suffer the
same Penalty as if the same had been done without License.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, No Persons but those
qualifi^d can retail Liquors.
That no Person or Persons within this Province, other than such who are or
shall be qualified so to do by the above-recited Law, shall presume presume, by
Virtue of any Permit from the Collector of the Excise, or under any other
Color or Pretense whatsoever, to sell, barter with, or deliver any Wine, Rum,
Brandy or other Spirits, Beer, Cider, or any mixed or strong Liquors, which
shall be used or drank within their Houses, Yards or Sheds, or which shall be,
with their Knowledge, Privity or Consent, used or drank in any Shelter, Places
or Woods near or adjacent to them, by Companies of Negroes, Servants or others;
or to retail or sell to any Person or Persons whatsoever any Rum, Brandy, or
other Spirits, by less Quantity or Measure than one Quart; nor any Wine by any
less Quantity or Measure than one Gallon; nor any Beer, Ale or Cider by any
less Quantity than two Gallons: And the same Liquors respectively delivered to
one Person, and at one Time, without any Collusion or Fraud contrary to the
true Intent and Meaning of this Act, under the same Penalty mentioned in the
said recited Act for keeping Publick-House, or selling Liquors without License.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That no Person or
Persons keeping a Publick-House or Inn, Tavern keepers not to trust above the
Value of ^0 ^.
shall trust or give Credit to any Person whatsoever for Liquors, or any other
Inn- or Tavern-Reckonings in any Sum exceeding Twenty Shillings, under the
Penalty of Forfeiti^g and Losing any such Debt.

AND if any Innholder or Keeper of a Publick-House, or any Retailers of Liquors
within this Province shall receive, harbor, Minors not to be trusted.
entertain or trust any Minor, under the Age of Twenty-one Years, or any
Servant, knowing them to be such, or after having been cautioned or warned to
the Contrary by the Parent, Guardian, Master or Mistress of such Minor or
Servant, in the Presence of one or more credible Witness or Witnesses, such
Innholder, Keeper of Publick-House or Retailer of Liquors so offending shall,
for the first or second Offense, being duly convicted thereof, forfeit and pay
the Sum of Twenty Shillings for every such Offense, over and above the Loss and
Forfeiture of any Debt, such Minor or Servant shall ^r may contract for Liquors
or Entertainment: And, upon Conviction, for the third Offense, the License
obtained by such Offender is hereby declared null and void, and the Person so
repeatedly offending shall forfeit and pay the Sum of Five Pounds, and be
forever after incapable of keeping a Publick-House or Inn within this Province.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That no Person
whatsoever, within this Province, Forfeitures on ha^bou^ing o^ furnishing
Slaves ^ith Liquors.
shall presume by any Means to furnish, supply or sell to any Negro or Indian
Servants any Rum, Brandy, Spirits, or any other strong Liquors whatsoever,
mixed or unmixed, either within or without Doors, or shall receive, harbor or
entertain any Negroe or Indian Servant in or about their Houses, without
special License had and obtained, under the Hand of the Master or Mistress of
such Negroe or Indian Servant respectively, under Penalty of Forfeiting and
Paying, for the first Offense, Twenty Shillings, and for the Second, and every
Offense after, Thirty Shillings; to be recovered before any one Justice of the
Peace of the County where the Offense is committed, upon Proof of one or more
credible Witness or Witnesses, or upon the View of any Magistrate within the
respective Counties of this Province where the Fact shall be committed.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, Any Person Suing for a
Tavern Debt above 20 ^. to be nonsuited, and p^y double Costs.
That if any Person or Persons keeping a Publick-House or Inn, or retailing
Liquors as aforesaid in this Province shall trust or credit any Person for
Liquors retailed, or other Expenses, above Twenty Shillings as aforesaid, or
shall presume to sue any such Person, or shall arrest or attach any Servant for
any Debt contracted for Liquors or Accomodations, knowing such Person to be a
Servant, and after they have been warned or cautioned not to entertain such
Servant as aforesaid, all such Actions and Suits shall abate, and the Person
sued, and the Master or Mistress, in Behalf of such Servant, or the said
Servants themselves, being sued as aforesaid, shall and may plead this Act in
Bar; and the Plaintiff in such Suit shall become Nonsuit and pay double Charges.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, Fines how to be levied
and disposed of.
That the several Fines imposed by this Act shall be levied by Execution on the
Offender'^ Goods, or his or her Person be committed to the County-Goal, until
the same be paid, upon Conviction of the Party before the Mayor or Recorder of
the City of Philadelphia, for Offenses against this Act committed in the City
of Philadelphia; and before any one or more of the Magistrates of the County,
for Offenses committed in the respective Counties: And that all Fines and
Forfeitures recovered by Virtue of this Act, which are not otherwise
appropriated by any former Act, shall be applied in Manner following, That is
to say, The one Moiety shall be paid to the Father, Mother, Guardian, Master or
Mistress of the Minor or Servant entertained as aforesaid, or to the said
Servant, as the Magistrate shall direct; and the other Moiety shall be paid to
the Overseers of the Poor of the City and County where the Offense is
committed, for the Use of the Poor of the said City and County.

CHAP. CCXXXV. An ACT for preventing Accidents that may happen by Fire. See
Geo. II. Chap* 314.

BE IT ENACTED by Sir WILLIAM K^ITH, Bart. Governor of the Province of
Pennsylvania, etc. by and with the Advice and Consent of the Freemen of the
said Province in General Assembly met, and by the Authority of the same, That
if any Master, or other Person whatsoever, Forfeiture of Fi^^ Pounds on
Breaming any Vessel in P^il^^^lphia, except in a Place as shall be appointed,
etc.
shall bream any Ship, Sloop or other Vessel with blazing Fire, or cause the
same to be done in any of the Docks, or at any of the Wharffs within the Limits
of the City of Philadelphia, except in such Place or Places as shall from time
to time be appointed for that Service by the Mayor and Commonalty of the said
City: And if any Master, or other Person whatsoever, shall heat, or cause to be
heated, with blazing Fire, any Pitch, Tar, Turpentine, Rosin, Oil, Tallow, or
any other sulphurous Matter, for the Use of any Ship or Vessel, other than such
as shall be on the Stocks, except in such Places as shall be from time to time
appointed as aforesaid; every such Master, or other Person whatsoever, doing or
causing the same to be done, being convict thereof by one or more credible
Witnesses, before the Mayor and Recorder, or any two Magistrates of the said
City, shall forfeit and pay the Sum of Five Pounds for every such Offense,
together with Costs of Prosecution; one Half whereof for the Use of the Person
or Persons who shall sue or prosecute for the same, and the other Half to be
paid to the City-Treasurer for the Use of the said City.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, No Fire to be kept on
board any Vessel after 8 at Night.
That if any Master or other Person whatsoever, shall suffer any Fire to be
kept (Candle excepted) after the Hour of Eight in the Evening, on board any
Ship or other Vessel lying in any of the Docks, or at any of the Wharffs
aforesaid, or in the Road before the said City, being convict thereof as
aforesaid, shall, for every such Offense, forfeit and pay the Sum of Ten
Shillings, for the Uses aforesaid.

PROVIDED ALWAYS, The Mayor of Philadelphia may permit a Fire on board a Vessel
at Night.
That it shall and may be lawful for the Mayor of the City of Philadelphia for
the Time being, by License under his Hand, to permit the Master of any Vessel,
lying in the Road of Philadelphia aforesaid, to use Fire on board such Ship or
Vessel after the Hour of Eight aforesaid, in Case of Sickness, or any other
extraordinary Occasion; any thing in this Act to the Contrary notwithstanding.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, Forfeiture on fi^ing of
Chimn^^s.
That if any Person or Persons within the City of Philadelphia, or Towns of
Chester, Bristol, Germantown, Darby or Chichester, shall set on Fire their
Chimnies to cleanse them, or shall suffer them, or any of them to take Fire and
blaze out at the Top, and be duly convicted thereof, by one credible Witness,
before any one Justice of the Peace of the said City or Counties, such Person
or Persons shall forfeit and pay, for every such Offense, Twenty Shillings, for
the Use of the said City or Towns respectively where such Offense shall happen.
And the first Paragraph of an Act of Assembly of this Province, imposing a Fine
of Forty Shillings upon every Person that shall fi^e or suffer their Chimnies
to be fired, shall and is hereby declared to be repealed and made void.

AND WHEREAS much Mischief may happen by Shooting of Guns, throwing, casting
and firing of Squibs, Serpents, Rockets, and other Fireworks within the City
of Philadelphia, if not speedily prevented: BE IT THEREFORE ENACTED by the
Authority aforesaid, That if any Person or Persons, of what Sex, Age, Degree or
Quality soever, from and after Publication hereof, Fire Works not to be sold or
fired in Philadelphia, without the Governor's Permission.
shall fire any Gun, or other Firearms, or shall make, or cause to be made, or
sell, or utter, or offer to expose to Sale any Squibs, Rockets, or other
Fireworks, or shall cast, throw, or fire any Squibs, Rockets, or other
Fireworks, within the City of Philadelphia, without the Governor's special
License for the same, of which License due Notice shall first be given to the
Mayor of the said City, such Person or Persons so offending, and being thereof
convicted before any one Justice of the Peace of the said City, either by
Confession of the Party so offending, or by the View of any of the said
Justices, or by the Oath or Affirmation of one or more Witnesses, shall, for
every such Offense, forfeit and pay the Sum of Five Shillings; one Half to the
Use of the Poor of the said City, and the other Half to the Use of him or them
who shall prosecute and cause such Offender to be as aforesaid convicted: Which
Forfeitures shall be levied by Distress and Sale of the Offenders Goods as
aforesaid; and for Want of such Distress, if the Offender refuse to pay the
said Forfeiture, he shall be committed to the Prison for every such Offense,
the Space of two Days, without Bail or Mainprize.

Conviction to be made in 10 Days. Punishment on a Slave offending herein.
PROVIDED, That such Convicton be ma^^ within ten Days after such Offense
committed. AND if such Offender be a Negroe or Indian Slave, she shall, instead
of Imprisonment, be publicly whipped at the Discretion of the Magistrate.

CHAP. CCXXXVI. An ACT to prevent the Killing of Deer out of Season, See a
Suppl^men^ to this Act 4 Geo. II. Chap 316.
and against Carrying of Guns and Hunting by Persons not qualified.
BE IT ENACTED by WILLIAM KEITH, Bart. Governor of the Province of
Pennsylvania, etc. by and with the Advice and Consent of the Freemen of the
said Province in General Assembly met, and by the Authority of the same, The
Time which is fi^'d for killing Deer.
That if any Person or Persons, after the Publication hereof, shall kill or
destroy any Buck, Do, Fawn, or any other Sort of Deer whatsoever, at any other
Time or Season except only betwixt the First Day of July, and first Day of
January, he shall forfeit and pay for every such Buck, Do, Fawn, or other Deer
so one killed or destroyed as aforesaid, the Sum of Twenty Shillings; one Half
thereof to the Poor of the Township where the Offense is committed, and the
other Half to him who shall inform or sue for the same, before any Justice of
the Peace of this Province, who is hereby empowered and authorized to hear and
determine the same, and to convict the Offender, by the Oath or Affirmation of
one or more Witnesses.

PROVIDED, Conviction to be made in 2 Months.
That such Conviction be made within two Months after such Offense committed.

AND for the better Convicting of Offenders against this Act, Selling green
Deer-Skins or Venison, etc. deemed guilty of this Offense.
BE IT FARTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That every Person in whose
Custody shall be found, or who shall expose to Sale any green Deer Skins, fresh
Venison, or Deer's Flesh, at any other Time of the Year than what is before
excepted, and shall be convicted thereof as aforesaid; shall be deemed guilty
of the said Offense: And that the same green Deer Skins, fresh Venison or
Deer's Flesh so found as aforesaid shall be held to be good Evidence in the
Cases aforesaid.

PROVIDED ALWAYS, Free native Indians excepted.
That nothing contained in this Act shall be deemed or construed to extend to
any free native Indians carrying Guns, Hunting, Killing, and having in their
Custody any Skins or Deer's Flesh for their own Use; any thing in this Act to
the Contrary notwithstanding.

AND WHEREAS diverse Abuses, Damages and Inconveniences have arose by Persons
carrying Guns and presuming to hunt on other People's Lands: For Remedy whereof
for the Future, BE IT ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, None to hunt in
enclosed Lands, etc. on Penalty, etc.
That if any Person or Persons shall presume, at any time after the Sixteenth
Day of November, in this present Year One Thousand Seven Hundred and
Twenty-one, to carry any Gun or hunt on any improved or enclosed Lands of any
Plantation, other than his own, unless he have License or Permission from the
Owner of such Lands or Plantation, and shall be thereof convicted, either upon
View of any Justice of the Peace within this Province, or by the Oath or
Affirmation of any one or more Witnesses, before any Justice of the Peace, he
shall, for every such Offense forfeit the Sum of Ten Shillings. None to hunt in
open Woods except those qualified, on Penalty, etc
And if any Person whatsoever, who is not Owner of Fifty Acres of Land, and
otherwise qualified in the same Manner as Persons are or ought to be by the
Laws of this Province for Electing of Members to serve in Assembly, shall, at
any Time after the said Sixteenth Day of November, carry any Gun, or hunt in
the Woods or uninclosed Lands, without License or Permission obtained from the
Owner or Owners of such Lands, and shall be thereof convicted in Manner
aforesaid, such Offender shall forfeit and pay the Sum of Five Shillings for
every such Offense.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, Penalty on Killing any
Pidgeon in Philadelphia.
That no Person whatsoever shall presume to shoot at or kill with a Fire-Arm,
any Pidgeon, Dove, Patridge, or other Fowl in the open Streets of the City of
Philadelphia, or in the Gardens, Orchards and Enclosures adjoining upon and
belonging to any of the Dwelling-Houses within the Limits of the said City,
upon the Forfeiture of Five Shillings for every such Offense, to be convicted
in Manner aforesaid.

How the Forfeitures are to be levied.
ALL which Penalties and Forfeitures shall go, one Moiety to the Informer, and
the other to the Poor of the Township where such Offense is committed: But if
convicted upon View of a Justice of the Peace, the whole Forfeiture shall be to
the Use of the Poor. And if the Offender refuse to pay, the same shall be
levied by Distress and Sale of the Offender's Goods, by Warrant under the Hand
and Seal of the Justice before whom such Offender shall be convicted, returning
the Overplus, if any be, the Charge (...) Distraining being first deducted: And
for Want of such Distress he shall be committed to Prison, where the Forfeiture
is Twenty Shillings, for the Space of ten Days; and, where the Forfeiture is
Ten Shillings, for the Space of five Days; and, if the Forfeiture be Five
Shillings, for the Space of two Days, without Bail or Mainprize.

CHAP. CCXXXVI. An ACT for the well Tanning and Currying of Leather, and
Regulating of Cordwainers, and other Artificers using and occupying Leather
within this Province.
WHEREAS very great Abuses have been committed by Tanners, Curriers, and other
Persons Using and Working of Leather within this Government; and the Prices of
Leather become very exorbitant and burdensome to the People of this Province:
To the intent therefore that a reasonable and indifferent Course, for the true
and well Tanning, Currying and Working of Leather, may be from henceforth
established and appointed, and yet the Persons using the several Crafts and
Mysteries aforesaid may not be more strictly bound and limited than the
necessary Regard of the Welfare and general Commodity of all his Majesty's
Subjects within the said Province requires; BE IT ENACTED by Sir WILLIAM
KEITH, Bart. Governor of the Province of Pennsylvania, etc. by and with the
Advice and Consent of the Freemen of the said Province in General Assembly met,
and by the Authority of the same, Leather impo^ted into this Province
insufficiently tanned, unless Security be given to export the same unwrought,
shall be forfeited.
That from and after the Twenty-f^^th Day of November next, in this present
Year of our LORD One Thousand Seven Hundred and Twenty-one, if any Person or
Persons using or which shall use the Mystery or Faculty of Tanning, or any
Person or Persons importing, or who shall import any Leather into this
Province, shall at any Time or Times hereafter offer or put to Sale any kind of
Leather which shall be insufficiently and not thoroughly tanned, so that the
same, by the Triers of Leather, lawfully appointed by Virtue of this present
Act, for the Time being, shall be found insufficiently and not thoroughly
tanned, that then all and every such Person and Persons so offending, shall
forfeit such Leather as shall be found insufficiently and not thoroughly
tanned, unless the Party importing the same will give Security to the Triers to
be appointed by Virtue of this Act, to export the said Leather (so imported and
being insufficiently tanned) without Working, or Manufacturing, or causing the
same to be wrought or manufactured in this Province.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, Persons using the Trade
of Tanning shall not occupy the Trades of Shoemaker or Currier.
That no Person or Persons using the Mystery of Tanning of Leather, by him or
themselves, or any other Person or Persons, from and after the Twenty-fifth Day
of November next, in the Year of our LORD aforesaid, shall, during the Time
that he or they shall use the said Mystery of Tanning, occupy or use the
Mystery of a Shoemaker or Currier, or any other Artifice^ Using or Exercising
the Cutting or Working of Leather, upon Pain to lose and forfeit all and every
such Hide and Hides, Skin and Skins so by them, or any of them wrought or
curried during the Time that he or they shall use the Mystery or Craft of
Tanning, or the just Value thereof.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, None but Tanners shall
buy or contract for Skins, except, etc.
That no Person or Persons whatsoever, after the Twenty-fifth Day of November
aforesaid, shall buy or make any Contract for any unwrought Hides or Calf-Skins
in the Hair, but only such Person or Persons as use the Trade or Mystery of a
Tanner, or shall tan or taw the same, except such Persons as shall p^rchase
them to be tanned for their own private Use; or shall purchase salt or raw
Hides for any Persons private Use, or the necessary Use of Ships or Vessels
going to Sea.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, No Leather or raw Hides
to be shipped or exported from this Province, except to, etc. on Penalty of
treble the Value, etc.
That it shall not be lawful for any Person or Persons to lade, ship or carry
in any Ship or Vessel, Entering and Lading in any Port of this Province, any
Leather or raw Hides, with Intent to transport or carry the same into any Place
or Places out of this Province, except such as may be carried to the Province
of New-Iersey, and Counties of New Castle, Kent and Sussex upon Delaware, to be
wrought up there, and except Leather imported into this Province; upon Pain of
Forfeiture of the said Leather or raw Hides so laden and transported, and
treble the Value thereof to be forfeited by the Owner or Owners thereof: The
Owner not being found, the Possessor is deemed such, and shall pay.
And if no Owner can be found, then the Person in whose Custody or Possession
the same shall be found to incur the like Penalty of the treble Value as
aforesaid. And the Owner or Owners of the said Ships or Vessels knowing of such
Offense and not discovering the same, shall forfeit three Times the Value of
the Leather and and Hides so shipped or exported. Forfeiture on concealing such
Leather or Hides.
And the Master or Mariners knowing of such Offense, and not discovering the
same, shall forfeit the treble Value as aforesaid, or be imprisoned for any
Time at the Discretion of the Justices of the Court of Quarter Sessions, not
exceeding six Months, without Bail or Mainprize.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, No Tanner to receive
more than 9 d. lb. for well-tan'd Leather, on Penalty, etc.
That from and after the Twenty-fifth Day of November, in the present Year of
our LORD, One Thousand Seven Hundred and Twenty-one, no Tanner or Tanners,
Person or Persons whatsoever within this Province, shall sell for, or take or
receive of any Person or Persons whomsoever within this Province, above the
Rate of Nine-Pence, current Money of America, for a Pound of well-tann'd
Leather, and so proportionably for a greater Quantity, on Penalty of Forfeiting
the said Leather, and One Shilling for every Pound so sold above the Rate
aforesaid.

AND that no Person or Persons within this Province shall, by any Means, No
Leather to be used or worked up before it has been searched and allowed of, etc.
occupy or put in any made Wares any curry'd Leather, before the same shall be
searched and allowed by the Sealer or Searchers, according to the Direction of
this Act, to be well and sufficiently curried; and that every Shoemaker, and
other Artificer and Cutter of Leather, shall forfeit for every Hide or Skin so
used or occupied without Sealing and Searching as aforesaid, the Sum of Ten
Shillings, and the Value of such Hide or Skin so used and occupied.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, Boots, etc. to be made
of Leather well-tann'd.
That no Person occupying or using the Mystery of a Shoemaker, shall make or
cause to be made any Boots, Shoes or Slippers for Sale, but of Leather well and
truly tanned and curried, and well and sufficiently sewed with good Thread well
twisted and made, and well waxed; nor shall mingle the Over-Leather, That is to
say, Part of the Over-Leather being of Neats-Leather and Part of
Calves-Leather; nor shall put into any Boots, Shoes or Slippers for Sale any
Leather made of Sheep-Skin, Bull-Hide or Horse-Hide; or into the upper Leather
of any Shoes or Slippers, or into the Inner-Part of any Boots (the Inner-Part
of the Shoe excepted) any Part of any Hide from which the Sole-Leather is cut,
called The Womb's Neck, Shank, Flank, Powle or Cheek, upon Pain of Forfeiture
of all such Shoes, Boots and Slippers, to be divided and applied in Manner
directed by this Act.

Rates to be taken for Shoes.
AND that no Shoemaker, or other Person, shall take or receive above the Rate of
Six Shillings and Six Pence for a Pair of good well-made Men's Shoes, and Five
Shillings for a Pair of good, plain, well-made Women's Shoes; and so
proportionably for all smaller Shoes for any Person above four Years of Age,
according to their several Sizes, to be set and rated by the Mayor and Aldermen
of the City of Philadelphia, in their Quarterly-Court of Record, and by the
Justices of the respective Counties within this Province, in their respective
General Qua^ter-Sessions of the Peace, on Pain of Forfeiting all such Shoes as
shall be sold above the Rates in this Act directed and limited, and above the
several Rates that shall from time to time be set and rated by the aforesaid
Mayor and Aldermen, and the said Justices in their respective Courts of
Quarter Sessions in Manner beforementioned.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, Justices, upon Penalty
of Forty Pounds, shall once in two Years, or oftener, choose Sealers and
Searchers of Leather.
That the Mayor and Aldermen of the City of Philadelphia for the Time being,
and the Justices of the several Courts of Quarter Sessions of the Peace for the
Counties of Philadelphia, Chester and B^cks, upon the Penalty of Forty Pounds,
to be recovered and employed as other Forfeitures in this Act mentioned, shall
at their next respective Courts of Quarter Sessions, to be held after
Publication of this Act, and afterward once in every two Years, or oftener if
need be, nominate and appoint (...) or more honest and skilful Person or
Persons of their respective Cities and Counties, who shall be Sealers, and keep
a Seal, to be prepared by the Directions of the said Justices, The Office and
Duty of the Sealers and Searchers of Leather.
for the Sealing of Leather: Which Sealers and Searchers shall also be sworn or
affirmed before the Mayor and Aldermen aforesaid, and before the Justices of
the said General Quarter Sessions of the Peace in their respective Cities and
Counties, to do their Office of Sealers and Searchers of Leather truly: Which
said Sealers and Searchers shall view and search all Leather, and finding it
sufficiently and thoroughly tanned and dried, shall seal the same with the said
Seal; for which the said Sealer and Searcher shall receive of the Owner or
Owners of such Leather, for every Dicker of Hides so searched and sealed One
Shilling, and for every single Half-Dicker Eight Pence, and for any less Number
than Half a Dicker Two Pence per Hide; and Four Pence for every Dozen of
Calf-Skins by him so sealed. And that no Sealer and Searcher shall continue
above two Years in his Office aforesaid at one Time. And that the said
Searchers and Sealers shall, and by this Act are empowered, to enter into any
Tan-Yard, Shop, or other House or Place whatsoever, and search for Leather
tanned or occupied, and for Shoes, Boots, Slippers, Saddles, and all other
Wares made for Sale, contrary to the Directions and true Intent and Meaning of
this Act; and in Case of Opposition or Refusal, to break open Doors and other
Obstacles, and the same Leather or Wares to seize; and after Seizure to bring
the same to the Mayor of the City of Philadelphia, and to any of the Justices
of the Counties aforesaid respectively, who shall forthwith appoint three
honest and skilful Persons to be Triers, who shall openly, in some Marketplace
or public Place, try whether the same Leather, Boots, Shoes or other Wares so
seized, be sufficient and according to the true Intent and Meaning of this Act:
Which said Trial shall be made upon the Oath or Affirmation of the Triers; and
if the same be found insufficient, then the said Leather, Shoes, Boots,
Slippers, and other Wares, shall be forfeited and appraised, and disposed of as
the said Mayor and Aldermen of the City of Philadelphia, and Justices at their
next respective Court of Quarter Sessions in their several Counties shall
direct. And that no Person or Persons shall buy any forfeited Wares to sell
again, on Pain of Forfeiting three Times the Value thereof. And every Person or
Persons resisting the Searcher or Searchers in any Part of their Duty injoined
them by this Act, shall forfeit the Sum of Twenty Pounds, to be recovered and
applied in the Manner and to the Uses in this Act directed.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That any Person or
Persons, or Officer sued for any thing done by Virtue or in Pursuance of this
Act may plead the general Issue, and give this Act and other special Matter in
Evidence: And if the Prosecutor shall be cast or become Nonsuit, he shall pay
treble Damages to such Person or Officer, to be recovered in any Court of
Record within this Province, by Action of Debt, Bill, Plaint or Information.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, Leather, when sealed, to
be sufficiently curry'd, in six Days in Summer, and twelve in Winter.
That no Currier shall refuse or neglect well and sufficiently to curry Leather
within six Days in Summer, and twelve Days in Winter, after he shall or may
take it in Hand; nor curry any Hide or Skin not sealed by the Officer appointed
by this Act, on Pain to forfeit, for every Hide or Piece of Leather not curried
accordingly, Sealers and Searchers Allowance for traveling.
Fifteen Shillings. And that the said Searchers and Sealers who shall travel
from the Place of his or their Habitation to search or seal any Leather, shall
be allowed and paid by the Tanner or Owner of such Leather Three Pence for each
Mile. And that the said Sealers and Searchers, to be appointed by Virtue of
this Act, shall, upon Request made unto them, forthwith search and seal all
such Leather as shall be sufficiently tanned which shall be brought unto them
respectively, or shall be within the City of Philadelphia; and shall, within
one Day after Request made unto them, go to any Tan-Yard, or other Place, to
search and seal Leather sufficiently tanned, on Pain to forfeit Forty
Shillings, for each wilful Neglect: Which Penalty, with all others mentioned in
this Act, not otherwise appropriated, shall be, one Moiety to the Governor for
the Support of Government, and the other Moiety to the Person or Persons that
will inform or sue for the same. Forfeitures how to be recovered.
And that the Recovery of all Forfeitures and Penalties under Forty Shillings
shall be heard and determined by the Mayor or any one or more of the Aldermen
of the City of Philadelphia, and by one or more of the Justices of the
respective Counties out of Sessions. And that all Forfeitures and Penalties
ar^^e the Value of Forty Shillings shall be recovered in any Court of Record in
this Province, by Bill, Plaint or Information, wherein no Essoin, Protection,
or Wager of Law, nor any more than one Imparlance shall be allowed.

No Prohibition on Boots, Shoes, etc. being exported.
PROVIDED NEVERTHELESS, That this Act, or any thing therein contained, shall not
extend to the Prohibiting the Exportation of Boots, Shoes, Slippers, Saddles,
and other Wares, manufactured and made of Leather within this Province.

Tanned Leather may be exported when it is not above Eight Pence per lb.
PROVIDED ALSO, That it shall and may be lawful for any Person or Persons to
export tanned Leather out of this Province when the Price does not exceed Eight
Pence per Pound, a Permit being first had and obtained, for which there shall
be paid One Shilling, and no more, by the Exporter or Owner of such Leather,
from the Mayor and two of the Aldermen of the City of Philadelphia, for the
said City, and from three or more Justices of the Peace for the respective
Counties of Philadelphia, Chester and Bucks, certifying the common Price of
well-tann'd Leather not to be no^ have been above Eight Pence, for at least one
Month before the Date of such Permit; which Permit shall be granted for no
longer Time than the Space of on^ Month, and if the same be granted for any
longer Time, or in other Manner than in this Act is directed and limited, the
same shall be void, and the Parties concerned in the Exportation of such
Leather, shall be liable to all the Penalties of this Act as if no such License
or Permit had ever been granted.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Butcher,
Forfeiture on exposing to Sale any Hides or Calf-Skins* which are gash'd or
impaired.
or other Person shall gash, slash or cut any Hide of any Ox, Bull, Steer, Cow,
or Calf-Skin, in Fleaing thereof, or otherwise, so as the same shall be
impaired or hurt, and shall expose or offer the same to Sale, such Offender
shall forfeit Two Shillings for every such Hide of Ox, Bull, Steer or Cow, and
Sixpence for every such Calf-Skin.

AND if any Person shall offer or expose to Sale any putrified Hide or Skin,
Forfeiture on off^ring putrified Hides or Skins to Sale.
such Person shall forfeit for every such Hide so offered to Sale Three
Shillings, and for every such Skin Nine-Pence; one Half of which Forfeitures
shall be paid to the Tanner or Person purchasing such Hide, and the other Half
to the Overseers of the Poor of the City or County where such Hide shall be
cut, slashed, gash'd and exposed to Sale.

ANNO REGNI GEORG II REGIS OCTAVO.
At a GENERAL ASSEMBLY begun at Philadelphia, the Fourteenth Day of October, in
the Eighth Year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord GEORGE, King of Great
Britain, etc. Annoque Domini One Thousand Seven Hundred and Twenty-one, and
continued by Adjournments until the Twenty-second Day of May One Thousand Seven
Hundred and Twenty-two; the following ACTS were passed by WILLIAM KEITH, Bart.
Lieutenant Governor under WILLIAM PENN, Esquire absolute Proprietary and Governor
in chief of the Province of Pennsylvania, etc. That is to say,
CHAP. CCXXXVII. An ACT for imposing a Duty on Persons convicted of heinous
Crimes, and imported into this Province as Servants, or otherwise.
Repealed by an Act passed 3 Geo. II. Chap. 305.

CHAP. CCXXXVIII. An ACT for laying a Duty on all Wine, Rum, Brandy and
Spirits, Melasses, Cider, Hops and Flax, imported, landed or brought into this
Province.
Expired.

CHAP. CCXXXIX. An ACT for laying a Duty on Negroes imported into this Province.
Expired.

CHAP. CCXL. An ACT for laying an Ex^ise or Duty on all Wine, Rum, and other
Spirits, retailed in this Province.
Expired.

CHAP. CCXLI. An ACT to prevent the Exportation of Flour not merchantable.
Supplied.

CHAP. CCXLII. An ACT for Encouraging the Making of good Beer, ^ee p^st^a C^^p
25^. 9 Geo I.
and for the Consumption of Grain in this Province.
WHEREAS it is found by Experience, that the Using of Melasses and other
Materials herea^ter-mentioned, in Brewing Ale and Beer, does very much hinder
the Consumption of Malt; and so the Raising of Barley is hereby discouraged:
Therefore may it please the Governor that it may be enacted, AND BE IT ENACTED
by Sir WILLIAM KEITH, Bart* Governor of the Province of P^nnsylvani^, etc. by
and with the Advice and Consent of the ^reem^n of the said P^ovince in General
Assembly met, and by the Autho^ity o^ the same, That if any common Brewer or
Retail^r of Peer or Ale, shall, Penal^y o^ B^ewe^s using Melasses, and^. i^
^^er; or taking it into their B^ew H^use.
after the first Day of June next, ma^e ^se of any Melasses, coarse Sugar or
Composition (...) Extract of Sugar, Honey, foreign Grains, Guinea Pepper, or
any Liqu^r or Syrup, boiled up to the Consistency of Melass^s, or any
unwholesome Materials or Ingredients whatsoever, in the Brewing, Making or
Working of any Beer or Ale: Or if any Brewer shall receive or take into his
Brew House any Melasses, coarse Sugar, Honey or Composition or Extracts of
Sugar; every such Brewer and Retailer shall forfeit and lose for every such
Offense respectively the Sum of Twenty Pounds: And every Servant of such
Brewer, Also on their Servants, or others who aid or assist therein.
and every other Person who shall be Aiding and Assisting in the Using any
Melasses, Sugar, Honey, or any other of the said Materials or Ingredients, in
the Brewing or Working of such Ale or Beer, or in Carrying or Conveying the
same into the Brew House belonging to such Brewer, shall also forfeit and lose,
for eve y such Offense, the Sum of Twenty Pounds; and in Default of Payment
thereof shall suffer three Months Imprisonment.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, None to keep Alehouses,
etc. except those that the Justices, in Sessions, approve of.
That no Person or Persons whatsoever, after the said first Day of June next,
shall be admitted or suffered to keep any common Alehouse, Inn or
Tipling-House, but such as the Justices of the Peace of the respective Counties
of this Province and City of Phil^delphia for the Time being, or the major Part
of them, in the open Sessions of the Peace in the same Counties and City
respectively, shall, in their Discretion judge fit, as well by their Character
of honest, civil and sober Behavior, as the commodious Situation and
Convenience of their Houses for such Purposes.

Persons approved of, to be licensed and give Bond to the Governor.
BUT that none be so admitted or licensed before they be bound, with one or more
sufficient Sureties, by Recognizance to the Governor for the time being, in
Twenty Pounds Penalty, with Condition, as well against Using any unlawful
Games, as for the Using and Maintaining of good Order and Rule to be had and
kept within the same: And also that they will not directly nor indirectly fell
or utter, in or about their Houses or elsewhere, any Wine, Brandy, Rum, or
other distilled Liquors, mixed or unmixed: And that the principal Party which
shall be so bound shall pay to the Clerk of the Court, Fees for Licenses.
for all Fees to him relating to the said License, Five Shillings; and to the
Justices Four Shillings, for every such License or Allowance to keep such Inn
or Alehouse, and no more.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That the said Justices
of Peace, within the said several Counties and City respectively, Justices have
Power to suppress selling Ale, Beer, etc. and cause Disorders to be punished.
or a Quorum of them, shall have full Power within the Limits of their
Authority, to remove, discharge and suppress common Selling of Ale, Beer and
Wine in Taverns, Alehouses, Inns and Tipling-Houses, and to cause all
Disorders in such Houses to be punished by the Direction of this Act, and hear
and determine the same by all such Ways and Means as by Law is usual in such
Cases.

AND where the Keepers of any Inns or Alehouses brew their own Beer or Ale,
Innkeepers, who brew, not to put Melasses, etc. in their Beer.
a Clause shall be added to the Condition of the Recognizance, That they will
not make Use of any Melasses, or other Materials or Ingredients hereby
forbidden to be used, in Brewing, Making or Working any of their Beer or Ale.

AND that from and after the said first Day of June next, all common Brewers
shall, Brewers shall become bound to observe what is required herein.
in the open Sessions of the Peace, within the City or County where they
respectively follow their Trades, become bound to the Governor for the Time
being, with one or more sufficient Sureties, by Recognizance, in One Hundred
Pounds Penalty, with Condition, That they will well and faithfully observe and
obey all that is required of them by this Act: For every of which Recogniza^ces
the Party shall pay Two Shillings and Six-^ence, and no more.

AND that the said Justices shall cause all the said Recognizances,
Recognizances to be entered of Record, on Penalty, etc.
and also all other Recognizances to be given by the Direction of this Act, to
be entered of Record in the respective Courts where the same are so taken as
aforesaid, there safely to be kept and remain. And if the Justices or their
Clerks ^ail therein, he or they so offending shall forfeit and pay for every
Recognizance taken and not entered of Record, as this Act requires, the Sum of
Five Pounds; any other Act or Law of this Province to the Contrary hereof in
anywise notwithstanding.

PROVIDED ALWAYS, Justices may recommend fit Persons to to be licensed to keep
Taverns; such Persons becoming bound, etc.
That nothing herein contained shall debar or hinder the Justices of the said
City and Counties to recommend such as live in fit Places, and as they shall
deem fit Persons to keep Taverns for selling Wines, Brandy, Rum, and other
Spirits, by retail; but that all such Persons so recommended may be licensed to
keep such Taverns as heretofore has been used, upon their paying the Fees
formerly allowed for such Recommendations and Licenses, and becoming bound with
one or more sufficient Sureties, by Recognizance to the Governor for the Time
being, in One Hundred Pounds, with Condition, as well against Using of unlawful
Games, as for the Using and Maintaining of good Order and Rule to be had and
kept within the same.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, The Officer appointed to
put this Act in Execution, and recover the Forfeitures.
That Charles Read, of Philadelphia, Merchant, shall be and is hereby appointed
the Officer to put this Act in Execution, and to sue for and recover the
Penalties or Forfeitures arising for not observing of this Act: Which
Forfeitures, when recovered, shall be equally divided between the Governor and
the said Officer.

AND as the true Design of this Act is, amongst other Things, to encourage the
Raising of Wheat and Barley for the Brewing Trade, so it is expected that all
Brewers may take special Care to bring their Beer and Ale to the Goodness and
Perfection which the same was formerly brought to; that so the Reputation which
then was obtain^d (and is since lost) may be retrieved, BE IT FURTHER ENACTED
by the Authority aforesaid, Higher Prices may be allowed by the Justices for
Beer and Ale, according to the Goodness.
That the Justices of the Peace of the respective Counties, and the Mayor,
Recorder and Alde^men of the City of Philadelphia, when they set Prices upon
Beer and Ale, pursuant to a Law of this Province, shall allow higher Prices
than common to be taken for such Beer and Ale as by the Judgment of Persons
skilled therein shall exceed in Quality and Goodness; any Law or Ordinance to
the Contrary notwithstanding.

BUT to prevent the ill Designs of Brewers, Retailers, Victualers and Butchers,
who combine to advance the Prices of the Grain and Provisions they respectively
buy, beyond a due Proportion to the Rates they give, BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by
the Authority aforesaid, Statutes of Great Britain against Persons combining to
advance the Prices of Grain, to be put in Execution here.
That all the Laws and Statutes of that Part of Great Britain called England,
shall be put in Execution against all such Combinations and evil P^actices; so
that such Offenders shall be brought to the like Punishments, and incur the
same Penalties as those Laws and Statutes direct and appoint for Offenders in
li^e Cases.

CHAP. CCXLIII. A Supplementary ACT to the Act for the more effectual Raising
of County Rates and Levies.
Supplied.

CHAP. CCXLIV. An ACT for establishing Courts of Judicature in this Province.
WHEREAS the late King CHARLES the Second, Preamble.
by his Royal Charter and Grant to William Penn, Esquire of that Tract of Land
called Pennsylvania, and for Erecting the same into a Province, did, for
himself, his Heirs and Successors, grant, free, full and absolute Power to the
said William Penn, and his Heirs, and to his and their Deputies and
Lieutenants, for the good and happy Government of the said Country, by and with
the Advice, Assent and Approbation of the Freemen of the said Country, or of
the greater Part of them, or of their Delegates or Deputies, in Assembly, when
and as often as need should require, to ordain, make and enact any Laws
whatsoever, for the public State, Peace and Safety of the said Country, or
unto the private Utility of particular Persons, unto their best Discretion: AND
LIKEWISE, to do all and every Thing and Things which unto the complete
Establishment of Justice, unto Courts and Tribunals, Forms of Judicature and
Manner of Proceedings do belong. And, by Judges, by the said William Penn, his
Heirs, their Deputies and Lieutenants, appointed to award Process, hold Pleas,
and determine in all the said Courts and Tribunals all Actions, Suits and
Causes whatsoever, as well criminal as civil, personal, real and mixed;
Provided, the said Laws, so made and published, be consonant to Reason, and not
repugnant or contrary, but as near as conveniently may be agreeable to the
Laws, Statutes and Rights of the Kingdom of England; saving and reserving to
the said King Charles, his Heirs and Successors, the Receiving, Hearing and
Determining of the Appeal and Appeals of all or any Person or Persons, touching
any Judgment, to be there made or given.

AND WHEREAS, by Virtue and in Pursuance of the said Grant, diverse Acts and
Ordinances have been made from time to time for the Holding of Courts and the
Administration of Justice within this Province; which, by the Increase of
Inhabitants and Change of Circumstance^ of the Country, seem necessary to be
altered and amended, BE IT THEREFORE ENACTED by Sir WILLIAM KEITH, Bart.
Governor of the Province of Pennsylvania, etc. by and with the Advice and
Consent of the Freemen of the said Province in General Assembly met, and by the
Authority of the same, Court of Quarter Sessions to be held, in each County,
four Times a Year.
That there shall be a Court styled, The General Quarter Sessions of the Peace
and Jail-delivery, holden and kept four Times in every Year, in each County of
this Province, viz. At Philadelphia, for the County of Philadelphia, on the
first second Day of the Week called Monday, in the Months called March, June,
September and December: At Bristol, for the County of Bucks, on the eleventh
Day following (inclusive) in every of the same Months: And at Chester, for the
County of Chester, on the last third Day of the Week called Tuesday in the
Months called May, August, November and February.

The Governor to commissionate Justices; who are to hold the saidCourt.
AND that there shall be a competent Number of Justices in every of the said
Counties nominated and authorized by the Governor or Lieutenant Governor for
the Time being, by Commission, under the broad Seal of thi^ Province: Which
said Justices, or any three of them, shall and may hold the said General
Sessions of the Peace and Jail-delivery according to Law, and as fully and
effectually as any Justice of the Peace, Justices of the Assize, Justices of
Oyer and Terminer, or of Jail-delivery may or can do.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That the said Justices of the Peace, or any three
of them, may, And may hold private Sessions; and have Power to take
Recognizances out of Sessions; which shall be certified into the next
Quarter Sessions.
pursuant to their said Commissions, hold special and private Sessions when and
as often as Occasion shall require; and that the said Justices, and every of
them, shall have full Power and Authority, in or out of Sessions, to take all
Manner of Recognizances and Obligations, as any Justices of the Peace of Great
Britain may, can or usually do: All which said Recognizances and Obligations
shall be made to the King and his Successors. And all Recognizances for the
Peace, Behavior, or for Appearance, which shall be taken by any of the said
Justices out of Sessions, shall be certified into their said General-Sessions
of the Peace, to be holden next after the Taking thereof: Recognizances for
Suspicions of Felony to be certified at the Court of Oyer and Terminer.
And every Recognizance taken before any of them, for Suspicions of any Manner
of Felony, or other Crime not tryable in the said Court of Quarter Sessions of
the Peace and Jail-delivery, shall be certified before the said Justices of the
Supream-Court of Oyer and Terminer, at their next succeeding Court, to be
holden next after the Taking thereof, without Concealment, Detaining or
Imbezzling of the same. Forfeited Recognizances, and the Record of the Default,
shall be certified into the Supreme Court.
But in case any Person or Persons shall forfeit his or their Recognizances of
the Peace, Behavior or Appearance, for any Cause whatsoever, then the said
Recognizance so forfeited, with the Record of the Default or Cause of
Forfeiture, shall be sent and certified without Delay, by the Justices of the
Peace, into the said Supreme Court, as the Case may require, that thence
Process may issue against the said Parties, according to Law. All which
Forfeitures shall be levied by the proper Officers, and go to the Governor for
Support of Government.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED That all Fines and Amerciaments which shall be laid
before the Justices of the said Courts of General Quarter Sessions of the Peace
and Jail-delivery, shall be taxed, All Fines in the Quarter Sessions to be set
according to the Q^ality of the Offense, and be yearly estreated in the Supreme
Court.
offered and set duly and truly, according to the Quality of the Offense,
without Partiality or Affection, and shall be yearly estreated by the Clerks of
the said Courts respectively into the said Supreme Court, to the Intent that
Process may be awarded to the Sheriff of every County, as the Case may require,
for Levying such of their Fines and Amerciaments as shall be unpaid, to the
Uses for which they are or shall be appropriated.

PROVIDED ALWAYS, Quarter Sessions to hold three Days in Philadelphia County,
and two Days in each of the other Counties.
That the said Courts of of the General Quarter Sessions of the Peace may be
kept and continued for the Space of three Days in the County of Philadelphia,
at any of the Times herein before appointed to hold and keep the same Courts
and Sessions there; and for the Space of two Days in either of the said
Counties of Bucks and Chester respectively, at any of the said Times herein
before appointed to hold and keep the said Courts and Sessions there in Manner
aforesaid.

PROVIDED ALSO, This Act not to lessen the Powers of the Corporation.
That nothing herein contained shall deprive or abridge the Mayor, Recorder and
Aldermen of the City of Philadelphia, of any Powers, Privileges, Jurisdictions
or Franchises granted them by Charter or the Laws of this Province.

Writs may be directed by the Magistrates of one County to the Sheriff, etc. of
another County, for taking any Persons outlawed.
AND to the End that Persons indicted or out-lawed for Felonies, or other
Offenses, in one County or Town cor^^rate, who dwell, remove or be received
into another Cou^^y or Town corporate, may be brought to Justice, BE IT FURTHER
ENACTED, That the said Justices, or any of them, shall and may direct their
Writs o^ ^^cepts to all or any the Sheriffs or other Officers of the (...)
Counties or Towns corporate within this Province, where (...) shall be, to take
such Persons indicted or out-lawed. And (...) it shall and may be lawful to and
for the said Justices, Also Subpoena's and other Warrants for summoning
Evidences.
and (...) of them, to issue forth Subpoena's, and other Warrant^, (...) their
respective Hands and Seal of the County, into any Co^^ty or Place of this
Province, for summoning or bringing (...) Person or Persons to give Evidence in
and upon any (...) or Cause whatsoever, now or hereafter examinable or (...)
wise tryable by or before them, or any of them, under (...) Pains and Penalties
as Subpoena's or Warrants of that (...) usually are or ought by Law to be
granted or awarded (...)

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, Persons aggrieved with
the Judgment of the Quarter Sessions, may have their Writs of Error, returnable
to the Supream-Court.
That if any Person or (...) shall find him or themselves aggrieved with the
Judg^^^t of any of the said Courts of General Quarter-Session^ of the Peace and
Jail-delivery, or any other Courts (...) ^^cord within this Province, it shall
and may be (...) to and for the Party or Parties so aggrieved, to have (...)
their Writ or Writs of Error; which shall be granted them of course, in Manner
as other Writs of Error are to be granted and made returnable to the said
Supreme (...) of this Province.

PROVIDED ALWAYS, That when any (...) of Error shall be granted upon any
Judgment given or to be given for the said City of Philadelphia, Only the Tenor
or Transcript of Writs passed by the Mayor, etc. for the City of Philadelphia,
to be certify'd by them into the Supream-Court.
the Mayor, Recorde^ and Aldermen of the said City of Philadelphia, and their
(...), or any of them, shall not be compelled upon any of the said Writs, or
any other Writ or Writs directed to them, or any of them, to remove, send or
certify into the ^^id Supreme Court, or elsewhere, any of the Indictme^^ or
Presentiments taken or to be taken before them, or the ^^cord of the Judgments
and Proceedings upon any such (...) and Presentiments; but only the Tenors or
Transcri^^ of the said Records under their common Seal. And (...) such
Indictments are reversed or affirmed, or Causes law^^^ly removed from the said
City-Courts are tried in the Supreme Court, it shall and may be lawful for the
Mayor, or Recorder and Aldermen, and their Successors, to proceed to Execution
or otherwise, as shall appertain according to Law.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, A Court of Record to be
held twice ^ Year at Philadelphia, called The Supreme Court of Pennsylvania.
That there shall be holden and kept at Philadelphia a Court of Record twice in
every Year, That is to say, On the Twenty-fourth Day of September, and the
Tenth Day of April, if the same Days, or either, do not happen to be the first
Day of the Week; and in such case the said Court shall be held on the next Day
following: Which said Court shall be called and styled The Supreme Court of
Pennsylvania. And that there shall be three Persons of known Integrity and
Ability, Justices to be commissionated.
commissionated by the Governor or his Lieutenant for the Time being, by
several distinct Patents or Commissions under the Great Seal of this Province,
to be Judges of the said Court; one of whom shall be distinguished in his
Commission by the Name of Chief Justice. Who shall issue forth Writs of Habeas
Corpus, etc.
And every of the said Justices shall have full Power and Authority, by Virtue
of this Act, when and as often as there may be Occasion, to issue forth Writs
of Habeas Corpus, Certiorari and Writs of Error, and all Remedial and other
Writs and Process, returnable to the said Court, and grantable by the said
Judges by Virtue of their Office, in Pursuance of the Powers and Authorities
hereby given them.

PROVIDED ALWAYS, Issues joined in the said Court shall be tried in the proper
County; and Judges to go the Circuit twice every Year.
That upon any Issue joined in the said Supream-Court, such Issue shall be
tried in the County from whence the Cause was removed, before the Judges
aforesaid, or any two of them, who are hereby empowered and required, if
Occasion require, to go the Circuit twice in every Year into the respective
Counties of Chester and Bucks, to try such Issues in Fact as shall be depending
in the said Supream-Court, and removed out of either of the Counties aforesaid,
That is to say, in the County of Bucks on the Fourteenth Day of April, and the
Twenty-eighth Day of September; and in the County of Chester, on the Eighteenth
Day of April, and the Second Day of October, in every Year: When and where they
may try all Issues, joined and to be joined, in the same Supream-Court, and to
do generally all those Things that shall be necessary for the Trial of any such
Issue, as fully as Justices of Nisi Prius in England may or can do.

AND that the sai^ ^^dges, or any two of them, Who are to hear all Causes
cogni^^ble in the s^id Court, and all Causes removed thither.
shall have full Power to (...) said Court, and therein to hear and determine
all Causes, Matters and Things cognizable in the said Court; and also to hear
and determine all and all Manner of Pleas, Plaints and Causes which shall be
removed or brought there from the respective General Quarter Sessions of the
Peace and Courts of Common Pleas, to be held for the respective Counties of
Philadelphia, Chester and Bucks, as also for the City of Philadelphia, or from
any other Court of this Province, by Virtue of any of the said Writs: As also,
to correct the Errors of the Justices, etc.
And to examine and correct all and all Manner of Errors of the Justices and
Magistrates of this Province in their Judgments, Process and Proceedings in the
said Courts, as well in all Pleas of the Crown, as in all Pleas real, personal
and mixed; and thereupon to reverse (...) affirm the said Judgments as the Law
does or shall direct: And also to examine, And punish the De^aults of Officers,
etc.
correct and punish the Contempts, Omissions and Neglects, Favors, Corruptions
and Defaults of all or any of the Justices of the Peace, Sheriffs, Coroners,
Clerks and other Officers within the said respective Counties.

AND ALSO, shall award Process for Levying, (...) well of such Fines, And award
Process to levy Fines.
Forfeitures and Amerciaments as shall be estreated into the said
Supream-Court, as of the Fines, Forfeitures and Amerciaments which shall be
lost, taxed and set there, and not paid to the Uses they are or shall be
appropriated.

And generally minister Justice, as in the King's Courts in Britain.
AND generally shall minister Justice to all Person^, and exercise the
Jurisdictions and Powers hereby granted concerning all and singular the
Premises according to Law* as fully and amply to all Intents and Purposes
whatsoever as the Justices of the Courts of King's Bench, Common Pleas and
Exchequer at Westminster, or any of them, may or can do.

Saving to all Persons the Right of Appeal to Britain.
SAVING to all and every Person and Persons, his, her or their Heirs, Executors
and Administrators, their Right of Appeal from the final Sentence, Judgment or
Decree of any Court within this Province, to His Majesty in Council, or to such
Court or Courts, Judge or Judges, as by our Sovereign Lord the King, his Heirs
or Successor^ shall be appointed in Britain, to receive, hear and judge of
Appeals from His Majesty's Plantations.

PROVIDED the Person Appealing shall, upon Entering his Appeal in the Court
where the Sentence* Judgment or Decree shall be given in this Province, pay all
the Costs before that Time expended in the Prosecution, or Desending the said
Suit: The Appellant shall give Bond in 300 l. etc.
And shall further enter into Bond, with two good and sufficient Securities, in
the Sum of Three Hundred Pounds, to the Defendant in the Appeal, conditioned to
prosecute the said Appeal with Effect, within the Space of eighteen Months
after the Entry of such Appeal, and to satisfy the Judges of the Court from
which he appeals: And further, to pay all such Costs and Damages as shall be
adjudged to him to pay, in case a Sentence, Judgment or Decree pass against the
said Appellant, or in case he, she or they fail to prosecute their Appeal with
Effect.

AND that there shall be a fit Person nominated by the Judges, and
commissionated by the Governor, Governor commissionates the Prothonotary of the
Supream-Court.
to be Prothonotary or Clerk of the said Supream-Court, who shall keep and duly
attend his Office at some convenient Place in the City of Philadelphia, and may
be suspended, punished or amoved by the said Court for Misdemeanors in his
Office.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That all the said Writs shall be granted of course,
How Writs shall be granted and bear Style.
and made i^ the Name and Style of the King, his Heirs and Successors, and
shall bear Test in the Name of the chief Justice for the time being: But if he
be Plaintiff or Defendant, in the the Name of one of the other Justices, and
shall be sealed with the judicial Seal of the said Court, and made returnable
to the next Court after the Date of such Writ.

PROVIDED ALWAYS, No Provincial Judge to sit in the inferior Courts.
That none of the Judges of ^he said Supreme or Provincial-Court shall sit
judicially in any of the said Courts of Common Pleas, Quarter Sessions, or any
other inferior Court in this Province.

AND (...) IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, The said Judges to
deliver the Goals of all Treasons, Murders,
That the said Judges of the Supream-Court shall have Power, and are hereby
authorized and empowered from time to time to deliver the Goals of all Persons
which now are or shall hereafter be committed for Treasons, Murders, and such
other Crimes as (by the Laws of this Province) now are or hereafter shall be
made Capital or Felonies of Death as aforesaid: And for that E^d from time to
time to issue forth such necessary Precepts and Process, and force Obedience
thereto as Justices of Assize, Justices of Oyer and Terminer and of
Jail-delivery may or can do in the Realm of Gre^^ Britain.

Felo^ies committed in (...) Out-Parts of the Province, to be tried in
Philadelphia.
AND ALSO, That all Manner of Offenses already made or declared, or hereafter to
be made or declared to be Capital orFelonies of Death by any Law or Act of
Assembly of this Province, and done, perpetrated or committed, or hereafter to
be done, perpetrated or committed by any Person orPersons within the Bounds and
Limits of the same Province, and without the certain and known Bounds and
Limit^ of any of the Counties now or hereafter erected in the said Province,
shall be from henceforth enquired of, heard and determined before the said
Judges, by good and lawf^l Men of the City and County of Philadelphia, in like
Manner and Form to all Intents and Purposes as if the said Offenses and
Felonies of Death had been done, perpetrated and committed within the said City
or County of Philadelphia.

Fees to be double in the said Court to what they are in the Quarter-Session^.
PROVIDED ALWAYS, That the Fees du^ to the Judges and Officers of the said Court
for Hearing and Determining any of the said capital Offenses for any thing done
there, shall be double the Fees usually taken i^ the General Quarter Sessions
held in any of the said Counties in this Province; any thing herein, or in any
other Law, to the Contrary notwithstanding.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, County Count to be held
four Time^ ^ Year.
That a competent Number of Persons shall be commissionated by the Governor or
his Lie^tenant, under the Broad Seal of this Province, who shall hold and keep
a Court of Record in every County, which shall be styled and called The County
Court of Common Pleas, and shall be holden four Times in every Year, at the
Places where the General Quarter Sessions shall be respectively kept, viz. at
Philadelphia, for the County and City of Philadelphia, on the Day called the
first Wednesday after the Day appointed for the Quarter Sessions to begin (...)
there, in the Months called March, June, September and December: At Bristol,
for the County of Bucks, on the eleventh Day following, inclusive: And at
Chester, for the County of Chester, on the Day called the last Tuesday in the
Months called May, August, November and February. Which said Justices, or any
three of them (according to the Teno^ and Direction of their Commissions) shall
hold Pleas of Assizes, S^ire Facias, Replevins, and hear and determine all and
all Manner of Pleas, Actions, Suits and Causes, civil, personal, real and
mixed, according to the Laws and Constitutions of this Province.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Autho^ity a^oresaid, Justices of the said
Court to grant Replevins, etc.
That every of the said Justices shall and are hereby empowered to grant, under
the Seal of the respective Counties* Replevins, Writs of Partition, Writs of
View, and all other Writs and Process, upon the said Pleas and Actions
cognizable in the said respective Cour^s, as Occasion may require.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED That the said Justices of the said respective Courts
s^^ll and are hereby empowered to issue forth Subp^ena's under their respective
Hands and Seal of the Counties, And issue S^bpaena's for Evidences, etc.
into any County or Place of this Province, for summ^ning or bringing any
Person or Persons to give Evidence in or upon the Trial of any Matter or Cause
whatsoever depending before them or any of them, under such Pains and Penalties
as by the Rules of the common Law and Course and Practice of the King's Court
at West^inster are usually appointed.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED That upon any Judgment obtained in any of the said
Courts of this Province, Upon Judgment ob^^^ned and and the Party not to be
f^und, or has not Land^, etc in that County, an al^as Ex^cution may (...)
granted by the Court, directed to the Sheriff of another County.
and Execution returned by the Sheriff or Coroner of the proper County where
^uch Judgment was obtained, that the Party is not to ^e found or has no Lands
or Tenements, Goods or Chattels in that County, and thereupon it is testifi^^,
that the Party s^^lks, or lies hid, or has Lands, T^^^ments, Goods or Chattels
in another County of this Province, it shall and may be lawful to and for the
Court that issued out such Execution, to grant, and they are hereby required to
grant, an alias Execution, with a Testatum, (...) to the Sheriff or Coroner of
the County or Place (...) such Person lies hid, or where his Lands or Effects
(...), commanding him to execute the same according to (...) Tenor of such Writ
or Writs, and to make Return ^^ereof to the Court of Common Pleas where such
Recovery (...) had or Judgment given. And if the Sheriff or Coroner, Which if
the said She^iff refuse to execute or ^eturn he shall b^ amerced, etc*
(...) whom such Writ or Writs shall be directed, shall refuse (...) neglect to
execute and return the same accordingly, he shall be amerced in the Court where
he ought to retu^n it, and be liable to the Action of the Party grieved: And
(...) said Amerciaments shall be duly and truly set according to the Quality of
the Offense, and estreated by the Protho^^taries of the respective Courts of
Common Pleas of (...) Province into the next Supreme or Provincial Court (...)
course, that thence Process may issue out against the Offe^ders, for Levying of
such Fines and Amerciaments as shall be unpaid, to the Uses for which they are
or shall be appropriated.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, The Defendant may have a
special Court, in c^se of suddenDeparture.
That if any Defendant o^ D^fendants in any Suit or Action, by Reason of his or
(...) sudden Departure out of this Province, shall require a (...) speedy
Determination in such Action or Suit than can ^e obtained by the common or
ordinary Rules of Proceedi^^^ in any of the said Courts of Common Pleas in this
Provi^c^, the said Justices, upon Application to them made, shall grant to such
Defendant or Defendants special Courts, (...) shall proceed to hear and
determine the Premises according to the Course and Practice of the said Courts
of Commo^^Pleas, and for the usual Fees therein taken.

But shall give Bail to the Plaintiff's Action.
PROVIDED ALWAYS, That before the said Justices shall grant such special Court,
or proceed to (...) and determine the Premises, the Defendant shall give Bail
to the Plaintiff's Action by Recognizance according to the Course and Practice
of the said Court of Common Pleas.

AND to prevent excessive Charges that have of late arisen upon Executing of
Writs of Enquiry of Damages, BE IT ENACTED, Writs of Enquiry shall be made as
easy of Charge as possible.
That the Justices who give any Interlocutory Judgment, shall, at the Motion of
the Plaintiff or his Attorney in the Action where such Jud^ment is given, make
an Order, in the Nature of a Writ ^f Enquiry, to charge the Jury attending at
the same or n^xt Court after such Judgment is given, to enquire of the Damages
and Costs sustained by the Plaintiff in such Action: Which Enquiry shall be
made and Evidence given in open Court; and after the Inquest consider thereof,
they shall forthwith return their Inquisition under their Hands and Seals;
whereupon the Court may proceed to Judgment as upon Inquisitions of that Kind
returned by the Sheriff.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, A competent Number of
Atto^nies may be admitted;
That there may be a competent Number of Persons of an honest Disposition, and
learned in the Law admitted by the Justices of the said respective Courts, to
practice as Attorneys there; who shall behave themselves justly and faithfully
in their Practice: Who Misbehaving, shall suffer the Penalties, etc. as
Attorneys in Britai^, etc.
And if they misbehave themselves therein, they shall suffer such Penalties and
Suspensions as Attorneys at Law in Great Britain are liable to in such Cases;
by which Attorneys Actions may be entered, and Writs, Process, Declarations and
other Proceedings and Records in all such Actions and Suits as they shall
respectively be concerned to prosecute or defend from time to time, may be
drawn, and with their Names and proper Hands signed: Attorneys to f^le
theirWarrants of Attorney.
Which said Attorneys so admitted may practice in all the Courts of this
Province without any further or other License or Admittance: And that the
Attorney for the Plaintiff in every Action shall file his Warrant of Attorney
in the Prothonotary's-Office the same Court he declares: And the Attorney for
the Defendant shall file his Warrant of Attorney the same Court he appears: And
if they neglect so to do, they shall have (...) Fee allowed them in the Bill of
Costs, nor be suffered to speak in the Cause until they file their Warrants
respectively.

CHAP. CCXLV. An ACT to prohibit the Selling of Rum, and other strong Liquors,
to the Indians, and to prevent the Abuses that may happen thereby.
WHEREAS the peaceable, Preamble.
wise and prudent Measures which the late Honorable William Penn, Esquire our most
worthy Proprietor, took with the native Indians, at his first Coming into and
Settling of this Province, has been, under GOD, the happy Foundation and
Groundwork of the Tranquillity and perfect good Understanding hitherto
preserved between the English Inha^itants of this Colony and their native
Indians. AND WHEREAS the Misunderstandings and fatal Breaches, which have
lately happened in some of the neighboring Colonies, between the English and
the adjacent Indian Nations, are well known to have proceeded from (...)
Irregularaties and Abuses committed by those (...) t^avel into the Woods in
order to trade promiscuously (...) ^he Indians as they return from Hunting;
whereby they have Opportunity, first, to debauch the Natives with (...)
Quantities of Rum and strong Spirits, and then cheat (...) of their Peltry: For
the Prevention of which evil (...) wicked Practices for the Future, BE IT
ENACTED by Sir WILLIAM KEITH, Bart. Governor of the Provinc^ of Pennsylvania,
etc. by and with the Advice and Consen^ of the Freemen of the said Province in
General Assembly met, No Rum, etc. to be sold to Indians under the Penalty of
20 l.
and by the Authority of the same, That no Person whatsoever, otherwise than is
herein after declared, (...) sell, barter or give to any Indian or Indians, or
to any (...) Person for their Use, nor by any Means directly or in^^rectly
furnish, or cause to be furnished, an^ Indian or Indi^^^ with any Rum, Wine, or
other strong Liquors, mixed (...) unmixed, under the Penalty of Twenty Pounds
for each O^fence, one Half to the Governor, for Support of Government, and the
other Half to the In^ormer, or such Person or Persons as will sue for the same;
to be recovered in any Court of Record within this Province, by Action of De^t,
Bill, Plaint or Information, wherein no Essoin, Protecti^^ or Wager of Law
shall be allowed to the Defendant.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, No Rum, above the
Quantity of one Gallon, to be carried beyond the Inhabitants.
That in case any Rum, (...) other Spirits, above the Quantity of one Gallon,
be carrie^ amongst the Indians at their Towns, or beyond the Christ^^^
Inhabitants, the Person car^^ing the same, or he in who^^ Possession the same
shall be found, shall ^orfeit and pay (...) Sum of Twenty Pounds, to the Uses
aforesaid, to be recover^d in Manner aforesaid.

At Treaties, Rum may be given to the Indians.
PROVIDED ALWAYS, That the Governor and Council, or Persons by them authori^ed
and appoint^^ to hold Treaties with any Nati^n of Indians, may, at (...)
Treaties, give any reasonable Quantity of Rum as by them shall be thought
nec^ssary; any thing herein contained to the Contrary notwithstanding.

None shall trade with the Indian^ but at their own Dwelling^, without License.
AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That no Person or Persons
whatsoever, after the first Day of August next, under the the Penalty of Twenty
Pounds, to be recovered in Mann^^ and for the Uses aforesaid, shall trade or
traffic with any Indian for any Commodity whatsoever, but at their own
Dwelling-Houses and Places of Residence with their Famili^s, within some
settled Township of this Province, without being first recommended to the
Governor for his Lic^nce, by the Justices of the County-Courts of
Quarter Sessions where he resides, or the next Quarter Sessions within this
Province to the Place of such Residence: And that no Person shall be so
licensed without first giving Bond in the said Quarter Sessions, with one or
more substantial Freeholders of the same County to be bound with them in the
Sum of One Hundred Pounds, conditioned, that he will duly observe the Laws of
this Province for regulating the Trade with the Indians: Which Recommendations
and Licenses s^all be renewed annually, in the Manner before directed; and
shall further, by his Oath or Affirmation, oblige himself, that he will not
directly nor indirectly sell or dispose of any Rum, or other Spirits, mixed or
unmixed, to any Indian whatsoever. For which License he shall pay the Sum of
Thirty Shillings, and no more.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Person, The
Person convicted not having Goods to satisfy the Fine, the Sum of 5 l shall be
paid the Informer out of the public Treasury.
convicted for any Offense committed against this Act, have not Goods and
Chattels sufficient to pay the Fine or Forfeiture, in which he shall be
condemned, the Justices or Judges before whom such Conviction is had, shall, at
the Request of the Informer or Prosecutor, grant to him a Certificate of the
Time and Place of such Conviction, and of such Person being the Informer or
Prosecutor; which Certificate shall be directed to the Provincial-Treasurer,
upon Sight whereof the said Treasurer shall and is hereby required to pay to
such Person, his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, the Sum of Five Pounds.
And the Person convicted, for Want of Estate to pay the Fine and Cost of his
Prosecution, shall be committed to the public Goal of the County, or House of
Correction, there to continue at hard Labor for the Space of six Months,
without Bail or Mainprize.

PROVIDED ALWAYS, No more than one 16th of a Quart to be given to an Indian in
twelve Hours.
That nothing herein contained shall be deemed or taken to prevent any
Inhabitant of this Province from giving unto any Indian at his Dwelling House
or Habitation any Quantity of Rum, or other Spirits, not exceeding One
Sixteenth Part of a Quart at one Time, and that not oftener than once in twelve
Hours.

AND because the good Intent of this Act shall not be frustrated by the secret
and clandestine Practices of Persons for the Sake of private Advantage, BE IT
FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That from and after the first Day
of August next, Magistrates may send for and examine suspicious Persons, and
reprimand 'em.
it shall and may be lawful for the Mayor or Recorder of the City of
Philadelphia, or any two Justices of the Peace of this Province, as often as
they shall think fit, to send for any Person or Persons whatsoever whom they
shall suspect to offend against this Act, and severely to reprimand such Person
or Persons for having given any Cause by their Conduct or Behavior with and
toward any Indians for such Suspicion: And upon a second Suspicion, may
administer to them an Oath, etc.
But if the said Mayor or Recorder, or any two Justices of the Peace, shall
again suspect the same Parties a second Time for having offended against the
Intent or Tenor of this Act, then it shall and may be lawful for the said Mayor
and Recorder, or any two Justices of the Peace, to administer to such Person or
Persons so suspected, an Oath or Affirmation, that he has not directly nor
indirectly, by himself, nor any other for him, after the said first Day of
August, given, sold, or otherwise disposed of any Rum, Spirits, Wine, or other
strong Liquors, mixed or unmixed, to any Indian or Indians, or to any other
Person or Persons whatsoever, for them or any of them, contrary to the true
Intent and Meaning of this Act: Penalty on not appearing upon Summons, or
refusing to swear or attest.
And every such Person or Persons so suspected as aforesaid not appearing upon
Summons duly served, or appearing and refusing to take the aforesaid Oath or
Affirmation, shall forfeit the Sum of Thirty-nine Shillings, or undergo
Imprisonment for the Space of three Months: The Forfeitu^e to be divided and
disposed of in Manner aforesaid.

No Forfeiture to be inflicted 'til serving of the Summons be sworn or attested
to.
PROVIDED ALWAYS, That no Forfeiture or Imprisonment shall be levied or
inflicted upon any Person whatsoever in this Behalf, for not appearing upon
Summons duly made, until an Oath or Affirmation be made of the due Service of
the said Summons upon the suspected Person or Persons, before the Mayor,
Recorder or Justices aforesaid; who are hereby empowered to administer such
Oath or Affirmation to the Constable or Officer who has served the same; any
thing before to the Contrary thereof in anywise notwithstanding.

Conviction upon this Act may be pleaed in Bar, etc.
PROVIDED ALSO, That any Person or Persons being convicted for any Matter or
Thing done or committed against this Act, such Conviction may be pleaded in Bar
to any other Suit or Prosecution, to be brought or prosecuted for Breach of any
other Law of this Province made and provided against the same Offenses.

CHAP. CCXLVI. An ACT for Encouraging the Raising of Hemp within this Province.
Supplied.

CHAP. CCXLVII. An ACT for Settling a Ferry at Solebury, in Bucks County, over
Delaware to New Jersey.
Expired.

CHAP. CCXLVIII. An ACT to erect and establish a Ferry on the Land of Thomas
Yardley, of Makefield Township, in Bucks County.
Expired.

CHAP. CCXLIX. An ACT for Regulating the Gauging of Cask in this Province.
WHEREAS great Abuses are daily committed in the Trade of this Province,
Preamble.
by importing Wine, Rum, and other liquid Merchandises, in disproportionable
Cask, which have been usually gauged by the Diagonal; which is known not to be
an exact Rule to find the Contents of a disproportionable Cask; and the Persons
selling such Commodities commonly refusing to submit to any other Method or
Rule of Gauging, the Purchaser is thereby imposed upon, and often suffers great
Loss in Want of just Measure: For the Redress of which Abuse for the Future
within this Province, BE IT ENACTED by Sir WILLIAM KEITH, Bart. Governor of the
Province of Pennsylvania, etc. by and with the Advice and Consent of the
Freemen of the said Province in General Assembly met, and by the Authority of
the same, No Persons to sell Liquors before gauged by the Gaugers, under
Penalty, etc.
That if any Merchant or other Person whatsoever, shall utter, sell or put to
Sale, any Butt, Tun, Pipe, Hogshead, Barrel, Rundlet, or other Cask of Rum,
Wine, Melasses, or other liquid Merchandise, imported into any Port or Place
within this Province, before the Gaugers hereafter-mentioned or their Deputies,
shall have plainly and truly set down or marked, upon the Head of such Vessel,
the Capacity and full Contents of the same, according to the Standard and
Excise of Wine-Measure by the Gallon; such Person or Persons shall forfeit, for
the Uses directed in this Act, the Sum of Ten Pounds, for every Cask so
uttered, sold or put to Sale.

Forfeiture on Liquors lacking the Quantity sold for.
AND FURTHER, If any Merchant, or other Person shall utter, sell or put to Sale,
any Rum, Wine, Melasses, or other liquid Merchandises as aforesaid, within any
Port or Place of this Province, in any Cask or Vessel, having the Number of
Gallons set down and marked on the Head of such Vessel, and the same shall be
found to lack of the Contents marked on the said Vessel, such Person shall
forfeit and pay, to the Uses directed in this Act, the Sum of Ten Shillings for
every Gallon marked or numbered on the said Cask more than it will truly contain.

AND to the End that all Persons dealing in such Merchandise may the more
easily and readily be informed and assisted in discovering the true Quantity of
such liquid Merchandise so imported as aforesaid, BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the
Authority aforesaid, That Nathaniel Griffitts and Benjamin Morgan of
Philadelphia, Gaugers Names, and how to be qualified.
shall be and are hereby appointed Gaugers of all the Wine, Rum, Melasses, and
other liquid Merchandise, imported into this Province for Sale. Which said
Gaugers (before they enter upon their Office, shall take an Oath or Affirmation
well and truly to execute the Office of Gaugers within this Province, between
Buyer and Seller) are hereby empowered, by themselves or their proper Deputies
or Assistants, to gauge all Rum, Wine, Melasses, or other liquid Merchandise,
imported in any Butt, Tun, Pipe, Hogshead, Barrel, Rundlet, or other Cask, into
any Port or Place of this Province, when they the said Gaugers, or either of
them, shall be thereunto required.

Gaugers to mark the Cask, with the Contents, and enter it in a Book.
AND that they shall mark and set down the true Number of Gallons, according to
the English Standard and Excise of Wine-Measure, which each Cask or Vessel will
truly contain, with their own Mark: All which Casks, with their true Marks and
Numbers, and Owners Names, shall be entered in a Book or Books, to be kept for
that Purpose by the said Gaugers, or their proper Deputies; to which, recourse
may be had as Occasion may require: Fee for a Copy, and for Gauging.
For a Copy of which Entry they shall receive Four Pence; and for each Cask so
by them gauged and marked, they shall receive the Sum of Four Pence, and no
more.

AND if any Cask, or other Vessel, Penalty on false Gauging.
gauged and marked by the said Gaugers, or their lawful Deputies, shall be
found lacking one or more Gallons of the Quantity numbered or marked on the said
Cask or Vessel, the aforesaid Gaugers shall forfeit Ten Shillings for each
Gallon lacking or exceeding the Number or Mark so set down on each Cask.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, How the Penalties shall
be appropriated and recovered.
That all and every the Penalties and Forfeitures in and by this Act set and
appointed, shall be, one Half to the Governor, for the Support of Government,
and the other Half to the Informer, or him or them that will sue for the same:
If under Forty Shillings, to be recovered as Debts under Forty Shillings are
usually recovered, and if above Forty Shillings, to be sued for and recovered
by Bill, Plaint or Information, in any Court of Record within this Province,
wherein no Essoin, Protection or Wager of Law shall be allowed for the
Defendant.

ANNO REGNI GEORG II REGIS NONO.
At a GENERAL ASSEMBLY begun at Philadelphia, in the Province of Pennsylvania,
the Fourteenth Day of October, in the Ninth Year of the Reign of our Sovereign
Lord GEORGE, King of Great Britain, etc. Annoque Domini One Thousand Seven
Hundred and Twenty-two, and continued by Adjournments until the Eleventh Day of
May following: On which Day the following ACTS were passed by Sir WILLIAM
KEITH, Bar^ Lieutenant Governor of the said Province of Pennsylvania, etc. That
is to say,
CHAP. CCXLV. An ACT for emitting and making current Fifteen Thousand Pounds in
Bills of Credit. Postea Chap. 256 and Chap. 261.

Preamble.
FORASMUCH as through the extreme Scarcity of Money, the Trade of this Province
is greatly lessened and obstructed, and the Payment of the public Debts of
this Government rendered exceeding difficult, and likely so to continue, unless
some Medium in Commerce be by Law made current instead of Money: For Remedy
whereof, may it please the Governor that it be enacted, AND BE IT ENACTED by
Sir WILLIAM KEITH, Baronet, Governor of the Province of Pennsylvania, etc. by
and with the Advice and Consent of the Freemen of the said Province in General
Assembly met, and by the Authority of the same, That Bills of Credit to the
Value of Fifteen Thousand Pounds, current Money of America, according to an Act
of Parliament, made in the sixth Year of the late Queen ANNE, For ascertaining
the Rates of foreign Coins in the Plantations, shall be printed within two
Months next after the End of this present Session of Assembly, as follows, to
wit, Six Thousand Bills of Twenty Shillings Value each: Four Thousand Bills of
Fifteen Shillings Value each: Six Thousand Bills of Ten Shillings Value each:
Six Thousand Bills of Five Shillings Value each: Four Thousand Bills of Two
Shillings and Sixpence Value each: Six Thousand Bills of Two Shillings Value
each: Eight Thousand Bills of One Shilling Value each. Upon which Bills shall
be impressed upon the left side of the said Bills, about the Middle of the
Side, the Arms of Pennsylvania. And the said Bills shall be in the Form
following: THIS indented Bill of -- current Money of America, according to the
Act of Parliament made in the f^^th Year of the late Queen ANNE, The Form of
the Bills.
for Ascertaining the Rates of foreign Coins in the Plantations, due from the
Province of Pennsylvania, to the Possessor thereof, shall be in (...) equal to
Money, and shall be accepted accordingly by the Provincial-Treasurer,
County-Treasurers and the Trustees for the General Loan-Office of the Province
of Pennsylvania, in all public Payments, and for any Fond at any Time in any
of the said Treasuries and Loan-Office. Dated in Philadelphia, the -- Day of --
in the Year of our LORD One Thousand Seven Hundred and Twenty-three, by Order
of the Governor and General Assembly.

WHICH Bills shall be signed and numbered by Charles Read, Francis Rawle,
Benjamin Vining and Anthony Morris, Signers Names.
or the major Part of them. And the Sum of Money that each Bill shall be
current for, shall be printed on the Top of each Bill.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, Signers to take an Oath
or Affirmation.
That the said Persons appointed for signing the said Bills of Credit, shall
take an (...) or Affirmation before any one Justice of the Peace of this
Province, for the true Signing and Delivering of all the said Bills of Credit,
and no more than the Number mentioned in this Act, to the several Officers and
Persons herei^ after mentioned and appointed to receive the same, according to
the true Intent and Meaning of this Act: Fifte^^ Thousand Pounds of which Bills
of Credit, being signed and numbered as aforesaid, shall be put into the Hands
of Samuel Carpenter, The Trustees Names.
Jeremiah Langhorne, William Fishbo^^^ and Nathaniel Newlin, of this Province
of Pennsylva^^^, Gentlemen; who are hereby constituted Trustees of the General
Loan-Office of the Province of Pennsylvania; who shall give their Receipt for
such Bills as shall be by the^ received.

AND the said Charles Read, Francis Rawle, Benj^^^^ Vining and Anthony Morris,
Signers Reward.
appointed by this Act to sign the aforesaid Bills of Credit, shall, for such
their Service, have paid unto each of them, or each of their Executors or
Assigns, by the Trustees aforesaid, in Bills of Credit, the Sum of Twenty
Pounds, as a Reward for their Tro^ble in Signing and Numbering the Bills
aforesaid. Trustees Salary.
And the aforesaid Trustees shall have allowed unto each of them the Sum of
Fifty Pounds per Annum, for their Service and Trouble in the Execution of their
Trust. Which Trustees, before they receive the said Bills, or enter upon the
Execution of their Trust, shall give Five Hundred Pounds Security each, to the
Provincial-Treasurer for the Time being, for the true Performance of their said
Office, and take the following Oath or Affirmation before any one Justice of
the Peace of the Province of Pennsylvania: Trustees Oath or Affirmation.
I A. B. will, according to the best of my Skill and Knowledge, faithfully,
impartially and truly demean myself in Discharge of the Trust committed to me
by an Act of General Assembly of this Province, entitled, An Act for the
Emitting and Making current Fifteen Thousand Pounds in Bills of Credit;
according to the Purport and Tenor of the said Act, so as the Public may not
be prejudiced by my Consent, Privity or Procurement.

AND for the better securing and supporting the Credit of the said Bills, BE IT
ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That the said Trustees, before they take or
accept of any Lands, Trustees to inform themselves of the Mortgage^s Estate in
Fee-simple.
Houses or Ground-Rents in Mortgage for any of the said Bills, they shall
inform themselves of the real Value of the said Lands, Houses and Rents; and
also of the Title of the same, so as to be satisfied that the Person offering
the same to Mortgage have a good, indefeazible Estate in Fee-simple, in the
Lands, Houses and Rents offered to Mortgage, and that the same be free from all
Encumbrance whatsoever. And the said Trustees, 11^^^ l. to be let out at ^ per
Cent
or any three of them, being satisfied, as well of the Value as of the Title of
the said Lands, Houses and Rents, and being qualified, as by this Act is
directed, have full Power and Authority, and hereby are authorized and
empowered to let out the Value of Eleven Thousand Pounds of the said Bills upon
Loan, at the Interest of Five per Cent. per Annum for the Term of eight Years,
from the Date of the said Bills, in Sums not exceeding One Hundred Pounds, and
not under Twelve Pounds Ten Shillings to any one Person; the said Trustees
taking a Security by Way of Mortgage in at least double the Value of Lands and
Ground-Rents, lying in this Province, and in (at least) three Times the Value
of Houses within the Province aforesaid: Which Mortgage, Mortgages to be
enrolled.
when executed in the Presence of two lawful Witnesses, and acknowledged before
any Justice of Peace of this Province, shall be enrolled in a Book (to be kept
for that P^rpose by the said Trustees) at the Costs and Charges of the
Mortgager: An attested Copy of which Deed so enrolled and certified under the
Hands of the said Trustees, or any three of them, shall and is hereby declared
to be Matter of Record, and shall be good Evidence to prove the Sale or
Mortgage thereby made.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, Where the General Loan
Office is to be kept
That there shall be one public Office kept in the City of Philadelphia, which
shall be called, The General Loan-Office of Pennsylvania; where the said
Trustees, or any three of them, shall duly attend every third and fourth Day,
commonly called Tuesday and Wednesday, in each Week, for the first six Months,
and afterward the Attendance to be according to the Discretion of the said
Trustees, for the due Execution of the Trust reposed in them by this Act; and
for the Ease of the Inhabitants of the Counties of Bucks and Chester, who may
have Occasion to take upon Loan any of the said Bills of Credit, the aforesaid
Trustees, or any three of them, shall attend, as Occasion may require, at the
respective Towns of Bristol and Chester, for executing the Trust aforesaid, and
shall give at least fourteen Days public Notice at the respective Towns
aforesaid of the Time and Place of their Meeting for the Purposes aforesaid.
And the said Trustees, or some of them, shall, at their own proper Costs and
Charges, provide good large Books of Royal or other large Paper, and well
covered; wherein shall be recorded and enrolled all the Deeds of Mortgages to
be taken for Bills of Credit to be let out upon Loan, according to the
Directions of this Act, in a fair ^^gible Hand; for which there shall be paid
by the Mortgager, his Heirs, Executors or Administrators, to the Person or
Persons attending the said Office, in any of the Counti^^ aforesaid, for
Recording or Inrolling every Deed or W^iting, Five Shillings; and for every
Mortgage-Deed, if draw^ by the Clerk, Twelve Shillings, and no more.

Trustees to choose a Clerk.
AND for the more Ease and Convenience of the Trustees appointed by this Act,
they are hereby allowed and enabled to choose a fit Person to serve them in the
Office of a Clerk, during the Continuance of their Trust. Which said Sums of
Money so taken upon Loan shall be paid i^ again, The Manner of Payment of
Principal and Interest.
with the annual Interest, in the said Bills of Credit, or current Money of
America, to the said Trustees of the General Loan-Office aforesaid, in Manner
following, That is to say, One eighth Part of the Sum borrowed, with the whole
Interest of Five per Cent. per Annum, shall be annually paid by the Mortgager,
his Heirs, Executors or Administrators, to the said Trustees; who shall indorse
the Sum received, both Principal and Interest, upon the Back of the
Mortgage-Deed, and for each Indorsement made in Manner aforesaid, they shall be
paid, by the Mortgager, the Sum of One Shilling, and no more: And at the last
Payment of the said Money and Interest, the said Mortgage shall be released and
delivered up by the said Trustees: From which Time the said Lands, Houses and
Ground-Rents so mortgaged or engaged shall be forever clearly acquitted and
discharged. And the said Trustees shall make an Entry in the Margin of the
Inrollment of the said Mortgage, of the Day and Year of such Discharge and
Release: For which they shall be paid, by the Mortgager, the Sum of One
Shilling, and no more.

AND WHEREAS the aforesaid Bills of Credit are chiefly intended for the Benefit
of the poor industrious Sort of the People of this Province, at an easy
Interest to relieve them from the present Difficulties they labor under; which
End cannot be so well performed if any one Person should be allowed to take up
too great a Sum of the said Bills of Credit upon Loan: Therefore to prevent the
Splitting of any one Man's Lands into sundry Parcels by alienating the same to
diverse Persons in Trust, thereby to get great Quantities of the said Bills for
the Use of one Man, and to prevent committing of Frauds and Abuses in
Mortgaging any Lands, Houses or Ground-Rents being under any former Mortgage
and Encumbrance, which would in a great Measure frustrate the good End for
which this Act is intended, BE IT THEREFORE ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid.
Estates to be ^ee of all Encumbrances to the Mortgager's Knowledge.
That the Person offering any Lands, Houses or Ground-Rents to Mortgage for any
of the said Bills, shall, at the Time of Executing the Deed of Mortgage,
declare upon his or her Oath or solemn Affirmation, which the said Trustees, or
any one or more of them, are hereby enabled to administer, That he or she is
bona fide seized of the said Lands, Houses or Ground-Rents in his or her own
Right, and to his or her own Use, and that the same were not alienated to him
or her in Trust for the Use of any other Person, nor with Intent to raise any
Sum or Sums of Money upon the same by Way of Loan, or otherwise, for the Use of
any other Person or Persons whatsoever; and that the Lands, Houses and
Ground-Rents mentioned in the Mortga^^ Deed by him or her to be executed, are
free and clear from any other or former Gift, Grant, Sale, Mortgage or other
Encumbrance, to his or her Knowledge. Which Oath or Affirmation the said
Trustees administering the same shall indorse upon the Back of the Deed of
Mortgage, together with the Day and Year of the Caption thereof.

PROVIDED ALWAYS, If any Part of the said Sum remain in the Office four Months
after the Date of the Bills, 200 l. may be let out on Loan to one Person.
That if any Part of the Sum of Eleven Thousand Pounds be remaining in the
Office at the End of four Months, next ensuing the Date of the said Bills, and
not taken out upon Loan, it shall and may be lawful to and for the aforesaid
Trustees to lend out to any Person or Persons, upon the like Security as before
is directed in this Act, and under the same Rules and Restrictions, any Sum or
Sums of the said Money, so (...) the whole Sum advanced or lent to one Person
exceed not the Sum of Two Hundred Pounds in the Whole.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, Bills to be current for
8 Years, and pay all Debts whatsoever
That the aforesaid Bills of Credit, to be made and issued by Virtue of this
Act, shall be and continue current for and during the Space and Time of eight
Years, from the Date of the said Bills, and no longer, and shall be received
and paid for the same Value, and equal to the current Coin passing in this
Province, for Goods or any other Thing bought and sold by all Persons
whatsoever residing in and passing through this Province, according to their
Rates; and the Tender of the said Bills of Payment for Discharging of any Debt
or Debts, Bargain, Sale of Lands, or other Things, Bonds, Mortgages,
Specialties and Contracts whatsoever, already made, or hereafter to be made,
either for Sterling Money, Silver Money of America, Dollars, or any other
Species of Gold or Silver, or any Quantity of Plate or Gold, shall be as
effectual in the Law, to all Intents and Purposes, as if the current Silver
Coin of this Province had been offered and tendered for the Discharge of the
same, or any Part thereof.

AND to prevent the Damage that may happen to any Person or Persons, who, at
the Expiration of the said eight Years, may have any of the said Bills
remaining in their Hands, BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid,
That the aforesaid Trustees, and the Survivors and Survivor of them, Trustees
to receive the said Bills of Credit fou^ Months after the Expiration of 8 Years.
shall be and hereby are obliged to receive the said Bills of Credit four
Month^ after the Expiration of the said eight Years, of any Person tendering the
same, and thereupon, shall either pay unto the Owner of the said Bills the Sum
or Sums of Money for which they are by this Act made current, or otherwise
oblige themselves to pay the same unto the Owner (...) Owners of the said Bills
within three Months after the Bills are delivered to them, with the Interest of
Five (...) Cent. per Annum, till the same be paid.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, Persons refusing the
said Bills shall lose the Debt.
That if any Person or Persons, Creditor or Creditors, Obligee or Obligees, and
Party or Parties to any Contract, Covenant, Bargain or Agreement whatsoever,
already made or hereafter to be made, at any Time during the said eight Years,
shall, upon Tender of all or any of their Debts, Dues and Demands whatsoever,
in the Bills of Credit made current by this Act, refuse to accept or receive
the said Bills of Credit in Discharge of the said Debts, Dues or Demands,
according to their Val^^^ and Rates, he, she or they so refusing to accept the
(...) Bills of Credit in Discharge as aforesaid, shall lose the (...) Debt or
Debts, Sum or Sums of Money so refused; (...) they and every of them, their and
every of their Hei^^* Executors and Administrators, shall forever be barred
from bringing his or her or their Actions for the Recovery of the said Debt or
Debts, Sum or Sums of Money so refused as aforesaid; and the Defendant may
plead this Act in Bar to any Action or Actions that shall be so commenced.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, Penalties on Persons
offering Goods cheaper for Silver o^Gold than the said Bills.
That if any Person or Persons whatsoever within this Province, shall, during
the said eight Years, offer to sell or expose to Sale, any Goods or Chattels,
Lands or Tenements whatsoever, and deny or refuse to sell, or ask a greater
Value for the same, unless Payment be made in current Silver Money, Gold,
Plate, Dollars, or other Specie whatsoever, and not in the said Bills of Credit
(whereby the Credit of the said Bills may be impaired) then and in such Case
the Person so exposing to Sale, and refusing as aforesaid, shall, if the Goods
or Chattels exposed to Sale be under the Value of Five Pounds, forfeit the Sum
of Thirty Shillings for each Offense, to be recovered before any Justice of the
Peace within this Province, upon the Oath or Affirmation of any two Witnesses:
And if the Value of the Goods or Chattels, Lands or Tenements be above Five
Pounds, and under Fifty Pounds, the Exposer to Sale shall forfeit the Sum of
Five Pounds: And if the Goods or Chattels, Lands or Tenements be above the
Value of Fifty Pounds, and under One Hundred Pounds, the Exposer to Sale shall
forfeit the Sum of Ten Pounds: And if the Value of the Goods and Chattels,
Lands or Tenements be above One Hundred Pounds Value, the Exposer to ^ale shall
forfeit Fifty Pounds; to be recovered by Action of Debt in any Court of Record
within this Province, with Costs of Suit; the first two Forfeitures to the Use
of any Person that shall sue for the same; the other two Forfeitures, the one
Half to the Use of such Persons as shall sue for and prosecute the same with
Effect, the other Half to the Governor, to be applied toward the Support of
the Government of this Province; any Law, Custom or Usage to the Contrary in
anywise notwithstanding.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, Penalties on Persons
counterfeiting the Bills of Credit.
That if any Person or Persons whatsoever shall presume to counterfeit, or be
Aiding or Assisting in Counterfeiting any of the said Bills of Credit, (...)
utter or cause to be uttered any Bill or Bills (knowing (...) same to be false
and counterfeit) of the Tenor or in Imitation of any of the said Bills of
Credit made current by (...) Act, and be thereof legally convict, he, she or
they so offending shall be set upon the Pillo^y in some open public Place, and
there have both his or her Ears cut off and be publicly whipped on his or her
bare Back with Thirty-one Lashes, well laid on; and moreover, shall forfeit the
Sum of One Hundred Pounds current Money of America, to be levied of the Lands
and Tenements, Goods and Chattels of such Offenders; and shall pay to the Party
grieved double the Value of the Damage sustained by the said counterfeit Bills,
together with the Costs and Charges of Prosecution: And in Case the Person or
Persons so convicted have not sufficient to satisfy the Party for his or her
Damages and Charges, and to pay the Forfeiture aforesaid, then and in such Case
the Offender or Offenders shall, by the Order of the Court before whom such
Offender (...) convicted, be sold for any Term not exceeding seven Years for
Satisfaction of the same.

AND WHEREAS the true and regular Sinking of the said Bills of Credit will very
much conduce to the Keeping up the Value of the same, BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by
the Authority aforesaid, That a Committee of the Assembly of this Province,
Committee of Assembly to audit the Accounts of the Trustees, etc.
(...), once every Year, or oftener, as the Assembly shall think (...), be
appointed to audit the Accounts of the Sums of Money in Bills of Credit, let
out upon Loan to the Inhabitants of this Province, according to the Directions
of this Act; and also the Sums of Money and Bills of Credit received by the
said Trustees from the respective Mortgagers, their He^^, Executors and
Administrators; and shall, within one We^k next after the said Accounts are
audited, affix Adverti^^ments in the most public Places of the City of
Phil^^^^phia, setting forth what Quantity of Money has been ^^ceived and is in
the Hands of the Trustees aforesaid, (...) and above what will pay the Interest
due to the Public, for the Loan of the said Bills of Credit let out upon
Mo^^gage by Virtue of this Act. Which Money shall, by the said Trustees, be
given in Exchange for Bills of Cr^dle, made current by this Act, to any Person
or Persons bringing in the same. And the said Bills of Credit received as Part
of the principal Sum lent out of the said Office in Manner aforesaid, and
remaining in the Hands of the Trustees, shall, within ten Days after such
Audit, be sunk and destroyed in the Presence of the Committee who shall be
appointed Auditors, they having first compared the (...) Bills of Credit with
their Counterparts, and entered into a Book, to be kept for that Purpose, the
Number and Value of each Bill of Credit so sunk and destroyed.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, Annual Interest, after
Charges deducted, to be disposed of by the Assembly.
That the annual Interest received for the Loan of the said Bills of Credit
which shall be remaining in Money in the Hands of the said Trustees, after the
Accounts audited as aforesaid, and after Salaries and Charges allowed by this
Act are deducted, shall be disposed of in such Manner as the Assembly of this
Province shall from time to time think fit to order and direct.

AND WHEREAS the Fonds provided for the Support of this Government, have proved
deficient for these two Years last past, and sundry Debts, claimed as Debts due
from this Province, remain yet unpaid: Therefore, in order to discharge the
said Debts, BE IT ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That the Sum of Two
Thousand Five Hundred Pounds, The Provincial* Treasurer to have 2500 l. to
answer former Debts.
in the Bills of Credit aforesaid, be delivered into the Hands of the
Provincial-Treasurer of this Province for the Time being, who shall give his
Receipt for the same; and who shall forthwith apply the said Bills, or so much
of them as shall be needful, to the Paying and Discharging the several Sums of
Money (...) and owing by any Order of the Assembly of the Province of
Pennsylvania, within two Years last past, where the Foods have not been
sufficient to pay and answer the same. And that the aforesaid Sum of Two
Thousand Five Hundred Pounds, in Bills of Credit, hereby directed to be paid
into Provincial-Treasury of this Government, may be truly and (...) fide sunk,
as the Fonds arising by Virtue of three Acts of Assembly, viz. An ACT for
laying an Excise on all Wine, Rum, and other Spirits, retailed in this
Province: An ACT for laying a Duty on all Wine, Rum, Brandy and Spirits,
Melasses, Cider, Hops and Flax, imported, landed or brought into this Province:
And, An ACT for laying a Duty on Negroes imported into this Province; are paid
^^to the Provincial-Treasurer for the Time being; BE IT ENACTED by the
Authority aforesaid, That a Committee of Assembly of this Province shall, once
every Year, and oftener, if the Assembly shall think fit, audit the Accounts of
the Money received by the Provincial-Treasurer by Virtue of the Acts aforesaid,
for laying (...) Excise on strong Liquors, etc. in this Province, and shall
(...) and destroy the said Bills in the Manner before directed for Sinking the
Bills of Credit received by the Trustees into the Loan-Office of this Province.

AND WHEREAS there are diverse public Works now undertaken to be done in the
respective Co^^ties of Philadelphia, Bucks and Chester, which cannot (...) be
completed for Want of a Stock of Cash in the (...) of the Treasurers of the
respective Counties, BE IT THEREFORE ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, The
Sum of 1500 l to be paid to the County-Treasurers.
That the Sum of One Thousand Pounds, in Bills o^ Credit, made current by this
Act, be delivered by the (...) Trustees into the Hands of the Treasurer of the
County of Philadelphia: And the further Sum of Two Hundred Pounds, in the Bills
aforesaid, into the Hands of the Treasurer o^ the County of Bucks: And the
further Sum of Three H^^dred Pounds, in the said Bills, into the Hands of the
Treasurer of the County of Chester; to be applied by the respective Treasurers
of the several Counties aforesaid in such public Services as the Commissioners
and Assessors of the respective Counties shall think fit to order and direct.

AND that the said Bills of Credit, to be paid to the respective
County-Treasurers aforesaid, for the Uses aforesaid, may be truly and bona fide
sunk, BE IT ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That a Tax of O^^ Penny per
Pound, over and above all other County-Charges* shall be annually raised and
^evied by the respective Commissioners and Assessors of the said Counties in
the same Manner as County-Levies by an Act of Assembly of this Province,
entitled, An Act for the more effectual Raising of County-Rates and Levies,
are directed and appointed to be raised and levied, until all the Bills of
Credit received (...) the respective County-Treasurers for the Uses aforesaid,
be sunk and destroyed by the Tax aforesaid. Which said T^^ of One Penny per
Pound, shall be paid into the Hands of (...) respective County-Treasurers, in
Bills of Credit, or curren^ Money of America, toward the Sinking the Bills of
Cre^^^* by them respectively received for the Use of the respective Counties
aforesaid. And that a Committee of the Assembly of this Province, shall, once
every Year, audit the A^counts of the Money received by the respective
County-Treasurers, by Virtue of the said Tax of One Penny per Pound, and shall
sink and destroy the said Bills of Credit in the Manner before directed for
Sinking the B^lls (...) Credit received by the Trustees into the Loan-Officer
of this Province.

PROVIDED ALWAYS, Tha^ it shall and may lawful to and for the Trustees of the
Lo^^-Office aforesaid, or any three of them, to let out upon Loan, Trustees to
let out Bills of Credit on Security of good Pla^e, at 5^. per Ounce.
in such Manner as they shall think best, any Sum of the said Bills of Credit
not exceeding the Sum of One Hundred Pounds to one Person, upon Security of
good* Plate, to be delivered to them at the Value of Five Shillings current
Money of America, per Ounce, and at the Interest of Five per Cent. per A^^um,
to be paid in again to the said Trustees in the Space of Twelve-months, with
the Interest aforesaid. And in case of Non-Payment, to sell and dispose of the
said Plate for the most it will yield, returning the Overplus, if any be, to
the Owner, after Payment of the Principal, Interest, and Charges accrued
thereupon; any thing in this Act to the Contrary notwithstanding.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, Any Trustee or Trustees
dying the Assembly of this Province to choose another.
That in case of the Death or Removal of any of the aforesaid Trustees, the
Assembly of this Province for the Time being shall, from time to time, during
the Continuance of this Act, appoint some other fit Person or Persons in the
Room, Place and Stead of such Trustee or Trustees so dying or being removed:
Which Person or Persons, to be so appointed, shall give the like Securities,
and lie under the same Obligations with those who are now named and appointed
by this Act.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by (...) Authority aforesaid. On Default of Payment,
the Mortgagers to be sued by S^ire ^acias.
That where Default shall be ma^^ or suffered by any Mortgager of any Lands,
Rents or Houses (mortgaged by Virtue of this Act) his or her Heirs, Executors,
Administrators or Assigns, of or in Payment of any of the annual Payments or
Sums, whether in Part of Principal or Interest, which they or any of them
should have paid, in such Manner and Form, and according to the Purport, Tenor
and Effect of the said Deed or Deeds of Mortgage, and this Act of Assembly, and
at the Days, Times and Places, in the same Deeds respectively mentioned and
contained, That in every such Case, and upon any Default made in the Premises,
it shall and may be lawful to and for the said Mortgagees or Trustees, and the
Survivors and Survivor of them, and Heirs, Executors and Administrators of the
Survivors of them, and they are hereby required, after the Expiration of Two
Months next ensuing any of the Days of Payment herein directed, in the said
Mortgage contained, whereon any Part of the said Mortgage-Money and Interest
ought to be paid, to sue forth a Scire facias out of the Office of the Clerk of
the Court of Common Pleas for the County or City where the mortgaged Lands,
Ground-Rents and Houses lie, and be dire^^ed to the proper Officer, requiring
him, by honest and lawful Men of the Neighborhood to make known to the
Mortgager or Mortgagers, his, her or their Heirs, Executo^^, Administrators and
Assigns, that he, she or they be and appear before the said Justices of the
said Court of Common Pleas, to show, if any thing he, she or they have to say
wherefore the said mortgaged Premises ought not to be sold for the Payment of
the said Mortgage-Money, with the Interest due thereupon, together with such
Costs and Damages as the Court shall assess by Reason of the Non-Payment of the
Money aforesaid at the Time and Place whereon the same ought to have been paid:
And if the Defendant or Defendants in the Scire facias neglect or refuse to
appear, or be not to be found in the County; or if the said Defendant or
Defendants appear, and do not pay down the Money and Interest in Bills of
Credit, or current Money of Pennsylvania, then due upon the said Mortgage,
together with the Costs of Suit; then the Court shall award Execution by Levari
facias, directed to the proper Officer, by Virtue whereof the said mortgaged
Premises shall be taken in Execution, and exposed to Sale by public Vend^e,
within one Month after the awarding Execution aforesaid, and, upon Sale,
conveyed to the Buyer or Buyers thereof, and the Money or Price of the same
rendered to the Mortgagee or Trustees. And when the said Lands and Hereditaments
shall be so sold or delivered as aforesaid, the Person or Persons to whom they
shall be so sold or delivered (...) and may hold and enjoy the same, with their
Appurtenances, for such Estate or Estates as they were (...) delivered, clearly
discharged and freed from all (...) and Benefit of Redemption, and all other
Encumbrances made and suffered by the Mortgagers, their Heirs or Assigns. And
such Sales shall be available in Law, and the respective Vendees, their Heirs
and Assigns, shall hold and enjoy the same freed and discharged as aforesaid.
But before such Sales shall be made, Notice shall be given in Writing, (...) is
directed by one Act of Assembly of this Province, entitled, An Act for taking
Land in Execution for Payment of Debts.

Overplus of the Sale of Mortgages to be returned to the Owners.
PROVIDED ALSO, AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That when
any of the said Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments or Ground-Rents, which by the
Direction and Authority of this Act, are to be sold for Payment of Debts and
Damages due to the Public in Manner aforesaid, shall be sold for more than
will satisfy the same Debt and Damages, and reasonable Costs; then the Sheriff,
or other Officer who shall make the Sale, must render the Overplus to the
Debtor or Defendants; and then, and not before, the said Officer shall be
discharged thereof upon Record, in the same Court where he shall make Return of
his Proceedings concerning the said Sales.

PROVIDED ALSO, That no Sale which shall be made by Virtue of this Act, shall
be extended to create any further Estate to the Vendees, than the Lands or
Hereditaments so sold or delivered shall appear to be mortgaged for, by the
said respective Mortgages or defeazable Deeds.

PROVIDED ALSO, The Sheriff's Sale to be good, and not to be reversed for any
Errors.
That if any of the said Judgments which do or shall warrant the Awarding of
the said Writ of Execution, whereupon any Lands, Tenements or Hereditaments
have been or shall be sold, shall at any time hereafter be reversed for any
Error or Errors; then, and in (...) such Case, none of the said Lands,
Tenements or H^reditaments so as aforesaid taken or sold, or to be taken or
sold upon Execution, not any Part thereof, shall be res^^red, nor the Sheriff's
Sale th^reof avoided.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That if after any Lands,
Mortgagers having no good Right and Title, shall be sued by the Trustees for
Value received.
Ground-Rents or Houses are mortgaged to the aforesaid Trustees for any Bills
of Credit, according to the Directions of this Act, it shall appear the Party
Mortgager had no good Right and Title to the said Lands, Ground-Rents and
Houses, or any of them, so that the Government may be in Danger of Losing the
Moneys, or any Part thereof, advanced in Loan upon the Credit of the said
Lands, Ground-Rents and Houses, it shall and may be lawful to and for the said
Trustees, and they are hereby required and empowered to prosecute any Action or
Actions of Debt or Covenant upon the said Mortgage or Mortgages against the
said Mortgager, his Heirs, Executors and Administrators, and the same to
prosecute to Judgment and Execution in any Court of Record within this
Province, for the Recovery of the Moneys due on the said Mortgage, with the
Costs of Suit, by all lawful Ways and Means whatsoever.

Any Person at any Time paying Interest and Principal the Mortgages to be
discharged.
PROVIDED ALWAYS, That if any Person or Persons who shall take upon Loan any of
the said Bill^ of Credit, shall see Cause, at any time after the Making the
said Mortgage, to pay down the whole Principal and Interest then due in like
Public Bills of Credit, or current Money of America; upon his or her so ^oing
such Mortgage or Security shall be released and delivered in the Manner before
directed, and the Lands, Ground-Rents and Houses, in the said Mortgage-Deed
contained and mortgaged, shall be forever discharged therefrom.

CHAP. CCLI. An ACT to rectify Proceedings upon Attachments. (...) a former
Act, antea Chap. 84.

WHEREAS in the Execution of a Law of this Province, entitled, An Act about
Attachments, diverse Irregularities and fraudulent Practices have happened, to
the Injury of such Creditors as were willi^^ to accept of an equal Share of
their Debtors Effects, in Proportion to their Demands, and not have them wasted
in needless Prosecutions, contrary to the true Design of the said Act:
Therefore, to prevent such Practice for the Future, may it please the Governor
that it may be enacted, AND BE IT ENACTED by Sir WILLIAM KEITH, Baronet,
Governor of the Province of Pennsylvania, etc. by and with the Advice and
Consent of the Freemen of the said Province in General Assembly met, and by the
Authority of the same, Writs of Attachment not to issue out except Oath be made
that the Person indebted is not worth the Sum charged, or is absconded.
That from henceforth no Writ or Writs of Attachment shall issue forth or be
granted, before the Person or Persons requesting the same, or some other
credible Person or Persons for him or them, shall, upon Oath or Affirmation,
declare, That the Defendant in such Attachment is indebted to the Plaintiff
therein named in the Sum of Forty Shillings, or more; and that the Defendant is
and has been absconded from the Place of his usual Abode for the Space of six
Days, with Design to defraud his Creditors, as is believed; and that the
Defendant has not lest a clear Estate in Fee-simple within this Province
sufficient to pay his Debts, so far as such Plaintiff or Deponent knows or
believes. Which Oath or Affirmation the Officer that grants such Writs is
hereby empowered and required to administer, and to file the same in the Court
to which the said Attachment is returnable: And if any Attachments be granted
or issued out otherwise or contrary to the true Intent and Meaning hereof, the
Officer or Person so granting the same, shall, for every such Offense, forfeit
the Sum of ^ive Pounds; the one Half for the Use of him or her that will sue
for the same, the other Half to the Governor, for the Support of Government.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, Writs of Attachment to
be served by the Sheriff or Coroner.
That all Writs of Attachments to be issued out as aforesaid, shall be directed
to and served by the Sheriff or Coroner of the proper County; who shall attach
all the Lands, Goods, Chattels and Effects whereof the Defendants, in every of
the said Writs named, were possessed or reputed Owners at the Time of their
Absconding, in whose Hands ^oever the same can be found: Chattels and Effects
to be ^^thwith appraised, etc.
And that all the said Chattels and Effects, attached by Virtue of such Writs,
shall forthwith be appraised, inventory'd and secured by the Officer who
executes the Writs, in such Hands as he shall answer for.

AND if any of the Defendant's Money, Defendant's Effects, garnished, shall
also be attached.
or other Effects, happen to be garnished in other Hands, the same shall also
be attached, and the Garnishees obliged to appear and answer at the Return of
such Writs, and be proceeded against in such Manner as by the above-recited Act
is dire^^ed.

PROVIDED ALWAYS, No second Attachment to issue out.
That no Second or other Attachment shall, under the Penalty aforesaid, be
issued against or served upon the Estate or Effects of the same Defendant,
unless the first Attachment be not executed or happens to be diss^lved by the
Court.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, Justices accepting the
Offic^r's Return of Writs, to nominate Men to audit Accounts and adjust
De^mands.
That as soon as the Justices of that Court where the said Writs of Attachment
are returnable, accept the Officer's Return thereof, they are hereby empowered
and required to nominate and appoint Three honest and discreet Men to audit the
Accounts of all the Defendant's Creditors, and to adjust the Demands not only
of the Plaintiffs in those Attachments, but of all the Rest of the Defendant's
Creditors, and settle their Shares or Proportions of the Defendant's whole
Estate, real and personal, and make true Report of their Proceedings therein to
the Justices of the Court, next after such Appointment, which Justices are
hereby empowered and required to allow reasonable Fees to the said Auditors,
out of the Goods or Effects attached as aforesaid, as a Reward for their
Trouble.

Auditors to examine Men upon Int^^rogatories, etc.
AND for the better Discovery of the fraudulent Practices of the said
Defendants, it shall be lawful for the Auditors, so as aforesaid to be
appointed, or the major Part of them, to examine such Persons as they shall
think fit, upon Interrogatories or otherwise, on Oath or Affirmation (which
they are hereby empowered to administer) touching the Lands, Tenements, Goods,
Chattels or Effects of the said Defendants, and such other Things as may tend
to disclose their Estates, or their secret Grants and Alienating of their
Effects. And that the said Auditors may, by Warrants under their Hands and
Seals, cause to be broke open any Houses, Chambers, Shops, Warehouses, Doors,
Trunks or Chests of the said Defendants, where their Goods or Effects shall be
or reputed to be, and seize the same for the Use of their Creditors.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, Auditors to make Sale of
the Defend^ ^^s Lands, etc.
That it shall and may be lawful to and for the said Auditors, or a Majority of
them, to make Sale and Assurance of all the Lands and Tenements, Goods and
Chattels belonging to such Defendants, or otherwise to order the same for
Satisfaction of their Creditors, rateably, according to the Quantity of their
respective Debts: And that every Direction, Bargain, Sale or Assignment done by
the said Auditors concerning the Premises, pursuant to this Act, shall be good
and ef^ectual in Law against the said Debtors, their Heirs, Executors and
Assigns. And that it shall and may be lawful for a Majority of the said
Auditors to grant and assign, And dispose of Debts due to the Defendants.
or otherwise to order or dispose of all or any of the Debts due or to be due
to and for the Benefit of the said Defendants, to the Use of their Creditors.
And that the same Grant, Assignment or Disposition of the said Debts so to be
made, shall vest the (...), Right and Interest thereof in the Person or (...)
of him, her or them to whom it shall be so granted, assigned or ordered by the
Auditors; so that such Assignees may sue for and recover the said Debts in
their own Names, and detain the same to their own Use. And that after such
Grant, Assignment or Disposition made of the said Debts, neither the said
Defendants nor any other to whom such Debts shall be due, shall have Power to
recover the same, nor to make any Release or Discharges thereof.

PROVIDED ALWAYS, Auditors to give 30 Days Notice before Sale of Effects.
That the Persons nominated as Auditors shall give public Notice, thirty Days
before the Sale or Disposition of such Goods or Effects as aforesaid, by a
public Advertisement in the Weekly Mer^ury, or affixed on the Doors of the
respective Court-Houses of this Province.

AND if the said Defendants have heretofore granted, Any Lands conveyed or
assured with Power of Redemption may be sold by them, etc.
conveyed or assured, or shall at any Time hereafter grant, convey or assure
any Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments, Goods, Chattels, or other Estate, unto any
Person or Persons, upon Condition or Power of Redemption at a Day to come, by
Payment of Money, or otherwise, that it shall and may be lawful to and for the
said Auditors, or a Majority of them, before the Time of Performance of such
Condition, to assign and appoint, under their Hands and Seals, such Person or
Persons as they shall think fit, to make Tender or Payment of Money, or other
Performance, according to the Nature of such Condition, as fully as the said
Def^ndants ought to have done. And that the said Auditors shall, after such
Tender, Payment or Performance, have Power to sell and dispose of such Lands
and other Estates so assured, upon Condition to and for the Benefit of the
Creditors as aforesaid.

PROVIDED ALWAYS, Overplus of Effects to be returned.
That the Overplus of the said Debtor's Estate (if any be) after all their
Debts and lawful Charges are deducted, shall be returned to such Debtors, their
Executors or Administrators; any thing herein contained to the Contrary
notwithstanding.

PROVIDED ALSO, This Act not to repeal the Law about Attachments.
That nothing in this Act contained shall be deemed to repeal or disannul any
thing in the Law, entitled, An Act about Attachments under Forty Shillings;
any thing herein to the Contrary notwithstanding.

PROVIDED ALWAYS, Any Persons Goods, not Inhabitants, (...) be att^^hed.
That nothing in this Act contained shall be construed, deemed or taken to
exempt the Goods or Effects of any Person or Persons, not Inhabitants of this
Province, from being attached according to the Directions of an Act of General
Assembly of this Province, made in the Fo^^^h Year of the late Queen Anne,
entitled, An Act about Attachments; any thing in this, or any other Act
contained to the Contrary hereof in anywise no^withstanding.

CHAP. CCLII. An ACT for reducing the Interest of Money from Eight to Six per
Cent. per Annum.
BE IT ENACTED by Sir WILLIAM K^ITH, Bart. Governor of the Province of
Penns^lvania, etc* by and with the Advice and Consent of the Freemen of the
said Province in General Assembly met, and by the Authority of the same, 6 l.
per Cent. to be lawful Interest of Money, etc.
That no Person shall, directly nor indirectly, for any Bonds or Contracts to
be made after the Publication of this Act, take for the Loan or Use of Money,
or any other Commodities, above the Value of S^x Pounds for the Forbearance of
One Hundred Pounds, or the Value thereof, for one Year, and so proportionably
for a greater or lesser Sum; any Law, Custom or Usage to the Contrary
notwithstanding.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, Person^ taking more than
6 l. per Cent. forfeit the Money, or Things lent.
That if any Person or Persons whatsoever, do or shall (alter the Publication
of this Act) receive or take more than Six Pounds per Cent. per An^u^, on any
such Bond or Contract as aforesaid, upon Conviction thereof, the Person or
Persons so off^nding shall forfeit the Money and other Things lent; one Half
thereof to the Governor, for the Support of Government; and the other Half to
the Person who shall sue for the same, by Action of Debt, Bill, Plaint or
Information, in any Court of Record within this Province, wherein no Essoin,
Protection or Wager of Law, or any more than one Imparlance shall be allowed.

CHAP. CCLIII. An ACT for respiting Executions upon certain Judgments of Courts
in this Province.
Obsolete.

CHAP. CCLIV. An ACT for vesting the Lands and Lots, commonly called the Lands
of the Free-Society of Traders in Pennsylvania, in Trustees, to be sold for the
Payment of such Sums of Money as were paid into the Public Stock of the said
Society for purchasing the said Lands and Lots, and carrying on the Trade
designed by said Society.
--

CHAP. CCLV. An ACT directing the Process of Summo^^ against Freeholders.
Supplied.

CHAP. CCLVI. A Supplementary ACT, to the Act, entitled, See before Chap. 250
and hereafter Chap. 261.
An Act for Emitting and Making current Fifteen Thousand Pounds in Bills of
Credit.
WHEREAS, for good Reasons, an Act of General Assembly of this Province was
made and published this Session of Assembly, entitled, An Act for the Emitting
and Making current Fifteen Thousand Pounds in Bills of Credit; and because of
the dubious Construction of some Words mentioned in the said Act, it is
apprehended, the same will not answer the full Intent for which it was made:
Wherefore, for better Explanation thereof, and to supply any Defect that may
obstruct the good Ends and Purposes for which the said Act was made, BE IT
THEREFORE ENACTED by Sir WILLIAM KEITH, Baronet, Governor of the Province of
Pennsylvania, etc. by and with the Advice and Consent of the Freemen of the
said Province in General Assembly met, and by the Authority of the same,
Treasurer's Receipt sufficient for the Trustees Delivery of Money.
That the Receipts enjoined to be given to the Trustees by the
Provincial-Treasurer and the respective County-Treasurers of Philadelphia,
Bucks and Chester, for the respective Sums ordered to be paid to them, in Bills
of Credit, by the said Act of Assembly, shall de deemed, taken and allowed to
be good and sufficient Discharge to the said Trustees, their Heirs, Executors
and Administrators, for the Sums in Bills of Credit in said Receipts mentioned
to be received. And that after the aforesaid Sum of Eleven Thousand Pounds, in
the said Bills of Credit, ordered to be let out upon Loan by the said Act,
shall be accounted for by the said Trustees, and sunk according to the
Directions of the Act of Assembly; the aforesaid Trustees, their Heirs,
Executors and Administrators, and every of them, shall from thence forward
stand and forever be clearly discharged and acquitted of and from all and all
Manner of Securities, and other or further Demands to be had or made for any
thing by them done in Discharge and Execution of the Trust reposed in them by
the said Act.

AND WHEREAS the Trustees are enjoined by the said Act to attend the
Loan-Office at Philadelphia, tw^ Days in every Week, for the first six Months
after the Date of the said Bills: Which Attendance may prove burdensome to the
said Trustees, and of no Service to the Public, if all the said Sum of Eleven
Thousand Pounds in Bills of Credit should be let out upon Loan in less Time
than the Space of Six Months: BE IT THEREFORE ENACTED by the Authority
aforesaid, That the Attendance to be given at the said General Loan-Office,
Trustees Attend^^ce to be at the^^ own Discretion.
after all the said Bills of Credit are let out upon Loan, shall be at the
Discretion of the said Trustees; any thing in the aforesaid Act to the Contrary
in any wise notwithstanding.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, Coined Gold to be
current at 2 d. 3 q. per Grain.
That Spanish Pistoles, or any Pieces of good coined Gold, shall pass in this
Province, at the Rate of Two Pence Three Farthings per Grain, or Five Pounds
Ten Shillings per Ounce, in all Pa^ments whatsoever, and shall be accepted
accordingly in the General Loan-Office of this Province; and that no Person
shall exact any higher or other Rates for the same under any Pretense
whatsoever.

CHAP. CCLVII. An additional ACT to the Act, entitled, An Act for Laying an
Excise or Duty on all Wine, Rum, and other Spirits retailed in this Province.
Expired.

CHAP. CCLVIII. An ACT for the Encouragement of Trade.
Obsolete.

CHAP. CCLIX. An ACT for regulating and establishing Fees.
FOR Preventing of Extortion and undue Exactions of Fees by the several
Officers and Practitioners of Law in this Province; and to the End that all
Fees may be limited and reduced to Certainty, BE IT ENACTED by Sir WILLIAM
KEITH, Bart. Governor of the Province of Pennsylvania, etc. by and with the
Advice and Consent of the Freemen of the said Provin^e, in General Assembly
met, and by the Authority of the same, That the Fees of the several Officers
and Practitioners of Law in this Province, shall be as herein after is
as^ertained, limited and appointed, viz.

That the FEES belonging to the Keeper of the Great Seal of this Province,
shall be as follows, viz.

For Affixing the Seal to THE Lieutenant Governor's Commission, The Keeper of
the Great Seal's ^ees.
to be paid by the Public, Fifteen Shillings. The Keeper of the Great Seal's
Commission, to be paid by the Party, Twelve Shillings. Any Body of Laws passed
in any Session of Assembly, ^o be paid by the Public, Twelve Shillings. Any
Copy of such Body of Laws sent Home for the Royal Assent, to be paid by the
Public, Twelve Shillings. Each private Law for Sale of Lands and
Hereditaments, to be paid by the Party, Six Shillings. An Exemplification of
such Laws, to be paid by the Party, Five Shillings. The Master of the Rolls
Commission, to be paid by the Party, Ten Shillings. Every Provincial Judge's
Commission, to be paid by the Public, Six Shillings. A Commission of Sheriff
of the City and County of Philadelphia, to be paid by the Party, Eight
Shillings. A Commission of Sheriff of Bucks and Chester, each, to be paid by
the Party, Five Shillings. A Proclamation by the Governor and Council, to be
paid by the Public, Four Shillings and Six Pence. A Commission of the Peace,
to ^e paid by the County, Four Shillings and Six Pence. The Attorney-General's
Commission, to be paid by the Public, Four Shillings and Six Pence. The
Secretary's Commission, to be paid by the Party, Four Shillings and Six Pence.
The Surveyor-General's Commission, to be paid by the Party, Four Shillings and
Six Pence. A Commission for Clerk of the County of Philadelphia, to be paid by
the Party, Ten Shillings. A Commission for Clerk of Bucks or Chester, to be
paid by the Parties, Five Shillings. The Register-General's Commission, to be
paid by the Party, Ten Shillings. Each Coroner's Commission, to be paid by the
Party, Four Shillings. A Charter for a City, to be paid by the Parties, Twenty
Shillings. A Charter for a Borough or Town, to be paid by the Parties, Ten
Shillings. The Proprietor's Receiver-General's Commission, to be paid by the
Party, Four Shillings and Six Pence. Any single Law (other than private Acts)
passed in any Session of Assembly, Four Shillings and Six Pence. A special
Commission, to be paid by the Public, Four Shillings and Six Pence. Each
Patent for Land or Lots, to be paid by the Party, Four Shillings and Six Pence.


And that the FEES belonging to the Master of the Rolls shall be as follows,
viz.

The Master of the Rolls.
FOR REcording the Laws of the Province, in a fair, close Hand, including
Parchment or Book, for every Line, not less than Twelve Words, one with
another, One Halfpenny. Exemplification or Copying of all Laws under the Seal,
for the Royal Assent, or for the several Counties of this Province, One
Halfpenny per Line, as above. Recording, Exemplifying or Copying all Patents,
Commissions, Proclamations, and other Instruments, for each Line, as it stands
recorded as above, One Halfpenny. Recording Deeds, Writings, and Things
appertaining to the Inrollment-Office, he finding Paper or Parchment, for each
Line, as aforesaid, One Halfpenny. A Copy or Exemplification of any Record in
the said Office, as it stands recorded, for each Line, One Halfpenny.
Searching any Roll or Record, One Shilling. Indorsement of Certificate on each
Deed proved o^ acknowledged, and his Hand and Seal thereto, One Shilling and
Six Pence.


And that the FEES belonging to the Justices of the Supream-Court shall be as
follows, viz.

Justices of the Supream-Court.
FOR ALlowing and Signing the Allocator of every Certiorari, for removing of
Indictments, Orders, etc. Four Shillings. Every Cause brought into Court by
Certiorari, or Writ of Error, Six Shillings. Taking Bail to prosecute a
Certiorari, Two Shillings. Ju^gment on every Writ of Error, Noli prosequi, or
other Matter, to the Bench, Six Shillings. Every Rule of Court, Imparlance,
Continuance, by Advisement or otherwise, Two Shillings.


And that the FEES belonging to the Governor's Secretary, or Clerk of the
Council, shall be as follows, viz.

FOR REading and Entering every Petition to the Governor and Council, for Laying
out High-Roads, Governor's Secretary.
Two Shillings. Entering their Order thereupon, for Laying out the Road, and
Entering the Return thereof when laid out, Four Shillings and Six Pence. A Copy
thereof, if required, Three Shillings. Reading and Entering every other
Petition, and the O^der or Answer thereof, Two Shillings. A Mediterran^an-Pass,
or Let-Pass, if required, each, Three Shillings. A Register of every Vessel,
Four Shillings. (...) of the Provincial-Judges Commission, or for Trial of
Negroes, each, Five Shillings. General Commissions of the Peace, to be paid by
the County, Five Shillings. A si^gle Commis^ion for a Justice or Coroner, to be
paid by the County, Four Shillings and Six Pence. A single Commission for
Sheriff or Clerk, to be paid by the Party, Six Shillings. A Warrant under the
lesser Seal to affix the Great Seal to any Body of Laws or single Law passed
here, Provincial Judges Commission, Commission of the Peace, or an^ other
Comm^ssion, Proclamation, or other public Instrument, each, Two Shillings and
Six Pence. (...) for a Pardon, to be paid by the Party, Four ^^illings.


And that the FEES belonging to the Proprietary's Secretary shall be as
follows, viz.

FOR EVery Warrant of Land, directed to the Surveyor, Proprietary's Secretary.
Two Shillings. Every Patent for Lands, to be in Parchment, Seven Shillings and
Six Pence. Every Recital of Transference, or mentioning more than one Tract or
Parcel of Land, Nine Pence each, over and above the said Seven Shillings and
Six Pence.


And that the FEES belonging to the Attorney General shall be as follows, viz.

Attorney General.
FOR EVery capital Cause, where Life is concerned, Twenty-four Shillings, for
the whole Prosecution, to be paid by the Party. And if not found by the
Grand-Inquest, Twelve Shillings, to be paid by the County. Every other Matter
by Bill of Indictment, Six Shillings.


And that the FEES belonging to the Sheriff of every County of this Province
shall be as follows, viz.

Sheriffs.
FOR SErving every Writ of Arrest, and taking into Custody, Four Shillings and
Six Pence. Serving a Summons, Three Shillings. Return of a Summons, Arrest or
Attachment, One Shilling. Delivery of a Copy of a Declaration, One Shilling.
Every Bail-Bond, Two Shillings and Six Pence. Travelling-Charges for every
Mile, Two Pence. Summoning or serving a Witness with a Subpaen^, besides
Mileage, Nine Pence. Summoning and returning a Jury in every Cause where Issue
is joined, Two Shillings. Returning an Execution for Land, Six Shillings.
Returning an Execution for Goods and Chattels, One Shilling and Six Pence.
Serving an Execution, and selling the Lands or Goods executed or delivered to
the Creditor, and returning the Venditioni exponas or Liberari facias, for any
S^m not exceeding One Hundred Pounds, Six Pence per Pound. If above One Hundred
Pounds, Three P^^c^ per Pound, and no more. And that no Poundage be paid for
more than the real Debt or Damage (...) to the Plaintiff named in the
Execution. The Turn-Key's Fees to be paid upon the Discharge of a Prisoner, Two
Shillings and Six Pence. But if upon a Debt under Forty Shillings, Nine Pence.
Executing Writs of Enquiry of Damages, Attesting the Jury and making Return
thereof, Nine Shillings. Executing every Writ of Enquiry, and all Writs or
Orders of Partition of Lands or Tenements, Attesting the Jury for any Matter or
Thing to be done by him about such Partition, and making Return thereof, Twenty
Shillings. But if the Business of the Partition exceed what the Jury can
perform in one Day, then the Sheriff, for every Day more that he shall attend
on the Jury about the said Partition, shall have Six Shillings per Diem. Every
Judgment in civil Causes, One Shilling. ^^signing every Bail-Bond, One Shilling
and Six Pence. (...) criminal Cause, Ten Shillings. (...) capital Cause, Twenty
Shillings. (...) Fines, Forfeitures and Amerciaments estreated and paid to the
Treasurer, Six Pence per Pound, to be allowed by the Treasurer out of the same.


And that the FEES belonging to every Coroner of the Counties of this Province
shall be as follows, viz.

FOR VIewing a Dead Body, Ten Shillings. Coroners.
Summoning the Inquest, entering the Verdict, and returning the Inquisition, Ten
Shillings. Summoning or Arresting the Sheriff, or any other Person for him,
Four Shillings and Six Pence. Travelling-Charges, each Mile, Two Pence.


And that the FEES belonging to the Justices of Peace shall be as follows, viz.

FOR WRiting, Signing and Sealing every Warrant, Justices of the Peace.
Mittimus, Recognizance, Certificate, Pass, or other Instrument, One Shilling
and Six Pence. Signing every Attachment, Arrest orSummons, One Shilling Taxing
every Bill of Costs, and Signing every Judgment of Court, One Shilling. Every
Judgment of Court, upon Confession, Default, Noli prosequi, or otherwise,
Bench-Fees, Four Shillings. Signing and Sealing every judicial Writ, One
Shilling. Respiting every Recognizance, Six Penc^* Writing the Assignment of a
Servant* ^^gning it, and keeping a Record thereof, Two Shillings. Taking a
Deposition or Affidavit (...) of Court, One Shilling. Every Warrant of Summons,
Capias or Attachment, and Execution for Demand under Forty Shillings each, Nine
Pence. For every Judgment for such Debt or Demand, Nine Pence.


And that the FEES belonging to the Prothonotary or Clerk of the Supream-Court
shall be as follows, viz.

Clerk of the Supream-Court.
FOR Entering every Action or Cause there, One Shilling. Filing the Errors
assigned in every Cause, One Shilling. Every Retraxit, Discontinuance or
Quashing of a Writ of Error, One Shilling. Entering every Appearance, One
Shilling. Filing and Entering any Demurrer, Plea, Replication, and every other
subsequent Plea and Issue, One Shilling and Six Pence. Calling the Jury and
Attesting them, One Shilling and Six Pence. Attesting each Witness in every
Cause, Nine Pence. Recording every Verdict, One Shilling and Six Pence.
Recording every Judgment, One Shilling. Entering every Continuance, One Shilling
and Six Pence. Entering the Arrest of Judgment, One Shilling and Six Pence.
Entering every Warrant of Attorney, Committatu^ or Rule of Court, One Shilling.
Reading the Record, which is all the Proceedings below and above, Two
Shillings. Every Noli prosequi, One Shilling. Filing a Declaration, One
Shilling and Six Pence. Reading every Affidavit, Nine Pence. Acknowledging
Satisfaction upon Record, One Shilling and Six Pence. Every Subpaena to give
Evidence, One Shillin^ and Six Pence.


And that the FEES belonging to the Clerk of the Court of the General
Quarter Sessions of the Peace and Jail-delivery i^ every County and City of
this Province shall be as follows, viz.

Clerk of the Quarter Sessions.
FOR EVery Warrant of the Peace or Behavior, requiring to bring Sureties, if
drawn by the Clerk, Nine Pence. Every common Warrant, Subpaena or Mittimus, if
drawn by the Clerk, Nine Pence. Every Deposition upon Examination, if written
by the Clerk, Nine Pence. Every Recognizance, if drawn by him, Nine Pence.
Every Indictment of Felony, Trespass, Assault, Battery, Riot, etc. if drawn by
the Clerk, Three Shillings. A Copy thereof, One Shilling. Entering every
Appearance to every Judgment or Information, Nine Pence. Discharge o^ every
Person, upon Bail for the Peace, good Behavior, Contempt, or the like, with a
Warrant of Discharge thereon, One Shilling. Awarding and making out Process
against the Defendant upon an Information or Indictment, One Shilling.
Discharge of every Indictment upon Ignoramus, Nine Pence. Every Plea of
Not-guilty, Nine Pence. Entering every special Plea or Demurrer, One Shilling.
Entering every Submission, Nine Pence. Calling the Jury and Attesting them, Nine
Pence. Attesting each Witness in every Trial, Four Pence. Entering every
Verdict, Nine Pence. Entering every Judgment, Nine Pence. A Copy of every
Judgment, Six Pence. Every judicial Writ in criminal Cases, Two Shillings and
Six Pence. Respiting a Recognizance, Nine Pence. Every Writ of Restitution, Two
Shillings. Drawing and Entering every Order of Sessions, NinePence. Copying of
every Order of Sessions. Nine Pence. Reading and Entering every Petition, Nine
Pence. Entering the Return at large of a Road laid out, Two Shillings and Six
Pence. A Copy thereof, for every Sheet, containing Thirty Lines and Twenty
Words in a Line, Two Shillings. Making out the Estreats for levying Fines and
Forfeitures of each Session, One Shilling. Entering Similiter to join Issue, Six
Pence. Relinquishing the Plea, and Entering Submission, Nine Pence. A Venire
facias, One Shilling. Reading the In^ictment and Arraigning the Criminal, Nine
Pence. Continuing the Cause after Issue joined, Nine Pence. Reading every
Evidence upon Trial, Four Pence. Allowing every Writ of Certiorari, Writ of
Error or Pro^^d^ndo* Six Pence. Entering a Noli prosequi, Nine Pence. Entering
the Rule, upon a Motion to arrest Judgment, Nine Pence. Entering the Arrest of
Judgment, Nine Pence. A Habeas Corpus, Two Shillings. Drawing up and examining
every Record of all the Proceedings upon Indictments or Informations, in Rolls
of Parchment, not less than Ten Inches wide, for every Line containing Twelve
Words, Three Farthings per Line. A Copy and Signing thereof, if required, One
Half-pen^y per Line. Writing every Recommendation for a License to keep a
Public Inn or Alehouse, for selling Provision, and all Sorts of Liquors, and
Making the Bond o^ Recognizance, and Entering the said License, Bo^d or
Recognizance, Five Shillings.


And that the FEES belonging to the Prothonotary or Clerk of the Common Pleas,
in every County of this Province, shall be as follows, viz.

Clerk of the Common-Plea^.
FOR EVery Arrest, Attachment or Summons, Three Shillings and Four Pence. Every
Replevin, Three Shillings. Entering every Action, Six Pence. Filing the
Declaration, Six Pence. A Copy of the Declaration, in an Action of Account,
Debt, Detinue, Trespass, Assumpsit, Trover and Ejectment, One Shilling. A Copy
of a Declaration in an Action of Slander, Covenant or Waste, Two Shillings.
Withdrawing or Discontinuing every Action, Nine Pence. Entering every
Appearance, Six Pence. Filing and Entering every Demurrer, Plea, Replication,
and Pleas subsequent, and Issue in every Action, Six Pence. Entering every
General Issue, Six Pence. A Copy of every Plea, Replication, or Pleas
subsequent, Six Pence. Calling the Jury and Attesting them, One Shilling.
Attesting each Witness, who shall give Evidence on every Trial, Four Pence.
Recording every Verdict, Nine Pence. Entering the Judgment, Nine Pence. Every
Continuance, Nine Pence. Entering a Committatur, Nine Pence. Entering every
Warrant of Attorney, and Filing, Six Pence. Entering Remittitur for Debt or
Damages, Nine Pence. Drawing the Bill of Costs at large, Nine Pence.
Acknowledging Satisfaction of a Judgment upon Record, Nine Pence. Making out
the Estreats for levying Fines and Forfeitures in each Court, One Shilling.
Each Cause contained in the List of Issues, to be set up in the Clerk's-Office,
and in Court when sitting, Three Pence.


And that the FEES belonging to the Register-General of this Province shall be
as follows, viz.

FOR GRanting and Making Letters of Administration, Register-General.
under the Seal of the Office, Registering the same, and taking Bond, Twelve
Shillings. Making and Granting Probate of a Will, with Copy of a Will under the
Seal of the Office, and Registering the same, Fifteen Shillings. A Copy of
Letters of Administration, Four Shillings. A Citation, Two Shillings. Filing
the Inventory, and Certifying the Time when it was brought into the Office on
the Back of the Bond, or if no Bond, giving the Executors such Certificate,
Nine Pence. A Copy thereof, if it exceed not One Hundred Pounds, Three
Shillings. But if it amount to more, Six Shillings. A Search, One Shilling and
Six Pence. A Quietus, Four Shillings. Every Caveat, One Shilling. Filing and
Entering a Renunciation, One Shilling. A Copy of an Administrator's Account, if
less than one Sheet, Four Shillings: If more, Three Shillings per Sheet. A Copy
or Exemplification of a Will under Seal, which does not go with the Probate,
for every Line, not less than Twelve Words, One Halfpenny.


And that the FEES belonging to the Attorneys at Law in this Province shall be
as follows, viz.

FOR EVery Replevin, if drawn by the Attorney, Attornie^
Thr^^ Shillings. All Actions they shall undertake for Plaintiff or Defendant,
with Declaration, Twelve Shillings. Attending every Writ of Enquiry, Four
Shillings. Every Action brought to Judgment, Twelve Shillings. Writing every
Writ of Enquiry, Scire facias, Ve^ditio^^ exponas, or Execution, Three
Shillings. Drawing the Recognizance for prosecuting a Writ of Error, or
Certiorari, in the Supream-Court, (...) Shillings and Six Pence. Every Writ of
Execution in that Court, Six Shilling^. Drawing every Warrant of Attorney, Six
Pence.


And that the FEES belonging to the Constables within this Province shall be as
follows, viz.

Constables.
FOR SErving a Warrant, One Shilling. Traveling Charges, Two Pence per Mile.
Serving every Attac^ment, One Shilling. Serving an Execution for a Debt under
Forty Shillings, One Shilling. Selling Goods taken in Execution, One Shilling.


And that the FEES belonging to all Iuries and (...) within this Province shall
be as follows, viz.

Jurym^n.
FOR trying all Actions upon Issue joined, Eight (...) per Man.

For every Inquisition on Writs of Enquiry of Damag^^, Elegit, Partition, or on
any Inquest of Office, or other Enquiry, each Man, Two Shillings per Diem.

Witnesses.
AND that every Witness shall have for every Day he spends in going, coming and
attending to give Evidence in any Cause, Two Shillings per Diem.

Crier.
AND that the Crier of every Court shall have for every Action called in Court,
Nine Pence.

And that the FEES belonging to the Surveyor of (...) within this Province
shall be as follows, viz.

Surveyor.
FOR every single Hundred Acres or lesser Quantity, surveyed by him, Seven
Shillings and Six Pence.

For Surveying any Tract of Land, above One Hundred Acres, for the first
Hundred Seven Shillings and Six Pence, and for every Hundred Acres above, the
Sum of Three Shillings.

For a whole Lot, with Return and Plot, Six Shillings.

Which said Fees respectively shall be paid upon their Delivering up the
Draught or Plot, and Return of the Survey, signed with the Surveyor's own Hand,
to the Owner or Possessor of the said Lands or Lots, and not before.

For Searching for a Warrant or Return, and Copy thereof, each, One Shilling
an^ Six Pence.

For Travelling-Charges, per Mile, Two Pence.

For a Search, if not foun^, Nine Pence.

And the Surveyor shall, in fair Books, record the Warrant, and shall duly
prove the Draught^, and then record them.

For Recording the Prop^ietor^ Warrant, Making a Return thereof, after the
Survey, into his Secretary's (...), Recording the same, and for a Draught, Five
Shillin^

Which Fees as aforesaid are to be in full of all Man^er of Fees that the
Surveyor, or his Deputies, by any Means whatsoever, may hereafter pretend to
claim or take for any Matter or Thing relating to his said Office.

AND that the Fees belonging to each Chain-Carrier shall be after the Rate of
Three Shillings per Day, Chain-Carrier.
and the Owner of the Land to find a Marker.

AND that the Comptroller shall have, for every Ship or Vessel above One
Hundred Tons, Six Shillings, Comptroller.
and for (...) Vessels under, Four Shillings.

AND if any Attorney General, Defective Indictments to be drawn over again,
gratis.
Clerk of any of the said Courts, or other Person, draw any Indictment or
Information defective, they shall draw new Bills or Informations gr^tis, or
forfeit Five Pounds, with full Costs, to be recovered as hereafter directed.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, Tables of Fees to be se^
up.
That all and every the respective Officers and Attorneys at Law, whose Fees
are herein before respectively ascertained, limited and appointed, shall, and
are hereby required to make fair Tables of their Fees respectively, according
to this Act, and to publish and to set up the same in Manner following, viz.
The Fees of the respective Courts in the said Courts from time to time, during
the Sitting of the said Co^rts; and the Fees of other Officers, in their
respective Offices, within Three Months after the Publication hereof, where it
shall be constantly exposed to View and Inspection of all Persons who have
Business in the said Offices.

Atto^nies* etc. demanding greater Fees, forfei^, etc.
AND if any Attorney at Law, or Officer herein before mention^d, shall neglect
or delay to make and set up the Tables of their Fees, as herein before limited
and appointed by this Act; or shall, by Color of any Law, Custom or Usage of
this Province or Great Britain, take, dir^^^ly or ind^^ectly, any more, greater
or other Fees than is herein before appointed, for the Doing, Acting or
Performing any of the Mattors or Things herein before enumerated; or shall make
Demand of any Fees, without giving the Party of whom such Fees shall be
demanded, a Bill of Particularis, signed by him, if demanded; or shall refuse,
upon Demand, to give the Party a Receipt or Discharge, under his Hand, for the
Fees, upon Payment thereof; every such Person or Officer shall forfeit and pay,
for the first of every such Offense the Sum of Ten Pounds, current Money of
thi^ Province; and for the second Offense the Sum of Twenty Pounds, Money
aforesaid; one Half to the the Governor, for the Support of this Government,
and the other Hal^ to him or them that shall sue for the same: Which, with the
Penalties and Forfeitures aforesaid, shall be recovered in any Court of Record
within this Province, by Action of Debt, Bill, Plaint or Information, wherein
no Essoin, Protection or Wager of Law, or more than one Imparlance, shall be
allowed. And for the Third, and every other Offense, be liable to be displaced
or removed out of hi^ Office; any Law, Custom o^ Usage to the Contrary
notwithstanding.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, See before 8 Ge^. I.
Chap. 244.
That no Attorney or Practitioner at Law shall be admitted to make any Plea at
the Ba^ (except in his own Case) without taking the following Qualification by
Oath or Affirmation, viz. Attorney's (...)
THOU shall behave thys^lf in the Office of Attorney, within the Court,
according to the best of thy Learning and Ability, and with all good Fidelity,
as well to the Court as to the Cli^^^: Thou shall use no Falsehood, nor d^lay
any Person's Cause for Lucre or Malice.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, Assemblymen's Wages.
That from and after the Publication of this Act, the Wages of this present
Assembly, and of all succeeding Assemblies, shall be Eight Shillings per Diem,
for the Speaker, and Five Shillings per Diem, for each of the other Members.

CHAP. CCLVIII. A Supplementary ACT to an Act, entitled, An Act to prevent the
Exportation of Flour not merchantable.
Supplied.

CHAP. CCLIX. A Supplement to the Act, entitled, A^t Chap 252. S Geo. I.
An ACT for the Making good Beer, etc.
WHEREAS by an Act of this Province, made in the Eighth Year of the Reign of
King George, entitled, An Act f^r the Making good Beer, and for the
Consu^^^ion of Grain in this Province, Prohibiting the Use of Mel^ss^s, c^arse
Sugar, or Composition or Extract of Sugar, Honey, foreign Grains, Guin^a
Pepper, or any Liquor boiled up to the Consistency of Melasses, etc. in the
B^ewing, Making or Working of any Beer or Ale. And forasmuch as the good Design
and Intent of the said Act is or may be ^rustrated and ^luded, by the Brewer or
his Servant, secretly and clandestinely Aiding and Assisting in the Using
Melasses, etc. as aforesaid, in Manner aforesaid: For Prevention thereof, BE IT
ENACTED by Sir WILLIAM K^ITH, Baronet, Governor of the Province of
Pennsylv^^ia, etc. by and with the Advice and Consent of the Freemen of the
said Province in General Assembly met, and by the Authority of the same, That
every such Brewer, An O^th or Affi^ mation to be taken by Brewe^s, not to use
Melasses, etc in brewing Beer.
by himself, Servant, or other Person concerned in Brewing strong Beer or Ale
for Sale, before they are admitted or licensed, shall be qualified by Oath or
Affirmation according to Law, That he or she will not directly or indirectly,
to his or her Knowledge, Privity or Consent, use any of the said Ingredients in
the Making, Brewing or Working of such Ale or Beer, or put any therein, either
before or after the Brewing thereof, under the Pains and Forfeitures mentioned
in the said recited Act: Which said Qualification shall be taken by all Persons
who shall brew strong Beer or Ale for Sale, in the open Sessions of the Peace
within the City or County where they respectively follow their Trades, under
the Penalty of Five Pounds: And the J^^^ices of the said Sessions shall cause
the same to be ent^r^d on Record, according to the Direction, and under the
Penalties of the before recited Act.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, Collector of the Excise
^o take their Bonds and S^curities.
That the Collector of the Excise for the Time being shall take the Bonds and
other Securities to be given by the said Brewers in this and the said recited
Act, for the Uses in the said recited Act mentioned, and demand for the same
such reasonable Allowance (...) in the said recited Act is appointed; any thing
in this, or in the said recited Act, to the Contrary hereof in anywise
notwithstanding.

CHAP. CCLX. An ACT for establishing a Ferry over the River Schuylkil, at the
End of the High Street of Philadelphia.
FOR the greater Convenience of the Inhabitants o^ the West Side of the River
Schuylkil, traveling to and from the City of Philadelphia, BE IT ENACTED by
Sir WILLIAM KEITH, Bart. Govern^^ of the Province of Pennsylvania, etc. by and
with the Advice and Consent of the Freemen of the said Province (...) General
Assembly met, and by the Authority of the same, That the Mayor and Commonalty
of the said City of Philadelphia, Mayor and Commonalty to erect a Ferry at the
End of High Street.
may and shall, at their own proper Cost and Charge, within Eighteen Months
after the Publication of this Act, make or cause to be made a sufficient
Causeway and Landing at the End of the said High Street of Philadelphia, on
both Sides of the said River, and shall keep and maintain the same in good
Repair, fit for Footmen, Horses and Carts to pass and repass, and also provide
and maintain a good and substantial Ferry-Boat or Boats, and capable Ferry-men,
who shall reside and dwell on the West Side of Schuylkil River, and duly and
constantly attend the same as Occasion may require.

AND for the Support of the said Ferry, BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority
aforesaid, That the said Mayor and Commonalty, and their Successors, by their
Deputies or Officers, to be appointed for that Purpose, shall receive and take
for Ferriage over the said River, of all Persons (the Proprietor and Governor,
and their Attendants, only excepted) the several following Rates, and no more,
That is to say,

For each Person, One Penny. The Rates of Ferri^ge.


For each Hor^e, loaded or unloaded, One Penny.

For a Coach or Chariot, One Shilling.

For a Chaise of Four Wheels, Six Pence.

For a Chaise of Two Wheels, Four Pence.

For a Ca^t or Wagg^^ with their Loading, One Shilling. And without Loading,
Six Pence.

For a Sled loaded or unloaded, One Penny. Besides the aforesaid Rates for each
Horse belonging to, and Person accompanying such Coach, Chariot, Chaise, Cart
or Wagon or Sled.

For every Cow, or other neat Cattle, boated or swam, Thr^e Half-(...).

For every live Sheep, One Halfpenny.

And for every Hog or Swine, One Penny.

AND for the better Encouragement of the said Ferry, BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by
the Authority aforesaid, None to keep a Ferry between Roach'^ and Bl^nston's.
That no Person or Persons whatsoever shall keep or use any Boat or Canoe for
transporting any Person or Persons, Creatures or Carriages, for Hire or pay,
over the said River, in any other Place between those Ferries now called
Roa^h's and Bl^nston's Ferries, on the said River, besi^es the Ferry hereby
established, under the Penalty and Forfeiture of Twenty Pounds, lawful Money of
this Government, for each Offense, to be recovered in any Court of Record of
this Province, one Half thereof to the Use of the In^ormer or Prosecutor, who
shall sue for the same, and the other Half to the Use of the Mayor and
Commonalty of the said City, wherein no more than one Imparlance shall be
allowed.

PROVIDED NEVERTHELESS, That nothing herein contained shall be deemed or
adjudged to annul or make void any Contract made between the said Corporation
and any Person or Persons whatsoever, in Relation to the said Ferry, but that
the said Contract is hereby declared as good and effectual to all Intents and
Purposes (...) before the Enacting of that Law.

CHAP. CCLXI. An ACT for the better and more effectual putting in Execution an
Act of Assembly of this Province, See before Chap. 250. and Chap. 250.
entitled, An ACT for the Emitting and Making current Fifteen Thousand Pounds
in Bills of Credit.
Preamble.
WHEREAS some Doubts have arisen, That by the Purport and Direction of the said
Act, the Trustees of the General Loan-Office of this Province are restricted
from Loan of the said Bills on Mortgage of Lands and Houses subject to any
former or other Encumbrances whatsoever; and the Persons offering to mortgage
are thereby required to declare on Oath or Affirmation, viz. That the Lands,
Houses and Ground-Rents are free and clear from any other or former Gift,
Grant, Sale, Mortgage, or other Encumbrance to his or her Knowledge. AND
inasmuch as all or most of the Lands purchased of the Proprietary of this
Province, are held of him, his Heir^ and Assigns, under certain Rents and
Reservations; and many of the Houses and Lots of Ground in the City of
Philadelphia, and diverse other Parts of this Province, are subjected to Rents
and Reservations thence issuing to diverse Persons, with Cla^ses and Covenants
for securing the same Rents. AND inasmuch as many well-meaning People in this
Province called Quakers, who conscientiously scruple to take the Affirmation in
the usual Form, are debarred by the said recited Act from taking up of the said
Bills of Credit as thereby directed; by Means of all which Matters and Things
before recited, the good Ends intended by the said recited Act are in a great
Measure obstructed: For Remedying whereof for the Future, BE IT ENACTED by Sir
WILLIAM KEITH, Bart. Governor of the Province of Pennsylv^nia, etc. by and with
the Advice and Consent of the Freemen of the said Province in General Assembly
met, and by the Authority of the same, Trustees may accept of Est^tes in
Mortgage, though inc^mber'd with Grou^d-rents, etc.
That it shall and may be lawful to and for the said Trustees, and they are
hereby authorized and empowered, upon Loan of the said Bills, to accept in
Mortgage any Messuages, Lots, Lands or Tenements in this Province, of all
Manner of Persons whatsoever who have therein an inde^eazible Estate of
Inheritance in Fee-simple, though the same Messuages, Lands or Tenements be held
under or subject to any Reserve, Quit-Rent, Ground-Rent, or other incumbent
annual, half-yearly or quarterly Payment whatsoever thence issuing: Trustees to
inform themselves of the clear Value of Lands, etc.
But before the Trustees shall accept of any Mortgage of any Messuages, Lands
or Tenements so encumbered with any Rent or Rents, they shall inform themselves
of the clear Value of the same Messuages, Lands and Tenements, over and above
the Value of the Rent (not reckoning the said Rents at mo^e than Twenty, n^r
less than Twelve Years Purchase) and shall let out upon Loan to the Mortgager
one Third Part of the clear Value aforesaid, to the best of their Judgment, in
Bills of Credit, on S^cu^ity of the same Messuages, Lands and Tenements, at the
same Rate of Interest, for the same Term, in the same Manner and Form, subject
to the same Provisoes and Conditions, and to and for the Ends, Intents and
Purposes, as by the said recited Act is directed and appointed concerning other
Houses, Lands, Rents or Hereditaments.

PROVIDED NEVERTHELESS, AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid,
Any Quaker scrupling the Affi^mation, may sincerely declare, etc.
That where any Person, being a Quaker, does scruple to take an Affirmation in
the usual Form, he or she shall be admitted by the said Trustees to mortgage,
upon his or her solemnly or sincerely declaring to be true, That he or she is
seized of the Lands, Houses or Ground-Rents so offered to be mortgaged, at the
Time of Executing the Mortgage-Deed, in his or her own Right, to his or her own
Use, and not in Trust; and that free and clear of any Gift, Grant, Sale,
Mortgage, Arrearages of Ground-Rent, and all other Encumbrances, to his or her
Knowledge (the Proprietary's Quit-Rents or other Ground-Rents then to accrue,
and discovered to the said Trustees, only excepted.) And the same Exception
shall be admitted by the said Trustees to all Persons Mortgagers, Swearing or
Affirming in the usual Form, as required by the said recited Act; any Law,
Usage or Custom to the Contrary notwithstanding.

PROVIDED ALSO, AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That at
any Time or Times after any Default shall happen to be made, in Payment of any
Sum or Sums of Money, On Default of Payment the Trustees to sue, etc.
by any Mortgager or Mortgagers, according to the Direction of the said recited
Act; or in the more especial Form and Manner specified in the Deeds of Mortgage
respectively (whether the same Deeds have been already made and executed
pursuant to the same Act, or shall hereafter be so made and executed) it shall
and may be lawful to and for the Trustees of the General Loan-Office aforesaid,
to s^e forth and prosecute any Action or Actions of Debt, for Recovery of the
Mortgage Moneys, or any Part or Parcel thereof, either upon Bond (where Bonds
have been or shall be taken for Performance of the Covenants contained in the
Mortgage-Deed) or otherwise, as the Trustees shall think fit, to the ^ses,
Intents and Purposes mentioned and appointed by the said recited Act.

AND WHEREAS, by a Clause in the said reci^^d Act, it is enacted, viz. That the
Sum of Two Hundred Pounds, in the Bills aforesaid, are to be delivered into the
Hands of the Treasurer of the County of Bucks, and the further Sum of Three
Hundred Pounds, in the said Bills, into the Hands of the Treasurer of the
County of Ch^ster, to be applied by the respective Treasurers of the several
Counties aforesaid, in such public Services as in the same Act mentioned: But
inasmuch as the Moneys will not be wanted for those Services for a considerable
Time; and to the End that a Circulation of the said Bills may be more speedily
promoted: Therefore, BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That the
Rep^esentatives in General Assembly of the said respective Counties, shall
receive of the respective Treasurers of the same Counties, so much Moneys in
the Bills of Credit so delivered, or to be delivered pursuant to the said Act
(which the Treasurers are hereby required to pay pursuant to Orders of
Assembly) as will amount to discharge the Assembly-men's Wages of the
respective Counties, now due, or to become due during this present Session of
Assembly.

ANNO REGNI GEORG II REGIS DECIMO.
At a GENERAL ASSEMBLY begun at Philadelphia, in the Province of Pennsylvania,
the Fourteenth Day of October, in the Tenth Year of the Reign of our Sovereign
Lord GEORGE, King of Great Britain, etc. Annoque Domini One Thousand Seven
Hundred and Twenty-three, and continued by Adjournments until the Twelfth Day
of December following: On which Day the following ACTS were passed by Sir
WILLIAM KEITH, Bart. Governor of the said Province, That is to say,
CHAP. CCLXII. An ACT for the Emitting and Making current Thirty Thousand
Pounds in Bills of Credit.
WHEREAS by Virtue of an Act of Assembly of this Province passed in the Ninth
Year of His present Majesty's Reign, Preamble.
Bills of Credit for Fifteen Thousand Pounds were struck and emitted, which
being being found by Experience to fall far short of a sufficient Medium in
Trade, and could not supply the Wants of such as then had and still have
Occasion to borrow upon the S^curities prescribed by the said Act: Therefore
that those Deficiencies may be supplied, and a further Provision made for
Support of this Government, may it please the Governor that it may be enacted,
AND BE IT ENACTED by Sir WILLIAM KEITH, Bart. Governor of the Province of
Pennsylvania, etc. by and with the Advice and Consent of the Freemen of the
Province aforesaid in General Assembly met, and by the Authority of the same,
That indented Bills of Credit, 3^,00^ l. in Bills of Credit to be printed.
to the Value of Thirty Thousand Pounds, c^^rent Money of America, according to
an Act of Parliament made in the Sixth Year of the Reign of the late Queen
Anne, entitled, An Act for ascertaining the Rates of foreign Coins in her
Majesty's Plantations in America, shall be made and prepared before the first
Day of the Month called March next: Which Bills shall severally contain therein
the Sums hereafter respectively mentioned, and no other, That is to say, Number
of Bills of each Sort.
Eighteen Thousand of the said Bills the Sum of Twenty Shillings in each of
them: Eight Thousand of the said Bills the Sum of Fifteen Shillings in each of
them: Five Thousand of the said Bills the Sum of Ten Shillings in each of them:
Six Thousand of the said Bills the Sum of Five Shillings in each of them: Six
Thousand of the said Bills the Sum of Two Shillings and Six Pence in each of
them: Si^ Thousand of the said Bills the Sum of Two Shillings in each of them:
Four Thousand of the said Bills the Sum of Eighteen Pence in each of them: And
Seven Thousand of the said Bills the Sum of One Shilling in each of them.

AND the Trustees hereafter named shall (at the Charge of this Province, to be
defrayed and paid in Bills of Credit) cause and procure the said Bills to be
made and printed upon good Paper or Parchment, in the Form following, and not
otherwise, viz. Form of the Bills.
THIS indented Bill shall pass current for -- i^ all Payments, according to a
Law of Pennsylvania. (...) the -- Day of -- in the Y^ar our LORD One Thousand
Seven Hundred and Twenty-Three.

WHICH Bills shall be signed and numbered by Francis Rawle, Signers Names.
Anthony Morris, Charles Read and Samuel Hudson, or a Majority of them. And the
Sums of Money that every of the said Bills is to pass for shall be printed at
the Top of each Bill, in Words at length, with the Arms of Penn^^l^ania on the
left, and the Signers Names subscribed on the other Side thereof.

AND that the Counterparts of all the said Bills shall be likewise printed,
Counterparts of the Bills to be numbre^ by theSigner^, and delive^^d to the
Lo^n-Office
and shall be numbered by the Signers, who shall deliver the same unsigned to
the said Trustees for the Time being at the General Loan-Office hereby intended
to be erected, where they shall remain in Books kept for that Purpose, under
the Care and Charge of the said Trustees, for the trying the Truth of the
original Bills whenever there shall be Occasion. And the same Bills shall be
so fashioned as may render them less liable to be counterf^ited or fraudulently
resembled, by putting the Figure or Shape of a Crown in Five Shilling Bills,
two Crowns in Ten S^illi^g Bills, three Crowns in Fifteen Shilling Bills, and
four Crowns in Twenty Shilling Bills. And the said Signers shall also deliver
to the said Trustees, at the said Loan-Office, the Original of all the said
Bills so made forth, numbered and signed as aforesaid, not exceeding the Number
herein before respectively limited and appointed, taking the said Trustees
Receipts for the same, and charging them respectively with the Moneys contained
in the Bills so delivered in order to be lent out as herein after directed.
Signers to keep Account of the Bills delivered
And the said Signers shall cause to be kept a true Account of all the said
Bills by them signed and delivered to the Trustees as aforesaid; and for their
Trouble, Care and Diligence in doing what is required of them by this Act, they
shall receive Thirty-five Pounds a-piece, payable to each of them, Their Salary.
his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, in Bills of Credit, to be delivered
to them by the said Trustees, within six Days after they deliver the said Bills
and Counterparts in the Lo^n-Office as aforesaid.

BUT before the said Persons hereby appointed, Signers to take an Oath or
Affirmation.
or hereafter to be appointed by Virtue of this Act, to be Signers of the said
Bills of Credit, presume to act therein, they shall take an Oath or Affirmation
before any one Justice of the Peace of the City or County of Philadelphia, who
is hereby empowered and required to administer the same, charging them jointly
and severally, That they will well and truly number, sign and deliver all the
said original Bills of Credit, and truly number and deliver all the
Counterparts of the same Bills, and keep a true Account of what Bills they sign
and deliver, with the Counterparts thereof, according to the Direction of this
Act.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, Trustees Names.
That Samuel Carpenter, Jeremiah Langhorne, William Fishbourn and Nathaniel
Newlin, shall be and are hereby nominated and appointed Trustees for the
holding and ordering of the said General Loan-Office, and for the Receiving and
Issuing the said Bills of Credit and taking Securities for the same; and for
the directing, managing and performing all other Matters and Things hereby
injoined and required to be done and transacted by them in the said Office, and
relating to the said Bills of Credit, according to the Direction and true
Meaning of this Act.

How to be chosen in case of Death, etc.
AND if any of the said Trustees shall happen to die or be removed for
Misfeazance, or for not Acting, it shall be lawful for the Assembly of this
Province from time to time, during the Continuance of this Act, to elect and
appoint some other fit Person or Persons in the Place or Places of such Trustee
or Trustees so dying, misbehaving or refusing as aforesaid. But if no Assembly
be then Sitting, it shall be lawful for such of the Trustees as survive and
act, to choose others to supply such Vacancies until the Assembly sits: And
that the Trustee or Trustees so from time to time elected and appointed, shall
have the same Power and Authority as if they had been nominated and appointed
by this Act.

How Trustees are to be styled, and their Power.
AND that the Persons now or hereafter appointed Trustees by Virtue of this Act,
shall be styled The Trustees of the General Loan-Office of the Province of
Pennsylvania, and by that Name shall have Succession during the Continuance of
this Act, and by the Name aforesaid shall be able and capable in Law to
receive, take, hold, enjoy and retain to them, and their Successors in the said
Trust, all such Lands, Tenements, Rents and Hereditaments, and all such Plate
as shall be granted them in Mortgage, for securing the Re-payment of such Sums
of Money as they shall from time to time lend and issue in the said Bills of
Credit, and also to sell, grant, alien and dispose of the same in Default of
Payment, as in and by this Act is provided and directed in those Cases, and by
the same Name to sue and implead, be sued and impleaded, answer and be
answered, in all Cases relating to the said Trust, in all Courts and other
Places whatsoever; and by the Name aforesaid to do and execute all other
Matters and Things that to them shall or may appertain to do and perform,
pursuant to this Act, subject to the Provisoes, Restrictions and Limitations
herein expressed.

AND that the said Trustees for the time being, Trustees to attend at the
Loan-Office.
or any three of them, shall duly attend at the said Loan-Office every third
and fourth Day, commonly called Tuesday and Wednesday, in every Week, until all
Demands for borrowing Money in the said Loan-Office be answered; and afterward
at such Times as their Trust and Service of the Public may require them,
during the Continuance of this Act.

AND such of the said Trustees as shall undertake and execute the said Trust,
Trustees Salary.
shall be allowed for their Service and Trouble therein, after the Rate of
Twenty Pounds per Annum a-piece, added to the Fifty Pounds per Annum allowed
them as Trustees, for Emitting the said Fifteen Thousand Pounds, during the
Continuance of that Act; and after the Expiration thereof the Sum of Seventy
Pounds per Annum a-piece during the Continuance of this Act, payable to each of
them, his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, in the said Bills of Credit,
during the Continuance of their Trust.

BUT the said Trustees before they receive the said Bills, Trustees to give
Bonds to the Treasurer
or enter upon the Execution of their said Trust, each of them shall enter into
Bond to the Provincial-Treasurer for the time being, in the Penalty of One
Thousand Pounds each, conditioned for the due Observance of all Things required
of them by this Act, and true Performance of the Trust hereby reposed in them;
and shall also take an Oath or Affirmation before any one Justice of the Peace
of the City or County of Philadelphia, who is hereby empowered and required to
administer the same, in these Words, to wit, I A. B. will, according to the
best of my Skill and Knowledge, Trustees Qualification.
faithfully, impartially and truly demean myself in the Discharge of the Trust
committed to me by an Act of General Assembly of this Province, entitled, An
Act for the Emitting and Making current Thirty Thousand Pounds in Bills of
Credit, according to the Purport and Tenor of the said Act, so as none may be
prejudiced by my Consent, Privity or Procurement.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, Trustees to receive into
the Loan Office Bills and Counterparts, and give Receipts, etc..
That the said Trustees, after they are so qualified, shall receive into the
said Office all such and so many of the said Bills of Credit and Counterparts
thereof from the said Signers as they may have Occasion to lend out from time
to time, and thereupon shall give their Receipts for the same, and keep true
Accounts as well of the said Bills which they respectively receive and issue
out, as also of the Money and Bills which they shall actually receive and pay
pursuant to this Act: To which Accounts a Committee of Assembly shall have
Access.
To which several Accounts the Committee of Assembly, hereafter appointed to
audit the said Trustees Accounts, shall have free Access at all seasonable
Times, to the End they be satisfied that the Sums for which Bills may be issued
pursuant to this Act, is not exceeded; and may be acquainted from time to time
with the State of the whole Transactions and Affairs relating to the said
Office.

AND forasmuch as the chief Intent of appointing the said Trustees, is in order
to enable them to lend the said Bills on Securities of Lands at low Interest;
Therefore, IT IS FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, Trustees to lend
26500 l. of the said Bills on Land Security.
That the said Trustees shall lend out the Value of Twenty-six Thousand Five
Hundred Pounds of the said Bills, on Land Securities, at the Interest of Five
per Cent. per Annum, for the Term of twelve Years and a Half, from the Date of
the said Bills, in Sums not exceeding Two Hundred Pounds, nor less than Twelve
Pounds Ten Shillings, to any one Person.

Which are to pass in all Payments.
WHICH said Bills so lent shall pass in all Payments from any Person or Persons
to any other Person or Persons, and shall be deemed to be good Payment for
Debts, Rents, Goods, Chattels, Plate, Bargains, Sales, Specialties, Bonds and
all other Demands whatsoever, as if the same were paid in the Coins mentioned,
and at the full Rates ascertained in and by the said Act of Parliament; and
shall be as effectual a Bar of such Suits or Actions as shall be brought for
such Debts or Demands, as if the Money had been paid at the Day and Place,
according to the Condition, Defe^zance or Contract, and had been so pleaded;
and the Tenders and Refusal, or not receiving of the said Bills, shall be
available and conclusive in Law and Equity, as if such Tenders were in the said
Coins, or in current Coins of England, or in any other Coin or Specie mentioned
in the Contracts upon which any such Tenders are made.

AND if at any Time pending an Action upon any Bond or other Writing
obligatory, the Defendant shall bring into Court, where the Action shall be
depending, all the Principal-Money and Interest due on such Bond or Writing,
with all the Costs that have been expended in any Suit or Suits in Law or
Equity upon such Bonds or Writings, the said Money or Value thereof, in the
said Bills of Credit hereby made current, so brought into Court and offered at
the Value and Rates set upon them by this Act, shall be deemed and taken to be
in full Satisfaction and Discharge of the said Bond or Writing, and the Court
shall forthwith give Judgment to discharge every such Defendant off and from
the same accordingly.

AND for the better Discovery of Encumbrances which may affect the said
Securities, Searches to be free.
it shall be lawful for the said Trustees, and such as they shall appoint from
time to time, to make Searches in any Office in this Province; and, if there be
Occasion, take Copies or Transcripts of the Dockets, or Notes of any Extents
and Judgments, or of Mortgages and Entails, kept in any of the said Offices,
without paying any Fee or Reward for the same.

AND to the End said Trustees may be the better enabled to perform their said
Trust, Trustees to inform themselves of the clear Value and Titles of Land, etc.
they shall inform themselves as well of the clear Value as of the Titles of
all the Lands, Houses and Ground-Rents which shall be proposed in Security for
the said Bills, so as to be satisfied that the said Lands and Ground-Rents are
at least double the Value, and Houses treble the Value of the Sums requested to
be lent, and then they shall receive and take the same in Mortgage accordingly.

PROVIDED, That upon all the Loans hereby intended, the Trustees shall take
Care that the Borrower has an indefeazible Estate in Fee-simple in the Lands,
Tenements, Rents and Hereditaments by him proposed to be mortgaged; and that
they are free from former Sales, Gifts, Grants, Mortgages, Entails, and all
other Encumbrances, ^^cept the Proprietary's Quit-Rents, or other Rents issuing
out of the same.

BUT before the Trustees shall accept of any Mortgage upon Messuages, Lands or
Tenements, subject to the Payment of such Quit-Rents, Ground-Rents,
Rentcharge, or other annual Payments, they shall duly consider, and, according
to the best of their Skill, find out the clear Value thereof, not reckoning the
said Rents at more than Sixteen, nor less than Ten Years Purchase; and shall
let out upon Loan to the Mortgager one third Part of the Value aforesaid, in
Bills of Credit, at the Interest, and for the Term aforesaid.

The Person offering Lands, etc. in Mortgage to take an Oath or Affirmation.
AND that the Person offering any of the said Houses, Lands, Ground-Rents or
Rentcharge to mortgage for any of the said Bills, shall, at or before the Time
of executing the Deed of Mortgage, declare upon Oath or solemn Affirmation in
the usual Form, but in case that be scrupled, then in the Form allowed by a
late Act of Parliament to the People called Quakers in England, which the
Trustees, or any one of them, are hereby empowered and required to administer,
That he or she is really seized of the Premises in his or her own Right, and to
his or her own Use, and that the same were not conveyed to him or her in Trust
for the Use of any other Person, nor with Intent to raise any Sum or Sums of
Money upon the same by Way of Loan, or otherwise, for the Use of any other
Person or Persons whatsoever; and that the Lands, Houses and Ground-Rents, or
Rentcharge, mentioned in the Deed by him or her to be executed, are free and
clear from any former or other Gift, Grant, Mortgage, or other Encumbrance, to
his or her Knowledge, excepting the Proprietary's Quit-Rents or other Charges
appearing in his or her Deeds then produced: Which Oath or Affirmation shall be
indorsed on the Back of the Mortgage, with the Day and Year of the Caption
thereof; for which the Clerk shall receive Six Pence, and no more.

Trustees shall take and receive Deeds of Mortgage in Fee simple.
AND for securing the Payment of the Sums or Value so lent as above directed,
the said Trustees, or any three of them, shall, in Pursuance of the Trust
hereby reposed i^ them, and as Trustees of the General Loan-Office aforesaid,
and not otherwise, take and receive Deeds of Mortgage in Fee-simple for what
they lend: Which being executed and acknowledged or proved, as herein after
directed, shall transfer the Possession of the Lands, Houses and Hereditaments
thereby granted, to the said Trustees, and vest the Inheritance thereof in them
and their Successors, as fully and effectually as Deeds of Feoffment, with
Live^y and Seizin, or Deeds enrolled in any of the King's Courts at
Westminster, The general Words in Mortgages to be construed a^ particular
Covenants.
may or can do in England. In all which Deeds, the Words [ Grant, Bargain and
Sell] shall amount to and be construed and adjudged in all Courts of
Judicature, to be express Covenants to the said Trustees, their Successors and
Assigns, from the Bargainer or Mortgager, for himself, his Heirs, Executors and
Administrators, that the Mortgager, notwithstanding any Act done by him, was,
at the Time of the Execution of such Deed, seized of the Hereditaments and
Premises thereby granted of an indefeazible Estate in Fee-simple, free from all
Encumbrances (Rents due to the Lord of the Fee, with the other Rents and
Reservations contained in their respective Deeds, only excepted) and for quiet
Enjoyment thereof against the Mortgager, his Heirs and Assigns, and all
claiming under him or the former Owners thereof; and also for a further
Assurance to be made by the Mortgager, his Heirs and Assigns, as the Case may
require; so that those express Covenants are not to be set down at large in any
of the Mortgages, but that the said Trustees and their Successors in the said
Trust respectively, shall and may, in any Action to be brought, assign Breaches
thereupon as they might do in Case such Covenants were expressly inserted in
such Deeds.

AND that all the said Mortgages or defeazible Deeds, Mortgage^ to be entered
in Books, etc.
being sealed and delivered to the said Trustees, or some of them, in Presence
of two or more credible Witnesses, and proved or acknowledged before any
Justice of the Peace in this Province, shall be fairly entered at the Charge of
the Mortgagers, in large Books to be for that Purpose provided and kept by the
said Trustees as herein after directed; An attested Copy thereof to be Matter
of Record.
an attested Copy of any of the said Deeds so entered and certified under the
Hands of the said Trustees for the time being, or any three of them, shall be
and is hereby declared to be Matter of Record, and shall be good Evidence to
prove the Sale or Mortgage thereby mentioned to be made.

AND the said Trustees shall, at their own proper Costs and Charges, provide
the said Books of Royal or other large good Paper, well bound and covered,
wherein shall be recorded all the said Deeds of Mortgage given in Security for
the said Bills of Credit to be lent out as aforesaid.

AND for the more regular Management of the Affairs relating to the said
Office, Trustees shall choose ^ Clerk.
the Trustees are hereby empowered to choose and employ a fit and able Person
(for whom they shall be answerable) to serve them as Clerk of the said Off^ce,
during their Pleasure; who, for recording every one of the said Deeds shall
have the Sum of Four Shillings, and for every attested Copy thereof Four
Shillings, and no more, and for every Mortgage-Deed that he draws, the Sum of
Eight ^hillings, and no more; which said Sums are to be paid by the Mortgager,
his Heirs, Executors or Adminstrators, in full Satisfaction of all Fees and
Charges demandable by the said Clerk, for Drawing, Engrossing and Recording the
said Deeds, and inspecting the Title of the Lands and Premises thereby
mortgaged.

The Clerk to prepare Bond and Warrant of Attorney, etc.
AND the said Clerk shall also prepare a Bond of double the Mortgage Money for
every Mortgager to execute along with their respective Deeds of Mortgage,
conditioned for the Payment of the Money borrowed, with the Interest, according
to the Proviso or Condition contained in every such Deed of Mortgage; and shall
also prepare a Warrant of Attorney to be, at the same Time, signed and sealed
by every Mortgager, impowering such Person or Persons as the Trustees shall
nominate and appoint to acknowledge or suffer Judgment, which they the said
Trustees are hereby required to cause their Attorney to enter, in due Form of
Law, in the Court of Common Pleas for the proper County, against such Mortgager
as shall make Default in the Payment of the Mortgage Money, or any Part
thereof, according to the Direction of this Act, and Times of Payment specified
in the Proviso contained in his Mortgage Deed, either in Actions of Ejectment
to gain the Possession of the mortgaged Premises, or in Actions of Debt to be
brought upon any of the said Bonds for Nonperformance of the Conditions
thereof, or in such Actions of Debt as the said Trustees are hereby required to
bring for the Value of these Bills of Credit, which happen to be received by
the Mortgagers, whose Title to the Lands, Tenements or Heredit^ments by them
mortgaged shall prove defective, together with the Interest hereby allowed upon
such Loans, and Costs of Suit. And the said Clerk shall also insert a Release
of Errors in every of the said Warrants of Attorney: And for the said Bonds,
Warrants of Attorney, and Release of Errors, the said Clerk shall have One
Shilling and (...) Pence each, and no more.

BUT before any Person so chosen to be Clerk shall enter upon the Execution of
his said Office, he shall take an Oath or Affirmation, before some Justice of
the Peace of the City or County of Philadelphia, who is hereby empowered and
required to adminster the same, in these Word^, Clerk's Qualification
I A. B. shall truly and faithfully perform and execute the Office and Duty that
is directed and required of me, according to a Law of this Province, entitled,
An Act for Emitting and Making current Thirty Thousand Pounds in Bills of
Credit; and that I will keep a just and true Account of the Names of all such
Persons as shall apply to the said Office for Bills of Credit, and will prepare
and record their Deeds of Mortgage in the same Order of Time as their
Applications are made, without any undue Preference, unnecessary Delays, or
fraudulent Practice.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, How the Money lent shall
be paid in.
That the said Sums of Money so lent upon Mortgage shall be paid ^n again, with
the annual Interest, in the said Bills of Credit, or in current Money of
America, or in any other Bills of Credit made current by a Law of this
Province, to the Trustees of the General Loan-Office aforesaid, in Manner
following, That is to say, One Twelfth Part and Half of the said Sum borrowed,
with the whole Interest of Five per Cent. per Annum, shall be annually paid by
the Mortgager, his Heirs, Executors or Administrators, to the said Trustees;
who shall indorse the Sum received, both Principal and Interest, upon the B^ck
of the Mortgage-Deed, and for each Indorsment made in Manner aforesaid they
shall be paid, by the Mortgager, the Sum of Six Pence, and no more.

AND at the last Payment of the said Money and Interest, the said Mortgage
shall be released and delivered by the said Trustees; from which Time the said
Lands, How the Mortgage^ are to be released at the last Payment.
Hous^^ and Ground-Rents so mortgaged or engaged shall be forever clearly
acquitted and discharged; and the said Trustee^ shall make an Entry, in the
Margin of the Inrollment of the said Mortgage, of the Day and Year of such
Discharge and Release; for which they shall be paid by the Mortgager the Sum of
Six Pence, and no more. An attested Copy of which Entry of the said Discharge
or Release of such Mortgages, signed by the Majority of the said Trustees for
the time being, shall be as valid and effectual in Law, as their Re-conveyance
of the mortgaged Premises made and executed in the usual Form, can be to the
Mortgagers, their Heirs and Assigns.

PROVIDED ALWAYS, 500 l. may be lent out of the Loan-Offi^e to one Person after
eight Month^.
That if any Part of the said Thirty Thousand Pounds be remaining in the said
Office at the End of eight Months, next ensuing the Date of the said Bills, and
not taken out upon Loan, it shall be lawful to and for the said Trustees to
lend out the same to any Person or Persons, in the same Manner, and upon the
like Securities as herein before directed concerning other Loans, so as the
whole Sum thenceforth to be advanced or lent to any one Person exceed not the
Value of Five Hundred Pounds in the Whole.

PROVIDED ALSO, AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That
until some Default shall be made by the said respective Mortgagers of or in
Payment of the Mortgage-Money, The Mortgager to enjoy quiet Possession until
Default made.
or some Part thereof, it shall be lawful for them and their Heirs to hold and
enjoy the mortgaged Premises, with the Appurtena^^es; any thing in the Deeds of
Mortgage, or in this Act contained, to the Contrary notwithstanding.

Trustees upon D^^ault to sell the mor^gaged Premises, and no Redemption to be
had of the same.
BUT if Default shall be made or suffered by any of the said Mortgagers, their
Heirs, Executors, Administrator^ or Assigns, of or in Payment of any of the
said yearly Payments or Sums, whether in Part of the Principal or Interest
which they or any of them should have paid on the Days and Times and in Manner
and Form as in and by their respective Deeds of Mortgage shall be specified, it
shall and may be lawful to and for the said Trustees for the time being, at
their Discretion, either to take their Remedy by Course of Law, as herein above
directed, and proceed to take the mortgaged Lands and Hereditaments in
Execution as for other Debts; or, within two Months next after the Days whereon
the same ought to be paid, according to the several Provisoes or Conditions in
the ^^id Deeds respecti^ely contained, to enter upon the Land^, Houses, Rents
and Hereditaments in the same Deed specified, and expose the same to a public
Sale; and thereupon sell and convey the same Lands, Hereditaments and Premises
to the best Purchaser, and out of the Money arising by such Sale detain and
keep the Moneys to them due thereon, and all Cost^ and Charges relating
thereto, returning the Overplus, if any be, to the Owners of such Lands and
Hereditaments; and that then and in such Case the Owners of such Lands and
Hereditaments shall stand absolutely for-closed from all Equity of Redemption
of the same.

Sheriff's Sale not to be avoided or released.
PROVIDED ALSO, That if any of the said Judgments, which Warrant the Awarding of
any Writs for the Sale of the said Lands, Tenements or Hereditaments, shall at
any time hereafter be reversed for any Error or Errors, then and in every such
Case none of the said Lands, Tenements or Hereditaments so as aforesaid taken
or sold, or to be taken or sold upon Executions, nor any Part thereof, shall be
restored, nor the Sheriff's Sale thereof avoided.

AND that no Sale, No Estate to go to the Vendee but what appears to b^
mo^tgaged.
which shall be made by Virtue of this Act, shall be extended to create any
further Estate to the Vendees, than the Lands or Hereditaments so sold or
delivered, shall appear to be mortgaged for by the said respective Mortgages or
defeazible Deeds.

PROVIDED ALSO, Trustee^ to let out Money on Pl^te Secu^i^y, and sell the same
upon Default.
That it shall and may be lawful to and for the Trustees of the Loan-Office
aforesaid, or any three of them, to let out upon Loan, in such Manner as they
shall think best, any Sum of the said Bills of Credit not exceeding the Sum of
Two Hundred Pounds to one Person, upon Security of good Plate, to be delivered
to them at the Value of Five Shillings current Money of America per Oun^e, and
at the Interest of Five per Cent. per Annum; to be paid in again to the said
Trustees within the Space of twelve Months, with the Interest aforesaid: And in
case of Non-Payment, to sell and dispose of the said Plate for the most it will
yield, returning the Overplus, if any be, to the Owner thereof, after Payment
of the Principal and Interest, with the Charges accrued thereupon.

AND WHEREAS the Funds, provided for the Support of this Government, have
proved deficient, and diverse Sums claimed as Debts due from this Province
remain yet unpaid: Therefore, BE IT ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, 13^^ l.
to the Provincial Treasurer.
That the Sum of Thirteen Hundred Pounds in the said Bills of Credit be
delivered to the Provincial-Treasurer for the time being, who shall give his
Receipt for the same; which Receipt shall be deemed, taken and allowed to be
good and sufficient Discharge to the said Trustees, their Heirs, Executors and
Administrators, for the Sums in Bills of Credit mentioned and contained in such
Receipts: Which said Bills, How to b^ applied.
or so many of them as shall be needful, the said Treasurer shall forthwith
apply to the Paying and Discharging the several Sums of Money due and to be due
and owing by an Order of Assembly of this Province And that the aforesaid Sum
of Thirteen Hundred Pounds, How to (...) sun^
hereby directed to be lent to the Provincial-Treasury, and the Sum of Two
Thousand Pounds lent the (...) Treasury, in Bills of Credit, last Year, shall
be truly ^unk, as the Sum or Sums of Money due o^ to be due to this Province,
from the Collectors of the Impost and Excise, and by An Act for laying a Duty
on Negro^s imported; and by An Act for imposing a Duty on Persons ^onvicted of
heinous Crimes imported into this Province, etc. and by an Act of this present
Assembly for laying an Ex^ise on all Wine, Rum, Brandy, and other Spirits,
retailed in this Province, are paid to the Provincial-Treasurer for the Time
being.

AND WHEREAS the Assembly is given to understand, on Behalf of the
Commissioners and County-Treasurer of Philadelphia, that the said County is
indebted for Arrears of Assembly-Men's Wages, and other Demands for carrying on
and finishing the Public Buildings, which cannot be effected without an
Addition to the last Year's Loan. And it being also represented by the Mayor
and Recorder of the City of Philadelphia, that they want also to borrow Bills
of Credit for the public Service of the said City; BE IT THEREFORE ENACTED by
the Authority aforesaid, Sums of Money to be lent to the City and County of
Philadelphia; and how to be applied.
That the Sum of One Thousand Pounds, in Bills of Credit made current by this
Act, be delivered by the said Trustees to the Treasurer of the said County of
Philadelphia, who shall give his Receipt to the said Trustees for the same. And
that the further Sum of Three Hundred Pounds, in the said Bills of Credit, be
delivered by the said Trustees to the Mayor and Commonalty of the said City of
Philadelphia, they giving their Receipts to the said Trustees for the same, and
securing the Re-payment thereof, with Interest of Five per Cent. per Annum, by
Obligation under their common Seal, to be given to the Trustees of the
Loan-Office. And that the like Sum of Three Hundred Pounds be delivered to the
Treasurer of the said City, without Interest, for four Years, to be by the
Mayor and Commonalty applied toward the Building and Repairing of public
Wharffs and Bridges in the said City, they likewise giving their Receipts to
the said Trustees for the same.

A Sum to be lent to the County of Chester.
AND that the Sum of Four Hundred Pounds, in Bills of Credit, be delivered by
the said Trustees to the Treasurer of the County of Chester, he giving his
Receipt for the same: And that Three Hundred Pounds thereof be applied toward
building a Courthouse at Chester; and the other Hundred Pounds for Making and
Repairing Bridges on the King's High-Road from Philadelphia to New Castle, and
toward other public Charges.

AND that the further Sum of Two Hundred Pounds, A Sum to be lent to Bucks
County.
in Bills of Credit, be delivered to the Treasurer of the County of Bu^ks, he
likewise giving his Receipt for the same.

AND that the said several Sums so lent, and not hereby already appropriated to
particular Uses, shall be applied to such public Services as the said Mayor
and Common Council shall* within the Limits of the said City, and the
Commis^^^ners and Assessors of the said Counties shall, within their ^everal
Precincts, respectively order and direct. And that the said several Receipts
shall be deemed and allowed to be good Discharges to the said Trustees, their
Heirs, Executors and Adminstrators for the Sums respectively mentioned therein.

WHICH said Bills shall be sunk by such Proportions as other Loans are in this
Act appointed by Taxes to be laid for that Purpose, How the same shall be sunk.
in the same Manner that County and City Levies are usually raised and levied,
until all the said Bills of Credit, so as aforesaid received on the Account and
for the Use of the said City and Counties respectively, be sunk in the Manner
hereby prescribed for sinking Bills of Credit in the said Loan-Office, and as
the said Act for Emitting Fifteen Thousand Pounds in the like Cases directs.

AND WHEREAS the true and regular Sinking of the said Bills of Credit will very
much conduce to the keeping up the Value of the same; BE IT ENACTED by the
Authority aforesaid, Committee of Assembly to audit the Accounts of the Loan
Office, etc.
That a Committee of the Assembly of this Province shall, once every Year, or
oftener, as the Assembly shall think fit, be appointed to audit the Accounts of
all the Moneys so as aforesaid to be received by the Provincial-Treasurer,
County-Treasurers and Mayor of Philadelphia, together with the Sums of Money,
in Bills of Credit, let out upon Loan to the Inhabitants of this Province,
according to the Direction of this Act, and also the Sums of Money and Bills of
Credit received by the said Trustees from the respective Mortgagers, their
Heirs, Executors and Administrators; and shall, within one Week next after the
said Accounts are so audited, affix Advertisements on the most public Places
of the City of Philadelphia, setting forth what Quantity of Money has been
received and is in the Hands of the Trustees aforesaid, over and above what
will pay the Interest due to the Public for the Loan of the said Bills of
Credit let out upon Mortgage by Virtue of this Act; which Money shall by the
said Trustees be given in Exchange for Bills of Credit made current by this Act
to any Person or Persons bringing in the same. How the y^^rl^ Q^ota^ (...) to
be sunk.
And the said Bills of Credit, received as Part of the Principal Sum lent out
of the said Office in Manner aforesaid, and remaining in the Hands of the
Trustees, shall, within ten Days after such Audit, be sunk and destroyed in the
Presence of the Committee, who shall be appointed Auditors, they having first
compared the said Bills of C^edit with their Counterparts, and entered into a
Book to be kept for that Purpose the Number and Value of each Bill of Credit so
sunk and destroyed.

After the Sum emitted shall be sunk the Trustees are discharged.
AND that after the aforesaid Sum of Twenty-six Thousand Five Hundred Pounds, in
the said Bills of Credit, ordered to be let out upon Loan by this Act, shall be
accounted for by the said Trustees, and sunk according to the Direction of this
Act, the aforesaid Trustees, their Heirs, Executors and Administrators, and
every of them, shall, from thence forwards, stand and forever be clearly
discharged and acquitted of and from all and all Manner of Security, and other
or further Demands to be had or made for any thing by them done in Discharge
and Execution of the Trust reposed in them by this Act.

The whole Principal and Interest being paid discharges the Mo^tg^ge.
PROVIDED ALWAYS, That if any Person or Persons who shall take upon Loan any of
the said Bills of Credit, shall see cause at any time after the Making the said
Mortgage, and before the Forfeiture and Sale thereof, to pay down the whole
Principal and Interest then due, in the like Public Bills of Credit or current
Money of America; upon his or her so doing, such Mortgage or Security shall be
released and delivered in the Manner before directed, and the Lands,
Ground-Rents and Houses in the said Mortgage Deed contained and mortgaged,
shall be forever discharged therefrom.

AND IT IS HEREBY DECLARED AND ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That if any
Sum or Sums shall be paid down, And the Trustees shall let out the same on Loan.
pursuant to this Clause, or to the like Clause in the said Act for Emitting
Fifteen Thousand Pounds, before or at other Days or Times of Payment, than what
are or shall be mentioned or specified in the respective Mortgages, then and in
every such Case it shall be lawful for the Trustees of the Loan-Office hereby
and by the said Act erected respectively, and they are hereby required, in the
Presence of the Committee of Assembly, to sink such Part or Parts of the
Principal Sums due upon the said Mortgages, when such Payments are made as the
said Acts respectively direct in other Cases, and thereupon emit or let out
upon Loan all the Residue thereof, together with such other Sums as shall arise
from the Sales of Estates forfeited and sold pursuant to the said Accounts. All
which Sums so emitted shall be secured and made payable, with the Interest of
Five per Cent. per Annum, at such Days and Times, and after such Manner as in
and by this, and the said other Act, is respectively limited, and not
otherwise, so that the Payments be proportioned to the Time ^nexpired in the
said respective Acts.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, Interest of Bills of
Credit to be dispose^ of by the Assembly
That the annual Interest received for the Loan of the said Bills of Credit,
which shall be remaining in Money in the Hands of the said Trustees, after the
Accounts are audited as aforesaid, and after Salaries and Charges allowed by
this Act are deducted, shall be disposed of in such Manner as the Assembly of
this Province shall from time to time think fit to order and direct.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Person or
Persons whatsoever, within thi^ Province, shall, Penal^^^s on Persons offering
Goods cheaper ^or Silver or Gold th^n ^^id bills*
during the said twelve Years and a Half, offer to sell or expose to Sale any
Goods or Chattels, Lands or Tenements whatsoever, and deny or refuse to sell,
or ask a greater Value for the same, unless Payment be made in current Silver
Money, Gold, Plate, Dollars, or other Specie whatsoever, and not in the said
Bills of Credit (whereby the Credit of the said Bills may be impaired) then and
in such Case the Person so exposing to Sale, and refusing as aforesaid, shall,
if the Goods or Chattels exposed to Sale be under the Value of Five Pounds,
forfeit the Sum of Thirty Shillings, for each Offense, to be recovered before
any Justice of the Peace within this Province, upon the Oath or Affirmation of
any two Witnesses; and if the Value of the Goods or Chattels, Lands or
Tenements, be above Five Pounds, and under Fifty Pounds, the Exposer-to-Sale
shall forfeit the Sum of Five Pounds; And if the Goods or Chattels, Lands or
Tenements be above the Value of Fifty Pounds, and under One Hundred Pounds, the
Exposer-to-Sale shall forfeit the Sum of Ten Pounds; And if the Value of the
Goods and Chattels, Lands or Tenements be above One Hundred Pounds, the
Exposer-to-Sale shall forfeit Fifty Pounds, to be recovered by Action of Debt
in any Court of Record within this Province, with C^sts of Suit. The first two
Fo^feitures to be to the U^e of any Person that shall sue for the same; the
other two Forfeitures, the one Half to the U^e of such Persons as shall sue for
and prosecute the same with ^ffect, the other Half to the Governor, to be
applied toward the Support of the Government of this Province; any Law, Custom
or Usage to the Contrary in any wise notwithst^nding.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, Penaltie^ on Person^
counte^fei^ing Bills.
That if any Person or Persons whatsoever shall presume to forge or
counter^eit, or ^e Aiding or Assisting in Forging or Counterfeiting any of the
said Bills of Credit, or utter or cause to be utter^^ or offered in Payment,
any Bill or Bills (knowing the same to be actually forged or counter^eited)
with an Intent t^ (...) any other Persons, and be the^eof legally convicted,
he, ^^e or they so off^nding shall be set upon the Pillory in ^^me open public
Place, and there have b^th his or her (...) cut off, and be publicly whipped
on his or bare Back with Thirty-one Lashes well laid on; and moreover shall
(...) the Sum of One Hundred Pounds, current Money of Ame^ica, to be levied of
the Lands and Tenement^, Good^ and Cha^tels of such Offenders, the one Ha^^
thereof to the Use of the Government, and the other Ha^^ thereof to the
Discoverer. And the Offender shall pay to the Party gri^ved double the Value of
the Damage sustained b^ the said counterfeit Bills, together with the Costs and
Charges of P^o^ecution. And in Case the Person or Persons ^o convicted have not
sufficient to satisf^ the Party for his or her Damages and Charges, and to pay
the Forfeiture aforesaid, then and in such Case, the Offender or Offenders
shall, by Order of the Court before which they were convicted, be sold ^or any
Term, not exceeding Seven Years, for Satisfaction of the same. And in such Case
the Trustees of the said Loan-Office shall reward the Discoverer and Prosecutor
of such insolvent Offenders to the Value of Five Pounds.

AND that all Magistrates, and others, into whose Hands any counterfeited Bills
may happen to come, How counterfeit Bill^ shall be disposed of.
shall forthwith deliver the same to one of the Trustees of the said
Loan-Office, who shall cause the Names of those that delivered them, and of the
Persons from whom they were taken, to be indorsed on the Back thereof; which
Bills shall be safely kept in the said Office, and be forthcoming when there
may be Occasion to make Use of the same.

AND IT IS HEREBY DECLARED AND ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid* That this
present Act, and the said other Act for Emitting Fifteen Thousand Pounds, shall
be taken and allowed in all Courts within this Province as public Acts, all
Judges, Justices and other Persons concerned therein are hereby required to
take Notice thereof as such, without Pleading the same specially.

PROVIDED ALWAYS, 400 l. may be set out upon Lo^n to Owen Roberts.
That it shall be lawful for the said Trustees of the Loan-Office to lend unto
Owen Ro^erts, Collector of the Impost, etc. the Sum of Four Hundred Pound^,
upon his giving Land Security, as is usual upon such Loans: Which Sum is to be
delivered to the Provincial-Treasurer, toward paying the Arrears due from the
^ai^ Ow^n Roberts to the Treasury of this Province; any Thing herein contained
to the Contrary notwithstanding.

CHAP. CCLXIII. An ACT laying an Excise on all Wine, Rum, Brandy, and other
Spirits, retailed in this Province.
Supplied.

CHAP. CCLXIV. An ACT to improve the Breed of Horses, and regulate Rangers.
WHEREAS the Multitude of small-sized Stone-Horses, running at large in the
Woods, have very much degenerated the Breed of good Horses, and is found very
detrimental to the Inhabitants of this Province, it is thought necessary that
some suitable Remedy be provided in that Behal^: We therefore pray that it be
enacted, AND BE IT ENACTED by Sir WILLIAM KEITH, Bart. Governor of the Province
of Pennsylvania, etc. by and with the Advice and Consent of the Freemen of the
Province a^ore^aid in General Assembly met, and by the Authority of the same,
The Size of Stone Horses that are suf^e^ed ^o run in ^he Woods.
That from and after the Publication of this Act, no Stone-Horse of above
Eighteen Mo^ths (...) shall be suffered to run at large within this Province,
unless such Horse be of a comely Proportion, and, by the Judgment of the
Taker-up and one Freeholder in the Neighbou^hood where he is taken up, shall be
full thirteen Hands high, from the Ground to the Withers, reckoning four Inches
Standard Measure to one Hand.

Penalty on suffering Horses of lesser Size to run in the Woods.
AND in case any Stone-Horse, otherwise than is above described, shall be found
loose and at large in the Woods, it shall and may be lawful for any Freeholder
to take up and secure such Horse or Horses, in order to have them cut or gelt
by a skilful Gelder, on the Risque of the Owner, or cause him or them to be
detained until the Owner or Owners of such Horses (having speedy and convenient
Notice thereof) shall geld or cut, or cause them to be gelt or cut; for which
taking-up and gelding the Owner or Owners of such Horse or Horses shall pay to
the Person so taking up, securing and gelding, the Sum of Ten Shillings, to be
recovered in like Manner before any Justice of the Peace a^ a Debt under Forty
Shillings.

Proviso.
PROVIDED ALWAYS, That no Person shall be entitled to the said Sum of Ten
Shillings, unless Proof be made, by one or more credible Witnesses, that the
Horse so gelt was seen well one Month after the Time of gelding.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Stone-Horse
or Horses shall be found at large above the Age aforesaid, and under fourteen
Hands high, it shall and may be lawful for any Freeholder to take up such Horse
or Horses, and with the Assistance of two other sufficient Freeholders of the
Neighborhood where such Horse is taken up, to view the said Horse or Horses,
and if they shall judge such Horse or Horses not of comely Proportion or fit to
^un at large, according to the Intent and Meaning of this Act, then it shall be
lawful for the said Freeholders to order the same to be gelt by such a Person
as is above directed. And all Person^ whatsoever that are or shall be Owner or
Owners of such Horse or Horses ^o judged and geldt, shall pay the like Sum as
above allowed (to be recovered in the same Manner) as is by this Act directed;
any Law, Usage or Custom to the Contrary in anywise notwithstanding.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Horse or
Colt shall be taken and gelt according to the Direction of this Act, and no
Owner can be found in the Space of Twelve-months, that th^n and in such Case it
shall and may be lawful for such Person or Persons, with the Advice and Consent
of any two Justices of the Peace of the County to which they respectively
belong, to sell the same by public Vendue for the most that can be got, and
all and every such Person and Persons are hereby required to pay all the Money
arising by such Sales (after the Deduction of all incident Charges allowed by
this Act) into the Hands of the County-Treasurer for the Time being, for the
Use of the County.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That no Person, No
Person t^ r^nge the Woods without License.
by Color of Commission, or as a common Ranger, shall be allowed to range in
the Woods or Forests after Horses or Mares, without License first obtained from
the County Court where he lives, under the Penalty of suffering as a
Horse-Stealer, for every Horse or Mare that such unlicensed Person shall take
up, brand, mark, or dispose of.

AND forasmuch as it will be necessary for one or more Persons in the
respective Counties of this Province, Justices at the Q^^^ter-Sess^^^^ to pay
and satisfy the Ranger.
to be licensed as Rangers in and for each County, who are hereby empowered and
required to take up and secure all Horses and Mares for which no Owner can be
found, and all such Horses and Mares (after they have been posted in three or
more public Places within every County of this Province, at least one Year) to
sell and dispose of in such Manner as is before by this Act directed; which
said License the Justices at their General Quarter Sessions of the Peace for
the said respective Counties, are hereby empowered and require^ to grant, and
make such Allowance to the said Rangers for taking-up and securing the Horses
and Mares aforesaid as they shall think fit.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That in case any Person
or Persons shall at any time be sued for any thing they do by Virtue of this
A^t, they may plead the general Issue, and give this Act in Evidence.

CHAP. CCLXV. An ACT for continuing a^^ est^blishing a Ferry over Neshaminey
Creek, on the King's High-Road from Philadelphia to Bristol, in the County of
Bucks.
Expired.

CHAP. CCLXVI. An ACT to enable Trustees to sell the old Courthouse and Prison
belonging to the Borough and County of Chester.
Obsolete.

ANNO REGNI GEORG II REGIS UNDECIMO.
At a GENERAL ASSEMBLY begun at Philadelphia, in the Province of Pennsylvania,
the Fourteenth Day of O^tober, in the Eleventh Year of the (...) of our
Sovereign Lord GEORGE, ^^ing of Great Britain, etc. Annoque Domini One Thousand
Seven Hundred and Twenty-four, and continued by Adjournments 'til the
Twenty-first Day of August, in the Twelfth Year of his said Majesty's Reign:
The following ACTS were passed by Sir WILLIAM KEITH, Bart. Governor of the said
Province, That is to say,
CHAP. CCLXVII. An ACT to prev^nt the Exportation of Bread and Flour ^ot
merchantable.
Repealed 7 Geo. II. Chap. 320.

CHAP. CCLXVIII. An ACT to enable Jere^iah Langhorne, William Biles, Joseph
Kirkbride, jun. Thomas Watson, Practitioner in Physic, and Abraham Chapman, to
build a new (...) Prison in the County of Bucks.
WHEREAS it has been represented to this House, Preamble.
That the Courts o^ General Quarter Sessions of the Peace, and Common Pleas for
the County of (...), have of late been held at the Borough of Bristol, in the
said County; and that a great Number of the Inhabitants are settled many Miles
back from that Place, which mak^s their Attendance at Courts very inconvenient
and burdensome to the People living so remote; and that the Township of
Newt^wn is near the Center of the inhabited Part of the said County; and if a
Courthouse and Prison were erected in the said Township, it wou^d be very
commodious, and much for the Ease of the Inhabitants of the said County in
general: May it therefore please the Governor that it may be enacted, AND BE IT
ENACTED by Sir WILLIAM KEITH, Bart. Governor of the Province of Pennsylvania,
etc. by and with the Advice and Consent of the Freemen of the Province
aforesaid in General Assembly met, and by the Authority of the same, Persons
app^inted to buy Land, to build the Courthouse, etc.
That it shall and may be lawful to and for the said Jeremiah Langhorne,
William Bil^s, Joseph Kirkbride, jun. Thomas Watson and Abraham Chapman, or any
three of them, to purchase, and take Assurance, to them and their Heirs, of a
Piece of Land, situate in some convenient Place in the said Township of
Newtown, in Trust and for the Use of the said County; and thereon to erect and
build, or cause to be erected and built, a Courthouse and Prison, sufficient
to accomodate the public Service of the said County, and for the Ease and
Convenience of the Inhabitants.

AND BE IT ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, Commissioners and Assessors to
levy Money for the same.
That for the Defraying the Charge of Purchasing the Land, Building and
Erecting the Courthouse and Prison aforesaid, it shall and may be lawful to
and for the Commissioners and Assessors of the said County, or a Majority of
them, who are hereby required to assess and levy so much Money as the said
Trustees, or any three of them, shall judge necessary for Purchasing the Land
and finishing the said Courthouse and Prison. Provided always, Not
exceedceeding 300 l.
The Sum of Money so raised do not exceed Three Hundred Pounds current Money of
the Province.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, TheCourts to be kept,
and Elections to be m^de at the said Courthouse.
That when the said Courthouse shall be erected as aforesaid, that from
thenceforth the several Courts of General Quarter Sessions of the Peace, and
Jail-delivery, and the Courts of Common Pleas for the said County, shall be
holden and kept at the said Courthouse, when the same is built and erected in
the Township of Newtown as aforesaid; and the Election of Representatives to
serve in General Assembly, Assessors, and all other Officers of the said County
who are or shall be appointed to be annually elected, or otherwise shall be
made and elected at the said Courthouse; any Law, Custom or Usage to the
Contrary in anywise notwithstanding.

CHAP. CCLXIX. An ACT for raising of County Rates and Levies. See a Supplem^nt
to this Act 6 Geo. II. Chap. 326.

WHEREAS by the Help and Directions of a Law of this Province, passed in the
fourth Year of his present Majesty's Reign, entitled, An Act for the more
effectual Raising of County Rates and Levies, the Method of those Assessments
are brought to a competent Certainty and Regulation; but inasmuch as by a
Supplementary Act, passed in the eighth Year of this Reign, the Number of
Commissioners appointed by the first Act was reduced, and the Manner of their
Choice and Succession settled, it is now thought convenient that both those
Acts should be reduced to one, omitting some Clauses, which at present may not
be of absolute Necessity to insert; BE IT THEREFORE ENACTED by Sir WILLIAM
KEITH, Bart. Governor of the Province of Pennsylvania, etc. by and with the
Advice and Consent of the Freemen of the Province aforesaid, in General
Assembly met, The present Commissioners and Assessors to act.
and by the Authority of the same, That the present Commissioners for putting
the said Acts in Execution, together with the Assessors of the respective
Counties of Philadelphia, Chester and Bucks, now in being, shall continue in
their several Places, and execute the Powers and Authorities given and required
of them by the same Acts, for and during all the Time they were respectively
appointed to serve, according to the Direction of those Acts.

AND in Regard it is intended, that three Commissioners shall be continued to
execute this Act in every County of this Province, and that the Eldest or
First-chosen of them, shall be successively changed, by yearly Elections, in
each County; IT IS THEREFORE ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, The Time and
Method of electing Members of Assembly, etc. and their Returns.
That the Freeholders and Inhabitants of the said respective Counties, who are,
by the Laws of this Province, qualified to elect and be elected Members of
Assembly, shall, yearly and every Year, in a peaceable and quiet Manner, meet
at the Time and Place appointed for such Elections, or the Day following,
unless it be that called Sunday, and then on the Day next after; whereupon they
shall choose, not only the said Commissioners, but also Persons to serve in
Assembly, and to be Sheriffs, Coroners and Assessors of the said respective
Counties, in Manner following, That is to say, all Persons who, by Virtue of
the said Laws, have a Right to vote in Elections, shall deliver, in Writing, to
the Judges of those Elections respectively, in one Piece of Paper, the Names of
eight Persons for whom they vote to serve in Assembly, in one other Paper the
Names of two Persons for Sheriffs, and two for Coroners; and in another Piece
of Paper the Names of one Person to be Commissioner, and six to be Assessors
for each of the said Counties: And when the said Commissioners and Assessors
are so chosen, the Sheriff of the respective Counties shall take their Names in
Writing, under the Hands and Seals of at least six or more of the said
Freeholders, and certify the same to the Justices at their General Sessions of
the Peace in each County, next after such Election: Which Return shall be
entered on Record, by the Justices Clerk, in their Sessions Minute-Book. And
that the Returns of all the said other Elections shall be made as usual,
according to the Manner and Form prescribed by the said Laws of this Province
relating thereunto.

BUT before any of the said Commissioners and Assessors so chosen and returned,
shall take upon them the respective Service and Duty by this Act required of
them, they shall be qualified, to wit, the new elected Commissioner first, and
the Assessors afterward, by Oath or Affirmation, to the Effect following, That
is to say, The Commissioners and Assessors Qualification.
THOU shall well and truly cause the County Debts to be speedily adjusted, and
the Rates and Sums of Money by Virtue of this Act imposed, to be duly and
equally assessed and laid, according to the best of thy Skill and Knowledge;
and herein thou shall spare no Person for Favor or Affection, nor grieve any
for Hatred or Ill Will.

By whom to be administered.
WHICH Qualification or Engagement, any two or more of the Justices of the Peace
in the proper County, or City of Philadelphia, where such Assessments are
usually made, shall have Power, and are hereby required, under the Penalty of
Five Pounds a-piece, to administer when required: And the said Qualifications
shall be put in Writing, and signed by those that take them, and certified by
the Justices, and filed by the Clerk of the Sessions along with the said
Sheriff's Return of the Persons so qualified.

On Neglect to choose, the old ones to stand.
PROVIDED ALWAYS, That when the Inhabitants of any of the said Counties refuse
or neglect to choose Commissioners and Assessors according to the Directions of
this Act, then and in every such Case the Commissioners and Assessors, who
officiated the Year next preceding such Neglect, shall continue to officiate
in their respective Stations until another Election be made, according to the
Direction of this Act.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, To meet ann^lly, and to
calculate the public Debts, etc.
That the said Commissioners and Assessors, or a Majority of them, as soon as
conveniently they can, after they are qualified as aforesaid, shall annually
meet at the Place where the Quarter Sessions and other Courts are usually held,
and then and there, or at such other Times and Places as the said
Commissioners, or any two of them, may then after appoint, shall calculate the
public Debts and Charges of the said respective Counties; allowing all just
Debts and Demands which now are and hereafter shall be charg^^ble upon the said
respective Counties and City of Philadelphia; and shall from time to time
adjust and settle the Sum and Sums of Money which ought of Necessity to be
raised yearly, to pay for Representatives Service in General Assemblies, and to
defray the Charges of Building and Repairing of Court-Houses, Prisons,
Workhouses, Bridges, and Causeways at the Ends of Bridges; or for destroying
Wolves, Foxes and Crows, with such other Uses as may redound to the public
Service and Benefit of the said Counties respectively: And shall also ascertain
and set down such competent Sum and Sums of Money as shall be yearly applied
toward every of the said Services, together with such Sums as may be needful
to make good Deficiencies in County Rates assessed and not yet collected, and
to enforce the Collection thereof as Occasion may require.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That the said
Commissioners, Commissioners to ^ssue their Precepts to the Constables to bring
in Certificates of all Taxables, etc. on Penalty, etc.
or any two of them, in each County, shall, within six Days after their said
annual Meetings, issue forth their Precepts, directed to the Constables of
every Township, requiring them to bring to the said Assessors, within six Weeks
next after the Date of such Precepts, fair and true Certificates in Writing,
upon their Oaths or Affirmations, of the Names and Sir-Names of all and every
the Persons dwelling or residing within the Limits of those Townships or Places
with which they shall be charged, and the Names of all Freemen, I^mates, hired
Servants, and all other Persons residing or sojourning in every of the said
Townships, together with an Account of what Tracts and Parcels of Land and
Tenements they respectively hold in such Township; and how many and what Parts
of those Tracts are settled, improved or cultivated, and how much of the same
Land is sowed with Corn; and how many bound Servants and Negroes, with their
Ages; and what Stock of Cattle, Horses, Mares and Sheep they possess, without
Concealment, Fear, Malice, Favor or Affection, upon Pain of Forfeiture of any
Sum not exceeding Five Pounds, to be levied as by this Act is appointed.

AND every of the said Constables shall, 3 d. per Pound for the Constable.
by an Order from one or more of the said Commissioners, have and receive from
the Treasurer of the said respective Counties, Three Pence by the Pound, for
their Care and Trouble in executing and returning the said Precepts in Manner
aforesaid.

AND that the Assessors for the said respective Counties, Assessors to meet at
the Return of the Commissioners Precepts.
or any four of them, shall meet at the Day and Place where the Commissioner's
Precepts are made returnable, and then and there receive the Constables
Returns; and shall thereupon, by the Oaths or Affirmation of the said
Constables, or other credible Persons, or by any other lawful Ways or Means,
inform themselves what Persons and Estates in their respective Counties are
rateable by Virtue of this Act; and shall forthwith equally and impartially
assess themselves, The Manner of Ass^ssing, and who are rateable, etc.
and all others rateable as aforesaid, exempting out of such Assessments all
unsettled Tracts or Parcels of Land, That is to say, such Tracts of Land as at
the Time of the said Assessments making are unseated, although the same were
formerly accustomed to be rated in Assessments, and having due Regard to such
as are poor and have a Charge of Children; and no single Man who at the Time of
Assessment is under Twenty-one Years of Age, or has not been out of his
Servitude or Apprentiship six Months, shall be rated by this Act; but as to
those single Men whose Estates shall not be rated at Fifty Pounds, they shall
be assessed after the Rate of Three Shillings a Head, upon a Tax of One Penny
per Pound, both for Poor Rates, and City and County Levies.

Proviso.
PROVIDED ALWAYS, That no Assessments of County Rates, to be made by Virtue of
this Act in any one Year, shall exceed the Value of Three Pence in the Pound,
and Nine Shillings per Head.

Proviso.
PROVIDED ALSO, That the Propri^^^y and Governor's proper Estate shall not be
liable to b^ rated or assessed by Virtue of this Act.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, Persons who (...) Wolves
and red Foxes in an inhabited Part of the Country to bring their Heads to a
Justice, and receive a Reward, etc.
That whenever any Wolves are killed within the inhabited Parts of this
Province, and when red Foxes are killed by any Person or Persons (except
Indians) within the said inhabited Parts, he or they who kill such Wolves or
Foxes shall bring the Heads of them to some Justice of the Peace for the County
where they are killed, who is hereby empowered and required to examine the
Parties producing such Head, or at the Discretion of the Justice to charge him
or them, upon Oath or Affirmation, to declare where those Wolves or Foxes,
whose Heads they so produce, were killed, and by whom; and if it shall clearly
appear to the Satisfaction of such Justice, that those Heads were severed from
Wolves or Foxes so as aforesaid killed, by the Party producing the same, the
Justices before whom such Examination is taken shall cause the Tongues and Ears
of such Heads to be cut off* and upon Proof made as aforesaid, and not before,
shall grant an Order upon the Treasurer of the County where such Wolves or
Foxes are killed, reciting therein the Substance of the Proof, and requiring
the Treasurer to pa^ the Party after the Rates herein after appointed for each
Head, That is to say,

For every grown Dog or Bitch Wolf, Fifteen Shillings. Price for killing Wolves
and Foxes.


Every Wolf Puppy or Whelp, Seven Shillings and Six Pence.

Every old red Fox, Two Shillings.

Every young red Fox or Whelp, One Shilling.

PROVIDED NEVERTHELESS, Indian killing of Wolves to have the Benefit of this
Act.
That Wolves Heads brought before a Magistrate by any Indian, to claim the
Benefit of this Act, shall be attended with a Certificate, or other Proof of
some Person in the Neighborhood where such Wolf was killed, certifying, under
his Hand, that he saw such Head when green.

AND whosoever kills any Crows, 3 d. per Head for Cro^s.
he may bring them (but not less than six at a time) to the next Justice of the
Peace, who shall see their Bills cut off, and then give the Party that brings
them an Order upon the County-Treasurer to pay him Three Pence per Head, for
every such Crow.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, Treasurers to enter Sums
paid.
That all the said respective Sums of Money, with the Names of those Persons to
whom payable, and the particular Uses to which they are appropriated, shall be
entered in a Book to be kept for that Purpose by the Treasurers of the
respective Counties, who are hereby required to provide Books, at their own
Charge, wherein they shall make the said Entries accordingly. A Majority of
Commissioners to allow Accounts, etc.
And that all Accounts of Debts and Demands, justly chargeable upon the said
respective Counties, shall be allowed by a Majority of the Commissioners and
Assessors of the same Counties for the Time being, who shall certify such
Allowance accordingly, by Indorsement on the Accounts; and shall cause the
Names of the Creditors, and the Sums so allowed them, to be entered in a Book,
which the said Commissioners shall prepare and keep for that Purpose, at the
Charge of the said respective Counties.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That the said Assessors
shall, Counties to be divided into Districts, and and a Collector to be
appointed in each.
at the Return of the Commissioners Precepts abovementioned, divide the
Counties wherein they act into Districts, and appoint some fit Person in every
of those Districts to be Collector of the said Assessments from time to time,
and shall cause fair Duplicates of the Assessments of each District to be
drawn; one Part thereof shall, by the Clerk that writes the same, be delivered
to one of the said Commissioner^ of the proper County, and the other Part to
the Collector of each District, with Directions from the said Commissioners to
every such Collector, indorsed on his Duplicate, or annexed thereunto,
requiring him to demand of the Parties the respective Sums of Money wherewith
they are chargeable, Notice to be given of the Day of Appeal, etc.
and acquaint them of the Day of Appeal, which shall be appointed by the said
Commissioners within one Month after the Assessments are made; but where any of
the said Collectors cannot meet with the Party of whom Demand is to be made as
aforesaid, he or they shall leave Notice in Writing with some of the Family, or
at the Place of the Parties last Abode, signifying also the Day of Appeal; at
which Day every of the said Collectors shall return their Duplicates, with the
Names of such Persons, and Value of such Estates, as shall be concealed,
undervalued or omitted in the Constables Return.

The Party grieved may appeal.
AND if any Person or Persons find him or themselves aggrieved with any of the
said Assessments, supposing the same to be unequal, he or they may appeal to
the Commismissioners of the proper County.

Commissioners and Assessors to meet on the Day of appeal, and examine those
that appeal, etc.
AND the said Commissioners are hereby required to meet on the said Day of
Appeal, where the Assessors shall attend, and lay before the Commissioners all
the written Certificates of the Names of the Taxables, and the Account of their
Estates, returned by the Constables, as this Act requires, together with the
particular Valuation set by the Assessors upon the Persons and Estates so
returned: Whereupon the Commissioner shall take due Notice thereof, and
strictly examine the Persons appealing, upon their Affirmations, or otherwise,
concerning the Cause of their Appeal; and upon such Examination, or Proof of
others, they are empowered to diminish or add to such Person's Rate or
Assessment, as to them shall seem just and reasonable, with Power also to call
before them such Persons, and take Notice of such Estates as they find are
omitted in the said Assessments, in order to rectify it: And if the Persons so
omitted refuse or neglect to appear and give an Account of the Value of their
Estates, they shall pay double the Sum they should or ought to have been rated
at by this Act.

AND the said Commissioners, Assessments being rectified, to cause theirClerks
to give five Days Notice.
upon hearing of the said Appeals, shall rectify and adjust the said
Assessments, by abating or adding to the Sums contained in their said
respective Duplicates, and cause their Clerks to give the Parties concerned,
where Omissions are supplied or Additions made to their Assessments, five Days
Notice to appear before the Commissioners and make their Objections thereunto:
And that the said Clerks shall, Sums total to be delivered to the Treasurer.
within ten Days next after the said Day of Appeal, deliver to the Treasurers
of the said respective Counties a true Account of the Sums total which every
Collector shall be charged with pursuant to this Act.

AND the said Commissioners shall cause their Clerks to draw fair Duplicates of
the Assessments of the said respective Dist^icts so rectified as aforesaid,
Duplicates to be delivered to the Collectors.
and deliver them to the Collectors of those Districts where they belong,
within twenty Days after the said Day of Appeal, with a Warrant annexed
thereunto, under the Hand and Seal of one or more of the Commissioners who
signed the Assessments, requiring them forthwith to collect and receive from
the Persons assessed the several Sums in the said Duplicates respectively
mentioned, either in ready Money, In what Species to be paid.
Bills of Credit, or good merchantable Wheat, at Money Price, to be delivered
at such Market, Mill or Mills in the said respective Counties, where the Charge
of the Portage thereof to Philadelphia shall not exceed Three Pence per Bushel;
and that the Miller's Receipt for the said Wheat being delivered to the
respective Collector by the Persons paying or delivering the same as aforesaid,
shall be taken by the said Collectors as Payment from the Persons by or from
whom the same are delivered as aforesaid.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That the said Collectors
shall, Collectors to account once in six Weeks, and pay the Whole in three
Months.
once in six Weeks at least, render a just and true Account of, and bring in
and pay unto the respective County Treasurers all such Sums of Money and
Receipts for Wheat as they shall then have received, and shall pay the Whole
and every of the Sums of Money assessed in their respective Duplicates, within
three Months next after the said Days of Appeal; and the Treasurers shall give
Receipts to the Collectors for what they shall so bring in and pay from time to
time; which Receipts shall be the Collector's Discharge for so much.

Treasurers to acquaint the Commissioners of the Sums received, and of the
Collectors Neglect.
AND that the said Treasurers shall from time to time signify, in Writing, to
the said Commissioners, how much every Collector brings in and pays as
aforesaid; and when any of the said Collectors are negligent or refuse to do
their Duty in the Premises, the Treasurers are hereby required forthwith to
signify the same by Way of Complaint to the Commissioners where such Neglect or
Refusal shall happen.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid* Persons refusing to pay
in 30 Days after Demand, the same to be distrain'd for.
That if any Person or Persons so rated or assessed by Virtue of this Act,
shall refuse or ^^glect to pay the Sum or Sums so assessed, in ready Money,
Bills of Credit, or Wheat delivered in Lieu thereof in Manner aforesaid, by the
Space of thirty Days after Demand made as aforesaid, it shall be lawful for the
said Collectors respectively, by Virtue of a special Warrant for that Purpose,
signed and sealed by two or more of the said Commissioners, who shall forthwith
grant the same, and shall thereby empower the said Collectors to call to their
Assistance, if Occasion be, any Constable or other Person, and in case of
Resistance, to break open, in the Daytime, any House, Trunk, Box, Chest,
Closet, Cupboard, or other Things, where any such Offender's Goods and
Chattels, or other Effects are supposed to be, and make Distress and Sale
thereof, rendering the Overplus, if any be, to the Owners, after reasonable
Charges deducted.

For Want of Distress to take the Bodies.
BUT if no Distress can be found by the Collector, and the Party refuses or
neglects to show them Goods or Chattels of his own forthwith to satisfy the
Money then due, with reasonable Charges, then the Collector shall take the Body
of every such Person, and bring him to the County Goal, and deliver him to the
Sheriff or Keeper of the said Goal, who shall detain him in safe Custody,
without Bail or Main prize, until Payment be made.

If Effects for Part, the Delinquent to be imprisoned for the Residue.
PROVIDED ALWAYS, That where Effects cannot be found sufficient to answer the
whole Sum in A^rear, with Charges as aforesaid, then Distress shall be made for
so much as the Effects extend to, and the Party to be imprisoned only for the
Residue thereof, with incident Charges: All which Charges of Distress,
Assistance, and bringing to Prison, shall be adjusted and settled by any two or
more of the said Commissioners, when such Occasion shall happen.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, I^ Collectors neglect to
pay, to be fined.
That if upon Complaint of the Treasurer to the Commissioners* it shall appear
that any of the said Collectors refuse or neglect to pay the said Sums of
Money, or other Effects, which he or they shall be respectively charged to
collect, or produce Receipts testifying the Payments or Delivery thereof as
aforesaid, and deliver the Money or Receipts for Wheat in the Manner and at the
Time by this Act required, retaining such Sums as is hereby allowed for
collecting and paying the same, then the Commissioners of the proper County, or
any two of them, shall fine every such delinquent Collector, in any Sum not
exceeding Ten Pounds, and appoint others to act in his or their Stead.

AND moreover, Process to issue against delinquent Collectors Estates*
it shall be lawful for the said Commissioners of the proper County, or any two
of them, and they are hereby required, to meet and issue out their Warrants,
under their Hands and Seals, directed to the Sheriff or Coroner of the proper
County, requiring him to take the Body, and seize and secure the Estate, real
and personal, belonging to such Delinquent, or which shall come into the Hands
or Possession of his Heirs, Executors or Administrators, wherever the same can
be discovered or found in this Province, and make Return of his Proceedings
therein, at such Time and Place as the Commissioners shall appoint.

AND that the said Commissioners, Commissioners to appoint a General Meeting,
and to issue theirPrecepts, to sell the said Estates, etc.
who shall cause the said Lands and Estates to be seized and secured as
aforesaid, shall be and are hereby empowered to appoint a Time for a General
Meeting of the Commissioners of such County, and there do cause public Notice
to be given where such Meeting shall be appointed, six Days at least before
such General Meeting; and the Commissioners then present at such Meeting, or
the major Part of them, in case the Money detained by such Delinquent be not
then paid or satisfied, shall and are hereby empowered and required to issue
sorth their Warrants or Precepts to the Sheriff or Coroner of the proper
County, impowering and requiring him to sell and dispose of all such Estates as
shall be for the Cause aforesaid seized and secured, or any Part thereof, and
to bring the Money arising by such Sale to the Commissioners who granted such
Warrants, in order to satisfy and pay unto the respective County Treasurers for
the time being the Sum or Sums that shall be so unpaid or detained in the Hands
of the said Collectors, or other Persons, their Heirs, Executors or
Administrators respectively, with Damages for what shall be so unpaid,
returning the Overplus (if any be) to the Owner, after all necessary Charges
deducted.

The Title of which shall be by Deed from the Sheriff or Coroner.
AND when any Sale of Lands, Tenements or Hereditaments shall be made by such
Sheriff or Coroner respectively, pursuant to this Act, the Title and Conveyance
thereof shall be by Deed, signed* sealed and delivered by the Sheriff or
Coroner to such Person or Persons as shall purchase the same, in Fee-simple, or
otherwise; which shall be most absolute and available in Law against the said
Delinquents, and their Heirs and Assigns, and all claiming under them.

Gifts, etc. made after the Money should have been paid, are declared to be
fraudulent.
AND that all Gifts, Grants and Sales, which shall be made by any of the said
delinquent Collectors, or other Officers respectively, of any of their said
Estates, after the Time they should have paid the Money or Effects arising from
the said Assessments (unless the Estate so seized be sufficient to answer what
they are in Arrear) are hereby declared to be fraudulent, and shall not prevent
or avoid the Seizure and Sales hereby appointed to be made thereof as aforesaid.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, Freemen and hired
Servants to be taxed, Householders to give Account of their Lodgers, etc. on
Penalty, etc.
That all Freemen, not being Householders, nor having a certain Place of Abode;
and all the said hired Servants, shall be taxed at the Place where they reside
at the time of the Constables taking their Name^ as aforesaid; and that every
Householder shall, at the Request of the said Constables of the respective
Township^, Wards or Places, give an Account of the Names, Qualifications and
Estates of such Persons as shall sojourn, lodge or dwell in their respective
Houses, under the Penalty of Forty Shillings, to be levied, charged and paid in
Manner aforesaid.

On Non^payment by Freemen, or Servants, theCollectors may distrain upon the
Imployer.
AND if any such Freemen shall not be found at such Place of Residence, nor
within the same Township where their Names are taken as aforesaid, at the Time
when such respective Collectors shall come to receive such Householders
Assessment, then (unless such Freemen or Servant has by himself or Friend
paid, or unless such Householders or Imployer does pay the same for him upon
Demand made thereof by the Collector) it shall and may be lawful for every such
Collector to make Distress and Sale of the Housholder's or Imployer's Goods and
Chattels for the same, rendering the Overplus to the Owner as aforesaid; and
every such Householder or Imployer shall recover the same from every such
Freeman, with Charges, by Warrant from any Justice of the Peace of the proper
County, as in case of Debts under Forty Shillings.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, The Commissioners on
neglect of Duty to be fined, etc.
That if any of the said Commissioners shall refuse or neglect to do his or
their Duty in the Premises, he or they so offending shall be fined by a
Majority of the Justices of the Peace of the proper County for the time being,
at their next Quarter Sessions after the said Offense is committed, in any Sum
not exceeding Ten Pounds, for every Offense; which* by Virtue of a Warrant
under the Hands and Seals of the said Justices, or any two of them, directed to
the Sheriff or Coroner of the County where such Offender or his Estate is at
the Time of issuing of such Warrant, shall be levied by Seizure and Sale of
Lands, Distress and Sale of Goods, or Imprisonment of Body, as the case shall
require; In case of Death, etc. new Commissioners to be chosen.
and from and after such Refusal or Neglect, or if any of the said
Commissioners shall misbehave themselves, or happen to die, during the Time for
which they are chosen, the other Commissioners and Assessors for the time
being, at their next Meeting, next after such Death, Refusal, Misbehaviour or
Neglect* shall, in every such Case, appoint others to act in their Stead.

AND if any of the said Treasurers shall refuse or neglect to do his Duty, as
by this Act is required, The Treasurers to be fined by the Commissioners.
he shall be fined by two or more of the Commissioners for the County where he
is deficient of his Duty, in any Sum not exceeding Ten Pounds, for every
Offense; which shall be levied as aforesaid, by Virtue of a Warrant under the
Hand and Seal of two or more of the same Commissioners, directed as aforesaid;
and from and after such Refusal or Neglect, New Treasurers to be chosen on
Death, etc.
or if any of the said Treasurers shall happen to die, the Commissioners of the
proper County, shall, in every such case, appoint others to act in their Stead.

AND if any of the said Assessors shall refuse or neglect to do their Duty, as
this Act requires, The Assessor^ to be fined by Commissioners.
the Commissioners of the proper County, or any two of them, shall fine every
such Assessor, in any Sum not exceeding Ten Pounds, which shall be levied by
one of the same Commissioners Warrant in Manner aforesaid.

Fines to be paid into the County Stock.
ALL which Fines, with all other Fines and Fo^feitures mentioned in this Act,
shall be levied as aforesaid* and shall be paid and added to the public Stock
of the respective Counties where they shall happen.

The Commissioners Allowance.
AND the said Commissioners shall be allowed Four Shillings and Six Pence each,
for every Days Attendance, besides Twelve Pence for every Precep^ and Warrant
they are to sign by Direction of this Act; which, with reasonable Charges to be
allowed their Clerks for delivering the Duplicates and other Services, besides
Writing, as the said Commissioners in their respective Counties, by Order under
the Hand of two of them, shall think fit to allow, ^^all be paid by the
respective County Treasurers.

The Assessors Allowance.
AND the said Assessors for their Time and Labor i^ the Premises, shall be
allowed Six Pence per Pound for the whole Sum contained in the Rates of their
respective Co^^ties, after the Assessment is rectified and adjusted by (...)
Commissioners according to the Directions of this Act; (...) be paid by the
Treasurer upon Sight of the Commissio^e^^ Order for the same, and be equally
divided amongst them Which said Poundage shall be to the Assessors for the
ti^^ being, in full Satisfaction for all the Service and Attenda^^^ required of
them by this Act.

The Collectors Allowance.
AND the said Collectors shall retain in their Hands Twelve Pence per Pound for
all Sums of Money by them ^^^spectively collected, together with what they
shall pay the Assessors as aforesaid.

The Clerks Allowance.
AND those that officiate as Clerks shall, for their Pa^^ in writing the
Duplicates, and all Warrants and Precepts relating to the Premises, have and
receive as follows, (...) The Clerk of Philadelphia, Four Pounds: The Clerk
of Chester, Four Pounds: And the Clerk of Bucks, Three Pounds Ten Shillings:
Which the respective County Treasurer is hereby required to pay them
accordingly.

Penalty on the Clerk's neglect of Duty.
AND if any of the said Clerks shall neglect to do his or their Duty, as by this
Act is required, he or they shall be fined by the Commissioners of the proper
County in the Sum of Ten Pounds each; to be levied and paid as aforesaid And in
case of Death or Neglect of any of the said Clerks, the Commissioners shall
forthwith appoint others to act in their Stead.

PROVIDED ALWAYS, Persons sued, etc. to plead the general Issue, and^
That if any Person or Persons be sued or prosecuted for any thing done in
Pursuance of this Act, he or they may plead the general Issue, and give this
Act and special Matter in Evidence for their Justification; and if the
Plaintiff or Prosecutor become Nonsuit, or forbear Prosecution, or suffer
Discontinuance; or if a Verdict pass against him in such Action, The Plaintiff
if cast, to pay treble Costs.
Suit or Information, the Defendant shall have treble Costs, to be recovered as
in case where Costs by Law are given to Defendants.

PROVIDED ALSO, Prosecution to be within 12 Months.
That no Person or Persons shall be sued or prosecuted for Neglect in the
Execution of this Act, unless he or they be sued or prosecuted within twelve
Months after such Offense committed.

PROVIDED ALSO, No Suits to be stayed or Fines pardoned.
That no Proceedings prescribed or required by this Act against Collectors, and
other Officers and Persons refusing or neglecting to comply therewith, ^^^ll be
stayed by Noli prosequi, or otherwise; nor any Fines or Forfeitures arising by
this Act pardoned or released, without Payment thereof made to the Uses hereby
appointed; any Law or Usage to the Contrary notwithstanding.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, Treasurers to be chosen
by the Commissioners and Assessors.
That the said Commissioners and Assessors of the said respective Counties for
the time being, or the major Part of them, are hereby empowered and required,
as often as there may be Occasion, during the Continuance of this Act, to
choose a Treasurer for each County; which Treasurers, when so chosen, as well
as the present County Treasurers, and every of them, are hereby empowered and
required respectively to receive all the Money and other Effects arising as
well from all the said Assessments, as also the Fines and Forfeitures which
shall be imposed from time to time by Virtue of this Act.

AND that the said respective Treasurers for the time being, before they enter
upon the Execution of their Offices, Who are to give Security to the
Commissioners.
shall become bound to the Commissioners of the proper County, with one or more
sufficient Sureties, to wit, The Treasurer of Philadelphia County, in an
Obligation of One Thousand Pounds: The Treasurer of Chester County, in an
Obligation of Eight Hundred Pounds: And the Treasurer of Bucks County, in an
Obligation of Four Hundred Pounds, conditioned for the true Execution of their
respective Offices and due Observation of this Act.

In case of Death, etc. the Commissioners to appoint others.
AND in case of Death or Removal of any of the said Treasurers, then the
Commissioners and Assessors of the proper County for the time being, or the
major Part of them, shall appoint others to supply the Places of such a^ shall
so die or be removed, from time to time, who shall give Security as above;
Treasurers to keep Books, etc.
which said respective Treasurers shall give Security in Manner aforesaid, and
shall keep a distinct Book in each County, containing a particular Account of
all the Rates and Assessments made or to be made as aforesaid; as also of all
Disbursments and Payments made by Order of former Commissioners and Assessors;
with such Payments as shall hereafter be made by Order of the Commissioners by
Virtue of this Act.

And settle their Accounts yearly.
AND that the Treasurers shall, yearly, at the next Quarter Sessions after
Midsummer-Day, in each County of this Province, bring in and settle their
respective Accounts with the said Commissioners and Assessors, a Majority of
whom shall give Attendance for that Purpose, and shall have Power to adjourn
from time to time, till the Accounts be settled: Treasurers Allowance.
And the Treasurers shall be allowed for their Trouble in receiving and paying
all such Money as shall come into their Hands respectively by Virtue of this or
the other Acts for raising County Levies, so much as the said Commissioners and
Assessors, or the major Part of them, from time to time shall judge reasonable.

Treasurers removed to deliver up their Accounts, etc. to their Successors, on
Penalty, etc.
AND where any County Treasurers shall be remov^^ from their Offices of
Treasurers, they shall deliver up to the succeeding Treasurers all the Books,
public Accounts and Papers belonging to those Counties where they acted, whole
and entire, and undefaced, under the Penalty of One Hundred Pounds; to be
recovered in Manner and for the Uses herein abovementioned. And where any
County Treasurer has been or shall be removed by Death, the Executors or
Administrators of such Decedent shall deliver in like Manner all the Books and
Papers relating to the said public Accounts, to the succeeding Treasurers,
under the same Penalties, to be recovered as aforesaid.

Repeal of former Laws.
AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That the said Acts for
the ^or^ effectual raising of County Levies, made in the fourth Year of his
present Majesty's Reign, and the said Supplementary Act, made in the eighth
Year of the same Reign, and all other Acts made for raising and collecting
Arrears of County Levies, passed in the several Reigns of the late King William
and Queen Anne, and every Article, Clause or Thing therein, or in any of them
contained, shall be and are hereby repealed to all Intents and Purposes
whatsoever.

CHAP. CCLXX. An ACT to regulate the Practice upon Writs of Summons and Arrest.
A^te^, Chap. 94 and 155.

WHEREAS it has been the earnest Endeavors of the legislative Power of this
Government, Preamble.
to provide for the Liberty of the Subject, by Regulations of this Kind,
without the least Design of protecting Me^^ Estates from Payment of their
Debts; but so far as Justice would permit, to maintain the Freedom of their
Persons, according to the ancient common Law of England, which suffered not the
Body, in case of Debt, to be detained in Prison, but be at Liberty to follow
his own Affairs and Business, etc. And it seems highly just that the same
Reason should take Place in this new Colony, where Plantations are to be
improved by hard Labor and great Diligence: Therefore may it please the
Governor that it may be enacted, AND BE IT ENACTED by Sir WILLIAM KEITH, Bart.
Governor of the Province of Pennsyl^^^ia, etc. by and with the Advice and
Consent of the Freemen of the said Province in General Assembly met, and by the
Authority of the same, No Freeholder to be arrested; and who shall be deemed
such.
That no Freeholder inh^biting in any Part of this Province, who has resided
therein for the Space of two Years, and has fifty Acres of Land, or more, in
Fee-simple, well seated, and twelve Acres thereof, or more, well cleared and
improved, or has a dwelling House worth Fifty Pounds current Money of America,
in some City or Township within this Province, clear Estate, or has unimproved
Land to the Value of Fifty Pounds, like Money, shall be arrested or detained in
Prison by any Writ or Arrest, or Capias ad Respondendum, in any civil Action,
unless it be in the King's Case, Except in the King's Case, etc.
or where a F^^e is or shall be due to the King, his Heirs or Successors; or
unless they be such Freeholders as by this Act are made liable to be arrested;
Process to be by Writ of Summons.
but that the original Process against Freeholders shall be a Writ of Summons,
under Hand and Seal of one of the Justices of the Court of Common Pleas,
directed to the Sheriff or Coroner there, as the Case may require, commanding
to summons the Defendant: The Form of which Writ shall be as follows, viz.
The Form.
GEORGE, by the grace of GOD, of Great Britain, France and Ireland, King,
Defender of the Faith, etc. To the Sheriff of the County of -- Greeting. We
Command you, That you summon -- so that he be and appear before our Justices --
at -- at our Court of Common Pleas, there to be held -- Day of -- next, to
answer the Complaint of -- of a Plea, etc. -- Witness -- Esquire -- Day of -- at --
in the -- Year of our Reign.

The Defendant not app^aring the Officer to certify the Court that he has
summoned him; and the Plaintiff may proceed to Judgment and Execution.
AND if the Defendant in such Writ does not appear at the Day of the Return
thereof, but makes Default, and the Officer to whom such Writ was directed, or
his lawful Deputy, does certify to the Court, upon Oath or Affirmation, that on
or before the Day of the Return of such Writ he has summoned the Defendant
(mentioning the Day he did so) or left Notice in Writing of such Summons at the
House of the Defendant, in the Presence of one or more of his Family or
Neighbors, signifying that the Defendant should be and appear according to the
Contents of such Summons; upon which Return, if the Defendant has been so
served ten Days, and the Plaintiff had filed his Declaration in the Office of
the Prothonotary within the Space of five Days before the Court to which such
Writ is returnable, it shall be lawful to and for the Plaintiff in such Action
to file a common Appearance for the Defendant so making Default, and proceed to
Judgment and Execution by Nihil Dicit.

Sundry Cases where a Freeholder may be arrested, and held to special Bail, the
Plaintiff making appear by Oath, etc.
PROVIDED ALWAYS, That nothing herein contained shall exempt any Person from
being arrested, or shall debar any Person from taking out Writs of Arrest, if
the Plaintiff in every such Writ, or somebody for him, does make appear by
Affidavit upon Oath or Affirmation (which the Justice that grants such Writ is
hereby empowered and and required to administer) testifying, That the Defendant
in the same Writ named has signified his Intentions of going to Sea, or of
removing out of this Province, or lurks in secret Places, or conceals himself
in his own or others House; or that the Defendant in such Writs has refused or
neglected, upon Demand, to give either real or personal Security for the Debt,
or refused, without Process, to appear and put in special Bail to the
Plaintiff's Action for the Debt or Cause for which he complains; or that the
Defendant suffered himself to be arrested or Judgment to be entered against him;
or made over his Lands or Chattels to others, or suffered them to be attached,
and made no proper Defense to such Proceedings; or where the Plaintiff can make
appear, from Records or otherwise, that so much of the Defendant's Estate is
mortgaged, aliened, intailed, or liable to one or more Judgments suffered or
ordered to be entered against such Defendant, so that the Value of his
Fee-simple Estate, in Possession, clear of those and all other Encumbrances,
will not (as the Deponent believes) be sufficient to satisfy the Debt demanded;
or that the Defendant in such Writ has not been a Resident in this Province
for the Space of two Years, next before the Date of the same Writ: In all which
Cases, Writs of Arrest shall be granted, and the Defendant held to special
Bail, if the Case requires it; and the Justices that grant the same shall cause
all the Affidavits they take, as above required, to be filed by the Clerk of
the Court where such Writs are returnable.

BUT if any Freeholder exempted from Arrest by Virtue of this Act, Freeholders
arrested within the Intent of this Act, the Writ to abate, and the Defendant
allowed Costs.
shall happen to be taken by any Writ of Arrest, the Court where such Writ is
depending shall forthwith, upon the Defendant's Motion, stay all further
Proceedings against him till they examine his Circumstances, and if they find
he is such as by this Act is intended to be exempted, the Court shall of their
own Accord, abate the Writ, and allow the Defendant Thirty Shillings Cost, to
be paid by him or them that procured such Writ, and for Non-payment thereof the
Court shall grant an Attachment as in other Cases where a Rule of Court is not
complied with.

AND if any of the Justices or Clerks of the said Courts, Persons offending
against this Act to answer at the Supream-Court.
or Practitioners at Law, shall contemn thi^ Act, and wilfully proceed in the
Premises, contrary to the Direction thereof, they shall be liable to answer,
and be fined for the same at the Supream-Court of this Province, any Sum not
exceeding Ten Pounds.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, A former Act of Summons
repealed.
That the Act directing the Process of Summons against Freeholders, and every
Article, Clause or Thing therein contained, shall be and are hereby repealed to
all Intents and Purposes whatsoever.

CHAP. CCLXXI. An ACT for continuing the Bounty upon Hemp.
Supplied.

CHAP. CCLXXII. An ACT prescribing the Forms of Declaration of Fidelity,
Ratified and confirmed by the King in Council, the 2^th of March 1725.
Abjuration and Affirmation, instead of the Forms heretofore required in such
Cases.
WHEREAS diverse Statutes having been made, concerning the Affirmations or
Declarations allowed instead of Oaths to the People called Quakers; but the
Inconveniences to them and others (requiring their Testimony and Service in
many Cases) not being sufficiently avoided, by Reason of Difficulties which
happened relating to the Forms of the Declaration, Affirmation and Abjuration
prescribed by the said Statutes, it pleased the King and Parliament of Great
Britain by another Statute (made in the eighth Year of the King's Reign) to
grant further Ease and Relief in that Behalf, by enacting other Forms of
Affirmation or Declaration for the said People. Now forasmuch as the
Legislature of Great Britain, upon Five-and-twenty Years Experience, were
pleased to acknowledge in the said Statute of the Eighth of King George, that
the said People called Quakers had given Testimony of their Fidelity and
Affection to his Majesty and the Settlement of the Crown in the Protestant
Line, and had not abused the Liberty and Indulgence allowed them by Law; and
since the like Testimony may be given concerning the said People inhabiting
this Province, and that those that conscienciously scrupled the Forms of the
Affirmation or Declaration heretofore used, are Persons of like Probity and
Justice with those who were not under that Scruple, and should be obliged to
bear the Burden of Government, and serve their Country as well as their
Neighbors, it would be reasonable to put them in a Capacity so to do; may it
therefore please the Governor that it may be enacted, AND BE IT ENACTED by Sir
WILLIAM KEITH, Bart. Governor of the Province of Pennsylvania, etc. by and with
the Advice and Consent of the Freemen of the said Province, in General Assembly
met, and by the Authority of the same, That in all Cases where by Law any of
the said People called Quakers is or shall be required or permitted to make and
subscribe the Declaration of Fidelity, in the Form prescribed by the Statute
made in the first Year of the late King William and Queen Mary, entitled, An
Act exempting their Majesty's Protestant Subje^ts, dissenting from the Church
of England, from the Penalties of certain Laws; or in the Form prescribed by
any ^aw of this Province; or to make the solemn Affirmation or Declaration in
the Form prescribed by a Statute made in the seventh and eighth Years of the
said late King William, entitled, An Act that the solemn Affirmation and
Declaration of the People called Quakers shall be accepted instead of an Oath
in the usual Form; or in the Form prescribed by any Law of this Province; or to
take the Effect of the Abjuration Oath in the Form prescribed by a Statute made
in the first Year of the present King's Reign; every such Quaker shall, instead
of such first-mentioned Declaration of Fidelity, make and subscribe a
Declaration of Fidelity in the following Words, viz. I A. B. do solemnly and
sincerely promise and declare, The Form of Declaration of Fidelity.
That I will be true and faithful to King GEORGE; and do solemnly, sincerely
and truly profess, testify and declare, that I ^o from my Heart abhor, detest
and renounce, as impious and heretical, that wicked Doctrine and Position, that
Princes excommunicated or deprived by the Pope, or any Authority of the Sea of
Rome, may be deposed or murdered by their Subjects, or any other whatsoever:
And I do declare, that no foreign Prince, Person, Prelate, State or Potentate
has, or ought to have, any Power, Jurisdiction, Superiority, Pre-eminence or
Authority, ecclesiastical or spiritual, within the Realm of Great Britain, or
the Dominions thereunto belonging.

AND instead of the solemn Affirmation or Declaration in the Form prescribed by
the said Act of the seventh and eight Years of the Reign of the late King
William the Third, and by a Law of this Province, made in the first Year of
King George, every such Quaker shall make the following solemn Declaration or
Affirmation, to be administered by a Question put as follows, viz. The
Affirmation.
DO thou A. B. solemnly, sincerely and truly declare and affirm;

Adding the proper Words; which the Affirmant is to answer or assent unto,
according as the Case or Occasion may require; which said Assent shall be
expressed by the Affirmant's answering Yea or Yes.

AND instead of the Form prescribed by the said Act of the first Year of the
present King's Reign, for the Effect of the Abjuration Oath, every such Quaker
shall take the Effect thereof in the following Words, viz. The Effect of the
Abjuration Oath.
I A. B. do solemnly, sincerely and truly acknowledge, profess, testify and
declare, that King GEORGE is lawful and rightful KING of the Realm of Great
Britain, and of all others his Dominions and Countries thereunto belonging; and
I do solemnly and sincerely declare, That I do believe the P^r^^^ pretending to
be Prince of Wales during the Life of the late King James, and since his
Decease pretending to be and taking upon himself the Style and Title of King of
England, by the Name of James the Third; or of Scotland, by the Name of James
the Eighth; or the Style and Title of King of Great Britain; has not any Right
or ^itle whatsoever to the (...) of the Realm of Great Britain, nor any other
the Dominions thereunto belonging. And I do renounce and refu^^ any Allegiance
or Obedience to him; and I do solemnly promise, that I will be true and
faithful and ^ear true Allegiance to King GEORGE, and to him will be faithful
against all traiter^^^ Conspiracies and Attempts whatsoever which shall be made
against his Person, Crown and Dignity: And I will do my best Endeavor to
disclose and make known to King GEORGE, and his Successors, all Treasons and
traitorous Conspiracies which I shall know to be made against him, or any of
them. And I will be true and faithful to the Succession of the Crown against
him the said James, and all other Persons whatsoever, as the same is and stands
settled by an Act, entitled, An Act declaring the Rights and Liberties of the
Subject, and Settling the Succession of the Crown to the late Queen Anne, and
the Heirs of her Body, being Protestants; and as the same by one other Act,
entitled, An Act for the further Limitation of the Crown, and better securing
the Rights and Liberties of the Subject, is and stands settled and entailed
after the Decease of the said late Queen, and, for Default of Iss^^ of the said
late Queen, to the late Princess Sophia, Electoress and Duchess Dowager of
Hanover, and the Heirs of her Body, being Protestants. And all these Things I
do plainly and sincerely acknowledge, ^romise and declare, according to these
express Words by me spoken, and according to the plain and common Sense and
Understanding of the same Words, without any Equiv^cation, mental Evasion or
secret Reservation whatsoever. And I do make this Recognition, Acknowledgment,
Renunciation and Promise, h^artily, willingly and truly.

AND all Persons authorized or required to administer or tender eit^er the said
former Declaration of Fidelity, All which are allowed to Quakers.
or the said former solemn Affirmation or Declaration, or the former Effect of
the Abjuration Oath aforesaid, shall be and are hereby authorized and required
to administer and tender the same respectively to the said People called
Quakers, in the Words by this Act respectively appointed.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That the Declaration of
Fidelity, and the Effect of the Abjuration Oath appointed by this Act for the
said People called Quakers, instead of the respective Forms prescribed for the
same by the abovementioned Acts, shall respectively be adjudged and taken to
be of such and the same Force and Effect, and no other, to all Intents and
Purposes, in all Courts of Justice, and elsewhere, as if such Quakers had made
and subscribed the Declaration of Fidelity, or had taken the Effect of the
Abjuration Oath in the respective Form appointed by the said recited Acts.

AND that the Affirmation or Declaration by this Act appointed to be made
instead of the Affirmation or Declaration in Form prescribed by the said Act of
the seventh and eighth Years of the Reign of the late King William the Third,
and instead of the Form prescribed by the said Law of this Province, made in
the first Year of the present King's Reign, shall be made by the said People
called Quakers, as Occasion may require, whether it be for giving Evidence, or
for qualifying the Affirmants to serve in General Assemblies, or to be
Justices, Officers, Inquests or Jurymen, or for any other Matter, Cause or
Thing whatsoever, wherein Oaths are or shall be required: And that the said
Affirmation or Declaration, by this Act prescribed, shall be adjudged and
taken, and is hereby enacted and declared to be of the same Force, and as
available in Law to all Intents and Purposes as an Oath, in all Courts of
Justice, and other Places where by Law an Oath is required.

Persons corruptly affirming to s^ffer as Perjurers.
AND if any Person making such Affi^mation or Declaration, as is appointed by
this Act to be made, instead of the Affirmation in the Form prescribed by the
aforesaid Act of the seventh and eighth Years of the Reign of the late King
William the Third, and instead of the Form prescribed by our said Law, made in
the first Year of King George's Reign, shall be lawfully convicted of wilful,
false and corrupt Affirming or Declaring any Matter or Thing, which, if swo^n
in the common or usual Form, would have amounted to wilful and corrupt Perjury,
every such Person so offending, shall incur and suffer such and the same Pains,
Penalties and Forfeitures, as are inflicted or enacted by the Laws and Statutes
of England, against Persons convicted of wilful and corrupt Perjury.

PROVIDED ALWAYS, That nothing herein contained shall be deemed to repeal or
disanul the Law of this Province, passed in the Fourth Year of the King's Reign
that now is, entitled, An A^t for the Advancement of Justice, and more certain
Administration th^reof, except such Part thereof concerning which other
Provision is made by this Act.

PROVIDED ALSO, That this p^esent Act shall not be put in Execution until the
King's ^leasure be known concerning the same.

NEVERTHELESS IT IS HEREBY ENACTED AND DECLARED, That the said Statute made in
the eighth Year of the present King'^ Reign, entitled, An Act for Granting the
People called Quakers such Forms of Affirmation or Declaration as may remove
the Difficulties which many of them lie under, shall be duly observed and put
in Execution in this Province, and be of like Force and Effect as it is in
England, and as if the same were here repeated and enacted.

CHAP. CCLXXIII. An ACT for the better securing the City of Philadelphia from
the Danger of Gunpowder.
FORASMUCH as the City of Philadelphia is destitute of any Magazine, or other
suitable Repository for the safe-keeping of Gunpowder, which being a Commodity
of good Consideration in the Trade of this Province, the Me^chants and Traders
are frequently reduced to the Necessity of keeping it on Shipboard within the
Port of the said City, or to deposite the same in Stores or Shops, too often
within the Access of Sailors and Servants, to the manifest Danger of the People
of the said City in their Persons and Estates: And forasmuch as William
Chan^ellor, of the said City, Sail-maker, by the Recommendati^n of diverse of
the Magistrates as well as Merchants, and others of the said City, has
undertaken to build a suitab^^ Powder-House or Store for the Receipt of of all
the Gunpowder which shall or may be imported into the said City, on a Piece of
Ground he lately purchased from Daniel Pegg, lying near the North-End of the
said City, adjoining to a Swamp on the South Side, and upon the King's
High-Road on the East End thereof, BE IT THEREFORE ENACTED by Sir WILLIAM
KEITH, Bart. Governor of the Province of Pennsylvania, etc. by and with the
Advice and Consent of the Freemen of the said Province, in General Assembly
met, and by the Authority of the same, Wi^liam Chancellor appointed to build a
Powder Store within three Months.
That the said William Chan^ellor, his Heirs, Executors or Assigns shall, at
his and their proper Costs and Charges, cause to be well erected and built, a
good, substantial, tight and secure Powder-House, or Store for Gunpowder, of
Brick or Stone, on the Piece of Ground afor^said, within three Months next
ensuing the Publication of this Act; to be well boarded and covered, and so fit
and capacious as may reasonably be expected will contain all the Gunpowder to
be from time to time imported into the said City: And to store all Gun Powder,
and be accountable for the same.
Wherein he the said William Chancellor, his Executors and Assigns, shall lay
up and store all the Gunpowder to be from time to time imported or brought
into the said City, which shall come to his or their Receipt pursuant to the
Direction of this Act; and for which he and they shall be accountable to the
Owners or Deliverers thereof (Lightning, and other unavoidable Accidents
excepted) And shall also cause daily Attendance to be given at the Powder-Store
aforesaid, And attend daily.
betwixt the Hours of Nine and Eleven in the Morning, and One and Three in the
Afternoon, for Delivering out the said Commodity, and also at all Times, on due
Notice given, for Receiving thereof, at the nearest and most convenient Landing
to the said Lot of Ground; and immediately upon his receiving into his Custody
any Quantity of Powder as aforesaid, he shall pass his Receipts in Writing for
the same, expressing the Quantity of Powder, and describing the Marks and
Numbers of the Cask.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, No Person to keep in
their Houses above 12 lb. of Gunpowder, on Penalty, etc.
That no Person whatsoever within the Precincts of the City of Philadelphia
aforesaid, nor within two Miles thereof, shall, from and after the Time the
Powder-Store aforesaid is so erected and finished, presume to keep in any
House, Shop, Cellar, Store or Place of the said City, nor within two Miles
thereof, other than the Powder-Store aforesaid, any m^re or greater Quantity,
at any one time, than twelve Pounds of Gunpowder, under the Penalty of Ten
Pounds, for every Offense. And whatsoever Master, Every Captain, etc. shall
deliver his Powder, on Penalty, etc.
Merchant, or other Person trading or bringing into the said Port any
Gunpowder (other than such as shall be specially licensed in that Behalf by
the Governor of this Province for the time being, or shall be commissionated by
the King's Majesty, or other Authority under the Crown of Great Britain) shall
not within the Space of Forty-eight Hours from his first Arrival and coming to
Anchor there, upon due Notice given him of the Purport of this Act by the said
William Chancellor, or his Assigns, or any of his or their Deputies or
Servants, deliver all the Powder so brought into the said Port aforesaid unto
the said William Chancellor, his Executors or Assigns, he shall forfeit the
like Sum of Ten Pounds, for every such Offense.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, The Price of Storage per
Month.
That the said William Chancellor, his Executors and Assigns, shall have and
receive for Storage for Gunpowder, at the Powder-Store aforesaid, Twelve Pen^e
per Barrel per Month, and so proportionably for Half-Barrels, and other Cask,
for the first six Month^; and Six Pence per Barrel per Month, and so
proportionably for Half-Barrels, and other Cask, for every Month any of the
said Powder remains in the said Store above six Months; and likewise shall have
and receive for every twelve Pounds, or lesser Quantity, to be delivered at one
time, Six Pence, over and above the said Storage.

PROVIDED ALWAYS NEVERTHELESS, AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority
aforesaid, Proviso.
That what Quantity of Powder soever of the Ship's Store of any Vessel, shall
be so as aforesaid delivered to be kept at the said Powder-Store, and shall be
re-demanded back again in order for its Exportation out of this Province, the
said William Chancellor, his Executors or Assigns, shall cause the same to be
re-delivered at the nearest and most convenient Landing to the Powder-Store,
without exacting any other Perquisite for such Re-delivery than what is herein
before allowed for Storage* And if the said William Chancellor, Penalty on his
not giving Attendance, and^.
his Executors or Assigns, shall neglect to give due Attendance at the
Powder-House aforesaid, as is herein before directed and appointed, or shall
take or exact greater or larger Sum or Sums of Money for Storage and Delivery
of said Powder than is herein before limited and appointed, he or they so
offending shall, on due Proof thereof made by one or more credible Witnesses,
before any one Justice of the Peace of the City or County of Philadelphia,
forfeit and pay for every such Offense such Sum of Money as the said Justice
shall think ^it to award, not exceeding the Sum of Thirty Shillings, for any
one Offense.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, How the Penalties are to
be recovered and applied
That all and singular the Penalties and Forfeitutes arising by this Act
(excepting those under Forty Shillings) shall be recovered in any Court of
Record in this Province, by Bill, Plaint or Information, wherein no Essoign,
Protection or Wager of Law, nor any more than one Imparlance shall be allowed;
the one Moiety of which Forfeitures and Penalties shall go to the Governor, for
the Support of this Government, and the other Moiety thereof to the Informer or
Prosecutor who shall sue for the same.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, A Clause in the former
Law repealed.
That the Clause in an Act of Assembly of this Province (entitled, An Act for
preventing Accidents that may happen by Fire in the Town of Bristol, for^^rly
c^lled Buckingham, Philadelphia, Germantown, Derby, Chester, New Castle and
Jews, within this Government) enacting that no Person within the Town of
Philadelphia, within six Months next following the Publication of the same Act,
presume to keep in their Houses, Shops or Warehouses, more than six Pounds of
Gunpowder at one time, unless it be forty Perches distant from any Dwelling,
under the Penalty of Ten Pounds, for every such Offense, is hereby repealed and
decla^ed to be null, void and of none Effect; This Law to continue 21 Years.
and that this present Act shall continue in Force for and during the Term of
Twenty-one Years, and no longer.

CHAP. CCLXXIV. An ACT for the better preventing Obstructions to the Navigation
of Chester Creek, See before Chap. 56. and hereafter 8 Geo. II. Chap. 328.
and other navigable Creeks and Rivers in this Province.
Preamble.
WHEREAS in the Year One Thousand Seven Hundred, it was thought necessary, for
the better Accommodation of the Borough of Chester, in the County of Chester,
and the Inhabitants of the lower Parts of the said County, as well as
T^avellers, that the King's High-Road should be altered and brought nearer to
the River, to pass through the said Borough with a Bridge over the said Creek
there; and thereupon, in Consideration of the Owners of Lands, and especially
of the Mills situate on the said Creek above the said Borough, which had been
erected at great Charge, and required the same to maintain and support them for
the Benefit of Trade, an Act was passed in the said Year that the Road should
be laid out as aforesaid through the said Borough, and a Drawbridge should be
there built, and that a Person should attend the same to draw it up, that
Sloops and Shallops might pass to and from the said Mills; and also, that for
the Convenience of Rafts of Logs passing to the said Mills the Space of twenty
Foot at least should be left clear between the Timber or Stone-Work; which
Drawbridge was accordingly erected, but now is gone to Decay, and requires to
be rebuilt or repaired: THEREFORE BE IT ENACTED by Sir WILLIAM KEITH, Bart.
Governor of the Province of Pennsylvania, etc. by and with the Advice and
Consent of the Freemen of the said Province, in General Assembly met, and by
the Authority of the same, That the Commissioners for the time being appointed
for the said County of Chester shall cause the said Drawbridge to be rebuilt
or repaired within the Space of twelve Months, Commissione^s to cause a
Drawbridge to be built within one Year.
next after the Publication hereof, according to the Dimensions in the said
recited Act, and from time to time shall cause it to be continued in Repair ^or
the Accommodation of the said Mills, and of the Owners of Lands, and
Inhabitants on the navigable Parts of the said Cre^k above the Borough
aforesaid, and also for the Accommodation of all such Persons as have Occasion
to pass and repass with any Mast-Vessel through the said Bridge; The Person
going through obliged to raise and lo^er the Bridge, on Penalty, and^.
who are hereby obliged carefully to raise and lower the said Drawbridge, so
as the same may receive no Damage thereby, under the Penalty of Five Shillings,
for every Neglect or Offense therein.

AND WHEREAS the erecting of Bridges over Creeks or Rivers of Water, to the
Obstruction of their Navigation where navigable, does not only affect the
Interest of the Owners of Land upon and near navigable Waters above those
Bridges, but also the Trade of this Province in general: And the better to
preserve the Navigation of those Rivers and Creeks, diverse Laws of this
Province have from time to time been enacted; but the same, upon Experience,
have been found not fully to answer the Ends thereby intended; BE IT THEREFORE
ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That no Bridge, No Bridge to be built or
^epa^red on navigable Cre^ks, that ^ay hinder Navigation.
Frame or Device whatsoever shall at any time to come be made, erected, upheld,
sustained or repaired, over any Creek or River within this Province navigable
for any Sloop, Shallop, Flat or other Craft, that shall or may anywise stop or
hinder the Navigation of any such Sloop, Shallop, Flat, or other Craft, or
Floats of Logs; any Law, Custom or Usage to the contrary thereof in anywise
notwithstanding.

PROVIDED ALWAYS, Except.
That nothing herein contained shall be deemed or construed to forbid or hinder
the Maintaining and Repairing the Drawbridge herein before particularly
mentioned, or any other Bridge erected by public Authority; or the making of
Dams, Mounds or Tide-Banks for the Draining of low Grounds, and improving of
Meadows, by the Owners or Owner of the greater Part of the Lands, low Grounds
or Meadows included within the same Dams, Mounds or Tide-Banks; any thing
herein contained to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

ANNO REGNI GEORG II REGIS DUODECIMO.
At a GENERAL ASSEMBLY begun at Philadelphia, in the Province of Pennsylvania,
the Fourteenth Day of October, in the Twelfth Year of the Reign of our
Sovereign Lord GEORGE, King of Great Britain, etc. Annoque Domini One Thousand
Seven Hundred and Twenty-five, and continued by Adjournments until the
Twenty-fifth Day of August One Thousand Seven Hundred and Twenty-six, in the
Thirteenth Year of his Majesty's Reign: The following ACTS were passed by Sir
WILLIAM KEITH, Bart. Governor of the said Province, That is to say,
CHAP. CCLXXV. An ACT for the Re-emitting and continuing the Currency of such
Bills of Credit of this Province as by former Acts are directed to be sunk and
destroyed, and for the Striking and Making current 10,000 l. in new Bills, to
supply those that are torn and defaced.
WHEREAS by an Act of General Assembly of this Province, passed in the ninth
Year of his present Majesty's Reign, Bills of Credit of 15000 l. Value were
struck and emitted; which being found to fall s^ort of a Medium in Trade, and
to supply the Exigencies of such as had Occasion to borrow upon Securities
pre^cribed by the same Act; and to provide for the Support of of this
Government, therefore, by one other Act passed in the tenth Year of his said
Majesty's Reign, Bills of Credit of 30,000 l. Value were also struck and
emitted. AND WHEREAS the annual Sinking and Destroying the said Bills, pursuant
to the same Acts, has already considerably reduced the Quantity of this
Currency; and the Bills themselves (more especially of the lesser
Denominations) daily impairing, many of them are scarce fit to pass; which
Inconveniences increasing, will shortly reduce the People of this Province to
great Straits and Difficulties, unless some proper Remedy be provided;
Therefore may it please the Governor that it may be enacted, AND BE IT ENACTED
by Sir WILLIAM KEITH, Baronet, Governor of the Province of Pennsylvania, etc.
by and with the Advice and Consent of the Freemen of the Province aforesaid, in
General Assembly met, and by the Authority of the same, That such yearly Quotas
or Payments, No ^a^t of the annual Quo^as, or Pa^ts of the principal Sum^
formerly lent, to be sunk or destroyed, etc.
Parcel of the principal Sums emitted in Bills of Credit of this Province,
pursuant to the Direction of the said Acts respectively, and such other
principal Sums which by Virtue thereof, or of any Mortgage-Deed or Assurance
thereby directed to be taken, are, shall or may be paid, recovered or received
from time to time, from and after the 17th Day of January 1725, and before the
16th Day of January 1731, shall not be sunk or destroyed; nor shall any Part o^
Parcel of any such Quotas or principal Sums in Bills of Credit, payable within
the Space aforesaid unto the Trustees, nominated or to be nominated pursuant to
the Direction of those Acts, be sunk or destroyed as the same Acts or either of
them direct; Trustees shall not be culpable for not sinking the same.
nor shall the said Trustees, or any of them, nor any other Person, be culpable
for not Sinking or causing to be sunk or destroyed any Bills of Credit which
they are by the same Acts respectively directed to sink or cause to be sunk or
destroyed.

THEREFORE BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, Clauses of the two
former Acts relating to Sinking the Quotas, are repealed.
That neither the said Trustees appointed by the two Acts aforesaid, nor any of
them, nor any other Person or Persons whatsoever, shall presume to sink or
destroy any of the said Bills of Credit, otherwise or at any other time than is
by thi^ Act particularly directed and appointed; nor shall any of them or their
Sureties, nor the Heirs, Executors or Administrators of any of them, suffer any
Penalty, Forfeiture or Loss for not Sinking or Destroying the said Bills of
Credit according to the Tenor and Direction of either of the said two Acts made
for emitting the same, but that every such Part and Parts, Clause and Clauses
of the said two Acts as are hereby altered, or concerning which any other
Provision is made by this Act, and so much of those Acts as does or may concern
or relate to the Sinking of the said Bills, and the Oaths or Affirmations
required, administered and taken by the said Trustees for discharging their said
Trusts, together with the said Oaths and Affirmations themselves, shall be and
are hereby repealed, utterly abrogated and made void to all Intents and
Purposes whatsoever; any Law or Usage to the contrary in anywise
notwithstanding.

Which Quotas, etc. shall be re-emitted by the T^ustees.
BUT the same yearly Quotas and principal Sum^ in Bills of Credit so to be paid
in unto and received by the said Trustees, or any of them, within the time
before limited, whether payable by the Provincial or any of the County
Treasurers, or by the Mayor or Treasurer of Philadelphia, or by any Mortgager
or Persons whatsoever, and every Part and Parcel of the same Sums, shall from
time to time be re-emitted by the Trustees of the General Loan-Office of the
Province of Pennsylvania, for the time being, upon Loans, as herein after
mentioned and appointed.

AND IT IS HEREBY PROVIDED AND ENACTED, The respective Treasurers, etc. are to
bring in their Quotas, etc.
That the said Treasurers, and Mayor of Philadelphia aforesaid, are hereby
required to pay such of the yearly Quotas and Sums as by the said Acts they are
directed to pay within the time aforesaid, unto the said Trustees, and none
other; who are hereby required to give their Receipts for the same, which
Receipts shall be sufficient Discharges in the Law; the same Acts or any thing
therein contained to the contrary notwithstanding.

AND that all the yearly Quotas or Parcels of the principal Sums, arising upon
those Re-emissions, The subQuotas, arising by Re emissions, to be re emitted,
etc.
which shall be paid into the General Loan-Office of the Province of
Pennsylvania, on or before the 16th Day of January 1731, shall, by the Trustees
thereof, for the time being, be re-emitted again on Securities as aforesaid;
and so from time to time, until all principal Moneys anyways accruing, that
shall be paid unto them on or before the 16th Day of January 1731, shall be
wholly re-emitted.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, All which Sums shall be
lent on good Security, etc.
That the Trustees of the General Loan-Office aforesaid shall lend out the
Value of all the Bills of Credit that they shall receive to be re-emitted, as
before in this present Act directed, in Sums not exceeding 100 l. not less than
12 l. 10 s. to any one Person, for and during all the Rest and Residue of the
twelve Years and a half, in the said recited 30,000 l. Act limited, commencing
from the Times of the same respective Loans by this present Act; to be made
upon Securities of Messuages, Lands, Tenements, Rents and Hereditaments in this
Province, of which the respective Mortgagers stand seized in Fee-simple, clear
of Encumbrances (the Proprietary's Quit-Rents, and other Rents discovered to
the said Trustees, issuing out of the same Securities, excepted:) Of which
Title and Clearness the said Trustees are to inform themselves the best they
can, and to observe the same Directions in the Valuation thereof, and in
proportioning such Valuation to the Sums requested to be lent, as the same
30,000 l. Act before recited directs, upon Loans thereby made: Whereupon the
said Trustees, in Pursuance of the Trust hereby committed to them, shall, in
the Name and Style of the Trustees of the General Loan-Office of the Province
of Pennsylvania, and not otherways, take and receive Deeds of Mortgage in
Fee-simple of such Messuages, Lands, Tenements, Rents or Hereditaments as
aforesaid, for securing the Re-payments of the Sums they lend, to be made
yearly and every Year of the Remainder of the twelve Years and a half
aforesaid, by even and equal annual Payments, and so proportionably for the
Part or Parts of a Year, as Occasion may happen, together with the whole
Interest at the Rate appointed by the said Acts. Which Deed^ executed and
acknowleged, or proved as herein after mentioned, shall transfer the Possession
and vest the Inheritance to and in the Trustees of the General Loan-Office
aforesaid and their Successors in Trust, in the same Manner and Form, and as
fully and effectually as the said 30,000 l. Act transferreth and vesteth the
Possession and Inheritance o^ and in Lands and Hereditaments thereby mortgaged;
and the Words, grant, bargain and sell, in the Mortgage-Deed^ hereby directed
to be taken, shall amount unto and be construed and adjudged of the same
Virtue, Force and Effect, to all Intents, Constructions and Purposes in the Law
whatsoever, as the Words grant, bargain and sell, are in the same 30,000 l. Act
mentioned and intended to be of, and that as fully and effectually as if here
again particularly repeated and expressed.

Each Mortge^ to give Bond* etc.
AND that the said Trustees of the General Loan-Office, as such, and in
Pursuance of the Trust hereby committed to them, shall also receive and take of
each Mortgager, together with his Mortgage-Deed, an Obligation and Warrant of
Attorney, with a Release of Errors, in the same Warrant inserted, under his
Hand and Seal, duly executed; the Obligation in double the Sum borrowed, and
conditioned for Payment of the Mortgage-Monies, according to the Proviso or
Condition of the Mortgage-Deed; and the Warrant of Attorney authorizing and
impowering such Person or Persons as the said Trustees shall direct, therein to
be nominated for that Purpose, to acknowledge or suffer Judgment; which
Judgment the said Trustees for the time being are hereby required to cause
their Attorney to enter against such Mortgager as shall make Default in Payment
of the Mortgage-Money, or any Part thereof, in the like Manner and Form, and as
fully and effectually as the said 30,000 l. Act directs to be entered against
such Defaulters, in the Sense of the same Act to all Intents and Purposes.

The Mortgager's Oath, etc. to be indorsed on the Mortgage-Deed.
ON every of which Deeds of Mortgage shall be indorsed the Mortgager's Oath or
Affirmation, which the said Trustees, or any one of them, is hereby empowered
and required to administer. Which shall be of the same Tenor, Form and
Efficacy, and have the same Exceptions as the said 30,000 l. Act prescribes
Borrowers of the Sums thereby emitted on Securities.

AND the same Mortgage-Deeds (for the better Preservation of Sec^riti^s h^reby
directed to be taken) being ^o executed as af^^esaid, The Mortgage Deed to be
proved, and then recorded.
and acknowledged by the Mortgager, (...) proved by two of the Witnesses to the
Execution thereof, before any Justice of the Peace of any County of this
Province, shall be ente^ed at large* in Books of Royal or other large Paper,
well covered or bound, to be provided and ^ept by and at the proper Charge of
the Trustees; which Deeds so entered shall be and are hereby declared to be
Matter of R^cord, and an attested Copy of any such Entry, certifi^d under the
Hands of the said Trustees for the time being, ^r any three of them, shall be
and is hereby declared to be good ^vidence to prove the Sale or Mortgage
thereby mentioned to be made, and the same may be showed, plea^ed and made use
of accordingly.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, Trustees Receipt to be
indorsed for each Paymen^
That each Payment of Mortgage-Monies i^^erted in any Mortgage-Deed hereby
directed to be taken, being paid, the Trustees, or any of them, shall indorse
on the Deed a Receipt for the same, under his or their Hand, and so from time
to time until the whole Sum lent, with the Interest accruing, be fully paid and
satisfied; and upon full Payment and Satisfaction (which the Mortgager, his
Heirs, Executors or Administrators, may make of the principal Sums lent, at any
time before Fo^feiture and Sale of the mortgaged Premises, with Interest to the
time of such Payment at the Rate aforesaid) the Mortgage shall be released and
delivered by the Mortgagees thereof; from which Time the Lands and
Hereditaments so mortgaged shall be forever acquitted and discharged, and the
M^^tgagees shall thereupon make an Entry in the Margin of the Inrollment of
such Mortgage-Deed, of the Day (...) Time of such Release and Discharge, for
which there ^h^ll be paid by the Mortgager the Sum of Six Pence, and no more;
an attested Copy of which Entry, certified by the Trustees of the said General
Loan-Office, or a Ma^ority of them, shall be as valid and effectual as their
Reconveyance of the mortgaged Premises made and executed i^ due Form of Law may
or can be, to the Mortgagers, their Heirs and Assigns respectively.

PROVIDED ALWAYS, Premises to be held by the Mortgager' (...) Default in
P^yment.
That until some Default shall be made in Payment by the respective Mortgagers,
it shall be lawful for them, and their Heirs, to hold and enjoy the mortgaged
Premises, with the Appurtenances; the Mortgage-Deeds, or any thing therein to
contrary notwithstanding.

Upon Default how the Trustees are to pro^eed as in the 30,000 l. Act.
BUT if any Default shall be made or suffered of or in Payment of any of the
yearly Sums herein beforementioned, whether in Part of Principal or Interest,
which any of the Mortgagers (by this present Act) their Heirs, Executors,
Administrators or Assigns, should or ought to have paid at any of the Days,
Time or Place in and by their respective Mortgage-Deeds to be particularly
specified, then and so often, and in any such Case, it shall and may be lawful
for the said Trustees, for the time being, at their Discretion, to take their
Remedy, and proceed for Recovery of the Mortgage Moneys, according to the
Provisoes or Conditions in the Mortgage-Deeds respectively contained; or by any
such Ways or Means as are particularly directed in and by the said 30,000 l.
Act, for Recover^ of Sums thereby emitted, with and under all and singular the
like Provisoes, Conditions and Limitations thereby directed, as if the same
were here again particularly enumerated and expressed* And the Sales and
Assurances by this Act to be made, shall be of the same Force and Effect to the
Purchasers, and a^ valid and conclusive against all other Persons, as any Sale
by that Act directed to be made, may or can be, to all Intents and Purposes in
the Law whatsoever.

AND BE IT ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, Bills to be printed under the
Care of the Trustees.
That indented Bills of Credit, to the Value of 10,000 l. current Money of
America, according to an Act of Parliament made in the Sixth Year of the Reign
of the late Queen Anne, referred to by the said two Acts, with Counterparts of
the same Bills, shall be prepared and printed before the 25th Day of March next
ensuing, on good Paper; under the Care and Direction of the Trustees of the
said General Loan-Office, but at the Charge of the Province, to be paid by the
said Trustees or by the Provincial-Treasurer by their Order.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That the said Bills
shall severally contain therein the Sums hereafter respectively mentioned,
Denominations of the said Bills.
and no other; That is to say, Nine Thousand of the same Bills, the Sum of One
Shilling in each of them: Ten Thousand of the same Bills, the Sum of One
Shilling and Six Pence in each of them: Three Thousand of the same Bills the
Sum of Two Shillings in each of them: Eight Thousand of the same Bills, the Sum
of Two Shillings and Six Pence in each of them: Twenty Thousand of the same
Bills, the Sum of Five Shillings in each of them: And Five Thousand of the same
Bills, the Sum of Ten Shillings in each of them. And the said original Bills
shall have the same Arms impressed thereon, and be of the same Tenor and Form,
as original Bills of the Denominations respectively are directed and appointed
to be of by the said recited Thirty Thousand Pound Act; save only the
Difference in the Date, and Names of the Signers thereunto subscribed.

AND that all and singular the Bills which shall be made and issued in
Pursuance of this present Act, and all and sing^lar other the Bills of Credit
of this Province, issued in Pursuance of the said recited Acts of Assembly
respectively, which hitherto remain unsunk, shall in all Respects have the same
Currency, and be of the same Effect in Law and Equity, with respect to
Payments, Tenders, or bringing the same into Court for Performance of any
Contract, Bargain or Promise whatsoever, and to all other Intents and Purposes,
as any other Bills of Credit emitted by Virtue of the said ^^irty Thousand
Pound Act may, can or ought to have and be of.

AND that Persons offering to sell Goods or Chattels* Persons (...) the
samePenal^ies as per said (...) l. Act.
Lands or Tenements, or refuse to sell, or ask a greater Value for the same,
unless paid in Silver, Gold or other Specie whatsoever, and not in the Bills of
Credit m^de current by this present and those former Acts, or any of them,
shall incur the same Penalties as Persons in the like Cases ought to incur by
the said Thirty Thousand Pound Act.

AND that whatsoever Person or Persons shall pr^sume to forge or counterfeit
any of the said Bills of Credit, Counterfeiters ^o suffer as per 3^,000 l. Act.
issued in Pur^uance of this present or either of the said former Acts; or
shall be Aiding or Assisting therein, or shall enlarge the Value or Sum
expressed in any of the said Bills, or shall utter or cause to be uttered or
offered in Payment any such Bill or Bills, knowing the same to be actually
forged, counterfeited, or the Sum or Value therein altered, with an Intent to
defraud any other Person, he, she or they so offending, and being thereof
legally co^^^cted, shall, for every such Offense, incur and suffer the same
Pains and Penalties respectively, as Forgers or Counterfeiters of Bills are by
the said Thirty Thousand Pound Act directed to incur and and suffer. And the
Discoverer or Prosecutor, The Discoverers Rewar^
by Virtue of this present Act, shall be paid and satisfied his Damages, with
Costs and Charges of Prosecution, in like Manner as the Discoverer and
Prosecutor by Virtue of the same Thirty Thousand Pound Act is or ought to be
paid and satisfied. And that no Suit or Prosecution whatsoever to be commenced
or brought against any Person or Persons, in order to recover any of the said
Penalties, be stayed before Judgment or Conviction.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That each of the said
new Bills, to be made by Virtue of this Act, shall be signed and numbered by
the Persons hereby appointed Signers of the same Bills: The Signers Names* and
how to be supplied in C^se of Death, etc.
(to wit,) Evan Owen, John Wright and Thomas Tresse. And if any of the said
Signers shall happen to die, or be rendered incapable of doing his Duty
required by this Act, the Assembly, for the time being, shall appoint other
Persons to supply such Deficiencies from time to time until all the Bills to
the said Value of Ten Thousand Pounds shall be signed, and together with their
Counterparts numbered and delivered as this Act directs.

Their Qualifications.
BUT before any of the Persons before nominated or hereafter to be appointed
Signers of Bills of Credit, by Virtue of this Act, presume to act therein, they
shall take an Oath or Affirmation before any one Justice of the Peace of the
City or County of Philad^lphia, who is hereby empowered and required to
administer the same, charging them jointly and severally that they will well
and truly sign and number the said original Bills of Credit; and number their
Counterparts that shall come to their Hands (...) that Purpose by the Direction
of this Act; and the same ^o signed and numbered will deliver or cause to be
delivered to the Trustees of the General Loan-Office of th^s ^rovince, pursuant
to the Directions of the same Act

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, How the Trustees are to
deliver the Bills to be signed.
That the said Trust^^^, within ten Days after the said new Bills and
Counterpa^^^ (...) ^repared and deposited with them, as by this Act is
d^^e^ted, shall deliver out, at the Place where they keep the said Loan-Office,
the Value of One Thousand Pounds, out of the said Ten Thousand Pounds, to the
Signers hereby appointed; who having signed and numbered the original Bills so
delivered them, and truly numbered the Counterparts thereof, shall immediately
re-deliver them to the said (...), who shall thereupon give their Receipts for
the (...).

(...) after the said Bills, to the Value of One Thousand (...) aforesaid, are
exchanged by the said Trustees as this (...) ^irects, then the Trustees of the
said Loan-Office for (...) time being, shall, within ten Days next after,
deliver (...) at their sa^d Office, to the Signers of Bills for the time being,
the further Value of One Thousand Pounds more of the said T^n T^^^^^nd ^ounds:
Who having signed and numbered the origin^l Bills so delivered them, and
numbered the Counterparts thereof, shall immediately re-deliver them to the
Trustees; who shall thereupon give their Receipts as abovesaid; and so from
time to time till the whole (...) of the said Ten Thousand Pounds, by
delivering, signing, ^^mbering and re-delivering One Thousand Pounds Va^^^ at a
time, shall be exchanged as this Act directs; and the sai^ C^unterparts so
numbered and re-delivered as afore^^id, shall be kept by the said Trustees for
trying the Truth (...) their Originals when there shall be Occasion.

AND the said Signers shall cause to be kept a true (...) of all the Bills they
so respectively sign and (...) aforesaid. The Signer^ Reward.
And for their Care and Trouble required (...) by this Act, the Signers of each
Thousand Pounds (...) shall receive Three Pounds a-piece, in six Days after
(...) Delivery thereof, with their Counterparts, as above (...); to be paid by
the Trustees for the time being (...) each Signer, his Executors,
Administrators or Assigns.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED (...) the Authority aforesaid, Trustees S^il^,
Succession, and^.
That the said Trustees shall (...)* as heretofore, The Trustees of the General
(...) of the ^rovince of Pennsylvania; and shall have (...) and the same
Capacities and Powers for putting this (...) and those two other Acts in
Execution, to all (...) and Purposes, as in the said Thirty Thousand Pound Act
(...) and settled, for putting the same in Execution: (...) nevertheless, to
all and singular the Provisoes, (...), Limitations and Restitutions, in and by
this (...) provided and enacted.

AND IT IS HEREBY FURTHER ^^^VIDED AND ENACTED, The two former Acts confirmed,
except, and^.
That every (...), Cl^use and Sentence in the said two former Acts ^^^^ectively
(except such Clauses and Parts thereof as are hereby altered, supplied, or
concerning which other Provision is hereby made) shall be and are hereby
declared and enacted to be of full Force and Virtue in the Law.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, Trustees shall give
Bond, etc.
That before any of the said Trustee or Trustees, for the Time being, shall be
in or enter upon the Execution of the Trust by this Act required, they shall,
each of them, enter into a Bond to the Provincial-Treasurer of this Province,
for the time being, in the Penalty of Five Hundred Pounds, conditioned for the
due Observance of all Things required of him, in Performance of the Trust
reposed in him by this present Act; and shall each of them also make Oath or
Affirmation before any Justice of the Peace of the City or County of
Philadelphia, who is hereby empowered and requi^ed to administer the same;
That, to the best of his Skill and Knowledge, he will faithfully, impartially
and truly demean himself in the Discharge of the Trust committed to him by this
present Act; as also, in the Discharge of the remaining Part of the Trust
committed to him by the said two recited Acts, so as none may be prejudiced by
his Consent, Privity or Procurement.

AND that the said Trustees assuming upon themselves the Execution of the Trust
by this present Act req^i^ed of them, shall be allowed for their Service and
Trouble therein at and after the Rate of Twenty Pounds per Annum each, added to
their Salaries hereafter accruing by the ^ai^ former Acts, payable to each of
them in Bills of Credit of this Province, for and during the Continuance of the
said Thirty Thousand Pound Act: The time they are to give Attendance, etc.
And that they the said Trustees, or any two of them, shall duly attend at the
said Loan-Office the first third Day of the Week called Tuesday, in the Months
called March, May, July, September, November and January, yearly, for receiving
the Sums to be paid in pursuant to this and the said two former Acts
respectively, and for emitting the Sums to be lent by the Direction of this
present Act, until all the Quota^ to be paid in, pursuant to this and the said
former Acts, be re-emitted; and afterward at such Times as the Trust and
Service of the Public may require them, during the Continuance of the said
Thirty Thousand Pound Act: And that the said Trustees, or one of them, or some
other Person under their Direction, and for whom they shall be accountable,
shall duly attend at the Place where the said Office is kept, on the first
fourth Day of the Week, called Wednesday, in every Month, then and there to
deliver out new Bills of the Ten T^^usand ^ounds Value hereby directed to be
struck, to such Persons as demand them in Exchange and in Lieu of such torn and
d^fac^d Bill^ as the said Trustees, or any of them, shall ju^g^ to be (...)
Bills of this Province, and of (...) Value with those they so give in Exchange,
until (...) Thousand Pounds Value aforesaid be wholly (...): Which torn and
defaced Bills, being kept by the (...) Trustees, shall by them be produced for
their Vouc^er^ to discharge th^mselves of the Ten Thousand Pounds (...), before
any Committee of Assembly, to be appointed Auditors of the said Trustees
Accounts; who shall thereupon cause the said torn and defaced Bills to be sunk
and destroyed.

AND that the Clerk herein after appointed, shall, once a Year, make out a List
of the Securities by this Act directed to be taken, containing the Persons
Names to whom the Sums are lent, and the Times when; and the same Li^t^ shall
submit and deliver to the Assemblies of this Province for the time being, from
time to time, until all the Sums hereby directed to be emitted be wholly
comprehended and delivered.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED (...) the Authority aforesaid, A Committee of
Assembly to be Auditors of the T^^^tees Accounts.
That any Committee of Assembly of this Province, being appointed Auditors of
Account, of the said Trustees, the same Auditors for the time being shall, once
in every Year, or oftener, call the said Trustees to Account for all the Moneys
in Bills of Credit they shall receive, recover and pay, exchange or emit in
Purs^ance of this Act, and all the Interest to be received upon S^curities
hereby directed to be taken (whether the ^^me Interest accrue on or before the
said sixteenth Day of January, Anno Domini 1731, or afterward) being accounted
for, and the Salaries and Charges allowed by this Act Act b^ing deducted, they
the said Trustees shall dispose ther^of as the Assemblies of this Province
shall from time to time order and direct.

AND that all the yearly Quotas or Parcels of the principal Sums which shall or
ought to be paid in into the ^^id Loan-Office aforesaid, The Quotas of all
principal Sums paid in after 1^31, to be sunk and destroyed.
at any time after the said 16th Day (...) 1731, remaining in the Hands of the
Trustees there^^ for the time being, shall, within ten Days after every such
Audit, be sunk and destroyed by and in the Presence of the same Auditors
respectively, they having first compa^ed the original Bills with their
Counterparts, as they shall have Occasion, and entered the Numbers and Value of
each Bill so destroyed, into a Book to be kept for that Purpose.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, Charles Brockden
nominated Clerk of the Loan-Offic.
That Charles Brockden, of Philadelphia, shall be and is hereby nominated and
appointed to be Clerk of the General Loan-Office hereby erected, during the
Continuance of this Act, to advise and assist the Trustees thereof, in and
about the Titles aforesaid, and for the devising and preparing of the
Mortgage-Deeds and Writings of the Mortgagers herein before directed to be
given, and for Recording of the same Mortgage-Deeds. And in case of the Removal
of the said Charles Brockden, by Death or otherwise, the said Trustees for the
time being shall appoint a fit Person to supply his Place, and so from time to
time during the Continuance of this Act, as often as there shall be Occasion:
Which Persons so to be nominated, shall thereupon act in that Station until the
General Assembly of this Province for the time being disapprove such
Appointment, by nominating another in his Stead; any Law or Usage to the
contrary notwithstanding. And that the said Clerk, for his Trouble, Care and
Diligence, shall have and receive of every Mortgager, the like Fees and
Perquisites as the said Thirty Thousand Pound Act specifieth and directs to
be paid in like Cases, to the Clerk thereby directed to be chosen. But before
the Person h^reby nominated or hereafter to be elected Clerk aforesaid, shall
enter upon the Execution of his Duty aforesaid, he shall enter into Bond to the
Provincial-Treasurer for the time being, in the Penalty of Five Hundred Pounds,
conditioned for the due Observance of all Things required of him by this Act;
and shall also take an Oath or Affirmation before any one Justice of the Peace
of the City or County of Philadelphia, who is hereby empowered and required to
administer the same; That he shall truly and faithfully perform and execute the
Office and Duty that is directed and required of him by this present Act; and
that he will keep a just and true Account of the Names of all such Persons as
shall apply unto the Loan-Office aforesaid for Bills of Credit; and will
prepare and record the Deed^ of Mortgage in the same Order of time as their
Applications are made, without any undue Preference, unnecessary Delays, or
fraudulent Practice.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, When the Trustees shall
be fin^ (...) discharged.
That after all the Sums and Bills of Credit, to be received by the Trustees of
the General Loan-Office aforesaid, are so by them accounted for and sunk,
pur^uant to the Direction of this Act, the same Trustees, and Trustees for the
time being, their Heirs, Executors and Administrators, and every of them,
shall, thenceforwards, stand and forever be clearly discharged and acquitted of
and from all Manner of Obligations, Securities, Actions, Causes of Actions, and
of and from all further or other Accou^ts and Demands whatsoever, to be made or
rendered by them of or for any Trust unto them committed, or any thing by them
done in Pursuance of this Act.

CHAP. CCLXXVI. An ACT for laying a Duty on Negroes imported into this Province.
Expired.

CHAP. CCLXXVII. An ACT for the better enabling of Bernhard Vanleer, Arent
Hassert, Michael Smiths, William Seliger, Arnold Bamberger, William Hilligart,
and Ulrick Hageman, to trade and hold Lands in this Province.
WHEREAS by the Royal Charter of the late King Charles the Second to William
Penn, Esquire late Proprietary and Governor of the Province of Pennsylvania,
License is granted to all Persons, not specially forbidden, to transport
themselves and Families into the said Province, in such Shipping as by the Laws
of the of the Kingdom of England they ought to use, paying the Customs
therefore due, and here to settle themselves, dwell and inherit, and plant for
the Public and their own private Advantage; with License to purchase and hold
Lands in Fe^-simple, or otherwise, of the said Proprietary, and his Heirs, with
full License to all Persons who shall from time to time repair hither with a
Purpose to inhabit (...) trade with the Natives of this Country, to load,
height and transport all and singular their Goods, Wares and Merchandises, not
prohibited by the Laws and Statutes of England, into any Ports whatsoever of
the said late King, his Heirs and Successors, according to the Laws made or to
be made within the said Kingdom of England; SAVING ALWAYS to the said late
King, his Heirs and Successors, the legal Impositions, Customs or other Duties
due or to become due by any Law or Statute, for the said Wares or Merchandises,
as by the said Royal Charter (amongst other Things) may more fully appear. AND
WHEREAS the said Bernhard Vanleer, Arent Hassert, Michael Smiths, William
Seliger, Arnold Bamberger, William Hilligart and Ulrick Hageman, were born
under the Allegiance of the Emperor of Germany, now in Amity with the King of
Great Britain; and being of the Protestant or reformed Religion, and desirous
to come under the Power and Protection of his British Majesty, have transported
themselves, with their Effects, into this Province; and duly considering the
Happiness of being governed by a Constitution agreeable to the Laws, Rights and
Liberties of England; and desiring to be made Partakers of these Immunities
belonging to the natural-born Subjects of this Province, and be more
effectually secured of those Privileges and Advantage^ granted by his said late
Royal Majesty King Charles the Second to Persons coming into this Province to
settle and inhabit; they the said Berhard Vanleer, Arent Hassert, Michael
Smiths, William Seliger, Arnold Bamberger, William Hilligart and Ulrick
Hageman, having on the 6th Day of December 1725, in the General
Quarter Sessions of the Peace of our Lord the King that now is, held at
Philadelphia, in the said Province, taken and subscribed the several
Qualifications required by Law to be taken and subscribed by his Majesty's
liege Subjects, obtained Leave to bring in this Bill to the present Assembly.
Now forasmuch a^ the Increase of People in these foreign Plantations is an
Encouragement to the English Trade, and a Means of advancing the Wealth and
Strength of the English Empire; Therefore may it please the Governor that it
may be ^nacted, AND BE IT ENACTED by Sir WILLIAM KEITH, Bart. Governor of the
Province of Pennsylva^ia* etc. by and with the Advice and Consent of the
Freemen of the said Province, in General Assembly met, and by the Authority of
the same, That the said Bernhard Vanleer, Arent Hassert, Michael Smiths,
William Se ^g^r, Arnold Bamberger, William Hilligart and Ulrick Hageman, are
hereby declared, and shall at all times hereafter, be esteemed and taken, to
all Intents and Purposes, to be and to have been since their first Arrival in
this Province, free and fully able and capable to trade, traffic, load,
freight and transport all and all Manner of Goods, Wares and Merchandises not
by Law p^ohibited to be imported or exported, as if they the said Bernhard
Vanleer, Arent Hassert, Michael Smiths, William Seliger, Arnold Bamberger,
William Hilligart and Ulri^k Hageman, had been the natural liege People and
Subjects of the King of Great Britain, born in this Province of Pennsylvania.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That the said Bernhard
Vanleer, Arent Hassert, Michael Smiths, William Seliger, Arnold Bamberger,
William Hilligart and Ulrick Hageman, shall and are hereby enabled and adjudged
able, to all Intents, Constructions and Purposes whatsoever, as well to demand,
take, have, retain and enjoy any Privileges and Immunities belonging to his
Majesty's liege People and natural Subjects of this Province; as also to have
and enjoy all Lands and Tenements, or other Hereditaments, by Way of Purchase,
or Gift of any Person or Persons whatsoever; and also to prosecute, pursue,
maintain, avow and justify all and all Manner of Actions, Suits and Causes, and
all other Things to do as lawfully, freely and fully as if they the said
Bernhard Vanleer, Arent Hassert, Michael Smiths, William Seliger, Arnold
Bamberger, William Hilligart and Ulrick Hageman, had been and were born natural
Subjects of this Province, or as any other Person or Persons born within this
Province, may lawfully in anywise do; any Law, Custom or Usage to the contrary
thereof in anywise notwithstanding.

CHAP. CCLXXVIII. An ACT for the better Regulating of Negroes in this Province.
See before Chap. 125.126.

WHEREAS it too often happens, Preamble.
that Negroes commit Felonies, and other heinous Crimes, which by the Laws of
this Province, are punishable by Death; but the Loss in such Case falling
wholly on the Owner, is so great a Hardship, that sometimes may induce him to
conceal such Crimes, or to convey his Negroe to some other Place, and so suffer
him to escape Justice, to the ill Example of others to commit the like
Offenses: For Remedy whereof, BE IT ENACTED by Sir WILLIAM KEITH, Bart.
Governor of the Province of Pennsylvania, etc. by and with the Adv^^e and
Consent of the Freemen of the said Province, in General Assembly met, and by
the Authority of the same, That if any Negroe, Negroes convicte^ of c^pita^
Offe^ce^, to ^e (...)* and^. (...) Owne^ paid.
owned by any of the Inhabitants of this Province, shall hereafter be convicted
of any capital Crime for which he or she shall suffer Death, the Justices, with
the F^eeholders, before whom he or she shall be convicted, shall immediately
upon such Conviction value such Negroe; which Value by them set shall be
allowed and paid to the Owner out of the Duties, Fines and Penalties arising
from this and one other Act, laying a Duty on Negroes impo^ted into this
Province, and no otherways; and the Provincial-Treasurer is hereby empowered
and required to pay the same, by Order under the said Justices Hands; which
said Order they are hereby required to make, seal and deliver to the Owner of
any Negroe executed as abovesaid.

AND BE IT ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, All Negroes impo^^ed into thi^
Province to be ent^ed, and ex^min'd whether they were s^nt hither for capit^l
Offenses, etc.
That from and after the Twenty-fourth Day of June 1726, for every Negroe
imported or brought into this Province, from the West Indies, or any other
Place, who shall or have been transported or sent away for being Pri^cipal or
Accessory to any Felony, or grand or Petty-La^ceny, or other Misdemeanors,
there shall be paid by the Owner, Importer or Possessor, the Sum of Five
Pounds, over and above the Five Pounds Duty laid by an Act of Assembly of this
Province, passed this Sessions: Which said Duty shall be paid to the Officer
appointed to collect and receive the said Duty imposed by the said recited Act.
And all Masters of Vessels, or others bringing into this Province any such
Negroes, shall, within the Space of Twenty-four Hours, make Entry, and, upon
Oath or Affirmation, give a true Account to the said Collector, of the Number
of Negroes by him or them imported or brought in, and to whom they respectively
belong; whereupon the said Officer shall forthwith give Notice thereof, to any
one or more of the Justices of the Peace for the City or County whe^^ such
Negroes are or shall be imported; which Justice or Justices are hereby
empowered and required immediately, by Warrant or otherwise, to call before him
or them the said Master, Owner or other Person or Persons importing such
Negroes as aforesaid, and to examine him or them upon Oath or Affirmation, in
Order to discover which or how many of the said Negroes are liable to the said
Duty of Ten Pounds per Head; and then the said Justice or Justices shall
deliver, or cause to be delivered to the said Collector, a Certificate or List
of the Number of Negroes so imported, which shall appear to them, or as they
shall judge to be within the Meaning of this Act; and thereupon the said
Officer shall proceed to collect and recover the said Duty, or take Bond for
the same. And all Masters of Vessels, and others, bringing into this Province
any such Negroes; as likewise the said Collector, and all other Persons, shall
and are hereby required to observe and comply with the Directions of the said
Act in and about the Execution of this Part of this Act, and under the same
Exceptions, Restrictions and Penalties as is appointed and set down in and by
the said recited Act, excepting where the same is hereby expressly altered or
supplied.

AND WHEREAS it is found by Experience, that ^ree Negroes are an idle, slothful
People; and often prove burthensom to the Neighborhood, and afford ill
Examples to other Negroes: THEREFORE BE IT ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid,
That if any Master or Mistress shall discharge or set free any Negroe, Security
to be given on setting a Negroe free.
he or she shall enter into Recognizance at the respective County Court, with
sufficient Sureties, in the Sum of Thirty Pounds, to secure and indemnify the
City, Township or County where he resides, from any Charge or Encumbrance they
may bring upon the same, in case such Negroe, by Sickness or otherwise, be
rendered incapable to support him or herself; but until such Recognizance be
given, such Negroes shall not be deemed free.

AND (...) any Negroe be made free by the Will or Testament of any Person
deceased, Also, on setting them free by Will.
then the Executor or Executors of the Deceased, or some other Person, shall
enter into the like Recognizance as above, immediately upon proving the said
Will, or otherwise the said Negroe shall not be deemed free.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That if any free Negroe,
Free Negroes, neglecting to to work, to be bound out by the Year.
fit and able to work, shall neglect so to do, and loiter or mispend his or her
Time, or wander from Place to Place, any two Magistrates next adjoining are
hereby empowered and required, to bind out to Service such Negroe from Year to
Year, as to them shall seem meet.

Free Negroe Children to be bound out, etc.
AND if any Negroe be set free under the Age of Twenty-one Years, or where there
be any Children of free Negroes, it shall and may be lawful for the Overseers
of the Poor, and they are hereby ordered, with the Assent of two or more
Justices of the Peace, to bind out to Service such Negroe or Negroes, a Man
Child until he comes to the Age of Twenty-four Years, and a Woman Child to the
Age of Twenty-one.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, Penalty on free Negroes
entertaining Slaves, etc.
That if any free Negroe or Mulatto shall harbor or entertain any Negroe,
Indian or Mulatto Slave, or Servant, in his or her House, without the Leave and
Consent of their respective Master or Mistress, he or she shall forfeit and pay
the Sum of Five Shillings, for the first Hour, and One Shilling for every Hour
afterward, they shall be so harbored or entertained.

Also on trading with them.
AND if any free Negroe or Mulatto shall barter, trade or anyways deal with any
Negroe or other Slave, without License had as abovesaid, he or she shall make
Restitution to the Party grieved, and also be publicly whipped, not exceeding
Twenty-one Lashes.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, And not being able to
pay the Penalties, Satisfaction to be ordered by Servitude.
That i^ any free Negroe or Mulatto shall refuse or be unable to pay his or her
Fine or Forfeiture as aforesaid, it shall and may be lawful to and for the
Justice before whom such Matter is tried to order Satisfaction by Servitude.

AND BE IT ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, Penalty on any Person joining
White and Black in Marriage.
That no Minister, Pastor or Magistrate, or other Person whatsoever, who
according to the Laws of this Province usually join People in Marriage, shall,
upon any Pretense whatsoever, join in Marriage any Negroe with any white
Person, on the Penalty of One Hundred Pounds.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, Forfeitures on White and
Black cohabiting together.
That if any white Man or Woman shall cohabit or dwell with any Negroe, under
Pretense of being married, such white Man or Woman shall forfeit and pay the
Sum of Thirty Pounds, or be sold for a Servant, not exceeding seve^ Years, by
the Justices of the respective County Courts; and the Child or Children of such
white Man or Woman shall be put out to Service as above directed, until they
come to the Age of Thirty-one Years: And if any free Negroe Man or Woman shall
intermarry with a white Woman or Man, such Negroe shall become Slave during
Life, to be sold by Order of the Justices of the Qua^ter-Sessions of the
respective County. And if any free Negroe Man or Woman shall commit Fornication
or Adultery with any white Man or Woman, such Negroe or Negroes shall be sold
Servant for seven Years as abovesaid; and the white Man or Woman shall be
punished as the Law directs in Cases of Adultery or Fornication.

AND WHEREAS a good Regulation and suitable Management of Negroes is very much
conducive to the Safety and Peace, as well as Advantage of those Countries
which are possessed of any Number of them, THEREFORE BE IT ENACTED by the
Authority aforesaid, Piunshment on Negroes tippling, from their Home, after Nine
at Night.
That if any Negroe shall at any time be found tippling or drinking in or near
any House or Shop where strong Liquors are sold, or be found out of or absent
from his Master or Mistress's House after nine a Clock at Night, without
License from his said Master or Mistress, shall be whipped on his or her bare
Back, at his Master's or Owner's own Cost, not exceeding ten Lashes, by Order
of any Justice of the Peace.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, Negroes found ten Miles
from home, to be taken up, etc.
That whoever shall take up any Negroe above ten Miles from his or her Master
or Mistress's Habitation, who has not Leave in Writing from his or her said
Master or Mistress, or are not known to be on their Service, he, she or they so
taken up shall be whipped by Order of any Justice of the Peace, on the bare
Back, at the Owner's Charge, not exceeding ten Lashes; and the Taker-up shall
have for his Reward Five Shillings, with reasonable Charge for carrying him or
them home, paid by the Master or Mistress of the said Negroe.

AND BE IT ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, No Owner to permit his Negroe to
seek his own Employ, on Penalty, etc.
That no Master or Mistress of any Negroe shall hereafter, for any Reward, Sum
or Sums of Money stipulated and agreed upon between them, or upon any other
Pretense whatsoever, permit or suffer his or their Negroes to ramble about,
under Pretense of getting Work, give Liberty to their Negroes to seek their own
Employ, and so go to work at their own Wills, under the Penalty of Twenty
Shillings, for every such Offense.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, Penalty on any Person's
entertaining a Slave.
That no Person or Persons whatsoever shall employ or knowingly harbor,
conceal or entertain other People's Slaves, at their Houses, Outhouses or
Plantations, without the Master or Owner's Consent, excepting in Distress of
Weather, or other extraordinary Occasion, under the Penalty of Thirty
Shillings, for every Twenty-four Hours he or they shall entertain or harbor
him or them as aforesaid.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, How the Fines, etc. are
to be recovered and applied.
That all the Fines, Forfeitures and Penalties, arising by this Act, shall go,
one Half thereof for and toward the Paying for Negroes executed for capital
Offenses, according to the Directions of this Act; to be paid into the Hands of
the Provincial-Treasurer, and the other Half thereof to the Prosecutor: And
shall be recovered in Manner following, viz. all those under Forty Shillings,
as other Debts of the like Value are recovered, and those above Forty
Shillings, to be recovered in any Court of Record in this Province, by Bill,
Plaint or Information, where no more than one Imparlance shall be allowed.

CHAP. CCLXXI^. An ACT for the better Regulating the Retailers of Liquors near
the Iron-Works, and elsewhere.
Expired.

ANNO REGNI GEORG II REGIS DECIMO TERTIO.
At a GENERAL ASSEMBLY begun at Philadelphia, in the Province of Pennsylvania,
the Fourteenth Day of October, in the Thirteenth Year of the Reign of our
Sovereign Lord GEORGE, King of Great Britain, etc. Annoq Domini, One Thousand
Seven Hundred and Twenty-six, and continued by Adjournment till the
Twenty-fifth Day of August, One Thousand Seven Hundred and Twenty-seven: The
following ACTS were passed by the Honorable PATRICK GORDON, Esquire Governor of
the said Province, That is to say,
CHAP. CCLXXX. An ACT for the Establishing of Courts of Judicature in this
Province.
Repealed.

CHAP. CCLXXXI. An ACT for the more effectual encouraging the Raising of good
Hemp; and for continuing an Excise on all Wine, Rum, Brandy, and other Spirits,
retailed within this Province.
Repealed, vid. 5 Geo. II. Chap. 325.

CHAP. CCLXXXII. An ACT for establishing a Ferry from the City of Philadelphia,
to the Landing at or near the House of William Cooper; and another from or near
the City-Bounds, to Gloucester in New Jersey.
Expired.

CHAP. CCLXXXIII. An ACT more effectually to prevent unfair Practices in the
Packing of Beef and Pork for Exportation.
WHEREAS an Act was passed in this Province, in the twelfth Year of the Reign
of the late King William the Third, entitled, An Act for the Ascertaining the
Dimensions of Cask, and for the true Packing of Meat for Transportation: AND
WHEREAS the Frauds and Abuses provided against and intended to be prevented by
the said Act, relating to the Package of Beef and Pork, and Dimensions of Cask,
are still complained of: For the Preventing whereof, for the Time to come, BE
IT ENACTED by the Honorable PATRICK GORDON, Esquire Lieutenant Governor of the
Province of Pennsylvania, etc. by and with the Advice and Consent of the
Freemen of the said Province, in General Assembly met, and by the Authority of
the same, How much every tight Cask, made for exporting Beef and Pork, shall
contain; the Cooper to brand his Cask, etc. and enter the Brand and his Name
with the Offices, on Pe^alty, etc.
That all tight Cask, made in this Province, for Beef and Pork for Exportation,
shall be made of good, sound, well-seasoned white Oak Timber, and shall contain
as follows, viz. The Ba^rel, Thirty-one Gallons and a half, Wine-Measure, and
the Half-Barrel, sixteen Gallons: And every Cooper, residing or hereafter to
reside within this Province, shall, each one for himself, provide and have a
distinguishable Brand-Mark, and shall therewith brand each and every tight
Barrel and Half-Barrel he shall make for containing of Beef or Pork for
Exportation: But before any such Cooper shall brand any Barrel or Half-Barrel
as aforesaid, he shall cause such his Brand-Ma^^, together with his Name and
Place of Abode, to be entered with the Officer hereafter appointed by this Act;
who is hereby required to enter the same in a Book provided and kept by him for
that Purpose, for Entering of which the Officer shall have One Shilling each,
and no more: And every Cooper offending in all or any of the Premises, on due
Proof made, shall forfeit and pay the Sum of Ten Shillings, for every such
Offense.

AND BE IT ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, How good Beef and Pork shall be
packed.
That all Beef and Pork designed for Exportation, from and after the Twentieth
Day of September, One Thousand Se^^n Hundred and Twenty-seven, shall be found
and merchantable Meat, well packed and secured with Salt and Pickle, and shall
not have more than two Heads of Pork in one Barrel, nor more than one Head in
half a Barrel.

AND BE IT ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, No Person to export Beef and
Pork before viewed by the Officer.
That no Merchant or Person whatsoever shall lade or ship any Beef or Pork for
Exportation out of this Province, before he shall first submit the same to the
View and Examination of the Officer or his Deputy, appointed by the Direction
of this Act, who shall search the same, by opening, unpacking and repacking, in
order to judge of the Sound^es^ and true Package of the Meat, as well as the
Contents of the Cask; and if the said Officer or his Deputy shall find the said
Beef or Pork to be merchantable, and the Cask to contain, the Barrel Thirty-one
Gallons and a half, Wine-Measure, and the Half-Barrel sixteen Gallons,
according to the Direction of this Act; he shall, after the Packing or
Re-packing and Heading, The Barrel to be branded thu^,
brand every such Barrel and Half-Barrel on the Quarter, with a Provincial
Brand-Mark, which the said Officer shall have and provide for that Purpose,
sufficient to impress, in a fair and distinguishable Manner, the Arms of the
Province of Pennsylvania, as in the Margin.

PROVIDED ALWAYS NEVERTHELESS, On any Dispute arising, ho^ to pr^ceed.
That if any Dispute shall happen to arise between the said Officer and
Possessor of such Beef or Pork, concerning the Soundness o^ Package of the
same, or Contents of the Cask, Application being made to one of the Magistrates
of the City or County where the said Dispute arises, who shall issue his
Warrant to two indiffere^^ judicious Persons of Skill and Integrity, to view
and search the said Beef and Pork, and make Report forthwith according as they
find the same; and the said Magistrate is hereby empowered and required to give
Judgment acco^dingly: And in case the said Beef or Pork is judged not (...) to
be exported, the said Magistrate shall order it not to be exported, under the
Penalty of Forfeiture of all such Beef or Pork; and shall also award and order
the Owner or Possessor of the said Beef or Pork, to pay the said Officer Five
Shillings per Cask, for all such Beef or Pork as shall be adjudged not fit for
Exportation as aforesaid, with reasonable Charges. But in case the said Beef or
Pork, upon Tri^^ shall be found to be good and merchantable, according to the
Direction of this Act, the Charges of Prosecution shall be paid by the Officer.

AND BE IT ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, The Officer's Fee for ^acking.
etc.
That the Officer hereafter appointed, or to be appointed, or his Deputy, shall
have and receive, for the Viewing, Searching and Packing, or Re-packing,
Heading and Branding of every Barrel of Beef or Pork, One Shilling and
Sixpence, and for every Half-Barrel One Shilling, and no more; to be paid, one
Half by the Buyer or Shipper, and the other Half by the Seller.

AND BE IT ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, The Officer's Power and Duty.
That the said Officer, or his Deputies, shall have full Power and Authority by
Virtue of this Act, and without any further or other Warrant, to enter on board
any Ship, Sloop or Vessel whatsoever, lying or being in any Port or Place in
this Province, and into any House, Store or Places whatsoever, within the
Province aforesaid, to search for and make Discovery of any Beef or Pork
shipped or intended to be shipped for Exportation; and if the O^^ner or
Possessor, or their Servants, or others, shall den^ him or them Entrance; or if
the said Officer or his Deputies shall be anyways molested in making such
Discovery as aforesaid; or if such Merchant or Owner shall refuse to permit the
said Officer, or his Deputies to view and examine any Beef or Pork, or not
permit him or them to brand the same, if merchantable, according to the
Direction of this Act, every such Person so of^ending shall forfeit and pay the
Sum of Ten Pounds: Or shall ship off any Cask or Casks of Beef or Pork not
branded with the Provincial Brand-Mark aforesaid, every such Person so
offending shall forfeit and pay the Sum of Ten Shillings for every Cask so
shipped.

AND BE IT ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That Nathaniel Griffitts, of
Philadelphia, Cooper, Who is appointed Officer, and in whose Power it is, in
case of Death, etc. to appoint another.
shall be and is hereby appointed the said Officer for Viewing, Searching,
Packing or Re-packing and Branding as aforesaid all Beef and Pork intended for
Exportation, according to the Direction of this present Act. And if the said
Nathaniel Griffitts, or other Person hereafter appointed to be the Officer
aforesaid, shall, by any Accident be rendered incapable, or neglect to execute
the said Office, or shall happen to die before or after the Time of pu^^^ng
this present Act in Execution, then, and so often, and from time to time, it
shall and may be lawful to and for the Mayor, together with any two Aldermen,
of the City of Philadelphia, to supply his Place by some other fit and capable
Person; who shall thereupon be the Officer for putting this Act in Execution
until the Assembly appoints another.

BUT before the said Nathaniel Griffitts, The Offices to make Oath or
Affirmation.
or any other Person so to be appointed the Officer aforesaid, shall do any
thing in the Execution of his Office, he shall first make Oath or Affirmation
before any Justice of the Peace of any County of this Province, faithfully and
impartially to perform his Duty and Trust to the best of his Capacity,
according to the Direction of this present Act.

AND BE IT ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That the said Nathaniel
Griffitts, And may appoint Deputies.
or any other Person appointed the Officer aforesaid, is hereby empowered to
appoint Deputies in the respective Counties of this Province (for whom he or
they shall be accountable) which said Deputies are hereby fully empowered to
act as Deputy-Officers for the Viewing, Searching, Packing and Branding of Beef
and Pork in Manner aforesaid, in their respective Counties, to all Intents and
Purposes, as fully as ^e said Nathaniel Griffitts could do by Virtue of this
Act.

AND BE IT ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, Penalty on counterfeiting the
Brand-Mark, and using the same.
That if any Person or Persons shall counterfeit the said Provincial
Brand-Mark, or impress or brand the same on any Cask of Beef or Pork, he, she
or they being thereof legally convicted, shall, for the first Offense, forfeit
and pay the Sum of Five Pounds, for the second Offense the Sum of Ten Pounds,
and for the Third, and every other such Offense, the Offender shall be
committed to Goal, and sentenced to the Pillory, there to stand the Space of
two Hours, on a Market Day, in any City, Borough or Town of the respective
Counties of this Province where the Fact was committed.

AND BE IT ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, The Appropriation of the Fines,
and h^w to be recovered.
That all and singular the Fines, Forfeitures and Penalties in and by this Act
set and appointed, shall be, one Half to the Governor, for the Support of
Government, and the other Half thereof to the Informer, or him or them that
will sue for the same; if under Forty Shillings, to be recovered as Debts under
Forty Shillings are usually recovered; if above Forty Shillings, to be sued for
and recovered by Bill, Plaint or Information, in any Court of Record within
this Province, wherein no Essoin, Protection or Wager of Law, nor any more than
one Imparlance, shall be allowed.

CHAP. CCLXXXIV. A Supplementary ACT to the Act for Ascertaining the Number of
Members of Assembly, Antea Chap. 1^9.
and to regulate Elections.
Preamble.
WHEREAS by an Act of Assembly of this Province, passed in the fourth Year of
the late Queen Anne, entitled, An Act to ascertain the Number of Members of
Assembly, and to regulate Elections, amongst other Things it is enacted, that
every Sheriff, or, in his Absence, his under Sheriff, or such as he shall
depute, or for Want of such Deputation, the Coroner, or such as he shall
appoint, or for Want of such Appointment, any two of the Freeholders, who, by
the major Part of the Electors then and there present shall be nominated and
appointed Judges of the said Elections, in the Absence of the Sheriff or
Coroner shall attend the said Elections, and shall appoint such Number of
Clerks for taking the Poll or Votes of the Electors as the Inspectors in the
said Act after mentioned shall appoint. AND WHEREAS by the said recited Act it
does not clearly appear what Number of Inspectors are to be nominated or chosen
by the major Part of the Electors, nor are they (...) under any Oath or
Affirmation for the true Discharge of the Trust in them reposed by the said
Act, from whence some Disputes have arisen to the D^lay of the said Elections:
For Remedy whereof, BE IT ENACTED by PATRICK GORDON, Esquire Lieutenant Governor of
the Province of Pennsylvania, etc. by and with the Advice and Consent of the
Freemen of the Province aforesaid, in General Assembly met, and by the
Authority of the same, How the Sheriff, etc shall proceed in the Election, etc.
That when the Sheriff of every County of this Province, or his Undersheriff,
or such as he shall depute, or for Want of such Deputation, the Coroner, or
such other Person or Persons, who by the before-recited Act, or any other Law
of this Province, are or shall be, in the Absence of the Sheriff or Coroner,
appointed to be Judges of the said Elections respectively, are ready to proceed
according to the Direction of the said Act, the Freemen of the respective
Counties then and there present, and having Right to be Electors, or the major
Part of them, shall immediately, preceding every such Election of
Representatives, nominate such substantial Freeholders, of the County where
such Election is to be, for Inspectors of the ensuing Election, who at the Time
and Place aforesaid shall be p^t up one by one, by the Sheriff, or other Judges
of the said Elections, until eight of those Freeholders so nominated shall be
chosen for the County and City of Philadelphia, and six for the said City of
Philadelphia, and the Number four for the Counties of Bu^ks and Chester
respectively, by a fair Majority of the Electors, to be Inspectors as
aforesaid, having Regard (as much as may be) in all Elections for the
respective Counties of this Province, to choose such Persons for Inspectors as,
from their living in different Quarters of the said Counties, may have the most
Knowledge of the Qualification or Abilities of the Electors.

AND the said Inspectors, when chosen as aforesaid, The Inspectors how to he
qualified, etc.
before they shall proceed to act in receiving the Poll or Votes at the said
Elections, shall be qualified by Oath or Affirmation, by the Sheriff of the
proper County, or other Judges of the Elections; who are hereby empowered and
required to administer the same, That they will duly attend the ensuing
Election, during the Continuance thereof, and will truly and faithfully assist
the Sheriff, Coroner, or other Person who shall, by Virtue of the before
recited Act, officiate as Judges of the said Elections, to preven^ all Frauds
and Deceits whatsoe^er of Electors, or others, in the Management and carrying
on of the same, and in causing the Poll or Votes at such Elections to be taken
and cast up according to the Directions of the said recited Act.

An Oath or Affirmation to be administered to the Voter, (...)
AND the said Inspectors are hereby authorized and required to administer to
every Elector or Person, who present^ his Ticket for electing Representatives
to serve an Assembly, an Oath or Affirmation, in the Words directed by the
aforesaid Act of the fourth of Queen Anne, viz. That such Elector is of
Twenty-one Years of Age, and a Freeholder for the County of -- and has fifty
Acres of Land or more, well seated, and twelve Acres thereof, or more, cleared,
or that he is otherways worth Fifty Pounds, Money of this Province, clear
Estate, and has been resident therein for the Space of two Years, and that he
has not been before polled at that Election; unless the Qualification of such
Elector be generally well known, or some one or more of the Inspectors shall or
will openly declare to the rest, that they know such Elector to be qualified as
aforesaid; and the Votes or Tickets of such as offer to Poll, and refuse to
take the said Oath or Affirmation, shall be openly rejected; and the Vote or
Ticket of every Person who takes the said Oath or Affirmation shall be put into
the Box, and no Ticket so received shall be suppressed.

PROVIDED, That nothing herein contained shall be deemed or taken to disannul,
alter or make void the said recited Act, or any thing therein contained, but
that every Clause, Article and Sentence therein, except what is hereby altered
or supplied, shall be and remain in full Force and Virtue.

CHAP. CCLXXXV. A SUPPLEMENT to the Act for taking Lands in Execution for the
Payment of Debts. (...) Acts before Chap. 144. and 48.

Preamble.
WHEREAS sundry Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments have been taken in Execution
and sold, pursuant to the Direction of the abovesaid Act, by some Sheriffs in
this Province, who have been removed, by Death, or otherwise, before any Title
made o^ Deeds executed to the Purchaser for the said Lands or Hereditaments so
sold, by Reason whereof great Inconveniences have aris^n both to the Purchaser
and Debtor: For Remedy whereof* and to prevent such Inconveniencie^ for the
future, BE IT ENACTED by the Hon. PATRICK GORDON, Esquire Lieutenant Governor of
the Province of Pennsylvania, etc. by and with the Advice and Consent of the
Freemen of the said Province, in General Assembly met, and by the Authority of
the same, That where the Sheriff, or other proper Officer has heretofore taken
in Execution, and either with or without a Writ of Venditioni exponas sold any
Land or Hereditaments, and has happened to die or be removed before a Title
made or Deeds executed for the ^ame, according to the Direction of the said
Act; or whenever it shall happen hereafter that any Sheriff, or other proper
Officer, shall, pursuant to the said Act, take in Execution and sell any Lands
or He^editaments, and shall happen to die or be removed from his said Office
before the Deeds shall be executed or Title made for the same to the Purchaser,
then, and so often, and upon all such Accidents, the Plaintiff, or Person in
whose Behalf Execution was levied, may apply to the Court of Common Pleas for
the County where Judgment was obtained, and set forth to them his Case, with
the Reasons why his Title was not duly perfected by the preceding or former
Sheriff; and the said Court may thereupon, as they shall see Cause, and as
Justice and Equity shall require, order and direct the Sheriff, for the time
being, to complete any such Title and execute such Deeds as aforesaid: And upon
such Order obtained as aforesaid, and entered on the Records of the Court, it
shall and may be lawful to and for the present and all succeeding Sheriffs, and
they are hereby empowered and required (upon the full Discharge and Payment of
the Money or Price of such Lands or Hereditaments, with such Charges as remain
unpaid to the former Sheriff) to make, execute and deliver any Deed or Deeds
duly executed and acknowledged in Court, and to perform and do all other
Matters and Things which by the former Sheriff might, could or ought to have
been done in and about the Premises, according to the Direction of the said
recited Act; which shall be deemed and adjudged as effectual in Law as if the
^ame had been done and finished by the said preceding Sheriff; any Law, Usage
or Custom to the contrary in any wi^e notwithstanding.

PROVIDED NEVERTHELESS, That this Act, or any thing therein contained, shall
not extend ^o disannul, alter or make void the said recited Act, or any Part
thereof: Save only, what is herein and hereby expressly altered and supplied.

ANNO REGNI GEORGII II. REGIS SECUNDO.
At a GENERAL ASSEMBLY begun at Philadelphia, in the Province of Pennsylvania,
the Fourteenth Day of October, in the Second Year of the Reign of our Sovereign
Lord GEORGE the Second, King of Great Britain, etc. Annoque Domini One Thousand
Seven Hundred and Twenty-eight, and continued by Adjournment till the Tenth Day
of May, One Thousand Seven Hundred and Twenty-nine: The following ACTS were
passed by the Honorable PATRICK GORDON, Esquire Lieutenant Governor of the said
Province, That is to say,
CHAP. CCLXXXVI. An ACT for Erecting of Pownds in each Township of this
Province.
BE IT ENACTED by the Honorable PATRICK GORDON, Esquire Lieutenant Governor of the
Province of Pennsylvania, etc. by and with the Advice and Consent of the
Freemen of the said Province, in General Assembly met, and by the Authority of
the same, That it shall and may be lawful for the Inhabitants of the respective
Townships within this Province, The Inhabitants of every Township to meet
yearly and choose a Pownd-keeper; who may agree to e^ect a Pownd where there is
none.
who are Owners or Possessors of Land, to meet on the Twentieth Day of the
Month called May, unless it happens on the first Day of the Week, then on the
next Day after, yea^ly, or at such other Time as the Majority of those that
meet may appoint, at the most public Place of each respective Township, in
every County within this Province, and there the Majority of those ^o met shall
choose a fit Person to be Pownd-keeper in each Township for the Year ensuing;
which Pownd-keeper, where no Pownd is already erected, shall agree with some
Person forthwith, to build or erect a good and sufficient Pownd, in some fit
and convenient Place within the said Township, where the same shall be agreed
upon by the Majority of the Persons aforesaid, being then present: A Memorandum
or Minute of which Appointment shall be taken and kept by the Constable of the
said respective Townships, and returned to the next County Court to be held for
the County in which the said respective Townships do lie; the Clerk of which
County Court shall enter the same among the Proceedings of the said Court, and
shall forthwith affix public Notice in Writing, Public Notice to be given
where the Pownd is erected.
on the Door of the Courthouse, of the Name of each respective Pownd-keeper,
and the Pla^es where the same are erected.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, Creatures tresp^ssing,
and the O^ner, if known, having had 24 Hours Notice thereof, and refusing
Satisfaction, the Taker up to deliver them to the Pownd-keeper.
That whoeve^ shall take up any stray Horse or Horses, Cattle or Sheep
trespassing within their Enclosures, within this Province, shall, within the
Space of Twenty-four Hours after such taking-up, give Notice to the Owner or
Owners of such Horse, Cattle, etc. if he or she can be readily found, and if
the Owner shall, upon such Notice, neglect or re^use to make reasonable
Satisfaction to the Party grieved, as by them shall be agreed upon, or if no
Owner be found, then the Taker-up shall take or send such trespassing Creature
or Creatures to the Pownd-keeper of the Township where the Trespass was
committed, who shall receive the same immediately into his Custody, and shall
feed them duly with Grass or good Hay and Water, during the Time of their
Continuance in the Pownd; and shall pay to the Party grieved such Damages as
shall be assessed by any two indifferent Neighbors living near to the Place
where the Trespass was committed, to be nominated by the Pownd-keeper.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, The Pownd-keeper to
enter the Kind, Color and Marks of the Creatures in a Book, an^ give publi^k
Notice within ten Days.
That after any Horses, Cattle or Sheep shall be delivered to any Pownd-keeper,
he shall forthwith enter the Kind, Color and Marks of such Creatures in a
Book, by him to be kept for that Purpose, together with the Day of his
Receiving the same, and from whom he received them, and thereupon shall, within
ten Days send an Account in Writing to the Clerk of the County Court, where
such Township lies, who shall affix the Notice in public View in his Office;
and the Pownd-keeper shall also affix Notice in Writing at the Courthouse of
the same County, of the Kind of Creatures ^o impownded, together with their
Marks described at large, to the End that the Owners of such trespassing
Creatures may the more readily be informed of and restored to their Property:
What Ra^es shall be taken by the Pownd-keeper.
And if the Owner appear and make out his Right to the said Creatures, the same
shall forthwith be delivered to him, he paying the Pownd-keeper the Sum of One
Shilling for taking in and delivering out each Creature, together with the
Damages paid to the Taker-up of such trespassing Creatures, and the Sum of Six
Pence a Hea^ for Horses or horned Beasts, for each Day, and One Penny a Head
for Sheep, for each Day, Charges allowed by this Act for Feeding the said
Creatures and Publishing their Kind and Marks, in the Manner herein directed;
and also the Sum of Six P^nce to the Use of the Clerk of the County Court, for
Entering and Filing the Certificate of the Pownd-keeper. And if no Owner shall
appear to claim the Creatures so impownded, No Owner appearing the Creatures
may be sold, af^e^ ten Days Notice given thereof, and the Pownd-keeper may
retain his Rates.
within the Space of three Months after impownding, it shall and may be lawful
to and for the said Pownd-keeper, by Warran^ from one Justice of the Peace of
the said County, who is hereby required to grant the ^ame, to expose s^^h
trespassing Creatures to Sale by public Vendue, for ^he most that can be got
for the same, after ten Days public Notice given of the Time and Place of
Sale; and, out of the Money arising by such Sale, the said Pownd-keeper shall
and may retain to himself for publishing and booking each Horse Two Shillings,
for each horned Beast One Shilling and Six Pence, and for each Sheep Nine
Pence; and likewise all such Moneys as he has pa^d to the Taker-up of such
trespassing Creatures on Account of his Damages, or other Charges allowed by
this Act: And shall likewise retain to himself the Sum of Six Pence for every
Day he shall keep such trespassing Creatures in the Pownd, if the same be a
Horse or horned Beast, and One Penny each Day for each Sheep. And the said
Pownd-keeper shall moreover be allowed the Sum of Ten ^er Cent. on all Sales
made by him according to the Direction of this Act, and shall keep a plain
Account of all his Pr^ceedings, An Account thereof ^o ^e (...) ^o the Justices;
and (...) Mo^ey to go the Oversee^s of the Poor.
and return the same, together with the Overplus Money (if any be remaining) to
the Justic^s, at their next County Court, to be held ^^r the said County, who
shall ord^r the same to be paid to the Overseers of the Poor of the Township
where the C^eature was impownded, for the Use of the same Township, a^^^r the
Cost paid to the Clerk for his Service therein.

PROVIDED ALSO, The O^ner appea^^^g, within (...) Months, and p^^ving his
P^operty thereto before the Justice^ of the Coun^y Court, Repa^ment may be
ordered.
That if the right Owner of any Beast ^old as aforesaid, appear within nine
Months a^^er Sale made as aforesaid, and prove his Property to any s^^h
Creature sold in Pursuance of this Act before the Justices of the Peace of the
sai^ County, at the next Court, they shall thereupon or^er Repayment of the
Money arising by such Sale to the said Owner, all reasonable Charges first
deducted.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, Forfeiture on t^king
away a C^e^ture impownded.
That if any Person or Persons shall, by Force or otherwise, without the Leave
of the Pownd-keeper, or by due Order of Law, take away any trespassing Creature
impownded according to the Direction of this Act, and shall be legally thereof
convicted, he, she or they shall forfeit the Sum of Fi^e Pounds, to be applied
to the Use of the Poor of that Township, in which the said Creature was
impownded. Overseers of the P^^^ to asses^ Money on the Inhabitants for
building a Pownd.
And that it shall and may lawful for the Overseers of the Poor of the
respective Townships within this Province, and they are hereby injoined and
required, to assess the Inhabitants of the respective Townships in the same
Manner as they are directed by the Act for the Reli^f of the Poor, for such Sum
or Sums of Money as may or shall be necessary for supplying the Charge of
building and maintaining the said respective Pownds, and to collect the same,
to be employed as shall be ^^r^cted by the Majority of the Freeholders of the
respect^^^ Townships, at their Town-Meeting, for and toward (...) and
maintaining of Pownds, and no other Use whatsoever: Persons refusing to pay,
Distres^ may be m^de on hisGoods, etc.
And if any Person or Persons shall refuse to pay their respective Rates as
taxed, that then the said Overseers shall make Complaint thereof to any one
Justice within the said County where he resides, who is hereby required
forthwith to issue out his Warrant to the Overseers of the Poor of the Township
where such Default is made, to make Distress upon the Offender's Goods and
Chattels, who shall immediately make Sale thereof, for paying the said
Assessment and Charges of Distress, and return the Overplus (if any be) to the
Owner.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, The Height^ of lawful
Fences.
That to prevent Disputes about the Sufficiency of Fences, all Fences shall be
esteemed lawful or sufficient though they be not close at the Bottom, so that
the Distance from the Ground to the Bottom thereof exceed not nine Inches, and
that they be four Feet and a half high, and not under.

AND BE IT LIKEWISE ENACTED, That the former Act made for erecting Pownds, The
former Act relating to Pownds repealed. See 7 Geo. I. Chap. 231.
passed in the seventh Year of the late King George the First, and every Part
thereof, shall be made void and repealed by this Act; any thing in the said
former Act contained to the contrary in anywise notwithstanding.

CHAP. CCLXXXVII. An ACT for laying a Duty on Negroes imported into this
Province.
WE the Representatives of the Freemen of the Province of Pennsylvania, de^i^e
that it may be enacted, AND BE IT ENACTED by the Honorable PATRICK GORDON, Esquire
Governor of the Province of Pennsylvania, etc. by and with the Advice and
Consent of the Freemen of the said Province, in General Assembly met, and by
the Authority of the same, That for every Negroe which shall be imported, Forty
Shillings Duty, per Head, on all Negroes imported, except, etc.
landed or brought into this Province, at any time after the Publication of
this Act, other than such Negroes as are actually shipped for Sailors, and
shall continue in the Service of the Vessel they were brought in, and not be
exposed to Sale in this Province, and other than such Negroes as shall be
brought or sent into this Province upon their Masters immediate Business, and
not to remain in the Province, and not for Sale, there shall be paid for the
Uses hereafter mentioned the Sum of Two Pounds, lawful Money of America.

AND that all Masters of Vessels, and others, who shall, Masters to make Entry
of Negroes by them imported, etc.
within the Time aforesaid, bring into this Province, by Land or Water, an^
Negroes, shall forthwith make Entry, and give or cause to be given, upon Oath
or Affirmation, to the Person herein after appointed to collect the said Duty,
or his lawful Deputy, a true and just Account of all the Negroes ^o imported or
brought in, and to whom they re^pectively belong; which the said Collector
shall duly enter in a Book ^or that Purpose, and thereupon shall grant a
Permit, for which the Person obtaining the same, shall pay the Sum of Six
Pen^e, for every Negroe contained in the said Permit, for landing them.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That every Master of a
Vessel, Forfeiture on re^using or neglecting to make Entry
or other Person who by this Act are obliged or ought to make such Entry as
aforesaid, and shall refuse or neglect to make the same accordingly, within the
Time and in the Manner directed by this Act, and being thereon convicted before
any one Justice of the Peace, or before the Mayor or Recorder of the City of
Phila^elphia for the time being, shall forfeit, for every Negroe, of which he
ought to give an Account to the Collector of the Duties imposed by this Act,
the Sum of Thirty-five Shillings, to be levied upon the Goods and Chattels of
the Party offending, by Warrant under the Hand and Seal of the Justice, or of
the Mayor or Recorder aforesaid, before whom the Party is convicted.

AND that every such Importer, Duty to b^ paid before landing them.
Owner or Claimer of such Negroes shall, before Landing of them, pay down the
said Duty in ready Money, or otherwise become bound to the Coll^ctor for the
time being, with one or more sufficient Sureties, or procure some other
sufficient Person or Persons to be bound to the said Collector to answer and
pay the said Duty hereby imposed upon such Negroes, within six Months, next
after the Date of the said Obligation; for which the Collector shall receive of
the Party One Shilling and Six Pence, and no more.

AND if any of the said Negroes shall be imported, Forfeiture on landing them
before making Entry, and^.
landed or brought in, within the time aforesaid, without making Entry, and
obtaining a Permit as aforesaid, or without paying or giving Security for
Payment of the said Duty, in Manner aforesaid, that then all the Negroes so
imported, landed or brought in (or the Value of them, if they cannot be found)
shall be forfeited by the Importer or Owner; one Moiety, after the said Duty
and all Cha^ges of Seizure and Prosecution are deducted, shall go the Governor,
for Support of Government, and the other Half, after the said Deduction, to the
said Collector, or such other Person as will sue for the same in any Court of
Record in this Province, by Bill, Plaint or Information, wherein no Essoin,
Protection or Wager of Law, nor any more than one Imparlance shall be allowed.

The Officer's Power.
AND that the said Collector of the said Duty arising by this Act, or his
Deputy, shall have full Power and Authority, by Virtue hereof, without any
further or other Warrant, to enter on board any Ship or Vessel, and into any
House or Place whatsoever where he shall suspect any of the said Negroes to be
conceale^, and ma^e Searches, and do all other Matters and Things, which may
tend to secure the true Payment of the said Duty, and the (...) and orderly
Collection thereof; and in case of Opposition or Refusal, the said Collector or
his Deputy, with the Assisstance of the Sheriff, Water-Bailiff, C^nstable, or
other Officer, who, without any further or other Warrant, are enabled and
required, under the Penalty of Five-P^unds for every Neglect or Refusal in that
Behalf, to be recovered as aforesaid, to be Aiding and Assisting unto the said
Collector, to seize the said Negroes which shall be concealed, or endeavored
so to be as aforesaid; and for that End to break open Doors and other Things,
and to do and perform all other Act or Acts which by this Act is and are
required to be done for collecting, receiving and recovering the said Duty, and
the Penalties and Forfeitures herein mentioned, or for making Seizures of
Negroes landed or brought in without making Entries and paying and ^ecuring the
said Duty, in as full and ample a Manner, to all Intents, as any of the
Collectors or Officers of the King's Customs may or can do by the Laws of Great
Britain.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That all Masters of Vessels and others trading in
the River Delaware, Compliance to be made to this Act, by Masters trading to
and from the Harbor, without Notice given.
and coming into any Port or Place of this Province, having Negroes on board
which by this Act are liable to pay the said Duty, are hereby required to
comply with the Directions of this Act as if such Vessels came from Sea
directly; and that all Persons obliged by this Act to pay the said Duty, shall
apply to the said Collector, or his Deputy, without any Notice given or Request
made by him for their so doing.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That in case any Vessel
shall arri^e at any Port, Member, Creek or Landing-Place in this Province with
any Negroe or Negroes on board, and there remain the Space of Twenty-four Hours
without making Entry, under Pretense of going to some other Port, or any other
Pretense whatsoever, the Master or Owner of said Vessel shall give a true
Account of the Number of Negroes on board, and shall give Security to the said
Collector that he shall not land any of the said Negroes without Entry made and
Permit obtained from the said Collector, under the Penalty of Seizure and
Forfeiture of the said Negroes, to be recovered as aforesaid.

PROVIDED ALWAYS, Three fourths of the Duty abated, on Negroes exported.
That if any of the said Negroes, for which the said Duty is paid or secured as
aforesaid, shall, within the Space of six Months die or be exported, or carried
out to Sea, then and in such Case three Fourths of the said Duty hereby imposed
shall be abated for such of them as shall die or be exported as aforesaid; and
on Payment of the remaining fourth Part, the Security given shall be delivered
up and discharged; and the Officer shall and may deduct Five Shillings per
Head, for his Care and Trouble therein.

PROVIDED ALSO, Proviso.
That all such Negroes for which such Deduction shall be made, shall actually
and bona fide be forthwith shipped off or sent out of this Province, so as not
to return again without complying with this Act, under the Penalty of Seizure
and Forfeiture as aforesaid.

PROVIDED ALSO, Persons coming hither to settle, and bringing Negroes, to pay
no Duty.
That if any Person or Persons shall, during the Continuance of this Act,
transport him or themselves, with their Families and Negroes, i^ order to
settle in this Province, and shall, upon Oath or Affirmation, declare before
the said Collector or his Deputy, who are hereby empowered to administer the
same, That such Negroes so brought in are for their own Service, and not for
Sale, he or they shall not be liable to pay the said Duty for such Negroes, but
shall forthwith give Security to the said Collector, which he is hereby
empowered and required to take, by a Bond of the full Value of such Negroes
conditioned for the Payment of the Rates aforesaid, in case such Negroes shall
be sold, or the Property of them directly or indirectly altered, within the
Space of sixteen Months after the Date of such Bond.

AND to prevent the clandestine Practice of landing or bringing in of Negroes
into the remote Parts of this Province, by Masters of Vessels, Merchants, or
others, without making Entry of and paying the Duty for the same according to
the Directions of this Act, BE IT ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid,
Constables to return Lists to the Quarter Sessions, of the Neg^oes in their
respective Townships.
That the Constables of the respective Townships, Hundreds or Wards, within
this Province, shall and are hereby obliged, upon Oath or Affirmation, to bring
in a List to the respective Courts of Quarter Sessions for the City or County
where they live, of all the Negroes that shall come or be brought into their
respective Townships or Wards, and by whom the same Negroes were imported or
brought in, and in whose Possession such Negroes are.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That Charles Read, The Officer appointed by this
Act.
of Philadelphia, Merchant, shall be and is hereby appointed the present
Collector of the said Duty hereby imposed, and Receiver of all Fines,
Forfeitures and Penalties herein beforementioned to be set, imposed and levied
by Virtue of this Act; which the said Collector, by himself, or his lawful
Deputy, is hereby empowered to demand, collect, receive and recover of and from
all Persons importing, landing or bringing in any Negroes during the
Continuance of this Act; and shall from ^^me to time take all Bonds required to
be given as aforesaid.

The Collecto submit his Accounts, and pay the Money received to the Treasurer.
AND the said Collector shall keep true and fair Accounts, in Writing, of all
such Transactions relating to the Premises; which he shall from time to time
submit to the View and Inspection of the Provincial-Treasurer, and lay the same
before the Assembly, when required; and once in six Weeks, or oftener, if
required, during the Continuance of this Act, pay into the said Treasurer's
Hand^ all such Sums of Money as he shall receive by Virtue of this Act, and
shall deduct out of the same, for his own Use, Five per Cent. for all Sums so
by him paid* and shall further be allowed by the said Treasurer, in the final
Adjusting of his Accounts, all reasonable Charges by him expended in the
Prosecution of the said Seizures and Recovery of any of the said Fines,
Forfeitures and Penalties, ^ Pursuance of this Act.

PROVIDED ALWAYS, Collector to take an Oath, etc.
That the said Collector, before he enter upon the Execution of his Office,
shall be sworn or attested before some Justice of the Peace, and shall, with
one or more sufficient Sureties, become bound, in an Obligation of Five Hundred
Pounds, to the Treasurer, conditioned for the due and faithful Execution of his
said Offi^e.

AND in case of the Death or Removal of the said Collector, the
Provincial-Treasurer, for the time being, Who has the Power, in case of Death,
etc. to choose another.
shall appoint an other in his Stead, to collect the said Duty, until some
other Person be appointed for that Purpose by the General Assembly of this
Province.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Person or
Persons shall at any time be sued or prosecuted for any thing done in Pursuance
of this Act, Persons sued, how to proceed.
such Person or Persons so sued or prosecuted may plead the General Issue, and
give this Act and the special Matter in Evidence for their Excuse or
Justification: And if the Plaintiff or Prosecutor become No^suit, or forbear
Prosecution, or suffer a Discontinuance, or if a Verdict pass against him in
such Action, Suit or Information, the Defendant shall have treble Costs, as in
any Cases where Costs by Law are given to Defendants.

CHAP. CCXCVIII. An ACT laying a Duty on Foreigners, and Irish Servants, etc.
imported into this Province.
Repealed, 3 Geo. II. Chap. 306.

CHAP. CCXCIX. An ACT for Erecting the upper Parts of the Province of
Pennsylvania, lying toward Sasquehannah, Conestogoe, Dunnegal, etc. into a
County.
WHEREAS a great Number of the Inhabitants of the upper Parts of Chester
County, have, P^eamble.
by their Petition, humbly represented to the Governor and Assembly of this
Province, the great Hardships they lie under by being at so great a Distance
from the Town of Chester, where the Courts of Justice are held, and the public
Offices kept; and how hard and difficult it is for the sober and quiet
Inhabitants of that Part of the County to secure themselves against the Thefts
and Abuses almost daily committed upon them by idle and disolute Persons, who
resort to the remote Parts of the Province, and by reason of the great Distance
from a Court or Prison, do frequently find Means of making their Escape: For
the Removing which Inconveniency, and Relief of the said Inhabitants, BE IT
ENACTED by the Hon. PATRICK GORDON, Esquire Governor of the Province of
Pennsylvania, etc. by and with the Advice and Consent of the Freemen of the
said Province, in General Assembly met, and by the Authority of the same,
Boundaries.
That all and singular the Lands within the Province of Pennsylvania, laying to
the Northward of Octoraroe Creek, and to the Westward of a Line of marked
Trees, running from the North Branch of the said Octoraroe Creek,
North-easterly to the River Schuylkil, be erected into a County, and the same
is he^eby erected into a County, named, and from henceforth to be called
Lancaster County; Its Name.
and the said Octoraroe Creek, the Line of marked Trees, and the River
Schuylkil aforesaid, shall be the boundary Line or Division between the said
County and the Counties of Chester and Philadelphia.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, The Privileges, etc.
granted it.
That the said County of Lancaster shall have and enjoy all and singular the
Jurisdictions, Powers, Rights, Liberties, Privileges and Immunities whatsoever
which any other County within the Province of Pennsylvania does, may or ought
to enjoy by any Charter of Privileges, or the Laws of this Province, or by any
other Ways or Means whatsoever, excepting only in the Number of Representatives
to serve in the General Assembly of this Province, in which Case, IT IS HER^BY
PROVIDED AND ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That, until it shall be
otherwise ordered by the Governor and Assembly of this Province, the Freemen
and Inhabitants of the said County, qualified by the Laws of this Province to
elect, shall annually meet at or near the Courthouse of the said County, at
the same Time the other Counties of this Province shall meet for such like
Purpose, or at such Place where the Courts shall be held until such Courthouse
shall be erected, and there proceed to choose Inspectors, and to elect four
Representatives or Delegates to serve them in Assembly, in the same Manner as
by the said Charter and Laws of this Province is directed: Which said four
Representatives, when so chosen, shall be Members of the General Assembly of
Pennsylvania, and sit and act as such, as fully and freely as any of the
Representatives for the other Counties within this Province do, may, can or
ought to do.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, Taxes already laid in
the said County, are to be collected, etc.
That all Taxes already laid within the Bounds of the said County of Lancaster
by an Act of General Assembly of this Province, which are not already paid,
shall be collected by the respective Collectors within the Bounds aforesaid,
and paid into the Hands of the Treasurer of Chester County; and that all
Persons concerned in the Levying, Receiving and Paying the said Taxes, shall
have the same Power and Authority, and be under the same Penalties and
Restrictions for the Collecting and Paying the same, as by the said Acts by
which the said Taxes were assessed are expressed and directed, until the Whole
be collected and paid as aforesaid.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, Courts when to be held
for the said County.
That the several Courts of General Quarter Sessions of the Peace and
Jail-delivery, and the Courts of Common Pleas for the said County of Lancaster,
shall be holden and kept on the first Tuesday in the Months of February, May,
August and November, in every Year, at some proper Place within the said
County, until a convenient Courthouse shall be built; and when the same is
built and erected in the County aforesaid, the said several Courts shall then
be holden and kept at the said Courthouse, on the Days before mentioned: And
the Election of Representatives to serve in General Assembly, Election of
Representatives to be held at the same time, and in like Manner as in the other
Counties.
Assessors, and all other Officers of the said County who are or shall be
appointed to be annually elected, shall be made and elected at or near the said
Courthouse, at the same Time and in the same Manner as by the Charter of
Privileges and Laws of the Province of Pennsylvania is directed to be done in
the other Counties of this Province. And it shall be lawful for the Freemen of
the said County, for the first Year, to choose three Persons for Commissioners
for raising County-Rates and Levies for the said County.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That it shall and may be
lawful to and for Cal^h Pearce, Trust^^s up (...) to (...) and Prison.
John Wright, Thomas Edwards and James Mitchel, or any three of them, to
purchase and ^ake Assurance to them and their Heirs, of a Piece of Land si^uate
in some convenient Place in the said County, to be approved of by the Governor,
in Trust and for the Use of the said County, and there^^ to erect and build, or
cause to be erected and built a Courthouse and Prison, sufficient to
accommodate the public Service of the said County, (...) Ease and Convenience
of the Inhabitants.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, The Charge ^^e^^of to be
(...) by an Ass^ssment on the Inh^bita^ts.
That for the Defraying the C^a^ges of Purchasing the Land, building and
erecting the (...) House and Prison aforesaid, it shall and may be law^^l (...)
and for the Commissioners and Ass^ssors of the said County, or a Majority of
them, who are hereby required to ass^ss an^ levy so much Money as the Trustees,
or any th^ee of them, shall judge necessary for purchasing the Land and
finishing the said Courthouse and Prison.

Not exceeding Three Hundred Pounds.
PROVIDED ALWAYS, The Sum of Money so raised does not exceed Three Hundred
Pounds current Money of the Province.

PROVIDED ALWAYS, AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, No
Action now dep^nding in Chester County against any Inhabi^an^^ of Lancast^r, to
be discontinued.
That no Action or Suit, now commenced or depending in the County of Chester,
against any Person living within the Bounds of the said County of Lancaster,
shall be staid or discontinued by this Act, or by any thing herein contained,
but that the same Actions already commenced or depending may be prosecuted, and
Judgment thereupon rendered as if this Act had not been made: And that it shall
and may be lawful for the Justices of Chester County to issue any judicial
Process, to be directed to the Sheriff of Lancaster County, for carrying on and
obtaining the Effect of their Suits; which Sheriff shall be obliged to yield
Obedience in executing of the said Writs, and make due Return before the
Justices of the Court of the said County of Chester, as if the Parties had been
living and residing within the same.

CHAP. CCC. An ACT for continuing and establishing a Ferry from the
Landing-Place of Joseph Kirkbride, over Delaware River, at the Falls.
Expired.

CHAP. CCCI. A SUPPLEMENT to that Part of the Act, See before ^^ Geo. I. Chap.
2^9.
for ra^^^^g County Rates and Levies, relating to the K^lling of Wolves.
WHEREAS by a Paragraph in an Act of Gen^^^l Assembly of this Province,
ent^^uled, An (...) for rais^^g County Rates and Levies, it is pro^i^^d and
(...), That there shall be paid for every Dog or Bitch Wolf (...) S^illings,
for every Wolf Puppy or Whelp (...) ^hillings and Six Pence, killed within the
inh^bited Parts of this Province, according to the Directions of the said Act:
BUT WHEREAS it is found by Experience, that a greater Encouragement for killing
Wolves would much better answer the Intent of the said Law, and be of greater
Service to the Inhabitants of this Province: BE IT ENACTED by the Honorable
PATRICK GORDON, Esquire Governor of the Province of Pennsylvania, etc. by and with
the Advice and Con^^nt of the Freemen of the said Province, in General Assembly
met, and by the Authority of the same, That there shall be paid for all Wolves
killed in the Manner directed and prescribed by the aforesaid Act of Assembly,
the further Sum of Five Shillings for every grown Dog or Bitch Wolf, and the
further Sum of Two Shillings and Six P^nce for every Wolf Puppy or Whelp,
killed after the Publication of this Act, over and above the Allowance
mentioned in the said County-Levy Act, to be paid upon such Proof made, and in
the Manner therein directed.

CHAP. CCCII. A SUPPLEMENT to the Act, entitled, See before Chap. 150. 4 Ann.
An Act to prevent Swine running at large.
WHEREAS by the said Act the Relief provided for Persons suffering by Hogs
trespassing in their Fields or Enclosures, is limited to the Extent of ^ourteen
Miles from the navigable Parts of the River Delaware: Now, forasmuch as the
Country is become more populous, and it appears necessary to provide the same
Remedy for the Inhabitants living in the other Parts of this Province:
THEREFORE BE IT ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That the same Penalties,
Rules and Orders enacted and directed to be observed by the aforesaid Act,
within fourteen Miles of the navigable Parts of Delaware River, shall, within
one Month after the Publication hereof, be in force, and extended throughout
the Province of Pennsylvania, as fully and amply as if the same Act were again
herein repeated and enacted; any Limitation in the aforesaid Act, for
preventing Swine running at large, to the contrary in anywise notwithstanding.

CHAP. CCCIII. An ACT for emitting of Thirty Thousand Pounds in Bills of
Credit, for the better Support of Government and the Trade of this Province.
Preamble.
WHEREAS the Bills of Credit, formerly emitted in this Province, are now very
much lessened by sinking the same according to the Directions of the several
Acts by which they were made current; and the Inhabitants of this Province
being now become very numerous, by the great and constant Importation of
Foreigners, as well as others, and our Trade also greatly increased, are hereby
reduced to very great Difficulties for Want of Currency to enable them readily
to discharge their Engagements to the English Merchants, and their Factors,
trading here, who are no less affected in their Interest for Want of a
sufficient Medium in Trade: Therefore, that these Deficiencies may be supplied,
and the People relieved from the Inconveniences they at present labor under,
and a further Provision made for the better Support of Government, which,
without an Addition to our Currency, cannot be done by any Ways or Means
practicable in this Province; May it please the Governor that it may be
enacted, AND BE IT ENACTED by the Hon. PATRICK GORDON, Esquire Governor of the
Province of Pennsylvania, etc. by and with the Advice and Consent of the
Freemen of the said Province, in General Assembly met, and by the Authority of
the same, That indented Bills of Credit to the Value of Thirty Thousand Pounds,
current Money of (...), according to an Act of Parliament made in the sixth
Year o^ the Reign of the late Queen Anne, entitled, ^n A^t for A^^^taining the
Rates of foreign Coins in her Majesty's ^lantation^ in America, shall be made
and prepared before the Fi^teenth Day of September next: Contents and Number o^
the Bills.
Which Bills shall ^everally contain the^ein the Sums he^eafter respectively
ment^^^ed, and no other (That is to sa^) Fifteen Th^usand of the said ^ills the
Sum of Twenty Shillings in each of them: Two Thou^and of the said Bills the Sum
of (...) Shill^ng^ in each (...) them: Twelve Thousand of the (...) Bills the
^um (...) Ten Shilling^ in each of them: Sixteen Thousan^ of the said Bills the
Sum of Five ^hillings in each o^ them: (...) Th^^sand of the said ^ills the Sum
of Two Shillings and (...) in each of them: Twelve Thousand of the said Bi^l
the Sum of Two ^hillings in each of them: (...) Thousand of the said Bills the
Sum of Eighteen (...) ^n each of them: And, Ten Thousand Five Hundred of the
said Bi^l^ the Sum of ^ne Shilling in each of them.

AND the Trustees, hereafter named, shall, at the Charge of this Province, to
be defrayed and paid in Bills of Credit, cause and procure the said Bills to be
made and printed upon good Paper, in the Form following, and not otherwise,
viz. THIS indented Bill shall p^ss current for -- in all Payments, according to
a Law of Pennsylvania, The Form of the Bills.
dated the -- Day of -- in the Year of our Lord One Thousand Seven Hun^^^d and
Twenty-nine.

ALL which said Bills shall be signed and numbered by Thomas ^resse, Edward
Horn, Signers Names.
John Parry and Abraham Chapm^n, or a Majority of them. And the Sums of Money
that every of the said Bills is to pass for shall be printed at the Top of each
Bill, in Words at length, with the Arms of Pennsylvania on the Lest, and the
Signers Names subscribed on the other Side thereof.

AND the bette^ to prevent forged or counterfeited Bills, or any clandestine
Practice, The Trustees to attend the Press, etc.
during the Printing of the Bills of Credit hereby intended to be struck, they
the said Trustees, or one of them, or some other Person under their Direction;
and for who^e Care and Management they shall be accountable, shall personally
attend the Press, during all the Time of the Printing the same Bills; and
shall, nightly, and at such other Times as the Printing-Business is
intermitted, receive into his or their Care and Charge all the Printing Plates,
Types, Bills, Blotters and Papers printed off, and the same secure, in the best
Manner, until the Printer proceeds in his Operation and Business aforesaid, and
so from time to time until all the Bills of Credit aforesaid shall be fully
printed off, and be received by the said Trustees as aforesaid.

Counterparts how to be disposed of, etc.
AND that the Counterparts of all the said Bills shall be likewise printed, and
shall be numbered by the Signers, who shall deliver the same unsigned to the
said Trustees for the time being, at the General Loan-Office hereby intended to
be ^rected; where they shall remain in Book^ kept for that Purpose, under the
Care and Charge of the said Trustees, for the trying the Truth of the original
Bills whenever there shall be Occasion: And the same Bill^ shall be so
fashioned as may render them less liable to be counterfeited or fraudulently
resembled, by putting the Figure or Shape of a Crown in Five Shilling Bills,
two Crowns in Ten Shilling Bills, three Crowns in ^ifteen Shilling Bills, and
four Crowns in Twenty Shilling ^ills. And the said Signers shall also deliver
to the said Trustees, at the said Loan-Office, the Originals of all the said
Bills so made forth, numbered and signed as aforesaid, not exceeding the Numbers
herein before respectively limited and appointed, taking the said Trustees
Receipt ^or the same, and charging them respectively with the Money contained
in the Bills so delivered in order to be lent out, as herein after directed.
And the said Signers shall cause to be kept a true Account of all the said
Bills by them signed and delivered to the said Trustees as aforesaid; Signers
to keep an Account of the Bills delivered.
and for their Trouble, Care and Diligence in doing what is required of them by
this Act, they shall each of them receive Fifteen Shillings for every Thousand
Bills by them so signed and numbered, Their Salary.
to be paid to each of them, his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, in Bills
of Credit, to be delivered to them by the Trustees within six Days after they
deliver the said Bills and Counterparts in the Loan-Office as aforesaid.

Signers to take an Oath or Affirmation.
BUT before the said Persons, hereby appointed, or hereafter to be appointed by
Virtue of this Act, to be Signers of the said Bills of Credit, presume to act
therein, they shall take an Oath or Affirmation before any one Justice of the
Peace for the City or County of P^il^d^lphia, who is hereby empowered and
required to administer the same, charging them jointly and severally, That they
will well and truly number, sign and deliver all the said original Bills of
Credit, and truly number and deliver all the Counterparts of the same Bills,
and keep a true Account of what Bills they sign and deliver, with the
Counterparts thereof, according to the Direction of this Act.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That Samuel Carpenter,
Trustees Name^.
William Fis^^ou^n, Jeremiah Langhorne and Nathaniel ^ew^in, shall be and
hereby are nominated and appointed Trustees for the Holding and Ordering of the
said General Loan-Office, and for the Receiving and Issuing the said Bills of
Credit, and taking Securities for the same, and for the Directing, Managing and
Performing all other Matters and Things hereby inj^ined and required to be done
and transacted by them in the said Office, and relating to the said Bills of
Credit, according to the Direction and true Meaning of this Act.

AND if any of the said Trustees shall happen to die or be removed for
Mi^^eaz^nce, or ^or not Acting, How to be chosen in c^se of Death, etc.
it shall be law^^l for the Assembly of this Province, from time to time,
during the Continuance of this Act, to elect and appoint some other fit Person
or Persons in the Place or Places of such Trustee or Trustees so dying,
misbehaving or refusing as aforesaid. And that the Trustee or Trustees so from
time to time elected and appointed, shall have the same Power and Authority as
if they had been nominated and appointed by this Act.

AND that the Persons now or hereafter appointed Trustees by Virtue of this
Act, shall be styled, Their Style, Power, etc.
The Trustees of the General Loan-Offi^e of the Province of Pennsylvania, and
by that Name shall have Succession, during the Continuance of this Act; and by
the Name aforesaid shall be able and capable in Law to receive, take, hold,
enjoy and retain to them and their Successors in the said Trust, all such
Lands, Tenements, Rents and Hereditaments, and all such Plate as shall be
granted them in Mortgage for secu^ing the Re-payment of such Sums of Money as
they shall from time to time lend and issue in the said Bills of Credit; and
also, to ^ell, grant, alien and dispose of the same Lan^, Tenements, Rents,
Hereditaments and Plate, in De^ault of Pa^m^^t, as in and by this Act is
provided and directed in those Cases: And by the same Name to sue and implead,
be sued and impleaded, answer and to be answered in all Cases relating to the
said Trust, in all Courts and other Places whatsoever, and, by the Name
aforesaid, to do and execute all other Matters and Things that to them shall or
may appertain to do and perform, pursuant to this Act, subject to the
Provisoes, Restrictions and Limitations herein expressed.

TheDays the Trustees are to giveAttendance.
AND that the said Trustees for the time being, or any three of them, shall duly
attend at the said Loan-Office every third and fourth Day, commonly called
Tuesday and Wednesday, in every Week, until all Demands for borrowing Money in
the said Loan-Office be answered, and afterward at such Times as their Trust
and Service of the Public may require them, during the Continuance of this Act.

Trustees Salary.
AND such of the said Trustees as shall undertake and execute the said Trust,
shall be allowed for their Service and Trouble therein after the Rate of Ten
Pounds per Annum added to their Salaries of Ninety Pounds each, allowed by
former Acts during the Continuance of those Acts, and after the Expiration
thereof, the Sum of Fifty Pounds a-piece, during the Continuance of this Act,
payable to each of them, his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, in the said
Bills of Credit, during the Continuance of their Trust.

Trustees to giveBond, etc.
BUT the Trustees hereby appointed or hereafter to be appointed, before they
receive the said Bills, or enter upon the Execution of their said Trust, shall
each of them enter into a Bond to the Provincial-Treasurer for the Time being,
in the Penalty of One Thousand Pounds each, conditio^ed for the due Observance
of all Things required of them by this Act, and true Performance of the Trust
hereby reposed in them: And shall also take an Oath or Affirmation before any
one Justice of the Peace for the City or County of Philadelphia, And take an
Oath o^ Affirmation.
who is hereby empowered and required to administer the same in these Words, to
wit. The Form.
I A. B. will, according to the best of my Skill and Knowledge, faithfully,
impartially and truly demean myself in the Discharge of the Trust committed to
me by an Act of G^^eral Assembly of this Province, entitled, An Act for the
Emitting and Making current Thirty Thousand Pounds in Bills of Credit,
according to the Purport and Tenor of the said Act, so as none may be
prejudiced by my Cons^nt, Privity or Pro^urement.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That the said Trustees, after they are so
qualified, Trustees Duty.
shall receive into the said Office, all such and so many of the said Bills of
Credit and Counterparts thereof, from the said Signers, as they may have
Occasion to lend out from time to time; and thereupon shall give their Receipts
for the same, and keep true Accounts as well of the said Bills which they
respectiv^ly receive and issue out, as also of the Money and Bills which they
shall ac^ually receive and pay pursuant to this Act: To which several Accounts
the Committee of Assembly, hereafter appointed to audit the said Trustees
Accounts, shall have free Access, at all seasonable Times, to the End they be
satisfied that the Sum for which Bills may be iss^ed pursuant to this Act is
not exceeded, and may be acquainted from time to time with the State of the
whole Transactions and Affairs relating to the said Office.

AND forasmuch as the chief Intent of appointing the said Trustees, is in order
to enable them to lend the said Bills on Securities of Lands at low Interest,
THEREFORE IT IS FURTHER ENACTED, That the said Trustees shall lend out to the
Value of Twenty-six Thousand Pounds of the said Bills on Land-Security, The Sum
to be lent out o^ Land Security.
at the Interest of ^ive per Cent. per Annum, for the Term of sixteen Years,
from the Date of the said Bills, in Sums not exceeding Three Hundred Pounds,
nor less than Twelve Pounds Ten Shillings to any one Person or Persons.

WHICH said Bills so lent shall pass in all Payments from any Person or Persons
to any other Person or Persons, The said Bills to pass in all Payment^, and^.
and shall be deemed to be good Payment for Debts, Rents, Goods, Chattels,
Plate, Bargains, Sales, Specialties, Bonds, and all other Demands whatsoever,
as if the same were paid in the Coins mentioned, and at the full Rates
ascertained in and by the said Act of Parliament, and shall be as effectual a
Bar of such Suits or Actions as shall be brought for such Debts or Demands, as
if the Money had been paid at the Day and Place, according to the Condition,
Defeazance or Contract, and had been so pleaded; and the Tender^ and Re^u^^l,
or not receiving of the said Bills, shall be available and conclusive in Law
and Equity, as if such Tenders were in the said C^ins, or in the current Coins
of England, or in any other Coin or Specie mentioned in the said C^ntracts upon
which any such Tenders are made.

And in Discharge of all Bonds, etc.
AND if at any time pending an Action upon any Bond, or any other Writing
obligatory, the Defendant shall bring into Court, where the Action shall be
depending, all the principal Money and Interest due on such Bond or Writing,
with all the Costs that have been expended in any Suit or Suits in Law or
Equity upon such Bonds or Writings, the said Money or Value thereof in the said
Bills of Credit hereby made current, so brought into Court and offered at the
Value and Rates set upon them by this Act, shall be deemed and taken to be in
full Satisfaction and Discharge of the said Bond or Writing, and the Court
shall forthwith give Judgment to discharge every such Defendant of and from the
same accordingly.

Searches to be free.
AND for the better Discovery of Encumbrances, which may affect the said
Securities, it shall be lawful for the said Trustees, and such as they shall
appoint from time to time, to make Searches in any Office in this Province, and
if there be Occasion, take Copies or Transcripts of the Dockets, or Notes of
any Extents and Judgments, or of Mortgager and Entails, kept in any of the said
Offices, without Paying any Fee or Reward for the ^ame.

Trustees to inform themselves of the clear Value, and Titles of Land, etc.
proposed in Security.
AND to the End the said Trustees may be the better enabled to perform their
said Trust, they shall inform themselves as well of the clear Value as of the
Titles of all the Lands, Houses and Ground-Rents which shall be proposed in
Security for the said Bills, so as to be satisfied that the said Lands and
Ground-Rents are at least double the Value, and Houses treble the Value of the
Sums requested to be lent, and then they shall receive and take the same in
Mortgage accordingly.

PROVIDED, That upon all the Loans hereby intended, the Trustees shall take
Care that the Borrower ha^ an indefeazible Estate in Fee-simple in the Lands,
Tenements, Rents and Hereditaments by ^im proposed to be mortgaged, and that
they are free from former Sales, Gifts, Grants, Mortgages, Entails, and all
other Encumbrances, except the Proprietary Quit-Rents, or other Rents issuing
out of the same.

BUT before the Trustees shall accept of any Mortgag^ upon Messuages, Lands or
Tenements, subject to the Payment of such Quit-Rents, Ground-Rents,
Rentcharge, or other annual Payments, they shall duly consider, and, according
to the best of their Skill, find out the clear Value thereof, not Reckoning the
said Rents at more than sixteen, nor less than ten Years Purchase, and shall
let out upon Loan to the Mortgager, one third Part of the Value aforesaid, in
Bills of Credit, at the Interest and for the Term aforesaid.

AND that the Persons offering any of the said Houses, Lands, The Persons
offering Lands, etc. in Mortgage to take an Oath or Affirmation.
Ground-Rents or Rentcharge to mortgage for any of the said Bills, shall, at
or before the Time of executing the Deed of Mortgage, declare, upon Oath or
solemn Affirmation, in the usual Form, which the Trustees or any one of them
are hereby empowered and required to administer, That he or she is really
seized of the Premises in his or her own Right, and to his or her own Use; and
that the Lands, Houses and Ground-Rents or Rentcharge, mentioned in the Deed
by him or her to be executed, are free and clear from any former or other Gift,
Grant, Mortgage, or other Encumbrance, to his or her Knowledge (excepting the
Proprietary Quit-Rents, or other Charges appearing in his or her Deeds then
produced) which Oath or Affirmation shall be indorsed on the Back of the
Mortgage, with the Day and Year of the Caption thereof, for which the Clerk
shall receive Six Pence, and no more.

AND for securing the Payment of the Sums or Values so lent as above directed,
the said Trustees, Trustees shall take and receive Deeds of Mortgage in Fee
simple.
or any three of them, shall, in Pursuance of the Trust hereby reposed in them,
and as Trustees of the General Loan-Office aforesaid, and not otherwise, take
and receive Deeds of Mortgage in Fee-simple for what they lend; which being
executed and acknowledged, or proved as herein after directed, shall transfer
the Possession of the Lands, Houses and Hereditaments thereby granted to the
said Trustees, and vest the Inheritance thereof in them and their Successors,
as fully and effectually as Deeds of Feoffments with Livery and Seizin, or
Deeds enrolled in any of the King's Courts at Westminster may or can do in
England: In all which Deeds the Words [ Grant, Bargain and Sell] shall amount
to, The general Words in Mortgages to be construed as particular Covenants.
and be construed and adjudged, in all Courts of Judicature, to be express
Covenants to the said Trustees, their Successors and Assigns, from the
Bargainer or Mortgager, for himself, his Heirs, Executors and Administrators,
that the Mortgager, notwithstanding any Act done by him, was at the time of the
Execution of such Deed, seized of the Hereditaments and Premises thereby
granted, of an indefeazable Estate in Fee-simple, free from all Encumbrances
(Rents due to the Lord of the Fee, with the other Rents and Reservations
contained in their respective Deeds, only excepted;) and for quiet Enjoyment
thereof against the Mortgager, his Heirs and Assigns, and all claiming under
him or the former Owners thereof; and also for a further Assurance to be made
by the Mortgager, his Heirs and Assigns, as the Case may require, so that those
express Covenants are not to be set down at large in any of the Mortgages, but
that the said Trustees, and their Successors in the said Trust, respectively,
shall and may, in any Action to be brought, assign Breaches thereupon, as they
might do in case such Co-were expressly inserted in such Deeds.

Trustees to sign a Receipt for Writings.
AND the said Trustees, or some one of them, upon Acceptance of any Mortgage by
them taken, shall (at the reasonable Request and Charge of the respective
Mortgagers) sign a proper Receipt of all the Writings and Evidences of his
Title and Estate to the mortgaged Premises left with the said Trustees.

Mortgages to entered in a Book, etc. an attested Copy thereof to be Matter of
Record.
AND that all the said Mortgages or defeazable Deeds being sealed and delivered
to the said Trustees, or some of them, in Presence of two or more credible
Witnesses, and proved or acknowledged before any Justice of the Peace in this
Province, shall be fairly entered, at the Charge of the Mortgagers, in large
Books, to be for that Purpose provided and kept by the said Trustees, as herein
after directed; and an attested Copy of any of the said Deeds so entered and
certified under the Hands of the said Trustees for the time being, or any three
of them, shall be and is hereby declared to be Matter of Record, and shall be
good Evidence to prove the Sale or Mortgage thereby mentioned to be made; which
Mortgage Deeds being so entered, shall be kept by the Trustees, in some proper
House or Place distant from the Place of the Records thereof, for their better
Preservation and Security against Accidents.

AND the said Trustees shall, at their own proper Costs and Charges, provide
the said Books of Royal or other large good Paper, well bound and covered,
wherein shall be recorded all the said Deeds of Mortgage given in Security for
the said Bills of Credit to be lent out as aforesaid.

AND for the more regular Management of the Affairs relating to the said
Office, Trustees shall choose a Clerk.
the Trustees are hereby empowered to choose and employ a fit and able Person,
for whom they shall be answerable, to serve them as Clerk of the said Office,
during their Pleasure* Who, for recording every one of the said Deeds, shall
have the Sum of Four Shillings, and for every attested Copy thereof Four
Shillings, and no more; and for every Mortgage-Deed that he draws, the Sum of
Eight Shillings, and no more: Which said Sums are to be paid by the Mortgager,
his Heirs, Executors or Administrators, in full Satisfaction of all Fees and
Charges demandable by the said Clerk, for Drawing, Engrossing and Recording the
said Deeds, and Inspecting the Title of the Lands and Premises thereby
mortgaged.

AND the said Clerk shall also prepare a Bond of double the Mortgage-Money, The
Clerk to prepare a Bond and Warrant of Attorney, etc.
for every Mortgager to execute along with their respective Deeds of Mortgage,
conditioned for the Payment of the Money borrowed, with the Interest, according
to the Proviso or Condition contained in every Deed of Mortgage, and shall also
prepare a Warrant of Attorney, to be at the same time signed and sealed by
every Mortgager, impowering such Person or Persons as the Trustees shall
nominate and appoint, to acknowledge or suffer Judgment against him, his Heirs,
Executors and Admini^^ators, which they the said Trustees are hereby required
to cause their Attorney to enter, in due Form of Law, in the Court of
Common Pleas for the proper County, against such Mortgager, his Heirs,
Executors and Administrators, as shall make Default in the Payment of the
Mortgage-Money, or any Part thereof, according to the Direction of this Act and
Times of Payment specified in the Proviso contained in his Mortgage-Deed,
either in Actions of Ejectments, to gain the Possession of the mortgaged
Premises, or in Actions o^ Debt, to be brought upon any of the said ^^nds for
Nonperformance of the Conditions thereof, or in such Actions of Debt as the
said Trustees are hereby required to bring for the Value of the Bills of Credit
which happen to be received by the Mortgagers, whose Title to the Lands,
Tenements or Hereditaments by them mortgaged shall prove defective, together
with the Interest hereby allowed upon such Loan, and Costs of Suit. And the
said Clerk shall also insert a Release of Errors in every of the said Warrants
of Attorney; and for the said Bonds, Warrants of Attorney and Release of
Errors, the said Clerk ^^^ll have Two Shillings, for the Whole, and no more.

The Clerk to be qu^lified.
BUT before any Person so chosen to be Clerk shall enter upon the Execution of
the said Office, he shall take (...) Oath or Affirmation before some Justice of
the Peace for the City or County of Philadelphia, who is hereby empowered and
required to administer the same in these Words. The Form of the Oath of
Affirmation.
I A. B. shall truly and faithfully perform and execute the Office and Duty that
is directed and required of me, according to a Law of this Province, entitled,
An Act for emitting and making current Thirty Thousand Pounds, in Bills of
Credit, for the better Support of Government, etc. And that I will keep a just
and true Account of the Names of all such Persons as shall apply to the said
Office for Bills of Credit, and will prepare and record their Deeds of Mortgage
in the same Order of Time as their Applications are made, without any undue
Preference, unnecessary Delay, or fraudulent Practice.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, How the Money shall be
paid in, etc.
That the said Sums of Money so lent upon Mortgage, shall be paid in again,
with the annual Interest, in the said Bills of Credit, or in current Money of
America (or in any other Bills of Credit made current by a Law of this
Province) to the Trustees of the General Loan-Office aforesaid, in Manner
following, That is to s^y, One Sixteenth of the said Sum borrowed, with the
whole Interest of Five per Cent. per Annum, shall be annually paid by the
Mortgager, his Heirs, Executors or Administration, to the said Trustees; who
shall indorse the Sum received, both Principal and Interest, upon the Back of
the Mortgage-Deed, and also upon the Back of the said Counterpart; for both
which Indorsements, made in Manner aforesaid, they shall be paid by the
Mortgager the Sum of Six Pence and no more.

How the Mortgages are to be released at the last Payment.
AND at the last Payment of the said Money and Interest, the said Mortgage shall
be discharged, and the Origi^^l as well as Mortgage-Deeds delivered by the said
Trustees* from which Time the said Lands, Houses and Grou^^-Rents so mortgaged
or engaged, shall be forever clearly acquitted and discharged; and the said
Trustees shall make an Entry, in the Margin of the Inrolment of the said
Mortgage, of the Day and Year of such Discharge, for which they shall be paid,
by the Mortgager, the Sum of Six Pence, and no more; an attested Copy of which
Entry of the said Discharge of such Mortgages, signed by the Majority of the
said Trustees for the time being, shall be a^ valid and effectual in Law as
their Re-conveyance of the mortgaged Premises, made and executed in the usual
Form, can be to the Mortgagers, their Heirs and Assigns.

PROVIDED ALSO, AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, The Mortgager to ^eep quiet
P^ss^ssion, until De^ault ma^e.
That until some Default shall be made by the said respective Mortgagers, of or
in Payment of the Mortgage-Money, or some Part thereof, it shall be lawful for
them and their Heirs to hold and enjoy the mortgaged Premises, with the
Appurtenances; any thing in the Deeds of Mortgage, or in this Act contained, ^o
the contrary notwithstanding.

BUT if Default shall be made or suffered by any of the said Mortgagers, their
Heirs, Executors, The Trustees upon Default to ^ell the mortgaged Premi^es.
Administrators or Assigns, of or in Payment of any of the said yearly Payments
or Sums, whether in Part of the Principal or Interest which they or any of them
should have paid on the Days and Times, and in Manner and Form, as in and by
their respective Deeds of Mortgage shall be specified, it ^^all and may be
lawful to and for the said Trustees, for the time being, at their Discretion,
either to take their Remedy by Course of Law, as herein above directed, and
proceed to take the mortgaged Lands and Hereditaments in Execution as for other
Debts, or within two Months ^^xt after the Days whereon the same ought to be
paid, according to the several Provisoes or Conditions in their Deeds
respectively contained, to enter upon the Lands, Houses, Rents and
Hereditaments in the same Deeds specified, and expose the same to a public
Sale, and thereupon sell and convey the same Lands, Hereditaments and Premises,
to the best Purchaser, and out of the Money arising by such Sale detain and
keep the Moneys to them due thereon, and all Costs and Charges relating
thereto, retur^ing the Overplus (if any be) to the Owners of such Lands and
Hereditaments; and that then and in such Case the Owners of such Lands and
Hereditaments shall stand absolutely forclosed from all Equity of Redemption of
the same.

PROVIDED ALSO, Sheriff's Sale not to be avoided or r^leased.
That if any of the said Judgments, which warrant the Awarding of any W^its ^or
the Sale of the said Lands, Tenements or Hereditaments, shall at any time
hereafter ^e reversed for any Error or Errors, then and in every such case none
of the said Lands, Tenements or Hereditaments so as aforesaid taken o^ sold, or
to be taken or sold upon Executions, or any Part thereof, shall be restored,
nor the Sheriff's Sale thereof avoided.

No Estate to go to the Vende^, but what shall appear to be mo^tgaged.
AND that no Sale which shall be made by Virtue of this Act, shall be extended
to create any further Estate to the Vendees, than the Lands or Hereditaments so
sold or delivered shall appear to be mortgaged for, by the said respective
Mortgages or defeazable Deeds.

The Trustees to let Money on Plat^-Security, etc.
PROVIDED ALSO, That it shall and may be lawful to and for the Trustees of the
Loan-Office aforesaid, or any three of them, to let out upon Loan, in such
Manner as they shall think best, any Sum of the said Bills of Credit, not
exceeding the Sum of Two Hundred Pounds to one Person, upon Security of good
Plate, to be delivered to them at the Value of Five Shillings, current Money of
America, per Ounce, and at the Interest of Five per Cent. per Annum, to be paid
in again to the said Trustees, within the Space of twelve Months, with the
Interest aforesaid: And in case of Non-Payment, within one Month after Default
made, to sell and dispose of the said Plate for the most it will yield,
returning the Overplus (if any be) to the Owner thereof, after Payment of the
Principal and Interest, with the Charges accrued thereupon.

AND WHEREAS the true and regular Sinking of the said Bills of Credit will very
much conduce to the keeping up the Value of the same, Committee of Assembly
audit the Accounts of the Loan-Office, etc.
BE IT ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That a Committee of the Assembly of
this Province, shall, once every Year, or o^tner, as the Assembly shall think
fit, be appointed to audit the Accounts of all the Moneys in Bills of Credit ^o
as aforesaid let out upon Loan to the Inhabitants of this Province, according
to the Direction of this Act, and also the Sums of Money and Bills of Credit
received by the said Trustees from the respective Mortgagers, their Hei^s,
Executors and Administrators; and shall, within one Week next after the said
Accounts are so audited, affix Advertisements on the most public Places of the
City of Philadelphia, setting forth what Quantity of Money has been received
and is in the Hands of the Trustees aforesaid, over and above what will pay the
Interest due to the Public for the Loan of the said Bills of Credit let out
upon Mortgage by Virtue of this Act: Which Money shall by the said (...) be
given in Exchange for Bills of Credit made current by this Act, to any Person
or Persons bringing in the same; and the said Bills of Credit received as Part
of the principal Sum lent out of the said Office in Manner aforesaid, How the
yearly Quotas are to b^ sunk.
and remaining in the Hands of the Trustees, shall, within ten Days after such
Audit, be sunk and destroyed, in the Presence of the Committee who shall be
appointed Auditors, they having first compared the said Bills of Credit with
their Counterparts, and entered into a Book to be kept for that Purpose, the
Number and Valu^ o^ ^ach Bill of Credit so sunk and destroyed.

AND that after the aforesaid Sum of Thirty Thousand Pounds in the said Bills
of Credit, After the Sum emitted shall be sunk, the Trustees a^e discharged.
ordered to be let out upon Loan by this Act, shall be accounted for by ^he
said Trustees, and sunk according to the Directions of this Act, the aforesaid
Trustees, their Heirs, Executors and Administrators, and every of them, shall
from thenceforward stand and forever be clea^ly discha^ged and acquitted of and
from all and all Manner of Security, and other or farther Demands, to be had or
made for any thing by them done in Discharge and Execution of the Trust reposed
in them by this Act.

PROVIDED ALWAYS, Any Person paying down the Principal and Interest discharges
his Mortgage.
That if any Person or Persons, who shall take upon Loan any of the said Bills
of Credit, shall see cause, at any time after the Making the said Mortgage, and
before the Forfeiture and Sale thereof, to pay down the whole Principal and
Interest then due, in the like public Bills of Credit, or current Money of
America, upon his or her so doing, such Mortgage or Security shall be released
and delivered in the Manner before directed, and the Lands, Ground-Rents and
Houses, in the said Mortg^ge-Deed contained and mortgaged, shall be forever
discharged therefrom.

AND IT IS HEREBY DECLARED AND ENACTED, And the Trustees shall let out the same
on Loan.
That if any Sum or Sums shall be so paid down, pursuant to this Clause, before
or at any other Days or Times of Payment than what are or shall be mentioned or
specified in the respective Mortgages, then and in every such Case it shall be
lawful for the Trustees of the Loan-Office, by this Act directed, and they are
hereby required, in the Presence of the Committee of the Assembly, to sink such
Part or Parts of the principal Sums due upon the said Mortgages, when such
Payments are made, as by this Act is directed in other Cases, and thereupon
emit or let out upon Loan all the Residue thereof, together with such other
Sums as shall arise from the Sales of Estates forfeited and sold pursuant to
the said Accounts: All which Sums so emitted shall be secured and made payable,
with the Interest of Five per Cent. per Annum, at such Days and Times, and
after such Manner as in and by this Act is limited, and not otherwise, so that
the Payments be proportioned to the Time unexpired.

AND BE IT ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, Interest of Bills of Credit to
be disposed of by the Assembly.
That the annual Interest received for the Loan of the said Bills of Credit,
which shall be remaining in Money in the Hands of the said Trustees, after the
Accounts audited as aforesaid, and after Salaries and Charges allowed by this
Act are deducted, shall be disposed of in such Manner as the Assembly of this
Province shall from time to time think fit to order and direct.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, Penalties on Persons
counterfeiting Bills.
That if any Person or Persons whatsoever shall presume to forge or
counterfeit, or be Aiding or Assisting in forging or counterfeiting any of the
said Bills of Credit, or utter or cause to be uttered, or offered in Payment,
any Bill or Bills, knowing the same to be actually forged or counterf^ited,
with an Intent to defraud any other Person, and be thereof legally convicted,
he, she or they so offending shall be set upon the Pillory, in some open
public Place, and there have both his or her Ears cut off, and be publicly
whipped on his or her bare Back with Thirty-one Lashes well laid on, and
moreover shall forfeit the Sum of One Hundred Pounds current Money of America,
to be levied of the Lands and Tenements, Goods and Chattels of such Offenders;
the one Half thereof to the Use of the Government, the other Half thereof to
the Discoverer; and the Offender shall pay to the Party grieved double the
Value of the Damage sustained by the said counterfeit Bills, together with the
Costs and Charges of the Prosecution. And in case the Person or Persons so
convicted have not sufficient to satisfy the Party for his or her Damage and
Charges, and to pay the Forfeitures aforesaid, then in such Case the Offender
or Offenders shall, by Order of the Court by which they were convicted, be sold
for any Term not exceeding seven Years, for Satisfaction of the same: And in
such Case the Trustees of the said Loan-Office shall reward the Discoverer and
Prosecutor of such insolvent Offenders to the Value of Five Pounds.

How counterfeited Bills shall be disposed of.
AND that all Magistrates, and others, into whose Hands any counterfeited Bills
may happen to come, shall forthwith deliver the same to one of the Trustees of
the said Loan-Office, who shall cause the Names of those that delivered them,
and of the Persons from whom they were taken, to be indorsed on the Back
thereof; which Bills shall be safely kept in the said Office, and be
forthcoming when there may be Occasion to make Use of the same, and afterward
delivered to a Committee as aforesaid to be destroyed.

AND IT IS HEREBY DECLARED AND ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, This Act to
be taken and allowed in all Courts.
That this present Act shall be taken and allowed in all Courts within this
Province as public Acts, and all Judges, Justices, and other Persons concerned
therein, are hereby required to take Notice thereof as such, without Pleading
the same specially.

AND for the more Ease to the said Trustees in the Attendance on their Duty
required by this Act, and the better Settling their Accounts with the said
Committee; BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, All Payments to be
made the 15th of October annually.
That upon any future Emission of any Bills of Credit by Virtue of this Act,
the Trustees are hereby directed and empowered so to devise the Mortgage-Deeds
that the annual Quotas or Payments of the Money thereby secure^ be made payable
on the Fifteenth Day of October annually, during the respective Terms or Number
of Years limited for Payment thereof. Trustees to give an Account to the
Auditors when they receive in and remit the Money.
And that as often as the Whole or Remainder of any principal Sum emitted by
Virtue of this or any other Act for emitting Bills of Credit in this Province,
shall be paid in or recovered within the Time limited for Payment thereof by
the Mortgage-Deed, the Trustees are hereby required, in settling their Accounts
with the Auditors aforesaid, to render Accounts as well of the Days and Times
of their Receipts thereof, as also of the Days and Times when the same Sums are
emitted again.

AND WHEREAS the Funds provided for the Support of this Government have proved
deficient, and diverse Sums, claimed as Debts due from this Province, remain yet
unpaid: THEREFORE BE IT ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, 1000 l. to be
delivered to the Provincial Treasurer.
That the Sum of One Thousand Pounds, in the said Bills of Credit, be delivered
to the Provincial-Treasurer for the time being, who shall give his Receipt for
the same, which Receipt shall be deemed, taken and allowed to be a good and
sufficient Discharge to the said Trustees, their Heirs, Executors and
Administrators, for the Sums in Bills of Credit mentioned and contained in such
Receipts, which said Bills, or so many of them as shall be needful, the
Treasurer shall forthwith apply to the Paying and Discharging the several Sums
of Money due and to be due and owing by any Order of Assembly of this Province.
And the Residue (if any be) to be applied to the Payment of such Orders as
shall be issued by this or any succeeding Assembly of this Province, and not
otherwise.

How the same shall be sunk.
AND that the said Sum of One Thousand Pounds hereby directed to be lent to the
Provincial-Treasurer, shall be sunk by an annual Sinking and Destroying of One
Hundred Pounds Interest-Money, arising by this Act, by the said Truste^s, in
Presence of a Committee of Assembly, in Manner hereby prescribed for sinking
Bills of Credit in the said Loan-Office, and as this Act in like Cases directs,
until the said One Thousand Pounds be sunk and destroyed.

AND WHEREAS it is represented by the Recorder of the City of Philadelphia, in
Behalf of the Mayor and Commonalty of the said City, the great Necessity there
is for an Almshouse, and desiring the Loan of One Thousand Pounds in Bills of
Credit, for the Pu^chasing a convenient Piece of Ground, and for building the
same thereupon, within the City of Philadelphia, for the Use of the Poor of the
said City: BE IT THEREFORE ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, 1^00 l. to the
Mayor and Commonalty, to build an Almshouse.
That the Sum of One Thousand Pounds, in Bills of Credit made current by this
Act, be delivered by the said Trustees to the Mayor and Commonalty of the said
City of Philadelphia, they giving their Receipts to the Trustees for the same,
and securing the Re-payment thereof by Obligation, under their Common Seal, to
be given to the Trustees of the Loan-Office: Which said Bills shall be sunk by
Taxes to be laid on the City for that Purpose, How the same shall be sunk.
in the same Manner that County and City Levies are usually raised and levied,
until all the said Bills of Credit so as aforesaid received on the Account and
for the Use of the said City, be sunk in the Manner prescribed for sinking
Bills of Credit in the said Loan-Office.

AND forasmuch as a House for the Representatives of the Freemen of this
Province to meet and sit in General Assembly in the City of Philadelphia, is
very much wanted: BE IT THEREFORE ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, 2000 l.
to be delivered to Thomas Lawrence, etc. to build a State-House.
That the Sum of Two Thousand Pounds of Bills of Credit made current by this
Act, be delivered by the Trustees of the Loan-Office to Thomas Lawrence, Andrew
Ha^ilton and John Kearsley, who are hereby appointed for building and carrying
on the same; who shall give their Receipt to the Trustees for the said Bills;
which Receipt shall be deemed, taken and allowed to be a good and sufficient
Discharge to the said Trustees, their Heirs, Executors and Administrators, for
the Sums in Bills of Credit mentioned and contained in such Receipts. And that
the said Sum of Two Thousand Pounds, shall be sunk by an annual Sinking and
Destroying of Two Hundred Pounds Interest Money arising by this Act, by the
said Trustees, in Presence of a Committee of Assembly, in Manner hereby
prescribed for sinking Bills of Credit, in the said Loan-Office, and as this
Act in like Cases directs, until the said Two Thousand Pounds be sunk and
destroyed.

ANNO REGNI GEORGII II. REGIS TERTIO.
At a GENERAL ASSEMBLY of the Province of Pennsylvania, begun and holden at
Philadelphia, the Fourteenth Day of October, Anno Domini One Thousand Seven
Hundred and Twenty-nine, in the Third Year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord
GEORGE II. by the Grace of GOD, of Great Britain, France and Ireland, KING,
Defender of the Faith, etc. And from thence continued by Adjournment to the
Twelfth of January, in the same Year; the following ACTS were passed, That is
to say,
CHAP. CCCIV. An ACT for the Relief of insolvent Debtors within the Province of
Pennsylvania. Post 4 Geo. II. Chap ^19. An Act for Am^ndment of this Act.

WHEREAS in Compassion to such unhappy Persons, as by Losses and other
Misfortunes have been rendered unable to pay their Debts, it is provided by an
Act of Assembly of this Government, That if any Person be imprisoned for Debt,
or Fines, within thi^ Province, and have no sufficient Estate to satisfy the
same, the Debtor shall make Satisfaction by Servitude, according to the
Judgment of the Court; but there being no Provision made by the said Law to
compel the Debtor to render any Account of his or her Estate, great Abuses have
been committed by Persons claiming the Benefit of that Law, in concealing their
Estates, or making them over in Trust so that no clear Discovery could be made
of the same by the Creditors; and it being ^ound by Experience that the Service
of the Debtor has in nowi^e answered the End proposed in making the said Law:
Therefore, for the Relief of such Prisoners who shall be willing to satisfy
their Creditors as far as they are able, BE IT ENACTED by the Hon. PATRICK
GORDON, Esquire Lieutenant Governor of the Province of Pennsylvania, etc. by and
with the Advice and Consent of the Representatives of the Freemen of the said
Province, in General Assembly met, and by the Authority of the ^ame, That if
any Person or Persons charged in Ex^cution for any Sum or Sums of Money, not
exceeding in the Whole the Sum of One Hundred Pounds, from and after the
Twenty-fifth Day of March, in the Year of our Lord One Thousand Seven Hundred
and Thirty, shall be minded to deliver up to his, her, or their Creditors, all
his, her, or their Effects, toward the Satisfaction of the Debts wherewith he,
she or they stand charged, it shall and may be lawful for such Prisoner to
exhibit a Petition to any of the Courts of Law within this Province, Prisoner
to exhibit a Petition, etc.
from whence the Process issued upon which he, she or they was or were taken or
charged in Execution, certifying the Cause or Cause^ of his, her or their
Imprisonment, and an Account of his, her or their whole real and personal
Estate, with the Dates of the Securities wherein any Part of it consists, and
the Dee^s or Notes relating thereunto, and the Names of the Witnesses to the
same, as far as his, her or their Knowledge extends thereto: And upon such
Petition the Court may, and is hereby required, by Order or Rule of Court to
cause the Prisoner to be brought up, and the several Creditors at whose Suit
he, she or they stand charged as aforesai^, and all other his or her Creditors
that are or can be known to the Court, to be summoned to appear personally, or
by their Attorney, in Court, Creditors to be summoned to appear, etc.
at a Day to be appointed for that Purpose; and upon the Day of such
Appearance, if any of the Creditors summoned refuse or neglect to appear, upon
Affidavit of the due Service of such Rule or Order, or upon Affidavit made that
the Creditor or Creditors are not to be found, the Court shall in a summary Way
examine into the Matter of such Petition, and hear what can or shall be
alleged on either Side for or against the Discharge of such Prisoner; and upon
such an Examination the Court may and are hereby required to administer or
tender to the Prisoner an Oath or Affi^mation to the Effect following: I A. B.
do solemnly (swear in the Presence of Almighty God) or, The Form of the O^th o^
Affirmation.
(sincerely and truly declare and affirm) that the Account by me delivered in
to this Honorable Court in my Petition to this Court, does contain a full and
true Account of all my real and personal Estate, Debts, Credits and Effects
whatsoever, which I, or any in Trust for me, have, or at the Time of my
imprison^ent, had, or am, or was in any respect entitled to, in ^ossession,
Remainder or Reversion (except the Wearing-Apparel and Bedding for me or my
Family, and the Tools or Instruments of my Trade or Calling, not exceeding Five
Pounds in Value, in the Whole;) and that I have not at any Time since my
Imprisonment, or before, directly or indirectly, Sold, Leased, Assigned, or
otherwise disposed, or made over in Trust, for myself, or otherwise, other than
as mentioned in such Account, any Part of my Lands, Estate, Goods, Stock,
Money, Debts, or other real and personal Estate, whereby to have or expect any
Benefit or Profit to myself, or to defraud any of my Creditors to whom I am
indebted.

AND in case the Prisoner shall in open Court take the said Oath or
Affirmation, and upon such Examination, and his or her taking the said Oath or
Affirmation the Creditors shall be satisfied with the Truth thereof, the Court
may immediately order the Lands, Goods and Effects contained in such Account,
or so much of them as may be sufficient to satisfy the Debts wherewith he or
she is or shall be charged, together with Costs of Suit, and the Fees due to
the Keeper of the Goal or Prison from which the Prisoner was brought, to be by
a short Indorsement on the Back of such Petition, signed by the Prisoner,
assigned to the said Creditors, Prisoner to assign his Effects to the
Creditors, etc.
or one or more of them in Trust for the rest of them, or to so some proper
Person to be by the said Court appointed in Trust for all the Creditors; and by
such Assignment the Estate, Interest and Property of the Lands, Goods, Debts
and Effect^ so assigned, shall be vested in the Person or Persons to whom such
Assignment is or shall be made, who may take Possession of, or ^ue for the
^ame, in his or their own Name or Names, in like Manner as Assignees of
Commissioners of Bankrupts; to which Suit no Release of the Prisoner, his or
her Executors or Administrators, or any Trustee for him or her, subsequent to
such Assignment, And upon such Assignment to be discharged.
shall be any Bar. And immediately upon such Assignment executed, the said
Prisoner shall be discharged out of Custody by Order of Court; and such Order
shall be a sufficient Warrant to the Sheriff, Jailer or Keeper of such Prison,
to discharge the said Prisoner i^ detained for the Causes mentioned in such
Petition, and no other; and he is hereby required to discharge and set him or
her at Liberty forthwith without Fee; nor shall such She^iff or Jailer be
liable to any Action of Escape, or other Suit or Information upon that Account:
And the Person or Persons to whom the said Effects shall be assigned, paying
the Fees to the Jailer or Keeper of the Prison, in whose Custody the Party
discharged was, Effects to be divided among theCredito^s, in Proportion to
their respective Debts. Creditors not being satisfied wi^h the Oath, etc. the
Court may remand the Prisoner, etc.
shall and are hereby required, to divide the Effects so assigned among the
Creditors, and all the Persons for whom they shall be entrusted, in Proportion
to their respective Debts. But in Case the Person or Person^, at whose Suit
such Prisoner was charged in Execution, or any other Creditor, shall not be
satisfied with the Truth of such Oath or Affirmation, but shall desire further
Time to inform himself of the Matters contained therein, the said Court may and
shall remand the said Prisoner, and direct the said Prisoner, and the Person or
Persons dissatisfied with such Oath or Affirmation, to appear at another Day to
be appointed by the said Court sometime within the Term next following the Time
of such Examination; and if at such second Day so to ^e appointed, the Creditor
or Creditors dissatisfied which such Oath or Affirmation, shall make Default in
appearing, or in case he or they shall appear, but shall be unable to discov^^
any Estate or Effects of the Prisoner omitted in such his or her Petition, or
to show any Probability of his or her having been forsworn or to have declared
falsely in the said Oath or Affirmation, then the said Court shall immediately
cause the said Prisoner to be discharged, upon such Assignment of hi^ or her
Effects in Manner as aforesaid; Creditors insisting on the P^isoner's being
detained, must pay, etc. toward hi^ Maintenance.
unless such Creditor or Creditors do insist upon his or her being detained in
Prison, and do agree, by Writing, under his Hand* to pay and allow any Sum of
Money that shall be assessed by the said Court, not exceeding Three Shillings
per Week, unto the said Prisoner, to be paid the second Day of every Week so
long as he or she shall continue in Prison at his, her or their Suits; on
Failure of the Payment of which weekly Sum at any Time, the said Prisoner shall
forthwith, upon Application to the Court, or to any three Justices of the said
Court in the Vacation, be discharged by such Order as a^oresaid. But in ca^e
the said Prisoner shall refuse to take the said Oath or Affirmation, or having
taken the same, shall be detected of Falsity therein, he or she shall be
presently remanded.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, NoPersondischarged by
this Act, to be hereafter imprisoned for any Debt, etc. due before his
Discharge.
That no Person to be discharged by this Act, shall at any Time hereafter be
imprisoned by reason of any Judgment or Decree obtained for Payment of Money
only, or for any Debt, Damages, Contempts, Costs, Sum or Sums of Money,
contracted, occurred, occa^ioned, owing, or growing due, before the Time of his
or her Discharge; but that upon every Arrest upon every such Judgment or
Decree, or for such Debts, Damages or Contempts, Costs, Sum and Sums of Money,
it shall and may be lawful for any Judge of the Court where the Process issued,
upon showing the Duplicate of such Prisoner's Discharge or Discharges, to
release and discharge out of Custody such Prisoner or Prisoners as aforesaid,
and the Judg^ is hereby empowered so to do; so as every such Prisoner or
Prisoners arrested or detained upon Execution or mes^e Process, do give a
Warrant of Attorney to appear to every such Action, and to plead thereunto.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Action of
Escape, Ju^^ices, She^iff, etc. may plead the General Issue, etc.
or any Suit or Action be brought against any Justice or Justices of the Peace,
Sheriff, Jailer or Keeper of any Prison, for Performing their Office in
Pursuance of this Act, they may plead the General Issue and give this Act in
Ev^dence; and if the Plaintiff be nonsuited, or discontinue his Action, or
Verdict pass against him, or Judgment upon Demurrer, the Defendant shall have
treble Costs.

PROVIDED, That the Discharge of any Person by virtue of this Act shall not
acquit any other Person from such Debt, Sum or Sums of Money, or any Part
thereof; but that all others shall be answerable for the same in such Manner a^
before the Passing of this Act.

AND PROVIDED, That this Act shall not extend to discharge any Person out of
Prison who shall stand chargeable at the Suit of the Crown only.

PROVIDED ALWAYS, AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, by the Authority aforesaid,
Notwithstanding the Prisoner's Discharge* Judgment to stand good against what
he may hereafter possess, etc.
That notwithstanding the Discharge of the Person of such Prisoner or Prisoners
as aforesaid, all and every Debt and Debts, due or owing from the said Prisoner
or Prisone^^, and all and every Judgment or Judgments had and taken, and Decree
obtained against him or her, shall stand and be good and effectual in the Law
to all Intents and Purposes, against the Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments, Goods
and Chattels of the said Prisoner so discharged as aforesaid, which he, she or
they, or any other Person or Persons in Trust for him, her or them, at the Time
of such Discharge has or have, or at any Time hereafter shall or may be
anyways seized or possessed of, interested in or entitled to either in Law or
Equity, except his, her or their Wearing Apparel, Bedding for his, her or their
Families, and Working Tools and Impleme^ts necessary for his, her or their
Occupations, not exceedi^g the Value of Five Pounds in the Whole; And the
Creditors may take out a new Execution, etc.
and it shall and may be lawful to and for such Creditor or Creditors of such
Prisoner or Prisoners so discharged as aforesaid, his, her o^ their Executors
or Administrators, to take out a new Execution against the Lands, Tenements,
Hereditaments, Goods and Chattels of such Prisoner or Prisoners (except as are
before excepted) for the Satisfaction of his, her or their Debts, in such Sort,
Manner and Form, as he, she or they might have done if the Person or Persons of
such Prisoner or Prisoners had never been taken in Execution; any Act, Statute,
Law or Custom to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

PROVIDED ALSO, AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That if
any such Person who shall take such Oath or Affirmation as aforesaid, Prisoner
convicted of Perjury, shall suffe^, etc.
shall, upon any Indictment for Perjury in any Matter or Particular contained
in the said Oath or Affirmation, be convicted by his or her own Confession, or
by Verdict of Twelve Men, the Person so convicted shall suffer all the Pains
and Forfeitures which may by Law be inflicted on any Person convicted of wilful
Perjury; and shall likewise be liable to be taken on any Process de (...), and
charged in Execution for the said Debt, in the same Manner as if he or she had
never been discharged or taken in Execution before; and shall never after have
the Benefit of this Act.

PROVIDED ALSO, AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That if
the Effects so assigned shall not extend to satisfy the whole Debts due to the
Creditors of the Person or Persons so discharged, and the Fees due to the
Jailer, there shall be an Abatement in Proportion, and such Jailer shall come
in as a Creditor for what shall be then due to him for his Fees, in Proportion
with the other Creditors.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, Where there are mutual
Debts, one may be set against the other, etc.
That where there are mutual Debts between the Debtor or Debtors and his, her
or their Creditors, or if either Party sue or be sued as Executor or
Administrator, where there are mutual Debts between the Testator or Intestate
and either Party, one Debt may be set against the other, and such Matter may be
given in Evidence upon the General Issue, or pleaded in Bar as the Nature of
the Case shall require; so as at the Time of the Pleading the General Issue,
where any such Debt of the Plaintiff, his Testator or Intestate, is intended to
be insisted on in Evidence, Notice shall be given of the particular Sum or Debt
so intended to be insisted on, and upon what Account it became due, or
otherwise such Matter shall not be allowed in Evidence upon such General Issue.

PROVIDED, Landlords may recove^ one Year's Rent, as before this Act.
That where any Rent shall be due from any Prisoner or Prisoners at the Time of
his or their respective Discharges, no Goods or Chattels then lying or being in
or upon the respective Tenements or Lands so in Lease, or liable to be
distrained, shall be removed or disposed of without the Consent of the Landlord
or Person to whom the Rent is due, until the same, not exceeding one Year's
Rent, be paid or ^atisfied; and that the Landlord may use all lawful Ways for
the having and recovering his Rent, so as the same exceed not one Year's Rent,
by Distres^ or otherwise, as he might have had or could have done before the
making of this Act; any thing herein contained to the contrary in anywise
notwithstanding.

AND PROVIDED ALSO, No abse^t o^ distant Creditor barred by this Act.
That this Act shall not bar any absent or distant Creditor, who had not Notice
of the Prisoner's Application to the Court as aforesaid.

AND WHEREAS, by an Act of Assembly of this Province, entitled, An Act for
better determining Debts and D^mands under Forty Shillings, Power is given to
any one Justice of the Peace, to hear and determine any Debt or Demand under
Forty Shillings, and upon Judgment given to award Execution against the Body
and Goods or Effects of the Defendant; in Pursuance of the Execution of which
Law many poor Persons have been taken and imprisoned a long Time for very small
Sums of Money, to the utter Ruin of their Families, and without any real
Benefit to the Creditors; And forasmuch as it will be a very great Hardship and
Charge upon a poor Prisoner confined for a small Debt, to oblige him or her to
apply to be discharged in the Manner directed by this Act for Persons
imprisoned for a greater Sum; THEREFORE, for the Ease of such poor Persons, BE
IT ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, How Prisoners for Debt under Forty
Shillings may be relieved.
That where any Person or Persons shall be charged in Execution for any Sum of
Money not exceeding in the Whole the Sum of Forty Shillings, besides Costs of
Suit, such Person or Persons may, by Petition, apply to any two Justices of the
Peace of the County or City where he or she is imprisoned, and therein set
forth the Truth of his or her Case, with a true Account of his or her whole
Effects; which Justices shall thereupon give reasonable Notice to the Plaintiff
or Creditor to appear before them at a certain Day and Place, to show if that
the said Debtor or Debtors have some Effects that he or she will not discover
and yield up for Payment of the Debt and Costs; at which Day the Defendant or
Defendants shall make such Oath or Affirmation as in the Case of other Debtors
is by this Act directed to be taken, the Word Five Pounds in the said Oath only
excepted; and the Word Twenty Shillings in the Case of a single Person, and the
Word Fifty Shillings in the Case of a married Person, to be taken or inserted
instead thereof. And if the Plaintiff or Creditors shall, upon Notice given as
aforesaid, neglect or refuse to appear, or appearing and not making out to the
said Justices that the Debtor has omitted to discover some of his or her
Effects in his or her Petition, or to show any Probability of his or her being
forsworn in the said Oath or Affirmation, then the said Justices shall
immediately cause the said Prisoner to be discharged, upon his or making an
Assignment to the Plaintiff, on the said Petition, of all the Effects contained
therein, the Wearing Apparel, to the Value of Twenty Shillings, if a single
Person, and to the Value of Fifty Shillings, if a married Person, only
excepted; and the Persons of the Debtor or Debtors shall never after be
arrested for the same Debt or Costs.

AND WHEREAS many Persons may suffer by the Oppression and Exactions of
Goalers, and other inferior Officers in the Execution of Process for Debt: For
Prevention whereof, BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That no
Sheriff, Undersheriff, Sheriff, Undersheriff, etc. shall not carry Persons
arrested to any Tavern, etc. without their Consent.
Bailiff, or other Officer or Minister whatsoever, shall at any Time or Times
hereafter, convey or carry, or cause to be conveyed or carried, any Person or
Persons by him or them arrested, or being in his or their Custody, by Virtue or
Color of any Writ, Process or Warrant, to any Tavern, Alehouse, or other
public Victualling or Drinking House, or to the private House of any such
Officer, without the vo^^^tary Consent of the Person so taken or arrested; nor
^^arge, demand, take or receive, or cause to be demanded, No^ shall demand
extravagant Fees or Rewards, etc.
^^ken or received, directly or indirectly, any other or gr^ater Sum or Sums of
Money than is or shall be by Law allowed to be taken or demanded, for such
Arrest, Taking, Detaining or Waiting till the Person or Persons so arrested or
in Custody shall have given in an Appearance or Bail (...) the Case shall
require, or agreed with the Person or Persons at whose Suit or Prosecution he,
she or they shall be taken or arrested, or until he, she or they shall be sent
to (...) proper Goal belonging to the County, City, Town or Place where such
Arrest or Taking shall be; Nor shall keep Person^ arrested in any public or
privateHouse, with or without their Consent above 23 Days.
nor shall keep the Person or Persons so taken or arrested in any Tavern,
Alehouse, or other public Victualling House, or private House of any Officer,
with or without the Consent of the Persons so arrested, above the Space of
Twenty Days; nor ^^all exact or take any Reward, Gratuity or Money for keeping
the Person or Persons so arrested or in Custody ^^t of Goal or Prison, nor
shall take or receive any other or greater Sum or Sums of Money for one or more
Night's Lodging, or for a Day's Diet, or other Expenses, Justices of the Court
of Common Pleas to make Orders for regulating Expenses* etc.
than what shall be allowed as reasonable in such Cases, by some Order o^
Orders to be made by the Justices of the respective Courts of Common Pleas
within this Province, at some Court to be held for such County, City, Town or
Place where such Arrest or Taking shall be; who are hereby authorized and
required, with all convenient Expedition, to make some standing Order or Orders
for ascertaining such Expenses within their respective Counties or Cities.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That every Sheriff,
Officers shall permit Prisoners to send for Necess^^ie^ where they please.
Undersheriff, Jailer, Keeper of any Prison or Goal, or other Person or
Persons whatsoever, to whose Custody or Keeping any one so arrested or taken
shall be committed, on any Pretense shall permit and suffer him, her or them so
arrested or taken, at his, her or their Will and Pleasure to send for and have
any Beer, Ale, Victuals, or other necessary Food from what Place they please;
and also to have an^ use such Bedding, Linen and other Things as he, she or
they shall think fit, without purloining or detaining the same, or any Part
thereof, or enforcing or requiring him, her or them to pay for the having or
using thereof, or putting any Manner of Restraint or Difficulty upon him, her
or them in using thereof, or relating thereto.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That no Fees shall be
taken by any Jailer or Keeper of any Goal or Prison within this Province, for
any Prisoner or Prisoners Commitment, or coming into Goal, or Chamber-Rent
there, or Discharge from thence, or other Expenses, than what shall be allowed
by Law, until such Fees shall be settled and established by the Justices or
Judges of the respective County-Courts, Justices shall settle Tables of Fees,
etc.
and other Courts of Record within this Province, for and in respect of the
Counties and Courts to which they belong* who are hereby directed, empowered
and required to settle and establish the same as soon as conveniently may be:
And Tables shall be made of the respective Orders, Rules and Fees so settled
and established, and signed by the Justices or Judges of the respective
County-Courts, Courts of General Quarter Sessions of the Peace, and other
Courts of Record for their respective Goals within their respective
Jurisdictions; and signed by the Mayor, Recorder and Aldermen, for and in
respect of the Courts of Record held before the Mayor, Recorder and Aldermen of
the City of Philadelphia; Which Tables of Fees, etc. may be altered and
amended; and shall be entered on Record.
which Rules, Orders and Fees may from time to time be enlarged, reformed or
altered and amended ^^ Occasion shall require, by the Judges of the Supreme
Court, by Rules and Orders of the said Court to be signed by the Judges of the
same; and Duplicates shall be transmitted to the respective County-Courts, and
other Courts of Record for which they are made, to be entered of Record and
enrolled without any Fee to be taken for the Inrollment thereof.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, Courts to enqui^e
concerning the Table^ of F^e^, etc.
That the several Courts of Common Pleas, and other Courts of Record in the
several Counties and Cities of this Province, shall at every Time of the
Sitting or Meeting of such Court or Courts, inquire whether such Tables of
Fees, and such Rules as aforesaid, be hung up and remain public and easy to be
resorted to in the several Prisons to the Courts respectively belonging, and
whether the same be duly complied with and observed; and cause eight Days
Notice to be given to the Prisoners in the said Prison, of the Time appointed
for such Inquiry; and shall inform themselves, touching the same, in the best
Manner they can, and supply and redress whatever they find neglected or
transgressed: And that the Judges of the Court of Oyer and Terminer, and
General Goal Delivery, shall likewise make Enquiry of the Matters aforesaid, at
all such Courts and Sessions of Goal Delivery within this Province, for and in
respect of the Goals and Prisons within their respective Jurisdictions; and
shall expressly give it in Charge to the Grand Jury to inquire concerning the
same.

AND for the more speedy punishing Goalers, Bailiffs, and others employed in
the Execution of Process, for Extortions or other Abuses in their respective
Offices and Places; BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, How
Go^lers, and^. (...) of (...), sh^l^ be punished.
That upon Petition of any Prisoner or Person, being or having been under
Arrest or in Custody, complaining of any Exaction or Extortion by any Jailer,
Bailiff or other Officer or Person employed in the keeping or taking Care of
any Goal or Prison, or the arresting or apprehending of any Person or Persons,
by Virtue of any P^ocess or Warrant, or any other Abuse whatsoever, committed
or done in their respective Offices or Places, unto any of His Majesty's Courts
of Record within this Province, from whence such Process issued, or under whose
Power such Goal or Prison is; or to any two Justices of such Court in the Time
of Vacation; or to the Judges of the Supreme Court, or any of them, in their
respective Sessions of Oyer and Terminer or General Jail-delivery; it shall and
may be lawful for the said Court, Justices or Judges to hear and determine the
same in a summary Way, and to make such Order thereupon for redressing such
Abuse, and punishing of such Officer or Person complained of, and making
Reparation to the Party or Parties injured, as they shall think just, together
with the full Costs of such Complaint, and all Orders and Determinations which
shall be made by the said Courts, or of the said Justices or Judges
respectively, in such summary Way as herein prescribed, shall have the same
Effect, Force and Virtue, to all Intents and Purposes, as any other Orders of
the said respective Courts; and Obedience thereunto may be enforced, either by
Attachments ordered by the said respective Courts, or by Attachments to be
issued under the Seal of the said Courts, by Direction of the Justice or Judge
making such Order.

AND for the preventing Prisoners being imposed upon, by being under a
Necessity of spending their Money in Prisons where strong Liquors are sold, BE
IT ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, No Sheriff, Undersheriff or Jailer, to
keep any Tavern, etc.
That no Jailer or Keeper of any Goal, or any Sheriff, or Undersheriff having
the Care or Keeping of any Goal or Prison within the Province of Pennsylvania,
shall keep or suffer to be kept any Tavern, Publick-house or Alehouse, or
shall utter or sell to any Person or Persons under Arrest, or in Prison, any
Wine, Rum, Beer, Ale, Cider, Punch, or any other strong Liquors, other than
what shall be allowed by the Justices as aforesaid for a Day's Diet or Expenses
by such Order to be made as aforesaid, on Pain of being removed from his or
their Office or Offices of Sheriff, Undersheriff or Jailer, upon Complaint
made, to be heard and determined upon Petition in a summary Way as aforesaid,
before the Justices in the respective Courts of Common Pleas for the County to
which such Jailer, Sheriff, or Undersheriff having the keeping of any Goal,
does belong.

AND for the more effectual preventing Oppressions to His Majesty's Subjects
within this Province; BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That no
Sheriff within this Province shall continue in his Office of Sheriff, No
Sheriff to continue in his Office above 3 Years,
or occupy the said Office above Three Years; and that no Man who has been
Sheriff or Undersheriff of any County by the Space of Three Years, shall be
chosen Sheriff of that County again within Three Years next ensuing, upon Pain
of forfeiting Two Hundred Pounds by him who shall occupy his Office contrary to
the Effect and Intent of this Act.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, The Act for making
Debto^^ pay by Se^vitude, repealed
That one Act of General Assembly of this Province, entitled, An Act about
Arrests and making Debtors pay by Servitude; be, and is hereby repealed and
made void.

CHAP. CCCV. An ACT for lending the Sum of Three Hundred Pounds in Bills of
Credit, for building a Prison and Courthouse in Lancaster County, etc.
Obsolete.

CHAP. CCCVI. An ACT imposing a Duty on Persons convicted of heinous Crimes,
and to prevent poor and impotent Persons being imported into the Province of
Pennsylvania.
WHEREAS many Persons trading into this Province have, for Lucre and private
Gain, Preamb^e.
imported, sold or disposed of, and daily do import Passengers and Servants
into this Province, who, by Reason of Age, Impotency or Idleness, have become a
heavy Burden and Charge upon the Inhabitants thereof; and likewise do
frequently import diverse Persons convicted of heinous C^imes, who soon after
their coming into this Province do often commit many Felonies, Robberies,
The^ts and Burglaries, to the great Hurt of His Majesty's Subjects trading to
and inhabiting the same: BE IT THEREFORE ENACTED by the Honorable PATRICK
GORDON, Esquire Lieut. Governor of the Province of Pennsylvania, etc. by and with
the Advice and Consent of the Freemen of the said Province, in General Assembly
met, and by the Authority of the same, That all Masters of Vessels, Merchants
or others, who shall import, Importer of Convicts to pay 5 l. per Head.
land or bring into any Port or Place belonging to this Province, at any Time
after the Publication of this Act, any Person in the Condition of a Servant or
otherwise, within the Intent and Meaning of this Act, who has been convicted
of any Murder, Burglary, Rape, Sodomy, Forgery, Perjury, or any Felony, at any
Time before such Importation or coming into this Province; shall, before the
said Convicts be landed or put on Shore, pay the Sum of Five Pounds for every
such Convict so imported or otherwise brought in; one Moiety thereof to the
Governor for Support of Government, and the other Moiety to the Collector
appointed by this Act, or the Informer; and shall ^urther become bound, with
good and sufficient Security to the Treasurer of this Province for the Time
being, in the Sum of Fifty Pounds, for the Good-Behaviour of such convict
Person, for the Space of one Year next after his or her Importation or coming
into this Province.

AND WHEREAS it has been a Practice for Masters of Vessels, Merchants and
others trading into this Province, with Intent to avoid complying with the
Payment of the Duties, and giving the Security required by former Acts of
Assembly of this Province, made to prevent the Importation of Convicts, and
poor and impotent Persons, to land their Passengers, Servants and Convicts in
some of the adjacent Governments; which Passengers, Servants, impotent People
and Convicts have afterward been secretly brought into this Province;
THEREFORE, to prevent such Practices for the future, BE IT ENACTED by the
Authority aforesaid, That if any such Convict as aforesaid, or Servant or
Passenger being poor and impotent Persons, shall be imported into the River
Delaware after the Publication of this Act, and shall be found within this
Province at any Time within the Space of twelve Months next after their being
imported as aforesaid, Convicts, etc. if found in this Province within twelve
Months after their Importation, may be apprehended and examined, etc.
whether such Persons were landed within this Government or elsewhere, it shall
and may be lawful for the Collector of the Duties appointed by this Act, or his
Deputy for the time being, and for any Justice of the Peace, or principal
Magistrate or Magistrates of any City or County or Town within this Province,
to cause to be apprehended, taken up, and to examine upon Oath or Affirmation,
all such Convicts as aforesaid, or Passengers and Servants being poor and
impotent Persons, and all other Persons who may be supposed to be able to make
any Discovery of the Time and Manner of their being imported or coming into
this Province, and from whence they came last; how long they have been come
from Parts beyond the Seas; of what Country, and in what Vessel, and who was
Master or Merchant of such Vessel, and whether such Vessel at the Time of such
Person or Persons being shipped, or coming on board was bound to, or designed
for Pennsylvania; and whether such Person or Persons shipped themselves with
Intent to come into this Province; And if upon Examination it shall appear to
any two Justices of the Peace within this Province, or to the Mayor and
Recorder, or either of them, with any one of the Aldermen of the City of
Philadelphia, that the said Persons were shipped or took their Passages for
Pennsylvania; then the said Magistrates before whom such Examination is taken,
And shall be compelled immediately to comply with the Direction^ of this Act.
shall demand and compel the Persons, if Convicts, immediately to comply with
the Directions of this Act, by paying the Duties hereby imposed on them, and
giving the Security, directed in the Case of Convicts by this Act; and shall
be, and are hereby empowered and required to send for the Master and Merchant
of such Vessel, or either of them, in which the said Persons were supposed to
be imported, and to examine such Master or Merchant upon their Oath or
Affirmation, concerning the said Passengers, Servants or Convicts, and their
Importation or coming into this Province: And if it shall appear that the said
Persons so apprehended, or any other Persons being Convicts as af^^esaid, were
shipped or taken on board to be imported into Pennsylvania, and put on shore, or
permitted to go on shore by such Master or Merchant in any other Government
upon the River Delaware, or upon any Place or Island within the said River,
without making Report and complying with the Directions of this Act; then in
such Case the said Master or Merchant shall be obliged forthwith to give
Security for his Appearance at the next Court of General Quarter Sessions of
the Peace, to be held for the City or County where such Examination is taken;
and if upon Presentment, or Information, he or they shall be legally convicted
of such fraudulent Practice, he, she or they so offending, Penalty o^ Master or
Merchant convicted of acting contrary to this Act.
shall forfeit the Sum of Twenty Pounds for every Person so by him or them
brought in as aforesaid, and put, or permitted to be put on shore, and
afterward at any Time within the Space of Twelve Months next after their being
landed or put on shore, shall be found within this Province, without making
such Entry and paying the Duties, and giving the Security required by this Act;
one half to the Governor, and the other to the Collector or Informer; and shall
further pay the same Duties, and give the same Security for such Convicts as
aforesaid, as if such Persons had been imported into this Province, and Report
thereof made according to the Direction of this Act.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That upon Information
given to the Mayor and Recorder of the City of Philadelphia for the Time being,
or the Mayor, or Recorder, together with ^^e of the Aldermen of the said City,
or to any two Justices of the Peace of any County within this Province, that
any old Persons, Infants, ma^med, lunatic, or any vaga^^^d or vagrant Persons
are imported, come or are brought into this Province; the said Mayor, Recorder
and Aldermen, or any two of them as aforesaid, or any two Justices of the Peace
of the respective Counties where such Persons shall be found, shall cause such
aged Persons, In^ants, or impotent or vagrant Persons to be brought before
them; and if upon Examination, they shall judge that such Person or Persons are
likely t^ become chargeable to the City, Town, or County where they are found,
or were imported, it s^all and may be lawful for the said Ma^or, Recorder and
Aldermen, or any two Justices of the Peace as aforesaid, by Warrant or
otherwise, to send for the Master, Merchant, or other Person who imported any
such Infant, lunatic, aged, maimed, impotent or vagrant Person or Persons, as
aforesaid, as are likely to become chargeable as ^foresaid; and upon Proof made
of their being the Importers or Owners of such infant, lunatic, aged, maimed,
impotent or vagrant Persons, who shall be judged to be likely to become
chargeable as aforesaid, the said Ma^or, Recorder and Aldermen, or any two of
them as aforesaid, or any two Justices as aforesaid, shall and may compel the
said Master, Merchant, Importer of Persons likely to become chargeable, shall
give Security to indemnify the ^rovince.
or Importer of such Infant, lunatic, maimed, aged, impotent or vagrant Person
or Persons, to give sufficient Security to carry and transport such In^a^t,
lunati^, maimed, aged, impotent or vagrant Person o^ Persons, to the Place or
Places from whence such Person or Persons were imported, or otherwise to
indemni^y the Inhabitants of th^^ Province from any Charge that may come or be
brought upon them by such Infant, lunatic, maimed, aged, impotent, or vagrant
Person or Persons coming into or living within this Province.

Persons appr^hending themselves aggrieved by the Jud^ment of Justices, may
appeal to the Court of Quarter Sessions.
PROVIDED ALWAYS, That if any Person or Persons shall apprehend him or
themselves agg^ieved with any such Order or ^udgment of the Justice or Justices
of the Peace, or other Magistrates who shall make the same, the Person or
Persons so aggrieved may appeal to the next Court of General Quarter-Session^
of the Peace to be held for the City or County where such Order shall be made,
whose Judgment then shall be final; but before such Appeal be allowed of, the
Person or Persons appealing shall enter into a Recognizance, with one good
Surety at least, to pay the Costs and Charges of such Appeal, in case the said
Order shall happen to be confirmed.

AND for the better Discovery of such Convicts, and poor and impotent or idle
and vagrant Persons, who shall hereafter be importe^ into, and shall be likely
to become chargeable to the In^abitants of this Province; BE IT FURTHER ENACTED
by the Authority aforesaid, That all Ma^ters of Vessels, Merchants and others,
M^sters of Vessels, Merchants, etc to give an Account upon Oath of the Names of
all Servants P^ssenger^, and^.
who shall hereafter bring into any Port or Place belonging to this Province,
by Land or by Water, any Men or Women Passengers, or Servants, shall within the
Space of Twenty-four Hours after their Arrival into any Port or Place of this
Province, forthwith make Entry, and give, or cause to be given upon Oath or
Affirmation, to the Collector of the said Duty for the time being, a true and
just Account of all the Names of the Serva ts and Passengers so imported or
brought in; which Account the said Collector shall duly enter, and shall
forthwith give Notice thereof to the Mayor of Philadelphia for the time being,
if such Servants, Passengers, etc. are designed to be landed at Philadelphia;
or to any two or more o^ his Majesty's Justices of the Peace for the Town or
County where ^uch Servants or Passengers shall be imported; and the said Mayor
or Justices as aforesaid, are hereby empowered and injoined, immediately by
Warrant or otherwise, to call before them the said Master, Merchant, or other
Person or Persons importing such Servant or Servants, or Passengers as
aforesaid, and to examine upon Oath or Af^irmation, the said Master, Merchant,
and all other ^ersons who may be supposed to have any Knowledge of the
Character and Circumstances of such Servants or Passengers, and thereupon shall
grant unto the Master, Justices may give a Certificate, containing the Names of
such Servants or Passenge^^ as they judge fi^ to be landed.
Merchant or Owner, or other Person having the Charge or Care of any Servant or
Servants, or Passengers so imported or brought into this Province, a
Certificate containing the Names of all the Servants, or Passengers, which such
Justices shall judge fit to be landed, or disposed of as Servants, and do not
appear to them to have been formerly convicted of any of the Crimes mentioned
in this Act; or such as do not appear to them to be such Infants, lunatic,
maimed, aged, impotent or vagrant Persons, as they shall judge likely to become
chargeable to the Inhabitants of this Province; for which Examination, Permit
and Certificate, there shall be paid to the Mayor or Justices aforesaid, the
Sum of Nine Pence per Head; and to the Collector, J^stices and Collectio^^ Fees.
the Sum of Nine P^nce for every Person ^o imported; and there shall likewise
be paid to the Collector, for each Bond he shall take in Pursuance of an^ thing
required to be done by Virtue of this Act, the Sum of Two Shillings and
Sixpence, and no more.

PROVIDED NEVERTHELESS, And it is hereby further Enacted, Duty to be paid, etc
notwithstanding the Certificate granted, if it afterward appears that any ^^
the Persons imported are Convict^
That if after such Examination taken, and Certificate granted as aforesaid, it
shall be made appear, that any of the said Persons so landed or imported are
Convicts, the Master, Merchant, or other Person, who imported such Convict or
Convicts, shall be liable to pay the same Duty, and give the same Security as
if no such Examination had been taken or Certificate granted; any thing in this
Act contained to the contrary notwithstanding.

Penalty on M^ster, Merchant, etc. not complying with the Di^ections of this
Act.
AND if any Servant or Servants, or Convict, or other Person, shall be imported
or brought into and landed in any Port or Place within this Province, without
making such Entry as aforesaid in the Manner before directed, and paying the
Duty and giving the Security required by this Act, and within the Time limited
by this Act for that Purpose, and obtaining such Certificate from the Mayor or
Justices as aforesaid, every such Master of a Vessel, Merchant, and other
Person so importing, bringing in, or landing such Servants or other Persons,
shall forfeit and pay for each Servant, or other Person so imported, brought
in, or landed contrary to the Directions of this Act, the Sum of Ten Pounds;
one Half, after the Charge of Prosecuti^^ deducted, to the Governor for the
Support of Gover^^^^t; and the other Half, after such Charges deducted as
aforesaid, to the Collector, or to such Person or Persons who will sue for the
same in any Court of Record in this Province, by Bill, Plaint or Information,
wherein no Essoin, Protection or Wager of Law shall be allowed.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, Persons obl^liged to
make Entry shall apply to the Collector.
That all Persons obliged by this Act to make Entry as aforesaid, shall apply
to Charle^ Read, of Philadelphia, Merchant, who is hereby appointed the present
Collector of the said Duty hereby imposed, without any Notice or Request made
by him for their so doing; and the said Collector is hereby further empowered
to receive, collect, demand and recover from all Persons importing, landing or
bringing in any Servant or Servants, or other Persons, into any Port or Place
within this Province, all Forfeitures and Penalties herein before appointed to
be set, imposed and levied by Virtue of this Act.

Two former Acts repealed. A^^. Cap 298. 2 Geo. II.
AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That one Act of General Assembly of this Province,
entitled, An Act for imposing a Duty upon Persons convicted of heinous Crimes,
and imported into this Province, etc. and one other Act of General Assembly,
entitled, An Act laying a Duty on Foreigners and Irish Servants, etc. imported
into the said Province, be and are hereby repealed and made void.

PROVIDED ALWAYS, Duties, etc. now payable by former Acts, no^ hereby
discharged.
That nothing herein contained, shall extend or be construed to extend to
discharge any Sum of Money or other Duty payable by the aforesaid two recited
Acts of Assembly, or either of them; but that the aforesaid Acts, as to the
Recovery of any Sum or Sums of Money, Duty or Penalty, forfeited, become due,
or payable before the first Day of this Instant January, by Virtue of or by
Breach of the aforesaid Acts, or either of them, do and shall continue and
remain in full Force, until the said Sums of Money, Duty, or Forfeitures be
effectually levied, recovered a^^ received.

AND WHEREAS by a Law of this Province, For the better Regulation of Servants,
it is provided, That no Servant shall be assigned over to any Person but in
Presence of one Justice of the Peace;

BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, All S^les or Assignments of
Servants in Philad^^phia, to be before the Mayor, etc.
That all Sales or Assignments of Servants within the City of Philadelphia,
shall be made before the Mayor of the said City for the time being; or in Case
of his Neglect or Absence, then before the Recorder of the said City, and
before no other Person or Persons whatsoever; under the Penalty of Ten Pounds,
to be levied as in the said Act is directed.

AND the said Mayor and Recorder shall, Who is to keep ^ Register, etc.
and are hereby injoined, to keep a Register or Registers of the Names of such
Servants, and by whom and to whom assigned, and the Term of Years mentioned in
the Indenture, with the Date or Time of Assignment. And the said Mayor shall,
at his going out of his Mayoralty, deliver the Register or Registers aforesaid
to his Successor, to be carefully kept, to the End that all Persons concerned
may readily have Access to the same.

CHAP. CCCVII. An ACT for continuing the Encouragement for raising good Hemp
within this Province, and imposing certain Penalties on Persons manufacturing
or working-up unsound and unmerchantable Hemp into Cord^ge and Cables.
Repealed.

CHAP. CCCVIII. An ACT laying an Excise on all Wine, Rum, Brandy, and other
Spirits, retailed in this Province.
Expired.

CHAP. CCCIX. A Supplement to the Act entitled, An Act for Preventing
clandestine Marriages.
Preamble.
WHEREAS the good Intention of an Act of Assembly of this Province, entitled,
An Act for preventing clandestine Marriages, has been very much eluded, by
reason that no proper Penalty is by the said Law imposed upon the Justice of
Peace or other Persons marrying or joining in Marriage any Persons contrary to
the Intent and Meaning of the said Act; For the Remedying whereof,

BE IT ENACTED by the Honorable PATRICK GORDON, Esquire Lieutenant Governor of the
Province of Pennsylvania, etc. by and with the Advice and Consent of the
Representatives of the Freemen of the said Province in General Assembly met,
and by the Authority of the same, That no Justice of the Peace shall subscribe
his Name to the Publication of any Marriage within this Province, No Justice
shall subscribe his Name to any Publication of Marriage, unless, etc.
intended to be had between any Persons whatsoever, unless one of the Persons,
at least, live in the County where such Justice dwells, and unless such Justice
shall likewise have first produced to him a Certificate of the Consent of the
Parent or Parents, Guardian or Guardians, Master or Mistress, of the Persons
whose Names or Banns are to be so published, if either of the Parties be under
the Age of Twenty-one Years, or under the Tuition of their Parents, or be
indented Servants, if such Parent, Guardian, Master or Mistress live within
this Province, or can be consulted with; No Person to publish the Bann^ of
M^^rimony, unless, etc.
And also that no Person or Persons of what Character or Degree soever he be,
presume to publish the Banns of Matrimony or Intentions of Marriage between any
Person or Persons, in any Church, Chapel, or other Place of Worship within
this Province, unless one of the Parties at least live in the Town, County or
City, where such Publication shall be made; and unless the Person or Persons
making or causing to be made such Publication, shall have received such
Certificate of the Consent of the Parent, Guardian, Master or Mistress, as is
herein before directed, if the Parties who ought to grant such Certificate live
within this Province.

AND if any Justice of the Peace, Clergyman, Penalty on Justice, Clergyman,
etc. acting contrary to the Directions of this Act.
Minister, or other Person, shall take upon him or them to join in Marriage any
Person or Persons, or if any Justice of the Peace shall be present at and
subscribe his Name as a Witness to any Marriage within this Province, without
such Publication being first made as aforesaid, such Justice of Peace,
Clergyman, Minister, or other Person, taking upon him to sign, make, or cause
to be made, any Publication contrary to the Directions of this Act, or shall
marry or join in Marriage any Person or Persons not published, as in the
aforesaid Act of Assembly and by this Act is directed, every Justice of Peace,
Clergyman, Minister, or other Person so offending, shall, for every such
Offense, forfeit the Sum of Fifty Pounds, Fifty P^^^ds.
to be recovered in any Court of Record within this Province, by Bill, Plaint
or Information, by the Person or Persons grieved, if they will sue for the
same; wherein no Essoin, Protection or Wager of Law, nor any more than one
Imparlance shall be allowed.

PROVIDED, Marrying in Religious Societies not forbid by this Act. so ^^ Notice
be given, etc.
That nothing herein contained shall be deemed to extend to any Person who
shall be married in the Religious Society to which they belong, so as Notice be
given to the Parent or Parents, Guardian or Guardians, Masters or Mistresses,
of the Person or Persons so to be married (if such Parent, Guardian, Master or
Mistress live within this Province) at least twenty Days before such Marriage
be solemnized; nor that this Law shall extend to any Person marrying by the
Authority of any lawful License, so as such Consent or Approbation in Writing
of the Parent or Parents, Guardian or Guardians, Masters or Mistresses, Consent
of Parents, etc. to be certified in Licenses.
as by this Act is directed, be first had, and the same Consent be certified in
the Body of the said License; any thing herein or in the aforesaid Act of
Assembly contained to the contrary notwithstanding.

CHAP. CCCX. A Supplementary ACT to an Act of Assembly of this Province,
entitled, An Act against buying Land of the Natives.
Preamble.
WHEREAS diverse Laws have from time to time been enacted in this Province, for
preserving Peace, and cultivating a good Understanding with the Indian Natives
thereof: AND WHEREAS notwithstanding the Provision made by the said former Act
against purchasing Land of the said Natives, without Leave from the Proprietor,
the Peace of the Public has been and may further be endangered by the
Proceedings of some Persons, who, to elude the said Act now in Force against
such Practices, do, contrary to the Intention thereof, pretend to take Land of
the Natives on Lease or for Te^m of Years, or to bargain with the Indians for
the Herbage, or for the Timber or Trees, Mines or Waters thereof; and others
who without any Authority have settled upon and taken Possession of vacant
Lands, as well to the manifest Controvention of the Royal Grant of the Soil of
this Province from the Crown to the Proprietor and his Heirs, and the apparent
Damage of such Persons who have Right to take up Lands heretofore granted to
them within this Province, as to the laying a Foundation for Disputes,
Misunderstandings and Breaches with the said Natives and others: For the
Prevention whereof, BE IT ENACTED by the Hon. PATRICK GORDON, Esquire Lieutenant
Governor of the Province of Pennsylvania, etc. by and with the Advice and
Consent of the Representatives of the Freemen of the said Province in General
Assembly met, and by the Authority of the same, No Land^, etc to be he^eafter
purchased of the Natives.
That no Person or Persons, Bodies politic or corporate whatsoever, shall at
any time hereafter, for any Cause or Consideration, or on any Pretense
whatsoever, presume to purchase, bargain, contract for, have or take, of or
from any Indian Native or Natives, by any Manner of Gift, Grant, Bargain, or
Sale in Fee-simple, or for Life, Lives, Terms of Years, or any Estate
whatsoever, any Lands, Tenements or Hereditaments within the Limits of this
Province, or any Manner of Right, Title, Interest or Claim, in or to any such
Lands, Tenements or Hereditaments, or in or to any Herbage, Trees, Fishings,
Rivers, Waters, Mines, Minerals, Quarries, Rights, Liberties or Privileges, of
or belonging unto any such Lands, Tenements or Hereditaments, without the Order
or Direction of the Proprietary or Proprietaries of this Province, or of his or
their Proprietary Commissioners or Deputies, authorized and appointed, or to be
authorized and appointed for the Management of the Proprietary Affairs of this
Province, for and in Behalf of the Proprietor or Proprietors thereof for the
time being; and that every Gift, Grant, Bargain, Sale, All Contract^ with them
for Land^, etc. t^ be null and void.
written or verbal Contract or Agreement, and every pretended Conveyance,
Lease, Demise, and every other Assurance made, or that shall be hereafter made
with any of the said Indian Natives, for any such Lands, Tenements or
Hereditaments, Herbage, Trees, Rivers, Waters, Fishings, Mines, Minerals,
Quarries, Rights, Liberties or Privileges whatsoever, within the Limits of this
Province, without the Order and Direction of the Proprietor or his
Commissioners as aforesaid, shall be and is hereby declared and enacted to be
null, void, and of no Effect, to all Intents, Constructions and Purposes in the
Law whatsoever: And that as well the Grantee, Bargainee, Lessee, Purchaser, or
Person pretending to bargain or to have bargained or agreed with any Indian
Native as aforesaid, contrary to the true Intent and Meaning of this Act, as
all and every Person or Persons entering into and taking Possession of any Lands
within the Province of Pennsylvania, not located or surveyed by some Warrant or
Order from the Proprietary or Proprietaries, his or their Agents or
Commissioners as aforesaid, Person^ p^ssessing L^nd not taken up by War^an^* to
be proceeded against* etc.
to the Person or Persons possessing the said Lands, or to some Person or
Persons under whom they claim, and upon reasonable Notice and Request, re^u^^ng
to remove, deliver up the Possession, or to make Sati^faction for such Lands,
shall and may be proceeded against in such Manner as is prescribed by the
several Statutes of that Part of the Kingdom* of Great Britain, called England,
made against forcible Entries and Detainers; and that no Length of Possession
shall be a Plea against such Prosecution.

PROVIDED ALWAYS, That nothing herein contained shall be deemed or construed to
extend to any Person or Persons who have contracted or bargained with the
Proprietary or Proprietaries, his or their Agents or Commissione^s as
aforesaid, for the Lands in their Possession, although the Money agreed to be
paid for the said Lands be not paid according to such Bargain or Contract.

CHAP. CCCXI. An ACT for regulating Pedlars, Vendues, etc.
Preamble.
WHEREAS of late many idle and vagrant Persons are come into this Province, and
under Pr^tence of being Hawkers or Pedlar^, and carrying Goods from House to
House within this Province to sell, have greatly imposed upon many People, as
well in the Quality as in the Price of the Goods, and under Color of selling
their Wares and Merchandises, have entered into the Houses of many honest and
sober People in the Absence of the Owner or Owners of the said Houses, and
committed Felonies and other Misdemeanors, to the great Prejudice of the
Inhabitants of this Province: For remedying of which Inconveniences, and
preventing such evil Practices, and to the Intent that no Persons may be
admitted to follow the Business of Hawkers or Pedlars within this Province, b^t
Persons of known Honesty and civil Behavior, BE IT ENACTED by the Honorable
PATRICK GORDO^, Esquire Lieut. Governor of the Province of Pennsylvania, etc. by
and with the Advice and Consent of the Representatives of the Freemen of the
said Province, in General Assembly met, and by the Authority of the same, No
Person to follow the Business of Pedling, etc. until, etc.
That after the Twenty-fifth Day of March next, no Person or Persons
whatsoever, shall follow, or employ him, her or themselves, in the Business or
Employment of a Hawker, Pedlar or Petty-chapman, or in going from Town to Town,
or to other Men's Houses, and traveling with Horse or Horses, Ass or Asses,
Mule or Mules, or otherwise, within the Province of Pennsylvania (except as
herein after is excepted) or carry to sell or expose to Sal^ any Goods, Wares
or Merchandises within the Province aforesaid, until such Person or Persons
^^all have obtained a Recommendation from the Justices of the County Court
where he or she dwells, certifying their Opinion of the Honesty of the Person
recommended, and that he or she is a Liver within this Province, and intends to
travel with one, two or more Horse or Horses or other Beasts of Burden, or on
Foot, and shall thereupon have obtained a License from the Governor, and shall
have given Bond in the Prothonotary's-Office of the said County Court, in his
Majesty's Name, with one Surety at least, in any Sum not exceeding Forty
Pounds, conditioned that such Person or Persons shall be of good Behavior
during the Continuance of the said License, and shall well and duly satisfy and
pay all such Taxes and Duties as shall be legally assessed upon him, her or
them, within the said County where he, she or they shall obtain the said
Recommendation; for which License there shall be paid to the Governor the Sum
of Twenty-five Shillings, by every Person obtaining a License to travel with a
Horse, Ass, Mule, or other Beast of Burden; and the Sum of Fifteen Shillings
for every Person licensed to travel on Foot.

AND if any Person or Persons, Penalty (...) Pe^son^ not qualified, that shall
be found traveling (...) Pedlars* and^.
not being qualified as aforesaid, shall be found hawking, pedling, or
traveling from House to House to sell Goods as a Hawker, Pedlar, or
Petty-chapman, he or she so offending, if traveling with one or more Horses,
shall forfeit the Sum of Fifteen Pounds; and if traveling on Foot, shall
forfeit the Sum of Ten Pounds; one Moiety thereof to the Governor for the
Support of Government; and the other Moiety to any Person who will sue for the
same by any Action of Debt, Bill, Plaint or Information, in any Court of Record
within this Province, wherein no Essoin, Protection or Wager of Law, nor more
than one Impa^lance shall be allowed. And that every Person so trading, who
upon demand made by any Justice of the Peace, Mayor, Constable or other Officer
of the Peace of any Town, Place or County within this Province, where he or she
shall so trade, shall refuse to produce and show unto such Justice or Officer
of the Peace, his or her License for so trading, to be granted as aforesaid,
that then the Person so refusing, shall forfeit Forty Shillings, to be
recovered in Manner aforesaid; and for Non-payment thereof, shall suffer as a
common Vagrant.

PROVIDED ALWAYS, Prod^^^ (...) Manufactu^es of this Province may be ^old, a^
before this Act.
And it is hereby further Enacted, That nothing herein contained shall extend
or be construed to extend to hinder any Person or Persons from selling or
exposing to Sale any Sort of Goods or Merchandises in any public Market or
Fair within this Province, or to hinder any Persons from carrying about from
Town to Town, and from House to House, any Goods, Wares or Merchandises being
of the Growth, Product or Manufacture of this Province; but that such Person or
Persons may do therein as they lawfully might have done before the making of
this Act; any thing herein contained to the contrary notwithstanding.

AND BE IT HEREBY FURTHER ENACTED, Any Dis^u^e a^ising* (...).
That if any Dispute shall happen to arise concerning the said Goods, Wares or
Merchandises, the Person or Person so carrying about or exposing the same to
Sale in Manner aforesaid, shall be obliged to declare upon Oath or Affirmation,
before any Justice of the Peace, or other Magistrate of the County, Town or
Place where he, she or they shall carry about or offer the same to Sale,
whether such Goods, Wares or Merchandises be of the Growth, Product or
Manufacture of this Province.

AND WHEREAS sundry Persons for Lucre of Gain, and in Contempt of the Laws of
this Province, and the Ordinances and the good Rules of the City of
Philadelphia, have taken upon themselves to set up Lotteries, and also to sell
and retail Goods, Wares and Merchandises by small Parcels, by Way of Vendue, at
unseasonable Times in the public Streets of the said City of Philadelphia, in
Deceit of the Buyers, and to the great Annoyance of its Inhabitants, by reason
of the many idle and disorderly Persons assembling themselves together in the
Nightime in the open Streets, at the said Vendues or public Sales: For the
Redressing of which Abuses, and the Preservation of the Peace within the said
City; and to prevent the many Impositions which attend such Practices; BE IT
ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, Penalty on Persons presuming to make
Lotteries, etc.
That if any Person or Persons shall presume or take upon him, her or
themselves, from and after the Publication of this Act, upon any Pretense
whatsoever, privately or publicly to set up, exercise or keep any Lottery or
Lotteries within the Province of Pennsylvania, and be thereof legally convict,
he, she or they shall forfeit, for every such Offense, the Sum of One Hundred
Pounds; one Moiety thereof to the Governor, and the other Moiety to any Person
that will sue for the same.

AND BE IT HEREBY FURTHER ENACTED, How the Vendue-Maste^ is to be qualified.
That no Person or Persons whatsoever (except as herein after is excepted)
shall after the Publication of this Act, take upon him, her or themselves, to
sell or expose to Sale by Way of Vendue or Auction, any Wares, Goods or
Merchandises within the City of Philadelphia, unless such Person or Persons
shall first be recommended by the Mayor, Recorder and Aldermen of the said City
of Philadelphia (in their open Sessions) to the Governor of this Province; and
shall have given Security to the Mayor of the said City for the time being, for
the Use of the Corporation, in such Sum as shall be agreed upon by the said
Mayor, Recorded and Aldermen, provided the same do not exceed the Sum of Five
Hundred Pounds, for his or their honest and due Execution of the Office of
Vendue-Master within the City of Philadelphia, and for the due Observation of
the Ordinances of the said City touching the regulating Vendues, or public
Sales, or Auctions within the same, and shall thereupon obtain the Governor's
License or Commission, according to the Tenor of, and for the Time limited in
the said Recommendation, for executing the saidOffice of Vendue-Master. And
there shall, at all Times hereafter, be authorized and appointed in the City of
Philadelphia, a proper Person qualified for executing the said Office of
Vendue-Master pursuant to the Directions of this Act. And if any Person or
Persons shall be found selling or disposing of any Goods, Penalty on Persons
not qualified, acting as Vendue-Master.
Wares or Merchandises within the City of Philadelphia aforesaid (excepting as
herein after is excepted) by Way of Vendue or Auction, without being
recommended, and having given Security as aforesaid, such Person or Persons so
offending, and being thereof legally convict, shall, for every such Offense,
forfeit the Sum of Fifty Pounds, to the Use of the Corporation of the City of
Philadelphia: And moreover, it shall and may be lawful for the Mayor, Recorder,
or any of the Aldermen of the said City, upon his or their own View, or upon
the Testimony and Information of one credible Witness, to them, or any one of
them given, of any Persons selling any Goods, Wares or Merchandises by Way of
Vendue or Auction as aforesaid (except as in this Act is excepted) within the
said City, without such Recommendation and Bond given as aforesaid, to cause
such Person or Persons so offending to be apprehended, and may oblige him, her
or them to find Sureties for his, her or their good Behaviors and Appearance
at the next Court of Quarter Sessions of the Peace, to be held before the
Mayor, Recorder and Aldermen of the said City: And it is further declared, That
if the Party so bound over, shall, during the Continuance of his, her or their
Recogni^ances, presume to sell or expose to Sale by Way of Vendue ^s aforesaid,
any Wares and Merchandises within the said City, without being recommended and
having given Bond ^s aforesaid, such selling or exposing to Sale, shall be
deemed, and is hereby declared, to be a Breach of the Good Behavior.

PROVIDED ALWAYS, AND IT IS HEREBY FURTHER ENACTED, Officer may sell by Vendue
Goods taken in Execution, etc.
That nothing herein contained shall extend, or be construed to extend, to
hinder any Sheriff, Constable, or other Officer, to sell and dispose of by Way
of Vendue, any Goods, Wares or Merchandises taken in Execution, and liable to
be sold by Order of Law; or to hinder any Person or Persons from selling or
exposing to Sale by public Vendue, or otherwise, any Goods or Chattels of any
kind whatsoever, taken and distrained for Rent being in Arrear; or to prohibit
any lawful Executor or Executors, Administrator or Administrators, to expose to
Sale by Way of public Auction, Vendue or otherwise, any Goods or Chattels
which were of their respective Testator or Intestates; but that all and every
such Person or Persons may do therein as they might have done before the making
of this Act; any thing herein contained to the contrary notwithstanding.

CHAP. CCCXII. An ACT for the better enabling diverse Inhabitants of the
Province of Pennsylvania, to hold Lands, and to invest them with the Privileges
of natural-born Subjects of the said Province.
WHEREAS by the Encouragement given by the Honorable William Pe^n, Esquire late
Proprietary and Governor of the Province of Pennsylvania, and by the Permission
of his late Majesty King GEORGE the First, of blessed Memory, and his
Predecessors, Kings and Queens of England, etc. diverse Protestants, who were
Subjects to the Emperor of Germany, a Prince in Amity with the Crown of Great
Britain, transported themselves and Estates into the Province of Pennsylvania,
between the Years One Thousand Seven Hundred, and One Thousand Seven Hundred
and Eighteen; and since they came hither have contributed very much to the
Enlargement of the British Empire, and to the raising and improving sundry
Commodities fit for the Markets of Europe, and have always behaved themselves
religiously and peaceably, and have paid a due Regard and Obedience to the Laws
and Government of this Province. AND WHEREAS many of the said Persons, to wit,
Martin Mylin, Hans Graaf, Christian Stoneman, Jacob Funk, Francis Neiff,
Francis Neiff, jun. George Kindick, John Burkholder, John Burkholder, jun.
Abraham Burkholder, Michael Bohman, John Hess, John Frederick, Christopher
Preniman, Martin Harnist, Joseph B^^kwalter, Felix L^ndas, jun. Adam Preniman,
John Funk, Io^^ Bohman, John Tailor, Henry Neiff, Michael Mire, Henry Bare,
Peter Bumga^mer, Melcor Hufford, Melcor Erishman, John Brubaker, Jacob Nisly,
Hans Snevely, Jacob Goot, John Woolslegle, Jacob Mire, Christopher Sowers,
Joseph Stoneman, Daniel Ashleman, Christian Peelman, John Henry Neiff, John
Henry Neiff, jun. Abraham Hare, John Ferie, Jacob Biere, Peter Yordea, Peter
Leamon, Hans Jacob Snevely, Isaac Co^fman, Andrew Coffman, Woolrick Rodte,
Henry Funk, Roody Mire, John Mylin, Jacob Bheme, John Coffman, Michael Donedor,
Charles Christopher, Andrew Shults, John Howser, Christian Preniman, Jacob
Miller black, Henry Carpenter, Emanuel Carpenter, Gabriel Carpenter, Daniel
Herman, Christian Herman, Philip Fiere, Mathias Slareman, big John Shank, Jacob
Churts, Jacob Snevely, jun. John Woolrick Houver, John Croyder, John Leeghte,
John Stampher, Martin Graaf, Peter Smith, Peter New^omat, Jacob Bare, jun. John
Henry Bare, Jacob Weaver, Henry Weaver, John Weaver, David Longanickar, George
Weaver, Abraham Mire, Woolri^k Houser, John Mire, Henry Musselman, Michael
Shank, Jacob Miller, Jacob Miller, jun. Martin Miller, Peter Aybe, Hans Goot,
Christian Staner, John Jacob Light, Adam Brand, Christopher Francis^us, Caspar
Loughman, Frederick Stay, John Line, John Shwope, Bastian Royer, Jonas Lerow,
Simeon King, John Aybe, and Everard Ream, all of Lancaster County in the said
Province; and John Naglee, Bernard Resor, John Wistor, John Frederick Ax, John
Philip Bohm, Anthony Yerkhas, and Herman Yerkhas, of the County of
Philadelphia, in the same Province, in Demonstration of their Affection and
Zeal for his present Majesty's Person and Government, qualified themselves by
taking the Qualification and subscribing the Declaration directed to be taken
and subscribed by the several Acts of Parliament, made for the Security of his
Majesty's Person and Government, and for preventing the Dangers which may
happen by Popish Recusants, etc. and thereupon, have humbly signified to the
Governor and the Representatives of the Freemen of this Province, in General
Assembly met, that they have purchased and do hold Lands of the Proprietary,
and others His Majesty's Subjects within this Province, and have likewise
represented their great Desire of being made Partakers of those Privileges
which the natural-born Subjects of Great Britain do enjoy within this Province;
and it being just and reasonable that those Persons who have bona fide
purchased Lands, and who have given such Testimony of their Affection and
Obedience to the Crown of Great Britain, should as well be secured in the
Enjoyment of their Estates, as encouraged in their laudable Affection to and
Zeal for the English Constitution; BE IT ENACTED by the Honorable PATRICK
GORDON, Esquire Lieutenant Governor of the Province of Pennsylvania, etc. by and
with the Advice and Consent of the Freemen of the said Province in General
Assembly met, and by the Authority of the ^ame, That Martin Mylin, Hans Graa^f,
Christian Stoneman, Jacob Funk, Francis Neiff, Francis Neiff, jun. George
Kindick, John Burkholder, John Burkholder, jun. Abraham Burkholder, Michael
Bohman, John Hess, John Frederick, Christopher Preniman, Martin Harnist, Joseph
Buckwalter, Felix Landas, jun. Adam Preniman, John Funk, John Bohman, John
Tailor, Henry Neiff, Michael Mire, Henry Bare, Peter Bumgarner, Melcor Hufford,
Melcor Erishman, John Brubaker, Jacob Nisly, Hans Snevely, Jacob Goot, John
Woolsleg^e, Jacob Mire, Christopher Sowers, Joseph Stoneman, Daniel As^leman,
Christian Peelman, John Henry Neiff, John Henry Neiff, jun. Abraham Hare, John
Ferie, Jacob Biere, Peter Yorde^, Peter Leamon, Hans Jacob Snevely, Isaac
Coffman, Andrew Coffman, Woolrick Ro^te, Henry Funk, Roody Mire, John Mylin,
Jacob Bheme, John Coffman, Michael Donedor, Charles Christopher, Andrew Shults,
John Howser, Christian Preniman, Jacob Miller black, Henry Carpenter, Emanuel
Carpenter, Gabriel Carpenter, Daniel Herman, Christian Herman, Philip Fiere,
Mathias Slareman, big John Shank, Jacob Churts, Jacob Snevely, jun. John
Woolrick Houver, John Croyder, John Leeghte, John Stampher, Martin Graaf, Peter
Smith, Peter Newcomat, Jacob Bare, jun. John Henry Bare, Jacob Weaver, Henry
Weaver, John Weaver, David Longanickar, George Weaver, Abraham Mire, Woolrick
Houser, John Mire, Henry Musselman, Michael Shank, Jacob Miller, Jacob Miller,
jun. Martin Miller, Peter Aybe, Hans Goot, Christian Staner, John Jacob Light,
Adam Brand, Christopher Franciscus, Caspar Loughman, Frederick Stay, John Line,
John Shwope, Bastian Royer, Jonas Lerow, Simeon King, John Aybe, Everard Ream,
John Naglee, Bernard Resor, John Wistor, John Frederick Ax, John Philip Bohm,
Anthony Yerkhas and Herman Yerkhas, be, and shall be to all Intents and
Purposes, deemed, taken and esteemed His Majesty's natural-born Subjects of
this Province of Pennsylvania, as if they and each of them had been born within
the said Province; and shall and may, and every of them shall and may, within
this Province, take, receive, enjoy, and be entitled to all Rights, Privileges
and Advantages of natural-born Subjects, as fully to all Intents, Constructions
and Purposes whatsoever, as any of His Majesty's natural-born Subjects of this
Province can, do, or ought to enjoy, by Virtue of their being His Majesty's
natural-born Subjects of His Majesty's said Province of Pennsylvania.

Two ACTS passed in the Third Year of His Majesty's Reign, One Thousand Seven
Hundred and Twenty-nine, viz.
CHAP. CCCXIII. An ACT to prevent the Erecting of Wears, Vide S Geo. II. Chap.
332.
Damms, etc. within the River Skuylkill.
Repealed.

CHAP. CCCXIV. An ACT to remove the Trustees of the General Loan-Office of
Pennsylvania, and appointing others to execute the said Trust.
--

ANNO REGNI GEORGII II. REGIS QUARTO.
At a GENERAL ASSEMBLY of the Province of Pennsylvania, begun and holden at
Philadelphia, the Fourteenth Day of October, Anno Domini One Thousand Seven
Hundred and Thirty, in the Fourth Year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord
GEORGE II. by the Grace of GOD, of Great Britain, France and Ireland, KING,
Defender of the Faith, etc. And from thence continued by Adjournment to the
Fourth of January, 1730.
CHAP. CCCXV. An ACT for Re-emitting and continuing the Currency of such Bills
of Credit of this Province as by former Acts are directed to be sunk and
destroyed.
WHEREAS by two several Acts of General Assembly of this Province, P^eamble.
made in the Ninth and Tenth Years of the Reign of our late Sovereign King
GEORGE the First, Bills of Credit to the Value of Forty-five Thousand Pounds
were struck and emitted, ^o be let out upon Loan on Land-Security; and again to
be paid in annually, and to be sunk and destroyed, according to the Directions
of the said Acts: AND WHEREAS the Sinking and Destroying of the said Bills of
Credit, pursuant to the Directions of the said several Acts, did (...) reduce
the Quantity of the Currency of this Province; and thereupon the
Representatives of the said Pro^^^^e, in the second Year of the Reign of our
present Sovereign King GEORGE the Second, taking the same into their
^onsideration, and being sensible of the great Difficulties the Merchants and
People of Pennsylvania were reduced to (...) carrying on the Trade and Commerce
of the Province for Want of a sufficient Currency, Bills of Credit to the Value
of Thirty Thousand Pounds were by another Act of General Assembly of this
Province, struck and emitted to be let out upon Loan on Land-Security, as in
the said last ^entioned Act is directed: AND WHEREAS by the Accounts of the
General Loan-Office of this Province, it ^ppears that the Bills of Credit
emitted by Virtue of the said two first Acts of Assembly, and of one other Act
of Assembly for the Re-emission of the said Bills of Credit, are now near
expiring; and should the annual Quotas yet (...) due upon the said several Acts
be sunk and destroyed, as by the said Acts is directed, it may again involve
(...) Merchants, as well as Farmers and Tradesmen of this Province in new
Difficulties, and lay them under a Necessity of making new Acts of Assembly for
emitting more Bills of Credit to supply the Wants of the People: For preventing
which Inconveniences, BE IT ENACTED by the Honorable PATRICK GORDON, Esquire
Lieut. Governor of the Province of Pennsylvania, etc. by and with the Advice
and Consent of the Representatives of the Freemen of the said Province in
General Assembly met, and by the Authority of the same, That such yearly Quotas
or Payments (Parcel of the principal Sums emitted in Bills of Credit of this
Province pursuant to the Direction of the said Acts respectively) and such
other principal Sums, which by Virtue thereof, or of any Mortgage-Deed or
Assurance, by any of the beforementioned Acts directed to be taken, and which
are or shall be paid, recovered or received from time to time before the
Fifteenth Day of October, which will be in the Year of our Lord One Thousand
Seven Hundred and Thirty-seven, shall not be sunk or destroyed, nor shall any
Part or Parcel of any such Quotas or principal Sums in Bills of Credit,
payable, within the Space aforesaid, unto the Trustees nominated or to be
nominated pursuant to the Directions of those Acts, or any other Act or Acts of
Assembly of this Province, be sunk or destroyed, otherwise or at any other Time
than is by this Act directed; nor shall the Trustees, or any of them, be
culpable, or suffer any Penalty or Forfeiture for not sinking the said Bills of
Credit, as directed by the aforesaid Acts, any thing in the said Acts, or any
of them, contained to the contrary notwithstanding; but the same yearly Quotas
and principal Sum^ in Bills of Credit so to be paid in unto and received by the
said Trustees, or any of them, within the Time before limited, whether payable
by the Provincial or any of the County-Treasurers, or by any Mortgager, Mayor
or Treasurer of Philadelphia, or by any Mortgager or Person whatsoever, and
every Part and Parcel of the same Sums shall from time to time be re-emitted by
the Trustees of the General Loan-Office of the Province of Pennsylvania for the
time being, upon Loans, as herein after mentioned and appointed: And that all
the yearly Quotas or Parcels of the principal Sums arising upon those
Re-emissions, which shall be paid into the General Loan-Office of the Province
of Pennsylvania on or before the aforesaid Fifteenth Day of October, in the
Year of our Lord One Thousand Seven Hundred and Thirty-seven, shall, by the
Trustees thereof for the time being, be re-emitted again, on Securities as
aforesaid, and so from time to time until all principal Moneys, anyways
accruing, that shall be paid unto them on or before the said Fifteenth Day of
October, 1737, shall be wholly re-emitted.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, In what Sums the Money
s^^ll be re-emitted.
That the Trustees of the General Loan-Office aforesaid, shall lend out the
Value of all the Bills of Credit, that they shall so receive to be re-emitted
as before in this present Act directed, in Sums not exceeding One Hundred
Pounds, nor less than Twelve Pounds Ten Shillings to any one Person, for and
during all the Rest and Residue of the sixteen Years in the said recited Thirty
Thousand Pounds Act limited, commencing from the Times of the same respective
Loans to be made by this present Act upon Securities of Messuages, Lands,
Tenements, Rents and Hereditaments in this Province, of which the respective
Mortgagers stand seized in Fee-simple, clear of Encumbrances (the Proprietor's
Quit-Rents, and other Rents discovered to the said Trustees, issuing out of the
same Securities, excepted) of which Title and Clearness the said Trustees are
to inform themselves the best they can, and to observe the same Directions in
the Valuation thereof, and in proportioning such Valuation to the Sums
requested to be lent, as the same Thirty Thousand Pound Act before recited
directs, upon Loans thereby made: Whereupon the said Trustees, in Pursuance
of the Trust hereby committed to them, shall, in the Name and Style of the
Trustees of the General Loan-Office of the Province of Pennsylvania, and not
otherways, take and receive Deeds of Mortgage in Fee-simple of such Messuages,
Lands, Tenements, Rents or Hereditaments as aforesaid, with Bonds and Warrants
of Attorney, as by the said Thirty Thousand Pound Act is directed, for securing
the Re-payments of the Sums they lend to be made yearly, and every Year of the
Remainder of the sixteen Years aforesaid, by even and equal annual Payments,
and so proportionably for the Part or Parts of a Year, as Occasion may happen,
together with the whole Interest at the Rate appointed by the said Thirty
Thousand Pound Act; which Deeds shall be executed and acknowledged, and the
Oath or Affirmation of the Mortgagor to be thereon indorsed, as by the
aforesaid Act is directed: Which Deeds so executed, etc. shall transfer the
Possession, and be of the same Force and Effect, and the Words therein shall
have the same Operation in Law as the Deeds made or directed to be made and
taken in Pursuance of the aforesaid Thirty Thousand Pound Act, to all Intents
and Purposes whatsoever; and in Default of Payment of any of the Sums contained
in the (...) Mortgage-Deeds, to sue for and recover the same in the (...)
Manner as is directed by the said last mentioned Act, as fully and effectually
as if here again particularly repeated. And for the better Preservation of the
said Mortgage-Deed^ being executed, as in the said Thirty Thousand Pound Act is
appointed, the said Deeds shall be entered at large in Books of Royal or other
large Paper, and shall be of the same Force and Virtue as by the aforesaid Act
of Assembly is provided and ordained.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, Payments to be indorsed,
etc.
That all and every the Payments made, whether principal Sums or Quotas, upon
any Mortgage-Deed by this Act directed to be taken, shall be by the said
Trustees indorsed and entered in the same Manner, and be of the same Force and
Effect for Discharging a Part or the Whole of any of the said Mortgage-Deeds,
(...) by the aforesaid Thirty Thousand Pound Act is directed and appointed, and
that the Trustees shall receive the same Sums for Indorsements on the
Mortgages, and other Entries and Discharges, as by the aforesaid Act of
Assembly is limited and appointed, and no more.

PROVIDED ALWAYS, That until some Default shall be made in Payment by the
respective Mortgagers, it shall be lawful for them and their Heirs to hold and
enjoy the mortgaged Premises, with the Appurtenances; the Mortgage-Deeds, or
any thing therein contained to the contrary notwithstanding.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That the said Trustees
shall be styled as heretofore, The Trustees of the General Loan-Office of the
Province of Pennsylvania, and shall have Succession, and the same Capacities
and Powers for putting this present and the beforementioned Acts in Execution,
to all Intents and Purposes, as in the said Thirty Thousand Pound Act is
contained and settled for putting the same in Execution; subject nevertheless,
to all and singular the Provisoes, (...), Limitations and Restrictions in and
by this present Act provided and ordained.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That every Article,
Clause and Sentence in the said former Acts respectively (except such Clauses
and Parts thereof as are hereby altered, supplied, or concerning which other
Provision is hereby made) shall be and are hereby declared to be and continue
of full Force and Virtue in the Law as if this present Act had not been made.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That before any of the
said Trustees for the time being shall enter upon the Execution of the Trust by
this Act required, they shall each of them enter into a Bond to the
Provincial-Treasurer of this Province for the time being, in the Penalty of 500
l. conditioned for the due Observance of all Things required of him in
Performance of the Trust reposed in him by this present Act; and shall each of
them also make Oath or Affirmation before any Justice of the Peace of the City
or County of Philadelphia, who is hereby empowered and required to administer
the same, That to the best of his Skill and Knowledge, he will faithfully,
impartially, and truly demean himself in the Discharge of the Trust committed
to him by this present Act; as also ^n the Discharge of the remaining Part of
the Trust committed to him by the said before-recited Acts; so as none may be
prejudiced by his Consent, Privity or Procurement. And that the said Trustees,
assuming upon themselves the Execution of the Trust by this present Act
required of them, shall be allowed for their Service and Trouble therein, at
and after the Rate of Ten Pounds per Annum each, Trustees Reward.
added to their Salaries hereafter accruing by the said former Acts; payable to
each of them in Bills of Credit of this Province, for and during the Term of
Seven Years from the Commencement of this Act. And that the said Trustees, or
any two of them, shall duly attend at the said Loan-Office the first Tuesday in
the Months of March, May, July, September, November and January, Time of
Trustees Attendance.
yearly, for receiving the Sums to be paid in, pursuant to this and the said
former Acts respectively; and for emitting the Sums to be lent, by the
Direction of this present Act, until all the Quotas paid in, pursuant to this
and the said former Acts, be re-emitted; and afterward at such Times as the
Trust and Service of the Public may require them, during the Continuance of
the said recited Thirty Thousand Pound Act.

AND WHEREAS most of the Bills of Credit emitted by the several Acts of
Assembly of this Province, before the Tenth Day of April, in the Year of our
Lord, One Thousand Seven Hundred and Twenty-eight, are so torn (...) ^efaced,
that the Currency thereof is almost stopped, and the said Bills of Credit become
useless to the People; For remedying of which Inconveniency, and yet that no
Addition may or shall be made by this Act to the Sum of the Bills of Credit now
current in this Province: BE IT ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, New Bills
to be m^de.
That indented Bills of Credit to the Value of Forty Thousand Pounds current
Money of America, according to an Act of Parliament made in the Sixth Year of
the Reign of the late Queen Anne, with Counterparts of the same Bills, shall be
prepared and printed before the Tenth Day of April next ensuing, on good Paper,
under the Care and Direction of the Trustees of the General Loan-Office, but at
the Charge of the Province, to be paid by the said Trustees. And that the said
Bills shall severally contain therein the Sums hereafter respectively
mentioned, and no other; that is to say, Four Thousand of the same Bills the
Sum of One Shilling in each of them; Four Thousand of the same Bills the Sum of
One Shilling and Sixpence in each of them; Five Thousand of the same Bills the
Su^^ of Two Shillings in each of them; Eight Thousand of the same Bills the Sum
of Two Shillings and Sixpence in each of them; Twelve Thousand of the same
Bills the Sum of Five Shillings in each of them; Ten Thousand of the same Bills
the Sum of Ten Shillings in each of them; Eight Thousand of the same Bills the
Sum of Fiftee^ Shillings in each of them; and Twenty-four Thousand of the same
Bills the Sum of Twenty Shillings in each of them: And the said original Bills,
shall have the same Arms impressed thereon, and be of the same Tenor as
original Bills of the Denominations respectively are directed and appointed to
be of by the said recited Act for emitting Thirty Thousand Pounds in Bills of
Credit, save only the Difference in the Date and the Form, and the Names of the
Signers thereunto subscribed; And that the said Trustees, or one of them, or
some other Person under their Direction, and for whom they shall be
accountable, shall duly attend at the Place where the said Office is kept, on
the first Wednesday in every Month, New Bills to be exchanged for the old, etc.
then and there to deliver out new Bills of One Thousand Pounds Value hereby
directed to be struck, to such Persons as demand them in Exchange and in Lieu
of such torn ragged and other Bills, directed to be exchanged by this Act, as
the said Trustees, or any of them, shall judge to be genuine Bills of this
Province, and of equal Value with those they so give in Exchange, until the
whole Forty Thousand Pounds in this Act directed to be struck to be exchanged
for such Bills of Credit, be wholly exchanged; Which said torn and other Bills,
being kept by the said Trustees, shall by them be produced for their Vouchers,
to discharge themselves of the Forty Thousand Pounds Value aforesaid, before
any Committee of Assembly to be appointed Auditors of the said Trustees
Accounts, who shall thereupon cause the said Bills to be sunk and destroyed;
and that the Sum of Twelve Pounds Ten Shillings shall be paid to the Trustee
having the Custody of the said Bills, for every Ten Thousand Pounds Value of
the said Bills of Credit which he shall ^o exchange; Cl^rk to m^ke ours L^st,
etc.
And that the Clerk shall once a Year make out a List of the Securities by this
Act directed to be taken, containing the Persons Names to whom the Sums are
lent, and the Times when; and the same Lists shall submit and deliver to the
Assembly of this Province for the Time being, from time to time, until all the
Sums hereby directed to be emitted, be wholly comprehended and delivered; and
shall be under the same Restraints and Qualifications, and shall receive the
same Fees and Rewards for his Services, as by the aforesaid Thirty Thousand
Pound Act is provided and allowed, and no other.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, Commi^ee of Ass^mb^y to
call Trustees to Account once a Year, etc.
That any Committee of Assembly of this Province, being appointed Auditors of
Accounts of the said Trustees, the same Auditors for the Time being shall once
in every Year, or o^tner, call the said Trustees to Account, for all the Moneys
in Bills of Credit they shall receive, recover, and pay, exchange or emit, in
Pursuance of this Act; and all the Interest to be received upon Securities
hereby directed to be taken being accounted for, and the Salaries and Charges,
allowed by this Act, being deducted, they the said Trustees shall dispose of
the said Interest Money as the Assemblies of this Province shall from time to
time order and direct. And that all and singular the Bills which shall be made
and issued in Pursuance of this present Act, in exchange for torn or ragged
Bills, or for any other Bills of Credit emitted before the said tenth Day of
April, shall in all respects have the same Currency, and be of the same Effect
in Law and Equity with Regard to Payments and Tenders, or bringing the same
into Court for Performance of any Contract or Bargain, or Promise whatsoever,
and to all other Intents and Purposes as any other Bills of Credit emitted by
Virtue of the said Thirty Thousand Pound Act may, can, or ought to have; Old
Bills made before 1728 not to be current after March 1731.
and that none of the Bills of Credit emitted by Virtue of any Act or Acts of
Assembly of this Province, before the said Tenth Day of April, in the Year of
our Lord One Thousand Seven Hundred and Twenty-eight, shall be current after
the First Day of March, which will be in the Year of our Lord One Thousand
Seven Hundred and Thirty-one.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Person or
Persons shall presume to forge or counterfeit any of the said Bills of Credit,
issued to be exchanged for torn Bills in pursuance of this Act, or shall be
aiding or assisting therein, or shall enlarge the Value or Sum expressed in any
of the said Bills, or shall utter, or cause to be uttered or offered in Payment
any such Bill or Bills, knowing the same to be f^^ged, counterfeited, or the
Value or Sum therein altered, and being thereof legally convict, such Person or
Persons so offending, Penalty on Counterfeiters.
shall suffer the same Pains and Penalties, and be prosecuted in the same
Manner, as by the aforesaid Thirty Thousand Pound Act is directed.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That each of the said
new Bills to be made by Virtue of this Act, shall be signed and numbered by the
Persons hereby appointed Signers of the same Bills; viz. Job Goodson, Signers
Names.
John Parry, Joseph Kirkbride and Thomas Griffitts: And if any of the said
Signers shall happen to die, or be rendered incapable of doing his Duty required
by this Act, the Assembly for the Time being shall appoint other Persons to
supply such Deficiencies from time to time, until all the Bills to the Value of
Forty Thousand Pounds shall be signed, and together with their Counterparts
numbered and delivered as this Act directs. But before any of the Persons
before-named, or hereafter to be appointed Signers of Bills of Credit by Virtue
of this Act, presume to act therein, they shall take an Oath or Affirmation,
before any one Justice of the Peace of the City or County of Philadelphia, who
is hereby empowered and required to administer the same, Signers Qualification.
charging them jointly and severally, that they will well and truly sign and
number the said original Bills of Credit, and number their Counterparts, that
shall come to their Hands for that purpose, by the Direction of this Act; and
the same so signed and numbered will deliver, or cause to be delivered to the
Trustees of the General Loan-Office of this Province, pursuant to the
Directions of the same Act.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, Method of delivering the
Bills to be signed, etc,
That the said Trustees within Ten Days after the said new Bills and
Counterparts are prepared and deposited with them, as by this Act is directed,
shall deliver out at the Place where they keep the said Loan-Office, the Value
of One Thousand Pounds out of the said Forty Thousand Pounds, to the Signers
hereby appointed, who having signed and numbered the said original Bill^ so
delivered to them, and truly numbered the Counterparts thereof, shall
immediately re-deliver them to the said Trustees, who shall thereupon give
their Receipts for the same; And after the said Bills to the Value of One
Thousand Pounds aforesaid are exchanged by the said Trustees as this Act
directs, then the Trustees of the said Loan-Office for the time being* shall
within Ten Days next after deliver out at their said Office to the Sig^^rs of
Bills for the time being, the further Value of On^ ^housand ^ounds; who having
signed and numbered the said original Bills to delivered to them, and numbered
the Counterpa^ts thereof, shall immediately re-deliver them to the Trustees,
who shall thereupon give their Receip^^ as ab^ves^^d, and so from time to time
'till the whole Value of the said Forty Thousand Pounds, by delivering*
signing, numbering, and re-delivering One Thousand Pounds Value at a Time,
shall be exchanged as this Act directs; and the said Counterparts, so numbered,
Counterparts to be p^^served.
and re-delivered as aforesaid, shall be kept by the said Trustees for Trying
the Truth of their Originals when there shall be Occasion.

AND the said Signers shall cause to be kept a true Account of all the Bills
they so respectively sign and deliver as aforesaid; Signers Reward.
and for their Care and Trouble required of them by this Act, the Signers of
each Thousand Bills shall receive Fifteen Shillings each in Six Days after
their Delivery thereof, with their Counterparts, as above directed, to be paid
by the Trustees for the time being, unto each Signer, his Executors,
Administrators or Assigns, out of the Interest-Money in their Hands.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That after all the Sums
and Bills of Credit to be received by the Trustees of the General Loan-Office
aforesaid, are by them accounted for, and sunk pursuant to the Direction of
this Act; the same Trustees for the time being, their Heirs, Executors and
Administrators, and every of them, shall thenceforward stand and forever be
clearly discharged and acquitted of and from all Manner of Obligations,
Securities, Actions, Causes of Actions, and of and from all further and other
Accounts and Demands whatsoever to be made or rendered by them of or for any
Trust unto them committed, or any Thing by them done in Pursuance of this Act.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, John Wright, Esquire
appointed a Trustee.
That John Wright of Lancaster County, Gentlemen, shall be, and is hereby
appointed one of the Trustees of the General Loan-Office of the Province of
Pennsylvania, for the issuing out and receiving in again, the Bills of Credit
lent out upon Loan by Virtue of this Act, and taking Securities for the same,
and to render an Account of his Management in his said Trust, at the same Time,
and in the same Manner, with the other Trustees of the General Loan-Office of
this Province; and before he enter upon the Execution of his Trust, shall give
Security to the Provincial Treasurer in the Sum of One Thousand Pounds, for the
due Performance of his Trust; and shall take an Affirmation before any Justice
of the Peace of the County of Philadelphia, His Qualification.
that he will according to the best of his Skill and Knowledge, faithfully,
impartially and truly demean himself in the Discharge of the Trust committed to
him by an Act of General Assembly of this Province, Entitled, An Act for
Re-emitting and Continuing the Currency of such Bills of Credit of this
Province, as by former Acts are directed to be sunk and destroyed; according to
the Purport and Tenor of the said Act, so as none may be prejudiced by his
Consent, Privity or Procurement. And the said John Wright shall attend at the
General Loan-Office in Philadelphia, At what times he shall attend.
at least Three Times in the Year, to wit, the first Tuesdays in March, July
and November, and shall have allowed to him the Sum of Fifty Pounds per Annum
for his Service and Trouble in the Execution of his said Trust. AND WHEREAS it
is represented by the Commissioners and Assessors of the County of Lancaster,
that they have occasion for a Sum of Three Hundred Pounds, over and above the
Sum first lent to the said County, to finish the Prison and Courthouse of the
said County,

BE IT ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That the Sum of Three Hundred Pounds
in Bill of Credit of this Province be delivered to the Treasurer of Lancaster
County, 300 l. to be lent to Lancaster.
he giving his Receipt for the same to the Trustees of the General Loan-Office
aforesaid, which said Treasurer shall pay the same to the Order of the Trustees
appointed to build the said Prison and Courthouse, who shall annually lay the
Account of their Payments and Disbursements before the Commissioners and
Assessors for the same County, which said Bills of Credit shall be sunk by
Taxes to be laid on the County of Lancaster, in the same Manner that County
Levies are usually raised and levied, until all the Bills of Credit, so as
aforesaid, received on the Account and for the Use of the said County, be sun k
in the Manner prescribed for sinking Bills of Credit by this, and one other Act
of Assembly of this Province, made in the Second Year of his Majesty's Reign,
for emitting and making Current Thirty Thousand Pounds.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, When the Payments are to
be made, and^.
That upon any Emission of Bills of Credit to be made by Virtue of this Act,
the Trustees are hereby directed and empowered, so to devise the
Mortgage-Deeds, that the annual Quotas, or Payments of the Money thereby
secured, be made payable on the Fifteenth Day of October annually; and the
Trustees are hereby required, in settling their Accounts with the Auditors or
Committees of the Assembly of this Province, to render an Account as well of
the Days and Times of their Receipts, as of the Days and Times when the same
Sums are emitted again.

CHAP. CCCXVI. An ACT for the enabling Religious Societies of Protestants
within this Province, to purchase Lands for Burying-Grounds, Churches, Houses
for Worship, Schools, etc.
WHEREAS sundry Religious Societies of People within this Province, professing
the Protestant Religion, have at their own respective Costs and Charges
purchased small Pieces of Land within the Province of Pennsylvania, and (...)
erected Churches, and other Houses of Religious (...), School-Houses and
Almshouses, and enclosed part of the same Lands for Burying-Grounds: AND
WHEREAS the said Lands were purchased, and paid for by the said resp^ctive
Societies, in the Name or Names of Persons at that Time being of or professing
themselves to be of the same Religious Persuasion with the Societies who made
Use of of the Names of the said Persons, as Trustees for and in Behalf of the
saidSocieties:

AND WHEREAS some of the said Trustees or their Heirs having afterward changed
their Opinions, and joined themselves to other Religious Societies of a
different Persuasion from the People by whom the said Persons were at first
entrusted, and upon Pretext of their having the Fee-simple of the Lands so
purchased in their Names, vested in them, have contrary to the true Intent and
Meaning of the first G^ant or Gift, attempted (by granting away the said Lands,
Houses of Religious Worship and Burying-Grounds) to deprive the Society of
People in Possession of the same, of the Right and Use of the said Houses of
Worship, and Burying Grounds, to the great Disquiet and Uneasiness of many of
the good People of this Province; and others being entrusted in the like Manner
may herea^ter do the same. For Remedy whereof, and for the better securing the
several Religious Societies in the q^iet and peaceable Possession of their
Churches, Houses of Worship, School Houses, and Almshouses, and
Burying-Grounds within this Province,

BE IT ENACTED by the Honorable Patrick Gordon, Esquire Lieutenant Governor of the
Province of Pennsylvania, and of the Counties of New Castle, Kent, and Sussex
on Delaware, by and with the Advice and Consent of the Representatives of the
Freemen of the said Province in General Assembly met; and by the Authority of
the same; That all Sales, Gifts or Grants made of any Lands or Tenements within
the Province of Pennsylvania, to any Person or Persons in Trust, for Scites of
Churches, Houses of Religious Worship, Schools, Almshouses, and for
Burying-Grounds, or for any of them, shall be and are hereby ratified and
confirmed to the Person or Persons to whom the same were sold, given, or
granted, their Heirs and Assigns, in Trust nevertheless, and for the Use of the
respective Religious Societies, for whose Use the same were at first sold,
given, granted or purchased, according to the ^rue Intent and Meaning of such
Gifts or Grants: And that every Sale, Gift, Grant or D^^ise of any such Trustee
or Trustees, or any Person or Per^^^ in whose Name or Names the said Lands for
erecting Churches, Houses of religious Worship, Schools, Almshouses or
Burying-Grounds, within this Province, were purchased, taken or accepted, or
the Heirs or Assigns of such Trustees, shall be and are hereby declared to be
for the sole Use, Benefit and Behoof of the said respective Societies who have
been in the peaceable Possession of the same for the Space of Twenty-one Years,
next before the T^nth Day of June, in the Year of our Lord One Thousand Seven
Hundred and Thirty, or for whose Use the same were at first given, granted or
devised, and no other.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That it shall and may be
lawful to and for any religious Society of Protestants within this Province, to
purchase, take and receive, by Gift, Grant, or otherwise, for Burying-Grounds,
erecting Churches, Houses of religious Worship, Schools and Almshouses, for
any Estate whatsoever, and to hold the same for the Uses aforesaid of the Lord
of the Fee by the accustomed Rents.

PROVIDED ALWAYS, AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That
nothing in this Act contained, shall be deemed, taken, or con^trued to enable
any of the said Religious Societies of People, or any Person or Persons
whatsoever, in Trust for them, or to their Use, to purchase, take, or receive,
any Lands or Tenements, by Gift, Grant, or otherwise, for or toward the
Maintenance, or Support of the said Churches, Houses of Worship, Schools or
Almshouses, or the People belonging to the same, or for any other Use or
Purpose, save for the Uses in this Act beforementioned.

PROVIDED ALSO, That this Act, nor any Thing therein contained shall be deemed
or construed to impeach the just Right or Title, which any Person or Persons
may have to any of the Lands or Tenements herein beforementioned, so that they
prosecute such their Right or Claim within the Space of Three Years next after
the Publication of this Act.

CHAP. CCCXVII. An ACT for the better Prevention of Accidents that may happen
by Fire in the City of Philadelphia, by Bake-Houses and Coopers-Shops.
FOR the further securing the Inhabitants of the City of Philadelphia, from
(...) that may happen by Fire, BE IT ENACTED by the Honorable PATRICK GORDON,
Esquire Lieutenant Governor of the Province of Pennsylvania, etc. by and with the
Advice and Consent of the Representatives of the Freemen of the said Province
in General Assembly met, and by the Authority of the same; That from and after
the Space of Sixte^ Months next ensuing the Publication of this Act, no Person
whatsoever within the said City, by himself, his Agents, Journeymen, or
Servants, shall occupy the Trade of a Cooper or Baker, but in such Shops, or
Places, as are built in the Manner herein respectively directed and appointed,
that is to say; That no Person after the Time aforesaid, shall occupy the Trade
of a Cooper, within the said City, How Coopers S^ops must be built.
but in a Shop or Place built of Brick or Stone, with a large Chimney in the
same, the Cieling thereof plaistered, no Stairs nor Passage up the Lost within
such Shop, and the Floor thereof to be Earth, or laid with good Two-Inch Oak
Plank. How Bake-Houses must be built.
And that no Person after the time aforesaid, within the said City, shall
occupy the Trade of a Biscuit, or Soft-bread-Baker, but in a Bake-House built
of Brick or Stone, and arched over with Brick, if the Place will admit thereof,
or otherwise to be well cieled with Plaistering; the Floor of the said
Bake-House paved with Brick or Stone; the Crown of the Oven to be secured by
carrying up the Foundation-Walls square, and filling the same with Gravel or
Sand, at least Six Inches higher than the Top of the Oven; and the Chimney to
be arched in the said Bake-House, without any Timber in or near adjoining to
the same.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Person or
Persons, from and after the Time aforesaid, shall presume by themselves, their
Agents, Journeymen or Servants, to occupy the Trade of a Cooper, or Biscuit or
Soft-bread Baker, or either of them within the City aforesaid, in any Shop or
Place other than is above directed, enjoined and appointed; every Person so
offending, for every Month he, she, or they shall occupy the Trades of Baker or
Cooper, or either of them, in any Shop or Bake-House, contrary to the
Directions of this Act, shall forfeit as herein after is provided; that is to
say, for the first Offense, the Sum of Twenty Shillings; Penalty on Offenders
against this Act.
and for the second Offense, the Sum of Thirty Shillings; and for the third,
and every other Offense, the Sum of Forty Shillings; to be recovered upon
Complaint made in the Name of the Clerk of the Market for the City of
Phil^^^^^hia, or in the Name of any other Person who will give Information of
the same, for and toward the Repair of Fire-Engines, and purchasing Leathern
Buckets, before two Magistrates of the said City, whereof the Mayor for the
time being to be one.

PROVIDED ALWAYS, That if any Person or Persons shall find him, her, or
themselves aggrieved with any Judgment or Sentence of the said two Magistrates,
it shall and may be lawful for the Person or Persons so aggrieved, to appeal to
the next Court of Common Pleas, to be held for the City and County of
Philadelphia aforesaid, whose Judgment therein shall be definitive.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, Keeping of Hay and
F^ggots regulated.
That no Person whatsoever within the City aforesaid, from and after the Tenth
Day of May next ensuing, shall keep, or stack any Hay within One Hundred Feet
of any Dwelling House, or other Building (except it be in a Stable or other
secure House) nor shall keep any greater Number of Faggots than Two Hundred,
unless it be at a Distance of One Hundred Feet from any Dwelling House or other
Building, under the Penalty of Ten Shillings for every Offense; which Penalties
so accrui^^ shall be recovered, and applied in the Manner, and to the Use
aforesaid, with Costs of Suit; and the Hay and Faggots so remaining against the
Tenor of this Act, shall be liable to be removed, in such Sort, Manner and
Form, as any Nuisance may be by the Laws of Great Britain, or this Province.

CHAP. CCCXVIII. An ACT for the Relief of Benjamin Main, with respect to the
Imprisonment of his Person.
--

An ACT for Amendment of the Law, entitled, An Act for Relief of insolvent
Debtors.
WHEREAS sundry idle and ill-disposed Persons who were indebted before the
Commencement of an Act of Assembly of this Province, Preamble.
Entitled, An Act for the Relief of Insolvent Debtors, An^ 3 Geo 11, Chap. 3^4.
have very much abused their Creditors, and disappointed the good Intentions of
the Legislature in making the said Act; and especially single or unmarried
Persons, who were indebted in small Sums of Money, which they could easily have
paid by their Labor, have taken the Advan^^ge of the said Act of Assembly, by
procuring themselves to be discharged as Insolvent Debtors; by Means whereof,
many Creditors of low Circumstances have lost their Debts and been obliged to
pay the Costs of Suit. BE IT THEREFORE ENACTED by the Honorable Patrick
Gordon, Lieutenant Governor of the Province of Pennsylvania, etc. by and with
the Advice and Consent of the Representatives of the Freemen of the said
Province in General Assembly met, and by the Authority of the same; That no
Person or Persons whatsoever shall have any Benefit of the aforesaid Act of
Assembly for the Relief of Insolvent Debtors, for any Sum or Sums of Money
which they owed before the making of the said Act, Who shall have the Benefit
of that Act.
except such Persons as were actually Prisoners in some of the public Gouls of
this Province, on or before the First Day of August, in the Year One Thousand
Seven Hundred and Thirty, any Thing in the said Act to the contrary in any wise
notwithstanding.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, by the Authority aforesaid, Single Persons indebted
for small Sums have no Benefit.
That no Person or Persons, being unmarried and under the Age of Forty Years,
having no Charge of Children; and being, or that shall be (...) to any one or
more Persons in any Sum or Sums of Money in the whole not exceeding Twenty
Pounds, shall have any Benefit of the aforesaid Act of Assembly; but such
Person or Persons shall be liable to be arrested and imprisoned for their
respective Debts, as if the said Act of Assembly had never been made.

PROVIDED ALWAYS, AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That
any Person or Persons within this Province, that shall be arrested and
imprisoned for any Debt, Sum of Money or other Thing which was owing by them
before the First Day of August last past; and that any single Person under the
Age of Forty Years aforesaid, having no Charge of Children, and whose Debts in
the whole do not exceed Twenty Pounds, whether the Debts owing by such Person
were contracted before the First Day of August last, or since that, or shall
hereafter be contracted, and being arrested or imprisoned for the same or any
Part thereof, may at any succeeding Court to be held for the City or County
where he or she is imprisoned, next after his or her Imprisonment, exhibit to
the Justices of the said Court upon Oath or Affirmation, an Account of all
their Effects, to which they have any Right in Law or Equity, and the Names of
their Creditors, at whose Suit such Person is imprisoned, and the Sums of Money
which they owe, and when the same became due as far as his or her Knowledge
does extend, and shall by Petition show to the Court their Inability to pay the
Debts for which such Person is imprisoned, and shall make an Assignment of
their Effects to any Person that shall be appointed by the Court, in Trust for
his or her Creditors, or for such of them as the said Court shall direct, and
shall signify his or her Willingness to make Satisfaction by Servitude, for the
Residue of the Debt, the Party petitioning shall be discharged, as by an Act of
Assembly of this Province, Entitled, An Act about Arrests, and making Debtors
pay by Servitude, is provided: which said Act of Assembly is hereby revived,
and declared to be and continue in full Force for the Purposes in this Act
mentioned, any Thing in the aforesaid Act of Assembly for Relief of Insolvent
Debtors contained to the contrary notwithstanding.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Autho^ity aforesaid, That if any Person be
imprisoned in any City or (...) o^ this Province for any Debt under Fort^
Sh^^lings, h^ving no Effects to pay the same, and shall be willing to m^ke
Satisfaction by Servitude, it shall and may b^ lawful for any Two Magistrates,
in any County or City within thi^ Province where the Party is imprisoned, to
proceed to relieve the Party so imprisoned, by judging such D^btor to make
Satisfaction by Servitude.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, by the Authority aforesaid, That no Person or
Persons who have not resided within this Province for the Space of two Year,
next before his or her Imprisonment, ^ew Comers (...) have no (...) Act
shall have the Benefit of the aforesaid Act for Relief of Insolvent Debtors.

PROVIDED NEVERTHELESS, That if the Person at whose Suit any Person is
arrested, shall refuse or neglect to give Security for Payment of such weekly
Allow^nce, for Maintenance of the Defendant, as the Justices of the Court where
the said Suit is depending, shall direct and award, and also give Security that
the said Defendant or Defendants, his or their Wife or Children, nor any of
them shall become chargeable to the Town or County where such Person or Persons
are imprisoned; It shall and may be lawful for the Justices of the said
respective Courts of Common Pleas within this Province, and they are hereby
required in such Case, to cause the Action or Actions against the Person or
Persons so imprisoned to be discontinued, and the Parties thereupon to be
discharged.

AND WHEREAS some Doubts have arisen concerning the Meaning of some part of the
aforesaid Act of Assembly for Relief of Insolvent Debtors, touching the Time of
a Sheriff being capable to hold his Office in any County of this Province, and
the Uses to which the Fine of Two Hundred Pounds, imposed on any Person
occupying the Office of Sheriff contrary to the Directions of the said Act,
shall be applied; therefore for the Removing any Doubts that have arisen, or
may arise concerning that part of the aforesaid Act; BE IT ENACTED by the
Authority aforesaid, Clause to the former Act explained.
And it is hereby declared to be the true Intent and Meaning of the aforesaid
Act of Assembly, that no Sheriff who had been elected, and who had occupied the
Office of a Sheriff or Undersheriff, in any County of this Province for the
Space of Three Years at one Time, shall be again elected Sheriff for the said
County, or serve or occupy the Office of a Sheriff in the same County, within
the Space of Three Years next after his being Sheriff as aforesaid. And it is
hereby Enacted and Declared, That of the Two Persons elected for the Office of
Sheriff and returned to the Governor, one being commissionated, the other shall
not act as Undersheriff to the Person appointed Sheriff, during the Term of
the said Sheriff's Commission. And that if any Sheriff or Undersheriff within
this Province, shall be elected contrary to the true Intent and Meaning of this
Act, and the aforesaid Act of Assembly, such his Election shall be null and
void, and if any such such Sheriff or Undersheriff shall again enter upon and
occupy the Office of a Sheriff contrary to the Directions and Provision made in
and by this and the last mentioned Act of Assembly, shall forfeit and pay the
Sum of Two Hundred Pounds, as in the said Act is directed, one Moiety thereof
to the Person or Persons who will inform or sue for the same, and the other
Half to be paid to the Provincial Treasurer, toward the Support of Government,
to be recovered by Action of Debt, Bill, Plaint or Information, wherein no more
than one Imparlance shall be allowed; and that no Pardon, Noli prosequi, or
other Act of the Governor or Lieutenant Governor for the time being, shall be
any Bar or Hindrance to the suing for, Recovery and Levying the said Fine for
the Uses aforesaid.

CHAP. CCCXX. A SUPPLEMENT to the Law, entitled, An Act to prevent the Killing
of Deer out of Season, and against carrying of Guns and Hunting by Persons not
qualified.
WHEREAS the said Law limits the Conviction of Offenders against the said Act,
to be within Two Months next after such Offense is committed, by the Oath or
Affirmation of one or more Witnesses: But forasmuch as there is no Provision
made against Hunting and Chasing Deer out of Season, nor any Person under any
Obligation to prosecute, many Offenders pass with Impunity, and the good End
and Purpose for which the said Act was made is eluded, and rendered not so
beneficial as it otherwise might be;

THEREFORE BE IT ENACTED by the Honorable Patrick Gordon, Esquire Lieutenant
Governor of the Province of Pennsylvania, etc. by and with the Advice and
Consent of the Representatives of the Freemen of the said Province in General
Assembly met, and by the Authority of the same, That if any Person or Persons
shall after the Publication hereof, hunt, chase or follow any Buck, Do, Fawn,
or any Deer whatsoever, at any other Time or Season, excepting only between the
first Day of July, and the first Day of January, and shall be lawfully
convicted thereof by the Oath or Affirmation of one or more Witnesses, or the
Confession of the Party before one or more Justices of the Peace for the
respective County where such Offense shall be committed, he or they shall
forfeit and pay for every such Offense the Sum of Ten Shillings, to be
recovered as aforesaid, and for the Uses in the aforesaid Act directed.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That the Constables of
each respective Township in every County of this Province, having any Knowledge
of any Offenses against this and said recited Act, shall and are hereby
required to present every such Offense to some one Justice of the Peace for the
respective County where such Offenses shall be committed, or before the
Justices of the General Quarter Sessions of the Peace for the same County,
together with the Name or Names of all such Offenders: And the said Justice or
Justices of the respective Sessions aforesaid, are hereby empowered and
required to hear and determine the same, and to convict the Offenders in the
Penalties and Forfeitures mentioned in this and the said recited Act, so that
such Conviction shall be within Four Months next ensuing after such Offense
committed; any thing in the said recited Act or any other Law of this Province
to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

PROVIDED, That nothing herein contained shall be deemed or taken to disannul,
alter, or make void the said recited Act, or any thing herein contained; but
that every Clause, Article and Sentence therein, except what is hereby altered
or supplied, shall be and remain in full Force and Virtue.

CHAP. CCCXXI. An ACT to disable W. F. from holding any Office of Trust, etc.
--

CHAP. CCCXXII. An ACT for the better enabling diverse Inhabitants of the
Province of Pennsylvania to hold Lands; and to invest them with the Privileges
of natural-born Subjects of the said Province.
WHEREAS by the Encouragement given by the Honorable William Penn, Esquire late
Proprietary and Governor of the Province of Pennsylvania, and by the Permission
of his late Majesty King GEORGE the First, of blessed Memory, and his
Predecessors Kings and Queens of England, etc. diverse Protestants who were
Subjects to the Emperor of Germany, a Prince in Amity with the Crown of
Great Britain, transported themselves and Estates into the Province of
Pennsylvania, and since they came hither have contributed to the Enlargement of
the British Empire, and have always behaved themselves religiously and
peaceably, and have paid a due Regard and Obedience to the Laws and Government
of this Province.

AND WHEREAS many of the said Persons, to wit, Peter Wentz, Martin Kolb,
Dielman Kolb, Jacob Kolb, Michael Zeigler, Paul Fried, Johannes Fried, Hans
Datweiller, Valentine Hunsucker, Jacob Scheimer, I^hannes Koocken, George
Markl, Hubbard Kassel, I^hannes Leseber, Jacob Herman, Gerhard Clements, C^ris^
pher Zimmerman, Jacob Metz, Bastian Smit, Mathias Gemelin, Ulrich Mayer,
Christian Bowman, Abraham, Schw^rtz, Hermanus Kuster, John Ioder, John Ioder,
jun. I est Ioder, Philip Keilwein, Hans Hoch, Peter Endreas, John Dietrich
Kriener, Peter Balio, Abraham Levand, Isaac Levand, Nicholas Lescher, David
Kouffman, Iean Bartolet, Hans Martin Gerich, Martin Schenkel, Jonathan Herbein,
John Bowman, Arnold Huffnagle, Johannes Langenecker, Johannes Buckwalter,
Johannes Extein, Isaac Vansintern, Johannes Dewalt End, Johannes Goerge
Bentzel, Blassius Daniel Mackinet, Mathias Adams Hogermoed, Hans Rup, Lorence
Belitz, Johan Nicholas Kressman, Christopher Funk, John Joseph Schrack, Philip
George Iager, Samuel Gouldin, Christopher Gouldin, Henry Penn^^ecker, Ha^s
Sigfried, Peter Tre^ler, Henry ^^heat, Jacob Hottlestein, Daniel L^^genecker,
Ha^s Ia^^b Bech^lay, Melchor Hoch, Jacob Hoch, George Hollen^^ck, John Jacob
Schrack, John George Reif, John George Reif, jun. Jacob Re^f, Conrad Reif,
Peter Reif, Antonius Hi^^an, Henry Antis, Ger^ard Peter's, John Isaac Klei^,
Johannes Mayer, Samuel Hoch, John S^yder, George Bechtley, Ioest Hendrick
Zaatzmentzhoussen, all of Philadelphia County; Marcus Kuhl, John Keller, Jacob
Kasdrop, Johan Baker, Abraham Kintzing, of the City of Philadelphia; Jacob
Klemmer, Jacob S^^der, Philip Geifinger, George B^chman, John Driessle of the
County of B^cks; Christian Mary, Johannes Roth, Cospar Acker and Jacob Acker,
of the County of Ch^ster, in Demonstration of their Affection and Zeal for his
present Majesty's Person and Government, qualified themselves by taking the
Qualification and subscribing the Declaration directed to be taken and
subscribed by the several Acts of Parliament, made for the ^ecurity of his
Majesty's Person and Government, and for preventing the Dangers which may
happen by Popish Recusants, etc. and thereupon, have humbly signified to the
Governor and the Representatives of the Freemen of this Province, in General
Assembly met, that they have purchased and do hold Lands of the Proprietary,
and others His Majesty's Subjects within this Province, and have likewise
represented their great (...) of being made Partakers of those Privileges which
the natural-born Subjects of Great Britain do enjoy within this Province; and
it being just and reasonable that those Persons who have bona fide purchased
Lands, and who have given such Testimony of their Affection and Obedience to
the Crown of Great Britain, should as well be secured in the Enjoyment of their
Estates, as encouraged in their laudable Affection to and Zeal for the English
Constitution;

BE IT ENACTED by the Honorable PATRICK GORDON, Esquire Lieutenant Governor of the
Province of Pennsylvania, etc. by and with the Advice and Consent of the
Representatives of the Freemen of the said Province in General Assembly met,
and by the Authority of the same, That Peter Wentz, Martin Kolb, Dielman Kolb,
Jacob Kolb, Michael Zeigler, Paul Fried, Johannes Fried, Hans Datweiller,
Valentine Hunsucker, Jacob Scheimer, Johannes Koo^ken, George Markl, Hubbard
Kassell, Johannes Leseber, Jacob Herman, Gerhard Clements, Christopher
Zimmerman, Jacob Metz, Bastian Smit, Mathias Gemelin, Ulrick Mayer, Christian
Bowman, Abraham Schwartz, Hermanus Kuster, John Ioder, John Ioder, jun. Ioest
Ioder, Philip Keilwein, Hans Hoch, Peter Endreas, John Dietrich Kreiner, Peter
Balio, Abraham Levand, Isaac Levand, Nicholas Lescher, David Kouffman, Iean
Bartolett, Hans Martin Gerich, Martin Schenkel, Jonathan Herbein, John Bowman,
Arnold Huffnagle, Johannes Langenecker, Johannes Buckwalter, Johannes Extein,
Isaac Vansintern, Johannes Dewalt End, Johannes George Bentzel, Blasius Daniel
Mackinet, Mathias Adams Hogermoed, Hans Rup, Lorenc^ Belitz, Iohann Nicholas
Kressman, Christopher Funk, John Joseph Schrack, Philip Schrack, Johannes
Shaffer, Jacob Seltzer, George Ro^se, George Iager, Samuel Gouldin, Christopher
Gouldin, Henry Pennebecker, Hans Sigfried, Peter Trexler, Henry Scheat, Jacob
Hottlestein, Daniel Langenecker, Hans Jacob Bechtley, Melchor Hoch, Jacob Hoch,
George Holle^back, John Jacob Schrack, John George Reif, John George Reif, jun.
Jacob Reif, Conrad Reif, Peter Reif, Antonius Hilman, Henry Antis, Gerhard
Peter's, John Isaac Klein, Johannes Mayer, Samuel Hoch, John Snyder, George
B^chtl^y, Ioest Hendrick Zaatzmentzhoussen, all of Philadelphia County; Marcus
Kuhl, John Keller, Jacob Kasdrop, Johan Baker, Abr^ham Kintzing, of the City of
Philadelphia; Jacob Klem^er, Jacob Souder, Philip Geisinger, G^^rge Bachman,
John Driessle of the County of Bucks; Chris^ian Mary, Johannes Roth, Caspar
Acker and Jacob Acker, of the County of Chester, be and shall be to all Intents
and Purposes, deemed, taken and esteemed His Majesty's natural-born Subjects of
this Province of Pennsylvania, as if they and each of them had been born within
the said Province; and shall and may, and every of them shall and may, within
this Province, take, receive, enjoy, and be entitled to all Rights, Privileges
and Advantages of natural-born Subjects, as fully to all Intents, Constructions
and Purposes whatsoever, as any of His Majesty's natural-born Subjects of this
Province can, do, or ought to enjoy, by Virtue of their being His Majesty's
natural-born Subjects of His Majesty's said Province of Pennsylvania.

ANNO REGNI GEORGII II. REGIS QUINTO.
At a GENERAL ASSEMBLY of the Province of Pennsylvania, begun and holden at
Philadelphia, the Fourteenth Day of October, Anno Dom. One Thousand Seven
Hundred and Thirty-one, in the Fifth Year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord
GEORGE II. by the Grace of GOD, of Great Britain, France and Ireland, KING,
Defender of the Faith, etc. And from thence continued by Adjournment to the
Tenth of January, 1731.
CHAP. CCCXXIV. An ACT for reviving and continuing the Proceedings of the
Courts of Judicature within this Province.
WHEREAS an Act of General Assembly of this Province, made in the Year One
Thousand Seven Hundred and Twenty-six, and in the Thirteenth Year of the Reign
of his late Majesty King George the First, ofblessed Memory, Entitled, An Act
for Establishing Courts of Judicature within this Province, which Act,
(supposed to supersede or repeal one other Act of Assembly of this Province,
entitled An Act for establishing Courts of Judicature within this Province,
made in the Year One Thousand ^even Hundred and Twenty-two) is since repealed
by the King in Council. And whereas without some Provision be made for the
Confirmation of such Judgments as have been rendered since the Repeal of the
said Act, and for the Continuance of such Process as are depending in the
several Courts within this Province, many Suitors may be disappointed, and such
Judgments may be reverst, and the Process upon Indictments or Informations,
depending in the several Courts of Pennsylvania, may be discontinued; It is
therefore humbly prayed that it may be enacted, and BE IT ENACTED by the
Honorable PATRICK GORDON, Esquire Lieut. Governor of the Province of Pennsylvania,
etc. by and with the Advice and Consent of the Representatives of the Freemen
of the said Province, in General Assembly met, and by the Authority of the
same, That no Indictment, Plea, Suit or Action, in which Judgment has been
rendered since the Repeal of the said last recited Act of Assembly, nor any
Process thereupon, shall be abated, quashed, reversed, or judged null or void,
for or by reason of the Repeal of the said Act of Assembly made in the Year One
Thousand Seven Hundred and Twenty-six; But that the said Judgments, Suits and
Process, shall be and are hereby declared to be good and valid in Law, as if
the said Act had never been repealed: And that no Indictment, Presentment,
Action, Suit, Plea, Pro^ess, or other Matter, now depending in any Court of
Record within this Province, shall be discontinued, abated, quashed, nulled or
reversed, for or by Reason of the Repeal of the said last mentioned Act of
Assembly only: But that the Judges and Justices of the respective Courts within
this Province shall, by virtue of the said Act of Assembly made in the Year One
Thousand Seven Hundred and Twenty-two, now again come in Force, by Repeal of
the said Act of the Thirteenth of King George the First, proceed to hear, try,
and determine, all Causes Civil and Criminal, now depending; and the
Proceedings of the several Courts of Judicature within this Province, be and
are hereby confirmed; so that no Advantage shall be taken of or for any want of
Authority, Defect of Jurisdiction, or Error on such Proceedings, occasioned by
such Repeal only; but that all such Defects and Errors, be and are hereby
aided, according to the true Intent and Meaning of the said Act, as if the same
had not been repealed; any Law, Statute or Usage to the contrary
notwithstanding.

CHAP. CCCXXV. An ACT for repealing an Act, entitled, (...) Act for continuing
the Encouragement for raising good Hemp within this Province, etc.
WHEREAS by an Act of Assembly passed in the Third Year of the Reign of his
present Majesty, entitled, An Act for continuing the Encouragement for raising
good Hemp within this Province, etc. it was, amongst other Things therein
contained, enacted, that there should be paid out of the public Revenue of
this Province, by the Officer therein appointed, the Sum of One Penny
Halfpenny for every Pound of good, sound, well-ordered, and merchantable
water-rated ^emp, raised within this Province, from and after the Time of the
publication of the said Act, until the first Day of May, which will be in the
Year One Thousand Seven Hundred and Thirty-three.

AND WHEREAS it has on Experience been found, that the Price to be had for the
Commodity aforesaid, is a sufficient Encouragement for the Raising thereof,
without the Payment of so large a Bounty; And, that by by reason of the large
Quantities of Hemp likely to be raised within this Province, the Continuance of
so considerable a Premium would prove too great a Burden for the Inhabitants
to bear; THEREFORE may it please the Governor that it may be enacted, and

BE IT ENACTED by the Honorable PATRICK GORDON, Esquire Lieut. Governor of the
Province of Pennsylvania, etc. by and with the Advice and Consent of the
Representatives of the Freemen of the said Province in General Assembly met,
and by Authority of the same, That the Bounty aforesaid shall only be paid for
such good, sound, well-ordered and merchantable water-rated Hemp, raised within
this Province, which shall be imported in the City of Philadelphia, pursuant to
the Tenor of the Act aforesaid, on or before the first Day of July next
ensuing: And that from and after the Time last aforesaid, the Premium aforesaid
shall cease to be paid. And the Act of Assembly aforesaid, and every Clause,
Part and Paragraph thereof, shall be void and of no effect, any thing therein
contained to the contrary thereof notwithstanding.

ANNO REGNI GEORGII II. REGIS SEXTO.
At a GENERAL ASSEMBLY of the Province of Pennsylvania, begun and holden at
Philadelphia, the Fourteenth Day of October, Anno Domini One Thousand Seven
Hundred and Thirty-one, in the Fifth Year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord
GEORGE II. by the Grace of GOD, of Great Britain, France and Ireland, KING,
Defender of the Faith, etc. And from thence continued by Adjournments to the
First Day of July, 1732.
CHAP. CCCXXVI. A Supplementary ACT to the Act for raising County Rates and
Levies.
WHEREAS it is found by Experience, that the Method for assessing the
Inhabitants of the Province of Pennsylvania, and the Disposition of the Moneys
raised by Virtue of an Act of Assembly of this Province, entitled, An Act for
raising County Rates and Levies, has not altogether answered the good Ends
proposed by that Act, and some Doubts have arisen concerning the Time of the
Commissioners Continuance in their Office of Commissioner, and of the Powers of
the said Commissioners and Assessors by the aforesaid Act. To the End therefore
that those Doubts may be removed, and that it may be known how the Money raised
by Virtue of the said Act of Assembly is disposed of, and to what Uses the same
is applied; BE IT ENACTED by the Hon. Patrick Gord^n, Esquire Lieut. Governor of
the Province of Pennsylvania, by and with the Advice and Consent of the
Representatives of the Freemen of the said Province in General Assembly met,
and by the Authority of the same, That no Person or Persons whatsoever who is
or hereafter shall be chosen a Commissioner for any of the Counties within this
Province, shall serve as a Commissioner for any longer time than the Space of
three Years at one time; and if any such Person be re-elected in the same
County where before he had served as Commissioner the preceding Year, such
Election shall be void, and the next Person being qualified to be elected as
the Law directs, having the greatest Number of Votes for Commissioner, shall
be, and is hereby declared to be the Commissioner legally elected, and shall be
qualified and serve accordingly.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That the Commissioners,
Assessors, and Treasurers of the several Counties within this Province, shall
at the respective Courts of General Quarter Sessions of the Peace to be held
for the Counties of Philadelphia, and Bucks in the Month of September, and at
the respective Courts of General Quarter Sessions of the Peace to be held for
the Counties of Chester and Lancaster, in the Month of August, yearly exhibit
to, and lay before the Justices and Grand Juries of the said respective
Counties to which they belong, as well the Books of Entries, and Accounts
directed by the aforesaid Act to be kept by the Treasurers, as a true and
particular Account of all the Moneys by them, or any of them, assessed and
raised, by virtue of their several Offices, as also an Account to whom and for
what Use or Uses the same Money and every part and parcel thereof was pai^ out
again, with the proper Vouchers, if required; which Books, Accounts, and
Receipts or Vouchers, being seen and examined by the Justices and Grand Juries
of the said respective Counties, the said Books, and Receipts or Vouchers,
shall be delivered back safely, without Alteration, to the respective
Treasurers; and the Accounts shall be filed, and kept among the Records and
Proceedings of the said Court of General Quarter Sessions of the Peace for such
County.

AND WHEREAS by an Act of Assembly, made in the twelfth Year of the Reign of
the late King William the third, entitled, An Act for erecting Bridges and
maintaining Highways, etc. it is provided, that the County Courts with the
Concurrence of the Grand Jury shall agree with and appoint some Persons to
build Bridges in their respective Counties; And the Commissioners and Assessors
having of late by color of the aforesaid Act of Assembly for raising County
Levies, claimed a Power of directing the Building of Bridges, and of agreeing
with Workmen for doing the same, without the Concurrence of any Court or
Grand Jury, THEREFORE to prevent for the future any Mistakes or
Misunderstandings concerning the Power of the Commissioners and Assessors* IT
I^ HEREBY FURTHER DECLARED AND ENACTED, that the Grand-Juries, Commissioners
and Assessors with the Concurrence of the Justices of the General
Quarter Sessions of the Peace, shall be the sole Judges of the Place where any
Bridge shall be built and maintained over any Creek or Rivulet within the
respective Counties to which they belong; and the Commissioners and Assessors
with the Concurrence of the Justices of the said respective Counties, at their
respective General Quarter Sessions of the Peace, shall agree with Workmen for
building, repairing and maintaining any Bridge or Bridges, ordered to be built
or repaired as aforesaid, within their respective Counties; and that the
Commissioners for the time being shall allow of, and pay the Moneys becoming
due for the same accordingly.

CHAP. CCCXXVII. An ACT directing the Manner of Payment of Assembly-men's Wages.
Expired.

ANNO REGNI GEORGII II. REGIS SEPTIMO.
At a GENERAL ASSEMBLY of the Province of Pennsylvania, begun and holden at
Philadelphia, the Fourteenth Day of October, Anno. Domini One Thousand Seven
Hundred and Thirty-three, in the Seventh Year of the Reign of our Sovereign
Lord GEORGE II. by the Grace of GOD, of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
KING, Defender of the Faith, etc. And from thence continued by Adjournments to
the Seventeenth of December, 1733.
CHAP. CCCXXVIII. An ACT for reviving an Excise on Wine, Rum, Brandy, and other
Spirits.
Expired.

CHAP. CCCXXIX. An ACT to prevent the Exportation of Bread and Flour not
merchantable.
WHEREAS by a Law of this Province made for preventing the Exportation of Bread
and Flour not merchantable, Preamble
the Credit of the said Province in one of its most considerable Branches has
in some Measure been retrieved; But forasmuch as it becomes the Prudence of the
Legislature to do all that in them lies to advance the Credit of this our
Staple Commodity in foreign Markets, and it having been found by Experience
that some farther Regulations may be necessary to promote the good Intention of
the said Act, THEREFORE to the End that the said Credit of our Trade, and the
Benefits thence arising may be continued and improved, BE IT ENACTED by PATRICK
GORDON, Esquire with the King's Royal Approbation, Lieutenant Governor under the
Honorable John Penn, Thomas Penn, and Richard Penn, Esqs; true and absolute
Proprietaries of the Province of Pennsylvania, by and with the Advice and
Consent of the Freemen of the Province aforesaid, in General Assembly met, and
by the Authority of the same, Bolters and Bakers to have B and-marks, etc.
That every Bolter of Flour and Baker of Bread, residing, or (at any Time
hereafter during the Continuance of this Act) to reside within this Province,
shall each one for himself provide and have a distinguish^ble Brand-mark, and
shall therewith brand each and every Cask of Flour or Biscuit of his own Bolting
or Baking, before the same shall be removed from the Place where the same was
so as aforesaid bolted or baked, under the Penalty of One Shilling for every
Cask so removed and not branded as aforesaid; but before any such Bolter or
Baker shall bolt any Flour or bake any Bread for Exportation out of this
Province, every such Bolter or Baker shall cause such his Brand-mark, together
with his Name and Place of Abode, to be entered with the Clerk of the Court of
Quarter Sessions for the County where he does reside (if not already done) and
so from time to time as often as any such Bolter or Baker shall move the Place
of his Residence from one County of this Province into another, within the
Space of one Month after ^^ch Removal, or any Alteration of his Brand-mark, he
shall there cause his Mark, Name, and Place of Residence to be entered with the
Clerk of the respective County; for recording whereof the Clerk shall have and
receive One Shilling each, and no more; and every Bolter or Baker offending
herein, shall forfeit and pay the Sum of Twenty Shillings for every such
Offense.

AND BE IT ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That all Wheat-Flour bolted for
Exportation, from and after the Publication of this Act, shall by the Bolter
thereof be and be made merchantable and of due Fineness, without any Mixture of
coarser and other Flour, and honestly and well packed in good strong Cask, well
made, and of Staves thoroughly seasoned, with the Tare thereof thereupon
marked, Flour, etc. to be honestly packed, weighed and nailed.
the Cask being first weighed by Weights tried by or made agreeable to the
Standard of Weights in this Province, wherewith the Bread and Flour packed
shall be also weighed, and each and every Cask thereof (Bread in tight Casks
excepted) shall be we^l and sufficiently nailed before the same be moved and
carried from the Place where the same was made as aforesaid. And if any Bolter
and Baker shall offend in all or any of the Premises, he, she, or they shall
forfeit and pay for every such Offense the Sum of One Shilling for each Cask.

AND BE IT ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Person or Persons
shall put (...) false or wrong Tare on any Cask of Flour and Bread, to the
Disadvantage of the Purchaser, he, she, or they shall forfeit and pay for every
such Cask falsely tared as aforesaid, Penalty on false Taring of Cask.
the Sum of Five Shillings. And the Officer for each County respectively, or
his Deputy, upon Suspicion, or upon the Request of the Buyer, shall and are
hereby required to unpack any such Cask of Flour and Bread, in order to try the
Tare thereof, and if the said Cask or Casks be found to weigh more than is
marked thereon, the Baker or Bolter shall pay the Charge of unpacking and
repacking over and above the Five Shillings for each Cask as aforesaid. But if
the Tare thereon marked be found just and true, then the Officer (or Purchaser,
if the Trial be made at his Request) shall pay the Costs of Unpacking and
Repacking.

Invoice to be delivered with Bread and Flour.
AND BE IT ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That every Miller or Bolter of
Flour, and every Baker of Bread for Exportation as aforesaid, shall deliver
with the said Flour or Bread an Invoice of the Contents thereof with his said
Brand-mark made thereon, together with his Name signed thereto, under the
Penalty of Forty Shillings, for every Invoice delivered contrary to the true
Intent and Meaning hereof. And if any Cask or Casks of Flour or Bread upon
Trial be found lighter than is set down in the said Invoice, every such Bolter
or Baker thereof shall forfeit and pay Threepence for every Pound of Flour or
Bread the same is found wanting or lighter than invoiced. Penalty on Fraud^.
And if any Person or Persons shall be convicted of any other wilful Fraud or
Cheat in Packing of Flour or Bread, or of wilfully making a fraudulent Invoice
of the Net Proceeds or Weight of any Flour or Bread, the Person offending
therein shall forfeit and pay the Sum of Five Pounds for every such Offense.

AND BE IT ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That no Cart, Wain, Carts etc.
to have good Covering.
or Wagon shall be made Use of for the carrying or conveying of Flour or Bread
from any Mill or other Place to the Place of Exportation, or to any Landing
Place, but such as shall have and be provided with a good and sufficient
Covering; and that no Flour shall be left at any Landing, or other Place, in
order to be transported or carried to the Place of Exportation, except the same
be put in a Store or Shelter sufficient to keep it dry; and that no Flour or
Bread shall be carried or conveyed by Water from any Mill or Landing-Place to
the Place of Exportation, in any open Boat, Flat or Shallop, without a good and
sufficient Covering or Ta^paulin to secure the same in case of Rain.

AND BE IT ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That if the Owner or Possessor
of any Cart, Wayn, Wagon, Boat, Flat, or Shallop, Penalty on suffering Flour
to take Damage.
cause or suffer any Flour or Bread to be wet or take Damage for want of due
Care, or not being provided as aforesaid, in the moving, carrying, or
transporting the same from any Mill or Landing-Place to the Place of
Exportation, every such Person or Persons shall forfeit and pay for every Cask
of Flour or Bread damaged as aforesaid, the Sum of One Shilling.

AND BE IT ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, No Flour to be Shipped before
examined.
That no Merchant or Person whatsoever shall lade or ship a^y Flour for
Exportation out of this Province, before he shall first submit the same to the
View and Examination of the Officer or his Deputy, of the respective County
from whence the same is intended to be shipped, who shall search and try the
same, by boring the Head and piercing it through with an Instrument to be
contrived for that Purpose, in order to prove whether it be honestly and
well-pack'd, as also to enable him to judge of its Goodness, and shall
afterward plug up the Hole; and if the said Officer shall judge the same to be
merchantable, according to Direction of this present Act, he shall brand every
such Cask of Flour on the Quarter with the Provincial Brandmark, which the said
respective Officers shall each one for himself provide and have for that End
and Purpose, sufficient and capable to impress in a fair and distinguishable
manner the Arms of the Province of Pennsylvania, with the Letter P on one Side
thereof; and to distinguish the Counties, And branded.
Philadelphia County Brand-mark shall have the Letter P, Bucks County the
Letter B, and Chester County the Letter C on the other Side thereof; for which
Trouble of the said respective Officer, he shall have and receive of the
Shipper One Penny for each Cask, and no more.

PROVIDED ALWAYS nevertheless, that if any Dispute shall happen to arise
between the said Officers and Possessor of such Flour, concerning the Fineness
or Goodness thereof, Indifferent Persons to judge Flour. etc.
upon Application made to one of the Magistrates of the City or County where
the Dispute arises, he shall issue his Warrant to two indifferent judicious
Persons of Skill and Integrity, to view and search the said Flour, and make
Report forthwith according as they find the same, and the said Magistrate is
hereby empowered and required to give Judgment accordingly; and in case the
said Flour is judged not fit to be exported, the said Magistrate shall order it
not to be exported, under the Penalty of Forfeiture of all such Flour, and
shall also award and order the Owner or Possessor of the said Flour to pay the
said Officer One Shilling for each Cask, Penalty on Flour not fit for
Exportation.
for all such Flour as shall be adjudged not fit for Exportation as aforesaid,
with reasonable Charges, who shall recover the said Costs and Charges from the
Bolter or Maker thereof; but in case the said Flour upon Trial shall be found
to be good and merchantable according to the Directions of this Act, the
Charges of Prosecution shall be paid by the Officer; and in case any Flour
shall upon Trial be found not merchantable or fit to be exported, the Officer
shall take the Bolter's Brand and the Marks and Numbers of such Casks of Flour,
and shall also note upon the Invoice of the said Flour, the Numbers of so many
of them as shall be found not merchantable; and if the same Flour be afterward
shipped in order for Exportation, the Proof that it is not the said Flour shall
lie wholly on the Owner or Shipper thereof* and shall not be incumbent on the
said Officer.

AND BE IT ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That the said Officer or his
Deputies shall have full Power and Authority by Virtue of this Act, Officers
empowered to enter Ship^, etc.
and without any further or other Warrant, to enter on board any Ship, Sloop or
Vessel whatsoever, lying or being in any Port o^ Place of this Province, and
into any House, S^ore or Place whatsoever within the Province aforesaid, to
search for and make Discovery of any Flour shipped or intended to be shipped
for Exportation; and if the Owner or Possessor thereof, or their Servants, or
others shall deny him or them Entrance, or if the said Officer or his Deputies
shall be any ways molested in making such Discovery a^ aforesaid, or if such
Merchant or Owner shall refuse to permit the said Officer or his Deputies to
view and examine any Flour, or not permit him or them to brand the same, if
merchantable, Penalty on molesting Officers*
according to the Direction of this Act, every such Person so offending shall
forfeit and pay the Sum of Ten Pounds; or shall ship off any Cask or Casks of
Flour not branded with the Provincial Brand-mark aforesaid, every such Person
so offending shall forfeit and pay the Sum of Five Shillings for every Cask of
Flour so shipped.

AND BE IT ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That Samuel Carpenter of
Philadelphia, Merchant, Officers Names.
shall be and is hereby appointed the Officer for Viewing and Examining all
Flour shipped or intended to be shipped directly out of this Province from the City
and County of Philadelphia; And that William Atkinson of Bucks County, Yeoman,
shall be and is hereby appointed the Officer for Viewing and Examining all
Flour shipped or intended to be shipped directly out of this Province from the
County of Bucks: And John Owen of Chester, Gent, shall be and is hereby
appointed the Officer for Viewing and Examining all Flour shipped or intended to
be shipped directly out of this Province from the County of Chester. And if any
or either of the Officers hereby appointed, shall by any Accident be rendered
incapable, or neglect to execute the said Office, or shall misbehave him or
themselves therein, or shall happen to die, then and so often, and from time to
time, it shall and may be lawful to and for a Majority of the Justices of the
Peace of the respective Counties, to supply his or their Place by some other
fit and capable Person, who shall thereupon be the Officer for putting this Act
in Execution for the respective County, until the Assembly appoints another.
Officers to take an Oath or Affirmation.
But before the said Officers hereby or hereafter to be appointed shall do any
thing in the Execution of their said Office, they shall each of them take an
Oath or Affirmation before any one Justice of the Peace of any County of this
Province, faithfully and impartially to perform his Duty and Trust to the best
of his Capacity, according to the Directions of this present Act.

AND BE IT ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That the said respective
Officers hereby appointed, or hereafter to be appointed, are hereby empowered
to appoint Deputies in the respective Counties, Officers may appoint Deputies.
for whom he or they shall be accountable; which said Deputies having taken the
same Oath or Affirmation required to be taken by the Principals, are hereby
fully empowered to act as Deputy-Officers in their respective Counties for the
Searching and Branding Flour, and for all other Things required to be done by
this Act, to all Intents and Purposes whatsoever.

BUT forasmuch as all the Endea^^^rs and Skill that can be used in the making
of Flour goo^, will prove ineffectual, except due Care be taken in the
Management of the Grain before it be ground, Therefore BE IT ENACTED by the
Authority aforesaid, That every Owner, Possessor, All Wheat to be screened
before ground.
or Occupier of any Grist-Mill, shall have and be provided with a Screen,
wherewith all the Wheat to be ground into Flour for Exportation, shall be first
screen'd; and if any Owner, Possessor, or Occupier of any Grist-Mill shall by
himself, Servants or others, presume to grind or suffer to be ground into Meal
for Bolting for Exportation out of this Province, any Wheat before the same be
screened as aforesaid, or shall grind or suffer to be ground any unsound,
ill-dressed, foul or unmerchantable Wheat, to be bolted for Exportation as
aforesaid, or shall bolt any Meal so ground before the same be thoroughly
cooled and dried, he, she, or they so offending in the Premises, shall forfeit
and pay for every such Offense the Sum of Thirty-five Shillings, Penalty.
on due Proof thereof made by one or more credible Witnesses, before any one
Justice of the Peace of the County or Place where the Fact was committed.

BE IT ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That every Miller, Bolter, and Baker
within this Province, is hereby required, within Six Months after the
Publication of this Act, and afterward once in every Three Years, to bring his
or their Weights and Measures to the Standard in each County, to be examined
and tried, Weights and Measures to (...) brought to the Standard.
and to have them made to agree with the Standard, and stamped and marked as
directed by an Act of Assembly of this Province of the Twelfth of King William
the Third, entitled, An Act for regulating Weights and Measures, under the
Penalties and Fines impos^d by the same Act.

AND BE IT ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, that if any Person or Persons
shall counterfeit the said Provin^ial Brand-Marks, or either of them, or
impress or brand the same on any Cask of Flour, he, she or they being thereof
legally convicted, shall for the first Offense forfeit and pay the Sum of Five
Pounds, Penalty on counterfeiting Brandmarks.
and for the Second Offense the Sum of Ten Pounds, and for the Third and every
other such Offense the Offender shall be committed to Goal^* and Sentenced to
the Pillory, there to stand the Space of Two Hours on a Market Day, in any
City, Borough or Town of the respective Counties of this Province, where the
Fact was committed.

AND BE IT ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That all and singular the Fines,
Forfeitures and Charges mentioned in this Act, How the Forfeitures are to be
recovered and disposed of.
w^^re the same respectively exceed not Forty Shillings, the same shall be
recovered in the same Manner as other Debts under Forty Shillings by the Law of
this Province; and where the same exceed Forty Shillings, they may be sued for
and shall be recovered in any Court of Record in this Province, by Bill, Plaint
or Information, wherein no Essoin, Protection, or Wager of Law, nor any more
than one Imparlance shall be allowed. All which said Fines and Forfeitures not
herein before directed how to be applied, shall be paid to the respective
Officer or his Deputy aforesaid, who is hereby strictly enjoined and required
to keep just and true Accounts thereof, and shall once every Year, at the Time
of appointing Overseers of the Poor, deliver unto the Magistrates a true and
exact List of all the Fines and Forfeitures arising from this Act for the Year
past, in the respective Counties; the one half whereof he or they shall
immediately pay into the Hands of the Overseers of the Poor, for the Use of the
Poor of the Place where the Forfeitures happened, and the other he or they may
detain to his or their own Use, as Prosecutor; and if any or either of the
Officers as aforesaid said shall refuse or neglect to account for and pay as
aforesaid, he or they shall forfeit their Office, any Law, Usage, or Custom to
the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

PROVIDED ALWAYS, that the Officer herein appointed to examine and b^and Flour
as aforesaid for the City and County of Philadelphia, Officers not to trade in
Flour.
nor his Deputies, nor any other Person or Persons to be appointed in their or
either of their Places or Stead, shall during the Continuance of this Act, by
him or themselves, or by any other Person to his or their Use or by his or
their Procurement, vend, barter, sell, exchange or trade in Flour, under the
Penalty of Fifty Pounds, to be recovered by Action of Debt, Bill, Penalty.
Plaint or Information, by any Person or Persons who will sue for the same to
Effect, in any Court of Record in this Province, one half thereof to the Use of
the Person or Persons so suing, the other half thereof to be paid to the
Treasurer of this Province, toward the Support of Government. And the Person
or Persons duly convicted of any such Offense or Offenses against this Act,
shall be and are hereby disabled from acting thereafter in their respective
Offices; and the Justices of the City and County of Philadelphia are hereby
authorized and required to appoint another or others in lieu or stead of the
Person or Persons so offending, who shall have the same Powers and Authorities,
and be liable to the same Restrictions and Penalties, as the Officers in this
Act named, until others are appointed by the Assembly of this Province.

AND BE IT ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, that the said Act, entitled, An
Act to prevent the Exportation of Bread and Flour not merchantable, and every
Article, Clause, or Thing therein contained, shall be and is hereby repealed to
all Intents and Purposes whatsoever.

CHAP. CCCXXX. An ACT for confirming the Repeal of diverse Laws of this Province.
WHEREAS the late King CHARLES the Second, by his Royal Charter bearing Date at
Westminster the Fourth Day of March, in the Thirty-third Year of his Reign, was
graciously pleased, for the Consideration therein mentioned, to give and grant
unto the late William Penn, Esquire and to his Heirs and Assigns, all that Tract of
Land now known and called by the Name of the Province of Pennsylvania. And by
the same Royal Charter, the said late King did for himself, his Heirs and
Successors, make, create, and constitute him the said William Penn, Esquire,
true and absolute Proprietary of the said Country, saving always to the said
late King, his Hei^s and Successors, the Faith and Allegiance of the said
William Penn, Esquire, his Heirs and Assigns, and of all other the
Proprietaries, Tenants and Inhabitants, that then were, or thereafter should be
within the Territories and Precincts aforesaid; and likewise saving to the said
late King, his Heirs and Successors, the Sovereignty of the aforesaid Country,
To have, hold, possess and enjoy the said Tract of Land, together with all the
Islands therein contained, unto the said William Penn, Esquire, his Heirs and
Assigns, to the only proper Use and Behoof of the said William Penn, his Heirs
and Assigns forever. AND whereas the said late King Charles the Second,
reposing special Trust and Confidence in the Fidelity, Wisdom, Justice, and
provident Circumspection of the said William Penn, did further by his said
Royal Charter, for himself, his Heirs and Successors, grant free, fall and
absolute Power to the said William Penn, Esquire, and to his Heirs, and to his
or their Deputies and Lieutenants, for the good and happy Government of the
said Country, to ordain, make, and enact, and under his or their Seal to
publish, any Laws whatsoever, for the Raising of Money for the public Use of
the said Province, or for any other End, appertaining either to the public
State, Peace and Safety of the said Province, or to the private Utility of
particular Persons, according to his or their best Discretion, by and with the
Advice, Assent, and Approbation of the Freemen of the said Country, or the
greater Part of them, or of their D^^^^ates or Deputies. But to the End that
the said William Penn, or his Heirs, or other the Planters, Own^^^ (...)
^^^^bitants of the said Province, might not at any Time (...), by
misconstruction of the Powers aforesaid, through Inadvertency, or Design,
depart from the Faith and due Allegiance, which by the Laws of the Realm of
England, they, and all the said late King's Subject^, in his Dominions and
Territories, were always obliged to own to the said late King and his
Successors, by color of any Extent or Largeness of Powers in the said Royal
Charter given, or pretended to be given, or by Force or Color of any Laws
thereafter to be made in the said Province, by Virtue of any such Powers, the
said late King was pleased to declare his further Will and Pleasure to be, that
a Transcript or Duplicate of all Laws, which should be so as aforesaid made and
published within the said Province, should within Five Years after the Making
thereof, be transmitted and delivered to the Privy Council for the time being,
of the said late King, his Heirs and Successors. And if any of the said Laws
within the Space of Six Months after they should be so transmitted and
delivered, should be declared by the said late King, his Heirs and Successors,
in his or their Privy Council, inconsistent with the Sovereignty or lawful
Prerogative of the said late King, his Heirs and Successors, or contrary to the
Faith and Allegiance due to the legal Government of the Realm of England, from
the said William Penn, Esquire and his Heirs, or from the Planters and Inhabitants
of the said Province, and that thereupon any of the said Laws should be
adjudged and declared to be void by the said late King, his Heirs and
Successors, under his or their Privy Seal; That then and from thenceforth, such
Laws concerning which such Judgment and Declaration should be made, should
become void, otherwise the said Laws so transmitted should remain and stand in
full Force, according to the true Intent and Meaning thereof* as by the said
Royal Charter, relation thereunto being had, does more fully appear. AND
WHEREAS in Right of, and by Virtue of the Powers granted to the said William
Penn, Esquire and his Heirs, in and by the said Royal Charter, many Laws and
Ordinances have from time to time since the Settlement of the said Province
been made by the said William Penn, Esquire, and his Heirs, and his and their
Deputies and Lieutenants, by and with the Advice and Assent of the Delegates or
Representatives of the Freemen of the said Province in General Assembly met,
and published under the Great Seal of the said Province. AND WHEREAS diverse of
the said Laws after being made and published in Manner aforesaid, have
according to the Directions of the said Royal Charter, been transmitted to the
Privy Council of the said late King and his Successors, where the same have
been by them in their Privy Council adjudged to be void: But forasmuch as the
said Laws not having been declared void under the Privy Seal of the said late
King or his Successors, according to the express Words of the said Royal
Charter, some Doubts have arisen, whether the said Laws were by such
Declaration actually made void and repealed. To the End THEREFORE that all
Scuples touching the Repeal of the said Laws may be effectually removed, and
that no Doubts may hereafter be made concerning the same, BE IT ENACTED by
PATRICK GORDON, Esquire Lieutenant Governor by the King's Royal Approbation under
the Honorable John Penn, Thomas Penn, and Richard Penn, Esquires, true and
absolute Proprietaries of the Province of Pennsylvania, by and with the Advice
and Consent of the Freemen of the said Province in General Assembly met, and by
the Authority of the same, That all and every of the Laws, Ordinances, or Acts
of Assembly of the Province of Pennsylvania, which at any Time before the
Publication of this Act, have been transmitted to the Privy Council, and have
been adjudged to be void by the said late King or his Successors in his or
their Privy Council, though the same were not declared to be void under the
Privy Seal (according to the Terms of the said Royal Charter) shall
nevertheless be deemed, taken and allowed to be void, to all Intents and
Purposes whatsoever from the Time of such Declaration, in the same manner as if
the said Laws had been adjudged and declared to be void by the said late King
or his Successors, or any of them, under his or their Privy Seal, the want of
the said Privy Seal, or any other Formality in such Declaration in any wise
notwithstanding.

CHAP. CCCXXXI. An ACT the better to enable William Fishbourn to discharge the
Debt due from him to the Trustees of the General Loan-Office of this Province.
Obs.

ANNO REGNI GEORGII II. REGIS OCTAVO.
At a GENERAL ASSEMBLY of the Province of Pennsylvania, begun and holden at
Philadelphia, the Fourteenth Day of October, Anno Domini One Thousand Seven
Hundred and Thirty-three, in the Seventh Year of the Reign of our Sovereign
Lord GEORGE II. by the Grace of GOD, of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
KING, Defender of the Faith, etc. And from thence continued by Adjournments to
the Twelfth of August, 1734.
CHAP. CCCXXXII. An ACT the more effectually to prevent the Erecting of Wears,
Vide 12. Wm. Ill. Chap. 53. and 11. Geo. I. Chap. 274.
Damms, etc. within the River Skuylkill.
WHEREAS by an Act of General Assembly of this Province, made in the Year One
Thousand Seven Hundred and Thirty, for remedying the Inconveniences which the
Inhabitants of the Counties of Philadelphia and Chester, living near the upper
Parts of the River Skuylkill, labored under in the Carriage of their Corn and
other Commodities down the said River, by reason of Erecting Wears, Fishing
Damms, and other Devices (for taking of Fish) within the said River or Creek;
it was provided by the said Act, that all Wears, Fishing Damms, and other
Devices or Obstructions whatsoever, built, laid, or erected within the River
Skuylkill, so as the Trade of the said Creek or River might be hindered or
obstructed ther^^y, should be removed within the Time in the said Act limited;
and that if any such Obstruction should after the Publication of the said Act,
be built, erected, or set up within the River or Creek afores^id, whereby the
T^^d^ or Passage of the same might be impeded or hindered, all such Obstructions
should upon Complaint made to two of the next Justices of the Peace, etc. be
viewed, judged of, and removed, in the Manner in the said Act dir^^^^d: BUT
forasmuch as great Difficulties have arisen among the People living near the
said River Skuylkill, and others, about the Meaning of these Words, When (...)
the Trade or Passage of the said River may be impeded (...); and upon
Experience the said Law being found ^o be in a great Measure impracticable, by
reason of the Remoteness of the Magistrates from the Places where such Nusances
are commonly erected: For Remedy whereof,

BE IT ENACTED by the Honorable PATRICK GORDON, Esquire Lieutenant Governor of the
Province of Pennsylvania, etc. by and with the Advice and Consent of the
Representatives of the Freemen of the said Province in General Assembly met,
and by the Authority of the same, That all and every Person and Persons who
shall erect, build, set up, lay or maintain, or shall be aiding or assisting in
erecting, building, setting up, laying, or maintaining any Wear, Racks, Fishing
Damm, or other Device or Obstruction whatsoever, within the River Skuylkill,
shall upon Complaint made to any Justice of the Peace in the County of
Philadelphia, Chester, or Lancaster, be bound to his or her good Behavior, in
the Sum of Twenty Pounds, and to appear at the next Court of General
Quarter Sessions of the Peace, of the County where Complaint is made; and eve^^
^^ch Person and Persons being thereof legally convi^^ upon Indictment or
Information* shall for every Offense forfeit and pay the Sum of Forty
Shillings, one Moiety to the Use of the Workhouse of that County where such
Conviction shall be had and the other Moiety to the Person or Persons who will
inform or prosecute for the same.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That it shall and may be
lawful to and for any Person or Persons whatsoever, to pull down, break or
remove all or any Wear or Wears, Fishing Damms, Racks, or other Device or
Obstruction whatsoever, built, erected, set up, or laid, or to be built,
erected, set up or laid within the said River Skuylkill; And that every Person
or Persons who shall assault, hinder or obstruct any Person in pulling down,
breaking or removing the said Wears, Racks, Fishing Damms, Devices or other
Obstructions within the River Skuylkill afores^id, and being thereof legally
convict, shall forfeit for every Offense any Sum not under Forty Shillings, nor
exceeding Ten Pounds; one Moiety thereof to the Use of the Workhouse of the
County where such Conviction is had, and the other Moiety to the Person or
Persons assaulted or obstructed in pulling down, breaking or removing any such
Obstructions as aforesaid.

AND WHEREAS Part of the Creek or River Skuylkill divides the Counties of
Philadelphia, Chester, and Lancaster, some Doubts have arisen in which of the
s^id Counties the Offenses committed within the said River shall be tried; For
removing of which Doubts, BE IT ENACTED by the Authori^y aforesaid, That it
shall and may be lawful for the Person or Persons informing, prosecuting, or
complaining of any of the aforesaid Offenses committed within the said River
Skuylkill, to lay the same to be committed within the said River in the County
of Philadelphia, Chester or Lancaster, and the same shall be heard and tried in
either of the same Counties, joining on that Part of the River where the
Offense i^ committed, at his Election.

AND for the more speedy Removing such Obstructions as are already made, or
hereafter shall be made, it shall and may be lawful for any Justice of the
Peace within the Counties of Philadelphia, Chester or Lancaster respectively,
and they are hereby enjoined and required, to Issue forth their Warrant to the
Surveyors of the Highways, of the Townships next adjacent to the Obstruction
so erected (or to such Person or Persons as such Justice shall think fit)
requiring them to summon the Inhabitants of the respective Townships, or the
nearest Inhabitants to the Damm or Device so erected or laid, by giving them
six Days Notice to repair to and remove the said Obstruction; and any Person or
Persons refusing or neglecting to appear and assist (...) removing such
Obstruction at the Time appointed, shall for every such Offense forfeit the Sum
of Five Shillings to (...) Use of the Poor of the Township where the Offense is
committed, to be levied as Debts under Forty Shillings.

AND BE IT HEREBY FURTHER ENACTED, Th^^ an Act of General Assembly of ^his
Province, entitled, An Act to prevent the erecting Wears, Damms, etc. within
the River Skuylkill, hall be and ^ ^ereby repealed to all Intents and Purposes
wh^ soever.

ANNO REGNI GEORGII II. REGIS OCTAVO.
At a GENERAL ASSEMBLY of the Province of Pennsylvania, begun and holden at
Philadelphia, the Fourteenth Day of October, Anno Domini One Thousand Seven
Hundred and Thirty-four, in the Eighth Year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord
GEORGE II. by the Grace of GOD, of Great Britain, France and Ireland, KING,
Defender of the Faith, etc. And from thence continued by Adjournments to the
Seventeenth Day of March, 1734*
CHAP. CCCXXXIII. A Supplement to the several Acts of Assembly of this Province
for the Relief of the Poor. See before 4 Ann Chap. 146. and 4 Geo* I. Chap. 217.

WHEREAS it is found by Experience, that the Laws of this Province made for the
Relief of the Poor, and for Removing and punishing Rogues, Vagrants, and other
Idle and disorderly Persons wandering about the Country, have not proved
effectual for the good Purposes for which they were intended; and for securing
the Inhabitants of this Province from being oppressed with great Charges
arising by such idle and disorderly Persons coming from the neighboring
Colonies into, and concealing themselves in the City of Philadelphia, and the
respective Townships of this Province, until they have either gained a
Settlement, or become so sick and infirm that they cannot be removed; For
Remedying which Inconveniences, BE IT ENACTED by PATRICK GORDON, Esquire
Lieutenant Governor, with the King's Royal Approbation, under the Honorable
John Penn, Thomas Penn, and Richard Penn, Esqrs; true and absolute
Proprietaries of the Province of Pennsylvania, by and with the Advice and
Consent of the Representatives of the Freemen of the said Province, in General
Assembly met, and by the Authority of the same, That no Person or Persons
whatsoever coming into the City of Philadelphia, Who shall be deemed to have
gained no Settlement, unless, etc.
or into any Township or County within this Province, Mariners and other
healthy Persons coming directly from Europe only excepted, although such Person
be an hired Servant and shall abide in such Service for the Space of one whole
Year, and although any Person being an indented Servant, or be bound Apprentice
by Indenture in the said City, or in any Township within this Province, and
shall continue in such Apprenticeship, or Servitud^, for the Space of One Year,
(which is hereby declared sufficient to gain such Apprentice and indented
Servant a Settlement, upon Notice given as is hereafter directed in this Act,
and not otherwise) or although any Person or Persons shall on his own Account,
execute any public annual Office or Charge in the said City, or any Township
within this Province during One whole Year, or be charged and pay his Share
toward the County Taxes or Levies for the Poor of the said City or Township,
or shall have bona fide taken a Lease of a Tenement or Plantation, of the
Yearly Value of Five Pounds or upwards within the City of Philadelphia, or any
Township of this Province, shall be deemed to have gained a legal Settlement in
the said City or in any such Township, unless such Person or Persons shall
within five Days next after his or her coming into the City of Philadelphia, or
into any Township within this Province, give Notice in Writing, which they are
hereby required to do, of the House of his or her Abode, and the Number of his
or her Family, if any he or she have, to the respective Overseers of the Poor
for the time being, of the said City or Township, into which he or she shall
come; nor shall any hired or indented Servant or Apprentice, by Virtue of his
or her being hired, bound or assigned over unto any Person inhabiting the said
City, Township or County, as aforesaid, gain a Settlement within the same,
unless Notice be given in Writing within Ten Days after such hiring or binding,
as aforesaid, to the Overseers of the Poor of the City or Township where such
Person shall come to reside, by the Person who shall take such Apprentice, hire
a Servant, or purchase an indented Servant (or by the Person or Persons so
hired themselves) within Ten Days next after such hiring; any Law, Custom, or
Usage of this Province to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

PROVIDED ALWAYS, Persons likely to become chargeable, refusing to give
Security, may be removed, etc.
That if upon Complaint made by the Overseers of the Poor of the City of
Philadelphia, or of any Township within this Province, to such Magistrates as
have a Right to hear the same, it shall be adjudged within the Space of
Twelve-Months next after such Notice, that any Person or Persons is, or are
likely to become chargeable to the City or Township where he or she is come to
reside, shall upon his or her being required, neglect or refuse to give
Security, that he or she shall not become chargeable to the Inhabitants of the
said City or Township, into which he or she is come, that then such Person or
Persons shall be liable to be removed to the last Place of his or her legal
Settlement, the giving of Notice as aforesaid, or any other thing in this or
any other Act of Assembly of th^s Province to the contrary in any wise
notwithstanding.

AND for the more effectual preventing Rogues, Vagabonds, and other idle and
disorderly Persons concealing themselves within the said City of Philadelphia,
or in any Township or County within this Province, BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the
Authority aforesaid, That if any Housekeeper or Inhabitant of this Province,
shall after the Publication of this Act, take into, receive, or entertain in
his or her House or Houses any Person or Persons whatsoever (healthy Mariners,
Every Housekeeper to give Notice to the Overseers what Persons they entertain.
and other Persons coming immediately from Europe into the said Province only
excepted) not being Persons who have gained a legal Settlement in some City or
Township within this Province, and shall not give Notice in Writing, which they
are hereby required to do within Three Days next after the taking into, or
entertaining any Person or Persons in his or her House within th e City of
Philadelphia, to the Overseers of the Poor of the said City, and within the
Space of Ten Days next after his or her taking into, or entertaining any Person
or Persons in his or her House, in any Township within this Province, to the
Overseers of the Poor of the Township where such Person dwells, such Inhabitant
or Housekeeper being thereof legally convict by the Testimony of One credible
Witness, on Oath or Affirmation, before any two Magistrates of the said City of
Philadelphia, whereof the Mayor or Recorder to be One, or before any Two
Magistrates of the County where such Person dwells, shall forfeit and pay the
Sum of Twenty Shillings for every Offense, On Penalty of Twenty Shillings.
the One Moiety to the Use of the Poor of the said City or Township
respectively, and the other Moiety to the Informer, to be levied on the Goods
and Chattels of the Delinquent, in the Manner herein after directed; and for
want of sufficient Distress, the Offender to be committed to the Workhouse of
the said City or County, there to remain without Bail or Mainprize, for the
Space of Ten Days; and moreover, in Case the Person or Persons so entertained
or concealed shall become poor, and unable to maintain him or her self, and
cannot be removed to the Place of his or her last legal Settlement, or shall
happen to die, and not have wherewithal to defray the Charge of his or her
Funeral, then in such Case the Housekeeper or Person convicted of entertaining
or concealing such poor Person, against the Tenor of this Act, shall be obliged
to provide for and maintain such poor and indigent Person or Persons, And shall
maintain them if they be sick, and bury them if they die.
and in Case of such poor Person's Death shall pay the Overseers of the Poor so
much Money as shall be expended on the Burial of such poor and indigent Person
or Persons; and upon refusal so to do, it shall be lawful for the Overseers of
the Poor of the said City or Township respectively, and they are hereby
required to assess a Sum of Money on the Person or Persons so convict from time
to time by a weekly Assessment, for maintaining such poor and indigent Person
or Persons, or assess a Sum for defraying the Charges of such poor Person's
Funeral, as the Case may be; and in case the Party convict shall refuse to pay
the Sum of Money so assessed or charged, to the Overseers of the Poor, for the
Uses aforesaid, the same shall be levied of the Goods or Chattels of the
Offender in the manner herein after directed; but if such Person so convicted
have no Goods or Chattels to satisfy the Money so ass^s^'d for him or her to
pay, that then it shall and may be lawful for the said Justices to commit the
Offender to Pri^on, there to remain without Bail or Mainprise, until he or she
have paid the same, or until he or she shall be discharged by due order of Law.

AND WHEREAS it is found by Experience, that many poor Person^ within this
Province cannot find Employment in the City or Township where they are legally
settled, yet might find Work for themselves and Families in other Places within
the Province, Poor Persons removed into another Township, to take a Certificate.
but not being able to give Security, if required, upon their coming to settle
in any other Place, that they and their Families shall not become chargeable or
burdensome to any City or Township where they come to dw^ll, and by that means
are confined to their own City or Township, though their Labor may be wanted
elsewhere; BE IT THEREFORE FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That if
any Person or Persons whatsoever, from and after the first Day of May, which
will be in the Year of our Lord One Thousand Seven Hundred and Thirty Five,
shall come out of the City of Philadelphia, or any Township into another
Township in this Province, or shall come out of any Township in this Province,
into the City of Philadelphia, thereto inhabit and reside, shall at the same
time procure, bring and deliver unto the Overseers of the Poor of the City or
Township where he or she shall come to inhabit, a Certificate under the Hands
and Seals of the Overseers of the Poor of the City or Township from whence he,
she or they removed, to be attested by two or more credible Witness^^, thereby
acknowledging the Person or Persons mentioned in the said Certificate, to be an
Inhabitant or Inhabitants legally settled in that City or Township; every such
Certificate, having been allowed of and subscribed by two or more Justices of
the Peace of the City or County where such Township does lie, shall oblige the
said City or Township to receive and provide for the Person mentioned in the
said Certificate, together with his or her Family, as Inhabitants of that Place
whenever after he, she or they shall happen to become chargeable to, or be
forced to ask Relief of the City or Township to which such Certificate was
given, or into which he, she or they were received by Virtue of the said
Certific^te, and then and not before i^ shall and may be lawful for any such
Person and his or her Children, though born in the City or Township, and his or
her Servants and Apprentices not having otherwise acquired a legal Settlement
there, to be removed, conveyed and settled in the City or Township from whence
such Certificate was brought.

AND WHEREAS it oftentimes happens that poor Persons come from the City of
Philadelphia, into some Township or Place within this Province, and from some
Place or Township of this Province, into the said City of Philadelphia, or into
some other Township of this Province, and conceal themselves until they become
sick or lame, and cannot be removed, and oftentimes die before they can be
removed, by reason whereof the Inhabitants of the City or Township where such
poor Person or Persons fell sick or died, are put to Charges, without any Means
to relieve themselves from the Payment of the Moneys expended upon the
Maintenance or Burying of such poor Person or Persons, BE IT THEREFORE FURTHER
ENACTED, That if any poor Person or Persons shall come out of the City of
Philadelphia into any Township within this Province, or shall come out of any
Township or Place within this Province into the City of Philadelphia, or any
other Township within this Province, and shall happen to fall sick or die
before he or she have gained a legal Settlement in the City or Township to
which he or she shall come, so that such Person or Persons cannot be removed,
and if upon Notice given by the Overseers of the Poor of the Place unto which
such poor Person is come, or by one of them, to the Overseers of the Poor of
the City, Township or Place where such poor Person or Persons had last gained a
legal Settlement, or to one of them, of the Name, Circumstances and Condition
of such poor Person or Persons, with Request that they or one of them may take
order for the Relief and Maintenance of such sick or lame Person during his or
her Sickness, and for his or her being buried in case he or she should die, and
if such Overseer or Overseers shall neglect or refuse so to do, that then and
in such Case it shall be lawful for any two Justices of the Peace of the City
or County where such poor Person had last gained a legal Settlement, and they
are hereby authorized and required upon Complaint made to them, to cause all
such Sum and Sums of Money as shall be necessarily expended on the Maintenance
of such poor Person in his or her Sickness, or on his or her Burial, by Warrant
under their Hands and Seals, to be directed to some Constable of their County,
to be levied by Distress and Sale of the Goods and Chattles of the said
Overseer or Overseers of the Poor so neglecting or refusing to take care and
provide for any such poor Person as aforesaid, after such Notice given to them
or to one of them as aforesaid, and to be paid to the Overseer or Overseers of
the City or Township where such poor Person happened to be sick or die as
aforesaid, and the Overplus of the Moneys arising by Sale of such Goods
remaining in the Constable's Hands, after the Sum of Money ordered to be paid,
together with the Costs of Distress, etc. are satisfied, shall be restored to
the Owner or Owners of the said Goods.

AND WHEREAS by an Act of Assembly of this Province, entitled An Act for the
Relief of the Poor, it is provided, that it shall and may be lawful to and for
the Overseer or Overseers of the Poor, to make and lay a Rate of One Penny per
Pound clear Value of Real and personal Estates of all and every the Freeholders
and Inhabitants within their respective Townships, to be employed for the
Relief of the Poor, etc. and Four Shillings per Head on all Freemen not
otherwise rated, but it being found upon Experience that the Number of the Poor
within this Province are very much increased, and the Overseers of the Poor of
this City of Philadelphia, and the respective Townships within this Province,
have been obliged to lay several Rates of One penny per Pound in one Year, for
Maintenance of the Poor within the City of Philadelphia, and the respective
Townships within this Province, which has proved very troublesome as well to
the Persons on whom the said Moneys are raised, as to the Persons who are
obliged to collect the same; For the Remedying of which Inconveniency for the
future, BE IT ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That it shall and may be
lawful to and for the Overseers of the Poor of the City of Philadelphia, for
the said City, having first obtained the Approbation of the Mayor or Recorder,
with any two of the Aldermen of the said City, and for the Overseers of the
Poor of the several Townships within this Province, having first obtained the
Approbation of any two Magistrates living next to the Township where any Poors
Tax shall be raised, Overseers may lay a Rate of Three Pence in the Pound, or
Nine Shillings per Head.
to make or lay any Rate not exceeding Three pence in the Pound at one Time,
upon all the Estates liable to be rated, and in the manner directed to be
raised and levied by the aforesaid Act of Assembly for the Relief of the Poor,
and not exceeding Nine Shillings per Head on all Freemen not otherwise rated,
any thing in the aforesaid Act of Assembly, or any other Law, Custom, or Usage
of this Province to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

AND for the more easy Discovery, certain Knowledge, and well Management of the
Affairs of the Poor within this Province, and of what Moneys are raised for the
Use of the Poor, and ^o what Uses applied, BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the
Authority aforesaid, That all and every Overseer and Overseers of the Poor of
any City or Township within this Province, shall at their laying any Rate for
the Relief of the Poor of their respective Cities or Townships, Overseers to
deliver to a Justice, a Duplicate of the Rate they lay; and a List of the Poor
to their Successors, etc.
and they are hereby obliged to deliver to one of the Justices of the Peace,
who allows such Rate, a fair Duplicate of the same, signed by such Overseer or
Overseers, and shall likewise deliver to the respective Overseer or Overseers
who shall succeed them, fair and true Lists of the Poor of their respective
City or Townships, with such Certificates and Notices as shall be delivered or
given to them upon the coming of any Person from the City of Philadelphia into
any Township of this Province, or of the coming of any Person from any such
Township into the City of Philadelphia, or into any other Township within this
Province, as by this Act is provided and directed; for which Trouble the
Justices are hereby required to make such Allowance to the respective Overseer
or Overseers of the Poor, within this Province, at their going out of their
Office, a^ to them shall seem reasonable, for their making such Duplicates of
the Rates by them laid, and for the Charge and Trouble they may be at in making
fair Lists of their Poor, and of the Notices and Certificates herein directed
to be delivered to their Successors, of which said Notices and Certificates a
Register or Entry shall be made, by the respective Overseers of the Poor to
whose Hands the same shall come, in a Book for that Purpose to be by them
provided and kept; which Book shall likewise be delivered by the Overseers
aforesaid to their respective Successors in the said Office.

AND WHEREAS Complaints have been made against Overseers of the Poor, who have
supplied the Poor with Necessaries out of their own Stores and Shops at
exorbitant Prices, and also against Overseers who have paid unreasonable
Accounts to their Friends or Dependants, for Services done the Poor; AND
WHEREAS the Twenty-fifth Day of March appointed by the aforesaid Act for the
Relief of the Poor, is found by Experience not to be a sufficient time for
Examining* and Settling the Accounts of the several Overseers, and for
regulating and redressing the Abuses that may be complained of; BE IT THEREFORE
ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That the Magistrates of the respective
Counties, Overseers Accounts to be examined and allowed by the Magistrates, etc.
or any three of them, within this Province, for the said Counties, shall and
may on the Twenty-fifth Day of March, and within three Days next after the said
Day, and the Mayor or Recorder, with any two Aldermen of the City of
Philadelphia, for the said City, shall and may on the said Twenty-fifth Day of
March, and at any time within one Month after the said Day, annually examine
and settle the said Overseers Accounts; and shall have full Power to allow such
Accounts and Sums only, as to them shall seem just and reasonable.

AND WHEREAS the Almshouse built for the City of Philadelphia, may, if well
regulated, be of Service, and help to case the Inhabitants of the Taxes yearly
assessed on them for the Maintenance of the Poor, BE IT ENACTED by the
Authority aforesaid, That the Mayor and Recorder, with any two or more Aldermen
of the said City of Philadelphia, Alms House of Philadelphia, who are to have
the Government of it.
shall from time to time have Power and Authority to choose and appoint a sober
and discreet Person to reside in the said Almshouse, for taking Care of the
Poor therein, and, where it may be needful, to direct the Receiving into the
said Almshouse such Poor, and to employ such Persons in the Service of the
said House and care of the Poor, and generally to give such Orders and
Instructions for the well-ordering of the said House, and the Poor of the said
City, as to the said Mayor and Recorder, with any two or more Aldermen of the
said City, shall seem just and reasonable, and to enjoin Obedience to the same.

AND WHEREAS the Overseers of the Poor of the City of Philadelphia, and the
respective Townships within this Province, at going out of their Office, not
only frequently neglect or refuse to deliver to the Justices, a fair and true
Account of the Moneys by them received for the Use of the Poor, but likewise
leave considerable Sums of Money by them assessed for the Maintenance of the
Poor, uncollected, by which means it comes to pass that the Moneys remaining
uncollected are lost, and the Burden of maintaining the Poor falls heavy on
such as have paid their Money; For remedying of which Inconveniency for the
future, (...) to r^^der a fair Account, at going out of their Office.
BE IT ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That all and every the Overseer and
Overseers of the Poor of the City of Philadelphia, and the respective Townships
within this Province, shall, at their going out of their Office, render a fair
and true Account to the Magistrates of the City of Philadelphia for the said
City, and to the Justices of the respective Counties in which they live, of all
the Moneys assessed by them, or that has otherwise come to their Hands, and
how the same has been disposed of, and also what part shall be remaining in
their Hands, and to pay the same to the succeeding Overseer or Overseers; and
if any Overseer or Overseers of any Poor within this Province, shall refuse or
n^glect to render such Account to the Justices as aforesaid, and to pay what
shall be remaining in their Hands, according to the Direction of the respective
Magistrates who shall have the Right of Examining their Accounts, it shall and
may be lawful to and for the said Justices, or any three of them, to commit
such Overseer or Overseers to the County Goal, without Bail or Mainprise, until
such Overseer or Overseers shall render a true and fair Account, and pay such
Moneys as shall appear to be remaining in his or their Hands, to the succeeding
Overseer or Overseers of the Poor of the said City or Township to which they
respectively belong.

AND if any Overseer or Overseers of the Poor of the City of Philadelphia,
Penalty if they neglect or refu^e to collect and pay what is ^ssessed.
or of any Township within this Province, has or have neglected or refused, or
shall neglect or refuse to collect and pay to the succeeding Overseers, all
such Sums of Money as is or shall be remaining in their Hands, or uncollected
at their going out of his or their Office, which they are hereby enabled to
collect by Warrant under the Hands and Seals of any two Magistrates within the
said City or Counties, within the Space of Thirty Days after Notice and Request
made to them so to do, by any Justice of the Peace, and being duly convicted
thereof before any three Justices of the City or County to which they belong,
it shall and may be lawful to and for the Mayor and Recorder, and any two of
the Aldermen of the said City, and for any three Justices of the Peace of the
County in which such Delinquent Overseer or Overseers dwell, by Warrant under
their Hands and Seals to commit such Delinquent Overseer or Overseers to the
Goal of the County to which they belong, there to remain without Bail or
Mainprise until the same shall be paid.

How new ^verseers are to be appointed in Case of Death, etc.
AND to the End that the Poor may not suffer for want of proper Persons to take
due care of them in their Sickness or Necessities, BE IT ENACTED by the
Authothority aforesaid, That in case of the Death or want of any Overseer of
the Poor of the City of Philadelphia, or of any Township within this Province,
it shall and may be lawful to and for the Mayor, Recorder, and any two
Aldermen, or the Mayor or Recorder with any two Aldermen of the City of
Philadelphia, for the City of Philadelphia, and any two Justices of the Peace
of the County in which such Township lies, to appoint one or more Overseers of
the Poor for the said City or Township as the Case may require, at any time
when there shall be occasion; which Overseer or Overseers when so appointed,
shall be subject to the same Rules and Penalties and obliged to the Performance
of the same Duties and Services as if he or they had been appointed at the Time
in the first recited Act of Assembly mentioned, any thing in the aforesaid Act,
or any other Law of this Province to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That the several Fines,
How the Fines and Forfeitures, etc. are to be recovered, etc.
Forfeitures and Penalties, Sum and Sums of Money, imposed or directed to be
paid by this Act, and not herein otherwise directed to be recovered, the same
and every of them shall be levied and recovered by Distress and Sale of the
Goods and Chattels of the D^linquent or Offender, by Warrant under the Hands
and Seals of the Mayor and Recorder, or of the Mayor or Recorder and one or
more Aldermen of the City of Philadelph^^, for the said City, and under the
Hands and Seals of any two or more Justices of the Peace of the County where
the D^linquent or Offender dwells, or is to be found; and after Payment or
Satisfaction made of the respective Forfeitures, Fin^s, Penalties and Sums of
Money directed to beleviby such Warrant as aforesaid, together with such legal
Charges as s^^ll become due in the Recovery thereof, the Overplus, if any, to
be returned to the Owner or Owners of such Goods or Chattels, his or her
Executors or Administrators.

PROVIDED ALWAYS, That if any Person or Persons shall find him or themselves
aggrieved with any Judgment of the Justices given out of their Sessions, in
Pursuance of this Act, such Person or Persons may appeal to the next General
Quarter Sessions of the Peace for the County or City where such Judgment or
Sentence was given, whose Decision shall in all such Cases be conclusive.

CHAP. CCCXXXIV. An ACT for confirming the Election of the Commissioners and
Assessors for the County of Bucks.
Obs.

CHAP. CCCXXXV. An ACT to prevent the Damages which may happen by Firing of
Woods.
WHEREAS by an Act of the General Assembly of this Province, past in the
Twelfth Year of the Reign of King William the third, it is enacted, That
whosoever shall presume to set on Fire any Woods, Lands or Marshes in this
Province, or Territories, before the first Day of the first Month Yearly, or
after the first Day of the third Month, shall make good all Damages that shall
thereby happen to any the Inhabitants thereof; AND WHEREAS it has on
Experience been found that the setting the Woods on Fire at any Time has
proved rather hurtful than beneficial to this Province, and great Losses have
happened by Occasion of such Fires; For prevention thereof BE IT ENACTED by
PATRICK GORDON, Esquire with the King's Royal Approbation Lieutenant Governor under
the Honorable John Penn, Thomas Penn, and Richard Penn, Esqrs; true and
absolute Proprietaries of the Province of Pennsylvania, and of the Counties of
New Castle, Kent, and Sussex, on Delaware, by and with the Advice and Consent
of the Representatives of the Freemen of the said Province in General Assembly
met, and by the Authority of the same, That the Act of Assembly herein before
recited, and every Clause and Article therein, be and is hereby repealed to all
Intents, Constructions and Purposes whatsoever.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That whosoever shall
presume at any Time or Times hereafter to set on Fire, or cause to be set on
Fire any Woods, Lands or Marshes whatsoever within this Province, so as thereby
to occasion any Loss, Damage or Injury to any other Person or Persons, every
such Person or Persons so offending, shall be and are hereby declared liable to
make Satisfaction for the same, in any Action or Actions on the Case, to be
brought by the Party or Parties grieved, in the Court of Common Pleas of the
County where the Offense was committed.

PROVIDED ALWAYS, AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That
where the Party injured shall not Demand above Forty Shillings for his Loss or
Damag^, it shall and may be lawful to and for such Person or Persons to apply
to any Justice of the Peace of the County where the Offense is committed, who
is hereby empowered and required by Warrant under his Hand and Seal, to cause
the Party offending to be brought before him, or some other Justice of the
Peace of the same Count^, and if upon Examination it shall appear to such
Justice by the Testimony of one or more credible Witnesses, that the Defendant
is guilty of the Charge exhibited against him, then the said Justice shall
issue forth his Warrant to two or more substantial Freeholders of the
Neighborhood, thereby commanding them in the Presence of the Defendant, (if he
will be present) to view the Place or Thing damnified, or enquire into the Loss
sustained by the Plaintiff, and to certify to the said Justice upon their Oath
or Affirmation, what Damage in their Judgment the Plaintiff has sustained by
Occasion of the Premises; and that upon Return of such Certificate to the said
Justice, he is hereby empowered to grant Execution for the Recovery of the said
Damages, together with such Costs of Prosecution, as is usual in the Recovery
of Debts under Forty Shillings.

PROVIDED ALSO, That no Costs of Suit shall be paid to any Plaintiff, in any
Suit to be brought for any Matter or Thing in this Act mentioned, if the Jury
who shall try the Cause, do not assess above Forty Shillings Damage, any Law,
Custom or Usage to the contrary, in any wise notwithstanding.

PROVIDED ALSO, That where any Offense shall be committed against the Tenor of
this Act, by any Servant, Negro or Slave, without the Direction of his, her or
their Master or Mistress respectively, and such Offender be thereof duly
convicted by the Oath or Affirmation of one credible Witness, before any
Justice of the Peace of the respective Counties, such Offender or Offenders,
unless his or her Master or Mistress will pay the Damages sustained, with Costs
of Suit, shall be whipped with any Number of Stripes, not exceeding Twenty-one,
on his or her bare Back, at the Discretion of the Justice, before whom the
Party shall be convicted, and further shall be committed to the Workhouse of
the County where the Offense is committed, there to remain until the Costs of
Prosecution shall be paid.

CHAP. CCCXXXVI. An ACT for the better enabling diverse Inhabitants of the
Province of Pennsylvania, to hold Lands, and to invest them with the Privileges
of natural-born Subjects of the said Province.
WHEREAS by the Encouragement given by the Honorable William Penn, Esquire late
Proprietary and Governor of the Province of Pennsylvania, and by the
P^rmission of our present Sovereign King George the Second, and his
Predecessors, Kings and Queens of England, etc. diverse Protestants, who were
Subjects of the Emperor of Germany, and other Foreign Princes in Amity with the
Crown of Great Britain, transported themselves and Estates into the Province of
Pensylvania, and since they came hither have contributed to the Enlargement of
the British Empire, and to the raising and improving sundry Commodities fit for
the Markets of Europe; and have behaved themselves peaceably, and paid a due
Regard and Obedience to the Laws and Government of this Province:

AND WHEREAS many of the said Persons, to wit, John Diemer, David Scholtze,
Peter Hillegas, Wilhelm Ziegler, Paulus Kripner, Jacob Siegel, George Scholtze,
Ulrich Aller, Caspar Ulrich, Henry Van Aken, John Iden, Adam Klamter, Anthony
Ben^zet, of the City of Philadelphia, Anthony Bohm, Conrad Bensell, Adam
Romich, Fredrick Reymer, Joseph Graff, Henry Slingloff, Michael Berger, George
Souber, Alexander Dihl, Jacob Bowman, Gottlieb Herger, Daniel Schoner, Adam
Galar, Nicholas Leisher, jun. Peter Souber, Conrad Reble, Hans George Weigert,
Christopher Mink, Johannes Zirwer, Sebastian Reiff Schneider, Jacob Kemp, Jacob
Hill, John Souber, Abraham Zimmerman, Christian Weber, Nicolas Keyser, Martin
Pitting, Conrad Keer, Conrad Kustor, Jacob Dubre, Anthony Zadouski, Hans
Pingeman, Andreas Kraver, Lodwick Pitting, of the County of Philadelphia, John
George Kinkner, William Morey, Peter Schneider, John Ioder, Christian Klimmer,
John Ioder, jun. Joseph Eberhart, Michael Eberhart, John Brecht, Henry
S^hneider, George Zeitwitz, Michael Weber, Ulrich Rubel, Jacob Kangweer, Diter
Gauff, Henry Rinker, of the County of Bucks, George D^nat, Garr^t Brownback, of
the County of Chester, John George Beard, John Casp^r St^ver, Michael Weidler,
Frederick Elberschidt, Peter Entzminger, Jacob Kersberger, Jacob Byerly, Jacob
Leman, and Michael B^rl, in the County of Lancaster, in the said Province, in
D^monstration of their Affection and Zeal for the Person and Government of Our
present Sovereign King GEORGE the Second, have qualified themselves by taking
and subscribing the sever^l Oaths and Declarations or solemn Affirm^tions
directed to be taken and subscribed by several Acts of P^^li^ment made for the
Security of the King's Person and Government, and for preventing the Dangers
which may happ^n by popish Recusants, etc. and thereupon, have h^mbly applied
to the Governor and the Representatives of the Freemen of this Province, in
General Assembly met, setting forth their great Desire of being made Partakers
of those Privileges, which the Natural-born Subjects of Great Britain do enjoy
within this Province; and it being just and reasonable that those Persons who
have given such Testimony of their Affection and Obedience to the C^own of
Great Britain, should as well be secured in the Enjoyment of their Estates, as
encouraged in their laudable Affection to, and Zeal for the English
Constitution,

BE IT ENACTED by PATRICK GORDON, Esquire with the King's Royal Approbation
Lieutenant Governor under the Honorable John Penn, Thomas Penn, and Richard
Penn, Esqrs; true and absolute Proprietaries of the Province of Pennsylvania,
and of the Counties of New Castle, Kent, and Sussex on Delaware, by and with
the Advice and Consent of the Representatives of the Freemen of the said
Province in General Assembly met, and by the Authority of the same, That John
Diemer, David, Scholtze, Peter Hillegas, Wilhem Zeigler, Paulus Kripner, Jacob
Siegel, George Sch^ltze, Ulrich Aller, Casper Ulrich, Henry Van Aken, John
Iden, Adam Klamter, Anthony Benezet, of the City of Philadelphi^* Anthony Bohm,
Conrad Bensell, Adam Romich, Fredrick R^y^er, Joseph Graff, Henry Slingloof,
Michael B^rger, George Souber, Alexander Dihl, Jacob Bowman, Gottlieb Herg^^,
Daniel Schoner, Adam Galar, Nicholas Leisher, jun. Peter Souber, Conrad Reble,
Hans George Weigert, Christopher Mink, Johannes Zirwer, Sebastian Reiff
Schneider, Jacob Kemp, Jacob Hill, John Souber, Abraham Zimmerman, Christian
Weber, Nicholas Keyser, Martin Pitting, Conrad Keer, Conrad Kuster, Jacob
Dubre, Anthony Zadouski, Hans Pingeman, Andreas Kraver, Lodwick Pitting, of the
County of Philadelphia, John George Kinkner, William Morey, Peter Schneider,
John Ioder, Christian Klimmer, John Ioder, jun. Joseph Eberhart, Michael
Eberhart, John Brecht, Henry Schneider, George Zeitwitz, Michael Weber, Ulrich
Rubel, Jacob Kangwe^r, Diter Gauff, Henry Rinker, of the County of Bucks,
George Donat, Garret Brownback, of the County of Chester, IohnGeorge Beard,
John Casper Stover, Michael Wiedler, Fredrich Elberschidt, Peter Entzminger,
Jacob Kersberger, Jacob Byerly, Jacob Leman, and Michael Byerly, of the County
of Lancaster, in the said Province, be and shall be to all Intents and Purposes
deemed, taken and esteemed the King's Natural-born Subjects of this Province of
Pennsylvania, as if they and each of them had been Born within the said
Province; and shall and may, and every of them shall and may within this
Province, take, receive, enjoy, and be entitled to all Rights, Privileges and
Advantages of Natural-born Subjects, as fully to all Intents, Constructions and
Purposes whatsoever, as any of the King's Natural-born Subjects of this
Province can, do, or ought to Enjoy.

ANNO REGNI GEORGII II. REGIS NONO.
At a GENERAL ASSEMBLY of the Province of Pennsylvania, begun and holden at
Philadelphia, the Fourteenth Day of October, Anno Domini One Thousand Seven
Hundred and Thirty-five, in the Ninth Year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord
GEORGE II. by the Grace of GOD, of Great Britain, France and Ireland, KING,
Defender of the Faith, etc. And from thence continued by Adjournments to the
Twelfth Day of January, 1735.
CHAP. CCCXXXVIII. A Supplement to the Law for laying out Highways and Public
Roads.
WHEREAS by a Law of this Province, enabling the Justices in each County to l^y
out and confirm all Roads, except the King's Highway and public Roads, it is
provided that all Road^ within ^his Province, laid out by the Directions of the
s^id Act, shall be public Highways, and shall be cle^red and m^int^ined at the
Charge or by the Inh^bitants of the Town^^ip in which the said Road lies, and
that if any Part of such Ro^d, although the same be laid out for the Convenience
of one or but few Persons, shall h^pp^n to be laid out th^o' the improved
Ground of any Person, the said improv^d Ground is ^o be v^lued as by the s^id
Act is directed, and paid for out of the Coun^y St^^k; which Parts of the said
Law have, since the gre^^ Inc^^^se of our Inhabitants, been found to be very
inconvenie^t and burdensome as well to the Public as to (...) P^rson^; For
Remedying of which Inconv^nie^cy, BE IT ^NACTED by PATRICK GORDON, Esquire with the
King's Royal Approbation Lieuten^n^ Go^^rnor under the Honorable Io^n P^nn, Th
mas ^enn and Richard P^nn, Esqrs; true and absolute (...) of the Province of
P^nnsylvania, and of the Coun^i^^ of N^w-Cast^e, Kent and Suss^x on Delaware,
by and with ^he Advice and Consent of the Repr^s^ntatives of the (...) of the
said Province in General Assembly met, and by the Au^hori^^ of the same, That
upon the Application of any Person or Pe^so^s to the Justices of the Gener^l
Qu^rter-Sessions of the Peace, for a Road to be laid out from or to the
Plantation or Dw^lling-Place of any Person or Persons, to or from the Highway,
the said Justices shall and they ^re hereby empowered to order and direct a
View of the Pl^ce where the Road is requested to be laid, and Retu^n thereof to
be made in the same M^nner as by the befor^mentioned Act of Assembly is
directed and appointed; and if a Road shall be f^und necess^ry, the said
Justices shall further order and appoint of what Breadth the said Ro^d shall
be, so as the same exceed not thirty-three Foot.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Autho^ity ^fo^es^id, That any Road or
Cart-way laid out in pursuance of this Act, not exceeding Thirty-three Foot in
Breadth, being first paid for, by the Person or Persons herein after directed
to pay for the same, shall then be recorded, and from thence forward shall be
allowed to be a common Road or Cart-way, as well for the Use and Convenience of
the Person or Persons at whose Request the same was laid out, as for the Use
and Convenience of all such as shall have Occasion to travel to and from the
Plantations or Dwellings of such Persons upon whose Application the same Road
was laid out, and shall be cleared and maintained by the Persons using the same
to and from their respective Dwellings; and if any such Person or Persons being
summoned by the Overseers of the Highways to assist in clearing or maintaining
any such Cart-way or Road, shall refuse or neglect to attend and give his
Assistance in doing the same, shall be subject to the like Penalties, to be
recovered in the like Manner as in and by an Act of Assembly of this Province,
Entitled, An Act for the Erecting of Bridges and maintaining Highways, is
provided and directed in Case of the Non-attendance of any Person summoned to
work in repairing of Highways. And if it shall happen that the said Road shall
be laid out through any Man's improved Ground, then the same shall be valued as
in the aforesaid Act of Assembly is directed, and the Value thereof shall be
paid to the Owner or Owners of the Land by the Person or Persons at whose
Request and for whose Use the same was laid out, and by those who shall use the
same as a common Road to and from their own Dwellings.

AND if the Owner or Owners of such Lands through which any such Cart-way shall
be laid out, or if the Owner or Owners of such Lands through which any Cart-way
or Road has been already laid out in pursuance of the beforementioned Act of
Assembly, the same Road being only for the Use of a few Families, shall be
desirous to hang Swinging-Gates upon such Roads, it shall and may be lawful for
the Justices aforesaid to appoint Persons in the Manner directed for laying out
Roads in the aforesaid Act of Assembly, to enquire whether such Gate or Gates
may without much Inconveniency to the Persons using the said Road, be hung upon
the same. And if the Persons appointed to view the Place shall certify to the
Justices aforesaid, that a Gate or Gates may be hung according to the Prayer of
the Party, without much Inconveniency to the Person or Persons using the (...),
the Justices shall in such Case order and ^ppoint that such Gate or Gates may
be hung accordingly, and that the same shall be made and kept in good R^pair by
the Owner of the said Land; and made easy for the Passage of the Persons using
the said Road, the aforesaid Act of Assembly or any other Law of this Province
to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

CHAP. CCCXXXIX. An ACT for regulating Retailers of Liquors near the Iron Works.
WHEREAS the Erecting of Furnaces for Running and M^l^ing Iron-Oar, has proved
successful and advantageous to the Trade of this Province in gener^l, and if
duly encouraged and improved will render our Commerce with Great Britain of
Esteem there, and our Remittances more e^sy and benefici^l to the Inhabitants
here than the Methods heretofore used; AND WHEREAS the Act against Selling Rum
and other Liquors near those Furnaces, has been found useful and necessary to
prevent many Inconveniences detrimental and injurious to the said Works, but
the said Act is now expired; To the End therefore that the said Inconveniences
may be still prevented, and all due Encouragement given to the Undertakers of
the said Works, BE IT ENACTED by PATRICK GORDON, Esquire with the King's Royal
Approbation Lieuten^nt Governor under the Honorable John Penn, Thomas Penn,
and Richard Penn, Esqrs; true and absolute Proprietaries of the Province of
Pennsylvania, and Counties of New Castle, Kent, and Sussex, on Delaware, by and
with the Advice and Consent of the Representatives of the Freemen of the said
Province in General Assembly met, and by the Authority of the same, That no
Person or Persons whatsoever from and after the Publication of this Act, shall
within the Distance of Three Miles to any Furnace now erected or hereafter to
be erected within the said Province, keep a public House, sell by Permit, or
otherwise dispose of any Wine, Rum, Brandy, or other Liquors, (except he or
they shall be specially recommended for a License or Permit to the Justices of
the County where such Furnace is, by a Majority of the Owners of such
Iron-Works, near which he or they are desirous of Keeping a Public House, or
Selling Rum, Wine, Brandy or other Liquors) under the Penalty of Forty
Shillings for every such Offense, being thereof convicted by his or their own
Confession, or by the Oath or solemn Affirmation of two or more credible
Witnesses, before any Justice of the Peace of the County where such Offense is
committed, to be levied by Distress and S^le of the Offender's Goods, by
Warrant under the Hand and Seal of the said Justice before whom such Conviction
is made, which Warrant such Justice is hereby empowered and required to make,
seal and grant. And where Distress cannot be found to be made on the Offender's
Goods, it shall and may be lawful to and for the said Justice of Peace, to
commit such Offender or Offenders to the County-Goal where the Offense is
committed, there to remain without Bail or Mainprize for the Space of Twenty
Days.

AND BE IT ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, that the Justices of the Peace
of the County in which any such Furnaces are erected, upon Complaint to them
made, shall, and they are hereby required and enjoined, at any of the General
Quarter Sessions of the Peace to be held for any of the Counties aforesaid
respectively, to direct and appoint the Rates or Prices to be taken by any
Innkeeper, or other Retailer of Rum, Wine, Brandy, and other strong Liquors
whatsoever, to be sold within the Limits or Distances of the Furnaces
aforesaid. And if any Innkeeper or Retailer of strong Liquors within those
Limits or Distances, shall exact, demand, and take any other and greater Prices
for any of the Liquors aforesaid, than shall be so directed and appointed by
the Justices as aforesaid, and shall be thereof convicted ^y the Oaths or
Affirmations of two credible Witnesses, before any one or more of the Justices
of the Peace of the Counties aforesaid respectively, every such Offender shall
forfeit and pay for each such Offense the Sum of Twenty Shillings to be applied
to the Uses herein after directed.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED the Authority aforesaid, That all the Fines,
Forfeitures and Penalties mentioned in this Act, shall be and are hereby
appropriated, one Half thereof to the Overseers of the Poor of the Township
where the Offense is committed, for the Use of the Poor of the said Township,
and the other Half thereof to the Use of the Prosecutor.

AND this Act to continue in Force for Five Years, after its Publication, and
from thence to the End of the next Sessions of Assembly, and no longer.

CHAP. CCCXL. An ACT for Vesting the State-House and ^ther Public Buildings,
with the Lots of Land wher^^n the same are erected, in Trustees for the Use of
this Province.
WHEREAS by the Directions of the Representatives of the Freemen of the
Province aforesaid, Andrew Hamilton and William Allen, Esqrs; made Purchase^ of
di^ers Lots of Land situate and being on the South Side of Chesnut-Street in
the City of Philadelphia, lying contiguous to each other, and bounded as
follows, viz. Beginning at a Corner on the East Side of the Sixth-street from
Delaware, and on the South Side of Chestnut-street, and ext^nding thence by the
said Chesnut-street South seventy-five Degrees East three Hundred and
ninety-six Feet to a Corner on the West Side of the Fifth-street from Delaware,
thence by the same South fifteen Degrees West three Hundred and thirty-seven
Feet, thence by other Ground North seventy-five Degrees West one-Hundred
forty-eight Fe^t and an half to a Line of a Lot of Ground reputed to be vacant,
thence by the same these three several Courses and Distances next following,
^iz. North fifteen D^grees East eighty two Feet, th^nce Nor^h seventy-f^ve
Degrees W^st ninety-nine Feet, thence So^^h fifteen Degrees West eighty-two
Fee^, thence by other Ground North seventy-five Degrees West one Hund^ed
forty-eight Feet and an half to the East Side of the Sixth-Street afores^id,
thence by the same Nor^h fifteen Degrees ^es East three Hundred and thirty-seven
Feet to the Pl^ce of Beginning.

AND WHEREAS since those Purchases made, a S^ate-House and other Buildings have
been erected on the Ground afor^said at the Charge of the Province, but the
Estate and Inheritance therein yet remain in the same Andrew Hamilton and
William Allen; NOW to the Intent that the said State-House, Building^ and
Ground aforesaid, may be effectually secured to the Use of this Province, it is
thought necessary the Estate in the Premises should be vested in Trustees for
the Uses, Int^nts and Purposes herein after specified; to which End BE IT
ENACTED by PATRICK GORDON, Esquire Lieutenant Governor with the King's Royal
Approbation under the Honorable John Penn, Thomas Penn, and Richard Penn,
Esqrs; true and absolute Proprietors of the Province of Pennsylvania, and of
the Counties of New Castle, Kent, and Sussex on Delaware, by and with the
Advice and Consent of the Representatives of the Freemen of the said Province
in General Assembly met, and by the Authority of the same, That the aforesaid
Andrew Hamilton and William Allen as soon as conveniently may be after the
Publication of this Act, shall and they are hereby required by some good and
sufficient Deed or Deeds, Assurance or Assurances in the Law, to grant,
bargain, sell, enfeoff and convey unto John Kinsey of the City of Philadelphia,
Joseph Kirkbride, jun. of the County of Bucks, Caleb Cowpland of the County of
Chester, and Thomas Edwards of the County of Lancaster, Esqrs; the Lands,
Tenements and Hereditaments aforesaid, and all and singular the Appurtenances
thereunto belonging or in any wise appertaining, To have and to hold to them
the said John Kinsey, Joseph Kirkbride, jun. Caleb Cowpland, and Thomas
Edwards, and the Survivors and Survivor of them, and to the Heirs of the
Survivor of them for ever, YET NEVERTHELESS to the Uses, Intents, and Purposes
herein after specified, and to no other Use, Intent or Purpose whatsoever, That
is to say, To and for the Use of the Representatives of the Freemen aforesaid,
which now are, and from time to time hereafter shall be duly elected by the
Freemen aforesaid; and to and for such other Uses, Intents and Purposes as they
the said Representatives at any Time or Times hereafter in General Assembly met
shall direct and appoint.

PROVIDED ALWAYS, and it is hereby declared to be the true Intent and Meaning
of these Presents, that no Part of the said Ground lying to the Southward of
the State-House as it is now built, be converted into or made use of for
Erecting any Sort of Buildings thereupon, but that the said Gr^^nd shall be
enclosed, and remain a public open Green and Walks for ever.

AND on this further Trust and Confidence, and to this further Intent and
Purpose, that they the said John Kinsey, Joseph Kirkbride, jun. Caleb Cowpland,
Thomas Edwards, and the Survivors and Survivor of them, and the Heirs of such
Survivor, shall from time to time and at all times hereafter, permit and suffer
such Suit or Suits, Action or Actions to be commenced and prosecuted in his or
their Name or Names, and to make such Conveyance or Conveyances of the Lands,
Tenements and Hereditaments or any Part or Parcel thereof to the Uses
aforesaid, as the Representatives aforesaid in General Assembly met shall at
any Time or Times hereafter direct and appoint, so always that they the said
John Kinse^, Joseph Kirkbride, jun. Caleb Cowpland, and Thomas Edwards, and
their Heirs, Executors and Administrators, and every of them, be well and truly
indemnified, saved and kept harmless of and from any Costs, Charges, Troubles
or Molestations whatsoever, which may arise or happen for or by Reason of such
Suit or Suits, Conveyance or Conveyances so to be commenced, prosecuted, made
and executed.

ANNO REGNI GEORGII II. REGIS DUODECIMO.
At a GENERAL ASSEMBLY of the Province of Pennsylvania, begun and holden at
Philadelphia, the Fourteenth Day of October, Anno Domini One Thousand Seven
Hundred and Thirty-seven, in the Eleventh Year of the Reign of our Sovereign
Lord GEORGE II. by the Grace of GOD, of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
KING, Defender of the Faith, etc. And from thence continued by Adjournments to
the Seventh of August, 1738.
CHAP. CCCXLI. An ACT for Laying an Excise on Wine, Rum, Brandy, and other
Spirits.
Preamble
WHEREAS the several Acts for laying an Excise on Wine, Rum, Brandy and other
Spirits, retailed within this Province, are now expired, Therefore to the End
farther Provision be made for the Payment of the Public Debts, and defraying
the other necessary Charges of Government; BE IT ENACTED by the Honorable
GEORGE THOMAS, Esquire Lieutenant Governor, with the King's Royal Approbation,
under the Honorable John Penn, Thomas Penn, and Richard Penn, Esqrs; true and
absolute P^oprietaries of the Province of Pennsylvania; by and with the Advice
and Consent of the Representati^es of the Freemen of the said P^ovince in
General Assembly met, and by the Authority of the same; That there shall be
throughout this Province raised, levied, collected and paid, for all Rum,
B^^ndy, and other Spirits, sold, drawn or bartered, by any Person or Persons
whatsoever, by any Quantity under Seventy Gallons, and for all Wine, sold,
drawn or bartered under the Quantity of one Hogshead, and to be delivered at
one Time, and to one Person, at any Time after the First Day of September, One
Thousand Seven Hundred and Thirty Eight, and before the First Day of September,
One Thousand Seven Hundred and Forty Three; ^our Pence per Gallon.
the Rate or Sum of Four Pence per Gallon, and so proportionably for a greater
or lesser Quantity.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That every Retailer of
all or any of the said Liquors, before he or they draw, sell, or barter any of
the said Liquors, shall enter his or her Name and Place of Abode, Retailer
shall en^er his Name, etc.
with the Collectors of the respective Counties herein after appointed, or
their Deputies, in Books to be by them kept for that Purpose, and shall also
take and have from the said Collectors, or their Deputies respectively, a
Permit for drawing or selling such Liquors, for which Entry and Permit, they
shall pay One Shilling, and no more.

PROVIDED ALWAYS, That no such Permit be granted to any Person or Persons, to
retail the Liquors aforesaid, the Rates and Duties whereof (by this Act
imposed) do not amount to the Value of Three Pounds per Annum, and so in
Proportion for a lesser Time, Not less than Three Pounds per Annum.
unless such Retailer or Retailers, at the Time of their obtaining such Permit
as aforesaid, will undertake and give Security (if thereunto required by the
said Collectors respectively) well and truly to pay so much to the said
Collectors as shall make up the Rates and Duties by this Act imposed, the Sum
of Three Pounds per Annum, and so proportionably for a longer or shorter Time.

AND all such Retailers, and every of them, are hereby enjoined once in every
Three Months, or oftener if required, to make true and particular Entries with
the Collectors or their Deputies aforesaid respectively, upon Oath or
Affirmation, (which the said Collectors or their Deputies are hereby fully
empowered to administer) of all Wine, Rum, Brandy and other Spirits, which they
or any of them shall have vended, bartered or retailed within that time, and so
from time to time during the Continuance of this Act: And shall and are hereby
required to account and pay to the said Collectors or their Deputies, Retailers
to make Payment once in 3 Mon.
respectively, once in every Three Months or oftener if required, all such Sum
and Sums of Money, as shall become due and payable by Virtue of this Act.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That all and every
Retailer of all or any of the Liquors aforesaid, shall on the Entry of their
Names and Places of Abode with the Officers aforesaid, give unto the said
Coll^c^ors or their Deputies, True Account of Liquors to be given the Col.
an exact and true Account of all Wine, Rum, Brandy and other Spirits, which
shall be in their Possession at the Time of Entry aforesaid, and of whom
purchased; and shall also from time to time after the first Day of September
next, before they take into their Houses, Shops, Cellars, Vaults or Stores, any
Cask or Quantity of Liquors liable to pay the Duties imposed by this Act, make
Entry of all and every such Cask or Quantity of Liquors, with the Collectors
aforesaid or their Deputies, respectively, with the Marks, Numbers and Contents
thereof, and of whom purchased; and shall receive from him a Certificate or
Duplicate of such Entry, if required by the Party; for which Entry and
Certificate the said Retailer shall pay Sixpence, and no more.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Retailer
shall presume to retail, Penalty on Retailers not e^tering, etc.
draw, sell or barter any of the Liquors aforesaid, without having first
entered his or her Name and Place of Abode with the Collectors or their
Deputies, as this Act directs, every such Retailer shall forfeit and pay the
Sum of Five Pounds, over and above the Duties for all such Liquors retailed by
them as aforesaid. Or if after such Entry made, any such Retailer shall refuse
or neglect to make true and particular Entries every three Months, as directed
by this Act; or shall refuse or neglect to account with or pay to the said
Collectors, or their Deputies, what shall appear to be due by this Act, upon
the Entries made by them as aforesaid, once in every Three Months or oftener if
thereunto required, every such Retailer shall forfeit and pay for so neglecting
or refusing to enter the Liquors drawn every Three Months respectively,
Penalties for neglecting to pay, etc.
and to account and pay as aforesaid, for the First Offense the Sum of Forty
Shillings, and for the Second Offense Five Pounds, and have their Permit or
License taken away, and are hereby declared incapable of Retailing or Selling
any of the Liquors aforesaid, during the Continuance of this Act. And if the
Person or Persons liable to pay the Duties arising upon selling or retailing of
the Liquors m^ntioned in this Act, shall neglect or refuse to pay the same in
the manner and at the times herein limited and appointed, by the Space of Ten
Days after the same ought to be paid, it shall and may be lawful for the said
Collectors respectively, by Virtue of a special Warrant for that purpose,
signed and sealed by any one Justice of the Peace of the City or County where
the Offense is committed, to empower the said Collector to levy the same by
Distress and Sale of the Goods and Chattels of the Offender, rendering the
Overplus if any be, to the Owner or Owners, after reasonable Charges deducted.

Liquors not truly entered, to be seized.
AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Person shall
mak^ short or fraudulent Entries of the Liquors in his or her Possession as
aforesaid, or shall neglect or refuse to enter and take Permits for such
Liquors as he or she shall receive into his or her House, Shop, Cellar, Vault,
Store or other Place, after the said first Day of September next, all such
Liquors not entered as aforesaid, shall be forfeited; and the Collectors
hereafter named, or their Deputies, are hereby respectively empowered to enter
at any time when they shall see convenient, the House, Cellar, Vault, Store or
Shop of any R^tailer, and to compare the Liquors in such House, Cellar, Vault,
Shop or Store with the Entries made, and to seize and take away all such
Liquors as shall be found not truly entered as aforesaid.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, Collectors may enter
Hou^es, etc. to search, etc.
That the said Collectors or their Deputies may enter into any House, Cellar,
Vault, Store or other Room, to search, examine, and gauge the Liquors of any
Person retailing, with or without License or Permit, as often as he or they
shall see fit; and upon their refusing him Liberty so to do, he may force and
break open Doors to gauge and examine the same; and in Case of Opposition, if
necessity requires, shall take to his Assistance the Sheriff or one or more
Constables of the Town or County respectively, who without any other Warrant
are hereby, under the Penalty of Five Pounds for every Refusal or Neglect,
required to be aiding and assisting to the said Collectors, and their Deputies,
therein, for the better and more effectual collecting the Duties, Penalties and
Forfeitures imposed by this Act.

PROVIDED ALWAYS, That there shall be allowed by the Collectors or their
Deputies, unto the several Retailers of the Liquors aforesaid, Allowance for
Leakage, etc.
Fifteen per Cent. for Leakage and Wastage; and if any Cask should happen to
start or burst, no Duties shall be reckoned for so much of the said Liquors as
such Retailers shall prove was lost thereby.

AND BE IT ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That Joseph Wharton, of
Philadelphia, Collectors Names.
Gent. shall be and is hereby appointed Collector of the Excise, etc. within
the City and County of Philad^lphia; and that William Atkinson of Bucks County,
Gent. shall be and is hereby appointed Collector of the Excise, etc. for the
County of Bucks; and that Thomas Cummings of Chester County, Gent. shall be and
is hereby appointed Collector of the Excise, etc. for the County of Chester;
and that Iame Mitchel of Lancaster County, Gent. shall be and is hereby
appointed Collector of the Excise, etc. for the County of Lancaster; which said
several Collectors are hereby severally empowered, by themselves, or their
Deputies, to be by them duly constituted, and for whom they shall be
accountable, to demand, collect, receive, and recover the Excise appointed to
be paid by this Act, of and from all and every Person or Persons (within their
respective Counties and Places for which they are appointed) retailing or
vending any of the Liquors by this Act liable to pay the Duties aforesaid, and
also to recover and receive all and every the Duties, Fines and Forfeitures
laid or imposed, or that shall happen to arise or become due for any thing done
contrary to the true Intent and Meaning of this Act.

AND the said Collectors are hereby required to keep true and fair Accounts in
Writing, Collectors to keep fair Accounts.
of all their Doings in the Premises, which Accounts they shall, when
thereunto required, submit to the View and Inspection of the Provincial
Treasurer, for the Time being; and thereupon settle and adjust the said
Accounts, and also lay the same before the Assembly of this Province, when and
so often as they shall be thereunto required.

AND the said Collectors and each of them shall once in Three Months, And to
make Payment to the Treasurer.
or oftener if required, pay unto the Provincial Treasurer all such Sums Money
as they shall receive by Virtue of this Act, (to be disposed of as the Assembly
of this Province shall think fit to direct) deducting out of the same Ten per
Cent. for all Sums by them received in the Counties of Bucks, Chester, and
Lancaster, and Seven and a Half for the County and City of Philadelphia, for
their Trouble and Care in Collecting and Paying the same, and deducting also
one Moiety of all the Fo^feitures by them recovered for any Offense committed
against this Act, after Charges paid and satisfied; and shall be further
allowed in the final adjusting their Accounts with the Assemblies of this
Province, all reasonable Charges which may have accrued in prosecuting Persons
offending against this Act.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, Collectors may be
distrained on, and may also distrain.
That if the said Collectors, or any of them, shall refuse or neglect to
collect the said Excise respectively, or any Part thereof, and pay the same
unto the Provincial Treasurer within the Time limited in this Act, every such
Collector, so refusing or neglecting, shall pay all the Arrearages of such
Excise which he ought to have collected; which shall be levied by a Warrant
under the Hand and Seal of any two Magistrates of the City of Philadelphia, for
the time being (whereof the Mayor or Recorder always to be one) or of any two
Magistrates of the respective Counties, where the Offense is committed,
directed to the Sheriff of the County, who is hereby empowered and required to
execute such Warrant upon the Goods and Chattels of the Collectors so
offending, and in Case Goods and Chattels sufficient to make Sattisfaction
cannot be found, then to imprison such Offender until Payment be made; and the
Collector being so distrained on, and having made full Satisfaction as
aforesaid, is hereby empowered without any other Warrant, to distrain for his
own Use upon all such Persons as shall refuse or neglect to pay the said
Arrearages.

AND the said respective Collectors, before they enter upon the Execution of
their said respective Offices, are hereby required to give Bonds with two
sufficient Sureties ^o the said Treasurer for the time being, in manner
following, Collectors (...) give Bond* etc.
that is to say, that the said Joseph Wharton, Collector of the Excise, etc.
for the City and County of Philadelphia, in the Sum of Five Hundred Pounds; the
said William Atkinson, Collector of the Excise, etc. for the County of Bucks,
in the Sum of One Hundred Pounds; the said Thomas Cummings, Collector of the
Excise, etc. for the County of Chester, in the Sum of Two Hundred Pounds; the
said James Mitchel, Collector of the Excise, etc. for the County of Lancaster,
in the Sum of One Hundred Pounds, for the faithful Discharge of their
respective Duties, and for their respective accounting and paying all such Sums
of Money as they shall from time to time receive, by Virtue of this Act.

AND the said Collectors are hereby required to give Public Notice by printed
Advertisements fixed on convenient Public Places, Collectors (...) publish
Advertisements.
certifying the Time of the Commencement of this Act, and also the Duties
hereby imposed, with Notice to the Constables of their Duty, and full
Directions how and when Entries are to be made in pursuance of this Act.

PROVIDED ALWAYS, AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That in case the said Joseph
Wharton, Thomas Cummings, William Atkinson, and James Mitchel, or either of
them, shall refuse to take upon him or them to be the Collector* or Collectors
of the said Duties, or having taken the same upon him or them shall afterward
neglect or decline the same, or misbehave him or themselves therein, or die,
during the Continuance of this Act; that then and in any such Case, Tr^^surer
may appoint new Officers, in c^se, etc.
the Provincial Treasurer shall appoint another or others in the Place or Stead
of such Person or Persons so refusing, neglecting, mis-behaving or dying, who
shall have the same Power and Authority, and shall be liable to the same
Restrictions and Penaltie^, as by this Act is given to the Collectors herein
named, until others shall be appointed by the Assembly.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That no Person or
Persons within this Province, shall during the Continuance of this Act, retail
less than one Quart of Rum, Wine, Brandy, or other Spirits, to delivered at one
time, and to one Person; unless such Person or Persons shall be regularly
recommended to the Governor for the time being, and by him licenced, according
to the Direction of an Act of Assembly of this Province, in that Case made and
provided. And if any Person or Persons shall presume during the Continuance of
this Act, to retail within this Province less than one Quart of Wine, Penalty
on retailing less than one Quart without License.
Rum, Brandy, or other Spirits, to be delivered at one time and to one Person,
without being legally recommended and licensed as aforesaid, he, she or they so
offending, shall forfeit and pay the Sum of Five Pounds over and above the
Duties for all such Liquors by them retailed as aforesaid, or be committed to
the Workhouse or Prison of the respective County where the Offense shall be
committed, there to be kept at hard Labor, for the Space of Five Months, any
thing herein contained to the contrary notwithstanding.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That all and every such
Person and Persons, who by Virtue of Licenses obtained from the Governor, shall
be allowed to retail Wine, Rum, Brandy, or other Spirits, in less Quantity than
a Quart as aforesaid, every such Retailer or Retailers, who shall apply him,
her, or themselves to the Justices of the Court of Quarter Sessions of the
Counties to which he, she or they respectively do belong, for a Recommendation
to the Governor to renew their Licenses, Condition of Recommendation.
for keeping a Publick-House or Houses, and retailing as aforesaid, every such
Person and Persons, shall on every such Application, and before any
Recommendatio^ obtained, produce Certificates from the Collectors of the said
Counties respectively, to which he, she or they belong, of having discharged
all Arrearages of Money due to the said Collectors, or any of them, for the
Rates and Duties imposed; or otherwise the said Justices are hereby enjoined
and required not to recommend such Person or Persons for the Purpose aforesaid;
and every such Person or Persons are hereby declared incapable of retailing any
of the Liquors aforesaid in less Quantities than one Quart as aforesaid; and in
Case any Person or Persons shall notwithstanding retail in less Quantities than
one Quart as aforesaid, he she, or they so offending, shall be liable to such
and the same Penalties and Forfeitures as by this Act is imposed on other
Persons.

AND for the better Discovery of Frauds and Abuses, BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by
the Authority aforesaid, That it shall and may be lawful for any Justice of the
Peace in this Province upon Application made by any one of the said Collectors,
or other Person, Justice^ may summon Evidence.
to summon any Person or Persons to appear before such Justice, at such Time
and Place as he shall appoint, to give Evidence upon Oath or Affirmation, for
discovery of Frauds and Abuses committed against this Act. And if any Person or
Persons summoned as aforesaid, shall neglect or refuse to appear and give
Evidence as aforesaid, he, she, or they so offending, shall for every such
Offense be fined by the Justice that issued out the Summons, in any Sum not
exceeding Twenty Shillings, and be committed to Prison until paid.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, How Offenses against
this Act are to b^ de^ermined.
That all the Forfeitures and Offenses, made, done, and committed against this
Act, or any Clause or Article therein contained, shall be heard, adjudged and
determined by such Person or Persons, and in such Manner and Form as herein is
directed, that is to say, All such Forfeitures and Offenses made and committed
within the City of Philade^phia, shall be heard, adjudged and determined by any
two or more of the Aldermen of the said City; and all such Forfeitures and
Offenses made and committed within any of the Counties within this Province,
shall be heard and determined by any two or more of the Justices of the
respective Counties where such Forfeitures shall be made or Offense committed.

AND if the Party finds him or herself aggrieved by the Judgment given by the
said Aldermen or Justices, Party aggrieved may appeal.
he or she may appeal to the Justices of the Peace of the next Court of General
Quarter Sessions of the Peace, to be held for the respective City or County
where the Judgment shall be given, which Court is hereby empowered and
authorized to hear and determine the same, and whose Judgment therein shall be
final.

PROVIDED ALWAYS, that no Alderman or Justice, who shall sit on the first
Hearing of any such Cause, shall sit to hear and determine in the same Cause in
case any Appeal shall happen to be made therein.

AND the said Aldermen and Justices of the said City and Counties of this
Province, Justices are required to take Cognizance of Offence^ ag inst this Act.
are hereby authorized and strictly enjoined and required, upon any Complaint
or Information exhibited and brought of any such Forfeiture made and Offense
committed contrary to this Act, to summon the Party accused, and upon his or
her Appearance or Contempt, to proceed to Examination of the Matters of Fact,
and upon due Proof thereof, either by Confession of the Party, or by the Oath
or Affirmation of one or more credible Witnesses, to give Judgment or Sentence
as before is directed, And to issue out Warrant^* etc. and cause Sale to be
mode, etc.
and to award and issue out Warrants under their Hands and Seals for the
levying of such Forfeitures, Penalties and Fines as by this Act is imposed, for
any such Offenses committed, upon the Goods and Chattels of such Offender; and
to cause Sale to be made of such Goods and Chattels (if they are not redeemed
within five Days) rendering to the Parties the Overplus, if any be, the Charges
of Distress and Sale being first deducted; and for want of sufficient Distress,
to imprison the Party offending until Satisfaction be made.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That if the said
Magistrate, Officer, or any Sheriff or Constable shall be sued and prosecuted
for any Thing done by them in pursuance of this Act, Officers, etc. sued may
plead the general Issue, etc.
he or they may plead the general Issue, and give this Act and special Matter
in Evidence, for his or their Justification; and in case a Verdict shall be
given against the Prosecutor, or he shall become Nonsuit, or suffer a
Discontinuance, the Defendant shall recover treble Costs, to be recovered as is
usual in other Cases.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That all and every the
Constables, of the respective Townships or Districts, in this Province, shall
and are hereby required under the Penalty of the Forfeiture of Twenty Shillings
for every Refusal or Neglect, to return on Oath or Affirmation unto the Court
of Quarter Sessions in their respective Counties, the Names and Places of Abode
of all Persons in their several Townships or Districts, retailing or vending
any Liquors liable to pay the Duties imposed by this Act; and that the
Collector of such respective County may and shall have Recourse to the Returns
of the Constables for the better Collecting the Duties, Fines and Forfeitu^es
arising upon this Act.

AND WHEREAS it has been the Practice of diverse Persons who were not Retailers
of the said Liquors, formerly to draw off certain Quantities of Wine, Rum and
other Spirits, and distribute the same amongst their Neighbors, on purpose to
^lude the Payment of Excise; For Prevention whereof for the future, it is
hereby enacted and declared, That the Drawing, Sharing of Rum, etc. to be
^eemed Reta^ling.
Distributing or Sharing of any Rum, Wine, Br^ndy or other Spirits out of any
Cask or Casks whatsoever in^o any Quantity or Quantities less than Seventy
G^llons each, under Pretense of making it convenient for Carriage or otherwise,
shall be deemed and taken to be Retailing within the meaning of this Act.

PROVIDED ALWAYS nevertheless, it shall and may be lawful to and for any
Distiller, in this Province, Distiller^ may sell 5 Gallons* etc.
to sell to any Retailer or Retailers any Quantity of Spirits of his own
Distilling, not less than Five Gallons to one Person, and to be delivered at
one Time, first making Entry thereof with the Collector of the County where he
resides, with the Retailer's Name and Place of Abode to whom sold, and Number
of Gallons, and also at the same Time taking an Oath or Affirmation that the
same Spirits by him sold as aforesaid, were bona fide distilled in this
Province, and from Materials of the Growth or Produce of the said Province, and
are clear of all Mixtures of Rum, or any other Foreign Spirits whatsoever, (and
the said Retailer shall account for and pay the Duty thereof to the said
Collector, pursuant to the Directions of this Act) any thing herein contained
to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

PROVIDED SALO, That the Collectors of the Excise aforesaid, or any of them,
Collectors not to deal in Liquors.
nor their or any of their Deputies, nor any other Person or Persons to be
appointed in their or any of their Places or Stead, shall during the
Continuance of this Act, vend, barter, sell, exchange or trade in any of the
Liquors aforesaid made exciseable by this Act, under the Penalty of Fifty
Pounds, Penalty on Officers trading Liquors.
to be recovered by Action of Debt, Bill, Plaint or Information, by any Person
who will sue for the same to Effect, one Half thereof to the Use of the Person
so suing, the other Half thereof to be paid into the Provincial Treasurer
aforesaid, toward the Support of the Government of this Province; and the
Person or Persons duly convicted of any such Offense or Offenses against this
Act, is and are hereby disabled from acting any longer in their respective
Offices; and the Treasurer aforesaid is hereby authorized and required to name
another or others in Lieu or Stead of the Person or Persons so offending, who
shall have the same Powers and Authorities, and be liable to the same
Restrictions and Penalties as the Collectors named in this Act, until others
are appointed by the General Assembly of this Province.

AND WHEREAS there are sundry Sums of Money which became due by Virtue of the
former Act of Excise, Treasurer to deliver Lists of old outstanding Debts to
the new Officers to be recovered, etc.
still outstanding, and not received by the former Collectors; BE IT ENACTED by
the Authority aforesaid; That the Provincial Treasurer for the Time being,
shall deliver unto the Officers appointed by this Act, a true List of all such
outstanding Sums of Money as became due upon the former Act of Excise, together
with the Names and Places of Abode of the Person or Persons from whom the same
are due; and the said Collectors are hereby authorized and empowered to demand,
recover and receive the same, in the same Manner as the Excise arising upon
this Act is directed to be received and recovered, and shall upon Receipt
thereof pay the same to the Provincial Treasurer, for the Uses and in the
Manner as the other Moneys are directed to be paid by this Act.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority afor^said, That this Act shall
continue in Force until the First Day of September, which will be in Year
OneThousandSeven Hundred FortyThree, and from thence until the End of the next
Sessions of Assembly, and no longer.

CHAP. CCCXLII. An ACT to remove the Trustees of the General Loan-Office of
Pennsylvania, and appointing others to execute the said Trust.
Preamble.
WHEREAS in the Year of our Lord 1729, Andrew Hamilton, Charles Read, Jeremiah
Langhorne and Richard Hayes, were, by an Act of General Assembly of the
Province of Pennsylvania, nominated and appointed Trustees of the General
Loan-Office of the said Province, in the Room and Place of Samuel Carpenter,
Jeremiah Langhorne, William Fishbourne and Philip Tailor, the former Trustees
of the said General Loan-Office, with full Power and Authority to execute the
said Trust, by doing and performing all Matters and Things whatsoever, enjoined
or required to be done or performed in the Execution of the said Trust, as
fully and amply as if the said Andrew Hamilton, Charles Read, Jeremiah
Langhorne, and Richard Hayes had been expressly named, authorized and appointed
in the Bodies of the several Acts of Assembly by which any Bills of Credit were
emitted, re-emitted, or otherwise to be issued, paid or exchanged. AND WHEREAS
in the Year 1733, it was resolved by the then House of Representatives, that
the Trustees of the General Loan-Office should be removed once in Four Years
for the future, although they may well behave themselves during that time in the
said Office:

AND WHEREAS the said Charles Read is since deceased, and the said Andrew
Hamilton requesting to be discharged from his Office of Trustee of the said
General Loan-Office: It is therefore thought proper, in Pursuance of the said
Resolve, to remove the present Trustees, and to appoint others in their Stead
to execute the said Trust. BE IT THEREFORE ENACTED by the Honorable GEORGE
THOMAS, Esquire Lieutenant Governor with the King's Approbation, under the
Honorable JOHN PENN, THOMAS PENN, and RICHARD PENN, Esqrs; true and absolute
Proprietaries of the Province of Pennsylvania, and the Counties of New Castle,
Kent, and Sussex on Delaware; by and with the Advice and Consent of the
Representatives of the Freemen of the said Province in General Assembly met:
That after the Tenth Day of October, in the Year One Thousand Seven Hundred and
Thirty-eight, the said Andrew Hamilton, Jeremiah Langhorne, Richard Hayes, and
every of them, be and are hereby discharged from executing the Office of
Trustees of the General Loan-Office of Pennsylvania; and John Kinsey, Jonathan
Robeson, Joseph Kirkbride, and Caleb Cowpland, New Trustees appointed.
are hereby nominated and appointed Trustees of the said General Loan-Office of
the Province aforesaid, to succeed the said present Trustees, and on the Tenth
Day of October aforesaid, to enter upon the Execution of their said Trust, to
which they are hereby appointed, for holding and ordering of the said General
Loan-Office, and for receiving and issuing all Bills of Credit of this Province
according to the Directions of any Act or Acts of Assembly of this Province, by
which any Bills of Credit have been or shall be emitted and made current; and
for the doing and performing all other Matters and Things enjoined or required,
or that shall be enjoined or required to be done by the Trustees of the said
General Loan-Office, in the said Office, by any of the Acts of Assembly now
made, or that shall be made, during the continuance of the said Acts, or until
they shall be legally removed from the said Trust, as fully and amply to all
Intents and Purposes, as the present or former Trustees of the General
Loan-Office of the Province of Pennsylvania, now can, or might, or could have
done, by virtue of any of the Acts of Assembly, by which the said Trustees
therein named were appointed, and as fully as if the said John Kinsey, Jonathan
Robeson, Joseph Kirkbride, and Caleb Cowpland had been nominated and appointed
Trustees in the Bodies of the said Acts of Assembly; each of the said Trustees,
before they enter upon the Execution of their Trust, first giving Bond to the
Provincial Treasurer for the time being, in the Sum of Three Thousand Pounds,
according to the Directions of the said Acts of Assembly, with a further
Condition to deliver up to their Successors in the said Trust, the
Mortgage-Deeds, and all other Things belonging to the said General Loan-Office,
when they shall happen to be removed ^^om their Trust, and taking the Oath or
Affirmation therein enjoined to be taken by the Trustees, for the due
Performanc of their Trust.

Vacancy how to be supplied.
AND if any of the Trustees shall happen to die, or be removed for Misfeazance,
or for not acting, some other fit Person or Persons shall be appointed in the
Place or Places of such Trustee or Trustees, in the Manner directed by the
Thirty Thousand Pound Act, made in the Year One Thousand Seven Hundred and
T^^nty-nine.

AND the said John Kins^y, Jonathan Robeson, Joseph Kirkbride and Caleb
Cowpland, are hereby further authorized and required, from and immediately
after the said Tenth Day of October, to demand, take and receive of the said
Andrew Hamilton, Jeremiah Langhorne and Richard Hayes, their Heirs, Executors
and Administrators, and of every of them, and of every other Person concerned,
all the Mortgage-Deeds, Bonds and Warrants of Attorney, together with the Books
of Records and Enrollments of the same, and all Deeds, Writings and Evidences
relating to or con^erning the Right or Title of any Lands, Tenements or
Hereditaments, or other Things taken or received by the late Trustees into the
said General Loan-Office, for Security of Payment of any Sum of Money, and all
the Bills of Credit remaining in their or any of their Hands, belonging to the
said Loan-Office.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That all the aforesaid
Mortgages, and Enrollments of the same, or other Deeds, Evidences and Writings
relating to or concerning any Mortgage or other Security, for Payment of any
Money or Bills of Credit into the General Loan-Office of the Province of
Pennsylvania, and all Plate, with the said Bills of Credit now remaining in
their or any of their Hands; whether the same be to be re-emitted, sunk and
destroyed, or exchanged for torn Bills, or directed by any Act or Acts of
General Assembly to be paid to any Persons for any particular Uses, together
with a Schedule or Inventory of the same, shall immediately from and after the
said Tenth Day of Oc^^ber, be delivered with all convenient Speed to the
^rustees in this Act named, who are hereby empowered to account with the said
late Trustees, and to receive the Mortgage-Deeds, Plate, and other Things so
delivered, of the said Andrew Hamilton, Jeremiah Langhorne and Richard Hayes,
late Trustees, or any other Person whomsoever, having the same in their Hands
or Possession, and to lay the several Accounts before the General Assembly of
this Province, when thereunto required. And that the Receipt of the said
Trustees, by this Act appointed, or any three of them, shall be a sufficient
Discharge to the said Andrew Ha^ilton, Jeremiah Langhorne and Richard Hayes,
their Heirs, Executors and Administrators, for such Bills of Credit, Plate,
Mortgage-Deeds and Enrollments of the same, or other Writings so delivered.

PROVIDED ALWAYS, that it shall and may be lawful for the late Trustees, or any
of them, Late Trustees may have recourse to the Mortgage-Deeds, etc.
at any seasonable Time or Times, to have recourse to, and Inspection of all
the Mortgage Deeds or Inrollments of the same, with their Indorsements, in
order to enable them to account with the Assembly of this Province, or their
Committees, or any other Persons to be appointed by the Assembly for that
Purpose, if any such Account be required.

Trustees may choose a Clerk.
AND that the said Trustees are hereby empowered to choose and employ a fit and
able Person to be Clerk, for whom they shall be answerable, to serve them in
the said Office, during their Pleasure, under the like Qualification enjoined
to be taken by the Clerk in the said Acts, before he enter upon his Office; who
shall deliver to the Committee of Assembly, when thereunto required, upon Oath
or Affirmation, a true List of ^ll Mortgage Deeds, taken according to the
Directions of the aforesaid Acts of Assembly. And the Trustees shall themselves
keep fair and exact Books of Account, And shall keep Books of Account, etc.
Tablewise, of all the Emissions of Bills of Credit, by them let out upon Loan,
or otherwise issued out of the said Office, and of the Receipts of the
Principal Sums, Quotas and Interests arising thereupon, of all the Moneys to
them paid in, upon all or any of the said several Acts of Assembly. To which
Books of Account the Committee of Assembly hereafter to be appointed to audit
the said Trustees Accounts, shall have free Access at all seasonable Times; and
shall further have delivered to them for the Use of the Assembly, a fair
Duplicate of the said Tables by the aforesaid Trustees, with a List of the
Receipts of all such Moneys paid in, with the Days of Payment; and likewise
have Access to the Mortgage-Deeds and Enrollments of the same, with the Bonds
given by the Mortgagers, to the End they may be satisfied, that there is due
Credit given to the Province for the Moneys or Bills of Credit paid in, and
that the same have been again let out, without Delay, to such Persons as have
had Occasion to borrow; and that the said Committee may from Time to Time be
acquainted with the State of the whole Transactions and Affairs belonging to
the said Loan-Office. Trustees Salary.
AND such of the said Trustees as shall undertake and execute the said Trust,
shall each of them receive the same like Salaries as are allowed and appointed
by the aforesaid several Acts of Assembly to be paid to the former Trustees.

CHAP. CCCXLII. A Supplement to the Act, Entitled, An Act for imposing a Duty
on Persons convicted of heinous Crimes, to prevent poor and impotent Persons
being imported into this Province.
WHEREAS by an Act of the General Assembly of this Province, See 3 Geo. II.
Chap. 310.
past in the Third Year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord GEORGE the Second,
Entitled, An Act for imposing a Duty on Persons convicted of heinous Crimes,
and to prevent poor and impotent Persons being imported into this Province;
Charles Read, late of Philadelphia, Merchant, was appointed Collector of the
Duties by the said Act imposed, who is since deceased. AND FORASMUCH as the
Circumstances of the Province require the said Act should be put in Execution,
and no Provision being therein made for appointing another Officer instead of
the said Charles Read: THEREFORE, for remedying that Defect, BE IT ENACTED by
the Honorable GEORGE THOMAS, Esquire Lieutenant Governor, with the King's
Approbation, under the Honorable John Penn, Thomas Penn, and Richard Penn,
Esqrs; true and absolute Proprietaries of the Province of Pennsylvania; by and
with the Advice and Consent of the Representatives of the Freemen of the said
Province in General Assembly met, and by the Authority of the same; That Thomas
Glentworth of Philadelphia, be, and he is hereby nominated and declared to be,
Collector of the Duties imposed by the beforementioned Act; and for the doing
and performing all other Matters and Things appertaining to the said Office by
Virtue of the said Act, as fully, amply and largely to all Intents and
Purposes, as the said Charles Read in his Lifetime was empowered to do, or
could or might have done; and as fully as if the said Thomas Glentworth had
been expressly named and appointed Collector of the Duties aforesaid in the
Body of the said Act; he thesaid Thomas Glentworth, before the entering upon the
Execution of his Office, first taking an Oath or Affirmation before one of the
Justices of the Peace of the County aforesaid, (which the s^id Justice on
Application to him made, by the said Thomas Glentworth, is hereby authorized
and enjoined to administer) for the faithful and impartial Discharge of the
Trust by Virtue of this Act committed to him, according to the best of his
Skill and Knowledge.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That if the aforesaid
Thomas Gle^tworth shall by any Accident be rendered incapable, or neglect to
execute the said Office, or shall misbehave himself therein, or shall happen to
dye, that then and so often it shall and may be lawful to and for the Mayor,
Recorder and Aldermen of the City of Philadelphia, or the Majority of them, to
supply his or their Place by some other fit and capable Person, who shall
thereupon be the Officer for putting the Act aforesaid in Execution, until the
Assembly shall appoint another.

PROVIDED ALWAYS, That before the said Officers, or either of them, shall do
any Thing in Execution of their said Office, they shall each of them
respectively take an Oath or Affirmation in Manner aforesaid, faithfully and
impartially to perform the Duty and Trust committed to them, to the best of
their Skill and Capacity, according to the Direction of the Act aforesaid.

ANNO REGNI GEORGII II. REGIS DUODECIMO.
At a GENERAL ASSEMBLY of the Province of Pennsylvania, begun and holden at
Philadelphia, the Fourteenth Day of October, Anno Domini One Thousand Seven
Hundred and Thirty-eight, in the Twelfth Year of the Reign of our Sovereign
Lord GEORGE II. by the Grace of GOD, of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
KING, Defender of the Faith, etc. And from thence continued by Adjournments to
the First Day of May, 1739.
CHAP. CCCXLIII. An ACT for Reprinting, Exchanging and Reemitting all the Bills
of Credit of this Province, and for striking the farther Sum of 11,110 l. 5 s.
to be emitted upon Loan.
WHEREAS, Preamble.
through the Scarcity of Silver and Gold in this Province, occasioned by
remitting the same to Great Britain, to pay for the Product and Manufactures of
that Kingdom imported hither for the Use of the Inhabitants, sundry Sums of
Money in Bills of Credit were formerly emitted, which, by Experience, have been
found to be very useful for carrying on the Trade and Commerce of this
Province. AND WHEREAS in Pursuance of the Direction of former Acts of Assembly,
by which the said Bills of Credit were emitted, a great Part of the same have
been sunk and destroyed, so that there is not current in the Province at this
Time, more than the Value of 68,889 l. 15 s. in the said Bills of Credit,
which, since the great Increase of the Inhabitants as well as the Trade of the
Province, is found to f^ll short of a proper Medium for negotiating our
Commerce and supporting the Government. AND WHEREAS it ^ppears, that great
Quantities of counterfeit Bills in the Likeness and Imitation of genuine Bills
of Credit of this Province, have been imported among us; which has rendered it
necessary to call in all our Bills of Credit, and to emit others of the same
Value, but of a different Impression from the former.

TO THE END THEREFORE, That the Wants of those concerned in Trade may be
supplied, and the Government supported, and to prevent the Peoples being
imposed upon by the said Counterfeit Bills, made in Imitation of the present
Bills of Credit of this Province; BE IT ENACTED by the Honorable GEORGE
THOMAS, Esquire with the King's Royal Approbation, Lieutenant Governor of the
Province of Pennsylvania, and of the Counties of New Castle, Kent, and Sussex
on Delaware; under the Honorable John Penn, Thomas Penn, and Richard Penn,
Esqrs; true and absolute Proprietors of the said Province and Counties, by and
with the Advice and Consent of the Freemen of the said Province in General
Assembly met, and by the Authority of the same; That indented Bills of Credit
of the Value of Eighty Thousand Pounds of lawful Money of America (according to
an Act of Parliament; 80,000 l. in Bills to be printed.
made in the Sixth Year of the late Queen Anne, for ascertaining the Rates of
foreign Coins in the Plantations in America) shall before the Tenth Day of
August, next after the Passing of this Act, be prepared and printed on good
strong Paper, under the Care and Direction of John Kinsey, Jonathan Robeson,
Joseph Kirkbride, Caleb Cowpland and John Wright, the Trustees of the General
Loan-Office of the Province of Pennsylvania, and at the Charge of the Public
to be defrayed out of the Interest Money arising or to arise upon the Loan of
any Bills of Credit formerly emitted, or to be emitted, by any Trustees of the
said General Loan-Office; which Bills shall be made and prepared in Manner and
Form following, and no other, viz.

Form of the Bills.
THIS Indented Bill shall pass current for within the Province of Pennsylvania,
according to an Act of Assembly of the said Province, made in the Twelfth Year
of the Reign of King GEORGE the Second. Dated the Tenth Day of August, One
Thousand Seven Hundred and Thirty Nine.

AND the same Bills shall have such like Escutcheon as in the Margent hereof,
with such other Devices on the said Bills as the said Trustees shall think fit,
as well to prevent Counterfeits as to distinguish their several Denominations;
each of which Bills shall be of the several and respective Denominations
following, and no other, viz.

Number of Bills of each Sort.
TEN Thousand of the same Bills, the Sum of One Shilling in each of them.

TEN Thousand of the same Bills, the Sum of One Shilling and Sixpence in each
of them.

TEN Thousand of the same Bills, the Sum of Two Shillings in each of them.

TEN Thousand of the same Bills, the Sum of Two Shillings and Sixpence in each
of them.

THIRTY Thousand of the same Bills, the Sum of Five Shillings in each of them.

FORTY Thousand of the same Bills, the Sum of Ten Shillings in each of them.

TWENTY Thousand of the same Bills, the Sum of Fifteen Shillings in each of
them; and

THIRTY-FOUR Thousand of the same Bills, the Sum of Twenty Shillings in each of
them.

AND the said Trustees shall use the best of their Care, Attention and
Diligence, during the Printing of the said Bills, that the Number and Amount
thereof, according to their respective Denominations aforesaid, be not
exceeded, nor any clandestine or fraudulent Practice use^ by the Printer his
Servants or Persons concerned therein.

AND for the perfecting the said Bills, to make them Current within this
Province, according to the true Intent and Meaning of this Act; BE IT FURTHER
ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That all and every of the said Bills shall
be signed by the Persons following, or by Three of them at least, that is to
say, Signer^ (...)*
Thomas Leech and William Monington of Philadelphia County, Abraham Chapman of
Bucks County, Joseph Harvey of Chester County, and Samuel Smith of Lancaster
County, who are hereby nominated and appointed to be the Signers of the said
Bills; and shall before they presume to receive or sign any of the said Bills
of Credit, take an Oath or Affirmation to the following Effect, to wit. THAT
they shall well and truly sign and number all the Bills of Credit that shall
come to their Hands for that Purpose, by the Direction of this Act, Signer^
Qualification.
and the same so signed and numbered will deliver or cause to be delivered unto
the Trustees of the General Loan-Office of the Province of Pennsylvania,
pursuant to the Direction of this Act.

AND for avoiding the Danger of Embezzlement o^ Misapplication of any of the
said Bills of Credit; IT IS HEREBY FURTHER ORDAINED AND PROVIDED, That the said
Trustees, after the said Bills are printed, shall deliver them to the said
Signers, to be signed and numbered by Parcels, for which the said Signers or
some of them shall give their Receipt, Not more than 1000 l. to be delivered
for signing at one tim^.
that is to say, One Thousand Pounds value in the said Bills at one Time, and
so from time to time, till all the said Bills of Credit shall be signed and
numbered, yet so as that the said Trustees shall not deliver any other of the
said Bills to the Signers aforesaid, whilst the Sum in their Custody
unexchanged exceeds One Thousand Pounds; of all which Bills of Credit so
delivered ^o be signed by the Trustees, true Accounts shall be kept by the
Signers. who upon their Re-delivery of each or any Parcel of the said Bills of
Credit by them signed and numbered to the Trustees of the General Loan-Office,
shall take the Receipt of the said Trustees to charge them before any Committee
of Assembly to be appointed for that Purpose.

Signers Reward.
AND the said Signers shall have Fifteen Shillings apiece for every Thousand of
the aforesaid Bills by them signed and numbered, within Ten Days after the
Re-delivery thereof to the said Trustees, to be by them paid out of the
Interest-Money in the said Trustees Hands.

AND if any of the Persons before nominated to be Signers, shall happen to die
or be rendered incapable of doing his or their Duty by this Act required, Signer
dying, etc. the Assembly to apanother.
the Assembly for the time being shall appoint some other Person or Persons in
his or their Stead from time to time, until all the Bills hereby directed to be
made, be wholly signed and numbered as aforesaid.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, Trustees to give
Attendance for exchanging the old Bills.
That the said Trustees, after the Receipt of any Parcel of the said new Bills,
signed and numbered as aforesaid, or some fit Person for whom they shall be
accountable, shall give due Attendance at their Office, on every Fourth Day of
the Wee^, and shall deliver out the same unto such Persons as shall demand them
in Exchange for Bills of the same Value made and emitted by the Direction of
any former Act of Assembly of this Province; which said old Bills shall be kept
by the said Trustees for their Vouchers, to discharge them of so much of the
aforesaid L80000 Value in new Bills as they shall have given in Exchange as
aforesaid, before any Committee of Assembly to be appointed for that Purpose,
who having duly examined such old Bills so received in Exchange, shall cause
the same to be burnt and destroyed in their Presence; Trustees Reward for
exchanging.
and the said Trustees shall have for their Trouble and Care, in exchanging
every 10,000 l. Value of the said old Bills, the Sum of 27 l. 10 s. to be
defrayed out of the Interest Money aforesaid.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, Limitation of the
Currency of the old Bill^
That all the aforesaid Bills of Credit made and emitted by any former Act of
Assembly of this Province, shall, from and after the Tenth Day of August, One
Thousand Seven Hundred and Forty, cease to be current Bills of this Province,
and from thenceforth become null and void, and of no Effect, any Law, Custom or
Usage to the contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding.

AND the said new Bills hereby directed to be made and signed as aforesaid, to
be emitted in Exchange or Loans, New Bill^ when to b^come current.
as this Act directs, shall from and after the Tenth Day of August, One
Thousand Seven Hundred and Thirty-Nine, be the current Bills of this Province,
for the Payment and Discharge of all Manner of Debts, Rents, Sum and Sums of
Money whatsoever, due, payable or accruing upon or by Reason of any Mortgage,
Bill, Specialty, Bond, Note, Book-Account, Promise, or any other Contract or
Cause whatsoever, as if the same were tendered or paid in the Coins mentioned in
such Bond, or other Writing, Book-Account, Promise, Assumption, or in any other
Contract whatsoever, and at the Rates ascertained in the said Act of
Parliament, and shall be so receivedin all Payments by all Persons whatsoever.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, Power of the Trustees,
etc.
That the said Trustees shall be in and have Capacity and Power to take, hold
and enjoy to them and their Successors in the said Trust, all such Lands,
Tenements* Rents and Hereditaments, and all such Plate as shall be granted them
in Mortgage, or which has at any Time heretofore been granted to any Trustee
or Trustees of the General Loan-Office of Pennsylvania, for securing the
Re-payment of the Money or Bills, formerly lent, or hereby directed to be lent;
and also to sell, grant, alien, and dispose of the same Lands, Tenements,
Rents, Hereditaments and Plate in Default of Payment, and also to do, execute,
perform and suffer all other Things whatsoever, a^ fully to all Intents and
Purposes as any Trustees of the General Loan-Office aforesaid, by any former
Act of Assembly of this Province may or might have done, executed, performed
and suffered: Any Truste^ dying, the Assembly to appoint a new one.
And upon the Death or Removal of any of the present Trustees, or of any other
that shall be nominated and appointed hereafter, it shall and may be lawful to
and for the General Assembly of this Province for the Time being, to appoint
some other fit Person or Persons in his or their Place and Stead, who shall
have the same Power and Authority as if they had been nominated and appointed
by Virtue of this Act.

Trustees to continue in that Of^^ce but 4 Years, etc.
PROVIDED ALWAYS, AND IT IS HEREBY FURTHER ENACTED, That none of the Persons
herein before nominated or hereafter to be appointed Trustees of the General
Loan-Office aforesaid, shall longer continue in the Exercise of the said Office
than the Space of Four Years from the Time of such their nomination as
aforesaid, and from thence to the End of the then next Session of Assembly.

But not to be discharged till they have accounted, etc.
PROVIDED ALSO, That none of the Trustees so as aforesaid nominated or to be
nominated and appointed according to the Direction of this Act, or any of them,
or any of their Heirs, Executors or Administrators, or Securities hereby
directed to be given, be acquitted o^ discharged, for any Thing done or
suffered in or about the Trust hereby committed to them, until they have
accounted for and paid and delivered up to the succeeding Tr^stees all Bills,
Moneys, Securities and Writings belonging to the Loan-Office, and so from time
to time during the Continuance of this Act, any thing herein contained to the
contrary notwithstanding: But before any of the present Trustees, or such as
shall hereafter be appointed Trustees, shall enter upon the Execution of their
Trust, or any Part thereof* they shall each of them enter into Bond to the
Treasurer of this Province, Trustees to give Bond to the Treasurer.
in the Sum of Three Thousand Pounds, conditioned for the Execution of the
Trust and Performance of all Things required of them by this Act, and shall
take an Oath or Affirmation, before some Justice of the Peace, in the Words
following, viz. Trustees Qualification.
I A. B. will according to the best of my Skill and Knowledge, faithfully,
impartially and truly demean myself, in the Discharge of the Trust required of
me by an Act of Assembly of this Province, entitled, An Act for Reprinting,
Exchanging and Re-emitting all the Bills of Credit of thi^ Province, and for
striking the further Sum of 11,110l. 5 s. to be emitted upon Loan, so as none
may be prejudiced by m^ (...), Privity or Procurement.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That the said Trustees
shall lend out the Value of 11,110 l. 5 s. in the Bills hereby directed to be
made, for and during the Space, 11,110 l. 5 s. to be let out for 16 Years, upon
Mortgages of Messuage^, etc.
and unto the full End and Term of Sixteen Years, from the 15th Day of October,
in the Year of our Lord One Thousand Seven Hundred and Thirty-nine: All which
Loans made by Virtue of this Act, shall be made in Sums not exceeding One
Hundred P^unds, nor less than Twelve Pounds, to any one Person, upon Mortgages
of Messuages, Lands, Tenements, Rents and Hereditaments in this Province,
whereof the Borrowers stand seized in Fee-simple in their own Right, free from
Encumbrances, the Proprietary Quit-Rents, and other Rents charged on the same,
and discovered to the said Trustees, only excepted; of which Titles and
Clearness, the Trustees are to inform themselves the best they can, by any of
the Ways and Means heretofore granted and allowed to the former Trustees of the
said General Loan-Office, or to any of them, and shall inform themselves, as
well of the clear value of the Titles of all Lands, Houses and Ground-Rents
offered in Security, so as to be satisfied that the Lands and Ground-Rents are
held in Fee-simple, and are at least o^ double the Value of the Sums requested
to be lent* and tha^ as to the Houses erected upon Ground subject to the
Paymen^ of Ground-Rent, offered in Mortgage, Care shall be taken by the said
Trustees, that there be no Rent or Quit-^ent in Arrear at the Time of receiving
the same in Mortgage, and that the Ground shall be near equal in Value, above
the Ground-Rent, to the Sum lent, yet so that the House and Ground be of double
Value, for the better Security of the Mortgage-Money. And thereupon the said
Trustees, in pursuance of the Trust hereby committed to them, shall in the Name
and Style of the Trustees of the General Loan-Office of the Province of
Pennsylvania, and not otherwise, tak^ and receive Deeds of Mortgage in
Fee-simple of such Messuages, Lands, Tenements, Rents and Hereditaments, with
the Appurtenances, to secure the Re-payment of the Sums they lend, to be made
yearly on the 15th Day of October, by equal Payments, with the whole Interest
accrued, at the Rate of Five per Cent. per Annum.

PROVIDED ALWAYS, Former Mortgagors may renew their Mortgage^, etc.
AND IT IS HEREBY FURTHER ENACTED, That the better to enable any of the
Mortgagors, by any former Act of Assembly, to discharge their Mortgages, it
shall and may be lawful to and for the said Trustees, and they are hereby
required, to permit those Mortgagors, or their Heirs, or such other Person or
Persons to whom they have made over their Right of Redemption and Estate in
their mortgaged Messuages, Lands and Rents, to renew their Mortgages
respectively, if they the said Trustees shall judge them a sufficient Security
for the Sums thereon due and in Arrear, although the same exceed the Sum
aforesaid limited to one Person, to be repaid according to the Proportions and
within the Times by this present Act limited and appointed.

PROVIDED ALSO, That if any Mortgager of any Messuages, Lands or Rents by this
Act directed, his Heirs, Executors or Assigns, shall be minded to pay off and
discharge his Mortgage and Security at any other Time than according to the
Time specified in his Mortgage-Deed, it shall be lawful for him or them so to
do before Sale of the mortgaged Premises, by paying down the whole principal
Sum due and in arrear, together with the Interest and Charges then accrued.

Principal Sums etc. not to be sunk, otherwise than by this Act direc-
AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That the principal Sums
and all and singular the Parts, Parcels and Quotas thereof, or any them,
payable to the Trustees of the said General Loan-Office, by the Provincial
Treasurer, or any of the County Treasurers, or by the Mayor or Treasurer of the
City of Philadelphia, or by any Mortgagor or Person whatsoever; as also the
Quotas of the Sum appropriated for Building the State-House, shall not be sunk
or destroyed, otherwise, or at any other Time than by this present Act is
directed, limited and appointed, any Law, Custom or Usage to the contrary
notwithstanding: But shall be re-emitted, etc.
But the same principal Sums, and all other yearly Payments of principal Sums
herein-before directed to be emitted on Loans as this Act directs, now in the
Hands of the said Trustees, or hereafter to be recovered or received by them,
before the Fifteenth Day of Oct^ber, Anno Domini One Thousand Seven Hundred and
Forty-Nine, shall be from Time to Time re-emitted on Securi^ies as herein
before directed, for the Residue of the aforesaid Term of Sixteen Years. And
also, so often as any Mortgage-Monies, directed to be re-emitted as aforesaid,
shall be recovered or received before the aforesaid Fifteenth Day of October,
One Thousand Seven Hundred and Forty-Nine, the principal Moneys thence arising,
shall in like manner, from time to time, be re-emitted again on Securities as
afor^said* And the said Trustees or some three of them, shall weekly attend at
their Office on the Third and Fourth Days in every Week (commonly called
Tuesdays and Wednesdays) until the aforesaid Sum of Eleven Thousand One Hundred
and Ten Pounds, Five Shillings, shall be wholly emitted, as this Act directs:
And afterward, on the Third Day of the Second Week in the Months commonly
called April, June, August, October, December and February, in every Year of
the Continuance of this Act, and at such other Times as their Duty and Trust
shall require; which Deeds of Mortgag^ shall be fairly entered in Books of
large Paper* to be provided by the said Trustees, an attested Copy of which
Deeds, so entered and certified by the said Trustees or any Three of them for
the Time being, shall be and is hereby declared to be good Evidence, to prove
the Mortgage thereby mentioned to be made; Oath or Affi^mation to be taken by
the Mortgagors*
and on every of the aforesaid Deeds of Mortgage shall be indorsed or added an
Oath or Affirmation, to be taken by the Mortgagor or Mortgagors, before some or
one of the said Trustees, who are hereby empowered and required to administer
the same, That he, she or they is or are seized of the Hereditaments and
Premises thereby granted, in his, her or their own Right, and to his, her or
their own Use, and that free from all Encumbrances to the Knowledge of such
Mortgagor (the yearly Quit-Rents thence issuing, payable to the Chief Lord or
Lords of the Fee thereof, and such other Rents, if any, as are therein
particularly mentioned and discovered to the Trustees, only excepted); and the
aforesaid Deeds being so executed and acknowledged, shall transfer the
Possession and vest the Inheritance of and in such Mortgaged Premises, to and
in the said Trustees and their Successors, as fully and effectually as Deeds of
Feoffment, with Livery and Seizin, or Deeds enrolled in any of the King's
Courts of Westminster may or can do.

IN all which Deeds, the Words, Grant, Bargain and Sell, shall be, and be
adjudged in all Places and Courts whatsoever within this Province, to have the
Force and Effect of a Covenant, that the Mortgagor notwithstanding any Act done
by him, was at the Time of the Execution of such Deed, seized of the
Hereditaments and Premises thereby granted* of an indefeasible Estate of
Inheritance, free from Encumbrances, the Rents so as aforesaid to be discovered
to the said Trustees only excepted.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, Mortgagor^ to execute a
Bond and Warrant of Attorney* etc.
That together with every of the aforesaid Mortgage-Deeds, the respective
Mortgagor shall execute a Bond of double the Mortgage-Money, conditioned for
the Payment of the Money borrowed with the Interest, according to the Proviso
or Condition contained in each such Mortgage-Deed, and also a Warrant of
Attorney, impowering such Person or Persons as the Trustee^ shall appoint, to
confess or suffer Judgment, which the said Trustees are hereby required to
cause their Attorney to enter in any of the Courts of Common Pleas of this
Province, against such Mortgagor as shall make Default in Payment of the
Mortgage-Moneys, or any Part thereof, on the said Bonds or Mortgages, for
Nonperformance of the Conditions thereof, or in such Actions of Debt as the
said Trustees are required to bring for the Value of the said Bills of Credit
received by the Mortgagors, whose Titles shall happen to prove defective,
together with the Interest and Costs of Suit; in every which Warrant of
Attorney shall be inserted a Release of Errors by the Mortgagor.

PROVIDED ALWAYS, NEVERTHELESS, That until some Default be made in Payment of
some Part of the Mortgage-Moneys by the Mortgagors respectively; it shall and
may be lawful to and for them and their Heirs, to hold and enjoy the mortgaged
Premises, any Thing in this Act, or in their Mortgage-Deeds, to the contrary
notwithstanding; but if Default shall be made or suffered in Payment of any
Part of the Mortgage-Monies aforesaid, whether of the Principal or Interest,
which the Mortgagors, their Heirs, Executors, Administrators or Assigns should
or ought to pay, according to the Days of Payment, aforesaid, and as in their
respective Deeds of Mortgage shall be specified, it shall and may be lawful to
and for the said Trustees for the Time being, Two Months after Defaul^ in
Payment Trustees may sell the mortgaged Premises.
after two Months next after Default made as aforesaid, to enter upon the
Messuages, Lands, Rents and Hereditaments, respectively in the Deeds of
Mortgage specif^ed, and the same thereupon to sell and convey to the best
Purchaser, and out of the Moneys arising by such Sale, to detain and keep the
Sums thereon due unto them* with all Costs and Charges relating thereunto,
returning the Overplus if any, to the Owners of such Lands and Hereditaments,
who shall thereupon stand foreclosed of and from all Right of Redemption of the
same.

PROVIDED ALWAYS, AND IT IS HEREBY FURTHER ENACTED, That it shall and may be
lawful to and for the said Trustees or any three of them, at any Time or Times
before ^he aforesaid Fifteenth Day of October, One Thousand Seven Hundred and
Forty-Nine, to lend out in such Manner as to them shall seem best, any Sums in
the Bills aforesaid, not exceeding One Hundred Pounds nor less than Twelve
Pounds to one Person, Good Plate may be taken in Security by the Trustee^.
on Securities of good Plate at the Value of Six Shillings per Ounce, to be
repaid to the said Trustees within Twelve Months, with the Interest thereof at
the Rate aforesaid: And in Case of the Non-Payment to sell and dispose of such
Plate for the most it will yield, returning the Overplus, if any be, to the
Owner, after Payment of the Sum ^ent, with the Interest aforesaid, and all
Charges thereupon accrued.

PROVIDED ALWAYS, That where any Part of the Mortgage-Monies has been paid,
the Trustees shall indorse upon the Writ of Execution the real Sum of Principal
and Interest due to the said Loan-Office, and the Sheriff shall thereupon
proceed as in other Cases of Sale of Lands, to sell so much of the mortgaged
Premises, as near as he can judge, as will be sufficient to pay the whole Debt
and Costs; and if any Overplus remain in the Sheriff's Hands after the Payment
of the whole Moneys due to the said Loan-Office, with the Costs and Charges
accrued thereupon, the said Sheriff shall render the same to the Debtor or
Defendant, his or their Executors or Administrators, and put the said Purchaser
into peaceable and quiet Possession of the Messuages, Lands and Tenements so
sold as aforesaid, who shall hold and enjoy the same to his Heirs and Assigns,
as fully and amply as he or they for whose Debt the same shall be sold, might,
could, or ought to have done at any Time before the taking thereof in
Execution, freed and discharged from all Claim of Dower by any Person claiming
under the Defendant for whose Debt the same was sold.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, Trustees to indorse
their Receipts on the Mortgage Deeds, etc.
That the said Trustees shall indorse upon each Mortgage-Deed their Receipts of
all the yearly Quotas to be paid by the respective Mortgagors, which they shall
also note on the Counterparts to them produced, when required; for which
Receipts they shall be paid by the Mortgagors Six Pence each and no more; and
upon the last Payment thereof, the said Trustees shall enter in the Margent of
the Inrollment of the Mortgage-Deed the Time of the Discharge thereof, for
which they shall receive of the Mortgage^ Six Pence an^ no more.

And shall keep fair Accounts, etc.
AND the said Trustees shall keep distinct, fair and true Accounts of all the
Sums they receive, by Virtue of this and the before recited Acts, respectively,
and of what they lend, pay or emit, by Virtue hereof or by Orders of the
Assembly, whether in Part of Principal or Interest Moneys, and shall have and
receive for their Trouble and Service the Sum of One Hundred and Ten Pounds a
piece per annum, Trustees Salary.
during the Continuance of their Re-emitting on Mortgage, as this Act directs,
which will be until the Fifteenth Day of October, Anno Domini One Thousand
Seven Hundred and Forty-Nine; and afterward the Sum of Eighty Pounds a piece
per annum, during the future Continuance of this Act, which Payments shall be
made in Bills of Credit of this Province unto each of them, his Executors or
Administrators.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That the said Trustees
shall once in every Year, Trustees to account once a Year with Committes of
Assembly, etc.
or oftener, exhibit their Accounts aforesaid unto the Committees of Assembly
of this Province appointed for that Purpose, with whom they shall from time to
time settle and adjust: And all the Interest Money by them from time to time
received being accounted for, and the Salaries and Charges allowed for, by this
Act, being deducted, the Residue thereof shall be disposed of as the Assembly
of this Province shall direct and appoint; and as for and concerning all yearly
Quotas and Payments in the Bills aforesaid, (Part of the Principal Sums to be
emitted or re-emitted upon Loans as this Act directs) which by Virtue hereof or
of any Mortgage or Security heretofore taken or to be taken as aforesaid, shall
be recovered or received, and remaining in the Loan-Office, on or after the
Fifteenth Day of October, in the Year of our Lord, One Thousand Seven Hundred
and Forty-Nine, the Trustees of the Loan-Office aforesaid shall from time to
time as they come to their Hands, exhibit the same Bills to the aforesaid
Committees, Bills to be burnt, etc.
who having duly examined and compared them, shall cause the same to be burnt
and destroyed in their Presence.

AND the better to prevent Inconveniences arising from indulging the
Mortgagors to be behind in their Payments hereby directed to be made: BE IT
FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That the Trustees for the Time
being shall, Trustees to keep the Mortgagors up to their annual Payments^
and they are hereby required, to keep the Mortgagors, in pursuance of this
Act, up to their annual Payments* as by the same Act is directed and appointed:
And the Committees of Assembly to be annually appointed to audit the said
Trustees Accounts are hereby directed not to allow of any Quotas in arrear and
unpaid which have been due Twelve Months at the Time of the Settlement,
excepting only such Sums for which the Trustees have commenced Suit, or
otherwise have proceeded according to the Direction of th^^ Act, for the
Recovery of the Money due.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, by the Authority aforesaid, That the said Trustees
shall, Trustees to c^use a Clerk
for the better r^gulating of their said Office, choose and employ a fit and
^ble Person for their Clerk during their Pleasure, for whom they shall be
answerable, who shall prepare the Deed^ of Mo^tgage, with the Mortgagors
Affidavits, Bonds, Warrants of Attorney, and Releases of Errors, and shall have
and receive the following Fees, and no more, viz. for every Mortgage-Deed,
recording the same, the Counterpart or Copy thereof, the Mortgagor's Oath or
Affirm^tion indorsed on the Mortgage-Deed, and the Bond, Warrant of Attorney,
and Release of Errors, Hi^ Fee^ an^ Duty.
the Sum of Twenty Shillings and no more, to be paid, by the said Trustees, out
of the Interest Money aforesaid: And the said Clerk shall keep true Accounts of
the Name^ of all Persons applying to borrow on Secu^ities, as this Act directs,
and shall record their Deeds of Mortgage in the same Order of Time as they were
executed. And shall once a Year make out a List of the Names of all Mortg^gors,
by this Act directed, with the Sums they borrow, and Date of their
Mortgage-Deeds; and the same List shall deliver to the Committees of Assembly
to be appointed Au^itors of the said Trustees Accounts: But before any Person,
so chosen to be Clerk, shall enter upon the Execution of his Office, he shall
take an Oath or Affirmation before some Justice of the Peace, Clerk's
Qualification.
That he will truly and faithfully perf^rm the Office and Duty that is directed
and required of him by this Act, wherein he will make no undue Preference,
unnecessary Delays or fraudulent Practice.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, Penalty on (...), etc.
That if any Person or Persons shall presume to counterfeit any of the said
Bills of Credit, made current by this Act, or any Law of this Province, by
printing or procuring the same to be printed, in the Likenes^ of the said
genuine Bills of Credit; and also, if any Person or Persons shall ^orge the
Name or Names of the Signers of the true Bills of Credit, to such Counterfeit
Bills, whether the counterfeiting of the said Bills or Names be done within
this Province or elsewhere, or shall utter such Bills, knowing them to be so
counterfeited as aforesaid, and being thereof legally convicted, by Confession,
standing mute, or by the Verdict of Twelve Men, in any Court of Record within
this Province, he, she or they shall suffer Death without Benefit of the
Clergy: And the Discoverer or Informer shall have, as an Encouragement for his
Discovery, the Sum of Fifty Pounds, of the Goods and Chattels, Lands and
Tenements of the Person convicted, and if no such Goods and Chattels can be
found, then the Trustees of the General Loan-Office shall pay to such Informer
or Discoverer, his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, the Sum of Ten Pounds.
And if any Person or Persons, shall counterfeit any of the said Bills of Credit
of this Province, by altering the Denomination of the said Bills, with Design
to increase the Value of such Bills, or shall utter such Bills, knowing them to
be so counterfeited or altered as aforesaid, and shall thereof be legally
convicted, in any Court of Record in this Province, such Person or Persons
shall be Sentenced to the Pillory, and to have both his or her Ears cut off and
nailed to the Pillory, and to be publicly whipped on his or her bare Back, with
Thirty-one Lashes well laid on: And moreover, every such Offender shall forfeit
the Sum of One Hundred Pounds lawful Money of Pennsylvania, to be levied on his
and her Lands and Tenements, Goods and Chattles, the one half to the Use of the
Governor, and the other half to the Discoverer; and the Offender shall pay to
the Party grieved double the Vaof the Damages thereby sustained, together with
the Costs and Charges of Prosecution. And in Case the Offender has not
sufficient to satisfy the Discoverer for his or her Damages and Charges, and
pay the Forfeiture aforesaid, in such Case the Offender shall, by Order of the
Court where he or she was convicted, be sold, for any Term not exceeding Seven
Years, for Satisfaction; and in such Case the said Trustees shall reward the
Discoverer of such insolvent Offender, to the Value of Five Pounds. And every
such Counterfeit Bill shall be delivered to any of the said Trustees, to be
made Use of upon the Trial of the Person accused or suspected, and afterward
to be burnt or destroyed by the said Trustees, in the Presence of a Committee
of Assembly.

AND IT IS HEREBY DECLARED AND ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That this
Act shall be taken and allowed in all Courts and Places within this Province as
a Public Act, and all Judges, Justices and other Persons concerned, are hereby
required to take Notice thereof, as such, without pleading the ^ame specially.

CHAP. CCCXLIV. An ACT for the more effectual preserving the Credit of our
Paper-Money, and recovering the Proprietary Quit-Rents.
WHEREAS it has been found by Experience, That Bills of Credit emitted upon
Land-Security as a Medium in Commerce, have been of great Service for carrying
on the Trade and other Improvements in this Province; and Money and Gold being
now become a Commodity, and generally remitted to Great Britain, in Return for
the Manufactures of that Kingdom imported hither;

AND it being objected by the Proprietors of the Province of Penns^lvania, That
the Quit-Rents reserved to them and payable in Sterling-Money, are now greatly
in Arrear, and that it would be a very great Disapointment to them to receive
the same otherwise than in Silver-Money;

AND WHEREAS it would be a Hardship upon the Freeholders of this Province, to
purchase Silver to pay their Quit-Rents, and the same might also greatly affect
the Credit or Value of our Paper-Money, and render it of less general Use: To
remove which Difficulties, and for the Preservation of the Credit of our
Paper-Money, our Proprietors having condescended to accept of the Bills of
Credit of this Province at the Rate the same are made current by Law in all
Payments, for the Quit-Rents due or to become due to them, on Grants of Land
and Lots made before the Year One Thousand Seven Hundred and Thirty-two, during
the Continuance of this Act; the Representatives of the Freemen of the Province
of Pennsylvania, in General Assembly met, in Consideration of the Premises,
have agreed to pay to them our said Proprietors the Sum of Twelve Hundred
Pounds in Bills of Credit of this Province, at the Days and Times herein after
mentioned, as also the Sum of One Hundred and Thirty Pounds annually, during
the Re-emission of the Bills of Credit, to be made current by an Act of the
General Assembly of thi^ Province, past this Session of Assembly, entitled An
ACT for Re-printing, Exchanging and Re-emitting all the Bills of Credit of this
Provine, and for striking the farther Sum of 11,110 l. 5 s. to be emitted upon
Loan.

THEREFORE BE IT ENACTED by GEORGE THOMAS, Esquire with the King's Approbation,
Lieutenant Governor under the Honorable John Penn, Thomas Penn, and Richard
Penn, Esqrs; true and absolute Proprietors of the Province of Pennsylvania, and
Counties of New Castle, Kent and Sussex on Delaware, by and with the Advice and
Consent of the Representatives of the Freemen of the said Province in General
Assembly met, and by the Authority of the same; That there shall be paid to our
Honorable Proprietors, or their Order, by the Trustees of the General
Loan-Office of this Province, for the time being, out of the Interest-Money
made payable to them by Virtue of the Act of Assembly aforesaid, the Sum of
Seven Hundred and Thirty Pounds in Bills of Credit, on the Twentieth Day of
October, (...) will be in the Year of our Lord One Thousand Seven Hu^^^^d and
Forty, and also the further Sum of Se^en Hundred an^ Thirty Pounds like Mon^y,
on the Twentieth Day of October, which will be in the Year of our Lord, One
Thousand Seven Hundred and Forty-one, and likewise the Sum of One Hundred and
Thirty P^unds every Year after the said Twentieth Day of October in the Year
One Thousand Seven Hundred and Forty-one, during the Re-^mission of the Bills
of Credit afores^id, by the Act aforesaid: Which Payments so made, and Receipts
for the same from the Prop^ietors, or their Order or Assigns, being produc^d,
shall be deemed, taken and adjudg^d sufficient Vouchers to discharge them the
s^id Trustee^, their Executors and Administrators, of and from so much of the
Interest Money p^yable into their Hands, by Virtue of the Act of Assembly
afo^^^^id.

AND WHEREAS the suffering the Q^it-Rents to lie so long in Arrear, has proved
not only a real Loss to our Proprietors, but at this Time has brought a very
great Charge upon the Province, which we judge may in a great Measure be owing
to the t^dious and expensive Way provided for the Recovery of the said Rents.
For Remedying thereof, BE IT ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That in Case
any Person or Persons holding or claiming any Lands or Lots within this
Province, shall neglect to appear upon public Notice given, as in and by one
Act of General Assembly of this Province made in the Fourth Year of the late
Queen ANNE, entitled An ACT for the more easy and effectual Collecting the
Proprietaries Quit-Rents, is directed and provided, or within the Space of Ten
Days after the Time limited by the aforesaid Act of Assembly, a^^ pay the
Quit-Rents that by him, her or them shall be then due to the Proprietors of
Pennsylvania, in Bills of Credit of this Province as then current, upon Grants
made before the Year One Thousand Seven Hundred and Thirty-two, and upon all
Grants made afterward, according to the Tenor of the said Grants; It shall and
may be lawful to and for the said Receiver-General, or such Person as he shall
appoint for that Purpose, to distrain the Goods and Chattels of the Owner or
Possessor of the said Lands, for all such Rents as shall then be in Arrear, or
ought to have been paid as aforesaid, and the Distress so taken to carry, lead
or drive away, and if such Goods or Chattels shall not be replevied within the
Space of Five Days next after such Distress made, then to cause the said Goods
and Chattels to be appraised and sold in such Manner, and the Money arising by
such Sales to be distributed, as by an Act made in the Second Year of the late
King William and Queen Mary, entitled An ACT for enabling the Sale of Goods
distrained for Rent* in Case the Rent be not paid in reasonable Time, is in
that Behalf directed and appointed.

AND if upon such Suit the Person replevying shall discontinue his Suit, become
Nonsuit, or a Verdict pass against him in the said Cause, the Goods distrained
shall be restored by the Person who replevied the same, or he shall pay the
Rent in Arrear with Costs of Suit, and such Damages only as shall be awarded by
the Court.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That where no sufficient Distress can be found, or
where the Owners of Lands are not resident within this Province, it shall and
may be lawful for the said Proprietors, to cause a Summons to issue in the
usual Manner as directed in the Case of Freeholders, against the Owner or
Possessor of such Lands, and a Copy of the said Summons to be delivered by the
Sheriff or his Deputy to such Owner or Possessor of the said Lands, or to some
of his or her Family, Ten Days before the Court to which such Summons is
returnable, or to leave a Copy of the Summons upon the Land, in Case there be
no Person in Possession of the same, or that the Owner be a Non-Resident, at
least Ten Days before the Day of the Return of the Summons, in the Presence of
One Witness at least; and in Case of the Nonappearance of the Party by himself
or lawful Attorney, then Judgment to be entered against the Defendant for the
Rent due with Costs of Suit: And the better to avoid the Expense and Delay
often occasioned by long and tedious specia^ Pleadings, it shall and may be
lawful and sufficient for the said Proprietors, where any Action or Suit shall
be brought or Distress made for Quit-Rents due to them, to declare generally as
Proprietors of Pennsylvania, upon an Insimul computassent in Debt or otherwise
to avow as the Case may require for so much Quit-Rent due to them, out of the
Lands or Lots, etc. for so many Years in Arrear, to which the Defendants may
appear, and plead that he, or those under whom he claims, has or have paid the
whole or some Part of the Rents demanded, as the Cause may be, or that he made
a lawful Tender of all the Moneys due for Rent in Arrear, and is still ready
and offers to pay the same; and if Verdict or Judgment be given for such
Defendant, he shall thereupon be discharged without Payment of Costs.

PROVIDED ALWAYS, That nothing herein contained shall be deemed to repeal or
disannul the aforesaid ACT of General Assembly for the more easy and effectual
Collecting of the Proprietaries Quit-Rents, except such Part thereof as is
hereby altered or other Provision made by this Act; and that this Act continue
until the Fifteenth Day of October in the Year One Thousand Seven Hundred and
Forty-Nine, and no longer.

CHAP. CCCXLV. A Supplement to the ACT for Electing Members of Assembly, etc.
(...)
WHEREAS notwithstanding the just and impartial Method prescribed for Electing
of Members of Assembly by the Charter of Privileges granted by the Honorable
William Penn, See (...) Chap (...) and (...) Chap. (...).
Esquire late Pro^^^^tor and Governor in Chief of the Province of Pennsylvania,
and Counties of New Castle, Kent and Sussex on Delaware, to the Inhabitants
thereof, and of the several Acts of General Assembly of the said Province made
in Pursuance of the said Charter, for the more free, impartial and peaceable
Election of Members to serve in the General Assembly of the said Province, and
of Sheriffs, Coroners, Commissioners, Assessors, and of Inspectors to assist in
the said Election: It has nevertheless been found upon Experience, That the
present Method prescribed by the Laws of this Province for choosing Inspectors
to assist the Sheriff, and for receiving the Poll or Votes at the said
Elections, has not answered the good Purposes for which it was intended; but
great Numbers of disorderly Persons, many of whom not being qualified to vote
for Members of Assembly, etc. have mixed themselves among the Electors at the
Time of choosing Inspectors, and have by their rude and disorderly Behavior
disturbed the Electors, and created Strifes and Quarrels, to the great Danger
and Disquiet of the peaceable People there met together, and in Delay of the
said Elections.

AND WHEREAS it often happens, that the said Inspectors are chosen most or all
of them out of one Part of the Country, and by reason thereof cannot be so well
acquainted with the Estates and Circumstances of all the Electors, which was
the principal End of their first Appointment.

FOR remedying of which Inconveniences for the future, BE IT ENACTED by GEORGE
THOMAS, Esquire with the King's Approbation, Lieutenant Governor, under the
Honorable John Penn, Thomas Penn, and Richard Penn, Esqrs; true and absolute
Proprietors of the Province of Pennsylvania, and the Counties of New Castle,
Kent, and Sussex upon Delaware* and with the Advice and Consent of the
Representatives of the Freemen of the said Province in General Assembly met,
and by the Authority of the same; That the Justices of the respective Counties
within this Province, Justices to divide their Counties into eight Districts.
shall at their next General Quarter Sessions of the Peace to be held for the
County to which they belong, next after the Publication of this Act, proceed to
divide their Counties into Eight Districts or Hundreds, allotting as near as
may be an equal Number of the adjacent Townships to each District, and shall
cause the Clerk of the Peace to enroll or preserve the same among the Records
or Proceedings of the said Court, and to deliver to the Sheriff of the
respective Counties an Account of the several Districts or Hundreds within the
County, as directed by the Justices aforesaid, with the Names of the several
Townships in each of the said Districts, all which the said Sheriff shall make
known to the respective Constables within his County with all Expedition, that
they may thereby be the better enabled to discharge their several Trusts in
Pursuance of the Directions of this Act.

Freeholders to meet in each Township, and nominate, etc.
AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED That the Freeholders and others qualified to elect
Members of Assembly, in each Township, shall meet on the Twenty-fifth Day of
September yearly, but if the same shall happen upon a First Day of the Week,
then upon the next Day following, at some convenient* Placewithin their said
respective Townships, to be appointed by the Constable of the said Township, or
in Case of his Absence, Neglect or Refusal, then at such convenient Place
within such Township as the Overseers of the Poor shall appoint; and the said
Electors being qualified to vote for Members of Assembly, shall between the
Hours of Nine in the Forenoo^ and Two in the Afternoon the same Day in the
Presence of the Constable, and such two Freeholders as he shall call to his
Assistance, or in his Absence, etc. the Overseer of the Poor, proceed by a
Majority of Voices to nominate one able and discreet Freeholder of the said
Township, who may be supposed to be best acquainted with the Estates and
Circumstances of the Inhabitants, The Name of the Person nominated to be given
to the Sheriff, etc.
the Name of which Person so nominated and chosen is to be taken down in
Writing by the Constable or Overseer of the Poor, as the Case shall happen,
with the Name of the Township for which he is chosen, and shall be delivered to
the Sheriff of the County at the Place of Election, or to such Person or
Persons as shall happen to be Judges of the Election, before the Hour of Nine
in the Forenoon of the Day whereupon the Election of Members of Assembly shall
happen: And the Sheriff or other Judge of the Election, having then and there
received the Names of all the Persons chosen for the respective Townships
within his County, or so many of them as shall be delivered to him in Manner
aforesaid, he shall call to his Assistance at least four Freeholders of the
County, and in their Presence shall put all the Names of the Persons returned
for each District into a separate Box to be provided by him for that Purpose;
and shall likewise in the Presence of the said Freeholders call some
indifferent Person, who shall draw one Name out of each Box, and deliver the
same to the Sheriff or other Judge of the Election, which being done, the
Persons whose Names shall happen to be drawn and being present, shall for that
Year be the Inspectors of the Election, and as such shall be published by the
Sheriff in the Presence of the Electors, or so many of them as shall be present.

AND BE IT ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, Inhabitants of each Ward in
Philadelphia. to me^t, etc.
That it shall and may be lawful for the Inhabitants of the respective Wards of
the City of Philadelphia, qualified to vote for Members of Assembly, to meet
together at the Time herein before mentioned for the Meeting of the Inhabitants
of the respective Townships in this Province, and at some convenient Place
within their respective Wards to be appointed by the Constable of the Ward to
which he belongs, of which public Notice shall be given in Writing, etc. by
affixing the same upon the Courthouse Door in Philadelphia at least Six Days
before the said Twenty-fifth of September, and there shall in the Presence of
the Constable of the Ward and such two Freeholders of the s^id Ward as he shall
call to his Assistance, proceed by a M^jority of Voices, to nominate one
substantial Freeholder of Ability and Integrity residing within the said Ward,
whose Name when so chosen shall be taken in Writing, and certified by the
Constable and Freeholders aforesaid, to the Sheriff of the County or other
Judge of the said Election, in the Manner before directed for the Constables of
Townships; and the Sheriff shall put the Names of all the Persons so to him
returned into a Box, and shall call some indifferent Person who shall draw four
of the said Names out of the said Box, and deliver the same to the Sheriff, who
shall read the same publicly in the Presence of the Electors then present: And
the four Persons whose Names shall so happen to be drawn, shall together with
the Inspectors chosen out of the several Districts of the said County, be the
Inspectors for that Year for the Election, and as such shall be qualified in
the Manner before directed for other Inspectors, and the other six Persons
whose Names shall remain in the Box, shall be the Inspectors for that Year for
the City of Philadelphia, and shall be qualified in Manner aforesaid.

BUT before they proceed to act in assisting the Sheriff to receive the Poll or
Votes of the said Electors, (...)
they shall be qualified by Oath or Affirmation by the Sheriff of the proper
County, or other Judges of the Elections, who are hereby required and empowered
to administer the same; That they the said Inspectors will duly attend the
ensuing Election, during the Continuance thereof, and will truly and f^ithfully
assist the Sheriff, Coroners or other Judges of the said (...), to prevent all
Frauds and Deceipts whatsoever of Electors or others in carrying on the same,
and in causing the Poll or Votes at such Election to be taken and cast up
according to the Direction of the before-recited Act.

Inspectors may qualify Electors, etc.
AND the said Inspectors shall and are hereby authorized to administer to every
Elector or Person who presents his Ticket, an Oath or Affirmation in the Words
directed by the aforesaid Act of Assembly, unless the Qualification of such
Elector be generally well known, and some one or more of the said Inspectors
shall and will openly declare to the rest that they know such Elector to be
qualified as in the aforesaid Act of Assembly is required; and the Votes or
Tickets of such as offer to Poll and refuse to take the said Oath or
Affirmation, shall be openly rejected, and the Votes or Tickets of every Person
who takes the said Oath or Affirmation, shall with the other lawful Tickets or
Votes be put into the Box, and no Ticket so received shall be suppressed.

Constables to give public Notice, etc.
AND to the End this Act may be duly executed and the Peace preserved; BE IT
THEREFORE ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That the Constables of the
respective Townships within the several Counties of this Province, or in case
of the Death, Neglect or Absence of the said Constables, then the Overseers of
the Poor of such Township, or one of them, shall at least Ten Days before the
said 25th Day of September in every Year, give public Notice in Writing, by
affixing the same at the most public Places in the respective Townships, of
the Place where the Inhabitants of the Township in which they live, shall meet,
to nominate a fit Person, according to the Direction of this Act; and that the
said Constable, or in his Absence the Overseer of the Poor as aforesaid, shall
there attend at the Time appointed in this Act; and such Constable or Overseer
of the Poor shall call to his Assistance two substantial Freeholders of the
said Township, being there present, who shall assist him in judging of the said
Nomination, or in taking the Poll, if need be, and who together with himself
shall certify to the Sheriff of the County or other Judge of the Election,
under their Hands, that such Person was nominated by a Majority of lawful
Voices, by the Township to which he belongs; which Nomination so made as
aforesaid shall be delivered to the Sheriff, etc. of the County to which they
belong, in the manner herein before directed.

AND if any Constable or Overseer of the Poor being the Judge of such
Nomination as aforesaid, Penalty on Constables, etc. neglecting the Duty
required of them by this Act.
shall neglect to do the Duty hereby enjoined him, or shall wilfully misbehave
himself in the Execution of his Duty, and being thereof legally convict, or if
any of the Persons so nominated and returned, for any Township within this
Province, in the manner before directed, shall neglect or refuse to give his
Attendance at the Time and Place of Electing Members of Assembly, every such
Person so offending in any of the Premises, shall forfeit the Sum of Five
Pounds, to any Person who will sue for the same, to be recovered by Action of
Debt in any Court of Record within this Province, with Costs of Suit; and if
the Person whose Name shall happen to be drawn being called shall not appear,
then the Name of another Person belonging to the same District shall be drawn,
and shall be qualified and proceed to officiate as an Inspector, in the Manner
before directed in this Act for Inspectors.

AND BE IT ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That an Act of Assembly of this
Province, entitled, A Supplementary ACT, to the Act for ascertaining the
Number of Members of Assembly, and to regulate Elections, and every Article and
Clause therein, shall be and is hereby repealed.

PROVIDED ALWAYS, That nothing herein contained, shall be deemed or taken to
alter or make void the said recited Act of General Assembly made in the Fourth
Year of the Reign of the late Queen Anne, or any thing therein contained, but
that every Clause, Article and Sentence therein, except what is hereby altered
or supplied, shall be and remain in full Force and Virtue, as the same was
before the making of this Act, or the aforesaid Supplementary Act hereby
repealed.

THIS Act to continue for the Space of Three Years, and from thence to the End
of the next Session of Assembly, and no longer.

CHAP. CCCXLVI. An ACT for the more easy and speedy Recovery of small Debts.
WHEREAS it is found by Experience, that a great ^umber of the Lawsuits which
are commenced in this Province, Preamble.
are brought against the poorer Sort of People, for small Sums of Money, who
are unable to bear the Expenses arising by the common Method of Prosecution;
Therefore, for Remedying thereof,

BE IT ENACTED by GEORGE THOMAS, Esquire with the King's Royal Approbation,
Lieutenant Governor, under the Honorable John Penn, Thomas Penn and Richard
Penn, Esqrs; true and absolute Proprietaries of the Province of Pennsylvania,
and of the Counties of New Castle, Kent and Sussex on Delaware, by and with the
Advice and Consent of the Representati^es of the Freemen of the said Province
in General Assembly met, and by the Authority of the same, That all Actions for
Debt or other Demand, Actions for Debt under 5 l. cognizable before any one
Justice, etc.
for the Value of Forty Shillings, and upwards, and not exceeding Five Pounds
(except such Actions as are herein after excepted) shall immediately after the
Publication of this Act, be and are hereby made cognizable before any Justice
of the Peace of any of the Counties in this Province, in the County in which
the Defendant shall be or reside; and the said Justices are hereby respectively
empowered and required, upon Complaint to either of them made, for any such
Debt or Demand, to issue a Warrant in the Nature of a Summons, or Capias, as
the Case may require, directed to the Constable of the Township or District
where the Defendant dwells or can be found, commanding him to bring or cause
such Defendant to appear before him, at the Time and in the Manner following,
(That is to say) In Cases where such Process shall be in the Nature of a
Capias, forthwith after ^he Service thereof; but where a Summons shall be
issued* then on some certain Day tderein to be expressed, not les^ than five
nor exceeding eight Days from the Date of such Process; and at the Time
appointed for the Hearing (...) any such Cause, the said Justice, himself, or
at, the Requ^^t of the Parties, by Auditors or Referees to that Purpose by him
appointed, and approved of by the said Parties, shall proceed to hear and
examine the Proofs and Allegations of the Plaintiff and Defendant; and upon the
Return of such Auditors, or otherwise, to give his Judgment thereupon, as the
true Merits and Right of the Cause shall appear to him, with such Costs only as
by the Laws of this Province are allowed in Debts under Forty Shillings.

PROVIDED ALWAYS, that the Process against a Freeholder shall be by Summons
only, Process against a Freeholder to be by Summons, etc.
and Service shall be made thereof on the Person, or a Copy thereof lest at the
House of the Defendant, in the Presence of one or more of his Family or
Neighbors, or least four Days before the Time appointed for a Hearing; and in
Case the Defendant does not appear at the Time appointed, then on Oath or
Affirmation made by the Constable, that the said Summons was duly served in
Manner aforesaid, the Justice who granted the same Summons, may either then, or
on such farther Day as he shall deem consistent with Reason and the Nature of
the Case to appoint, and not otherwise, proceed to hear and determine such
Cause or Causes in the Defendant's Absence, and give Judgment and award
Execution thereupon, as if the Defendant had been personally present.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, After Judgment Execution
to be granted, etc.
That after Judgment given in any of the Cases aforesaid, the Justice who
pronounced the same, shall grant Execution thereupon, directed to the Constable
aforesaid, commanding him to levy the Debt or Damages and Costs of the
Defendant's Goods and Chattels (who by Virtue thereof shall within the Space of
Ten Days next following expose the same to Sale by public Vendue, returning
the Overplus, if any be, to the Defendant) and for Want of sufficient Distress,
to take the Body of such Defendant into Custody, and him or her to carry and
convey to the Common Goal of the County; and the Sheriff or Keeper of such Goal
is hereby required to receive the Person or Persons so taken in Execution, and
him, her or them safely to keep, until the Sum recovered, with Costs, be fully
paid; and in Default of such safe Keeping, to be liable to answer the Damages
to the Party grieved, in such Manner as by Law is provided in Case of Escapes.
In Case no (...) on Land^* (...).
BUT in C^se no Assets b^longing to the D^fendant, sufficient to pay the D bt
and Costs, can be found, it shall and may be lawful for the Plain if to apply
to the justice who pronounced the Judgment, for a Transcript thereof, and on
filing the same in the Prothonotary's Office of the Court of Common Pleas in
that County in which the Recov ery shall be had, it shall and may be lawful for
the Plaintiff to levy the Sum recovered, with Costs of Suit, on the Lands and
Tenements of the Defendant, either by Fieri facias, Venditioni exponas, or
Extent, as the Case may require, in like Manner as by Law is provided in other
Cases.

PROVIDED ALWAYS. That no such Execution shall be issued against any
Freeholder, No Execution to be issued against a Freeholder, in less than three
Months, unless etc.
in less than the Space of Three Months next after the Entry of such Judgment,
unless the Plaintiff, or Somebody for him or her, shall on Oath or Affirmation
declare, that he or she has good Reason to believe that the Debt will by such
Delay be lost, for that at the End of the said Term, or before it (he or she
believes) the Defendant will not have sufficient Assets in the County on which
the said Debt may be levied. And if any Judgment to be given as aforesaid,
shall be against a Person not a Freeholder, such Person shall have the
Execution against him or her respited for like Term of Three Months, on his or
her entering into Recognizance to the Plaintiff, with one sufficient Security
in the Nature of Special Bail, on Condition to deliver the Body of the
Defendant to the Sheriff of the County, at the Expiration of the Time so to be
allowed, or that the Condemnation-Money shall then be paid; and in Default of
giving such Security, shall be committed to the common Goal of the County,
there to remain until the Debt and Costs shall be paid, or such Defendant
otherwise legally discharged.

PROVIDED ALSO, That where the Plaintiff in any Cause shall become nonsuit, or
Judgment shall pass against him, then the Justice is hereby required to assess
the Defendant his reasonable Costs, to be levied in Manner aforesaid.

PROVIDED ALSO, That it shall and may be lawful for the Justices of the
respective Courts of Common Pleas, Insolvent Debtors may be relieved, as before.
to give such Relief to any insolvent Debtor or Debtors prosecuted in pursuance
of this Act, as they might have done by the Laws now in force, in case this Act
had not been made.

PROVIDED ALSO, (...) Person or Persons shall conceive him, (...) aggrieved by
any such Judgment so to be given, Persons conceiving themselves aggrieved may
appeal, etc.
(Cases determined on the Return of Auditors or Referrees as aforesaid only
excepted) it shall and may be lawful for such Person or Persons at any Time
within the Space of Six Days next following the Giving of such Judgment, but
not after, to appeal therefrom to the next Court of Common Pleas to be holden
for the County in which such Suit shall be commenced, he, she or they first
entering into Recognizance with at least one sufficient Security, at least in
double Value of the Debt or Damage sued for, and sufficient to answer all
Costs, to prosecute the said Appeal with Effect, and to abide the Order of the
said Court, or in default thereof to be sent by Mitimus, to the Sheriff of the
County, by him to be kept, until he, she or they shall give such Security, or
be otherwise legally discharged.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, Justices to m^ke fair
E^tries in Books, etc.
That the said Justices shall cause fair Entries to be made in Books by them to
be provided for that Purpose, of the Names of the Plaintiff and Defendant in
all such Causes as may come before them, with the D^bt and Costs adjudged, and
the time when the same Judgment was given; and upon any Appeal made from any
such Judgment, the Justice who pronounced the same shall send a Transcript
thereof to the Prothonotary of the Court of Common Pleas of the County in which
such Appeal is made, on or before the first Day of the Term next following any
such Appeal; for which Transcript or any other obtained by Virtue of this Act,
the Justice shall be allowed in the Costs to be taxed Eighteen Pence, and no
more.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That at the Court to
which any such Appeal shall be made, Method of Proceeding in Court upon Appeal.
the Person so Appealing shall cause an Entry of his Suit to be made by the
Prothonotary of such Court, and shall either have his Appearance entered, or
give Bail to the Action, as the Nature of the Case may require; or on Neglect
thereof, and Application of the Appellee to the Court for that End, the
Appellant's Default shall be recorded, the first Judgment affirmed with
reasonable Costs, and Execution shall be issued out of the said Court against
the Defendant's Body, Goods or Chattels, as is usual in other Cases. A^^ in
Case the Defendant shall appeal or give Bail as aforesaid, the Plaintiff or
Defendant in the Appeal (as the Case may require) shall fil^ his or her
Declaration, and the adverse Party plead to issue in such Time as shall be
directed by the Court, so always that the Cause be tried by a Jury of the
Country, in the usual Manner, either the Court to which such Appeal is made, or
the next Term at farthest (unless the Court on Cause to them shown, shall think
fit to give the Parties a farther Day) and as the Verdict shall be rendered in
any of the said Causes, the Court shall give Judgment thereupon, as the Nature
of the Case may require, with Costs of Suit.

PROVIDED ALWAYS, That if the Parties Appellant and Appellee shall neglect or
refuse to file his or her Declaration, or to plead to issue in such Time as
shall be directed by the Court, a Nonsuit or Judgment by Default may be entered
for want thereof as usual.

PROVIDED ALSO, That the Costs to be taxed in any such Suit, to the several
Officers, and others concerned, (...) the Services by them respectively to be
done, shall be two third Parts only of the Costs now usually taken in the said
Courts of Common Pleas.

PROVIDED ALSO, That none of the Justices who by Virtue of this Act shall hear
and determine any of the Causes aforesaid out of Court, shall afterward sit on
the Hearing and Determining the same Cause on an Appeal made to any of the
Courts of Common-Plea^ aforesaid.

Penalty on commencing Suits made cognizable by this Act, in any other Manner.
AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Person or
Persons whosoever, shall commence, sue or prosecute any Suit or Suits, for any
Debts or Demands made cognizable as aforesaid, in other Manner than is directed
by this Act, and shall obtain a Verdict or Judgment therein for Debt or
Damages, which without Costs of Suit shall not amount to more than Five Pounds
(not having caused an Oath or Affirmation to be made before the obtaining of
the Writ of Summons or Capias, and filed the same in the Prothonotary's Office
respectively, that he, she or they so making Oath or Affirmation, did truly
belive the Debt due, or Damage sustained, exceeded the Sum of Five Pounds) he,
she or they so prosecuting, shall not recover any Costs in such Suit, any Law,
Usage, or Custom to the contrary notwithstanding.

PROVIDED ALSO, That this Act, nor any thing herein contained, shall be deemed,
construed, or understood to extend to Actions of Debt for Rent, Debt upon Bonds
for Performance of Covenants, to Actions of Covenant, to Actions of Replevin,
or upon any real Contract; nor to Actions of Trespass on the Case for Trover
and Conversion, or Slander; nor to Actions of Trespass for Assault and Battery,
or Imprisonment; nor to such Actions where the Title of Lands shall any wise
come in Question.

PROVIDED ALSO, That this Act shall continue in Force for the Space of Three
Years, and from thence to the End of the next Sessions of Assembly, and no
longer.

CHAP. CCCXLVII. A Supplement to an Act of Assembly of this Province, entitled
An ACT prescribing the Forms of Declarations of Fidelity, Abjuration and
Affirmation instead of the Forms heretofore required in such Cases.
Repealed.

CHAP. CCCXLVIII. An ACT for the better enabling diverse Inhabitants of the
Province of Pennsylvania, to trade and hold Lands within the said Province.
WHEREAS, by the Royal Charter of the late King Charles the Second, to William
Penn, Esquire late Proprietary and Governor of the Province of Pennsylvania,
License is granted to all Persons not specially forbidden, to transport
themselves and Families into the said Province, in such Shipping as by the Laws
of the Kingdom of England they ought to use, paying the Customs therefore due,
and here to settle themselves, dwell and inherit, and plant for the public and
their own private Advantage; with License to purchase and hold Lands in
Fee-simple, or otherwise, of the said Proprietary and his Heirs, with full
License to all Persons who shall from time to time repair hither with a purpose
to inhabit, or trade with the Natives of this Country, to load, freight, and
transport, all and singular their Goods, Wares and Merchandises, not prohibited
by the Laws and Statutes of England, into any Ports whatsoever of the said late
King, his Heirs and Successors, according to the Laws made or to be made within
the said Kingdom of England, saving always to the said late King, his Heirs and
Successors, the legal Impositions, Customs or other Duties, due or to become
due by any Law or Statute for the said Wares or Merchandises, as by the said
Royal Charter, among other Things, may more fully appear.

AND WHEREAS, Ioannes Dylander, Christian Grassold, Henry Shocklier, Michael
Iansen Halling, Daniel Steinmetz, Johannes Smith, David Deshler, Hans George
Passage, David Seesholz, Stephen Greiff, Hans George Hickner, Sebastian Mirry,
Rudolph Bonner, Baltzazar Resser junior, Johannes Zacharias, Charles Benzel
junior, Daniel Mackned junior, Iustus Reebe Camp, Charles Reebe Camp, Jacob
Gallete, Anthony Hinkel, Peter Righter, William Rerigh, Henry Shoub,
Christopher Rhoab, Caspar Singer, Ludovick Knaus, William Hawk, Leonhard
Cristler, Johannes Wilhelm, Ludovick Cirkel, Ludovick Hinnige, George Creesman,
Friedrick Gotshall, Andreas Trombouer, Jacob Trombouer, Hartmann Dettermer,
Philip Enghert, Leonhard Hartlein, Michael Kleim, Joseph Cub, Henry Deenig,
Johan Dieterick Bauman, Johan Kleim, Friedrick Marstaller, Matthias Koplin,
Johannes Bender, Henry Deeringer, Adam Moser, Peter Iarger, Samuel Gooldin,
Hans George Iarger, IacobFrey, Christopher Witman, Andreas Geisberts, Andreas
Iager, Jacob Aister, Andreas Kepler, Benedictus Muntz, Johan Eigster, Michael
Herger, Philip Haan, Conrad Dotterer, Bernhard Dotterer, Herman Fischer,
Friedrick Hillengas, Philip Labar, Michael Knappenberger, Michael Dotterer,
George Hubner, Conrad Kolb, George Philp Dotterer, Johan, Miller, Jacob Freeh,
Henry Smith, Leonhart Smith, Rowland Smith, Michael Kraus, Daniel Kr^^^tman,
Abraham B^yer, MichaelGood, George Good, Henry Sneyder Adam Reed, Christopher
Ottinger, Anthony Iager, Nicolas Iager, Johan Henry Weeber, Johan Jacob Roth,
Iohann^s Geldbag^, and Christian Gondy, Inhabitants of the City and County ^f
Philadelphia; Henry Bernhard, Mickel Neace, and Adam (...), Inhabitants of the
County of Bucks; Michael Albert, William Albert, Leonhard Bender, George
Miller, John (...), Nichol^^ C^ndle, John Hagey, Charles Keller, Stephen (...),
Lu^^vick Dettenburn, Jacob Bare junior, John L^^berger, M^c^^el B^cker, John
Peter Cooher, Christian Lawer, John Libough, BartholomewShaver, CasperStump,
Jacob Becker, TobiasPickle, Peter Rutt, George Klein, Paul Tittenboffer,
Matthias Tise, George Ludovick Horst, Sebastian Graff, Johan Henry Basseler,
Matthias Iung, Jacob Schloug, Henry Michael Immel, Felix Miller, Martin
Weybrecht, Friedrick Eighelberger, Sabastian Fink, Hens Adam Schreiner,
Christian Lang, Caspar Tiller, Anthony Bretter, Leonhard Ellmaker, Andreas
Bersinger, Hans Graff, Jacob Hartman, Theophilus Hartman, Theophilus Hartman
junior, Benjamin Witmer, Adam Witmer, Johannes Pinkly, Turst Buckwalter, Henry
Neaf junior, Valentine Hergelrat, Henr^ Basseler, Johan Stetler, L^onhard
Romler, Leonhard Heyer, Peter Schell, Johan Nobaker, Nicolas Miller, Johan
Hock, Thomas Kop^nheffer, Michael Kopenheffer, Christian L^man, Ge rge Unro^k,
Jacob Scheffer, Valentine Keffer, Jacob E^s^berger, Herman Walburn, Caspar
Reed, Christian Manusmith, Nicholas Kutts, George We^rick, Christopher Ley,
Jacob Lo^er, Hans Mo^r, Johannes Blum, George Steitz, Erasmus Buckenme er, and
George Graff, Inhabitants of the County of Lancaster; being of the Protestant
or Reformed Religion, and Subjects of the Emperor of Germany, and other
Princes, now in Amity with the King of Great Britain, having transported
themselves with their Families and Effects into this Province, and being
desirous to be made Partakers of the Immunities, belonging to the natural-born
Subjects (...) this Province; and to be more effectually secured of those
Privileges and Advantages granted by his said late Majesty King Charles the
Second, to Persons Coming into this Province to settle and inhabit, they having
(as a Testimony of their Fidelity and Affection to his present Majesty King
GEORGE the Second and the Crown of Great Britain) taken the Qualifications to
his Majesty and his Government by Law appointed and enjoined to be taken,
obtained Leave to bring in this Bill to the present Assembly.

THEREFORE may it please the Governor that it may be enacted; AND BE IT ENACTED
by GEORGE THOMAS, Esquire Lieutenant Governor with the Royal Approbation, under the
honorable John Penn, Thomas Penn, and Richard Penn, Esqrs; true and absolute
Proprietaries and Governors of the Province of Pennsylvania, That they the said
Ioannes Dylander, Christian Grassold, Henry Schocklier, Michael Iansen Halling,
Daniel Steinmetz, Johannes Smith, David Deshler, Hans George Passage, David
Seesholz, Stephen Grieff, Hans George Hickner, Sebastian Mirry, Rudolph B^nner,
Baltzazar R^sser junior, Johannes Zacharias, Charles Benzel junior, Daniel
Mackned junior, Iustus Reebe Camp, Charles Reebe Camp, Jacob Gallete, Anthony
Hinkel, Peter Righter, William Rerigh, Henry Shoub, Christopher Rhoab, Caspar
Singer, Ludovick Knaus, William Hawk, Leonh^rd Cristler, Johannes Wilhelm,
Ludovick Cirkel, Ludovick Hinnige, George Cree^man, Friedrick Gotshall, Andreas
Trombouer, Jacob Trombouer, Hartmann Dettermer, Philip Enghert, Leonhard
Hartlein, Michael Kleim, Joseph Cub, Henry Deenig, Johan Dieterick Bauman,
Johan Kleim, Friedrick Marstaller, Matthias Koplin, Johannes Bender, Henry
Deeringer, Adam Moser, Peter Iarger, Samuel Gooldin, Hans George Iarger, Jacob
Frey, Christopher Witman, Andreas Geisberts, Andreas Iager, Jacob Aister,
Andreas Kepler, Benedictus Muntz, Johan Eigster, Michael Herger, Philip Haan,
Conrad Dotterer, Bernhard Dotterer, Herman Fischer, Friedrick Hillengas, Philip
Labar, Michael Knappenberger, Michael Dotterer, George Hubner, Conrad Kolb,
George Philp Dotterer, Johan, Miller, IacobFreeh, Henry Smith, Leonhart Smith,
Rowland Smith, Michael Kraus, Daniel Kreestman, Abraham Beyer, MichaelGood,
George Good, Henry Sneyder Adam Reed, Christopher Ottinger, Anthony Iager,
Nicolas Iager, Johan Henry Weeber, Johan Jacob Roth, Johannes Geldbagh, and
Christian Gondy, Inhabitants of the City andCounty of Philadelphia; Henry
Bernhard, Mickel Neace, and Adam Scheffer, Inhabitants of the County of Bucks;
Michael Albert, William Albert, Leonhard Bender, George Miller, John Bushung,
Nicholas Candle, John Hagey, Charles Keller, Stephen Remsberger, Ludovick
Dettenburn, Jacob Bare junior, John Leiberger, Michael Becker, John Peter
Cooher, Christian Lawer, John Libough, BartholomewShaver, CasperStump, Jacob
Becker, Tobias Pickle, Peter Rutt, George Klein, Paul Tittenhoffer, Matthias
Tise, George Ludovick Horst, Sebastian Graff, Johan Henry Basseler, Matthias
Iung, Jacob Schloug, Henry Michael Immel, Felix Miller, Martin Weybrecht,
F^iedrick Eighelberger, Sabastian Fink, Hens Adam Schreiner, Christian Lang,
Caspar Tiller, Anthony Bretter, LeonhardEllmaker, Andreas Bersinger, Hans
Graff, IacobHartman, Theophilus Hartman, Theophilus Hartman junior, Benjamin
Witmer, Adam Witmer, Johannes Pinkly, Turst Buckwalter, Henry Neaf junior,
Valentine Hergelrat, Henry Basseler, Johan Stetler, Leonhard Romler, Leonhard
Heyer, Peter Schell, Johan Nohaker, Nicolas Miller, Johan Hock, Thomas
Kopenheffer, Michael Kopenheffer, Christian Leman, George Unrook, Jacob
Scheffer, Valentine Keffer, Jacob Etshberger, Herman Walburn, Caspar Reed,
Chris^ian Manusmith, Nicholas Kutts, George We^rick, Christopher Ley, Jacob
Lower, Hans Moor, Johannes Blum, George Steitz, Erasmus Buckenmeyer, and George
Graff, Inhabitants of the County of Lancaster; and every of them, are hereby
declared, and shall at all Times hereafter be esteemed and taken, to all
Intents and Purposes, to be and to have been, since their first Arrival in this
Province, free and fully able, and capable to trade, traffic, load, freight,
and transport all and all Manner of Goods, Wares and Merchandises, not by Law
prohibited to be imported or exported, as if they and every of them had been
the natural Liege People and Subjects of the King of Great Britain, born in
this Province of Pennsylvania; and also they and each of them shall and are
hereby enabled, and adjudged able to all Intents, Constructions and Purposes
whatsoever, as well to demand, take, have and enjoy any Privileges and
Immunities belonging to his Majesty's Liege People, and natural Subjects of
this Province, as also to have and enjoy all Lands and Tenements, and all other
Hereditaments, by Way of Purchase or Gift, of any Person or Persons whatsoever;
and also to prosecute, pursue, maintain, avow and justify all and all Manner of
Actions, Suits and Causes, and all other Things to do, as lawfully, freely and
fully, as if they and every of them had been and were born Natural Subjects of
this Province, or as any other Person or Persons born within this Province may
lawfully in any wise do, any Law, Custom or Usage to the contrary thereof in
any wise notwithstanding.

ANNO REGNI GEORGII II. REGIS DECIMO SEXTO.
At a GENERAL ASSEMBLY begun at Philaaelphia, in the Province of Pennsylvania,
the Fourteenth Day of October, in the Sixteenth Year of our Sovereign Lord
GEORGE the Second, King of Great Britain, etc. Annoque Domini One Thousand
Seven Hundred and Forty-two, and continued by Adjournments 'till the Third Day
of January, in the same Year: The following ACTS were passed by the Honorable
GEORGE THOMAS, Esquire Governor of the said Province, That is to say,
CHAP. CCCXLIX. An ACT imposing a Duty on Persons convicted of heinous Crimes,
brought into this Province, and not warranted by the Laws of Great Britain; and
to prevent poor and impotent Persons being imported into the same.
Preamble.
WHEREAS many Persons trading into this Province have, for Lucre and private
Gain, imported and fold, or disposed of, and daily do import Passengers and
Servants into this Province; who, by reason of Age, Impotency or Idleness, have
become a heavy Burden and Charge upon the Inhabitants thereof; and likewise,
do frequently import diversPersons convicted of heinous Crimes, who soon after
their coming into thisProvince do often commit many Felonies, Robberies, Thefts
and Burglaries, to the great Hurt of his Majesty's Subjects trading to and
inhabiting the same: BE IT THEREFORE ENACTED by the Honorable GEORGE THOMAS,
Esquire with the King's Royal Approbation Lieutenant Governor of the Province of
Pennsylvania, and Counties of New Castle, Kent and Sussex on Delaware, under
the Honorable John Penn, Thomas Penn and Richard Penn, Esqrs; true and
absolute Proprietors and Governors in chief of the said Province and Counties;
by and with the Advice and Consent of the Representatives of the Freemen of the
said Province, in General Assembly met, and by the Authority of the same, That
all Masters of Vessels, Importer of Convicts to pay 5 l. per Head.
Merchants, or others, who shall import, land or bring into any Port or Place
belonging to this Province, at any Time after the Publication of this Act, any
Person in the Condition of a Servant, or otherwise within the Intent and
Meaning of this Act, who has been convicted of any Murder, Burglary, Rape,
Sodomy, Forgery, Perjury, or any Felony, at any Time before such Importation or
coming into this Province, shall, before the said Convicts be landed or put on
Shore, pay the Sum of Five Pounds for every such Convict so imported or
otherwise brought in; one Moiety thereof to the Governor for Support of
Government, and the other Moiety to the Collectors appointed by this Act, or
the Informer, and shall further become bound, with good and sufficient
Security, to the Treasurer of this Province for the time being, in the Sum of
Fifty Pounds, for the good Behavior of such convict Person, for the Space of
one Year next after his or her Importation or coming into this Province.

AND WHEREAS it has been a Practice for Masters of Vessels, Merchants, and
others, trading into this P^ovince, with Intent to avoid complying with the
Payment of the Duties and giving Security required by former Acts of Assembly
of this Province, made to prevent the Importation of Convicts and poor and
impotent Persons, to land their Passengers, Servants and Convicts in some of
the adjacent Governments; which Passengers, Servants, impotent People and
Convicts have afterward been secretly brought into this Province: THEREFORE,
to prevent such or the like Practices for the future, BE IT ENACTED by the
Authority aforesaid, That if any such Convict as aforesaid, or Servant, or
Passenger, being poor and impotent Persons, shall be imported into the River
Delaware, after the Publication of this Act, Convicts, etc. If found in this
Province within 12 Months after Importation, may be apprehended and examined,
etc.
and shall be found within this Province at any Time within the Space of Twelve
Months next after their being imported as aforesaid, whether such Persons were
landed within this Government or elsewhere, it shall and may be lawful for the
Collectors of the Duties appointed by this Act, or their Deputies for the time
being, and for any Justice of the Peace or principal Magistrate or Magistrates
of any City or County or Town within this Province to cause to be apprehended,
taken-up, and to examine, upon Oath or Affirmation, all such Convicts as
aforesaid, or Passengers and Servants, being poor and impotent Persons, and all
other Persons who may be supposed to be able to make any Discovery of the Time
and Manner of their being imported or coming into this Province, and from
whence they came last, how long they have been come from Parts beyond the Seas,
of what Country, and in what Vessel, and who was Master or Merchant of such
Vessel, and whether such Vessel, at the Time of such Person or Persons being
shipped or coming on board was bound to or designed for Pennsylvania, and
whether such Person or Persons shipped themselves with Intent to come into this
Province: And if upon Examination it shall appear to any two Justices of the
Peace within this Province, or to any principal Magistrate aforesaid, or to the
Mayor and Recorder, or to either of them, with any one of the Aldermen of the
City of Philadelphia, that the said Persons were shipped or took their Passages
for Pennsylvania, or were shipped or came from any other Port or Place
whatsoever, and were found within this Province; And shall be compelled
immediately to comply with the Directions of this Act.
then the said Magistrates before whom such Examination is taken, shall demand
and compel the Persons, if Convicts, immediately to comply with the Directions
of this Act, by paying the Duties hereby imposed on them, and giving the
Security directed in the Case of Convicts by this Act, and shall be and are
hereby empowered and required to send for the Master and Merchant of such
Vessel, or either of them, in which the said Persons were supposed to be
imported (if to be found within the Province) and to examine such Master or
Merchant, upon their Oath or Affirmation, concerning the said Servants,
Passengers or Convicts, and their Importation or coming into this Province; and
if it shall appear that the said Persons so apprehended, or any other Persons
being Convicts as aforesaid, were shipped or taken on board to be imported into
Pennsylvania, and put on Shore, or permitted to go on Shore, by such Master or
Merchant, in any other Government upon the River Delaware, or upon any Place or
Island within the said River, without making Report and complying with the
Directions of this Act, then in such Case the said Master or Merchant shall be
obliged forthwith to give Security for his or their Appearance at the next
Court of General Quarter Sessions of the Peace to be held for the City or
County where such Examination is taken; and if, upon Presentment or
Information, he or they shall be legally convicted of such fraudulent Practice,
he, she or they so offending shall forfeit the Sum of Twenty Pounds for every
Person so by him or them brought in as aforesaid and put or permitted to be put
on Shore; Penalty on Master or Merchant acting contrary to this Act.
and for every such Person as afterward at any Time within the Space of Twelve
Months next after their being landed or put on Shore, shall be found within
this Province without making such Entry and paying the Duti^^* and giving the
Security required by this Act; one ^alf to the Governor, and the other Half to
the Collector of the County in which they shall be respectively imported or
brought in, or Informer* and shall further pay the same Duties, and give the
same Security for such Convicts as aforesaid, as if such Persons had been
imported into this Province and Report thereof made according to the Direction
of this Act.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That upon Information
given to the Mayor and Recorder of the City of Philadelphia for the time being,
or the Mayor or Recorder, together with one of the Aldermen of the said City,
or to any two Justices of the Peace, or other Principal Magistrate of any
County or Town within this Province, that any old Persons, Infants, maimed,
lunatic, or any vagabond or vagrant Persons ar^ imported, come or brought into
this Province, the said Mayor, Recorder and Aldermen, or any two of them as
afore^^id, or any two Justices of the Peace of the respective (...) where such
Persons shall be found, shall cause such ag^^ Persons, Infants, impotent or
vagrant Persons to be brought before them; and if, upon Examination, they shall
judge that such Person or Persons are likely to become chargeable to the City,
Town or County where they are found or were impo^ted, it shall and may be
lawful for the said Mayor, Recorder and Aldermen, or any two Justices of the
Peace or principal Ma^istrate as aforesaid, by Warrant or otherwise, to send
for the Master, Merchant or other Person who imported any such Infant,
lunatic, aged, maimed, impotent or vagrant Person or Persons as aforesaid as
are likely to become chargeable as aforesaid; and upon Proof made of their
being the Owners or Importers of such Infant, lunatic, aged, maimed, impotent
or vagrant Persons who shall be judged to be likely to become chargeable as
aforesaid, the said Mayor, Recorder and Aldermen, or any two of them as
aforesaid, or any two Justices or principal Magistrate as aforesaid, shall and
may compel the said Master, Merchant or Importer of such Infant, lunatic,
maimed, Imp^rter^ of P^^sons likely to become chargeabl^, shall g^ve Securit^
to indemni^y the P^ovinc^.
aged, impotent or vagrant Person or Persons, to give sufficient Security to
carry and transport such Infant, lunatic, maimed, aged, impotent or vagrant
Person or Persons to the Place or Places from whence such Person or Persons
were imported, or otherwise to indemnify the Inhabitants of this Province from
any Charge that may come or be brought upon them by such Infant, lunatic,
maimed, aged, impotent or vagrant Person or Persons coming into or living
within this Province.

PROVIDED ALWAYS, Persons apprehending themselves aggrieved by the Judgment of
Justices, may appeal to the Court of Quarter-Session^.
That if any Person or Persons shall apprehend him or themselves aggrieved with
any such Order or Judgment of the Justice or Ju^tices of the Peace or other
Magistrates who shall make (...) same, the Person or Persons so aggrieved may
appeal to the next Court of General Quarter Sessions of the Peace, to be held
for the City or County where such Order shall be made; whose Judgment then
shall be final: But before such Appeal be allowed of, the Person or Persons
appealing shall enter into a Recognizance with one good Security at least, to
pay the Cost and Charges of such Appeal, in case the said Order shall happen to
be confirmed.

AND for the better Discovery of such Convicts, and poor and impotent or idle
and vagrant Persons who shall hereafter be imported into or likely to become
chargeable to the Inhabitants of this Province, BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the
Authority aforesaid, Master^ of Vessels, etc. to give an Account upon Oath of
the Names of all Servants, etc.
That all Masters of Vessels, Merchants, and others, who shall hereafter bring
into any Port or Place belonging to this Province, by Land or Water, any Men or
Women Passengers or Servants, shall, within the Space of Forty-eight Hours
after their Arrival into any Port or Place of this Province, make Entry and
give or cause to be given, on Oath or Affirmation, to the Collector of the said
Duty for the time being, a true and just Account of all the Names of the
Servants and Passengers so imported or brought in; which Account the said
Collector shall duly enter, and shall forthwith give Notice thereof to the
Mayor of Philadelphia for the time being, if such Servants, Passengers, etc.
are designed to be landed at Philadelphia, or to any two or more of his
Majesty's Justices of the Peace, or to the principal Magistrate for the Town or
County where such Servants or Passengers shall be imported; and the said Mayor
or Justices as aforesaid are hereby empowered and injoined immediately, by
Warrant or otherwise to call before them the said Master, Merchant or other
P^^son or Persons importing such Servant or Servants or Passengers as
aforesaid, and to examine, upon Oath or Affirmation, the said Master, Merchant,
and all other Persons who may be supposed to have any Knowledge of the
Characters and Circumstances of such Servants or Passengers, Justice^ may give
a Certificate, containing the Names of such Servants, etc. as they judge ^it to
be landed.
and thereupon shall grant unto the Master, Merchant or Owner, or other Person
having the Charge or Care of any Servant or Servants or Passengers so imported
or brought into this Province, a Certificate containing the Names of all the
Servants or Passengers which such Justices or other Magistra^^ aforesaid shall
judge fit to be landed or disposed of (...) ^ervants and do not appear to them
to have been formerly convicted of any of the Crimes mentioned in this Act, or
such as do not appear to them to be such Infants, lunatic, maimed, aged,
impotent or vagrant Persons as they shall judge likely to become chargeable to
the Inhabitants of this Province: For which Examination, Permit and Certificate
there shall be paid to the Mayor or Justices or Magistrates aforesaid, Justices
and Collector's Fees.
the Sum of Nine Pence per Head; and to the Collector or his Deputy Twelve
Pence per Head, one Half thereof to his own Use, for the Services enjoined him
by this Act, and the other Half to be paid to the Trustees of the
Province-Island for the time being, to be applied to repair the Buildings
there, to provide Conveniences for the Reception of such sick Persons as shall
be sent thither, and for such other Uses as by them shall be found necessary in
the Discharge of their Trust; for which Sums of Money so to be received, the
said Trustees shall duly account in like Manner as for other Money received in
Pursuance of the Trust in them reposed. And there shall likewise be paid to the
said Collector for each Bond he shall take in Pursuance of any thing required
to be done by virtue of this Act, the Sum of Two Shillings and Sixpence, and
no more.

PROVIDED NEVERTHELESS, AND IT IS HEREBY FURTHER ENACTED, That if after such
Examination taken, Duty to be paid, n^twithstanding the Certificate granted, i^
it afterward appear^ that any of the Persons imported are Convict^.
and Certificate granted as aforesaid, it shall be made appear that any of the
Persons so landed or imported are Convicts, the Master, Merchant, or other
Person who imported such Convict or Convicts, shall be liable to pay the same
Duty, and give the same Security, as if no such Examination had been taken or
Certificate granted, any thing in this Act contained to the contrary
notwithstanding.

PROVIDED ALSO, That where the Master, Masters, etc. paying the Dutie^ for
Passengers, may recover it again from them.
Owner or Merchant shall pay the said Duties for any Passenger or Passengers,
it shall and may be lawful for such Master, Owner or Merchant to recover the
same of the said Passenger or Passengers, before any one Justice of the Peace
in the respective County, City or Towns within this Province, in like Manner as
Debts under Forty Shillings are recovered, together with Costs of Suit.

AND if any Servant or Servants, or Convict, Penalty on Masters, etc. not
complying with the Directions of this Act.
or other Person, shall be imported or brought into and landed in any Port or
Place within this Province, without making such Entry as aforesaid, in the
Manner before directed, and paying the Duty, and giving the Security required
by this Act, and within the Time limited by this Act for that Purpose, and
obtaining such Certificate from the Mayor, or Justices, or principal Magistrate
as aforesaid, every such Master, Merchant and other Person so importing,
bringing in or landing such Servants or other Persons, shall forfeit and pay
for each Servant or other Person so imported, brought in or landed contrary to
the Direction of this Act, the Sum of Ten Pounds; one Half, after the Charges
of Prosecution deducted, to the Governor for the Support of Government, and the
other Half to the Collector or Collectors, or to such Person or Persons who
shall sue for the same in any Court of Record in this Province, by Bill, Plaint
or Information, wherein no Essoin, Protection or Wager of Law shall be allowed.

The Importation of Servants, etc. allowed by Laws of England, not h^ndred by
the Act.
PROVIDED ALWAYS, That this Act, nor any thing herein contained, shall extend or
be construed to extend to hinder the Importation of such Servants or others who
by any Acts of the Parliament of Great Britain, or that Part of Great Britain
called England, now in Force, can or may be legally imported into this Province.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, Persons obliged to make
Entry shall apply to the Collector.
That all Persons obliged by this Act to make Entry as aforesaid, shall apply
to Joseph Pritchard, of the City of Philadelphia, Gentleman, who shall be and
is hereby appointed Collector of the said Duty imposed by this Act, without any
Notice or Request made by him for their so doing. Collector's Duty.
Upon which Application and Entry so made with the said Collector, or at any
time before, it shall and may be lawful for the said Collector and his
Deputies, and he or they are hereby injoined and required to repair on board
the Ship or Vessel in which such Passengers shall be imported, and to view
their Condition in respect to Sickness or Health; and where he shall have just
Cause to suspect any infectious Distemper is amongst them, if the same Vessel
be in or near the City of Philadelphia, he shall forthwith apply himself to the
Governor for the time being, or, in his Absence, and in all the other Counties
within this Province, to any two Justices of the Peace of the said Counties
respectively, and give Information thereof, who shall thereupon direct some
Physician, at the Cost and Expense of the Master or Owner of the Vessel, to go
on board such Vessel so suspected, and after View and Enquiry into the
Premises, to make Report of the true State in which he shall find such
Passengers: And where it shall at any time happen, sick and infectious
Passengers are in any Vessel, they shall be removed by Directions from the
Governor for the time being, or Justices aforesaid, unto Province-Island, there
to remain until they shall be restored to Health, and the Danger of Spreading
the Infection, by their means, removed.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, His Power.
That the said Collector or his Deputies to be by him duly constituted, and for
whom he shall be accountable, may and shall (a Warrant being first obtained
under the Hand and Seal of one of his Majesty's Justices of the Peace) enter on
board any Ship, Sloop or Vessel whatsoever, lying or being within any Port or
Place of this Province, or into any House, Store, or Place whatsoever, to
search for and make Discovery of any such Convicts, Infants, Lunaticks, aged,
maimed, impotent or vagrant Persons, landed or intended to be landed contrary
to the Intent and Meaning of this Act: Penalty on molesting the Collector in
hisDuty.
And if the said Master or Merchant, or their Servants or others, shall deny
the said Officer or his Deputies, Entrance, or if he or any of them shall be
any way obstructed or molested in making such Discovery as aforesaid, every
such Person so offending shall forfeit and pay the Sum of Twenty Pounds, one
Half thereof to the Governor, and the other Half to the Collector, or Informer.
And the said Collector is hereby further empowered to receive, collect, demand
and recover from all Persons importing, landing or bringing in any Servant or
Servants, or other Persons into any Port or Place within this Province, all
Forfeitures and Penalties herein before appointed to be set, imposed and levied
by virtue of this Act.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, Penalty on the
Collector's Neglect or Refusal to perform (...) Office.
That if the said Joseph Pritchard shall neglect or refuse, by himself or his
sufficient Deputy or Deputies, to do, execute and perform the several Services
by this Act enjoined him, he the said Officer shall forfeit and pay Fifty
Pounds, the one Half thereof to the Trustees of the Province-Island aforesaid,
for the Uses aforesaid, and the other Half to any one that will sue for the
same, in the Court of Common Pleas of the respective Counties, by Action of
Debt, Bill, Plaint or Information.

AND WHEREAS it has been the Practice for Masters of Vessels, Merchants, and
others, Importers of Servants into this Province, to sell and dispose of such
Servants as are infirm, or afflicted with secret and loathsome Diseases, and so
otherwise disabled as to become useless and burdensome to the Purchasers, to
the great Damage and Loss of the Purchasers themselves, and to the Province in
general; For the Prevention whereof for the Future, IT IS HEREBY ENACTED AND
DECLARED, That every Master, Masters, etc. selling Servants afflicted with
secret Diseases, etc. liable to pay Damages.
Merchant, or other Person, who shall import and sell or dispose of any Servant
or Servants, who at the Time of such Sale were with Child, or afflicted with
such secret or other Diseases as shall render them incapable of performing the
ordinary and reasonable Duties of Servants, such Master, Merchant or other
Person or Persons so disposing of or Selling such Servant or Servants, shall be
liable to answer the Purchaser or Purchasers all Damages which he, she or they
shall sustain by means of such Sale or Sales in an Action or Actions of the
Case to be brought against such Seller or Sellers, in any Court of Record
within this Province, to be recovered with full Costs of Suit.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, Four former Acts ^pealed.
That one Act of General Assembly of this Province, entitled, An Act for
imposing a Duty on Persons convicted of heinous Crimes, and imported into this
Province, etc. and one other Act of General Assembly, entitled, An Act for
laying a Duty on Foreigners and Irish Servants, etc. imported into this
Province; and one other Act of General Assembly, entitled, An Act imposing a
Duty on Persons convicted of heinous Crimes, and to prevent poor and impotent
Persons being imported into the Province of Pennsylvania; and one other Act of
General Assembly, entitled, A Supplement to the Act entitled, An Act for
imposing a Duty on Persons convicted of heinous Crimes, and to prevent poor and
impotent Persons being imported into this Province, be and are hereby repealed
and made void.

Duties, etc. now payable by former Acts, not hereby discharged.
PROVIDED ALWAYS, That nothing herein contained shall extend, or be construed to
extend, to discharge any Sum of Money, or other Duty, payable by the aforesaid
four recited Acts of Assembly, or either of them; but that the aforesaid Acts,
as to the Recovery of any Sum or Sums of Money, Duty or Penalty, forfeited,
become due or payable before the Publication of this Act, by virtue of or by
Breach of the aforesaid Acts, or either of them, do and shall continue and
remain in full Force, until the said Sums of Money, Duty or Forfeitures be
effectually levied, recovered and received.

AND WHEREAS by a Law of this Province for the better Regulation of Servants,
it is provided that no Servant shall be assigned over to any Person but in
Presence of one Justice of the Peace; BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority
aforesaid, All Sales or Assignments of Servants in Philadelphia, to be before
the Mayor, etc.
That all Sales or Assignments of Servants, within the City of Philadelphia,
shall be made before the Mayor of the said City for the time being, or in case
of his Neglect or Absence then before the Recorder of the said City, and before
no other Person or Persons whatsoever, under the Penalty of Ten Pounds, to be
levied as in the said Act is directed. Who is to keep a Register, etc.
And the said Mayor and Recorder shall and are hereby enjoined to keep a
Register or Registers of the Names of such Servants, and by whom and to whom
assigned, and the Term of Years mentioned in the Indenture, with the Date or
Time of Assignment. And the said Mayor shall, at his going out of his
Mayoralty, deliver the Register or Registers aforesaid to his Successor, to be
carefully kept and preserved, to the End that all Persons concerned may readily
have Access to the same.

CHAP. CCCL. An ACT for the more easy and speedy Recovery of small Debts.
WHEREAS it is found by Experience, Preamble.
that a great Number of the Lawsuits which are commenced in this Province, are
brought against the poorer Sort of People, for small Sums of Money, who are
unable to bear the Expenses arising by the common Method of Prosecution;
THEREFORE, for Remedying thereof, BE IT ENACTED by the Honorable GEORGE
THOMAS, Esquire with the King's Royal Approbation Lieutenant Governor under the
Honorable John Penn, Thomas Penn and Richard Penn, Esqrs, true and absolute
Proprietors of the Province of Pennsylvania, and of the Counties of New Castle,
Kent and Sussex on Delaware, by and with the Advice and Consent of the
Representatives of the Freemen of the said Province, in General Assembly met,
and by the Authority of the same, Actions for Debt not (...) before any one
Justice, etc.
That all Actions for Debt or other Demand, for the Value of Forty Shillings
and upwards, and not exceeding Five Pounds (except such Actions as are herein
after excepted) shall, immediately after the Publication of this Act, be and
are hereby made cognizable before any Justice of the Peace, of any of the
Counties in this Province, in the County in which the Defendant shall be or
reside. And the said Justices are hereby respectively empowered and required,
upon Complaint to either of them made, for any such Debt or Demand, to issue a
Warrant in the nature of a Summons or Capias, as the Case may require, directed
to the Constable of (...) Township or District where the Defendant dwells or
can be ^ound, commanding him to bring or cause such Defendant to appear before
him, at the Time and in the Manner following, That is to say, in Cases where
such Process shall be in the nature of a Capias, forthwith after the Service
thereof; but where a Summons shall be issued, then on some certain Day therein
to be expressed, not less than five, nor exceeding eight Days from the Date of
such Process; and at the Time appointed for the Hearing of any such Cause, the
said Justice himself, or, at the Request of the Parties, by Auditors or
Referrees to that Purpose by him appointed and approved of by the said Parties,
shall proceed to hear and examine the Proofs and Allegations of the Plaintiff
and Defendants; and upon the Return of such Auditors, or otherwise, to give his
Judgment thereupon, as the true Merits and Right of the Cause shall appear to
him, with such Costs only as by the L^ws of this Province are allowed in Debts
under Forty Shillings.

Process against a Freeholder to be by Summons, etc.
PROVIDED ALWAYS, That the Process against a Freeholder shall be by Summons
only, and Service shall be made thereof on the Person, or a Copy thereof left
at the House of the Defendant, in the Presence of one or more of his Family or
Neighbors, at least four Days before the Time appointed for a Hearing: And in
case the Defendant does not appear at the Time appointed, then on Oath or
Affirmation made by the Constable that the said Summons was duly served in
Manner aforesaid, the Justice who gr^nted the same Summons may, either then, or
on such fu^ther Day as he shall deem consistent with Reason and the nature of
the Case to appoint, and not otherwise, proceed to hear and determine such
Cause or Causes in the Defendant's Absence, and give Judgment and award
Execution thereupon as if the Defendant had been personally present.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, After Judgment,
Execution to be granted, etc.
That after Judgment given in any of the Cases aforesaid, the Justice who
pronounced the same shall grant Execution thereupon, directed to the Constable
aforesaid, commanding him to levy the Debt or Damages and Costs, of the
Defendant's Goods and Chattels (who by virtue thereof shall, within the Space
of ten Days next following, expose the same to Sale by public Vendue,
returning the Overplus if any be, to the Defendant) and for Want of sufficient
Distress, to take the Body of such Defendant into Custody, and him or her to
carry and convey to the common Goal of the County; and the Sheriff or Keeper of
such Goal is hereby required to receive the Person or Persons so taken in
Execution, and him, her or them safely to keep until the Sum recovered, with
Costs, be fully paid, and in Default of such safe Keeping to be liable to
answer the Damages to the Party grieved in such Manner as by Law is provided in
case of Escapes. In case no Assets can be found, the Sum recovered may be
levied (...) Lands, etc.
But in case (...) belonging to the Defendant, sufficient to pay the Debt and
Costs, can be found, it shall and may be lawful for the Plaintiff to apply to
the Justice who pronounced the Judgment for a Transcript thereof, and on filing
the same in the Prothonotary's-Office of the Court of Common Pleas in that
County in which the Recovery shall be had, it shall and may be lawful for the
Plaintiff to levy the Sum recovered, with Costs of Suit, on the Lands and
Tenements of the Defendant, either by Fieri facias, Venditioni exponas, or
Extent, as the Case may require, in like Manner as by Law is provided in other
Cases.

PROVIDED ALWAYS, No Execution to be issued against a Freeholder, in less than
three Months, (...)* etc.
That no such Execution shall be issued against any Freeholder in less than the
Space of three Months next after the Entry of such Judgment, unless the
Plaintiff, or somebody for him or her, shall on Oath or Affirmation declare
that he or she has good Reason to believe, that the Debt will by such Delay be
lost, for that at the End of the said Term or before it (he or she believes)
the Defendant will not have sufficient Assets in the County on which the said
Debt may be levied: And if any Judgment to be given as aforesaid, shall be
against a Person not a Freeholder, such Person shall have the Execution against
him or her, respited for like Term of Three Months, on his or her entering into
Recognizance to the Plaintiff, with one sufficient Security, in the nature of
special Bail, on Condition to deliver the Body of the Defendant to the Sheriff
of the County, at the Expiration of the Time so to be allowed, or that the
Condemnation-Money shall then be paid; and in Default of giving such Security,
shall be committed to the common Goal of the County, there to remain until the
Debt and Costs shall be paid, or such Defendant otherwise legally discharged.

PROVIDED ALSO, That where the Plaintiff in any Case shall become Nonsuit, or
Judgment shall pass against him, then the Justice is hereby required to assess
the Defendant his reasonable Costs, to be levied in Manner aforesaid.

PROVIDED ALSO, Insolvent Debtors may be relieved, as before.
That it shall and may be lawful for the Justices of the respective Courts of
Common Pleas to give such Relief to any insolvent Debtor or Debtors, prosecuted
in Pursuance of this Act, as they might have done by the Laws now in Force in
case this Act had not been made.

(...) conceiv^^ themselves (...) may appeal, etc.
PROVIDED ALSO, That if any Person or Persons shall conceive him, her or
themselves aggrieved by any such Judgment so to be given (Cases determined on
the Return of Auditors or Referrees, as aforesaid, only excepted) it shall and
may be lawful for such Person or Persons, at any Time within the Space of six
Days next following the giving of such Judgment, but not after, to appeal
therefrom to the next Court of Common Pleas to be holden for the County in
which such Suit shall be commenced, he, she or they first ^ntring into
Recognizance, with at least one sufficient Security, at least in double Value
of the Debt or Damages sued for, and sufficient to answer all Costs to
prosecute the said Appeal with Effect, and to abide the Order of the said
Court, or in Default thereof to be sent by Mittimus to the Sheriff of the
County, by him to be kept until he, she or they shall give such Security, or be
otherwise legally discharged.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, Justices to make fair
Entries in ^ooks, etc.
That the said Justices shall cause fair Entries to be made, in Books by them
to be provided for that Purpose, of the Name of the Plaintiff and Defendant, in
all such Cases as may come before them, with the Debt and Costs adjudged, and
the Time when the same Judgment was given: And upon any Appeal made from any
such Judgment, the Justice who pronounced the same shall send a Transcript
thereof to the Prothonotary of the Court of Common Pleas of the County in which
such Appeal is made, on or before the first Day of the Term next following any
such Appeal: For which Transcript, or any other obtained by virtue of this Act,
the Justice shall be allowed in the Costs to be taxed Eighteen Pence, and no
more.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, Meth^^ of Pro^^eding in
Court upon Appeal.
That at the Court to which any such Appeal shall be made, the Person so
appealing shall cause an Entry of his Suit to be made by the Prothonota^y of
such Court, and shall either have his Appearance entered or give Bail to the
Action, as the nature of the Case may require, or on Neglect thereof, and
Application of the Appellee to the Court for that End, the Appellant's Def^ult
shall be recorded, the first Judgment affirmed, with re^sonable Costs, and
Execution shall be issued out of the said Court against the Defendant's Body,
Goods or Chattels, as is usual in other Cases: And in case the Defendant shall
appeal or give Bail as aforesaid, the Plaintiff or Defendant in the Appeal (as
the Case may require) shall file his or her Declaration, and the adverse Party
plead to issue, in such Time as shall be directed by the Court, so always that
the Cause be tried by a Jury of the Country, in the usual Manner, either the
Court to which such Appeal is made, or the next Term at farthest (unless the
Court, on Cause to them shown, shall think fit to give the Parties a farther
Day) and as the Verdict shall be rendered in any of the said Causes, the Court
shall give Judgment thereupon, as the nature of the Case may require, with
Costs of Suit.

PROVIDED ALWAYS, That if the Parties Appellant and Appellee shall neglect or
refuse to fil^ his or her Declaration, or to plead to issue in such Time as
shall be directed by the Court, a Nonsuit, or Judgment by Default, may be
entered for Want ^hereof as usual.

PROVIDED ALSO, That the Costs to be taxed in any such Suit, to the several
Officers, and others concerned, for the Services by them respectively to be
done, shall be two third Parts only of the Costs now usually taken in the said
Courts of Common Pleas.

PROVIDED ALSO, That none of the Justices, who by virtue of this Act shall hear
and determine any of Causes aforesaid out of Court, shall afterward sit on the
Hearing and Determining the same Cause on an Appeal made to any of the Courts
of Common Pleas aforesaid.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, Penalty on commencing
Su^ts made cognizable by this Act, in any other M^^ner.
That if any Person or Persons whosoever shall commence, sue or prosecute any
Suit or Suits for any Debts or Demands, made cognizable as aforesaid, in other
Manner than is directed by this Act, and shall obtain a Verdict or Judgment
therein for Debt or Damages, which, without Costs of Suit, shall not amount to
more than Five Pounds (not having caused an Oath or Affirmation to be made
before the obtaining of the Writ of Summons or Capia^, and filed the same in
the Prothonotary's-Office respectively, that he, she or they so making Oath or
Affirmation did truly believe the Debt due or Damage sustained exceeded the Sum
of Five Pounds) he, she or they so prosecuting shall not recover any Costs in
such Suit; any Law, Usage or Custom to the contrary notwithstanding.

PROVIDED ALSO, That this Act, nor any thing herein contained, shall be deemed,
construed or understood to extend to Actions of Debt for Rent, Debt upon Bonds
for Performance of Covenants, to Actions of Covenant, to Actions of Replevin,
or upon any real Contract; nor to Actions of Trespass on the Case for Trover
and Conversion, or Slander; nor to Actions of Trespass for Assault and Battery,
or Imprisonment; nor to such Actions where the Title of Lands shall anywise
come in Question.

PROVIDED ALSO, That this Act shall continue in Force for the Space of Three
Years, and from thence to the End of the next Sessions of Assembly, and no
longer.

CHAP. CCCLI. An ACT for continuing and amending the Act of Assembly,
entitled, A Supplement to the Act for electing Members of Assembly, etc.
Pr^^^ble.
WHEREAS notwithstanding the just and impartial Method prescribed for Electing
of Members of Assembly by the Charter of Privileges, granted by the Honorable
WILLIAM PENN, Esquire late Proprietor and Governor in chief of the Province of
Pensilvania, and Counties of New Castle, Kent and Sussex upon Delaware, to the
Inhabitants thereof, and of the several Acts of General Assembly of the said
Province, made in Pursuance of the said Charter, for the more free, impartial
and peaceable Election of Members to serve in the General Assembly of the said
Province, and of Sheriffs, Coroners, Commissioners, Assessors, and of
Inspectors to assist in the said Election; it was nevertheless found upon
Experience, that the Method formerly prescribed by the Laws of this Province
for choosing Inspectors to assist the Sheriff, and for receiving the Poll or
Votes at the said Elections, did not answer the good Purposes for which it was
intended; but great Numbers of disorderly Persons, many of whom not being
qualified to vote for Members of Assembly, etc. mixed themselves among the
Electors at the Time of choosing Inspectors, and by their rude and disorderly
Behavior disturbed the Electors, and created Strifes and Quarrels, to the
great Danger and Disquiet of the peaceable People there met together, and in
Delay of the said Election.

AND WHEREAS it often happened, that the said Inspectors were chosen most or
all of them out of one Part of the County, and by reason thereof could not be
so well acquainted with the Estates and Circumstances of all the Electors,
which was the principal End of their first Appointment.

FOR remedying of which Inconveniences, an Act of General Assembly of this
Province was pas^'d in the Twelfth Year of the present Reign, entitled, A
Supplement to the Act for electing Members of Assembly; which Act, with some
Amendments, is thought necessary to be continued: THEREFORE BE IT ENACTED by
the Honorable GEORGE THOMAS, Esquire with the King's Approbation Lieutenant
Governor, under the Honorable John Penn, Thomas Penn and Richard Penn, Esqrs;
true and absolute Proprietors of the Province of Pennsylvania, and the Counties
of New Castle, Kent and Sussex upon Delaware, by and with the Advice and
Consent of the Representatives of the Freemen of the said Province, in General
Assembly met, and by the Authority of the same, That the Eight several
Districts into which the several Counties within this Province have been
divided by the Justices of the said Counties, The 8 Districts into which the
Counties have been divided are to ^ontinue, etc.
in Pursuance of the Act of Assembly aforesaid, shall and do remain, and they
are hereby declared to be and remain firm, stable and unalterable during the
Continuance of this Act, except in such Cases as are herein after provided, for
the Purposes herein after mentioned: And that if any new Township, since the
Passing of the Act aforesaid, has been or during the Continuance of this Act
shall be erected out of several Districts within any of the said Counties, that
it shall and may be lawful for the Justices aforesaid, respectively, at their
Quarter Sessions of the Peace, next after the Publication of this Act, and at
the Quarter Sessions of the Peace next following the Erecting such Townships,
during the Continuance of this Act, and they are hereby enjoined and required
to annex such Township or Townships to the District or Districts out of which
the greatest Part of the said Townships respectively were taken, and to deliver
to the Sheriff of the respective Counties an Account to what District the same
Township or Townships are annexed, with the Names of all the new-erected
Townships; all which the said Sheriff shall make known to the respective
Constables of the said Townships with all Expedition, thereby to enable them to
discharge their several Trusts, in Pursuance of the Directions of this Act.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, Freeholders to meet in
each Township, and nominate, etc.
That the Freeholders and others qualified to elect Members of Assembly in each
Township, shall meet on the Twenty-fifth Day of September, yearly, but if the
same shall happen upon a first Day of the Week, then upon the next Day
following, at some convenient Place within their said respective Townships to
be appointed by the Constable of the said Township, or in case of his Absence,
Neglect or Refusal, then at such convenient Place within such Township as the
Overseers of the Poor shall appoint; and the said Electors being qualified to
vote for Members of Assembly, shall, between the Hours of Nine in the Forenoon
and Three in the Afternoon the same Day, during all which Time the Election
shall continue, in the Presence of the Constable, and such two Freeholders as
he shall call to his Assistance, or in his Absence, etc. the Overseer of the
Poor, proceed to elect by Balloting one able and discreet Freeholder, residing
within the said Township, who may be supposed to be best acquainted with the
Estates and Circumstances of the Inhabitants. The Name of the Person no^i^^t^d
to be given to the Sheri^^, etc.
The Name of which Person so nominated and chosen is to be taken down in
Writing by the Constable or Overseer of the Poor, as the Case shall happen,
with the Name of the Township for which he is chosen, and shall be delivered to
the Sheriff of the County, at the Place of Election, or to such Person or
Persons as shall happen to be Judges of the Election, before the Hour of Nine
in the Forenoon of the Day whereupon the Election of Members of Assembly shall
happen, and the Sheriff, or other Judge of the Election, having then and there
received the Names of all the Persons chosen for the respective Townships
within his County, or so many of them as shall be delivered to him in Manner
aforesaid, he shall call to his Assistance at least four Freeholders of the
County, and in their Presence shall put all the Names of the Persons returned
for each District into a separate Box to be provided by him for that Purpose,
and shall likewise, in the Presence of the said Freeholders, call some
indifferent Person, who shall draw one Name out of each Box and deliver the
same to the Sheriff, or other Judge of the Election; which being done, the
Persons whose Names shall happen to be drawn, and being present, shall, for
that Year, be the Inspectors of the Election, and as such shall be published by
the Sheriff, in the Presence of the Electors, or so many of the as ^^^ll (...)
pr^s^nt.

AND BE IT ENACTED by the Authority (...), Inhabitants of each W^rd in
Philadelphia, to meet, etc.
That it shall and may be lawful for the Inhabit^nts of the r^^pecti^e Wards of
the City of Philadelphia, qu^li^ied to vote for Member^ of Assembly, to meet
together at the Time herein before mentioned for the Meeting of the Inhabitants
of the respective Townships in this Province, and at some convenient Place
within their respective Wards, to be appointed by the Constable of the Ward to
which he belongs, of which public Notice shall be given in Writing, etc. by
affixing the same upon the Courthouse Door in Philadelphia, at least six D^ys
before the said Twenty-fifth Day of September, and there shall, in the Presence
of the Constable of the Ward, and such two Freeholders of the said Ward as he
shall call to his Assistance, proceed to choose by Balloting one substantial
Freeholder of Ability and Integrity, residing within the said Ward; whose Name,
when so chosen, shall be taken in Writing and certified by the Constable and
Freeholders aforesaid to the Sheriff of the County, or other Judge of the said
Election, in the Manner before directed for the Constables of Townships. And
the Sheriff shall put the Names of all the Persons so to him returned into a
Box, and shall call some indifferent Person, who shall draw four of the said
Names out of the said Box, and deliver the same to the Sheriff, who shall read
the same publicly in the Presence of the Electors then present: And the four
Persons whose Names shall so happen to be drawn, shall, together with the
Inspectors chosen out of the several Districts of the said County, be the
Inspectors for that Year for the Election, and as such shall be qualified in
the Manner before directed for other Inspectors. And the other six Persons,
whose Names shall remain in the Box, shall be the Inspectors for that Year at
the Election of Burgesses and Assessors for the City of Philadelphia and shall
be qualified in Manner aforesaid.

BUT before they proceed to act (...) A^^isting the Sheriff to receive the Poll
or Votes of the said Electors, Inspectors to (...) qualified, etc.
they shall be qualified, by Oath or Affirmation, by the Sheriff of the proper
County, or other Judges of the Elections, who are hereby required and empowered
to administer the same; That they the said Inspectors will duly attend the
ensuing Election, during the Continuance thereof, and will truly and faithfully
assist the Sheriff, Coroners, or other Judges of the said Election, to prevent
all Frauds and Deceits whatsoever of Electors or others in carrying on the
same, and in causing the Poll or Votes at such Election to be taken and cast up
according to the Direction of the before-recited Act.

Inspectors may qualify Electors, etc.
AND the said Inspectors shall and are hereby authorized to administer to every
Elector or Person who presents his Ticket, an Oath or Affirmation in the Words
directed by the aforesaid Act of Assembly, unless the Qualification of such
Elector be generally well known, or some one or more of the said Inspectors
shall and will openly declare to the Rest, that they know such Elector to be
qualified as in the aforesaid Act of Assembly is required* And the Votes or
Tickets of such as offer to poll and refuse to take the said Oath or
Affirmation, shall be openly rejected, and the Votes or Tickets of every Person
who takes the said Oath or Affirmation shall, with the other lawful Tickets or
Votes, be put into the Box, and no Ticket so received shall be suppressed.

Constables to give public Notice, etc.
AND to the End this Act may be duly executed, and the Peace preserved; BE IT
THEREFORE ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That the Constables of the
respective Townships within the several Counties of this Province, or in case
of the Death, Neglect or Absence of the said Constables, then the Overseers of
the Poor of such Township, or one of them, shall, at least six Days before the
said 25th Day of September, in every Year, give public Notice, in Writing, by
affixing the same at the most public Places in the respective Townships, of
the Place where the Inhabitants of the Township in which they live shall meet
to elect a fit Person, according to the Direction of thi^ Act; and that the
said Constable, or, in his Absence, the Overseer of the Poor as aforesaid,
shall there attend at the Time appointed in this Act; and such Constable or
Overseer of the Poor shall call to his Assistance two substantial Freeholders
of the said Township, being there present, who shall assist him in Judging of
the said Election, and in taking the Votes, and who, together with himself,
shall certify to the Sheriff of County, or other Judge of the Election, under
their Hands, that such Person was elected by a Majority of lawful Votes, by the
Township to which he belongs; the Name of which Person so elected as aforesaid
shall be delivered to the Sheriff, etc. of the County to which they belong, in
the Manner herein before directed.

AND if any Constable or Overseer of the Poor, Penalty on Constables, etc.
neglecting the Duty required of them by this Act.
being the Judge of such Election as aforesaid, shall neglect to do the Duty
hereby injoined him, or shall wilfully misbehave himself in the Execution of
his Duty, and being thereof legally convict, or if any of the Persons so
elected and returned for any Township within this Province, in the Manner
before directed, shall neglect or refuse to give his Attendance at the Time and
Place of Electing Members of Assembly, every such Person so offending in any of
the Premises shall forfeit the Sum of Five Pounds to any Person who will sue
for the same, to be recovered by Action of Debt, in any Court of Record within
this Province, with Costs of Suit. And if the Person whose Name shall happen to
be drawn being called shall not appear, then the Name of another Person
belonging to the same District shall be drawn, and shall be qualified and
proceed to officiate as an Inspector, in the Manner before directed in this Act
for Inspectors.

AND BE IT ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That an Act of Assembly of this
Province, e^^^^tuled, A Supplementary Act to the Act for ascertaining (...)
Number of Members of Assembly, and to regulate Elections, passed in the
Thirteenth Year of the Reign of King George the First, and every Article and
Clause therein, shall be and is hereby repealed.

PROVIDED ALWAYS, That nothing herein contained shall be deemed or taken to
alter or make void the said recited Act of General Assembly made in the Fourth
Year of the Reign of the late Queen Anne, or any thing therein contained, but
that every Clause, Article and Sentence therein, except what is hereby altered
or supplied, shall be and remain in full Force and Virtue as the same was
before the Making of this Act, or the aforesaid Supplementary Act hereby
repealed.

THIS Act to continue for the Space of Three Years, and from thence to the End
of the next Session of Assembly, and no longer.

CHAP. CCCLII. An ACT for vesting the Province-Island, and the Buildings
thereon erected, and to be erected, in Trustees, for providing an Hospital for
such sick Passengers as shall be imported into this Province; and to prevent
the Spreading of infectious Distempers.
Preamble.
WHEREAS by an Act of General Assembly of this Province, made in the Twelfth
Year of the Reign of King William the Third, entitled, An Act to prevent
sickly Vessels coming into this Government, it is among other Things enacted,
That from and after the Publication thereof, no unhealthy or sickly Vessels,
coming from any unhealthy or sickly Place whatsoever, shall come nearer than
one Mile to any of the Towns or Ports of this Province or Territories, without
Bills of Health, nor shall presume to bring to Shore such Vessels, nor to land
such Passengers, or their Goods, at any the said Ports or Places, without first
obtaining License for the same, in such Manner as by the said Act is directed.
But no Place, until of late, having been provided for the Reception of sick and
distempered Passengers, they have been heretofore clandestinely landed and
lodged within the City of Philadelphia and elsewhere, by Means whereof
infectious Distempers have spread within the Province, and the good Ends
intended by the said Act in great Measure frustrated: For Remedying whereof and
making Provision for the Reception of sick Passengers imported into this
Province, by Directions from the Representatives of the Freemen of the
Province, a Purchase was made of all that Island situate on the Southerly Side
of the Mouth of Schuylkill River, in the County of Philadelphia, adjoining on
Delaware River, heretofore known by the Name of Fisher's-Island, but hereafter
to be called PROVINCE-ISLAND, containing about Three Hundred and Forty-two
Acres of Land and Meadow, with certain Buildings thereon erected, and a
Conveyance thereof taken from Jonathan Paschal and Mary his Wife, late Mary
Fisher, John Paschal and Henry Hodge, Executors of the Testament and last Will
of John Fisher, late Proprietor and Owner of the said Island (who were duly
authorized to make Sale thereof) unto Joseph Harvey, Thomas Tatnal, Joseph
Trotter, James M^rris, and O^^ald Peel, Gentlemen; In Trust nevertheless and
s^b^^ct to such Uses as the Representatives of the Freemen of this Province, in
Assembly, shall from time to time appoint; and under this further Trust and
Confidence, that they the s^id Trustees, and the Survivors and Survivor of
them, and the Heirs of such Survivor should convey the said Isl^nd and
App^rtenances, and transfer their said Trust to such other Person or Persons,
and for such Estate and Estates as the Representatives aforesaid, in Assembly,
should direct and appoint. Now to the Intent that the said Island may be
effectually secured to the Uses aforesaid, and that the Inconvenienci^s which
might happen from the Importation of sick Passengers within the Province may
for the fut^re be prevented, BE IT ENACTED by the Honorable GEORGE THOMAS, Esquire
Lieutenant Governor, with the Royal Approb^tion, under the Honorable I^^n
Penn, Thomas Penn and Richard Penn, Esqrs, true and ab^olute Proprietors of the
Province of Pennsylvania, and of the Counties of New Castle, Kent and Sussex on
Delaware, by and wi h the Advice and Consent of the Representatives of the
Freemen of the said Province, in General Assembly met, and by the Authority of
the same, Trustees Names.
That the aforesaid I ^eph Harve^, Thomas Tatnal, Joseph Trotter, James Morris
and Oswald Peel, and the Survivors and Survivor of them* do stand seized, and
they are hereby declared and enacted to stand seized of the Province-Island
aforesaid, and the Edi^ices and Buildings thereon erected and to be erected,
with their and every of their Appurtenances, to hold the said Island, and all
and singular the Premises to them the said Joseph Harvey, Thomas Tatnal, Joseph
Trotter, James Morris and Oswald Peel, and the Survivors and Survivor of them,
and the Heirs of such Survivor forever; in Trust nevertheless, and for the
Uses, Intents and Purposes herein after specified, and to and for no other Use,
Intent or Purpose whatsoever, That is to say, That they the said Trustees, and
the Survivors and Survivor of them, do undertake and continue their Care and
Management of the said Island, with the Appurtenances, and receive the Ren^s,
Issues and Profits thereof, and duly to account for the same as herein after is
directed, until such Time as the Representatives of the Freemen aforesaid, in
Assembly, shall appoint others to succeed them in the said Trust: And on this
further Trust and Confidence, that they the said Trustees, and the Survivors
and Survivor of them, and the Heirs of such Survivor, do and shall permit and
suffer such Person and Persons so hereafter from time to time to be appointed,
to succeed them in the Trust aforesaid to have the Care and Management of the
s^id Island, and to receive and take the Rents, Issues and Profits thereof, to
be accounted for and applied as herein after is directed.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, Trustees empowered to
lease the Island, etc.
That it shall and may be lawf^l to and for the aforesaid Joseph Harvey, Thomas
(...), Joseph Trotter, James Morris and Oswald Peel, or the greater Number of
them, during the Continuance of their Trust, and to and for such other Person
and Persons as the Representatives of the Freemen aforesaid shall from time to
time appoint in the Stead and Place of the said Trustee^ before named, to
grant, bargain and lease the Island aforesaid, or any Part thereof, for such
Term and Terms of Years, not exceeding Seven, as to them shall seem expedient;
so always as such Tenant or Tenants to whom the same shall be so leased be
obliged to keep the said Buildings thereon erected, Banks, Dams, Fences, and
other the demised Premises, in Repair, during the respective Terms for which
the same shall be demised, and reserving always full Liberty to place and
continue thereon, in the Manner herein after directed, any such sickly Persons
imported into this Province, as Occasion shall require, in Pursuance of this
Act: And also reserving and excepting six Acres, Reserving Six Acres.
Part of the said Island, adjoining to the River Delaware, most commodious for
erecting a new Hospital or Pesthouse.

PROVIDED ALWAYS, That nothing herein contained shall affect, vacate or make
void the Contract made by the Trustees before-named with Jacob Mellor, but that
the said Contract and Lease of the said Province-Island shall be and remain as
firm, valid and effectual to all Intents, Constructions and Purposes as if this
Act had not been made.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, Trustees to account, etc.
That the Trustees of the said Province-Island herein before named, and such
others as shall at any time hereafter be appointed in their or any of their
Steads, shall well and truly account with and pay to the Treasurer of this
Province for the time being, all such Sum and Sums of Money as they or any of
them already have received or at any time hereafter shall receive from the
Island aforesaid; to be disposed of in such Manner and for such Uses as the
Representatives of the Freemen aforesaid, in Assembly, shall from time to time
direct and appoint. And if it shall at any Time or Times happen that the said
Trustees, or any of them shall fail so to do, that then, and so often, and in
every such Case, it shall and may be lawful for the Treasurer aforesaid to
commence, prosecute and maintain an Action of Debt against such Delinquent or
Delinquents, and to recover the Sum or Sums so to become due, in any Court of
Record in the Province, with Costs of Suit.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, Trustees shall suffer
Suits to be commenced in their Names when necessary.
That when any Lease or Leases shall at any time hereafter be made of the
Province-Island aforesaid, or any Part of Parcel thereof, and the Rent reserved
for the same, or any Part thereof, ^^all be in Arrear and unpaid, that then,
and so often, and in ^^ery such Case, and in all other Cases wherein it shall
be thought necessary, that they the before-named Trustees, and the Survivors
and Survivor of them, and the Heirs, Executors and Administrators of such
Survivor, shall permit and suffer all such Suit and Suits, Action or Actions to
be commenced and prosecuted in his, her or their Name or Names, as the
Representatives aforesaid, in Assembly, shall at any Time or Times hereafter
direct or appoint: So always that they the s^id Trustees, and every of them,
and their Heirs, Executors and Administrators, and every of them, be well and
truly indemni^^ed, saved and kept harmless of and from any Costs, Charges,
Troubles or Molestations whatsoever, which may arise or happen for or by Reason
of such Suit or Suits so to be commenced and prosecuted.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, Governor, etc may order
imported infectious Persons to the Province-Island, etc.
That when and so often as Occasion shall require, it shall and may be lawful
for the Lieutenant Governor, or Commander in chief, for the time being, or to
and for any two J^stices of the Peace of any of the Counties within this
Province respectively, to order and direct all sick and infectious Persons, at
any time hereafter imported into this Province, to be transported to the
Province-Island aforesaid, there to remain in such Places as shall be provided
for them by the Trustees aforesaid, until it shall be judged by the Physician
attending them, that they are free from any infectious Distemper. Their
Nursing, Physic, Their Nursing, etc. to be paid for by the Importer.
Maintenance and Necessaries to be paid for by the Importer, Master or Owner of
the Vessel in which such sick and distempered Persons shall be imported; to be
repaid to them out of the Effects of the said Passengers* respectively, if any
they have.

AND for the better securing the Payment of the several Sums of Money which
shall become necessary to disburse in or about such sick and distempered
Persons as shall be imported as aforesaid; BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the
Authority aforesaid, That it shall and may be lawful for any one of the
Justices of the Peace aforesaid, Upon Application of the Trustees, Importers of
sick Persons shall be obliged to give Bond, etc.
on the Application of any one of the said Trustees, and they are hereby
enjoined, as Occasion shall require, to send for the Masters or Owners of the
Vessels in which such sick and distempered Persons shall, at any time
hereafter, be imported, or the Importer of such sick Person or Persons, and
oblige him, them, or some, or one them, to give Bond, in a competent Sum of
Money, together with one or more sufficient Sureties, to them the said
Trustees, with Condition to be underwritten, to find and provide proper Food,
Nursing, Physic, and other Necessaries for the sick People aforesaid, or to
pay for the same.

And refusing may be committed to Prison.
AND in case any Master or Importer shall refuse so to become bound, that then,
and in every such Case, it shall and may be lawful for the said Justices,
respectively, to commit the Offender to Prison, there to remain in close
Custody, without Bail or Mainprize, until he or they shall conform to the
Directions of this Act.

AND BE IT ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, Trustees to keep fair Entries in
a Book, of the Names, etc.
That the Trustees aforesaid shall keep or cause to be kept, in a Book to be
provided for that Purpose, a fair Entry of the Names of every sick Person that
shall be transported to the said Hospital or Pesthouse, and also the Names of
the Vessel, Master or Merchant who shall import them into this Province.

AND BE IT ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, None to b^ discharged from the
Hospital without a Certificate.
That after any such distempered Person has recovered his or her Health as
aforesaid, they, or any of them, shall not be discharged from the Hospital or
Pesthouse but by a Certificate under the Hands of two or more of the said
Trustees, certifying, That the Bearer (mentioning his Name) having remained in
the Hospital for his Health until they the said Trustees judged him clear of
any infectious Distemper, they had discharged him from the said Hospital or
Pesthouse.

AND WHEREAS the Entertaining sick and distempered Persons brought into this
Province, has been attended with fatal Consequences, BE IT ENACTED by the
Authority aforesaid, That no Housekeeper, or other Inhabitant of this
Province, shall receive into his or their Houses or Outhouses, or entertain
any Person or Persons whatsoever, knowingly, that have been ordered by the
Governor for the time being, or by any two Justices of the Peace of any of the
Counties within this Province respectively, to be transported to the Hospital
or Pesthouse, pursuant to the Direction of this Act, unless such Person has
been discharged from the said Hospital or Pesthouse, and has received from
the Trustees, or any two of them as aforesaid, a Certificate, certifying, that
the said Person or Persons is or are discharged from the said Hospital as
aforesaid, Penalty on entertaining Persons who have been ordered to the
Pesthouse, etc.
on Penalty of paying the Sum of Ten Pounds, for every Offense, and also of
maintaining and providing for the said sick distempered Person during his, her
or their Sickness; and, in case of Death, burying them at their own Expense.
Which said Sum of Ten Pounds is hereby ordered to be paid to the Overseers of
the Poor of the Township where such Delinquent may reside, for the Relief of
the Poor of such Township; and to be recovered by the said Overseers, of the
Person so offending, by a Warrant from any Magistrate, in the same Manner as
Debts under Forty Shillings are recovered.

AND in case the Person harboring or entertaining such sick and distempered
Person (...) be poor, or allege he or she is not of Ability to pay the said
Fine of Ten Pounds, such indigent Person shall be confined to the Workhouse or
Prison for any time not exceeding one Month, as the Magistrate or Magistrates
of the respective County may direct.

CHAP. CCCLIII. An ACT for the more easy Recovery of Legacies within this
Province.
FORASMUCH as the Laws of this Province, relating to the Recovery of Legacies,
are defective: Therefore, for Remedying thereof, BE IT ENACTED by the
Honorable GEORGE THOMAS, Esquire with the King's Royal Approbation Lieutenant
Governor, under the Honorable John Penn, Thomas Penn and Richard Penn, Esqrs;
true and absolute Proprietors of the Province of Pennsylvania, and of the
Counties of New Castle, Kent and Sussex upon Delaware, by and with the Advice
and Consent of the Representatives of the Freemen of the said Province, in
General Assembly met, and by the Authority of the same, That from and after the
Publication of this Act, Legatee^ may su^ for their Legacies.
it shall and may be lawful for any Person or Persons to whom any Legacy or
Bequest of any Sum or Sums of Money, or other Goods or Chattels, have been or
may be made by the last Will and Testament of any other Person or Persons
legally made, to commence, sue and prosecute an Action of Debt, Detinue or
Accompt-render, as the Case may require, for such Legacy after it becomes due,
in any of the County Courts for holding of Pleas, in any of the Counties within
this Province. And if it shall appear that the Legacy or Legacies is or are
due, and there be sufficient Assets in the Hands of the Executors or
Administrators with Testaments annexed, to discharge the just Debts of the
Testator, and the Legacy or Legacies bequeathed, the Plaintiff or Plaintiffs
shall recover, with Costs of Suit; any Law, Usage or Custom to the contrary
notwithstanding.

If there be not Assets enough, Abatement shall he made.
PROVIDED ALWAYS, That where it shall so happen that there are Assets in the
Hands of any Executors, or Administrators with Testaments annexed, to discharge
all the Debts of the Testator, with an Overplus not sufficient to disch^rge all
the Legacies which may be given, then an Abatement shall be made, in Proportion
to the Legacies so given; unless it shall otherwise be provided by the Will.
Legatee being under Age, may sue by Guardian, etc.
And where any Legatee or Legatees are or may be under Age at the Time when
such Legacy or Legacies shall become due, in such Case such Legatee or Legatees
shall and may maintain an Action for their respective Legacies, by Guardian or
next Friends, as fully, amply and largely as by Law they may do in any other
Actions whatsoever.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, Upon Plea of Want of
Assets, Auditors shall be appointed.
That the respective Courts where the said Actions shall be commenced, upon the
Plea of the Want of Assets to pay all the Debts and Legacies, shall appoint
Auditors to examine the Accounts of the Executors, and Administrators with
Testaments annexed; who, after full Hearing of the Parties, at such Times and
Places as by them the said Auditors shall be appointed, with Notice to the
Parties, shall report how the Accounts of the Executors or Administrators do
stand, what Assets will remain after Payment of all the Debts, and what Part of
the Remainder is the Proportion that ought to go toward paying of the
Plaintiff's Legacies. For which Proportion only, unless it shall be otherwise
provided by the Will, the Court shall then award Execution upon the Judgment to
be had in the said Suit: Which Judgment shall remain a Security for the Payment
of the Remainder of the said Legacies and Costs, when sufficient Assets for the
Payment thereof come to the Executors or Administrators Hands. And where any
Exceptions shall b^ taken b^ either of the Parties to the Report of the
Auditors, it shall and may be lawful for the Court in which the Action shall be
depending, on hearing of the Parties, to correct and amend any Mistakes or
Errors which may happen in the Accounts so to be reported.

PROVIDED ALWAYS, No Suit to be maintained un^il reasonable Demand made, and^*
That no such Suit shall be maintained for any such Legacy until reasonable
Demand made of the Executor or Executors, or Administrators with Wills annexed,
who ought to pay the same, and an Offer made of two sufficient Sureties to the
said Executor or Executors, Administrator or Administrators aforesaid; who, if
they think proper to accept thereof, shall become bound to them the said
Executor or Executors, Administrator or Administrators aforesaid, in double the
Sum of the Legacy given, with Condition underwritten, that if any Part or the
Whole thereof shall at any time after appear to be wanting to dischar^e any
Debt or Debts, Legacy or Legacies which the said Executor or Executors,
Administrator or Administrators shall not have other Assets to pay, that then
he the said Leg^tee will return his said Legacy, or such Part thereof as shall
be necessary for the Payment of the said Debts, or the Payment of a
proportional Part of the said Legacies. And if the said Executors or
Administrators shall not think proper to accept of such Bond, then the said
Legatees shall file the same with the Clerk of the Court, before obtaining any
Process against the Executor or Executors, Administrator or Administrators;
otherwise, and in Default thereof, the Process issued shall abate.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, Court may award Costs,
or no Costs, etc.
That the Justices of the Courts aforesaid, respectively, upon Consideration of
the Report of the Accounts of the Executors or Administrators shall, according
to Justice and Equity, either award no Costs, or Costs out of the Testator's
Estate; or in case the Executors or Administrators have been faulty in delaying
to pay the Legacy demanded, or a proportional Part thereof, without sufficient
Excuse, then out of the proper Estate of the Executor or Executors,
Administrator or Administrators; any thing herein contained to the contrary
notwithstanding.

Each Legatee to return proportionally.
PROVIDED ALSO, That where there are or may be several Legatees, and a Return of
Part of the said Legacy sued for appear necessary, in such Case each Legatee
shall only be compelled to return a proportional Part of his Legacy, so as to
make up the whole Sum wanting.

Where no time is limited, Executors, etc. to have a Year.
PROVIDED ALSO, That where no Time in and by any Last Will and Testament is
limited for the Payment of any such Legacies, that then and in such Case the
said Executors or Administrators shall have the Space of one Year to discharge
the same.

Limitation of this Act.
AND BE IT ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That this Act shall continue in
Force for the Term of Seven Years, and from thence to the End of the next
Session of Assembly, and no longer.

CHAP. CCCLIV. An ACT for naturalizing such foreign Protestants as are settled
or shall settle within this Province, who, not being of the People called
Quakers, do conscientiously refuse the Taking of any Oath.
Preamble.
WHEREAS by an Act of Parliament, passed in the Thirteenth Year of the Reign of
our present Sovereign King GEORGE the Second, entitled* An Act for
naturalizing such foreign Protestants and others therein mentioned as are
settled or shall settle in any of his Majesty's Colonies in America, it is,
amongst other Things, provided and enacted, that from and after the first Day
of June, in the Year of our LORD 1740, all Persons born out of the Ligeance of
His Majesty, his Heirs or Successors, who have inhabited and resided, or shall
inhabit and reside for the Space of Seven Years, or more, in any of his
Majesty's Colonies in America, and shall not have been absent out of some of
the said Colonies for a longer Space than two Months, at any one Time during
the said Seven Years, and shall take and subscribe the Oaths, and make, repeat
and subscribe the Declaration appointed by an Act made in the first Year of the
Reign of his late Majesty King George the First, entitled, An Act for the
further Security of his Majesty's Person and Government, etc. or being of the
People called Quakers shall make and subscribe the Declaration of Fidelity, and
take and affirm the Effect of the Abjuration-Oath appointed and prescribed by
an Act made in the Eighth Year of his s^id l^te Majesty, entitled, An Act for
granting the People called Quakers such Forms of Affirmation or Declaration as
man remove the Difficulties which many ^f them lie under, and also make and
subscribe the Profession of his Christian Belief, appointed and prescribed by
an Act made in the first Year of the Reign of their late Majesty's King William
and Queen Mary, entitled, An Act for exempting their Majesty's Protestant
Subjects from the Penalties of certain Laws; before the chi^f Judge, or other
Judge of the Colony, wherein such Persons respectively have so inhabited and
resided, or shall so inhabit and reside, shall be deemed, adjudged and taken to
be his Majesty's natural-born Subjects, to all Intents, Constructions and
Purposes; as in and by the said Act, among other Things, fully appears.

AND WHEREAS by an Act of Assembly of this Province, made in the Fourth Year of
the Reign of the said late King George the First, and approved of by the Lords
Justices, in Council, entitled, An Act for the Advancement of Justice, etc. it
was, among other Things, enacted, That the Affirmation of such Persons (whether
of the People called Quakers, or others) as conscientiously refuse to take an
Oath, shall be accounted and deemed in the Law to have the full Effect of an
Oath, in any Case whatsoever in this Province.

AND WHEREAS diverse Persons born out of the Ligeance of our said present
Sovereign King GEORGE the Second, from the Lenity of our Government, the
Benefit of our Laws, the Advantages of our Trade, and the Security of our
Property, have been induced to settle within this Colony, and although otherwise
qualified according to the Tenor of the Act of Parliament aforesaid, are not
of the People called Quakers, and do conscientiously refuse to take any O^th,
and are thereby disabled from Partaking of the Benefit British Subjects in this
Colony enjoy, and by the Act of Parliament aforesaid is intended; THEREFORE,
for Removing of these Difficulties and those of others who may h^reafter come
amongst (...) in like Circumstances, BE IT ENACTED by the Honorable GEORGE
THOMAS, Esquire with the King's Approbation, Lieutenant Governor, under the
Honorable John Penn, Thomas Penn and Richard Penn, Esqrs, true and absolute
Proprietors of the Province of Pennsylvania, and of the Counties of New Castle,
Kent and Sussex on Delaware, by and with the Advice and Consent of the
Representatives of the Freemen of the said Province, in General Assembly met,
and by the Authority of the same, That from and after the Publication of this
Act, all Persons, being Protestants, born out of the Ligeance of our present
Sovereign King GEORGE the Second, his Heirs or Successors, who shall
conscientiously refuse an Oath, and have inhabited and resided, or shall
inhabit and reside for the Space of Seven Years, or more, within this Province,
and shall not have been absent out of the same or some other of the Colonies,
in the said Act of Parliament mentioned, for a longer Space than two Months, at
any one Time during the said Seven Years, and shall make and subscribe the
Declaration of Fidelity, and the Profession of his Christian Belief, and take
and affirm the Effect of the Abjuration Oath, before the chief Judge, or other
Judge of the Supreme Court of this Province, in such Sort, Manner and Form as
in and by the said Act of Parliament is directed to be done and performed by
the People called Quakers, shall be deemed, adjudged and taken to be the King's
natural-born Subjects of this Province, to all Intents, Constructions and
Purposes, as if they and every of them had been or were born within this
Province: Which said Affirmations the said chief Judge or other Judge aforesaid
is hereby enabled, empowered and required to administer and take. And when
administered and taken, an Entry thereof shall be made in the said Court and in
the Secretary's-Office, and the Names of the Persons transmitted to the
Commissioners for Trade and Plantations, yearly, in like Manner, as by the Act
of Parliament herein before-recited is directed. And for administering the said
Affirmations, and making Entries thereof, the Judges and Secretary aforesaid,
respectively, shall be entitled to the like Fees and be under like Penalties
as in and by the said Act of Parliament is directed and inflicted.

AN APPENDIX; CONTAINING A SUMMARY OF SUCH ACTS of ASSEMBLY As have been
formerly in Force within this Province, For Regulating of Descents, And
Transfering the Property of Lands, etc.

But since expired, altered or repealed.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed by B. FRANKLIN. M, DCC, XLII.

ADVERTISEMENT TO THE READER.
READER,
THE following Appendix contains a Collection of diverse Acts of Assembly
formerly in Force within this Province, but since altered, expired or repealed.
The Necessity of preserving them in Print will be obvious to any one who will
consider, that whatever is done by virtue of any Law whilst it was in Force,
ought to remain valid, though the Law by which it was done after expires or be
repealed.

Many Conveyances have been made by virtue of these Acts whilst they were in
Force; and the Titles of the present Possessors of Lands depend on them: And no
Person, however ever skilful, can form a right Judgment of the Validity of the
Title to those Lands, without being first well informed how the Law stood at
the Time when the several Deeds, of which such Title is composed, were
executed: Hence the Necessity and Usefulness of preserving those Laws which
have been made for regulating Descents and transfering the Property of Lands
must be evident.

As to the ensuing Collection, the Reader may be assured it has been made with
much Care and Difficulty; and it is hoped no such Mistakes will be formed as to
frustrate the good Purposes for which it is designed.

AN APPENDIX, etc.
In the CHARTER granted by King CHARLES the Second, to William Penn, Esquire late
Proprietary and Governor of the Province of Pennsylvania, bearing Date the
Fourth of March, in the 33d Year of his Reign, Anno 1681, it is, amongst other
Things, provided in the Words following, viz.
AND our further Will and Pleasure is, OBSERVATION.

ALTHOUGH it should be made a Question, whether the Statute Laws of England, by
the Royal Charter, or otherwise, did or do extend to this Province; yet as the
Common Law is generally allowed to be in force here in such Cases wherein no
Alterations have been made by Acts of Assembly: And as it appears to have been
resolved in the Earl of Derby 's Case, 4 Inst. 284, That Land granted by
Letters Patents from the Crown, though out of the Realm of England, should
descend according to the Course of the Common Law. It is clear, that from the
Date of the Charter, until Ac^s of Assembly were made to alter the same, Lands,
within this Province, descended according to the Course of Common Law.


That the Laws for regulating of Property, within the said Province, as well
for the Descent of Lands, as likewise for the Enjoyment of Goods and Chattels,
and likewise as to Felonies, shall be and continue the same as they shall be
for the time being in our Kingdom of England, until the said Laws shall be
altered by the said William Penn, his Heirs or Assigns, and by the Freemen of
the said Province, their Delegates or Deputies, or the greater Part of them.

Soon after the Grant made by the Royal Charter aforesaid, an Assembly of the
said Province, and Three Lower Counties (then called the Territories) was
called by the Proprietary and Governor aforesaid, which met at Chester, on the
Seventh Day* of December, 1682; where the following Laws were passed, to wit.
Part of an Act, entitled, An Act of Union, etc.
OBSERVATION.

1. BY an Act made at an Assembly, held at New Castle, Anno 1683, this is
declared to be a fundamental Law.

2. It was continued until the Year 1700; and then an Act of Assembly (Chapter 30)
was made at New Castle, of like import, which repealed this Act.

3. The Act which repealed this was afterward repealed, by which, according to
the Rule, Wood' s Inst. 9. this Act was revived, and remained in force during
the late Proprietor's Life.


BE IT ENACTED by the Governor and Proprietary of the Province aforesaid, by and
with the Advice and Consent of the Deputies of the Freemen thereof, in Assembly
met, That all Persons, who are Strangers and Foreigners, that now do inhabit
this Province and Counties aforesaid, that hold Land in Fee, in the same,
according to the Law of a Freeman, and who shall solemnly promise, within three
Months after the Publication hereof, in their respective County Courts where
they live, upon Record, Faith and Allegiance to the King of England, and to his
lawful Heirs and Successors, and Fidelity and lawful Obedience to William Penn,
Proprietary and Governor of these Provinces, etc. and his Heirs and Assigns,
acording to the King's Letters Patents, shall be held and reputed Freemen of
the Province and Counties aforesaid, in as ample and full Manner as any Person
residing therein. AND IT IS HEREBY FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid,
That when at any Time any Person, that is a Foreigner, shall make his Request
to the Proprietary of this Province for the aforesaid Freedom, the said Person
shall be admitted on the Conditions herein expressed, paying at Admission
Twenty Shillings Sterling, and no more, any thing in this Law, or any other
Law, Act or Thing in this Province to the contrary in anywise notwithstanding.

CHAP. XXXVI.
AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, OBSERVATION.

1. So much of this Law which regards the Manner of giving Evidence, is, in
Substance, the same with the 26 th Law agreed on in England.

2. By an Act, made at the Assembly held at New Castle, in the Year 1683, it
was declared a fundamental Law.

3. By an Act passed at New Castle ( Chap. 91) this Act is declared to be in
Force, and thereby continued without Limitation; but the Act for Continuance of
this and other Laws was after repealed; yet a^ a former Law then was, and, for
aught I find, yet is in being, the Repeal of the New Castle Act does not seem
to affect this Act; but it may be considered as an Act now in Force.


etc. That there shall be two credible Witnesses, in all Cases, in order to
Judgment, and all Witnesses coming or called, to testify their Knowledge in or
to any Matter or Thing in any Court or before any lawful Authority in the said
Province or Territories, shall there give or deliver in their Evidence, by
solemnly Promising to speak the Truth, the whole Truth, and nothing but the
Truth in the Matter or Thing in Question: And in case any Person so called to
give in their Evidence shall afterward be convicted of wilful Falshhood, such
Person shall after undergo such Damage or Penalty as the Person or Persons
against whom he bare false Witness did or should undergo; and shall also make
Satisfaction to the Party wronged, and be publicly exposed for a false
Witness, never to be credited again in any Court, or before any Magistrate in
the said Province. And whosoever shall lie in Conversasation, shall, for every
such Offense, pay Half-a-Crown, or suffer three Days Imprisonment in the House
of Correction, at hard Labor.

CHAP. XLV.
AND BE IT ENACTED, OBSERVATION.

BEFORE the Proprietary and the Adventurers concerned with him left England
diverse Laws were there agreed on; the 15 th of which was the same with the
present.

This Act, as amended in the Fourth of Queen Anne, remains to this Day.


etc. That Wills in Writing, attested by two sufficient Witnesses, shall be of
the same Force to Lands and Tenements as other Conveyances, being legally
proved, in Forty Days, either within or without the Province.

CHAP. LI.
AND BE IT ENACTED, OBSERVATION.

1. BY the 14 th Law made in England, all the Goods, and a Third of the Land
only, where a Man had Issue, was liable to pay Debts, this Act renders Half the
Lands in such Cases liable.

2. This Act cntinued to the 10 th of the Third Month, 1688: The 111 th Chap.
postea, altered it; and then, by an Act passed at Philadelphia, all Lands were
made liable to be taken in Execution, and sold for Payment of Debts, though there
were Issue; which, under certain Regulations remains in Force to this Day.


etc. That all Lands and Goods shall be liable to pay Debts, except where ^here
shall be legal Issue, and then all the Goods, and one Half of the Land only, in
case the Land was bought before the Debts were contracted.

At an Assembly held for the Province and Territories aforesaid, at Chester,
the Tenth Day of the First Month, 1683, the following Acts, among others, were
passed, to wit.
CHAP. CX. An ACT for settling Intestates Estates; [which as it was explained by
the 172d Chapter of the Laws, made at New Castle the 10th Day of the Month
called May, 1684, follows in these Words.]
OBSERVATION.

1. FROM the Passing of this Act the Course of the Descents of Land was
altered: The eldes^ Son, by this Act (where there were other Children) taking a
double Share only.

2. By this Act, it seems, where there were no Children, the Brothers and
Sisters, or their Children (where such there were) of the Intestate, took a
joint Estate; and where there were none, the Parents took Half the Estate.

3. This Act continued to the Year 1693, and then it received some Alterations;
amongst others, where there were no Children, Brothers or Sisters, or their
Issue, were to inherit; and if there were none of these, it was to go to the
Parents: And for W^nt of Kindred, one Half to the Governor, the other Half to
the County Stock.

4. The last mentioned Act continued until 1700; which see postea.


THAT the Estate of an Intestate shall be thus disposed of, That is to say, One
Third of his personal Estate shall go to his Wife, and further, one Third of
his Lands and Tenements to his Wise during he^ natural Life; the Remainder,
with the other two Thirds of his Estate shall go to his Children, his eldest
Son having a double ^ar^ or Share: And in case the Intestate leaves no Child,
then Hal^ the personal Estate to the Widow, and the Mo^ety of the real Estate,
during her natural Life; the Remainder thereof to the next of her Husband's
Kin. And if he leaves no Wife, Child or Children, it shall go to his Brothers
or Sisters, if any be, or to theChildren of such Brothers and Sisters, and in
case no such be, one Half shall go to the Parents, and one Half shall go to the
Governor, and for Want of Kin, one Half to the public Stock of the County: And
the Estate of an Intestate Widow shall go to her Children, to be shared as
before; and if she leave no Child or Children, the Estate to be disposed of as
aforesaid: And the Estate of a single Woman shall go to her Brothers and
Sisters, if any be; and for Want of such, as before limited: Provided, that his
or her Debts be first paid, and that the Time of claiming be within Three Years
after the Decease of the Intestate Party.

CHAP. CXI.
BE IT ENACTED, OBSERVAT.

1. THis Act seems to restrain the Power of devising more than one Third of the
Lands of which a Man died seized.

2. This Law, for aught I find to the contrary, continued until the First of
the the fourth Month, 1693; when a Law passed authorizing a Man to devise all
his real Estate.


etc. That whatever Estate any Person has in this Province or Territories
thereof, at the Time of his Decease, unless it appear that equal Provision be
made elsewhere, shall be thus disposed of, That is to say, One third Part to
the Wise of the Party deceased; one third Part to the Children equally; and the
other Third as he pleases; and in case his Wife be deceased before him, two
Thirds shall go to the Children equally, and the other Third disposed of as he
shall think fit, his Debts being first paid.

At an Assembly held at New Castle, the 10th of the Third Month, 1684, it was
enacted, amongst other Things.
CHAP. CLVIII.
THAT there shall be five Provincial-Judges appointed by the Governor,
OBSERVATION.

1. THIS Law continued 'til the Year 1693, when a new Act was made, giving the
County Courts a^ equitable Power in Causes under Ten Pounds; and an Appeal from
thence against Verdicts or Judgments to the next Supreme-Court, etc. which last
Law was continued by the 91 Chap. of the Laws made at New Castle, and remained
in Force until the 26 th of October, 1701, when a new Act passed for
establishing of Cour^s, etc.


under the Great Seal of this Province; which Judges, or any Three of them,
shall be a Provincial Court, and sit twice every Year in the Town of
Philadelphia; and any two of them at least shall, every Fall and Spring,
yearly, go the Circuits into every respective County of this Province and
Territories, and there hold a Provincial Court, which Court, whether fixed or
circular, shall have the Hearing and Determining of all Appeals from inferior
Courts, also all Trials of Titles of Land, and all Causes, as well criminal as
civil both in Law and Equity, not determinable by the respective County Courts;
any thing in this Act, or in any other Act or Law of this Province or
Territories, to the contrary in anywise notwithstanding.

At a General Assembly held at Philadelphia, the 10th of the Month (...) May
1688, the following Act was passed, among others, viz.
CHAP. CLXXXVIII.
BE IT ENACTED, OBSERVATION.

THIS Act continued to the Year 1693, which see hereafter, by which Executors
and Administrators were authorized to sell without the Application here
directed.


etc. That any Person who died or shall die Intestate Owner of Land within this
Province or Territories, and has left or shall leave a legal Issue, it shall
be lawful for the Court of Orphans, with the Approbation of the Governor and
Council, to empower the Widow or Administrator, in case of considerable Debts,
^harge of Child or Children, to make Sale of such Parts an^ Tracts of the said
Land as the Council and Court shall judge meet, toward the Defraying of such
Debts, the Education of such Child or Children, Support of the Widow, and the
better Improvement of the Remainder of the Estate to their Advantage; and that
this Law be in Force for one whole Year, and no longer.

At a General Assembly held at Philadelphia, in the Year 1693, the Acts
following were passed, viz.
I. The Laws about Factors, and their Imployers.
OBSERVAT.

1. A LAW of like Import with Part of this was agreed on in England, Numb. 36.

2. It was confirmed by the first Assembly held in the Year 1682, and continued
until the making of this Act.

3. This Act being not limited, i^ respect to Time, nor (that I have found)
altered or repealed, by any subsequent Act, seems to be in Force at this Day.


TO the Intent that the Estates of Factors or Correspondents shall make good all
just Debts due to their Imployers, and that the Estates or Effects of Merchants
or Imployers shall discharge all just Debts due to their Factors or
Correspondents, BE IT ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That all Factors or
Correspondents, in this Province or Territories, defrauding their Imployers
shall make Restitution, and one Third over to the said Imployers. And in case
any Factor shall die and shall not leave sufficient Estate to pay his Debts, it
shall be lawful for the respective Court, or any two Justices of the Peace, to
secure the Goods, proper Credits and Effects of his Imployer or Imployers, for
his or their proper Use or Uses, and give due and speedy Notice thereof
accordingly to the said Imployers, to the End that they may receive the Sum,
paying necessary Charges, in case any Factor, Attorney or Correspondent shall
contract any Debts, or really disburse any Sums of Money or other Things for
the carrying on his Imployer's Affairs according to Order and Direction, either
within this Province and Territories, or Pa^ts adjacent: And also, That if such
Imployers shall order out, dispose of, or sell their Effects and Estates
without making Satisfaction to their said Factors or Correspondents for all
such Debts or Things due and laid out as aforesaid, unless Provision be
thereupon made for the Payment thereof, such Sale shall be of no Effect until
the same be discharged; and that the respective County Courts, in all such
Cases, upon Complaint entered and sufficient Proof made of such Debts and Dues,
in open Court, may pass Judgment against such Imployers for the same, with
Costs and Damages, and award Execution for the same.

II. The Law about Testates and Intestates Estates. Anno 1693.
OBSERVAT.

THis Act continued to the Year 1694, when another Act was made, authorizing
Sales of Lands to be made by the Widow or Administrators, with the Leave of the
Governor and Council, or the County Court, where there were Debts to be paid, a
Charge of Children, or it was necessary for the Improvement of the Residue of
the Estate: Which last Law continued to the Year 1696.

2. But then the first Law was revived, which enabled Executors or
Administrators to sell for Payment of Debts, and continued in Force from the
Year 1696 to the 27 th of Nov. 1700.

3. At which Time two Acts passed, the first, entitled, An Act for
ascertaining the Descent of Lands, etc. whereby Executors and Administrators
are authorized to sell their Testators or Intestates Lands in Manner directed
by this Act: The other Act which passed the same Session is entitled, An Act
to empower Widows and Administrators to sell so much of the Lands of Intestates
as may be sufficient to clear their Debts, etc. Which last mentioned Act
provides, that Widows or Administrators may sell so much Lands of Intestates
(where there is not sufficient personal Estate) as the Orphans Court shall
think fit, for Payment of Debts, Education of Children, and Improvement of the
Residue.

4. These Acts continued 'til the 13 th of the 12 th Mo. 1705, and then were
repealed.


AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That all real Estates,
and Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, and all per^onal Estates, which any
Person has in this Province and Territories at the Time of his Decease, shall
be liable, either by Conveyance or Bill of Sale, duly executed by the lawful
Executor or Administrator of such Deceased, and approved and acknowledged in
open Court according to Law, or by Judgment or Order of the respective Courts
of Record, upon due Procedure therein had, to be seized and sold for Payment of
the Decedent's just Debts, etc. which Sale and Seizures are hereby declared to
be binding and conclusive against such Deceased, and their Heirs, and all
claiming under them, etc.

At a General Assembly held at New Castle, the Fourteenth of October, and
continued by Adjournment to the 27th Day of November, Anno 1700, the following
Act, among others, was passed, viz.
An Act for the effectual Establishment and Confirmation of the Freeholders,
etc.
WHEREAS at the first laying out and settling of Lands in this Province of
Pennsylvania and Territories thereunto belonging, OBSERVAT.

1. THIS Act continued to the 13 th of the Twelfth Month, 1705, and was then
repealed by by an Order of the Queen in Council.


many great Neglects and Errors have been committed, through the Want of
Experience and Care both in Officers and the People, as well to the Wrong of
the Proprietary as the Insecurity of the said People, and the great
Inconveniency of both: For Remedy whereof, and for the Safety of the said
Province and Territories, in general, and that the Inhabitants may be
completely and absolutely settled, and ful^y secured in their Rights and Titles
to Land, and all Occasions of Difference and Contest thereupon may forever
hereafter be prevented and removed, BE IT ENACTED by the Proprietary and
Governor, by and with the Advice and Consent of the Freemen of this Province
and Territories, in General Assembly met, and by the Authority of the same,
That all Tracts and Parcels of Land taken up within this Province and
Territories, and duly seated by virtue of Letters Patents or Warrants, obtained
from Governors or lawful Commissioners, under the Crown of England, before the
King's Grant to the Proprietary and Governor for the Province (except the same
was had by Fraud or Deceit) shall be quietly enjoyed by the actual Possessors,
their Heirs and Assigns: And that all Lands and Tracts of Land, duly taken up
by virtue of Warrants obtained pursuant to Purchases made and had from the
Proprietary and Governor, or in Pursuance of any Commission or Power granted by
the Proprietary to any other Person (except as before excepted, and except
where the same does interfere with other Persons just Rights and Claims) shall
be quietly and peaceably enjoyed by, and confirmed to the Possessor (according
to the said Warrants) his Heirs and Assigns for^ver; and although no Patent has
been granted, yet, if peaceable Entry and Possession has been obtaine^, by
Warrants, or otherwise, as aforesaid, and thereupon quiet Possession has been
held during the Space of Seven Years, or more, such Possession, or such Entry
as aforesaid shall give an unquestionable Title to all such Lands, according to
the Quantity they were taken up for, and shall be deemed and held good, and be
confirmed by the Proprietary to the Seaters or Possessors thereof, their Hei^s
and Assigns, forever. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid,
That all Grants for Lands from the Proprietary, shall be henceforth under the
Great S^^l of this Province and Territories; which Grants shall give the
respective Grantees an absolute Title for all the Lands therein to be granted
or confirmed, be they more or less than laid out for, and shall never more
thereafter be subject or liable to any further Survey. And that all Grants and
Patents heretofore granted, whether under the broad or lesser Seal, either by
the Proprietary himself or his Commissioners as aforesaid, shall be firm and
good, to all Intents and Purposes, for the Quantity of Land in such Grants
expressed, forever after the Time herein limited, without any further Dispute.
AND WHEREAS several Mista^es and Errors have happened through the Negligence,
Ignorance or Fraud of Surveyors or Chain-Carriers, and many Surveys have
thereby been made erroneous: For the Rectifying whereof, BE IT ENACTED by the
Authority aforesaid, OBSERVAT.

2. IT is probable diverse Re-surveys have been made in Pursuance of the Power
given by this Act: And though the Act be since repealed, it does not invalidate
what was legally done whilst the Act was in force.


That it shall and may be lawful for the Proprietary and Governor, and his
Heirs, by his and their lawful Surveyors, at any time within the Space of two
Years after Publication hereof, to re-survey, or cause to be re-surveyed, any
Person's Land within this Province or Territories; and if upon such re-survey,
allowing four Acres in the Hundred, over or under, for the Difference of
Surveys, there be more Land found in the Number of Acres than the said Tract so
surveyed was laid out for, allowing also Six per Cent. for Roads and Highways,
all such overplus Lands shall be to the Proprietary, and the Possessor thereof
shall have the Refusal of it from the Proprietary, at reasonable Rates: And if
the Proprietary and the said Possessor do not agree, then, and in such case,
the Proprietary shall choose two more, who shall either fix a Price on the said
overplus Land, to be paid by the Possessor, or otherwise appoint where it shall
be taken off for the Proprietary in one entire Piece, at an outside, saving to
the Purchaser or Renter his Improvements, and best Conveniences; and three of
whom agreeing shall be conclusive; and the Charges of Re-surveying such Lands
shall be bore by him to whom the overplus Land shall ^^ll, if he buy the
Overplus, or if not, by the Proprietary. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the
Authority aforesaid, That if any Purchaser or Tenant, having procured his Land
to be again surveyed by any of the lawful Surveyor^, shall find the same to be
deficient of the Qu^ntity it was before laid out for and should contain
(allowing for Diff^rence of Surveys, Roads and Highways being fir^^ made, as
before expressed) all such Deficiencie^ shall be made good by the Proprietary
and Governor according as he receives for the overplus Land as aforesaid. And
that the People in the said Surveys may have the greater Satisfaction, BE IT
^URTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That no Surveyor shall enter upon
any Person's Land to make a Re-survey of the same, without giving Notice to the
Owner or Possessor thereof, or leaving Notice at his House, if he dwell near
the same, and if he do not know him, and the said Owner dwell not in the
Precincts or Township, that then such Surveyor shall give Notice thereof to the
two next Neighbors, under the Penalty of Twenty Pounds, to be forfeited to
such Owner. And in case any Surveyor shall hereafter wilfully or negligently
survey any Lands to the Prejudice of the Possessor or Owner, he shall make good
double Damages to the Party grieved. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority
aforesaid, That the first Hundred Purchasers of Land in the Province shall be
preferred, and have Liberty to take up their Lands before any other Purchasers,
so that they make Application for the same within four Months after Publication
hereof, AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, OBSERVATION.

3. THE Heir of a Ioyntenant, whose Ancestor died during the Continuance of
this Act, seems to have a Right to claim and hold the Part of such Ancestor
against the surviving Ioyntenant, and his Heirs, notwithstanding this Act is
since repealed; not only because it would not be reasonable that a Fee-simple
which vested whilst the Act was in force should be divested by the Repeal; but
also because the Estate of such an Heir seems to be confirmed by a ^^^itable
Construction of the Act, entitled, An Act for the better confirming the Owners
of Lands, etc. passed in the Fourth of Queen Anne.


That where any Lands have been purchased or taken up in Copartnership, and
either of the Parties die before Division be made thereof, the Survivor shall
claim his equal and just Share and Proportion, and the Heirs and Assigns of the
deceased Partner shall hold and enjoy the Part belonging to such Deceased as
firmly as when all the Parties were living, unless it shall appear that there
has been some Contract or Agreement made to the contrary. And whereas it may
sometimes happen, that where some have purchased a Parcel of Land (for
Instance, a Thousand Acres) and the same has been surveyed and laid out; but
upon a Re-survey of such Tract it is found to contain twelve Hundred Acres, of
which the Purchaser, having been wholly ignorant, has sold either Part of it
or the Whole to several Persons, or has given it to several Children, under the
Notion of only a Thousand Acres, upon Re-survey of which, by the Proprietary's
Order, the Overplus may happen to fall within several small Plantations, or to
consist entirely of one of them, Be it therefore Enacted by the Authority
aforesaid, That in such Cases the Proprietary's Overplus shall not be taken of
any one Particular of the said several Plantations, but of the rough Land
remaining undisposed of in the whole Tract, if any such be; and if there be not
any such, then to be taken off every particular Plantation proportionably: And
the Charges of running the Division-Lines shall be always borne by the
respective Owners of the several Plantations. And where the Overplus is taken
in one entire Piece off the Whole, it shall and may be lawful for the first
Purchaser to cause the several Tracts by him sold to any measne Purchaser or
Purchasers to be re-surveyed by any lawful Surveyor; and the Overplus sound in
such Tracts or measne Purchases above what they were sold or rented for, shall
go the Person of whom they were bought, in the like Manner as the overplus
Lands in general go the Proprietary and Governor. And whereas our Proprietary
and Governor did formerly, in a Clause of our Charter of Privil^^^s, This
Charter was called The Frame of the Government, etc, and bears Date in the Year
1683. Art. 23.
give and grant to all and every (...) of the Inhabitants of this Province and
Territories full and quiet Enjoyment of their respective Lands to which they
had any lawful or equitable Claim, saving only such Rents and Services for the
same as were or customarily ought to be reserved to the Proprietary, his Heirs
and Assigns; which Clause, upon delivering up our Charter, was reserved, and
our said Proprietary and Governor was pleased to reserve to us; We therefore
desire that it may be enacted, And be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,
That the said Clause shall be in as full Force, Power and Virtue as if the
Surrender of the Charter as aforesaid had never been made. Provided always,
That nothing in this Act shall be construed to confirm any Lands to the
Prejudice of the Right of Infants, married Women, Lunaticks or Persons beyond
the Seas; any thing herein to the contrary in anywise notwithstanding. And for
the Satisfaction and Encouragement of Aliens coming into this Province or
Counties annexed, Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any
Alien, who is or shall be a Purchaser, or does or shall inhabit in this
Province or Territories thereof, shall decease at any time before he can well
be naturalized, his Right and Interest therein shall notwithstanding descend to
his Wife and Children, or other his Relations, be he Testate or Intestat^,
according to the Laws of this Province and Territories thereof in such Cases
provided, in as free and ample Manner, to all Intents and Purposes as if the
said Aliens had been naturalized. And whereas diverse Persons beyond Seas are
and have been Owners of Land within this Province and Territories, and such
Persons have usually appointed Attorneys to sell and dispose of the same; to
the End therefore that the several Persons that have so purchased, their Heirs
and Assigns, may forever hereafter be secured in their Titles and Covenants, BE
IT ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, OBSERVAT.

4. THIS Part of the Act is supplied by an Act, entitled, An Act for
confirming of Sales made by Attorneys, etc. passed in the Fourth Year of the
Reign of Queen Anne.


That all Sales of Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments made by lawful Attorneys,
especially granted to sell such Lands, are and shall be deemed and adjudged
good and effectual in Law to all Intents, Constructions and Purposes
whatsoever, as if the said Owners of such Lands had by their own Deeds,
Bargains and Sales actually and really sold, conveyed and executed the same;
and all and singular the Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments sold and conveyed
as aforesaid shall be and remain to such Purchasers respectively, their Heirs
and Assigns forever, as they might or ought to have done to the Owner or Owners
of such Lands and Premises so Employing his or their Attorney or Attorneys as
aforesaid. And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all
Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments that hereafter shall be sold by virtue of
any Letter of Attorney, shall be good and valid respectively to the Purchasers,
their Heirs and Assigns, forever, as aforesaid; provided the said Letter of
Attorney be attested before some Magistrate or public Notary, where the same
shall be made and executed, and certified under their respective Hands and
public Seals, and be proved within this Province or Territories viva voce, by
two Witnesses at least.

At a General Assembly held at Philadelphia, in the Year 1705, an Act was
passed, entitled, An Act for the acknowledging and recording of Deeds; which
Act, among others, contained the Clause following, viz.
AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, OBSERVAT.

1. THIS Act continued in force diverse Years. By the Minutes of Assembly of the
Second of the 11 th Mo. 1710, it appears it was then repealed, and an Order
made for bringing in of a new Bill to amend the former.

2. Deeds made in Pursuance of this Act, whilst in force, are sufficient Bars
to Estates Tail.

3. In the 28 th of the 12 th Mo. 1710, a new Act passed, in which there is a
Clause of the same Import with this; which last Act continued in Force until
the 20 th of the 12 th Month, 1713, and was the^ repealed by Order of the Queen
in Council.


That all Deeds and Conveyances, made or to be made, proved, acknowledged and
recorded according to the true Intent and Meaning of this Act, shall be of the
same Force and Effect here for the Assurance of the said Lands, Tenements and
Hereditaments, and for docking and barring of Estates Tail, as Fines and
Recoveries at common Law or Deeds of Feoffments with Livery of Seizin, or Deeds
enrolled in any of the Queen's Courts of Record at Westminster are or shall be
in the Kingdom of England.

At an Assembly held at Philadelphia, the 15th of October. 1711, the following
Act, among others, was passed.
An Act confirming Patents and Grants.
BE IT ENACTED by Charles Gookin, OBSERVATION.

THIS appears to have been a short lived Act, it being repealed by Order of of
the Queen in Council the 20 th of the 12 th Mo. 1713; and yet, as it is not
improbable Re-survey^ may have been ma^e whils^ the Act was in force, it seems
necessary to preserve the Act in Print.


Esquire by the Queen's Royal Approbation Lieut. Governor under William Penn, Esquire
absolute Proprietary and Governor in chief of the Province of Pennsylvania, by
and with the Advice and Consent of the Freemen of the said Province in General
Assembly met, and by the Authority of the same, That all Lands and
Hereditaments which any Person or Persons do hold and enjoy, or ought to have,
hold and enjoy within this Province, as well by or under any Gift, Grant or
Estate made or granted by the said Proprietary and Governor William Penn, or
his Commissioners of Property and Agents, pursuant to the said Persons Right of
Purchase, Demise or Grant from him the said Proprietary, as also by or under
any old Grant, Patent or Warrant obtained or had from Governors or lawful
Commissioners, under the Crown of England, before the Date of the late King
Charles the Second his Letters Patents to the said Proprietary, or by any other
legal or equitable Grant, Right, Title, Entry, Possession or Estate whatsoever,
shall, by virtue of this Act, be h^ld and enjoyed by such Person or Persons
according to the Purport and Intent of the respective Right, Grant, Patent,
Purchase or Demise, and for and in the Estate or Estates thereby granted or
intended to be thereby granted or settled. Provided always, That nothing herein
contained shall be construed or adjudged to confirm any Lands taken up by
virtue of the said old Grants and not duly seated or improved by the Grantees
or their Assigns before the Year One Thousand Six Hundred and Eighty-two, nor
to create or confirm any Right or Interest to any Person or Persons whatsoever
for or to any more or greater Quantity of Lands, Marsh, Meadow or Cripple than
shall appear, by Gi^t, Grant, Demise or Purchase from the said Proprietary, or
his Commissioners or Agents, or from his Predecessors, the former Governors or
Commissioners aforesaid, to be the said Person or Persons just Due (over and
above the six Acres of Land for Roads and Barrens, and the four Acres over or
under, to be accounted for Difference of Surveys) no^ shall create a Right to
the Possessor or Claimer of any Lands that were not taken up or surveyed by
virtue of a Warrant or Order from Persons empowered to grant the same, and by a
Surveyor appointed for that Purpose; any thing herein, or in any Patent, Grant
or Survey to the contrary in anywise notwithstanding. And be it further Enacted
by the Authority aforesaid, That all the Sales, Gifts, Grants, Surrenders,
Assurances, Conveyances and Estates in anywise conveyed, had or made to or for
the said Proprietary, by or from any Person or Persons whatsoever, of any
Lands, Tenements or other Hereditaments, for or upon any Consideration
whatsoever, shall stand, remain and be good and available in Law, according to
the true Meaning and Purport of the same; Saving the Right, Title and Demand of
all and every Person and Persons whatsoever, and of their Heirs and Assigns
(other than such Person or Persons, and their Heirs, being Parties or Privies
to such Grants, Surrenders, Conveyances or Assurances, or from whom the said
Proprietary has had, obtained or purchased any of the said Lands, Tenements
and Hereditaments by Exchange, Surrender, Gift, Grant, Deed, or otherwise. And
be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the said William Penn,
his Heirs and Assigns, Proprietaries of this Province of Pennsylvania, either
by him or themselves, or by his present Commissioners or Deputies, or by
Commissioners, Deputies or Agents, to be by them appointed, shall and will from
time to time, and at all Times hereafter, upon all reasonable Demands, make, do
and execute, or cause so to be, all and every such Patents, Grants or
Assurances as may be necessary according to the Laws and Constitutions of this
Province, to grant, assure and confirm all and singular the Lands, Tenements
and Hereditaments in the said Province by him the said Proprietary or his
Commissioners or Agents heretofore sold, granted or disposed, or which by him,
his Heirs or Assigns, or by his or their Commissioners or Agents shall
hereafter be sold, granted or disposed to any Person or Persons, Bodies
politic or corporate, to hold the said Lands, Hereditaments and Premises, with
their Appurtenances, to the Grantees or Persons interested therein, for such
Estate or Estates, Term or Terms of Life, Lives or Years, and for such Uses,
and under such Rents or Acknowledgments as the same Lands and Premises were,
are or shall be sold, granted or disposed of as aforesaid: Saving to all
Persons their Rights, Titles, Estates and Interest in Lands granted, derived or
claimed by, from or under the said old Patents or Grants made before the Date
of the said Letters Patents, sealed and improved as aforesaid.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That all and every the
Grants, Patents, Deeds or Conveyances of or for any Lands, Tenements and
Hereditaments in this Province, hereto^ore made or given by the said
Proprietary, his Heirs or Assigns, or by his or their Deputies, Commissioners
or Agents, sealed with or under the Seal or Seals now used or hereafter to be
used for that Purpose, and entered upon Record in the Patent or Rolls-Office
(which is hereby declared to be an Office of Record) shall be good and
available in Law, and shall be adjudged, deemed and taken, and are hereby
declared to be Grants or Conveyances and Matters of Record, and to have no need
of Delivery before Witnesses, Livery and Seizin, or Acknowledgments as Deeds of
other Persons may or ought to have; and none shall be admitted to plead non est
factum, or null tiel Record, against them, or shall plead in Disability of the
Person or Persons, in whose Names or stead they have been or shall be made or
granted; but inasmuch as they are in the nature of Conveyances, therefore, if
any shall have Occasion to deny the Operation thereof, the Party may plead non
conces^it, and prove in Evidence that he or they, in whose Name or stead the
same Patents or other Deeds were made or granted as aforesaid, had nothing in
the Lands or Tenements so granted, or that the same Lands and Hereditaments did
not pass by such Grant, Deed, Patent or Conveyance.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That no Grant, Patent or
Conveyance of any Lands, Tenements or Hereditaments so as aforesaid made, or
which shall at any time herea^ter be made or granted by the said Proprietary,
his Heirs or Assigns, or by his or their said Commissioners or Ag^nt as
aforesaid, to or for the Use of any Person or Persons, Bodies politic or
corporate, shall be adjudged, or taken to be defective, avoided or prejudiced
for or by reason of any Misnaming, Misrecital or Non-recital of any of the said
Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments and Premises, or any Part thereof, or any lack
of finding of Offices or Inquisitions of and in the Premises, or any part
thereof, whereby the said Proprietary's Title therein ought to have been found,
or for Misrecital or Non-recital or not mentioning, or not true mentioning of
the said Proprietary's Estate or Estates of, in or to the Premises, or for
misnaming or not true naming of the Counties or Place^ where the said Lands and
Premises lie or be, or for lack of the true naming of the Lands and Premises,
or of the Natures, Kinds or Qualities thereof, or for any want of Form, or for
not being formerly entered upon Record, or for want of being hithertofore
sealed with the Great Seal, or for not being sealed and delivered before
Witnesses, or for want of Livery and Seizin or Attornment, or for not
mentioning the Consideration: But that all the said Gifts, Grants, Patents and
Conveyances, with all the Warrants and Returns of Surveys, pursuant thereunto,
and other Writings relating to the said Lands, Hereditaments and Premises,
shall be, and are hereby declared and enacted to be, good and available in Law
against the said Proprietary, his Heirs and Assigns, and against all others
claiming or to claim under him or them, and against all and every other Person
and Persons, that shall at any time inherit or enjoy this Province; and that
the same shall be and remain in full Force, and be maintained and have Effect,
according to the true Intent and Purport thereof, and shall be expounded,
deemed and adjudged most beneficially for the Patentees, Donees and Grantees of
the same, and their Heirs and ^ssigns, Executors and Administrators, according
to the Wo^ds, Tenor and true Meaning of every of the said Gi^ts, Grants,
Patents, Conveyance, Surveys and other W^itings.

And be it f^rther Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all and singular
the said Lands, Hereditaments and Premises, and every Part thereof, which have
been granted or confirmed by the said Patents or Conveyances passed under the
Proprietary's Seal, and recorded, as aforesaid, as al^o all and singular the
Lands and Hereditaments hereafter to be granted, conveyed or confirmed by
Patents or other Conve^ances, which shall pass under the Seal of the said
Proprietary, his Heirs or Assigns, and be entered of Record in Manner
aforesaid; and every Part thereof shall be and continue unto the said
Patentees, Donee^ and Grantees, and such as shall legally represent them, free
and clear, f^eely and clearly acquitted and discharged, or otherwise well and
sufficiently saved harmless and indemnified by the said Proprietary, his Heirs
and Assigns, of and from all Ind^an Claims, and from all other Gifts, Grants,
Sales, Ti^l^s, Charges and Encumbrances whatsoever, heretofore had, made, done
or suffered, or hereafter to be had, made, done or suffered by him the said
Proprietary or his Heirs. Saving to all and every other Person and Persons,
Bodie^ politic and corporate, their Heirs and Successors, Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, all such Rights, Titles, Estates, Rents,
Reversions, Commons, Profits, Interests, Tenu^e^, Claims and Demands
whatsoever, of what Nature, Kind or Quality soever, of, in and to, or out of
the said Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, or any Part thereof, as they or
any of them had or ought to have had before the making of this Act, in as large
and ample Manner, Form and Condition, to all Intents and Purposes, as if this
Act had never been made, any thing herein contained to the contrary
notwithstanding.

Provided always, that nothing in this Act contained, shall extend to make
Patents of any Office to be of any other Effect, than if this Act had never
been made; nor shall this Act make good any Patent that shall be annihilated or
made void by due Course of Law; nor shall any thing herein contained, oblige
the Proprietary or his Heirs, to make good to any Purchaser of a Right or
Rights to unlocated Lands, who advertently or by Misinformation, did or may
obtain a Patent or Confirmation of Lands which are discovered to be the prior
Right of another Person, further or any more than the same Quantity of Land in
the next advantageous Place, that such Purchaser shall choose and discover to be
vacant and free from all other Claims. But where any such prior Right shall
appear and take Effect against any such Person or Persons who have purchased
the said Tract or Parcel of Land of the Proprietary or his Commissioners or
Agents, by a certain Name, or by any agreed Location in that particular Place,
or the Warrant expressing the same accordingly; then and in such Case the
Proprietary, his Heirs and Executors, shall refund and make good to such second
Purchaser the full Sum or Value, which he, the said Proprietary or his Agents,
did receive for the same, together with lawful Interest from the Time such
Payment was made: And in both the above mentioned Cases, if the latter
Purchaser, his Heirs or Assigns, shall have made any Improvements on the said
Land, such Improvement shall be valued by two or more Persons to be
indifferently chosen by each of the said Claimers or Purchasers, which both
Parties are by this Act required to do, and such as they or the Majority shall
agree to, under their Hands, shall be paid by the Claimer of the first Right,
to such Improver for his Improvements accordingly.

And whereas several Persons before the Date of the late King's Royal Charter
obtained Grants or Patents for more Lands than they had a Right unto by their
Original Warrants or Orders for the Surveying or laying out the same, in which
case it has been the Method of the said Proprietary and Commissioners, by
their Warrants to order Resurveys of those Lands, and allot to the Possessors
thereof, or to the Heirs or Assigns of the old Patentees or Grantees so many
Acres of Land and Meadow or Marsh, as really belonged unto them by Virtue of
the said respective Original Warrants or Orders, or by the Right of Occupancy
or Improvements, and confirm the same by new Patents, and dispose the Residue
as other vacant Lands which had never been surveyed. Nevertheless no effectual
Care has been hitherto taken for vacating or annulling the Record of those old
exorbitant Grants, Patents, Surveys or Locations, and for securing the new
Patentees against the Demands of the old Patentees and Possessors, or such as
claim by, from or under them; therefore be it Enacted by the Authority
aforesaid, That nothing herein contained shall extend to revive, make good or
confirm any of the said old Grants or Patents, nor give to the Grantees or
Patentees of the same, nor their Heirs, Executors or Assigns, any Right, Title,
Interest or Estate, of, in, to or for any more or greater Quantity of Lands,
Meadows, Marsh or Cripple, than were expressly granted, or really intended to
be granted, in and by the said Original first Warrants or Orders for Survey, to
which the old Patents respectively relate: But that all and every the said old
Grants and Patents, as to the Residue or Overplus of the said Lands and
Hereditaments contained therein, shall be, and are hereby declared to be null
and void and of no Effect; and that all and every the Grants, Patents,
Conveyances and Assurances made or to be made and granted for the said Residue
or Overplus-Lands, to any Person or Persons whatsoever, and all the Estate or
Estates, Rights, Interest and Possessions of any Person or Persons, or, in or
to the said Overplus-Lands, shall, notwithstanding any of the said old Grants
or Patents, be and continue, and are hereby declared to be good and available
in Law, against the old Patentees, and against all other claiming or to claim
the said Overplus-Land or any Part thereof, by, from or under them or any of
them, as if the said Lands had never been surveyed or located before the Date
of the said King's Letters Patents. Saving always to all and every Person or
Persons (other than those who will set up or insist on any of the said old
Grants or Patents to maintain or make good their Demands or Claims to any more
of the said Overplus-Lands, than what they or those under whom they claim, have
occupied, built upon or improved) all and every such Right, Titles, Interests,
Use, Possession, Estate, Rents, Reversion, Commons, Profits and Advantages
whatsoever, as he or they, or any of them, should or might have had before the
making of this Act, any thing herein contained to the contrary notwithstanding.

And Whereas by a late Law of this Province, passed in Year 1700, and confirmed
in the Year 1701, it was (among other Things) enacted, That any Person's Lands
in this Province should be re-surveyed; and if upon such Re-survey (after
Allowance of four Acres in the Hundred, over or under, for Di^^erence of
Surveys, and Six per Cent. for Roads) an Overplus should be found, the
Possessors thereof should have the Refusal of it from the Proprietary, at
reasonable Rates; and in case of Disagreement about such Rate^, the Proprietary
was to choose two Men, and the Possessor two more, who should either fix a
Price on the said overplus Land, or appoint where it should be taken off for
the Proprietary in one entire Piece at an Outside, (^aving to the Purchaser or
Renter his Improvements and best Conveniences) any three of whom agreeing
should be conclusive; and the Charges of Resurveying should be bore by the
Purchaser or Renter of the main Tract, if he bought the Overplus, or if not,
then by the Proprietary; and that Deficiencies should be made good by the
Proprietary, according as he received for Overplus-Land as aforesaid.

In Pursuance of which Act, Resurveys have been made of diverse Lands, wherein
Overmeasure was found; but the Act expiring before the same could be cut off,
or the Rates thereof settled as the said Law directed, the Proprietary is not
satisfied for the Overmeasure, and the Owners of the Land want Confirmation of
what is their just due; Be it therefore Enacted, That where any Overplus-Land
has been found upon the said Surveys (after Allowances are made for Roads, and
Difference of Surveys as aforesaid) the Proprietary, his Heirs and Assigns, and
his o^ their Commissioners or Agents, shall give the Possessor or Owner of such
Land, the Refusal thereof at reasonable Rates; and in case of Disagreement with
the said Possessor about such Rates, then the Proprietary, his Heirs or
Assigns, or his or their Commissioners or Agents, shall forthwith choose two
Men, and the said Possessor or Owner shall at the same time choose two more,
which Persons so chosen, or any three of them, shall within Thirty Days after
such Choice, either fix a Price on the said Overplus-Land to be paid by the
said Possessor or Owner, or within the same time appoint where it shall be
taken off for the Proprietary, his Heirs or Assigns, in One entire and
convenient Piece, at an End or Outside; saving to the said Possessor or Owner
his Improvements and best Conveniences.

But in case the said Persons so chosen, as aforesaid, shall refuse or neglect
to fix a Price on the said Overplus, or to cut off the same within the time
herein before limited, then the Party aggrieved may apply to the Justices at
the Court of common Ple^s for the County where the Land lies, who are hereby
empowered and required to grant their Order in that behalf, to five indifferent
and disinterested Persons of the Neighborhood, requiring them, or any three of
them, to perform what the said four Persons had refused or neglected to do.

And be it further Enacted, That where any Overplus shall be taken off as
aforesaid, the Proprietary or his Commissioners shall confirm the Residue to
the Possessor or Owner thereof, his Heirs or Assigns, saving the Rights of all
others; but if the Proprietary, or his Commissioners or (...) to appoint two
Persons on his behalf as aforesaid, or if after the said Overplus be taken off,
shall refuse to confirm the Residue to the Possessor or Owner thereof, his
Heirs or Assigns, within six Months after such Overplus is taken off, as
aforesaid, and Application made for the same by such Owner or Possessor, then
and in every such Case all such Possessors or Owners respectively shall stand,
and be seized or possessed of the whole Tract, as if no such Re-survey had been
made.

But if any of the said Possessors or Owners of Lands so re-surveyed as
aforesaid, shall refuse or neglect to choose two Men in his behalf, then the
Persons so as aforesaid to be chosen by the Proprietary or his Commissioners,
shall within the time aforesaid appoint where the Overplus shall be taken off,
saving the Owner's Improvements and best Conveniences, as aforesaid.

And if the Owners of any such Lands as have been resurveyed as aforesaid, do
not reside in this Province, and no Person in the actual Possession of those
Lands, then and in every such Case the Proprietary or his Commissioners may
appoint two Men of the next Neighborhood to such Land, who are hereby
empowered to appoint where the Overplus of such Lands shall be taken off as
aforesaid, leaving to every such Owner the full Quantity belonging to him by
Purchase and Location there, together with the Allowances for Roads and
Difference of Surveys, and saving the Improvements and Conveniences, as
aforesaid.

And in all Cases where any such Overplus shall be cut, as aforesaid, in
pursuance of this Act, the Proprietary or his Commissioners or Agents shall
have full Liberty to dispose of, and grant such Overplus to any Person or
Persons, that he or they shall think fit; any thing in this Act contained, or
in any other Law, to the contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding.

And if upon the said Resurveys any Tract has been found deficient in the
Number of Acres for which it was at first granted after Allowances made, as
aforesaid, all such Deficiencies shall be made good by the Proprietary, his
Heirs or Assigns, after the same Rate he or they shall receive for such
Overplus-Land in that Neighborhood.

Provided always, That nothing herein contained shall be deemed or construed to
be taken off any Overplus-Land out of any Tract, the Possessor or Owner whereof
has Right, by his Purchase, to take up more Land over and above the Quantity
such Tract was laid out for.

Provided also, That where any Lands have been resurveyed, and such Allowances
for Roads, Barrens and Difference of Surveys, has been made and allowed as
aforesaid, the Possessor or Owner thereof shall not pay any Quitrents for such
Allowance.

And be it further Enacted, That for all Lands hereafter to be taken up or
surveyed in this Province, the Surveyor that lays out the same, shall allow for
Roads and Barrens, after the Rate of Six Acres for every Hundred Acres to the
Owner of such Lands, for which said Allowances of Six per Cent. no Rent^ shall
be paid to the Proprietary, his Heirs or Assigns.

THE TABLE.
REIGN. CHA. FOL. ACCESSARIES, diverse Clauses concerning them 4 Geo. 216 161
162 163 166 167 Actions, Time for bringing them, limited 11 Ann 187 129
Administration of Government, an Act concerning 10 Ann 184 126 Administration,
Letters thereof granted abroad, good here 4 Ann 125 56 -- when to be granted
with the Will annexed 127 63 -- to be taken in one County only 125 58
Administrators, how to pay Debts 126 59 -- their Bonds, and how to account 127
60 -- to account to the Orphans Court, and when 11 Ann 188 131 Adultery, the
Punishment 4 Ann 114 48 Adulterers living abroad, their Lands here liable to
pay their Wives Debts 4 Geo. 121 180 Affirmation, a sufficient Qualification
for Jurors 216 150 Affirming falsely, how punished 159 -- See also 11 Geo. 272
314 Affirmations of Fidelity, etc. an Act prescribing the Form thereof 310 Ale,
by what Measure to be sold 4 Ann 130 75 Alehouses, Tippling therein, how
punished 111 46 Appraisors how to be appointed 12 Wm. 40 11 Apprentices,
Orphans 11 Ann 188 136 Appeals to Great Britain to be allowed 1 Geo. 192 139 --
theTerms on which such Allowance may be had 8 Geo. 244 218 Assessors to be
elected, and how 4 Geo. 213 156 11 Geo. 299 293 Assessments how to be made 300
Assembly-men how to be elected 4 Ann 129 67 -- their Wages 9 Geo. 259 268 -- A
Supplementary for electing them 13 Geo. 284 346 -- a further supplementary Act
12 Geo. 2 345 514 -- a Continuance and Amendment of the said supplementary Act
16 Geo. 2 351 546 Assignment of Bonds and Notes, an Act concerning 1 Geo. 198
145 Assignor may not release them after an Assignment 146 Attachments under 40
s. an Act concerning 12 W. 3. 100 36 Attachments, Acts concerning them 4 Ann
134 81. -- ^^tifying the Proceedings thereon 9 Geo. 251 244 Attorneys at Law,
ho^ to be admitted 259 262 -- their Qualifications ibid -- taking undue Fees,
the Punishment ibid Attornment need not be proved 4 Ann 124 55 Award of
Referees chosen by the Court, etc. to have like Effect as a Verdict 142 89 B
Bailiff, Sheriff, appointed Water-Bailiff 153 106 Bailing of Prisoners 143 89
Bastards, putative Fathers to maintain them 114 50 -- Death of such Child
concealed, Murder 4 Geo. 216 160 Baron may not sell Lands, leaving his Wife
unprovided 221 179 Barrators, their Punishment, and who they are 12 Wm. 41 11
Beef, how to be packed 13 Geo. 283 342 Beer to be sold by Wine-Measure 4 Ann
130 75 Beer, an Act for making thereof good 8 Geo. 242 209 -- a supplementary
Act concerning it 9 Geo. 259 263 Bills of Exchange, Damages recoverable in
Cases of Protest -- 12 Wm. 70 26 Bills how assignable 1 Geo. 198 145 Bigamy,
the Punishment 4 Ann 115 51 Bills of Credit, L. 15,000 Act 9 Geo. 250 230 --
refusing them in a Tender, Loss of Debt 236 -- Counterfeiters of them, how
punished 237 -- Accounts concerning them, how to be audited 238 -- Interest
thereof how to be disposed of 239 -- a supplementary Act 256 249 -- an Act for
putting the former in Execution 261 206 -- 30,000 L. Act 10 Geo. 262 209 --
Tenders made in them good 274 -- Counterfeiters thereof how to be punished 286
-- Act for re-emitting them, etc. 12 Geo. 275 321 -- Act for emitting 30,000 l.
for the better Support of Government 2 Geo. 2 303 364 -- Re-emitting and
continuing the Currency of Bills of Credit 4 Geo. 2 315 413 -- an Act
re-printing, exchanging, re-emitting etc. and striking the further Sum of
11,110l. 5s. to be emitted upon Loan 12 Geo. 2 343 497 -- preserving the Credit
of Money, and recovering the Proprietary Quit-Rents 344 511 Blasphemy, how to
be punished 12 Wm. 44 12 Black-birds, an Act concerning them 114 4^
Black-Walnuts ( See Timber) Boats taken-up, the Reward 8 5 -- setting adrift,
how punished ibid Bonds assignable, and how 1 Geo. 198 145 Bread, the Assize
thereof 51 17 -- unmerchantable, not to exported 7 Geo. 2. 329 443 Bridges, how
to be erected 12 Wm. 57 22 Bribery how punished 4 Geo. 216 160 Burglary how
punished 4 Geo. 216 162 Br^wers an Act concerning them 8 Geo. 242 209 Butchers
an Act concerning them 8 Geo. 242 212 Brandy ( vide Excise) C.
Cannoes taking-up, the Reward 12 Wm. 8 5 -- taking away, the Penalty ibid
Cask, their Dimensions 80 29 -- Act to regulate the Gauging 8 Geo. 249 227
Challenges, when to be allowed 4 Geo. 216 139 -- in capital Cases 162 Charters
not to be defaced or counterfeited, and the Penalty 12 W. 3. 16 7 City of
Philadelphia, the Manner of raising Money in it 10 Ann 176 118 Clergy, when to
be allowed 4 Geo. 216 165 166 Commissioners, how to be chosen 11 Geo. 269 293
Conscience, an Act for the Liberty thereof 12 Wm. 1 4 Confirmation of Lands 4
Ann 147 99 Courts to be duly attended 34 9 -- to have no Cognizance of Debts
under 40 s. 1 Geo. 102 151 -- a Law for establishing them 8 Geo. 244 213 --
Proceedings therein revived and continued 4 Geo. 2. 324 436 Courthouse, Bucks,
an Act for erecting 11 Geo. 268 291 Council to be assigned to Prisoners 4 Geo.
216 159 Correction, Houses to be established 224 181 Convicts, Acts relating to
them 3 Geo. 2. 306 393 16 Geo. 2 349 532 -- a Supplement appointing an Officer
12 Geo. 2 342 495 Court-Proceedings 12 W. 3. 92 34 Common Law extends 4 Geo.
216 158 Coroners, their Election 4 Ann 153 ^04 -- an Act for regulating them 4
Geo. 213 156 Counterfeiting Hands and Seals, the Penalty 141 88 Cordwainers, an
Act regulating 8 Geo. 236 201 Crows ( See Black-birds) 11 Geo. 269 297
County-Levies 269 292 -- a supplementary Act 6 Geo. 2. 326 439 Creeks not to be
obstructed 1^ Geo. 274 318 D
Dams, etc. how to prevent them in Schuylkil 8 Geo. 2. 332 454 Debtors,
capitally charged may yet be sued 4 Geo. 216 164 -- insolvent, their Relief 3
Geo. 2. 304 382 -- Amendment thereof 4 Geo. 2. 313 427 Debts under Forty
Shillings, how recoverable 1 Geo. 202 151 -- of Persons deceased, how to be
paid 4 Ann 126 59 -- public, how to be collected 12 Geo. 269 292 -- a
Supplement 6 Geo. 2. 426 439 -- small, an Act for the more easy Recovery of 12
Geo. 2 346 520 16 Geo. 2 349 54^ Deeds not to be forged 12 Wm. 16 6 -- defaced,
the Penalty 7 -- wanting habendum, etc. good 4 Ann 124 55 -- recited, yet need
not be produced ibid -- sundry Defects therein aided ibid -- to be expounded as
the Laws were understood when such Deeds were made ibid -- Deeds made out of
the Province how to be proved 4 Ann 147 99 1 Geo. 199 148 -- an Act for
recording them 147 -- a Recorder thereof how to be appointed 150 -- an Act to
prevent Disputes about their Dates 9 Ann 156 115 Declarations, when to be filled
11 Geo. 270 308 Deer, when to be killed 8 Geo. 236 198 -- a supplementary Act 4
Geo. 2 320 430 Delaware River, Sheriff, as Water-Bailiff, may execute Writs on,
etc. 4 Ann 153 106 Departers 132 81 Distribution of Intestates Estate 126 59
Defalcation 14^ 88 Dower 127 65 Duelling, how punished 12 Wm. 4^ 13
Drunkenness, how punished 4 Ann 118 51 Duty on Convicts and poor and impotent
Persons imported 3 Geo. 2. 306 392 -- a Supplement, appointing an Officer 12
Geo. 2 342 495 -- a new Act repealing the former 16 Geo. 2 349 532 E
Entry forcible, how punished 12 Wm. 11 6 Engrossing ( See Engrossing) Election
of Assembly-men 4 Ann 129 67 -- Supplementary Acts 13 Geo. 284 346 12 Geo. 2
345 514 -- of Sheriffs 4 Ann 153 104 Ex^cutors how to pay Debts 126 59 -- to
account to the Orphan's-Court 1^8 131 Estrays 10 Geo. 266 287 Excise on Rum,
Brandy, etc. 12 Geo. 2 341 480 Escheats 4 Ann 127 66 Executions against Lands,
and how 12 Wm. 48 14 4 Ann 144 90 -- a supplementary Act concerning 13 Geo. 285
348 Evidence, Registry of Marriages etc. good 12 Wm. 75 28 -- See Deeds F.
Fences, an Act for regulating them 12 Wm. 56 21 -- what deemed lawful 7 Geo.
232 118 Felony in cutting out of Tongues, putting out eyes, slitting of Noses,
etc. 4 Geo. 216 161 -- committed in one County, having Accessaries in another,
how to be tried 166 167 Feme-sole-Traders, an Act concerning 221 178 -- whom
such 179 Fees regulated 9 Geo. 259 250 Ferry over Schuylkil, the End of
Highstreet, established 260 264 Firing of Woods, when prohibited 12 W. 3. 59 24
8 Geo. 2 335 468 Fire, and Accidents thereby 12 W. 3. 102 39 -- how prevented 8
Geo. 235 196 Fines to the Government, how to be recovered 4 Geo. 2 317 425 1
Geo. 197 140 -- how they may be moderated 143 Flour, to prevent Exporation, if
not merchantable 7 Geo. 2 329 443 Forgery, etc. the Penalty 12 Wm. 16 6/7 --
Vide Counterfeiting 4 Ann 141 88 Fornication and Adultery 114 48 Foxes, the
Reward for killing them 11 Geo. 269 296 G.
Gauging Casle, an Act for regulating 8 Geo. 249 227 Goods, how to be appraised
12 Wm. 40 11 Guardians, how to be appointed 11 Ann 188 134 (Grant, bargain,
sell) the Force thereof in Deeds 1 Geo. 199 148 Gunpowder, an Act for securing
the City of Philadelphia from the Danger thereof 11 Geo. 273 315 Government, an
Act for further securing the Administration of 11 Geo. 184 126 H.
Hemp, Repeal of a former Law ^ Geo. 2 325 437 Highways, how to be laid out 12
Wm. 55 19 -- how to be maintained 57 22 -- an additional Act about them 4 Ann
148 100 -- a supplementary Law 9 Geo. 2 388 473 Horses, ^n Act to improve the
Breed 10 Geo. 264 287 Houses for Correction to be established 4 Geo. 224 181
Hunting on the Enclosures of others, how punished 8 Geo. 236 199 -- in the
Woods, by none but Freeholders ibid Hoggs (See Swine, post.) Husband not to
sell Lands leaving his Wife unprovided for 4 Geo. 216 160 I.
Impotent Persons, to prevent their Importation 16 Geo. 2 349 532 3 Geo. 2. 306
393 -- a Supplement thereunto appointing an Officer 12 Geo. 2 342 495 Indian
Tr^ders, a Law for regulating 12 Wm. 96 35 Indians, Rum not to be sold them 8
Geo. 106 41 245 223 -- an Act against buying Land of them 20 7 -- a
supplementary Act 3 Geo. 2. 310 442 Indian Slaves not to be imported 4 Ann 136
86 Incest, what, and how punished 113 47 Engrossing, the Penalty 8 Geo. 242 212
Intestates Estates, an Act for settling 127 60 Inns (See Publick-Houses) 9 Ann
163 113 Infants (See Minors) Indictments found, the Penalty not appointing
Capi^^ directed 4 Geo. 216 163 Inspectors, the Choice of them 12 Geo. 2 345 515
Insolvent Debtors their Relief 3 Geo. 2. 304 382 -- an Amendment thereof 4 Geo.
2. 319 427 Interest to be at the Rate of Six per Cent. an Act 9 Geo. 252 248
Iron-Works, regulating Retailers of Liquor near them an Act 9 Geo. 2. 339 475
Justices not attending the Courts, the Penalty 12 Wm. 34 9 Jurors, duly
summoned, not attending, the Penalty 35 10 -- a sufficient Number to be
summoned for each Court 93 34 Justice, an Act for advancing 4 Geo. 216 157
Justices may settle Prices of Liquors 228 185 L.
Landmarks, an Act against removing 12 Wm. 15 6 Land not to be bought of the
Natives 20 7 -- a supplementary Act 3 Geo. 2 310 442 Lands to be taken in
Execusion where other Effects are not to be found 12 Wm. 48 14 4 Ann 144 90 --
a supplementary Act concerning 13 Geo. 285 348 Labor, prohibited on first Day
of the Week 4 Ann 111 45 Land, Purchases thereof, pursuant to former Laws,
confirmed 124 53 Land divided amongst Intestate's Children, etc. to be held in
Severality 54 Lands of Intestates to be sold for Payment of Debts 4 Ann 127 63
-- how to be divided 64 -- to whom they shall escheat 66 -- sold by Power of
Attorney, etc. confirmed 147 99 Lancaster County erected 2 Geo. 2 299 359
Larceny, how punished 4 Geo. 216 169 -- Compounders thereof, how punished 172
-- under Five Shillings, how punished 7 Geo. 233 190 Laws, Repeal of them
confirmed 7 Geo. 2 330 450 Letters of Administration granted Abroad, good here
4 Ann 125 56 -- need be taken in one County 58 Leather, an Act regulating 8
Geo. 236 201 Letters of Attorney, how to be proved 4 Ann 147 99 Levies (See
County Levies) 11 Geo. 269 292 -- a Supplement thereto 6 Geo. 2 326 439 Livery
and Seizin need not be proved 124 55 Liberty of Conscience, an Act concerning
13 Wm. 1 4 Liquors not to be adulterated 139 87 -- the Prices to be settled by
the Justices, etc. 4 Geo. 227 185 -- not to be retailed but by Permit 9 Ann 163
113 -- a Supplement thereto 8 Geo. 234 193 -- not to be retailed near
Iron-Works 9 Geo. 2 330 475 Limitation of Actions 11 Ann 187 129 Loan-Office,
the Trustees removed 12 Geo. 2 342 490 Legacies an Act for the more easy
Recovery of them 16 Geo. 2 353 556 M.
Marriages, an Act for regulating 12 Wm. 111 37 -- a supplementary Act 3 Geo. 2
314 400 Mariners not to be trusted 4 Ann 140 87 Measure of Beer and Ale 130 75
Measure, an Act for regulating Wm. 73 27 Mortgagees may sell Lands forfeited,
and how 144 90 Months, how named 9 Ann 166 115 Minors, how to be aided where
their Estates are in Danger 11 Ann 188 133 Mortgages to be recorded in six
Months, or void 1 Geo. 199 149 Mortgagee receiving his Money, to acknowledge
Satisfaction, and how, under a Penalty ibid Money, an Act for raising in the
City of Philadelphia 10 Ann 176 118 -- (See Bills of Credit) -- Gold and
Silver, what Rate to be current 9 Geo. 156 249 -- brought in Court, Act 4 and 5
Ann extended to Bills of Credit mentioned in 30,000 l. Act Murder, how to be
tried 4 Geo. 216 158 Manslaughter, how punished ibid Murder by concealing the
Death of Bastards 4 Geo. 160 -- Accessaries thereto 161 -- by Stabbing, the
Statute extended ibid N.
Naturalization of Foreigners, several Acts concerning 7 Ann 158 109 12 Geo.
277 333 3 Geo. 2. 312 408 4 Geo. 2. 322 432 8 Geo. 2 336 470 12 Geo. 2 348 525
-- of such foreign Protestants as refuse to swear, etc. an Act 16 Geo. 2 354
560 Natives, Land not to be bought of them 12 Wm. 20 7 -- a supplementary Act 3
Geo. 2 310 442 Negroes how to be tried, etc. 4 Ann 135 83 -- their Punishment
for diverse Offense* 85 -- an Act for better regulating 321 354 Notice to be
given by those who depart the Province 132 81 Nusances in obstructing ^reeks 11
Geo. 274 318 O.
Offenses, Petty, how to be punished 12 Wm. 21 7 Orphans Courts, an Act for
establishing 11 Ann 188 131 -- may direct Sale of Intestates Estates, how and
when ibid -- may call Administrators to Account 4 Ann 127 61 Overseers of the
Poor (vide Poor) 146 96 P.
Party-Fences (See Fences) Party-Walls (See Walls) Pay in Country-Produce, good
12 Wm. 90 33 Packing of Beef and Pork, an Act 13 Geo. 283 342 Peace, Sureties
to be found for it, and when 12 Wm. 26 8 Persons leaving the Province to give
Notice 4 Ann 132 81 Perjury, what, and how to be punished 1 Geo. 199 146 --
Subornation of it 4 Ann 216 167/168 Pedlars regulated 3 Geo. 2 311 404 Pounds,
an Act for erecting them 2 Geo. 2. 286 350 Prisoners, when bailable 143 89
Pork, how to be packed 13 Geo. 283 342 Possession 7 Years, on an equitable
Right, gives a Title 4 Ann 137 86 Poor, Acts to relieve 146 95 Poor, an Act for
aiding Defects in former Laws 4 Geo. 2. 217 174 -- what makes a Settlement ibid
-- or how removed 175 -- relieved, to wear Badges, or not relievable 177 -- a
Supplement to former Acts 8 Geo. 2 333 458 Prisoners to be allowed Council 4
Ann 216 159 -- to have Processes for Witnesses ibid -- their Witnesses to be
affirmed, etc. and convict how to be punished ibid -- what is allowed by the
Act to be deemed convict 162 -- standing mute, or challenging above what is
allowed by the Act, to be deemed convict ibid Process on Indictments, on
Nonappearance a Capias 163 Prisoners not appearing when indicted, how to be
out-lawed 164 -- charged with capital Crimes may be sued for Debt ibid -- may
be reprieved, etc. 168 Prison-breakers, how punished ibid Process, the
Discontinuance thereof aided in certain Cases 168 Proprietary Quit-rents, an
Act for recovering 12 Geo. 2 344 511 Province-Island vested in Trustees 16 Geo.
2 352 552 Publick-Houses not to be kept without License 9 Ann 163 113 -- a
Supplement thereto 8 Geo. 234 193 -- vide Liquors An Account thereof to be
given the Treasurer 1 Geo. 197 144 -- not to be kept but with License 8 Geo.
234 193 -- trusting upwards of 20 s. lose the Debt 194 -- entertaining Servants
195 Q.
Quit-rent, an Act for Collecting 4 Ann 131 76 -- how to to be paid 77 -- how
to be apportioned 79 -- an Act for recovering them 12 Geo. 2 344 511 R.
Rape, how to be punished 4 Geo. 216 160 Rangers, how to be appointed 10 Geo.
264 289 Rates and Levies in the County, an Act 11 Geo. 269 292 -- a Supplement
thereto 6 Geo. 2 326 439 Registry of Marriages, etc. kept by any religious
Society, authentic 12 Wm. 75 28 Register-General and his Deputies here
constituted 4 Ann 125 58 10 Ann 178 123 -- with two Justices, may decide
Caveats, etc. 124 Replevin, Writs, grantable 4 Ann 131 81 Referrees, their
Awards, how binding 142 89 Recorders of Deeds appointed, their Fees, Duty, etc.
1 Geo. 199 150 Reprieve may be granted, and how 4 Geo. 216 168 Riot and Riots,
what, and how punished 4 Ann 120 52 Robbery, how to be punished 4 Geo. 216 160
Robbers, those who receive them, how to be punished 162 Rum, (...) to be sold
to the Indians 12 Wm. 106 41 8 Geo. 245 223 Rum (See Excise) 12 Geo. 2 341 480
Retailers of Liquors near Iron-Works prohibited ^9 Geo. 2 339 475 River
Delaware, Sheriff, as Water-Bailiff, may execute Writs on 4 Ann 153 106 Repeal
of diverse Laws confirmed 7 Geo. 2 330 450 Re-emitting and continuing the Bills
of Credit 4 Geo. 2 315 413 12 Geo. 2 343 497 Religious Societies enabled to
purchase Lands within this Province 4 Geo. 2 316 423 Rates and Levies 11 Geo.
269 292 -- a supplementary Act 6 Geo. 2 326 439 Roads (See Highways) S.
Seals of the County and Province, not to be counterfeited 4 Ann 141 88
Servants, a Law for regulating them 12 Wm. 49 15 -- their Marriages 101 37 --
having Bastards, how to be punished 38 Schuylkil River, to prevent Wears and
Dams therein 8 Geo. 2 332 454 Settlement of poor Persons, Law concerning 4 Geo.
217 175 Ships and Vessels, sickly, not to come into the Government 12 Wm. 62 25
Sheriffs how to be elected 4 Ann 153 104 -- to be Water-Bailiff 107 -- an Act
for regulating them 4 Geo. 213 156 -- not to continuea bove three Years in
their Office 3 Geo. 2. 304 392 4 Geo. 2. 319 430 Sodomy, how to be punished 4
Geo. 216 160 Squibs, not to be made or fired 8 Geo. 235 196 Statutes, recited,
to be adjudged not to extend 4 Ann 216 158 Statehouse and Land vested in
Trustees 9 Geo. 2 340 477 Stabbing, the Statute 1 Jac. I. Cap. 8. extended 4
Geo. 216 161 Summons, and their Time 12 Wm. 92 34 -- their Form 94 35 Swearing
profanely, how punished 44 12 Swine, not to run at large without Yokes and
Rings within 14 Miles of Delaware, nor within the City of Philadelphia, etc. 4
Ann 150 101 -- a supplementary Act 2 Geo. 2 302 363 T.
Taverns (See Public Houses) 9 Ann 163 113 8 Geo. 234 193 T^nning Leather,
etc. an Act 236 201 Tender in the Species agreed, good, etc. Party suing after,
to pay Costs 4 Ann 142 89 Theft (vide Larceny) 4 Geo. 216 169 Timber Trees,
etc. the Cutting prohibited 12 Wm. 81 32 Tippling on first Days, the Penalty 4
Ann 111 46 Trespass involuntary, Parties may tender Amends, and disclaim, etc.
11 Ann 187 130 Treason, how to be tried 4 Geo. 216 158 -- how punished 160
Trustees of the Loan-Office removed 12 Geo. 2 342 490 V.
Vessels, sickly, not to come to the Province 12 Wm. 62 25 Vendues, Pedlars,
etc. regulated 3 Geo. 2. 311 404 W.
Walls, Party, how to be regulated 7 Geo. 232 188 Water-Bailiffs, who 4 Ann 153
106 Wears across Creeks or Rivers prohibited 12 Wm. 58 24 11 Geo. 274 318 8
Geo. 2 332 454 Weights and Measure^, an Act for regulating 12 Wm. 73 27 Wills
of Land, in Presence of two Witnesses, good 4 Ann 125 56 -- Copy of, under
Seal, with Probate, good Evidence ibid -- nuncupative, when good, etc. 57 -- in
Writing, how to be altered 58 Witchcraft, the Statute 1 Jac. I. Chap. 12.
extended 4 Geo. 216 161 Widows, their Rights to Land of Intestates 4 Ann 127 64
Wine (See Excise) 12 Geo. 2 ^41 480 Woods not to be unseasonably fired 12 Wm.
59 24 -- to prevent the firing them 8 Geo. 2. 335 468 Wolves, the Price of
killing 11 Geo. 269 297 Writs, their Form 12 Wm. 94 35 -- of Replevin 4 Ann 131
81 -- of Summons and Arrests, an Act for regulating 11 Geo. 270 307


