A CONFERENCE Held at the Fort at St. George's in the County of York, the
fourth Day of August, Anno Regni Regis GEORGIJ Secundi, Magnae Britanniae,
Franciae et Hiberniae, and c. Decimo Sexto, Annoque Domini, 1742. BETWEEN His
Excellency WILLIAM SHIRLEY, Esquire Captain General and Governor in Chief in and
over His Majesty's Province of the Massachusetts Bay in New England. AND THE
Chief Sachems and Captains OF THE Penobscott, Norridgewock, Pigwaket or
Amiscogging or Saco, St. John's, Bescommonconty or Amerescogging and St.
Francis Tribes of INDIANS.
August 2. 1742.
HIS Excellency WILLIAM SHIRLEY Esquire with a Committee of His Majesty's Council
and of the House of Representatives, who were appointed by the General Court to
attend him on that Occasion, with sundry other Gentlemen arrived in ^^e River
St. George's this Day in the Forenoon, on board the (...) Vernon, the Province
Galley and the Province Sloop.

In the Afternoon His Excellency sent Mr. Wheelwright and Mr Cotton, to inform
the Chiefs of the several Tribes assembled at the Fort at St. George's, That He
was arrived in the River; and that as He was desirous of seeing St. George's;
He had appointed to meet them there.

August 3. 1742.
A Committee of Thirty-five of the Sachems and chief Men from the several
Tribes appeared at the Fort in order to wait upon His Excellency, and proceeded
from thence in their Canoes with the British Union Flagg (of their own) hoisted
at their Head, and waited on His Excellency on Board the Province Galley, where
after congratulating the Governor on his safe Arrival, they were entertained
with a Dinner.

After which the Governor gave them another Flagg; and directed them to inform
the several Tribes He should meet them the next Morning at a Place prepared on
Shore, in order to begin the Conference, Their Signal for Appearance to be a
great Gun fired from the Province Galley, and a Flagg hoisted at the Fort.

On which the Committee of the Tribes withdrew.

Fort at St. George's, August 4. 1742.
HIS Excellency being seated at a large Table under a handsome Field Tent for
that purpose erected, attended by the Committee of His Majesty's Council and
the Honorable House of Representatives, with a great Number of Gentlemen and
others Spectators: the Union-Flagg flying at the Front of the said Tent.

And the several Sachems and chief Captains of the Indian Tribes, after the
usual Salutations, being seated under an opposite Tent, provided for that
purpose;

Mr. Roland Cotton was sworn to the faithful discharge of the Trust of a Clerk
to His Excellency the Governor and Council, by Col. Pepperrell.

Then Capt. Samuel Jordan, Capt. Joseph Bean, and Mr. Abraham Johnson were
sworn to the faithful discharge of the Trust of Interpreters at the present
Conference.

After which His Excellency spoke to the said Chiefs as follows, viz.

My good Friends and Brethren,

IN the Fall of the last Year I notified You, That I had the Honor of being
appointed His Majesty King GEORGE's Governor of this His Province of the
Massachusetts Bay; and assured You, That I was determined to observe the
Treaties subsisting between the British Subjects and your Tribes; and to treat
You with all Kindness as King GEORGE's good Friends, so long as you should on
your Part observe your Articles and Treaties of Submission to the Crown of
Great Britain, and behave your selves peaceably and friendly toward the
English Settlements: And I also acquainted you, That if any of your Tribes were
desirous to send Delegates to Me at Boston, Care should be taken to transport
them thither in the Province Sloop, with suitable Accommodations; soon after
which, Col. Lewis and Capt. Sam were sent from you to Boston, and in two
Conferences held at the Council Chamber there, on the 3d and 8th of last
December saluted Me and the great Council of the Province, in the Name of the
Penobscott and your other Tribes; and in their Names informed Me of your Joy at
bearing my Letter read; and of your Desire that Friendship might continue
between Us; and laid before Me the Difficulties in your Trade, arising from a
Scarcity of Provisions, Tobacco, Powder and Shot, and the Truck-Master's not
understanding your Language; and desired that Two Men might be appointed twice
a Year to view the Truck-Houses; and that an Account of the Prices of Bever,
Peltry, and other Goods might be publicly posted up there: In all which
Matters I promised, That you should be redressed; and told your Delegates that
I purposed, (GOD willing) to see your Tribes near your own Habitations, some
Time in the ensuing Spring; and that if you had any Thing further to lay before
Me then, I should consider of that also. And I am now come to this Place that I
might see you all Face to Face, and perform to you in Person what I promised to
your Delegates at Boston: And I return Thanks to the great GOD of Heaven and
Earth, whose good Providence has most graciously preserved Us and our Ships in
our Passage bither, amidst the Perils of a most violent Storm of Thunder and
Lightning; for giving Us both this Opportunity of renewing former Leagues, and
confirming the Covenants of Peace and Friendship between Us; which I hope will
be improved in such a Manner, that our Posterity may have cause to rejoice at
our Meeting together this Day: And for this purpose I am now ready to bear,
whatever you have to lay before me; and would have you speak with Freedom and
Openness.

The Indians, by Loron their Speaker, made Answer as follows;

Loron, As your Excellency was mentioning, That GOD was pleased to grant you a
safe Arrival, it was very agreeable to us, that GOD was pleased to preserve your
Lives when in Danger, and land you in Safety. Likewise the several Tribes at a
great Distance, are safely arrived through the Goodness of GOD to this Spot.

We return Thanks to GOD for this Opportunity to see the Faces of one another
in this Place.

And as your Excellency engaged to meet us here, and have accordingly done it,
we judge your Excellency sincere, and heartily rejoice therein. And as to the
Matters proposed by your Excellency, we will Answer thereto to Morrow; when we
shall shall declare the whole Secrets of our Hearts, we having no sinister
corrupt Views in our Breasts.


GOVERNOR, What you say to me is very acceptable; and I expect to meet you to
Morrow Morning according to your Desire; and I will give you the same Signal as
I did this Morning, and desire you to be here within an Hour after that Time.

I hope you were taken good Care of last Night and this Morning.


Loron, As your Excellency desires we may mention Things freely; We say, the
Pork and Bread sell short last Night.


GOVERNOR, You shall have a larger Proportion for the future. I ordered you an
Ox this Morning; desire to know whether you have had it?


Loron, We have not yet had it, though it was offered us, not having Time to
eat it.


GOVERNOR, It shall be now delivered to you that you may refresh your selves.


Loron, We thank your Excellency, and do assure you, we believe where your
Excellency is, nothing will be wanting.


GOVERNOR, As you have nothing further to say, we will drink King GEORGE's
Health.


Toxus, Chief of Norridgewock, We rejoiced when we first heard of your
Excellency's coming, and have been here some Time, and are now heartily glad at
the Sight of the Governor.


Saquent, Chief of the Saco Tribe, We heartily rejoice, that we have been
preserved in the Night past, and have now an Opportunity to see the great
Governor in the sight of the Sun.


GOVERNOR, I am very glad to hear you have brought your Wives and Children
with you; and hope they are all in Health.


Indians, They are all Well. We thank your Excellency.


Then His Excellency drank to Edewakenk, chief Sachem of the Penobscott Tribe,
and the rest of the Chiefs of all the Tribes, King GEORGE's Health.

Who all drank King GEORGE's Health to His Excellency.

His Excellency being informed that the Squaws were at a small Distance from
the Tent on the Hill, ordered them and their Papooses a Glass of Wine, with his
Service to the Squaws.

His Excellency also ordered a Glass of Rum to the young Men who appeared under
Arms as a Guard to the Sachems about 120 in Number.

His Excellency then congratulated Loron on his Recovery so far from his
Indisposition as to be present this Day.

Who answered, That he thanked His Excellency, and hoped it would be a good Day
to them all, That he was scarce able to attend, yet out of great Respect to the
Governor, was now present.

August 5. 1742.
The CONFERENCE continued, PRESENT, His EXCELLENCY William Shirley, Esquire
Captain General and Governor in Chief, and c. AND THE Chiefs of the several
Tribes, and c.

GOVERNOR, I AM glad to see you all here again to Day; and hope you are in
Health, and have had sufficient Provision, and am now ready to hear what you
have to say to Me.


Loron; Brother, We are in good Health this Morning; and rejoice that your
Excellency and the Gentlemen are all well also this Morning.

And as your Excellency desired Yesterday that we may speak freely, we declare
we now desire to renew the Treaty made in the Year 1727.

Which Treaty your Excellency has by you; and is the same we now mean. This is
really the first Treaty, and those that were at the Treaty then, and their
Children and Grand Children are obliged to observe it.

This is what we depend upon; and if any Thing should fall out contrary
thereto, that Treaty is to be consulted, and both Sides to be judged by it.

The Treaty we have safe by us here; and though we don't understand Writing,
the Treaty will speak for it self.

The Article of Trade is the chief and most material Thing; therefore is first
to be considered. Some Time after the beginning of which Treaty, in 1726, the
Trade was altered: And at the Conclusion of the Treaty afterward, it was
promised, That the Trade should be better regulated for the future: And it was
further told us, if any Body should sell cheaper than the English, this
Government, would go beyond them, particularly the French, who were poorer than
the English, and could not afford to sell cheaper. That at the first beginning
of Trade a Stroud Blanket was Thirty Shillings: Corn was Seven Shillings per
Bushel: Powder was Four Shillings per Pound: Shot at Ten Pence per Pound: And a
stripped Blanket was Twenty Shillings. And for all other little Things, which
cannot at present be enumerated, they were sold for a less Price at that Time
than at this.

What is now said is the Truth concerning the Trade; which we are very uneasy
under, that all Things should grow dearer every Year.

And as your Excellency desired us to speak the Truth, we shall be very free
and open, and speak the whole Truth.


GOVERNOR, That is my desire that you should use the greatest Freedom and
Liberty; it being the End of our Meeting, that we should have a right
Understanding of each other.


Loron, The reason of our mentioning the Affair of Trade, is because that
Matter is the chief Band of our Peace and Friendship, and therefore should be
well settled and concluded.

The Trade is not well furnished; and Things are not suitable as formerly,
which will slacken Love.


GOVERNOR, If you can mention any other Particulars concerning the Trade which
you have not spoken of, endeavor to recollect them, and enumerate them.


Loron, At the Treaty in 1727, Governor DUMMER told us, he could supply us
much cheaper than the French, who used yearly to make us a Present of Powder
and Shot, which the English could better a f^ord than they.

Which Present we never have had, though we are daily looking out for it.

And as to the Truck-House here, it is always wanting Provisions, Tobacco, and
many other necessary Things.

As for a Hundred Bushels of Corn, it is nothing; for it will not Supply a
Bushel a Man when we come to Trade. Nay, Two Hundred Bushels is really nothing
when we come to Trade, being so very little and insufficient that we are forced
to divide it.

We desire there may be so much that every Man may have what he can purchase,
which will then be enough.

And we desire that a List of the Prizes of the Goods may be posted up here;
and that Two Men may be chosen with an Interpreter to view the Truck-Houses,
Spring and Fall by the Government to see that nothing be wanting therein.

Another Grievance is, That it was said, none of your young Men, should go into
our Woods to Hunt; but should continue by the Waterside, which is not complied
withal.

The Reason of our mentioning it is, If they kill our hunting Game, we have
nothing else to live upon; whereas the English till the Ground, and have other
Ways to support themselves. This Practice if continued, will destroy our
Livelihood.

Now we come to another Head, and speak for our Tribes in general, That Jabez
Bradbury may be our Truck Master here at St. George's.

The Reason thereof is; Jabez can understand us, and we him; and it is very
difficult for one that don't understand the Language to Trade with us.

When we begun to trade, it used to be the Custom to give Money for Peltry, but
now we cannot understand Cyphering; and they tell us, Your Peltry comes to so
much; by which as we don't understand it, we are cheated, being obliged to
depend upon the Word of the Truck-Master for the Weight by which we often
suffer.

We have done concerning the Trade.

What we have now repeated was engaged in Governor DUMMER's Treaty; and we
desire those Things may now be remembered and agreed to that we may Live in Love
and Peace.

As I was the Chief in that Day, and was the Cause of our Tribes complying with
that Treaty; they desire me now to strengthen my self and have it confirmed.

This is all we have to say at present.


GOVERNOR, Do you mean this is all you have to say on any Head whatsoever?


Loron, This is at present all. We now wait an Answer from your Excellency.


GOVERNOR, I shall be glad to hear all you have to say on every Head, that I
may consider all the Matters together.


Loron, We have one Article more to mention, It was said in the Time of
Governor DUMMER's Treaty, the English desired to go no further than the
SaltWater relished. The English then told us, they would not step a Foot over
that Lisle. It is a very long Foot that reaches from that Line to the Place
from whence we came.

This is all we have to say at present; and we have here the Treaty which we
desire your Excellency to look over, and then return it to us again.


GOVERNOR, We have Governor DUMMER's Treaty in the same manner you have,
which we brought with us, and we will compare that with yours, and see that it
be same, and then will make use of our own.

Which was accordingly done to the Satisfaction of the Tribes.


GOVERNOR, The English Government think as well as you, that they ought to
regulate themselves by Governor DUMMER's Treaty, and that it is binding on our
Children and Grand Children, as you have said. And we are glad you have desired
to walk by Governor DUMMER's Treaty, that we may determine Things by it: And I
will look over that Treaty and consider of it; and of every Thing else you have
said. And I desire you would with Openness and Freedom declare any Thing else
you have to say now, because the great Council of Boston is near at Hand, and
we must soon go there; And I desire that we may finish so that we may have an
Opportunity to dine together before our Return to Boston.

Are you satisfied that the Treaty we have now shown you is the same with that
you have by you?


Loron, We are.


GOVERNOR, I again desire, That if you have any new Matter to mention, you
would now do it, that it may be considered, with what is already offered; and
that I may any answer them altogether.


Loron, We are grieved at some Accidents about killing of Horses by our young
Men. As soon as we heard of it, we sent to them to forbid such Practices.


GOVERNOR, The Government was also sorry when they heard of it. And upon our
hearing that the Men to whom the Horses belonged, had taken the Guns from the
young Men, we recommended it to them to deliver up the Guns again to them, lest
it should be a Prejudice to them, expecting the young Men would make
Satisfaction for the Injuries done: I desire to know whether they have done so?


Loron, There is no Satisfaction, but the keeping their Guns, which has been a
great Damage to them.


GOVERNOR, I am sensible of it; and therefore recommended that the Guns should
be given them again, upon their engaging Satisfaction, which now we are
sensible has not been done; and therefore shall enquire into that Affair.


Loron, As your Excellency was mentioning, that the great Court was near; and
you would return Home; we are of the same Mind, but desire there may be no more
haste than good Speed; that we may moderately consider and determine Things,
that we may go away in Peace.


GOVERNOR, I also desire that we may make no more haste than good speed; and
would therefore have every particular Head of Grievance from any of the Tribes
now mentioned, that all may be answered and fully settled before we go.


Loron, All the Tribes speak the same Things, which have been now mentioned.


GOVERNOR, Have any of the other Tribes any Thing further to offer?


Toxus, Chief of Norridgewock; Brother, We have a small Matter to offer
concerning our Tribe.

The same that the Penobscott Tribe have said concerning the Trade, we also say.

I shall freely declare what we have to say: The Gentleman that was ordered to
Richmond to Trade is gone from thence; not but we liked Capt. Minot very well
at Richmond: And the Gun-Smith that is there we like very well, Mr. Wood. We
should be glad he would be our Truck-Master. The Reason of my mentioning him is
because the Penobscott Tribe had mentioned Jabez Bradbury before for this
Truck-House, who would else have been agreeable to us.

I have now done speaking.


Loron, There are no Chiefs of the Saco Tribe here present; but they desire
also that the Truck-Houses may be well provided for.


GOVERNOR, I will consider all the Things mentioned; and answer them to Morrow
Morning; and desire you would come as soon as you can after the usual Signal,
because hitherto you have come so late that nothing can be done in the
Afternoon.

I have ordered you another Ox for you Provision this Day, with other Things
suitable to comfort and refresh you.


Loron, We desire that the Refreshment for our Throats may be only to Night and
not in the Morning.


GOVERNOR, I like it well, and shall give Orders accordingly.


Loron, We desire a Dish of Peace for change of Diet.


GOVERNOR, I shall give Orders that you may have some.


Loron, We desire some Pipes.


GOVERNOR, You shall have Pipes and Tobacco also.


Then His Excellency drank to the Chiefs, King GEORGE's Health: Which was
pledged by them.

August 6, 1742.
The CONFERENCE continued,

PRESENT, His EXCELLENCY William Shirley, Esquire Captain General and Governor in
Chief, etc. AND THE Chiefs of the several Tribes, etc.

GOVERNOR, I AM glad to see you all here met again, and hope you are all in
good Health, and were well entertained Yesterday.


Indians, Yes, Very well.


Chief of St. John's Tribe; Brother, We have the same to say as the others
have; and are rejoiced at our Meeting here in Love; and that there is a
Prospect of Union; and we desire to follow the same Paths with our Brethren of
the other Tribes.


GOVERNOR Very well


Waro^m^^ood, Chief of the Tigwacket Tribe; We come only about some little
Trade at Saco; and to pay our Respects here to the Governor.

As to the Trade; We thought when we sold our Peltry it was very valuable, but
when we received the Pay it was very little, almost nothing, occasion d by the
English not purchasing the Bever till a good while after Christmas, and then
would give but a poor Price.

And since Capt. Smith's Death, we cannot but very seldom see the Face of the
present Truck-Master.


GOVERNOR I have considered what Sachem Loron said Yesterday and what the
other Chiefs have now said, and shall give you an Answer with all Freedom and
Sincerity.

The Government of this Province is desirous as well as you, to renew the
Treaty made and concluded by Governor DUMMER in the Year 1727, at Casco-Bay.

We think with you, that we and you, with our and your Children and
GrandChildren are bound and obliged to observe and perform it.

And you rightly observe the said Treaty to be in writing and must speak for
itself. And that as you say, It must be consulted by us both and we must be
judged and concluded by it.

I shall speak first of Trade, because you mentioned it first.

And it is truly, as you say, the chief Tie of Friendship and Union between us
and your Tribes.

It is true, That in Governor DUMMER's Treaty you were told, the English would
supply you cheaper than any other Nation whatsoever, in which the French must
be included. And you will find by what I am now going to say, the English have
performed their Agreement with you in that Respect. The Justice of this
Government toward you will appear in those very Articles you mentioned.

Yesterday you observed, That in the Year 1727, when Governor DUMMER's Treaty
was made, that stroud Blankets were 30s a piece. Corn 7s pr. Bushel, Powder 4s.
pr. Pound, Shot at 10 d. pr. Pound, stripped Blankets at 20s a piece. And I
would observe to you, that at that Time a Pound of your Bever was sold at 9s.
pr. Pound, and other Peltry in proportion.

We are sensible, that Strouds are now sold at the Truck-House from 45s. to
50s. a piece, Corn is now sold at 10s. pr. Bushel, Powder at 7s. Shot at 19 d.
stripped Blankets at 38s. Now the same Strouds which are sold to you at St.
George's Fort from 45s. to 50s. a piece, are sold at Boston to the English for
52s. a piece, Corn is sold at Boston from 12s. to 16s. a Bushel, Powder at
Boston is sold for ^^. pr. Pound, and in the Country Towns at 10s. pr Pound,
and Shot and strip^d Blankets at the same Price for which they are sold to you
at the Truck Houses. And your Bever which was sold in Governor DUMMER's Time,
for (...) is s^ld by you for 16s pr. Pound at the Truck Houses.

I will endeavor to explain to you the Reason of the Difference between the
Prices of these Goods at the Time of Governor DUMMER's Treaty, and the present
Prices.

First, It was expressly told you by Governor DUMMER that the Prices of Goods
would be sometimes higher and sometimes lower, according to the Plenty or
Scarcity of them.

In the next Place the 30s. which you observe the stroud Blankets were sold for
at the Time of that Treaty was 30s. Paper Money. And I would observe to you,
that the Paper Money since that Time has sunk so much in value, that 55s. of it
now is worth no more than 30s. was then; so that the Blankets which you now
give from 45s. to 50s. for, are not so dear as the Blankets at 30s. in the time
of Governor DUMMER's Treaty.

To make this Matter still more plain, A Pound of your Bever which the English
then gave 9s. for, they now give 16s. for; and yet we do not complain, though the
Price of your Bever has rose more upon us, than the Price of our Provisions
upon you.


Loron, As to the Price of Bever that is nothing to the purpose, for every
Thing is at a stand. The Price of Bever and the Goods now are the same as then.


GOVERNOR, To explain this yet further.

A less Quantity of Bever will purchase a stroud Blanket at this time, than
what would purchase one in Governor DUMMER's time. And it is a Demonstration
of the Justice of this Government to you, that you have the Goods at the Truck
Houses at a more moderate Price than the English have at Boston.

Another Reason of the Advance of the Price of our Goods is, that the War with
Spain and all Parts of Europe, at this Time, makes the Powder much dearer than
it would otherwise be, as also all sorts of Provisions.

And another Proof of our Justice and Friendship is, that the Government lose
considerably every Year by letting you have their Goods at such low Prizes,
which they do purely out of Friendship and Kindness to you.

What is now said concerns the Justice of the Government only.

If you are ever imposed upon by the Truck Masters it is a great Fault, which
the Government don't allow of; and when they know it, will always endeavor to
prevent.

I don't like that Practice of the Truck-Masters which you mention, their
telling you what your Bever and Peltry comes to, in the Lump, without giving
you a particular Account of it; and then delivering you Goods in exchange for
it after the some Manner.

This is such a Method as seems to me to give the Truck-Masters room to blind
both You and the Government, if they think sit.

To prevent this for the future, I shall take care that the Weight of your
Bever and Peltry small be marked down by the Truck-Master; and he shall
deliver. you a Bill of Parcels of the quantity and price of Bever, and the
Goods p^i^ in exchange for them.

By this Means you will have a Paper delivered to you containing the quantity
and price of your Bever, and the particulars and price of the Goods delivered
to you in exchange for them; and by means of that Paper you will see whether
you are imposed upon; and if you will complain to the Government you shall
always have strict Justice done you.

And I will order an Account of the several Prices of your Peltry andour Goods
to be posted up in the Truck-Houses, that you may be informed of the Prices of
both.


Col. Lewis, That is very well.


GOVERNOR, This is what Iat present think of; and if the Government at any
Time, shall find out other or better Methods to prevent your being impos'dupon
by the Truck-Masters, they will do it.

I think it is very reasonable, since you depend upon supplying your selves at
our Truck-Houses with Provisions and other Necessaries, that they should be
sufficiently stored with them for your Wants and Demands; therefore the
Government will take Care it shall be done; and will provide sufficient Stores
for every particular Person as they shall want.

And as you have desired, I will take Care that the Government shall appoint
two fit Persons in the Spring and Fall, with an Interpreter, to view the
TruckHouses; and you shall have seasonable Notice of it, that if you have any
thing to complain of, you may have an Opportunity to be heard by the Persons so
appointed.

As to Mr. Bradbury and Mr. Wood's being appointed Truck-Masters at George's
and Richmond Forts, the great Council of the Province which choose those
Officers, will always choose suitable Persons for that Service. Since you desire
to have Mr. Bradbury for your Truck-Master at St. George's, I will recommend
him to the great Council.

I think his understanding your Language is a considerable Qualification for a
Truck-Master; which I doubt not will have it is Weight with them.

I don't find by the Treaty, that Governor DUMMER ever promised that the
Government would (as the French did) every Year make you a Present of Powder
and Shot.


Loron, It may not be wrote; but it was told us so then.


GOVERNOR, As the Treaty is in Writing, we must resort to that for the Truth
of Things.

Notwithstanding you never were Friends to the English, as you have been to the
French in Time of War, yet this Government have frequently made you
considerable Presents; and the Generosity of the Government will always be
proportioned to your Friendship to the English.

We shall always treat you with Kindness; but our Presents must be the Effect
of our Friendship and Generosity; and not of any Terms of Agreement to make
them to you at certain Times and Seasons.

The English Government have always looked upon it as their Honor to treat
their Friends with Generosity.

I am sensible you support your selves by hunting in your Woods, and not by
Tillage of your Lands as you have observed.

I therefore think if any of our young Men hunt on your Grounds, it is a great
Piece of Injustice done you; and I shall always look upon it as such.

And I will recommend it to the great Council to prevent such Trespasses being
made upon you; and to oblige the young Men for all such Offenses to pay double
Damages.

As to the Settlements of Lands, as you observed Yesterday, Governor DUMMER's
Treaty must judge between us and decide that Matter.


Loron, As to the First. We desired the English might not go where the Fresh
Water runs.


GOVERNOR, The Treaty must determine that Matter; Therefore I shall read
several Paragraphs of the Treaty it self.

In Page 13, are these Words; Lient GOVERNOR, If there should be any Dispute
or Controversy hereafter between the English and you, respecting the Titles and
Claims of Land; and after a fair and lawful Trial, if the English cannot make
out and prove their Titles to the Lands controverted, they shall disclaim them;
but if the English can make out their Titles, then the Indians shall disclaim
the Lands so controverted.

To which you then made Answer

We understand it very well, and agree to it, that it shall be so; The
Controversies we understand are to be determined by impartial Judges and
disinterested Persons, appointed for that Purpose, to do equal Justice. And in
your Treaty of Submission, at that Time, in Page 9, you have stipulated, That
His Majesty's Subjects the English, shall and may peaceably and quietly enter
upon, improve and forever enjoy all and singular their Rights of Lands and
former Settlements, Properties and Possessions, within the Eastern Parts of the
said Province of the Massachusetts Bay; together with all Islands, Islets,
Shores, Beaches and Fishery within the same, without any Molestation or Claims
by us or any other Indians; and be in no ways molested, interrupted or
disturbed therein. Saving unto the Penobscott, Norridgewock, and other Tribes
within His Majesty's Province aforesaid, and their natural Descendants
respectively, all their Land, Liberties and Properties, not by them conveyed or
sold to or possessed by any of the English Subjects as aforesaid; as also the
Privilege of Fishing, Hunting and Fowling as formerly. If any Controversy or
Difference at any Time hereafter happen to arise between any of the English and
Indians for any real or supposed Wrong or Injury done on either Side, no
private Revenge shall be taken for the same; but proper Application shall be
made to his Majesty's Government upon the Place for Remedy or Redress thereof
in a due course of Justice.


Loron, We know all this.


GOVERNOR, I shall say but one Thing more, viz.

You have had some doubt whether Medockawando was ever the Sachem of the
Penobscot Tribe. We find about Fifty four Years ago in our History and Records
that He was your Sachem.


Loron, He never was a Proprietor of Land here; and we have heard so often
about him. We don't desire to hear any more.


GOVERNOR, Do you acknowledge that Winnemouet was your Sachem?


Loron, We don't know that he was.


GOVERNOR, One of our old Men, who is now with us here on the Spot was present
when Madockawando signed the Deed of this Land where the Fort stands, and above
a Hundred Indians most of whom were of the Penobscot Tribe were present and
consenting to that Grant and saw the Money paid for the Land, a Hatt-full of
Pieces of Eight, and sundry Blankets.


Loron, We have heard of that very often, and if we should hear of it again, it
would signify nothing; if we come to Agreement, we desire all those Things may
be put under the Table.


GOVERNOR, I would not have you misunderstand me; the English are not about to
settle any other Lands than what you have at two several Times agreed to in
Conferences with some of the Proprietors in 1735.


Loron, We only mention the Affair of Lands to put you in mind of your
Agreements not to go a Foot over the Line agreed to.


GOVERNOR, I would have you rightly understand me; I can assure you, the
Proprietors of that Land granted by Medockawondo, are not about settling any
Lands on the East Side of this River.


Loron, As for our Part, we were always willing, when the English came here,
that they should settle so as not to crowd us in our Settlements. The French
have desired to settle in our Rivers, but we would not grant it. We have shown
more regard to the English, than any white People, being desirous to live in
Friendship with them.


GOVERNOR, We don't desire to crowd you in any of your Settlements.


Loron, We are more tender of the English than any People, and desire their
Friendship; but would not be crowded nor crowd them.

We greatly rejoice in your Excellency's last Speech.


GOVERNOR, As this Government will always be careful that King GEORGE's
Subjects shall not take away an Inch of Land from you, so they will always
support them in their Settlement of Lands to which they have a just Right and
Pretension; which you must acknowledge to be reasonable, for we shall always
keep our Agreements with you, and expect you to keep your Agreements with all
King GEORGE's Subjects, both with respect to Lands and all other Matters.

As to your young Men killing the Horses; we as well as you are sorry for it.
Your killing our Cattle does our Inhabitants as much Injury as our taking away
your Bever and Guns; they being as necessary for our Support, as Hunting for
yours.

The English have always expected, and you have always acknowledged, that when
the young Men commit such Trespasses, they should make Reparation for such
Damage done. If we should uphold and countenance our young Men, or you
countenance yours in such Matters, it would soon break all Friendship between
us. It is therefore necessary for us, when our young Men commit Trespasses that
they should be obliged to make Restitution And it is as necessary that your
young Men should be obliged to do the same in such Cases.

Since I have been here, I have received many Complaints from the Inhabitants
that they have had their Cattle, Horses and Hoggs killed to a great Value.


Loron, It may be the Vermin have killed them.


GOVERNOR, Some Gentlemen of the Council have inquired into the Truth and
Justice of the Complaints; and I have rejected all those that are not supported
by Proof.


Loron, I know of my certain Knowledge, that Bears and Wolves have killed a
great many.


GOVERNOR, We therefore don't take Notice of any such Complaints, as are not
certainly proved by Witnesses.


Loron, As to the Horses mentioned Yesterday; they were killed by young Men,
who found them at a great Distance from any Habitation; however they are pretty
well paid for them, the Owners having their Guns; so we should be glad to have
that Matter drop. For the future we shall take double Care; and Charge our
young Men to do so no more: And we pray, that when the Cattle stray away, and
are mir'd or hung in Crotches of Trees, your young Men may not charge us with
killing of them.


GOVRENOUR, We will take Care not to be imposed upon by our young Men in that
Matter.


Loron, Sometimes the English desire us to look for their lost Cattle, and we
find them dead. We ought not to be charged with them.


GOVERNOR, It is not reasonable you should.

But besides the Horses, one Mr. Kogg lost an Ox, which Ackumbuett's Sons own,
they had killed before Witnesses. Another Ox was kili'd which Col. Lewis saw
the Bones and Hoofs of, (two English Men being present.) As to our young Men
making themselves Satisfaction for their Horses which were killed by taking
away your Guns, we don't like it; because when either Side pretend to take
their own Satisfaction, it will create Quarrels, and break Friendship;
therefore the Method must be to complain to the Government, and leave to them
to order proper Satisfaction.


Moxus, As for two of the Cattle killed by Ackumbuett's Son, and my Son; they
were in Liquor, and hardly know what they did; when I came to know it I paid 25
s. for them.


GOVERNOR, That Money was paid for a Horse and Steer that I have not mentioned.


Moxus, It is true. I am mistaken.


GOVERNOR, As to the two Oxen which you acknowledge were killed, what
Satisfaction do you propose to make for them?


Loron, As for them, we believe our young Men killed them; and when we return,
we shall have a Meeting, and see that they be paid for.

As to the Horses, the Guns we think may satisfy for them, and we should be
glad to hear no more about that Matter.


GOVERNOR, I have appointed two Gentlemen on Oath to apprize the value of the
Oxen; and they have valued them at 40 l.


Col. Lewis, As to the Oxen I viewed the Bones; and don't think they were so
big as Oxen's Bones, and therefore not worth so much.


Loron, There was a Sloop come in here and she run aground: Two Canoes were
coming along and the Sloop Men desired the Indians to help them, which they
did; and for a Reward the Sloop Men made them drunk, put them on the Beach, and
before they got sober they loft their Canoes and three Guns.


GOVERNOR, We are informed, That the Indians came on board of their own
accord; and would not leave the Vessel, though often desired, till they were
Drunk; therefore ought to charge their Loss to their own Folly in drinking too
much.


Loron, We have been informed as I have said, and thought it true.


GOVERNOR, I have many such Informations, even to the Amount of above three
Hundred Pounds; but take no Notice of them because they are not sufficiently
proved.


Loron, As to these Things you have mentioned them; and they may be settled
between two or three. And we desire to mention Things that may continue
Friendship: And for the future, that strict Charges may be given on both Sides
to the young Men to do so no more.


GOVERNOR, The Inhabitants complain, that sometimes your young Men stop the
Oxen and prevent their bringing Home their Hay.


Loron, We are old Men, and cannot have our Eyes every where.


GOVERNOR, You ought to do all you can, to restrain your young Men.


Loron, We are loath to enter into little Complaints, about the English killing
our Dogs, and c. But are resolved on our Part to endeavor to prevent such
Things for the future. You have an Advantage with regard to restraining your
young Men, having better Government than we. But we will do what we can in
these Matters.

There was something forgot about the Truck-Trade Yesterday. One Thing is, that
the little Skins called Sable-Skins used to be sold for 10s.; but now for 8s.
We desire they may be at the first Price.

Another about Bear-Skins, they grow scarce, and we cannot afford to bring them
at the customary Price.


GOVERNOR, As to the Sable-Skins, we did give 10s. a piece for, two Years ago,
and sold them for 8s.; and now we cannot get but 8s. Therefore as you have our
Goods at the same or less Price than the People at Boston; so we ought to give
no more for your Peltry than we can get for it there.


Loron, The Musquosh Skins sell but for 9 d.


GOVERNOR, We wish they would search more with us, but they don't.


Loron, As to what we have said, your Excellency cannot certainly determine with
respect to the Truck-Masters, and the Men to view the Truck-Houses and the
Interpreters. However, We hope you will appoint good Men.


GOVERNOR, We will do that for our own sakes, as well as yours, it being of
equal Service to us both.


Loron, We desire we may mention one of the Gentleman to view the TruckHouses.


GOVERNOR, If you mention one I will consider of it.


Loron, If we may have our desire we should choose Mr. Wheelwright for viewing,
and Capt. Jordan for an Interpreter.


GOVERNOR, I will consider of it, and gratify you as far as I am able.


Loron, We desire the Men may be suitable and Honest.


GOVERNOR, You may depend upon the Government to take care of that.


Loron, Now we are come to the conclusion of the Conference, and we and all
around us rejoice at the prospect of Union between us, and that we are like to
live in Love.


GOVERNOR, We are very glad to hear you say so, and we hope that lasting Peace
and Friendship will continue between us as it was designed by Governor
DUMMER's Treaty.


Saco Indian, We desire that Mr. Cutter may continue in the Truck House, but
not be absent so much.


GOVERNOR, I will consider of that Matter.


Loron, We have done.


GOVERNOR, I have some Presents to make you from the Government; and I desire
you will be here at the usual Signal in the Morning, when I shall present them:
And desire afterward your Tribes will dine with me, that we may snake Hands
and depart in Peace.

I have ordered another Ox to be delivered to you to Day, and the usual
Allowance for Refreshment; and I hope nothing has been wanting in all your
Entertainment.


Loron, Nothing has been or can be wanting when your Excellency is present.


Then His Excellency drank to the several Tribes King GEORGE's Health, wishing
the Peace now subsisting may continue so long as the Sun and Moon endures.

Loron, We heartily join in the same Wish.


ON the Day following, being the 7th of August, the Chiefs of the several
Tribes dined with his Excellency the Governor in the Tent; and the young Men,
the Squaws and Papooses dined in the open Field.

After Dinner, Loron stood up and in Name of his own and all the other Tribes
said as follows, viz.

WE have been here now many Days, and your Excellency has treated us, and our
People with great Kindness in all Respects; for which we return you Thanks. We
are so sensible of your Excellency's and the Governments Care of and Kindness
to us, that we cannot express what is in our Breasts. We speak from our Hearts;
and are now perfectly easy and satisfied in our Minds: We harbor no Evil in
our Breasts, but are sincere and upright in what we say; and could your
Excellency look into our Hearts, you would not be able to find any corrupt
Nature in us. We desire to live as Friends and Brothers; and that the Peace
which we have now renewed and confirmed may last always. A true Copy of the
Conference, Examined per Roland Cotton, Cler.

BOSTON: Printed by J. Draper, Printer to His Excellency the GOVERNOR and
COUNCIL, 1742.


