To the REVEREND Mr. James Davenport on his Departure from Boston, By Way of a
DREAM: With a Line to the Scoffers at Religion; who make an ill Improvement of
his naming out our worthy Ministers. To which is added, A Postcript to the Rev.
Mr. A -- d -- w C -- w -- Ik
By a Female Friend:
ASSIST celestial Powers my grieved Heart,
For Love and Sorrow bear an equal Part;
I love the Zeal that fires good DAVENPORT's Breast,
But his harsh Censures give my Soul no rest;
Our worthy Guides whom GOD has much inflamed
As unexperienced Souls, alas, he named;
Hence giddy Youth a wosul License take;
A monk at reverend heary Heads they make,
Despise the blessed Instructions of their Tongue,
Conversion is become the Drunkard's Song;
GOD's glorious Work, which sweetly did arise,
By this unguarded sad Imprudence dies;
Contention spreads her Harpy Claws around,
In every Church her hateful Stings are found
But as these Thoughts my troubled Mind oppressed,
Sleep sweet Cessation instantly refreshed,
My Tumults calm, and newborn Pleasure rise,
A charming VISION swims before my Eyes.
The sacred Man is to his Shade conveyed,
On Cammomile his aching Temples laid;
Here Roses, Honey-Suckles, Jessamine
In beauteous Arches over the Champion twine;
Here Nature does her flowery Glories spread,
Sheets of white Lillies dress the lovely Bed,
With rich Cor'nations for his Coverlid;
Here pretty Birds employ each smiling Hour
In noble Toyls to deck the charming Bower;
Arabia Trace for Spices in the Bloom,
And with enameled Branches straw the Room;
Here gilded Clouds Ambrosia Drops distill,
And all the Air with matchless Odors fill;
Here gentle Zephyrs fan the fragant Flowers,
While singing Angels guard his sleeping Hours:
Now as the shining Warriors watch his Bed,
These gentle Ch^cks they whisper in his Head;
'Favourite of Heaven! How came it in thy Mind?
'That Grace was so much to thy self confined;
'Crush the proud Thought, and kill it in the Bud;
'Too long you have in this sad Error stood;
'Let Charity unclose thy drowsy Eyes;
'You'l see a Train of faithful Pastors rise,
'Thousands of happy Souls surround their Feet,
'Which you in Realms of Glory soon shall meet;
'The timorous Christian to his great Surprise,
'Sees himself there, though he himself despised;
'So the censorious Wonders when he views
'Souls there he thought GOD surely would refuse:
'What has the Enemy provoked you too?
'Success is not confined, dear Man, to you,
'O let not Fancy turn thy Zeal aside,
'Free Grace in others must not be denied;
'No more attempt to touch the Judgment Throne,
'Soul Secrets to the LORD alone are known.
The Heralds rise and touch him with their Wings;
Now in his Breast a holy Shame there springs;
He starts with rosy Blushes in his Face,
And weeping sweetly sings to sovereign Grace;
'Praise to Free Grace, that kept my erring Breath,
'Nor sent me, swiftly to eternal Death:'
^own his Cheeks the crystal Showers flow,
He wrings his Hands in penitential Woe,
Cries, 'What have I vainglorious Mortal done,
'Strove to Eclipse the Influence of the Sun,
'Made false Report a Bandage for my Eyes,
'And boundless Grace in Numbers vast despise;
'The very End my Zeal pursued the most,
'The glorious End untemper'd Zeal has lost;
In lovely Language here his Lips impart
The blessed Contrition of his pious Heart;
His shining Guardians listen to his Tongue,
And smiling upwards bear his mournful Song:
I Will hearken too, as yet he does not cease;
'FATHER, he cries, Creator of my Peace,
'Forgive my Guilt, I Will censure so no more,
'Thy Pardon on my Knees I here implore;
'Unite the Churches I have rashly rent,
'To heal the Breaches O let some be sent;
'My Error in my Mind I ever keep,
'Unhappy Shepherd thus to scatter Sheep;
'COLMAN and SEWALL I in have expressed,
'I clasp as first rank Worthies to my Breast;
'Now all I Have wronged, or have too rashly named,
'Freely forgive, ask my self have blamed:'
In folded Arms of Love the Prophets meet,
GOD's Work goes on by Unity most sweet.
Round him again his heavean'ly Guardians fly,
With Love and Pleasure sparkling in each Eye;
In Language here too sweet to be expressed
They still the Self-Reflections of his Breast;
One holds before a burnished golden Shield,
One graves his Love and Zeal upon the Field,
One from the living Greens which ever spread,
Twists up a Laurel for his sacred Head,
One holds the fainting Hero in his Arms
With heavenly Cordials his blessed Bosom warms;
And all by turns their golden Harps employ
To banish Sorrow and increase his Joy:
No more, best Man, do thou thy self upbraid,
Atoning Blood has Reparation made;
The glorious SAVIOR shows the Crimson Flood,
An bids him welcome to his smiling GOD:
Now joyful Thoughts in blissful Torrents role,
And fill with Raptures his dear laboring Soul:
The Vision end, pleased and refreshed I wake,
And long m^ Reverend Friend the Hint should take.
But I must leave the Pleasures of my Dream,
And turn my Thoughts to a more awful Theme,
To Soul immersed in the black Gulf of Sin,
Who (...) drink the deadly Poison in;
Pleased with the fancied Freedom of their Will,
They seek their crying Conscience to still;
Nor can they bear dear Nature to deface,
Pride will not Beggar be to sovereign Grace;
Arrayed in moral Duties, gaudy show,
They for a Savior little have to do;
They wonder any such Complaints should make,
In Reformation they a Shelter take:
Dare you appear before the eternal Throne
In this vile Cob-webb Garment of your own!
Oh no! my Friends, repent, reform ye must,
And trust Free Grace, or be for ever cursed;
A Sovereign Savior, all in all must be;
His Gifts, his Grace, his glorious Mercy free;
We merit nothing by our utmost Cares,
But plead the Scars his human Nature wears;
This boundless Deep no Angel fathom can,
The perfect Sacrifice is GOD and Man;
The noblest Theme that golden Harps employ;
No wonder Mortals saint beneath the Joy:
While at the worthy Man you railing stand,
Say, should such Truths as these your Minds offend?
For this you ought him highly to esteem
These Truths were often his beloved Theme,
'My worthless Works I banish from my Breast,
'And on the blessed incarnate Mystery rest;
'Yet let a holy Life dear JESUS show
'My humble Faith and high Prosession true;
'A helpless Worm in thy kind Arms I fall,
'Be thou my Prophet, Priest, my King and all;
'Command dear Sovereign every flying Hour,
'But with thy Precepts give the doing Power:'
Now let the Scoffers at the Word of GOD,
Tremble, for Gabriel brandishes his Sword;
Your raging Hearts shall feel the burning Steel,
And GOD his Terrors in your Soul reveal;
Think not the Frailties of a Man forgiven,
Gives you a License thus to storm at Heaven;
Turn your dire Hissings into Songs of Praise,
Leave off your Railings, and amend your Ways;
Fly to the purple Streams on Calv'ry shed,
There bathe your Souls, or Vengeance strikes ye
But ah, in vain I bid you thither go, [dead:
Of this blessed Fountain yet ye nothing know;
Poor blinded Nature cannot her Danger see,
Unless the optic Scale removed be,
Much less descry the blessed Remedy.
0 glorious JESUS! the poor Sinner's Friend,
Our Sins, black Mountains, come and condescend
To show the charming Beauties of thy Face,
And stop the Rebels in their woeful Race;
n sleeping Conscience fix thy piercing Spear,
And make them bow to thee with trembling Fear.
When they have inwards turned a weeping Eye,
Oh! sovereign GOD thy cheering Grace apply;
When ever they do their Nakedness confess,
Adorn them with thy perfect Righteousness;
show the Sacrifice thou did provide,
That Justice is compleately satisfied;
let the Sinners see the cleansing Flood,
their Sins all cancelled in the Blood of GOD:
^elestial Dove! Their Bosoms now inspire,
^hen shall they praise thee on, and never tire.
^^rd pour a radian File of Angels round
(...) guard our Levites on their sacred Ground;
Life and Doctrine may they pure appear,
Fellow Mortals make them void of Fear;
(...) them a shining Stars in thy right Hand,
^hile they disp'ay thy Counsels and Commands
O! Grant the Promise thy blessed Word has given,
Let Satan fall as Lightning quick from Heaven;
His Legions fright thy Sheep with dreadful roar,
Confine them down that they may rise no more:
We long to see, sweet CHRIST, thy riseing Throne,
That Praise and Victory should be thine alone:
Lord sanctify these worthless feeble Lays,
O glorious TRINITY accept the Praise!
A POSTSCRIPT,
To the Rev. Mr A -- d -- ew C -- w-ll, On his writing against some of the
worthy Ministers of the Gospel.

GO dear loved C -- w -- l rest on D -- p -- t's Bed,
To ease the Pains that seize your laboring Head,
There let your tuneful Soul with Angels join;
There let your Sentiments and Style refine.
May heavenly Language from your Lips distill,
And Love's soft Hand guide your ingenious Quill,
Then worthy F-x -- ft you no more will blame,
Or so reflect on gentle T -- r -- l's Name,
Your Fathers and your Brethren don't despise;
Though you are arrayed with Argus shining Eyes:
An Optick-^old turn inward, you may view,
Some Imperfection that remains in you.
Excuse the Freedom real Friendship takes,
And le^ your Wisdom just Improvement make:
How can Reflections those blessed Lips employ,
That Heaven has formed to raise immortal Joy,
You have the Art to win with melting Words;
You need not use Grenades, Darts and Swords;
Let rougher Minds these hostile Weapons take;
By Love divine hard Hearts in Pieces break.
My Soul by you it is glorious Power has felt.
My Bosom warms all my Affections melt:
I should not think a thousand Winters long,
While Jesus Love sounds sweetly from your Tongue
Many such Times has Sovereign Love returned:
By many Instruments my Heart has burned;
Then blame me not if I should take the Part
Of all, whom GOD has made to reach my Heart;
I cannot bear a Mortal should reflect
Or treat our precious Guides with cold Neglect:
I beg on bended Knees, with flowing Tears,
You may not give me ground for future Fears;
GOD does their mutual pious Labors bless,
Don't Methods take to lessen their Success;
But Hand in Hand the glorious Work pursue,
There Is sweet Employ for many more than you:
Each faithful Shepard does perform his Part;
Some rouse the Conscience, others cheer the Heart;
Some from mount Sinai throw the awful Flame;
While some sweet Peace in Jesus do proclaim.
Each have their different Talents from the Lord,
And each to wandering Souls their help afford.
If I should perish, them I cannot blame;
But my deceitful Heart must take eternal Shame.
BOSTON:

Printed for CHARLES HARRISON, in Cornhil, over against the Brazen Head, 1742.


