A POEM Occasioned by the spreading in this Province the Result of a
Consociation in a Neighbor Government; being a private Christian's Dissent
from, and Testimony against, that unscriptural and dangerous Opinion which
seems to prevail under the Umbrage of that Result, viz. That the Minister of
each Town or Parish has a POWER to license or forbid the preaching of the
Gospel by any other than himself in the Parish whereof he is Minister -- And
this though (as the same Result says) he be really an unconverted Man.

BOSTON, Printed and Sold by Rogers and Foul at the Head of Queen Street near
the Townhouse 1742.

A POEM.
ENVY though one of the most hateful Evils
And bearing near Resemblance to the Devils,
Must needs confess, unless its deadly Hate
All Sense and Reason does obliterate,
That Works of Wonder have of late been wrought,
And Multitudes in the Gospel Net been caught,
Of Ministers and People too much drowsing,
'Till Joggs from Whitefield proved a happy rousing.
[II.]
DEad Souls secure and in their Graves of Sin,
Have heard the Gospel and CHRIST's Voice therein;
From Beds of Sloth, from Graves of Unbelief,
By Terrors roused, in Christ have found Relief.
And when (with Philip) they have JESUS found
Cannot but commend him unto all around:
His lovely Face, when graciously revealed*
Creates a Joy which cannot be concealed.
[III.]
WHile doleful Night of Horror passed on
Their sinking Souls, their Hope was almost gone,
And black Despair did well nigh overwhelm,
Till Faith discovered Jesus at the Helm:
Will any wonder then at strange Expressions
Of Fears and Joys produced by deep Impressions
In Matters of eternal Consequence,
Fixed on the Soul, by the Spirit's Influence?
[IV.]
Although uncommon, seeming out of Season,
Or for a Time suspending Acts of Reason,
While (with the Jailer) they a trembling fall
Or to the Ground are stricken down (with Paul)
And when revived, transported with the Rays
Of heavenly Light, their Lips are filled with Praise,
And elevated Minds take no Repose
In earthly Objects, that may interpose.
[V.]
RAther than wonder how these Things can be
I wonder at my own Stupidity,
And wish and long such mighty Power to feel
As on my Soul may deep Impressions seal,
And join with such as far as I am able
Who think this Work divine and admirable,
And honor those (although Itinerants)
Who have herein been happy Instruments.
[VI.]
DO any say this Work is mere Delusion,
And all such Preaching tends to breed Confusion,
And (without Leave) a manifest Disorder
For one to preach within another's Border?
When this is proved from Scripture I will mind it,
But at the present know not where to find it;
And rather think if any find such Clause,
It must be amongst some Antichristian Laws.
VII.
GReat William finding such a penal Act
As did Imprisonments and Fines exact
For such like Crimes; the Edict did revoke
And freed his Subjects from that Iron Yoke:
And his Successors on the British Throne
That persecuting Act do still disown:
Christ's preached Truth the Subjects now receive
Without depending on the Bishop's Leave.
[VIII.]
ORder and Peace, by GOD himself ordained,
Ought in the Scripture Sense to be maintained;
Their sovereign Author never did design
Them Instruments his Truth to undermine,
Or that one Truth should against another dash,
Or Peace and Order with the Gospel clash;
Yet persecuting Spirits make their Claims
From Age to Age, under those lovely Names.
[IX.]
DId Christ or his Apostles ever teach
That Men commissioned in his Name to preach,
Must of their Fellow Mortals Leave obtain,
Else (to avoid Disorder) must refrain?
Or where have they restrictive Bounds assigned
Of Time or Place to preach or hear his Mind?
Or can it grieve an holy faithful Pastor
If other Workmen drive his Nails yet faster.
[X.]
DID Paul rejoice when Christ was preached by those
Who envied him: and vainly did suppose
Their doing so, would rather make him sad
And to his Bonds a sore Affliction add.
And did our Savior Christ himself express
Dislike that his Disciples should suppress
The casting out of Devils in his Name
Though they pretend Disorder in the same.
[XI.]
AND shall not all true Christians who inherit
A Part and Portion in the self same Spirit
Rejoice to see Christ's Name exalted high
Though in the Dust their own may seem to lie.
Accept their Labors very thankfully
(Though Strangers) preaching Christ incessantly,
Whose Love to Christ and Souls inspires with Zeal
To wound poor Sinners, and their Wounds to heal.
[XII.]
REligion drowned in dull Formality,
And Gospel Grace in Sensuality,
Lately revived, deserves our chiefest Cares,
For still we walk, 'midst dangerous Pits and Snares,
'Twill be our Safety closely to adhere
To the holy Scriptures, and rejoice with Fear:
Satan no doubt will all his Force employ,
With utmost Craft and Assiduity.
[XIII.]
DEceitful Heart, misguided Zeal will join,
And numerous Clans of hurtful Lusts combine
This Work (if possible) to nullify,
Or cover with some dark Obscurity;
Or bloody Persecution may ensue
To try the Faith of such whose Faith is true:
Or (worse than so) GOD's SPIRIT may surcease
And Things be hid, which most concern our Peace.
[I.]
MEN need not fear, to preach or hear
The ^^^th: none may prohibit,
GOD and the King, allow the Thing
Though Classes should forbid it.
[II.]
Elders and Scribes, or Heads of Tribes
Go out of their Commissions,
As I suppose, when they impose
Their Orders or Traditions.
[III.]
Yet Churches ought, with prudent Thought
To keep a watchful Eye,
That none debase Doctrines of Grace
Or faithful Ministry.
[IV.]
They Are right to judge, whoever grudge
Though an Association
Of spirit'al Food, what to their Good
Or Hurt, does bear Relation.
[V.]
If Errors Way, lead them astray
Their Judgments to resign
To towering Men, it may be then
As in the Days of Constantine;
[VI.]
When Prelacy, was mounted high
And loaded with Promotion,
Which (as some say) did soon betray
The Truth to blind Devotion.
N. B.
It Is Lordly Power, not a due Respect
To the Ministerial Function I reject.
May 14th 1742.
FINIS.

