Mr. Edwards's SERMON AT THE ORDINATION Of the REVEREND Mr. Jonathan Judd.

The great Concern of A WATCHMAN FOR SOULS, appearing in the DUTY he has to do,
and the ACCOUNT he has to give, represented and improved, IN A SERMON Preached
at the ORDINATION Of the REVEREND Mr. Jonathan Judd, To the Pastoral Office
over the Church of CHRIST, in the New Precinct at Northampton, June 8. 1743.

By Jonathan Edwards, M. A.

Pastor of the first Church of CHRIST in Northampton.

Ezra 8. 29. Watch ye, and keep them, until ye weigh them before the Chief of
the Priests, and the Levites, and Chief of the Fathers of Israel, at Jerusalem,
in the Chambers of the House of the LORD. BOSTON, Printed by Green, Bushel,
and Allen, for N. Procter, at the Bible and Dove in Ann-Street, near the
Drawbridge, MDCCXLIII.

The Watchman's Duty and Account.
HEB. xiii. 17. -- They watch for your Souls, as they that must give Account.
AFTER the Apostle had in this Epistle particularly and largely insisted on the
great Doctrines of the Gospel relating to the Person, Priesthood, Sacrifice,
Exaltation and Intercession of Christ, and the Nature, Privileges and Benefits
of the new Dispensation of the Covenant of Grace, as answering to the Types of
the Old Testament; He improves all in the latter Part of the Epistle to enforce
christian Duties and holy Practice, as his Manner is in most of his Epistles.
And after he had recommended other Duties to the christian Hebrews, in this
Verse he gives them Counsel with Regard to their Duty toward those that were
set over them in ecclesiastical Authority: Obey them that have the Rule over
you, and submit your selves. -- By them that had the Rule over them, the
Apostle means their ecclesiastical Rulers, and particularly their Ministers or
Pastors that preached the Word of God to them; as is evident by Verse 7.
Remember them that have the Rule over you, who have spoken unto you the Word of
God: And also by the Words of the Text, that immediately follow in the same
Verse, in which the Employment of those that have the Rule over them, that they
are to obey and submit to, is represented. Concerning which may be observed,

1. What it was their Pastors were conversant about, in the Employment they
were charged with, viz. the Souls of Men. The Employments that many others were
engaged in were about the Bodies of Men; so it is with almost all the
particular Callings that Mankind do follow; they are in one Respect or other to
provide for Men's Bodies, or to further their temporal Interests; as the
Business of Husbandmen, Sailors, Merchants, Physicians, Attorneys, and civil
Officers and Rulers, and the innumerable Trades and mechanical Arts that are
practiced and pursued by the Children of Men: But the Work of the Ministry is
about the Soul, that Part of Man that is immortal, and made and designed for a
State of inconceivable Blessedness, or extreme and unutterable Torments
throughout all Eternity, and therefore infinitely precious; and is that Part of
Man in which the great Distinction lies between Man and all the other
innumerable Kinds of Creatures in this lower World, and by which he is vastly
dignified above them: It Is such Beings as these that the Work of the Ministry
is immediately conversant about.

2. How Ministers in the Business they have to attend are to be employed about
Men's Souls, they are to watch for them; which implies that they are committed
to their Care to keep, that they may be so taken Care of that they may not be
lost, but eternally saved.

3. A grand Argument to induce and oblige them to Faithfulness in this
Employment, they must give Account; i. e. they must give an Account to him that
committed those Souls to their Care, of the Souls they were betrusted with, and
of the Care they have taken of them.

Therefore that we may the better understand the Nature of that Work of a
Minister of the Gospel and Pastor of a Church, and the grand Inducement to
Faithfulness in it, spoken of in the Text, and know the better what Improvement
we ought to make of these Things, I would I. Show that Ministers of the Gospel
have the Souls of Men committed to their Care by the Lord Jesus Christ. II. I
would show to what Purpose Christ thus commits the precious Souls of Men to the
Care of Ministers. III. That the Way in which Christ expects that Ministers
should seek that these Purposes may be obtained, with Respect to the Souls
committed to them, is by watching for them. IV. I would observe, how when the
Time of their Employment is at an End, they must give an Account to him that
committed the Care of these Souls unto them.


And then make Application of the Whole.

I. Ministers of the Gospel have the precious and immortal Souls of Men
committed to their Care and Trust by the Lord Jesus Christ.

The Souls of Men are his; he is the Creator of them: God created all Things by
Jesus Christ. He created not only the material World, but also those Things
that are immaterial and invisible, as Angels and the Souls of Men. Col. 1. 16.
For by him were all Things created that are in Heaven, and that are in Earth,
visible and invisible; whether they be T^rones, or Dominions, or
Principalities, or Powers, all Things were created by him and for him.

God is the Creator of Men in both Soul and Body; but their Souls are in a
special and more immediate Manner his Workmanship, wherein less Use is made of
second Causes, Instruments or Means, or any Thing pre-existent. The Bodies of
Men, though they are indeed God's Work, yet they are formed by him in a Way of
Propagation from their natural Parents, and the Substance of which they are
constituted is Matter that was pre-existent; but the Souls of Men are by God's
immediate Creation and Infusion, being in no Part communicated from earthly
Parents, nor formed out of any Matter or Principles existing before. The
Apostle observes the Difference, and speaks of earthly Fathers as being Fathers
of our Flesh, or our Bodies only, but of God as being the Father of our
Spirits. Heb. 12. 9. Furthermore, we have had Fathers of our Flesh, which
corrected us, and we gave them Reverence: Shall we not much rather be in
Subjection to the Father of Spirits, and live? Therefore God is once and again
called the God of the Spirits of all Flesh, Numb. 16. 22. and Chap. 27. 16. And
in Eccl. 12. 7. God is represented as having immediately given or implanted the
Soul, as in that Respect differing (...) the (...), that is of pre-existent
Matter; Then (...) the Earth as it was, and the Spirit (...) God who gave it.
And it is mentioned in (...) as one of God's glorious Prerogatives, that he is
(...) forms the Spirit of Man within him. And (...) Soul of Man is by far the
greatest and most glorious Piece of divine Workmanship, of all the Creatures on
this lower Creation. And therefore it was the more meet that, however second
Causes should be improved in the Production of meaner Creatures; yet this,
which is the chief and most noble of all, and the Crown and End of all the
rest, should be reserved to be the more immediate Work of God's own Hands, and
display of his Power, and to be communicated directly from him, without the
Intervention of Instruments, or honoring second Causes so much as to improve
them in bringing to pass so noble an Effect. -- It Is observable that even in
the first Creation of Man, when his Body was formed immediately by God, not in
a Course of Nature, or in the Way of natural Propagation; yet the Soul is
represented as being in a higher, more direct and immediate Manner from God,
and so communicated that God did therein as it were communicate something of
himself: The Lord God formed Man (i. e. his Body) of the Dust of the Ground, (a
mean and vile Original) and breathed into his Nostrils the Breath of Life;
(whereby something was communicated from an infinitely higher Source, even
God's own living Spirit or divine vital Fullness) and so Man became a living
Soul.

The Souls of Men being thus in a special Manner from God, God is represented
as having a special Propriety in them, Ezekiel. 18. 4. Behold all Souls are mine:
As the Soul of the Father, so also the Soul of the Son is mine.

And as the Souls of Men are more directly from God, by the more special and
immediate Exercise of his divine Power as a Creator, and are what he challenges
as his by a special Propriety, and are the most noble Part of the lower
Creation, and are infinitely distinguished from all other Creatures here below
in that they are immortal Beings; so they are, above all other Creatures which
God has made in this World, the Subjects of God's Care and special Providence.

Divines are will not to distinguish between God's common and special Providence.
His common Providence is that which he exercises toward all his Creatures,
rational and irrational, animate and inanimate, in preserving them, and
disposing of them by his mighty Power, and according to his sovereign Pleasure.
His special Providence is that which he exercises toward his intelligent
rational Creatures, as moral Agents; of which Sort are Mankind alone, of all
the innumerable Kinds of Creatures in this lower World: And in a special Manner
the Souls of Men; for in them only is immediately seated Reason and
Intelligence, and a Capacity of moral Agency; and therefore they in a peculiar
Manner are the Subjects of God's special Providence that he exercises in this
lower World. And it is be to observed that God's common Providence is
subordinated to his special Providence; and all Things in this World are
governed and disposed of in Subordination to the great Ends God has to obtain
with Respect to the Souls of Men. And it is further to be observed that as the
Creation of the World was committed to the Son of God by, the Father, so is the
Government of it; and in a peculiar Manner the Affairs of God's special
Providence, are left in his Hands; and so the Souls of Men, that are the
peculiar Subjects of this special Providence are committed to his Care; and
more especially such Souls as are of Christ's visible Kingdom or Church, which
is often in Scripture represented as the Field and Vineyard that he is the
Owner of and has taken the Care of. -- And what Christ's Value is for Men's
Souls appears by what he has done and suffered for them.

But these Souls that Christ has made, and that are committed into his Hands of
the Father, and that are so precious in his Account, he commits to the Care of
Ministers. There is a certain Order of Men that are so dignified and honored
by him, as to have so great a Trust reposed in them. He as it were brings those
Souls as an infinitely precious Treasure, and commits 'em to them to take Care
of; as a Prince commits his Treasure, his Jewels, and most precious Things into
the Hands of one of the dignified Servants of his Household; or as the Father of
a Family, when he goes a Journey into a far Country, leaves his Family to the
Care of a Steward.

I come now in the

IId Place, to enquire to what Purpose Christ commits (...) Souls of Men to the
Care of Ministers.

I answer in two Things,

1. He commits Men's Souls to Ministers to keep and take Care of them for him,
that by their Means they may answer their End in glorifying him. God has made
all Things for himself, he has created them for his Glory; but more especially
those Creatures that he has endued with Understanding, as he has done the Souls
of Men: It is by them that God has his Glory from all his Creatures, as they
are the Eye of the Creation to behold the Glory of God manifested in the other
Creatures, and the Mouth of the Creation to praise him and ascribe to him the
Glory that is displayed in them. The other Creatures glorify God passively and
eventually, as God glorifies himself in them, as they are the Subjects of the
Exercise of his Power and Wisdom in their Creation and Preservation, and in
those Events that are brought to pass in his Disposal of them. Thus God
glorifies himself in his Works that are manifest in the irrational and
inanimate Creation, in the View of his rational Creatures that he has made
capable of beholding and admiring them, and adoring, loving and praising him
for them: But they only are capable of glorifying him actively and immediately;
therefore all the other Creatures do as it were bring their Tribute of Glory to
them, through their Hands, to be offered to their Creator. And therefore the
Souls of Men are Beings that, with Regard to the Glory of God the great End of
all Things, are of immensely greater Importance than all other Creatures in
this lower World. But these, with Respect to this their great End, are
committed to the Care and Keeping of Ministers. And therefore Christ has
furnished them with proper Means to bring them to this End: He has given 'em
all needful Instructions; they have a perfect Rule and Directory to guide them
in this great Affair; and has enjoined them the Duties they are to perform in
their Office in every particular, and the Manner in which they are to perform
these Duties, in the Charge which he has left them; and has furnished them with
all needful Helps for the Instruction of those Souls that are committed to
them, to lead 'em to answer their great End, in duly glorifying their Creator,
and all proper Means for the exciting and engaging them to attend to, and
follow those Instructions, as also Means for their Help and Assistance in it,
that they may do it the more easily and effectually.

2. They are committed to their Care and Keeping that they may not be eternally
lost, but may have everlasting Life. These Souls, as I observed before, are
immortal and made for Eternity; and they are set in this World between two
opposite eternal States, the one a State of exceeding and eternal Glory and
Blessedness, the other a State of unutterable and unalterable Misery: And as
they are by Nature they are liable to either; by their original Guilt and
Corruption they are exposed to perish forever, in total and perfect Destruction
and Misery: But Christ, from his Knowledge of the infinite Worth of Souls, and
his great Compassion and Love to 'em, has, by his own precious Blood, made Way
for their Escape, and at this infinite Expense, has procured unspeakable
Exaltation and perfect Blessedness for them in Heaven to all Eternity; which by
this Means they have Opportunity to obtain. But yet it remains uncertain what
will become of them, 'till Christ's Redemption be applied to them, or they are
actually cast into Hell: There is an Opportunity given, a Time of Probation,
'till the great and unalterable Event shall determine one Way or the other. In
the mean Time there is a Space for the Use of Means, and the Exercise of Care,
Prudence and Diligence for our own Souls and the Souls of others; that they may
not fail of the Grace of God, but may escape that infinitely dreadful
Destruction that they are naturally in Danger of, and may indeed obtain that
infinite Privilege of eternal Life, that is offered through the Purchase of
Jesus Christ. And now in this grand Affair, and to this great Purpose of an
Escape from eternal Misery, and the obtaining everlasting Glory, Christ has
committed the precious Souls of Men to the Care of Ministers; that by their
Means they may have the Benefit of his Redemption, and might obtain that which
he has suffered so much to procure. Christ knew that notwithstanding all that
he had done to procure Life for Souls, they would need much Care to be taken of
them, and many Means to be used with them, in order to their being indeed
preserved from eternally perishing, and actually brought to the Possession of
Life: And therefore he has appointed a certain Order of Men, whose whole
Business it might be to take Care of immortal Souls; and into their Hands has
committed these Souls, and has betrusted them with the Ordinances of his House,
and Means that he has provided for their Salvation; that nothing might be
wanting that they need for their Furniture for this great Business; he has as
it were committed to them his Goods, and has given them in some Respects the
Keys of his Stores and Treasury; to them are committed the Oracles of God and
Treasure of the Gospel. 2 Cor. 4. 7. We have this Treasure in earthen Vessels.
And Chap. 5. 18, 19. And all Things are of God, who has reconciled us to
himself by Jesus Christ; and has given to us the Ministry of Reconciliation,
to wit, that God was in Christ reconciling the World unto himself, not imputing
their Trespasses unto them, and has committed to us the Word of Reconciliation.

And as the Word of God, so the Sacraments that he has appointed, and the
Discipline of his House, he has committed to them, to be administered by them;
and has subjected the Souls themselves that they have the Care of to them, as
far as is necessary to put them under the greatest Advantage effectually to
care for their Salvation, and has left a Charge to their People to obey them
and submit themselves, as in the Verse of my Text.

I now proceed

III. To observe, that the Way in which he who has committed Souls to
Ministers, expects they should seek that these Purposes may be obtained with
Respect to them, is by watching for them,

Though great Things have been done by Christ to make Way for the Salvation of
those precious Souls, and although Christ has furnished Ministers with all proper
Means to keep them; yet they are in such Circumstances in this World, that
there is Need of the Exercise of great Watchfulness, and the utmost Care and
Diligence, in those that have the Care of them, to prevent their being lost:
for they are in the Midst of Snares, and encompassed round with Dangers on
every Side; they are in the Enemies Country, where there are Multitudes every
where that are strong and subtle and exceeding Blood-thirsty and cruel, that
are indefatigably, Day and Night, seeking the Destruction of these Souls.

If a Prince should commit some great Treasure, consisting of most precious
Jewels, to the Care of a Subject, to keep for him, and carry through an Enemy's
Country, and bring home safe to his Palace, and knew that the Enemies by the
Way would be sensible that the Treasure was committed to him, and would be
aware of the great Value of it, and therefore would be exceeding greedy of it,
and incessant in their Endeavors to get it from him; would not the Prince
expect that he, with whom he had entrusted this Treasure, should use great Care
in keeping it? Would he be esteemed faithful to his Trust, in the* Care of so
great a Treasure, and in such Circumstances, without keeping up a continual
Watch?

They that have the Care of a City in Time of War, and especially at a Time
when the City is encompassed by Enemies that lay Siege to it, are wont, if
faithful, to maintain incessant Vigilance to defend it: The Watchmen of the
City in such a Case had need to watch strictly, for they have the Care of the
Lives of Men. -- Ministers are from Time to Time represented in Scripture as
the Watchmen that have the Care of the City of God; as Cant. 3. 3. and 5. 7.
Isai. 52. 8. and 62. 6. and in other Places. These Watchmen han't only the Care
of the Lives of Men's Bodies, but of their Souls, which are infinitely more
precious. It Is expected of them that they should behave themselves as those
that both kept and built the City of Jerusalem, in Nehemiah's Time, while they
were continually observed by malicious and subtle Enemies, that diligently
sought by all Means to circumvent them, and to destroy the City and People; who
with one Hand wrought in the Work, and with the other Hand held a Weapon;
holding Spears from the rising of the Morning 'till the Stars appeared; and had
a Trumpet always at Hand to sound, to give Warning of any appearing Danger, and
did not put off their Clothes, nor lay up their Weapons, Day nor Night, Neh. 4.
from the 16 Verse to the End.

Ministers are appointed to be Shepherds over Christ's Flock; and he commits
his Flock to their Care to keep 'em and lead 'em through a great and howling
Wilderness, full of hungry Wolves and roaring Lions: And is there not need of a
strict and constant Watch in the Shepherds in such a Case, as they would
preserve the Lives of the Sheep, and lead 'em to the Land of their Rest?

I come now to the

IVth and last Thing in the doctrinal Handling of the Text, viz. That Ministers
hereafter must give Account to him that committed Men's precious Souls to their
Care.

Christ's committing Souls to Minister's Care and Charge, and betrusting them
with them as Servants or Stewards, necessarily supposes them to be accountable
to their Master with Respect to the Charge committed to them.

He that has a Treasure committed to him by the Owner, and takes the Care and
Charge of it, not as his own Possession, but only to improve or keep for an
appointed Time, for him to whom the proper Possession belongs, must return that
Treasure to the Owner when his Time is out, and is accountable to him how he
has fulfilled that which he undertook; and if any precious Jewel be missing, he
must give an Account of it. -- So must Ministers give an Account of the Souls
committed to their Care.

The Office and Work of Ministers is not to last always; their Care of Souls is
but for a limited Season; and when that is expired, they must return to their
Master to give an Account.

After what Manner they must be called to an Account, may be shown in these two
Things,

1. The Event of Things with Regard to the Souls committed to them will be
enquired into. As there are so many precious Souls committed to their Care by
Christ, so hereafter it will be enquired what is become of those Souls. As if a
Person has a Number of precious Jewels committed to him to keep; when the Time
of his Betrustment is out, and he comes to return the entrusted Treasure, the
State of it will be examined, that it may be seen whether any Jewel be lacking
or not; and if any be missing, an Account must be given what is become of it.
The Charge of a Minister is in Scripture represented by that of a Steward, to
whom the Householder, when going into a far Country, commits his Goods, and when
he returns, expects that the Steward should give an Account of his Stewardship.
In such a Case the Householder looks into the State of his Goods that he left
behind under the Steward's Care. The Master in the Parable, Matthew. 25. 14, etc.
when he returns from his Journey, has his Goods, that he committed to the Care
of his Servants, brought forth and laid before him.

2. It will be enquired how far the Event that shall be found, with Regard to
Souls committed to them, was owning to their Faithfulness or Unfaithfulness in
that Care and Watch that was appointed them. If any precious Soul be found
lacking, it will be enquired how this comes to pass; they must give an Account
what they have done with this and that Soul that is missing, whether they were
lost through their Neglect or no: they must give an Account what Care they have
taken, and what Diligence they have used, and whether or no they can wash their
Hands from Guilt with Respect to them: it shall be examined by an Eye that is
as a Flame of Fire, whether the Blood of the Souls that are lost is not indeed
to be found in their Skirts. -- We find in the Parable of the great Supper,
that the Servants that are sent out to invite Guests, return from Time to Time
to their Master to give him an Account both of the Event in their Success with
Respect to some that they were sent to, and Unsuccessfulness with Regard to
others; and also of their own Doings and Faithfulness, whereby they are clear
of the Guilt of their Unsuccessfulness, and are commended to the gracious
Reward of their Success. Luke 14. 20, 21. I now come to the

APPLICATION,
In which I shall only address my self to those who are principally concerned
in the great and solemn Affair of this Day, viz. to him who (...) now solemnly
to be set apart to the Work of the Ministry in this Place, and to those whose
Souls are to be committed to his Care.

I. I would apply my self to you, dear Sir, to whose Care the great Redeemer
and Head of the Church is this Day committing a Number of precious Souls in
this Place. I beseech you now to suffer the Word of Exhortation on this solemn
Occasion: Suffer me to put you in Mind how great the Person is, with whom you
are immediately and chiefly concerned in the Affair of this Day; even the great
Shepherd of the Sheep, and glorious Lord of Heaven and Earth, who is to be your
and our Judge. You present your self this Day before him to receive at his
Hands a sacred Depositum, a great Treasure, a Number of Souls that are to exist
throughout all Eternity, each one of which is infinitely more precious than all
the precious Gems that the Earth affords. And I beseech you to consider to how
great a Purpose he is about to commit them to your Care and Keeping; it is that
they, by Means of your faithful Care and Watchfulness, may be saved with an
everlasting Salvation. You may judge how much Christ will insist upon it that
you should exercise great Diligence and Strictness in the Care you take of
them, by the Value he himself has manifested of the Souls of Men, by what he
has done and suffered for them: he has shown how precious he has judged
immortal Souls to be, in that he, though a Person of infinite Glory, did not
think his own Blood, his Life, his Soul, too precious to be offered up as a
Price for them to redeem them, that they might obtain that Salvation in order
to which he now is about to commit a Number of them to your Care, and to
betrust you with the Means that he has provided for that End; committing to you
his holy Oracles, and the Food of his House, which is his own Body and Blood,
that therewith you might feed these Souls; and in some Sense committing to you
the Keys of his Stores and Treasures, that you might supply and enrich them,
and be a Means of their eternal Wealth and Glory.

Consider, dear Sir, how great an Honor he does you whom God the Father has
made Head of the whole Universe, and Lord of all Things to the Church; that
after he has provided for the Salvation of Souls by his dying Pains and
precious Blood, and the Father has committed to him all Power in Heaven and
Earth, that he might actually bestow eternal Life on them that he died for; he
should call you to be a Co-worker with him, and should commit precious Souls to
your Care, that you might be the Instrument of bringing them home to him, and
bringing that to pass with Respect to them, for which his Soul travailed in the
Agonies of Death, and in ineffable Conflicts with the dreadful Wrath of God.
You are now about to receive the precious Treasure at his Hands, which you are
to keep for him: you present your self here before the Lord for this End, that
you may as it were reach forth your Hand and take this great Depositum, with
solemn Vow diligently and faithfully to keep it, and devote your self to that
Service; so that if it be possible for you to prevent it, no one of those
infinitely precious Jewels may be lost, but that you may return them all safe
to him from whose Hands you receive them.

Consider the Example of your glorious Lord and Master: There was a Number of
the Souls of Men committed by the Father into his Hands, that he might take
Care for their Salvation: And after what Manner did he execute his Office? How
did he lay out himself for the Salvation of those Souls? What great Things did
he do? And what great Things did he suffer? How hard was the Labor he went
through? And how greatly did he deny himself? How did this great Shepherd of the
Sheep behave himself when he saw the Wolf coming to destroy the Sheep? He did
not flee to save his own Life, and so leave the Sheep to become a Prey; but
from Pity and Love to the Sheep, interposed himself between them and their
Enemy, stood between them and Harm, and encountered the Wolf, and in the
Conflict gave his own Life to save their's, John 10. 11, -- 15. -- We read of
Christ's travailing for Souls, Isai. 53. 10, 11. It pleased the Lord to bruise
him, he has put him to Grief. When thou shall make his Soul an Offering for
Sin, he shall see his Seed. -- He shall see of the Travail of his Soul, and
shall be satisfied. And how did he Travail for this Seed of his? Look into the
Garden of Gethsemane, and there behold him lying on the Earth, with his Body
covered over with clotted Blood, falling down in Lumps to the Ground, with his
Soul exceeding sorrowful even unto Death, and offering up strong Crying and
Tears together with his Blood: and look to the Cross, where he endured yet far
more extreme Agonies, and drank up the bitter Cup of God's Wrath, and shed the
Remainder of his Blood, lingeringly drained out through his tortured Hands and
Feet, and extravasated out of his broken Heart into his Bowels, and there
turned into Blood and Water, through the vehement Fermentation occasioned by the
Weight of Grief and Extremity of Agony of Soul, under which he cried out with
that loud and lamentable and repeated Cry. Thus he travailed in Birth with his
Seed; thus he labored and suffered for the Salvation of those Souls that the
Father had committed to him. This is the Example of the great Shepherd. And
though it is not required of Under-Shepherds that they should endure Sufferings
of such a Degree or Nature; for Christ has suffered them to that End, that both
Ministers and People might escape them; yet surely he expects that, as they
would approve themselves as his Disciples and Followers and Co-workers with him
in seeking the Salvation of the same Souls, they should not be backward to go
through any Labors or Sufferings which may be requisite in them, in order to
their most effectually promoting the great End of his Sufferings, with Regard
to the Souls that he has committed to them.

And as you, dear Sir, are to stand in Christ's Stead toward this People, and
to act as his Ambassador; should you not show the like Spirit, the like Love to
Souls, and imitate him in his Readiness to labor and deny your self and
suffer, yea to spend and be spent for them? Like the blessed Apostle, 2 Cor.
12. 15.

The Case with you, Sir, is as if the Head of a Family, that was a great
Prince, with a Number of Children in a strange Land, when going home to receive
a Kingdom, should leave his Children behind him, and commit them to the Care of
a Servant, safely to conduct them through a dangerous Wilderness, and bring 'em
home to him; in which Case, he has their Health and Lives committed to his
Care, as well as their future Glory in his Kingdom. With what Care and
Watchfulness would it be expected of a Servant that he should execute his
Office in such a Case! And surely if he fails of being thoroughly careful and
watchful, after he has taken upon him so great a Charge, and any sad Disaster
should be the Consequence of his Unfaithfulness; it will most justly be
required of him that he should answer it, and he will inexcusably fall under
his Master's heaviest Displeasure.

And suffer me, Sir, to put you in Mind of the Account you must give to your
Master of these Souls he seems this Day to be about to commit to you: You are
to watch for these Souls as one that must give Account. If any one of these
Souls should be missing hereafter, having been lost under your Ministry, it
will be demanded of you another Day, by your great Lord, What is become of such
a Soul? Here are not all the Souls that I committed to you to bring home to me;
there is such an one missing; What is become of it? Has it perished through your
Neglect! If you are able to say at that Time, Lord, it was not through my
Neglect; I have done what in me lay for his Salvation; I ceased not to warn and
counsel and reprove him, and faithfully set before him his Danger, and have not
forborne to declare thy whole Counsel to him; I have not neglected this and
other Souls that thou did commit to me, to gratify my Sloth, or pursue my
worldly Interest; I have given my self wholly to this Work, laboring therein
Night and Day; I have been ready, Lord, as thou know, to sacrifice my own
Ease, and Profit, and Pleasure, and temporal Convenience, and the Good Will of
my Neighbors, for the Sake of the Good of the Souls I had the Charge of; I
have not led this Soul into any Snare by my ill Example; I have neglected no
Means of thine Appointment, either public or private, to turn him from Sin to
God; I sought out acceptable Words, and studied for the most likely Means to be
used for his saving Good; but he would not hearken, but turned a deaf Ear;
under all was stupid and obstinate, and went on carelessly and frowardly in the
Imagination of his Heart: If you are able to say in like Manner a Christ did to
the Father, with Respect to the Souls that were committed to him; those that
thou gave me I have kept, and none of them is lost, but the Son of Perdition;
you will be able to hold up your Head with Comfort before your Judge, your
Account will be accepted, you shall be acquitted, and your unsuccessful
Faithfulness shall be rewarded. But if when it shall be demanded of you, What
is become of such and such Souls? You shall be dumb, having nothing to say,
your Conscience flying in your Face, and it shall appear that it has been much
owing to your Unfaithfulness; O how amazing will your Case (...) What Confusion
and Astonishment will fill your Soul before your great Master and Judge! And
remember that the Blood of such Souls will be required at your Hand, Ezekiel. 33.
6.

And suffer me, dear Brother, to tell you, that you must another Day meet these
Souls that you are now going to take the Charge of, before the Judgment Seat of
Christ; and if by Means of your Faithfulness toward them, in your Work, you
shall meet them at the right Hand of Christ in Glory, how joyful a Meeting will
it be to you! They will be indeed your Crown of Rejoicing in that Day. But if
you behold 'em with Devils at the left Hand, in Horror and Despair, your
Conscience accusing you of Unfaithfulness toward them, and it appears that
they are lost through your Neglect, how amazing will the Sight of 'em be to you!

Your Master and mine is this Day calling me to resign the Pastoral Care of a
Number of Souls into your Hands, that have hitherto been committed to my Care:
It Is with Cheerfulness that I can now resign 'em to the Care of one, concerning
whom I can have so much Hope that he will be faithful in his Care of them. May
the Lord of the Harvest enable you to discharge your Duty toward them more
faithfully than I have done, and make you a far greater Blessing to them; and
may you come with them at the Day of Judgment before Christ with exceeding Joy,
and in Robes of Glory, and say then as Christ himself will say to the Father,
when he shall come with all the Souls that were given him of the Father, and
present them before him in perfect Glory, Here am I, and the Children which
thou have given me.

II. I would apply my self to those whose Souls are now about to be committed
to the Care of that Servant of Christ that is now to be ordained to the
pastoral Office in this Place.

Beloved Brethren, and dear Children, It Is your immortal Souls that is the
precious Treasure that the great Creator and Savior of Souls seems now to be
about to commit to the Care of him whom you have chosen to be your Pastor. And
indeed it is a great Charge, an high Betrustment; and he ought to use his
utmost Care and Diligence that you may not be eternally lost: But if your
Pastor should exercise such Care that you may be saved, surely you ought to
take Care for the Salvation of your own Souls: It nearly concerns him that you
should be saved; but much more nearly does it concern you. Let your Minister be
never so careful and watchful, if you take no Care for your selves, his
Faithfulness and Diligence will signify nothing, unless it be to harden you,
and aggravate your Damnation: In such a Case, the more Care and Pains he takes
for your Salvation, the greater will your eternal Misery be: for all will be
only a Savor of Death unto Death: Those People are like to sink the deepest
into Hell hereafter, that go to Hell from under the Care of the most faithful
Ministers, that have taken the most Pains to save 'em from going to Hell. The
Preciousness of your Souls has now been made use of as an Argument with your
chosen Pastor to take Care for your Salvation; but much more may it be used as
an Argument with you to seek your own Salvation; for therein lies the
Preciousness of your Souls, in their being of infinite Worth to your selves,
appearing in the infinite Loss you will sustain if they are lost, and your
infinite Gain if they are saved; herein lies that Preciousness of the Soul that
Christ speaks of, Matthew. 16. 26. For what is a Man pr^^^^d, if he shall gain
the whole World, and loose his own Soul? Or what shall a Man give in Exchange
for his Soul?

It Is not only your Minister that is concerned in the Work that he is to
perform among you, but you also are infinitely concerned in it: And it is not
only he, but you also that are infinitely concerned in the Account that he has
to give of the Discharge of his Office among you. You must all of you hereafter
meet your Minister before the Judgment Seat of Christ; and if then it shall be
found that he has been faithful, and that you have made an ill Improvement of
his Ministry, and so failed of the Grace of God, the Sight of the Devil will not
be so terrible to you at that Day as the Sight of your Minister; for he will rise
up in Judgment against you, and your Pastor that above all other Persons in the
World, excepting your selves, is concerned to endeavor your Salvation, will
then above all other Persons appear against you before the Judge to witness
against you and condemn you. But how joyful will it be to you, as well as to
him, if he renders his Account with Joy, for these Reasons, that he has been
both faithful and successful with Respect to you, and appears with you in Glory
at the right Hand of Christ, and has to say to the great Judge concerning
himself and you, Here am I, and the Children which thou have given me! What a
joyful Meeting of Minister and People will there be! And how will you be each
others Crown of Rejoicing! But if your Souls perish, you will be present when
it shall be required by Jesus Christ of your Minister to give an Account of
such and such Souls that are lost, which were committed to his Care; and how
dreadful will it be to you, if you shall then hear him boldly and truly say
before the Judge, Lord, thou know that I have sincerely and faithfully
endeavored their Salvation, I have not been slack or negligent toward them, I
have earnestly watched for their Souls, and diligently and unweariedly used all
the Means with them that thou did appoint; they perished not through my
Neglect, but through their own obstinate Negligence and Wickedness! In such a
Case your Minister will be acquitted and justified, but you will be condemned
with a most aggravated Condemnation, and your Blood will be upon your own Head.
Ezekiel. 33. 2, 3, 4. Son of Man, speak to the Children of thy People, and say
unto them, when I bring the Sword upon a Land, if the People of the Land take a
Man of their Coasts and set him for their Watchman, if when he see the Sword
come upon the Land, (...) Trumpet and warn the People; then whosoever hears
the Sound of the Trumpet, and takes not Warning, if the Sword come and take
him away, his Blood shall be upon his own Head. The good Account your Minister
has to give of his own Faithfulness, will incense the Displeasure of the Judge
toward you. Luke 14. 17. So the Servant came and showed his Lord these Things:
Then the Master of the House being angry, said to his Servant, Go out quickly,
etc.

And if you would have the Account your Minister shall have to give concerning
you to be profitable and joyful to you, don't neglect your Duty toward him;
endeavor by all Means in your Power to put him under the best Advantage for
Serviceableness and Success among you: Do what in you lies to encourage his
Heart and strengthen his Hands. This I know to be a Thing of vast Importance,
as you would have your Pastor a Blessing to you, and the successful Instrument
of the Salvation of your Souls and the Souls of your Children: Therefore suffer
me to be a little particular with you upon this Head: I may be the more bold
toward you as you hitherto have been of the Flock that Christ has committed to
my Care, and I hope some of you my spiritual Children; therefore as my beloved
Children I counsel and warn you.

If you would meet your Minister with Comfort another Day, don't neglect doing
what belongs to you comfortably to support him, so as to enable him to attend
on his great Work without Distraction, and to give himself wholly to the
Business of seeking and promoting the eternal Welfare and Happiness of you and
your Children; without being disheartened by the Difficulties and Indigencies of
straitened Circumstances, or being diverted by exercising Care, and taken off
by involving himself in worldly Business for his necessary Support. While we
are in the Body our heavenly Father knows that we have need of these Things,
and the Way that he has provided for Ministers supply, is by their partaking
of the temporal good Things of the People to whom they minister spiritual
Things. 1 Cor. 9. 4, etc. Have we not Power to eat and to drink? Have we not
Power to lead about a Sister a Wife? -- Have we not Power to forbear working?
Who goes a Warfare any Time at his own Charges? Who planteth a Vineyard, and
eats not of the Fruit thereof? Or who feeds a Flock, and eats not of the
Milk of the Flock? Say I these Things as a Man? Or says not the Law the same
also? For it is written in the Law of Moses, Thou shall not muzzle the Mouth of
the Ox that treads out the Corn. Does God take Care for Oxen? Or says he it
altogether for our Sakes? For our Sakes, no doubt, this is written; that he
that ploweth should plow in Hope, and that he that thresheth in Hope, should be
partaker of his Hope. If we have s^wn unto you spiritual Things, is it a great
Thing if we shall reap your carnal Things? -- Do ye not know that they (...)
minister about holy Things, live of the Things of the Temple, and they that
wait at the Altar, are Partakers with the Altar? Even so has the Lord
ordained, that they which preach the Gospel should live of the Gospel. 1 Timothy
5. 17, 18. Let the Elders that rule well be counted worthy of double Honor;
especially they who labor in Word and Doctrine: For the Scripture says, Thou
shall not muzzle the Ox that treads out the Corn. And the Labourer is worthy
of his Reward. 2 Timothy 2. 6. The Husbandman that labors must be first
partaker of the Fruits. Gal. 6. 6. Let him that is taught in the Word
communicate to him that teaches in all good Things. Christ would not have
Ministers Time and Thoughts taken up about providing temporal good Things for
their own Support, but would have them wholly provided for by their People.
Matthew: 10. 9, 10. Provide neither Gold, nor Silver, nor Brass in your Purses,
nor Scrip for your Journey, neither two Coats a piece, neither Shoes, nor yet
Staves; for the Workman is worthy of his Meat. Agreeable to these Directions he
gave the twelve Apostles, are the Directions he gave the Seventy, when he sent
them out. Luke 10. 7. In the same House remain, eating and drinking such Things
as they give; for the Labourer is worthy of his Hire.

You see what great Care Christ has taken in this Matter, and how full and
abundant the Scripture is in Commands and Directions concerning the Support of
Ministers.

I know you are small, and in your new Beginnings in this Place, and not so
able as many other Congregations: But if we may give Credit to the Word of God,
for you (...) and comfortably to support your Pastor, is not the Way to be
poorer. Prove. 3. 9, 10. Honor the Lord with thy Substance, and with the first
Fruits of all thine Increase; so shall thy Barns be filled with Plenty, and thy
Presses shall burst out with new Wine. To give to the Lord is not the Way to be
poor, but the Way to be supplied by the Lord. Christ now is not personally, and
in his human Nature, here upon Earth, to be supported by temporal good Things
from his Disciples, as once he was: But though he be now gone from hence into a
far Country, yet he has not left his Disciples without Opportunity, in this Way
of showing their Love to him; for there are two Sorts of Persons that he has
appointed to be his Receivers, viz. his indigent Members, and his Ministers: As
of old God appointed the Poor and the Levite to receive the Tithes and other
Offerings that were made to the Lord, Deuteronomy. 16. 11, 14. and Chap. 14. 28, 29.
and 26. 10, 11, 12. What is given to Ministers is a Sacrifice to God; so the
Apostle represents what was sent to him for his Supply from the Philippians,
Phil. 4. 18. Having received of Epaphroditus the Things which were sent from
you, an Odor of a sweet Smell, a Sacrifice acceptable, well-pleasing to God.
And Christ when he sent forth his Disciples to preach, and had directed that
they should take no Provision for themselves, because the Labourer is worthy of
his Reward, he says Matthew. 10. 40. He that receives you receives me, and he
that receives me receives him that sent me

And since what is given to your Pastor is given to Christ, you may be assured
that you cannot consult your own temporal, as well as spiritual Interest better,
than by liberally supplying of him; for he that lends to the Lord shall be
repaid again with large Interest. And as to your Ability, if there be but a
cheerful, ready Mind, the greatest Difficulty is got over; if you find this,
there is no doubt but that God will make the Duty of supporting your Minister
in other Respects easy to you: God loves a willing Offering, and a cheerful
Giver; if you will do your Part in opening your Hearts and Hands, God will do
his Part in finding you where-withal. But if a People grudge what they do, are
always full of Fears how they shall pay their Rates, and excessively cautious
least they should run themselves into Difficulty, and straiten themselves and
Families by giving to Christ, no wonder it proves difficult; it is the Way to
meet with nothing else but Difficulties in their outward Circumstances; for
there is that scatters, and yet increases; but to withold more than is meet,
tends only to Poverty, Prove. 11. 24.

The Jews in the Days of the Prophet Haggai were few in Number, and were under
difficult and straitn'd Circumstances; and they made it an Excuse why they
should not be at the Expense that was requisite in order to build the House of
God, and set up his Worship; and so for a Time neglected it: And in the mean
Time none of their Affairs prospered: they sowed much, and ^^ought in little;
they ^at, but (...) not enough: They drank, but were not filled with drink:
They clothed them, but there was none warm; and he that earneth Wages, earneth
Wages to put it into a Bag with Holes: They looked for much, and lo it came to
little: and the Heaven was stayed from Dew, and the Earth was stayed from her
Fruit, Hag. Chap. 1. So in the Days of the Prophet Malachi it was a Time of
Scarcity, and the People thought themselves thereby excused from paying Tithes
for the Support of the Levites, and so robbed God of his due; but got nothing
by it, but God cursed them with a Curse; they made that Scarcity and Want the
Excuse for their Backwardness to Support God's Ministers, which was its
Punishment; and God tells them by the Prophet that if they would cheerfully do
their Duty in that Respect it would be a sure Way to have their Wants
plentifully supplied. Mal. 3. 1, 9, 10. Ye are cursed with a Curse, for ye have
robbed me, (...) this whole Nation. Bring ye all the Tithes into the
Storehouse, that there may be Meat in mine House; and prove me now herewith,
says the Lord of Hosts, if I will not open you the Windows of Heaven, and pour
you out a Blessing, that there shall not be Room enough to receive it. What can
God say more to encourage a People cheerfully to run the venture of expending
what is necessary for the comfortable and honorable Support of the Ministry?

And here let me wa^^ you in particular, that you don't only do pretty well by
your Minister for a while at first, while the Relation between you and him is a
new Thing, and then afterward, when your Minister's Necessities are increased,
begin to fail, as it too frequently happens.

Some may be ready to say, It Is no wonder Ministers should be forward to urge
such a Duty as this, wherein their own temporal Interest is so much concerned,
a coveteous Disposition will make 'em love to harp upon this String. -- I have
not been much in insisting on this Duty in my own Pulpit, where it would
especially concern my temporal Interest; and blessed be God that I have had no
more Occasion. -- But whatever any may judge of the Secrets of my Heart, with
Regard to the Principles that I have been influenced by, in what I have now
said; it is enough for you to whom I have spoke it, that I have demonstrated
that what I have delivered is the Mind of God; and also (if there be any Truth
in his Word) that what I have recommended is not only for the temporal Interest
of your Minister, but also for your own both temporal and spiritual Interest.

Another Article of Advice that I would give you, is, to beware that you don't
weaken your Minister's Hands, and wound your selves by Contention. You are but
a small People, and you will be a very foolish People indeed if you are divided
against yourselves. Contention among a People hinders all Manner of Comfort and
Prosperity either of Soul or Body; it makes 'em a Torment to themselves and one
another; it puts 'em every Way under Disadvantages, and weakens the whole Body
like a Consumption.

There are two Sorts of Contention I would warn you against,

1. Avoid Contention among your selves about your own temporal Affairs: This
will exceedingly tend to render a Minister's Labors ineffectual; and it is
what greatly damps the Spirit and discourages the Heart of a Minister, to see
his People divided into Parties, and envying one another, and entertaining
mutual Prejudices, Jealousies and Grudges, and so backbiting and reproaching
one another, and carrying on secret Plots and Designs one against another.

2. Avoid quarrelling with your Minister in Matters of Church Discipline: This
is a common Thing, but a most unchristian Thing, and tends greatly to weaken
the Hands of a Minister in the whole of his Work, and render all to no Purpose.
The Exercise of the Discipline of God's House is the most difficult Part of
that great Work that a Minister has to do; and it becomes a christian People to
their utmost to strengthen their Minister's Hands in this difficult Business,
and say as the People said to Ezra the Priest, with Respect to the Affair of
purging the Church of Israel from the Scandal of those that had married strange
Wives, Ezra 10. 4. Arise, for this Matter belongs to thee; we also will be
with thee: Be of good Courage and do it.

To conclude, If you would have your Minister successful among you, and a
Blessing to you, and if you would be a happy People, then love one another and
love your Minister. There are some Professors, in some of our Towns, that are
anti-ministerial Men; they seem to have a Disposition to dislike Men of that
Order; they are apt to be prejudiced against them, and to be suspicious of
them, and talk against them; and it seems to be as it were natural to 'em to be
unfriendly and unkind toward their own Ministers, and to make Difficulty for
them: But I don't believe there is a true Christian on Earth that is of this
Character; on the contrary the Feet of them that bring good Tidings, and
publish the Gospel of Salvation are beautiful in the Eyes of all the true
Children of Zion; and every one that receives Christ, and whose Heart is
governed by a supreme Love to him, has a Disposition to receive, love and
honor his Messengers. It was the distinguishing Mark by which God manifested
the Person he had chosen to be the Wife of Isaac, that Type of Christ, that it
was the Damsel that should give kind and friendly Entertainment to Abraham's
Servant or Steward that was sent to espouse her and bring her home to Isaac;
and therein was a Type of the Gospel Ministry, Genesis 24. 14, etc. See to it that
you thus entertain the Steward of the House of God that comes on this blessed
Errand to you.

If you and your Minister thus live in Peace, it will be the Way for you to be
a happy Society, to flourish and prosper with all Manner of Prosperity, to have
Christ dwelling among you; and for Things to be brought to so blessed an Event
at last, as that he that is the great Shepherd of the Sheep, that purchased the
Souls of Men with his Blood, and your Pastor that has the Care of your Souls
committed to him, and your selves and Children, all should rejoice together in
another World, agreeable to John 4. 36. And he that reapeth receives Wages,
and gathers Fruit (...); that both he that seweth and he that reapeth may
rejoice together.

FINIS.
THE CHARGE Given by the Rev. Mr. Hopkins of Springfield.
Rev. and dear Sir,
GOD who orders the Bounds of every Man's Habitation, and assigns him hi^
Business in it; fixes you in this Place, to be a Pastor to this Flock of Christ.

This People have, with one Voice, chosen you to the Work of the Ministry among
them; you have accepted their Call, and devoted yourself to the Service of
Christ in the Work of the Gospel Ministry in this Place: We also are called to
set you apart, to that sacred Service and Office, by Prayer and the Imposition
of Hands.

We therefore now ordain you a Minister of the Church of Christ, and of this
Flock in particular: And in the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ, in the Presence
of God, Angels and Men, we beseech, we exhort, yea we solemnly charge you, to
take Heed to the Ministry, which you now receive of the Lord Jesus, that you
fulfill it Col. (...)
.

Here we must descend to some Particulars, and give you in Charge the following
Things,

I. Take heed that you be a faithful Follower of Christ your self, in the
careful Practice of that holy Religion, in which you are to instruct others.

Surely one who preaches the Gospel, is under the strongest Obligations to live
according to the excellent Rules prescribed in the Gospel. He is under the most
powerful and sacred Engagements to be a Christian, whose Business it is to
persuade others to be so. One who leads on the Flock of Christ in the Ways of
Religion, must go before them, in the Practice of it.

Devote your self therefore wholly to God, in a Life of practical Piety: Flee
youthful Lusts 2 Timothy 2. 22.
seek first the Kingdom of God. -- Mind the one Thing needful. Believe in the
Lord Jesus Christ. Add to your Faith Virtue, to Virtue Knowledge, to Knowledge
Temperance, to Temperance Patience, to Patience Godliness, to Godliness
Brotherly-Kindness, to Brotherly-Kindness Charity: 2 Pet. 1. 5, 6, 7.
Even that Charity, which suffers long, and is kind, envieth not, vaunteth
not it self, is not puffed up, does not behave it self unseemly, seeks not
her own, is not easily provoked, thinks no Evil, rejoiceth not in Iniquity,
but rejoiceth in the Truth, bears (or rather endures) all Things, believes
all Things, hops all Things, endures all Things, 1 Cor. 13. 4, -- 7.
If you would be wise to win Souls, abound in the Wisdom that is from above,
which is pure, peaceable, gentle, easy to be entreated, full of Mercy and good
Fruits, without Partiality and without Hypocrisy. James 3. 17.
Follow God as a dear Child.

Hereby you will, not only be an Example to the Flock, but on other Accounts
also, more likely to answer the great Ends of your Ministry.

For,

If you have the Knowledge of God yourself, you will be the more desirous that
others should know him; and the better prepared to lead them into an
Acquaintance with him. If you have tasted the Pleasures of Communion with God,
you will be the more desirous that others should partake of those Streams of
Delight, and urge them with the greater Importunity to seek after them. If you
have had Experience of the Consolations of God in your own Soul, you will be
the better able to Comfort others with the same Comforts by which you your self
have been comforted of God. If you have Skill in the spiritual Warfare your
self, you will be under the better Advantage to direct others, how to use the
Armor of Righteousness, etc. Fail not therefore, dear Sir, of following God in
a Life of strict Religion.

II. Take Heed that you fulfill that Part of the Ministry which consists in your
private Studies.

Close Application to Study will be needful in the Course of your Ministry, to
furnish you with those Degrees of Knowledge, that may render you an able
Minister of the New Testament. Give your self therefore to Reading, to
Meditation, that your profiting may appear unto all. 1 Timothy 4, 13, 15.
And though other Studies may be useful to you, and employ Part of your Time, yet
Divinity is to be the principal Subject of your Meditations. Study the holy
Scriptures which are profitable for Doctrine, for Reproof, for Correction, for
Instruction in Righteousness; that the Man of God (the Minister of Christ) may
be perfect, thro'ly furnished unto all good Works. 2 Timothy 3. 16, 17.


Labor to gain such an Acquaintance with the Scriptures, that you may be able
to explain them: To apply them to the Hearts and Consciences of your Hearers:
To convince the Gainsayer by them; and to put to Silence those who oppose
themselves. Endeavor more and more to deserve that excellent Character given
to Apollos -- Mighty in the Scriptures -- Acts 18. 24.


Look well to the Composures you prepare for the public Service of the House
of God. Let your Sermons be well studied; offer not that to your People, in the
Name of God, which is crude and undigested; nor presume to depend upon
immediate Assistance, in the Neglect of previous Preparations.

III. Take Heed that you fulfill that Part of your Ministry, which consists in
private treating of Souls, in the great Affair of their eternal Salvation.

We hope many will come to you with that important Enquiry, Sir, What shall I
do to be saved?

In all such Cases you are to be easy of access. You must be open and free,
pitiful and compassionate, tender and gentle, to those who make their
Application to you; adapting your Counsels and Directions to their various
Cases. Not healing those slightly who are wounded in Spirit, least they be
ruined by a false Foundation: Not making the Hearts of those sad whom God would
not have made sad, least they be discouraged and faint in their Minds; but
strengthen the weak Hands and confirm the feeble Knees: Like a skillful
Physician suit your Directions, to the various Circumstances of particular
Souls.

IV. Take Heed to fulfill that Part of your Ministry which consists in public
Administrations.

Watch against Coldness, Dullness and Formality in your public Prayers: let a
decent Fervor of Soul attend them all, that it may appear to the Congregation
that you are fired with a true Devotion, and their Hearts may keep Time with
yours in the humble Addresses you make to God. -- With that holy Fear, with
that Reverence and Devotion, which becomes Dust and Ashes, when before the most
High, make your Application to him: Using at the same Time, that humble
Boldness, Confidence, and Importunity, which he condescends to encourage in his
Word.

Preach the Word, ^e instant in Season, and out of Season, reprove, rebuke,
exhort, with all Long-suffering and Doctrine. -- Do the Work of an Evangelist,
make full Proof of thy Ministry. 2 Timothy 4. 2, 5.
Study to show thy self approved unto God, a Workman that needs not to be
ashamed, rightly dividing the Word of Truth. 2 Timothy 2. 15.


Preach the Terrors of the Law to those who are secure in Sin: show them the
Relation they bear to the divine Law; that they are under the Curse;
endeavoring thereby to pluck them as Brands from the Burning.

Apply your self in the most clear and instructive Manner you can, to those who
desire to be informed in the Way of Life. Teach them what they must do to be
saved.

Apply the gracious Encouragements of the Gospel, to those who labor under
spiritual Burdens. Strengthen the weak Hands confirm the feeble Knees, say to
them who are of a fearful Heart, Be strong, fear not. Isai. 35. 3, 4.


Labor to rectify the Mistakes of those who are out of the Way, by plentifully
declaring the Truth as it is in Jesus. Foolish and unlearned Questions avoid,
knowing that they do gender Strifes. And the Servant of the Lord must not
s^rive; -- be gentle unto all Men, -- in Meekness instruct those that oppose
themselves; if God peradventure will give them Repentance to the acknowledging
of the Truth. 2 Timothy 2. 23, 24, 25.


Let not Believers want their Portion, even that which is good to the Use (...)
edifying; That which may conduce to their spiritual Nourishment and Growth in
Grace.

Thus, Sir, divide the Word of Truth: Be that faithful and wise Steward, who
gives to every one his Portion of Meat in due Season. Blessed is that Servant
whom his Lord when he comes shall find so doing. Luke 12. 43.


Administer the Sacraments of the New Testament to those who are proper
Subjects of them. Urge your People, that they do not in a careless Manner
neglect those sacred Institutions of God our Savior: And use your best
Endeavors to prepare them for the Reception, and your self for the
Administration of them.

V. Finally, Take Heed that you fulfill that Part of your Ministry, which
consists in Rule (...) Government.

The holy Ghost makes you an Overseer to this Flock, a Ruler in the House of
God. You are therefore not only to labor in Word and Doctrine, but also to
rule well, that you may be accounted worthy of double Honor.

Use those Censures that Christ has appointed for them who will not be subject
to his Laws. Them who Sin rebuke before all, that others also may fear. 1 Timothy
5. 20.
A Man that is an Heretic, after the first and second Admonition reject* Tit.
3. 10
as unworthy your christian Communion* (...) from every Brother that walks
(...) 2 These. 3. 6.
and ^^ntinues impenitent in his Crimes. Those who are humble and penitent,
restore to your Charity and Communion, in the Spirit of Meekness. Exercise that
Authority and Government in this Church, which shall most tend to its
Stability, Peace and Purity.

In these and in all other Parts of your ministerial Work, endeavor to approve
your Heart to God. And let the Glory of his Name, the Interest of his Kingdom,
and the Good of precious Souls, be powerful Perswasives to excite you to all
possible Diligence and Faithfulness, in the Trust reposed in you: But
especially that strict Account that you must one Day give to God the Judge of
all.

Remember that if Souls perish through your Neglect, their Blood will be required
at your Hands. Ezekiel. 3. 18.
But if you prove faithful to God and to the Souls committed to your Charge, if
you feed the Flock of God, -- taking the Oversight thereof, not by Constraint
but Willingly* not for filthy Lucre, but of a ready Mind; not (...) it over
God's Heritage, but being an Example to the Flock; when the chief Shepherd
shall appear, you shall (...) a Crown of Glory, that fades not away. 1 Pet. 5.
2, 3, 4.


If you be wise to win Souls, you shall shine as the Brightness of the
Firmament; if you turn many to Righteousness, as a Star forever and ever. Dan.
12. 3.
If you prove faithful to Death, Christ will give you a Crown of Life. Rev. 2.
10.
And what more moving Considerations can we possibly set before you.

And as it is to be your faithful and constant Endeavor, so it shall now be
our humble Request, to the God of the Spirits of all Flesh; that you may be an
able, diligent, faithful and successful Minister of the New Testament. That you
may fulfill the Ministry you have received of the Lord Jesus; that when he shall
appear, you may give up your Account with Joy, and receive, through Grace, the
Reward of a faithful Servant; an unfading Crown of eternal Glory.

AMEN.

