A persuasive to Repentance. A SERMON PREACHED at PHILADELPHIA, Anno 1739. At
the usual Evening-Lecture before the Synod.

By SAMUEL BLAIR, Minister of the Gospel of Christ.

Acts 20.21. Testifying both to the Jews and also to the Greeks, Repentance
toward God, and Faith toward our Lord JESUS CHRIST.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed by W. BRADFORD, at the Sign of the Bible in Second
Street.

A Premonition to the Reader.
ALTHOUGH the saving Change of a Sinners Hearts, is the superna^ural Work of
God alone; yet he brings it about in a way agreeable to their natural
Practices, and Endowments as reasonable Beings; and uses rational proper means
with them for that End. Hence are all the Instructions, Motives, Arguments, and
Expostulations, which are in the Scriptures; which are not only for the
Spiritual Progress of the renewed and sanctified; but also for the Conversion
of the ungodly, and Sinners; as may be abundantly seen throughout both
Testaments. God in his Word, deals with Man, even in his Apostace unregenerate
Condition, as an intelligent Creature, by all the Topics of Argument and
Rational Persuasion. Accordingly those whom Christ employs as his Ambassadors,
in the Gospel Ministry, are to labor not only for the Spiritual Good and
Comfort of the Regenerate Children of God; but also with the unrenew'd and
unholy, for their saving Conversion, by all those rational Means wherewith God
has furnished them in his Word. And it is as plainly both the Duty and Interest
of Sinners (though they cannot savin^ly Change themselves yet) to take up
themselves, and as much as possible conform themselves to God's declared Will;
and, in that Way, to seek incessantly for renewing Grace, and a saving vital
Union with Jesus Christ. This is but to act as becomes rational Creatures in
their Circumstances: It Is the Command of God, and the only Way of reasonable
Hope.

Agreeably to these Things, I have in the following Discourse addressed the
Reason, and considering Faculty of the Irreligious, in behalf of Religion, and
their Souls eternal Interest: And showed from many Considerations, the
unparellel'd Unreasonableness and Brutishness, of Irreligion and Impenitence;
which might be sufficient to confound with Shame and deep Concern, especially
such as highly Value themselves upon that truly valuable Endowment of the Human
Nature, their Understanding and Reason, and yet live irreligious and ungodly
Lives. As I hinted already I know Mankind are so far depraved and corrupted,
that nothing but the Almighty to change and reclaim them: But yet suitable and
adapted means are to be used for that End, both by the Preacher, and the Sinner
himself. And it is by, and in the use of these that God ordinarily Works this
Effect.

I think such a Sermon as this is especially seasonable at this Time, when the
^^ravians, lately come to these Parts of the World, Teach, that Ministers are
not to use such Methods with the ungodly; and, that ungodly Sinners themselves,
are not to use any endeavors this Way, in seeking to God for their Conversion
and Salvation: From the specious Arguments, that Salvation is not of Works, and
that Christ needs not our help to convert us: As may be clearly seen in Count
Zinzendorff's printed Discourses. This is to make Man like a brute or a block,
rather than a Reasonable Creature; and fairly to lay the Reins on licencious
Sinners Necks, and allow them to run where they Please. It is very true
Salvation is not of Works, either by a Merit of Congruity or Condignity (as the
Romanists Term and Distinguish it) so that Sinners ought not to set about
reforming, with a View to appease God, or to excite his Love and Favor toward
them, by any imagined excellency in their Works of Obedience, as I have
carefully directed in the Close of the Sermon: And yet it is as true, that the
utmost Efforts of unregenerate Sinners to observe the Divine Law, and seek the
Mercy of God, and their Souls Salvation, is their indispensible Duty, their
reasonable Service, and God's express Command; or else a great Part of the
Bible is wrong, wherein they are enjoined to Strive to enter in at the strait
Gate, Luke 13.24. And, all Men every where is commanded to repent, because God
has appointed a Day in which he will judge the World in Righteousness. Acts
17.30, 31. with numberless other Places. If God requires the ungodly to turn
from their irreligious Courses, to seek and endeavor to serve him; the they
ought to do so: And that under the highest Pains, of his terrible and dread
Displeasure. If God does not require it of them, then it is not their Sin not
to do so; and consequently they are no Sinners, but doing Right enough; for
where no Law is, there is no Transgression: And then consequently again, they
have no Hell nor Damnation to fear; for where there is no Transgression, there
is no Punishment, in a just Government. Thus you may see where this Doctrine
leads. May the Lord preserve People from such a dangerous and fearful Snare,
which tends to del^de them to their Destruction, and also, preserve them from
resting upon means, and putting their own Righteousness in the place of
Christ's Righteousness; which is as fatal upon the other Hand.

Me^iae ^utissimus ibis.

Resting upon means is inconsistent with, and a Bar in the way of believing in
Christ; but the use of means, as means, is not; but is the express Command of
God, and the Sinners Duty. It is ridiculous arguing here, that Christ needs not
Sinners help to convert them: For, who ever ima^in'd that they were to use
means, with a View to help Christ to Convert them. But this is not a proper
Place to pursue this Argument in its full Latitude. What I have already said
may be sufficient here.

I know not of any thing in the following Discourse, that I am any way obliged
to Account for, except it be the high Description I have given of the
Repentance which may be attained to, by unregenerate Men. I would have it
observed, that I expressly include the ordinary Concurrence of the Holy Spirit:
And how far the Spirit of God may concur, by way of common Operation, with the
Endeavor of natural Men, I think we cannot Determine. I am satisfied that when
the Holy Spirit lays hold of Sinners with a Design of their saving Conversion,
he frequently brings them to such a Degree of Repentance, even before the
saving Change is wrought in their Hearts. I shall detain the Reader no longer
from the Perusal of the Sermon: And may the Lord help you to peruse it to
profit.

New-^^ndonderrry, April 1. 1743
JEREMIAH 8.6. I hearkened and heard, but they spoke not aright: No Man
repented him of his wickedness, saying, what have I done? Every one turned to
his Course, as the Horse rusheth into the Battle.


THESE Words are a part of a Prophecy or divine Message which begins with the
foregoing Chapter, wherein the Lord by his Prophet calls us Sinful, Rebellious
and Apostate People, to Repentance and Amendment, to turn from their sinful
Courses and abominable Transgressions, to the obedience of his Laws, as may be
seen in the 3d, 5th, and 6th, Verses of that Chapter. This the Lord presses
upon them from two great Arguments, viz. The Benest they should enjoy upon
their true Reformation, and the terrible Judgment they should sustain upon
their obstinate refusal and impeniten^y Upon their thorough Reformation the
Lord promises them a peaceable and prosperous Possession of their pleasant
Land, v. 7. But upon their proceeding on still in their wicked Ways, he
threatens them with the most dreadful Desolation, Death, and Captivity,
generally throughout the Chapter.

This Argument the Lord father Prosecutes in the beginning of this Chapter,
showing the extent of that misery and contempt which he was about to bring upon
them, and which in a little Time he did bring upon them by Nebuchadnezar's
Army: And then in the 4th and 5th Verses he aggravates the folly and madness of
their obstinacy and bold Resolu^ions in persisting in their wickedness, by
observing to them that it was folly unexampled, of which there are no parallel
Instances to be found in any other cases. Thus says the Lord, shall they fail
and not arise? shall he turn away and not return? As if he had said, can any
Persons so sof^ish and unwise be found, as will not rise up again, after they
are fallen down upon the Ground? Can any such demented Person be found, who
will not return to his right Road, after he has wandered out of it and gone
wrong? surely no; common Prudence will teach Men better in such Cases. Why
then, says he, is this People of Jerusalem sliden back by a perpetual
backsliding; O! unexampled madness! Though they have gone woefully out of the
way, and are a wandering in their own ways, to their eternal Destruction, and
have been over and over told of it from me, in the most moving and awful Terms;
yet they presumptuously go on and turn not; their backsliding is perpetual,
they hold fast deceit and refuse to return. And this their continuance in a
course of Sin and Disobedience, against all the warnings he had given them, and
Pains which he had bestowed upon them, the Lord more fully and pathetically
expresses in the Words of our Text, I hearkened and heard but they speak not
^^g^t: No Man, etc. In the Words you may Notice these few particulars. 1st, It
is intimated that the Means which God had used with that People, were such as
that a Reformation among them, might reasonably have been expected by them.
This is implied in these Words, I hearkened and heard, in these Words are
presupposed the means which God had previously used to them especially by the
frequent Messages of his Word, in the Mouth of his Prophets: And so they
signify how reasonably a thorough Reformation among them, might have been
expected thereupon. I hearkened and heard, says the Lord i. e. as if he had
said, having used such proper methods with them for their Repentance, which
were sufficient to have influenced them thereto, then I hearkened and listened to
hear if there were any discourse like Repentance among them, any talk that
might give Hopes of their Amendment and Conversion, whether any were bewailing
their past Impieties, and Transgression, saying, with Shame and Sorrow, alas
what have I done!

The great God represents himself in a familiar condescending way, after the
manner of Man, as expecting and hoping that the means which he had used with
them, might possibly have had some good effect upon them, in their Reformation;
and so be hearkened to hear what they were a saying about it. He carefully
looked and observed, whether there were any signs and appearances of their
Repentance, after his Pains with them for that Purpose.

Yet these and all other such like Expressions, must be understood in a Way
agreeable ^o the divine Perfections, so as not to infer those Weaknesses and
Imperfections in God, which are in Creatures, and therefore not to be
understood in the most strict and ^^^eral Sense of the Words. God's design in
these Wor^s, is only to signify, how reasonably a Reformation, and strong
Endeavors after a true repentance, and the favor God might have bee^n
^xpected of that People, in Consequence of such means as he had afforded them
for that end; and consequently that their persisting after all in their old
Courses, was a Guilt of a most aggravated nature; and so here is one point of
Doctrinal Truth which arises from the Text, viz. That a Reformation in Sinners
from their wicked ways and earnest Inde^vours in seeking after the (...) of
God, might very reasonably be expected by means of the Messages of his Word
sent to them for that and by the Mouth of his Servants and (...) Ambassadors.

Again, 2dly. We are told of the unsuccesfulness of all these Means, with that
obstina^e People: They had not that Influence and effect upon them, which it
was very just to expect from rational Creatures, I hearkened and heard, but they
sp^ke not (...): No man repented him of his wickedness, saying, what have I
done? But every one turned to his own C^^^se, notwithstanding the I peated
Councils, movin* Invi^ations, awful Threats and Warnings sent to them under
God's own tremendious Authority which ought to have excited them to Repentance,
and filled them with the Language of humble Penitents, confessing with Shame
and Confusion their bypast Follies and Impieties, expressing sincerely their
Sorrow and self Abhorence for them, saying, What have I done? Yet alas, there
was no such discourse to be heard among them, they spoke not aright; they spoke
no^ to this purpose; I hearkened and heard, says the Lord, but they spe^^e not
aright: No Man repented (...) of his wickedness, saying, what have I done? here
you may observe what kind of Repentance it is which God requires of Sinners,
under the hearing of his Word, faithfully delivered to them: A Repentance
attended with an ashamed confession of their Sins and Iniquities; that they
acknowledge what they have done, and that with deep regret of Soul, with
confounding Shame and Indignation against themselves; as the Interroga^ory form
of the Expression required of the true penitent, imports, What have I done? The
penitent Sinner is represented as looking back upon his former way, freely
confessing what they have been, and reflecting upon himself for them, with the
sadest Grief and Sorrow; as a Person, who, through some Mismanagement, some bold
or tho'tless Action has brought Disgrace and Misery upon himself, will, in his
distress, sadly recoil upon himself, saying, Who is me, what have I done? what
have I done? by what I have done, I have undone myself. Now, because there was
no such thing to be heard or discerned among the People of Jerusalem, it was
evident, that no Man repented him of his Wickedness. And so here is another
point of Doctrine to be observed in the Text, viz, That the Repentance which
God requires of Sinners, upon his dealing with them by the solemn Messages of
his Word, must be attended with Confession, deep Shame and Sorrow.

3d. The Text declares how wilfully and brutishly resolute these People were in
their wicked Courses. This is set our by the Similitude of a Horse, fariously
running without thought or fear into the Battle: Every one turned to his Curse,
as the Horse rusheth into the Battle. Perhaps they might give God a bodily
hearing for an Hour or two sometimes, while his Servants declared to them his
Messages, but that was all; as soon as that was over, then away every one
immediately to his Course again without restraint, as the Horse to the Battle;
as it is now lamentably among us.

This Comparison implies in it these two things, 1st. The brutish
Unreasonableness, bold Presumption, and Fool-Hardiness of Sinners, who go on in
their sinful Courses against all the awful warnings of Heaven, and all the
restraints of Reason and Conscience. Hence they are compared to a Headstrong
ungoverned Horse in his Fury, that will be under no Control, but rushes madly
on in the Face of ten ^^ousand T^r^ors. 2dly, It implies the terrible
Dangerousness of the Sinners Course. He is a going wilfully on to his own Ruin
and Destruction, as the Horse rushes into the Battle, into the midst of Dangers
and of Deaths. And so this Branch of the Text affords us these two Propositions
of Truth more, 1st, That it is brutish, irrational, and wilful for Sinners to
go on still in their sinful Courses, against all the Instructions and solemn
Warnings of God's Word. And 2d. That Sinners going on in these Courses, are
rushing upon the most terrible Dangers and Miseries: Every one turned to his
Course, as the Horse rusheth into the Battle.

And now I shall gather together the several Propositions of Truth, which I
have taken Notice of from this Text, in the Explication of it, for our farther
Consideration: And they are these four, 1st. That a Reformation in Sinners from
their wicked Ways, and earnest Endeavors in seeking after the Favor of God,
might very reasonably be expected, by means of the Messages of his Word sent to
them for that End, by the Mouth of his Servants and Ambassadors. 2dly, That the
Repentance which God requires of Sinners, upon his dealing with them by the
solemn Messages of his Word, must be attended with Confession, deep Shame and
Sorrow. 3dly, That it is brutish, irrational, and wilful for Sinners to go on
still in their sinful Courses, against all the Instructions and solemn Warnings
of God's Word. And 4thly, That Sinners going on in these Courses, are rushing
upon the most terrible Dangers and Miseries.


These are Truths clearly enough contained in this Verse. I hearkened and heard,
etc.

I shall speak something to each of these propositions in their order. And

1st, I say a Reformation in Sinners, etc. I shall a little illustrate the
Truth of this Doctrine, show what we are to learn from it, and the use to be
made of it in Practice, very briefly, and then pass to the next Proposition.

The Truth of this Proposition will clearly appear by considering and comparing
one or two things. 1st. That Sinners are rational Creatures, and so ought to be
influenced and wrought upon in matters of Practice, if they would not forfeit
all claim to that Character, by rational Means, by powerful convincing
Arguments and Considerations. If there is no dealing with mankind, and
persuading them in this Method of rational Argument, they act no more like
rational Beings than the brute Beasts: To direct us in our Choice and Practice,
is certainly the very greatest use and benefit of our understanding and Reason;
and therefore it might be justly expected from rational Creatures, in this Case
as well as all others, that they should be swayed by Reasons, which they are
capable to understand, according to the We^ght and Importance of 'em;
otherwise, if they will not be Governed and acted from rational Considerations,
but from sensual appeti^e, lust and blind wilfuness, they put off the Man and
put on the Beast: Yea, much worse, they rather put on the Devil, acting against
the light of Reason and Conscience, which Beasts do not, and so are the nearest
resemblance to the diabolical Nature; indeed a rational Creature, acting cross
to the very confessed Laws of Reason, and that in matters of infinite and
eternal Moment, is the most unaccountable kind of being within the Compass of
the whole universe. It could hardly be believed that there could possibly be
such an irregular self-repugnant, obli^^e kind of thing in the whole System of
being, did not sad Experience so undeniably confirm it: such a being would seem
a sort of natural impossibility, and the very Mention of (...), a direct
Sol^cism.

And then 2dly, Consider, That the Messages of God's Word to Sinners for their
Reformation and Repentance, are the most solemn, weighty, and powerful of any
Thing that can possibly be proposed to the Reason of Mankind.

He would be justly looked upon as a most demented and brutish Man, who would
not be persuaded in other Cases by ten thousand Times less weighty Reasons than
those which are proposed and urged in the word of God for Sinners Repentance.
The great God lays before Sinners in his Word the Reasonableness, Equity, and
Excellency of Holiness; the just necessary Title and Sovereign claim which he
has to their Obedience, both as he is a God of inconceivable Glory and infinite
Perfections, worthy to be served honored and adored by all rational beings
beside; and as they are his Creatures, created by him for that End, to glorify
and serve him and enjoy the highest blessedness in him; and as he is their
constant Preserver, the upholder of their Lives and giver of all their
Benefits; upon all which Accounts they owe themselves entirely to him as his
own Property, and the Subjects of his moral Government, by a most necessary and
inalienable Right. He ^ells them of the unspeakable Happiness and Comfort which
would attend the hearty affectionate Choice and Practice of their Duty, and
that eternal Glory with himself, which he will give to them who truly Repent
and Love him. He tells them likewise what an immence, what an astonishing
amazing Price was laid down to redeem lost Sinners from eternal R^^^, without
which none could possibly have been saved consistent with the exalted Dignity
and Glory of his Majesty; how low the eternal Son of God condescended; how deep
he was humbled; how cruelly he suffered, even Death i^ self in its most hidious
Form: Yea, worse than ten Thousand Deaths; and all to purchase Salvation from
the deepest Miseries to the highest Blessedness for guilty Rebels* O! What a
surprising melting Argument is here to excite Sinners to Repentance, to turn to
the living God, with all their Hearts. O Sinners, will you, dare you trample
under Foot the Blood of the Son of God! Disregard and under-value the dearest
Love of the Father, Son and blessed Spirit! And go on in these Wickednessess,
which cost a life that was worth ten Thousand Worlds to redeem you from them
Farther, the great God sets before them in his Word, the awful and dismal Scene
of those eternal Pains, Miseries, and Horrors, which they shall infallibly
endure for ever without Regeneration and Conversion. He tells you, O ye
rebellious Sinners, that if ye do not Reform and Repent, seek his Mercy with
humbled pained Hearts, and turn to his Ways, the Damnation of Hell, will
infallibly be your Portion to all Eternity: That you are every Day in Danger of
being cast into never never ending Anguish, Pain and Horror for your continued
Rebellion. Now, are not here Reasons for Sinners Repentance, turning from the
Ways of Sin, and most earnest seeking the Favor and Mercy of God, of the
greatest Weight Imaginable? And are not Sinners rational Creatures, to
understand, consider and apply these Things: How reasonably, then might their
compliance with them be expected. If the Consideration of these solemn Things
will not work upon them, nothing else will. Luke 16.31. If they hear not (...)
and the Prophets, i. e. the Holy Scriptures, the Word of God written by Moses
and the Prophets, neither will they be persuaded though one ^^se from the ^ead.
Surely if Sinners did but act ingenuously and rationally here, as they do for
the most Part in other Cases, they would immediately abandon their Lusts and
wicked Ways, and betake themselves to the Ways of Religion with the the most
earnest Application, and most importunately and perseveringly cry for the Mercy
and Pity of the great God, against whom they have rebel'd, seeking an Interest
in his saving Love through Christ. O Sinners, these would be the Effects of God's
Word with you, if you did but act any Way agreeable to your noble Characters of
reasonable Creatures.

Agreeable to what I have offered upon this Head, is that Passage which we have
in the beginning of the 5th Chapter of Isaiah, the Lord there represents the
Pains which he had taken with the People of Israel, and the Means he vouchsafed
them under the Notion of the Provision which a careful industrious Husband Man,
makes for the Fruitfulness of his Vineyard, and then signifies that it was but
reasonable to expect good Fruit in Consequence of such Means, when he says, he
looked that it should bring forth Gr^^es: But (O wonder^^^ (...) it brought
f^^th ^^thing but wild Grapes after all; no other sort of Grapes than if it had
been a wild Vine in the Forest, that never had been taken any care of. And then
the Lord expressing the great Pains he had bestowed upon this Vineyard, saying,
What should have been done more to my ^^^eyard, that I have not done in it, i.
e. as to outward proper Means. He proposes the Question as is were with a kind
of Wonder, Wherefore when (...) that (...) (...) to the Grapes, (...) it (...)
wild Grapes? Wherefore brought it forth wild Grap^^, after (...) Means used
with it? What a strange thing is this? Yes, strange i^ is indeed; other Things
might well be looked for

Thus I think the Truth of this Doctrine is sufficiently evidenced: And now, to
make some Improvement of it, 1st. If it be reasonable to look for the
Reformation of Sinners, and their earnest Application to God for his pardoning
Mercy, as the Effects of God's Word faithfully delivered to them: How in
expressible H^inous then is the Sin, and how awfully aggravated is the Guilt of
such bold and daring Sinners, who after all go on in their old Practices? who
Repent not of their wickedness, but turn still to their own Course again, as
the Horse ^^s^eth into the Battle? And yet a^^s, is not this the Deplorable
case of Multitudes who are favored with the Word of God! O Sirs, are not the
Reasons and Arguments of God's Word sufficient to persuade you every one to
turn from his Iniquities, and to seek after God and your own eternal Salvation
in earnest? Sure there is Reason enough in them to do so. 2dly. This Doctrine
informs us of the excellency of the Word of God: It contains Things of the
almost Moment and Consequence imaginable: It Treats of Things which are of
infinite Importance to the Souls of Men; no less than Things which concern
their everlasting States, either of unspeakable Happiness, or inexpressible
Misery; such Things as have Reason and Weight enough in them to reclaim
rebellious Sinners (...) their wicked Courses, and (...) the deepest concern to
seek (...) If they lear not (...) and the Prop^ets, (...) and they (...) 3dly.
Ungodly and irreligious Persons, as well as others, should hence be excited to
esteem and reverence the Word of God. It is the Means which the great God uses
with you for your Conversion and Salvation, Ps. 19.7. The Law of the Lord is
perfect, converting the Soul: The Testimony of the Lord is sure, making wise
the Simple. Your cursed Lusts, the wicked Inc^inations and Dispositions of your
unsanctified Hearts are like to be your eternal Ruin, and unless the Power of
these Things is overcome, they will inevitably plunge you in a doleful Deluge
of everlasting Misery and Woe; now, the Word of God faithfully preached to you
contains such weighty and solemn Things, the due Consideration and Application
whereof might well be effectual to break and overballance the Prevalency of
these Soul-destroying Evils in you, and awake you to seek after God and your
Salvation in good earnest: And, O Sirs, if Things were once brought to this
pass with your then there would be some Hopes of your true Conversion to the
Living God, and the Salvation of your Souls; And, O! how carefully ought you to
improve that which has so great a Tendency to bring about your eternal
Happiness, and Deliverance from endless and deserved Torments. Believe it Sirs,
the Word of God is not like an insignificant useless Story which you may either
hear or let alone to little Loss or profit: Is not my Word like as a ^i^e?
says the Lord, And like a Hammer which breaks the Rock in pieces? Jer. 23.29.


2dly. But I must proceed to consider the 2d. Proposition, which is, that the
Repentance which God requires of Sinners, upon his dealing with them by the
solemn Messages of his Word, must be attended with Confession, Shame, and
Sorrow.

Here I shall a little farther open up and explain the Repentance intended in
this Proposition, and my Design is not particularly to open up the nature of
the saving Grace of Repentance, which is only in regenerate and sanctified
Persons, and necessarily requires the supernatural Principles of Sanctifying
Grace implanted in the Soul by the Holy Ghost, as the Foundation and Spring of
it; but the Repentance which I design to speak to, and which I think is the
Repentance intended in the Text, is that which Sinners through the Means and
Advantages of God's Word faithfully delivered to them, may generally, by the
ordinary Concurrence of God's Spirit perform, if they act so rationally and
faithfully as they may and ought to do; which Repentance God requires them to
perform as the Way of their seeking, and most hopeful Means for obtaining his
pardoning Mercy and sanctifying Grace through Christ Jesus. It is, in short that
Repentance which the Lord looks that Sinners should generally perform, such as
are not judicially hardened at least* to whom he has sent the Messages of his
Word for that End, when he says, Hearkened and heard to find whether any Man
repented (...) of his Wickedness, saying what have I done.

And in this Repentance two Things are to be considered: The Thing if self
substantially and its Qualifications or necessary Adjuncts. And 1st. This
Repentance strictly and substantially consider^d in it self is a turning from,
and opposing of Sin, and an Application to the Duties of Religion, universally
both in Heart and Life. A Sinner never practices any Thing like Repentance till
he comes to this; to forsake entirely his sinful Courses, withstand all Snares
and Temptations to them, and wrestle against the inward Corruptions of his
Heart; to betake himself to the prescribed Ways of Religion, and most solemnly
and earnestly to seek the Mercy and Favor of an offended and provoked God.
Penitent Ephraim says, What have I to do any move with Idols, Hes. 14.8.
repenting Israel and Judah do and seek the Lord their God, going and weeping
saying, Come and let us join our selves to the Lord in a perpetual Covenant
that shall not be forgotten Jer. 50.4, 5. How dreadfully are they deceived then
who think that a few Checks of Conscience for their Sin after the Commission of
it, and some slighty Confessions of it before God is true Repentance, when yet
they still go on in the same Practices? Who think that their gallings of
Conscience now and then, and their superficial Acknowledgments will secure them
from all Danger, and make up for their continuing Wickednesses and neglect of
the Ways of Godliness? How dreadfully I say, are such poor Creatures deceived
in their Imaginations? Especially seeing Persons may repent, even so far as I
have described, without being in a saving State, and fitly qualified for
eternal Glory.

2dly. As to the Qualifications of this Repentance, they are Confession, Shame
and Sorrow. 1. Confession; to repent with Confession of their Sin is what the
Lord requires of Sinners who enjoy the Light of his Holy Word. This was his
Complaint against the obstinate Jews in our Text, No Man repented him of his
Wickedness, saying, what have I done? No Man among them repented acknowledging
the horrible Sinfulness of his past Practice. It is not enough that Persons
barely acknowledge the sinful Actions and Neglects that they have been guilty
of; there is no doubt of their acknowledging them if they remember them; for it
is not possible that they can deny these Things before God whatever they may do
to Men; so far as their Memory serves them they cannot but be self conscious of
what they have done or not done; but they must acknowledge and be sensible of
their Sinfulness and Wickedness in these Actions and Omissions. That the
general Course of their Practice has been a Course of wicked Rebellion and
Disobedience against God. While Sinners continue to justify their Practices,
and though they will confess in general Terms that they are very sinful Creatures
yet will hardly acknowledge it in any one particular Instance, or if some
inward acknowledgments of their Sin in some or many particular Things be
extorted from them by the Light of their Consciences, while they endeavor
still to lessen the Sinfulness of these Things in their own View, to make it
appear as very little and trivial, or always plead Excuses and make Apologies
for themselves to their Consciences, I say, so long as it is thus with Sinners
they are far far from Repentance. And yet, alas, thus it is with Multitudes of
perishing Souls who are rotting in the Graves, in the Stench and Pollution of
Sin; they are willingly blinded by the Devil to look upon their Sins as very
Trifles; This is but a small Evil, and that is not much amiss, the Effect of
human Frailty, and the other Thing is not so bad as many are guilty of, I wish
I may never do worse, Had no ill Design ^n it, o^ it was such a One's ^aint as
much, and ^ere, than mine, and so it goes on. What base and contemptuous
Notions have these Person of the Great GOD, and his awful Authority, who think
so lightly of their wilful and insolen^ Disobedience against him! O! ye haughty
and unhambled Sinners, your Notes will be changed in a little Time, and unless
ye repent quickly you shall feel the Weight of these Sins you foolishly thought
so Light, in everlasting Miseries, Romans 2.9. Tribulation and Anguish upon every
Soul of Man that does ^vil, of the Jew ^^st, and also of the Gentile. To you I
would apply what the great God says to Sinners of a like Stamp. Jer. 2.22, 23.
Though thou w^sh thee with ^^tre, and take tree much Soap, yet thine Iniquity is
marked before men, s^^^ the Lord God. How can thou say, I am not polluted? I
have not come after Baalim? See thy Way in the Valley, know what thou have done.

2dly. Shame is another Ingredient in this Repentance When a poor Sinner comes
to see and solemnly consider Things as they are, the infinite Greatness and
August Majesty of the eternal GOD, and the strong Bonds that are upon his Soul
to live a Life of H^^^ Obedience to the Lord that made him, O! ^ow
unreasonable, heinous, loathsome, and v^^e does he then see his Sin to be
Especially considering how he has proceeded in it against so clear Light,
tender Mercy, and awful Warning as he has had Shame and Conf^^^ion covers him
when he thinks of his irrational, bold, and insolent Course of Disobedience and
Sin against God. Until Sinners are ashamed of their Sin before God, and their
(...) within them, looking (...) themselves as (...) and brutish Creatures for
what they have done, all their Repentance is little worth, shameless whorish
Foreheads shall be struck down to Hell, Jer 8 12. Were they ashamed when they
had committed abominations? Nay, they were not at all (...), neither could they
bl^sh; therefore shall they fall among them that fall, in the Time of their
Visitation they shall be cast down says the Lord.

3dly Another Qualification of this Repentance is deep Sorrow and Grief of
Heart. O! Sirs, a repenting Sinner is humbled to the Dust, the Springs of his
Grief are set open and many are the sorrowful Reflections of his Heart upon his
past Practice, crying out, Oh! What have I done: Oh! What a miserable pass have
I brought my self to by a Life of Sin? The Sorrows of his Heart gush forth when
he considers what a Course of Life he has led, what a great and Sovereign God
he has rebelliously disobeyed and provoked to Wrath: when he takes a View of
the sad and dismal Scene of Hell's Horrors when he sees he deserves to be cast
into, O! then Sorrow and Anguish invades his trembling Heart, fearing lost
these be his everlasting Portion. Before this, in the Time of his stupid
Carelessness, he thought in his Haste, without any due Consideration, that there
was no great Danger of his missing Salvation, that (...), ^^ne, would not be so
cruel as to damn such an one (...), but now, when he comes seriously to
consider Things and lay them to Heart, and takes a deliberate view of the
Number and very heinous provoking Nature of his Sins, O! then his Time is
altered; he is afraid that the Holy and tremend^ous God will eternally reject
him and cast him into Hell where he deserves to be: He sees it will be a wonder
of Mercy indeed if ever such a Wretch as he be saved, if ever God pardon and
glorify such a Rebel: Ah! it can hardly enter into his Heart, he is afraid he
never will; and this fills his Heart with the deepest Sorrow for his Sins that
have brought him into such deploreable Circumstances: Woe is me, what have I
done? What have I done? Says the poor Penitent: What a mad distracted Creature
have I been? Why, O! Way whretched Creature that I am, did I not consider these
Things long ago, and not have thoughtlessly and boldly gone on in a Course of
Sin r^shing upon the dismal Precipie^^ of the Damnation of Hell as the Horse
(...) into the Battle? These Considerations fill the Sinner with Indignation
against himself, so as to loath himself in his own Sight for his Abominations:
These Thoughts exci^^ him with the greatest earnestness to implore the Divine
Mercy, and to dread the Commission of Sin as Hell itself. This Repentance the
Great God very reasonably requires of Sinners ^^el 2.12, 13. Therefor also now
says the Lord etc. The Parable of the Prodigal Son, etc.

In the Beginning of the Discourse upon this Head of Doctrine, I signified that
there was a Difference between this Repentance and that which is the Effect of
sanctifying Grace which only is infallibly connected with Salvation; and here,
before I dis^^ss thi^, (...), I wo^^d just mention one or two of the Principal
Differences, 1. In this Repentance the Person forsakes his Sin, and be (...)
himself to the Ways of Religion only from the (...) and Awakenings of his
Conscience: (...) evangelical Repentance, when the Person has received the new
Nature, he forsakes Sin and practices Holiness out of Choice, freely, and
affectionately, from a renewed and sanctified Will. 2. In evangelical and
saving Repentance the Terror and Dread of God's Wrath for Sin is chiefly taken
away from the Conscience, by the Sinner's closure with Christ by Faith, and
believing on him, but yet he hates Sin and grieves for it from another and more
noble Principle, a Sense of its inherent Baseness, and a true Love to the
blessed God which is shed abroad in his Heart, whence he is most affectionately
inclined and engaged to please and honor him, and is sorrowful that he can no
better serve him. Whenever Repentance comes to have these two Qualifications,
then it is a blessed Evidence of the Person's being a regenerate Child of God,
and in a saving State.

Now, this Repentance and Humiliation which I have been discoursing of, is
necessary for Sinners to practice in order to their Regeneration, and the true
Conversion of their Souls to God; in order to the Sanctification of their
Hearts by the Holy Ghost, without which it is impossible for them to be said;
I or except a Man he born of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of
God John 3.5. and without Holiness no Man shall see the Lord Heb. 12.14.

And now, Sirs, to make some Application of this Head, I would propose to you
this necessary and in (...) Question, hate you ever (...) repeated? Pray put
the Question to your selves and answer to it in your own Consciences Have not
many of you gone on for a long Time in vain and sn^^ul Practices, with a
Neglect of God and serious Religion? Well then, now I ask you, have you ever
thus repented so as to be in the Way of Mercy? What say you to it Sirs? You see
the absolute Necessity of it Luke 13.3. Except ye repent, ye shall all likewise
perish. Nothing that defiles or is unclean shall enter into the New-Jerusalem;
there is another Place for such, The ^ake that burns with Five and Brimstone:
Without Holiness, no Man shall see the Lord. Have you turned from your Ways of
Sin and universally forsaken them and betaken yourselves to the constant
Practice of Religion, according to the Direction and Command of God? Are there
not some of you that have never done so yet unto this Day, but are still
persisting in the same negligent rebellious Course? Let the Conscience of the
guilty Person witness to his Face, and wound his hardened Heart.

Again, have you turned from your Sins with free Confession of them before God?
Acknowledging in yourselves that your Practices have been irreligoius, ungodly,
and vile? Have you been so sensible of your Sins as that you could put your
Fingers as it were, upon your Sores, and cry, unclean, unclean? So sensible of
them as to take the whole Guil^ and shame of them upon yourselves? Ah! are
there not some of you whose proud Hearts would never come to such an
acknowledgment? But you have been always excusing yourselves and lessening your
Sins, to still the Clamours and Accusations of your guilty Consciences: Though in
general, you will easily acknowledge you are Sinners, yet when it comes to
Particulars, there is no Sin at all, or very little to be found: Some wretched
brutishs Plea or another you will always have to make your ungodly Practices
appear to yourselves as very innocent Things, though you cannot but know that you
live contrary to the Law of God.

Farther, have you turned from your Sins, being deeply ashamed of them before
(...) Have you ^en the base Br^^sh^^ss and Unreasonableness (...) your S^up^^^y
and boldness, in a Course (...), ^^in and ^eli^ion, against the strongest
Rights and ^^stest Claims of Heaven, and all the Light and Warning which God
has given you, so as to l^^^h your selves in your own Sight for your I^^^^^ies
and Abominations? Have not some of you a Whore's forehead, that refuses to be
ashamed. Not being ashamed of the n^^^ Imp^^^ent manifest Transgression of the
Laws of the (...) God: Nay, do not some rather Glory in their Shame i. e. their
Sin of which they ought to be ashamed: Some of you, perhaps, makes a ^^^st of
your Wickedness, your (...), Uncleanness, Quarrelling and the ^ike: And don't
you Pride yourselves in your S^ou^ness against all Admon^^ions and (...) to be
Religions? In your making Light of the most awful Things that can be proposed
to your Consciences? This you think be^^ea^s a great and he^oick Spirit: Let
Children and the uncultivated Vulgar give way ^o the Impressions of such
Things, but for your P^^^s yo^ have a b^^^er Mi^^d. It must be confessed it is
pretty great indeed ^h^s to swagger it ou^ in the Face of Almightiness, and
(...) Light of these Things at which the Devils Tremble. But O, you will Tremble
as fast as they by and by, ^^less ye Repent, your great Spirit will be brought
down, when your shall be as (...) S^^bble before the consuming Flame, se^
(...). i e. W^o (...) before (...) Indignation, etc. Eze. 22.14. Can ^^ine
Hands be strong, etc.

In the last Place have you turned from your Sin with such deep Humil^ation,
Grief and Sorrow for it as I have described? Have you turned from all your old
sinful Courses with such a Sense of your miserable Circumstances thereby, your
Danger of the eternal Damnation of Hell, as made your Hearts to ache and Bleed
within you? so that nothing could yield any Peace or Satisfaction to your
distressed Souls, until you had a believing View of Jesus Christ the glorious
Mediator, and some Apprehensions of having your Sins pardoned, and being
accepted of God in him, which Faith has been attended with a very sensible
sanctifying Change and Al^eration in your whole Souls? Alas, are not many of
you utter Strangers to this? You have gone on several Years in the Way of Sin
and rebellious Neglect of the Ways of Godliness, and yet have never so much as
had your obstinate Hearts bowed in true Humiliation before God on that Account;
but are still boldly persisting on in the same Course. O Si^s, consider what a
deplorable Condition you are in, wherever you sit or stand in this Assembly,
you have a whole Life of very aggravated Sin and Wickedness to answer and
suffer for, you are under the dreadful and damning G^^lt of all; not one of all
your numberless Sins is pardoned or forgiven, and Death will Arrest your Souls
by and by, and carry you into the invi^ible World of Spirits, where (unless you
are before brought out of your present Condition) you will be cast into the
Prison of Hell, and lashed to the Wheel of J^stice to suffer for all your Sin
and Obstinacy against God, and slighting of the glorious Redeemer: There shall
be weeping, wailing, and gnashing of Teeth to all Eternity. But perhaps you
think you are pretty safe for all; the Improvement of two or three Days of
Sickness upon a dying Bed, will secure you for Eternity without all Doubt! O!
blind and damning Delusion, God may then be as Deaf to you and all your Cries,
as you have been for many Years to him. What Insolence and Haughtiness is this
in vile sinful Miscreants, to think that the Great and Sovereign God must be
just at their Beck and Pleasure! They for their Parts, have liberty to trample
upon his Authority, abuse his Mercy, and fly in his Face all their Life, but he
must be entirely at their Motion, and en^aged to Pardon them, and take them to
himself for a few whining Confessions of their Sin, and cries for Mercy when
they can go on in Sin no longer: O! base unworthy Thought of God. It is to Day
to Day, O Sinners if ye will hear his Voice harden not your Hearts.

But I pass on to speak a little and but a little, to the 3d. Observation, viz.
That it is brutish, Irrational, and Wilful for Sinners to go on still in their
sinful Courses, against all the Instructions and solemn Warnings of God's Word.

Indeed, to Sin against God, much more to continue to do so, in any
Circumstances is a very brutish Thing, in as much as it is most Unreasonable:
Obedience to the Sovereign God being most justly due from a rational Creature.
The Latin Word for Sin, Pe^^atum, some suppose to be derived from the Word
Pe^us, which in that Language signifies Cattle, because to Sin is to act
without any regard to the just Reason of Things, and so to act like a Beast.

But, how much more brutish and irrational is it for Persons to go on still in
a Course of Sin and Rebellion against God, who are favored with the clearest
Light and strongest Arguments of his Holy Word, most solemnly and repeatedly
urged upon them: Arguments justly brought from all the Topics of rational
Persuasion, from the intrinsic Reasonableness, Beauty, and Excellence of
Obedience to the great God; and consequently the unreasonableness and
unspeakable Baseness of Sin, from the endearing and tender Obligations of
Goodness and Mercy, and so from that amiable Disposition of Gratitude and
thankful Sense of undeserved Favor, and from the Topics of immortal Happiness
and Misery in the Life to come, both which are Unspeakable in their Duration
and Degree. What will a br^te Beast do more than Disregard all these Things?
and so do such impenitent Sinners. It is not to be admired that a Brute will
not be moved by the strongest Reasons, because it has ^ot a Capacity of
understanding them: But what Account can be given for such Brutishness in
rational Creatures* Be astonished O Heavens!

The Truth of this Observation may sufficiently appear from what has been said
already up-upon the first Head of Doctrine, for if a Reformation from Sin, and
earnest Endeavors in seeking after the Favor and Mercy of God, may be
reasonably expected of Sinners, to whom God has sent the Messages of his Word
for that End, then certainly their Impenitency and Continuance in Sin after all
is most Unreasonable, and consequently Brutish. Sinners persisting in a Course
of Impiety and Irre^lgion after such Means, I Am well assured can never be the
result of impartial Consideration, no^ owing to the Conduct of Right Reason,
but must be imputed to an irrational, brutish, impetus, viz. mere Wilfulness.
They don't go on in such a Course because they can justify it upon a fair Trial
to their own Consciences, much less to the Almighty God, but because they are
inclined to it, and so WILL do it. You that Live in a Course of Sin and secure
unconcernedness about your eternal States, I am well persuaded that the most
plausible Defense which you can possibly offer for your selves will not be able
to stand an impartial Trial, even yourselves being Judges; whence its manifest
that you act wilfully and brutishly, and turn to your Course just as the Horse
Rushes into the Battle Consider but the Reasons which I have briefly mentioned
under the first Proposition, which God offers you in his Word for your
Repentance and earnest Application to him for his Mercy, and then Try if you
can find any more weighty to oppose to them.

But farther, is it not irrational and brutish for Persons to be chiefly taken
up about present Things, and little or nothing concerned about the Condition in
the Time to come? This is the very Case of impenitent Sinners; and I may Appeal
to the World if this is not Acting like the most senseless and improvident
Brutes in the whole Creation. O* How unreasonable and absurd is this Practice
and Disposition! especially, considering that in a little Time your Condition
will be unalterably fixed for all Eternity, either in complete Happiness or
inexpressible Misery!

Again, is it not most irrational and brutish to go on in the Face, of the
clearest Warning and most awful Threatening, without Fear or Turning? This is
likewise the Case of impenitent Sinners amongst us. How dreadful are the
righteous Threatenings of the true and faithful God in his holy Oracles against
impious Transgressors of his Law, neglectors of his Commands, and slighters of
his Authority and offered Mercy, and yet (bold Mortals!) they will not be
detered: Yea, though the terrible Threats and Comminations of the great God, the
sovereign Lawgiver and ruler of the Universe, may be often denounced in their
hearing, so that they might see the awful Armor of Heaven, as it were pointed
at their very Breasts, yet they brutishly slight all these Things, and boldly
Rush on in the same Course, as the Horse rushes into the Bottle. An elegant
Description of the Horse's rushing to the Battle, you may find, Job. 39. from
verse 21 to 26, particularly accommodated to the Custom of those ancient Times,
when Battle were generally Fought by close Engagements, and so the two
contended Armies violently rushed upon each other. He paweth in the Valey, and
rejoices in his Strength: He goes on to meet the armed Men: He mocketh at
Fear, and is not ^^^is^ted; neither turns he back from the Sword: Though the
Q^^^e^ ratt^eth against him, the (...) Spear and the S^^eld The most awful
Things will neither Restrain nor terrify him, but on he will go. Just thus it
is with impenitent bold Sinners: You are with a brutish Madness, rushing upon
the spear Point of the divine Vengeance, and ^o thing will hold you Back. The
wicked Stre^^eth (...) his Hand against God, and Strent^^neth himself against
the Almighty: He ^^^neth upon him, even upon his Neck, upon the thick Losses of
his ^ucklers, Job, 15.25, 20. The Horse mocke^h at Fear, i. e. he despises all
the objects of Terror, they shall not stop him: And ver. 25. Among the
wariours Trumpets, he says, Ha, Ha; Thus do Sinners contemn and make Light of
the most awful Threatenings of the great Jehovah; Leviathan like you Laugh at
the shaking of the Spear: But O Sirs, you will not Laugh so at the Stroke of it:
When God comes to make his Sword red with Blood, and that with the Blood of the
Slain, rendering Vengeance to his Enemies, and a Reward to them that hate him;
O, then you will be convinced or your brutish folly to your eternal Shame and
Horror.

Thus, I think the Truth of this Proposition is clearly manifest, and how
little Cause then have obstinate Sinners, to Pride themselves of their great
Wisdom; or rather, what Cause have you to blush and be ashamed, when you think
how you debase yourselves to the Level of the brute Creation, vilely disgracing
the Excellency and Dignity of the human Soul. It is no shame for the Brutes to
act as they do, because they act according to the Endowments of their Nature,
and are not capable Subjects of moral Government: But sure it is a Shame for
you to act like them especially in Things of the highest Moment and everlasting
(...). I am per^waded that ma^y such Persons as I now Speak of, would be sadly
ashamed of ^^ting irrationaly in many other Things, of an infinitey lower
Order; and how comes it ^hen that you think it no Disgrace to (...) yourselves
like the unreasonable Creatures in the Things of God and your own eternal
Interest? Wherein you pay no Regard to the strongest Reasons imaginable. Alas,
a Course of Sin and neglect of practical Religion, is become so general that
this takes away the Igo^imy and Shame of it in the Eyes of the brutish World.

But the chief Inference I would deduce from this Doctrine is this, Is informs
us that such presumptuous wilful Sinners must expect to meet with an awfully
aggrava^ed Damnation in the next World, u^less ye Repent in Earnest, and God
extend undeserved Mercy to you and renew your unsanctify'd Souls, and fit them
for his heavenly. Glory, it will be more tollerably in the Day of God for Sodom
and Gomorrah, (the Cities which the Lord destroyed in his Anger for the most
unnatural Wickedness) than for you, Matt. 11.20, 24. Your Impiety and
Imp^^itency is of a more heinous and aggravated Nature, than that of the Pagan
World, who have never had the high Advantages which you are favored with, and
therefore your Torment will be greater, in Proportion to your Crime. This
Circumstance or Sins being committed and continued in against the clear Light
and Warning; of God's Word has a twofold Influence upon the increasing of
Sinners Punishment in Hell, viz. Physical and Moral. First, it will have a
Physical Influence upon it: The Misery of such Sinners will of necessity be
greater than of others from the very Nature of Things; for one Part of the
Misery of the Damned, consists in the cutting and terrible Reflections of their
Consciences upon themselves for the folly and madness which they have been
guilty of in their past life in this World, for which they now suffer; b^^ such
Gospel Sinners will have a^far higher Degree of brutish wilfulness and
affronted boldness, against God to charge themselves with; and therefore their
Remorse of this kind will naturally of necessity, be more Deep and Peircing the
Worm that never D^^s, an accusing tormenting Conscience, will gnaw more sharply
upon their Hearts.

Secondly, A continuance in a Course of Sin after all the Councils and
Arguments of the World of God that are used with Sinners; will (...) a moral
(...) upon the heightening of their Damnation; in as much as thereby they are
rendered more heinous Si^^ers; as you have seen made Evident: The higher
Advantages Persons enjoy for living a Religious Li^e, the more thoroughly and
solemnly Sinners are dealt by the Messa^es of God's Word, the more criminal is
their Imp^nitency: The Henious base qualities of their Sins, such as brutish
wilfulness, contempt of God, etc. are much more aggravated, so that they
deserve a greater Punishment; and justice will undoubtedly distinguish the
Degrees of Punishment, according to the Degrees of Merit. O thou wilful and
incorrigible Sinner, consider what a terrible aggravated Damnation thou
deservest and are like to meet with in a little Time, for thy brutishness, and
heaven daring Insolence, in paying no Regard to all the Councils, Arguments,
and Threatenings of the eternal God. O consider, and Tremble at the Thought;
humble thy obstinate and rebellions Heart in Time before the God that made
thee, before he Tear thee in Pieces when there shall be none to deliver; and be
not (any longer) like the (...) the Mule which have no Understanding, Psalm
32.9. And you who think that your Sin is so small and trivial, consider these
Things and see your blind Mistake.

But I hasten to the 4th and last Proposition, which is, that Sinners going on
in their sinful Courses, are rushing upon the most terrible Dangers and
Miseries. And if nothing that has hitherto been spoken will move such Persons,
O that what may yet be offered upon this Head, might awaken them to Repentance,
and seeking after God that they may be saved.

Upon this Head I shall speak very briefly to these two Things, and so
conclude, 1st* I shall show you some of these sinful Courses which lead Sinners
to such terrible Miseries. And,

2dly, What those Dangers and Miseries are, which Sinners in these Courses are
Rushing upon.

As to the former of these: In the first Place, a Course of more gross and
profane Sining leads Souls to most awful and eternal Miseries: Such as
swearing, lying, taking the sacred and venerable Name of God lightly and in
vain, Drunkenness, Quarelling, Whoredom, profane Sabbath-breaking, Stealling,
Defrauding, Revengeing, mocking and sco^fing at Piety and Religion, and all
such enormous Wickedness: All Persons who go on in these, or any of these,
Practices are posting directly and speedily to eternal Destruction; bound in
straight Course for Hell.

2dly. Another Course of destructive sining, is a Course of licentious
Merriment, Jolli^y, and sensual Pleasure. This is directly contrary to that
Sobriety and holy Fear of God which is inseparable from true Christianity: And
I would ask such as are addicted to this Course of Life, whether you can
possibly think that this is being holy in all manner of Conversation, according
to 1 Pet. 1.15. Whether you can imagine that this is that Holiness without
which no Man shall see the Lord You cannot but know in your own Consciences that
it is not, if you would allow yourselves to think Impartially and deliberately:
Is it not rather a casting off all due Fear of the Divine Majesty; and living
without God in the World? O* Sirs, the End of all Things is at Hand: Be ye
therefore sober, and watch unto Prayer. The Harp and the ^^ol, the ^^bret and
the Pipe, and Wine (...) their ^easts; but they regard not the Work of the
Lord, neither consider the Operation of his Hands: therefore ^ell both enlargea
her Self, and opened her Mouth without Measure, and their Glory and their
Mult^tude, and their Pomp, and he that rejoices shall descend into it. Isa.
5.12, 14.

3dly. An habitual Neglect and Omission of the positive Duties of Religion, is
another Course of Life wherein Sinners are hastening to their own Ruin. All
prayerless Persons, such as bear not a religious Regard to God's Holy Day, and
do not attend upon his instituted Worship and Ordinances in order to serve him
stand chargeable with high Disobedience and Rebellion against God, in the
Neglect of his Appointments, and contempt of his Authority. Is not the
Sovereign Authority of God the great giver as much condemned and trampled upon
in not performing what he enjoins as in commiting what he forbids? It is the
same adorable authority that is slighted and disobeyed in both Cases. Hear your
doom, ye Neglecters and Slighters of Religion, the Lord Jesus will be revealed
from Heaven in flaming Fire, taking Vengeance upon all them that obey not his
Gospel 2 These. 1.8.

4thly. A Course of covetous Worldliness: Which is an idolatrous prefering of
the Creature before God, and seting it up in his Room. Hence says the Apostle,
Ephesians. 5.5 No covetous Man who is an Idolater has any Inheritance in the Kingdom
of Christ and of God.

5thly. In the last Place: A Course of stupid Security, groundless Peace, and
unconcernedness about their eternal Condition is another Course whein Sinners
are going on to their Destruction. By Persons living in such fatal Security and
unconcernedness, I mean all such, of whatsoever Character and Conversation they
may otherwise be, who have not the sanctifying Graces of God's Spirit in their
Souls, who have not the Disposition of true Holiness implanted in their Hearts
by Regeneration, but have the natural Aversion of their Wills to God still
abiding and prevailing in them, and yet are stupidly insensible of their sinful
and dangerous Estate, of the deplorable Condition they are in, little
distressed or concerned about it, not earnestly seeking after God for his
renewing sanctifying Grace and a state of Favor with him. These Persons, though
they may be pretty moral for the most part in their Practices and likewise have
an outward Form and Appearance of Religion; yet, their Souls utterly unholy and
vile in the Sight of God: They have never laid hold on Jesus Christ and
embraced him by a true and living Faith for their Salvation and so slight the
glorious Mediator and cross the Design of the whole Gospel; they do not truly
love God above all Things and most affectionately desire to please and serve
him, making it the great Design of their Lives, from a Sense of their
Obligations and a Principle of Love, to live to his Honor and Glory; and thus
the very Temper and Disposition of their Souls is directly contrary to God and
Holiness: And while they are going on (...) this unsanctify'd Condition with
secure Consciences and whole unconcerned Hearts as if all were well with them,
they are heedlessly and very irrationaly going on to their eternal Ruin: And,
alas, this deep sleep, unreasonable damning Security and unconcernedness (as it
may be justy termed) very generally prevails among Mankind: They are so taken
up about other Concerns (and many of them very trifling of no Moment even as to
the present Life) that they don't take time thoroughly to consider and examine
the State of their Souls in Relation to the future World: But, as if that were
a Matter of no importance, readily take it for granted that they must be in a
safe Condition without ever duly enquiring, by the Rule of God's Word and
unbiased Reason, whether they have the Qualifications necessary for the
Heavenly State; and so enjoy a very unreasonable Peace and Quiet in their Minds
against the plainest Evidence. These are briefly some of the sinful Courses
wherein Persons are going on to their own Ruin and Destruction, and that
against all rational Means that can possibly be used with them, even as the
Horse rusheth into the Battle. But,

2dly. What are the Dangers and Miseries which in these Courses they are
rushing into? In a Word, they lie open and exposed at all times to all those
Plagues and Evils which God at any Time inflicts upon his Enemies either in
this Life or that which is to come: And if they are not punished with such
severe Strokes of Justice in this Life, it is not owing to the Goodness or
safety of their State, or any Security which they have against it, but merely
to the free and gracious Forbearance of God, whereby for a Time he defers the
Strokes of his Wrath; for God is angry with the Wicked every Day, Ps. 7, 11.
And however they may prosper in this Life there is a solemn Time of Accounts
and Payments hastening on. But, more particularly, there are two or three
Dangers and Miseries I would briefly mention, which such resolute Sinners are
apparently rushing upon. 1. Being judicially given up of God to hardness of
Heart, searedness of Conscience, and so to their own Lusts without the least
Restraint. Thus God dealt with the Heathen World for abusing the smaller Light
of Reason, as the Apostle infomrs us Romans 1. Therefore God gave them up to
Uncleanness, through the Lusts of their own Hearts, v. 24. For this Cause God
gave them up unto vile ^ffections, v. 20. And even as they did not like to
retain God in their Knowledge, God gave them over to a reprobate Mind, to do
th^se Things which are not convenient, being, s^^'d with a^l Unrighteousness,
Fornication, Wickedness, Covetousness etc. v. 28. and downwards. Thus he dealt
with the People of Israel Ps. 81.11, 12. but my People would not hearken to my
(...), and Israel would none of me, so I gave them up to their own Hearts
Lusts, and they walked in their own C^^^^il. This is the Condition which
Gospel-Sinners are (...) to come into; and is it not an awfully dangerous one?
All Hope of their Conversion and Salvation is then almost quite gone. Woe unto
them when God departs from them Hos. 9.12. 2. An utter and dreadful despair of
Mercy even in this Life is a Misery which such Sinners are in Danger of. The
Lord some times in this manner gives some Foretastes of Hell upon this Earth to
such as have thus gone on in Sin against all Light and Convictions, for a
Warning and Terror to others. Cain, Judas, and, in later Times, Francis Spira,
John Child and others have been awful Instances of this. For all so stupid, and
stout against God as Sinners are now, he may pass the Sentence of their eternal
Damnation in their own Bosoms yet before they die, and cause them to feel
something of the Desparation and Horror of the Damned World. A wilful
persisting in the Ways of Sin against all the Light and Warning of the Word of
God is the ready Way to this Misery.

3dly. In the last Place, such obstinate wilful Sinners are rushing into an
awfully aggravated Damnation in the next World. Their Pain and Torment through
all Eternity will be more intolerable than that of others, as has been made
appear upon the foregoing Proposition. O! Sinners, without a saving Conversion
to God this will be your dreadful Portion in a little Time: And can you think
of this without a trembling Heart, without any Concern or Distress; you know
not how soon Death may put an End to the Day of Life, and that will be a^ End
to all possible Hope; then you are irre^^ievably gone for ever if you are taken
away in this impenitent State: You stand as it were upon the very Brink of the
burning Furnace, and how soon you may be cast in and sealed up to Eternity in
the dismal Vault of Hell you know not; is it not then of the last Necessity to
try to escape for your Lives while there is any Hope, before your Feet stumble
upon the dark Mountains, and you fall into the Gulf of irreparable Ruin. O! Is
there no irreligious Christless Person in this Assembly that is ready by this
Time to cry out with the trembling Jailer, What shall I do to be saved? I am
now come to the Conclusion of this Discourse, and what more shall I say to
persuade obstinate perishing Sinners to awake out of their unreasonable
Security and seek after God in good earnest that they may escape the Wrath to
come; I have shown you the Nature of that Repentance which you ought to set
about with the utmost Application, in seeking to God for your Souls Salvation;
I have shown you some of the strong and weighty Reasons and Arguments which the
Great God urges upon you in his Word to persuade you to it; the unreasonable
horrid Brutishness and wilful Obstinacy of your disregarding them and going on
still in your old Courses; and the most awful terrible Dangers and Miseries
which you are thereby rushing yourselves into; and, O Sirs, will none of these
Things move you! What a m^ke are you of^ Will nothing that can be said to you
persuade you from Death and Ruin! Or, so much as to seek after your everlasting
Happiness! Are you so intoxicated with a love to Sin and dis^beying God from
whom you had your being and still have all your Benef^^s, and who (...) must be
your Happiness, that the everlasting Interest of your immortal Souls will not
overballance it! Are you resolved upon your own eternal Destruction? To sell
your deathless Souls to eternal Pains for a thing of naught? If any of you are
brought to a Sense of your miserable perishing Condition by a Life of Sin, and
hearty Resolution to seek for Relief out of it, let me direct and beseech you
not to suffer these Impressions to wear off and die away without saving
Effects; but endeavor to apply these Things still closely to your Hearts; take
the eternal Concerns of your Souls into Solemn Consideration, and abstain from
all your former Courses of Sin and Negligence; cry, O cry earnestly and often
to the Great God for his pardoning Mercy in Christ, and renewing Grace that you
may be entitled to and prepared for his glorious Kingdom. And one Thing I
would have you very particularly to take Notice of, viz. To consider in all
your Applications to God for your Salvation that if ever you are saved and
received to Mercy it must be through the Merits and Mediation of Jesus Christ
alone and nothing else. If you lay your Dependence and Hope for Pardon and
Acceptance with God upon your Reforming, Praying, and Repentance, you will
eternally miss of it: For this is acting contrary to the very Design of the
Gospel, and new Covenant-Way of Salvation. You are to observe and Practice
these Things as the Means which God requires you to use to seek his Mercy and
your own Salvation by: But if guilty Sinners hope by these Things, by their own
filty Rags, and impure Righteousness to incline the Love and Favor of God
toward them, they may expect he will frown them into Hell for their Impudence:
He has established another Method for their Relief which is more agreeable to
his Wisdom, better suited to the glorious Dignity and Perfections of his
Nature, and requires that they comply with it, humbly and thankfully embrace
their Salvation in that Way in which he is willing to give it. If ever God have
Mercy upon you and be reconciled to you it will be for the perfect and pure
Righteousness of his own Son alone: The Merit and Righteousness, the Obedience
and Sufferings of Jesus Christ must be accepted for you; there is no other
possible Way for your Salvation John 14.6. ^cts 4.12. Romans 3.24, 25. with many
other Scriptures. And if ever you have a Share and Interest in his
Righteousness and Mediation, and are brought into a State of Justification and
Peace with God by it, you must close with him by Faith, reject all Trust and
Confidence in any Thing else, fly to him alone for your Relief, lay the whole
Weight of your Salvation upon his Merit and Mediation, and so take him with all
your Heart for your only Savior. And whosoever do so come to Christ shall
never be confounded; his faithful Word is engaged for it: And therefore, O beg
of God that he would give you true Faith to embrace the Redeemer, and enable
you to receive and close with him in a right Manner. And know that there is a
blessed and glorious Change wrought in a Sinners Heart, when by Faith he closes
with Christ, as to the Actings and Dispositions, of it toward God; which
likewise produces an answerable Alteration in the outward Practice and
Deportment. O ye secure impenitent Sinners awake awake out of your deep and
deadly Sleep, out of your delusive Dreams, before the burning Flames of Tophet
kindle upon you and bring you to your Senses, and fly to Christ that you may be
saved. May the Lord bless these Things to our everlasting Benefit.

FINIS.

