The COMPLETE HOUSEWIFE: OR, Accomplished Gentlewoman's COMPANION: Being a
Collection of several Hundred of the most approved Receipts, in COOKERY,
PASTRY, CONFECTIONARY, PRESERVING, PICKLES, CAKES, CREAMS, JELLIES, MADE WINES,
CORDIALS.


AND ALSO BILLS of FARE for every Month in the Year.

To which is Added, A Collection of near Two Hundred Family Receipts of
MEDICINES; viz. Drinks, Syrups, Salves, Ointments, and many other Things of
sovereign and approved Efficacy in most Distempers, Pains, Aches, Wounds,
Sores, etc. never before made Public in these Parts; fit either for private
Families, or such publick-spirited Gentlewomen as would be beneficent to their
poor Neighbors.

By E. SMITH.

Collected from the FIFTH EDITION.

WILLIAMSBURG: Printed and Sold by WILLIAM PARKS. 1742.

PREFACE.
IT being grown as unfashionable for a a Book now to appear in Public without
a Preface, as for a Lady to appear at a Ball without a Hoop-petticoat, I shall
conform to Custom for Fashion sake, and not through any Necessity. The Subject
being both common and universal, needs no Arguments to introduce it, and being
so necessary for the Gratification of the Appetite, stands in need of no
Encomiums to allure Persons to the Practice of it, since there are but few
nowadays who love not good Eating and Drinking. Therefore I entirely quit
those two Topics; but having three or four Pages to be filled up, previous to
the Subject itself, I shall employ them on a Subject I think new, and not yet
^andled by any of the Pretenders to the Art of Cookery; and that is, the
Antiquity of it, which, if it either instruct or divert, I shall be satisfied,
if you are so.

COOKERY, Confectionary, etc. like all other Sciences and Arts, had their
Infancy, and did not arrive at a State of Maturity but by slow Degrees, various
Experiments, and a long Tract of Time: For in the Infant Age of the World, when
the new Inhabitants contented themselves with the simple Provision of Nature,
viz. the vegetable Diet, the Fruits and Productions of the teeming Ground, as
they succeeded one another in their several peculiar Seasons, the Art of
Cockery was unknown; Apples, Nuts, and Herbs were both (...) and Sauce, and
Mankind stood in no need of any additional Sauces, R^goes, etc. but a good
Appetite; which a healthful and vigorous Constitution, a clear, wholesome,
odoriferous Air, moderate Exercise, and an Exemption from anxious Cares, always
supplied them with.

WE read of no palled Appetites, but such as proceeded from the Decays of
Nature, by reason of an advanced old Age; but on the contrary, a craving
Stomach, even upon a Death bed, a^ in Isaac; nor no Sicknesses but th^se (...)
were both the first and the last, which proceeded from the Struggles of Nature,
which abhorred the Diss^lution of S^ul and (...); no Physicians to prescribe
for the S^^k, nor no Apothecaries to compound Medicine for ^^o Thousand Years
and upwards. Food and Physic were then one and the same Thing.

BUT when Men began to pass from a Vegetable to an Animal Diet, and feed on
Flesh, Fowls, and Fish, then Seasonings grew necessary, both to render it more
palatable and savoury, and also to preserve that Part which was not immediately
spent from Stinking and Corruption: And probably, Salt was the first Seasoning
discovered; for of Salt we read, Genesis xiv.

AND this seems to be necessary, especially for those who were advanced in Age,
whose Palates, with their Bodies, had lost their Vigor as to Taste, whose
degestive Faculty grew weak and impotent, and thence proceeded the Use of Soops
and savoury M^sses; so that Cookery then began to become a Science, though
Luxury had not brought it to the Height of an Art. Thus we read, that Jacob
made such palatable Pottage, that Esau purchased a Mess of it at the
extravagant Price of his Birthright. And Isaac, before by his last Will and
Testament he bequeathed his Blessing to his Son Esau, required him to make some
savoury Meat, such as his Soul loved, i. e. such as was relishable to his
blunted Palate,

SO that Seasonings of some Sort were then in Use; though whether they were
Salt, savoury Herbs, or Roots only; or Spices, the Fruits of Trees, such as
Pepper, Cloves, Nutmegs; Bark, as Cinnamon; Roots, as Ginger, etc. I shall not
determine.

AS for the Methods of the Cookery of those Times, boiling or stewing seems to
have been the Principal; broiling or roasting the next; besides which, I
presume, scarce any other were used for two Thousand Years and more; for I
remember no other in the History of Genesis.

THAT Esau was the first Cook, I shall not presume to assert; for Abraham gave
Order to dress a fatted Calf; but Esau is the first Person mentioned that made
any Advances beyond plain Dressing, as boiling, roasting, etc. For though we find
indeed, that Rebeccah his Mother was accomplished with the Skill of making
savoury Meat as well as he, yet whether he learned it from her, or she from
him, is a Question too knotty for me to determine.

BUT Cookery did not long remain a simple Science, or a bare Piece of
Housewifery or Family Economy, but in process of Time, when Luxury entered the
World, it grew to an Art, nay, a Trade; for, in 1 Samuel viii. 13. when the
Israelites grew Fashionists, and would have a King, that they might be like the
rest of their Neighbors, we read of Cooks, Confectioners, etc.

THIS Art being of universal Use, and in constant Practice, has been ever since
upon the Improvement; and we may, I think, with good Reason, believe, is
arrived at its greatest Height and Perfection, if it is not got beyond it, even
to its Declension; for whatsoever new, upstart, out of the-way Messes some
Humou^^sts have invented, such as stuffing a roasted Leg of Mutton with pickled
Herring, and the like, are only the Sau^es of a capricious Appetite, and
debau^hing, rather than improving the Art itself.

THE Art of Cookery, etc. is indeed diversified according to the Diversity of
Nations or Countries; and to treat of it in that La^^^ude would fill an
unportable Volume, and rather confound than inprove those that would accomplish
themselves with it. I shall therefore confine what I have to communicate within
the Limits of Practicalness and Usefulness, and so within the Compass of a
Manual that shall neither burden the Hands to hold, the Eyes in reading, nor
the Mind in conceiving.

WHAT you will find in the following Sheets, are Directions generally for
dressing after the best, most natural, and wholesome Manner, such Provisions as
are the Product of our own Country, and in such a Manner as is most agreeable
to English Palates; saving that I have so far temporized as, since we have to
our Disgrace so fondly admired the French Tongue, French Modes, and also French
Messes, to present you now and then with such Receipts of French Cookery, as I
think may not be disagreeable to English Palates.

THERE are indeed already in the World various Books that treat on this
Subject, and which bear great Names, as Cooks to Kings, Princes, and Noblemen,
and from which one might justly expect something more than many, if not most of
these I have read, perform, but found my self deceived in my Expectations; for
many of them to us are impracticable, others whimsical, others unpalatable,
unless to depraved Palates, some unwholesome, many Things copied from old
Authors, and recommended without (as I am persuaded) the Copiers ever having
had any Experience of the Palatableness, or had any Regard to the Wholsomness
of them: Which two Things ought to be the standing Rules, that no Pretenders to
Cookery ought to deviate from. And I cannot but believe, that those celebrated
Performers, notwithstanding all their Professions of having ingeniously
communicated their Art, industriously concealed their best Receipts from the
Public.

BUT what I here present the World with, is the Product of my own Experience,
and that for the Space of thirty Years and upwards, during which Time, I have
been constantly employed in fashionable and noble Families, in which the
Provisions ordered according to the following Directions, have had the general
Approb^^ion of such as have been at many noble Entertainments.

THESE Receipts are all suitable to English Constitutions and English Palates,
wholesome, toothsome, all practicable and easy to be performed. Here are those
proper for a frugal, and also for a sumptuous Table; and if rightly observed,
will prevent the spoiling of many a good Dish of Meat, the waste of many good
Materials, the Vexation that frequently attends such Mismanagements, and the
Curses not unfrequently bestowed on Cooks, with the usual Reflection, that
whereas God sends good Meat, the Devil sends Cooks.

AS to those Parts that treat of Confectionary, Pickles, Cordials, English
Wines, etc. what I have said in relation to Cookery, is equally applicable to
them also.

IT is true, I have not been so numerous in Receipts as some who have gone
before me, but I think I have made amends in giving none but what are approved
and practicable, and fit either for a genteel or a noble Table; and although I
have omitted odd and fantastical Messes, yet I have set down a considerable
Number of Receipts.

THE Treatise is divided into ten Tarts: Cookery contains above an hundred
Receipts, Pickles fifty, Puddings above fifty, Pastry above forty, Cakes forty,
Creams and Jellies above forty, Preserving an Hundred, Made Wines forty,
Cordial Waters and Powders above seventy, Medicines and Salves above two
Hundred: In all near eight Hundred.

AS for the Receipts for Medicines, Salves, Ointments, good in several
Diseases, Wounds, Hurts, Bruises, Aches, Pains, etc. which amount to above two
Hundred, they are generally Family Receipts, that have never been made public;
excellent in their Kind, and approved Remedies, which have not be^n obtained by
me without much Difficulty; and of such Efficacy in Distempers, etc. to which
they are appropriated, that they have cured when all other Means have failed;
and a few of them which I have communicated to a Friend, have procured a very
handsome Livelihood.

THEY are very proper for those Generous, Charitable, and Christian Gentlewomen
that have a Disposition to be serviceable to (...) Neighbors, laboring under
(...) ^f the afflicted Circumstances mentioned; wh^^ly making the Medicines,
and generously contributing as Occasions offe^, may help the Poor in their
Afflictions, gain their Good will and Wishes, entitle themselves to their
Blessings and Prayers, and also have the Pleasure of seeing the Good they do in
this World, and have good Reason to hope for a Reward (though not by way of
Merit) in the World to come.

AS the Whole of this Collection has cost me much Pains, and a thirty Years
diligent Application, and I have had Experience of their Use and Efficacy, I
hope they will be as kindly accepted, as by me they are generously offered, to
the Public: And if they prove to the Advantage of many, the End will be
answered that is proposed by her that is ready to serve the Public in what she
may.

THUS ends the Author's Preface: The Printer now begs Leave to inform the
Reader, that he has Coll^cted the following Volume from a much larger, printed
in England, which contained many Recipes, the Ingredients or Materials for
which, are not to be had in this Country: He has therefore collected only such
as are useful and practicable here, and left out such as are not so, which
would only have served to swell out the Book, and increase its Price. He has
printed the Bills of Fare exactly ^s they are in the English Edition; because
the judicious and experienced in such Affairs, may the better know how to
supply the Place of such Materials as are not to be had, with such suitable
Things as this Country affords.

A BILL of FARE for every Season of the Year.
For JANUARY.
First Course.
COllar of Brawn Bisque of Fish Soop with Vermicelly Orange-pudding, with
Patties Chine and Turkey Lamb Pasty Roasted Pullets with Eggs Oyster-Pie
Roasted Lamb in Joints Grand Sallad, with Pickles.
Second Course.
Wild Fowl of all Sorts Chine of Salmon broiled with Smelts Fruit of all Sorts
Jole of Sturgeon Collar'd Pig Dried Tongues, with salt Sallads Marinated Fish.
For FEBRUARY.
First Course.
SOOP Lorain Turbot boiled with Oysters and Shrimps Grand Patty Hen Turkeys
with Eggs Marrow Puddings Stewed Carps and broiled E^ls Spring Pie Chine of
Mutton with Pickles Dish of Scotch Collops Dish of Salmigondin.
Second Course.
Fat Chickens and tame Pigeons Asparagus and Lupins Tansy and Fritters Dish of
Fruit of all Sorts Dish of fried Soles Dish of Tarts, Custards, and
Cheesecakes.
For MARCH.
First Course.
DISH of Fish of all Sorts Soop de Saute Westphalia Ham and Pigeons Battalio
Pie Pole of Ling Dish of roasted Tongues and Udders Pease-Soop Almond-Puddings
of Sorts Olives of Veal a-la-mode Dish of Mullets boiled.
Second Course.
Broiled Pike Dish of Nots, Ruffs, and Quails Skerret Pie Dish of Jellies of
Sorts Dish of Fruit of Sorts Dish of cream'd Tarts.
For APRIL.
First Course.
WEstphalia-Ham and (...) Dish of ha^h'd C^^p^ Bisque of Pigeons Lumber Pie
Chine of Veal Grand Sallad Beef a-a-mode Almond Florentines Fricasy of Chickens
Dish of Custards.
Second Course.
Green Geese and Ducklings Buttered Crabs, with Smelts fried Dish of Sucking
Rabbits Rock of Snow and Syllabubs Dish of souced Mullets Buttered Apple-Pye
March-Pane.
For MAY.
First Course.
JOLE of Salmon, etc. Craw-fish Soop Dish of Sweet Puddings of Colors Chicken
Pie Calves Head hash'd Chine of Mutton Grand Sallad Roasted Fowls a-la-da^be
Roasted Tongues and Udders Ragoo of Veal, etc.
Second Course.
Dish of young Turkeys larded, and Quails Dish of Pease Bisqu^ of Shellfish
Ro^^ted Lobsters Green Geese Dish of Sweetmeats Orange^do Pie Dish of Lemon and
Chocolate Creams Dish of collar'd Eels, with Craw-fish.
For JUNE.
First Course.
ROasted Pike and Smel^ Westphalia-Ham and young Fowls Marrow Puddings Haunch
of Venison roasted Ragoo of Lamb-stones and Sweetbreads Fricasy of young
Rabbits, etc. Umble Pyes Dish of Mullets Roasted Fowls Dish of Custards.
Second Course.
Dish of young Pheasants Dish of fried Soles and Eels Potato Pie Jole of
Sturgeon Dish of Tarts and Cheesecakes Dish of Fruit of Sorts Syllabubs.
For JULY.
First Course.
COck Salmon with Buttered Lobsters Dish of Scot^^ Collops Chine of Veal
Venison Pasty Grand Sallad Roasted Geese and Ducklings Patty-Royal Roasted Pig
larded Stewed Carps Dish of Chickens boiled, with Bacon, etc.
Second Course.
Dish of Partridges and Quails Dish of Lobsters and Prawns Dish of Ducks and
tame Pigeons Dish of Jellies Dish of Fruit Dish of marinated Fish Dish of Tarts
of Sorts.
For AUGUST.
First Course.
WEstphalia - Ham and Chickens Bisque of Fish Haunch of Venison roasted Venison
Pasty Roasted Fowls a-la-daube Umble-Pyes White F^c^ssees of Chickens Roasted
Turkeys larded Almond Florentines Beef a-la-mode.
Second Course.
Dish of Pheasants and Partridges Roasted Lobsters Broiled Pike Creamed Tart
Rock of Snow and Syllabubs Dish of Sweetmeats ^almigondin.
For SEPTEMBER.
First Course.
BOiled Pa^iets with Oysters, B^^^, etc. Bisque of Fish Batallio Pie Chine of
Mutton Dish of Pickles Roasted Geese Lumber Pie Olives of Veal with Ragoo Dish
of boiled Pigeons with Bacon.
Second Course.
Dish of Ducks and Teel Dish of fried Soles Buttered Apple-pye Jole of Sturgeon
Dish of Fruit March-pane.
For OCTOBER.
First Course.
WEstphalia - Ham and Fowls Cod's Head with Shrimps and Oysters Haunch of Do
with Udder a-la-force Minced-Pies Chine and Turkey Bisque of Pigeons Roasted
Tongues and Udders Scotch-Collops Lumber-Pye.
Second Course.
Wild-fowl of Sorts Chine of Salmon broiled Artichoke Pie Boiled Eels and
Smelts Salmigondin Dish of Fruit Dish of Tarts and Custards.
For NOVEMBER.
First Course.
Boiled Fowls with Savoys, Bacon, etc. Dish of stewed Carps and scollop'd
Oysters Chine of Veal and Ragoo Sallad and Pickles Venison Pasty Roasted Geese
Calves Head hash'd Dish of Gurnets Grand Patty Roasted Hen Turkey with Oysters.
Second Course.
Chine of Salmon and Smelts Wild Fowl of Sorts Potato-Pye Sliced Tongues with
Pickles Dish of Jellies Dish of Fruit Quince-Pye.
For DECEMBER.
First Course.
WEstphalia - Ham and Fowls Soop with Teel Turbot with Shrimps and Oysters
Marrow-Pudding Chine of Bacon and Turkey Batallio-Pye Roasted Tongue and Udder,
and Hare Pullets and Oysters, Sausages, etc. Minced-Pies Cod's Head with
Shrimps.
Second Course.
Roasted Pheasants and Partridges Bisque of Shellfish Tansy Dish of roasted
Ducks and Teels Jole of Sturgeon Pear-Tart creamed Dish of Sweetmeats Dish of
Fruit of Sorts.
THE Complete Housewife: OR, The Accomplished Gentlewoman's COMPANION.
COOKERY, etc.
To make a Soop.
TAKE a Leg of Beef, and boil it down with some Salt, a Bundle of sweet Herbs,
an Onion, a few Cloves, a bit of Nutmeg; boil three Gallons of Water to one;
then take two or three Pounds of lean Beef cut in thin Slices; then put in your
Stew Pan a Piece of Butter, as big as an Egg, and flour it, and let the Pan be
hot, and shake it 'til the Butter be brown; then lay your Beef in your Pan over
a pretty quick Fire, cover it close, give it a Turn now and then, and strain in
your strong Br^th, with an Anchovy or two, and a Handf^l of Spi^n^ge and Endive
boiled green, and drained and shred g^oss; then have Pallets ready boiled, and
cut in Pieces, and Toasts fried and cut like Dice, and forced meat Balls s^^'d:
Take out the fried Beef, and put all the rest (...) with a little Pepper, and
let it boil a Quarter of an Hour, and serve it up with a Knuckle of Veal, or a
Fowl boiled, in the Middle.

Another Gravy Soop.
TAKE a Leg of Beef, and a Piece of the Neck, and boil it 'til you have all the
Goodness out of it; then strain it from the Meat; then take Half a Pound of
fresh Butter, and put it in a Stew Pan, and brown it; then put in an Onion,
stuck with Cloves, some Endive, Sellary, and Spinnage, and your strong Broth,
and season it to your Palate with Salt, Pepper, and Spices; and let it boil
together; and put in Chips of French Bread dried by the Fire; and serve it up
with a French Roll toasted, in the Middle.

A Fasting-Day Soop.
TAKE Spinnage, Sorrel, Chervil, and Lettuce, and chop them a little; then
brown some Butter, and put in your Herbs, keep them stirring that they do not
burn; then have boiling Water over the Fire, and put to it a very little
Pepper, some Salt, a whole Onion stuck with Cloves, and a French Roll cut in
Slices, and dried very hard, and some Pistachia Kernels blanched and shred
fine, and let all boil together; then beat up the Yolks of eight Eggs with a
little White Wind and the Juice of a Lemon, and mix it with your Broth, and
toast a whole French Roll, and put in the Middle of your Dish, and pour your
Soop over it; garnish your Dish with ten or twelve poached Eggs and scalded
Spinnage.

Savoury Balls.
TAKE part of a Leg of Lamb or Veal, and scrape it fine, with the same Quantity
of minced Beef Suet, a little lean Bacon, sweet Herbs, a Shallot, and
Anchovies, beat it in a Mortar 'til it is as smooth as Wax; season it with
savoury Spice, and make it into little Balls.

A Caudle for Sweet Pyes.
TAKE Sack and White wine alike in Quantity, a little Verjuice and Sugar, boil
it, and brew it with two or three Eggs, as buttered Ale; when the Pyes are
baked, pour it in at the Funnel, and shake it together.

A Lear for Savoury Pyes.
TAKE Claret, Gravy, Oyster-Liquor, two or three Anchovies, a Faggot of sweet
Herbs, and an Onion; boil it up and thicken it with brown Butter, then pour it
into your savoury Pyes when called for.

A Ragoo for made Dishes.
TAKE Claret, Gravy, sweet Herbs, and savoury Spice, toss up in it Lamb-stones,
Cox-combs, boiled, blanched, and sliced, with sliced Sweetmeats, Oysters,
Mushrooms, Truffles, and Murrels; thicken these with brown Butter, use it when
called for.

To make Plumb Porridge.
TAKE a Leg and Shin of Beef to ten Gallons of Water, boil it very tender, and
when the Broth is strong, strain it out, wipe the Pot, and put in the Broth
again; slice six Penny-loaves thin, cutting off the Top and Bottom; put some of
the Liquor to it, cover it up, and let it stand a Quarter of an Hour, and then
put it in your Pot; let it boil a Quarter of an Hour, then put in five Pounds
of Currants, let them boil a little, and put in five Pounds of Raisins, and two
Pounds of Prunes, and let them boil 'til they swell; then put in three Quarters
of an Ounce of Mace, Half an Ounce of Cloves, two Nutmegs, all of them beat
fine, and mix it with a little Liquor cold, and put them in a very little
while, and take off the Pot, and put in three Pounds of Sugar, a little Salt, a
Quart of Sack, and a Quart of Cl^ret, the Juice of two or three Lemons; you may
thicken with Sagoe instead of Bread, if you please; pour them into Earthen
Pans, and keep them for Use.

A Soop or Pottage.
TAKE several Knuckles of Mutton, a Knuckle of Veal, a Shin of Beef, and put to
these twelve Quarts of Water, cover the Pot close, and set it on the Fire; let
it not boil too fast; scum it well, and let it stand on the Fire twenty four
Hours; then strain it through a Colander, and when it is cold take off the Fat,
and set it on the Fire again, and season it with Salt, a few Cloves, Pepper, a
Blade of Mace, a Nutmeg quartered, a Bunch of sweet Herbs, and a Pint of Gravy;
let all these boil up for Half an Hour, and then strain it; put Spinnage,
Sorrel, green Peace, Asparagus, or Artichoke bottoms, according to the Time of
Year; then thicken it with the Yolks of three or four Eggs; have in Readiness
some Sheeps Tongues, Cox combs, and Sweetbreads, sliced thin, and fried, and
put them in, and some Mushrooms, and French Bread dried and cut in little Bits,
some forc'd-meat Balls, and some very thin Slices of Bacon, make all these very
hot, and garnish the Dish with Colworts and Spinnage scalded green.

To make Peas-Pottage.
TAKE a Quart of white Peace, a Piece of Neckbeef, and four Quarts of fair
Water, and boil them 'til they are all to Pieces, then strain them through a
Colander; then take a Handful or two of Spinnage, a Top or two of young
Colworts, and a very small Leek; shred the Herbs a little, and put them into a
Frying pan, or Stew pan, with three Quarters of a Pound of fresh Butter, but
the Butter must be very hot before you put in your Herbs; let them fry a little
while, then put in your Liquor, and two or three Anchovies, some Salt and
Pepper, to your Taste, a Sprig of Mint rubbed in small, and let all boil
together 'til you think it is thick enough; then have in Readiness some forced
Meat, and make three or four score Balls, about the Bigness of large Peace, fry
them brown, and put them in the Dish you serve it in, and fry some thin Slices
of Bacon, put some in the Dish, and some on the Brim of the Dish, with scalded
Spinnage; fry some Toasts after the Balls brown and hard, and break them into
the Dish; then pour your Pottage over all, and serve to the Table.

To make strong Broth to keep for Use.
TAKE part of a Leg of Beef, and the scrag End of a Neck of Mutton, and break
the Bones in Pieces, and put it to as much Water as will cover it, and a little
Salt; and when it boils, scum it clean, and put into it a whole Onion stuck
with Cloves, a Bunch of sweet Herbs, some Pepper, a Nutmeg quartered; let these
boil 'til the Meat is boiled in Pieces, and the Strength boiled out of it; then
put to it two or three Anchovies, and when they are dissolved, strain it out;
and keep it for any sort of Hash or Fricasy.

To make Forced Meat.
TAKE part of a Leg of Mutton, Veal, or Beef, and pick off the Skins and Fat
and to every Pound of Meat put two Pounds of Beef-sue^; shred them together
very fine, then season it with Pepper, Salt, Cloves, Mace, Nutmeg, and Sage;
then put al' into a stone Mortar, and to every two Pounds of Meat put Half a
Pint of Oysters and six Eggs well beaten; then mix them all together, and beat
it very well; then keep it in an Earthen Pot for your Use; put a little Flour
on the Top, and when you roll them up, flour your Hands.

A Lamb Pie.
CUT a hind Quarter of Lamb into thin Slices, season it with sweet Spices, and
lay it in the Pie, mixed with Half a Pound of Raisins of the Sun stoned, Half a
Pound of Currants, two or three Spanish Potatoes boiled, blanched, and sliced;
or an Artichoke Bottom or two, with Prunellas, Damsons, Gooseberries, Grapes,
Citron and Lemon Chips: Lay on Butter, and close the Pie; when it is baked, make
a Caudle for it.

A Chicken Pie.
TAKE six small Chichens, roll up a Piece of Butter in sweet Spice, and put it
into them; then season them, and lay them in the Pie, with the Marrow of two
Bones, with Fruit and Preserves, as the Lamb Pie, with a Caudle.

A Lumber Pie.
TAKE a Pound and Half of a Fillet of Veal, and mince it with the same Quantity
of Beef suet; season it with sweet Spice, five Pippins, an handful of Spinnage,
and an hard Lettuce, Thyme and Parsley. Mix it with a Penny grated white Loaf,
the Yolks of Eggs, Sack and Orange-flower Water, a Pound and an Half of
Currants and Preserves, as the Lamb Pie, with a Caudle. An Humble Pie is made
the same way.

A Mutton Pie.
SEASON your Mutton-steaks with savoury Spice; fill the Pie, lay on the Butter,
and close the Pie: When it is baked, toss up a Handful of chopp'd Capers,
Cucumbers, and Oysters, in Gravy, an Anchovy, and drawn Butter.

A Pigeon Pie.
TRUSS and season your Pigeons with savoury Spice, lard them with Bacon, and
stuff them with Forc'dmeat, and lay them in the Pie with the Ingredients for
savoury Pyes, with Butter, and close the Pie. A Lear, a Chicken or Capon Pie,
is made the same Way.

A Neats-Tongue Pie.
HALF boil the Tongues, blanch and slice them; season them with savoury Spice,
with B^lls, sliced Lemon and Butter, and close the Pie. When it is baked, pour
into it a Ragoo.

To pickle Oysters.
TAKE a Quart of Oysters, and wash them in their own Liquor very well, till all
the Grittiness is out; put them in a Sauce-pan or Stew pan, and (...) in the
Liquor over them, set them on the Fire, and scu^ them; then put in three or
four Blades of Mace, a Spoonful of whole Pepper-cor^s; when you think they are
boiled enough, throw in a Glass of white Wine; let them have a thorough Scald;
then tak^ them up, and when they are cold, put them in a Pot, and pour the
Liquor over them, and keep them for Use. Take them out with a Spoon.

To Collar Eels.
TAKE your Eel and cut it open; take out the Bones, and cut off the Head and
Tail, and lay the Eel fl^t on a Dresser, and ^^red Sage ^s fine as possible,
and mix it with black Pepper beat, Nutmeg grated, and Salt, and lay it all over
the Eel, and roll it up hard in little Cloths, and tie it up tight at even End;
then set over some Water with Pepper and Salt, five or six Cloves, three or
four Blades of Mace, and a Bay-leaf or two; boil it and the Bones and Head and
Tail well together; then take out the Head and Tail, and put it away, and put
in your Eels, and let them boil till they are tender; then take them out of the
Liquor, and boil the Liquor longer; then take it off, and when it is cold, put
it to your Eels, but do not take off the little Cloths till you use them.

Hung Beef.
MAKE a strong Brine with Bay Salt, and Petre-Salt, and Pump Water, and steep
therein a Rib of Beef for nine Days; then hang it up in a Chimney where Wood or
Saw-Dust is burnt; when it is a little dry, wash the Outside with Blood two or
three Times, to make it look black, and when it is dried enough, boil it for Use.

To make Collar'd Beef.
TAKE a Flank of Beef, salt it with white Salt, and let it lie forty eight
Hours; then wash it, and hang it in the Wind to dry twenty four Hours; then
take Pepper, Salt, Cloves, Mace, and Nutmegs, and Saltpetre, all beaten fine,
and mix them together, and rub it all over the Inside, and roll it up hard,
and tie it Bay Leaves, and four Pounds of Butter, and cover the Pot with Rye
Paste, and bake it with Household Bread.

To stew Oysters in French Rolls.
TAKE 1 Quart of large Oysters, wash them in their own Liquor, and strain it,
and put them in it with a little Salt, some Pepper, Mace, and sliced Nutmeg;
let the Oysters stew a little with all these Things, and thicken them up with a
great deal of Butter; then take six French Rolls, cut a Piece off the Top, and
take out the Crumb, and take your Oysters boiling hot, and fill the Rolls full,
and set them near the Fire on a Chafing Dish of Coals, and let them be hot
through, and as the Liquor soaks in, fill them up with more, if you have 'em,
or some hot Gravy: So serve them up instead of a Pudding.

A Veal Pie.
RAISE an high Pie, then cut a Fillet of Veal into three or four Fillets,
season it with savoury Spice, a little minced Sage and sweet Herbs; lay it in
the Pie, with Slices of Bacon at the Bottom, and betwixt each Piece, lay on
Butter, and close the Pie.

A Turkey Pie.
BONE the Turkey, season it with savoury Spice, and lay it in the Pie with two
Capons, or two wild Ducks, cut in Pieces to fill up the Corners; lay on Butter,
and close the Pie.

A Florendine of a Kidney of Veal.
SHRED the Kidney, Fat and all, with a little Spinnage, Parsley, and Lettuce,
three Pippins and Orange-peel; season it with sweet Spice and Sugar, and a good
Handful of Currants, two or three grated Biskets, Sack, and Orange-flower
Water, two or three Eggs; mix it into a Body, and put it into a Dish, being
cover^d with Puff Paste, lay on a cut Lid, and garnish the Brim.

A Marrow-Pudding.
BOIL a Quart of Cream or Milk, with a stick of Cinnamon, a quartered Nutmeg
and large Mace; then mix it with eight Eggs well beat, a little Salt, Sugar,
Sack, and Orange-flower Water; strain it, then put to it three grated Biskets,
an Handful of Currants, as many Raisins of the Sun, the Marrow of two Bones,
all in four large Pieces, then gather it to a Body over the Fire; then put it
into a Dish, having the B^^m th^reo' garnished with Puff Paste, and raised in
the Oven; then l^y on the four Pieces of Marrow, Knots, and Pastes, sliced
Citron, and Lemon peel.

A Calves-Feet Pudding.
TAKE Calves Feet, shred them very fine, and mix them with a Penny Loaf grated,
and scalded, with a Point of Cream; put to it half a Pound of shred Beef Suet,
eight Eggs, and a Handful of plump'd Currants; season it with sweet Spice and
Sugar, a little Sack and Orange-flower Water, the Marrow of two Bones; then put
it in a Veal Caul, being washed over with the Batter of Eggs, then wet a Cloth
and put it therein, tie it close up; when the Pot boils, put it in; boil it
about two Hours; then turn it in a Dish, and stick on it sliced Almonds and
Citron; let the Sauce be Sack and Orange flower Water, with Lemon-juice, Sugar,
and drawn Butter.

To stuff a Shoulder or Leg of Mutton with Oysters.
TAKE a little grated Bread, some Beef Suet, Yolks of hard Eggs, three
Anchovies, a Bit of an Onion, Salt and Pepper, Thyme and Winter-savoury, twelve
Oysters, some Nutmeg grated; mix all these together, and shred them very fine,
and work them up with raw Eggs like a Paste, and stuff your Mutton under the
Skin in the thickest Place, or where you please, and roast it; and for Sauce,
take some of the Oyster-liquor, some Claret, two or three Anchovies, a little
Nutmeg, a Bit of an Onion, the rest of the Oysters: Stew all these together,
then take out the Onion, and put it under the Mutton.

To boil a Pike.
CUT open a living Pike, gut it, and scour the Outside and In side very well
with Salt, then wash it clean, and have in Readiness a Pickle to boil it in,
Water, Venegar, Mace, whole Pepper, a Bunch of sweet Herbs, and a small Onion;
there must be Liquor enough to cover it; when the Liquor boils, put in the
Pike, and make it boil soon, (half an Hour will boil a very large Pike;) make
your Sauce with White wine, a little of the Liquor, two Anchovies, some
Shrimps, or Lobsters, or Crab; beat and mix with it grated Nutmeg, and Butter
flowered to thicken it; pour your Sauce over the Fish, garnished with
Horse-raddish and sliced Lemon.

To roast a Pike.
TAKE a large Pike, gut it and clean it, and lard it with Eel and Bacon, as you
lard a Fowl; then take Thyme and Savory, Salt, Mace, and Nutmeg, some Crumbs of
Bread, Beef Suet and Parsley; shred all very fine, and mix it up with raw Eggs;
make it in a long Pudding, and put it in the Belly of your Pike, skewer up the
Belly, and dissolve Anchovies in Butter, and baste it with it; put two Splints
on each Side the Pike, and tie it to the Spit; melt Butter thick for the Sauce,
or, if you please, Oyster sauce, and bui^e the Pudding in it. Garnish with
Lemon.

A Ragoo of Sweet-breads.
TAKE your Sweet breads and skin them, and put some Butter in the Frying pan,
and brown it with Flour, and put the Sweet breads in; stir them a little and
turn them; then put in some strong Broth and Mushrooms, some Pepper and Salt,
Cloves and M^ce; let them stew half an Hour; then put in some Forced meat
Balls, some Artichoke-bottoms cut small and thin; make it thick, and serve it
up with sliced Lemon.

A Ragoo of Oysters.
PUT into your Stew pan a Quarter of a Pound of Butter, let it boil; then take
a Quart of Oysters, strain them from their Liquor, and put them to the Butter;
let them stew with a Bit of Eschalot shred very fine, and some grated Nutmeg,
and a little Salt; then beat the Yolks of three or four Eggs with the
Oyster-liquor and half a Pound of Butter, and shake all very well together till
it is thick, and serve it up with Sippets; and garnish with sliced Lemon.

To stew Mushrooms.
TAKE some strong Broth, and season it if with a Bunch of Sweet herbs, some
Spice and Anchovies, and set it over the Fire till it is hot; then put in your
Mushrooms, and just let them boil up; then take some Yolks of Eggs, with a
little minced Thyme and Parsley, and some grated Nutmeg, and stir it over the
Fire till it is thick. Serve it up with sliced Lemon.

To Collar a Calf's Head.
TAKE a Calf's Head with the Skin and Hair upon it; then scald it, to fetch off
the Hair; then parboil it, but not too much; then get it clean from the Bones
while it is hot; you must stir it on the Fore part, season it with Pepper,
Salt, Cloves, Mace, Nutmeg, and Sweet-herbs, shred small, and all mixed
together with the Yolks of three or four Eggs, and spread it over the Head, and
roll it up hard. Boil it gently for three Hours, in just as much Water as will
cover it; when it is tender it is boiled enough. If you do the Tongue, first boil
it and peel it, and slice it in thin Slices, and likewise the Palate, and put
them and the ^yes in the Inside of the Head before you roll it up. When the
Head is taken out, season the Pickle with Salt, Pepper, and Spice, and give it
a Boil, adding to it a Point of White wine, and as much Vinegar. When it is
cold, put in the Collar; and when you use it, cut it in Slices.

To Collar Cow-Heels.
TAKE five or six Cow-Heels or Feet, and bone them while they are hot, and l^y
them one upon another, strewing some Salt between; then roll them up in a
coarse Clot^, and squeeze in both Ends, and tie them up very hard; boil it an
Hour and a half; then take it out, and when it is cold put it into common
Souce-drink for Brawn. Cut off a little at each End, it looks better. Serve it
in Slices, or in the Collar, as you please.

A Tansy.
BOIL a Quart of Cream or Milk, with a Stick of Cinnamon, quartered Nutmeg, and
large Mace; when half cold, mix it with twenty Yolks of Eggs, and ten Whites;
strain it, then put to it four grated Biskets, half a Pound of Butter, a Pint
of Spinnage-juice, and a little Tansy, Sack, and Orange-flower Water, Sugar,
and a little Salt; then gather it to a Body over the Fire, and pour it into
your Dish, being well buttered: When it is baked, turn it on a Pye-plate;
squeeze on it an Orange, grate on Sugar, and garnish it with sliced Orange and
a little Tansy. Made in a Dish; cut as you please.

To stew a Rump of Beef.
SEASON your Rump of Beef with two Nutmegs, some Pepper and Salt, and lay the
fat Side downward in your Stew Pan; put to it a quarter of a Pint of Vinegar, a
Pint of Claret, three Pints of Water, three whole Onions stuck with a few
Cloves, and a Bunch of Sweet-herbs; cover it close, and let it stew over a
gentle Fire four or five Hours; scum off the Fat from the Liquor. Lay your Meat
on Sippets, and pour your Liquor over it. Garnish your Dish with scalded Greens.

To make a Pale Fricasy.
TAKE Lamb, Chicken, or Rabbets, cut in Pieces, wash it well from the Blood,
then put it in a broad Pan or Stew Pan; put in as much fair Water as will cover
it; put in Salt, a Bunch of Sweet herbs, some Pepper, an Onion, two Anchovies,
and stew it till it is enough; then mix in a Poringer six Yolks of Eggs, a Glass
of White Wind, a Nutmeg grated, a little chopp'd Parsley, a Piece of fresh
Butter, and three or four Spoonfuls of Cream; beat all these together, and put
it into your Stew Pan, and shake it together till it is thick. Dish it on
Sippets, and garnish with sliced Lemon.

To hash a Calf's Head.
BOIL your Calf's Head almost enough, and when it is cold, cut the Meat in thin
Slices clean from the Bone, and put it into a Stew pan, with some strong Broth,
a Glass of White Wind, some Oysters and their Liquor, a Bunch of Sweet-herbs,
two or three Eschalots, a Nutmeg quartered, and let these stew on a slow Fire
till they are enough; then put in two or three Anchovies, the Yolks of four
Eggs well beaten, and a Piece of Butter, and thicken it up; then have ready
fried some thin Slips of Bacon, some Forc'd-meat Balls, some large Oysters
dipped in Butter; the Brains first boiled, and then fried, some Sweet-breads
cut in Slices, some Lamb-stones cut in Rounds; then put your Hash in your Dish,
and the other things, some round and some on it. Garnish the Dish with sliced
Lemon.

To make Scotch-Collops.
CUT thin Slices out of a Leg of Veal, as many as you think will serve for a
Dish, and hack them, and lard some with Bacon, and fry them in Butter, then
take them out of the Pan, and keep them warm, and clean the Pan, and put into
it half a Pint of Oysters, with their Liquor, and some strong Broth, one or two
Eschalots, a Glass of White Wind, two or three Anchovies minced, some grated
Nutmeg; let these have a Boil up, and thicken it with four or five Eggs and a
Piece of Butter, and then put in your Collops, and shake them together till
it is thick; put dried Sippets on the Bottom of the Dish, and put your Collops
in, and so many as you please of the things in your Hash.

A Fricasy of Chickens.
AFTER you have drawn and washed your Chickens, half boil them; then take them
up and cut them in Pieces, and put them into a Drying Pan, and fry them in
Butter; then take them out of the Pan and clean it, and put in some strong
Broth, some White Wind, some grated Nutmeg, a little Pepper and Salt, a Bunch
of Sweet-herbs, and an Eschalot or two; let these, with two or three Anchovies,
stew on a slow Fire and boil up; then beat it up with Butter and Eggs till it is
thick, and put your Chickens in, and toss them well together; lay Sippets in
the Dish, and serve it up with sliced Lemon and fried Parsley.

Gravy to keep for Use.
TAKE a Piece of coarse Beef, cover it with Water; when it has boiled some
time, take out the Meat, beat it very well, and cut it in Pieces to let out the
Gravy; then put it in again, with a Bunch of Sweet-herbs, an Onion stuck with
Cloves, a little Salt, some whole Pepper; let it stew, but not boil; when it is
of a brown Color it is enough; take it up, put it in an Earthen Pot, and let it
stand to cool; when it is cold scum off the Fat; it will keep a Week unless the
Weather be very hot. If for a brown Fricasy, put some Butter in your
Drying Pan, and shake in a little Flour as it boils, and put in some Gravy,
with a Glass of Claret, and shake up the Fricasy in it: If for a white Fricasy,
then melt your Butter in the Gravy, with a little White wine, ^ Spoonful or two
of Cream, and the Yolks of Eggs.

An Amulet of Eggs, the Savoury Way.
TAKE a Dozen of Eggs, beat them very well, and season them with Salt, and a
little Pepper; then have your Drying Pan ready, with a good deal of fresh
Butter in it, and let it be thoroughly hot; then put in your Eggs with four
Spoonfuls of strong Gravy; and have ready Parsley, and a few Chieves cut, and
throw them over it, and when it is enough turn it; and when done, dish it, and
squeeze Orange or Lemon over it.

A Fricasy of double Tripe.
CUT your Tripe in Slices two Inches long, and put it into a Stew pan; put to
it a quarter of a Pound of Capers, as much Samphire shred, half a Pint of
strong Broth, as much White Wind, a Bunch of Sweet herbs, a Lemon shred small;
stew all these together till it is tender; then take it off the Fire, and
thicken up the Liquor with the Yolks of three or four Eggs, a little Parsley
boiled green and chopp'd, some grated Nutmeg and Salt; shake it well together.
Serve it on Sippets. Garnish with Lemon.

To boil Mullet, or any Sort of Fish.
SCALE your Fish and wash them, saving their Liver, or Tripes, Rowses, or
Spawn; boil them in Water that is seasoned with Salt, White Wind Vinegar,
White Wind, a Bunch of Sweet-herbs, a sliced Lemon, one or two Onions, some
Horse-raddish; and when it boils up, put in your Fish, and for Sauce, a Pint of
Oysters with their Liquor, a Looster bruised or minced, or Shrimps, some
White Wind, two or three Anchovies, some large Mace, a quartered Nutmeg, a
whole Onion. Let these have a Boil up, and thicken it with Butter and the Yolks
of two or three Eggs. Serve it on Sippets, and garnish with Lemon.

To butter Crabs or Lobsters.
YOUR Crabs or Lobsters being boiled and cold, take all the Meat out of the
Shells and Body, break the Claws, and take out all their Meat, mince it small,
and put it all together, and add to it two or three Spoonfuls of Claret, a very
little Vinegar, a Nutmeg grated; then let it boil up till it is thorough hot;
then put in some Butter melted, with some Anchovies and Gravy, and thicken it
up with the Yolks of an Egg or two; and when it is very hot, put it in the large
Shell, and stick is with Toasts.

To stew a Carp.
TAKE two Carps, scale and rub them well with S^l^; then cut them in the Nape
of the Neck and round the Tail, to make them bleed. Cut up the Belly, take out
the Liver and Guts, and if you please to cut each Carp in three Pieces, they
will eat the firmer; then put them in a Stew Pan, with their Blood, a Quart of
Claret, a Bunch of Sweet-herbs, an Onion, one or two Eschalors, a Nutmeg, a few
Cloves, Mace, whole Pepper; cover them close, and let them stew till they be
half enough; then turn them, and put in half Pound of fresh Butter, four
Anchovies, the Liver and Guts, taking out the Gall, and let them stew till they
are enough; then beat the Y^lks of five or six Eggs, with a little Verjuice,
and by Degrees mix it with the Liquor the Carp was stewed in. Just give it a
Scald to thicken it; then put your Carp in a Dish, and pour this over it.
Garnish the Dish with sliced Lemon.

To Collar Venison.
TAKE a Side of Venison, and bone it, and take aw^y all the Sinews, and cut it
into square Collars, of what Bignes^ you please: It will make two or three
Collars; lard it with fat clear Bacon, cut your Lard as big as the Top of your
Finger, and as long as your little Finger; then season your Venison with
Pepper, Salt, Cloves, Mace, and Nutmeg: Roll up your Collars, and tie them
close with coarse ^^p^; then put them into deep Pots; put Seasoning at the
Bottom of the Pot, and some fresh Butter, and three or four Bay Leaves; then
put in your Venison, and some Seasoning, and some Butter on the Top, and over
that some Beef Suet, finely shred and beaten; then cover up your Pot with
coarse Paste; they will ask four or five Hours baking; then take them out of
the Oven, and let it stand a little; then take out your Venison, and let it
drain well from the Gravy. Take off all the Fat from the Gravy, and add more
Butter to that Fat, and set it over a gentle Fire to clarify; then take it off,
and let it stand a little, and scum it well; then make your Pots clean, or have
Pots fit for each Collar; put a little Seasoning at the Bottom, and some of
your clarified Butter; then put in your Venison, and fill up your Pots with
clarified Butter; and be sure your Butter be an Inch above the Meat; and when
it is thorough cold, tie it down with double Paper, and lay a Tile on the Top;
they will keep six or eight Months: You may, if you please, when you use a Pot,
put the Pot in boiling Water a Minute, and it will come whole out: Let it stand
till it is cold, and stick it round with Bay Leaves, and one Sprig on the Top.

To pot Neats-Tongues.
TAKE Neats-Tongues, and rub them very well with Salt and Water (Bay Salt is
best;) then take Pump-water, with a good deal of Saltpeter, and some white
Salt, and some Cloves and Mace, and boil it well, and scum it, and when it is
cold, put your Tongues in, and let them lie in it six Days; then wash them out
of that Liquor, and put them in a Pot, and bake them with Bread till they are
very tender; and when they are taken out of the Oven, pull off their Skins, put
them in the Pot you intend to keep them in, and cover them over with clarified
Butter: They will keep four or five Months.

To Collar a Breast of Veal.
TAKE a Breast of Veal and bone it, and wash it, and dry it in a clean Cloth;
then shred Thyme, Winter-savoury, and Parsley, very small, and mix it with
Salt, Pepper, Cloves, Mace, and Nutmeg; then strew it on the la^^de of your
Meat, and roll it up hard, beginning at the Neck End; tie it up with Tape, and
put it in a Pot fit to boil it in, standing upright: You must boil it in Water
and Salt, and a bunch of Sweet herbs; when it is boiled enough, take it off the
Fire, and put it in an earthen Pot, and when the Liquor is cold pour it over
it, or else boil Salt and Water strong enough to bear an Egg; and when that is
cold, pour it on your Veal: When you serve it to the Table, cut it in round
Slices. Garnish with Laurel or Fennel.

To Collar a Pig.
CUT off the Head of your Pig; then cut the Body asunder; bone it, and cut two
Collars off each Side; then lay it in Water to take out the Blood; then take
Sage and Parsley, and shred them very small, and mix them with Pepper, Salt,
and Nutmeg, and strew some on every Side or Collar, and roll it up and tie it
with coarse Tape; so boil them in fair Water and Salt till they are very
tender: Put two or three Blades of Mace in the Kettle, and when they are
enough, take them up, and lay them in something to cool; strain out some of the
Liquor, and add to it some Vinegar and Salt, a little White Wind, and three or
four Bay Leaves; give it a Boil up, and when it is cold, put it to the Collars,
and keep them for Use.

To pot Beef.
TAKE a good Buttock of Beef, and cut out the Bone, and lay it flat, and slash
it in several Places; then salt it well, and let it lie in the Salt three Days;
then take it out, and let it lie in running Water with a Handful of Salt three
Days longer; then take it out, dry it with a Cloth, and season it with Pepper,
Salt, Nutmeg, Cloves, Mace, and two Ounces of Salt petre, finely beaten; then
shred two or three Pounds of Beef suet, and one Pound in Lumps, and three
Pounds of Butter, put some in the Bottom of the Pot you bake it in; then put in
your Beef and the rest of the Butter and Suet on the Top; cover your ^ot over
with coarse Paste, and set it in all Night with ^eu^ old bread; in the Morning
draw it, and pour off. ^ll the ^^t into a Pot, and drain out all the Gravy;
pull the Meat all to Pieces, Fat and Lean, and work it into your Pots that you
keep it in while it is hot, or it will not close so well; then cover it with
the clear Fat you poured off; p^per it when it is cold, it will keep good a
Month or six Weeks.

Chickens sorc'd with Oysters.
LARD and truss them; m^ke ^ Forci^g with Oysters, Sweet breads, Parsley,
T^^^^les, Mushrooms, and Onions; chop these together and season it; mix it with
a Piece of Butter and the Yolk of an Egg; then tie them at both Ends and ^o^st
them; then make for them a Ragoo, and garnish them with sliced Lemon.

A Ragoo of a Breast of Veal.
BONE a Breast of Veal, cut a handsome square Piece, then cut the other Part
into small Pieces, brown it in Butter, then stew and toss it up in your Ragoo
for Made-dishes; thicken it with brown butter; put then the Ragoo in the Dish,
lay on the square Piece dic'd, with Lemon, Sweet-breads, Sippets, and Bacon
fried in the Batter of Eggs, and garnish it with sliced Orange.

To recover Venison when it stinks.
TAKE as much cold Water in a Tub as will cover it a Handful over, and put in
good Store of Salt, and let it lie three or four Hours; then take your Venison
out, and let it lie in as much hot Water and Salt, and let it lie as long as
before; then have your C^^st in readiness, and take it out, and dry it very
well, and ^e^son it with Pepper and Salt pretty high, and put it in your Pasty.
Do not use the Bones of your Venison for Gravy, but get fresh Beef or other
Bones.

How to force a Fowl.
TAKE a good Fowl, kill, pull, and draw it; then slit the Skin down the Back,
and take off the Flesh from the Bones, and mince it very small, and mix it with
one Pound of Beef Suet shred, and a Pint of large Oysters chopp'd, two
Anchovies, an Eschalot, a little grated Bread, some Sweet-herbs; shred all
these very well, and mix them, and make it up with Yolks of Eggs; so put all
these Ingredients on the Bones again, and draw the Skin over again; sew up the
Back, and put the Fowl in a Bladder; so boil it an Hour and a Quarter; then
stew some more Oysters in Gravy, and bruise in a little of your Forc'd-meat,
and beat it up with fresh Butter; put the Fowl in the Middle; pour on the
Sauce, and garnish with sliced Lemon.

To force a Leg of Veal, Mutton, or Lamb.
TAKE out all the Meat, and leave the Skin whole; then take the Lean of it and
make it into Forc'd-meat thus: To two Pounds of your lean Meat, three Pounds of
Beef Suet; take away all Skins from the Meat and Suet; then shred both very
fine, and beat it with a Rolling-pin, till you know not the Meat from the Suet;
then mix with it four Spoonfuls of grated Bread, half an Ounce of Cloves and
Mace beaten, as much Pepper, some Salt, a few Sweet-herbs shred small; mix all
these together with six raw Eggs, and put it into the Skin again, and sew it
up. If you roast it, serve it with Anchovie-sauce; if you boil it, lay
Colliflower or French beans under it. Garnish with Pickles, or stew Oysters and
put under it, with Forc'd-meat Balls, or Sausages fried in Butter.

To fry Oysters.
BEAT Eggs, with a little Salt, grated Nutmeg, and thicken it like thick
Batter, with grated white ^read and fine Flour; then dip the Oysters in it, and
fry them brown with Beef-dripping.

Beef A-la-mode.
TAKE a good B^tt^ck of Beef, interl^rded with great Lard, rolled up in s^^^^ry
Spice, and Sweet-herbs; put i^ in a great Sauce-pan, and cover it close, and
let it in the Oven all Night. This is fit to eat cold.

A Goose, Turkey, or Leg of Mutton, A-la-daube.
LARD it with Bacon, and half roast it; then take it off the Spit, and put it
in as small a Pot as will boil it, put to it a Quart of White wine, strong
Broth, a Pint of Vinegar, whole Spice, Bay Leaves, Sweet marj^ram,
Winter-savoury, and green Onions. When it is ready, lay it in the Dish, make
Sauce with some of the Liquor, Mushrooms, dic'd Lemon, two or three Anchovies;
thicken it with brown Butter, and garnish it with sliced Lemon.

A Leg of Mutton A-la-royal.
LARD your Mutton and Slices of Veal with Bacon rolled in Spice and
Sweet-herbs, then, bringing them to a Brown with melted Lard, boil the Leg of
Mutton in strong Broth, with all sort of Sweet herbs, and an Onion stuck with
Cloves; when it is ready, lay in on the Dish, lay round the Collops; then pour
on it a Ragoo, and garnish with Lemon and Orange.

A brown Fricasy of Chickens or Rabbets.
CUT them in Pieces, and fry them in Butter, then having hot a Pint of Gravy, a
little Cla^et and White Wind, and strong Broth tw^ Anchovies, two shiver^d
Palates, a Fagg^t of S^eet herbs, savoury Balls and Spice, thicken it with
brown Butter, and squeeze on it a Lemon.

A while Fricasy of the same.
CUT them in Pieces, and wash them from the Blood, and fry them on a ^^ft Fire;
then put them in a Tossing pan, with a (...) strong Broth; season them, and
toss them up with Mushrooms and Oysters; when almost enough, p^t to them a Pint
of Cream, and thicken it with a bit of Butter rolled up in ^l^ur.

A Fricasy of Lamb.
CUT an hind Quarter of Lamb into thin Slices, season it with sav^^^y (...),
Sweet herbs, and a Shalot; then fry them, and toss them up in strong Broth,
White Wind, Oysters, B^^^, and Palates, a little brown Butter to thicken it, or
a bit of Butter rolled up in Flour.

To fry Cucumbers for Mutton Sauce.
YOU must brown some Butter in a Pan, and cut the Cucumbers in thin Slices;
drain them from the Water, then sling them into the Pan, and when they are
fried brown, put in a little Pepper and Salt, a Bit of an Onion and Gravy, and
let them stew together, and squeeze in some Juice of Lemon; shake them well,
and put them under your Mutton.

To make a savoury Dish of Veal.
CUT large Collops out of a Leg of Veal; spread them abroad on a Dresser; hack
them with the Back of a Knife, and dip them in the Yolks of Eggs, and season
them with Cloves, Mace, Nutmeg, Salt, Pepper; then make Forced meat with some
of your Veal, and Beef suet, and Oysters chopped, Sweet herbs shred fine, and the
aforesaid Spice, and strew all these over your Collops; roll and tie them up,
and put them on Skewers, and tie them to a Spit and roast them; and to the rest
of your Forc'd-meat add the Yolk of an Egg or two, and m^ke it up in Balls, and
fry them, and put them in the Dish with your Meat when roasted, and make the
Sauce with strong Broth, an Anchovy, and an Eschalot, and a little White Wind
and Spice; let it stew, and thicken it up with Butter.

To Collar Beef.
LAY your Fl^nk of Beef in Ham-brine eight or ten Days; then dry it in a Cloth,
and take out all the Leather and the Skin; scotch it cross and cross, season it
with savoury Spice, two or three Anchovies, a Handful or two of Thyme,
Sweet-marjoram, Winter-savory, and Onions; strew it on the Me^t, and roll it in
a hard Collar in a Cloth; sew it close, and tie it at both Ends, and put it in
a Collar Cloth, with a Pint of Claret, and Cochineel, and two Q^arts of
Pump-water, and bake it all Night; then t^ke it out hot, and tie it close at
both Ends; then set it upon one End, and p^t a Weight upon it, and let it stand
till it is cold; then take it out of the Cloth, and keep it dry.

To Collar Pig.
SLIT the Pig down the Back, take out all the Bones, wash the Blood in three or
four Waters, wipe it dry, and season it with savoury Spice, Thyme, Parsley, and
Salt, and roll it in a hard Collar; tie it close in a Cloth, and boil it with
the Bones in three Pints of Water, a Handful of Salt, a Quart of Vinegar, a
Faggot of Sweet-herbs, whole Spice, a Pennyworth of Ising glass; when it is
boiled tender, take it off; and when cold, take it out of the Cloth, and keep
it in this Pickle.

To pot a Swan.
BONE and skin your Swan, and beat the Flesh in a Mortar, taking out the
Strings as you beat it; then take some clear fat Bacon, and beat with the Swan,
and when it is of a light Flesh Color, there is Bacon enough in it; and when
it is beaten till it is like Dough, it is enough; then season it with Pepper,
Salt, Cloves, Mace, and Nutmeg, all beaten fine; mix it well with your Flesh,
and give it a Beat or two all together; then put it in an Earthen Pot, with a
little Claret and fair Water, and at the Top two Pounds of fresh Butter spread
over it; cover it with coarse Paste, and bake it with Bread; then turn it out
into a Dish, and squeeze it gently to get out the Moisture; then put it in a
Pot fit for it; and when it is cold, cover it over with clarified Butter; the
next Day paper it up. In this Manner you may do Goose, Duck, or Beef, or Hare's
flesh.

To make Westphalia Bacon.
MAKE a Pickle as follows* Take a Gallon of Pump-water, a quarter of a Peck
of Bay salt, as much White s^lt, a Pound of Petre salt, and a quarter of a
Pound of Saltpeter, a Pound of coarse Sugar* and an Ounce of Socho tied up in
a Rag; boil all these together very well, and let it stand till it is cold; then
put in the Pork, and let it lie in this Pickle a Fortnight; then take it out
and dry it over Saw-dust. This Pickle will do Tongues, but you must first let
the Tongues lie six or eight Hours in Pump water, to take out the Sliminess*
and when they have lain in the Pickle, dry them as your Pork.

To salt and dry a Ham of Bacon.
TAKE English Bay Salt, and put it into a Vessel of Water suitable to the
Quantity of Hams you do; make your Pickle strong enough to bear an Egg with
your Bay Salt; then boil and scum it very well; then let the Pickle be
thoroughly cold, and put into it so much Redsaunders as will make it of the
Color of Claret; then let your Pickle stand three Days before you put your
Hams into it. The Hams must lie in the Pickle three Weeks; then carefully dry
them where Wood is burnt.

To dry Tongues.
TAKE to every two Ounces of Saltpeter a Pint of Petre-salt, and rub it well,
after it is finely beaten, over your Tongue, and then beat a Pint of Bay Salt,
and rub that on over it, and every three Days turn it; and when it has lain
nine or ten Days, hang it in Wood-smoke to dry. Do a Hog's head this way. For a
Ham of Pork or Mutton, have a Quart of Bay Salt, half a Pound of Petre-salt, a
quarter of a Pound of Saltpeter, a quarter of a Pound of brown Sugar, all
beaten very fine, mixed together, and rubbed well over it; let it lie a
Fortnight; ^urn it often, and then hang it up a Day to drain, and dry it in
Wood Smoke.

To salt Hams or Tongues.
TAKE three or four Gallons of Water, put to it four Pounds of Bay Salt, four
Pounds of White-salt, a Pound of Petre-salt, a quarter of a Pound of Salt
petre, two Ounces of Prunella-salt, a Pound of brown Sugar; let it boil a
quarter of an Hour; scum it well, and when it is cold, sever it from the Bottom
into the Vessel you keep it in.

Let Hams lie in this Pickle four or five Weeks.

A Clod of Dutch-Beef as long.

Tongues a Fortnight.

Collar'd Beef eight or ten Days.

Dry them in a Stove, or with Wood in a Chimney.

To make Dutch-Beef.
TAKE the lean Part of a Buttock of Beef raw, rub it well with brown Sugar all
over, and let it lie in a Pan or Tray two or three Hours, turning it three or
four Times; then salt it well with common Salt and Saltpeter, and let it lie a
Fortnight, turning it every Day; then roll it very strait in a coarse Cloth,
and put it in a Cheese-Press a Day and a Night, and hang it to dry in a
Chimney. When you boil it, you must put it in a Cloth: When it is cold, it will
cut out in Shivers as Dutch Beef.

To salt Bacon.
CUT your Flitches of Bacon very smooth, make no Holes in it: To about
threescore Pounds of Bacon, ten Pounds of Salt; dry your Salt very well, and
make it hot, then rub it hard over the Outside or skinny Part, but on the In
side lay it all over, without rubbing, only lightly on, about half an Inch
thick. Let it lie on a flat Board, that the Brine may run from it, nine Days;
then mix with a Quart of hot Salt, four Penny worth of Saltpeter, and strew it
all over your Bacon; then heat the rest of your Salt and put over it, and let
it lie nine Days longer; then hang it up a Day, and put it in a Chimney where
Wood is burnt, and there let it hang three Weeks or more, as you see Occasion.

To stew Pigeons.
SEASON your Pigeons with Pepper, Salt, Cloves, and Mace, and some Sweet-herbs;
wrap this Seasoning up in a Bit of Butter, and put it in their Bellies; then
tie up the Neck and Vent, and half roast them; then put them in a Stew Pan,
with a Quart of good Gravy, a little White Wind, some pickled Mushrooms, a few
Pepper-corns, three or four Blades of Mace, a Bit of Lemon Peel, a Bunch of
Sweet herbs, a Bit of an Onion, some Oyster-pickle: Let them stew till they are
enough; then thicken it up with Butter and Yolks of Eggs. Garnish with Lemon.
Do Ducks the some Way. You may put Forc'd-meat in their Bellies, or shred Thyme
wrapped up in Butter. Put Forced meat Balls in both.

To make a Poloe.
TAKE a Pint of Rice, boil it in as much Water as will cover it; when your Rice
is half boiled, put in your Fowl, with a small Onion, a Blade or two of Mace,
some wh^le Pepper, and some Salt; when it is enough, put the Fowl in a Dish, and
pour the Rice over it.

To stew Cucumbers.
PARE twelve Cucumbers, and slice them as for eating, and put them to drain,
and then lay them in a coarse Cloth till they are dry; flour them, and fry them
brown in Butter; then put to them some Claret, a little Gravy, some Pepper,
Cloves, and Mace, and let them stew a little; then roll a Bit of Butter in
Flour, and toss them up; put them under Mutton or Lamb roasted.

To pot Goose and Turkey.
TAKE a fat Goose, and a fat Turkey; cut them down the Rump, and take out all
the Bones; lay them flat, open and se^son them very well with white Pepper,
Nutmeg, and Salt, allowing three Nutmegs, with the like Proportion of Pepper,
and as much Salt as both the Spices; when you have seasoned them all over, let
your Turkey be within the Goose, and keep them in Season two Nights and a Day;
then roll them up as collar'd Beef very tight, and as short as you can, and
bind it very fast with strong Tape. Bake it in a long Pot, with good store of
Butter, till it is very tender, as you may feel by the End; let it lie in the
hot Liquor an Hour, then take it out, and let it stand till next Day; then
unbind it, and place it in your Pot, and melt Butter and pour over it. Keep it
for Use, and slice it out thin.

To make a Fricasy of Eggs.
BOIL your Eggs hard, and take out a good many of the Yolks whole, then cut the
rest in Quarters, Yolks and Whites together. Set on some Gravy, with a little
shred Thyme and Parsley in it, give it a Boil or two; then put in your Eggs,
with a little grated Nutmeg; shake it up with a Bit of Butter, till it be as
thick as another Fricasy; then fry Artichoke Bottoms in thin Slices, and serve
it up. Garnish with Eggs shred small.

To stew a Turkey.
TAKE a fine young Turkey, killed, pulled, and drawn; fill the Skin on the
Breast with Forc'd-meat, and lard it on the Sides with Bacon; Put into the
Belly half an Esch^lot, two Anchovies, and a little Thyme shred small; brown it
in a Pan with a little Butter; when it is very brown, put it in a Stew pan, with
strong Gravy, some White wine, or Claret, two or three Anchovies, some Mace,
Sweet herbs, a little Pepper, and let it stew till it is thoroughly enough; then
thicken the Liquor with Butter and Eggs; fry some French Loaves dipped in
Cream, after the Top and the Crumb is taken out; then fill them with stewed
Oysters or Shrimps, or Cockles, and with them garnish the Dish, or with sliced
Lemon. A Hen, Goose, or Duck, does well this way.

To bake a Rump of Beef.
BONE a Rump of Beef, beat it very well with a Rolling pin; cut off the Sinew,
and lard it with large Pieces of B^con; roll your Lards in Seasoni^g, which is
Pepper, Salt, and Cloves. Lard ^thwart the Me^t that it may cut handsomely;
then season (...) over the M^^t with P^pper and S^^t prett^ thick; then (...)
it with P^^ ^^thred cross and cross, and p^^ the Top under the Bottom, and tie
it up tight, and put it in an earthen Pot; break all the Bones, and put in the
Sides and over, to keep it fast that it cannot stir; then put in half a Pound
of Butter, and some Bay leaves, and whole Pepper, an Eschalot or two, and some
Sweet herbs; cover the Top of the Pot with coarse Paste; put it in the Oven,
and let it stand eight Hours Serve it up with its own Liquor, and some dried
Sippets.

To make Veal Cutlets.
CUT your Veal Steaks thin; hack them, and season them with Pepper and Salt,
and Sweet herbs; wash them over with Egg, and strew over them some Forc'd-meat;
put two Steaks together and lard them with Bacon; wash them over with melted
Butter, and wrap them in white Papers buttered. Roast them on a Lark-spit, or
bake them; when they are enough, unpaper them, and serve them with good Gravy
and sliced Lemon.

To dress a Calf's Head.
SCALD the Hair off, and take out the Bones; then have in Readiness Palates
boiled tender, Yolks of hard Eggs, Oysters ^calded, and Forced meat; stuff all
this into your Head, and ^ew it up close in a Cloth; boil it three Hours; make
a strong Gravy for Sauce, and garnish with fried Bacon.

To bake Herrings.
TAKE thirty Herrings, scale them, cut off their Heads and pull out their Roes,
and wash them very clean, and la^ them to drain four or five Hours, and roll
them in a dry Cloth; season them with Pepper and Salt, and lay them in a long
Venison Pot at full Length; when you have laid one Row, shred a large Onion
very small, and m^x with it a little Cloves, Mace, and Ginger cut (...), and
st^ew it all over the Herrings; and then another Row of Herri^gs and Seasoning,
and so do till all is in the Pot; let it stand seasoned an Hour before it is put
in the Oven; then put in a Quart of Claret, and tie it over with Paper, and
bake it with Houshold-bread.

To make Green Peace Soop.
TAKE half a Bushel of the youngest Peace, divide the great from the small; boil
the smallest in two Quarts of Water, and the Biggest in one Quart; when they
are well boiled, bruise the Biggest, and when the thin is drained from it, boil
the Thick in as much cold Water as will cover it; then rub away the Skins, and
take a little Spinnage, Mint, Sorrel, Lettuce, and Parsley, and a good Quantity
of Marigolds; wash, shred, and boil these in half a Pound of Butter, and drain
the small Peace; save the Water, and mingle all together, and a Spoonful of
Pepper whole; then melt a quarter of a Pound of Butter, and shake a little
Flour into it, and let it boil; put the Liquor to the Butter, and mingle all
well together, and let them boil up; so serve it with dried Bread.

To keep green Peace till Christmas.
SHELL what Quantity you please of young Peace; put them in the Pot when the
Water boils; let them have four or five Walms; then first pour them into a
Colander, and then spread a Cloth on a Table, and put them on that, and dry
them well in it: Have Bottles ready dried, and fill them to the Necks, and pour
over them melted Mutton-fat, and cork them down very close, that no Air come to
them: Set them in your Cellar, and when you use them, put them into boiling
Water, with a Spoonful of fine Sugar, and a good Piece of Butter; and when they
are enough, drain and butter them.

To make Asparagus Soop.
TAKE twelve Pounds of lean Beef, cut in Slices; then put a Quarter of a Pound
of Butter in a Stew Pan over the Fire, and put your Beef in; let it boil up
quick till it begins to brown; then put in a Pint of brown Ale, and a Gallon of
Water, and cover it close, and let it stew gently for an Hour and a Half; put
in what Spice you like in the Stewing, and strain out the Liquor, and scum off
all the Fat; then put in some Vermicelly, and some Sallery washed and cut
small, half a Hundred of Asparagus cut small, and Palates boiled tender and
cut; put all these in, and let them boil gently till tender. Just as it is going
up, fry a Handful of Spinnage in Butter, and throw in a French Roll.

Very fine Sausages.
TAKE a Leg of Pork or Veal; pick it clean from Skin or Fat, and to every Pound
of lean Meat put two Pounds of Beef suet, picked from the Skins; shred the Meat
and Suet severally very fine; then mix them very well together, and add a large
Handful of green Sage shred very small, season it with grated Nutmeg, Salt, and
Pepper; mix it well, and press it down hard in an earthen Pot, and keep it for
Use. When you use them, roll them up with as much Egg as will make them roll
smooth, but use no Flour: In rolling them up, make them the Length of your
Finger, and as thick as two Fingers; fry them in clarified Suet, which must be
boiling hot before you put them in. Keep them rolling about in the Pan; when
they are fried through they are enough.

A Pickle for either Tongues or Hams.
TAKE what Quantity of Water you please, and with Bay salt and common Salt make
it strong enough to bear an Egg; then to every Gallon of this Pickle add half a
Pound of Petre-salt, a Pound of coarse Sugar, and two or three Ounces of
Saltpeter beat fine; boil it and scum it, and when it is thorough cold, put in
your Hams or Tongues; turn them often; the Hams may lie in the Pickle about a
Month, the Tongues three Weeks; then hang them up to dry.

To stew Pigeons.
STUFF your Pigeons with Sweet-herbs chopp'd small, some Bacon minced small,
grated Bread, Spice, Butter, and Yolk of Egg; sew them up Top and Bottom, and
stew them in strong Broth, with half a Pint of White Wind to fix Pigeons, and
as much Broth as will cover them well, with Nutmeg, whole Pepper, Mace, Salt, a
little Bundle of Sweet-herbs, and a Bit of Lemon Peel, and an Onion; when they
are almost done, put in some Artichoke bottoms ready boiled, and fried in brown
Butter, or Asparagus Tops ready boiled; thicken up the Liquor with the Stuffing
out of the Pigeons, and a Bit of Butter rolled in Flour: Take out the
Lemon Peel, Bunch of Herbs, and Onion. Garnish the Dish with sliced Lemon, and
very thin Bits of Bacon toasted before the Fire.

Strong Broth.
TAKE twelve Quarts of Water, two Knuckles of Veal, a Leg or two Shins of Beef,
two Pair of Calves Feet, a Chicken, a Rabbet, two Onions, Cloves, Mace, Pepper,
Salt, a Bunch of Sweet-herbs; cover it close, and let it boil till six Quarts
are consumed: Strain it out, and keep it for Use.

To pickle Mackrel.
SLIT your Mackrel in halves, take out the Roes, gut and clean them, and strew
Salt over them, and lay one on another, the Back of one to the In side of the
other, so let them lie two or three Hours; then wipe every Piece clean from the
Salt, and strew them over with Pepper beaten, and grated Nutmeg, so let them
lie two or three Hours longer; then fry them well, take them out of the Pan and
lay them on coarse Cloths to drain, when cold put them in a Pan, and cover them
over with a Pickle of Vinegar boiled with Spice, when it is cold.

To jug a Hare.
CUT a Hair in Pieces, but do not wash it; season it with half an Onion shred
very fine, a Sprig of Thyme, and a little Parsley all shred, and beaten Pepper
and Salt, as much as will lie on a Shilling, half a Nutmeg, and a little
Lemon Peel; strew all these over your Hare, and slice half a Pound of Bacon
into thin Slices; then put your Hare into a Jug, a Layer of Hare, and the
Slices of Bacon on it; so do till all is in the Jug; stop the Jug close that
not any Steam can go out; then put it in a Pot of cold Water, lay a Tile on the
Top, and let it boil three Hours; take the Jug out of the Kettle, and put half
a Pound of Butter in it, and shake it together till the Butter is melted; then
pour it in your Dish. Garnish with Lemon.

To make Pockets.
CUT three Slices out of a Leg of Veal, the Length of a Finger, the Breadth of
three Fingers, the Thickness of a Thumb, with a sharp Penknife; give it a Slit
through the Middle, leaving the Bottom and each Side whole, the Thickness of a
Straw; then lard the Top with small fine Lards of Bacon; then make a Forced
meat of Marrow, Sweet-breads, and Lamb-stones just boiled, and make it up,
after it is seasoned and beaten together, with the Yolks of two Eggs, and put it
into your Pockets as if you were filling a Pincushion; then sew up the Top with
fine Thread, flour them, and pour melted Butter on them, and bake them; roast
three Sweet-breads to put between, and serve them with Gravy-sauce.

To make a Summer Cream-Cheese.
TAKE three Pints of Milk just from the Cow, and five Pints of good sweet
Cream, which you must boil free from Smoke; then put it to your Milk; cool
(...) it is but blood warm, and then put in a Spoonful of Runnet; when it is well
come, take a large Strainer, lay it in a great Cheese-fat; then put the Curd in
gently upon the Strainer, and when all the Curd is in, lay on the Cheeseboard,
and a Weight of two Pound. Let it so drain three Hours, till the Wey be well
drained from it; then lay a Cheese cloth in your lesser Cheese-fat, and put in
the Curd, laying the Cloth smooth over it as before, and the Board on the Top
of that, and a four Pound Weight on it; turn it every two Hours into dry Cloths
before Night, and be careful not to break it next Morning; salt it, and keep it
in the Fat till the next Day; then put it into a wet Cloth, which you must
shift every Day till it is ripe.

To make a Runnet-Bag.
LET the Calf suck as much as he will just before he is killed; then take the
Bag out of the Calf, and let it lie twelve Hours, covered over in stinging
Nettles till it is very red; then take out your Curd, and wash your Bag clean,
and salt it within side and without, and let it lie sprinkled with Salt twenty
four Hours, and wash your Curd in warm new Milk, and pick it, and put away all
that is yellow and hallow, and keep what is white and close, and wash it well,
and sprinkle it with Salt, and when the Bag has lain twenty four Hours, put it
into the Bag again, and put to it three Spoonfuls of the Stroakings of a Cow,
beat up with the Yolk of an Egg or two, twelve Cloves, and two Blades of Mace,
and put a Skewer through it, and hang it in a Pot; then make the Runnet-water
thus:

Take half a Pint of fair Water, a little Salt, and fix Tops of the Reddish of
black Thorn, and as many Sprigs of Burnet, and two of Sweet marjoram; boil
these in the Water, and strain it out, and when it is cold, put one half in the
Bag, and let the B^g lie in the other half, and take it out as you use it, and
when you want, make more Runnet, which you may do six or seven Times; three
Spoonfuls of this Runnet will make a large Cheshire or Chedder Cheese, and half
as much to a common Cheese.

To make a Chedder-Cheese.
TAKE the new Milk of twelve Cows in the Morning, and the Evening Cream of
twelves Cows, and put to it three Spoonfuls of Runnet; and when it is come,
break it, and whey it; and when it is well wheyed, break it again, and work into
the Curd three Pounds of fresh Butter, and put it in your Press, and turn it in
the Press very often for an Hour or more, and change the Cloths, and wash them
every Time you change them; you ^ay put wet Cloths at first to them, but
toward the last, put two or three fine dry Cloths to them; let it lie thirty
or forty Hours in the Press, according to the Thickness of the Cheese: Then
take it out, wash it in Whey, and lay it in a dry Cloth till it is dry; then lay
it on your Shelf, and turn it often.

To make Butter.
AS soon as you have milked, strain your Milk into a Pot, and stir it often for
half an Hour; then put it in your Pans or Trays; when it is cream'd, skim it
exceeding clean from the Milk, and put your Cream into an earthen Pot, and if
you do not churn immediately for Butter, shift your Cream once in twelve Hours
into another clean scalded Pot, and if you find any Milk at the Bottom of the
Pot, put it away; and when you have churned, wash your Butter in three or four
Waters, and then salt it as you will have it, and beat it well, but not wash it
after it is salted; let it stand in a Wedge, if it be to pot, till the next
Morning, and beat it again, and make your Layers the Thickness of three
Fingers, and then strew a little Salt on it, and so do till your Pot is full.

A Cream Cheese.
TAKE six Quarts of new Milk, warm from the Cow, and put to it three Quarts of
good Cream; then Runnet it, and when it comes, put a Cloth in the Cheesemold,
and with your Flitting dish take it out in thin Slices, and lay it on your Mold
by Degrees, 'til it is all in; then let it stand with a Cheese board upon it
'til it is enough to turn, which will be at Night; then salt it on both Sides a
little, and let it stand with a two Pound weight on it all Night; then take it
out, and put it into a dry Cloth, and so do 'til it is dry; ripen it with
laying it on Nettles; shift the Nettles every Day.

All Sorts of PICKLES.
To make Melon Mangoes.
TAKE small Melons not quite ripe, cut a Slip down the Side, and take out the
Inside very clean; beat Mustard-seeds, and shred Garlic and mix with the
Seeds, and put in your Mangoes; put the Pieces you cut out into their Places
again, and tie them up, and put them into your Pot, and boil some Vinegar, (as
much as you think will cover them) with whole Pepper, and some Salt, and
Jamaica Pepper, and pour in scalding hot over your Mangoes, and cover them
close to keep in the Steam; and so do every Day for nine Times together, and
when they are cold cover them with Leather.

To pickle Walnuts.
TAKE Walnuts about Midsummer, when a Pin will pass through them, and put them
in a deep Pot, and cover them over with ordinary Vinegar; change them into
fresh Vinegar once in fourteen Days, 'til six Weeks be past; then take two
Gallons of the best Vinegar, and put into it Cor^ander seeds, Carraway seeds,
and D^ll seeds, of each an Ounce, grossly bruised, Ginger sliced three Ounces,
whole Mace one Ounce, Nutmeg bruised two Ounces, Pepper bruised two Ounces,
give all a Boil or two over the Fire, and have your Nuts ready in a Pot, and
pour the Liquor boiling hot over them; so do for nine Times.

To pickle Samphire.
PICK your Samphire from dean or withered Branches; l^y it in a Bell metal or
Brass Pot; then put in a pint of Water and a pint of Vinegar; so do till your
Pickle is an inch above your Samphire; have a lid fit for the Pot, and paste it
close down, that no steam may go out; keep it boiling an Hour, take it off, and
cover it with old Sacks, or any old Cloths, under, over, and all about the Pot;
when it is cold, put it up in Tubs or Pots; the best by itself; the great
Stalks lay upmost in boiling; it will keep the cooler and better. The Vinegar
you use must be the best.

To mango Cucumbers.
CUT out a little Slip out of the Side of the Cucumber, and take out the Seeds,
but as little of the Meat as you can; then put in the Inside Mustard Seed
bruised, a Clove of Garlic, some Slices of Ginger, and some Bin of
Horseradish; tie the Piece in again, and make a Pickle of Vinegar, Salt, whole
Pepper, Cloves, Mace, and boil it, and pour it on the Mangoes; and so do for
nine Days together; when cold, cover them with Leather.

An excellent Way to pickle Mushrooms.
PUT your Mushrooms into Water, and wash them clean with a Sponge, throw them
into Water as you do them; then put in Water and a little Salt, and when it
boils put in your Mushrooms; when they boil up scum them clean, and put them
into cold Water, and a little Salt: Let them stand 24 Hours, and put them into
White Wind Vinegar, and let them stand a Week; then take your Pickle from them,
and boil it very well with whole Pepper, Cloves, Mace, and a little All-spice;
when your Pickle is cold, put it to your Mushrooms in the Glass or Pot you keep
them in; keep them close, and tied down with a Bladder; the Air will hurt them;
if your Pickle mothers, boil it again: You may make your Pickle half
White Wind, and half White Wind Vinegar.

To pickle Oysters.
WASH your Oysters in their own Liquor, squeezing them between your Fingers,
that there be no Gravel in them; strain the Liquor, and wash the Oysters in it
again; put as much Water as the Liquor, and set it on the Fire, and as it boils
scum it clean; then put a pretty deal of whole Pepper, boil it a little, then
put in some Blades of Mace, and your Oysters, stirring them apace, and when
they are firm in the Middle part, take them off, pour them quick into an
earthen Pot, and cover them very close; put in a few Bay Leaves; be sure your
Oysters are all under the Liquor; the next Day put them for Use, cover them
very close: When you dish them to eat, put a little White Wind or Vinegar on
the Plate with them.

To pickle Pods of Radishes.
GAther the youngest Pods, and put them in Water and Salt twenty-four Hours;
then make a Pickle for them of Vinegar, Cloves, Mace, whole Pepper; boil this,
and drain the Pods from the Salt and Water, and pour the Liquor on them boiling
hot; put to them a Clove of Garlic a little bruised.

To pickle Cucumbers.
WIPE your Cucumbers very clean with a Cloth, then get so many Quarts of
Vinegar as you have Hundreds of Cucumbers, and take Dill and Fennel, and cut it
small, and put it to the Vinegar, and set it over the Fire in a Copper Kettle,
and let it boil, and then put in your Cucumbers 'til they are warm through, but
not boil while they are in; when they are warm through, pour all out into a
deep earthen Pot, and cover it up very close 'til the next Day; then do the
same again; but the third Day season the Liquor before you set it over the
Fire; put in Salt 'til it is blackish, some sliced Ginger, whole Pepper, and
whole Mace; then set it over the Fire again; and when it boils, put in your
Cucumbers: When they are hot through, pour them into the Pot, covering it
close; when they are cold put them in Glasses, and strain the Liquor over them;
pick out the Spice, and put to them; cover them with Leather.

To pickle French Beans.
TAKE young slender French Beans; take off Top and Tail; then make a Brine with
cold Water and Salt, strong enough to bear an Egg; put in your Beans into that
Brine, and let them lie fourteen Days; then take them out and wash them in fair
Water, and set them over the Fire in cold Water, without Salt, and let them
boil 'til they are so tender as to eat; and when they are cold, drain them from
their Water, and make a Pickle for them: To a Peck of French Beans, you must
have a Ga^^on of White Wind Vinegar; boil it with some Cloves, Mace, whole
Pepper, and sliced Ginger, and when it is cold, put it and your Beans in a
Glass; so keep them for Use.

To pickle red Cabbage.
TAKE your close-leaved red Cabbage, and cut it in Quarters, and when your
Liquor boils put in your Cabbage, and give it a Dozen Walms; then make the
Pickle of White wine Vinegar and Claret: You may put to it Beet-root, boil them
first, and Turnips half boiled; it is very good for the garnishing Dishes, or to
garnish a Salade.

To pickle Barberries.
TAKE of White wine Vinegar, and fair Water, an equal Quantity, and to every
Pint of this Liquor, put a Pound of Six penny Sugar; set it over the Fire, and
bruise some of the Barberries and put in it, and a little Salt; let it boil
near half an Hour; then take it off the Fire, and strain it, and when it is
pretty cold, pour it into a Glass over your Barberries; boil a Piece of ^l^an^
in the Liquor and put over them, and cover the Glass with Leather.

To make English Katchup.
TAKE a wide mouthed Bottle, put therein a Pint of the best White Wind Vinegar;
then put in ten or twelve Cloves of Eschalot, peeled and just bruised; then
take a quarter of a Pint of the best Langoon White Wind; boil it a little, and
put to it twelve or fourteen Anchovies washed and shred, and dissolve them in
the Wine, and when cold put them in the Bottle; then take a quarter of a Pint
more of White Wind, and put in it Mace, Ginger sliced, a few Cloves, a Spoonful
o^ whole Pepper just bruised; let them boil all a little; when near c^^d, slice
in almost a whole Nutmeg, and ^^me Lemon peel, and likewise put in two or three
Spoonfuls of Ho^^ radish; then stop it close, and for a Week shake it once or
twice a Day, then use it; it is good to put into Fish Sauce, or any savoury Dish
or Meat; you may add to it the clear Liquor that comes from Mushrooms.

To pickle small Onions.
TAKE young white unset Onions, as big as the Tip of your Finger; lay them in
Water and Salt two Days; shift them once, then drain them in a Cloth; boil the
best Vinegar with Spice, according to your Taste, and when it is cold, keep
them in it covered with a wet bl^^d^r.

To distill Vinegar for Mushrooms.
TO a Gallon of Vinegar put an Ounce and half of Ginger sliced, an Ounce of
Nutmegs bruised, half an Ounce of Mace, half an Ounce of white Pepper, as much
Jamaica Pepper, both bruised, a few Cloves; distill this. Take care it does not
burn in the Still.

To make the Mushroom Powder.
TAKE a Peck of Mushrooms, wash and rub them clean with a Flannel Rag, cutting
out all the Worms; but do not peel off the Skins; put to them sixteen Blades of
Mace, forty Cloves, six Bay leaves, twice as much beaten Pepper as will lie on
a half Crown; a good Handful of Salt, a Dozen Onions, a Piece of Butter as big
as an Egg, and half a Pint of Vinegar: Stew these as fast as you can; keep the
Liquor for Use, and dry the Mushrooms first on a broad Pan in the Oven;
afterward put them on S^eves, till they are dry enough to pound all together
into Powder. This Quantity usually makes half a Pound.

To keep Artichoaks in Pickle, to boil all Winter.
THROW your Artichoaks into Salt and Water half a Day; then make a Pot of Water
boil, and put in your Artichoaks, and let them boil till you can just draw off
the Leaves from the Bottom; then cut off the Bottom very smooth and clean, and
put them into a Pot with Pepper, Salt, Cloves, Mace, two Bay Leaves, and as
much Vinegar as will cover them: Then pour melted Butter over them enough to
cover an Inch thick; tie it down close, and keep them for Use^ When you use
them, put them into boiling Water, with a Piece of Butter in the Water to plump
them; then use them for what you please.

To make Goose-berry Vinegar.
TAKE Gooseberries full ripe, bruise them in a Mortar; then measure them, and
to every Quart of Gooseberries, put three Quarts of Water, first boiled, and
let stand till cold; let it stand twenty four Hours; then strain it through a
Canvass, then a Fl^nnel; and to every Gallon of this Liquor, put one Pound of
feeding brown Sugar; stir it well, and barrel it up; at three Quarters of a
Year old it is fit for Use; but if it stands longer it is the better: This
Vinegar is likewise good for Pickles.

To distill Verjuice for Pickles.
TAKE three Quarts of the sharpest Verjuice, and put it in a cold Still, and
distill it off very softly; the sooner it is distilled in the Spring, the better
for use.

Sauce for Fish or Flesh.
TAKE a Quart of Verjuice, and put it into a Jug; then take Jamaica Pepper
whole, some sliced Ginger, some Mace, a few Cloves, some Lemon peel,
Horseraddish-root sliced, some Sweet herbs, six Eschalots peeled, and eight
Anchovies, two or three Spoonfuls of shred Capers; put all these into a
Linnen-bag, and put the Bag into your Verjuice; stop the Jug close, and keep it
for Use; a Spoonful cold or mixed in Sauce for Fish or Flesh.

All Sorts of Puddings.
To make an Orange Pudding.
TAKE the outside Rind of three Sevil Oranges, boil them in several Waters
till they are tender; then pound them in a Mortar with three Quarters of a
Pound of Sugar; then blanch and beat halt a Pound of Almonds very fine, with
Rose water to keep them from oiling; then beat sixteen Eggs, but six Whites,
and a Pound of fresh Butter; beat all these together very well till it is light
and hollow; then put it in. Dish, with a Slices of Puff-p^ste at the Bottom,
and bake it with Tarts; scrape Sugar on it, and serve it up hot.

To make a Carrot Pudding.
TAKE raw Carrots, and scrape them clean, grate them with a Grater without a
B^ck. To half a Pound of Carrot, take a Pound of grated Bre^d, a Nutmeg, a
little Cinnamon, a very little Salt, h^lf a Pound of Sugar, and h^lf a Pint of
Sack, eight E^gs, a Pound of Bu^er me^ted, and as much Cre^m as w^ll mix it
well tog^t^e^; stir it and beat it well up, and p^t it in a Dish to bake; put
Puff p^ste at the Bottom of your Dish.

To make an Almona Pudding.
TAKE a Pound of the best Jordan-Almonds blanched in c^ld Water, and beat very
fi^e with a little Rose w^ter; then take a Qu^rt of Cr^^m, boile^ with whole
Spice, and taken out ^^g in, and when it is cold, mix it with the Almonds, and
put to it three Spo^ (...) of grated Bread, and one Spoonful of Flour, nine
Eggs, but three Whites, half a Po^nd of Sug^r, a Nutmeg grated; mix and beat
these well together, pu^^ me Puff-paste at the Bottom of a Dish; put your S^uff
in, and here and there stick a Piece of Marrow in it. It must b^ke an Hour, and
when it is drawn, scrape Sugar on it, and serve it up.

To make a Marrow Pudding.
TAKE out the Marrow of three or four Bones, and slice it in thin Pieces; and
take a Penny Loaf, cut off the Crust, and slice it in as thin Slices as you
can, and stone half a Pound of Raisins of the Sun; then lay a Sheet of thin
Paste in the Bottom of a Dish; so lay a Row of Marrow, of Bread, and of
Raisins, till the Dish is full; then have in Readiness a Quart of Cream boiled,
and beat five Eggs, and mix with it; put to it a Nutmeg grated, and a half a
Pound of Sugar. When it is just going into the Oven, pour in your Cream and
Eggs; bake it half an Hour, scrape Sugar on it when it is drawn, and serve it up.

A baked Bread Pudding.
TAKE a Penny Loaf, cut it in thin Slices, then boil a Quart of Cream or new
Milk, and put in your Bread, and break it very fine; put five Eggs to it, a
Nutmeg grated, a Quarter of a Pound of Sugar, and Half a Pound of Butter; stir
all these well together; butter a Dish, and bake it an Hour.

A Lemon Pudding.
TAKE Two clear Lemons, grate off the outside rinds; then grate Two Naples
biskets, and mix with your grated Peel, and add to it Three Quarters of a Pound
of fine Sugar, Twelve Yolks, and Six Whites of Eggs, well beaten, and Three
Quarters of a Pound of Butter melted, and half a Pint of thick Cream; mix these
well together; put a Sheet of Paste at the Bottom of the Dish; and just as the
Oven is re^dy, put your Stuff in the Dish; sift a little double-resin'd Sugar
over it before you put it in the Ov^n; an Hour will bake it.

To make a Calf's-Foot Pudding.
TAKE two Calf's Feet, finely shred; then take of Biscuit grated, and stale
Mackaroons broken small, the Quantity of a Penn^ Loaf; then add a Pound of
Beefsuet, very finely shred, half a Pound of Currants, a q^^rter of a Pound of
Sugar; some Cloves, Mace, and Nutmeg, beat fine; a very little Salt, some Sack,
and Orangeflower-water, some Citron, and candied Orange peel; work all these
well together, with Yolks of Eggs; if you boil it, put it in the Caul of a
Breast of Veal, and tie it over with a Cloth; it must boil four Hours. For
Sauce, melt Butter, with a little Sack and Sugar. If you bake it, put some
Paste in the Bottom of the Dish, but none on the Brim; then melt half a Pound
of Butter, and mix with your Stuff, and put it in your Dish, and stick Lumps of
Marrow in it; bake it three or four Hours; Scrape Sugar over it, and serve it
hot.

A Rice Pudding.
SET a Pint of thick Cream over the Fire, and put into it three Spoonfuls of
the Flour of Rice; stir it, and when it is pretty thick, pour it into a Pan, and
put into it a Pound of fresh Butter; stir it till it is almost cold; then add to
it a grated Nutmeg, a little Salt, some Sugar, a little Sack, the Yolks of six
Eggs; stir it well together; put some Puff paste in the Bottom of the Dish,
pour it in; an Hour or less will bake it.

To make a French-Barley Pudding.
TAKE a Qu^rt of Cream, and put to it six Eggs well beaten, but three of the
Whites, then season it with Su^ar, Nutmeg, a little S^lt, Orange flower water,
and a Pound of melted Butter; then put to it six Handfuls of French barley,
that has been boiled tender in Milk; Butter a Dish and put it in, and bake it.
It must stand ^s long as a Venison P^sty, and it will be good.

A good boiled Pudding.
TAKE a Pound and a Quarter of Beef Suet, after it is skinned, (...) red very
fine; then stone three Quarters of a Pound of Raisi^s, and mix with it, and a
grated Nutmeg, a Quarter of a Pound of Sugar, a little Salt, a little Sa^k,
four Eggs, four Spoonfuls of Cream, and about half a Pound of fine Flour; mix
these well together pretty stiff; tie it in a Cloth, and let it boil four
Hours. Melt Butter thick for Sauce.

To make a Quaking Pudding.
TAKE a Pint of Cream, and boil it with Nutmeg and Cinnamon, and Mace; take out
the Spice when it is boiled; then take the Yolks of eight Eggs, and four of the
Whites; beat them very well, with some Sack, and mix your Eggs with your Cream,
with a little Salt and Sugar, and a stale Half Penny white Loaf, and one
Spoonful of Flour, and a Quarter of a Pound of Almonds bl^nch'd and beat fine,
with some Ro^e water; beat all these together, and wet a thick Cloth and flour
it, and put it in when the Pot boils. It must boil an Hour at least. Melt
Butter, Sack and Sugar for the Sauce; stick blanched Almonds and candied
Orange-peel on the Top.

To make a Cow-heel Pudding.
TAKE a large Cow-heel, and cut off all the Meat but the black Tees; put them
away, but mince the rest very small, and shred it over again, with three
Quarters of a Pound of Beef Suet; put to it a Penny Loaf grated, Cloves, Mace,
Nutmeg, Sugar, and a little Salt, some Sack, and Rose Water; mix these well
together with six raw Eggs well beaten; butter a Cloth and put it in, and boil
it two Hours. For Sauce, melt Butter, Sack, and Sugar.

To make a Curd Pudding.
TAKE the Curd of a gallon of Milk, and whey it well, and rub it through a
Sieve; then take six Eggs, a little thick Cream, three Spoonfuls of Orange.
flower water, one Nutmeg grated, grated Bread and Flour, of each three
Spoonfuls; a Pound of Currants, and stoned Raisins; mix all these together;
b^tter a thick Cloth, and tie it up in it; boil it an Hour. For Sauce, melt
Butter and Orange f1ower-water, and Sugar.

Very fine Hogs Puddings.
SHRED four Pound ^f Beef Suet very fi^^, mix with it two Pounds of fi^e Sugar
powdered, two grated Nutmegs, some Mace beat, and a little Salt, and three
Pounds of Currants washed and picked; beat twenty four Yolks, twelve Whites of
Eggs, with a little Sack; mix all well together, and fill your Guts, being
clean, and steeped in Orange flower water; cut your Guts Quarter and Half long,
fill them half full; tie at each End; and again thus, coco, Boil them as
others, and cut them in Balls when ^ent to the Table.

To make a baked Sack Pudding.
TAKE a Pint of Cream, and turn it to a Curd with Sack; then bruise the Curd
very small with a Spoon; then grate in two Naples-biskets, or the In side of a
stale Penny Loaf, and mix it well with the Curd, and half a Nutmeg grated; some
fine Sugar, and the Yolks of four Eggs, the Whites of Two, beaten with Two
Spoonfuls of Sack; then melt half a Pound of fresh Butter, and stir all
together 'till the Oven is hot. Butter a Dish, and put it in, and fist some
Sugar in it just as it is going into the Oven; half an Hour will bake it.

To make Pancakes.
TAKE a Pint of Cream, and eight Eggs, Whites and all, a whole Nutmeg grated,
and a little Salt; then melt a Pound of rare Dish Butter and a little Sack;
before you fry them stir it in. It must be made as thick with three Spoonfuls
of Flour, as ordinary Batter, and fried with Butter in the Pan, the first
Pancake, but no more: Strew Sugar, garnish with Orange, turn it on the Backside
of a Plate.

To make a Tansy to bake.
TAKE Twenty Eggs, but Eight Whites, beat the Eggs very well, and strain them
into a Quart of thick Cream one Nutmeg, and three Naples-biskets grated, as
much Juice of Spinnage, with a Sprig or two of Tansy, as will make it as green
as Grass; sweeten it to your Taste; then butter your Dish very well, and set it
into an Oven, no hotter than for Custards; watch it, and as soon as it is done,
take it out of the Oven, and turn it on a Pyeplate; scrape Sugar, and squeeze
Orange upon it. Garnish the Dish with Orange and Lemon, and serve it up.

To make Apple Fritters.
TAKE the Yolks of eight Eggs, the Whites of four, beat them well together, and
strain them into a Pan; then take a Quart of Cream, warm it as hot as you can
endure your Finger in it; then put to it a Quarter of a Pint of Sack, three
Quarters of a Pint of Ale, and make a Posset of it; when your Posset is cool,
put to it your Eggs, beating them well together; then put in Nutmeg, Ginger,
Salt, and Flour, to your liking: Your Batter should be pretty thick; then put
in Pippins sliced or scraped; fry them in good store of hot Lard, with a quick
Fire.

To make a Lemon Tart.
TAKE three clear Lemons, and grate off the out side Rinds; take the Yolks of
twelve Eggs, and six Whites; beat them very well, squeeze in the Juice of a
Lemon; then put in three Quarters of a Pound of fi^e powdered Sugar, and three
Quarters of a Pound of fresh Butter molted; stir all well together, put a Sh^et
of Paste at the Bottom, and stir Sugar on the Top; put it in a brisk Oven,
three Quarters of an Hour will bake it: So serve it to the Table.

A baked Pudding.
BLANCH half a Pound of Almonds, and beat them fine with sweet Water,
Ambergrease, dissolved in Orange flower Water, or in some Cream; then warm a
Pint of thick Cream, and melt in it half a Pound of Butter; then mix it with
your beaten Almonds, a little Salt, a grated Nutmeg, and Sugar, and the Yolks
of six Eggs; beat it up together, and put it in a Dish with Puff paste, the
Oven not too hot; scrape Sugar on it just before it goes into the Oven.

To make a Custard Pudding.
TAKE a Pint of Cream, and mix with it six Egg well beaten, two Spoonfuls of
Flour, half a Nutmeg grated, a little Salt, and Sugar to your Taste; butter a
Cloth, put it in when the Pot boils; boil it just half an Hour; melt Butter for
Sauce.

To make an Almond Tourt.
BLANCH and beat half a Pound of Jordan Almonds very fine; use Orange flower
Water in the beating your Almonds; pare the yellow Rind of a Lemon pretty
thick; boil it in Water till it is very tender: Beat it with half a Pound of
Sugar, and mix it with the Almonds, and eight Eggs, but for Water, half a Pound
of Butter melted, and ^lm it cold, and a little thick Cream; mix all together,
and bake it in a D^^ with Paste at Bottom. This may be made the Day before it is
used.

To make a Sweet-meat Pudding.
PUT a thin Puff paste at the Bottom of your Di^^. then have of candied Orange
and Lemon Peel, and (...) of each an Ounce; slice them thin, and put them in
the B^^t^^ ^n your Paste; then beat eight Volks of Eggs, and two Whites, near
half a Pound of Sugar, and half a Pound of Butter melted; mix and beat all well
together, and when the Oven is ready, pour it on your Sweetmeats in the Dish.
An Hour or less will bake it.

To make fine Fritters.
TAKE half a Pint of thick sweet Cream; put to it four Eggs well beaten, a
little Brandy, some Nutmeg and Ginger; make this into a thick Batter with
Flour; your Apples must be Golden-pippins pared and cut in thin Slices, dip
them in the Batter, and fry them in Lard. It will take up two Pounds of Lard to
fry this Quantity.

To make a fine Bread Pudding.
TAKE three Pints of Milk, and boil it; when it is boiled, sweeten it with half
a Pound of Sugar, and a small Nutmeg grated, and put in half a Pound of Butter;
when it is melted, pour it in a Pan, over eleven Ounces of grated Bread; cover
it up. The next Day put to it ten Eggs well beaten, stir all together, and when
the Oven is hot, put it in your Dish; three Quarters of an Hour will bake it.
Boil a Bit of Lemon peel in the Milk, take it out before you put your other
Things in.

All Sorts of PASTRY.
To make a Tureiner.
TAKE a China Pot or Bowl, and fill it as follows: At the Bottom lay some fresh
Butter; then put in three or four Beef steaks (...) with Bacon; then cut some
Veil steaks, from the Leg; hack them, and wash them over with the Yolk of an
Egg, and afterward lay it over with Forced meat, and roll it up, and lay it in
with young Chickens, Pigeons, and Rabbets, some in Quarters, some in Halves;
Sweetbreads, Lamb-stones, Cocks-combs, Palates after they are boiled, peeled,
and cut in Slices; Tongues, either Hogs or Calves, sliced, and some larded with
Bacon; whole Yolks of hard Eggs, Pistachia Nuts peeled, forced Balls, some
round, some like an Olive, Lemon sliced, some with the Rind on, Barberries and
Oysters; season all these with Pepper, Salt, Nutmeg, and Sweet herbs, mixed
together after they are cut very small, and strew it on every Thing as you put
it in your Pot: Then put in a Quart of Gravy, and some Butter on the Top, and
cover it close with a Lid of Puff paste, pretty thick. Eight Hours will bake it.

To make an Oyster Pie.
MAKE good Puff paste, and lay a thin Sheet in the Bottom of your Pattipan;
then take two Quarts of large Oysters, wash them well in their own Liquor, and
take them out of it, and dry them, and season them with Salt and Spice, and a
little Pepper, all beaten fine; lay some Butter in the Bottom of your Pattipan,
then lay in your Oysters, and the Yolks of twelve hard Eggs whole, two or three
Sweet-breads cut in Slices, or Lamb-stones, or in Want of these a Dozen of
Larks, two Marrow-bones, the Marrow taken out in Lumps, dipped in the Yolks of
Eggs, and seasoned as you did your Oysters, and some grated Bread dusted on it,
and a few Forced meat Balls: When all these are in, put some Butter on the Top,
and cover it over with a Sheet of Puff-paste, and bake it: When it is drawn out
of the Oven, take the Liquor of the Oyster, and boil it and scum it, and beat
it up thick with Butter, and the Yolks of two or three Eggs, and pour it hot
into your Pie, and shake it well together, and serve it hot.

To make Egg Pyes.
TAKE the Yolks of two Dozen of Eggs boiled hard, and chopp'd with double the
Quantity of Beef suet, and half a Pound of Pippins pared, c^^ed, and sliced;
then add to it one Pound of Currants wall^ed and dried, half a Pound of Sugar,
a little Salt, some Spice beaten fine, the Juice of a Lemon, and half a Pint of
Sack, candied Orange and Citron cut in Pieces, of each th^^e Ounces, some Lumps
of Marrow on the Top, fill them full; the Oven must not be too hot; three
Quarters of an Hour will bake them; put the Marrow only on them that are to be
eaten hot.

To make a Sweetbread Pasty, to fry or bake.
PARBOIL your Sweet breads, and shred them very fine, with an equal Quantity of
Marrow; mix with them a little grated Bread, some Nutmeg, Salt the Yolks of two
hard Eggs bruised small, and Sugar; then mix up with a little Cream and the
Yolk of an Egg: Make Paste with half a Pound of the finest Flour, an Ounce of
double-refin'd Sugar beat and sifted, the Yolks of two Eggs, and White of one,
and fair Water; then roll in half a Pound of Butter, and roll it out in little
Pasties the Breadth of your Hand; put your Meat in, cl^^e t^em up well, and fry
or bake them. A very pretty Side-dish.

To make little Pasties to fry.
TAKE the Kidney of a Loin of Veal or Lamb, Fat and all, shred it very small;
season it with a little Salt, Cloves, Mace, Nutmegs, all beaten small, some
Sugar, and the Yolks of two or three hard Eggs, minced very fine. Mix all these
together, with a little Sack or Cream; put them in Puff paste, and fry them:
Serve them hot.

To make Custards.
TAKE two Quarts of thick sweet Cream, boil it with some Bits of Cinnamon, and
a quartered Nutmeg; keep it stirring all the while, and when it has boiled a
little Time, pour it into a Pan to cool, and stir it 'til it is cool, to keep
it from scumming; then beat the Yolks of sixteen Eggs, the whites of but six,
and mix your Eggs with the Cream when it is cool, and sweeten it with fine
Sugar to your Taste, put in a very little Salt, and some Rose or Orange flower
Water; then strain all through a Hair Siere, and fill your Cups or Crust. It
must be a pretty quick Oven; when they boil up, they are enough.

To make Cheesecakes.
TAKE a Pint of Cream and warm it, and put to it the Quarts of Milk warm from
the Cow; then put Runnet to it; and when it is come, put the Curd in a (...)
rag or Cloth, and let it drain well from the Whey, but do not squeeze it much;
then put it in a Mortar, and break the Curd as fine as Butter; then put to your
Curd half a Pound of Almonds blanched, and beaten exceeding fine, (or half a
Pound of dry Mackaroons beat very fine,) if you have Almonds, grate in a ^^ples
^^ket; but if you use Mackaroons, you need not; then add to it the Yolks of
Nine Eggs beaten, a whole Nutmeg grated, Two per^^^e^ (...) dissolved in Rose
or Orange-flower Water, half a Pound of fine Sugar, mix all well together; then
melt a Pound and a quarter of Butter, and stir it well in it, and half a Pound
of Currants plump'd; so let it stand to cool 'til you use it.

Then make your Puff paste thus: Take a Pound of fine Flour, and wet it with
cold Water, roll it out, and put into it by Degrees a Pound of fresh Butter:
Use it just as it is made.

Another Way to make Cheesecakes.
TAKE a Gallon of new Milk, set it as for a Cheese, and gently whey it; then
break it in a Mortar, put to it the Yolks of six Eggs, four of the Whites,
sweeten it to your Taste; put in a grated Nutmeg, some Rose Water and Sack; mix
these together, and set over the Fire a Quart of Cream, and make it into a
Hasty-pudding, and mix that with it very well, and fill your Pattipans just as
they are going into the Oven. Your Oven must be ready, that you may not stay
for that; when they rise well up, they are enough. Make your Paste thus:

Take about a Pound of Flour, and strew into it three Spoonfuls of Loaf Sugar
beaten and sifted, and rub into it a Pound of Butter, one Egg, and a Spoonful
of Rose Water, the rest cold fair Water: Make it into a Paste, roll it very
thin, and put it into your Pans, and fill them almost full.

Paste for Pasties.
RUB six Pounds of Butter into fourteen Pounds of Flour; put to it eight Eggs,
whip the Whites to Snow, and make it in a pretty stiff Paste with cold Water.

To make Cheesecakes without Runnet.
TAKE a Quart of thick Cream, and set it over a clear Fire, with some quartered
Nutmeg in it; just as it boils up, put in twelve Eggs well beaten, and a
quarter of a Pound of fresh Butter; stir it a little while on the Fire, 'til it
begins to curdle; then take it off, and gather the Curd as for Cheese; put it
in a clean Cloth, tie it together, and hang it up that the Whey may run from
it; when it is pretty dry, put it in a Stone Mortar, with a Pound of Butter, a
quarter of a Pint of thick Cream, some S^^k and Orange flower Water, and half a
Pound of fine Sugar; then beat and grind all these very well together for an
Hour or more, 'til it is very fine; then pass it through a Hair Steve, and fill
your Pattipans but half full. You may put Currants in half the Quantity, if you
please: A little more than a Quarter of an Hour will bake them. Take the Nutmeg
out of the Cream when it is boiled.

To make Orange or Lemon Tarts.
TAKE six large Lemons, and rub them very well with Salt, and put them in Water
for two Days, with a handful of Salt in it; then change them into fresh Water
without Salt, every other Day for a Fortnight; then boil them for two or three
Hours 'til they are tender; then cut them in half Quarters, and then cut them
thus ^ as thin as you can; then take Pippins pared, cored and quartered, and a
Pint of fair Water, let them boil 'til the Pippins break; put the Liquor to
your Orange or Lemon, and half the Pippins well broken, and a Pound of Sugar,
boil these together ^ quarter of an Hour; then put it in a Gallipot, and
squeeze an Orange in it, if it be Lemon; or a Lemon, if it is Orange; two
Spoonfuls is enough for a Tart: Your Pattipans must be small and shallow; put
fine Puff-paste, and very thin; a little while will bake it. Just as your Tarts
are going into the Oven, with a Feather or Brush do them over with melted
Butter, and then sift double refined Sugar ^^ them, and this is a pretty Icing
on them.

To make Puff-paste for Tarts.
RUB a quarter of a Pound of Butter into a Pound of fire Flour; then whip the
Whites of two Eggs to Snow, and with cold Water and one Yolk make it into a
Paste, then roll it broad, and put in by Degrees a Pound of Butter, flouring it
over the Butter every Time, and roll it up, and roll it out again, and put in
more Butter: So do for six or seven Times, 'til it has taken up all the Pound
of Butter. This Paste is good for Tarts, or any small Things.

Apple Pasties to fry.
PARE and quarter Apples, and boil them in Sugar and Water, and a Stick of
Cinnamon, and when tender, put in a little White Wind, the Juice of a Lemon, a
Piece of fresh Butter, and a little Ambergrease or Orange-flower Water; stir
all together, and when it is cold, put it in Puff-paste, and fry them.

To season and bake a Venison Pasty.
BONE your Hanch or Side of Venison, and take out all the Sinews and Skin; then
proportion it for your Pasty, by taking away from one Part, and adding to
another, 'til it is of an equal Thickness; then season it with Pepper and Salt,
about an Ounce of Pepper; save a little of it whole, and beat the rest, and mix
with twice as much Salt, and rub it all over your Venison, and let it lie 'til
your Paste is ready. Make your Paste thus: A Peck of fine Flour, 6 Pounds of
Butter, a Dozen of Eggs; rub your Butter in your Flour, beat your Eggs, and
with them and cold Water make up your Paste very stiff; then drive it forth for
your Pasty; let it be the Thickness of a Man's Thumb; put under it two or three
Sheets of C^ppeper well floured: Then have two Pounds of Beef suet, shred
exceeding fine; proportion it on the Bottom to the Breadth of your Venison, and
leave a Verge round your Venison three Fi^g^^ broad, w^sh that Verge over with
a B^nch of Feathers or Brush dipped in an Egg beaten, and then lay a Board of
your Paste on the Place you washed, and lay your Venison on the Suet; put a
little of your Seasoning on the Top, and a few Corns of whole Pepper, and two
Pounds of very good fresh Butter; then turn over your other Sheet of Paste, so
close your Pasty. Garnish it on the Top as you think fit; vent it in the
Middle, and set it in the Oven It will take 5 or 6 Hours baking: Then break all
the Bones, wash them and add to them more Bones or Knuckles; season them with
Pepper and Salt, and put them with a Quart of Water, and half a Pound of
Butter, in a Pan or earthen Pot; cover it over with coarse Paste, and set it in
with your Pasty; and when your Pasty is drawn and dished, fill it up with the
Gravy that came from the Bones.

A fine Potato Pie, for Lent.
FIRST make your Forc'd-meat, about two Dozen of small Oysters just scalded,
and when cold chop small, a stale Roll grated, and six Yolks of Eggs boiled
hard, and bruised small with the Back of a Spoon; season with a little Salt,
Pepper, and Nutmeg, some Thyme and Parsley, both shred small: Mix these
together well, and pound them a little, and make it up in a stiff Paste, with
half a Pound of Butter and an Egg worked in it, just flour it to keep it from
sticking, and lay it by 'til your Pie ^^ fit, and put a very thin Paste in your
Dish, Bottom and Sides; then put your Forced meat, of an equal Thickness, about
two Fingers broad, about the Sides of your Dish, as you would do a Pudding
Crust, dust a little Flour on it, and put it down close; then fill your Pie, a
Dozen of Potatos, about the Bignels of a small Egg, finely pared just boiled a
Walm or two, a Dozen Yolks of Eggs boiled hard, a quarter of a Hundred large
Oysters just sealded i^ their own Liquor and cold, 6 Morels, 4 or 5 Blades of
Mace, some whole Pepper, and a little (...) Butter on the Bottom and Top; then
lid your Pie, and bake it an Hour when it is drawn, pour in a Caudle made with
half a Pi^^ of your Oyster Liquor, 3 or 4 Spoonfuls of White wine, and
thickened up with Butter and Egg; pour it in hot at the Hose on the Top, and
shake it together, and serve it.

Potato, or Lemon Cheesecakes.
TAKE six Ounces of Potatoes, four Ounces of Lemon Peel, four Ounces of Sugar,
four Ounces of Butter; boil the Lemon peel till tender; pure and scrape the
Potatoes, and boil them tender, and bruise them; beat the Lemon peel with the
Sugar, then beat all together very well, and melt the Butter in a little thick
Cream, and mix all together very well, and let it lie till cold: Put Crust in
your P^^tipans, and fill them little more than half full: Bake them in a quick
Oven half an Hour, sift some double refined Sugar on them as they go in the
Oven; this Quantity will make a Dozen small Pattipans.

Sauce for Fish in Lent, or at any Time.
TAKE a little Thyme, Horse radish, a Bit of Onion, Lemon peel and whole
Pepper; boil them a little in fair Water; then put in two Anchovies, and four
Spoonfuls of White Wind; then strain them out, and put the Liquor into the same
Pan again, with a Pound of fresh Butter; and when it is melted, take it off the
Fire, and stir in the Yolks of two Eggs well beaten, with three Spoonfuls of
White wine; let it on the Fire again, and keep it stirring till it is the
Thickness of Cream, and pour it hot over your Fish: Garnish with Lemon and
Horse radish.

To make a savoury Lamb Pie.
SEASON your Lamb with Pepper, Salt, Cloves, Mace, and Nutmeg; so put it into
your Coffin with a few Limb stones, and Sweet breads, seasoned as your Lamb,
also some large Oysters, and savoury Forced meat Balls, hard Yolks of Eggs, and
the Tops of Asparagus two Inches long, first boiled green; then put Butter all
over the Pie, and lid it, and set it in a quick Oven an Hour and a half; then
make the Liquor with Oyster-Liquor, as much Gravy, a little Claret, with one
Anchovy in it, and a grated Nutmeg. Let these have a Boil; thicken it with the
Yolks of two or three Eggs; and when the Pie is drawn, pour it in hot.

To make a sweet Lamb Pie.
CUT your Lamb into small Pieces, and season it with a little Salt, Cloves,
Mace, and Nutmeg; your Pie being made, put in your Lamb or Veal; strew on it
some stoned Raisins and Currants, and some Sugar; then lay on it some Forced
meat Balls made sweet, and in the Summer some Artichoke Bottoms boiled, and
scalded Grapes in the Winter. Boil Spanish Potatoes cut in Pieces; candied
Citron, candied Orange and Lemon peel, and 3 or 4 large Blades of Mace; put
Butter on the Top, close up your Pie, and bake it. Make the Caudle of
White Wind, Juice of Lemon and Sugar: Thicken it with the Yolks of two or three
Eggs and a Bit of Butter; and when your Pie is baked, pour in your Caudle as
hot as you can, and shake it well in the Pie, and serve it up.

A sweet Chicken Pie.
TAKE five or six small Chickens, pick, draw, and truss them for baking; season
them with Cloves, Mace, Nutmeg, Cinnamon, and a little Salt; wrap up some of
the Seasoning in Butter, and put it in their Bellies; and your Coffin being
made, put them in; put over and between them Pieces of Marrow, Spanish
Potatoes, and Chestnuts, both boiled, peeled, and cut, a Handful of Berberries
stripped, a Lemon sliced, some Butter on the Top; so close up the Pie and bake
it, and have in Readiness a Caudle made of White wine, Sugar, Nutmeg; beat it
up with Yolks of Eggs and Butter; have a care it does not curdle; pour the
Caudle in, shake it well together, and serve it up hot.

Another Chicken Pie.
SEason your Chickens with Pepper, Salt, Cloves, Mace, Nutmeg, a little shred
Parsley and Thyme, mixed with the other Seasoning; wrap up some in Butter, and
put in the Bellies of the Chickens, and lay them in your Pie; strew over them
Lemon cut like Dice, a handful of scalded Grapes, Artichoak-bottoms in
Quarters: So put Butter on it, and close it up; when it is baked, put in a Lear
of Gravy, with a little White Wind, a grated Nutmeg, thicken it up with Butter,
and two or three Eggs, shake it well together; serve it up hot.

To make an Olie Pie.
MAKE your Pie ready; then take the thin Collops of the But-end of a Leg of
Veal, as many as you think will fill your Pie; hack them with the Back of a
Knife, and season them with Pepper, Salt, Cloves, and Mace; wash over your
Collops with a Bunch of Feathers dipped in Eggs, and have in Readiness a good
Handful of Sweet-herbs shred small; the Herbs must be Thyme, Parsley, and
Spinach; and the Yolks of eight hard Eggs minced, and a few Oysters parboiled
and chopped; some Beef Suet shred very fine. Mix these together, and strew them
over your Collops, and sprinkel a little Orange-flower Water on them, and roll
the Collops up very close, and lay them in your Pie, strew the Seasoning that
is left over them; put Butter on the Top, and close up your Pie; when it is
drawn, put in Gravy, and one Anchovy dissolved in it, and pour it in very hot:
And you may put in Artichoak bottoms and Chestnuts, if you please, or sliced
Lemon, or Grapes scalded, or what else is in Season; but if you will make it a
right savoury Pie, leave them out.

To make a Florendine of Veal.
TAKE the Kidney of a Loin of Veal, fat and all, and mince it very fine; then
chop a few Herbs and put to it, and add a few Currants; season it with Cloves,
Mace, Nutmeg, and a little Salt; and put in some Yolks of Eggs, and a handful
of grated Bread, a Pippin or two chopped, some candied Lemon peel minced small,
some Sack, Sugar, and Orange-flower Water. Put a Sheet of Puff-paste at the
Bottom of your Dish; put this in, and cover it with another; close it up, and
when it is baked, scrape Sugar on it; serve it hot.

Another made Dish.
TAKE half a Pound of Almonds, blanch and beat them very fine; put to them a
little Rose or Orange-flower Water in the beating; then take a Quart of sweet
thick Cream, and boil it with whole Cinnamon and Mace, and quartered Dates;
sweeten your Cream with Sugar to your Taste, and mix it with your Almonds, and
stir it well together, and strain it out through a Sieve. Let your Cream cool,
and thicken it with the Yolks of six Eggs; then garnish the deep Dish, and lay
Paste at the Bottom, and then put in sliced Artichoke-bottoms, being first
boiled, and upon that a Layer of Marrow, sliced Citron, and candied Orange; so
do 'til your Dish is near full; then pour in your Cream, so bake it without a
Lid; when it is baked, scrape Sugar on it, and serve it up hot. Half an Hour
will bake it.

To make an Artichoke Pie.
BOIL the Bottoms of eight or ten Artichokes, scrape and make them clean from
the Core; cut each of them into six Parts; season them with Cinnamon, Nutmeg,
Sugar, and a little Salt; then lay your Artichokes in your Pie. Take the Marrow
of four or five Bones, dip your Marrow in Yolks of Eggs, and grated Bread, and
season it as you did your Artichokes, and lay it on the Top and between your
Artichokes; then lay on sliced Lemon, Barberries, and large Mace; put Butter on
the Top, and close up your Pie; then make your Lear of White Wind, S^ck, and
Sugar; thicken it with Yolks of Eggs, and a bit of Butter; when your Pie is
drawn, pour it in, shake it together, and serve it hot.

To make a Chervil or Spinach Tart.
SHRED a Gallon of Spinach or Chervil very small; put to it half a Pound of
melted Butter, the Meat of three Lemons picked from the Skins or Seeds; the
Rind of two Lemons grated, a Pound of Sugar; put this in a Dish or Pattipan
with Puff-paste on the Bottom and Top, and so bake it; when it is baked, cut off
the Lid, and put Cream or Custard over it as you do Codlin Tarts. Scrape Sugar
over it; serve it cold. This is good among other Tarts in the Winter for
Variety.

To make Lemon Cheesecakes.
TAKE the Peel of two large Lemons, boil it very tender; then pound it well in
a Mortar, with a quarter of a Pound or more of Loaf Sugar, the Yolks of six
Eggs, and half a Pound of fresh Butter; pound and mix all well together, and
fill the Pattipans but half full: Orange Cheese-cakes are done the same way;
only you must boil the Peel in two or three Waters to take out the Bitterness.

A Fish Pie.
TAKE of Soles or thick Flounders, gut and wash them, and just put them in
scalding Water to get off the black Skin; then cut them in Scollops or
indented, so that they will join and lie in the Pie, as if they were whole.
Have your Pattipan in Readiness with Puff paste in the Bottom, and a Layer of
Butter on it; then season your Fish with a little Pepper and Salt, Cloves,
Mace, and Nutmeg, and lay it in your Pattipan, joining the Pieces together, as
if the Fish had not been cut; then put in Forc'd-balls made with Fish, Slices
of Lemon with the Rind on, whole Oysters, whole Yolks of hard Eggs, and pickled
Barberries; then lid your Pie and bake it; when it is drawn, make a Caudle of
Oyster-liquor and White wine, thickened up with Yolks of Eggs, and a Bit of
Butter: Serve it hot.

To make Marrow Pasties.
MAKE your little Pasties the length of your Finger, and as broad as two
Fingers; put in large Pieces of Marrow, dipped in Eggs, and seasoned with
Sugar, Cloves, Mace, and Nutmeg; strew a few Currants on the Marrow. Bake or
fry them.

To make Mince-pyes of Veal.
FROM a Leg of Veal cut off four Pounds of the fleshy Part in thick Pieces, and
put them in scalding Water, and let it just boil; then cut the Meat in small
thin Pieces, and skin it: It must be four Pounds after it is scalded and
skinned; to this Quantity put nine Pounds of Beef Suet well skinned, and shred
them very well and fine with eight Pippins pared and cored, and four Pounds of
Raisins of the Sun stoned; when it is shred very fine, put it in a large Pan or
on a Table to mix, and put to it 1 Ounce of Nutmegs grated, half an Ounce of
Coves, as much Mace, a large Spoonful of Salt, above a Pound of Sugar, the Peel
of a Lemon shred exceeding fine; when you have seasoned it to your Palate, put
in seven Pounds of Currants, and two Pounds of Raisins of the Sun stoned and
shred. When you fill your Pies, put into every one some shred Lemon with its
Juice, some candied Lemon Peel and Citron in Slices, and just as the Pies go
into the Oven, put into every one a Spoonful of Sack and a Spoonful of Claret,
so bake them.

To make Cheesecakes without Curd.
BEAT two Eggs very well, then put as much Flour as will make them thick; then
beat three Eggs more very well, and put to the other, with a Pint of Cream, and
half a Pound of Butter. Set it over the Fire, and when it boils put in your two
Eggs and Flour, and stir them well, and let them boil 'til they be pretty
thick; then take it off the Fire, and season it with Sugar, a little Salt, and
Nutmeg; put in Currants, and bake them in Pattipans, as you do others.

To make a Cabbage-Lettuce Pie.
TAKE some of the largest and hardest Cabbage-Lettuce you can get; boil them in
Salt and Water 'til they are tender; then lay them in a Colander to drain dry;
then have your Paste laid in your Pattipan ready, and lay Butter on the Bottom;
then lay in your Lettuce and some Artichoke bottoms, and some large Pieces of
Marrow, and the Yolks of eight hard Eggs, and some scalded Sorrel; bake it, and
when it comes out of the Oven, cut open the Lid, and pour in a Caudle made with
White Wind and Sugar, and thicken it with Eggs; so serve it hot.

To make the light Wigs.
TAKE a Pound and half of Flour, and half a Pint of Milk made warm; mix these
together, and cover it up, and let it lie by the Fire half an Hour; then take
half a Pound of Sugar, and half a Pound of Butter; then work these in the
Paste, and make it into Wigs, with as little Flour as possible. Let the Oven be
pretty quick, and they will rise very much.

To make little Plumb-Cakes.
TAKE two Pounds of Flour dried in the Oven, and half a Pound of Sugar finely
powdered, four Yolks of Eggs, two Whites, half a Pound of Butter washed with
Rose water, 6 Spoonfuls of Cream warmed, a Pound and half of Currants unwashed,
but picked and rubbed very clean in a Cloth; mix all together, and make them up
in Cakes, and bake them up in an Oven almost as hot as for Manchet. Let them
stand half an Hour 'til they be colored on both Sides; then take down the
Oven-lid, and let them stand a little to soak.

To make Puff-Paste.
TO a Peck of Flour, you must have three quarters the Weight in Butter; dry
your Flour well, and lay it on a Table; make a Hole, and put in a Dozen Whites
of Eggs well beaten, but first break into it a third Part of your Butter; then
with Water make up your Paste; then roll it out, and by Degrees put in the rest
of your Butter.

To make a Hare Pie.
SKIN your Hare, wash her, and dry her, and bone her; season the Flesh with
Pepper, Salt, and Spice, and beat it fine in a Stone Mortar. Do a young Pig at
the same Time, and in the same Manner; then make your Pie, and lay a Layer of
Pig, and a Layer of Hare, 'til it is full; put Butter at the Bottom and on the
Top. Bake it three Hours; it is good hot or cold.

To ice Tarts.
TAKE a little Yolk of Egg, and melted Butter, beat it very well together, and
with a Feather wash over your Tarts, and silt Sugar on them just as you put
them in the Oven.

To make an Olio Pie.
TAKE a Fillet of Veal, cut it in large thin Slices, and beat it with a Rolling
pin. Have ready some Forc'd-meat, made with Veal and Suet, grated Bread, grated
Lemon Peel, some Nutmeg, the Yolks of two or three hard Eggs; spread the Forced
meat all over your Collops, and roll them up, and place them in your Pie with
Yolks of hard Eggs, Lumps of Marrow, and some Water: So lid it and bake it; and
when it is baked, put in a Caudle of strong Gravy, White Wind, and Butter.

To make very good Wigs.
TAKE a Quarter of a Peck of the finest Flour, rub into it 3 quarters of a
Pound of fresh Butter, 'til it is like grated Bread; something more than half a
Pound of Sugar, half a Nutmeg, and half a Race of Ginger grated; three Eggs,
Yolks and Whites beaten very well, and put to them half a Pint of thick
Ale-yeast, and 3 or 4 Spoonfuls of Sack. Make a Hole in your Flour, and pour in
your Yeast and Eggs, and as much Milk just warm, as will make it into a light
Paste. Let it stand before the Fire to rise, half an Hour; then make it into a
Dozen and Half of Wigs; wash them over with Eggs, just as they go into the
Oven; a quick Oven, and half an Hour, will bake them.

To make Almond Cheese-cakes.
TAKE a good Handful or more of Almonds; blanch them in warm Water, and throw
them into cold; pound them fine, and in the pounding put a little Sack or
Orange-flower Water to keep them from Oiling; then put to your Almonds the
Yolks of two hard Eggs, and beat them together: Beat the Yolks of six Eggs, the
Whites of three, and mix with your Almonds, and half a Pound of Butter melted,
and Sugar to your Taste; mix all well together, and use it as other Cheese-cake
Stuff.

To make a Lumber Pie.
PARBOIL the Umbles of a Deer, clear all the Fat from them, and put more than
their Weight in Beef Suet, and shred it together very small; then put to it
half a Pound of Sugar, and season with Cloves, Mace, Nutmeg, Salt to your
Taste; and put in a Pint of Sack, and half as much Claret, and two Pounds of
Currants, washed and picked; mix all well together, and bake it in Puff or
other Paste.

To make Lemon Cheesecakes.
TAKE two large Lemons, grate off the Peel of both, and squeeze out the Juice
of one; add to it half a Pound of fine Sugar; twelve Yolks of Eggs, eight
Whites well beaten; then melt half a Pound of Butter in four or five Spoonfuls
of Cream; then stir it all together, and set it over the Fire, stirring it 'til
it begins to be pretty thick; then take it off, and when it is cold, fill your
Pattipans little more than half full; put a fine Paste very thin at the Bottom
of the Pattipans; half an Hour, with a quick Oven, will bake them.

To make Cream Cheese with old Cheshire.
TAKE a Pound and half of old Cheshire Cheese, shave it all very thin, then put
it in a Mortar, and add to it a quarter of an ounce of Mace beaten fine and
fisted, half a Pound of fresh Butter, and a Glass of Sack; mix and heat all
these together 'til they are perfectly incorporated; then put it in a Pot, what
Thickness you please, and cut it out in Slices for Cream Cheese, and serve it
with the Desert.

All Sorts of CAKES.
To make a rich great Cake.
TAKE a Peck of Flour well dried, an Ounce of Cloves and Mace, half an Ounce of
Nutmegs, as much Cinnamon, beat the Spice well, and mix them with your Flour,
and a Pound and half of Sugar, and a little Salt, and thirteen Pounds of
Currants well washed, picked, and dried, and three Pounds of Raisins stoned and
cut into small Pieces; mix all these well together; then make five Pints of
Cream almost scalding hot, and put into it four Pounds of fresh Butter; then
beat the Yolks of twenty Eggs, three Pints of good Ale-yeast, a Pint of Sack, a
quarter of a Pint of Orange-flower Water, three Grains of Musk, and six Grains
of Ambergrease: Mix these together, and stir them into your Cream and Butter;
then mix all in the Cake, and set it an Hour before the Fire to rise, before
you put it into your Hoop; mix your Sweetmeats in it, two Pounds of Citron, and
one Pound of candied Orange and Lemonpeel cut in small Pieces: You must bake it
in a deep Hoop, butter the Sides, and put two Papers at the Bottom, and flour
it and put in your Cake; it must have a quick Oven; four Hours will bake it:
When it is drawn, ice it over the Top and Sides. Take two Pounds of double
refined Sugar, beat and sifted, and the Whites of six Eggs beaten to a Froth,
with three or four Spoonfuls of Orange-flower Water, and three Grains of Musk
and Ambergre^se together; put all these in a Stone Mortar, and beat them with a
wooden Pestle, 'til it is as white as Snow, and with a Brush or Bunch of
Feathers, spread it all over the Cake, and put in the Oven to dry; but take
Care the Oven does not discolor it; when it is cold paper it; it will keep good
five or six Weeks.

A Plumb-Cake.
TAKE six Pounds of Currants, five Pounds of Flour, an Ounce of Cloves and
Mace, a little Cinnamon, half an Ounce of Nutmegs, half a Pound of pounded and
blanched Almonds, half a Pound of Sugar, three quarters of a Pound of sliced
Citron, Lemon and Orange peel, half a Pint of Sack, a little Honey-water, and a
Quart of Ale-yeast, a Quart of Cream, a Pound and half of Butter melted and
poured into the middle thereof; then strew a little Flour thereon, and let it
lie to rise; then work it well together and lay it before the Fire to rise,
then work it up 'til it is very smooth; then put it in an Hoop with a Paper
floured at the Bottom.

A good Seed Cake.
TAKE five Pounds of fine Flour well dried, and four Pounds of single refined
Sugar beaten and sifted; mix the Sugar and Flour together, and sift them
through a Hair Sieve; then wash four Pounds of Butter in eight Spoonfuls of
Rose or Orange-flower Water; you must work the Butter with your Hand, 'til it is
like Cream; beat twenty Eggs, half the Whites, and put to them six Spoonfuls of
Sack; then put in your Flour a little at a Time, keeping stirring with your
Hand all the Time; you must not begin mixing it 'til the Oven is almost hot;
you must let it lie a little while before you put your Cake into the Hoop; when
you are ready to put it into the Oven, put into it eight Ounces of candied
Orange-peel sliced, and as much Citron, and a Pound and half of
Carraway-comfits; mix all well together, and put it in the Hoop, which must be
prepared at Bottom, and buttered; the Oven must be quick; it will take two or
three Hours baking. You may ice it if you please.

Another Seed Cake.
TAKE seven Pounds of fine Flour well dried, and mix with it a Pound of Sugar
beaten and sifted, and three Nutmegs grated, and rub three Pounds of Butter
into the Flour; then beat the Yolks of eight Eggs, the Whites of but four, and
mix with them a little Rose water, and a Quart of Cream blood warm, and a Quart
of Ale-yeast, and a little Salt; strain all into your Flour, and put a Pint of
Sack in with it, and make up your Cake, and put it into a buttered Cloth, and
lay it half an Hour before the Fire to rise; the mean while fit your Paper, and
butter your Hoop; then take a Pound and three Quarters of Biscuit comfit, and a
Pound and a half of Citron cut in small Pieces, and mix these in your Cake, and
put it into your Hoop, run a Knife cross down to the Bottom; a quick Oven, and
near three Hours, will bake it.

A Plumb Cake.
TAKE five Pounds of fine Flour, and put to it half a Pound of Sugar; and of
Nutmegs, Cloves, and Mace finely beaten, of each half an Ounce, and a little
Salt, mix these well together; then take a Quart of Cream, let it boil, and
take it off, and cut into it three Pounds of fresh Butter, let it stand till
it is melted, and when it is blood warm mix with it a Quart of Ale-yeast, and a
Pint of Sack, and twenty Eggs, ten Whites well beaten; put six Pounds of
Currants to your Flour, and make a Hole in the Middle, and pour in the Milk and
other Things, and make up your Cake, mixing it well with your Hands; cover it
warm, and set it before the Fire to rise for half an Hour; then put it in the
Hoop; if the Oven be hot, two Hours will bake it; the Oven must be quick; you
may perfume it with Ambergrease, or put Sweetmeats in it, if you please. Ice it
when cold, and paper it up.

An ordinary Cake, to eat with Butter.
TAKE two Pounds of Flour, and rub into it half a Pound of Butter; then put in
some Spice, a little Salt, a Quarter and half of Sugar, and half a Pound of
Raisins stoned, and half a Pound of Currants; make these into a Cake, with half
a Pint of Ale-yeast, and four Eggs, and as much warm Milk as you see
convenient; mix it well together; an Hour and a half will bake it. This Cake is
good to eat with Butter for Breakfasts.

A French Cake, to eat hot.
TAKE a Dozen of Eggs, and a Quart of Cream, and as much Flour as will make it
into a thick Batter; put to it a Pound of melted Butter, half a Pint of Sack,
one Nutmeg grated, mix it well, and let it stand three or four Hours; then bake
it in a quick Oven, and when you take it out, slit it in two, and pour a Pound
of Butter on it melted, with Rose Water; cover it with the other half, and
serve it up hot.

To make Portugal Cakes.
TAKE a Pound and Quarter of fine Flour well dried, and break a Pound of Butter
into the Flour and rub it in, add a Pound of Loaf Sugar beaten and sifted, a
Nutmeg grated, four perfumed Plumbs, or some Ambergrease, mix these well
together, and beat seven Eggs, but four Whites, with three Spoonfuls of Orange
flower Water; mix all these together, and beat them up an Hour; butter your
little Pans, and just as they are going into the Oven, fill them half full, and
search some fine Sugar over them; little more than a Quarter of an Hour will
bake them. You may put a Handful of Currants into some of them; take them out
of the Pans as soon as they are drawn, keep them dry, they will keep good three
Months.

To make Jumbals.
TAKE the Whites of three Eggs, beat them well, and take off the Froth; then
take a little Milk, and a little Flour, near a Pound, as much Sugar sifted, and
a few Carraway-seeds beaten very fine; work all these in a very stiff Paste,
and make them into what Form you please: Bake them on white Paper.

To make March-pane.
TAKE a Pound of Jordan Almonds, blanch and beat them in a Marble Mortar very
fine; then put to them three Quarters of a Pound of double-refin'd Sugar, and
beat with them a few Drops of Orange-flower Water; beat all together till it is
a very good Paste, then roll it into what Shape you please; dust a little fine
Sugar under it as you roll it to keep it from sticking. To ice it, searce
double-refin'd Sugar as fine as Flour, wet it with Rose Water, and mix it well
together; and with a Brush or Bunch of Feathers spread it over your Marchpane:
Bake them in an Oven that is not too hot; put Wafer-paper at the Bottom, and
white Paper under that, so keep them for Use.

To make Almond Puffs.
TAKE half a Pound of Jordan Almonds, blanch and beat them very fine with three
or four Spoonfuls of Rose Water; then take half an Ounce of the finest Gum
drag^nt steeped in Rose Water three or four Days before you use it, then put it
to the Almonds, and beat it together; then take three Quarters of a Pound of
double refined Sugar beaten and sifted, and a little fine Flour, and put to it;
roll it in what Shape you please; lay them on white Paper, and put them in an
Oven gently hot, and when they are baked enough, take them off the Papers, and
put them on a Sieve to dry in the Oven, when it is almost cold.

To make little hollow Biskets.
BEAT six Eggs very well with a Spoonful of Rose Water, then put in a Pound and
two Ounces of Loaf-Sugar, beaten and sifted; stir it together till it is well
mixed in the Eggs; then put in as much Flour as will make it thick enough to
lay out in Drops upon Sheets of white Paper; stir it well together till you are
ready to drop it on your Paper; then beat a little very fine Sugar and put into
a Lawn Sieve, and sift some on them just as they are going into the Oven; so
bake them, the Oven must not be too hot; and as soon as they are baked, whilst
they are hot, pull off the Papers from them, and put them in a Sieve, and set
them in the Oven to dry; keep them in Boxes with Papers between.

To make Wigs.
TAKE two Pounds of Flour, and a Quarter of a Pound of Butter, as much Sugar, a
Nutmeg grated, a little Cloves and Mace, and a Quarter of an Ounce of
Carraway-seeds, Cream and Yeast as much as will make it up into a pretty light
Paste; make them up, and set them by the Fire to rise till the Oven be ready;
they will quickly be baked.

To make Ginger-bread.
TAKE a Pound and half of London Treacle, two Eggs beaten, half a Pound of
brown Sugar, one Ounce of Ginger beaten and sifted; of Cloves, Mace, and
Nutmegs all together half an Ounce beaten very fine; Coriander-seeds, and
Carraway-seeds of each half an Ounce, two Pounds of Butter melted; mix all
these together, with as much Flour as will knead it into a pretty stiff Paste;
then roll it out, and cut it into what Form you please; bake it in a quick Oven
on Tin-plates; a little Time will bake it.

Another sort of Ginger-bread.
TAKE half a Pound of Almonds, blanch and beat them till they have done
thining; beat them with a Spoonful or two of Orange-flower Water, put in half
an Ounce of beaten Ginger, and a quarter of an Ounce of Cinnamon powdered; work
it to a Paste with double refined Sugar beaten and sifted; then roll it out,
and lay it on Papers to dry in an Oven, after Pyes are drawn.

To make Dutch Ginger-bread.
TAKE four Pounds of Flour, and mix with it two Ounces and a half of beaten
Ginger; then rub in a quarter of a Pound of Butter, and add to it two Ounces of
Carraway seeds, two Ounces of Orange-peel dried and rubbed to Powder, a few
Coriander-seeds bruised, two Eggs: Then mix all up in a stiff Paste, with two
Pounds and a quarter of Treacle; beat it very well with a Rolling-pin, and make
it up into thirty Cakes; put in a candied Citron; prick them with a Fork:
Butter Papers three double, one white and two brown; wash them over with the
white of an Egg; put them into an Oven, not too hot, for three quarters of an
Hour.

To make Buns.
TAKE two Pounds of fine Flour, a Pint of Ale-yeast; put a little Sack in the
Yeast, and three Eggs beaten; knead all these together with a little warm Milk,
a little Nutmeg, and a little Salt; then lay it before the Fire till it rise
very light; then knead in a Pound of fresh Butter, and a Pound of round
Carraway-comsits; and bake them in a quick Oven, on floured Papers, in what
Shape you please.

To make French Bread.
TAKE half a Peck of fine Flour; put to it fix Yolks of Eggs, and four whites,
a little Salt, a Pint of good Ale-yeast, and as much new Milk made a little
warm, as will make it a thin light Paste; stir it about with your Hand, but by
no Means knead it; then have ready fix wooden Quart Dishes, and fill them with
Dough; let them stand a quarter of an Hour to heave, and then turn them out
into the Oven; and when they are baked, rasp them. The Oven must be quick.

To make Wigs.
TAKE three Pounds and a half of Flour, and three quarters of a Pound of
Butter, and rub it into the Flour till none of it be seen; then take a Pint or
more of new Milk, and make it very warm, and half a Pint of new Ale yeast; then
make it into a light Paste. Put in Carraway seeds, and what Spice you please;
then make it up, and lay it before the Fire to rise; then work in three
quarters of a Pound of Sugar, and then roll them into what Form you please
pretty thin, and put them on Tin-plates, and hold them before the Oven to rise
again. Before you set them in, your Oven must be pretty quick.

To make Ginger-bread.
TAKE three Pounds of fine Flour, and the Rind of a Lemon dried and beaten to
Powder, half a Pound of Sugar, or more, as you like it, and an Ounce and a half
of beaten Ginger: Mix all these well together, and wet it pretty stiff with
nothing but Treacle; make it into long Rolls, or Cakes, as you please. You may
put can^^ed Orange-peel and Citron in it. Butter your Paper you take it on, and
let it be baked hard.

To make Shrewsbury-Cakes.
TAKE to one Pound of Sugar, three Pounds of the finest Flour, a Nutmeg grated,
some beaten Cinnamon; the Sugar and Spice must be sifted into the Flour, and wet
it with three Eggs, and as much melted Butter as will make it of a good
Thickness to roll into a Paste; mould it well and roll it, and cut it into what
Shape you please. Persume them, and prick them before they go into the Oven.

To make Almond Cakes.
TAKE a Pound of Almonds, blanch and beat them exceeding fine with a little
Rose or Orange flower Water; then beat three Eggs, but two Whites, and put to
them a Pound of Sugar sifted, and then put in your Almonds, and beat all
together very well; butter Sheets of white Paper, and lay the Cakes in what
Form you please, and bake them. You may persume them, if you like it; bake them
in a cool Oven.

To make Drop Biscuit.
TAKE eight Eggs, and one Pound of double-refin'd Sugar beaten fine, and twelve
Ounces of fine Flour well dried. Beat your Eggs very well; then put in your
Sugar and beat it, and then your Flour by Degrees, and beat it all very well
together for an Hour without ceasing. Your Oven must be as hot as for
halfpenny Bread; then flour some Sheets of Tin, and drop your Biscuit what
Bigness you please, and put them in the Oven as fast as you can; and when you
see them rise, watch them, and if they begin to color take them out again and
put in more, and if the first is not enough, put them in again; if they are
right done they will have a white Ice on them. You may put in Carraway seeds if
you please; when they are all baked, put them all in the Oven again till they
are very (...), and keep them in your Stove.

To make little Cracknels.
TAKE three Pounds of Flour finely dried, three Ounces of Lemon and Orange peel
dried and beaten to a Powder, and an Ounce of Coriander seeds beaten and
fearced, and three Pounds of double refined Sugar beaten fine and fearced; mix
these together with fifteen Eggs, half of the Whites taken out, a quarter of a
Pint of Rose Water, as much Orange flower Water. Beat the Eggs and Water well
together; then put in your Orange-peel and Coriander-seeds, and beat it again
very well with two Spoons, one in each Hand; then beat your Sugar in by a
little and little, then your Flour by a little at a Time, so beat with both
Spoons an Hour longer; then strew Sugar on Papers, and drop them the Bigness of
a Walnut, and set them in the Oven; the Oven must be hotter than when Pyes are
drawn. Do not touch them with your Fingers before they are baked. Let the Oven
be ready for them against they are done; be careful the Oven does not color
them.

To make the thin Dutch Biscuit.
TAKE five Pounds of Flour, and two Ounces of Carraway seeds, half a Pound of
Sugar, and something more than a Pint of Milk. Warm the Milk, and put into it
three quarters of a Pound of Butter; then make a Hole in the middle of your
Flour, and put in a full Pint of good Ale yeast; then pour in the Butter and
Milk, and make these into a Paste, and let it stand a quarter of an Hour by the
Fire to rise; then mould it, and roll it in Cakes pretty thin; prick them all
over pretty much, or they will blister; so bake them a quarter of an Hour.

To make an ordinary Seed-Cake.
TAKE six Pounds of fine Flour, rub into it a Thimblef^ ^ Caraway-seeds finely
beaten, and a Nutmegs grated, and Mace beaten; then heat a Quart of Cream, hot
enough to melt a Pound of Butter in it, and when it is no more than Blood-warm,
mix your Cream and Butter with a Pint of good Ale yeast* and then wet your
Flour with it; make it pretty thin; just before it goes into the Oven, put in a
Pound of rough Carraways, and some Citron sliced thin. Three quarters of an
Hour, in a quick Oven, will bake it.

To make ordinary Wigs.
TAKE three Pounds and an half of fine Flour, and three quarters of a Pound of
Butter, rub it into the Flour 'til none of it be seen; then take a Pint or more
of new Milk, and make it very warm, and three quarters of a Pint of Ale-yeast;
and with these make it into a light Paste; and put in Carraway-seeds, or what
Spice you please; then set it before the Fire to rise; then mix in it three
quarters of a Pound of Sugar; then roll them out pretty thin, and then put on
Tin-plates and hold them before the Fire to rise again, or before the Oven. Let
your Oven be pretty quick, and they will soon be baked.

A good Seed-cake.
TAKE two Pounds of the finest Flour well dried, two Pounds of fresh Butter
rubbed well in; ten Eggs, leave out five Whites; three Spoonfuls of Cream, four
Spoonfuls of good Yeast; mix all well together, and set it to the Fire, not too
near; when it is well risen, put in a Pound of Carraway-comfits. An Hour and a
quarter will bake it.

To make the Marlborough Cake.
TAKE eight Eggs, Yolks and Whites, beat and strain them, and put to them a
Pound of Sugar beaten and sifted; beat it three Quarters of an Hour together;
then put in three Quarters of a Pound of Flour well dried, and two Ounces of
Carraway seeds; beat it all well together, and bake it in a quick Oven in (...)
Tin Pans.

Another Sort of little Cakes.
TAKE a Pound of Flour and a Pound of Butter. Rub the Butter into the Flour,
two Spoonfuls of Yeast, and two Eggs. Make it into a Paste, slick white Paper,
roll your Paste out the Thickness of a Crown, cut them out with the Top of a
Tin Canister; sift fine Sugar over them, and lay them on the flicked Paper.
Bake them after Tarts an Hour.

To make the White Cake.
TAKE three Quarts of the finest Flour, a Pound and half of Butter, a Pint of
thick Cream, half a Pint of Ale yeast, half a quarter of a Pint of Rose water
and Sack together, a quarter of an Ounce of Mace, nine Eggs, abating four
Whites. beat them well; five Ounces of double-refin'd Sugar; mix the Sugar and
Spice, and a very little Salt with your dry Flour, and keep out half a Pint of
the Flour to strew over the Cake; when it is all mixed, melt the Butter in the
Cream when it is a little cool, strain the Eggs into it, Yeast, etc. Make a Hole
in the midst of the Flour, and pour all the Wetting in, stirring it round with
your Hand all one Way, 'til well mixed. Strew on the Flour that was saved out,
and set it before the Fire to rise, covered over with a Cloth; let it stand so
a quarter of an Hour. You must have in Readiness three Pounds and half of
Currants walled and picked, and well dried in a Cloth; mingle them in the Paste
without kneading; put it in a Tin hoop; set it in a quick Oven, or it will not
rise; it must stand an Hour and half in the Oven.

To make another Sort of Gingerbread.
TAKE a Pound and half of London Treacle, 2 Eggs beaten, a Pound of Butter
melted, half a Pound of brown Sugar, an Ounce of beaten Ginger; and of cloves,
Mace, Corian^^r seeds, and Carraway seeds, of each half an Ounce; mix all these
together, with as much Flour as will knead it into a Paste; roll it out, and
cut it into what Form you please. Bake it in a quick Oven on Tin-plates; a
little Time will bake it.

To make Biskets.
TO a Quart of Flour, take a quarter of a Pound of Butter, and a quarter of a
Pound of Sugar, 1 Egg, and what Carraway seeds you please, wet the Milk as
stiff as you can; then roll them out very thin; cut them with a Glass Bake them
on Tin plates, your Oven must be slick. Prick them very well just as you set
them in, and keep them dry when baked.

To make brown French Loaves.
TAKE a Peck of coarse Flour, and as much of the Raspings of Bread, beaten and
sifted, as will make it look brown; then wet it with a Pint of good Yeast, and
as much Milk and Water warm as will wet it pretty stiff; mix it well, and set
it before the Fire to rise; make it into six Loaves; make it up as light as you
can, and bake it well in a quick Oven.

To make the hard Biscuit.
TAKE half a Peck of fine Flour, one Ounce of Carraway-seeds, the Whites of two
Eggs, a quarter of a Pint of Ale-yeast, and as much warm Water as will make it
into a stiff Paste; then make it in long Rolls Bake it an Hour; the next Day
pare it round; then slice it in thin Slices about an Inch thick; dry it in the
Oven; then draw it and turn it, and dry the other Side; they will keep the
whole Year.

To make Whetstone Cakes.
TAKE half a Pound of fine Flour, and half a Pound of Loaf-sugar searced, a
Spoonful of Carraway-seeds dried, the Yolk of one Egg, the Whites of three, a
little Rose Water, with Ambergrease dissolved in it; mix it together, and roll
it out as thin as a Wafer; cut them with a Glass; lay on them flour'd Paper,
and bake them in a slow Oven.

To make a good Plumb-cake.
TAKE four Pounds of Flour, put to it half a Pound of Loaf sugar beaten and
sifted, of Mace and Nutmegs half an Ounce beaten fine, a little Salt. Beat the
Yolk of thirty Eggs, the Whites of fifteen, a Pint and half of Ale-yeast, three
Quarters of a Pint of Sack, with two Grains of Ambergrease, and two of Musk
steeped in it 5 or 6 Hours; then take a large Pint of thick Cream, set it on
the Fire, and put in two Pounds of Butter to melt, but not boil; then put your
Flour in a Bowl, make a Hole in the midst, and pour in your Yeast, Sack, Cream,
and Eggs. Mix it well with your Hands, make it up, not too stiff, set it to the
Fire a quarter of an Hour to rise; then put in seven Pounds of Currants picked
and washed in warm Water, then dried in a coarse Cloth, and kept warm 'til you
put them into your Cake, which mix in as fast as you can, and put candied
Lemon, Orange, and Citron in it; put it in your Hoop, which must be ready
buttered and fixed; set it in a quick Oven; bake it two Hours or more, when
it is near cold, ice it.

Another Plumb-cake.
TAKE four Pounds of Flour, four Pounds of Currants, and twelve Eggs, half the
Whites taken out, near a Pint of Yeast, a Pound and half of Butter, a good half
Pint of Cream; three quarters of a Pound of Loaf-sugar, beaten Mace, Nutmegs,
and Cinnamon, half an Ounce beaten fine; mingle the Spices and Sugar with the
Flour; beat the Eggs well, and put to them a quarter of a Pint of Rose Water,
that had a little Musk and Ambergrease dissolved in it; put the Butter and
Cream into a Jug, and put it in a Pot of boiling Water to melt; when you have
mixed the Cake, strew a little Flour over it. Cover it with a very hot Napkin,
and set it before the Fire to rise; butter and Flour your Hoop, and just as
your Oven is ready, put your Currants into boiling Water to plump. Dry them in
a hot Cloth, and mix them in your Cake. You may put in half a Pound of candied
Orange, Lemon, and ^^^ron; let not your Oven be too hot, two Hours will take
it, three it it is double the Quantity. Mix it with a broad Pudding-stick, not
with your Hands; when your Cake is just drawn, pour all over it a Gill of
Brandy or Sack; then ice it.

Another Plumb-cake with Almonds.
TAKE four Pounds of fine Flour dried well, five Pounds of Currants well picked
and rubbed, but not washed; five Pounds of Butter washed and beaten in Orange
flower Water and Sack; two Pounds of Almonds beaten very fine four Pounds of
Eggs weighed, half the Whites taken out; three Pounds of double refined Sugar,
three Nutmegs grated, a little Ginger, a quarter of an Ounce of Mace, as much
Cloves finely beaten, a quarter of a Pint of the best Brandy: The Butter must
be beaten to Cream; then put in your Flour, and all the rest of your Things,
beating it 'til you put it in the Oven; 4 Hours will bake it, the Oven must be
very quick; put in Orange, Lemon Peel candied, and Citron, as you like.

A rich Seed-cake, called the Nun's Cake,
TAKE four Pounds of your first Flour, and three Pounds of double-refin'd Sugar
beaten and sifted; mix them together, and dry them by the Fire 'till you
prepare your other Materials.

Take four Pounds of Butter, beat it in your Hands till it is very soft like
Cream; then beat thirty five Eggs, leave out sixteen Whites, and strain out the
Tr^d^^els of the rest, and heat them and the Butter together till all appears
like Butter, put in four or five Spoonfuls of Rose or Orange-flower Water, and
beat it again; then take your Flour and Sugar, with six Ounces of
Carraway-seeds, and strew it in by Degrees, beating it up all the Time for 2
Hours together; you may put in as much Tincture of Cinnamon or Ambergrease as
you please; butter your Hoop, and let it stand three Hours in a moderate Oven.

To ice a great Cake.
TAKE two Pounds of the finest double-refin'd Sugar, beat and sift it very
fine, and likewise beat and sift a little Starch and mix with it; then beat six
Whites of Eggs to a Froth, and put to it some Gum-water, the Gum must be
steeped in Orange-flower Water; then mix and beat all these together two Hours,
and put it on your Cake; when it is baked, set it in the Oven a quarter of an
Hour.

Another Seed-cake.
TAKE a Pound of Flour, dry it by the Fire, add to it a Pound of fine Sugar
beaten and sifted; then take a Pound and a Quarter of Butter and work it in
your Hand till it is like Cream; beat the Yolks of ten Eggs, the Whites of six;
mix all these together with an Ounce and half of Carraway-seeds, and a quarter
of a Pint of Brandy; it must not stand to rise.

CREAMS and JELLIES.
Lemon Cream.
TAKE five large Lemons, and squeeze out the Juice, and the Whites of six Eggs
well beaten, ten Ounces of double refined Sugar beaten very fine, and twenty
Spoonfuls of Spring water; mix all together, and strain it through a Jelly-bag;
set it over a gentle Fire, scum it very well, when it is as hot as you can bear
your Finger in it, take it off, and pour it into Glasses; put Shreds of
Lemon Peel into some of the Glasses.

Another Lemon Cream.
TAKE the Juice of four large Lemons, and half a Pint of Water, and a Pound of
double-refin'd Sugar beaten fine, and the Whites of seven Eggs, and the Yolk of
one beaten very well; mix all together, and strain it, and set it on a gentle
Fire, stirring it all the while, and scum it clean; put into it the Peel of one
Lemon, when it is very hot, but not boil; take out the Lemon Peel, and pour it
into China Dishes.

To make Orange Cream.
TAKE a Pint of the Juice of Sevil Oranges, put to it the Yolks of six Eggs,
the Whites of four; beat the Eggs very well, and strain them and the Juice
together; add to it a Pound of double-refin'd Sugar beaten and sifted; set all
these together on a soft Fire, and put the Peel of half an Orange into it, keep
it stirring all the while, and when it is almost ready to boil, take out the
Orange-peel, and pour out the Cream into Glasses or China Dishes.

To make Gooseberry Cream.
TAKE two Quarts of Gooseberries, put to them as much Water as will cover them;
let them boil all to mash, then run them through a Seive with a Spoon; to a
Quart of the Pulp, you must have six Eggs well beaten, and when the Pulp is
hot, put in an Ounce of fresh Butter, sweeten it to your Taste, and put in your
Eggs, and stir them over a gentle Fire 'til they grow thick; then set it by,
and when it is almost cold, put into it two Spoonfuls of the Juice of Spinach,
and a Spoonful of Orange-flower Water or Sack, stir it well together, and put
it into your Basins; when it is cold, serve it to the Table.

Some love the Gooseberries only mashed, not pulped through a Sieve, and put
the Butter, and Eggs, and Sugar, as the other, but no Juice of Spinach.

To make Barley Cream.
TAKE a small Quantity of Pearl-Barley, and boil it in Milk and Water 'til it is
tender; then strain the Liquor from it, and put your Barley into a Quart of
Cream, and let it boil a little; then take the Whites of five Eggs, and the
Yolk of one beaten with a Spoonful of fine Flour, and two Spoonfuls of
Orange-flower Water; then take the Cream off the Fire, and mix the Eggs in by
Degrees, and set it over the Fire again to thicken; sweeten it to your Taste,
pour it into Basins; and when it is cold, serve it up.

To make Steeple Cream.
TAKE five Ounces of Hart's-horn, and two Ounces of Ivory, and put them into a
Stone Bottle, and fill it with fair Water to the Neck, and put in a small
Quantity of Gum-arabick, and Gum-dragant; then tie up the Bottle very close,
and set it into a Pot of Water with Hay at the Bottom; let it boil 6 Hours,
then take it out, and let it stand an Hour before you open it, lest it fly in
your Face; then strain it in, and it will be a strong Jelly; then take a Pound
of blanched Almonds, and beat them very fine, and mix it with a Pint of thick
Cream, and let it stand a little; then strain it out, and mix it with a Pound
of Jelly; set it over the Fire 'til it is scalding hot, sweeten it to your Taste
with double-refin'd Sugar; then take it off, and put in a little Amber, and
pour it out into small high Gallipots like a Sugar Loaf at Top; when it is cold
turn them out, and lay whipt-Cream about them in Heaps.

To make Blanched Cream.
TAKE a Quart of the thickest sweet Cream you can get, season it with fine
Sugar and Orange-flower Water; then boil it; then beat the Whites of twenty
Eggs with a little cold Cream, take out the Treddles, and when the Cream is on
the Fire, and boils, pour in your Eggs, stirring it very well 'til it comes to
a thick Curd; then take it up and pass it through a Hair Steve; then beat it
very well with a Spoon 'til it is cold, and put it in Dishes for Use.

To make Quince Cream.
TAKE Quinces, scald them 'til they are soft; pare them, and mash the clear
Part of them, and pulp it through a Sieve; take an equal Weight of Quince, and
double-refin'd Sugar beaten and sifted, and the Whites of Eggs; and beat it
'til it is as white Snow, then put it in Dishes.

To make Almond Cream.
TAKE a Quart of Cream, boil it with Nutmeg, Mace, and a bit of Lemon Peel, and
sweeten it to your Taste; then blanch some Almonds, and beat them very fine;
then take nine Whites of Eggs well beaten, and strain them to your Almonds, and
rub them very well through a thin Strainer; so thicken your Cream; just give it
one boil, and pour it into China Dishes; and when it is cold, serve it up.

To make Ratafia Cream.
TAKE six large Laurel-leaves, and boil them in a Quart of thick Cream; when
it is boiled, throw away the Leaves, and beat the Yolks of five Eggs with a
little cold Cream, and Sugar to your Taste; then thicken your Cream with your
Eggs, and set it over the Fire again, but let it hot boil; keep it stirring all
the while^ and pour it into China Dishes; when it is cold, it is fit for Use.

To make Sack Cream.
TAKE the Yolks of two Eggs, and three Spoonfuls of fine Sugar, and a quarter
of a Pint of Sack; mix them together, and stir them into a Pint of Cream; then
set them over the Fire 'til it is scalding hot, but let it not boil. You may
toast some thin Slices of white Bread, and dip them in Sack or Orange-flower
Water, and pour your Cream over them.

To make Rice Cream.
TAKE three Spoonfuls of the Flour of Rice, as much Sugar, the Yolks of two
Eggs, two Spoonfuls of Sack, or Rose or Orange flower Water; mix all these
together, and put them to a Pint of Cream, stir it over the Fire 'til it is
thick, then pour it into China Dishes.

To make Hart's-horn Jelly.
TAKE a large Gallipot and fill it full of Hart's horn, and then fill it full
with Spring water, and tie a double Paper over the Gallipot, and set it in the
Baker's Oven with Household Bread; in the Morning take it out, and run it
through a Jelly-bag, and season it with Juice of Lemons, and double-refin'd
Sugar, and the Whites of eight Eggs well beaten; let it have a boil, and run it
through the Jelly-bag again into your Jelly-glasses; put a bit of Lemon Peel in
the Bag.

To make Calf's-foot Jelly.
TO four Calf's feet take a Gallon of fair Water, cut them in Pieces, and put
them in a Pipkin close covered, and boil them softly 'til almost half be
consumed; then run it through a Sieve, and let it stand 'til it is cold; then
with a Knife take off the Fat, and Top and Bottom, and the fine Part of the
Jelly melt in a Preserving-pan or Skillet, and put in a Pint of Rhenish wine,
the Juice of four or five Lemons, double-refin'd Sugar to your Taste, the
Whites of eight Eggs beaten to a froth; stir and boil all these together near
half an Hour; then strain it through a Sieve into a Jelly bag; put into your
Jelly-bag a Sprig of Rosemary, and a Piece of Lemon Peel; pass it through the
Bag till it is as clear as Water. You may cut some Lemon Peel like Threads, and
put in half the Glasses.

To make whipped Cream.
TAKE a Quart of thick Cream, and the Whites of eight Eggs beaten with half a
Pint of Sack; mix it together, and sweeten it to your Taste with double refined
Sugar: You may perfume it if you please with some Musk or Ambergrease tied in a
Rag, and steeped a little in the Cream; whip it up with a Whisk, and a bit of
Lemon Peel tied in the middle, of the Whisk; take the Froth with a Spoon, and
lay it in your Glasses or Basins.

To make whipped Syllabubs.
TAKE a Quart of Cream, not to thick, and a Pint of Sack, and the Juice of two
Lemons; sweeten it to your Pal^te, and put it into a broad earthen Pan, and
with a Whisk whip it, and as the Froth rises, take it off with a Spoon, and lay
it in your Syllabub glasses; but first you must sweeten some Clare^, or Sack,
or White Wind, and strain it, and put seven or eight Spoonfuls of the Wine into
your Glasses, and then gently lay in your Froth. Set them by. Do not make them
long before you use them.

To make a fresh Cheese.
TAKE a Quart of Cream, and set it over the Fire 't^l it is ready to boil, then
beat nine Eggs. Yolks and Wh^^es very well; when you are (...) him put to them
as much Salt as will lie on a small Kn^e's Point; put them to the Cream, and
some Nutmeg quartered, and tied up in a Rag; so let them boil till the Whey is
clear; then take it off the Fire, and put it in a Pan, and gather it as you do
Cheese; then put it in a Cloth, and drain it between two; then put it in a
Stone Mortar, and grind it, and season it with a little Sack, and Orange-flower
Water, and Sugar, and then put it in a little earthen Colande^, and let it
stand two Hours to drain out the Whey; then put it in the Middle of a China
Dish, and pour thick Cream about it: So serve it to the Table.

To make Almond Butter.
TAKE a Pound of the best Jordan Almonds, blanched in cold Water, and as you
blanch them throw them into fair Water; then beat them in a Marble Mor^ar very
fine, with some Rose or Orange-flower Water, to keep them from oiling; then
take a Pound of Butter out of the Churn before it is salted, but it must be very
well washed, and mix it with your Almonds, with near a Pound of double-refin'd
Sugar beaten and sifted; when it is very mixed, set it by to cool; when you are
going to use it, put it into a Colander, and pass it through with the Back of a
Spoon into the Dish you serve it in. Hold your Hand high, and let it be heaped
up.

To make Ribbon Jelly.
TAKE out the great Bones of four Calves-Feet, and put the Feet into a Pot with
ten Quarts of Water, three Ounces of Hart's-horn, three Ounces of Ising-glass,
a Nutmeg quartered, four Blades of Mace; then boil this till it comes to two
Quarts, and strain it through a fine Flannel Bag; let it stand twenty-four
Hours; then scrape off all the Fat from the Top very clean; then heat it, and
put to it the Whites of sig Eggs beaten to a Froth; boil it a little, and
strain it again through a Flannel Bag; then run the Jelly into little high
Glasses; run every Color as thick as your Finger; one Color must be thorough
cold before you put another on, and that you run on must not be blood warm for
fear it mixes together; you must color red with Cochineel, green with Spinach,
yellow with Saffron, blue with Syrup of Violets, white with thick Cream, and
sometimes the Jelly by itself.

To make Cream of any preserved Fruit.
TAKE half a Pint of the Pulp of any preserved Fruit, put it in a large Pan,
put to it the Whites of two or three Eggs; beat them together exceeding well
for an Hour; then with a Spoon take it off, and lay it heaped up high on the
Dish or Salver with other Creams, or put it in the middle Basin: Raspberries
will not do this way.

To make a Snow Posset.
TAKE a Quart of new Milk, and boil it with a Stick of Cinnamon and quartered
Nutmeg; when the Milk is boiled, take out the Spice, and beat the Yolks of
sixteen Eggs very well, and by Degrees mix them in the Milk 'til it is thick;
then beat the Whites of the sixteen Eggs with a little Sack and Sugar into a
Snow; then take the Basin you design to serve it up in, and put in it a Pint of
Sack; sweeten it to your Taste; set it over the Fire, and let one take the
Milk, and another the Whites of Eggs, and so pour them together into the Sack
in the Basin; keep it stirring all the while it is over the Fire; when it is
thorough warm take it off, cover it up, and let it stand a little before you
use it.

To make a Jelly Posset.
TAKE twenty Eggs, leave out half the Whites, and beat them very well; put them
into the Basin you serve it in, with near a Pint of Sack and a little strong
Ale; sweeten it to your Taste, and set it over a Charcoal Fire, keep it
stirring all the while; then have in Readiness a Quart of Milk or Cream, boiled
with a little Nutmeg and Cinnamon, and when your Sack and Eggs is hot enough to
scald your Lips, put the Milk to it boiling hot; then take it off the Fire, and
cover it up half an Hour; strew Sugar on the Brim of the Dish, and serve it to
the Table.

To make Flummery Caudle.
TAKE a Pint of fine Oat meal, and put to it two Quarts of fair Water; let it
stand all Night, in the Morning stir it, and strain it into a Skillet, with
three or four Blades of Mace, and a Nutmeg quartered; set it on the Fire, and
keep it stirring, and let it boil a quarter of an Hour; if it is too thick, put
in more Water, and let it boil longer; then add a Pint of Rhenish or
White Wind, three Spoonfuls of Orange flower Water, the Juice of two Lemons and
one Orange, a Bit of Butter, and as much fine Sugar as will sweeten it; let all
these have a walm, and thicken it with the Yolks of two or three Eggs. Drink it
hot for a Breakfast.

To make Tea Caudle.
MAKE a Quart of strong gre^n Tea, and pour it out into a Skillet, and set it
over the Fire; then beat the Yolks of four Eggs, and mix with them a Pint of
White Wind, a grated Nutmeg, Sugar to your Taste, and put all together; stir it
over the Fire till it is very hot, then drink it in China Dishes as Caudle.

A fine Caudle.
TAKE a Pint of Milk, turn it with Sack; then strain it, and when it is cold,
put it in a Skillet, with Mace, Nutmeg, and some white Bre^d sliced; let all
these boil, and then beat the Yolks of four or five Eggs, the Whites of two,
and thicken your Caudle, stirring it all one way for fear it curdle; let it
warm together, then take it off, and sweeten it to your Taste.

To make Hart's-horn or Calf's-foot Jelly without Lemons.
TAKE a Pair of Calves Feet, boil them with six Qu^rts of fair Water to mash;
it will make three Quarts o^ Jelly; then strain it off, and let it stand till
it is cold, take off the Top, and save the Middle, and melt it again and sc^m
it; then take 6 Whites of Eggs beaten to a Froth, half a Pint of Rhenish-wine,
and one Lemon juiced, and half a Pound ot fine powdered Sugar; stir all
together, and let it boil, then take it off, and put to it as much Spirit of
Vitriol as will sharpen it to your Palate, about one Pennyworth will do, let
it not boil after the Vitriol is in; let your Jelly-bag be made of thick
Flannel, then run it through till it is very clear; you may put the Whites of
the Eggs that swim at the Top into the Bag first, and that will thicken the Bag.

To make Oat-meal Caudle.
TAKE two Quarts or Ale, and one of stale Beer, and two Quarts of Water; mix
them all together, and add to it two Handfuls of Pot-Oatmeal, twelve Cloves,
five or six Blades of Mace, and a Nutmeg quartered or bruised; set it over the
Fire, and let it boil half an Hour, stirring it all the while; then strain it
out through a Sieve, and put in near a Pound of fine Sugar, and a Bit of
Lemon Peel; pour it into a Pan and cover it close that it may not scum; warm it
as you use it.

To make Salop.
TAKE a Quart of Water, and let it boil a quarter of an Hour; then put in a
quarter of an Ounce of Salop finely powdered, and let it boil half an Hour
longer, stirring it all the while; then season it with White Wind and Juice of
Lemons, and sweeten it to your Taste; drink it in China Cups as Chocolate; it is
a great Sweetner of the Blood.

Boil Sago till it is tender and jellies, a Spoonful and half to a Quart of
Water; then season it as you do your Salop, and drink it in Chocolate-Dishes;
or if you please leave out the Wine and Lemon, and put in a Pint of thick Cream
and a Stick of Cinnamon, and thicken it up with two or three Eggs.

To make Lemon Syllabubs.
TAKE a Quart of Cream, half a Pound of Sugar, a Pint of White Wind, the Juice
of two or three Lemons, the Peel of one grated; mix all these, and put them in
an earthen Pot, and milk it up as fast as you can 'til it is thick; then pour
it into your Glasses, and let them stand 5 or 6 Hours: You may make them over
Night.

To make white Leach.
TAKE half a Pound of Almonds, blanch and beat them with Rose Water and a
little Milk; then strain it out, and put to it a Piece of Ising glass, and let
it boil on a Chasing-dish of Coals half an Hour; then strain it into a Basin,
and sweeten it, and put a Grain of Musk in it, and let it boil a little longer,
and put to it two or three Drops of Oil of Mace or Cinnamon, and keep it 'til
it is cold; eat it with Wine or Cream.

To make White Wind Cream.
TAKE a Quart of Cream, set it on the Fire, and stir it 'til it is blood warm;
then boil a Pint of White Wind with Sugar 'til it is Syrup: So mingle the Wine
and Cream together; put it in a China Basin, and when it is cold, serve it up.

To make Strawberry or Raspberry Fool.
TAKE a Pint of Raspberries, squeeze and strain the Juice with Orange-flower
Water; put to the Juice five Ounces of fine Sugar; then set a Pint of Cream
over the Fire, and let it boil up; then put in the Juice, give it one stir
round, and then put it into your Basin; stir it a little in the Basin; and when
it is cold use it.

To make Sack Cream.
TAKE a Quart of thick Cream, and set it over the Fire, and when it boils take
it off; put a Piece of Lemon Peel in it, and sweeten it very well; then take
the China Basin you serve it in, and put into the Basin the Juice of half a
Lemon, and nine Spoonfuls of Sack; then stir in the Cream into the Basin by a
Spoonful at a Time, 'til all the Cream is in, when it is little more than
bloodwarm; set it by till next Day, serve it with Wafers round it.

To make Ratafia Biscuit.
TAKE four Ounces of bitter Almonds, blanch and beat them as fine as you can;
in beating them, put in the Whites of four Eggs, one at a Time; then mix it up
with sifted Sugar to a light Paste; roll them, and lay them on Wafer Paper, and
on Tin plates; make the Paste so ^^ght that you may take it up with a Spoon.
Bake them in a quick Oven.

To make a Hart's-horn Flummery.
TAKE three Ounces of Hart's horn, and put it to ^^^l with two Quarts of
Spring Water; let it simmer over the Fire six or seven Hours 'til half the
Water is consumed, or else put it in a Jug, and set it in the Oven with
Houshold-bread; then strain it through a Sieve, and beat half a Pound of
Almonds very fine, with some Orange-flower Water in the beating; and when they
are beat, mix a little of your Jelly with it, and some fine Sugar; strain it
out, and mix it with your Jelly; stir it together 'til it is little more than
blood-warm; then pour it into half-pint Basins, fill them but half full; when
you use them, turn them out of the Dish as you do Flummery; if it does not come
out clean, hold the Basin a Minute or two in warm Water, eat it with Wine and
Sugar.

Put six Ounces of Hart's-horn in a glazed Jug, with a long Neck, and put in
three Pints of soft Water; cover the Top of the Jug close, and put a Weight on
it to keep it steady; set it in a Pot or Kettle of Water 24 Hours; let it not
boil, but be scalding hot; then strain it out and make your Jelly.

A Sack Posset without Eggs.
TAKE a Quart of Cream or new Milk, and grate three Naples-biskets in it, and
let them boil in the Cream; grate some Nutmeg in it, and sweeten it to your
Taste; let it stand a little to cool, and then put half a Pint of Sack a little
warm in your Basin, and pour your Cream to it, holding it up high in the
pouring; let it stand a little, and serve it.

A Sack Posset without Cream or Eggs.
TAKE half a Pound of Jordan Almonds, lay them all Night in Water, blanch and
beat them in a Stone Mortar very fine, with a Pint of Orange-flower Water, or
fair Water, a quarter and half of Sugar, a Two-pen^y Loaf of Bread grated: So
let it boil 'til it is thick, continually stirring it, (...) half a Pint of
Sack, and put to it, stir it well together, and put a little Nutmeg and Cinnamon
in it.

To make a Posset with Ale, King William's Posset.
TAKE a Quart of Cream, and mix with it a Pint of Ale, then beat the Yolks of
10 Eggs, and the Whites of four; when they are well beaten, put them to your
Cream and Ale; sweeten it to your Taste, and slice some Nutmeg in it; set it
over the Fire, and keep it stirring all the while, and when it is thick, and
before it boils, take i^ off, and pour it into the Basin you serve it in to the
Table.

To make the Pope's Posset.
BLANCH and beat three quarters of a Pound of Almonds so fine that they will
spread between your Fingers like Butter, put in Water as you beat them to keep
them from oiling; then take a Pint of Sack or Sherry, and sweeten it very well
with double-refin'd Sugar, make it boiling hot, and at the same Time put half a
Pint of Water to your Almonds, and make them boil; then take both off the Fire,
and mix them very well together with a Spoon; serve it in a China Dish.

To make very fine Syllabubs.
TAKE a Quart and half a Pint of Cream, a Pint of Rhenish, half a Pint of Sack,
three Lemons, near a Pound of double-refin'd Sugar; beat and sift the Sugar and
put it to your Cream, grate off the yellow Rind of your three Lemons and put
that in; squeeze the Juice of the three Lemons into your Wine, and put that to
your Cream; then beat all together with a Whisk just half an Hour; then take it
up all together with a Spoon, and fill your Glasses: It will keep good nine or
ten Days, and is best three or four Days old. These are called The everlasting
Syllabubs.

To make an Oatmeal Sack Posset.
TAKE a Pint of Milk, and mix in it two Spoonfuls of Flour of Oatmeal, and one
of Sugar, put in a Blade of Mace, and let it boil till the Rawness of the
Oatmeal is gone off: In the mean Time have in Readiness three Spoonfuls of
Sack, and three of Ale, and two of Sugar, se^ them over the Fire till scalding
hot; then put them to your Milk, give one stir, and let it stand on the Fire a
Minute or two, and pour it in your Basin; cover your Basin with a Pie plate,
and let it stand a little to settle.

Preserves, Conserves, and Syrups.
To preserve Oranges whole.
TAKE the best Bermudas Oranges, and pare them with a Penknife very thin, and
lay your Oranges in Water three or four Days, shifting them every Day; then put
them in a Kettle with fair Water, and put a Board on them to keep them down in
the Water, and have a Skillet on the Fire with Water, that may be in Readiness
to supply the Kettle with boiling Water; as it wastes it must be filled up
three or four Times while the Oranges are doing, for they will take up seven o^
eight Hours in boiling, for they must be so tender that a Wheat-straw may be
thrust through them; then take them up and scoop the Seeds out of them, making
a li^t^^ Hole on the Top; then weigh them, and to every Pound of Orange, take a
Pound and three Quarters of double-refind Sugar, finely beaten and si^ted; fill
up your Oranges with Sugar, and strew some on them, and let them lie a little
^hile; then make your Jelly for them th^^:

Take two Dozen of Pippins, and s^ice them into Water, and when they are boiled
tender, strain the Liquor from the Pulp, and to every Pound of Orange, you must
have a Pint and half of this Liquor, and put to it three Quar^ers of the Sugar
you left in filling the Oranges; set it on the Fire, and let it boil and scum
it well, and put it in a clean earthen Pan till it is cold; then put it in your
^^illet, and put in your Oranges, and with a small Bodkin job the Oranges as
they are boiling to let the Syr^p into them; strew on the rest of your Sugar
while they are boiling, and when they look clear take them up, and put them in
your Glasses, but one in a Glass, just fit for them, and boil the Syrup till
it is almost a Jelly; then fill up your Oranges and Glasses; and when they are
cold paper them up, and put them in your Stove.

To preserve whole Quinces white.
TAKE the largest Quinces of the greenest Color, and scald them till they are
pretty soft; then pare them and core them with a Scoop; then weigh your Quinces
against so much double refined Sugar, and make a Syrup of one half, and put in
your Quinces, and boil them as fast as you can; then you must have in Readiness
Pippin Liquor; let it be very strong of the Pippins, and when it is strained
out, put in the other half of your Sugar, and make it a Jelly; and when your
Quinces are clear, put them into the Jelly, and let them simmer a little; they
will be very white; so glass them up, and when they are cold, paper them and
keep them in a Stove.

To preserve Gooseberries.
TAKE of the best Dutch Gooseberries before they are too ripe, stone them, and
put them in a Skillet with so much fair Water as will cover them; set them on a
Fire to scald, and when they are tender, take them out of the Liquor and peel
off the outer Skin as you do Codlins, and throw them into some double-refin'd
Sugar, powdered and sifted; put a Handful more of Gooseberries into that Water,
and let them boil a little; then run the Liquor through a Sieve; take the
Weight of your peeled Gooseberries in double refined Sugar; break the Sugar in
Lumps, and wet the Lumps in the Liquor that the Gooseberries were scalded in,
and put your Sugar in a Preserving-pan over a clear Fire, and let it boil up
and scum it w^ll; then put in your Gooseberries, and let them boil till they
look clear; then place them in your Glasses, and boil the Liquor a little
longer, and pour it on your Gooseberries in the Glasses; when they are cold,
paper them

To preserve Raspberries in Jelly.
TAKE of the largest and best Raspberries, and to a Pound take a Pound and
quarter of Sugar made into a Syrup, and boiled candy-high; then put in the
Raspberries, and set them over a gentle Fire, and as they boil shake them; and
when the Sugar boils over them take them off the Fire, and scum them, and set
them by a little; then set them on again, and have half a Pint of Juice of
Currants by you, and at several Times put in a little as it boils; shake them
often as they grow nearer to be enough, which you may know by setting some in a
Spoon to try if it will Jelly, for when they jelly they are enough; then lay
them in your Glasses, and keep the Jelly to cover them; but before you put it
to them pick out all the Seeds; and let the Jelly cover them well.

To preserve Apricocks.
TAKE your Apricocks, stone and pare them, and take their Weight in
double-refin'd Sugar beaten and sifted, and put your Apricocks in a Silver Cup
or Tankard, and cover them over with the Sugar, and let them stand so all
Night; the next Day put them in a Preserving-pan, and set them on a gentle
Fire, and let them simmer a little while; then let them boil till they are
tender and clear, taking them off sometimes to turn and scum; keep them under
the Liquor as they are doing, and with a small clean Bodkin or great Needle,
job them sometimes that the Syrup may penetrate into them; when they are enough
take them up, and put them in Glasses. Boil and scum the Syrup, and when it is
cold put it on your Apricocks.

To preserve Damsons whole.
TAKE some Damsons and cut them in Pieces, and put them in a Skillet over the
Fire with as much Water as will cover them; when they are boiled, and the
Liquor pretty strong, strain it out; add for every Pound of your whole Damsons
wiped clean, a Pound of single refined Sugar; put the third Part of the Sugar
in the Liquor, and set it over the Fire, and when it simmers put in your
Damsons. Let them have one good Boil, and take them off for half an Hour,
covered up close; then set them on again, and let them simmer over the Fire,
often turning them; then take them out and put them into a Basin, and strew all
the Sugar that was left on them, and pour the hot Liquor over them, and cover
them up, and let them stand till the next Day; then boil them up again till
they are enough; take them up, and put them in Pots; boil the Liquor till it
jellies, and pour it on them when it is almost cold, so paper them up

To par^h Almonds.
TAKE a Pound of Sugar, make it into a Syrup, and boil it candy-high; then put
in three quarters of a Pound of Jordan Almonds blanched; keep them stirring all
the while till they are dry and crisp; then put them in a Box and keep them dry.

To dry Apricocks.
TAKE to a Pound of Apricocks and Pound of double-refin'd Sugar; then stone
them and pare them, and put them into cold Water, and when they are all ready;
put them into a Skillet of hot Water and scald them ^ill they are tender; then
drain them very well from the Water, and put them into a Silver B^son: and have
in Readiness your Sugar boiled to Sugar again, and pour that Sugar over your
Apricocks, and cover them with a Silver Plat^, and let them stand all Night;
the next Day set them over a gentle Fire, and let them be scalding hot, turning
them often; you must do them twice a Day, till you see them begin to candy;
then take them out and set them in your Stove or Glasses to dry, heating your
Stove every Day till they are dry.

To preserve green Plumbs.
TAKE green Plumbs grown to their full Bigness, but before they begin to ripen;
let them be carefully gathered with their Stalks and Leaves; put them into cold
Spring Water over the Fire, and let them boil very gently; when they will peel
take off the Skins; then put the Plumbs into other cold Water, and let them
stand over a very gentle Fire till they are soft; put two Pounds of
double-refin'd Sugar to every Pound of Plumbs, and make the Sugar with some
Water into a thick Syrup before the Plumbs are put in; the Stones of the Plumbs
are not to be grown so hard, but that you may thrust a Pin through them: After
the same Manner do green Apricocks.

To make Sugar Plates.
TAKE a Pound of double refined Sugar beaten and scarced, and blanch and beat
some Almonds and mix with it, and beat them together in a Mortar, with Gum
dragant dissolved in Rose Water, till it is a Paste; roll it out and strew Sugar
on the Papers or Plate, and bake it after Manchet; gild it if you please, and
serve Sweetmeats on it.

To clear Sugar.
TAKE two or three Whites of Eggs, and put them into a Basin of Water, and with
a very clean Hand lather that as you do Soap; take nothing but the Froth, and
when your Syrup boils, with a Ladle cover it with it; do this till your Syrup
is clear, making still more Froth, and covering the Syrup with it; it will make
the worst Sugar as clear as any, and fit to preserve any Fruit.

To preserve green Plumbs.
THE Plumbs that will be greenest are the white Plumbs that are ripe in Wheat
Harvest; gather them about the Middle of July whilst they are green; when
gathered lay them in Water twelve Hours; then scald them in two several Waters,
let not the first be too hot, but the second must boil before you put the
Plumbs in, and when they begin to shrivel, peel off the Skin as you do Codlins,
keep them whole, and let a third Water be made hot, and when it boils put in
your Plumbs, and give them two or three walms; then take them off the Fire and
cover them close for half a quarter of an Hour, till you perceive them to look
greenish and tender; then take them out and weigh them with double-refind Sugar
equal Weight; wet a quarter of a Pound of your Sugar in four Spoonfuls of
Water; set it on the Fire, and when it begins to boil take it off, and put in
your Plumbs one by one, and strew the rest of your Sugar upon them, only saving
a little to put in with your Perfume, Musk, or Ambergrease, which must be put
in a little before they are done: Let them boil softly on a moderate Fire half
an Hour or more till they are green and the Syrup thickish; put your Plumbs in
a Pot or Glasses; let the Syrup have two or three walms more and put it to
them, when they are cold paper them up.

To preserve black Pear Plumbs, or any black Plumb.
TAKE a Pound of Plumbs, give them a little Slit in the Seam; then take some of
your worst Plumbs, and put them in a Gallipot close covered, and set them in a
Pot of boiling Water, and as they yield Liquor still pour it out. To a Pint of
this Liquor, take a Pound and quarter of Sugar; put them together, and give
them a boil and a scum, after which take it off to cool a little; then take
your Pound of Plumbs, and as you put them in, give every one of them a prick or
two with a Needle, so set them again on a soft Fire a pretty while; then take
them off, and let them stand 'til the next Day, that they may drink up the
Syrup without breaking the Skin; the next Day warm them again once or twice
'til you see the Syrup grow thick, and the Plumbs look of the right black,
still scumming them, and when they will endure a boil, give them 2 or 3 walins,
and scum them well, and put them in your Glasses. Be sure you keep some of the
Syrup in a Glass, that when your Plumbs are settled and cold you may cover them
with it. The next Day paper them up, and keep them for use.

To make white Jelly of Quinces.
PARE your Quinces, and cut them in Halves; then core them, and parboil your
Quinces; when they are soft, take them up, and crush them through a Strainer,
but not too hard, only the clear Juice. Take the Weight of the Juice in fine
Sugar; boil the Sugar candy-height, and put in your Juice, and let it scald a
while, but not boil, and if any Froth arise, scum it off, and when you take it
up, have ready a white preserved Quince cut in small Slices, and lay them in
the Bottom of your Glasses, and pour your Jelly to them, it will candy on the
Top and keep moist on the Bottom a long Time.

To make clear Cakes of the Jelly of any Fruit.
TO half a Pound of Jelly, take six Ounces of Sugar; wet your Sugar with a
little Water, and boil it candy-height; then put in your Jelly; let it boil
very fast 'til it Jelly; then put it into Glasses, and when it is dried enough
on one Side, turn it into Glass Plates. Set them in a Stove to dry leisurely;
let your Stove be hot against your Cakes be turned.

To make clear Cakes of any Fruit.
TAKE your Gooseberries, or other Fruit, and put them in an earthen Pot stopped
very close, and put them in a Kettle of Water, and let them boil 'til they
break; then take them out, and run them through a Cloth; take the Weight of the
Liquor in Sugar; boil the Sugar candy-height; then put in your Juice, and let
it stand over a few Embers to dry 'til it is thick like Jelly; if you fear it
will change Color, put in 3 or 4 Drops of Juice of Lemon; pour it out into
clear Cake Glasses, and dry them with a little Fire.

To make brown Sugar.
TAKE Gum arabic, and dissolve it in Water 'til it is pretty thick; then take
as much double-refin'd Sugar finely sifted and persumed as will make the Gum
into a stiff Paste; roll it out like Jumballs, and set in an Oven exactly
heated that it may raise them and not boil; for if it boils it is spoiled; you
may color some of them.

To make Pastils.
TAKE double-refin'd Sugar beaten and sifted as fine as Flour; perfume it with
Musk and Ambergrease; then have ready steeped some Gum arabic in Orange-flower
Water, and with that make the Sugar into a stiff Paste; drop into some of it 3
or 4 Drops of Oil of Mint, or Oil of Cloves, or Oil of Cinnamon, or of what Oil
you like, and let some only have the Perfume; then roll them up in your Hand
like little Pellets, and squeeze them flat with a Seal. Dry them in the Sun.

To fricasy Almonds.
TAKE a Pound of Jordan Almonds; do not blanch them, or but one Half of them;
beat the White of an Egg very well, and pour it on your Almonds, and wet them
all over; then take half a Pound of double refined Sugar, and boil it to Sugar
again; and put your Almonds in, and stir them 'til as much Sugar hangs on them
as will; then set them on Plates, and put them into the Oven to dry after Bread
is drawn, and let them stay in all Night. They will keep the Year round if you
keep them dry, and are a pretty Sweetmeat.

To make Almond Cakes.
BOIL a Pound of double-refin'd Sugar up to a thin Candy; then have in
Readiness half a Pound of Almonds blanched, and finely beaten with some Rose or
Orange-flower Water, the Juice of one Lemon, the Peels of two grated into the
Juice, put all these together, stir them over a gentle Fire 'til all the Sugar
is well melted, but be sure it does not boil after the Lemon is in; then put it
into your clear Cake Glasses; perfume them, and when they are a little dry, cut
them into what Shape you please.

To make Orange Cakes.
PARE your Oranges very thin, and take off the white Rinds in quarters; boil
the white Rinds very tender, and when they are enough, take them up, and scrape
the Black off, and squeeze them between two Trenchers; beat them in a Stone
Mortar to a fine Pulp with a little Sugar, pick the Meat out of the Oranges
from the Skins and Seeds, and mix the Pulp and Meat together, and take the
Weight and half of Sugar; boil the Sugar to a candy-height, and put in the
Oranges, stir them well together, and when it is cold, drop them on a Pye-plate,
and set them in a Stove. You may perfume them. To the Rinds of 6 Oranges put
the Meat of 9 Lemons. Cakes are made the same Way, only as many Rinds as Meat,
and twice the Weight of Sugar.

To make March-pane unboiled.
TAKE a Pound of Almonds, blanch them and beat them in Rose water; when they
are finely beaten, put to them half a Pound of Sugar. beat and scarced, and
work it to a Paste; spread some on Wafers, and dry it in the Oven; when it is
cold, have ready the White of an Egg beaten with Rose Water and double refined
Sugar. Let it be as thick as Butter, then draw your March-pane through it, and
put it in the Oven: It will ice in a little Time, then keep them for Use.

If you have a mind to have your March-pane large, cut it when it is rolled out
by a Pewter plate, and edge it about the Top like a Tart, and bottom with
Wafer-paper, and set it in the Oven, and ice it as aforesaid; when the Icing
rises, take it out and strew colored Comfits on it, or serve Sweetmeats on it.

To preserve Cherries.
PICK and stone your Cherries, and weigh them, and take their Weight in single
refined Sugar beaten fine, mix three parts of the Sugar with Juice of Currants,
and put it in your Preserving pan, and give it a boil and a scum, and then put
in your Cherries; let them boil very fast, now and then strewing in some of the
Sugar that was left 'til all is in, scum it well, and when they are enough,
which you may know by trying some in a Spoon, and when it jellies, take it off,
and fill your Glasses, and when they are cold, paper them up.

To preserve Currants in Jelly.
TAKE your Currants and strip them, and put them in an earthen Pot; tie them
close down, and set them in a Kettle of boiling Water, and let them stand 3
Hours, keeping the Water boiling; then take a clean flaxen Cloth, and strain
out the Juice, and when it has settled, take a Pound of double-refin'd Sugar
beaten and sifted, and put to a Pint of the clear Juice: Have in Readiness some
whole Currants stoned, and when the Juice boils, put in your Currants, and boil
them 'til your Syrup jellies, which you may know by taking some in a Spoon;
then put it in your Glasses. This way make Jelly of Currants, only leaving out
the whole Currants; when it is cold, paper them up.

To preserve Barberries.
TAKE the largest Barberries you can get, and stone them, and to every Pound of
Barberries take three Pounds of Sugar, and boil it 'til it is candy-high; then
put in the Barberries, and let them boil 'til the Sugar boils over them all;
then take them off, scum them, and set them on again, and give them another
boil, and put them in an earthen Pan, cover them with Paper, and set them by
'til the next Day; then put them in Pots, and pour the Syrup over them; cover
them with Paper, and keep them in a Stove. If the Syrup grows thin, you may
make a little Jelly of Pippins, and put them in when it is ready, and give them
one walm, and pour them again into Glasses.

To preserve whole Pippins.
TAKE Kentish Pippins, or Apple-Johns, pare them and slice them into fair
Water; set them on a clear Fire, and when they are boiled to mash, let the
Liquor run through a Hair Sieve. Boil as many Apples thus, till you have the
Quantity of Liquor you would have. To a Pint of this Liquor you must have a
Pound of double refined Sugar in great Lumps; wet the Lumps of Sugar with the
Pippin Liquor, and set over a gentle Fire, and let it boil, and scum it well,
and while you are making the Jelly, you must have your whole Pippins boiling at
the same Time; they must be the fairest and best Pippins you can get; scoop out
the Cores, and pare them neatly, and put them into fair Water as you do them.
You must likewise make a Syrup ready to put them into the Quantity as you think
will boil them in clear; you must make that Syrup with double-refin'd Sugar and
Water; tie up your whole Pippins in a Piece of fine Muslin severally, and when
your Sugar and Water boils put them in; let them boil very fast; so fast, that
the Syrup always boils over them; sometimes take them off, and then set them on
again, and let them boil 'til they are tender; then take off the Tiffney or
Muslin they were tied up in, and put them into Glasses that will hold but 1 in
a Glass; then see if your Jelly of Apple John's be boiled to Jelly enough; if it
be, squeeze in the Juice of two Lemons, and put Musk and Ambergrease in a Rag,
and let it have a boil; then strain it through a Jelly-bag into the Glasses
your Pippins were in: You must be sure to drain your Pippins well from the
Syrup they were boiled in; before you put them in your Glasses, you may, if you
please, boil Lemon Peel in little Pieces in Water 'til they are tender, and
then boil them in the Syrup your Pippins were boiled in; then take them out,
and lay them about the Pippins before the Jelly is put in; when they are cold,
paper them up.

To make Pippin Jelly.
TAKE fifteen Pippins, pared, cored, and sliced, and put them into a Pint and
half of Water, and let them boil 'til they are tender; then put them in a
Strainer, and let the thin run from them, as much as it will; and to a Pint of
Liquor, take a Pound of double refined Sugar, wet your Sugar, and boil it to
Sugar again; then cut some Chips of candied Orange or Lemon peel, and cut it as
fine as Threads, and put it into your Sugar, and then your Liquor, and let it
boil 'til it is a Jelly, which will be quickly; you may perfume it with
Ambergrease, if you please; pour the Jelly into shallow Glasses: When it is
cold, paper it up, and keep it in your Stove.

To candy Angelica.
TAKE Angelica that is young, and cut it in fit Lengths, and boil it 'til it is
pretty tender, keeping it close covered; then take it up and peel off all the
Strings; then put it in again, and let it simmer and scald 'til it is very
green; then take it up and dry it in a Cloth, and weigh it, and to every Pound
of Angelica take a Pound of double-refin'd Sugar beaten and sifted; put your
Angelica in an earthen Pan, and strew the Sugar over it, and let it stand two
Days; then boil it 'til it looks very clear, put it in a Colander to drain the
Syrup from it, and take a little double-refin'd Sugar and boil it to Sugar
again; then throw in your Angelica, and take it out in a little Time, and put
it on glass Plates. It will dry in your Stove, or in an Oven, after Pyes are
drawn.

To make Jelly of white Currants.
TAKE your largest Currants, and strip them into a Basin, and bruise and strain
them, and to every Pint of Juice a Pound of double-refin'd Sugar; just wet your
Sugar with a little fair Water, and set it on a slow Fire 'til it melts; then
make it boil, and at the same Time let your Juice boil in another Thing; scum
them both very well, and when they have boiled a pretty while, take off your
Sugar and strain the Juice into it through a Muslin; then set it on the Fire,
and let it boil, and if you please, you may stone some white Currants and put
them in, and let them boil 'til they are clear; have a Care you do not boil
them too high; let them stand awhile, then put them in Glasses.

If you would make clear Cakes of white Currants, boil the Juice just as this
is; but this observe, that when you put your Juice and Sugar together, they
must stand but so long on the Fire, 'til they are warm and well mixed; they
must not boil together; and when it is cold, put it in flat Glasses, and into
your Stove to dry them; turn them often.

To make white Marmalade.
TAKE your Quinces and scald them, and pare them, and scrape the Pulp clean
from the Cores, and to every Pound of Pulp put a Pound of double-refin'd Sugar;
put a little Water to your Sugar to dissolve it, and boil it candy-high; then
put in the Quince Pulp, and set it on the Fire 'til it comes to a Body; let it
boil very fast, when it is enough, put it in Gallipots.

To make red Quince Marmalade.
PARE, core, and quarter your Quinces, then weigh them, and to a Pound of
Quince allow a Pound of single-refin'd Sugar beaten small; and to every Pound
of Quince a Pint of Liquor; make your Liquor thus: Put your Parings and Cores,
and 3 or 4 Quinces cut in Pieces, into a large Skillet, with Water
proportionable to the Quantity of Quinces you do; cover it, and set it over the
Fire; and let it boil 2 or 3 Hours, then put in a Quart of Barberries, and let
them boil an Hour, and strain all out; then put your Quince and Liquor, and a
quarter of your Sugar into a Skillet or large Preserving-pan, and let them boil
together over a gentle Fire, cover it close, and take care it does not burn;
strew in the rest of your Sugar by Degrees, and stir it often from the Bottom,
but do not break the Quince 'til it is near enough; then break it in Lumps as
small as you like it; when it is of a good Color and very tender, try some in a
Spoon, if it jellies it is enough; then take it off, and put it in Gallipots;
when it is cold, paper it up.

To make Marmalade of Cherries.
TAKE four Pounds of Cherries, stone them, and put them in a Preserving-pan,
with a Quart of Juice of Currants; set them on a Charcoal Fire, and let the
Fire dry away most of the Juice; break or mash them, and boil 3 Pounds of Sugar
candy-high, and put the Cherries to it, and set it on the Fire again, and boil
it 'til it comes to a Body; so put it in Glasses, and when it is cold, paper it
up.

To make white Quince Paste.
SCALD the Quinces tender to the Core, and pare them, and scrape the Pulp clean
from the Core, beat it in a Mortar, and pulp it through a Colander; take to a
Pound of Pulp a Pound and two Ounces of Sugar, boil the Sugar 'til it is
candy-high; then put in your Pulp, stir it about constantly 'til you see it
come clear from the Bottom of the Preserving-pan; then take it off, and lay it
on Plates pretty thin: You may cut it in what Shape you please, or make Quince
Chips of it; you must dust it with Sugar when you put it into the Stove, and
turn it on Paper in a Sieve, and dust the other Side; when they are dry, put
them in Boxes with Papers between. You may make red Quince Paste the same Way
as this, only color the Quince with Cochineel.

To dry Pears or Apples.
TAKE poppering Pears, and thrust a piked Stick into the Head of them beyond
the Core, then scald them, but not too tender; then pare them the long Way; put
them in Water, and take the Weight of them in Sugar, and clarify it with Water,
a Pint of Water to a Pound of Sugar, strain the Syrup and put in the Pears; set
them on the Fire, and boil them pretty fast for half an Hour; cover them with
Paper, and set them by till the next Day; then boil them again, and set them by
till the next Day; then take them out of the Syrup, and boil it till it is thick
and ropy; then put the Pears in your Preserving-pan, and put the Syrup to them,
and if it will not cover them, add some Sugar to them, set them over the Fire
and let them boil up; then cover them with Paper, and set 'em in a Stove twenty
four Hours; then take 'em out and lay them on Sieves to dry; then lay them on
Plates, and dust them with Sugar, and set them into your Stove to dry; and when
one Side is dry, lay them on Papers, and turn them, and dust the other Side
with Sugar; squeeze the Pears flat by Degrees; if it is Apples squeeze the Eye
to the Stalk; when they are quite dry put them in Boxes with Papers between.

To dry Pears or Pippins without Sugar.
TAKE your Pears or Apples and wipe them clean, and take a Bodkin and run it in
at the Head and out at the Stalk, and put them in a flat earthen Pot and bake
them, but not too much; you must put a Quart of strong new Ale to half a Peck
of Pears, tie white Papers over the Pot that they may not be scorched in
baking, and when they are baked let them stand to be cold; and take them out to
drain, squeeze the Pears flat, and the Apples the Eye to the Stalk, and lay
them on Sieves with wide Holes to dry, either in a Stove or an Oven that is not
too hot.

To candy any sort of Flower.
TAKE your Flowers and pick them from the white Part; then take fine Sugar and
boil it candy-high; boil as much as you think will receive the Quantity of
Flowers you do; then put in the Flowers, and stir them about till you perceive
the Sugar to candy well about them; then take them off from the Fire, and keep
them stirring till they are cold in the Pan you candied them in; then sift the
loose Sugar from them, and keep them in Boxes very dry.

To make Syrup of any Flower.
CLIP your Flowers, and take their Weight in Sugar; then take a high Gallipot,
and put a row of Flowers, and a strewing of Sugar, till the Pot is full; then
put in two or three Spoonfuls of the same Syrup or stilled Water; tie a Cloth
on the Top of the Pot, and put a Tile on that, and set your Gallipot in a
Kettle of Water over a gentle Fire, and let it infuse till the Strength is out
of the Flowers, which will be in four or five Hours; then strain it through a
Flannel, and when it is cold bottle it up.

To candy any sort of Fruit.
AFTER you have preserved your Fruit, dip them suddenly into warm Water to take
off the Syrup; then sift on them double-refin'd Sugar till they look white;
then set them on a Sieve in a warm Oven, taking them out to turn two or three
Times; let them not be cold till they be dry, and they will look clear as
Diamonds. So keep them dry.

To preserve Gooseberries in Hops.
TAKE the largest Dutch Gooseberries, and with a Knife cut them a cross at the
Head and half way down, and with a Bodkin put out the Seeds clean, and do not
break them; then take fine long Thorns, scrape them, and then put on your
Gooseberries, putting the Leaf of the one to the Cut of the other, and so till
your Thorn is full; and when they are full, put them in a new Pipkin with a
close Cover, and cover them with Water, and let 'em stand scalding till they
are green; then take them up, and lay them upon a Sieve to drain from the
Water; be sure they do not boil in the Greening, for if they have but one walm
they are spoiled, and while they are greening make a Syrup for them. Take whole
green Gooseberries, and boil them in Water till they all break, then strain the
Water through a Sieve, and weigh your Hops, and to a Pound of Hops put a Pound
and a half of double-refin'd Sugar, put the Sugar and Hops into the Liquor, and
boil them open till they are clear and green; then take them up and lay them
upon Pye-plates, and boil your Syrup longer; lay your Hops in a pretty deep
Gallipot, and when the Syrup is cold, pour it on them; cover them with Paper,
and keep them in a Stove.

To preserve Gooseberries whole, without stoning.
TAKE the largest preserving Gooseberries and pick off the black Eye, but not
the Stalk; then set them over the Fire in a Pot of Water to scald, cover them
very close, and let them scald, but not boil or break; and when they are tender
take them up into cold Water; then take a Pound and half of double fined Sugar
to a Pound of Gooseberries, clarify the Sugar with Water, a Pint to a Pound of
Sugar, and when the Syrup is cold, put your Gooseberries single into your
Preserving pan, and put the Syrup to them, and set them on a gentle Fire and
let them boil, but not too fast, lest they break; and when they are boiled, and
you perceive the Sugar has entered them, take them off, cover them with white
Paper, and set them by till the next Day; then take them out of the Syrup, and
boil the Syrup till it begins to be ropy, scum it, and put it to them again,
and set them on a gentle Fire, and let them preserve gently till you percieve
the Syrup will rope; then take them off and set them by till they are cold,
covering them with Paper; then boil some Gooseberries in fair Water, and when
the Liquor is strong enough strain it out, let it stand to settle; and to every
Pint take a Pound of double-refin'd Sugar and make a Jelly of it, and put the
Gooseberries in Glasses, and when they are cold cover them with the Jelly; the
next Day paper them; wet, and then half dry the Paper that goes in the Inside,
it closes down better, and then put on other Papers, and put them in your Stove.

To make Conserve of red Roses, or any other Flowers.
TAKE Rose-buds, and pick them, and cut off the white Part from the red, and
put the red Flowers, and sift them through a Sieve to take out the Seeds; then
weigh them, and to every Pound of Flowers take two Pounds and half of
Loaf-Sugar, beat the Flowers pretty fine in a Stone Mortar; then by Degrees put
the Sugar to them, and beat it very well 'til it is well incorporated together;
then put it into Gallipots, and tie it over with Paper, and over that Leather,
and it will keep 7 Years.

To stew Apples.
TAKE to a Quart of Water a Pound of double-refin'd Sugar beaten fine, boil and
scum it, and put into it a Pound of the largest and clearest Pippins, pared,
and cut in Halves, and cored. Let them boil, covered with a continual Froth
'til they be as tender and clear as you would have them; then put in the Juice
of two Lemons, and a little Peel cut like Threads. Let them have 5 or 6 walms
after the Lemon is in; then put them in the China Dish or S^lver you serve them
in; they should be done two Hours before used.

To make Sugar of Roses.
CLIP off all the Whites from the Red rose Buds, and dry the Red in the Sun;
and to one Ounce of that finely powdered, you must have a Pound of Loaf Sugar;
wet the Sugar in Rose water, (but if in the Season, Juice of Roses;) boil it to
a candy-height; then put in your Powder of Roses, and the Juice of a Lemon; mix
it well together; then pour it on a Pye-plate, and cut it into Lozenges, or
what Form you please.

To preserve small Cucumbers green.
TAKE small Cucumbers, boil them, but not very tender; when you take 'em out of
the Water, make a Hole through every one with a large Needle; then pare and weigh
them, and to every Pound allow a Pound of Sugar, which make in a Syrup, with a
Pint of Water to every Pound of Sugar; you must green them before you put them
into the Sugar; then let them boil, keeping them close covered, then put them
by, and for 3 or 4. Days boil them a little every Day put into the Syrup the
Peel of a fresh Lemon. Then make a fresh Syrup with double-refin'd Sugar; you
must have three quarters of a Pound to a Pound of Cucumbers, and a quarter of a
Pint of fair Water, the Juice of a Lemon, and a little Amber-grease boiled in
it; so do them up for Use; paper them when cold.

To preserve Mulberries whole.
SET some Mulberries over the Fire in a Skillet, and draw from them a Pint of
Juice, when it is strained. Then take three Pounds of Sugar, beaten very fine;
wet the Sugar with the Pint of Juice, boil up your Sugar, and scum it, and put
in two Pounds of ripe Mulberries, and let them stand in the Syrup 'til they are
thoroughly warm; then set them on the Fire, and let them boil very gently; do
them but half enough, so put them by in the Syrup 'til next Day; then boil them
gently again, and when the Syrup is pretty thick, and will stand in a round
Drop when it is cold, they are enough; so put all together in a Gallipot for Use.

To make Rose Drops.
THE Roses and Sugar must be beat separately into a very fine Powder, and both
sifted; to a Pound of Sugar, an Ounce of red Roses; they must be mixed
together, and then wet with as much Juice of Lemon as will make it into a stiff
Paste. Set it on a slow Fire in a Silver Porringer, and stir it well; and when
it is scalding hot quite through, take it off, and drop it on Paper. Set them
near the Fire next Day; they will come off.

A fine way to preserve Raspberries.
TAKE the Juice of red and white Raspberries and Codlin Jelly; to a Pint and
half, two Pounds of double refined Sugar; boil it, and scum it, and then put in
three quarters of a Pound of large picked Raspberries; let them boil very fast
'til they jelly, and are clear; don't take them off the Fire, that will make
them hard, a quarter of an Hour will do them when they begin to boil; then put
your Raspberries in the Glass first, and strain the Seeds from the Jelly, and
put it to them, and when they begin to cool, stir them gently, that they may
not all lie on the Top of the Glass, and when cold, lay Papers close on them,
first wet the Papers, and dry them in a Cloth.

To make a strong Apple Jelly.
LET your Water boil in the Pan you make it in, and when the Apples are pared
and quartered, put them into your boiling Water; let there be no more Water
than will just cover them, and let it boil as fast as possible, and when the
Apples are all to Pieces, put in about a Quart of Water more, and let it boil
half an Hour longer, then run it through a Jelly-bag, and use it as Occasion
for any Sort of Sweetmeat; in the Summer Codlins are best, in the Winter Golden
Runnets or Winter Pippins.

To preserve Raspberries whole.
TAKE the full Weight of your Raspberries in double refined Sugar, beaten and
sifted; lay your Raspberries single in the Bottom of your Preserving-pan, and
put all your Sugar over them; set them on a slow Fire, 'til there is some Syrup
in the Bottom of the Pan; then set them on a quick Fire 'til all the Sugar be
thoroughly melted, give them 2 or 3 walms, scum them, and take them up, and put
them in Glasses.

To make Biscuit.
TAKE the Whites of four Eggs, the Yolks of ten, beat them a quarter of an Hour
with four Spoonfuls of Orange-flower Water; then add to it one Pound of Loaf
Sugar beaten and sifted; then beat them together an Hour longer; then stir in
half a Pound of dry Flour, and the Peel of a Lemon grated off; mix it well
together, then butter the Pans and fill them, searce some Sugar over them as
you put them in the Oven; when they are risen in the Oven, take them out and
lay them on a clean Cloth, and when the Oven is pretty cool, put them in again
on Sieves, and let them stand 'til they are dry, and will snap in breaking.

To make Chocolate Almonds.
TAKE a Pound of Chocolate finely grated, and a Pound and half of the best
Sugar finely sifted; then soak Gum dragant in Orange flower Water, and work
them into what Form you please. The Paste must be stiff, dry them in a Stove.

To make Lemon Puffs.
TAKE a Pound and a quarter of double-refin'd Sugar beaten and sifted, and
grate the Rinds of two Lemons, and mix well with the Sugar; then beat the
Whites of three new laid Eggs very well, and mix it well with your Sugar and
Lemon peel; beat them together an Hour and quarter, then make it up in what
Form you please; be quick to set them in a moderate Oven, don't take them off
the Papers 'til cold.

To make Almond Loaves.
BLANCH your Almonds in hot Water, and throw them into cold; then take their
Weight in double-refin'd Sugar finely searc'd, beat them together till they
come to a Paste; then make them up into little Loaves; then ice them over with
some white of Egg and Sugar; bake them on Paper: If you please you may throw
your Almonds into Orange-flower Water instead of cold Water.

To make Lemon Biscuit.
TAKE six yellow Rinds well beat, with a Pound of double-refin'd Sugar, and
Whites of four Eggs, till come to a Paste; lay them on Wafer-paper, so bake
them on Time.

To make Orange-Chips crisp.
PARE your Oranges very thin, leaving as little White on the Peel as possible,
throw the Rinds into fair Water as you pare them off; then boil them therein
very fast till they are tender, still filling up the Pan with boiling Water as
it wastes away; then make a thin Syrup with Part of the Water they were boiled
in, and put the Rinds therein and just let them boil; then take them off, and
let them lie in the Syrup three or four Days; then boil them again till you
find the Syrup begins to draw between your Fingers; then take them off from the
Fire, and let them drain between a Colander; take out but a few at a Time,
because if they cool too fast it will be difficult to get the Syrup from them,
which must be done by passing every Piece of Peel through your Fingers, and
laying them single on a Sieve with the Rind uppermost: The Sieves may be set in
a Stove, or before the Fire, but in Summer the Sun is hot enough to dry them.
Three Pounds of Sugar will make Syrup to do the Peels of twenty five Oranges.

To make Syrup of Orange-peel.
TO every Pint of Water in which the Orange-peels were steeped, put a Pound of
Sugar, boil it, and when it has boiled a little, squeeze in some Juice of
Lemon, and make it more or less sharp to your Taste; filter the Lemon-juice
through Cap paper, as it boils, scum it clear; and when boiled enough to keep
take it off the Fire, and when cold bottle it. When your Orange-peels are dried
on one Side, turn the other, and so do till they are crisp; brush the Sugar
from them, then take a Cloth dipped in warm Water and wipe off all that remains
of Sugar on the Rind Side; then lay them on the Sieve again, and in an Hour
they will be dry enough to put into your Boxes to keep.

To make Orange Marmalade.
TAKE the best Sevil Oranges and weigh a Pound of them, then pare off all the
yellow Rind very thin, quarter the Peel and put 'em in Water; cover 'em down
close, and shift the Water six or seven Times as it boils to take the
Bitterness out, and that they may look clear, and be tender; then take them
out, dry them in a Cloth, take out all the Strings, and cut 'em thin as
Pallets; then take a Pound of double-refin'd Sugar beaten, and boil it with a
little Water to a candy-height, scum it clean and put in your Peels; let them
boil near half an Hour; have in readiness your Orange-meat all picked from the
Skins and Seeds, and the Juice of two large Lemons, and put it into the Peels,
and boil all together a quarter of an Hour longer; so glass it up, and paper it
when cold.

To make Orange Cakes.
CUT your Oranges, pick out all your Meat and Juice free from the Strings and
Seeds, and set it by; then boil it and shift the Water till your Peels are
tender, dry them in a Cloth and mince them small, and put them to the Juice; to
a Pound of that weigh a Pound and half of double refined Sugar; dip your Lumps
of Sugar in Water and boil it to a candy-height; take it off the Fire and put
in your Juice and Peel, stir it well, and when it is almost cold put it in a
Basin and set it in a Stove; then lay it thin on earthen Plates to dry, and as
it candies fashion it with your Knife; and as they dry lay them on Glass; when
your Plate is empty, put more out of your Basin.

To make Lemon Cakes.
GRATE off the yellow Rind of your Lemon, and squeeze your Juice to that Peel;
take two Apples to every Lemon, pare and core them, and boil them clear, then
put them to your Lemon; to a Pound of this put two Pound of double-refin'd
Sugar, then order it as the Orange.

To make clear Candy.
TAKE six Ounces of Water and four Ounces of fine Sugar, searc'd, set it on a
slow Fire to melt without stirring, let it boil till it comes to a strong
Candy; then have ready your Peel or Fruit scalded hot in the Syrup they were
kept in, drain them very well from it, and put them into your Candy, which you
must rub on the sides of your Basin with the back of your Spoon till you see
the Candy pretty white; take out the Fruit with a Fork, touch it not with your
Fingers: If right, the Candy will shine on your Fruit, and dry in three or four
Hours in an indifferent hot Stove: Lay your Fruit on Sieves.

To keep Fruit in Syrup to Candy.
IF you candy Orange or Lemon-peels, you must first rub them with Salt; then
cut in what Fashion you please, and keep them in Water two Days; then boil them
tender, shifting the Water you boil them in two or three Times; you must have a
Syrup ready, a Pint of Water to a Pound of Sugar, scald your Peels in it till
they look clear. Fruit is done the same way, but not boiled till you put them
in your Syrup; you must heat your Syrup once a Week, taking out your Fruit, and
put them in again while the Syrup is hot; they will keep all the Year.

To dry Apricocks like Prunello's.
TAKE a Pound of Apricocks, being cut in halves or quarters, let them boil till
they be very tender in a thin Syrup; let them stand a Day or two in the Stove;
then take them out of the Syrup, and lay them drying till they be as dry as
Prunello's, then box them: You may make your Syrup red with the Juice of red
Plumbs; if you please you may pare them.

To preserve green Cucumbers.
TAKE Gerkins, rub them clean, then green them in hot Water; then take their
Weight in double-refin'd Sugar, boil it to a thick Syrup with a quarter of a
Pint of Spring Water to every Pound of Sugar; then put in your Cucumbers and
set them over the Fire, but not to boil fast; so do two or three Days. The last
Day boil them till they are tender and clear, so glass them up.

To make clear Cakes of Gooseberries.
TAKE your white Dutch Gooseberries when they are thorough ripe, break them
with your Fingers and squeeze out all the Pulp into a fine Piece of Cambrick or
thick Muslin to run through clear; then weigh the Juice and Sugar one against the
other; then boil the Juice a little while, then put in your Sugar and let it
dissolve, but not boil; scum it and put it into Glasses, and stove it in a warm
Stove.

To preserve Cherries.
GATHER your Cherries of a bright red, not too ripe; weigh them, and to every
Pound of Cherries put three quarters of a Pound of double-refin'd Sugar beaten
fine; stone them, and strew some Sugar on them, as you stone them; to keep
their Color, wet your Sugar with fair Water near half a Pint, and boil and
scum it, then put in three small Spoonfuls of the juice of Currants, that was
infused with a little Water; give it another boil, and scum, and put in your
Cherries; boil them till they are tender, then pour them into a China Basin,
cover them with Paper, and set them by twenty four Hours, then put them in your
Preserving-pan, and boil them till they look clear; put them in your Glass
clear from the Syrup, and put the Syrup on them strained through Muslin.

To preserve green Apricocks.
BEFORE the Stones are hard, wet them and lay them in a course Cloth and put to
them two or three Handfuls of Salt, and rub them till the Roughness is off,
then put them in scalding Water, and set them over the Fire till almost boiled,
then set them off till almost cold; do this two or three Times; after this let
them be close covered, and when they look to be green, let them boil till they
begin to be tender; weigh them and take their Weight in double-refin'd Sugar,
to a Pound of Sugar half a Pint of Water; make the Syrup, and when almost cold
put in your Apricocks, boil them well till clear, warm the Syrup two or three
Times till thick, or put them in cold Jelly, or dry them as you use them.

To Candy Orange Chips.
PARE your Oranges and soak the Peelings in Water two Days, and shift the Water
twice; but if you love them bitter soak them not: Tie your Peels up in a Cloth,
and when your Water boils, put them in, and let them boil till they are tender;
then take what double-refin'd Sugar will do, and break it small and wet it with
a little Water, and let it boil till it is near candy-high, then cut your Peels
of what Length you please, and put 'em into the Syrup; set 'em on the Fire and
let 'em heat well through, then let them stand a while, heat them twice a Day,
but not boil: Let them be so done till they begin to candy, then take them out
and put them on Plates to dry, and when they are dry, keep them near the Fire.

To scald Fruit for present Use.
PUT your Fruit into boiling Water, as much as will almost cover them, set them
over a slow Fire, keep it in a scald till tender, turning the Fruit where the
Water does not cover; when tender, lay a Plate close on it, let it stand till
cold; to a Pound of Fruit, put half a Pound of Sugar; let it boil, but not
fast, till it looks clear; all Fruit done whole but Pippins, and they in
halves, with Orange or Lemon peel and Juice of Lemon; cut your Peel very thin,
like Threads, and strew them on your Pippins.

To make Marmalade of Apricocks.
GATHER your Apricocks just turned from the green of a very pale yellow, pare
them thin, and weigh them, three quarters of a Pound of double-refin'd Sugar to
a Pound of Apricocks; then cut them in halves, take out the Stones and slice
them thin; beat your Sugar and put it in your Preserving pan with your sliced
Apricocks, and three or four Spoonfuls of Water: Boil and scum them, and when
they are tender put them in Glasses.

To make a Gooseberry Gam.
GATHER your Gooseberries full ripe, but green; top and tail them, and weigh
them; a Pound of Fruit to three quarters of a Pound of double refined Sugar,
and half a Pint of Water; boil them till clear and tender, then put it in Pots.

To make white Quince Marmalade.
SCALD your Quinces tender, t^ke off the Skin and pulp them from the Core very
fine, and to every Pound of Quince h^ve a Pound and half or double-refin'd
Sugar in Lumps, and half a Pint of Water, dip your Sugar in the Water, and boil
and scum it till it is a thick Syrup; then put in your Quince, boil and scum it
on a quick Fire a quarter of an Hour, so put it in your Pots.

To make red Quince Marmalade.
PARE and core a Pound of Quince, beat the Parings and Cores and ^ome of your
worst Quinces, and strain out the Juice; and to every Pound of Quince, take ten
or twelve Spoonfuls of that Juice, and three quarters of a Pound of Loaf-sugar,
put all into your Preserving-pan, cover it close, and let it stew over a gentle
Fire two Hours; when it is of an Orange-red, uncover and boil it up as fast as
you can; when of a good Color, break it as you like it, give it a boil, and
pot it up.

To make Syrup of Marshmallows.
TAKE of Marsh-mallow-Roots four Ounces, Grass-Roots Asparagus-Roots,
Liquorish, stoned Raisins, of each half an Ounce, the Tops of Marshmallows,
Pellitory, Pimpernel, Saxifrage, Plantan, Maiden hair white and black, of each
a Handful, red Sifers one Ounce; the four greater and four lesser cold Seeds of
each three Drachms; bruise and boil all these in three Quarts of Water till it
comes to two; then put to it four Pounds of white Sugar till it comes to a
Syrup; put to every Pint the White of an Egg to clarify it.

To make Syrup of Saffron.
TAKE a Pint of the best Canary, and as much Balmwater, and half an Ounce of
English Saffron, open and pull the Saffron very well, and put it into the
Liquor to infuse; let it stand close covered (so as to be hot, but not boil)
twelve Hours, then strain it out as hot as you can, and add to it three Pounds
of double refined Sugar; boil it till it is well incorporated, and when it is
cold bottle it, and take one Spoonful in a little Sack or small Cordial, as
Occasion serves.

A Syrup for a Cough or Asthma.
TAKE of Hyssop and Pennyroyal Water of each a quarter of a Pint, slice into it
a small Stick of Liquorish and a few Raisins of the Sun stoned; let it simmer
together a quarter of an Hour, and then make it into a Syrup with brown Sugar
candy, boil it a little, and then put in four or five Spoonfuls of Snail water;
give it a walm, and when it is cold bottle it: Take one Spoonful Morning and
Night, with three Drops of Balsam of Sulphur in it: Y^u may take a little of
the Syrup without the Drops once or twice a Day. If the Party is shortbreath'd
a Blister is very good.

To make Syrup of Balsam for a Cough.
TAKE one Ounce of Balsam of Tolu, and put to it Quart of Spring water; let
them boil together two Hours, then put in a Pound of white Sugar candy finely
beaten, and let it boil half an Hour longer; take out the Balsam, and strain
the Syrup through a Flannel bag twice; when it is cold put it in a Bottle. This
Syrup is excellent for a Cough; take a Spoonful of it as you lie down in your
Bed, and a little at any Time. When your Cough troubles you, you may add to it
two Ounces of the Syrup of red Poppies, and as much of Raspberry Syrup.

A Syrup for a Cough.
TAKE a Handful of Oak Lungs, a Handful of French Moss, a Handful of Maiden
hair; boil all these in three Pints of Spring Water till it comes to a Quart;
then strain it out and put to it six Pennyworth of Saffron tied up in a Rag,
and two Pounds of brown Sugar Candy; boil it up to a Syrup, and when it is cold
bottle it: Take a Spoonful of it as often as your Cough troubles you.

For a Cough.
TAKE three Quarts of Spring Water, and put it in a large Pipkin, with a Calf's
foot, and four Spoonfuls of Barley, and a Handful of dried Poppies; boil it
together till one Quart be consumed, then strain it out and add a little
Cinnamon and a Pint of Milk, and sweeten it to your Taste with Loaf-sugar; warm
it a little and drink half a Pint as often as you please.

To make Conserve of Hips.
GATHER the Hips before they grow soft, cut off the Heads and Stalks, slit them
in halves and take out all the Seed and White that is in them very clean; then
put them in an earthen Pan, and stir them every Day, else they will grow
moldy; let them stand till they are soft enough to rub through a coarse Hair
sieve; as the Pulp comes, take it off the Sieve; they are a dry Berry, and will
require Pains to rub it through; then add its Weight in Sugar, and mix it well
together without boiling; keep it in deep Gallipots for Use.

To preserve Apricocks ripe.
GATHER your Apricocks of a fine Color, but not too ripe; weigh them, and to
every Pound of Apricocks put a Pound of double refined Sugar beaten and sifted;
stone and pare your Apricocks, as you pare them put them into the P^n you do
them in, with Sugar strewn over and under them; let them not touch one
another, but put Sugar between, cover them up, and let them lie till the next
Day; then stir them gently till the Sugar is melted; then put them on a quick
Fire, and let them boil half an Hour, scumming exceeding well all the while;
then take it off, and cover it till it is quite cold, or till the next Day; then
boil it again, scumming it very well till it is enough, so put it in Pots.

To make Jelly of Currants.
STRIP your Currants, put them in a Jug, and insafe in Water, strain out the
Juice upon Sugar, sweeten to your Taste, boil it a great while till it jellies,
scumming all the while, and then put it in your Glasses.

To make Apricock Chips.
PARE your Apricocks, and part them in the Middle; take out the Stone, and cut
them cross ways pretty thin, as you cut them strew a very little Sugar over
them, beaten and sifted; then set them on the Fire, and let them stew gently a
quarter of an Hour, then take them off, cover them up, and set them by 'til the
next Day; then set them on the Fire as long as before, take them out one by one
and lay them on a Sieve, strew Sugar on the Steve and over them; dry them in
the Sun, or cool Oven, turn them often; when dry put them in Boxes.

To make a sweet Bag for Linen.
TAKE a Pound of Orris-roots, a Pound of sweet Calamus, a Pound of
Cypress-roots, a Pound of dried Lemon Peel, a Pound of dried Orange-peel, a
Peck of dried Roses, make all these into a gross Powder; Coriander-seeds four
Ounces, Nutmegs one Ounce and half, an Ounce of Cloves; make all these into
fine Powder, and mix with the other; add Musk and Ambergrease; then take four
large Handfuls of Lavender-flowers dried and rubbed, a Handful of
Sweet-marjoram, a Handful of Orange-leaves, a Handful of young Walnut leaves,
all dried and rubbed; mix all together with some bits of Cotton perfumed with
Essences, and put it up into silk Bags to lay with your Linen.

To make the burning Perfume.
TAKE a quarter of a Pound of Damask-rose Leaves, beat them by themselves, one
Ounce of Orris-root sliced very thin, and steeped in Rose Water. Beat them well
together, and put to it 2 Grains of Musk, as much Civet, two Ounces of
Benjamin, finely powdered; mix all together, and add a little powdered Sugar,
and make them up in little round Cakes, and lay them singly on Papers to dry;
set them in a Window where the Sun comes, they will dry in two or three Days;
make them in June.

All Sorts of Made Wines.
To make Apricock Wine.
TAKE three Pounds of Sugar, and three Quarts of Water, let them boil together
and scum it well; then put in six Pounds of Apricocks pared and stoned, and let
them boil 'til they are tender; then take them up, and when the Liquor is cold,
bottle it up. You may, if you please, after you have taken out the Apricocks,
let the Liquor have one boil with a Sprig of flowered Clary in it; the
Apricocks make Marmalade, and is very good for present Spending.

To make Damson Wine.
GATHER your Damsons, dry and weigh them, and bruise them with your Hand, put
them into an earthen Stean that has a Fosset; put a Wreath of Straw before the
Fosset; to every 8 Pound of Fruit a Gallon of Water; boil the Water, and scum
it, and put it to your Fruit scalding hot, and let it stand two whole Days;
then draw it off, and put it into a Vessel fit for it, and to every Gallon of
Liquor put two Pound and half of fine Sugar: Let the Vessel be full, and stop
it close, the longer it stands the better; it will keep a Year in the Vessel;
bottle it out; the small Damson is the best; you may put a very small Lump of
double-refin'd Sugar in every Bottle.

To make Gooseberry Wine.
TAKE to every four Pound of Gooseberries a Pound and a quarter of Sugar, and a
Quart of fair Water; bruise the Berries and steep them 24 Hours in the Water,
stirring them often; then press the Liquor from them, and put your Sugar to
your Liquor; then put it in a Vessel fit for it, and when it has done working,
stop it up, and let it stand a Month, then rack it off into another Vessel, and
let it stand 5 or 6 Weeks longer; then bottle it out, putting a small Lump of
Sugar into every Bottle; cork your Bottles well, and at 3 Months end it will be
fit to drink. In the same manner is Current and Raspberry Wine made; but Cherry
Wine differs, for the Cherries are not to be bruised, but stoned, and put the
Sugar and Water together, and give it a boil and a scum, and then put in your
Fruit, and let it stew with a gentle Fire a quarter of an Hour; then let it run
through a Sieve, without pressing; and when it is cold put it in a Vessel, and
order it as your Gooseberry or Current Wine. The only Cherries for Wine are the
great Bearers, Murrey Cherries, Morellos, black Flanders, or the John Treduskin
Cherries.

Pearl Gooseberry Wine.
TAKE as many as you please of the best Pearl Gooseberries, and bruise 'em, and
let them stand all Night; the next Morning press or squeeze them out, and let
the Liquor stand to settle 7 or 8 Hours; then pour off the Clear from the
Settling, and measure it as you put it into your Vessel; and to every three
Pints of Liquor put a Pound of double-refin'd Sugar; break your Sugar in small
Lump, and put it in the Vessel with a bit of Ising glass, and stop it up, and
at 3 Months end bottle it out, putting into every Bottle a Lump of
double-refin'd Sugar; this is the fine Gooseberry Wine.

To make Cherry Brandy.
TAKE six Dozen Pounds of Cherries, half red and half black, and mash or
squeeze them with your Hands to Pieces, and put to them three Gallons of
Brandy, and let them stand steeping 24 Hours; then put the mash'd Cherries and
Liquor a little at a Time into a Canvas Bag, and press it as long as any Juice
will run; sweeten it to your Taste, and put it into a Vessel fit for it, and
let it stand a Month, and bottle it out; put a Lump of Loaf Sugar into every
Bottle.

To make Cherry Wine.
PULL the Stalks off the Cherries, and mash them without breaking the Stones;
then press them hard through a hair Bag, and to every Gallon of Liquor put a
Pound and half of Six-penny Sugar; the Vessel must be full, and let it work as
long as it makes a Noise in the Vessel; then stop it up close for a Moth or 6
Weeks; when it is fine, draw it into Bottles, put a Lump of Loaf Sugar into
every Bottle; and if any of them fly, open them all for a Moment, and cork them
well again; 'twill not be fit to drink in a quarter of a Year.

To make Current Wine.
TAKE four Gallons of Currants, not too ripe, and strip them into an earthen
Stean that has a Cover to it; then take two Gallons and half of Water, and five
Pounds and a half of double-refin'd Sugar, boil the Sugar and Water together,
and scum it, and pour it boiling hot on the Currants, and let it stand forty
eight Hours, then strain it through a flannel Bag into the Stean again, and let
it stand a Fortnight to settle, and bottle it out.

To make strong Mead.
TAKE of Spring Water what Quantity you please, and make it more than Blood
warm, and dissolve Honey in it till it is strong enough to bear an Egg, the
breadth of a Shilling; then boil it gently near an Hour, taking off the Scum as
it rises; then put to about nine or ten Gallons, seven or eight large Blades of
Mace, three Nutmegs quartered, twenty Cloves, three or four Sticks of Cinnamon,
two or three Roots of Ginger and a quarter of an Ounce of Jamaica Pepper; put
these Spices into the Kettle to the Honey and Water, a whole Lemon, with a
Sprig of Sweet briar, and a Sprig of Rosemary; tie the Briar and Rosemary
together, and when they have boiled a little while, take them out and throw
them away; but let your Liquor stand on the Spice in a clean earthen Pot till
the next Day; then strain it into a Vessel that is fit for it; put the Spice in
a Bag, and hang it in the Vessel, stop it, and at three Months draw it into
Bottles. Be sure that it is fine when it is bottled; after it is bottled six Weeks
it is fit to drink.

To make small White Mead.
TAKE three Gallons of Spring Water and make it hot, and dissolve it in three
Quarts of Honey and a Pound of Loaf sugar; then let it boil about half an Hour,
and scum it as long as any rises; then pour it into a Tub, and squeeze in the
Juice of (...) Lemons; put in the Rinds of but two; twenty Cloves, two Races of
Ginger, a Top of Sweet briar, and a Top of Rosemary. Let it stand in a Tub till
it is but Blood warm; then make a brown Toast and spread it with two or three
Spoonfuls of Ale yeast, put it into a Vessel fit for it; let it stand four or
five Days, then bottle it out

To make Raisin Wine.
TAKE two Gallons of Spring Water, and let it boil half an Hour; then put it
into a Stean-pot two Pounds of Raisins stoned, two Pounds of Sugar, the Rind of
two Lemons the Juice of four Lemons; then pour the boiling Water on the Things
in the Stean, and let it stand covered four or five Days, strain it out and
bottle it up: In fifteen or sixteen Days it will be fit to drink. It Is a very
cool and pleasant drink in hot Weather.

To make Shrub.
TAKE two Quarts of Brandy, and put it in a large Bottle, and put into it the
Juice of five Lemons, the Peels of two, half a Nutmeg, stop it up, and let it
stand three Days, and add to it three Pints of White Wind, a Pound and half of
Sugar; mix it, and strain it twice through a Flannel, and bottle it up; it is a
pretty Wine and a Cordial.

To make Orange Wine.
PUT twelve Pounds of fine Sugar, and the Whites of eight Eggs well beaten into
six Gallons of Spring water; let it boil an Hour, scumming it all the Time;
take it off, and when it is pretty cool, put in the Juice and Rinds of fifty
Sevil Oranges, and six Spoonfuls of good Ale-yeast, and let it stand two Days;
then put it into your Vessel with two Quarts of Rhenish-wine, and the Juice of
twelve Lemons. You must let the Juice of Lemons and Wine, and two Pounds of
double refined Sugar stand close covered ten or twelve Hours before you put it
in the Vessel to your Orange Wine, and scum off the Seeds before you put it in.
The Lemon-peels must be put in with the Oranges, half the Rinds must be put
into the Vessel; it must stand ten or twelve Days before it is fit to bottle.

To make Birch Wine.
IN March bore a Hole in a Tree, and put in a Faucet, and it will run two or
three Days together without hurting the Tree; then put in a Pin to stop it, and
the next Year you may draw as much from the same Hole; put to every Gallon of
the Liquor a Quart of good Honey and stir it well together; boil it an Hour,
scum it well, and put in a few Cloves and a piece of Lemon Peel; when it is
almost cold, put to it so much Ale yeast as will make it work like new Ale, and
when the Yeast begins to settle, put it in a Runlet that will just hold it: So
let it stand six Weeks or longer if you please; then bottle it, and in a Month
you may drink it. It will keep a Year or two. You may make it with Sugar, two
Pounds to a Gallon, or something more, if you keep it long. This is admirably
wholesome as well as pleasant, an Opener of Obstructions, good against the
Pothisick, and good against the Spleen and Scurvy, a Remedy for the Stone; it
will abate Heat in a Fever or Thrush, and has been given with good Success.

To make Sage Wine.
BOIL Twenty-six Quarts of Spring Water a quarter of an Hour, and when it is
Blood warm, put Twenty five Pounds of Malaga Raisins picked, rubbed, and shred
into it, with almost half a Bushel of red Sage shred, and a Poringer of
Ale-yeast; stir all well together, and let it stand in a Tub covered warm six
or seven Days, stirring it once a Day; then strain it out, and put it in a
Runlet. Let it work three or four Days, stop it up; when it has stood six or
seven Days, put in a Quart or 2 of Malaga Sack, and when it is fine bottle it.

To make Raspberry Wine.
TAKE your Quantity of Raspberries and bruise them, put them in an open Pot 24
Hours; then squeeze out the Juice, and to every Gallon put three Pounds of fine
Sugar, and two Quarts of Canary, put it into a Stean or Vessel, and when it
has done working, stop it close; when it is fine bottle it. It must stand two
Months before you drink it.

To make Raspberry Wine another Way.
POUND your Fruit, and strain them through a Cloth; then boil as much Water as
Juice of Raspberries, and when it is cold put it to your Squeezings: Let it
stand together five Hours; then strain it and mix it with the Juice, and to
every Gallon of this Liquor put two Pounds and half of fine Sugar: Let it stand
in an earthen Vessel close covered a Week; then put it in a Vessel fit for it,
and let it stand a Month, or till it is fine; bottle it off.

To make Morella Cherry Wine.
LET your Cherries be very ripe, pick off the Stalks, and bruise your Fruit
without breaking the Stones; put them in an open Vessel together; let them
stand twenty four Hours, then Press 'em, and to every Gallon put two Pounds of
fine Sugar: then put it up in your Cask, and when it has done working, stop it
close, let it stand three or four Months, and bottle it; it will be fit to
drink in two Months.

To make Quince Wine.
TAKE your Quinces when they are thorough ripe, wipe off the For-very clean;
then take out the Cores and bruise them as you do Apples for Cider, and press
them, and to every Gallon of Juice put two Pounds and a half of fine Sugar,
stir it together till it is dissolved; then put it in your Cask, and when it has
done working stop it close; let it stand till March before you bottle it. You
may keep it two or three Years, it will be better.

To make Lemon Wine.
TAKE six large Lemons, pare off the Rind and cut the Lemons and squeeze out
the Juice, and in the Juice steep the Rind, and put it to a Quart of Brandy,
and let it stand in an earthen Pot close stopped three Days, and then squeeze six
more, and mix with two Quarts of Spring Water, and as much Sugar as will
sweeten the whole, and boil the Water and Lemons and Sugar together, and let it
stand till it is cool; then add a Quart of White Wind and the other Lemon and
Brandy, and mix them together, and run it through a Flannel Bag into some Vessel.
Let it stand three Months, and bottle it off. Cork your Bottles very well and
keep it cool, it will be fit to drink in a Month or six Weeks.

To make Elder Wine.
TAKE Twenty-five Pounds of Malaga Raisins, rub them and shred them small, then
take five Gallons of fair Water, boil it an Hour, and let it stand till it is
but Blood-warm, then put it in an earthen Crock or Tub with your Raisins; let
them steep ten Days, stirring them once or twice a Day, then pass the Liquor
through a hair Sieve, and have in readiness five Pints of the Juice of
Elderberries drawn off as you do for Jelly of Currants; then mix it cold with
the Liquor and stir it well together, and put it in a Vessel, and let it stand
in a warm Place; and when it has done working stop it close. Bottle it about
Candlemas.

To make Barley Water
TAKE of Pearl-barley four Ounces, put it in a large Pipkin and cover it with
Water; when the Barley is thick and tender, put it in more Water and boil it up
again, and so do till it is of a good Thickness to Drink; then put in a Blade or
two of Mace, or a Stick of Cinnamon. Let it have a warm or two and strain it
out, and squeeze in the Juice of two or three Lemons, and a bit of the Peel,
and sweeten it to your Taste with fine Sugar; let it stand till it is cold, and
then run it through a Bag and bottle it out, it will keep three or four Days.

To make Barley Wine.
TAKE half a Pound of French Barley, and boil it in three Waters, and save
three Pints of the last Water, and mix it with a Quart of White wine, half a
Pint of Borage Water, and as much Clary-water, and a little red Rose Water; the
Juice of five or six Lemons, three quarters of a Pound of fine Sugar, the thin
yellow Rind of a Lemmon; brew all these quick together, run it through a
Strainer, and bottle it up; it is pleasant in hot Weather, and very good in
Fevers.

To make Plumb Wine.
TAKE twenty Pounds of Malaga Raisins, pick, rub, and shred them, and put them
into a Tub; then take four Gallons of fair Water and boil it an Hour, and let
it stand till it is blood warm; then put it to your Raisins; let it stand nine
or ten Days, stirring it once or twice a Day, strain out your Liquor, and mix
it with two Quarts of Damson Juice, put it in a Vessel, and when it has done
working, stop it close; at four or five Months bottle it.

To make Ebulum.
TO a Hogshead of strong Ale, take a heaped Busbel of Elder-berries, and half a
Pound of Jeniper-berries beaten; put in all the berries when you put in the
Hops, and let them boil together till the Berries break in Pieces; then work it
up as you do Ale; when it has done working, add to it half a Pound of Ginger,
half an Ounce of Cloves, as much Mace, an Ounce of Nutmegs, and as much Cinnamon
grossly beaten, half a Pound of Citron, as much Ering-to^, and likewise of
candied Orange peel; let the Sweetmeats be cut in Pieces very thin, and put
with the Spice into a Bag, and hang it in the Vessel when you stop it up. So
let it stard till it is fine, then bottle it up, and drink it with Lumps of
double refined Sugar in the Glass.

To make fine Milk Punch.
TAKE two Quarts of Water, one Quart of Milk, half a Pint of Lemon Juice, and
one Quart of Brandy, Sugar to your Taste; put the Milk and Water together a
little warm, then the Sugar, then the Lemon Juice, stir it well together, then
the Brandy, stir it again and run it through a flannel Bag till it is very fine,
then bottle it; it will keep a Fortnight, or more.

To make Clary Wine.
TAKE twenty four Pounds of Malaga Raisins, pick them and chop them very small,
put them in a Tub, and to each Pound a Quart of Water; let them steep ten or
eleven Days, stirring it twice every Day; you must keep it covered close all
the while; then strain it off, and put it into a Vessel, and about half a Peck
of the Tops of Clary when it is in Bl^ssom; stop it close for six Weeks, and
then bottle it off; in two or three Months it is fit to drink. It Is apt to have
a great Settlement at Bottom, therefore it is best to draw it off by Plugs, or
tap it pretty high.

To recover Wine that is turned sharp.
RACK off your Wine into another Vessel, and to ten Gallons put the following
Powder; take Oystershells, scrape and wash off the brown dirty Out side of the
Shell, then dry them in an Oven till they will powder, a Pound of this Powder
to every nine or ten Gallons of your Wine; stir it well together, and stop it
up, and let it st^nd to settle two or three Days, or till it is fine; as soon as
it is fine bottle it off, and cork it well.

To fine Wine the Lisbon way.
TO every twenty Gallons of Wine take the Whites of ten Eggs, and a small
Handful of Salt, beat it together to a Froth, and mix it well with a Quart or
more of the Wine, then pour it in the Vessel, and in a few Days it will be fine.

To clear Wine.
TAKE half a Pound of Hartshorn, and dissolve it in Cider, if it be for Cider;
or Rhenish-wine for any Liquor: This is enough for a Hogshead.

To make Cider.
PULL your Fruit before it is too ripe, and let it lie but one or two Days to
have one good Sweat; your Apples must be Pippins, Pearmains, or Harveys, (if
you mix Winter and Summer Fruit together it is never good;) grind your Apples
and press it, and when your Fruit is all pressed, put it immediately into a
Hogshead where it may have some Room to work; but no Vent, but a little Hole
near the Hoops, but close bung'd; put 3 or 4 Pounds of Raisins into a Hogshead,
and two Pounds of Sugar, it will make it work better; often racking it off is
the best Way to fine it, and always rack it into small Vessels, keeping them
close bung'd, and only a small Vent-hole; if it should work after racking, put
into your Vessel some Raisins for it to feed on, and bottle it in March.

To make the fine Clary Wine.
TO ten Gallons of Water, put twenty five Pounds of Sugar, and the Whites of
twelve Eggs well beaten; set it over the Fire, and let it boil gently near an
Hour, scum it clean and put it in a Tub, and when it is near cold, then put into
the Vessel you keep it in about half a Strike of Clary in the Blossom, stripped
from the Stalks, Flowers and little Leaves togethe^, and a Pint of new
Ale-yeast; then put in the Liquor and stir it two or three Times a Day for
three Days; when it has done working stop it up, and bottle it at three or four
Months old, if it is clear.

To make Current Wine.
GATHER your Currants full ripe, strip 'em and bruise 'em in a Mortar, and to
every Gallon of the Pulp put two Quarts of Water, first boiled and cold; you
may put in some Rasps if you please; let it stand in a Tub twenty four Hours to
ferm^nt; then let it run through a hair Sieve. Let no H^nd touch it; let it
take its Time to run; and to every Gallon of this Liquor put two Pounds and a
half of white Sugar; stir it well, and put it in your V^ssel, and to every six
Gallons put in a Quart of the best rectified Spirit of Wine; let it stand six
Weeks and bottle it; if it is not very fine, empty it into other Bottles; or at
fi^^t draw it into l^rge Bottles, and then after it has stood a Fortnight, rack
it off into smaller.

Lemon Wine, or what may pass for Citron-Water.
TAKE two Quarts of Brandy, and one Quart of Spring water, half a Pound of
double-refin'd Sugar, and the Rinds of sixteen Lemons; put them together in an
earthen Pot, and pour into it twelve Spoonfuls of Milk boiling hot, stir it
together, and let it stand 3 Days; then take off the Top, and pass the other
two or three Times through a Jelly-bag; bottle it. It Is fit to drink, or will
keep a Year or two.

To make strong Beer.
TO a Barrel of Beer take two Bushels of Malt and half a Bushel of Wheat just
cracked in the Mill, and some of the Flour sisted out of it; when your Water is
scalding hot, put it in your Mashing-fat; there let it stand 'til you can see
your Face in it; then put your Malt upon it, then put your Wheat upon that, and
do not stir it; let it stand two Hours and a half; then let it run into a Tub
that has 2 Pounds of Hops in it, and a Handful of Rosemary-flowers; and when
it is all run put it in your Copper and boil it two Hours; then strain it off,
setting it a cooling very thin, and set it a working very cool; clear it very
well before you put it a working, put a little Yeast to it; when the Yeast
begins to fall, put it into your Vessel, and when it has done working in the
Vessel, put in a Pint of whole Wheat and six Eggs; then stop it up, let it
stand a Year, and then bottle it. Then mash again, stir the Malt very well in,
and let it stand two Hours, and let that run, and mash again, and stir it as
before; be sure you cover your Mashing-fat well up, mix the first and second
Running together, it will make good Household Beer.

To make Elder Ale.
TAKE ten Bushels of Malt to a Hogshead, then put two Bushels of Elder-berries
picked from the Stalks, into a Pot or earthen Pan, and set it in a Pot of
boiling Water 'til the Berries swell; then strain it out, and put the Juice
into the Guile-fat, and beat it often in, and so order it as the common way of
Brewing.

All Sorts of Cordial Waters.
Plague Water.
TAKE Rosa-solis, Agrimony, Betony, Scabious, Century-tops, Scordium, Balm,
Rue, Wormwood, Mugwort, Celandine, Rosemary, Marigold-leaves, brown Sage,
Burnet, Carduus, and Dragons, of each a large Handful; and Angelica-roots,
Peony roots, Turmentil-roots, Elecampane-roots, and Liquorish, of each one
Ounce; cut the Herbs, and slice the Roots, and put them all into an earthen
Pot, and put to them a Gallon of White wine, and a Quart of Brandy, and let
them steep two Days close covered; then distill it in an ordinary Still with a
gentle Fire: You may sweeten it, but not much.

Dr. Steven's Water.
TAKE a Gallon of the best Gascoigne Wine or Sack; tehn take of Ginger,
Galengar, Cinnamon, Nutmets, Cloves, Mace, Anniseeds, Carraway-seeds,
Coriander-seeds, of every of these one Dram; then take S^ge, Mint, red
Rose-leaves, Thyme, Pellitory of the Wall, Potmarjoram, Rosemary, Pennyroyal,
wild Thyme, common Lavender, of each of these one Handful; bruise the Spice and
Seeds, and stamp the Herbs, and put them all into the Wine, and let it stand
close covered twelve Hours, stirring it often; then still it in an Alembick,
and mix it as your please.

To make Aqua Mirabilis.
TAKE Cubebs, Cardamums, Galengal, Cloves, Mace, Nutmegs, Cinnamon, of each two
Drachms, bruised small; then take of the Juice of Celandine one Pint, the Juice
of Spearmint half a Pint, the Juice of Balm half a Pint, Melilot flowers,
Cowslip flowers, Rosemary flowers, Borage, and Buglos-flowers, and Marigold
flowers, of each three Drachms; Fennel-seed, Coriander seed, and Carraway-seed,
of each two Drachms, two Quarts of the best Sack; one Quart of White wine, one
Pint of Brandy, one Pint of the strongest Angelica water, and one Pint of red
Rose Water; bruise the Spices and Seeds, and steep them with the Herbs,
Flowers, Juices, Waters, Sack, Whitewine and Brandy all Night; in the Morning
distill it in a common Still, pasted up; from this Quantity draw off a Gallon at
least, sweeten it to the Taste with Sugar Candy; bottle it up and keep it in
Sand, or very cool.

To make Orange or Lemon Water.
TO one Hundred Oranges or Lemons, you must have three Gallons of Brandy and
two Quarts of Sack. Pare off the outer Rinds very thin, and steep them in the
Brandy one Night; the next Day distill them in a cold Still, a Gallon with the
Proprotion of Peels is enough for one Still, and of that you may draw off
between three and four Quarts; draw it off 'til you taste it begin to be
fourish; sweeten it to your Taste with double refined Sugar; mix first, second,
and third Running together; if it is Lemon water it should be persum'd; put 2
Grains of Ambergrease and one of Musk ground fine, tie it in a Rag, and let it
hang 5 or 6 Days in a Bottle, and then put it in another, and so for a great
many, if you please, or else you may put 3 or 4 Drops of Tincture of
Ambergrease in it; cork it very well; the Orange is an excellent Water for the
Stomach, and the Lemon is a fine entertaining Water.

King Charles II's Surfeit Water.
TAKE a Gallon of the best Aqua-vitae and a Quart of Brandy, and a Quart of
Anni^eed water, a Pint of Poppy-water, and a Pint of Damask Rose Water; put
these in a large glass Jar, and put to it a Pound of fine powdered Sugar, a
Pound and half of R^isins stoned, a quarter of a Pound of ^a^es stoned and
sliced, one Ounce of Cinnamon bruised; Cloves one Ounce, four Nutmegs bruised,
one Stick of L^qu^rish scraped and she would; let all th^se st^^d 9 Days close
covered, stirring it 3 or 4 Times a Day; then add to it three Pounds of fresh
Poppies, or three Handfuls of dried Poppies, a Sprig of Angelica, two or three
of Balm; so let it stand a Week l^nger, then strain it out and bottle it.

A Cordial-water that may be made in Winter.
TAKE three Quarts of Brandy, or Sack, put two Handfuls of Rosemary and two
Handfuls of Balm to it, chopped pre^^y small, one Ounce of Cloves, 2 Ounces of
Nutmegs, 3 Ounces of Cinnamon; beat all the Spices grossly, and steep them with
the Herbs in the Wine, then put it in a Still pasted up close; save near a
Quart of the first Running, and so of the second, and of the third; when it is
distilled mix it all together, and dissolve about about a Pound of
double-refin'd Sugar in it, and when it is settled bottle it up.

The Golden Cordial.
TAKE two Gallons of Brandy, two Drachms and a half of double perfumed
Alkermes, a quarter of a Dram of Oil of Cloves, one Ounce of Spirit of
Saffron, three Pounds of double-refin'd Sugar powdered, a Book of Leaf-Gold.
First put your Brandy into a large new Bottle, then put three or four Spoonfuls
of Brandy into a China Cup, mix your Alkermes in it, then put in your Oil of
Cloves and mix that, and do the like to the Spirit of Saffron, then pour all
into your Bottle of Brandy, then put in your Sugar and cork the Bottle, and tie
it down close; shake it well together, and so do every Day for two or three
Days and let it stand about a Fortnight; you must set the Bottle so that when
it is racked off into other Bottles it must only be gently tilted; put into
every Bottle two Leaves of Gold cut small; you may put one or two Quarts to the
Dregs, and it will be good, though not so good as the first.

The Fever Water.
TAKE of Virginia Snake-root six Ounces, Carduus seeds four Ounces, and
M^rigold flowers four Ounces, twenty green Walnuts, Carduus Water stilled two
Quarts, as much hot Poppy-water, two Ounces of Hartihorn; slice the Walnuts and
steep all in the Waters a Fortnight; then add to it an Ounce of London T^^cle,
and distill it all in an Alembick pasted up; three Drops of Spirit of Amber in
three Spoonfuls of this Water will deliver a Woman of a dead Child.

To make the best Liquid Laudanum.
TAKE a Quart of Sack, and half a Pint of Spirit of Wine, and four Ounces of
Opium, two Ounces of Saffron; slice the Opium, and pull the Saffron, and put it
in a Bottle with the Sack, and Spirit of Wine, and one Ounce of Salt of Tartar,
and of Cinnamon, Cloves, and Mace, of each a Dram; cork and tie down the
Bottle, and set it in the Sun or by the Fire twenty Days, pour it off the
Dregs, and it is fit to use; ten, fifteen, twenty, or twenty five Drops.

A fine Cordial Water.
BEAT two Pounds of double refined Sugar very well, and put to it a Gallon of
the best Brandy, stirring it a good while all one way; then put Confection of
Alkermes one Dram, Oil of Cloves one Dram, Spirit of Saffron one Ounce,
then stir it one Way for a quarter of an Hour, then add three Sheets of Leaf
Gold and bottle it up, it will keep as long as you please.

To cure the Spleen or Vapors.
TAKE an Ounce of the Filings of Steel, two Drachms of Gentian sliced, half an
Ounce of Carduus seeds bruised, half a H^ndful of Centaury-tops, in^^se all
these in a Quart of White Wind four Days, and drink four Spoonfuls of the clear
every Morning, fasting two Hours after it, and walking about; if it birds too
much, take once or twice a Week some little purging Thing to carry it off.

Hysterical Water.
TAKE Zedo^ry, Roots of Lov^ge, Seeds of wild Parsnips, of each two Ounces,
Roots of single Piony 4 Ounces, of Misletoe of the O^k 3 Ounces, Myrrh a (...)
of an Ounce, Castor half an Ounce; beat all these (...), and add to them a
quarter of a Pound of dried Milli^^^es, pour on these three Quarts of Mugwort
water, and (...) Quarts of Brandy. Let them stand in a close Vessel eight Days,
then distill it in a cold Still pasted up; you may draw off nine Pints of Water,
sweeten it to your Taste, and mix all together: This is an excellent Water to
(...) Fits, or to be taken in Faintings.

A Stone Water.
TAKE Beans in Pod, and cut them in small Pieces, fill good Part of an ordinary
Still with them, and put to them two good Handfuls of Yarrow, and distill them
together in a cold Still; let the Party drink a Glass when in Pain, and at the
Changes of the Moon.

To make Cherry Brandy.
TO every 4 Quarts of Brandy, put 4 Pounds of red Cherries, two Pounds of
black, and one Quart of Raspberries, a few Cloves, a Stick of Cinnamon, and a
bit of Orange-peel; let these stand a Month close stopped, then bottle it off,
and put a Lump of Sugar into every Bottle.

To make Citron Water.
TO a Gallon of Brandy t^ke ten Citrons, pare the outside Rinds of the Citrons,
dry the Rinds very well, then beat the remaining Part of the Citrons all to
mash in a Mortar; then put it into the Brandy, stop it close, and let it stand
nine Days; then distill it, then take the Rinds that are dry and beat them to
Powder, and insure them nine Days in the Spirit, and distill it over again;
sweeten it to your Taste with double-refin'd Sugar, let it stand in a large Jug
for three Week; then rack it off into Bottles. This is the true ^ ^hados
Receipt for Citron Water.

Stitch Water.
TAKE a Gallon of new Ale-wort, and put to it as much Stone-horse Dung from the
Horse as will make it pretty thick, add to this a Pound of London Treacle, two
Pennyworth of Ginger sliced, and six Penny worth of Saffron; mix these
together, and distill it off in a cold Still. Take three or four Spoonfuls at a
Time.

To make Carraway Brandy.
STEEP an Ounce of Carraway-seeds, and six Ounces of Sugar in a Quart of
Brandy, let it steep nine Days, and clear it off: it is a good Cordial.

The Saffron Cordial.
FILL a large Still with Marigold Flowers, and strew on it an Ounce of Case
Nutmegs, that is, the Nutmegs that have the Mace on them; beat them grossly, and
take an Ounce of the best English Saffron, pull it, and mix it with the
Flowers; then take three Pints of Muscadine or Tent, or Malaga Sack, and with a
Sprig of Rosemary dash it on the Flowers; then distill it off with a slow Fire,
and let it drop on white Sugar candy; draw it off till it begins to be sour,
save a Pint of the first Running to mix with other Waters on an extraordinary
Occasion; mix the rest together to drink by itself. This Cordial is excellent
in fainting, and for the Small pox or Ague; take five or six Spoonfuls at a
Time.

Black Cherry Water for Children.
TAKE six Pounds of black Cherries, and bruise them small; then put to them the
Tops of Rosemary, Sweet marjoram, Spearmint, Angelica, Balm, Marigold-flowers,
of each a Handful; dried Violets one Ounce; Anniseeds and sweet Fennel-seeds,
of each half an Ounce bruised. Cut the Herbs small, and mix altogether, and
dist^l them off in a cold Still. This Water is excellent for Children, giving
them two or three Spoonfuls at a Time.

To make Gripe Water.
TAKE two dozen Bunches of Penny royal, shred grossly, then take Coriander seeds
Anniseeds, sweet Fennel-seeds, Carraway-seeds; bruise them all, and put them to
the Herbs in an earthen Pot; mix them together, and sprinkle on them a Quart of
Brandy; let them stand all Night; the next Day distill it off, and take six
seven, or eight Sp^onfuls of this Water sweetened with Syrup of G^ll^flowers.
Drink it warm, and g^ ^o Bed; cover very warm, to sweat if you can; and drink
some of it as long as the Gripes continue.

To make the Dropsy Water.
TAKE a Bushel of picked Elderberries, put them in a large Tub; put in as much
Water or strong Beer as will cover them, and put in a Quart of Ale yeast, and a
Piece of Leaven as big as a Penny Loaf; break it to Pieces, and stir it
together once or twice a Day, for eight Days together; then put them in a Pot,
and distill it off in an Al^mbick: Draw off a Gallon of Water from this
Quantity. It must be drank three Times a Day; in the Morning fasting, before
Dinner, and last at Night, till you have drank up the Quantity.

To make Vertigo Water.
TAKE the Leaves of red Sage, Cinquefoil, Sandine and Wood Betony, of each a
good Handful; boil them in a Gallon of Spring Water, till it comes to a Quart;
when it is cold, put into it a Pennyworth of Roch-Allum, then bottle it up.
When you use it, put a little of it in a Spoon, or in the Palm of your Hand,
and snuff it up. Go not into the Air presently; it must be made between the
first and tenth of May.

Dr. Burgess's Antidote against the Plague.
TAKE three Pints of Muscadine, and boil therein one handful of Sage, as much
Rue, Angelica Room one Ounce, Zedoary roots one Ounce, Virgina Snakeroot half
an Ounce, S^ffron twenty Grains. Let all these boil till a Pint be consumed;
then strain it, and set it over the Fire again, and put therein two Pennyworth
of long Pepper, half an Ounce of Ginger, as much Nutmegs. Beat all the Spices,
and let them boil together a little, and put thereto a quarter of an Ounce of
Mithtidate, and as much Venice-Treacle, and a quarter of a Pint of the best
Angelica water: Take it warm both Morning and Evening, two Spoonfuls if already
infected; if not infected, one Spoonful is enough for a Day: Half a Spoonful in
the Morning and as much at Night. This had great Success, under God, in the
Plague; it is good likewise against the Smallpox, or any other pestilential
Disease.

The Lady Onslow's Water for the Stone.
TAKE as much Saxifrage, as being distilled will yield two Quarts of Water;
then take a Peck of Hogs haws, and bruise them well; then take Filipendula and
Parsley, of each three Handfuls, Parsley of Breakstone and Mother thyme, of
each two Handfuls; Marshmallow roots, Parsley roots, of each one Handful; 4
large Horse radish-roots, red Nettle-seed, and Burd^ck-seed, of each one Ounce;
bruise the Seeds, cut the H^rbs, and slice the Roots, and mix 'em well together
with three Quarts of White Wind, and as much new Milk from the Cow. So distill
them and the Saxifrage water together in a cold Still, and draw it off as long
as any Water will come; the Saxifrage must be distilled in May, and the other
Water the latter end of September or October, when the Haws are ripe. Let the
Person when the Fit of the Stone comes, take three or four Spoonfuls of
White Wind, and as much of this Water mixed together; if the Distemper abate
not, take six Spoonfuls of this Water once in two Hours till it is removed; you
may if you please, sweeten it with Syrup of Marshmallows.

To make Hiera-picra.
TAKE a Dram of Hiera-picra, and a Dram of Cochineal, and two Drams of
Anniseeds, beat them all very fine; then put them into a Bottle with a Pint of
the best Sack, and a Pint of Brandy; shake them well together five or six Days;
then let it stand to settle 12 Hours, to pour it off into another Bottle clear
from the Dregs, and keep it for use. Tis' very good against the Cholic or
Stomach ach, and removes any thing that offends the Stomach; take four
Spoonfuls of it fasting, and fast two Hours after it. You must take it
constantly three Weeks or a Month, and it is well to drink the following Drink
after it.

Take new laid Eggs and break them; save the Shells, and pull off the Skin
that is in the Inside; dry the Shells and beat 'em to Powder; sif^ them, and
put six Spoonfuls of this Powder into a Quart of these Wa^ers, half a Pint of
Fen^el water, half a Pint of Parsley-water, half a Pint of Mint water, h^lf a
pint of black Cherry water. Take a quarter of a Pint at a time, shaking the
Glass when you pour it out. Take this three times a Day, at eleven in the
Morning, at three in the Afternoon, at eight at Night; and you should take it
as long as you take the Hiera-piera.

To make Lime Water.
TAKE a Pound of unslack'd Lime, and put it into an earthen Jug well glazed,
and put to it a Gallon of Spring water boiling hot; cover it close till it is
cold; then scum it clean, and let it stand two Days; then pour it clear off
into Glass Bottles, and keep it for Use. The older the better; the Virtues are
as follows.

For a Sore, warm some of the Water and wash Sore well with it for half an
Hour; then lay a Pl^^ster on the Sore of some gentle Thing, and lay a Cloth
over the Plaster four or five Doubles, wet with this Water, and as it dries
wet it again, and it will Heal it.

For a Fl^x or Looseness, take two Spoonfuls of it cold in the Morning, and two
at Night, as you go to Bed; do this seven or eight Days together, for a Man or
Woman, but if for a Child one Spoonful at a Time is enough, and if very Young
half a Spoonful at a Time. It will keep Twenty Years, and no one who has not
experienced it, knows the Virtues of it.

A Milk-water for a Cancerous Breast.
TAKE six Quarts of new Milk, and four Handfuls of Cranes-^ill, that Sort of it
that has little Buds on it, and is long in the Stalk, and four Hundred of
Woodlice, D^stil this in a cold Still with a gentle Fire. Then take one Ounce
of Crabs Eyes, and half an Ounce of White Sugar Candy both in fine Powder; mix
them together, and take a Dr^chm of the Powder in a quarter of a Pint of the
Milk-water in the Morning, at Twelve at Noon, and at Night. Continue taking
this three or four Months, it is an excellent Medicine.

Cock-water for a Consumption.
TAKE an old Red Cock from a Barn-Door, pull him alive, then Kill him and
Quarter him, and with clean Cloths wipe the Blood from him; then put the
Quarters into a Cold Still, and part of a Leg of Veal, and put t^ them two
Quarts of old Malaga Sack, ^ Handful of Thyme, as much Sweet-marjoram and
Rosemary, two Handfuls of Pimpernel, four of Dates stoned and slice^, one Pound
of Currants, as many Raisins of the Sun ^^oned, a Pound of Sugar Candy finely
beaten; when all is in, paste up the Still. Let it stand all Night, the next
Morning still it, and mix the Water together, and sweeten it to your Taste with
white Sugar Candy. Drink three or four Spoonfuls an Hour before Dinner and
Supper. Distill this Water in May.

Another Water against a Consumption.
TAKE a Pound of Currants, and of Hart's-tongue, Liver wort, and Speedwell, of
each a large Handful; then take a Peck of Snails, lay them all Night in Hysop,
the next Morning rub and bruise them, and Distill all in a Gallon of new Milk;
sweeten it with white Sugar Candy, and drink of this Water two or three Times a
Day, a quarter of a Pint at a Time. It has done great Good.

A Water to strengthen the Sight.
TAKE Rosemary flowers, Sage, Betony, Rue, and Succory, of each one Hand^ul;
infuse these in two Quarts of Sack, and distill them in an Alembick. The Dose is
a Spoonful in the Morning fasting, till the Water is done.

Rue-water, good for Fits of the Mother.
TAKE of Rue, green Walnuts, of each a Pound, Figs a Pound and a half; bruise
the Rue and Walnuts, slice the Figs in thin Slices and lay them between the Rue
and Walnuts, and distill it off; bottle it up and keep it for Use. Take a
Spoonful or two when their is any Appearance of a Fit.

An opening Drink.
TAKE Pennyroyal, red Sage, Liver-wort,. Horehound, Maidenhair, Hysop, of each
two H^ndfuls; Figs one Pound, Raisins stoned one Pound, blue Currants half a
Pound, Liquorish, Anniseeds, Coriander-seeds, of each two Ounces; put all these
in two Gallons of Springwater, and let it boil away two or three Quarts; then
strain it, and when it is cold put it in Bottles. Drink half a Pint in the
Morning, and as much in the Afternoon; keep warm, and eat little.

For a Distemper got by an ill Husband.
TAKE two Pennyworth of Gum-dragant, pick and clean it, and put it in an
earthen Pot, put to it as much red Rose Water as it will drink up; stir it two
or three Times a Day till it is all dissolved into a Jelly; then put in three
grated Nutmegs, and double refined Sugar to your Taste, finely powdered, and a
little Cinnamon water, no more than will leave it in a Jelly: Take the Quantity
of a Nutmeg in the Morning fasting, and last at Night; but first prepare the
Body for it, by taking six Pennyworth of Pulvis Sanctus in Posset Drink, and
drink Broth in the Working.

For a Cough settled on the Stomach^
TAKE half a Pound of Figs, as many Raisins of the Sun stoned, a Stick of
Liquorish scraped and sliced, a few Anniseeds, a few sweet ^ennel-seeds, and
some Hysop washed. Boil all these in a Quart of Spring Water 'til it comes to a
Pint, strain it and sweeten it very well with white Sugar candy. Take 2 or 3
Spoonfuls of it Morning and Night, and when you please.

To make Hungary Water.
TAKE four Ounces of Rosemary-flowers, and a Pint of Spirits of Wine, infuse it
12 Hours, and draw it off in a Glass Still.

A Drink to preserve the Lungs.
TAKE three Pints of Spring Water, put to it one Ounce of flower of Sulphur,
and let it boil on a flow Fire 'til half is consumed; then let it stand to
settle, and strain it out, and pour it on one Ounce of Liquorish scraped, and a
Dram of Coriander seeds, and as many Aniseeds bruised. Let it stand to
settle, and drink a quarter of a Pint Morning and Night.

An excellent Snail Water.
TAKE of Comfry and S^ccory roots, of each four Ounces, Liquorish three Ounces,
the Leave of Hart's-tongue, Plantane, Ground Ivy, red Nettles, Yarrow,
Brooklime, Water-Cress^s, Dandelion, and Agrimony, of each 2 large Handfuls:
Gather these Herbs in dry Weather, and do not w^sh them, but wipe them clean
with a Cloth; then take 500 of Snails cleansed from their Shells, but not
scoured, and of Whites of Eggs beat up to Water one Pint, four Nutmegs grossly
beaten, the yellow Rind of one Lemon and one Orange; bruise all the Roots and
Herbs, and put them together with the other Ingredients in a G^llon of new
Milk, and a Pint of Canary; let them stand close covered 48 Hours, and then
distill them in a common Still with a gentle Fire; this Quantity will fill your
Still twice; it will keep good a Ye^r, and is best when made Spring or Fall,
but it is the best when new; you must not cork up the Bottles in 3 Months, but
cover them with Paper: It is immediately fit for Use; and when you use it, take
a quarter of a Pint of this Water, and put to it as much Milk warm from the
Cow, and drink it in the Morning, and at 4 o'Clock in the Afternoon, and fast
two Hours after it. To take Powder of Crabs eyes with it, as much as will lie
on a Sixpence, mightily assists to sweeten the Blood. When you drink this
Water, be very regular in your Diet, and eat nothing salt or sour.

To make Briony-water.
TAKE Orris root sliced two Ounces, white Copperas finely beaten one Ounce, put
them in three Pints of running Water, shake it well three or four Days, and
then use it; if a watery Eye, you may add a Bit of Bole-Armoniack.

Eye Water.
TAKE twelve Pounds of Briony-root, pound it to mash, then take one Quart of
the Juice of Rue, one Quart of the Juice of Mugwort-Leaves, of Savin three
Handfuls, sweet Basil two Handfuls, Mother of Thyme, Nepp and Pennyroyal, of
each three Handfuls, Dittany of Crete, and dried Orange peel, of each four
Handfuls, My^rh two Ounces, Castor one Ounce, both powdered, and likewise the
Orange-peel; distill this off in an Alembick: First cut your Herbs and put them
in the Bottom of your Still, then put in your Briony root, then mix your
Powders in a China Dish with some Sack, then pour in 6 Quarts of Sack. Close up
your Still, and draw it off.

A Water to take after taking Balsam of Tolu.
TAKE a Pint of Whites of Eggs beaten to a Froth, five Nutmegs bruised, two
Handfuls of dried Spearmint, tw^ H^ndfuls of unset Hysop, add to these a Gallon
of new Milk, and distill it off in a cold Still. You may draw off about 3 Pints,
take 6 Spoonfuls of this Water at a Time with Sugar Candy in it.

To make the true Daffy's Elixir.
TAKE five Ounces of Anniseeds, three Ounces of Fennel-seeds, four Ounces of
Pa^sley-seeds, six Ounces of Spanish Liquorish, five Ounces of Sena, one Ounce
of Rhubarb, three Ounces of Elecampane, seven Ounces of J^llap, 21 Drams of
Saffron, six Ounces of Manna, two Pounds of Raisins, a quarter of an Ounce of
Cochineal, two Gallons of Brandy; Stone the Raisins, Slice the Roots, bruise
the Jallap, put them altogether, keep them close covered 15 Days, then strain
it out.

For any Man or Beast bitten by a mad Dog.
TAKE Sage Leaves and Rue, of each a good Handful, two or three Heads of
Garlic, four Pennyworth of the best Treacle, a Handful of the smallest
Shavings of Tin or Pewter, boil all these in a Quart of Strong Ale in a Pipkin,
or Stone Crock, close stopped and pasted over, and set it to boil in a Kettle
of hot Water, and put it over the Fire for two Hours: It will be apt to fly up,
therefore put a Pye-plate and Bricks upon the Top of the Paste. Give, or rather
pour it into the Party Bitten by five or six Spoonfuls at a Time, according to
the Strength of the Party Bitten, whether it be Man of Dog, or other Creature.
This must be given three Days before the Full or New Moon next happening after
the Party has been Bitten,

Milk Water.
TAKE two good Handfuls of Wormwood, as much Carduus, as much Rue, four
Handfuls of Mint, as much Balm, half as much Angelica, cut these a little, put
them into a cold Still, and put to them three Quarts, of Milk; let your Fire be
quick till your Still drops then a little Slower. You may draw off two Quarts;
the first Quart will keep all the Year; this is extraordinary good in Fevers,
sweetened with Sugar or Syrup of Cloves.

A Powder to cure a Rupture.
IN the latter End of March get half a Pound of Knots of Scurvy grass before
they are quite blown; one Pound of Comfry roots, half a Pound of Fern-roots,
one Ounce of Juniper berries, one Ounce of Dragon's blood, half a Pound of the
Roots of Solomon-seal, a quarter of an Ounce of Nutmegs, a quarter of an Ounce
of Mace; scrape your Roots very clean, and slice them thin, and put every sort
by themselves in a clean Paper Bag; lay them on a clean earthen Dish, and let
them be put in a slow Oven till they are dry enough to powder: You must do the
like to your Scurvy grass, that they may be all finely powdered, and mixed
togther, and kept up cl^se in a Glass with Paper round it. Y^u may in any
Liquor give as much of this Powder to a young Child as will he on a Six pence,
Morning and Night; to one of seven Years, more, to a Man or Woman as much as
will lie on a S^ill^ng: Put the Powder in a Spoon and wet it to mix, and take
it three Weeks.

A very good Remedy for a hollow aching Tooth.
TAKE of Camphire and crude Opium, of each four Gr^ins; m^ke them into three
Pills, with as much Oil of Cloves as is convenient, roll them in Cotton, apply
one of them to the aching Tooth, and repeat if there is Occasion.

A Method to cure the Jaundice, which has been tried with great Success.
IN the first Place, give the Patient ^ Vomit of the Infusion of Cro^us
Me^^llorum, and Ox^mel of Sq^ls, a^^o^d^ng to his Constitution^; th^n take of
Aloes and (...), of e^ch two Scruples, of prepared Steel one (...) one Scruple;
m^ke Pills with Syrup of Horehound, of which give four every Night.

Take of the Roots of Turmerick, half an Ounce, Tops of Centaury the lesser,
Roman-Wormwood and Horehound, of each a Handful, Roots of the greater Nettle
two Ounces; boil them in three Pints of Water, to the Consumption of half; when
it is almost boiled enough, add to it Juniper Berries an Ounce, yellow Sanders
and Goose-dung made into a Nodolous, of each three Drachms, Saffron two
Scruples, Rhenish-wine a Pint; when it is boiled enough strain it, and add to
it compound Water of Snails and Earthworms, of each two Ounces. Take three
Ounces of it after each Time of taking the following Electuary.

T^ke of the Conserve of Sea-wormwood, of the outward Rind of Orange-peels, of
each two Ounces, of Species of Dracurcumae, and prepared Steel, of each three
Drachms, of prepared Earthworms and Rhubarb, of each two Drachms, Flowers of
Sal-Armoniack and Salt of Amber, of each two Scruples, of Saffron powdered one
Scruple, with a sufficient Quantity of Syrup of Horehound; make an Electuary,
of which take the Quantity of a large Nutmeg twice a Day, drinking three Ounces
of the bitter Tincture after it.

For a Rheumatism, or Pain in the Bones.
TAKE a Quart of Milk, boil it and turn it with three Pints of small Beer, then
strain the Posset on seven or nine Globules of Stone horse Dung tied up in a
Cloth, and boil it a quarter of an Hour in the Posset drink; when it is taken
off the Fire, press the Cloth hard, and drink half a Pint of this Morning and
Night hot in Bed. If you please you may add White wine to it. This Medicine is
not good if troubled with the Stone.

To make Treacle-water.
TAKE Juice of green Walnuts four Pounds, and of Rue, Carduus, Marigolds, and
Balm, of each three Pounds, Roots of Butter-bur half a Pound, Roots of Burdock
one Pound, Angelica and Master-wort, of each half a Pound, Leaves of Scordium
six Handfuls, Venice-Treacle, and Mithridate, of each half a Pound, (...)
Canary-wine two Pounds, White wine Vinegar six Pounds, Juice of Lemons six
Pounds; distill this in an Alembick, and on any Illness take four Spoonfuls
going to Bed.

To make Usquebaugh.
TO three Gallons of Brandy put four Ounces of Anniseeds bruised; the next Day
distill it in a cold Still pasted up; then scrape four Ounces of Liquorish, and
pound it in a Mortar, dry it in an Iron Pan, do not burn it, put it in the
Bottle to your distilled Water, and let it stand ten Days: Then take out the
Liquorish, and to every six Quarts of the Spirits put in Cloves, Mace, Nutmegs,
Cinnamon, and Ginger, of each a quarter of an Ounce, Dates stoned and sliced
four Ounces, Raisins stoned half a Pound: Let these infuse ten Days, then
strain it out, and tincture it with Saffron, and bottle it and cork it well.

An approved Medicine for the Dropsy.
TAKE about three Spoonfuls of the best Mustardseed, and about a Handful of
Bay Berries, the like Quantity of Juniper Berries, one Ounce of Horseradish,
and about half a Handful of Sage of Virtue, as much Wormwood Sage, and a half a
Handful of Scurvy Grass, and a quarter of a Handful of stinking Orach, and a
little Sprig of Wormwood, a Sprig of green Broom, and half an Ounce of Gentian
root; scrape, wipe, and cut all these, and put them into a Bottle that will
hold a Gallon; then fill the Bottle with the best strong Beer you can get; then
stop it close, and let it stand three or four Days, and drink every Morning
fasting half a Pint.

A Remedy for Rheumatick Pains.
TAKE of Sena, Hermodacts, Turperhum, and Scammony, of each two Drachms; of
Zedoary, Ginger, and Cu^ebs, of e^ch one Dram; mix them and let them be
powdered; the Dose is from one Dram to two, in any convenient Vehicle. Let
the Parts affected be anointed with this Liniment: Take Palm Oil two Ounces,
Oil of Turpentine one Ounce, Volatile Salt of Hartshorn two Drachms; afterward
lay on a Plaster of Mucilaginibus. Some that have been very much troubled with
Rheumatick Pains, have, by taking of Hartshorn in compound Water of Earth
worms, found mighty Benefit.

An excellent Medicine for the spotted, and all other malignant Fevers.
TAKE of the best Virginia Snake-Weed, and Root of Contrayerva finely powdered,
of each half a Scruple, Goa-stone half a Scruple, Castor and Camphire, of each
five Grains; make them into a Bolus, with a Scruple of Venice-Treacle, and as
much Syrup of Peony as is sufficient; to repeat the Bolus every six Hours,
drinking a Draught of the following Julep after it.

Take of Scorzonera roots two Ounces, Butterbur-roots half an Ounce, of Balm
and Scordium of each an Handful, of Cor^ander-seeds three Drachms, of
Liquorish, Figs, and Raisins, of each an Ounce; let them boil in three Pints of
Conduit water to a Quart, then strain it, and add to it compound Peony Water
three Ounces, Syrup of Raspberries an Ounce and a half. Let the Patient drink
of it plentifully.

A specific Cure for stopping Blood.
TAKE two Ounces of clarified Roch Alum; let it be finely powdered, and melt
it in a Silver Ladle^ then add to it half an Ounce of Dragon's blood in Powder,
and mix them well together; then take it off t^^ Fire, keeping it stirred till
it come to the Consistence of a soft P^ste, fit for making up into Pills; make
your Pills into the Bigness of a large Pea; and as the Paste cools, warm it
again to such a Degree, as the whole Quantity may be made into Pills. This
Medicine is proper in all Cases of violent Bleeding, without Exception. The
ordinary or usual Dose is half a Grain; to be taken once in four Hours, till
the Bleeding stops; taking a Glass of Water or Ptisan after it, and after every
Dose; and another of the same Liquor a quarter of an Hour after. In violent
Cases, give half a Dram for a Dose.

To make Stoughton's Elixir.
PARE off the Rinds of six Sevil Oranges very thin, and put them in a Quart
Bottle, with an Ounce of Gentian scraped and sliced, and six Pennyworth of
Cochineal; put to it a Pint of the best Brandy; shake it together two or three
Times the first Day, and then let it stand to settle two Days, and clear it off
into Bottles for Use. Take a large Tea Spoonful in a Glass of Wine in a
Morning, and at four in the Afternoon: Or you may take it in a Dish of Tea.

An Electuary for a Cough.
TAKE Conserve of red Roses two Ounces, Conserve of Hips one Ounce;
Lucatellus's Balsam half an Ounce; Spices of Hiatragacanth frigid one Dram,
Syrup of Balsam three Drachms; mix all together well; take the Quantity of a
small Bean three Times a Day.

Excellent Lozenges for a Cough.
TAKE a Pound of brown Sugar Candy, and a Pound of Loaf-sugar; beat and searce
them through a fine Sieve. Take an Ounce of the Juice of Liquorish, and
dissolve it in three or four Spoonfuls of Hysop water over a gentle Fire; then
mix your Sugar and Sugar candy with one Dram of O^^is-powder, one Dram of
the Powder of Elicampane, o^ Gum-dragant powdered half a Dram; add one Dram
of the Oil of Anniseeds, and one Grain of Musk^ Mix all these together, and
work it into a Paste; and roll them into Lozenges the Bigness of a Barley-corn,
or something larger.

For a Burn or Scald.
TAKE Laurel Leaves, chop them in Hog's Grease; strain it, and keep it for Use.

To make Necklaces for Children, in cutting Teeth.
TAKE Roots of Henbane, of Orpin and Vervain; scrape 'em clean with a sharp
Knife, cut them in long Be^ds, and string them green; first Henbane, then
Orpin, then Vervain; and so do till it is the Bigness of the Child's Neck. Then
take as much red Wine as you think the Necklace will suck up, and put into it a
Dram os^ed Coral, as much single ^eony root finely powdered. Soak your Beads
in this 28 Hours, and rub the Powder on the Be^ds. Syrup of Lemon^, and Syrup
of single Peony, is excellent to rub the Child's Gums with very frequently.

A Medicine for the Cholick, which not only gives Ease in the most violent
Fits, but also, being often used, prevents their returning.
TAKE of the best Manna, and Oil of sweet Almonds, of each an Ounce and a half;
of Camomile flowers boiled in Posset Drink, an Handful; let the Posset drink be
strained from the Flowers, and mingled very well with the Oil of Almonds and
Manna; let the Patient take it three Days successively, and afterward every
third Day for a Fortnight.

A Receipt for a Consumptive Cough.
TAKE of the Syrup of white and red Poppies of each three Ounces, of Barley,
Cinamon-water, and red Poppy-water, of e^ch two Ounces, of Tincture of Saffron
one Ounce, Liquid Laud ^um forty Drops, and ^s much Spirit of Sulphur as will
make it acid. T^ke three or four Spoonfuls of it every Night going to Bed;
increase or diminish the Dose, according as you find it agrees with you.

To make the Eye Salve.
TAKE of fresh Butter out of the Churn unsalted and unw^shed, two Pounds; set
it in a glass Jar in the Sun to clarify three Months; then pour very cle^r off
about a quarter of a Pound, and put to it an Ounce of Virgin Wax; when it is
melted, put it into Rose water to cool, and beat it in the W^ter half an Hour,
then take it out from the W^ter, and mix it with half an Ounce of rect^fied
Tutty finely p^wder'd, and two Scruples of Mastick beaten and bruited as well
as possible; mix all well together, and put it in Pots for use; take a very
little in you. Fingers when in Bed; shut your Eye, and rub it over the Lid and
Corner of your Eye.

An excellent Medicine for the Pain in the Stomach.
TAKE of Tinctura Sacra (or Tincture of Savory) one Ounce in the Morning,
fasting an Hour, then drink a little warm Ale; do this twice or three Times a
Week till you find Relief.

For a Pain in the Stomach.
TAKE a quarter of a Pound of blue Currants, wipe them cle^n and pound them in
a Mortar with an Ounce of Anniseeds bruised; before you put them to the(...)

A Stay to prevent a sore Throat in the Smallpox.
TAKE Rue, shred it very fine, and give it a bruise; mix with it Honey and
Album Graecum, and work it together; put it over the Fire to heat, sew it up in
a Linen Stay, and apply it to the Throat pretty warm: As it dries repeat it.

To prevent Pitting, and to take off Redness.
TAKE Rue and chop it, boil it in Hogs-lard 'til it is gre^n; strain it out and
keep it for Use. Warm a little in a Spoon, and with a Feather anoint the Face
as they begin to shell off; do it as often as convenient.

An admirable Sear-Cloth.
TAKE a Pound of Frankincense beaten fine, and a Pound of Rosin beaten, a Pound
of black Pitch, and four Ounces of Cummin-seeds powdered, four Pennyworth of
Saffron dried and powdered, four Pennyworth of Mace beaten and sifted, four
Pennyworth of Cloves beaten fine, an Ounce of Liquid Laudanum, and a Pound of
Deer-suet.

Season a new Pipkin: first lay it in cold Water, then boil Water in it, and
set it by 'til it is cold; then dry it and put in your Deer-suet, and let it
melt, shaking it about as you do for melting Butter; then put in your
Frankincense, Rosin, Pitch, Cummin seed, Saffron, Mace, Cloves, and set them
over the Fire, and let them have a boil or two; then take them off and set it
by a little, and then sprinkle in your Liquid Laudanum; let it simmer a little,
take it off, and when it is fit to spread, spread it on the thickest brown
Paper, and use it on Occasion. It Is good for Bruises, Aches, Pains, Burns,
Scalds, and sore Breasts; wipe the Plaster every Day, and put it on again; one
or two Plasters will do.(...)

Currants, make this into a Bolus with a little Syrup of Clove-g^^^flowers.
T^ke every Morning the Quantity of a Walnut, and drink Rose mary Tea instead of
other Tea for your Breakfast; if the Pain returns, repeat it.

For a Stitch in the Side.
TAKE R^sin, pound and sift it, and with Treacle mix it into an Electuary, and
lick it up often in the Day or Night.

To cure an intermitting Ague and Fever, without returning.
TAKE Jesuits B^rk in fine Powder one Ounce, Salt of Steel and J^maica Pepper,
of e^ch a q^arter of an Ounce, Treacle, or Molasses four Ounces, mix these
together, and take the Quantity of a Nutmeg three Times a Day when the Fit is
off, and a Draught of warm Ale or White Wind after it.

Dr. Hall's Plaster for an Ague.
TAKE one Pennyworth of black Soap, one Pennyworth of Gunpowder, ore Ounce of
Tobacco Snuff, and a Glass of Brandy; mix these in a Mortar very well together,
spread Plasters in Leather for the Wrists, and lay them on an Hour before you
expect the Fit.

Excellent for a Burn or Scald.
TAKE of Oil of Olive three Ounces, white Wax two Ounces, Sheeps Suet one Ounce
and half, Mimi^m and Castle soap, of each half an Ounce; Dragon's Blood and
Camphire, of each three Drachms, make them into a Salve by melting them
together; anoint with Oil to take out the Fire, then put the Plaster on; dress
it every Day.

A Recipe for the Cure of the Stone and Gravel, whether in the Kidneys,
Ureters, or Bladder.
TAKE Marsh M^llow Leaves, the Herb Mercury, Sax^^r^ge, and Pell^tory of the
W^ll, of each fre^h gathered, 3 H^nd^uls; cut them ^m^ll with a pair of
Sc^ss^^s, and mix them together, and pound them in a clean Stone M^^t^r, with a
Wooden Pestle, till they come to ^ M^ll^, th^n take them out, spre^d them thin,
in a bro^d gl^z'd E^rt^en Pan, and let them lie, stirring them abo^t on^e a
D^y, till they are thoroughly dry, (put not in the Sun) and then they are
r^^cy, and will keep g^od all the Year long. Of some of these Ingredients s^
dried, make Pe^, as you d^ common Tea, with boiling hot water, as strong as you
like to drink it, but the stronger the better, and drink 3, 4, or more Tea Cups
full of it Bloodwarm, swee^en'd with coarse Sugar, every Morning and Afternoon,
putting into each Cup o^ it, at le^st half a Spoonf^l, or r^t^^ more, of the
expressed Oil of Beech-Nuts, (...) dr^wn (w^^ch in this ^^as has been
experienc^d t^ be vastly preferable to Oil of Almonds, or any other Oil^
stirring them about together, and ^o to conti^^e it for as long ^s you ^ee
Occasion.

This Medicine, how sim^le^ ever it may seem to some, is yet a si^ emoll^^nt
Remedy, is perfectly agreeable to the ^^^m ^^ (a^^ is the B^^ch Oil be st^^^e
^r ra^c^d) and will be found to ^he^the and ^^^ten the Asperity of the Humo^^s
in ge^eral, par^^ ^^rly those that gener^^e the Gravel and Stone, and will
relax and supple the Solids, at the same Time: And it is well known by all
Physicians, that emol^^ent Medicines to l^^ric^te, widen and moisten the Fib^^s
so ^s to relax them (...) their proper Dimensions without forcing the Parts,
whereupon O^structions of the Re^^s ^^d Urinary Passages are ope^ed, and by
their ^^e (...) ^^^p^^ties, (...) is this M^^^c^ne, cleared of all (...) of
^a^dy C^ncretions, Gra^el, and possible Stones, and made to yield better to the
^^pulsion of whatever may plug or stop them up, and likewise takes away, as
this does, ^ll Heat and Difficulty of Urine and Stranguries, and withal, by
(...) soft mucilaginous Nature, cools and heals the Rein, Kidneys and Bladder,
giving present Ease in the Stone Cholick, breaks away Wind, and prevents its
Return, as it always keeps the Bowels laxative.

A late modern College Physician of our own, a Man of Learning and Probity, and
who for his great Ingenuity and Sincerity, was much esteemed and respected by
every Member of that venerable Body, says, in his Writings about the Stone and
Gravel, of one of the Ingredients in this Medicine, that some People have
extolled it prodigiously for its Lithontriptick or Stone breaking Qualities;
and in Favor of such an Opinion, say, that a certain Person, who had a very
large Stone in his Bladder, which was taken from him by Cutting, made a Cup of
it, which he usually drank out of; but as he once had some Beer put into it,
which had that Ingredient boiled in it, the Cup fell to Pieces in his Hands,
which sudden Dissolution of it was attributed to the said Ingredient. But
whether this Relation be real or feigned, or all or either of the Ingredients
capable of making frangible or mouldring into Fragments, the Stone bred in
human Bodies, (as are the Virtues ascribed to them, and to one of them more
particularly) or whether it be possible for any Thing in Nature to do it, I
shall not undertake to determine; but this is certain, that all the Ingredients
that enter the Composition of this Medicine are particularly noted and
prescribed, though in different Ways, as Occasions offer, by all ancient and
modern Physicians, both in their Writings and Practice, in all Cases of Gravel,
Stone, S^rangury, Stoppage of Urine, etc. with great Success.

Such as know not where to get the TRUE NUT OIL, may have the right Sort, and
very good, at Mrs Goddard's, at the Golden-Ball in Burleigh-street, near
Exeter-Exchange, in the Strand, at One Shilling and Six Pence the Vial.

An excellent Vomit.
TAKE a quarter of a Pound of clear Alum, beaten and sifted as fine as Flour,
divide it into three Parts, the first the biggest; put a quarter of a Pint of
Water in a Saucepan, and put in your biggest Paper of Alum, and let it simmer
over the Fire, but not boil; take it off, cool it to Blood-warm; drink it off,
but take nothing after it; sit still 'til it has worked once, keep very warm,
nor take nothing in the working; but you may walk about after it has worked
once; take it three Mornings together, or more, if there be Occasion, 'til the
Stomach is clear. There is no Case where a Vomit is proper, but this is good.

A fine Purge.
TAKE an Ounce of Liquorish, scrape it and slice it thin, and a Spoonful of
Coriand^r-seeds bruised, put these into a Pint of Water and boil it a little;
then strain this Water into an Ounce of Sena, let it stand six Hours; strain it
from the Sena, and drink it fasting.

A purging Diet-drink in the Spring.
TAKE 6 Gallons of Ale, 3 Ounces of Rhub^rh, 12 Ounces of Sena, 12 Ounces of
Mader-roots, 12 Ounces of Dock roots, 12 Handfuls of Scabtous, 12 Handfuls of
Agrimony, 3 Ounces of Anniseed; slice and cut these, put them in a bag, and let
it work in the Ale: Drink of it 3 or 4 Times a Day.

For a sore Mouth in Children.
TAKE half a Pint of Verjuice, strain into it 4 Spoonfuls of the Juice of Sage,
boil this with fine Sugar to a Syrup, and w^t^ a Feather anoint the Mouth
often, touch it ^^t with a Cloth, or rub it: The Child may lick it down, it
will not hurt it.

To create a good Appetite, and strengthen the Stomach.
TAKE of the Stomatick p^ll with Gums, Extractum Rudij, of each a Dram, Rasin
of Jarap half a Scruple, Tartar vitriolated one Scruple, Oil of Anniseeds four
Drops; mix with Syrup of Violets, and m^ke it into Pills, of which take 4 or 5
over Nig^t; they are of excellent Use in the Megr^ms and Vertigo, by reason
they carry the Humor off from the Stomach, which sumes up into the Head.

A very good Medicine for the Bloody Flux.
TAKE of the best Rhubarb finely powdered half an Ounce, of red Sanders two
Drachms, ^^^mon one Dram, Crocas Martis Astringent 3 Drachms, of Lucatellus's
Balsam what suffices; make a Mass of Pills, of which take 3 every Night and
Morning for a Fortnight. This has cured some that have lost a v^st Quantity of
Blood, after other Remedies had proved ineffectual.

For red or sore Eyes.
TAKE a quarter of an Ounce of white Copperas, and an Ounce of Bole-Armon^ack,
beat them to a fine Powder, and beat an Ounce of Camphire grossly in an Iron
Mortar; set two Quarts of Spring Water on the Fire, when it boils take it off,
and let it stand 'til it is Lukewarm, then put in your Powders, stirring 'til
cold: Drop the clear in the Eye.

For a Pain in the Stomach, or Heaviness of Heart.
TAKE a Pint of Rose Water, put to it some double-refin'd Sugar, and a
Pennyworth of Saffron tied up in a Piece of Lawn; let it stand 2 or 3 Days, and
then at any Time take 3 Spoonfuls.

For Fits from Wind or Cold.
TAKE three Drops of Oil of Amber in some burnt Wine, or Mace Ale. If it is
given in black Cherrywater, it is good to forward Labor in Childbed.

To make Elixir Proprietatis.
TAKE of Mirth four Drachms, Aloes four Drachms, Saffron four Drachms, infuse
them in a Pint of the best Brandy; first put in the Saffron, and let it stand
12 Hours, then the Mirth and Aloes; set it by the Fire 3 or 4 Days, shaking it
very often; then strain it off. Take 60 or 70 Drops, more or less, in a little
White wine, in a Morning fasting, for a Week or 10 Days together; it is good for
any Illness in the Stomach, or in the Bowels. It Is the best of Physic for
Children.

To cure a Pimpled Face.
TAKE an Ounce of live Brimstone, as much Roch-Allum, as much common Salt;
white Sugar candy two Drachms, Sperma-Cete two Drachms; pound and sife all
these into a fine Powder, and put it into a Quart Bottle; then put to it half a
Pint of Brandy, 3 Ounces of wh^te Lilly-water, and three Ounces of Spring
water; shake all these well together, and keep it for Use. When you use it,
shake the Bottle and bath the Face well, and when you go to Bed dip Rags in it,
and lay it all over the Face, in 10 or 12 Days it will be perfectly cured.

A Purge for Hoarseness, or any Illness on the Lungs.
TAKE four Ounces of the Roots of Sorrel, of Hysop and Maiden hair, of each
half a Handful; Raisins a quarter of a Pound stoned, Sena half an Ounce,
Barley-water two Quarts; put all these in a Jug, and infuse 'em in a Kettle of
Water 2 Hours, strain it out and take a Quarter of a Pint Morning and Night.

An Electuary for a Cold, or windy Stomach.
TAKE Gum-Ganicum one Ounce, Cu^ebs a quarter of an Ounce, Cardamums a quarter
of an Ounce, beat and sift all these, and mix it with Syrrup of Gilliflowers
into an Electuary. Take Night and Morning the Quantity of a Nutmeg; drink a
little warm Ale after it.

An Electuary for a Pain in the Stomach.
TAKE Conserve of Wood Sorrel and Mithridate an equal Quantity, mix it well
together, and take Night and Morning the Quantity of a Nutmeg; so do for
fifteen Days together.

To make Ink.
GET one Pound of the best Galls, half a Pound of Copperas, a quarter of a
Pound of Gum-arabick, a quarter of a Pound of white Sugar Candy; bruise the
Galls, and beat your other Ingredients fine, and infuse them all in 3 Quarts of
White Wind or Rainwater, and let them stand hot by the Fire 3 or 4 Days; then
put all into a new Pipkin, set it on a slow Fire, so as not to boil; keep it
frequently stirring, and let it stand 5 or 6 Hours 'til one quarter is
consumed, and when cold strain it through a clean coarse Piece of Linen; bottle
it and keep it for Use.

To wash Gloves.
TAKE the Yolk of an Egg and beat it, and egg the Gloves all over, and lay them
on a Table, and with a hard Brush and Water rub them clean; then rinse them,
and scrape white Lead in Water pretty thick, and dip the Gloves in; let them
dry, and as they begin to dry stretch and rub them 'til they be limber, dry,
and smooth; th^n gum them with Gum d^agant steeped in sweet Water, and let 'em
dry on a ma^ble Stone. If you color 'em, scrape some of the following Colors
amongst the white Lead: The dark Color is Umber; the brick Color red Lead;
for a Jessamy yellow Oaker; for Copper-colour red Oaker; for Lemon-colour
Turmerick.

To make Paste for Hands.
BLANCH and beat a Pound of bitter Almonds, and in the beating put in two
Handfuls of stoned Raisins, and beat them together 'til they are very fine;
then take 3 or 4 Spounfuls of Sack or Brandy, as much Ox Gall, 3 or 4 Spoonfuls
of brown Sugar, the Yolks of 3 Eggs, beat it well together; set it over the
Fire and give it 2 or 3 boils; when it is almost cold mix it with the Almonds,
put it in Gallipots; the next Day cover it close, and keep it cool, and it will
be good five or six Months.

MEDICINES and SALVES.
To cure the Rickets.
OPEN a Vein in both Ears between the Junctures, mix a little Aqua-vitae with
the Blood, and with it anoint the Breast, Sides, and Neck; then take three
Ounces of the green Ointment, and warm a little of it in a Spoon and anoint the
Wrists and Ancles as hot as it may be endured; do this for nine Nights just
before Bed time; shift not the Shirt all the Time. If the Veins do not appear,
rub it with a little Lint dipped in Aqua vitae, or else cause the Child to cry,
and that will make the Veins more visible and bleed the better.

To make the Drink.
Take a Quart of Spring water, of Liver wort 1 Handful, Liquorish, Anniseeds,
Coriander-seeds, sweet Fennelseeds, and Hartshorn, of each an equal Quantity;
forty Raisins of the Sun stoned, fourteen Figs; boil all these together 'til
one half is consumed; then put in 3 Spoonful of Honey, and b^^l it a little
more; let it stand 'til it is cold and strain it out, and put in two Spoonfuls
of Syrup of Gilliflowers, and bottle it up. Take 2 or 3 Spoonfuls Morning and
Evening.

The Green Ointment.
TAKE Rue, Camomile, Hysop, Hog's Fennel, red Fennel, Rosemary, Bays, Lady's
Mantle, Paul's Betony, Water Betony, Balm, Nepp, Valerian, Mallows,
Nightshade, Plantane, Comfry, Adder's-Tongue, Roman Wormwood, common Wormwood,
Vervain, Clary, Agrimony, red Sage, Ground Ivy, Featherfew, Self-heal, Melilot,
Bramble-tops, Marsh mallows, Sanicle, Rib wort, May-weed, of each of these 2
large Handfuls; pick and chop them, then take 4 Pounds of Butter unwashed, and
3 Pounds of Boar's-grease; melt them together, and put in the Herbs, and let it
boil 2 Hours; then strain it out, let it stand a little, and put it in Pots for
Use.

To make Charity-Oil.
TAKE Poplar Buds in the Beginning of May one Handful, and put them into a Pint
and half of Oil, and half a Pint of Aqua-vitae, and cover them close, and let
them stand till the following Herbs are in season; then add to your Buds
Betony, Charity, Sanicle, the Tops of St. John's wort, when blown; Adder's
Tongue, Comtry, Self heal, Balm, Southern-wood, Pennyroyal, Flowers of red Sage,
Parsley, Clown's All heal, Bals^m, Knot grass, Sweet marjoram, Lavender Cotton,
red Rose buds, Camomile, Lavender-tops when blown, of each of these Herbs a
small H^ndful; but of Poplar-buds, red Rosebud^, and Adder's-Tongue, double the
Quantity; gather the Herbs in dry Weather, and wipe them clean with a Clo^h;
shred them pretty grossly before you put them in, so let them steep in a Stone
Pot; when all is in, cover it very close; then set them on the Fire in a
Skillet, let them simmer with a slow Fire 5 or 6 Hours, then strain it out.
This Oil is good for any green Wound, Bruise, Burn, or Ach, and for Bruises
inwa^d, taking a Spoonful in a little warm Sack; and for any outward Swelling
warm it, and anoint the Part affected.

An excellent Plaster for any Pain occasioned by a Cold or Bruise.
TAKE of the Plaster of red Lead and Oxycroceum, of each equal Parts; of the
best Theban Opium one Scruple, spread it on Le^ther, and lay it to the Part
that aches, after you have well anointed with this Ointment: Take of Ointment
of Marshmallows one Ounce, Oil of Exeter half an Ounce, Oil of Spike and
Spirit of Hartshorn, of each a Dram.

For a Dropsy.
TAKE of Horseradish-roots sliced thin, and sweet Fennel seeds bruised, of each
two Ounces, Smallage and Fennel roots sliced, of each an Ounce, of the Tops of
Thyme, Winter-savory, Sweet marjoram, Water cresses, and Nettles, of each a
Handful; bruise the Herbs, and boil them in three Pints of Sack, and three of
Water, to the Consumption of half; let it stand close covered for three Hours,
then strain it, and drink a Draught of it twice in a Day, sweetened with Syrup
of Fennel, fasting two Hours after it.

For the Gripes.
TAKE a Glass of Sack warmed, and dissolve in it as much Venice-Treacle, or
Diascordium as a Hazel-Nut, drink it off going to Bed; cover warm.

To stay a Looseness.
TAKE a very good Nutmeg, and prick it full of Holes, and toast it on the Point
of a Knife; then boil it in Milk till much be consumed; then eat the Milk with
the Nutmeg powdered in it; in a few Times it will ^top.

For the Strangury.
TAKE half a Pint of Plantane water, one Ounce of white Sugar candy, finely
powdered, two Spoonfuls of Sallad Oil, and the Juice of a Lemon; beat all these
together very well, and drink it off.

For a Drought in a Fever.
TAKE of Sal-prunella one Ounce, and dissolve it in Spring water, and put as
much Sugar to it as will sweeten it; simmer it over the Fire till it is a Syrup,
and put some into Posser-drink, and take it two or three Times a Day, or when
very thirsty.

A Plaster for an Ague.
TAKE right Venice Turpentine, and mix with it the Powder of white
Hellebore-roots, till it is stiff enough to spread on Leather. It must be laid
all over the Wrist, and over the Ball of the Thumb six Hours before the Fit
comes.

For a Chin-Cough.
TAKE a Spoonful of Wood-lice and bruise 'em, and mix them with Breast Milk,
and take them three or four Mornings, according as you find Benefit. It will
cure; but some must take it longer than others.

An admirable Tincture for green Wounds.
BALSAM of Peru one Ounce, Storax Calamita two Ounces, Be^jamin three Ounces,
Aloes Socatrina, Myrrh, Electuary pure, and Frankincense, of each half an
Ounce, Angelica-roots and Flowers of St. J^hn's w^^t, of each half an Ounce,
Spirit of Wine one Pint; beat the Drugs, scrape and sl^ce the Roots, and put it
into a Bottle, stop it well, and let it stand in the Sun July, August, and
September, and then steam it through a fine Linen Cloth; put it in a Bottle,
stop it close, and keep it for Use. Apply it to a green Wound, dip a Feather in
it and anoint the Wound; then dip Lint in it, and put on it, and bind it up
with a Cloth; but let no Plaster touch it; twice a Day wet the Lint with a
Feather, but not take it off till it is well.

To take off Blackness by a Fall.
RUB it well with a cold Tallow-Candle as soon as it is bruised, and this will
take off the Blackness.

To break a Boil.
TAKE the Yolk of a new-laid Egg, some Honey and Wheat-flour, and mix it well
together, and spread it on a Rag, and lay it on cold.

A Poultice for a hard Swelling.
BOIL the finest Wheat flour in Cream till it is pretty thick, then take it off
and put in Mallows chopped, stir it, and apply it as hot as can be endured; dress
it twice a Day, and make fresh every Time.

To stay Vomiting.
TAKE Ash leaves, and boil them in Vinegar and Water, and apply them hot to the
Stomach; do this often.

A Poultice for a sore Breast, Leg, or Arm.
BOIL Wheat-flour in strong Ale very well, and pretty thick, then take it off
and scrape in some Boar's-Grease; let it not boil after the Grease is in, stir
it well, and apply it hot.

A Salve for a Blast, Burn, or Scald.
TAKE May Butter fresh out of the Churn, neither washed nor salted, and put
into it a good Quantity of the green inner Rind of Elder, and put it in a
Pipkin, and set that in a Pot of boiling Water; let it infuse a Day or two,
then strain it out, and keep it in a Pot for U.e.

An excellent Remedy for Agues, which has been often tried with very great
Success.
TAKE of black Soap, Gunpowder, stinking Tobacco, and Brandy, of each an equal
Quantity, mix them well together, and three Hours before the Fit comes apply it
to the Patient's Wrist; let this be kept on for a Fortnight.

To cure the Biting of a mad Dog.
TAKE two Quarts of strong Ale, two Pennyworth of Treacle, two Garlic heads, a
Handful of C^nqueso^l, Sage, and Rue: Boil them altogether to a Quart; strain
it, and give the Patient three or four Spoonfuls twice a Day: Take Dittany,
Agrimony, and rusty Bacon, beaten well together, and apply to the Sore to keep
it from festering.

For spitting Blood.
TAKE of Cinnaser of Antimony one Ounce, and mix it with two Ounces of Conserve
of red Roses, and take as much as a Nutmeg Night and Morning.

To know if a Child has Worms or not.
TAKE a Piece of white Leather, and peck it full of Holes with your Knife, and
rub it with Wormwood, and spread Honey on it, and strew the Powder of Al^es
Socratina on it; lay it on the Child's Navel when he goes to Bed, and if he has
Worms, the Plaster will stick fast, and if he have not, it will fall.

To stop Vomiting.
TAKE half a Pint of Mint-water, an Ounce of Syrup of Viole^^, a quarter of an
Ounce of Mithr^date, and half an Ounce of Syrup of Roses; mix all these well
together, and let the Party take two Spoonfuls first, and then one Spoonful
after every Vomiting till it is stayed.

To cure the Toothache.
LET the P^rty that is troubled with the Toothache he on the contrary Side, and
drop three Drops of the Ju^ce of Rue into the Ear on that Side the Tooth
acheth, and let it remain an Hour or two and it will remove the Pain. If a
Needle is run thorough a Wood-loose, and immediately touch the aching Tooth
with that Needle, it will cease to ach.

A rare Mouth-Water.
TAKE Rosemary, Rue, Celandine, Plantane, Bramble leaves, Woodbine leaves, and
Sage, of each an Handful; beat them and steep them in a Quart of the best
White Wind Vinegar two Days and Nights, then press it well and strain it, and
put to it 6 Ounces of Alum, and as much Honey, and boil them a little together
softly till the Alum is consumed; when it is cold keep it for Use.

To make Lozenges for the Heart-burn.
TAKE of white Sugar Candy one Pound, Chalk three Ounces, Bole-armoniac five
Scruples, Crab's-eyes one Ounce, red Coral four Scruples, Nutmegs one Scruple,
Pearl two Scruples; let all these be beaten and sitted, and make all into a
Paste with a little Springwater, roll it out and cut your Lozenges out with a
Thimble, lay them to Dry. Eat four or five at a Time as often as you please.

To make Syrup of Garlic.
TAKE two Heads of Garlic, peel it clean and boil it in a Pint of Water a
pretty while, then put away that Water and put a Pint more to your Garlic, and
boil it till the Garlic is tender; then straining it off, add a Pound of
double refined Sugar to it, and boil it in Silver or Tin till it is a thick
Syrup; scum it well, and keep it for Use; and take a Spoonful in a Morning
lasting, another last at Night, for a short Breath.

To prevent After-Pains.
TAKE nine single Piony seeds powdered, the same Quantity of Powder of Borax,
and a little Nutmeg; mix all these with a little white Anniseed water in a
Spoon, and give it the Woman; and a little Anniseed-water after it as soon as
possible after she is laid in Bed.

To cure the Toothache.
TAKE half an Ounce of Conserve of Rosemary over Night, and half a Dram of
Extract of Rudium in the Morning; do this three Times together; keep warm.

To cure the Jaundice.
TAKE a live T^^ch, slit it down the Belly; take out the Guts, and clap^^ T^^ch
to the Stomach as fast as possible, and it will c^re immediately.

To stop bleeding at Mouth, Nose, or Ears.
IN the Mouth of Man take a clean Linen Cloth, and wet it in the Sp^^^ (...)
D^y^, drying it every D^y in the Wind; lay up that Cloth, and when you have
Need, hold it to the Place where the Blood runs, and it will stop.

An excellent Medicine for Shortness of Breath.
TAKE half an Ounce of Flour of Brimstone, a quarter of an Ounce of beaten
Ginger, and 3 quarters of an Ounce of beaten Sena, and mix all together in 4
Ounces of Honey; take the Bigness of a Nutmeg Night and Morning for 5 Days
together; then once a Week for some Time; then once a Fortnight.

To cure a pimpled Face, and sweeten the Blood.
TAKE Sena one Ounce, put it in a small Stean Pot, and pour a Quart or more of
boiling Water on it; then put as many Prunes as you can get in; cover it with
Paper, and set it in the Oven with Household bread, and take of this every Day,
one, two, or three, or more of the Prunes and Liquor, according as it operates.
Continue this always, or at least half a Year.

To cure the Dropsy, Rheumatism, Scurvy, and Cough of the Lungs.
TAKE English Otris-roots, Squills, and Elecampane-roots, each 1 Ounce; Hysop
and Horehound leaves, each one Handful, the inner Rind of green ^lder and dwarf
Elder, of each one Handful, Sena one Ounce and half, Agarick two Drachms,
Ginger one Dram; cut the Roots thin and bruise the Leaves, and put them into
two Quarts of the best Lisbon Wine; let these boil an Hour and half on a gentle
Fire in an earthen M^g very close st^pp'd with a Cork, and ti^d down with a
bladder that no Air come to it, and so set it in a large Pot of boiling Water;
set it so that no Water get into the Mug, which must hold three Quarts, that
all the Ingredients may have room to go in; when it is almost cold, strain it
out very hard; you must scrape the Elder downwards. Take this for a Week
together, if you can, and then miss a Day; and if that does not do, go on with
your other Bottle of the same; take it in a Morning fasting, ten Spoonfuls at a
Time, without any Posset Drink, 'twill both vomit and purge you; it is an
unpleasant Taste, therefore take a Lump of Sugar after it; when it is quite
cold, after it is strained off, let it stand in a Flaggon to settle a Night and
a Day; then bottle it up clear and fine for your Use. It Is an admirable
Medicine.

To stop Bleeding.
TAKE a Pint of Plantane-water, put to it 2 Ounces of Ising-glass, and let it
stand 24 Hours to dissolve; pour it from the Dregs, and put in a Pint of good
red Port-wine, and add to it 3 or 4 Sticks of Cinnamon, and 2 Ounces of
double-refin'd Sugar; give it a boil or two, and pour it off; let the Party
take 2 or 3 Spoonfuls 2 or 3 Times a Day.

To cure a Cancer.
TAKE a Dram of the Powder of Crabs-claws finely searced, and made into Paste
with Damask Rose Water, and dried in Pellets of Lozenges; powder the Lozenges
as you use them, and drink the Powder in Whey every Morning fasting, If there
be a Sore, and it is raw, anoint it with a Salve made of Dock roots and fresh
Butter, make a Seaton or Issue in the Neck; keep a low Diet, keep from any
thing that is salt, sour, or strong.

To cure the Joint Evil.
TAKE good store of Elder-leaves, and distill them in a cold Still; let the
Person drink every Morning and Evening half a Pint of this Water, and wash the
Sores with it Morning and Evening, first warming it a little, and lay fresh
Elder-leaves on the Sores, and in a little Time you will find they will dry up;
but be sure to follow it exactly, it has cured when all other Remed^es have
failed.

For the Green Sickness.
TAKE Centaury the less, and Wormwood and Rosemary-flowers, of each one
Handful; Gentian root one Dram, Coriander seeds two Drachms; boil these in a
Quart of Water, sweeten it with Syrup of Steel, and take four or five Spoonfuls
in the Morning, and as much in the Afternoon.

To take off Freckles.
TAKE Bean-flower Water, or Elder-flower Water, or May Dew gathered from Corn,
of either the Quantity of 4 Spoonfuls, and add to it 1 Spoonful of Oil of
Tartar very new drawn; mix it well together, and often wash the Face with it:
Let it dry on.

To make Pomatum.
TAKE almost a Dram of white Wax, 2 Drachms of Sperma-Cete, one Ounce of Oil
of bitter Almonds, slice your Wax very thin, and put it in a Gallipot, and put
the Pot in a Skillet of boiling Water; when the Wax is melted, put in your
Sperma-Cete, and just stir it together; then put in the Oil of Almonds; after
that take it off the Fire, and out of the Skillet, and stir it 'til c^ld with a
Bone Knife; then beat it up in Rose Water 'til it is white; keep it in Water,
and change the Water once a Day.

A Salve for a Sprain.
TAKE a quarter of a Pound of Virgin's Wax, a quarter of a Pound of
Frankincense, half a Pound of Burgamy Pitch, melt them well together, stirring
them all the while 'til they are melted, then give them a good boil, and strain
them into Water; work it well into Rolls, and keep it for Use; the more it is
worked the better it is. Spread it on Leather.

A rare green Oil for Aches and Bruises.
TAKE a Pottle of O^l of Olives, and put it into a Stone Pot of a Gallon, with
a narrow Mouth; then take Southernwood, Wormwood, Sage, and Camomile, of each 4
Handfuls, a quarter of a Peek of red Rose-buds, the White cut from them; shred
them together grossly, and put them into the Oil, and once a Day for 9 or 10
Days stir them well, and when the Lavender spike is ripe, put 4 Handfuls of the
Tops in, and let it stand 3 or 4 Days longer, and covered very close; then boil
them an Hour upon a slow Fire, stirring it often; then put to it a quarter of a
Pint of the strongest Aqua-vitae, and let it boil an Hour more; then strain it
through a coarse Cloth, and let it stand 'til it is cold, and keep it in Glasses
for Use; warm a little in a Spoon or Saucer, and bath the Part affected.

To take out Spots of the Smallpox.
TAKE half an Ounce of Oil of Tartar, and as much Oil of bitter Almonds, mix it
together, and with a fine Rag daub it often on the Face and Hands before the
Air has penetrated into the Skin or Flesh.

For the Cholick.
TAKE a Dram and half of Dr. Holland's Powder, and mix it in a little Sack,
and take it and drink a Glass of Sack after it. It gives present Ease.

An approved Remedy against spitting of Blood.
TAKE of the Tops of stinging Nettles, Plantane-leaves, of each a like
Quantity; bruise them and strain the Juice out, and keep it close stopped in a
Bottle, in which t^ke 3 or 4 Spoonfuls every Morning and Evening, sweetened
with Sugar of Roses. The Juice of Comfry-roots drank with Wine is also very
good; let the Patient be blooded at first, and sometimes gently purged. But if
there happens to be any inward Soreness, occasioned by Straining, this
Electuary will be very convenient, viz. Take an Ounce of Lucatellus's Balsam,
of Conserve of Roses 2 Ounces, 12 Drops of Spirit of Sulphur, to be made into a
soft Electuary with Syrup of white Poppies; the Dose is the Quantity of a
Nutmeg every Morning and Evening.

For the Scurvy.
TAKE a Pound of Guiacum-bark, and half a Pound of Saffafras, and a quarter of
a Pound of Liquorish; boil all these in 3 Quarts of Water 'til it comes to 3
Pints, and when it is cold, put it in a Vessel with 2 Gallons of Ale; in 3 or 4
Days it is fit to drink; and drink no other Drink for 6 or 12 Months, according
to the Violence of the Distemper. It will certainly cure.

For Corns on the Feet.
TAKE the Yeast of Beer (not of Ale) and spread it on a Linen Rag, and apply it
to the Part affected ^ renew it once a Day for 3 or 4 Weeks. It will cure.

For Chillblains.
ROAST a Turnip soft, beat it to mash, and ap^ it as hot as can be endured to
the Part affected; ^ it lie on 2 or 3 Days, and repeat it 2 or 3 Times.

To stop Bleeding inwardly.
TAKE two Drachms of Henbane-seed, and the (...) of white Poppy-seed, beat them
up with Con^^^ of Roses, and give the Quantity of a Nutmeg at a Time or take 12
Handfuls of Plantane-leaves, and 6 Ounces (...) fresh Comfry-roots; beat these
and strain out the J^^^ and add to it some fine Sugar, and drink it off.

To kill a Tetter.
TAKE Flour of Brimstone, Ginger, and burnt Alum, a like Qu^ntity; mix it with
fresh Butter unsalted, anoint as hot as can be endured at Bed time; in the
Morning wash it off with Cel^ndine water heated; while this is continued, the
Parry most sometimes take Cordials to keep the Humor from going inward.

An Ointment for a Blast.
TAKE Velvet-leaves and wipe them clean, and chop 'em small, and put 'em to
unsalted Butter out of the Churn, and boil 'em gently 'til the Goodness is out
of the Leaves, then strain it into a Gallipot, and keep it for Use. Lay
Velvet-leaves over the Part after it is anointed.

A Poultice to ripen Tumors.
TAKE half a Pound of Figs, two Ounces of white Lilly-roots, two Ounces of Bean
Flour or Meal; boil these in Water 'til it comes to a Poultice; spread it thick
on a Cloth, apply it warm, and shift it as often as it grows dry.

For the Teeth.
TAKE a Pint of Spring Water, put to ^t six Spoonfuls of the best Brandy, wash
the Mouth often with it, and in a Morning roll a Bit of Alum a little while in
the Mouth.

For a Draught in a Fever.
MAKE Barley water, sweeten it with Syrup of Violets, and tincture it with
Spirit of Vitriol; let 'em drink sometimes of this; put Sal prunella in Beer or
Posset Drink, and sometimes drink of that; and if they are sick or faint, give
a Spoonful of Cordial in a Dish of Tea.

A Powder that has restored Sight when almost lost.
TAKE of Betony, Celandine, Saxifrage, Eyebright, Pennyroyal and Levisticum,
of each one Handful; of Anniseeds and Cinnamon of each half an Ounce; take also
of Grains of Paradise, Ginger, Hysop, Parsley, Origany, Osier of the Mountain,
of each one Dram, Galengal and Sugar, of each one Ounce: Make all into a fine
Powder, and eat of it every Day with your Meat such a Quantity as you used to
eat of Salt, and instead of Salt, Osier, you must have that at the Physic
Garden.

For a Cough settled on the Stomach.
TAKE half a Pound of Figs sliced, Raisins of the Sun stoned as many, and a
Stick of Liquorish scraped and sliced; ^^^w Anniseeds and some Hysop washed
clean: Put all these in a Quart of Spring Water; boil it till it comes to a
Pint; then strain it, and sweeten it with white Sugar Candy. Take 2 or 3
Spoonfuls Morning and Night, and when the Cough troubles you.

An excellent Method to cure the Dropsy.
TAKE a good Quantity of Black Snails, stamp them well with Bay Salt, and lay
to the Hollow of the Feet, putting ^resh twice a Day. Take likewise a Handful
of Spearmint and Wormwood, bruise them, and put them in a Quart of Cream, which
boil till it comes to an Oil, then strain and anoint those Parts which are
swelled. Take of the Tops of green Broom, which after you have dried in an
Oven, burn upon a clean Hearth to Ashes, which mingle very well with a Quart of
White Wind, set it stand all Night to settle, and in a Morning drink half a
Pint of the clearest, at four in the Afternoon, and at Night going to Bed do
the same. Continue laying the Poultice to your Feet, and drinking the
White Wind for three Weeks together; this Method has been often used with
Success.

An experienced Eye-Water to strengthen the Sight, and prevent Cataracts.
TAKE of Eyebright-tops two Handfuls, of Celandine, Vervain, Betony, Dill,
Ground Pine, Clary, Avens, and Pimpernel, of each an Handful, Rosemary-Flowers
an Handful, of Capon's Gall, and Alloes bruised, of each half an Ounce, of long
Pepper one Dram; infuse Twenty-four Hours in two Quarts of White Wind, then
draw it off in a Glass Still; drop the Water with a Feather into the Eye often.

For Stuffing in the Lungs.
TAKE white Sugar candy powdered and sifted two Ounces, China-roots powdered
and sifted 1 Ounce; Flower of Brimstone one Ounce. Mix these with Conserve of
Roses, or the Pap of an Apple; and take the Bigness of a Walnut in the Morning,
fasting an Hour after it; and the last at Night, an Hour after you have Eaten
or Drank.

To give Ease in a violent Fit of the Stone.
TAKE a Quart of Milk, and two Handfuls of dried Sage, a Pennyworth of
Hempseed, one Ounce of white Sugar candy: Boil all these together a quarter of
an Hour, and then put in half a Pint of Rhenish-wine. When the Curd is taken
off, with the Ingredients, put it in a Bag, and apply it to the grieved Part;
and of the Liquor drink a good Glass full. Let both be as Hot as can be
endured. If there is not Ease the first Time, warm it again, and use it: It
seldom fails.

To procure easy Labor.
TAKE half a Pound of Figs, half a Pound of Raisins of the Sun stoned, four
Ounces of Liquorish scraped and sliced; one Spoonful of Anniseeds bruised; boil
all these in 2 Quarts of Spring Water 'til one Pint is wasted; then strain it
out, and drink a quarter of a Pint of it Morning and Evening 6 Weeks before the
Time.

To procure speedy Delivery when the Throws are gone.
TAKE half a Dram of Borax powdered, and mixed with a Glass of White Wind,
some Sugar, and a little Cinnamon water; if it does no good the first Time, try
it again 2 Hours after, so likewise the third Time.

To bring the Afterbirth.
GIVE thirty or thirty five Drops of Oil of Juniper in a good Glass of Sack.

To prevent After Pains.
TAKE half an Ounce of large Nutmegs and toast them before the Fire, and one
Ounce of the best Cinnamon, and beat them together; then mix it with the Whites
of two Eggs, beating it together in a Portinger, and take every Morning in Bed
as much as will ^ie on the Pint of a Knife, and so at Night; and drink after it
the following Caudle.

Take a quarter of a Pint of Alicant Wine or Tent, a quarter of a Pint of red
Rose Water, and a quarter of a Pint of Pl^ntane water; mingle all three
together, and beat three new laid Eggs, Yolks and Whites, and make a Caudle of
them; put into it two Ounces of double refined Sugar, a quarter of an Ounce of
Cinnamon; you must boil the Cinnamon in the Wine and Water before the Eggs are
in; and after all is mixed, put to it half a Dram of the Powder of
Knot-grass; take of this six Spoonfuls Morning and Evening after the Electuary.

To stop Floodings.
TAKE the White of an Egg, and beat it well with four or five Spoonfuls of red
Rose Water, and Drink it off Morning and Night, nine Mornings together; it has
cured when all other Things have failed.

Let the Party often take Ising-glass boiled, or dissolved in Warm New milk, a
Pint at a Time.

A Plaster for a Weakness in the Back.
TAKE Plantane, Comfry, Knot-grass, Shepherd's-Purse, of each one Handful;
Stamp them small, and boil them in a Pound of Oil of Roses, and a little
Vinegar; when it is well boiled Strain it, and set it on the Fire again, and put
into it four Ounces of Wax, one Ounce of Chalk, Bole-Armoniac one Ounce, and
Terrasigillata one Ounce; boil all well, keeping it still stirring, then cool
it, and make it into Rolls, and keep it for Use; spread it on Leather when you
lay it to the Back.

A Drink for the same.
Take four Roots of Comfry, and of Knot-grass and Clary one Handful, a Sprig of
Rosemary, a little Galengal, a good Quantity of Cinnamon and Nutmeg sliced, the
Pith of the Chine of an Ox. Stamp and boil all these in a Quart of Muscadine,
then strain it, and put in six Yolks of Eggs; sweeten the Caudle to your Taste
with double-refin'd Sugar, and Drink a good Draught Morning and Evening. Take
of Crocus Martis and Conserve of red Roses mixed together three or four Times a
Day.

For a Flux.
TAKE a Pint of New-milk, and dissolve in it half a quarter of a Pound of
Loaf-Sugar, as much Mithridate as the bigness of a Walnut; give this for a
Clyster moderately warm; repeat it once or twice if their be Occasion.

For the falling down of the Fundament.
TAKE Ginger and slice it, and put it in a little Pan, heat it by clear well
kindled Coals, and put it in a Close stool. Let the Party fit over it, and
receive the Fume; cast in the Ginger by little and little, and keep warm.

To increase Milk in Nurses.
MAKE Gruel with Lentils, and let the Party Drink freely of it; or else boil
them in Posset drink, which they like best.

A good Purge.
INfuse an Ounce of Sena in a Pint of Water till half be consumed; when it is
cold, add to it one Ounce of Syrup of Roses, and one Ounce of Syrup of
Buckthorn; mix them well together. This Quantity makes 2 strong Purges for
either Man or Woman, and 4 for a Child.

To prevent Miscarrying.
TAKE of Dragon's-blood the Weight of a silver Twopence, and a Dram of red
Coral, the Weight of two Barley-corns of Ambergrease, the Weight of three
Barley-corns of East India Bezoar; make all these into a very fine Powder, and
mix them well together, and keep them close in a Box; and if you are frighted,
or need it, take as much at a Time as will lie on a Penny, and keep very still
and quiet. Take it in a Caudle made with Muscadine or Tent, and the Shucks of
Almonds dried and beaten to Powder, and thicken it with Yolks of Eggs. Take it
in a Morning fasting, and at Night going to Bed; this do 'til you are out of
Danger, and lay the following Plaster to the Back;

Take Venice Turpentine, and mix with it Bole-Armoniac, and spread it on black
brown Paper the Length and Breadth of a Hand, and lay it to the Small of the
Back, keeping Bed.

To procure a good Color.
TAKE Germander, Rue, Fumitory, of each a good Handful, one Pennyworth of
Saffron tied up in a Rag, half a Pound of blue Currants bruised; stamp the
Herbs, and infuse all these Ingredients in 3 Pints of Sack over a gentle Fire
'til half be consumed, drink a quarter of a Pint Morning and Evening, and walk
after it; repeat this Quantity once or twice.

You may add a Spoonful of the following Syrup to every Draught. Take 3 Ounces
of the Filings of Steel, and put it in a glass Bottle with a Dram of Mace,
and as much Cinnamon, pour on them a Quart of the best White Wind, stop it up
close, and let it stand 14 Days, shaking the Bottle every Day; then strain it
our into another Bottle, and put 2 Pounds of fine Loaf Sugar to it finely
beaten; let it stand 'til the Sugar is dissolved without stirring it; then
clear it into another Bottle, and keep it for Use.

A Receipt for the Gout.
THE following Prescription of the celebrated Messieurs Boerhaave and
Oste^dyke, for the Cure of the Gout, has been tried with so much Success by a
Gentleman who was afflicted with that Distemper from the Age of 15 to upwards
of 40, and is now, as he hopes, perfectly cured of it, and is returning (with
all proper Caution) to his usual (temperate) Manner of living; and it has
besides done so much Good to several others to whom the Salutary Regimen has
been communicated, that he thinks he cannot do a more acceptable Service to the
Public, no^ make a better Acknowledgment for the Benefit he has received by
it, than to publish the same for the general Good of his Fellow Creatures: And
though he cannot answer for it, that it may have the same happy Effects on every
Constitution that it has had with him, yet he doubts not that the Innocence of
the Method prescribed, and the disinterested Manner in which he offers it to
the Public, will be a sufficient Justification of his good Intentions, and a
better Recommendation of its Genuineness and Efficacy, than any Thing he can
^ay further on this Subject.

Professors BOERHAAVE and OSTERDYKE's Regimen prescribed for the Gout.
THEY are of Opinion that the Gout is not to be cured by any other Means but a
Milk Diet, which will in twelve Months Time alter the whole Mass of Blood; and
in order thereto, the following Directions must be strictly observed and
followed: I. You must not taste any Liquor, only a Mixture of one Third Milk
and two Thirds Water, your Milk as new as you can get it, and to drink it as
often as you have Occasion for it, without adding any other to it. A little Tea
and Coffee is likewise permitted with Milk. II. In a Morning as soon as awake,
and the Stomach has made a Digestion, you must drink eight Ounces of
Spring Water, and fast two Hours after; then eat Milk and Bread, Milk pottage,
or Tea with Milk, with a little Bread and fresh Butter. III. At Dinner you must
not eat any Thing but what is made of Barley, Oats, Rice, or Millet-s^eds,
Carrots, Potatoes, Turnips, Spinach, Beans, Peas^, etc. You may likewise eat
Fruit when full ripe, baked Pears or Apples, Apple-Dumplins; but above all Milk
and Biscuit is very good, but nothing salt or sour, not even a Sevil Orange. IV.
At Supper you must eat nothing but Milk and Bread. V. It is necessary to go to
Bed betimes, even before nine o'Clock, to accustom yourself to sleep much, and
use yourself to it. VI. Every Morning before you rise, to have your Feet, Legs,
Arms, and Hands, well rubbed with Pieces of Woollen Cloth for half an Hour, and
the same going to Bed. This Article must be strictly observed, for by this
Means the Humors, Knobs, and Bunches, will be dissipated, and prevent their
fixing in the Joints, by which they become useless. VII. You must accustom
yourself to Exercise, as riding on Horseback, which is best, or in any Coach,
Chaise, etc. the more the better; but take care of the cold Weather, Winds, and
Rain. Lastly, In case a Fit of the Gout should return, and be violent, which
they are of Opinion will not, then a little Opium or Laudanum may be taken to
compose you; but no oftener than Necessity requires. They are of Opinion, that
your Father or Mother having the Gout, is of no Consequence, if you will
resolve to follow the foregoing Directions strictly.


For the Piles.
TAKE of the Tops of Parsley, of Mullet, and of Elder-buds, of each one
Handful; boil in a sufficient Quantity of fresh Butter 'til it looks green, and
has extracted the Smell of the Herbs; strain, and anoint the Place with it 3 or
4 Times a Day.

A bitter Draught.
TAKE of the Leaves of Roman Wormwood, the Tops of Centaury, and St. John's
wort, of each a small Handful, Roots of Gentian sliced two Drachms,
Carraway-seeds half an Ounce; infuse these in half a Pint of Rhenish, and 3
Pints of White wine for 4 or 5 Days; take a quarter of a Pint in a Morning,
filling up the Bottle, and it will serve 2 or 3 Months.

For the Hemorrhoids inflamed.
LET the Party dip their Finger in Balsam of Sulphur made with Oil of
Turpentine, and anoint the Place two or three Times a Day.

For Costiveness.
TAKE Virgin-Honey a quarter of a Pound, and mix with as much Cream of Tartar
as will bring it to a pretty thick Electuary, of which take the Bigness of a
Walnut when you please; and for your Breakfast eat Water Gruel with common
Mallows boiled in it, and a good Piece of Butter; the Mallows must be chopped
small, and eaten with the Cruel.

To raise a Blister.
THE Seeds of Clemmatis Peregrina being bound hard on any Place, will in an
Hour or two raise a Blister, which you must cut and dress with Melilot
Plaster, or Colewort Le^ves, as other Blisters.

Likewise Leaven mixed with a little Verjuice, and about half a Pennyworth of
Cantharides Flies, and spread on Leather the Bigness you please, will in 9 or
10 Hours raise a Blister, which dress as usual.

Plaster for the Feet in a Fever.
TAKE of Briony roots one Pound, Tops of Rue an Handful, black Soap 4 Ounces,
and Bay Salt 2 Ounces; beat all these in a Mash, and out of this spread on a
Cloth for both Feet, apply it warm, and few Cloths over them, and let them lie
12 Hours; if there be Occasion, renew them 3 Times.

A Drink for a Fever.
TAKE a Quart of Spring Water, and boil in it an Ounce of burnt Hartshorn, a
Nutmeg quartered, a Stick of Cinnamon; let it boil a quart of an Hour; when it is
cold, sweeten it to your Taste with Syrup of Lemons or fine Sugar, with as many
Drops of Spirit of Vitriol as will just sharpen it. Drink of this when you
please.

A Vomit.
TAKE seven or eight Daffodil-roots, and boil them in a Pint of Posset drink,
and in the working drink Carduus-water a Gallon or more; your Posset must be
cold when you drink it, and your Carduus Tea must be blood-warm; if it works
too much, put some Salt in a Dish of Posset, and drink it off.

For the Hickup.
TAKE 3 or 4 preserved Damsons in your Mouth a a Time, and swallow them by
Degrees.

For the Cramp.
TAKE of Rosemary-leaves and chop them very small, and sew them in fine Linen,
and make them into Garters, and wear them Night and Day; lay a Down-pillow on
your Legs in the Night.

For Weakness in the Hands after a Palsy.
TAKE of the Tops of Rosemary, bruise it and make it up into a Ball as big as a
Walnut, and let the Party roll it up and down in their Hand very often, and
grasp it in the Hand 'til it is hot; do this very often.

For an old Ach or Strain.
TAKE an Ounce of Lucatellus's Balsam, and mix it with 2 Drachms of Oil of
Turpentine, gently heat it, anoint the Place, and put new Flannel on it.

For a Burn.
MIX Lime (...) with Linseed Oil; beat it together, and with a Feather anoint
the Place, and put on a Plaster to defend it.

To cure a Place that is scalded.
TAKE Linseed Oil, and put to it as much thick Cream; beat them together very
well and keep it for Use. Anoint the Place that is scalded twice a Day, and it
will cure it. Put on it soft Rags, and let nothing press it.

The bitter Draught.
TAKE of Gentian-root three Drachms; of Camomile-flowers one Ounce; of
Rosemary-flowers one Ounce; of Tops of Centaury, Tops of Roman Wormwood, Tops
of Carduus, of each one Handful. Boil all these in two Quarts of Spring Water,
'til it comes to a Quart. You may add a Pint of White Wind to it. Strain it
out, and when it is cold, bottle it. Drink a quarter of a Pint in the Morning,
and as much at 4 o'Clock in the Afternoon.

To draw out a Thorn.
TAKE the Roots of Comfry, and bruise them in a Mortar with a little
Boar's-grease, and use this as a Plaster.

For a scald Head.
TAKE three Spoonfuls of the Juice of Comfry, two Pennyworth of Verdegrease,
and half a Pound of Hogs-lard: Melt it together, but let it not boil. Cut off
the Hair, and anoint the Place. It will cure it.

For the Falling Sickness.
TAKE the Afterbirth of a Woman, and dry it to Powder, and drink half an Ounce
thereof in a Glass of White Wind for six Mornings together. If the Patient be a
Man, it must be the Afterbirth of a Female Child; if a Woman, the contrary.

For the Trembling at the Heart.
MAKE a Syrup of Damask Roses, and add thereto a small Quantity of red Coral,
Pearl, and Ambergrease, all finely beaten and powdered: Take this so long ^s
your Pain continues, about a Spoonful at a Time.

For a Pleurisy, if the Person cannot be blooded.
TAKE of Carduus, the Seeds or Leaves, a large Handful; boil them in a Pint of
Beer till half is consumed; then strain it, and give it the Party warm. They
must be fasting when they take it, and fast six Hours after it, or it will do
them harm.

To draw a Rheum from the Eyes.
ROAST an Egg hard, then cut out the Yolk, and take a Spoonful of Cummin-seed,
and a Handful of Bears-foot; bruise them and put them into the White of the
Egg, so lay it hot on to the N^pe of the Neck; bind it on with a Cloth, and let
it lie 24 Hours, so lay on fresh again. It will cure in a little Time.

To clear the Eyes.
TAKE the White of Hens dung, dry it very well, and beat it to Powder; fits,
and blow it into the Eyes when the Party goes to Bed.

For a Pin or Web in the Eye.
TAKE the Gall of a Hare and Honey, of each a like Quantity; mix them together,
and take a Feather and put a little into the Eye, and it will cure in two or
three Days.

If a Hair or Fish-bone stick in the Throat, immediately swallow the Yolk of a
raw Egg, it is a very good Thing.

An extraordinary Ointment for Burns and Scalds.
TAKE of red Dock leaves, and Mallow-leaves, of each a large Handful, two He^ds
of Houseleek, of green Elder, the Bark being scraped from it, a small Handful;
wash the Herbs and the Elder, which being cut small, boil in a Pint and a half
of Cream; boil it till it comes to an Oil, which, as it rises up, take off with
a Spoon; afterward strain, and put to it three Drachms of White Lead powdered
fine.

A very good Drink to be used in all Sorts of Fevers.
TAKE two Ounces of burnt Hartshorn, boil it with a Crust of Bread in three
Pints of Water to a Quart; strain, and put to it of Barley, Cinamon-water, two
Ounces, Cochineal half a Dram; sweeten it with fine Sugar, and let the
Patient, as often as he is thirsty, drink plentifully of it; rub the Cochineal
in a Mortar together with the Sugar.

To cure the yellow or black Jaundice.
TAKE a Quart of White Wind, a large red Dock-root, a Bur-root, that which
bears the small Bur, two Pennyworth of Turmerick, a little Saffron, a little of
the White of Goose-dung that seeds on the Green; boil all these together a
little while; then let it run through a Strainer: Drink it Morning and Evening
three Days.

A Plaster for the Sciatica.
TAKE of yellow Wax a Pound, the Juice of Marjoram and red Sage, of each six
Spoonfuls, Juice of Onions two Spoonfuls; let all these boil together till the
Juice is consumed, and when it is half cold, put in two Ounces of Turpentine,
and of Nutmegs, Cloves, Mace, Anniseeds, and Frankincense, of each one
Pennyworth finely powdered; stir it well together, and make a Plaster.

A Salve for the King's Evil.
TAKE a Burdock-root, and a white Lilly root; wash, dry, and scrape them; wrap
them in brown Paper, and roast them in the Embers; when they are soft take them
out, and cut out the Burn or Hard, and beat them in a Mortar with Boar's-grease
and Bean-flour; when it is almost enough, put in as much of the best Turpentine
as will make it smell of it, then put it in a Pot for Use.

The Party must take inwardly two Spoonfuls of Limewater in the Morning, and
fast two Hours after it, and do the same at four o'Clock in the Afternoon. If
there be any Swelling of the Evil, they must bathe it with this Water a quarter
of an Hour together, a little warmed, and wet a Cloth and bind it on the Place;
but if the Skin be broken, only wash it in the Water, and spread a thin
Plaster of the Salve and lay on it; shift it once a Day; if very bad, you must
dress it twice a Day.

To make the Limewater. Take a Limestone as big as a Man's Head, it must be
well burned; put it into six Quarts of boiling Water, cover it close, but
sometimes stir it; the next Day when it is settled pour off the clear Water, and
keep it in Bottles for Use.

To cure Burstenness.
TAKE Hemlock, and bruise it a little, heat it pretty well, and apply it twice
a Day, without any Truss, and keep the Party as still as may be. This has cured
when many other Things have failed.

A Powder for Burstenness.
TAKE a good Quantity of wild Musk, Roots and all, pick, wash, and dry them,
then take of Currant-leaves, Vine-leaves and Strings, an equal Quantity; then
take almost a Quart of Hemp-seeds; you must lay the Seeds at the Bottom of a
Pot, and the Leaves and Roots on the Top; then put it into an Oven, dry them,
rub them to Powder, and sift them together. The Party must take as much of this
Powder as will lie on a Six Pence, in a little Ale in the Morning, and at four
in the Afternoon, and continue it five or six Weeks: The Powder should be made
in May if possible.

For the Chin-Cough.
TAKE a Spoonful of the Juice of Pennyroyal, mixed with Sugar Candy beaten to
Powder. Take this for nine Mornings together.

To cure the Itch without Sulphur.
TAKE a Handful of Elecampane-root, and as much sharp pointed Dock; shred them
small, and boil them in two Quarts of Spring Water till it comes to a Pint;
strain the Liquor, and with it let the Party wash his Hands and Face two or
three Times a Day.

For the Scurvy or Dropsy.
STAMP and strain the Juice of the Leaves of Elder, and to a quarter of a Pint
of Juice put so much White Wind; warm it a little and drink it off, and do thus
for four or five Mornings together: If it purge you it will certainly do good.
Take this in the Spring.

For an Ague.
GIVE as much Virginia Snake root dried and powdered, as will lie upon a
Shilling, in a Glass of Sherry or Sack, just before the cold Fit begins; use
this two or three Times till the Ague is gone.

The yellow Balsam.
TAKE eight Ounces of Burgamy Pitch, three Ounces and a half of yellow Beeswax
sliced, one Pound of Deers-suet, one Ounce of Venice Turpentine, beaten up in
Plantane-water, half a Pint of red Roses, a quarter of a Pint of Vinegar of red
Roses, twenty four Cloves of Garlic, and of Saltpeter dried before the Fire
half the Quantity of a Nutmeg; bruise the Garlic in a Stone Mortar, and set
the Oil, Vinegar, and Garlic in an earthen Pipkin over the Fire; let it boil
gently half an Hour; then put in the Pitch and Wax, and when that is melted,
put in the Suet, and one Ounce of Palm Oil; then let it boil a quarter of an
Hour longer; then take it off the Fire, and put in the Turpentine and Salt
petre; set it over the Fire again for a little while; then take it off, and let
it stand to cool, then pour it gently into your Gallipots; be sure you put in
no Dregs; the Vinegar will fall to the Bottom; tie the Gallipots down with
Leather. It Is an excellent Salve for sore Legs, Boils, Whitlows, sore Breasts,
and may safely be used to draw Corruption out of any Sore; put a little of it
on Lint, and put a Plaster of the following black Salve over it.

The black Salve.
TAKE a Pint of Oil of Cloves, three quarters of a Pound of yellow Wax, two
Ounces of Frankincense finely beaten and searced, two Ounces of the best
Mastich, two Ounces of Olibanum, two Ounces of Myrrh, half a Pound of white
Lead finely ground, and two Drachms of Camphire: Boil these till they are
black; then let it stand a little; oil a Board and pour it on, and oil your
Hand, and make it up in Rolls for Use.

For the Falling Sickness.
TAKE of the Powder of a Man's Scull, of Cinnabar, and Antimony, of each one
Dram, of the Root of Male-Peony, and Frog's Liver dried, of each two Drachms,
of the Salt of Amber, half a Dram, Conserve of Rosemary, two Ounces, Syrup of
Peonies, enough to make it into a soft Electuary, of which give the Quantity of
a large Nutmeg every Morning and Evening, drinking after it three Ounces of the
Water of the Lillies of the Valley; take it three Days before the New Moon, and
three Days before the Full Moon; to bring the Patient quickly out of the Fit,
let his Nostrils and Temples be rubbed with the Oil of Amber.

A calcined Water to dry up Ulcers and old Sores.
TAKE of the best Roman-Vitriol three Ounces, Camphire one Ounce; beat them
into fine Powder, put them into the Bottom of a Crucible, and fix it in hot
Embers; cover it with white Paper four double, and put a little Tile on it: Let
it be well calcined, but not too much; when it is cold, beat it into fine
Powder, and sift it; then add to it three Ounces of Bole-Armoniac, beaten and
sifted; mix all together, and to half an Ounce of this Powder put a quart of
Spring or Plantane-water, boil the Water, and when it is blood-warm, put in your
half Ounce of Powder, and stir it together in a Pewter Basin till it is quite
cold, then put it in a Bottle for Use. When you use it, shake the Bottle, and
pour some out, and use it as hot as can be endured, either by Syringe, or
washing the Place twice or thrice a Day, and use the following Plaster or
Salve.

The Leaden Plaster.
TAKE of white Lead three Ounces, red Lead seven Ounces, of Bole-Armoniac nine
Ounces; beat all into fine Powder, and put to them a Pint of the best
Oil-olive, incorporate them over the Fire, and let them boil gently half an
Hour, putting in one Ounce of Oil of Exeter; stir it continually, and when it is
enough, make it up in Rolls. This is a drying Plaster.

A Green Salve.
TAKE five Handfuls of Clown's All-heal, stamp it and put it in a Pot, and add
to it four Ounces of Boar's-grease, half a Pint of Oil-olive, and Wax three
Ounces sliced; boil it 'til the Juice is consumed, which is known when the
Stuff does not bubble at all; 'then strain it and put it on the Fire again,
adding 2 Ounces of Venice-Turpentine; let it boil a little and put it in
Gallipots for Use. Melt a little in a Spoon, and if the Cut or Wound be deep,
dip your Tents in it; if not, dip Lint and put on it, and defend the Place with
a Leaden Plaster; dress it once a Day.

A Poultice for a Sore Breast before it is broken.
BOIL white Bread and Milk to a Poultice, then put to it Oil of Lillies, and
the Yolk of an Egg; set it over the Fire again to heat, and apply it as hot as
can be endured: Dress it Morning and Night till it is broke, then dress it with
the Poultice of Raisins.

For a Sore Breast when it is Broken.
TAKE a quarter of a Pound of Raisins of the Sun stoned, and beat them very
small; then add to it near as much Honey; and beat it together into a Salve;
spread it on a Cloth, and make Tents if Occasion. Dress it once a Day; when
it is well drawn, use the Yellow Balsom, and Black or Leaden Plaster.

To disperse Tumors.
TAKE of yellow Wax, Frankincense and Rosin, of each four Ounces; melt them
together, strain it out, and when it is cool make it in a Roll, and keep it for
Use.

To keep a Cancer in the Breast from increasing.
TAKE of Lapis Calaminaris four Ounces all in one Piece, and having made it
Red-hot in a Crucible, 9 Times, quench it every Time in a Pint of White wine;
then take two Ounces of Lapis Tutty, and having burnt that Red-hot in a
Crucible three Times, quench that every Time in a Pint of Red-rose Water: Then
beat the Tutty and the Calaminaris Stone together in a Mortar very fine, and
put it in a Glass Bottle, and put the Rose Water and White Wind to it, and
shake it three or four Times a Day, for nine Days before you begin to use it.
You must keep the Wine and the Rose Water close covered when you quench the
Stone, that the Steam does not go out. When you use it shake it well, and dip
Rags in it, and lay them to the Breast; let the Rags remain on till it is
dressed again: It must be dressed twice a Day, Night and Morning. The clear
Water is excellent for weak or sore Eyes.

For a Swelling in the Face.
TAKE a Handful of Damask rose Leaves, boil them in running Water till they are
tender; stamp them to a Pulp, and boil white Bread and Milk till it is soft;
then put in your Pulp with a little Hog's-lard, and thicken it with the Yolk of
an Egg, and apply it warm.

For a sore Throat.
MAKE a Plaster of Paracelsus four Inches broad, and so long as to come from
Ear to Ear, and apply it warm to the Throat; then bruise House-leek and press
out the Juice, add an equal Quantity of Honey, and a little burnt Alum; mix
all together, and let the Party often take some on a Liquorish-stick.

A purging Diet-Drink.
TAKE of Garden Scurvy Grass six Handfuls, Watercresses and Brooklime, of each
four Handfuls, Peach-blossoms four Handfuls, Nettle-tops and Fumitory, of each
three Handfuls, Monk's Rhubarb four Ounces, Sena four Ounces, China two Ounces,
Sarf^parilla three Ounces, Rhubarb one Ounce, Coriander and sweet Fenn^l-seeds,
of each half an Ounce; cut the Herbs, sl^ce the Roots, bruise the Seeds, put
them in a thin Bag, and hang them in four Gallons of small Ale; after three
Days, drink a Pint of it every Morning. Be regular in D^et, eat nothing salt or
sour.

Pills to purge the Head.
TAKE of the Extract of Rudium two Drachms, and Pill-Faetida one Dram; mix
these well together, and make it into 12 Pills; take 2, or if the Constitution
be strong, 3 of them at six o'Clock in the Morning; drink warm Gruel, or thin
Broth, or Posset Drink, when they work.

For a Canker in the Mouth.
TAKE Celandine, Columbine, Sage, and Fennel, of each one Handful, stamp and
strain them, and to the Juice put a Spoonful of Honey, half a Spoonful of burnt
Alum, and as much Bole Ammoniac beaten fine; mix and beat all these together
very well, and wrap a little Flax about a Stick, and rub the Canker with it; if
it bleeds, it is the better.

A Water for sore or weak Eyes.
TAKE of Ground Ivy, Celandine, and Dasies, of each a like Quantity, stamped
and strained, and add to the Juice a little Sugar and white Rose water; shake
this together, and with a Feather drop it into the Eyes; this takes away all
Manner of Inflammation, Spots, Itching, Smarting, or Web, and is an excellent
Thing for the Eyes.

A Clyster for the Worms.
TAKE of Rue, Wormwood, Lavender-cotton, three or four Sprigs of each, a
Spoonful of Anniseeds bruised; boil these in a Pint of Milk till the third Part
be consumed; then strain it out, and add to it as much Aloes finely powdered,
as will lie on a Threepence; sweeten it with Honey, and give it pretty warm;
it should be given three Mornings together; and the best Time is three Days
before the New or Full Moon.

Lucatellus' s Balsam.
TAKE of Venice Turpentine one Pound, the best Oil three Pints, Sack six
Spoonfuls, yellow Wax half a Pound, natural Balsam one Ounce, Oil of St.
John's-wort one Ounce, red Sanders well powdered, one Ounce; cut the Wax in
thin Slices, and set it over the Fire in a large Skillet, and when it is all
melted put in the Turpentine; first wash it three several Times in red
Rose Water, then stir them well together till they boil a little; then take it
off from the Fire and let it cool. The next Day take it out of the Skillet and
cut it in thin Slices, that all the Water may be got out of it; then set it
over the Fire again, and when it is melted, stir it well together; then put in
the Oil, and the Oil of St. John's-wort, and the natural Balsam, and the Sack
and Sanders, stirring them all together very well; then let it boil a little
while, and take it off the Fire and stir it two Hours all one way. When it is
cold, put it in Gallipots and cover them with Leather; it will keep good twenty
Years, and the older the better.

A Salve for a Sear-cloth, for Bruises or Aches.
TAKE a Pint of Oil, nine Ounces of red Lead, two Ounces of Bees wax, a
Shilling's-worth of Sperma-Cete, two Ounces of Rosin beaten and sifted; set all
these on a soft Fire in a Bell Skillet, stirring till it boils, and then try it
on a Rag whether it firmly sticks upon it; when it does stick, take it off; and
when you have made what Sear cloths you please, pour the rest on an oiled
Board, and make it up in Rolls. It Is very good for a Cut or green Wound.

An excellent Recipe for the Cure of Colds.
TAKE of Venice-Treacle half a Dram, Powder of Snake-root twelve Grains,
Powder of Saffron six Grains, Volatile Salt of Hartshorn four Grains, Syrup of
Cloves a sufficient Quantity to make it into a Bolus. To be taken going to
Rest, drinking a large Draught of Mountain Whey after it. Those who cannot
afford Mountain Whey, may drink Treacle Posset.

To such Constitutions as cannot be provoked to sweat, opening a Vein, or a
gentle Purge will be of great Service.

An Ointment for a Cold on the Stomach.
TAKE an Ounce and a half of the Oil of Valentia-Sc^bio^a, Oil of Sweet-Almonds
a quarter of an Ounce, a quarter of an Ounce of Man's Fat, and 4 Scruples of
the Oil of Mace; mix these together, and warm a little in a Spoon, and Night
and Morning anoint the Stomach. Lay a Piece of black or lawn Paper on it.

To make Gascoigne's Powder.
TAKE of Powder of Pearl, red Coral, Crab's Eyes, white Amber and Hartshorn, of
each one Ounce; beat them to a fine Powder and searce them. Then take a Dram
of oriental B^zoar, and a Dram of Ambergrease, and mix with the Powders; then
take off the black Toes of Crab's-Claws, beaten to a fine Powder, as much as of
all the rest of the Powders, for this is the Chief; then mix all well together,
and make them up in Balls in Jelly of Hartshorn, and in your Jelly infuse a
small Quantity of Saffron to give them a Color; when you have rolled them in
Balls as big as a Walnut, lay them on a China or Silver Plate to dry; when they
are fully dry and hard, paper them up, and keep them for Use. The Dose you must
give at a Time, is, to a Man or Woman 10 or 12 Grains, in Dragon, Carduus, or
the Lady Allen's Water; the Party going to Bed and covered warm. The Crabs used
in this Powder must be caught in May or September, and they must not be boiled.

A Water to cure red or pimpled Faces.
TAKE a Pint of strong White Wind Vinegar, and put to it Powder of the Roots of
Orris three Drachms, Powder of Brimstone half an Ounce, and Camphire two
Drachms, stamp with a few blanched Almonds, four oaken Apples cut in the
Middle, and the Juice of four Lemons, and a Handful of Bean-flowers; put all
these together in a strong double Glass Bottle, shake them well together, and
set it in the Sun for 10 Days; wash the Face with this Water, let it dry on,
and don't wipe it off. This cures red or pimpled Faces, Spots, Heat, Morphew,
or Sunburn. But you must eat the following Diet for three Weeks or a Month.

T^ke Cucumbers and cut them as small as Herbs to the Pot, boil them in a small
Pipkin with a Piece of Mutton, and make it into Pottage with Oatmeal: So eat a
Mess Morning, Noon, and Night, without Intermission, for three Weeks or a
Month. This Diet and the Water has cured when nothing else would do.

A good Thing to wash the Face in.
TAKE a large Piece of Camphire, the Quantity of a Goose-Egg, and break it so
that it may go into a Pint Bottle, which fill with Water; when it has stood a
Month, put a Spoonful of it in three Spoonfuls of Milk, and wash in it.

Wear a Piece of Lead, beaten exceeding thin, for a Forehead piece, under a
Forehead-cloth; it keeps the Forehead smooth and plump.

A Plaster for Worms in Children.
TAKE two Ounces of yellow Wax, and two Ounces of R^sin, boil them half an
Hour, stirring them all the while; scum them well and take it off, and put to
it three Drachms of Aloes, and two Spoonfuls of Treacle, and boil it up again;
rub a Board with fresh Butter, and pour the Salve thereon, work it well, and
make it up in Rolls; When you make the Plaster, sprinkle it with Saffron, and
cut a Hole against the Navel.

The Stomach Plaster.
TAKE of Burgamy Pitch, Frankincense, and Beeswax, of each one Ounce, melt
them together, then put in one Ounce of Venice-Turpentine, and one Ounce of Oil
of Mace; melt it together, and spread your Plaster on Sheep's Leather; grate
on it some Nutmeg when you lay it on the Stomach.

To make a Quilt for the Stomach.
TAKE a fine Rag four Inches square, and spread Cotton thin over it, then take
Mint and Sweet marjoram dried and rubbed to Powder, and strew it over the
Cotton pretty thick; then take Nutmeg, Cloves, and Mace, of each a quarter of
an Ounce beaten and sifted, and strew that over the Herbs, and on that strew
half an Ounce of Galengal finely powdered, then a thin Row of Cotton, and
another fine Rag, and quilt it together. When you lay it on the Stomach, dip it
in hot Sack and lay it on as warm as can be endured. This is very good for a
Pain in the Stomach.

A Powder for Convulsion Fits.
TAKE a Dram and half of single Piony-seed, of Misletoe of the Oak one
Dram, Pearl, white Amber, and Coral, all finely powdered, of each half a
Dram, Bezoar two Drachms, and five Leaves of Gold; make all these in a fine
Powder, and give it in a Spoonful of black Cherry-water, or if you please
Hysterical Water. You may give it to a Child new born, to prevent Fits, as much
as will lie on a Threepence, and likewise at each Change of the Moon; and to
older People as much as they have Strength and Occasion.

To prevent Fits in Children.
TAKE Saxifrage, Bean pods, Black-cherry, Groundsel, and Parsley-waters; mix
them together with Syrup of single Piony. Give a Spoonful very often,
especially observe to give it at the Changes of the Moon.

For a Hoarseness with a Cold.
TAKE a quarter of a Pint of Hysop-water, make it very sweet with Sugar Candy,
set it over the Fire, and when it is thorough hot, beat the Yolk of an Egg, and
brew it in it, and drink it Morning and Night.

A Remedy for a Cough.
TAKE the Yolk of a new-laid Egg, take the Skin of the Yolk, and add six
Spoonfuls of red Rose Water; beat it well together, and make it very sweet with
white Sugar Candy; drink it six Nights going to Bed.

An excellent Remedy for Whooping Coughs.
TAKE dried Coltsfoot Leaves a good Handful, cut them small, and boil them in
a Pint of Spring water, 'til half a Pint is boiled away; then take it off the
Fire, and when it is almost cold, strain it through a Cloth, squeezing the Herb as
dry as you can; and then throw it away, and dissolve in the Liquor an Ounce of
brown Sugar Candy finely powdered, and then give the Child (if it be about
three or four Years old, and so in Proportion) one Spoonful of it, cold or
warm, as the Season proves, three or four Times a Day, or oftener, if the Fits
of Coughing come frequently, 'til well, which will be in two or three Days, but
it will presently almost abate the Fits of Coughing.

This Herb seems to be a Specific for those Sorts of Coughs, and indeed all
others, in Old as well as Young; the Latin Name Tussilago, from Tussis, the
Cough, denotes as much; as does also the Latin Word Bechium, from the Greek
Word BEKION, a Cough; and are the Names given it by the Ancients, perhaps some
Thousand Years ago. It has wonderfully eased them, when nothing else would do
it, and greatly helps in Shortness of Breath; and in the Asthma and Phthisick I
have not known any Thing exceed it; likewise in Wastings or Consumptions of the
Lungs, it has been found of excellent Use, by it^ smooth, softning, healing
Qualities, even where there has been Spitting of Blood, and Rawness and
Soreness of the Passages, with Hoarseness, etc. in blunting the acrimonious
Humors, which in such Cases are almost continually dripping upon them. It is
to be questioned, whether for those Purposes there is to be h^d in the whole
Materia Medica, a Medicine so innocent, so safe, and yet so pleasant and
effectual, or that can afford Relief so soon as this will. Grown People may
make it stronger than for Children.

Get the Herb of the same Year's Growth and Drying, that you use it in; and the
larger the Leaves, as being the fuller grown, the better.

It is best to be made fresh and fresh, as you want it; and not too much at a
Time, especially in warm Weather.

Pills to purge off a Rheum in the Teeth.
TAKE four Drachms of Mastick, ten Drachms of Aloes, three Drachms of Agatick;
beat the Mastick and Aloes, and grate the Agarick; searce them and make them
into Pills with Syrup of Betony. You may make but a quarter of this Quantity at
a Time; and take it all out, one Pill in the Morning, and two at Night. You may
eat or drink any thing with these Pills, and go abroad, keeping yourself warm;
and when they work, drink a Draught or two of something warm.

An Ointment to cause Hair to grow.
TAKE two Ounces of Boar's grease, one Dram of the Ashes of burnt Bees, one
Dram of the Ashes of Southernwood, one Dram of the Juice of a white Dilly
root, one Dram of Oil of sweet Almonds, and six Drachms of pure Musk; and
according to Art, make an Ointment of these; and the Day before the full Moon
shave the Place, and anoint it every Day with this Ointment. It will cause Hair
to grow where you will have it.

Oil of sweet Almonds, or Spirit of Vinegar, is very good to rub the Head with
if the Hair grows thin.

To preserve and whiten the Teeth.
TAKE a quarter of a Pound of Honey, and boil it with a little Roch Alum; scum
it well, and then put in a little Ginger finely beaten; let it boil a while
longer, then take it off, and before it is cold, put to it as much
Dragon's-blood as will make it of a good Color. Mix it well together, and keep
it in a Gallipot for Use. Take a little on a Rag, and rub the Teeth. You may
use it often.

To make Lip Salve.
TAKE a quarter of a Pound of Alkermes-root bruised, and half a quarter of a
Pound of fresh Butter, as much Beeswax, and a Pint of Claret; boil all these
together a pretty while, then strain it, and let it stand 'til it is cold; then
take the Wax off the Top, and melt it again, and pour it clear from the Dregs
into your Gallipots or Boxes. Use it when, and as often as you please.

To clean and soften the Hands.
SET half a Pint of Milk over the Fire, and put into it half a quartern of
Almonds blanched and beaten very fine; when it boils, take it off, and thicken
it with the Yolk of an Egg; then set it on again, stirring it all the while
both before and after the Egg is in; then take it off, and stir in a s^all
Spoonful of sweet Oil; and put it in a Gallipot: It will keep about five or six
Days. Take a bit as big as a Walnut, and rub about your Hands, and the Dirt or
Soil will rub off, and it will make them very soft. Draw on Gloves, just as you
have used it.

A Remedy for Pimples.
TAKE half a quarter of a Pound of bitter Almonds, blanch, stamp them, and put
them into half a Pint of Spring Water, stir it together, and strain it out:
Then put to it half a Pint of the best Brandy, and a Pennyworth of the Flour of
Brimstone. Shake it well when you use it, which must be often. Dab it on with a
fine Rag.

A Water to wash the Face.
BOIL two Ounces of French Barley in three Pints of Spring water; shift the
Water three Times; the last Water use, adding to it a quartern of bitter
Almonds blanched, beat, and strained out; th^n add the Juice of two Lemons, and
a Pint of White Wind. Wash with it at Night. Put a bit of Camphire in the
Bottle.

To whiten and clean the Hands.
BOIL a quart of new Milk, and turn it with a Pint of Aqua-vitae; then take off
the Curd, then put into the Posset a Pint of Rhenish-wine, and that will raise
another Curd, which take off; then put in the Whites of six Eggs well beaten,
and that will raise another Curd, which you must take off, and mix the three
Curds together very well, and put them into a Gallipot, and put the Posset in a
Bottle. Scour your Hands with the Curd, and wash them with the Posset.

A Water for the Scurvy in the Gums.
TAKE two Quarts of Spring water, and one Pound of right Flower-de-luce Root,
and a quarter of a Pound of Roch Alum; two Ounces of Cloves, 2 Handfuls of red
Rose-leaves, two Handfuls of Woodbine leaves, two Handfuls of Columbine-leaves,
two Handfuls of brown Sage, and one of Rosemary; eight Sevil Oranges, Peel and
all, only take out the Seeds. Set these over the Fire, and let them boil a
Quart away; then take it off, and strain it, and set it over the Fire again,
and put to it three Quarts of Claret, and a Pint of Honey: Let them boil half
an Hour; scum it well, and when it is cold, bottle it for Use. Wash and gargle
your Mouth with it two or three Times a Day.

To take away Morphew.
TAKE Briony-roots, and Wake-Robin, stamp them with Brimstone, and make it up
in a Lump, wrap it in a fine Linen Rag, and dip it in Vinegar, and rub the
Place pretty hard with it, and it will take away the Morphew Spots.

The Italian Wash for the Neck.
TAKE a Quart of Ox-gall, two Ounces of Roch-Allum, two Ounces of white
Sugar Candy, two Drachms of Camphire, half an Ounce of Borax; beat all these in
a Mortar, and sist them through a fine Sieve; then mix them well in the Quart
of Ox-gall; put all together into a three Pint stone Bottle well cork'd; set it
to infuse in the Sun, or by the Fire, six Weeks together, sti^ring it once a
Day; then strain it from the Bottom, and put to every quarter of a Pint of this
Liquor a Quart of Spring Water, otherwise it will be too thick; set it a little
to clarify, and bottle it, put some Powder of Pearl in the Bottle: Wash with it.

For a Cold, Dr. Ratcliff's Receipt.
MAKE some Sack-whey, with Rosemary boiled in it; mix a little of it in a
Spoon, with twenty Grains of Gascoigne Powder; then drink half a Pint of your
Sack whey, with twelve Drops of Spirit of Hartshorn in it, go to Bed, and keep
warm; do this two or three Nights-together.

A Receipt for the Gravel.
PUT two Spoonfuls of Lint-seeds just bruised, into a Quart of Water, and a
little Stick of Liquorish; boil it a quarter of an Hour; then strain it through
a Sieve, and sweeten it to your Taste with Syrup of Althea.

Excellent for Worms in Children.
FEnegrig-seeds, and Wormwood-seeds mixed, one Pennyworth, beat and searced;
mix it well in a Halfpennyworth of Treacle; let the Child take a small Spoonful
in a Morning fasting, and fast two Hours after it; do this three or four Days.

For a Cold.
TAKE Rosemary and sliced Liquorish, and boil it in small Ale, and sweeten it
with Treacle, and drink it going to Bed four or five Nights together.

To stop Bleeding in the Stomach.
TAKE Oil of Spike, natural Balsam, Bole-Armoniac, ^hubarb, and Turpentine; mix
these together, and take as much as a large Nutmeg three Times a Day.

The Tar-Pills, for a Cough.
TAKE Tar, and drop it on Powder of Liquorish, and make it up into Pills; take
two every Ni^ht going to Bed, and in the Morning drink a Glass of fair Water
that Liquorish has been three or four Days steeped in. Do this for nine or ten
Days together, as you find Good.

For a Purge.
TAKE half an Ounce of Sena, boil it in a Pint of Ale till half be consumed;
cover it close till the next Day, then boil it again till it comes to two
Spoonfuls; strain it, and add to it two Spoonfuls of Treacle, and drink it
warm; drink Gruel, or Posset, or Broth after it; keep your self very warm while
it is Working. Or else two Ounces of Syrup of Roses, and drink warm Ale after it
in the working.

For the Itch.
TAKE Elecampane-roots, or Dock-roots, dried and beaten to Powder, and a little
beaten G^nger, both searced very fine; mix it up with fresh Butter, and anoint
with it in the Joints.

For a Cough.
TAKE Conserve of Roses two Ounces, Diascordium half an Ounce, Powder of
Olibanum half a Dram, Syrup of Jubebs half an Ounce; mix these, and take the
Quantity of a Nutmeg Three times a Day; in the Morning, at Four, and at Night.

To make Cashew Lozenges.
TAKE half an Ounce of Balsam of Tolu, put it in a Silver Tankard, and put to
it three quarters of a Pint of Fair Water; cover it very close, and let it
simmer over a gentle Fire 24 Hours; then take ten Ounces of Loaf Sugar finely
Powdered, and half an Ounce of Japan Earth finely powdered and sifted, and wet
it with two parts of Tolu Water, and one part of Orange flower Water, and boil
it together almost to a Candy height; then drop it on Pie plates, but first rub
the Plates over with an Almond, or wash them over with Orange flower Water.
It Is best to do but five Ounces at a Time, because it will cool before you can
drop it; after you have dropped 'em, set the Plates a little before the Fire,
they will slip off the easier. If you would have them perfumed, put in
Ambergrease.

For Obstructions.
PUT two Ounces of Steel filings into a Quart Bottle of White wine, let it
stand three Weeks, shaking it once a Day; then put in a Dram of Mace, let it
stand a Week longer, then put into another Bottle three Quarters of a Pound of
Loaf sugar in Lumps, and clear off your Steel wine to your Sugar, and when it is
dissolved it is fit to use. Give a Spoonful to a young Person, with as much
Cream of Tartar as will lie on a Three pence, to one that is older two
Spoonfuls; and Cream of Tartar accordingly.

For a Rheumatism.
LET the Party take of the finest glazed Gunpowder, as much as a large Thimble
may hold, wet it in a Spoon with Milk from the Cow, and drink a good half Pint
of warm Milk after it; be covered warm in Bed and sweat. Give it Fasting about
seven in the Morning, and take this nine or ten Mornings together.

The Bruise Ointment.
TAKE of Rosemary, brown Sage, Fennel, Camomile, Hysop, Balm, Woodbine leaves,
Southernwood, Parsley, Wormwood, Self-heal, Rue, Elder-leaves, Clowns-all heal,
Burdock leaves, of each one Handful; put them into a Pot with very strong Beer,
or Spirits enough to cover them well, and two Pounds of fresh Butter out of the
Churn; cover it up with Paste, and bake it with Bread, and when it is baked
strain it out: When it is cold, scum off the Butter and melt it, and put it in a
Gallipot for Use. The Liquor is very good to dip Flannels into, and bathe any
green Bruise or Ach, as hot as can be born.

A good Vomit.
TAKE two Ounces of the finest white Alum, beat it small, put it into better
than half a Pint of Newmilk, set it on a slow Fire till the Milk is turned
clear; let it stand a quarter of an Hour, strain it off and drink it just warm.
It will give three or four Vomits, and is very safe, and an excellent Cure for
an Ague, taken half an Hour before the Fit; drink good store of Carduus Tea
after it. Or else take half a Dram of Ipecacnana, and Carduus Tea with it.

An Ointment for a Scald Head.
TAKE one Pound of May Butter without Salt, one of the Churn, a Pint of Ale not
too stale, a good Handful of green Wormwood; let the Ale be hot, and put in the
Butter to melt, shred the Wormwood, and let them boil together till it turns
green; strain it, and when it is cold take the Ointment from the Dregs.

To Cure the Piles.
TAKE two Pennyworth of Litharge of Gold, one Ounce of Sallet Oil, one Spoonful
of White Wind Vinegar; put all into a new Gallipot, beat it together with a
Knife till it is as thick as an Ointment: Spread it on a Cloth, and apply it to
the Place; if Inward, put it up as far as you can.

To make the Teeth White.
TAKE three Spoonfuls of Celandine, nine Spoonfuls of Honey, half a Spoonful of
burnt Alum; mix these together, and rub the Teeth with it.

A Powder for the Teeth.
HALF an Ounce of Cream of Tartar, and a quarter of an Ounce of Powder of
Myrrh; rub the Teeth with it two or three Times a Week.

To make the right Angel-salve.
TAKE of R^sin and Parr^sin, of each half a Pound; Virgins Wax and
Fra^kincense, of each a quarter of a Pound; Masti^h one Ounce, Deer Suet a
quarter of a Pound; melt what is to be melted, and powder what is to be
powdered, and sift it fine; then boil them, and strain them through a C^nvas bag
into a Pottle of White Wind; then boil the Wine with the Ingredients an Hour
with a gentle Fire, and let it st^^d till it is no hotter than Blood; then put
to it two Drachm^ of Camphire, and two Ounces of Venice Turpentine, and stir it
constantly till tis' Cold. Be sure your Stuff be no hotter than Blood when you
put in your Camphire and Turpentine, otherwise it is spoiled; make it up in
Rolls, and keep it for Use. It Is the best Salve made.

To take out the Redness and Scurf after the Smallpox.
AFTER the first Scabs are well off, anoint the Face going to Bed with the
following Ointment. Beat common Alum very fine, and sift it through a Lawn
Sieve, and mix it with Oil, like a thick Cream, and lay it all over the Face
with a Feather; in the Morning, have Bran boiled in Water till it is Slippery,
then wash it off as hot as you can bear it. So do for a Month, or more, as
their is Occasion.

To make Brimstone-Lozenges for a short Breath.
TAKE of Brimstone flour and double-refin'd Sugar beaten and sifted an equal
Quantity; make it in Lozenges with Gum-dragant steeped in Rose Water; dry them
in the Sun, and take three or four a Day.

For a Burn.
TAKE common Alum, beat and sift it, and beat it up with Whites of Eggs to a
Curd; then with a Feather anoint the Place. It will Cure without any other
Thing.

To procure the Menses.
TAKE a quarter of an Ounce of pure Myrrh made into fine Powder; mix it with 3
quarters of an Ounce of Conserve of Bugloss flowers; two Days before your
Expectation take this Quantity at four Times, last at Night, and first in the
Morning; drink after each Time a Draught of Posset Drink made of Ale,
White Wind, and Milk, and boil in it some Pennyroyal, and a few Camomile
Flowers.

To provoke Urine presently when stopped.
IN a Quart of Beer boil a Handful of the Berries of Eglantine till it comes to
a Pint; drink it off Lukewarm.

To draw up the Uvula.
TAKE Ground Ivy and heat it well between two Tiles, and lay it as warm as can
be born on the top of the Head.

The Blood of a Hare, dried and drank in Red-wine, does stop the Bloody Flux,
or any Lask, though never so severe.

For a Thrush in Childrens Mouths.
TAKE a hot Sea-Coal, and quench it in as much Spring water as will cover the
Coal; wash it with this five or six times a Day.

For the Worms in Children.
TAKE of Mithridate and Honey, of each a Pennyworth, Oil of M^ce Two
pennyworth; melt them together, and spread upon Leather, cut in the Shape of an
Heart; Oil of Savin and Wormwood, of each six Drops, of Aloes and Saffron in
Powder, of each one Dram; rub the Oils, and strew the Powders all over the
Plaster; apply it, being warmed, to the Child's Stomach, with the Point
upwards.

For a Weakness in the Back or Reins.
TAKE an Ounce of Venice Turpentine, wash it in red Rose Water, work it in the
Water till it is white, pour the Water from it, and work it up into Pills with
Powder of Turmerick, and one grated Nutmeg; you may put a little Rhubarb, as
you see Occasion. Take three in the Morning, and three in the Evening, in a
little Syrup of Elder.

An approved Medicine for the Stone.
TAKE six Pounds of black Cherries, stamp them in a Mortar till the Kernels are
bruised, then take of the Powder of Amber, and of Coral prepared, of each two
Ounces; put them with the Cherries into a Still, and with a gentle Fire draw
off the Water; which, if you take for the Stone, mix a Dram of the Powder of
Amber with a Spoonful of it, drinking three or four Spoonfuls after it; if for
the Palsy or Convulsion, take four Spoonfuls, without adding any thing in the
Morning fasting.

To give Ease in Fits of the Stone, and to cure the Suppression of Urine, which
usually attend them.
TAKE of Snails Shells and Bees, of each an equal Quantity, dry them in an Oven
with a moderate Heat, then beat them to a very fine Powder, of which give ^s
much as will lie-upon a Six pence in a quarter of a Pint of Bean-flower water,
every Morning, fasting two Hours after it; continue this for three Days
together. This has been often found to break the Stone, and to force a speedy
Passage for the Urine.

To stop Flooding.
DISSOLVE a quarter of an Ounce of Venice Treacle in four Spoonfuls of Water,
and drop in it thirty or forty of Jones's Drops. Take it when Occasion
requires, especially in Childbed.

An approved Remedy for a Cancer in the Breast.
TAKE of the hard Knobs or Warts which grow on the Legs of a Stone-Horse, dry
them carefully, and powder them; give from one Scruple to half a Dram every
Morning and Evening in a Glass of Sack. You must continue taking them a Month
or six Weeks, or longer, if the Cancer is far gone.

A Receipt for Colds.
TAKE of Venice Treacle half a Dram; Powder of Snake-root twelve Grains;
Powder of Saffron six Grains; Volatile Salt of Hartshorn four Grains; Syrup of
Cloves, a sufficient Quantity to make it into a Bolus. To be taken going to
rest, drinking a large Draught of warm Mountain Whey after it.

N. B. Those who cannot afford Mountain Whey, may drink Treacle-Posset.

To such Constitutions as cannot be provoked to sweat, opening a Vein, or a
gentle Purge, will be of great Service.

An infallible Cure for the Bite of a mad Dog.
OF all the Diseases incident to Mankind, there is none so shocking to our
Nature, as the Bite of a mad Dog; and yet, as terrible as it is, we have known
Instances of those who chose rather to hazard the worst Effects of it, and to
die the worst of Deaths, than to follow the Advice of their Physicians, by
making use of the known Specific of dipping in the Sea, or Salt Water. It is
for the Sake of People of this unhappy Temper, who may have the Misfortune to
be so bit, and of those who may have Cattle that are so, that we publish the
following Receipt which has been frequently made use of in a neighboring
County, and (as the Gentleman who communicated it says) was never known to fail.

Take six Ounces of Rue, cleaned, picked, and bruised; four Ounces of Garlic,
peeled and bruised; four Ounces of Venice Treacle; four Ounces of filled Pewter
or scraped Tin. Boil these in two Quarts of the best Ale, in a Pan covered
close, over a gentle Fire, for the Space of one Hour; then strain the
Ingredients from the Liquor; give eight or nine Spoonfuls of it warm to a Man
or Woman three Mornings fasting, and cold to any Beast fasting. Eight or nine
Spoonfuls is sufficient for the strongest, a less Quantity to those younger, or
of a weaker Constitution, as you may judge of their Strength; ten or twelve for
a Horse or Bullock; three, four, or five for a Sheep, Hog, or Dog.

This must be given within nine Days after the Bite; and it never fails either
in Man or Beast. If you can conveniently, bind some of the Ingredients on the
Wound.

DIRECTIONS for Painting Rooms or Pales.
The Price of the Materials in London.
l. s. d. One Hundred Weight of Red Lead, 00 18 0 One Hundred Weight of White
Lead, 01 02 0 Linseed Oil, by the Gallon, 00 03 0 A small Quantity of Oil of
Turpentine is sufficient

THE Red Lead must be ground with Linseed-Oil, and may be used very Thin, it
being the priming or first coloring; when it is used, some drying Oil must be
put to it.

To prepare the drying Oil.
TAKE two Quarts of Linseed-Oil, put it in a Skillet or Sauce-pan, and put to
it a Pound of burnt Amber; boil it for two Hours gently; prepare this without
Doors for fear of endangering the House; let it settle, and it will be fit for
Use; pour the clear off, and use that with the White Lead, the Lees or Dregs
being as good to be used with Red Lead.

For the second priming.
TAKE a Hundred Weight of White Lead, with an equal Quantity of Whiting in
Bulk, but not in Weight; grind them together with Linseed-Oil pretty stiff;
when it is used, put to it some of the drying Oil abovementioned, with a small
Quantity of Oil of Turpentine. This is not to be laid on till the first priming
is very dry.

To prepare the Putty or Paste to stop all Joints in the Pales or Wood, that no
Water may soak in.
TAKE a Quantity of Whiting, and mix it very stiff with Linseed Oil, and drying
Oil, of each an equal Quantity; when it is so stiff it cannot be wrought by the
Hand, more Whiting must be added and beat up with a Mallet 'til it is stiffer
than Dough; when your second Priming is dry, stop such Places as require with
this Putty, and when the Putty is skinn'd over, that is, the Outside dr^, then
proceed and lay on the last Paint, which is thus to be prepared:

Take of the best White Lead, grind it very stiff with Linseed Oil, and when
it is used put to it some of the drying Oil, and some Oil of Turpentine. Thus
will the Work be finished to great Satisfaction; for it will be more clean and
more durable than it can be performed by a House-painter, without you pay
considerably more than the common Rates. Repeat this last Preparation once in
five Years, and it will preserve any Outworks that are exposed to the Weather,
Time out of Mind. But for Rooms or Places within Doors, proceed thus:

The Wainscot Color for Rooms.
WHEN you mix your last Paint, add to your White Lead a small Quantity of
Yellow Oaker, and use it as above directed. It Is now the universal Fashion to
paint all Rooms of a plain Wainscot Color; and if it should alter, it is but
mixing any other Color with the White Lead instead of Yellow Oaker. There must
be bought fix Chamber pots of Earth, and fix Brushes, and keep them to what
they belong to.

To make Yellow Varnish.
TAKE one Quart of Spirit of Wine, and seven Ounces of Seed Lake, half an Ounce
of Sandarack, a quarter of an Ounce of Gum-Anime, and one Dram of Mastich.
Let these infuse 36 or 40 Hours, strain it off, and keep it for Use. It Is good
for Frames of Chairs or Tables, or any Thing black or brown; do it on with a
Brush 3 or 4 Times, 9 Times if you polish it afterward, and a Day between
every doing: Lay it very thin the first and second Time, afterward something
thicker.

To make white Varnish.
TO one Quart of Spirit of Wine take eight Ounces of Sandarack well washed in
Spirit of Wine, that Spirit of Wine will make the Yellow Varnish; then add to
it a quarter of an Ounce of Gum-Anime well picked, half an Ounce of Camphire,
and one Dram of Mastich; steep this as long as the yellow Varnish, then
strain it out and keep it for Use.

To boil Plate.
TAKE twelve Gallons of Water, or a Quantity according to your Plate in
Largeness or Quantity; there must be Water enough to cover it. Put the Water in
a Copper or large Kettle, and when it boils put in half a Pound of red Argil, a
Pound of common Salt, an Ounce of Roch-Allum; first put your Plate into a
Charcoal Fire, and cover it till it is red hot; then throw it into your Copper,
and let it boil half an Hour; then take it out and wash it in cold fair Water,
and set it before the Charcoal Fire till it is very dry.

A Receipt for destroying Buggs.
TAKE of the highest rectified Spirit of Wine, viz. (Lamp Spirits) that will
b^rn all away dry, and leave not the le^st Moisture behind, half a Pint; n^wly
d^stil'd Oil, or Spirit of Turpentine half a Pint; mix them together and break
into it, in small Bits, half an Ounce of Camphire, which will dissolve in it in
a few Minutes; shake them well together, and with a Piece of Sponge, or a Brush
dipped in some of it, wet very well the Bed or Furniture wherein those Vermin
harbor or breed, and it will infallibly kill and destroy both them and their
Nits, although they swarm ever so much: But then the Bed or Furniture must be
well and thoroughly wet with it, (the Dust upon them being first brushed and
shook off,) by which means it will neither stain, soil, or in the least hurt
the finest Silk or Damask Bed that is. The Quantity here ordered of this
curious neat white Mixture, (which costs but about a Shilling) will rid any one
Bed whatsoever, though it swarms with Bugs: Do but touch a live Bug with a Drop
of it, and you will find it to die instantly. If any Bug or Bugs should happen
to appear after once using it, it will only be for want of well wetting the
Lacing, etc. of the Bed, or the Foldings of the Linings or Curtains near the
Rings, or the Joints or Holes in and about the Bed, Head-board, etc. wherein
the Bugs and Nits nestle and breed, and then their being well wet again with
more of the same Mixture, which dries in as fast as you use it, pouring some of
it into the Joints and Holes where the Sponge or Brush cannot reach, will never
fail absolutely to destroy them all. Some Beds that have much Wood work, can
hardly be thoroughly cleared, without being first taken down; but others that
can be drawn out, or that you can get well behind, to be done as it should be,
may.

Note, The Smell this Mixture occasions, will be all gone in two or three Days,
which yet is very wholesome, and to many People agreeable. You must remember
always to shake the Mixture together very well, whenever you use it, which must
be in the Daytime, not by Candlelight, le^t the Subtilty of the Mixture
should catch the Flame as you are using it, and occasion Damage.

To take Mildew out of Linen.
TAKE Soap and rub it on very well; then scrape Chalk very fine, and rub that
in well, and lay it on the Grass, and as it dries, wet it a little, and at once
or twice doing, it will come out.

THE INDEX.
A
ACHES, and Bruises, Page. 184. An old Ach or Strain, 196 Afterbirth, to bring
it away, 189 After pains, how prevented, 180, 189 Ague cured, 166, 178, 201.
Almond Butter, 90. Cakes, 77, 106. Cheesecakes, 67. Cream, 87. Loaves, 119,
Puffs, 73. Pudding, 44. Tourt, 50. to chocolate Almonds, 119. to parch them,
101. to fric^sy them, 105 Amulet of Eggs the Savoury Way, 15 Angel^c^ candied,
110 Angel Salve, 220 Apple Fritters, 49. Jelly, 118. Pasties to fry, 57.
Stewed, 116. Apricock Chips, 129. To dry Apricocks, 101. like Prun^llos, 122.
preserved, 100. preserved green, 124. preserved ripe, 128. Marmalade, 125.
Wine, 130 Aqua Mirabilis, 143 Artichoaks pickled, to keep all the Winter, 42.
Pie, 62 Asparagus Soop, 31
B
Bacon; to salt it, 27 To salt and dry a Ham of Bacon, 26. To make Westphalia
Bacon, 25 Balls Savoury, 2 Balsam, yellow, 201 Barberries pickled, 41.
preserved, 108 Barley Cream, 86. Water, 137. Wine, 138 Beef A la-mode, 22.
collar'd, 8, 24. hanged, 8. potted, 19 Beer strong, 141 Birch Wine, 135
Biskets, 81, 118. the hard Biscuit, 81. dropped Biscuit, 77. thin Dutch Biscuit, 78.
little hollow Biskets, 74. Lemon Biscuit, 119. Ratafia Biscuit, 95. Bite of a mad
Dog, 157, 178, 223. Bitter Draught, 194, 197 Black Cherry Water for Children,
149 Blackness by a Fall, 177 Bleeding at Mouth, Nose, or Ears, 180. Bleeding
inwardly, 185. Bleeding in the Stomach, 216. Bleeding stopped, 182 Blister, how
to raise one, 195. Blood stopped, 161, spitting Blood, 178, 184 Bloody Flux, 170
Boil, to break a Boil, 177 Brandy, Carraway Brandy, 148. Cherry Brandy, 132,
147. Bread Puddings, 45, 51 Breast of Veal collar'd, 18 Brimstone Lozenges for
a short Breath, 220 Briony Water, 156 Broth strong, to keep for Use, 5, 33
Bugs, how destroyed, 227 Buns, 75 Burns, 163, 166, 196, 220 Burstenness, 200
Butter, how to make it, 36
C
Cabbage Lettuce Pie, 65 Cakes to eat hot with Butter, 72. French Cake to eat
hot, ibid. Gooseberry Cake, 123. Lemon Cake, 121. little Cakes, 80. Marlborough
Cake, 79. Orange Cakes, 106, 121. Plumb Cakes, 65, 70, 71, 82, 83. Portugal
Cake, 72. rich great Cake, 69. Shrewsbury Cake, 77. Seed Cakes, 70, 71, 78, 79,
83, 84. Whetstone Cake, 81. the white Cake, 80 Calf's Head collared, 12 to
dress it, 30. Hash of it. 14 Calf's Foot P^^ding, 10, 46. Jelly, 88, 93.
Cancer, 182. (...) the Breast, to keep it fr^ growing, 204, 223. in the Mouth,
206. Carp stewed, 17 Carrot Pudding, 44 Cashew Lozenges, 217 Caudle of Oatmeal,
93, fine Caudle, 92. Flummery Caudle, ibid. for sweet Pyes, 3. Tea Caudle, 92
Charity Oil, 174 Cheese, A Summer Cream Cheese, 34. a Chedder Cheese, 36. Cream
Cheese, 36. with old Cheshire, 68. fresh Cheese, 89 Cheesecakes, 54, 55. Lemon
Cheesecakes, 63, 68. without C^rd, 65. without Runnet, 55 Cherries preserved,
107, 123. Marmalade of Cherries, 111. Cherry Wine, 132. Morella Cherry Wine,
136. Chervil Tart, 63 Chickens forced with Oysters, 20. Chickens fricasy'd, 15,
23. savoury Chicken Pie, 6, 61. sweet Pie, 60 Chilblains, 185 Chin Cough, 176,
201 Cholick, how to be cured, 163, 184. Citron Water, 147 Cider, 140 Clary
Wine, 139, 140 Clear Cakes of any Fruit, 105. Candy, 122. Jelly Cakes, 104
Clyster for Worms, 206 Cock Water for a Consumption, 152, 153 Colds, 207, 216,
217, 223 Color; to procure a good Color, 192 Conserve of Hips, 128. of red
Roses, 115 Cordial Water, 145, 146 Corns on the Feet, 185 Costiveness, 194
Cough, 127, 164, 184, 211, 217. settled on the Stomach, 154, 187. Cowheels
collared, 12. Pudding, 47 Crabs buttered, 16 Cracknels, 78 Cramp, 196 Cream
blanched, 87. Lemon Cream, 84, 85. Orange Cream, ibid. Cream of any preserved
Fruit, 91. Ratafia Cream, 87. Steeple Cream, 86. whipped Cream, 89 white Wine
Cream, 94 Cucumbers fried for Mutton Sauce, 23. pickled, 39. stewed, 28 Curd
Pudding, 48 Currants preserved in Jelly, 107. Jelly of white Currants, 110,
128. Current Wine, 132, 141 Custards, 54. Custard Pudding, 50
D.
Daffy' s Elixir, 157 Damsons preserved whole, 101. Wine, 130. Delivery of
Women, 189 Distemper got by an ill Husband, 154 Drink for a Fever, 176, 186,
195, 199. for the Rickets, 173, Rheumatism, or Pain in the Bones, 159, ^18.
opening Drink, 154. Purging Drinks, 169, 205. to preserve the Lungs, 155.
Dropsy, 160, 175, 187. Water, 149. Dropsy or Scurvy, 201 Drying Oil, 225 Dutch
Beef, 27 Dutch Gingerbread, 75
E.
Ebulum, 138 Eels collared, 7 Eggs fricosied, 29. Egg Pyes, 53. Elder Ale, 142
Wine, 137 Electuary for a Cough, 162. for a Cold, or windy Stomach, 172.
another for a Pain in the Stomach, ib. Elixir Proprietatis, 171 Eye Salve, 164
Eye Water, 156, 188 Eyes red or sore, 170. to clear the Eyes, 198. for sore or
weak Eyes, 206
F.
Face pimpled, 171, 181 Falling down of the Fundament, 191 Falling Sickness,
197, 202 Fever Water, 145. spotted Fever, 161. Plaster for the Feet, 195 Fish
Pie, 63 Fits in Children, 211. of the Mother, 153. from Wind or Cold, 171
Floodings, 190, 223 Florendine of Veal, 9, 62 Flowers candied, 113. Syrup of
Flowers, ibid. Flux, 190. Bloody flux, 170 Fool, of Strawberries, or
Raspberries, 94 Forc'd-meat, 5. to force a Fowl, 21 Freckles taken off, 183
French Barley Pudding, 46 French Beans pickled, 40 French Bread, 76 French
brown Loaves, 81 Fricasy of Lamb, 23. of double Tripes, 16. pale, 13. white and
bor^n, 23. Fritters, fine, 51 Fruit candied, 114. kept in Syrup to candy, 122
Fruit scalded, 124
G.
Gam of Gooseberries, 125 Garlic, Syrup of it, 180 Gascoigne' s Powder, 208
Gingerbread, 74, 75, 76, 80 Gloves, how to wash them, 172. Golden Cordial, 145
Goose or Turkey potted, 28. Turkey or Mutton A la-daube, 22 Gooseberries
preserved, 99. preserved in Hops, 114. without stoning, 115. Cream, 85.
Vinegar, 43. Wine, 131. Pearl Gooseberry Wine, ibid. Gout, 192, 193 Gravy to
keep for Use, 15 Gravel or Stone, 167, 216 Green Cucumbers (small) preserved,
116, 123 Green Pease Soop, 31. kept 'til Christmas, ibid. Green Ointment for
the Rickets, 174 Green Sickness, 183 Gripes, 175. Water, 149
H.
Hair, to make it grow, 212 Ham of Bacon. See Bacon. Hams of Pork, like
Westphalia, 26. a Pickle for them, 32. Hands, Paste for them, 173. to clean and
soften them, 213. to whiten them, 214. Hare Pie, 66. to jug a Hare, 34
Hartshorn Flummery, 95. Jelly, 88, 93. Head, to purge it, 206 Heart Heaviness,
170 Hemorrhoids inflamed, 194 Herrings, how baked, 30 Hickup, 196 Hiera-picra,
151 Hoarseness on the Lungs, 171. with a Cold, 211 Hogs Puddings, 48 Hungary
Water, 155 Hysterical Water, 147
I.
Jaundice, 158, 180. yellow or black, 199 Iceing a great Cake, 84 Jelly Posset,
91. Ribbon Jelly, 90. Jelly of Pippins, 109 Ink, how prepared, 172 Joint Evil,
182 Itch cured several Ways, 201, 217. Italian Wash, 215 Jumbals, 73
K.
Katchup, English, 41 King Charles II's Surfeit Water, 144
L.
Labor, in Child Birth, 188 Lady Onslow' s Water, 150 Lamb Pie savoury, 6, ^9.
sweet Lamb Pie, 60 Laudanum liquid, 146 Leach white, 94 Lear for savoury Pyes,
3 Leaden Plaster, 203 Leg of Mutton A-la-daube, 22 Lemon Pudding, 45. Puffs,
119. Syllabub, 94. Tart, 50. Water, 144. Wine, 137, 141 Lime Water, 152 Linen
freed from Mildew, 228 Looseness, 179 Lozenges for a Cough, 162. for the
Heartburn, 179 Lucatellus' s Balsam, 207 Lumber Pie, 6, 67
M.
Mackrel pickled, 33 Mangoes, of Cucumbers, 38. of Melons, 37 Marchpane, 73.
unboiled, 107. Marmalade white, 111 Marrow Puddings, 9, 45, Pasties, 64 Mead
strong, white small Mead, 133 Menses, how to procure them, 221 Milk Punch, 139
Milk in Nurses increased, 191 Milk Water for a cancerous Breast, 152. another
Milk Water, 157 Min^e Pyes of Veal, 64 Miscarrying prevented, 191 Morphew, 215
Mullet, or any other Fish, boiled, 16 Mouth sore in Children, 169. a rare Mouth
Water, 179 Mulberries preserved, 117 Mushrooms pickled, 38. Powder, 42. stewed,
12. Vinegar, 42 Mutton, Lamb, or Veal, forced, 21. Pie, 6. Leg or Shoulder
stuffed with Oysters, 10. Leg A-la-royal, 22.
N.
Neats Tongues potted, 18. Pie, 7 Necklaces for Children in cutting Teeth, 163
Nun's Cake, 83
O.
Oatmeal Sack Posset, 97 Obstructions, 218 Ointment for a Burn or Scald, 198.
for a Blast, 186. for a Bruise, 218. for a Cold on the Stomach, 212. scald
Head, 219 Oysters fried, 22. pickled, 7, 39. stewed in French Rolls, 8. Pie,
52. O^to Pie, 61, 66 Onions (small) pickled 41 Orange Chips crisped, 120
candied, 124. Marmalade, 121. Preserved whole, 98. Pudding, 44. Tarts, 56.
Water, 144. Wine, 134.
P.
Painting Rooms or Pales, 224 Pancakes, 49 Paste for Pasties, 55 Pasties of
Apples, 57. to fry, 54. Pastils, how made, 105 Pears dried, 112. without Sugar,
113. Pear Plumb, or any black Plumb preserved, 103 green Plumbs preserved, 102,
103. Pain in the Stomach, 164, 170. Pease Pottage, 4 Perfume, to make the
burning Perfume, 129 Pickle for Tongues, 32 Pickled Artichoaks, 42 Pig
collared, 19, 24 Pigeon Pie, 7. stewed, 27, 33 Pike boiled, roasted, 10, 11
Piles cured, 194, 219 Pills to purge the Head, 206 for a Cough, 216. Pimples,
214 Pin, or Web in the Eye, 198 Pippins preserved whole, ^^8 Pitting prevented,
105 Plague; Dr Burgesse' s Antidote against it, 150. Water, 142. Plaster for
an Ague, 176. for any Pain, by a Cold or Bruise, 175. for a We^^^ess in the
Back, 190. for Worms in Children, 209. for the Stomach, 210. Plate, how to boil
it, 227 Pleurisy cured without Bleeding, 198. Plumb Cakes with Almonds, 83.
Plumb Porridge, 3. Wine, 138. Pocke^s, how made, 34 Pol^e, how prepared, 28
Pomatum, 183 Poultice for a sore Breast, before broken, 204. when broken, ibid.
for Tumors, 186. for a hard Swelling, 177. another for a sore Breast, ibid.
Posset with Ale, or King William' s Posset, 96. Pope's Posset, 97. Snow Posset,
91. Potatoe Pie, 58. Cheesecakes, 59. Powder for Bu^stenness, 200. for
Convulsion Fits, 210. for a Rupture, 158. for the Teeth, 219 Pudding boiled,
47. baked, 50. Puff p^ste, for Tarts, 57, 66. Purges, 169, 191, 217. for
Hoarseness. 171. Purging Diet Drinks, 169, 205. Putty, how prepared, 225
Q.
Quaking Pudding, 47 Quince Cream, 87 Quince, white Jelly, 104 Quince
Marmalade, white, 111, 125. red Marmalade, ibid. Paste, 112. Preserved whole,
99. Wine, 136. Quilt for the Stomach, 210
R.
Radish Pods pickled, 39 Ragoo for made Dishes, 3. for Oysters, 11. for Sweet
breads, ibid. of Veal, 20. Raisin Wine, 134 Raspberries preserved in Jelly,
100. whole, 117, 118. Wine, 135, 136. Ratcliffe' s Receipt for a Cold, 215.
Remedy for a hollow Tooth, 158. Rheum in the Eyes, 198. in the Teeth, 212
Rheumatism, 218 Rheumatick Pains, 161 Rheumatism, Dropsy, Scurvy, and Cough in
the Lungs, 181 Red Cabbage pickled, 40 Rice Cream, 88. Rice Pudding, 46.
Ricke^s, 173 Rose Drops, 117 Rump of Beef baked, ^^ stewed, 13. Runnet Bag, 35
S.
Sack Cream, 88, 95 Sack Posset, without Eggs, 96. without Cream or Eggs, ibid.
Pudding, 48. Saffron Cordial, 148 S^ge Wine, 135 Salop, 93 Salve for a Blast,
Burn, or Scald, 178. Salve for a Sprain, 183. Salve for the King's Evil, 199.
black Salve, 202. green Salve, 203. Salve for a Sear-Cloth, 207. for the Lips,
213. Samphire pickled, 38 Sauce for Fish or Flesh, 43. for Fish in Lent, 59
Sausages, very fine, 32 Scald Head, 197. Ointment, 219. Sear-Cloth, 165
Sciatica, a Plaster for it, 199. Scotc^- Collops, 14 Scurvy or Dropsy, 184,
201. Water for the Gums, 214 Shortness of Breath, 181 Shrub, 134 Sight
restored, when almost ^ost, 187. Scurff and Redness taken out, 220 Snail Water,
155 Soop, 1, 4. Fasting Soop, 2. Gravy Soop, ibid. Spots of the Smallpox, how
to be taken out, 184 Stitch in the Side, 166. Stitch Water, 148 Stomach
strengthened, 170 Stone, to give Ease in a violent Fit, 188, 222 Stoughton' s
Elixir, 162 Str^n^ury, 176 Stuffi^g in the Lungs, 188 Sugar Plates, 102. brown
Sugar, 105. clear Sugar, 102. of Roses, 116 Swan potted, 25 Sweet- Bag for
Linen, 129 Sweet bread Pasty, 53 Sweetmeat Pudding, 51 Swelling in the Face,
205 Syllabubs fine Syllabubs, 97 whipped, 89 Syrup of Balsam, 127. for a Cough,
126, 127. of Flowers, 113. of Marshmallows, 126. of Orange Peel, 120. of
Saffron, 126.
T.
Tansey baked, 13, 49 Tarts iced, 66 Teeth, how to preserve and whiten them,
186, 213, 219. Tetter, how killed, 186 Thorn drawn out, 197 Throat sore, 165,
205 Thrush in Children, 221 Tincture for green Wounds, 176. Tongues dried, 26.
Pickle for them, ibid. Treacle Water, 159 Trembling at Heart, 197 Tooth- ach,
158, 179, 180 Tumors dispersed, 204 Turkey Pie, 9. stewed, 29 Tureiner, how
made 52
U.
Urine provoked, 221 Usquebaugh, how made, 160. Uvula, to draw it up, 221
V.
Vapors cured, 146 Varnish, white and yellow, 226. Veal Cutlets, 30. Pie, 9.
Savoury Dish of Veal, 24 Venison collared, 17. Pasty, 57. recovered when it
stinks, 20. Verjuice for Pickles, 43 Vomit, 169, 195, 219 Vomiting, how to be
stopped, 177, 179 Vertigo Water, 150
W.
Walnuts pickled, 37 Water calcined, for Ulcers and Sores, 203. to cure red or
pimpled Faces, 209. for sore or weak Eyes, 206. to wash the Face in, 209, 214.
Dr. Stevens' s Water, 143. Water for the Stone, 147. to strengthen Sight, 153.
to be taken after Balsam Tolu, 156. Rue Water, 153. Weakness in the Back, 222.
in the Hands, 196 Wigs, 74, 76, 79. very good, 67. made light, 65. Wine, how to
clear it, 140. fined the Lisbon Way, ^^. recovered, when sharp, 139. Worms in
Children, how to know them, 178. to destroy Worms, 216, 221 Whooping Coughs,
211
BOOKS Printed and Sold, by William Parks, in Williamsburg.
THE Sacrament of the LORD'S SUPPER Explained; or the Things to be done and
known, to make a worthy Communicant. With suitable Prayers and Meditations. By
the Right Reverend Father in God, Edmund, Lord Bishop of London: To which is
added, The HOLY DAYS, or the FEASTS and FASTS, as they are to be observed in
the Church of England, Explained: And the Reasons why they are Yearly
Celebrated. Price 2 s. 6 d.

The CHURCH CATECHISM Explained, by Way of Question and Answer; and confirmed
by Scripture Proofs: Divided into Five Parts, and 12 Sections: Wherein a brief
and plain Account is given of, 1. The Christian Covenant. 2. The Christian
Faith. 3. The Christian Obedience. 4. The Christian Prayer. 5. The Christian
Sacrament. Collected by John Lewis, Minister of Margate in Ke^t. Price Stitched
10 d. bound 1 s. 3 d.

The PRECIOUS BLOOD of the Son of GOD, Shed without the Gates of Jerusalem, for
the Redemption of lost and undone Sinners: Whereby his great Love to Mankind is
undeniably manifested, in these following Particulars. His Agony in the Garden;
being betrayed by Judas; being falsely accused before Annas, Caiaphas, Herod,
and Pilate; his being scourged, scorned, and, spitefully used; his
Condemnation, and going to Execution; how he was Crucified; of his being
Reviled, pardoning the Thief upon the Cross; and of his giving up the Ghost.
All which is practically applied and Improved; for the bringing of Sinners out
of the Way of Sin and Hell, into Wisdom's Ways. Whose Ways are Ways of
Pleasantness, and all her Paths are Peace. By John Howard, D. D. The Twentieth
Edition. Price bound Three Bits.

A FATHER'S ADVICE to his Children. In two Parts. 1. In a brief Explanation of
the Apostle's Creed. 2 In Sundry Cautions against Whoredom. Both in Verse. To
which is added, in Prose, a short Persuasion not to delay making a Will, when
it is necessary that One should be made. Price stitched Three Bits.

IMMANUEL, or the Mystery of the Incarnation of the Son of GOD, unfolded. By
James Usher, Archbishop of Armagh. Price stitched Two Bits.

The Psalter, or Psalms of DAVID, after the Translation of the Great Bible;
Pointed as they are to be Sung or S^^d in Churches. With the Addition of
Mo^^ing and Evening Prayer. Price bound Three Bits.

A Guide to the E^GLISH TONGUE. In Two Parts. The First proper for beginners,
showing a Natural and Easy Method, to pronounce and express both Common Words,
and proper Names; in which particular Care is had to show the Accent, for
preventing vicious Pronunciation. The Second for such as are advanced to some
Ripeness of Judgment, containing Observations on the Sounds of Letters and
Diphthongs; Rules for the true Division of Syllables, and the Use of Capital^,
Stops, and Marks: With large Tables of Abbreviations and Distinctions of Words;
and several Alphabets of Copies for young Writers. To which is now added, An
APPENDIX, containing many additional Lessons, in Prose and Verse; First in
Words of one Syllable only; and then mixed with two, three, four, five, six, or
seven Syllables. By Thomas D^^he, Schoolmaster, at Stratford Bow. The Twenty
Fifth Edition, Corrected. Price bound Three Bits.

The Gentleman's POCKET-FARRIER. Showing how to use your Horse on a Journey.
And what Remedies are proper for common Misfortunes that may befall him on the
Road. By Capt. William Burdon. Price stitched Two Bits, bound Three Bits.

Every Man his own Doctor: Or, the Poor Planter's Physician. Prescribing plain
and easy Means for Persons to cure themselves of all, or most of the
Distempers, incident to this Climate, and with very little Charge, the
Medicines being chiefly of the Growth and Production of this Country. The Third
Edition, with Additions. Price stitched i^.

An Essay on the PLEURISY. By John Tennent. The Second Edition, with Additions.
Price stitched ^ s.

A Collection of all the Acts of Assembly, now in Force, in the Colony of
Virginia. With the Titles of such as are Expir'^ or Repealed. And Notes in the
Margin, showing how, and at what Time, they were Repealed. Examined with the
Records, by a Committee appointed for that Purpose. Who have added many useful
Notes and References: And an exact Table. Published by Order of the General
Assembly. Price 1 ^ 15 s.

An exact Abridgment of all the Public Acts of Assembly, of Virginia, in Force
and Use. Together with sundry Precedents, adapted thereto. And proper Tables.
By John Mercer, Gent. Price 10 s. 10 d.

The Office and Authority of a Justice of Peace. And also the Duty of Sheriffs,
Coroners, Churchwardens, Surveiors of Highways, Constables, and Officers of
Militia. Together with Precedents of Warrants, Judgments, Executions, and other
legal Process, issu^ble by Magistrates within their respective Jurisdictions,
in Cases Civil or Criminal. And the Method of Judicial Proceedings, before
Justices of Peace, in Matters within their Cognizance out of S^ssions.
Collected from the Common and Statute Laws of England, and Acts of Assembly,
now in Force; and adapted to the Constitution and Practice of Virginia. By
George W^^b, Gent. one of His Majesty's Justices of Peace of the County of
New-Kent. Price 10 s.


