Mr. Ashley's SERMON At the ORDINATION of Mr. Kendall.

The Great Concern of CHRIST for the Salvation of Sinners, and the Duty of his
Ministers earnestly to persuade Men into his Kingdom: Considered in a SERMON
Preached at New-Salem, December 15. 1742. on Occasion of the Gathering a Church
there, and the Ordination of the Rev. Mr. Samuel Kendall To be their Pastor.

By Jonathan Ashley, A.M. And Pastor of the Church in DEERFIELD.

John xiv.2. In my Father's House are many Mansions, if it were not so, I would
have told you: I go to prepare a Place for you.

Matthew. xxii.9. Go ye therefore into the Highways, and as many as ye shall
find, bid to the Marriage.

BOSTON, Printed by Rogers and Foul for S. Eliot in Cornhill. 1743.

An Ordination SERMON.
Luke 14.23. And the Lord said unto the Servant, go out into the High Ways, and
Hedges, and compel them to come in, that my House may be filled.


OUR blessed Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, when he came down from the most
excellent Glory, to bring Life and Immortality to Light in a dark and miserable
World, was pleased to instruct Mankind in the important Things of Salvation by
plain, and most affecting Parables. Our Lord most commonly taught the People in
Parables (it being a usual Method of Instruction in the Eastern Countries) and
he rarely taught the People without a Parable. Mark 4.34.


The Design of our Savior herein seems to be, to enlighten the Understanding,
to assist the Memory, and to move the Affections, and Passions of the Mind; all
which are well answered thereby: Sublime and spiritual Things, being clothed in
such Metaphors, are brought down to the low and dull Capacities of Men. The
Event indeed of such parabolical Representations oftentimes was, through the
Inattention and Prejudice of the Hearer, the rendering him more hardened and
secure in Sin, but the Design of Christ was to make Men wise unto Salvation:
And it had this Effect upon the honest Hearer; but a very contrary and more
unhappy one on the careless Multitude, as it is intimated to us in Mat.
13.10-11.

The Parable, in which our Text is contained, is a short, and very wonderful
Representation of the great Affair of our Salvation. We are taught what vast
Preparation God has made for the Recovery, and Happiness of a sinful, perishing
World, intimated in the 16 Ver. by a certain Man making a great Supper: Matthew
tells us, that a certain King made a Marriage for his Son, in his 22 Chapt. By
which we are to understand, GOD himself, the great King of Heaven, and Earth,
who has made a great Supper, and a Feast of fat Things, in the Gospel, for
hungry and perishing Sinners. And when all Things were made ready; when a
Savior was provided; then many, even the whole Jewish Nation were invited to
come to this Gospel-Feast. The Servants of the Most High GOD, the Prophets,
were sent forth to entreat them to accept of the rich Provision God had made:
but they all excused themselves (or the greater Part of them); one had bought a
Piece of Ground and he must needs go and see it; another had bought five Yoke
of Oxen; and he must go and prove them; a third had married a Wife and he could
not come. Hereby not only is the Temper and Disposition of the Jews pointed out
to us; but also of the greater Part of Men under the Gospel; who have their
Hearts and Affections so much engaged in the Cares of the World, that they
cannot consult the Interest of their immortal Souls.

When the Jews had thus slighted the Invitations of a merciful God, and
rejected the Savior of their Souls: Then the Offers of Pardon and
Reconciliation are tendered to the Gentiles. Christ then sends forth his
Servants, the Apostles, and Ministers of the Gospel into the Streets and Lanes
of the City; that is, the Gentile World, to bring in hither the Poor, the
Maimed, the Halt, and the Blind: And the Lord of the Supper repeats his Command
to his Servants with the greatest Earnestness; go out into the High Ways, and
Hedges, and compel them to come in: Take no Denial of them; don't be easily put
off by them: persuade; yea bring them contrary to their Wills if possible; and
I will make them willing: Gather in great Numbers that my House may be full:

We have three Things intimated in the Words of the Text. 1st The Kingdom or
Church of God pointed out by the Term House, which signifies to us the happy
State and Condition of all such, who are brought into the Kingdom of Christ:
They are like Men in a House protected from the Storms and Tempests: They may
rest and refresh themselves: they may take their Pleasure, feast and regale
themselves in this House. The Kingdom of God is compared to a great House 2 Timothy 2.20.
where there are Vessels, some for Honor and some to Dishonor. 2dly, We have
the miserable State of the Gentile World; and of all those who are out of the
Kingdom of Christ, set forth to us by those who are in the High Ways and
Hedges, who are Poor, Maimed, Halt and Blind. They are like Men exposed to the
Storms and Severities of the Weather, who have no House nor Home to repair to,
who are ready to perish with the Hunger and Cold; and are so lame and maimed
that they cannot help themselves nor go any where to save their Lives: Sinners
are poor, maimed and helpless, exposed to all the Storms of the Displeasure and
Wrath of God. 3dly, We have the Pity and Compas^^^n of Christ toward such
miserable Creatures, and his Earnestness for their Salvation. Go, says he, to
his Servants, and compel them to come into my House, where they may be healed
of their Wounds and made rich.

But it is my Design to consider the Words before us under these two general
Propositions.

First, The Salvation of a sinful and miserable World, is a Matter, which our
Lord Jesus Christ is much engaged about.

Secondly, The Ministers of Christ should also have the Salvation of Sinners
much upon their Hearts: And should use all reasonable Methods to compel them
into the Kingdom of Christ.

First, The Salvation of a sinful and miserable World is a Matter which our
Lord Jesus Christ is much engaged about.

So he is represented in the Parable, as willing to take no Denial; Compel him
to come in; don't be turned off by their Refusals; but entreat, and persuade
them over and over again. The Salvation of Sinners was a Work, Christ had his
Mind upon from all Eternity: and he took great Delight in the Fore-thoughts of
it: His Delights were with the Children of Men Prove. 8.31.
above what they were with the holy Angels of Heaven; but this could be upon no
other Account but that of his being their appointed Savior and Redeemer: He
foresaw all he was to do, and suffer for them to bring them to God with
Pleasure. And the Psalmist, personating our Blessed Lord, says Psa. 69.6.
The Zeal of thine House has eaten me up. He was swallowed up with a Concern
for the House or Kingdom of God. So much was the Mind of Christ in this Work,
that he was Luke 12.10.
straightened until it was accomplished: Nothing could discourage him from his
Work. He would hearken to no Suggestions of going back from the Sufferings
which were before him. And when the Apostle Peter once ventured to tell him,
when speaking of his approaching Sufferings, that such Things should not happen
to him, how sharply does he reprove him? Mat. 16.23.
Get thee behind me Satan thou art an Offense unto me. I will hear no such
Thing from thee; for I am set upon finishing the Work I am come into the World
upon. His Heart was so much set upon it that he could deny himself of his Ease
and Comfort that he might fulfill it: he could fast and pray whole Nights for
Sinners, who had no Prayers to put up to God for themselves. He was so intent
upon his Work, that he forgot his Food: or rather he made it John 4.33, 34.
his Meat and Drink to do the Will of his heavenly Father, in saving Sinners.
He lived, as it were, upon his Work, he took so much Delight in it, and was so
much concerned to finish it. But the Engagedness of Christ in this important
Affair of our Salvation will more fully appear from the Consideration of these
following Particulars.

1. The Lord Jesus Christ most freely, and readily undertook for Sinners;
became obliged to pay the Price of their Redemption, and recover them from a
State of Sin to God. When God the Father proposed the Recovery of a Number of
the fallen Race of Adam; and made known the Design he had of a rich Display of
his Grace in their Salvation; and declared, that in Order to this, some one
must become a Surety for them, and pay the full Price of their Redemption: Then
it was there was Silence among the Angels: no one dared to step in between an
offended God and sinful Man: Nor was any Man found, who could undertake this
great Work: But now, behold the Willingness and Readiness of the Son! how
freely does he offer himself on our Behalf! and say to the Father, Heb. 10.6, 7.
Lo! I am come to do thy Will. Here, I, thy only begotten Son, am; place all
their Debt to my Account: I will pay thee all: Turn all the Strokes of thy
Displeasure upon me: I will bear them. Don't pity nor spare me; but shoot thine
Arrows at me; Cause thy Sword to awake against me. I will obey the Law they
have broke. I will endure all that Punishment thine holy Law threatens for
their Sins. I will satisfy thy Law; and restore that Honor to thee which their
Sins have took away. Now, if it were a Matter of Indifference with the Son of
God, whether we were saved or not, would he so readily have stepped in, and
become obliged to pay the whole Price of our Redemption? Would he have bound
himself in a Covenant of Redemption to endure all that Punishment due to
Sinners; if he was not much engaged for our Redemption? He was under no
Obligation to us. He might have left us to perish in our Sins without the least
Injustice to us. Nor did he stand in any Need of us; or the Services which he
expects from us, whom he has redeemed; for he was infinitely happy in the Bosom
of his Father and could not be made more so. Nor did the Father compel him
hereto: It was his own voluntary Act: No sooner did the Father make known his
Purposes of Grace but the Son freely offered himself to stand our Surety; and
become obliged to pay the Debt we had contracted.

2dly, The Incarnation of the Son of God shows us, how much the Work of our
Redemption was upon the Heart of the Son of God. It was an infinite
Condescension in the Son of God, who was equal with God in all his divine
Perfections, to take upon him the Seed of Abraham; and be made like unto sinful
Flesh. The Son of God had a full View of all the Miseries which should befall
him in our Nature, when he came down, and assumed Flesh of the Virgin Mary; but
yet, these did not terrify him: When the Fullness of Time was come, that he
should come forth into the World, he readily lest his Father's Bosom, parted
with the Joys and Glories of that happy World above; he became Man, and veiled
his Glory in Flesh: and with what agreeable Wonder and Surprise, should we
contemplate this great Mystery of Godliness, God manifested in the Flesh? It is
with Pleasure the holy Angels desire to look into and understand this wonderful
Transaction. And had not the Salvation of Sinners been a Thing of the greatest
Concern with the Son of God, would he have become Man? been made under the Law,
and become exposed to the Reproaches, and Blasphemies of a sinful World? would
he have subjected himself to the Condemnation and Threatening of a broken Law;
and by being made Man become necessitated to suffer and die in our Stead? As
the Son of God foresaw all these Things when he became Man* So nothing but
infinite Love and Pity to us could move him to it.

3dly, The Laboriousness and Diligence of Christ in fulfilling his Ministry
whilst here on Earth, discover to us, how much engaged he was to redeem lost
and perishing Sinners. He was incessant in his Labors, unwearied in his Pains
to do good to the Souls and Bodies of Men. He went about from City to City,
seeking all Opportunities of relieving miserable Men. He bore the Griefs and
carried the Sorrows of the Children of Men. He never turned aside from any
miserable Objects who sought his Compassion, refusing to help them. How
industrious was he to reveal the great Purposes of divine Grace to Sinners, and
the Way and Manner of our recovering the lost Image, and Favor of God: he took
the utmost Pleasure in acquainting Men with the Miseries of their natural
State, in convincing them of the Necessity they were under of obtaining Pardon
and Reconciliation with an offended God. He did not spend his Time in
Slothfulness; but was careful to finish the Work he came to do (k) before the
Night come upon him wherein no Man can work. He was willing to spend and be
spent in his Work* He did not spare himself; but encountered all Hardships and
Difficulties; when they stood in the Way of our Salvation: and what was it
stirred him up to all this Labor and Diligence but a Concern to finish the
Work of our Redemption? this made him so zealous in all the Matters of God's
House. This it was made him deny himself of his Sleep, and forget his Food.

4thly, That Grief and deep Concern which Christ had for hardened and secure
Sinners shows how much their Salvation lay upon his Mind.

However stupid and senseless Sinners were themselves; yet Christ had a most
tender Pity for them; however unconcerned they were about their own
Circumstances; yet Christ was full of Thoughtfulness about them. When they
rejected his gracious Invitations, and slighted his meanest Offers; Then Mark
3.5.
he was grieved at the Hardness and Impenitency of their Hearts. Luke 19.41, 42.
He wept over a sinful wretched World, who were neglecting the Things of their
Peace. Our blessed Savior knew what Miseries, and Torments Sinners were
hastening upon themselves; it filled him therefore with Pity to see them
refusing the only Remedy for their Souls, and going on obstinately in the broad
Way to everlasting Ruin, and this made the Son of God so affected for them, his
being so much concerned for their Salvation.

5thly, Christ's so readily undertaking all those severe Sufferings which he
endured for Sinners, shows us how much his Heart is upon this Work.

Sorrows were multiplied upon the Son of God. His whole Life was a Scene of
Suffering and Sorrow. Hence he is styled Isaiah 53.3.
A Man of Sorrows and acquainted with Grief. He was filled with inward Grief
for our Sins and Follies: and he sustained outward Troubles of various Kinds.
He became a Reproach of Men, and the Song of Drunkards: he had not where to lay
his Head; although the Earth and the Fullness thereof was his. But why do I tell
of these; they were light compared with what he met with in the Garden and at
his Death. The very Forethought of his Sufferings was so great that he Luke
22.44.
sweat great Drops of Blood: The very Vessels of his Body burst under the
pressing Agony: how great was the Distress of his Mind which had so great Power
on his Body? And from hence let us follow Christ to the Place of his Trial, and
Crucifixion: he was apprehended by a Band of Ruffians; who treated him in a
most barbarous Manner; who buffeted him; crowned him with Thorns, spit in his
Face, bowed the Knee before him in Contempt: they set him at Naught, and laid
most wicked Things to his Charge, such as he knew not: and when they had
condemned him, they led him away, obliging him to carry the very Wood upon
which he was to be crucified: and when he came to the Place of his Crucifixion,
they lifted him up upon the Cross, they nailed his Hands and Feet; and put him
to the most exquisite Torments: and his Soul was filled with the Displeasure of
God, when he hid his Face from him; then he cried out in the greatest Distress
Mat. 27.46.
my God, my God, why have thou forsaken me! and notwithstanding these
Sufferings were so very mighty, that the human Nature was ready to shrink back
at the Approach of them; and pray that the Cup of his Sufferings might be taken
from him: yet with what Cheerfulness did Christ meet them, and with what
wonderful Patience did he endure them! Isaiah 53.7.
he was brought as a Lamb to the Slaughter, and as a Sheep before its Shearer
is Dumb, so he opened not his Mouth.

He never murmured, nor complained under all his Sufferings; for they were what
he was so much engaged to fulfill: but would Christ have endured so many bitter
Things from the Hands of Sinners; if their Salvation was what he was not much
concerned about?

6thly, Christ's Patience with Sinners, and his repeated Suits to them to
accept of tendered Mercy, show how much concerned Christ is for the Salvation
of Sinners. It is astonishing Grace indeed that one Offer of Mercy should be
made to a convicted and condemned Rebel: but how much more wonderful, that the
Son of God should lay aside his dreadful Majesty, and put on the Supplicant to
beseech Sinners to accept of eternal Life? Would he ever stand knocking at the
Door of their Hearts, Rev. 3.20.
begging for Entrance, Cant. 5.2.
till his Locks were wet with the Dews of the Night, if his whole Heart was not
in this Matter? Would he ever bear so many Repulses from Sinners, and renew his
moving Calls and Entreaties, if it was a Matter of Indifferency with him
whether Israel be gathered? No verily, he would turn from them and leave them
to perish in their Unrighteousness: he would say to them, let him that is
filthy be filthy still; but the Son of God seems to be willing to take no
Denial from Sinners; he lengthens out his Patience from Day to Day that he may
have an Opportunity to be gracious to them.

7thly, That the Salvation of Sinners is a Matter of the utmost Concern with
the Son of God is evident from his appointing such a Variety of Means and his
sending forth his Ministers to beseech Men to be reconciled to God.

There are all those Means, and Helps provided for Sinners, which they can
reasonably expect or wish for, to recover them from Sin, and fit them for
eternal Life. Our blessed Lord has committed the Revelation which he has
brought from Heaven, to Writing; that we may daily study it, and be made wise
to Salvation: The Sabbath is instituted to solemnize our Hearts, and recover
our Affections from the World by the religious Worship of God. There is Baptism
to put us in Mind of our Need of being sprinkled with the Blood of Christ to
cleanse us from all our Filth, and spiritual Pollutions; and the Lord's Supper
is appointed to affect our Hearts with a Sense of the Sufferings of the Son of
God for us. The Ministers of the Gospel are sent forth in Christ's Name to
teach Men the Way of Life, and persuade them to return to God; and Christ has
promised his Presence with them: and when he foresaw that the best Means and
most able Ministers could of themselves do nothing without a divine Power,
cooperating with them; he was pleased, at his Ascension, to send down his Holy
Spirit to guide, and assist his Ministers; and work in the Hearts of Sinners
'till they are transformed into the glorious Image of God. And now would Christ
have appointed such Means, would he send forth his Servants to urge Sinners to
Salvation? Would he send forth his Spirit to supply his Presence here, if the
Salvation of Sinners was not much upon his Heart?

Lastly, The powerful, and constant Intercession of the Son of God in Heaven
shows how much he is engaged in his Work of redeeming Sinners. He who was
crucified with wicked Hands and put to Death is risen again, ascended into
Heaven, and ever lives to make Intercession for his People. Heb. 7.21.


He has by his own Blood entered into the most holy Place above, and
continually appears in the Temple there with the Names of his People Isa. 49.16.
written on the Palms of his Hands. He pleads the Merits of his own Sufferings
before God; nor are they ineffectual: the Father will not despise the Blood of
his own Son; nor will he reject his Mediation in Heaven. The Father grants to
his People here on Earth what ever his Son asks for above: Nor is the Son of
God ever forgetful of his suffering Saints, Heb. 4.15.
but is touched with a Sense of their Infirmities. He knows their State, he
feels their Sorrows; and pleads their Cause before a merciful God; but would
the Son of God always represent his People above, and plead their Cause, if
their Salvation was not much upon his Heart?

Should any now ask, whence it comes to pass, that the Lord Jesus Christ has
the Salvation of Sinners so much upon his Heart?

It may be answered, it is not because he stands in any Need of us, or would
not have been happy without our Salvation. His divine Perfections and
Blessedness are not in any Measure increased by our Recovery from Misery.

But the Son of God had entered into Covenant with the Father, and became
obliged to redeem a certain Number John 6.39.
whom the Father had given to him, for that End: he was made by Agreement Heb.
7.22.
a Surety for us: His Truth and Faithfulness were engaged for our Salvation,
and whatever Difficulties were in the Way he must go through and not give back;
lest he become false, and unfaithful to the Father; but he cannot deny himself:
he will fulfill all his Compact with the Father, and nothing can fail on
Christ's Part.

And besides, this Covenant which Christ had entered into with the Father, there
was the Honor and Glory of God concerned in the great Affair of Man's
Redemption: Christ is said to be Heb. 1.3.
the Brightness of the Father's Glory, because in this Way of the Sinner's
Salvation by Christ the Glory of God would more wonderfully appear, than in all
his other Works both of Creation and Providence. And since the Glory of all the
divine Perfections would most clearly shine forth in the Sinner's Salvation;
Christ was greatly concerned to carry it on and complete it; for the Glory of
the Father was what Christ was much concerned about; it was what he labored
and earnestly John 12.28.
prayed for on Earth. Nothing was too much for him to do or suffer that he
might glorify his Father.

Nor was he only concerned for the Glory of the Father, but being Man, and
partaking of Flesh and Blood with us; he had the most tender Pity and
Compassion for the Children of Men. He felt their Miseries and he was grieved
for them: He was willing to do every Thing that was necessary to save them from
the insupportable Wrath of God. He foresaw how intolerable their Punishment
would be; therefore he was grieved for them and wept over them.

And our Lord himself had much depending upon the Success of this great Work of
Redemption. The Father had promised him as a Reward for his Labors, that he
should have all Power in Heaven and Earth committed to him; that he should be
exalted Heaover all Things; That every Knee should bow in Subjection to him.
The highest Honors and Dignities were to be conferred upon him, upon his
finishing this Work. And now had not the Work of the Lord prospered in his
Hands, he must have missed of all this promised Glory from the Father: He was
therefore concerned to finish his Work that he might as Man be received John
17.5.
to that Glory, which he, as God, had with the Father before the World was.
Thus we see his Truth and Faithfulness, his Pity and Compassion for us: A
Concern for his Father's and a Desire for his own Glory, all conspired together
to put him upon the utmost Engagedness for the Salvation of Sinners.

But I proceed now to the Consideration of the second general Proposition, viz.

That the Ministers of Christ should also have the Salvation of Sinners much
upon their Hearts, and should use all reasonable Methods to compel Men into the
Kingdom of Christ.

Is Christ the great Shepherd and Bishop of Souls so much concerned for the
Salvation of Sinners? And shall not his Ministers, according to their Measure,
imitate him in Zeal for the Glory of God and the Salvation of Men? Christ has
set his Ministers an Example John 13.15.
and requires them to do as they have seen him do. He expects his Servants
should be fervent in Spirit in this great Trust, which he commits to them. He
does not allow them to be slothful in Business; but they must be Men of Life
and Resolution, concerned 1 Timothy 4.16.
to save themselves, and them that hear them. They must spend their Time and
Strength for this End that they may win Souls to Christ: They must use all
their Talents and the Gifts conferred upon them, that they may persuade and
compel Men into the Kingdom of God. But under this Proposition I design First
to show how it is Ministers are to compel Men into the Kingdom of God.
Secondly, Give some Reasons why they should have the Salvation of Sinners so
much upon their Hearts.

First, Let us consider how it is Ministers are to compel Men into the Kingdom
of God.

But here, we are carefully to observe that our Lord does not require his
Ministers to compel Men into his Kingdom, in a Way, and Manner that he
elsewhere condemns. We are not to suppose, our Lord would have his Ministers
use external Force, and Violence with Men: he gives them no Liberty to afflict
and torment their Bodies, in order to make them his Disciples. Christ will have
free and voluntary Subjects; such as submit to him out of Choice, and not such
as are forced into Subjection; whilst they hate his Laws, and Government. There
has been something of this Temper in all Ages of Christianity, to use Power to
make Men Christians: So our Lord's Disciples would have had him Luke 9.54, 55.
commanded Fire from Heaven to consume such as would not receive him; but he
told them they knew not what Manner of Spirit they were of: that is, how
contrary to the Nature of his Kingdom such forcible Means were; for he aimed to
rule over the Minds and Consciences of Men. Our Lord said to Pilate Joh. 18.36.
that his Kingdom was not of this World: It was not to be set up in the Way
that the Kingdoms of this World are; if it was, his Disciples would fight for
him. Nor does the Word ( compel) necessarily carry such a Construction: There
are other Ways to compel Men besides Fines, Imprisonments, Scourges, Racks and
Burnings: These are Engines of the Man of Sin, and never were contrived by a
meek and lowly Jesus for the Advancement of his Kingdom, which is to be set up
with Peaceableness, and Gentleness. The Apostle Peter compelled the Gentiles
Gal. 2.14.
to conform to the Rites and Ceremonies of the Jews, which he did no other Way
than by Persuasion and Entreaty. The Corinthians 2 Cor. 12.11.
compelled the Apostle Paul to Glory, which they did only by provoking him, and
stirring him up. But this Duty of Ministers in compelling Men into the Kingdom
of Christ consists chiefly in these Things,

1st, In teaching and instructing Men in a plain and forceable Manner in the
great Truths of the Gospel. Christ sent forth his Apostles, and so he now sends
forth his Ministers, to teach Men: they are naturally ignorant of God, and
divine Things; and they stand in Need of being taught the first Rudiments of
Christianity. Ministers are to teach Men who God is; how he is to be served:
what Duties we owe him; and where we are to look for Help to discharge them.
They are to teach Christ crucified to the World: And how Salvation is to be had
by Faith in him: The Servants of Christ must be 2 Timothy 3.2.
apt to teach; prepared and disposed to instruct Men. And they should endeavor
to teach with such Plainness and Demonstration that it may force the Assent of
the Understanding; and the Sinner be obliged to confess these are Things which
cannot be spoken against.

2dly, Ministers are to compel Men by sound Reason. They should compare one
Thing with another; and show the Fitness and Propriety of the several Parts of
Religion, how they are all suited both to advance the Glory of God the Author,
and the Happiness of Man the Creature. It is not eno' that Ministers fling out
many moving and affecting Words at Random: but they must treat Men as rational
Creatures; for so did God himself; and says Isa. 1.18.
come let us reason together. The Practice of the Apostle Paul differed much
from some Teachers at this Day; for his Manner was to Acts 17.2.
reason with the People. He reasoned before Felix of Righteousness, Temperance
and Judgment. Ministers of Christ should be Men of Reason, for they are to
preach* a most reasonable Gospel. And they should reason so closely to the
Consciences of Men, that they may be wrought into a Compliance. If Ministers
lay aside their Reason as useless; and treat Men as void of it, they cannot
expect their Hearers will have much of it; and if such Ministers make Men
Christians, they may be passionate ones; but they never will be very sound and
stable in the Faith.

3dly, The Ambassadors of Christ are to compel Men into the Kingdom of God by
stirring up the Affections and Passions of the Mind. These are termed the Feet
of the Soul, and if they are dead and unmoved, however the Understanding be
convinced the Man will not be in Earnest for his own Salvation: When a suitable
Degree of Knowledge is laid in the Understanding; and the Reason has been
improved; then it is proper to rouse the Passions, that the whole Soul may be
engaged to avoid the approaching Vengeance of God.

In the first Place, it is the Business of Ministers to awaken Men's Fears by
displaying the Misery of their State, whilst out of Christ, and under the
Condemnation of a fiery Law. Men must have the Torments of the Damned set
before them; and be informed, how dreadful, and insupportable the Vengeance of
that God is, who is a consuming Fire: they must be put in Mind of the Worm of
Conscience, which will always accuse and torment them with a Remembrance of
their past Sins, Mark 9.44.
and of the Fire that never can be quenched; that Fear and Trembling may take
hold on Sinners; and they may enquire in earnest, what they shall do to be
saved?

And when they are thus awakened with a Sense of their miserable Estate; then
their Hope of obtaining Salvation must be encouraged: They will take no Pains
to avoid Misery, if they have no Hope of its being possible. We have no such
Example in the Word of God, of using all possible Measures of hurrying Men on
to despair without setting before them the great Encouragements they have to
seek Salvation. Our Savior told Sinners Luke 13.3.
that unless they repented they would perish: but he also said Mat. 11.28.
that if they would come to him he would give them Rest for their Souls. So the
Apostles were mindful to inform the World, of an approaching Judgment and the
Wrath of God to be poured out on an ungodly World; but at the same Time they
encouraged Men to hope and seek for his Mercy. And designedly to avoid all the
Encouragements of the Gospel in our preaching under a Pretense they will lull
Men asleep, is what we cannot learn from the Word of God: Men are commanded to
seek; but will they ever do it if they have no Encouragement set before them.

So also Ministers must insist upon the Loveliness and Desirableness of divine
Things; that the Love, and Desire of the Soul may be drawn out toward them. It
is the Business of the Ministers of Christ to inform Sinners of the Loveliness
of the Son of God; of than infinite Fullness there is in him: of the unspeakable
Joys and Glories of an heavenly World: that they may long and desire to be
united to the Son of God, and be entitled to the Blessedness of an heavenly
State.

The Art of moving the Passions consists in these two Things. First, A suitable
Representation of the Terrors of the Law to awaken Sinners, and then Secondly,
A seasonable exhibiting the Encouragements of the Gospel to encourage Men to
seek and strive with the utmost Diligence. And he is a wise Scribe indeed who
can so time these, and blend them together; that on the one Hand the Sinner
shall not be drove into Despair; nor on the other be encouraged, in his Sins,
and strengthened in his Iniquities.

Fourthly, Ministers of the Gospel are to compel Men into the Kingdom of God by
convincing them that they are themselves in Earnest for their Salvation.

As the Salvation of Sinners is a Matter of the utmost Importance, so Ministers
are to engage in it with the utmost Fervor; that Sinners may see it is not a
Matter of Indifferency with them whether they are saved or not: If Ministers
are careless about the Souls of their People, they will be so themselves; but
if they are all Life, and appear to be willing to spend and be spent for them;
then it is likely Sinners will stir up themselves; and this is one Way of
compelling Men; by treating the great Affair of their Salvation with the utmost
Earnestness: Romans 9.1 -- 4.
So the Apostle endeavored to compel the Jews to receive the Gospel.

Lastly here, The Servants of Christ are to compel Men into his Kingdom by a
due Exercise of the Authority of Christ in his Church, and the most fervent
Prayer to God for his Blessing upon all their Labors and Endeavors. Ministers
are to reprove and rebuke the Sinner that they may pluck him as a Brand out of
the Burning. And the impenitent obstinate Sinner must 1 Cor. 5.5.
be delivered over to Satan to be buffetted, for the Destruction of the Flesh;
that his Soul may be saved in the Day of the Lord Jesus.

But after all, the Servants of Christ must remember that all their Teaching,
Reasoning, all their Warnings, Invitations, Reproofs and Censures will be
ineffectual, without the gracious Influences of the divine Spirit; and they
must wrestle with God in Prayer for the pouring out of his Spirit on their
People to work effectually in their Hearts, and bring them into Subjection to
the Son of God: and here it is we can most effectually compel Sinners to
Christ, by praying down the Holy Spirit of God into their Hearts, John 16.8.
whose Work it is to convince them of Sin of Righteousness and Judgment to
come. In the Closet it is Ministers may most powerfully compel Men into the
Kingdom of Christ, by pleading with God for a Blessing on their Labors.

But I proceed to show Secondly, Why it is that Ministers ought to have the
Salvation of Sinners so much upon their Hearts, and so earnestly to persuade
Men into the Kingdom of Christ.

First, This is the Command and Direction of God Isai. 58.1.
that they shall cry aloud and spare not. They are set as Watchmen over God's
People, and they are commanded to warn them to repent of their Sins, they are
Shepherds, and they must pluck the Sheep and Lambs out of the Mouth of the Lion
and the Bear. God has very fully charged his Ministers to lay themselves out,
and improve all their Talents this Way; that Israel may be gathered. And it is
open Contempt of the divine Authority for them to neglect their great Business
and suffer Sinners to perish: if we have any Regard to the divine Authority and
would not be found disobedient to the great God, we must apply ourselves to our
Work with the greatest Diligence and Resolution.

Secondly, The Servants of Christ have the Example of their Lord and Master to
excite them to the greatest Diligence and Carefulness in their Ministry. Never
was such Industry, Laboriousness, and Concern manifested in any Affair as
Christ discovered in this great Affair of Man's Redemption. He was careful to
finish his Work, to glorify his Father and save miserable Men. Luke 10.21.
He mourned and grieved when his Labors were not succeeded. And he rejoiced in
Spirit when he had Success. He denied himself all the Comforts of Life, that he
might redeem Men from the Slavery of Sin and Satan. He could spend whole Nights
weeping and praying over Sinners. And shall his Ministers think of the Labor,
and Diligence of their Lord in his Work; Of his deep Concern for Sinners; And
yet be slothful in their Ministry, and unconcerned about those immortal Souls
that are committed to their Charge? Had we a Sense of Christ's Engagedness for
the Salvation of Sinners, how would it quicken us to the greatest Diligence?

Thirdly, The infinite Worth of the Souls of Sinners is a sufficient Reason for
Ministers to be much concerned about them. One Soul is of more Worth than the
whole World. Matthew. 16.26.
The Souls of Sinners are immortal: and if they are not brought home to Christ,
they must be for ever miserable beyond all Conception. There is a vast Eternity
before us, whither all Men are daily hastening; and as there is a Heaven of Joy
for pious and holy Souls; so there is a Hell of Misery for all the Ungodly; and
this short Life is the only Opportunity Men have to secure the one, and escape
the other: Eccl. 11.3.
As they are at Death so they will be to all Eternity: Rev. 22.11.
he that is filthy at Death will remain so. If Men die in their Sins they must
perish in them: There is no Hope for them; for God will take no more Pains with
them, and make no more Offers to them. And when Ministers think of this, that
they have immortal Souls to save which are of more Value than Millions of
Worlds, is it not enough to spirit them to the utmost Pains that they may bring
them into the Kingdom of God? Can they willingly suffer such precious Things to
be lost? Will they not pray and weep over them Night and Day as Christ did,
that they may not finally perish? We are unwilling a House should be consumed
with Fire, and can we be willing an immortal Soul should burn in the Flames of
God's Wrath?

Fourthly, When Ministers consider, that they must answer for all the Souls
which perish through their Neglect, is it possible they should be indifferent
whether Sinners are saved or not? The Souls of Men are some of those precious
Talents which are committed to Ministers. And their Lord will demand them of
them another Day: When he shall come to judge every Man, and give him according
to his Works, then he will demand of his Ministers, what are become of the
Souls committed to their Charge. Then he will ask this and that Servant of his,
where is this and that Soul which was committed to thy Charge. And what Plea
can those Servants make who have not been faithful to their Trust? If Ministers
have not taught Men their Duty; if they have not warned them against Sin; nor
urged them to make sure of eternal Life; Ezekiel. 3.18.
if they perish, their Blood will be required of them. But how awful is this
Consideration, that Ministers must give an Account of the Souls of their
People? Is not this eno' to fill Ministers with the deepest Concern, that none
may perish through their Neglect? Is not this enough to quicken Ministers to
teach with all Diligence, to exhort with Earnestness, and pray without Ceasing?

Lastly, When we consider the great and abundant Promises, Christ has made to
all his faithful Ministers, who are industrious to persuade Souls into his
Kingdom, we see what sufficient Reason they have to be concerned to save
Sinners. Every Soul, they are the happy Instruments of saving, will be an
Addition to their Joy, and a bright Gem in their Crown. Dan. 12.3.
The more Souls are gathered to Christ under their Ministry, the greater their
Happiness will be.

Could we obtain an earthly Crown by listing many Soldiers to some earthly
King, would it not enliven us to compel Men into his Service? And shall we not
be as much concerned to fill up the Kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ, since he
will bestow on us not earthly Crowns, which shall fade away; but unfadeable
Crowns of Light and Glory? He who does most for Christ, and immortal Souls will
have a distinguishing Reward in that heavenly World. And are not these Things
enough to fill the Ministers of the Gospel with the greatest Concern that they
may fill up the House, and Church of God? That Sinners may not be left to
perish in the High Ways and Hedges, whilst there is room enough in the Kingdom
of God.

The APPLICATION of the whole may be in the following Uses.

USE I. Of Information, and from what you have heard you may learn these
following Things.

1. The Salvation of Sinners is a Matter of the greatest Importance, and
absolutely necessary for them. The Son of God never would take such vast Pains
therefore, and be so much concerned about it, if it were a Trifle, and a Thing
of Indifferency, whether they are saved or perish. Would the Son of God ever
have come down from Heaven, veiled his Glory in Flesh? Would he voluntarily
have subjected himself to the Law and become obliged to obey it, who himself
was the Author and Giver of it to Mankind? Would he so freely entered upon a
Life of Labor, Pain and Sufferings amongst Men? Would the eternal Son of God,
who was the Brightness of his Father's Glory, so readily have subjected himself
to the Curses and Reproaches of Men, if he is not engaged in this great and
important Work of our Salvation? It was attended with the greatest
Difficulties; and the most bitter Sufferings must be endured before ever it
could be completed; all which the Son of God had a full View of, when he
undertook it: and who can imagine that so great a Personage as the Son of God
should have his Mind from all Eternity upon this Work: That so wise Counsel
should be held about it; that such vast Preparations should be made for it;
that Christ should take such infinite Pains to accomplish it, and suffer more
than is possible to conceive of, if it were a Trifle and a Thing of no great
Concern? No verily the Son of God would never have born Reproach: He never
would have fasted and chastised his Soul; he never would have been grieved at
the Hardness of Men's Hearts, nor would he have wept over secure Sinners, had
he not seen their Salvation to be a Thing of the last Importance. --

2. From what you have heard, you may see what Love and Gratitude we owe the
Son of God: That he should be so much concerned, and do so much for our
Redemption. A Pity and Concern for others, and a Readiness to help, and
relieve, naturally commend Love and Esteem in other Cases; A poor Man loves the
rich, when he sees him condoling his Poverty, and ready to feed and clothe him:
a sick Man loves the Physician, who has Compassion on him under his Pains and
Diseases, who is ready to administer for his healing: So whatever our
Calamities be, our Love and Esteem is drawn out to such as have Bowels of
Compassion for us, be it so they only speak comfortable Words to us; how much
more when they relieve us? But how much more is Christ to be loved by us, who
is concerned for us in Things of infinite Moment? who has pitied our miserable
Souls under their spiritual Poverty, and dreadful Diseases; Who has purchased
at the dearest Rate for us all we want to remedy our miserable Circumstances;
Who offers us the Food of eternal Life, and Streams of living Water that we may
never hunger and thirst more; Who tenders the spotless Robes of his own
Righteousness to cover our Nakedness; who tenders Gold tried in the Fire that
we may be rich, who will heal all our Plagues and Infirmities and raise us to
the highest Dignities and Honors, even to be Kings and Priests to the Most
High God; who is concerned for us that we should not despise these Offers of
Mercy; earnestly knocks at the Doors of our Hearts until his Locks are wet with
the Dews of Night: And beseeches us to hearken to him; that we don't perish.
Shall Christ do so much for us and we have no Pity for our selves, and no Love
to him for it? This is brutish and most horrid Ingratitude indeed!

Thirdly, If the Son of God is so much concerned about our Salvation does it
lie so much upon his Mind, then certainly we ought to be concerned about it our
selves. Shall he fast for us, and we live in the Gratifications of the Flesh
ourselves? Shall he pray till his Soul is spent and melted within him, and we
restrain Prayer before God? Shall he weep and mourn over us, and we have no
Tears to shed for our selves? Shall he agonize and sweat great Drops of Blood
for us, and we not wrestle and strive to overcome the Enemies of our Souls? Can
this be and yet we have any Sense of our State and the dreadful Misery
hastening upon us? Let us all be up, and about our Business, as Christ has set
us an Example: Let us all endeavor to awaken in our own Minds the most lively
Concern for our eternal Well-Being by serious Meditation and fervent Prayer to
God to realize spiritual Things to our Souls. Let us often reflect upon
Christ's Labor, his Prayers and his Tears for us. Let us often wonder and
admire that he should have such Concern for us; and we be no more concerned for
our own precious immortal Souls, which must be happy or miserable, according to
the Provision we make for them in this short Life to all Eternity. We cannot be
too much concerned for them; We cannot do too much for their Well-Being, the
little while we have to live here.

Fourthly, Has Christ the Salvation of Sinners so much upon his Mind, then you
see what Encouragement Sinners have to seek Salvation by Christ: He will
assuredly Heb. 7.25.
save all that come to the Father in and by him, John 6.37.
nor will he cast out any that come to him for Life. He stands with open Arms
to receive repenting Sinners: He holds out a Scepter of Grace to them that they
may come to God, with Boldness in this Way of Access by the Blood of Christ.
The Lord Jesus Christ will reject none; but assures us that all shall be
welcome. Whosoever will let Rev. 22.17.
him come, is the Language of the Son of God to Sinners. Christ cannot deny
himself: he will fulfill all his Promises to such as depend upon him for
Salvation. He is not only able to save Sinners, but he is willing to undertake
for them and rescue them from the Jaws of Destruction: his Heart is set upon
this Work, he needs no large Entreaties to grant Salvation to you: are you but
willing to be saved by him and give divine Grace the Glory, Christ is ready:
There is not the least Backwardness on his Part: his Delights are with the
Children of Men: He has paid the Price of your Redemption: he has satisfied the
Law, and appeased the incensed Wrath of God, he has suffered the whole Penalty
due for Sin: he has shed his Blood to cleanse your Souls and wash out the
Stains of Sin: and is it possible after all this that Christ should deceive and
disappoint you, and turn you off with Coldness when you come to him? No verily,
Heaven and Earth may pass away but not the least Jot of Christ's Promises fail:
If Christ is so much engaged in this Work; Here is all the Encouragement you
want. What can you ask for more? He is able to save you; he has all you want,
and he is perfectly willing. Let none therefore ever excuse themselves in their
Sloth and Negligence in seeking Salvation under any Pretense they have not
Encouragement enough. But let all young and old look to the Lord Jesus for
Pardon and Salvation.

Fifthly, If this is the Business of Ministers to compel Souls into the Kingdom
of God, and if it is thus required of them to improve their utmost Endeavors
to bring Souls to Christ, then they may justly cry out with the Apostle, Who is
sufficient for these Things? Who is it knows, in all Respects, how to deal with
immortal Souls in the momentous Affairs of Eternity? Who is that Scribe
instructed to the Kingdom of Heaven, who can bring out of his Treasure Things
new and old, who can give to every one his Portion in their Season? Who is it
knows how and when to insist upon the Terrors of the Law, and discover the
terrible Wrath of God to the Sinner; and point out to him the Miseries and
Agonies of the damned: and then can so intermingle the Gentle Motives of the
Gospel as to excite the Hope of the Sinner. So that, on the one Hand, he may be
suitably concerned to save his Soul, and on the other, may not be hurried on to
despair of Mercy? How few can so speak to Sinners as to awaken them, and so
hold out the rich Invitations of Mercy, that the weary and Sin-burthen Sinner
may accept of them? How much Need do Ministers stand in of the Grace of Christ
and the Aids of his Holy Spirit in this great Work? They have no Strength nor
Wisdom of their own, they never would bring one Soul into the Kingdom of
Christ, did not the Lord Jesus Christ work with them and give Success to their
Labors. It is he subdues the People under himself and makes them willing in
the Day of his Power.

Sixthly, If Ministers are sent forth to persuade Men into the Kingdom of
Christ, then it is the Interest of a People to be instant in Prayer to God for
them. 2 Thessalonians. 3.1.
Pray for us, says the Apostle to the Thessalonians, that the Word of God may
have free Course: If Ministers are never so faithful and laborious, if they
spend and be spent for your Souls, it will avail nothing to your Salvation, if
God work not within you both to will and to do of his good Pleasure. The
Conversion of your Souls is the Work of God. And can you expect he will ever
make you the happy Subjects of it, if you pray not for it? Be found often
therefore upon your Knees, wrestling with God for your Ministers, that God
would make them Sons of Thunder to secure Sinners, and Sons of Consolation to
his own Children. Ministers are commonly such as a People pray them to be; and
their Success is usually in Proportion to their earnest Prayers for their
Ministers. If you neglect to pray for them God has set over you, there is too
much Reason to fear, they will only prove a Savor of Death unto Death to your
Souls.

USE II. of Awakening to Sinners. And is it so that Christ has taken vast Pains
for your Salvation? Is he still waiting upon you and pleading with you, in his
Word, and by his Ministers? And are his Ministers endeavoring to persuade and
compel you into the Kingdom of Christ? Then think upon these Things.

First, How inexcuseable you will be found in the great Day of Accounts.

You will have no Plea to make for your selves, your own Mouths will condemn
you, your own Consciences will testify what Pains have been taken with you: how
earnestly the Son of God has entreated you: How his Ministers have urged you.
Then Christ will tell you how you stopped your Ears against his Calls, and
mocked at all his Reproofs: Then Christ will put you in Mind of all the
precious Opportunities you have had and how much you have abused them: Then he
will tell you how he laid hold on you by his Ministers, and the Convictions of
his Spirit and would have plucked you out of the Fire of Sin and Hell; but you
offered Violence to his Servants, and despite to the Spirit of his Grace, and
choose rather to perish in your Sins, than accept of Life by him: And what can
the Sinner say when his Judge thus convicts him? What Shame and Confusion will
cover the Face of every Sinner in that Day? Their own Hearts will condemn them
and their Judge is greater than they. It is impossible to express the Horror
and the Confusion that Sinners who perish under the Light of the Gospel will be
in at that Day: They would gladly have the Mountains and Rocks fall on them to
cover them from the Face of their Judge.

Secondly, Let the Sinner seriously think, what an insupportable Punishment he
is bringing upon himself by refusing to enter into the Kingdom of God: all the
Pains and Entreaties that are used with Sinners to compel them into the Kingdom
of God, serve to increase and aggravate their everlasting Condemnation and
Torment. If all the Pains which are taken with you prove ineffectual for your
Salvation, it is likely they will greatly inhance your Misery. Every slighted
Call, and every abused Invitation will lay a Foundation for the more severe
Reflections of Conscience. How insupportable will your Punishment be if you
stand out against all the Earnestness of the Son of God? It will be more
tolerable for the Sinners of Sodom and Gomorrah than for you. Yea, it will be
more tolerable for those impious Jews, who with wicked Hands took our Blessed
Savior and put him to Death, than for you; Acts ^.17.
for they did it ignorantly the Apostle tells us; but you reject him; who know
he is the Son of God; they insulted him in the Form of a Servant; in his State
of Humiliation: but you in his State of Glory upon his Throne; and let the
Sinner think with himself, how he can bear an endless Eternity reflecting upon
the Pity, the Patience, the Long-suffering, and moving Invitations of the Son
of God: and how he despised and rejected them; How can you bear in Hell to
remember what Pains Ministers have taken with you? how they urged you to
subject yourselves to the Government of the Son of God; and you would not?

But I will shut up my Discourse with a Word of Address to my Brother now to be
sent forth to compel Souls into the Kingdom of Christ; and to this little Flock
over whom he is now to receive a solemn Charge.

First then, To you my dear Brother. You see what the Work and Business, which
is before you is. It is to bring Men into the Kingdom of Christ: You are to go
forth and compel Men into the Kingdom of your ascended Lord and Savior: You
are to fill up his House and Church: you are to use all the Gifts God has
bestowed upon you for this End: you must lay yourself out for this Work; and be
willing to spend and be spent, that you may persuade Souls to Christ: It is the
most honorable Employment in the World, vastly more than to be Ambassadors for
the greatest Princes on Earth. And it is a great and difficult Work: Too great
for even the Angels to undertake themselves: but here is your Comfort; Christ
is engaged in this Work as well as you: And he has it more upon his Heart, than
you can have upon yours. He has promised you his Presence, if you give up
yourself to his Service. And you may always remember the more you do for Christ
and immortal Souls the greater your Reward will be in Heaven.

Secondly, To this little Flock who are about to enter into Covenant and
receive a Pastor over them in the Lord. And you have heard what is to be the
Work of your Pastor, he is to compel you into the Service of Christ, he is to
importune you, and use all possible Earnestness: You must therefore suffer him
to teach you with Plainness. To reprove you with Zeal, and warn you with
Earnestness, you must allow him to observe your State, and warn you against
your beloved Sins that you may be plucked as Brands out of the Burning: You
must allow him to watch over you, and be jealous of you; That he may suit
himself to your State, and address you with the greater Propriety: You must
allow him to use a sort of Violence with you: for this is his Work: and then
you are to remember it is a reasonable Constraint he is to use with you; and it
concerns you to strive with him and take Pains for your own Souls whilst he is
laboring for them: otherwise he will labor in vain, and spend his Strength
for Naught: You must attend upon his Ministry, hearken to his Counsels, and
obey all those Precepts he shall bring you from the Word of God: and that he
may come to you in the Fullness of the Blessings of the Gospel and have many
Seals of his Ministry among you is our Desire and Prayer to the God of all
Grace and Consolation.

FINIS.

