A SERMON Preached at the PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH IN THE CITY of NEW YORK, On
Occasion of the DEATH of JOHN NICOLL, M. D. Who departed this Life October 2.
1743. Etat. suae. 64.

By E. PEMBERTON, A. M.

Phil. i. 21. For to me to live is Christ, and to die is gain. --

NEW YORK: Printed by James Parker: 1743.

PHIL. I. 23. -- And to be with CHRIST, which is far better.


DEATH is elegantly described in Scripture, as the King of terrors: And to an
eye of sense is a most formidable evil. It tears down these tabernacles of
clay, which are the habitations of our immortal spirits: It turns these
beautiful and active bodies, into heaps of deformity and corruption: It
separates us from this world and its agreeable enjoyments, and fixes the soul in
an unalterable state of happiness or misery.

SO great is the fondness of mankind for this present life; -- so strong their
aversion to a dissolution; that we need the highest cordials to support us
against the approaches of Death, and to enable us with a becoming fortitude to
encounter this grand enemy of human nature.

AND, Blessed be God, the Gospel has laid a sufficient foundation for our
support and comfort in this melancholy hour. -- Our great REDEEMER has
scattered the darkness of the grave, and brought life and immortality to light.
Through the virtue of his own meritorious death; he has destroyed him that had
the power of death, that is the devil, and delivered them who through fear of
death, were all their life time subject to bondage. Heb. II. 14, 15.
In his name, and by the victorious power of his grace, every true believer may
meet this universal terror of mankind with an holy triumph, and lay down his
head in the dust with serenity and joy.

THE Gospel represents death to the true Christian, not as an enemy but as a
friend: Not as the object of their terror and aversion, but rather of their
complacency and desire. It describes our departure out of this world, as a
deliverance from this vale of tears, and an introduction to a state of
consummate blessedness: A translation from the fading enjoyments of time, to
all the ineffable glories of eternity.

UPON these principles many of the Disciples of JESUS have welcomed the
approach of death as the messenger of their heavenly Father, and breathed out
their souls into the hands of God with extacy and triumph. A prospect of
obtaining complete deliverance from sin their greatest burden, and dwelling
with Christ their supreme delight, has wonderfully reconciled their tho'ts to a
dying hour, and changed the dark valley of the shadow of death, into a scene of
light and glory.

THUS the Apostle in my text, with an holy impatience, looks forward to the
time of his dissolution, and waits for the happy period, as the weary traveller
for the grateful shades of the evening.

Having a desire to depart, AND TO BE WITH CHRIST, WHICH IS FAR BETTER. In
speaking to which words I shall (by divine assistance) proceed in the following
method:

First, I shall show that every true believer, when he departs out of this
world goes to Christ.

Secondly, THIS is infinitely better than to abide in the flesh.

FIRST PART.
EVERY true believer, when he departs out of this world, goes to Christ.

THIS was not peculiar to this favorite Apostle, but is the common privilege
of every true Christian: When we are absent from the body, then we are present
with the Lord. The Doctrine of Purgatory is an idle fiction of the Priests of
mammon, contrived and propagated to establish the tyranny of the BISHOP OF
ROME, and support the grandeur of the PAPAL EMPIRE. The Opinion of the Sleep of
the Soul, till the morning of the general resurrection, is a senseless dream,
destructive of the very nature and essence of an immaterial spirit, and
contrary to many plain and express passages in the inspired Scriptures. -- Why
should the Apostle expect with pleasure the time of his separation from the
body, if death were to cast him into an insensible slumber, and deprive him of
all those blessed commmunications of divine LIFE and LOVE which he enjoyed upon
earth? -- Why should he desire to be dissolved and be with Christ, if all his
perceptive powers were to be chained up in a profound sleep, and he was to
remain for so long a season without any delightful views of the divine glory,
or any participation of the joys of his immediate presence? -- Upon this
supposition, it would be evidently more eligible to abide in the flesh, amidst
the labors and enjoyments of this life, than to sink into an insensible state,
and spend so many years in darkness and oblivion. But not to enlarge, --

NOTHING is more plain than that the scripture gives no countenance to this
absurd and unreasonable imagination: But on the contrary assures us, that when
this earthly house of our tabernacle is dissolved, we have a building of God,
an house not made with hands, eternal in the heavens. 2 Cor. V. 1.
Hence our Lord declares unto the penitent thief, when in the agonies of death,
THIS DAY shall thou be with me in Paradise.

NOW to be with Christ, implies that the believer upon his departure out of
this world, shall be immediately introduced into his divine presence, and be
favored with an intuitive vision of his glory. No sooner are they delivered
from the burden of the flesh, but immediately they mount up upon the wings of
love, and are conveyed by a bright guard of ministering spirits into the
imperial palace of heaven, -- the presence chamber of their exalted Redeemer;
where they see him, not in the humble form of a servant, but in the majestic
state of an incarnate GOD: -- Not in the inferior circumstances of poverty and
disgrace, but incircled with all the dazzling splendors of heaven: -- Not
crowned with thorns, but diadems of celestial glory: -- Not hanging upon an
infamous cross, but seated on the right hand of the Majesty on high: -- Not
surrounded with insulting crowds of insolent sinners, but encompassed with
myriads of spotless saints.

THIS must needs be to every true believer a scene of the purest joy, the
sublimest pleasure. -- If St. Peter was so transported with a transient glimpse
of his glory, when transfigured on the mount, that he forgot this lower world,
and cried out, Lord it is good to be here; how will the saints exult and
triumph when they have not only a vanishing glance, but a full view of his
beautiful countenance: Not on Mount Tabor, in company with Moses and Elias, but
standing upon the Holy Hill of Zion, attended by the whole hierarchy of heaven.
-- If the Disciples were glad, when they saw their Lord break asunder the bars
of the grave, and rise from the dead; how great will be their joy, when they
see him seated upon a radiant throne, and swaying the scepter of the invisible
world.

WHAT can be more delightful to these holy souls, than to enjoy the blessed
society of their dearest friend, and most generous benefactor; -- to dwell
continually with him, on whose name they have believed, in whose merits they
have confided, and from whose hands they have received a crown of eternal Life?
How will it revive and rejoice their hearts, to behold him who was so
unrighteously despised, so inhumanly tortured, so ignominiously crucified for
their sakes; advanced to the highest pitch of splendour and dignity, honored
and adored by all the happy inhabitants above; who with one consent cast their
crowns at his feet, and celebrate the praises of his redeeming grace? With what
rapturous pleasure shall they hear from his own blessed lips, the amazing
history of his Love, the mighty triumphs of his Grace, and the distressing
sorrows he past through for the redemption of an apostate world.

ESPECIALLY, Since they not only behold his glory, but dwell under the
perpetual effusions of his love: They not only see his face, but partake of his
goodness; they not only view the amiable excellencies of his nature, but find
by happy experience all those divine attributes engaged to promote their
perfection and happiness. In the present state he advances them to the dignity
of his children, adorns them with the graces of his spirit, and affords them
the reviving foretastes of his love; but in heaven he unfolds all the treasures
of his goodness, and showers down the boundless riches of his glory, into their
purified and enlarged bosoms. The Blessed Redeemer looks down upon them with
infinite pleasure, as the sacred purchase of his blood, and the conquests of
his almighty grace; and is highly delighted with the reflection of his own
image shining in them; as the bridegroom rejoices over the bride, so God
rejoices over them. Isai. LXV. 5.


AND now, what higher conception of happiness can we frame, than to dwell for
ever with the best and most amiable of BEINGS; to love him with the most ardent
affection; to receive the continual visits of his favor, which is life, and
his loving kindness which is better than life itself. HAPPY SOULS! who are
incircled in the arms of everlasting mercy, and lie imparadised in the bosom of
GOD. They now, more than ever, rejoice in God their Savior, and perpetually
triumph in their union to and communion with him: They break forth in the
language of the spouse. -- As the apple tree among the trees of the wood, so is
my beloved among the sons: I sit under his shadow with great delight, and his
fruit is pleasant unto my taste: he has brought me into his banqueting house,
and spread his banner of love over me. Cant. II. 3-5.
-- This it is to be with Christ. -- But how broken and imperfect an account
are we able to give of those joys, which eye has not seen, nor ear heard, nor
has it entered into the heart of man to conceive 1 Cor. II. 9.
their excellency and glory. This is a theme fitter for the eloquence of an
Angel, than the description of a feeble mortal, defiled with sin, and
encompassed with darkness. The glory of the saints is at present unseen; and we
can form no adequate conceptions of it, till the vail of mortality is drawn
aside, and we admitted into the sanctuary above: But so much is discovered as
fully justifies my text, and shows that to be with Christ, is infinitely better
than to abide in the flesh. And this I proposed for the SECOND GENERAL HEAD of
my discourse.

SECOND PART.
LET us then proceed to consider in what respects to be with Christ is far
better.

THE body indeed is subject to a melancholy change; -- those eyes are closed
in darkness, that once beheld the light of the sun, and the beauties of this
lower creation; -- those hands are rendered useless, that were active
instruments in the various offices of life; -- those feet are fettered with the
bands of death, that went about doing good: -- our visible frame is utterly
demolished, and blended with its original dust; but the Soul is delivered from
the prison in which it was long confined, and in all respects makes a blessed
exchange: -- For,

I. THEY change a state of toil and labor, for that of ease and refreshment:
While upon earth, the servants of God are necessarily engaged in the business
of the world, and are often called to a great deal of trouble and fatigue.
While encumbered with these tabernacles of clay, and surrounded with an
ensnaring world, they are obliged to be upon their perpetual guard, to watch
and pray, lest they enter into temptation. But the saints above are delivered
from all these toilsome labors: -- Blessed are the dead, who die in the Lord;
for they rest from their labors, and their works follow them. Rev. XIV. 13.
They have fought the good fight, they have finished their course, henceforth
there is laid up for them a crown of righteousness. 2 Timothy IV. 7, 8.
They are no longer condemned to earn their bread with the sweat of their
brows, but are fed with the heavenly Manna, the food of Angels! They no more
spend their wearisome days in the pursuit of their general or particular
callings; but receive the approbation of their Lord, and the reward of faithful
servants. It is now no small part of a Christian's exercise, to bear up with a
becoming fortitude and courage against the darkness, and difficulties, the
temptations, and sufferings of this present life; but when their spirit's are
lodged in Abraham's bosom, they have no more sufferings to go through, no more
lusts to mortify, no more enemies to conquer: Patience has had its perfect
work; their day of battle is over, and their warfare is finally accomplished.

NOT that the righteous will lead an idle and unactive life: This would be
contrary to the economy of heaven, and an abatement of their particular
happiness. -- In what employments they will be engaged, we know not; -- upon
this head the scripture is silent; and it becomes us not to be wise above what
is written. But this we know, -- that they are perpetually engaged in the
service of God; stand before him in the character of ministering spirits,
inviolably keeping the charge of his commandments: They join the blissful choir
above in the joyful celebration of the divine praises, and rest not day and
night, saying, -- Holy, Holy, Holy, LORD GOD ALMIGHTY! And doubtless they look
back with a grateful mixture of pleasure and surprise, upon the various scenes
of providence toward them, while they dwelt upon earth; and adore the
stupendous methods of divine grace, by which they were kept in the midst of
numberless dangers, and safely guided and preserved in the ways of salvation.
Doubtless with the highest affection and gratitude, they raise frequent and
delightful songs to the honor of the beloved JESUS; who saved them from the
ignominious bondage of sin, by his almighty power; who justified them by his
perfect righteousness, and has finally made them the everlasting monuments of
his sovereign mercy.

II. THEY pass out of a valley of tears, into a world of light and joy. The
evils that attend human life, are as numerous, and often as violent as the
tempestuous waves of the sea. Various and successive afflictions, like Job's
messengers, tread close upon the heels of each other. -- Our Bodies are the
seat of innumerable diseases; they frequently totter and shake, and are swiftly
tending to the grave, the house appointed for the living. -- Our Characters are
exposed to the malignant breath of envy and malice. -- Our Estates to rapine
and violence. -- And our dearest Friends are oftentimes snatched from our
affectionate embraces. Upon these accounts, it is justly said, that men is born
to trouble as the sparks fly upward. But all these evils are confined to this
transitory scene. The saints at death are translated to a world of perfect
light, and unmingled joy: They are admitted to that place which infinite wisdom
has contrived, almighty power has framed, and everlasting love has appointed
for the reception of his chosen friends, his distinguished favorites. -- There
he sheds abroad his brightest glory, and showers down his abundant grace, to
the unutterable transport of its happy inhabitants. -- There shines a bright
and eternal day, without any intervening clouds or darkness. -- There all is
calm and serene, without confusion or disorder; all tears are wiped from their
eyes; all sorrow banished from their breasts. -- There is no more pain, no more
death, for the former Things are passed away: In these peaceful regions, the
wicked cease from troubling, and the weary are at rest: Their joys are without
mixture or alloy; their pleasures divine and perpetual; and the remembrance of
their past afflictions, serves only to increase their present satisfaction, and
inflame their gratitude to their almighty Deliverer.

III. THEY are translated from a world of sin and temptation, to a state of
purity and perfection. The true Christian, even in this imperfect state, is
absolved from the guilt of sin, the curse of the fiery law, and the condemning
sentence of divine justice. He is also saved from the tyrannical reign of lust,
and no longer lives in a voluntary subjection to its unreasonable demands. The
dominion of sin was destroyed in the day of his first conversion; and its
interests are gradually decaying through the successive periods of the christian
life.

BUT our universal nature is so deeply infected with this spreading leprosy,
that it will never be perfectly purged out, while the earthly house of this
tabernacle remains undissolved. Our most exact obedience to the divine law, is
attended with innumerable defects, and our highest acts of faith weakened with
the remains of unbelief. Our purest gold has an alloy of dross, and our best
duties are polluted with sinful mixtures.

THIS is the constant burden of the saints upon earth; and above all things
embitters the present life, with its enjoyments. The relics of indwelling
corruption, cast a gloom upon their brightest days, and often obliges them to
breathe out that melancholy complaint, in the passionate language of the
Apostle, -- O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of
this death! Romans VII. 24.


BUT no sooner is the vital tie dissolved between the soul and body, but they
are entirely purified from all remains of sin, and made perfect in holiness
forever. Every corrupt affection and inclination is buried in the dust of
death; and their sanctified spirits stand before the throne of GOD, without
spot or blemish, without deformity or disorder. -- O happy DAY! O joyful
DELIVERANCE! when the servants of Christ shall no longer complain of any sinful
darkness in their understanding, any remaining rebellion in their wills, or any
defiling disorder in their affections. -- O thrice HAPPY SOULS! who are not
only delivered from sin, but from all temptation to it; -- who have no more
difficulties to conquer; -- no more dangers to encounter; -- no more spiritual
enemies to vanquish; but have overcome through the blood of the Lamb, and are
entered into a state of perfect victory and eternal triumph.

SURELY, to be with Christ is best of all! for such are ascended above the
territories of the prince of darkness, and are out of the reach of all his
fiery assaults: They dwell where there is no roaring lion to devour; no subtle
serpent to allure; no malignant influences to destroy their purity, or disturb
their happiness. That promise is completely fulfilled, -- To him that
overcomes, will I grant to sit with me in my throne, even as I also overcame,
and am set down with my Father in his throne. Rev. III. 21.


IV. THEY change the company of imperfect saints and ungodly sinners, for the
society of spotless angels and the spirits of just men made perfect. In this
world, saints and sinners dwell together in the same habitations: The sons of
GOD converse with the children of Satan; and how often are the righteous vexed
with the filthy conversation of the wicked, and forced to complain in the
bitterness of their souls, -- O that I had the wings of a dove, that I might
flee away, and be at rest. Psalm LV. 6.
Yea, the conversation of the godly, is too often interrupted by the remains of
sin, and sadly embittered by difference of opinion and practice. They that are
children of the same heavenly FATHER; united under the banners of the same
COMMON LORD, and traveling to the same undefiled inheritance; oftentimes
unhappily fall out by the way; treat each other with a rigid and uncharitable
distance, if not with unchristian and censorious language:

BUT death puts a final period to all these afflicting trials. In the new
Jerusalem there is nothing that defiles. The blessed inhabitants above no more
complain that they sojourn in Mesheck, and dwell in the tents of Kedar. They
leave the society of imperfect saints upon earth, to join with the general
assembly of the church of the firstborn, -- where perfect friendship, peace
and amity reign forever, -- where all the children of GOD, that were scattered
abroad in this divided world, are gathered together in one vast and universal
convention, -- are perfectly united in judgment, affection, and practice, --
with one heart, and one voice, join in singing the song of MOSES and the LAMB.
O BLESSED CHANGE! to pass from a peevish, ill-natured, and contentious world,
to those calm and peaceable mansions of light and love.

V. THEY are removed from this mutable scene, to a place of unchangeable
felicity. How valuable forever the enjoyments of the world may be in the eyes
of men* yet this exceedingly depreciates their worth, that they are of short
and uncertain continuance. -- The riches of the earth take to themselves wings,
and flee away as an eagle toward heaven: -- The pleasures of sense, are as the
crackling of thorns under a pot; a sudden blaze that soon expires: -- The
applause of the world, depends upon the breath of the giddy multitude; and is
therefore inconstant as the wind: -- This earthly theater, which is the seat of
these inferior joys, is a vanishing scene; the stage itself will shortly be
taken down, and all its actors retire into silence and oblivion. We plainly see
that nothing here is substantial and durable; but blessed are the dead that die
in the Lord: -- They are heirs of a kingdom that cannot be shaken, a city that
has foundations, whose builder and maker is GOD. When the sun itself shall
fade, and all the lamps of heaven shall be extinguished, the righteous shall
shine as the brightness of the firmament, and as the stars for ever and ever.
When the elements shall melt with fervent heat, and the pillars of heaven
tremble; they shall stand secure amidst the ruins of dissolving nature, and
spend eternal ages in undiminished and unfading pleasures. And now who among us
is not ready to say, Happy, O Lord, are these thy servants that stand in thy
presence, behold thy face, and are satisfied with thy likeness! Must we not all
join in the sentiments of St. Paul, and say, to be with Christ is far better?
-- better than to live in this sinful and polluted world, -- this vale of
affliction and tears

The IMPROVEMENT of my discourse remains.
I. IF this is the happiness of the servants of Christ; this the blessed
exchange they make at death; how great is the madness of those who continue in
the disgraceful service of sin and satan! GOD, in infinite compassion to
apostate men, has sent his SON, to call them off from the inferior enjoyments
of time and sense, to the nobler entertainments of the heavenly world. By the
gospel he invites them to accept the offers of his grace, and part with every
thing that stands in competition with their eternal interest. But, alas! how
careless are the greatest part of mankind in this important affair! how careful
of the concerns of a dying body! how negligent of their immortal souls! -- They
prefer temporal to eternal blessings; the fading satisfactions of sense, to
those ineffable pleasures that flow at the right hand of God forever. What
madness is in the hearts of men, thus greedily to pursue empty trifles, --
deceitful vanities; -- and sordidly neglect the one thing needful.

MAKE a pause, my Brethren, and consider, -- Are you not formed of the same
brittle clay with the rest of your fellow creatures? -- Are you not every
moment liable to the stroke of death? -- Can you expect to be numbered with the
children of the MOST HIGH, who now live in rebellion against his authority, in
open defiance of his laws? -- How can you hope to be with CHRIST in a future
state; whose grace you resist, whose invaluable merits you trample under feet,
and whose gracious yoke you obstinately and impenitently refuse? Deceive not
your selves with vain words; if ever you desire to see the face of God in
peace, and dwell with Christ in glory; you must now be united to him, by a true
and living faith; you must be justified by his grace; sanctified by his spirit,
and be made conformable to his precepts and example. Would you die the death of
the righteous; and do you wish your latter end may be like his? -- Let it then
be your first care to accept of Christ as your SAVIOR; and in the exercise of
an humble faith, to commit your souls into his almighty and compassionate
hands. -- With incessant importunity, seek after the regenerating influences of
his spirit, that that life may be begun in you, which abides forever. Blessed
and holy is he that has part in THIS first RESURRECTION; over such the second
death has no power.

II. THIS affords abundant ground of comfort, when the servants of Christ are
taken from us by death. Their piety gives no exemption from the common
accidents of life: They fall by the same diseases with the rest of mankind; and
their bodies are buried in the common dust. -- In this respect, there is one
event to the righteous, and the wicked; -- the servants of God and the subjects
of Satan. But at the moment of their dissolution, how vast the difference
between them! -- One is carried by Angels to the delights of Abraham's bosom;
-- The Other descends in all his guilt and deformity, to the melancholy
regions of eternal misery. -- To the One, death is the messenger of divine
grace, to introduce them to the endless felicities of paradise: -- To the
Other, the executioner of divine justice, that delivers them over to the bitter
pains of eternal death.

LET then the wicked tremble at the approach of the king of terrors; but let us
congratulate the righteous upon their deliverance out of this world, the abode
of guilt and sorrow. -- They have left our society, for the innumerable company
of angels, and the spirits of just men made perfect. -- They have laid aside
their polluted garments, for the spotless robes of purity and righteousness. --
Their eyes shall no longer flow down with tears, nor their tongues utter the
language of complaint, -- all their difficulties are removed, -- all their
clouds scattered, -- all their doubts resolved. They have obtained the end of
their faith, the perfection of their graces, and the complete salvation of
their souls. Surely then, it becomes us not to weep for them, but for
ourselves. -- Our loss is their unspeakable gain; -- they are gone from us, but
are with Christ, which is far better.

AND, Blessed be GOD, we have just ground to believe, that these are the happy
circumstances of our DEPARTED BROTHER, whose death has occasioned the present
discourse. -- I am not fond of funeral encomiums; nor averse to pay a just
tribute of honor to those GOD his distinguished by his grace, and made
uncommonly useful in the world; -- The memory of the just is blessed, and the
righteous should be had in everlasting remembrance. To give flattering titles,
I am sure is contrary to my principles, and, I think, as distant from my
temper. It is in vain to flatter the dead, and I am under no temptation to
complement the living. -- I shall therefore only mention some things in the
character of our deceased Friend, which were lovely and of good report; and
recommend them to the imitation of the survivors.

HE was born and brought up in the bosom of the CHURCH OF SCOTLAND; and ever
retained the highest reverence for its DOCTRINE, CONSTITUTION and DISCIPLINE.
He was educated in the University of EDINBURGH, and advanced by that
illustrious Body, to the highest honors that belong to his profession. -- But
piety is the brightest ornament of human nature; and of this he was a shining
example. He was favored with a religious education, which made an early
impression upon his mind, and through grace disposed him to a thoughtful concern
for his eternal welfare. In the younger years of life, -- in those days which
in the language of Solomon, are emphatically styled the days of vanity; he gave
up himself to GOD, and joyfully entered under the bonds of the covenant of
grace; and in the course of a long and useful life, maintained the honor of
his profession, and adorned it by a conversation becoming the Gospel. He
dedicated his morning hours to the sacred exercises of devotion; and rose
early, that he might have time to converse with GOD and divine things, without
noise or interruption. He was very punctual and exemplary in the devotions of
his family; and took care, not only of the bodies, but souls, of those
committed to his charge; instructing them in the principles of religion, and
exhorting them to the service of his and their common LORD.

THESE WALLS will be a lasting monument of his zeal for the house and public
worship of GOD; in the erecting of which he spent a considerable part of his
estate; and undertook a hazardous voyage to EUROPE, for the establishment and
security of this infant society. Upon these, and other accounts too numerous to
be mentioned, -- while a PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH subsists in the City of NEW YORK,
the name of DR. NICOLL, will ever be remembered with honor, as one of its
principal Founders, and greatest Benefactor.

THERE were few projects set on foot, for the propagation of undefiled
religion, in which his affectionate desires were not engaged for their
prosperity, and his charitable contributions for their support.

IN the business of his calling, he was faithful and successful. He went about
doing good, with unwearied diligence; not barely from a worldly motive, -- that
he might increase his business, and recommend himself to his patients; but from
a sense of duty to GOD, and an affectionate regard to the lives and health of
men.

FROM this principle it was, that he not only visited the poor in their
sickness, and administered to them, without any prospect of gain; -- but also
with a large and bountiful hand dispensed his charity among them. He was never
deaf to the complaints of the miserable; nor blind to the objects of pity and
compassion: His eye affected his heart, and his hand was continually stretched
forth for their relief and support. His charities were not attended with noise
and ostentation, nor proclaimed with the sound of a trumpet; but carefully
concealed from the eyes of the world; and like the gentle showers of heaven,
descended in a secret and silent plenty. There are few men to whom those words
of Job may be more justly applied, -- he delivered the poor that cried, and the
fatherless that had none to help him: the blessing of her that was ready to
perish came upon him, and he caused the widow's heart to sing for joy. In the
character of a friend, he was kind and beneficient, cheerfully embracing all
opportunities of doing good, within the circle of his acquaintance.

IF I should go on, and consider him in the station of a Husband, Father, and
Master, -- he deserves the character of one of the FIRST THREE; and upon a just
comparison, will be found to have left but few equals. -- But the most amiable
qualifications of nature, and richest endowments of grace, afford no exemption
from the common law of mortality. Our dear Friend, -- THE BELOVED PHYSICIAN, --
is dead!

HIS distemper was sudden, and snatched him out of the world, almost without
any warning. But during his short sickness, he was favored with the free use
of his understanding, and the comfortable exercise of his faith. He declared
his only hope of eternal happiness, was built upon the merits and RIGHTEOUSNESS
OF JESUS CHRIST, and expressed a firm and unshaken trust in that Blessed
Redeemer, to whom he had committed his Soul in the days of his health and
strength. He met death without terror, and with calmness and composure,
resigned his immortal spirit into the hands of GOD that gave it.

HIS children have lost an affectionate parent; -- his servants an indulgent
master; -- the commonwealth a valuable member; -- the church of Christ a
steadfast friend; -- the sick a skilful physician, -- and the poor a generous
benefactor: His removal has occasioned a general grief; but has made the widest
breach in this congregation.

BUT, though our earthly friends die; yet the LORD LIVES; and blessed be the GOD
OF OUR SALVATION! Let us therefore not mourn, as those that are without hope;
but pour out our prayers to the GOD of all grace, that he would raise up,
animate, and strengthen others, to stand in the room of those, who have served
their generation by the will of God, and are gone off the stage with comfort
and applause. Let us all work the works of him that sent us, while it is day,
and live in a diligent preparation for the coming of our LORD; -- that when we
have finished our course; we also may sleep in JESUS; and finally have a happy
meeting with all those, who through faith and patience inherit the promises.
Which GOD of his infinite mercy grant, through the merits and mediation of JESUS
CHRIST;

To whom, etc. AMEN.

TO Mrs. MARGARET DU BOIS: ON The DEATH OF Her late virtuous Father, JOHN
NICOLL, M.D.
Dignum laud virum musa vetat mori,

Horat.
WHILE you, DU BOIS, command the tears to flow,
And every bosom beats with silent woe;
An infant Muse awakes her dying fire,
And in a FUNERAL-SONG resumes the lyre.
Permit me then in pensive strains to mourn,
Join in thy grief, and echo groan to groan,
And drop a tear on NICOLL'S sacred urn:
In mingled torrents let our grief flow down;
I weep the Friend, while you the Parent moan.
FORGIVE, immortal Shade! if aught can rise
Warbled from dust to the superior skies,
A feeble mortal, who would fain rehearse
Thy deathless virtues in unfading verse.
OH! speak, DU BOIS, (those joyless glooms dispel)
You, whom he loved, his virtues best can tell;
Say when, for often in converse you were joined,
What were the dictates of his holy mind?
What heavenly sounds flowed from his breast refined?
Often have I seen thee, when he spoke, rejoice
To hear the accents of a Father's voice;
To hear him soar above this dull abode,
And talk of Heaven, of Virtue, of his GOD:
What sacred flames his glowing breast inspired,
When from the world in silence he retired!
But now no more his raptured bosom glows;
No more the Church his heavenly transport knows;
Death, the grim TYRANT of the human-race,
Breathless enfolds him in her cold embrace.
LAMENT, ye PIOUS! ye religious PEW!
Whose boundless thoughts celestial joys pursue;
For, lo! the man for piety revered,
Who scarcely but through human frailty erred;
Though grave religion shone around his head,
Promiscuous lies among the vulgar dead!
While others mourn, lament ye numerous POOR!
Who never unreliev'd forsook his door:
His alms descended like the flowing light,
And Poverty looked cheerful in his sight.
STRANGER to civil and religious strife,
He passed the stages of a peaceful life:
In youth he flourished over the youthful throng;
Through temperance severe his age was strong;
No slow diseases wore his frame away;
He fled at once, -- impatient of delay.
So some tall OAK, the monarch of the woods,
Exalts his towering summit to the clouds;
The spreading boughs extended over the plain,
From heat defend, and shelter from the rain;
Till by some furious storm's destructive rage,
He falls, -- the honor of a lengthened age.
A MAN so excellent who but must grieve
To lose; yet Heaven rejoices to receive:
There he is gone sublimest joys to prove
In the gay bowers that crown the seats above;
Loud songs among the blissful choir to raise,
And spend a glad eternity in praise.
To distant shores his ever-living name
Shall fly unsullied on the wings of fame.
CEASE then, DU BOIS, thy tears, -- no more complain,
Nor weep an Angel, whom you loved a Man:
In youth immortal, see thy FATHER dressed!
In robes celestial, see him stand confessed!
All pain forever banished from his breast;
Among the SONS OF LIGHT, his glad compeers,
He sees unnumber'd worlds, and treads the spheres.
WHEN nature into ruin shall be hurled,
And the last trump surprise the astonished world;
When clad in glory, GOD's eternal SON
Shall sit majestic on a radiant throne;
GOD-LIKE, thy NICOLL'S sacred dust shall rise,
And his embodied spirit mount the imperial skies.
BUT can his loved Idea from thee go,
Long as the vital streams of nature flow?
Though friendship cease, and love no more inspire
The breasts of lovers with a glowing fire;
Yet THINE shall sacred last, THINE undecay'd,
Burn on through death, and animate thy Shade.
W. S.


