THE TREATY HELD WITH THE INDIANS OF THE SIX NATIONS, AT PHILADELPHIA, In JULY,
1742.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed and Sold by B. FRANKLIN, at the New-Printing-Office,
near the Market. M,DCC,XLIII.

THE TREATY, etc.
THE Deputies of the Six Nations having, at their last Visit, agreed to release
their Claim to all the Land on both Sides of the River Sasquehanab, as far
South as this Province extends, and to the Northward to those called the
Endless Mountains or Kittochtinny Hills; in Consideration whereof, they then
received a large Quantity of valuable Indian Goods for the Lands situate on the
Eastern Side of the said River, but declined at that Time to receive any for
those on the Western Side of the said River, choosing to defer the same till
another Visit; A large Number arrived from these Nations at Philadelphia, on
Wednesday the 30 th of June, with Deputies duly empowered to receive the said
Goods; and acquainted the Governor, that being weary from the Fatigue of their
long Journey, they should crave three or four Days to rest themselves before
they proceeded to their Business: In the mean time they would wait on the
Governor to discourse, according to their usual Method, about News and other
Occurrences; which the Governor readily agreed to, and asked them when they
would choose to pay their first Visit; which they desiring might be on Friday:
the 2 d of July in the Afternoon, the Council was accordingly summoned, and met
at Mr. Logan's House, where were

PRESENT, The Honorable GEORGE THOMAS, Esquire Lieut. Governor. Esqrs; James
Logan, Clement Plumsted, Samuel Hasell, Abrabam Tailor, Samuel Preston, Thomas
Lawrence, Ralph Asketon, Robert Strettell,
The Chiefs of the Six Nations, with the Chiefs of the Shawanese. CANASSATEEGO,
the Onondago Chief, Speaker. CONRAD WEISER, Interpreter.


The Governor opened the Conference as follows.

BRETHREN,

The Proprietor having purchased certain Lands from your Nations about Six
Years ago, a Moiety of what was agreed to be given in Consideration of that
Purchase was at that Time delivered to them, and the other being at their own
Desire left in the Proprietor's Hands, He pressed you by Shikalamy to send last
Year for it, and would have been glad to have seen you and taken you by the
Hand before his Departure. But as the Design of this Meeting is to hear your
News and converse together in a free and friendly Manner, I shall say no more
about the Goods than that they lie ready at the Proprietor's House, and will be
delivered when you shall have sufficiently rested from the Fatigue of your
Journey.

The Chief of the Onondagoes spoke

BRETHREN, We propose to rest four Days, and then come to the main Business. At
present we are at a private Conference about News, and have something of this
Sort to mention to our Brother Onas. And on the Governor's signifying they
would be glad to know what it was, the Chief proceeded.

BRETHREN,

It is our Way when we come to our Brethren, or any other Persons, whom we live
in strict Friendship with, to remove all Obstructions to a good Understanding;
with this View we are to inform you of a Piece of disa retable News that
happened in our Journey. -- Some White People living at a Place called
Conegocheegoe, whose Names we cannot tell, nor whether they belong to this or
the neighboring Government, but one of them, as we heard, had his House burnt
over his Head some Years ago, and he was brought down a Prisoner and committed
to the Goal of this City: These People lighting of our young Warriors, as they
were hunting, made some Proposals about the Purchasing of Land from them, and
our young Men being indiscreet, and unacquainted with Public Business, were
foolish enough to hearken to them, and to receive five Duffil Strowds for two
Plantations on the River Cohongoronto. A Conestogoe Indian, and a French
Indian, and some others that were in Company had three Duffil Strowds, and went
away with them; and our young Men carried off the other two. As soon as this
came to our Knowledge, we sent for our Warriors, and after examining and
rebuking them severely, we took away their two Strowds, and publicly censured
them for exposing us to our Brethren of Pennsylvania in doing a Thing so
inconsistent with our Engagements to them; You are, said we aloud, that all our
People might hear and take Notice, to know and remember, that the Six Nations
have obliged themselves to sell none of the Land that falls within the Province
of Pennsylvania to any other but our Brother Onas, and that to sell Lands to
any other is an high Breach of the League of Friendship. Brethren, this rash
Proceeding of our young Men makes us ashamed. We always mean well, and shall
perform faithfully what we have promised: And we assure you, this Affair was
transacted in the Manner we have related, without our Privity or Consent. And
that you may be fully convinced of this, and of the Sincerity of our
Intentions, we have brought you these Two Strowds [ here be presented two Red
Strowds to the Governor] they are the very Strowds our foolish young Men
received; we took them from them, and we give them to you to return to those
white People who made the Bargain, and desire when the Strowds are returned to
them, they may be told what we now say, and that we shall not confirm such
Bargains nor any other that may interfere with our Engagements to our Brother
Onas.

The Governor then spoke:

BRETHREN,

I thank you for this Piece of News; you have taken this Matter perfectly
right. All Bargaining for Land within this Province, is, to be sure, a manifest
Breach of your Contract with the Proprietors, and what we know you will not
countenance. We have hitherto found the Six Nations faithful to their
Engagements, and this is a fresh Instance of their Punctuality. You could not
help these Mistakes of your young Men; they were not done in your Presence: But
as several Inconveniences may arise from these kind of clandestine Sales, or
from any such loose Sales of Land by your People, we desire you will, on your
Return home, give public Notice to all your Warriors not to bargain for any
Land; o^ if they do, that you will not confirm such Bargains; and that this
very Affair, together with what you have done therein, may be particularly
reported to all your Nation assembled in Council.

The Onondago Chief promised to give such public Notice; and desiring Liberty
to mend his former Speech, he proceeded:

BRETHREN,

I forgot one Circumstance: Our People who pretended to sell the Land, demanded
a Belt of Wampum of the Buyers to carry to their Chiefs; and on their declaring
they had no Wampum, our Warriors said, they would not answer that their Chiefs
would confirm this Bargain, since they never did any thing of this Nature
without Wampum.

The Governor, after a short Pause, spoke:

BRETHREN of the Six Nations,

I shall take this Opportunity to relate to you a Piece of disagreeable News I
received some Days ago in a Letter from Le Tort the Indian Trader, at
Allegheny, who says, That in May last some Indians of the Taway Nation,
supposed by us to be the Twightwees, in their Return from War, called and
stayed some Time with the Shawanese; who being asked, and denying they had
brought either Scalps or Prisoners, the Shawanese suspecting them, had the
Curiosity to search their Bags, and finding two Scalps in them that by the
Softness of the Hair did not feel like Indian Scalps, they washed them clean
and found them to be the Scalps of some Christians. On this Discovery, the
Twightwees were so much ashamed, that they stole away from their Town in the
Nightime; and coming, as they afterward understood, to a little Village
belonging to the Shawanese, they told our People that their Hearts were full of
Grief; for, as they came along the Road, they found it all bloody; and having
good Cause to believe it was made bloody with the Blood of some of the White
Brethren, they had very sorrowfully swept the Road; and desired them to inform
the Governor of Pensilvania of their (the Twightwees) Grief; and how they had
swept the Road clean. Le Tort adds, on Behalf of the Shawanese, That they were
much troubled and grieved at this unfortunate Accident; and prayed, as they had
no Concern in it, more than by being Instruments to discover it, their Brethren
would not blame them, nor suffer a Misunderstanding to arise between them on
this Account: They would sweep the Road clean, and wipe all the Blood away; and
desired their Brethren would be satisfied with this, and not weep too much for
a Misfortune that might not happen again as long as the Sun and Moon shone.

The Person who delivered me Le Tort's Letter, brought this Bundle of Skins as
a Present to me; but I told the Messenger, I would not meddle with it; he might
leave it if he pleased: The Affair appeared to me in a bad Light, and I would
represent it to the Six Nations, who were expected in Town every Day. This is
the Fact as I have it from Le Tort: I desire to be informed if you know any
thing of this Matter; and if you do not, that you will make diligent Enquiry
who committed the Murder, and who are the unhappy Sufferers, and assist us to
obtain Satisfaction, if it shall appear to be any of our Fellow Subjects that
have been treated in this Manner.

To enforce this Request, I present you with this String of Wampum.

The Onondago Chief, in Reply, said:

BRETHREN,

We take this Information kindly at your Hands; we will take this String of
Wampum Home with us to our Lodgings, and there consult about the most regular
and proper Steps to be taken by us to answer your Expectations; and when we
have duly considered the Matter, we will return you an Answer.

Upon this the Governor put an End to the Conference; and calling for Wine and
other Liquors, according to the Indian Custom, after a decent and cheerful
Entertainment, the Indians withdrew.

At a COUNCIL held at the Proprietor's House, July 5. 1742.
PRESENT The Honorable GEORGE THOMAS, Esquire Lieut. Governor. Esqrs; James Logan,
Clement Plumsted,
With several Gentlemen of the Town. The Chiefs of the Six Nations.


It being judged proper, at this critical Time, when we are in daily
Expectation of a French War, to sound the Indians, and discover what Dependence
we might have on them, in case their Aid should be wanted; an handsome Dinner
was provided for their Chiefs; and after they had made an hearty Meal, and
drank his Majesty's Health, the Proprietors, and the Health of the Six Nations,
the Chiefs gave the solemn Cry, in Testimony of their Thanks, for the Honor
done them. And soon after the Governor began, in a free Way, to enquire for
what Reason the Senecas were not come down, since they had an equal Right to a
Share of the Goods with the other Nations. -- Canassateego, their Speaker,
said, The Senecas were in great Distress, on Account of a Famine that raged in
their Country, which had reduced them to such Want, that a Father had been
obliged to kill two of his Children to preserve his own and the rest of his
Family's Lives; and they could not now come down, but had given Directions
about their Share of the Goods. -- The Governor expressed his Concern for the
unhappy Circumstances of their Brethren of the Seneca Nation; and, after a
short Respite, enquired if any of their Deputies were then at Canada, and
whether the French Governor was making any warlike Preparations. And on their
answering, Yes; the Governor said, with a smiling, pleasant Countenance, I
suppose if the French should go to War with us, you will join them. The Indians
conferred together for some Time, and then Canassateego, in a cheerful lively
Manner, made Answer. -- We assure you, the Governor of Canada pays our Nations
great Court at this Time, well knowing of what Consequence we are to the French
Interest: He has already told us, he was uncovering the Hatchet and sharpening
it, and hoped, if he should be obliged to lift it up against the English, their
Nations would remain neuter and assist neither Side. -- But we will now speak
plainly to our Brethren: Why should we, who are one Flesh with you, refuse to
help you, whenever you want our Assistance? -- We have continued a long Time in
the strictest League of Amity and Friendship with you, and we shall always be
faithful and true to you our old and good Allies. -- The Governor of Canada
talks a great deal, but ten of his Words do not go so far as one of yours. --
We do not look toward them; We look toward you; and you may depend on our
Assistance. Whilst the Onondago Chief made this open and hearty Declaration,
all the other Indians made frequently that particular Kind of Noise which is
known to be a Mark of Approbation. -- The Governor bid the Interpreter tell
Canassateego, He did not set on foot this Enquiry from any Suspicion he had of
the Six Nations wanting a due Regard for the English. -- Our Experience of
their Honor and Faith would not permit us to think any other of them than that
they would esteem our Friends their Friends, and our Enemies their Enemies,
agreeable to the strict Union which had ever subsisted between us. -- As to the
Governor of Canada, they need not mind what he said. -- The English, on equal
Terms, had beat the French, and could beat them again: And were they but to
consider the Advantages which the English have, by possessing so many large and
populous Countries and so many good Ports on the Continent of America, they
would soon see who had most Reason to fear a War, the French or the English.

Here the Conversation dropped; and, after another Glass of Wine, the Indians
resumed the Discourse, by asking whether their Brethren had not been for some
time engaged in a War with the King of Spain, and what Successes they had met
with.

The Governor told them, the King of Great Britain lived in an Island, and
being surrounded with the Sea, his chief Strength lay in his Ships; in which he
was so much superior to his Enemies, that they were seldom to be met with on
the broad Ocean, but sculk'd and hid themselves, only venturing out now and
then; and whenever they did they were almost sure to be taken; and that the
King of Great Britain had, with his Ships, beat down or taken several of the
Spaniards Great Forts in America. -- The Indians said, they were pleased to
hear their Brethren were an Over-match for their Enemies, and wished them good
Success.

The Governor then inquired into the State and Condition of the Nations to the
Westward of the Great Lakes, and whether they had any Warriors then in those
Countries? Whether they had concluded Peace with the Southern Indians? And
whether they had heard what their Deputies had done at Albany?

They made Answer: That they had always Abundance of their Men out amongst the
Nations situate to the West of their Lakes. -- That they had kindled a Fire
with a vast many Nations, some whereof were Tributaries, and they had a good
Understanding with all. -- They set out from their own Country in Company with
two Sets of Deputies, one going to hold a Treaty with the Southern Indians, and
they believed a Peace would be concluded: The other going to meet the Governor
of New York, at Albany; but they could not tell what had been done at either
Place. -- On their Return, they were to hold a General Council, and would
inform their Brethren of these Particulars.

Then the Governor put an End to the Conference, by telling the Indians the
Goods would be delivered to them at a Council to be held to morrow Afternoon at
the Meeting House.

At a COUNCIL held in the Meeting House, Philadelphia, July 6. 1742.
PRESENT,

The Honorable GEORGE THOMAS, Esquire Lieut. Governor. Esqrs; James Logan, Clement
Plumsted, Abraham Tailor, Samuel Preston, Ralph Asheton, Robert Strettell,
CANASSATEEGO, Chief of the Onondagoes, Speaker. SHICALAMY; and a great Number
of Indians, whose Names are as follows, viz. ONONTOGOES.
Counselors. Sawegaty, Caxhayion,
Saguyassatha, Kayadoghratie alias Slanaghquasy. Rotier-uwughton, Tokaughaah,
Tiorughwaghthe, Tokano-ungoh, Aronty-oony, Tohanohawigh^^^, Tioghwatouny,
Auughrahysey.
CAIYOUQUOS.
Chiefs. Sahugh-sowa, Tohatgaghthus,
Tokany-esus, Runho-hihio, Kanadoghary, Zior-aghquaty. Sagu-iughwatha, alias
Cadcaradsey. Sca-yenties, Tats-^eghteh, Alligh-waheis, Tayo-quario, Hogh degh
runtu, Rotehn Haghtyackon, Captain. Sawoalieselhohaa, Sagughsa-eck,
Uwantakeraa, Horuhot, Os^ghquaa, Tuyanoegon.
ANOYIUTS or ONEIDAS.
Chiefs. Saristaquoh, Ungquaterughiathe alias Shikelimo,
Tottowakerha, Taraghkoerus, Onughkallydawwy, a noted young Chief. Onughnaxqua,
Chief. Tawyiakaarat, To^athuyongochtha, Sughnakaarat, Taghneghdoerus,
Tokanyiadaroeyon, Sagogughyatha, Ra^e^ius, Tokanusoegon.
JENONTOWANOS or SENECAS.
Karugh iagh Raghquy, Captain. Ta^n heentus, Onontyiack.
TUSCARROROS.
Chiefs. Sawontka, Ti-ieroes, Cloghsytowax,
Tokary^oegon, Captain. Oghioghse^, Tieleghweghson, Tougrotha, Yorughianego,
Ot-quehig, Squaghky, Sayadyio, Onughsowughton, Cherigh wastho, Aghsunteries,
Tion ogh scoghtha, Saligh wanaghson, Obn-waasey, Tocar-eher [died since at
Tulpehokin.] Tobanatakqua, Kanyhaag,
SHAWANOES.
Wehwehlaky, Chief. Aset teywa, Asoghqua, Maya minickysy, Wawyia Beeseny.
Canestogo Indians that speak the Onayiut's Language.
Tior Haasery, Chief. Tanigh wackerau, Karha Cawyiat, Kayen quily quo.
CANOYIAS or NANTIKOKES of Canestogo.
Des-se^eg, Ichqua que heck, ^uesamaag, Ayiok-ius.
DELAWARES of Shamokin.
Chiefs. Olumapies, Lingehanoah,
Kelly macquan, ^uitie-yquont Pisbquiton, Nena chy haut.
DELAWARES from the Forks.
Chiefs. Onutpe, Lawye quohwon al. Nutimus,
Toweghkappy. Cornelius Spring, and others.
CONRAD WEISER, CORNELIUS SPRING, Interpreters. And a great Number of the
Inhabitants of Philadelphia.
The Governor, having commanded Silence, spoke as follows:

Friends and Brethren of the Six Nations,

Six Years ago a Number of your Chiefs obliged us with a Visit, when they
agreed, on Behalf of your Nations, to the Release of certain Lands on both
Sides the River Sasquehannah, to the Southward of the EndlessMountains, and
within the Limits and Bounds of the King's Grant of this Province. In
Consideration of which, a certain Quantity of Goods was agreed on and delivered
as a full Satisfaction for the said Lands lying on the Eastern Side of the said
River: And for the Lands on the Western Side of the said River, you desired the
Payment should be deferred sill another Opportunity. These Goods, which are
exactly the same in Quantity as those you received the last Time the Chiefs of
your Nations were here, have been ready a considerable Time, and kept in
Expectation of your Coming for them: And now you are come down fully empowered
by your respective Councils to receive them, we are well pleased to deliver
them: Leaving it to you to make a fair and equal Division of them amongst
yourselves. We are sorry for the Absence of our Brethren the Senecas, and much
more so that it should be owing to their Distress at Home by a Famine that
rages in their Country: -- A Famine so great that you tell us a Father has been
obliged to sacrifice one Part of his Family, even his own Children, for the
Support and Preservation of himself, and the other Part. -- We heartily
commiserate their Condition, and do not doubt but you will do them fair and
ample Justice in the Disposal of their Part of the Goods in such Manner as they
have instructed you. You shall now hear the List of the Goods read to you.

Here, by the Governor's Order, the List of the Goods was read over, viz.

500 Pounds of Powder. 600 Pounds of Lead. 45 Guns. 60 Strowd-Matchcoats. 100
Blankets. 100 Dussil Matchcoats. 200 Yards Half-thick. 100 Shirts. 40 Hats. 40
Pair Shoes and Buckles. 40 Pair Stockings. 100 Hatchets. 500 Knives. 100 Hoes.
60 Kettles. 100 Tobacco-Tongs. 100 Scissars. 500 Awl-Blades. 120 Combs. 2000
Needles. 1000 Flints. 24 Looking-Glasses. 2 Pounds of Vermilion. 100 Tin-Pots.
1000 Tobacco-Pipes. 200 Pounds of Tobacco. 24 Dozen of Gartering, and 25
Gallons of Rum.
Then the Governor told them that the Goods, of which the Particulars had been
just read to them, were in the Meeting House, and would be sent to whatever
Place they would direct.

The Governor then proceeded:

BRETHREN,

You have often heard of the Care that your great and good Friend and Brother
William Penn took at all Times to cultivate a perfect good Harmony with all the
Indians: Of this your Nations have ever been fully sensible; but more
especially a Number of your Chiefs, about ten Years ago, when, on the Arrival
of a Son of your said great Friend William Penn, large and valuable Presents
were exchanged by us with you; a new Road was made and cleared; a new Fire
kindled; and the Chain of Friendship made stronger so as to last while the Sun
and Moon endure.

And now we cannot but congratulate ourselves that your Coming should happen at
a Time when we are in daily Expectation of a War being declared between the
King of England, and the French King, well knowing that should such a War
happen, it must very sensibly affect you, considering your Situation in the
Neighborhood of Canada. Your Coming at this Juncture is particularly
fortunate, since it gives us an Opportunity of mentioning several Things that
may be necessary to be settled between People so strictly and closely united as
we are. -- An Union not to be expressed by any thing less than the affectionate
Regards which Children of the same Parents bear for each other, as conceiving
ourselves to be one Flesh and one People.

The utmost Care therefore ought mutually to be taken by us on both Sides, that
the Road between us be kept perfectly clear and open, and no Lets nor the least
Obstruction be suffered to lie in the Way; or if any should by Accident be
found, that may hinder our free Intercourse and Correspondence, it must
forthwith be removed.

To enforce this, We lay down a String of Wampum.

In next Place, We, on our Part, shall enlarge our Fire that burns between us.
We shall provide more Fuel to increase it and make it burn brighter and
clearer, and give a stronger and more lasting Light and Warmth.

In Evidence of our sincere Intentions, We lay down this Belt of Wampum.

In the last Place, considering the Obligations we are mutually under by our
several Treaties, "That we should hear with our Ears for you, and you hear with
your Ears for us." We shall at all Times very willingly give you the earliest
and best Intelligence of any Designs that may be formed to your Disadvantage.
-- And if you discover any Preparations that can hurt us, we desire you will
immediately dispatch some suitable Person in whom we can place a Confidence, to
give us a proper Information.

To enforce this Request, as well as to brighten the Chain, we lay down this
other Belt of Wampum.

On the Governor's concluding the Speech, the solemn Cry by way of Approbation
was repeated by the Indians as many Times as there were Nations present; and
then Canassateego rose up and spoke.

BRETHREN,

We thank you for your kind Speech: What you have said is very agreeable to us;
and tomorrow when we have deliberated on the several Matters recommended to
us, we will give you our Answer. We desire, as our Time will be wholly taken up
in Council, you will order the Goods to be carried back to the Proprietaries to
prevent their being lost, and that they may continue there till we call for
them.

At a COUNCIL held in the Meeting House, July 7. 1742.
PRESENT, The Honorable GEORGE THOMAS, Esquire Lieut. Governor.

Esqrs;
James Logan, Thomas Lawrence, Abraham Tailor, Samuel Preston, Samuel Hasell,
Robert Strettell.
CANASSATEEGO's Speech on Behalf of the Six Nations.

BRETHREN, the Governor and Council, and all present,

According to our Promise we now propose to return you an Answer to the several
Things mentioned to us Yesterday, and shall beg Leave to speak to Public
Affairs first, though they were what you spoke to last. On this Head you
Yesterday put us in Mind, first, Of William Penn's early and constant Care to
cultivate Friendship with all the Indians; of the Treaty we held with one of
his Sons, about ten Years ago; and of the Necessity there is at this Time of
keeping the Roads between us clear and free from all Obstructions. We are all
very sensible of the kind Regard that good Man William Penn had for all the
Indians, and cannot but be pleased to find that his Children have the same. We
well remember the Treaty you mention held with his Son on his Arrival here, by
which we confirmed our League of Friendship that is to last as long as the Sun
and Moon endure: In Consequence of this, We, on our Part, shall preserve the
Road free from all Encumbrances; in Confirmation whereof we lay down this
String of Wampum.

You in the next Place said you would enlarge the Fire and make it burn
brighter, which we are pleased to hear you mention; and assure you, we shall do
the same, by adding to it more Fuel, that it may still flame out more strongly
than ever: In the last Place, you were pleased to say that we are bound, by the
strictest Leagues, to watch for each others Preservation; that we should hear
with our Ears for you, and you hear with your Ears for us: This is equally
agreeable to us; and we shall not fail to give you early Intelligence whenever
any thing of Consequence comes to our Knowledge: And to encourage you to do the
same, and to nourish in your Hearts what you have spoke to us with your
Tongues, about the Renewal of our Amity and the Brightening of the Chain of
Friendship; we confirm what we have said with another Belt of Wampum.

BRETHREN,

We received from the Proprietors, yesterday, some Goods in Consideration of
our Release of the Lands on the West Side of Sasquehannah, It is true we have
the full Quantity according to Agreement; but if the Proprietor had been here
himself, we think, in Regard of our Numbers and Poverty, he would have made an
Addition to them. -- If the Goods were only to be divided amongst the Indians
present, a single Person would have but a small Portion; but if you consider
what Numbers are left behind, equally entitled with us to a Share, there will
be extremely little. We therefore desire, if you have the Keys of the
Proprietor's Chest, you will open it, and take out a little more for us.

We know our Lands are now become more valuable: The white People think we do
not know their Value; but we are sensible that the Land is everlasting, and the
few Goods we receive for it are soon worn out and gone. For the Future we will
sell no Lands but when Brother Onas is in the Country; and we will know
beforehand the Quantity of the Goods we are to receive. Besides, we are not
well used with respect to the Lands still unsold by us. Your People daily
settle on these Lands, and spoil our Hunting. -- We must insist on your
Removing them, as you know they have no Right to settle to the Northward of
Kittochtinny-Hills. -- In particular, we renew our Complaints against some
People who are settled at Juniata, a Branch of Sasquahannah, and all along the
Banks of that River, as far as Mahaniay; and desire they may be forthwith made
to go off the Land; for they do great Damage to our Cousins the Delawares.

We have further to observe, with respect to the Lands lying on the West Side
of Sasquahannah, that though Brother Onas (meaning the Proprietor) has paid us
for what his People possess, yet some Parts of that Country have been taken up
by Persons whose Place of Residence is to the South of this Province, from whom
we have never received any Consideration. This Affair was recommended to you by
our Chiefs at our last Treaty; and you then, at our earnest Desire, promised to
write a Letter to that Person who has the Authority over those People, and to
procure us his Answer: As we have never heard from you on this Head, we want to
know what you have done in it. If you have not done any thing, we now renew our
Request, and desire you will inform the Person whose People are seated on our
Lands, that that Country belongs to us, in Right of Conquest; we having bought
it with our Blood, and taken it from our Enemies in fair War; and we expect, as
Owners of that Land, to receive such a Consideration for it as the Land is
worth. We desire you will press him to send us a positive Answer: Let him say
Yes or No: If he says Yes, we we will treat with him; if No, we are able to do
ourselves Justice; and we will do it, by going to take Payment ourselves.

It is customary with us to make a Present of Skins whenever we renew our
Treaties. We are ashamed to offer our Brethren so few; but your Horses and Cows
have eat the Grass our Deer used to feed on. This has made them scarce, and
will, we hope, plead in Excuse for our not bringing a larger Quantity: If we
could have spared more we would have given more; but we are really poor; and
desire you will not consider the Quantity, but, few as they are, accept them in
Testimony of our Regard.

Here they gave the Governor a Bundle of Skins.

The Governor immediately replied:

BRETHREN,

We thank you for the many Declarations of Respect you have given us in this
solemn Renewal of our Treaties: We receive, and shall keep your String and
Belts of Wampum, as Pledges of your Sincerity, and desire those we gave you may
be carefully preserved, as Testimonies of ours.

In Answer to what you say about the Proprietaries. -- They are all absent, and
have taken the Keys of their Chest with them; so that we cannot, on their
Behalf, enlarge the Quantity of Goods: Were they here, they might, perhaps, be
more generous; but we cannot be liberal for them. -- The Government will,
however, take your Request into Consideration, and, in Regard to your Poverty,
may perhaps make you a Present. I but just mention this now, intending to refer
this Part of your Speech to be answered at our next Meeting.

The Number of Guns, as well as every thing else, answers exactly with the
Particulars specified in your Deed of Conveyance, which is more than was agreed
to be given you. It was your own Sentiments, that the Lands on the West Side of
Sasquahannah were not so valuable as those on the East; and an Abatement was to
be made, proportionable to the Difference in Value: But the Proprietor
overlooked this, and ordered the sull Quantity to be delivered, which you will
look on as a Favor.

It is very true, that Lands are of late become more valuable; but what raises
their Value? Is it not entirely owing to the Industry and Labor used by the
white People in their Cultivation and Improvement? Had not they come amongst
you, these Lands would have been of no Use to you, any further than to maintain
you. And is there not, now you have sold so much, enough left for all the
Purposes of Living? -- What you say of the Goods, that they are soon worn out,
is applicable to every thing; but you know very well, that they cost a great
deal Money, and the Value of Land is no more than it is worth in Money.

On your former Complaints against People's Settling the Lands on Juniata, and
from thence all along on the River Sasquahannah as far as Mahania^y, some
Magistrates were sent expressly to remove them; and we thought no Persons would
presume to stay after that.

Here they interrupted the Governor, and said: -- These Persons who were sent
did not do their Duty: So far from removing the People, they made Surveys for
themselves, and they are in League with the Trespassers. We desire more
effectual Methods may be used, and honester Persons employed.

Which the Governor promised, and then proceeded:

BRETHREN,

According to the Promise made at our last Treaty with you, Mr. Logan, who was
at that Time President, did write to the Governor of Maryland, that he might
make you Satisfaction for such of your Lands as his People had taken up; but
did not receive one Word from him upon that Head. I will write to him again,
and endeavor to procure you a satisfactory Answer. We do not doubt but he will
do you Justice: But we exhort you to be careful not to exercise any Acts of
Violence toward his People, as they likewise are our Brethren, and Subjects of
the same Great King; and therefore Violence toward them must be productive of
very evil Consequences.

I shall conclude what I have to say at this Time with Acknowledgments for your
Present; which is very agreeable to us, from the Expressions of Regard used by
you in presenting it: Gifts of this Nature receiving their Value from the
Affection of the Giver, and not from the Quantity or Price of the Thing given.

At a COUNCIL held at Philadelphia, July 8. 1742.
PRESENT, The Honorable GEORGE THOMAS, Esquire Lieut. Governor.

Esqrs;
James Logan, Clement Plumsted, Samuel Hasell, Abraham Tailor, Samuel Preston,
Thomas Lawrence, Ralph Asheton, Robert Strettell.
The Board taking into Consideration, whether it be proper or not at this Time
to make a Present to the Indians of the Six Nations now in Town, in Return for
their Present to this Government at Yesterday's Treaty:

Resolved,

That it is highly fit and proper that a Present be made to the said Indians at
this Time.

And it is the Opinion of this Board, that the said Present should be of the
Value of L. 500, or at least L. 300.

And it is recommended to Mr. Logan, Mr. Preston, and Mr. Lawrence, to acquaint
Mr. Kinsey, the Speaker of the Assembly, with the Opinion of this Board; and
that they request him to confer with such other Member of Assembly as are in
Town, and report their Sentiments thereupon.

The Board taking into Consideration the Threats expressed by the Indians, at
the Treaty yesterday, against the Inhabitants of Maryland, settled on certain
Lands on the West Side of Sasquahannah, which the Indians claim, and for which
they require Satisfaction; and considering, that should those Threats, in any
sort, be put in Execution, not only the Inhabitants of Maryland, but of this
Government, and all His Majesty's Subjects on the Northern Continent of
America, may thereby be involved in much Trouble: It is the Opinion of this
Board, that the Governor write to the Governor of Maryland without Delay, to
inform him of the Indians Complaints and Threats, and to request a satisfactory
Answer; and that his Letter be sent by a special Messenger, at the Public
Expense.

At a COUNCIL held July 9. 1742.
PRESENT, The Honorable GEORGE THOMAS, Esquire Lieut. Governor,

Esqrs.
James Lagan, Clement Plumsted, Samuel Hasell, Robert Strettell, Samuel
Preston, Ralph Asheton, Thomas Lawrence And Mr. Peter's.
The Governor informed the Board, that the Indian Chiefs dining with him
Yesterday, after Dinner delivered their Answer to two Affairs of Consequence;

The first related to the violent Battery committed on William Webb, in the
Forks of Delaware, whereby his Jaw Bone was broke, and his Life greatly
endangered, by an unknown Indian. Canassatego repeating the Message delivered
to the Six Nations by Shickcalamy, in the Year 1740, with a String of Wampum,
said in Answer: The Six Nations had made diligent Enquiry into the Affair, and
had found out the Indian who had committed the Fact; he lived near Asopus, and
had been examined and severely reproved: And they hoped, as William Webb was
recovered, the Governor would not expect any further Punishment; and therefore
they returned the String of Wampum received from their Brethren, by the Hand of
Shickcalamy, in Token that they had fully complied with their Request.

I thanked them for their Care; but reminded them, that though the Man did not
die, yet he lay a long Time in extreme Misery, and would never recover the free
Use of his Speech, and was rendered less able to get his Livelihood, and in
such Cases the English Laws obliged the Assailant to make good all Damages,
besides paying for the Pain endured. -- But as the Indian was, in all
Probability, poor and unable to make Satisfaction, I told them, that for their
Sake I would forgive him; adding, had Webb died I make no Doubt but you would
have put the Indian to Death, just as we did two of our People who had killed
an Indian; we caused them to be hung on a Gallows, in the Presence of many
Hundreds of our People, to deter all others from doing the like. Canassatego
made me this Reply: The Indians know no Punishment but Death; they have no such
Thing as pecuniary Mulcts; if a Man be guilty of a Crime, he is either put to
Death, or the Fault is overlooked. We have often heard of your Hanging-up those
two Persons; but as none of our Indians saw the Men die, many believe they were
not hanged, but transported to some other Colony: And it would be satisfactory
to the Indians, if, for the Future, some of them be sent for, to be Witnesses
of such Executions. I assured them, that whoever gave them that Information,
abused them; for the Persons certainly suffered Death, and in the Presence of
all the People.

Canassatego then proceeded to give an Answer to what was said to them the 2d
Instant relating to Le Tort's Letter: That they had, in Council, considered in
what Manner the Matter recommended to them ought to be conducted; and they were
of Opinion, that as the Shawanese, not the Twightwys (for they knew so much of
it that the People were of the Twightwy Nation in whose Bags the Scalps were
found) had sent me a Present of Skins, I should, in return, send them a Blanket
or a Kettle, and with it a very sharp Message, that though they had done well in
sweeping the Road from Blood, yet that was but a small Part of their Duty; they
ought not to have suffered the Twightwys, after their Lie and the Discovery of
the Scalps, to have left them, 'til they had given a full and true Account how
they came by them, whose Scalps they were, and in what Place, and for what
Reason the Men were killed; and when they had been fully satisfied of all these
Particulars, then it was their Duty to have given Information to the Government
where the white People lived, that the Murderers might be complained against,
and punished by the Nation they belonged to: And as the Shawanese had omitted
to perform the Part of Brethren, that I should reprove them for it, and charge
them to make Amends for their Neglect, by using all possible Expedition to come
at the Knowledge of these Things, and to aid their Brethren the white People in
obtaining Justice.

The Minutes of the preceding Council being read, Mr. Logan, in Pursuance of
the Board's Direction of Yesterday, reported, on Behalf of himself and the
other Gentlemen to whom it was recommended, that they had conferred with Mr.
Kinsey, and requested him to consult the other Members of the Assembly
concerning the making a Present to the Indians; and that Mr. Kinsey having
collected the Sentiments of several Members of the Assembly in Town, whom he
had conferred with on that Subject, found them generally of Opinion, that a
Present should at this Time be made; but that they had declined nominating any
Sum: However, that Mr. Kinsey had given it as his own Opinion, that the
Governor and Council might go as far as Three Hundred Pounds.

And accordingly it is referred to Mr. Logan, Mr. Preston and Mr. Lawrence, to
consider of and prepare a proper List of the Goods whereof the Present should
be composed, to the Value of Three Hundred Pounds as aforesaid; advising with
the Interpreter as to the Quantity and Quality.

At a COUNCIL held at the Proprietor's the 9th of July, P. M. 1742.
PRESENT, The Honorable GEORGE THOMAS, Esquire Lieut. Governor, Esqrs; James
Logan, Samuel Preston, Robert Strettell, Abraham Tailor.
The CHIEFS of the Six Nations. SASSOONAN, and Delawares. NUTIMUS, and the
Fork-Indians. CONRAD WEISER, Interpreter.


The Governor spoke to the Chiefs of the Six Nations as follows:

BRETHREN,

The last Time the Chiefs of the Six Nations were here, they were informed,
that your Cousins, a Branch of the Delawares, gave this Province some
Disturbance about the Lands the Proprietor purchased from them, and for which
their Ancestors had received a valuable Consideration above Fifty-five Years
ago, as appears by a Deed now lying on the Table. -- Sometime after this,
Conrad Weiser delivered to your Brother Thomas Penn your Letter, wherein you
request of him and James Logan that they would not buy Land, etc. -- This has
been shown to them and interpreted; notwithstanding which they have continued
their former Disturbances, and have had the Insolence to write Letters to some
of the Magistrates of this Government, wherein they have abused your good
Brethren our worthy Proprietaries, and treated them with the utmost Rudeness
and Ill-Manners. Being loath, from our Regard to you, to punish them as they
deserve, I sent two Messengers to inform them that you were expected here, and
should be acquainted with their Behavior. -- As you, on all Occasions, apply
to us to remove all white People that are settled on Lands before they are
purchased from you, and we do our our Endeavors to turn such People off; we
now expect from you, that you will cause these Indians to remove from the Lands
in the Forks of Delaware, and not give any further Disturbance to the Persons
who are now in Possession.

To enforce This we lay down a String of Wampum.

Then were read the several Conveyances, the Paragraph of the Lettes wrote by
the Chiefs of the Six Nations relating to the Delawares; the Letters of the
Fork-Indians to the Governor and Mr. Langborne, and a Draught of the Land; and
then delivered to Conrad Weiser, who was desired to interpret them to the
Chiefs when they should take this Affair into their Consideration.

At a COUNCIL held July 10. 1742.
PRESENT, The Honorable GEORGE THOMAS, Esquire Lieut. Governor,

Esqrs.
James Logan, Clement Plumsted, Thomas Lawrence, Abraham Tailor. Samuel
Preston, Samuel Hasell, Robert Strettell,
The Governor laid before the Board an Extract from the Treaty held here the
7th Instant with the Indians of the Six Nations, so far as it related to the
Inhabitants of Maryland; as also a Letter he had prepared for the Governor of
Maryland upon that Subject; both of which being approved were ordered to be
transcribed fair, in order to be dispatched to morrow Morning: The Letter is as
follows:

SIR, Philadelphia, July 10. 1742.
THE enclosed Extract of the Speech made by the Chiefs of the Six Nations,
before a very numerous Audience, in this Place, with my Answer to it, is of so
great Importance to all his Majesty's Colonies in this Part of his Dominions,
and to your Government in particular, that I have employed a special Messenger
to deliver it you. I hope you will enable me to send them a satisfactory
Answer. It would be impertinent in me to say more to one so well informed as
you are of these Nations, and of their absolute Authority over all the Indians
bordering upon us, or of the Advantages of maintaining a strict Friendship with
them at all Times, but more especially at this critical Juncture.

I am, Yours, etc.


An Account exhibited by Conrad Weiser of his Expenses upon the Indians and
Indian Affairs, from February last to July 1. 1742, amounting to L. 36 18 s. 3
d. was laid before the Board, and examined, and allowed to be a just and very
moderate Account.

And the Board taking into Consideration the many signal Services performed by
the said Conrad Weiser to this Government, his Diligence and Labor in the
Service thereof, and his Skill in the Indian Languages and Methods of Business,
are of Opinion that the said Conrad should be allowed, as a Reward from the
Province at this Time, the Sum of Thirty Pounds, at least, besides Payment of
his said Account.

At a COUNCIL held at the Great Meeting House, July 10. P. M. 1742.
PRESENT The Honorable GEORGE THOMAS, Esquire Lieut. Governor. Esqrs; James Logan,
Thomas Lawrence, Abraham Tailor, Samuel Preston, Samuel Hasell, Robert
Strettell.
CANASSATEGO, SHICKCALAMY,
And other Indian Chiefs. CONRAD WEISER, Interpreter. And a great Number of the
Inhabitants of Philadelphia.


The Governor spoke to the Indians as follows:

BRETHREN,

This Meeting will be short: It is in order to make you a Present from the
Governor, the Council, the Assembly, and all our People. William Penn was known
to you to be a good and faithful Friend to all the Indians: He made a League of
Friendship with you, by which we became one People. This League has often since
been renewed by friendly Treaties; and as you have declared that the Friendship
shall always last on your Parts, so we would have you believe that it shall
remain inviolable on ours while Sun and Moon endure.

I gave you some Expectation of a Present, and we have it now ready to deliver
to you. This Present is made you by the Governor, Council, Assembly, and all
our People, in Consideration of the great Miseries and Distresses which you our
good Friends have lately suffered. This will be some Relief to you for the
present, and it is to be hoped your own Industry will soon retrieve your
Circumstances.

It has sometimes happened, and may happen again, that idle and untrue Stories
are carried to you concerning us your Brethren; but our Desire is, and we
expect it from you, that you will give no Credit to them; for we are, and
always will be, your steady and sincere Friends.

It is a Custom when we renew our Treaties with our good Friends the Indians,
to clear the Road and make our Fire burn bright: We have done so upon this
Occasion; and, in Token of our Sincerity, we deliver you, as a Present from the
Governor, the Council, the Assembly, and all the People of Pennsylvania, the
following Goods, viz.

24 Guns. 600 Pounds of Lead. 600 Pounds of Powder. 25 Strowdes Match-Coats. 90
Duffel Match-Coats. 30 Blankets. 62 Yards of Half-Thicks. 60 Ruffled Shirts, 25
Hats. 1000 Flints. 50 Hoes. 50 Hatchets. 5 Pounds of Vermilion. 10 Dozen of
Knives. 8 Dozen of Gimblets. 2 Dozen of Tobacco-Tongs. 25 Pair of Shoes. 25
Pair of Stockings. 25 Pair of Buckles.
Whereupon the Chiefs, and all the Indians, returned their solemn Thanks; and
Canassatego said, They had no more to say as to Public Business at present;
but they had somewhat under Deliberation, which when they had duly considered
they would communicate.

At a COUNCIL held at the Proprietor's, July 12. 1742.
PRESENT The Honorable GEORGE THOMAS, Esquire Lieut. Governor. Esqrs. James Logan,
Thomas Lawrence, Robert Strettell, Clement Plumsted, Abraham Tailor, Mr.
Richard Peter's.
CANASSATEGO, SHICKCALAMY,
And sundry Chiefs of the Six Nations. SASSOONAN, and Delawares. NUTTIMUS, and
Fork-Indians. CONRAD WEISER, Interpreter. Interpreters to the Fork Indians.
Pisquetoman, Cornelius Spring, Nicholas Scull.



CANASSATEGO said:

BRETHREN the Governor and Council,

The other Day you informed us of the Misbehaviour of our Cousins the
Delawares, with respect to their continuing to claim, and refusing to remove
from some Land on the River Delaware, notwithstanding their Ancestors had sold
it by a Deed under their Hands and Seals to the Proprietaries, for a valuable
Consideration, upwards of Fifty Years ago; and notwithstanding that they
themselves had about (...) Years ago, after a a long and full Examination,
ratified that Deed of their Ancestors, and given a fresh one under their Hands
and Seals; and then you requested us to remove them, enforcing your Request
with a String of Wampum. -- Afterward you laid on the Table our own Letters by
Conrad Weiser, some of our Cousins Letters, and the several Writings, to prove
the Charge against our Cousins, with a Draught of the Land in Dispute. -- We
now tell you, we have perused all these several Papers: We see with our own
Eyes, that they have been a very unruly People, and are altogether in the Wrong
in their Dealings with you. -- We have concluded to remove them, and oblige
them to go over the River Delaware, and quit all Claim to any Lands on this
Side for the Future, since they have received Pay for them, and it is gone
through their Guts long ago. -- To confirm to you that we will see your Request
executed, we lay down this String of Wampum in return for yours.

Then turning to the Delawares, holding a Belt of Wampum in his Hand, he spoke
to them as follows:

COUSINS,

Let this Belt of Wampum serve to chastise you. You ought to be taken by the
Hair of the Head and shaked severely, till you recover your Senses and become
sober. You don't know what Ground you stand on, nor what you are doing. Our
Brother Onas's Cause is very just and plain, and his Intentions to preserve
Friendship. On the other Hand, Your Cause is bad; your Heart far from being
upright; and you are maliciously bent to break the Chain of Friendship with our
Brother Onas and his People. We have seen with our Eyes a Deed signed by nine
of your Ancestors above Fifty Years ago for this very Land, and a Release
signed, not many Years since, by some of yourselves and Chiefs now living, to
the Number of fifteen or upwards. -- But how came you to take upon you to sell
Land at all: We conquered you; we made Women of you; you know you are Women,
and can no more sell Land than Women; nor is it fit you should have the Power
of selling Lands, since you would abuse it. This Land that you claim is gone
through your Guts; you have been furnished with Clothes, Meat and Drink, by the
Goods paid you for it, and now you want it again, like Children as you are. --
But what makes you sell Land in the Dark. Did you ever tell us that you had
sold this Land. Did we ever receive any Part, even the Value of a Pipe-Shank,
from you for it. You have told us a blind Story, that you sent a Messenger to
us to inform us of the Sale, but he never came amongst us, nor we never heard
any thing about it. -- This is acting in the Dark, and very different from the
Conduct our Six Nations observe in their Sales of Land; on such Occasions they
give public Notice, and invite all the Indians of their united Nations, and
give them all a Share of the Present they receive for their Lands. -- This is
the Behavior of the wise united Nations. -- But we find you are none of our
Blood: You act a dishonest Part, not only in this but in other Matters: Your
Ears are ever open to slanderous Reports about our Brethren; you receive them
with as much Greediness as lewd Women receive the Embraces of bad Men. And for
all these Reasons we charge you to remove instantly; we don't give you the
Liberty to think about it. You are Women. Take the Advice of a wife Man, and
remove immediately. You may return to the other Side of Delaware where you came
from: But we do not know whether, considering how you have demeaned yourselves,
you will be permitted to live there; or whether you have not swallowed that
Land down your Throats as well as the Land on this Side. We therefore assign
you two Places to go, either to Wyomen or Shamokin. You may go to either of
these Places, and then we shall have you more under our Eye, and shall see how
you behave. Don't deliberate; but remove away, and take this Belt of Wampum.

This being interpreted by Conrad Weiser into English, and by Cornelius Spring
into the Delaware Language, Canassatego taking a String of Wampum, added
further.

After our just Reproof, and absolute Order to depart from the Land, you are
now to take Notice of what we have further to say to you. This String of Wampum
serves to forbid you, your Children and Grandchildren, to the latest Posterity
forever, meddling in Land-Affairs; neither you nor any who shall descend from
you, are ever hereafter to presume to sell any Land: For which P^rpose, you are
to preserve this String, in Memory of what your Uncles have this Day given you
in Charge. -- We have some other Business to transact with our Brethren, and
therefore depart the Council, and consider what has been said to you.

Canassatego then spoke to the Governor and Council:

BRETHREN,

We called at our old Friend James Logan's, in our Way to this City, and to our
Grief we found him hid in the Bu^^es, and retired, through Infirmities, from
Public Business. We pressed him to leave his Retirement and prevailed with him
to assist once more on our Account at your Councils. We hope, notwithstanding
his Age, and the Effects of a Fit of Sickness, which we understand has hurt his
Constitution, that he may yet continue a long Time to assist this Province with
his Counsels. He is a wife Man, and a fast Friend to the Indians. And we
desire, when his Soul goes to GOD, you may choose in his Room just such another
Person, of the same Prudence and Ability in Counselling, and of the same tender
Disposition and Affection for the Indians. In Testimony of our Gratitude for
all his Services, and because he was so good as to leave his Country House, and
follow us to Town, and be at the Trouble, in this his advanced Age, to attend
the Council; we present him with this Bundle of Skins.

BRETHREN,

It is always our Way, at the Conclusion of a Treaty, to desire you will use
your Endeavors with the Traders, that they may sell their Goods cheaper and
give us a better Price for our Deer-Skins. Whenever any particular Sort of
Indian Goods is scarce, they constantly make us pay the dearer on that Account.
We must now use the same Argument with them: Our Deer are killed in such
Quantities, and our Hunting-Countries grown less every Day, by the Settlement
of white People, that Game is now difficult to find, and we must go a great Way
in Quest of it; they therefore ought to give us a better Price for our Skins;
and we desire you would speak to them to do so. We have been stinted in the
Article of Rum in Town. We desire you will open the Rum-Bottle, and give it to
us in greater Abundance on the Road.

To enforce our Request, about the Indian Traders, we present you with this
Bundle of Skins.

BRETHREN,

When we first came to your Houses, we found them clean and in Order: But we
have staid so long as to dirty them; which is to be imputed to our different
Way of Living from the white People: And therefore, as we cannot but have been
disagreeable to you on this Account, we present you with some Skins to make
your Houses clean, and put them into the same Condition they were in when we
came amongst you.

BRETHREN,

The Business the Five Nations transact with you is of great Consequence, and
requires a skilful and honest Person to go between us; one in whom both you and
we can place a Confidence. -- We esteem our present Interpreter to be such a
Person, equally faithful in the Interpretation of whatever is said to him by
either of us, equally allied to both; he is of our Nation, and a Member of our
Council as well as of yours. When we adopted him, we divided him into Two equal
Parts: One we kept for our selves, and one we left for you. He has had a great
deal of Trouble with us, wore out his Shoes in our Messages, and dirty'd his
Clothes by being amongst us, so that he is become as nasty as an Indian.

In Return for these Services, we recommend him to your Generosity; and on our
own Behalf, we give him Five Skins to buy him Clothes and Shoes with.

BRETHREN,

We have still one more Favor to ask. Our Treaty, and all we have to say about
Public Business, is now over, and to morrow we design to leave you. We hope,
as you have given us plenty of good Provision whilst in Town, that you will
continue your Goodness so far as to supply us with a little more to serve us on
the Road. And we likewise desire you will provide us with Wagons, to carry our
Goods to the Place where they are to be conveyed by Water.

To these several Points the Governor made the following Reply.

BRETHREN of the Six Nations,

The Judgment you have just now passed on your Cousins the Delawares, confirms
the high Opinion we have ever entertained of the Justice of the Six Nations.
This Part of your Character, for which you are deservedly famed, made us waive
doing our selves Justice, in order to give you another Opportunity of
convincing the World of your inviolable Attachment to your Engagements. These
unhappy People might have always lived easy, having never received the least
Injury from us; but we believe some of our own People were bad enough to impose
on their Credulity, and engage them in these wrong Measures, which we with, for
their Sakes, they had avoided.

We hoped, from what we have constantly given in Charge to the Indian Traders,
that they would have administered no just Cause of Complaint: If they do you
Wrong, it is against our Inclinations, and contrary to our express Directions.
As you have exhibited no particular Charge against them, we shall use our best
Endeavors to persuade them to give you as much for your Skins as they can
possibly afford; and to take Care that their Goods which they give in Exchange
for Skins, be of the best Sort. We will likewise order you some Rum to serve
you on your Journey home, since you desire it.

We wish there had been more Room and better Houses provided for your
Entertainment; but not expecting so many of you, we did the best we could. It Is
true there are a great many Houses in Town, but as they are the Property of
other People, who have their own Families to take Care of, it is difficult to
procure Lodgings for a large Number of People, especially if they come
unexpectedly.

We entertain the same Sentiments of the Abilities and Probity of the
Interpreter as you have expressed. We were induced at first to make use of him
in this important Trust, from his being known to be agreeable to you, and one
who had lived amongst you for some Years, in good Credit and Esteem with all
your Nations; and have ever found him equally faithful to both. We are pleased
with the Notice you have taken of him, and think he richly deserves it at your
Hands. We shall not be wanting to make him a suitable Gratification, for the
many good and faithful Services he has done this Government.

We have already given Orders for Wagons to carry your Goods, and for a Supply
of Provisions to serve you on the Road in your Return home, where we heartily
wish you may arrive in good Health.

After the Governor had concluded, Mr. Logan returned an Answer to that Part of
Canassateego's Speech which related to him, and said, That not only upon the
Account of his Lameness, of which the Indians themselves were Witnesses; but on
Account of another Indisposition which about three Years since had laid him
under an Incapacity of expressing himself with his former usual Freedom, he had
been obliged to live retired in the Country. But that our first Proprietor, the
Honorable William Penn, who had ever been a Father and true Friend to all the
Indians, having above Forty Years since recommended them to his particular
Care, he had always, from his own Inclination as well as from that strict
Charge, endeavored to convince all the Indians, that He was their true Friend;
and was now well pleased, that after a Tract of so many Years, they were not
insensible of it. He thanked them kindly for their Present, and heartily joined
with them in their Desires, that this Government may always be furnished with
Persons of equally good Inclinations, and not only with such, but also with
better Abilities to serve them.

And then Canassatego said, he had forgot to mention, that Shickcalamy and
Caxbayn had been employed on several Messages to this Government, and desired
they might be considered on that Account.

At a COUNCIL held the 12th of July, P.M. 1742.
PRESENT, The Honorable GEORGE THOMAS, Esquire Lieut. Governor,

Esqrs;
James Logan, Clement Plumsted, Samuel Hasell, Robert Strettell, Samuel
Preston, Thomas Lawrence, Abraham Tailor, Mr. Richard Peter's.
The Board taking into Consideration the Regulation of the necessary Expenses
of the Indians Traveling down hither, and Returning; and upon an Estimate made
by Conrad Weiser, amounting to about One Hundred Pounds, it appearing that the
said Sam of L100. will be necessary to be advanced to Conrad Weiser to defray
those Expenses, Mr. Logan on the Proprietaries Behalf, proposes to advance 40
l. and the Treasurer declaring he had no Public Money in his Hands, and that
if he had, he would not advance Money without the Assembly's Order; it is
recommended to Mr. Preston and Mr. Lawrence, to confer with Mr. Kinsey, and
know whether he, as Speaker of the Assembly, and Trustee of the Loan-Office,
will advance the other 60 l.

And the Indians having requested that they might have a small Quantity of Rum,
to be added to their Provisions, to comfort them on the Road: The Board is of
Opinion, that there be added to the said Estimate for Twenty Gallons of Rum for
the aforesaid Use. And in Return for their Present of Skins, at Requesting that
the Indian Traders be enjoined to sell their Goods cheaper, the Board directs
that two Strouds be presented. And that Five Pounds be given to Caxhayn on the
Account of the Province, for his Services; and to Shickalamy the like Sum.

A just Copy, compared by PATRICK BAIRD, Secry.


