POEMS ON Several Occasions.

By Mr. BYLES.

Nunc itoque et versus et caetera ludicra pone.

Hor. Lib. 1. Epist. 1. v. 10. BOSTON: Printed and Sold by S. Kneeland and T.
Green, in Queenstreet, 1744.

PREFACE.
THE Poems collected in these Pages, were for the most Part written as the
Amusements of looser Hours, while the Author belonged to the College, and was
unbending his Mind from severer Studies, in the Entertainments of the
Classicks. Most of them have been several Time printed here, at London, and
elsewhere, either seperately, or in Miscellanies: And the Author has now drawn
them into a Volume. Thus he gives up at once these lighter Productions, and
bids adieu to the airy Muse.

POEMS ON Sereral Occasions.
The Almighty CONQUEROR.
I.
A Wake my Heart, awake my Tongue,
Sound each melodious String;
In numerous Verse and lofty Song,
To thee, my GOD, I sing.
II.
Omnipotent Redeemer-LORD,
What Wonders have thou done!
My flowing Numbers shall record.
The Vict'ries thou have won.
III.
I glow in Raptures all divine,
As with the Theme I rise,
Your tuneful Aids, fictitious Nine,
No more shall tempt my Eyes.
IV.
Lo! robbed with Light, JESUS descends
The Graves tremendous Gloom;
Day blushes round him where he tends,
And dawns amid the Tomb.
V.
Sudden from off that dismal Bed,
The scattering Shadows fly;
The dark Dominions of the Dead
Confess the Stranger, Joy.
VI.
Hark! how in hideous Howls complains
The conquered Tyrant Death;
He roars aloud, and shakes his Chains,
And grinds his Iron Teeth.
VII.
Immortal Vigor filled the Man,
Almighty Power the GOD,
When, armed with Thunders, down he ran
To Satan's dire Abode.
VIII.
Then Hell's grim Monarch saw, and feared,
And felt his tottering The One;
He raged, and foamed, and wildly star'd,
And seized his nodding Crown.
IX.
In vain he raved, and rolled his Eyes,
And held his Crown in vain:
Swift on his Head the Lightning flies,
With everlasting Pain.
X.
At once the old Serpent's Craft was crushed,
Beneath thy siery Prown,
When Thou, great GOD, resistless rushed,
And hurled the Monster down.
XI.
Thy Fetters, in the deep Abyss,
His tort'red Members wring:
There let him writhe, and coyl, and hiss,
And dart his pintless Sting.
XII.
These were the Victims of thy Hate,
When Fury flus'd thy Face;
But who, dear SAVIOR, can relate
The Conquests of they Grace!
XIII.
Cease, cease my Tongue, be still, my Lyre,
Be silent every String:
This is a Theme, O heavenly Chor,
Too great fro you to sing.
The GOD of Tempest.
I.
THY dreadful Power, Almighty GOD,
Thy Works to speak conspire;
This Earth declares thy Fame abroad,
With Water, Air, and Fire.
II.
At thy Command, in glaring Streaks,
The ruddy Lightning flies;
Loud Thunder the Creation shakes,
And rapid Tempests rise.
III.
Now gathering Glooms obscure the Day,
And shed a solemn Night;
And now the heavenly Engines play,
And shoot devouring Light.
IV.
The attending Sea thy Will performs,
Waves tumble to the Shore,
And toss, and foam amidst the Storms,
And dash, and rage, and roar.
V
The Earth, and all her trembling, Hills.
Thy marching Footsteps own;
A shudd'ring Fear her Entrails fills,
HER hideous Caverns groan.
VI.
My GOD, when Terrors thickest Throng
Through all the mighty Space,
And ratt'ling Thunders roar along,
And bloody Lightnings blaze:
VII.
When wild Confusion wrecks the Air,
And Tempests rend the Skies,
Whilst blended Ruin, Clouds and Fire
In harsh Disorder rise:
VII.
Amid the Hurricane I Will stand,
And strike a tuneful Song;
My Harp all trembling in my Hand,
And all inspired my Tongue.
VIII.
I Will shout aloud, "Ye Thunders! roll,
"And shake the sullen Sky;
"Your sounding Voice from Pole to Pole
"In angry Murmurs try.
IX.
"Thou Sun! retire, refuse thy Light,
"And let thy Beams decay;
"Ye Lightnings, flash along the Night,
"And dart a dreadfrul Day.
X.
"Let the Earth totter on her Base,
"Clouds Heavens wide Arch deform:
"Blow, all ye Winds, from every Place,
"And breath the final Storm.
XI.
"O JESUS, haste the glorious Day,
"When thou shall come in Flame,
"And burn the Earth, and waste the Sea,
"And break all Nature's Frame.
XII.
"Come quickly, Blessed Hope! appear,
"Bid thy swift Chariot fly:
"Let Angels tell thy coming near,
"And snatch me to the Sky.
XIII.
"Around thy Wheels, in the glad Throng
"I Would bear a joyful Part;
"All Hallelujah on my Tongue,
"All Rapture in my Heart.
The Complaint and the Consolation.
I.
WHERE shall find my LORD, my LOVE,
The SOV"REIGN of my Soul?
Pensive from East to West I rove,
And range from Pole to Pole.
II.
I search the shady Bowers, and trace
The Mazes fo the Grove,
Dear LORD, to see thy beauteous Face,
And tell thee how I love.
III.
For Him, about the flowery Fields
My wandering Footsteps stray,
When dewy Morn each Mountain guilds,
And purples over the Sea;
IV.
Till Evening bids the Western Clouds
With glittering Edges flame,
To the soft Winds, and murmuring Floods,
I still repeat his Name.
V.
Even in the silent Shades of Night
My Song the Forest fills;
When the fair Moon with solemn Light
Has silvered over the Hills.
VI.
JESUS my FAIR! aloud I cry,
For thee, for thee I burn;
JESUS, the echoing Vales reply,
JESUS, the Rocks return.
VII.
Ah thou my LITE, when shall I taste
That Heaven of endless Charms?
When shall I pant upon thy Breast;
And languish in thy Arms?
VIII.
Oh! how I long to clasp thee close,
Close in a strong Caress!
Joyful my latest Breath I Would loose
For so divine a Bliss.
IX.
Ye ling;ring Minutes, swiftly roll,
And rise, the happy Day,
When on his Bosom, tho my Soul,
Shall all dissolve away.
X.
The shall my fluttering Heart be sixth,
The Muse no more complain,
But with the Choirs immortal mixed,
Resound a heavenly Strain.
The Altogether Lovely.
I.
OFTEN has thy Name employed my Muse,
Thou LORD of all above:
Often has my Song to thee arose,
My Song, inspir;d by Love.
II.
My Heart has often confessed in Flame,
And melted all away:
Thou art by Night my hourly Dream,
My hourly Thought by Day.
III.
Each Feature over thee is a Charm,
And every Limb a Grace;
Divinely beauteous all thy Form,
Divinely fair thy face.
IV.
Thy Love to me how large! how full!
How kind are thy Commands!
Take, O my LOVE, take all my Soul
For ever in thy Hands.
V.
Those bleeding Hands, which on the Cross
Were stretched for my Caress:
In the dear Thought my Life I loose --
Was ever Love like this!
VI.
Weep, weep my Eyes, let gushing Tears
Stream in an endless flow:
Love on his dying Lips he wears.
His Wounds Compassion show.
VII.
Now he remembers me, and speaks,
I hear his Voice; Forgive:
In the dead Pale that spreads his Cheeks;
Ten thousand Beauties live.
VIII.
LORD, my Affections all are thine,
Warmed with a grateful Fire;
And thou, O best BELOVED, art mine,
My Hope, and my Desire.
IX.
Conspiring Love, conspiring Charms,
Confess thee all my Joy;
Come, heavenly FAIR, come to my Arms,
And all my Powers employ.
The Comparison, the Choice, and the Enjoyment.
I.
WHO on the Earth, or in the Skies,
Thy Beauties can declare?
JESUS, dear Object of my Eyes,
My Everlasting FAIR.
II.
Mortals, for you this is too great,
Too bright, and too sublime:
This, Angels labor to repeat;
And sink beneath the Theme.
III.
Behold, ye Beauties here below,
And clasp him it your Arms;
Can ye such heavenly Graces show,
Or rival him in Charms?
IV.
Though now, delighted, we can trace
Your Colors as they lie,
When he appears, from off your Face
The fading Colors fly.
V.
When all your Charms in vain we seek,
And all your Joys are fled,
Beauty blooms rosey on his Cheek,
And dances round his Head.
VI.
In vain your softest Smiles appear,
Or lovely Blushes rise:
Eternal Transports center here,
Heaven brightens in these Eyes.
VII.
Unviel, almighty LOVE, thy Face,
Thy Features let me see;
An once I Will rush to thy Embrace,
I Will spring at once to thee.
VIII.
With infinite Delight, I Will lay
My Head soft on thy Breast
My Eyes shall over thy Beauties stray;
My Arms surround thy Waist.
IX.
Thus six'd ever -- O the Joys!
The unutterable Bliss!
Now where is your Pleasure, earthly Toys?
Can ye compare with This!
X.
No more from thy Embrace I Will roam,
My LORD, my LIFE, my LOVE,
I see the Scenes of Joys to come
In long Procession move.
XI.
Now, vast Eternity, roll on,
O fathomless Profound!
Ye endless Ages, swiftly run,
Your never-ceasing Round.
On a very profane Compliment in a noble and devout Poem.
AH! Cease, vain Muse, forbear thy hardy Lays,
Nor urge the Thunder on thy guilty Bays,
How durst tho thus debase the SAVIOR'S Blood,
And raise a Mortal over the Throne of GOD:
Melodiously-Profane, prefer his Name,
And, gay in Eloquence, thy Judge blaspheme?
Over the black Lines remain perpetual Gloom,
And Flames, and deep Oblivion be the Doom.
Round the dire Rant shall sudden Lightnings rage,
And kindling Vengeance blast the impious Page.
So when the Archangel left his heavenly Song,
And mocked his Maker with a Seraph's Tongue.
MESSIAH, terrible Wrath! arose,
And hurled him down to Hell's tremendous Woes,
Where Seas of Fire with roaring Storms resound,
And endless Darkness spreads its brooding Horrors round.
HYMN to CHRIST for our Regeneration and Resurrection.
I.
TO Thee, my LORD. I lift the Song,
Awake, my tuneful Powers:
In constant Praise my grateful Tongue
Shall fill my foll'wing Hours.
II.
Gulty, condemned, undone I stood;
I bid my GOD depart:
He took my Sins, and paid his Blood,
And turned this wandering Heart.
III.
Death, the grim Tyrant, seized my Frame,
Vile, loathsome and accursed:
His Breath renews the vital Flame,
And Glories change the Dust,
IV.
Now, SAVIOR, shall thy Praise commence;
My Soul by Thee brought Home,
And every Member, every Sense,
Recovered from the Tomb.
V.
To Thee my Reason I submit,
My Love, my Memory, LORD,
My Eyes to read, my Hands to write,
My Lips to preach thy Word.
GOLIAH's Defeat.
In the Manner of Lucan.
WHEN the proud Philistines for War declared,
And Israel's Sons for Battle had prepared,
Before the Heathen Camp a Monster stalked.
And awful-frowning, in the Valley walked.
With hideous Strides he traversed all the Ground.
And over the Hills the Country viewed around
His brawny Flesh, and his prodigious Bones,
Bespoke him one of Anak's mighty Sons.
Death and Defiance sat upon his Brow,
Revenge and Hell his glaring Eye Balls show.
Then his dire Hand uplifted to the Skies,
Thunder his Voice, and Lightning in his Eyes,
He cried aloud with such a dreaful Sound,
As shook the Heavens, and rent the trembling Ground.
"Attend, ye Armies; Israel, hear; it is I
"Despise your Power, and all your Hosts defy
"What! not a Man among you dares attempt
"The glorious Fight, or urge the known Event?
"His despicable Flesh shall make a Feast,
"For ravenous Fowl, and each voracious Beast.
Behold, Concern and dire Amaze appear
Through all the Host, when they his Accents hear,
Shudd'ring Anxiety, and black Despair.
Pale are their Faces, in their Hearts is dread,
And panick Terror over the Field is spead.
Ghastly Confusion reigns, and not a Knight
Dares undertake to think upon the Fight.
Now a young Sheperd, David was his Name,
To see his Brethren in the Army, came:
But when Coliah's threatening Words he heard,
A generous Anger in his Looks appeared.
To Saul the King, his hasty Footsteps go,
And loud he claims for Combat with the Foe.
The astonished Chiefs, the daring Challenge hear,
And give Consent with Wonder and with Fear.
Instant the blooming Youth descends a Brook,
And in his Shepherd's Bag five Pebbles took;
He waits impatient, till his longing Eyes,
The gloomy Giant issuing forth descries,
With his tall Plume high-nodding in the Skies.
He roared loud Curses as he onward went,
Tortured the Air, and shook the Firmament.
David undaunted heard the Voice with Smiles,
And ran triumphant to the mighty Spoils.
Downward Goliath cast a careless Glance,
And saw the Stripling on the Ground advance.
As from some lofty Tower, tall Men below
Across the Streets like little Puppets go:
So looked young David to Goliah's size,
And, deep beneath, scarce reached his lofty Eyes.
Sublime, the Monster saw him with disdain,
Like a small Insect run along the Plain.
At first, collected in himself he stood,
'Himself, an Army! and his Spear, a Wood!'
His Helmet like a fiery Meteor shone,
Blazed high amidst the Heavens; another Sun.
His flaming Buckler with his Arm did rise,
Streaked Rainbows on the Clouds, and flashed about the Skies.
Then, with uplifted Roar, aloud he howls,
And shakes all Nature to the distant Poles.
"What daring Mortal this who treads the Field,
"And thinks himself so small to be concealed?
"Hence, fly my Rage, young Stripling quickly fly,
"Or, by the Gods! by Dagon! Thou shall die.
"This Hand, rash Youth, thy mangled Carcass tares,
"And hurls thy scatters'd Limbs above the Stars.
"For Birds and Beasts, thy Entrails spread the Plains,
"And on the Pavement smoke thy battered Brains!
"Not all the Powers above my Wrath shall brave;
"Thy God may pity, but he cannot save.
Fearless, the Hero heard the thundering Peals
Drive through the Rocks, and rattling round the Hills.
Disdain flashed dreadful from his martial Eyes,
And thus aloud his dauntless Tongue replies.
"Cease, empty Vaunter, cease thy impious Breath,
"This Stone shall fly commissioned with thy Death:
"Yours is the Sword and Spear you vainly boast,
"The Vict'ry's mine, for mine is the LORD OF HOST!
He said; then whirled his Sling, the Pebble flung.
It flew impetous, and triumphant sung;
On his broad Front it struck the Wariour full,
And Death drove furious through his crashing Scull.
Down fell the mighty Bulk; Hills, Fields and all,
Shook when he fell, and echoed to the Fall.
In Dust and Blood awhile his Members roll,
Then Night eternal rushed upon his Soul.
A Length enormous in the Plains he showed.
'Like a vast Island in a Sea of Blood.'
ODE, for Palatine Tune.
I.
Heavenly Love, our Bosoms seize!
Ye soft seraphick Powers,
Come, join your Songs with ours:
Gently as the dying Breeze
Whispers over the Midnight-Seas,
Or breathes along the Shores.
II.
Let the tender Echoes round
The sacred Song improve,
And sweetly onward move:
Lost in Ecstasy of Sound,
Let the feathered Choirs resound
Through all the tuneful Grove.
III.
JESUS, it is to Thee we sing,
Thou, the celestial Fair,
Soft to our Breafts repair;
Else we break each joyful String,
With sad Notes the Vales shall ring
Abandoned to Despair.
IV.
Oh! thy Love our Passion warms!
Come bless our longing Sight.
Come, over-pow'r us quite:
Put on all thy wondrous Charms,
Come and fill our ravished Arms,
And Heaven is less Delight.
Written in MILTON's PARADISE LOST.
HAD I, O had I all the tuneful Arts
Of lofty Verse; did every Muse inspire
My flowing Numbers, and adorn my Song!
Did MILTON's Fire flash furious in my Soul;
Could I command the Harmony, the Force,
The glittering Language, and the true Sublime
Whose mingled Beauties grace his glowing Lays,
Then should my Lines glide languishingly slow,
Or thundering roar, and rattle as they fleet,
Or, lovely-smiling, bud immortal Bloom,
As various as the Subjects they describe,
And imitate the Beauties which they mark.
Thus with ambitous Hand, I Would boldly snatch
A spreading Branch from his immoratal Laurels.
But, O my Muse, where shall thy Song begin?
Or where conclude? ten thousand Glories charm
My ravish's Heart, and dance before my Sight.
O MILTON! I Am transported at thy Name!
My Soul takes Wing at once; or shoots away,
Born eager by a Tide of Thought along.
Sometimes big Fury swells thy awful Verse,
And rolling Thunder bursts along thy Lines.
Now Hell is opened, and I see the Flames
Wide-waving, blazing high, and fluttering dance:
Now clanking Chains amaze my listening Ears,
And hideous Specter skim before my Sight.
Or in my wild Imagination stare.
Here Satan rears his mighty Bulk on high,
And towers amid the infernal Legions; filled
With Pride, and dire Revenge; during his Looks;
Rage heaves his laboring Breast, and all around
His fiery Eye Balls formidably roll,
And dart destructive Flames; with dreadful Blaze
The ruddy Ligh'ning rapid runs along,
And guilds the gloomy Regions of Despair,
With Streaks tremendous. Here assaults my Sight
The gressly Monster Death, He onward stalks
With horrid Strides, Holl trembles as he treads;
On his fierce Front a bold defiance low'rs;
Bent is his Brow, in his right Hand he shakes
His quivering Lance. How fell the Fiend appears
In every Prospect, wrathful or serene?
Pleased, horrible he grins agastly Smile;
And Erebus grows blacker as he Frowns.
But tell, immortal Muse, O Goddess! tell
the joyful Dread, the terrible Delight,
Which fill my Mind, when I behold the Ranks,
The embatt'led Ranks of mighty Cherubim,
In dreadful Quadrate crowd the Plains of Heaven.
I hear, I hear the Trumpets loud Alarms;
The keen Vibration cuts the yieldng Air,
And the shril Clangors ring around the Sky.
I see the bold intrepid Cohorts move;
From every Scabbard flies a slaming Sword,
Waved by the mighty Combatants on high,
So flashing radiant from a gloomy Cloud,
Long Lightnings flourish with a livid Glare.
Now on at once the immortal Hero's rush,
And with a sudden Onset shake the Field.
Hark! how confused Sounds thicken in the Air,
Mingling, tumultous, and perplexed, and rough,
Of Shouts, and Groans, and grating Clang of Arms,
The twanging Bow, the Jav'lins deadly Hiss,
Loud-clashing Swords, and Spears encountering Spears.
Helms sound on Helms, On Bucklers Bucklers ring,
Vast waving Wings high in the Air are heard,
Whilst loud-resounding Feet beat thick the Ground,
And all the jarring Sounds of War unite,
In direful Discord, and outrageous Roar.
Behold, my Muse, where Michael bends his Course,
Starts his swift Car, and bounds impetuous on,
With rapid Rage it rattles through the Ranks,
Smokes over the Field, and drives the War along.
But who can tell the Raptures which I feel,
When fixed in deep Astonishment, my Eyes
Behold MESSIAH, dread MESSIAH! armed
With all the dire Artillery of GOD?
Unnumber'd Seraphim around him throng,
Clap their expanded Wings, and shout aloud;
Heavens mighty Concave echo's to their Voice,
The everlasting Hills return the Sound.
Oh! how I feel the noble Ardor warm
My beating Breast, and thrill along my Veins!
My charging Spirits pour around my Heart;
My Eyes bright-sparkling with immortal Fires.
His flying Chariot shakes the tottering Sky,
Swift all the vast Expanse behind him rolls,
Resistless Thunders rattle from his Hand,
Devouring Lightnings shoot beneath his Feet,
Ten thousand Terrors thicken where he bends.
What Havoc! What Confusion spreads the Plain!
What Myriads fall by his descending Bolts,
Dashed to the Ground, and crushed beneath his Wheels?
Tumult and Ruin, Horror, Rage and Death,
Play round his Sword, and shake their shaggy Wings:
Hell flames before him, wild Despair stalks on,
And purple Victory hovers over his Head.
Great GOD! what Vengeance kindled in thy Eyes!
What Thunders bellowed! and what Lightnings blazed!
When Satan, daring Chief of all thy Foes!
Was seized, as trembling and aghast he stood,
Seized by thy mighty Hand, and raised aloft,
Then headlong hurled down the high Steep of Heaven?
At the dire Sight his bold compeers amazed,
Confounded, shiver even amidst the Flames,
Forget to Fight, drop all their idle Arms
Swift from thy Fury fly away, and down
Down from the towering Battlements they rush
Precipitant, into the Dark profound,
Whilst Chaos loud rebellows to the Fall.
No more -- my fainting Muse folds up her Wings,
Unable to sustain so strong a Flight --
The Battle only Raphael should relate,
Or MILTON in such Strains as Raphael sings.
Let softer Subjects now command my Muse,
Let softer Numbers smoothly flow along,
And bloom, and blossom as the Ever-greens,
That deck the flowery Face of Paradise.
O MILTON, Eden opens by thy Art,
And with redoubled Beauty wanton smiles,
I Am charmed, I Am revish'd, all my Soul dissolves,
I loose my Life amid the heavenly Scenes;
That in gay Order from thy Pencil flow.
O beauteous Garden! O delightful Walks!
In you forever, ever will I stray,
Glide over thy flowery Vales, climb thy fair Hills,
And through thy fragrant Lawns transported tread
I Would trace the mazy Windings of thy Bowers,
And in the Gloom of thy surrounding Groves
Ask the cool Shadow, and the fanning Breeze.
Here rising Perfume should regale my Smell,
And heavenly Harmony transport my Ears;
While all the Trees around, to court a look,
Flourish luxuriant with unfading Charms.
Roses, and Violets, and Daftodils,
And gaudy Tulips of a thousand Dies,
Shall spring profusely round; the Lilly too,
Ambitious, offer its unsullied White,
To grace a Garland for fair Innocence.
Ye feathered Songsters of the Spring, arise,
Display your spangled Plumes, where twinkling Gems,
With blended Beauties, cast a doubtful Blaze,
And, keenly-flashing, strike the Gazer's Sight.
Let your sweet Voices warble through the Grove,
While in concording Harmony I hear
The purling Murmurs of the bubbling Brooks
Mean time the embroidered Banks on either Hand
Shall open all their everlasting Sweets,
Their verdant Honors, and their flowery Pride,
As the pure floating Volumes wind along.
Here the first Pair, divinely reigned supreme,
And sunk reclining on the flowery Turff.
Hail, happy Adam, Heaven adorns thy Soul,
Full blessed. And thou, immortal Mother, Hail!
O heav'nly-fair, divinely-beauteous Eve!
Thee to adorn what endless Charms conspire?
Caelestial Coral blushes on thy Lips,
No opening Rose glows with so bright a Bloom.
Thy Breath abroad diffusive Odor spreads,
A gay Carnation purples over thy Cheeks,
While thy fair Eyes roll round their radiant Orbs,
With winning Majesty, and natural Art.
Thy waving Tresses on thy Shoulders play,
Flow loosely down, and wanton in the Wind.
You, amorous Zephires, kiss her snowy Breast,
Flit softly by, and gently lift her Locks.
Forgive, fair Mother, O forgive thy Son,
Forgive his vain Redundance of Expression,
Fired by thy Beauty, and by MILTON's Song.
Here could the ravished Fancy rove perpetual,
Amid the Raptures, the transporting Bliss,
That in soft Measures move for ever round. --
But, O my Muse, shake off these idle Dreams,
Imaginary Trances! vain Illusions!
Count the gay Stars, and number all the Sands,
And every Drop that in the Ocean floats:
But never hope to sum the unnumber'd Charms,
That swim before thy ever-ravish'd Eyes,
When they on thee, O MILTON, give a glance.
In vain thou striv'st to lisp his lofty Praise;
Imperfect Accents flutter round thy Tongue,
And on thy Lips unfinished, MILTON dies.
His mighty Numbers tower above thy Sight,
Mock thy low Music, and elude thy Strains.
To the Memory of a young Commander slain in a Battle with the Indians, 1724.
DEscend, immortal Muse, inspire my Song,
Let mournful Numbers gently flow along
And thou, my Lyre, in solemn Notes complain,
And in sad Accents softly speak thy Pain,
Let melting Music tremble on thy Strings,
While in concording Sounds the Goddess sings:
Sings hapless Alpeus in the gloomy Grave,
Alpeus the Gay, the Beauteous and the Brave;
Alpeus, who with the Thirst of Glory fired,
Courageous in his Country's Cause expired.
At the dear Name a sorrowful Delight,
Recalls the Youth back to my longing Sight.
Ah, lovely Youth! once flushed with every Grace,
A thousand Charms adorned thy smiling Face;
A lilly White was on thy Forehead spread,
And in thy Cheeks caelestial rosey Red;
Over all thy Features no Defect was found,
But blooming Beauty ever hovered round;
And, whilst without, unnumber'd Charms combined,
Unnumber'd Graces decked thy manly Mind.
Thus Alpeus, were thou once by all beheld,
Like some fair Flower, the Glory of the Field.
But now, alas! stopped is thy scattered Breath,
Thy Beauties rifled in the Arms of Death;
From thy pale Cheeks the fading Color flies,
And leaden Slumbers seal thy heavy Eyes.
So some bright Bird repeats his Lays of Love,
And sings melodious in a golden Grove;
When stait a Bullet, with a thundering Sound,
Bursts through the Air, and gives the deadly Wound;
Then, instant from the blooming Bough impelled.
He falls, and feebly slutters on the Field.
But, O my Muse, forbear these Strains, and tell
How great he fought, and how divine he fell
Say, how intrepid he maintained his Ground,
And with what Vigor scattered Deaths around.
Now on the Waves in the small Bark he stood,
And tinged the Billows with the Opposers Blood;
Now, daring, on the thickes. War he bore,
Broke through the Ranks, and gained the distant Shore.
His Sword, like Lightning, glittered from above,
When dreadful on, the undaunted Hero drove,
And with such Sounds destructive Thunder roars,
As his swift Lead impetuous onward pours.
Now on the Left he bent, now to the Right
The youthful Warrior led along the Fight.
You Pagan Troops, could scarce his Rage sustain,
Though your dire Numbers blackened all the Plain.
Till feeling in his Breast the fiery Wound,
The sinking Youth dropped fainting to the Ground;
In quick short pants ebbed out his quivering Breath,
While over his Eyelids hung the Shades of Death.
Thrice happy Youth, sleep in thy silent Bed,
While blissful Visions dance around thy Head;
Let living Verdure flourish over thy Tomb,
And let unfading Flowers for ever bloom.
Mean time the Muse thy Story shall relate,
And snatch thy Actions from the Jaws of Fate,
Declare the unrivaled Wonders of thy Youth,
Nor cloud with Fable the refulgent Truth;
So coming Ages shall thy Deeds admire,
And late Posterity thy Praise conspire.
Long as the Morning paints the blushing Skies,
Or Nature in the Spring renewed shall rise;
Whilst the gay Sun pours down in radiant Streams,
The golden Glory of his blazing Beams;
So long, O Alpeus, shall thy envied Name
Glow in the Records of immortal Fame:
There stand confessed among the meaner Fires,
As Syrius shines amid the lesser Stars.
Written in Dr. WATT's Poems; given to a young Lady.
I.
WHILE rosey Cheeks their Bloom confess,
And Youth thy Bosom warms,
Let Virtue, and let Knowledge dress,
Thy Mind in brighter Charms.
II.
Daily on some fine Page to look
Lay meaner Sports aside;
And let the Needle, and the Book,
Thy useful Hours divide.
III.
Let Heavenly Love from WATTS's Lays,
Inspire thy youthful Blood;
Nor let a mortal Rival seize
That Heart Ordained for God.
An ELEGY addressed to His Excellency Governor BELCHER: On the Death of his
Brother-in-Law, the Honorable DANIEL OLIVER, Esquire
PEnsive, overcome, the Muse hung down her Head,
And heard the fatal News, -- " The Friend is dead.
Dumb, fixed in Sorrow, she forgot her Song,
The Tune forsook her Lyre, the Voice her Tongue,
'Till, BELCHER, You command her Strains to rise,
You ask, she sings; You dictate, she replies;
That well-known Voice awakes her dying Fires
And instant, at your Call, the Power inspires.
Then let our Griess in mingling Streams descend,
You mourn the Brother, and I weep the Friend.
He Is dead -- O vast unutterable Woe!
Gone, gone for ever from these Seats below:
No more his gracious Lips our Souls shall move,
And lift us to the holy Joys above;
No more the Church his sacred Transports feel,
His strong Devotion, and his fervent Zeal;
No more his Face shines with the conscious Calms,
Of Faith, and Prayers, and generous Deeds, and Alms:
Ah! fainting, pale, ebbs out his quivering Breath,
And OLIVER the good descends to Death.
Thus while the Friends their private Loss deplore,
Lament unpitied, unreliev'd, ye Poor.
Who, round his Gates, your daily Blessings paid,
Warm by his Clothes, or from his Table fed.
Profuse, his liberal Hand their Prayer prevents,
(So shower'd the ancient Manna round the Tents)
Witness, ye conscious Nights, whose Shades he chose,
Unknown, to see, and succor Humane Woes:
Invisible, he trod the homely Cott,
The Hungry eat, the Oppressed to groan forgot,
The Sick perceived the sudden Cordial save,
All blessed the Gift, nor saw the Hand that gave.
From Men, with Art and sacred Caution hid,
The Muse, from Heaven inspired, reveals the Deed.
You painted Roofs, and pompous Rooms of State,
Where, in the Senate, the grave Patriot sat,
Say, how his steady Conduct graced your Board;
Just were his Thoughts, and prudent every Word;
Serene, delib'rate, undisguis'd by Art,
His Tongue was faithful, and sincere his Heart.
Statesmen, the unblemished Counselor bemoan,
And from his fair Example form your own.
So must your Greatness sink, your Glories sade,
And, blended, in the common Dust be laid.
Now Wealth, nor Titles, nor Fame's gentle Charms,
Can bride your Life from Fate's relentless Arms:
VIRTUE, fair Goddess only can allow
Conquests over Death, and crown the Victor's Brow.
Mindless of Grandieur, from the Crowd he sled,
Sought green Retirements, and the silent Shade.
Ye bow'ry Trees, which round his Mansion bloom,
Often ye concealed him in your hallowed Gloom:
Often he enjoyed, in your sublime Adobe,
His Books, his Innocence, his Friend, his GOD
Now, sad, I wander over the lofty Seat.
And trace the Mazes of the soft Retreat.
View the fair Prospects, round the Gardens rove,
Bend up the Hill, and search the lonely Grove;
But ah! no more his Voice salutes my Ear,
Nor in his Hands the blushing Fruits appear:
Yet is his Image in each Scene conveyed,
And busy Fancy forms his gliding Shade.
I seem to meet him in the flowery Walks,
And, through the Boughs, his whispering Spirit talks.
Eager I call, the dear Delusion flies,
Grief seals my Lips, and Tears suffuse my Eyes.
o far, far off, above the Ken of these,
The rising Mountain, and the aspiring Trees,
In the gay Bowers that crown the Eternal Hills,
His spotless Soul, in deathless Pleasure, dwells;
Tuneful replies, while Choral Seraphs play,
And in bright Visions smiles the Hours away.
He visits now no more this dull Abode,
But talks with Angels, and beholds his GOD.
Now cease, the flowing Tears, the Funeral Strains.
Let joyful Sounds revive the vocal Plains.
What though the Body in the Tomb be laid,
Ghastly and breathless, in the awful Shade?
Though by our Eyes, his Form no more confessed.
Pleased by the Friend, and by the Christian blessed?
We view the bright Reversion in the Skies,
When the dead Saint, waked to new Life, shall rise.
Mean time, the heavenly Muse embalms his Name,
And gives him up consigned to endless Fame:
These faithful Lines thy Absence still bemoan,
And this Inscription grace thy mouldering Stone.
"Here, Passenger, confined, reduced to Dust,
"Lies what was once, religious, wise, and just.
"Steady and warm in Liberty's Defense,
"True to his Country, loyal to his Prince,
"In Friendship faithful, generous to Desert,
"A Head enlightn'd, and a glowing Heart.
To a Friend, on the Death of a Relative.
WHILE Death his awful Triumphs spreads around,
And crowded Nations fill the vaulted Ground;
While every Rank, and State, and Sex, and Age,
Feel his keen Shafts, and sink beneath his Rage.
Mortals, prepare to try the doubtful State,
To yield the Battle, and resign to Fate.
Late has the Monarch, with despotick sway,
Resistless snatched thy favorite Fair away.
Gone, gone for ever from thy fond Caress,
No more her much-loved From thy Eyes shall bless,
Her Absence still thy rising Sighs deplore,
And in her Converse you delight no more;
Touched by your Woe, the Muse her Tribute brings
And with grave Airs, in soothing Numbers, sings.
But sacred is the Muse; by Heaven she is led
TO instruct the Living, not to blanch the Dead.
Ye Living, hear her tuneful Lips rehearse
No trifling Themes, nor in ignoble Verse.
And chief, bewise, ye blooming Young and Fair,
See your sad Picture, and your Period here,
How soon the Beauties vanish from your Forms,
Fall into Dust, and mingle with the Worms!
Beneath the Honors of a lonely Tomb,
In pensive Silence and a solemn Gloom,
Sleeps that fair Form in Death's relentless Arms,
Whose living Face once blushed with endless Charms.
But, Ah! Not more her Cheeks the Roses wear,
Nor on her lovely Lips the Smiles appear;
Fixed are those Eyes which once divinely rolled,
The Limbs all stiffen'd, and the Veins all cold;
That Voice is fled which charmed Mankind before,
And that soft snowy Breast must pant no more,
So from your Lips the transient Breath shall fly,
Pale the fresh Cheek, and fixed the rolling Eye;
The charming Face and beauteous Shape be laid,
All Pale and Breathless in the awful Shade.
To deck your Grave the Turff shall bloom around,
And the green Grass enamel all the Ground:
And still the flowery Emblem shall display,
The youthful Flourish and the swift Decay.
Ah, trust no more, ye Fair, your fading Face,
Let bright Religion court your warm Embrace,
To her soft Beauties be your Love inclined,
The deathless Beauties of the immortal Mind.
So to new Charms your waking Dust shall rise,
And gay in Glory glitter up the Skies,
In heavenly Tunes, with fresh Delights, shall sing,
And bloom and blossom in eternal Spring.
But thou, fond Mourner, give thy Tears away,
See the Gloom end in everlasting Day
See the fair Soul on Wings of Angels rise,
Above the starry Concave of the Skies:
Now here, now there she rolls her dazz'led Sight;
Struck at the Prospect with immense Delight.
Her down-cast Eyes the fulged Streets behold.
And view a Pavement rich with gleemy Gold:
Aloft, the Roof, framed by the almighty Hands,
Glorious, on Adamantine Pillars stands.
Here splendid Thrones confound the aching Sight,
And pour abroad unsufferable Light;
There in high Crowns a beamy Luster plays,
And twinkling Jewels shoot a trembling Blaze,
The flowing Robes wave on like lambent Flames,
And flash and sparkle with celestial Gems.
Abroad, the Fields display their flowery Pride,
In whose fair Bosoms living Waters glide.
Here the glad Saint in mazy Rapture roves
Through Bowers of Bliss, and gay immortal Groves.
Here JESUS shines unutterably bright,
And Storms of Glory beat upon the Sight;
To these high Scenes thy ravished Views be given
And bow consenting to the Will of Heaven.
Hymn at Sea.
I.
GReat GOD, thy Works our Wonder raise,
To thee our swelling Notes belong;
While Skies, and Winds, and Rocks, and Seas,
Around shall echo to our Song.
II.
Thy Power produced this mighty Frame,
Aloud to thee the Tempests rore,
Or softer Breezes tune thy Name
Gently along the shelly Shore.
III.
Round thee the scaly Nation roves,
Thy opening Hands their Joys bestow,
Through all the blushing coral Groves,
These silent, gay Retreats below.
IV.
See the broad Sun forsake the Skies,
Glow on the Waves, and downward slide!
Anon, Heaven opens all its Eyes,
And Star-Beams tremble over the Tide:
V.
Each various Scene, or Day or Night,
LORD, points to thee our ravished Soul;
Thy Glories fix our whole Delight:
So the touched Needle courts the Pole.
To an ingenious young Gentleman, on his dedicating a Poem to the Author.
TO you, dear Youth, whom all the Muses own,
And great Apollo speaks his darling Son,
To you the Muse directs her grateful Lays,
And brings the Tribute which you merit, Praise.
What various Virtues in your Person join,
Though great yet humble, modest though divine;
Though numerous Graces glitter through your Song,
And heavenly Accents dance around your Tongue;
Strong in your Mind while big Ideas roll,
And your vast Subject fills your laboring Soul.
Yet, from your Heights, how kind you condescend,
Forget your Greatness, and assume the Friend?
Your Friend, you fond approve, commend, admire,
Bless with the Critics Light, and Poets Fire,
To crown your Friend, your generous Hand allows
A Branch of Bays from your o'ershaded Brows;
Unfading Wreaths, around my Temples spread,
By you unmiss'd, adorn my joyful Head.
So your bright Father Phoebus, over the Skies
Profusely scatters Light's eternal Dies,
Unnumber'd Worlds from him receive their Days,
Yet still he shines with undiminish'd Rays.
Each Time I view this Product of your Art
Two different Passions struggle in my Heart,
Which, like the ebbing, or the flowing Tide,
Contracts with Envy, or dilates with Pride;
Now shrunk with Spite, now with Ambition swelled,
Proud at your Praise, env'ous to be excelled:
And as I meditate the doubtful Theme,
My clashing Passions strike a sudden Flame;
The Muse takes Fire -- Thoughts thick upon her throng,
Start the quick Words, and rapid run along.
So when in watery Clouds hot Sulphur pent,
Runs here and there, and labors for a Vent.
Till kindling to a Blaze at the rough Jars,
Water with Fire, and Fire with Water wars;
Then bursting forth, thick-flashing Lightning flies,
And ready Thunder rolls along the Skies.
Ah! how can I the happy Title claim,
And of your Tutor boast the immortal Name,
When in your Breast ten Thousand Raptures live,
And glow superior to the Sparks I give?
In vain you say I formed your Infant Strains,
Taught you on stubborn Thoughts to fling your Chains,
Smoothed your harsh Voice, -- bid your Numbers glide
Like gentle Rills a-down a Mountains Side;
Pruned your young Wings, instructed you to skim
The level Lawn, or daring Soar sublime;
In vain all these, when every Judge will find
You fly aloft, unfettered, unconfined,
And see my distant Muse, short-panting, lag behind.
So the low Hen the Eagles Egg may hatch,
And feed the callow Care, and over him watch,
But when thick Feathers on his Back unite,
He spreads his Plumes, and takes a towering Flight,
Neglects his Nurse, and claims his heavenly Birth,
While she, with fluttering Wings, hovers, -- and drops to Earth.
But Oh! forbear, thy lavish Tongue be tame,
Nor slush my Features with a conscious Flame,
Justice demands that I the Applause refuse:
Not I, but mighty POPE inspired thy Muse.
He, wondrous Bard! whose Numbers reach our Shore,
Though Oceans roll between, and Tempests roar:
Hushed are the Storms, and smooth the Waters lie,
As his sweet Music glides harmonious by;
Ravished, my Ear receives the heavenly Guest,
My Heart high-leaping, beats my panting Breast:
Through all my Mind incessant Rapture reigns,
And Joys immortal revel in my Veins,
So the soft SIRENS warbled over the Main,
And so ULISSES' Soul took Wing to meet the Strain.
O POPE! thy Fame is spread around the Sky,
Far as the Waves can slow, far as the Winds can fly!
Hail! Bard triumphant, filled with hallowed Rage,
Sent from high Heaven to grace the happy Age:
For thee a thousand Garlands shall be wove,
And every Clime project a laurel Grove;
Thy Name be heard in every artful Song,
And thy loud Praise employ each tuneful Tongue.
Even my young Muse the noble Theme would take,
And lisp imperfect what she cannot speak.
It Is POPE, my Friend, that guilds our gloomy Night,
And if I shine it is his reflected Light:
So the pale Moon, bright with her borrowed Beams,
Through the dark Horrors shoots her silver Gleams.
POPE'S are the Rules which you, my Friend, receive,
From him I gather what to you I give.
When I attend to his immortal Lyre,
I kindle instant with a sacred Fire;
Now here, now there, my Soul pursues his Song,
Hurried impetuous by his Power along:
My Pulse beats thick, urged by my driving Blood,
And on my Breast I feel the rushing GOD.
But when to you I would the Flames convey.
In my cold Hands the holy Fires decay.
As when your Hand the Convex-Glass displays,
It close collects some scattered solar Rays;
Though cold the Glass, wherever its Focus aims,
The Object smokes, it reddens, and it flames:
So POPE, through me, shines full upon your Muse;
So cold my Breast; and so your Bosom glows.
Go on, sweet Poet, charm our listening Ears,
Infuse new Joy, and scatter all our Cares.
O let no Trisle tempt your noble Rage,
No mortal Theme your mighty Muse engage;
But when harmonious to her Lyre she sings,
And with swift Fingers strikes the trembling Strings.
Let sacred Subjects fill the Air around,
And Angels waft to Heaven the Extacy of Sound.
Write for ETERNITY! -- what Pleasures thrill
Through all my Veins and urge my flying Quill
As that I name? what Transports fire my Mind,
When I behold its wondrous Scenes combined?
Here, the last Trumpet shakes the sounding Air,
There, gloomy glow the Regions of Despair:
Now, on this Earth devouring Flames increase,
And bellowing Burnings boil the hissing Seas:
Then, melting Joys my swiming Eyes confess,
And Saints dissolve away in endless Bliss:
While hymning Cherubs try their tuneful Strains,
And charm, with Notes like yours, the heavenly Plains;
Exalted high, the SAVIOR-GOD is known,
And dazzling Glory blazes round his Throne;
Around his Head a beamy Luster plays,
Where glittering Jewels blend their trembling Rays;
Eternal Day breaks from his radient Eyes,
And flames divinely over the shining Skies:
Thus sits the GOD, with awful Honors crowned
While everlasting Ages wheel their mighty Round! --
But, pause my Muse; cease my unartful Song:
The Beauties which I strive to praise I wrong.
The Scenes so fast upon my Fancy flow,
Convinced, I own ETERNITY a NOW.
Thus let your pious Muse employ her Flame,
Then, lasting as your Theme, shall be your Fame:
Thus let your Poesy resins, improve,
And match the Music of the Choirs above;
Still from your Lips let such soft Notes arise,
And Songs of Seraphs sound beneath the Skies;
Till, as your Muse, your Soul expands her Wings,
And to their bright Abodes, exulting, springs:
There, there your Voice shall deathless Strains resound,
And be amid the immortal Chorus drowned.
So some full Spring a trickling Rill bestows,
That makes melodious Murmur as it flows;
It widens as it wanders on its Course,
And as it glides it gathers greater Force;
Still on it runs, and naught its Stream controuls,
It now a Riv'let, now a River rolls.
Now its strong Tide, with unresisted Sway
Rushes impetuous down and foams away;
It pours along, and all its Banks out-braves
Till the vast Sea absorbs its undistinguished Waves.
The BLOOM of LIFE, fading in a happy DEATH.
I.
GReat GOD, how frail a Thing is Man!
How swift his Minutes pass!
His Age contracts within a Span;
He blooms and dies like Grass.
II.
Now in his Breast fresh Spirits dart,
And vital Vigor reigns:
His Blood pours rapid from his Heart,
And leaps along his Veins.
III.
His Eyes their sparkling Pleasure speak,
Joy flutters round his Head;
While Health still blossoms on his Cheek,
And adds the rosey Red.
IV.
Thus the fond Youth securely stands,
Nor dreams of a Decay --
At once he feels Death's Iron Hands,
His Soul is snatched away.
V.
Down to the Earth the Body drops,
Whence it was framed at first,
Forgets its former flattering Hopes
And hastens to its Dust.
VI.
No more we view the wonted Grace;
The Eye Balls roll no more:
A livid Horror spreads the Face
Where Beauty blazed before.
VII.
So the young Spring, with annual Green,
Renews the waving Grove;
And Riv'lets through the flowery Scene
In Silver Mazes rove.
VIII.
By tuneful Birds of Every Wing,
Melodious Strains are played;
From Tree to Tree their Accents ring,
Soft-warbling through the Shade.
IX.
The painted Meads, and fragrant Fields,
A sudden Smile bestow:
A golden Gleam each Valley guilds,
Where numerous Beauties blow.
X.
A Thousand gaudy Colors flush
Each odorous Mountain's Side:
Lillies turn fair, and Roses blush,
And Tulips spread their Pride.
XL.
Thus flourishes the wanton Year,
In rich Confusion gay,
Till Autumn bids the Bloom retire,
The Verdure fade away.
XII.
Succeeding Cold withers the Woods,
While hoary Winter reigns,
In Fetters binds the frozen Floods,
And shivers over the Plains.
XIII.
And must my Moments thus decline?
And must I sink to Death?
To Thee my Spirit I resign,
Thou SOVEREIGN of my Breath.
XIV.
JESUS my Life has died, has rose:
I burn to meet his Charms!
Welcome the Pangs, the dying Throes,
That give me to his Arms.
A Poem on the Death of King GEORGE I. And Accession of King GEORGE II.
SAY, mournful Muse, declare thy rising Woe,
What heaves thy Heart; and whence thy
Sorrows flow?
Why in thy Face such anxious Grief appears;
And over thy Eye Balls swim the speaking Tears:
O GEORGE, thy Death my flowing Numbers mourn,
Thy sacred Ashes, and distinguished Urn:
Thee, every Muse, and every Grace deplores,
From Thames's Banks, to these Atlantic Shores,
Each Bard his Grief in gliding Accents shows,
And fairest Eyes distill their crystal Dews.
O! were my Breast flushed with an equal Fire,
Vast as my Theme, and strong as my Desire!
Then, mighty GEORGE, then should my Notes arise,
And spreading Music echo round the Skies;
Thy Name, in tuneful Measures led along,
Should dance, harmonious, through my flowing Song;
The raptured Muse thy awful Form reveal,
Describe thy Counsels, and thy Actions tell;
Bid dying Sounds thy ravished Life bemoan,
Or shouting Nations hail thee to thy Throne;
Each various Scene, with varying Numbers crowned,
Should Earth, and Sea, and Air, and Heaven resound.
Long ere his Albion triumphed in his Reign
His Sword glar'd dreadful over the Hungarian Plain,
Witness, ye Troops, through whose wide Ranks he ran,
Rowz'd the fierce War, and call the Tumult on:
Say, how divinely then his Aspect showed,
What Conduct shone! what dauntless Courage glowed
When Man to Man, and Smoke opposed to Smoke,
Flames flashed at Flames, at Thunder Thunder broke,
When Death indignant, drove his Iron Car,
Through the dire Havoc of the raging War;
Say, Goddess, how the intrepid Hero flies,
To meet the Monster with undaunted Eyes;
'Till smilling Victory, and immortal Peace,
Hung over his Head, and bid the Battle cease!
Record, O heavenly Muse he illistrious Day,
When joyful Britain owned his sovereign Sway.
Concealed forever, lie the Acts which stain
The last black Months, the Shades of ANNA's Reign;
When secret Treason worked, when Justice fled,
And loud Destruction threatened over our Head,
'Twas then, by Heaven ordained, his happy Hand
From Ruin rescued the devoted Land,
The Storm was hush, the clamorous Factions laid,
And peaceful Olive spread its wealthy Shade.
So when dark Clouds hang heavy over the Main,
And bellying down, distend with Floods of Rain,
To push them on, the Winds their Forces try,
While they, slow-sailing, labor up the Sky;
The thickning Volumes spread the heavenly Doom,
And as they pass, project a solemn Gloom:
Dissolving now, a drisling Dew distills,
Dampens the Vales, and sprinkles round the Hills;
Still gathering Strength, the airy Sluices lower,
And on the Fields descends a copious Shower,
Last, furious grown, down rush the rapid Rains,
And pour impetuous, spatt'ring on the Plains.
If then the Sun breaks out, the Shadows fly,
And the gay Rainbow arches over the Sky.
Hail! happy Albion, Heavens peculiar Care,
See thy Deliv'rer to thy Shores repair!
Flourish, ye Fields; ye Groves, exalt your Heads,
Where Thame's Current murmurs over the Meads!
And thou, Augusta, sparkling in my Eyes,
Let thy tall Towers, and shining Turrets rise;
Where Riches glitter, Mirth for ever sings,
And smiling Plenty spreads her golden Wings:
For thee, Peru her beamy Face displays,
For thee the orient Stores of Ganges blaze;
A thousand Pleasures crown thy flowery Plains,
While GEORGE divinely over thy Kingdom reigns.
But, Oh! at once the heavenly Scenes decay,
And all the gaudy Vision fades away.
He dies -- my Muse, the dismal Sound forbear:
In every Eye debates the falling Tear;
A thousand Passions over my Bosom roll,
Swell in my Heart, and shock my inmost Soul.
He dies -- Let Nature own the direful Blow,
Sigh, all ye Winds; with Tears, ye Rivers flow;
Let the hoarse Ocean, loud in Anguish rore;
And Tides of Grief pour plenteous on the Shore:
No more the Spring shall bloom, or Morning rise,
But Night eternal wrap the sable Skies.
Enough, my Muse, give all thy Tears away,
Break, ye dull Shades; and rise, the rosey Day,
Quicken, O Sun, thy Chariot dazzling bright,
And over thy flaming Empire pour the Light.
O Spring, along the laughing Lawns be seen
Fields always fresh, and Groves for ever green:
Let Britain's Sorrows cease, her Joys enlarge,
The first revives in thee the second GEORGE.
Hail! mighty Prince, O shining Sovereign, hail!
Fain would the Muse lisp her prophetic Tale,
In mystic Lays thy future Years relate,
And sing the Records of unripen'd Fate;
Bid thee in Fame's triumphant Chariot ride,
And CAROLINA glitter by the Side:
Fair Princess, thou, in whose majestic Eyes,
Dawn heavenly Beauties, and immortal Joys:
By thee, shall Albion suture Triumphs own,
And a long Race of Hero's grace her Throne;
Here FREDERICK in Bloom of Years shall stand,
Here youthful WILLIAM blossom over the Land;
Thou ANNA, here, with Charms celestial crowned,
And all the heavenly Sisters flame around.
Even our far Shores confess the big Delight,
Where the faint Sun rolls down his golden Light;
The dancing Billows leap along the Main,
Proud of the Extent of GEORGE's happy Reign;
Applauding Thunders shake the Air around,
Waves shout to Waves, and Rocks to Rocks resound;
Each humane Breast glows with resistless Fire,
And cv'ry Angel strikes his sounding Lyre,
O live auspicious Prince; live, radiant Queen,
Long let your Influence guild the glorious Scene:
And you, fair Offspring, formed for high Command.
Flourish, ye blooming Honors of the Land:
So when from the dim Courts below you fly
To the bright Regions of the upper Sky;
Where Trees of Life by living Riv'lets team,
Wave their tall Heads, and paint the running Stream,
May round your Heads Crowns flash, celestial-bright,
And regal Purple change for Robes of Light;
Taste Charms still new, and Joys without Decay,
While endless Years in Raptures roll away.
To His Excellency Governor BURNET, on his Arrival at Boston.
WHile rising Shouts a general Joy proclaim,
And every Tongue, O BURNET, lisps thy Name;
To view thy Face, while crowding Armies run,
Whose waving Banners blaze against the Sun,
And deep-mouthed Cannon, with a thundering Roar,
Sound thy Commission stretched from Shore to Shore;
Accept the tuneful Labors of the Muse,
To bend fresh Laurels round your shaded Brows,
With your Deserts, to raise the sacred Fire,
And in your Praises string her joyful Lyre.
Long have we wished the golden Hours to rise,
And with distinguished Purple paint the Skies,
When, through our wondering Towns, in Raptures gay,
The pompous March should shape it is shining Way;
While breathing Trumpets try their silver Strains,
And whirling Chariots scour along the Plains;
When the glad City should unfold it is Gates,
And the long Triumph grace the glowing Streets,
O BURNET! how we bad the Minutes run,
Urged the slow Hours, and chid the lingering Sun!
Impatient, met each Post, and called aloud,
"When will his Wheels smoke rattling over the "Road?
"When shall we say, HE IS COME! with big Delight,
"And with his Aspect feast our longing Sight?
Welcome, great Man, to our desiring Eyes,
Thou Earth! proclaim it; and resound, ye Skies!
Voice answ'ring Voice, in joyful Confort meet,
The Hills all echo, and the Rocks repeat:
And thou, Bostonia Mistress of the Towns,
Whom the pleased Bay, with amorous Arms, surounds,
Let they warm Transports blaze in numerous Fires,
And beamy Glories glitter on thy Spires;
Let Rockets, streaming, up the Either glare,
And flaming Serpents hiss along the Air;
Sublime, thy Joys through the high Heavens be shown,
In foreign Lights, and Stars before unknown:
While rival Splendors deck the Earth below,
And over the Streets the daz'ling Windows glow.
But You, O Cambridge, how can you forbear
In gliding Lays to charm each listening Ear?
You, where the Youth pursue the illustrious Toil,
Where the Arts flourish, and the Graces smile,
Make BURNET's Name in lasting Numbers shine,
Ye soft Recesses of the tuneful Nine!
Speak the glad Day, with every warbling String,
When first you blessed the Indulgence of his Wing;
Say, how prophetic Rapture seized your Tongue,
When you, on Fire, your future Glories sung.
"By him protected, by his Pattern led,
"Each smiling Art shall lift her beauteous Head.
"Divinity, in opening Volumes, lies,
"O Wigglesworth, to thy enlightened Eyes;
"And Newton's Hand with wondrous Skill "displays
"Nature unveiled, and shows her lovely Face:
"Long shall the noble Sciences declare
"Thy Bounties, HOLLIS: and a BURNET's Care.
In BURNET's Face our future Fame appears,
And Arts and Graces lead his flowing Years.
For him, ye Muses, tune immortal Verse,
And mighty Themes, in lofty Lays, rehearse,
Proud in his Praises, wind your golden Strings,
And in high Raptures clap your waving Wings.
Thou Sun, for him, shall each fair Year adorn,
Bid the Spring blossom, and the Summer burn,
Teach ripening Fruits to paint autumnal Scenes,
And smile and blush amidst the living Greens.
Even the rough Winter feigns a youthful Tread;
And, in low Homage, bows his reverend Head;
The Northern Tempests shall forget to roar,
And gentle Waves, soft-murmuring, kiss the Shore.
Now Astronomic Tubes aloft shall rise,
Shake off their Dust, and level at the Skies,
Descry new Glories in the shining Spheres,
And BURNET's Name be read on future Stars.
The Pencil now, in wondrous Lines shall flow,
And, warm with Life, bid the touched Canvas, glow,
Music, sweet Daughter of the Choirs above,
Shall, soft-descending, down the Either move;
With heavenly Airs the breathing Flute inspire,
The Viol string, and bend the warbling Wyre.
But chief, Ye Pages, open to the Light,
Where wondering Angels roll their ravished Sight;
Ye sacred Pages, easy to his Soul,
Spread the dark Mazes of your His Essay on the Prophesies.
mystic Roll.
No more You sleep, hid in an awful Gloom,
Your Shades all scatter, and your Beauties bloom;
Years yet unborn, your opening Scenes unfold,
And all your dawning Clouds are edged with Gold.
So when the Shekinah, mysterious stood
High over Arahia's divided Flood,
(When down the Sands below the Prophet led,
And the Waves foamed sublime above his Head)
Whilst Clouds and Darkness Egypt's Host amazed,
Through Israel's Ranks immortal Glory blazed.
And Thou, my Muse, assume a joyful Air,
Recall his Candor, and forbid thy Fear;
Tell him You come before the Fount of Day,
And from the Power of Light, demand a Ray:
Gracious, He Will grant the Favor thou have prayed,
And fling the Blaze of Glocies from his Head.
As on the fragrant Windings of the Shore
Where Persia glitters with her golden Ore,
Up the high Hills the early People rise,
And to the East turn their desiring Eyes,
Till beamy Phoebus guilds rosey Skies,
Then, all at once, their founding Shouts unite,
Hail the bright Car, and bless the lovely Light:
Pleased with their Prayer, he passes over the Land,
And scatters Blessings with a lavish Hand;
The Fields all brighten, as he onward moves,
And his fair Glories flush the gladden'd Groves;
Over all the Earth the flaming Splendour flows,
And, like a Ruby, all the Ocean glows:
TO BURNET thus I sue, He thus complies,
And thus his soft Indulgence sooths my Eyes.
To His EXCELLENCY the GOVERNOR.
SIR,
AS Your EXCELLENCY has long honored me with a particular Friendship,
Gratitude demands that I attempt your Service: And as you are now in Mourning
from the Stroke of Heaven, the greatest Respect I can pay you, is, to assist
your Improvement under the Hand of GOD.

In order to this, the Muse has once more resumed her Lyre: And her Aversion to
Flattery you will receive as her best Complement. Instead of copious Panegyric
upon the Dead, I have chosen rather, in solemn Language, to admonish the
Living; And when others, perhaps, would have embraced so fair an Opportunity
for an Encomium on your EXCELLENCY, I have only taken the Freedom of an
Exhortation. I know you will be pleased to observe, that while I employ the
Numbers of the Poet, I never forget the Character of the Divine. I am,

May it please your EXCELLENCY, Your Excellency 's affectionate Nephew, and
most humble Servant, M. BYLES.
Boston, October 13. 1736.
To His EXCELLENCY Governor BELCHER, on the Death of His LADY.
BELCHER, once more permit the Muse you loved,
By honor, and by sacred Friendship moved,
Waked by your woe, her numbers to prolong,
And pay for tribute in a Funeral song.
From you, great Heaven with undisputed voice,
Has snatched the Partner of your youthful joys.
Her beauties, ere slow Hectic fires consumed,
Her eyes shone cheerful, and her roses bloomed:
Long lingering sickness, broke the lovely form,
Shock after shock, and storm succeeding storm'
Till Death, relentless, fier'd the wasting clay,
Stopped the faint voice, and caught the Soul away.
No more in Converse sprightly she appears,
With nice decorum, and obliging airs:
Ye Poor, no more expecting round her stand,
Where soft compassion stretched her bounteous hand:
Her House her happy skill no more shall boast;
"Be all things plentiful, but nothing lost.
Cold to the tomb see the pale corpse conveyed,
Wrapped up in silence, and the dismal shade.
Ah! what avail the sable velvet speread,
And golden ornaments amidst the dead?
No beam smiles there, no eye can there discern
The vulgar coffin from the marble urn:
The costly honors, preaching, seem to say,
"Magnificence must mingle with the clay.
Learn here, ye Fair, the frailty of your face,
Ravished by death, or nature's slow decays:
Ye Great, must so resign your transient power,
Heroes of dust, and monarchs of an hour!
So must each pleasing air, each gentle fire,
And all that is soft, and all that is sweet expire.
But you O BELCHER, mourn the absent Fair,
Feel the keen pang, and drop the tender tear:
The GOD approves that nature do her part,
A panting bosom, and a bleeding heart.
Ye baser arts of flattery, away!
The Virtuous Muse shall moralize her lay.
To you, o Favorite Man, the Power supreme
Gives wealth, and titles, and extent of fame;
Joys from beneath, and blessings from above;
Thy Monarch's plaudit; and thy people's love:
The same high Power, unbounded, and alone,
Rusumes his gifts, and puts your mourning on.
His Edict issues, and his Vassal, Death,
Requires your Consort's, -- or YOUR flying breath.
Still be your glory at his feet to bend,
Kiss thou the SON, and own his Sovereign hand;
For his high honors all thy powers exert,
The gifts of Nature, and the charms of Art:
So over Death the conquest shall be given,
Your Name shall live on earth, your Soul in heaven.
Mean time my Name to thine allied shall stand,
Still our warm Friendship, mutual flames extend;
The Muse shall so survive from age to age,
And BELCHER's name protect his Byles's page.
To Pollio, on his preparing for the Press a Treatise against the Romish Church.
LOng had the Romish Darkness mocked the Eyes,
And Smoke and Locusts hovered round the Skies;
Like some dire Plague the infectious Errors run,
They stalked through Midnight, and devoured at Noon.
Confederate Schools secured the dark Retreats,
With sacred Lies, and consecrated Cheats;
Amazing Change! Obedient to the Priest,
Bread leaps to Flesh and omnipresent Paste!
To fill their Coffers all their Fancies team,
Even Purgatory proves a golden Dream;
All Merchandise through their wide Market rolls,
From rotten Carcasses, to humane Souls.
It Is thine, O Pollio, in just Rage to rise,
And from the Monster snatch the thin Disguise,
With skilful Hand the fraudful Schemes display,
And all the bold Imposture open lay.
How strong thy Pages are in massy Sense,
Vast Hoards of Thought, and manly Eloquence!
Extensive Learning, and in Reasoning cool,
And, like thy Conversation, rich and full!
Thy Conversation! -- here the Muse could stay,
And in big Pleasures smile the Hours away.
The Muse familiar, shall the State forget.
The Schools, the Court, and secret Cabinet,
But milder Numbers shall in Thee commend
The gentle, and the condescending Friend.
If, in grave Words, you sacred Thoughts bestow,
A deep Attention sets on every Brow;
If through the Sciences your Fancy strays,
With Joy we follow through the flowery Maze;
Or if you Mirth, and hum'rous Airs assume,
And universal Laughter shakes the Room.
Each comes with Pleasure; while he stays admires;
Goes with Regret, nor unimprov'd retires.
Forgive me, Pollio, if the forward Muse,
Forgets her Rank, and too familiar growns:
Forgive, if she ambitious should relate,
How free you talk, how intimate I set;
O let my Name with thine together stand,
And let me boast the Honors of thy Friend,
My Name, by Thee shall last to future Days,
And Pollio's Page protect his Byles's Lays.
On the Death of the QUEEN.
To His Excellency Governor BELCHER.
WHile from each Soul the Sorrows copious flow,
And weeping Nations heave with mighty Woe;
Whilst every Lyre to mournful Notes is strung,
And CAROLINA slutters on each Tongue:
The mourning Muse, to Conso lation deaf,
Swells the sad Consort with melodious Grief.
Ten flowery Springs on golden Plumes have flown,
Since she, triumphant, hailed thee on thy Throne.
Oh CAROLINE! Oh Princess now no more!
Each Heart bleeds inward, and all Eyes deplore.
Stretched pale in Death thy lovely Limbs are laid,
Thy Beauty, Albion, and thy Joys are sled!
To Thee, our Tear their filial Torrents bring,
And every Passion opens every Spring:
Lost to Despair, in wild Laments we moan,
And distant Regions echo Groan for Groan.
'Twas she, adorned by Virtue's heavenly Charms,
In rosey Beauty blessed her Prince's Arms:
Her Lover with a pious Eye she viewed,
And CAESAR at her Feet successless su'd:
Imperial Purple her calm Eyes disdain,
And Roman Eagles waved their Wings in vain;
Inspired, Religion's Dictates to discharge,
She gave her self to Britain, and to GEORGE.
Say, raised Britannia, how her gently Air
Adorned the Palace, and improved the Fair.
Discord, and Party-Rage grew tame, to gaze,
And noisy Factions clamoured in her Praise.
Domestic Life the illustrious Pattern graced;
On royal Milk the royal Infant feast:
Formed by her Hands the Monarch-Race were seen.
The ripening Hero, and the future Queen.
Far from vain Courts her silent Footsleps roam,
Where chosen Volumes decked the sacred Dome:
Still loud Applauses of the joyful Age,
Pursued her through the lonely Hermitage.
Here, in high Raptures, her immortal Mind,
Over Newton's Orbs expatiates, unconfined;
Familiar Guest! she visits all the Skies,
From World to World, from Sun to Sun she flies!
Thence smiles at mimick Crowns which Sultans wear
In the mock Empires of this little Star.
Such was the Queen! she was -- but is no more! --
Wide wounds the Woe, and spreads from Shore to Shore;
Groans the hoarse Ocean as the Tidings fly,
Wave roars to Wave, and Rocks to Rocks reply,
She was, but is no more -- lost all Relief!
Now all her Graces greaten all our Grief.
Even our far Land it is Anguish loud proclaims,
We felt her Influence, and we blessed her Beams.
But, BELCHER, first in Grief as in Command;
With early Zeal you kissed her beauteous Hand;
Your Honors to the destined Queen you paid,
Ere the Crown flashed, far-beaming, on her Head.
The Muse reluctant, by your Order sings,
Else had she silent wept, and broke her Strings.
What Fame to us reports, by you were seen,
The Glance attractive, the majestic Mein,
The Angel-Form each milder Feature wears,
That Look obliging, those descending Airs.
Collected in her Innocence she stood,
Devout to Heaven, to Men divinely Good,
You saw -- now see the fated End of all:
How the Fair fades, and how the Mighty fall
See the Pale Cheek its faded Blush resign,
The dying Eyes with transient Luster shine;
Hoarse the sunk Voice, the Breast no longer warm,
And Death gains fast over every mortal Charm.
O VIRTUE! now thy Joys are all sincere!
The exulting Queen demands the final Prayer,
(Eternal Glories opening to her View,)
Waves her gay Hand, and bids the Globe adieu.
See, in the regal Vaults, the shattered Lead,
Whose gaping Seams disclose the royal Dead.
Were these, O Muse, triumphant Sov'reigns once!
This Skin all shrivel'd and these naked Bones!
No more resentful, great ELIZA, rest,
Support in Peace the Scottish Mery's Chest
Whilst fast by WILLIAM's and MARIA's Shrine,
We place the Dust of heavenly CAROLINE.
Ye living, hear what mouldering Monarchs say!
" For endless Joys give mortal Dreams away.
To the Reverend Dr. WATTS, on his Divine POEMS.
I.
SAY, smiling Muse, what heavenly Strain
Forbids the Waves to roar;
Comes gently gliding over the Main,
And charms our listening Shore!
II.
What Angel strikes the trembling Strings;
And whence the golden Sound!
Or is it WATTS -- or GABRIEL sings
From you celestial Ground?
III.
It Is Thou, Seraphick WATTS, thy Lyre
Plays soft along the Floods;
Thy Notes, the ans'wring Hills inspire,
And bend the waving Woods.
IV
The Meads, with dying Music filled,
Their smiling Honors show,
While, whispering over each fragrent Field,
The tuneful Breezes blow.
V.
The Rapture sounds in every Trace,
Even the rough Rocks regale,
Fresh slow'ry Joys flame over the Face
Of every laughing Vale.
VI.
And Thou, my Soul, the Transport own,
Eir'd with immortal Heat;
While dancing Pulses driving on,
About thy Body beat.
VII.
Long as the Sun shall rear his Head,
And chase the flying Glooms,
As blushing from his nuptial Bed
The gallant Bridegroom comes:
VIII.
Long as the dusky Evening flies
And sheds a doubtful Light,
While sudden rush along the Skies
The sable Shades of Night:
IX.
O WATTS, thy sacred Lays so long
Shall every Bosom fire;
And every Muse, and every Tongue
To speak thy Praise conspire.
X.
When thy fair Soul shall on the Wings
Of shouting Seraphs rise,
And with superior Sweetness sings
Amid thy native Skies;
XI.
Still shall thy lofty Numbers flow,
Melodious and divine;
And Choirs above, and Saints below,
A deathless Chorus! join.
To our far Shores the Sound shall roll,
(So Philomela sung)
And East to West, and Pole to Pole
The eternal Tune prolong.
To PICTORIO, on the Sight of his Pictures.
AGES our Land a barbarous Desert stood,
And savage Nations howled in every Wood;
No laureled Art over the rude Region smiled,
Nor blessed Religion dawned amidst the Wild;
Dullness and Tyranny confederate reigned,
And Ignorance her gloomy State maintained.
And hundred Journies now the Earth has run,
In annual Circles, round the central Sun,
Since the first Ship the unpolished Letters bore
Through the wide Ocean to the barbarous Shore,
Then Infant-Science made it is early Proof,
Honest, sincere, though unadorned, and rough,
Still through a Cloud the rugged Stranger shone,
Politeness, and the softer Arts unknown:
No heavenly Pencil the free Stroke could give,
Nor the warm Canvass felt its Colors live.
No moving Rhet'rick raised the ravished Soul,
Flourished in Flames, or heard it is Thunder roll;
Rough horrid Verse, harsh, grated through the Ear,
And jarring Discords tore the tortured Air;
Solid, and grave, and plain the Country stood,
Inelegant, and rigorously good.
Each Year, succeeding, the rude Rust devours,
And softer Arts lead on the following Hours;
The tuneful Nine begin to touch the Lyre.
And flowing Pencils light the living Fire;
In the fair Page new Beauties learn to shine,
The Thoughts to brighten, and the Style refine,
Till the great Year the finished Period brought;
PICTORIO painted, and MAECENAS wrote.
Thy Fame, PICTORIO, shall the Muse rehearse,
And sing her Sister-Art in soster Verse:
It Is yours, great Master, in just Lines to trace
The rising Prospect, or the lovely Face.
In the fair Round to swell the glowing Cheek,
Give Thought to Shades, and teach the Paints to speak.
Touched by thy Hand, how Sylvia's Charms engage!
And Flavia's Features smile through every Age.
In Clio's Face, the attentive Gazer spies
Minerva's reasoning Brow, and azure Eyes,
Thy Blush, Belinda, future Hearts shall warm,
And Celia shine in Citherea's Form.
In hoary Majesty, see CATO here;
Fixed strong in Thought, there NEWTON's Lines appear;
Here in full Beauty blooms the charming Maid;
Here Roman Ruins nod their awful Head;
Here gloting Monks their amorous Rights debate,
The Italian Master sits in easy State,
VANDIKE and RUBENS show their rival Forms,
And CAESAR flashes in the Blaze of Arms.
But cease, fond Muse, nor the rude Lays prolong,
A thousand Wonders must remain unsung;
Crowds of new Beings lift their wondering Heads,
In conscious Forms, and animated Shades.
What Sounds can speak, to every Figure just,
The breathing Statue, and the living Bust?
Landskips how gay! arise in every Light,
And fresh Creations rush upon the Sight;
Through fairy Scenes the roving Fancy strays,
Lost in the endless, visionary Maze.
Still, wondrous Artist, let thy Pencil flow,
Still, warm with Life, thy blended Colors glow,
Raise the ripe Blush, bid the quick Eye Balls roll
And call forth every Passion of the Soul.
Let thy soft Shades in mimick Figures play,
Steal on the Heart, and catch the Mind away.
Yet Painter, on the kindred Muse attend,
The Poet ever proves the Painter's Friend.
In the same Studies Nature we pursue,
I the Description touch, the Picture you;
The same gay Scenes our beauteous Works adorn,
The purple Evening, or the flamy Morn:
Now, with bold Hand, we strike the strong Design;
Mature in Thought, now soften every Line;
Now, unrestrained, in freer Airs surprise,
And sudden, at our Word, new World's arise.
In generous Passion let our Breasts conspire,
As is the Fancy's, be the Friendship's Fire;
Alike our Labor, and alike our Flame.
It Is thine to raise the Shape; it is mine to fix the Name.
EPITAPH.
BEneath, the PROPHET lays his reverend Head,
Amid, these awful Mansions of the Dead.
No more the PATRIOT shall assert the Laws,
Nor its the Senate plead his Country's Cause:
Around the CHURCH, no more the lift'ning Throng,
Gaze on his Eyes, and hang upon his Tongue:
No more his healing Hand shall Health restore,
Elude the Grave, and baffle Death no more.
In Eden's flowery Vales the Spirit roves,
Where Streams of Life roll through immortal Groves:
Fixed in deep Slumbers, here the DUST is given,
'Till the last Trumpet shake the Frame of Heaven:
Then fresh to Life the waking Saint shall rise,
And in new Triumphs glitter up the Skies;
With smiling Joys, and heavenly Honors crowned,
Bid endless Ages wheel their mighty Round.
EPITAPH.
SO fades the FAIR, the transient Roses fled,
(No Charms but Virtue bloom around the Dead)
The Patriot so forgets his Land's Defense,
His fine ADDRESS, and flowing ELOQUENCE:
"Ye LIVING, learn; Your Graces so consume,
"BEAUTY and GENIUS mingle in the Tomb.
EPITAPH.
REader, such as Thou art. such once She stood,
As soft, ingenious, beautiful and good;
Such as She is Thou quickly must become,
Stiff, senseless, loathsome, mouldering in a Tomb:
Yet shall These Limbs with Charms renewed ascend,
Bright from the Dust, and by the Grave refined;
"Like Her be Virtuous, You like Her shall shine
"Young, fair, gay, active, deathless and divine.
EPITAPH.
PROBUS beneath in peaceful Slumber lies;
PROBUS, the just, the active, and the wise.
His manly Frame contained an equal Mind,
Faithful to GOD, and generous to Mankind.
High in his Country's Honors long he stood,
Succored Distress, and gave the Hungry Food.
In Friendship steady, in Devotion warm,
A loyal Subject, and a Patriot firm.
Through every Age his dauntless Soul was tried,
Great while he lived, but greater when he died.
To a young Lady.
Written with a Silver Pen, presented by her to the Author. 1725.
LET groveling Rhymers court and awkward Muse,
Their Genius urge, and give their Fires a loose,
Invoke Apollo Delia's Name to sing.
And ask a Quill from Cupid's amorous Wing;
But I, more happy, speak a brighter Flame,
A nobler Pen, and a diviner Dame.
You, fair BELINDA, every Bosom fire,
Tune every Voice, and sound on every Lyre:
Where ever you point the Lightning of your Eyes,
Victim's fall thick, and Fate resistless flies;
From all your Form a thousand Glories dart,
And feathered Mischiefs strike on every Heart:
This slender Quill, from your fair Hand, can prove
An Arrow winged with Conquest and with Love;
Can, even in my unartful Fingers shine,
And with warm Beauties Grace each flowing Line,
While every Reader feels the immortal Strains,
Thrill through his Heart, and glow along his Veins.
But you, O charming Maid, throw by these Arms,
Forget your Features, and neglect your Charms
Though rising Lillies on your Temples spread,
And Roses strew your Cheeks with fainter red,
Yet look disdainful on a fading Face,
Boast brighter Glories, and a nobler Grace;
Ye Virtues! dress her with a constant Care,
And to an Angel raise the smiling Fair,
Written in the Blank Leaf of a POEM entitled Aetna.
THat first of Beauties in your Numbers shines,
You fust your Theme with correspondent Lines.
As sounding Aetna thunders from below,
And Smoke, majestic, hovers round its Brow,
While its tall Head shines with eternal Snow:
Each various Scene your answ'ring Lines unfold,
So rough you write, so cloudy, and so cold.
The following EPIGRAM was written upon a Pile of Building, erected in Paris by
Louis xivth. after the Peace with Queen ANNE.
PAR domus haec Urbi est, Urbs orbi: neutra trimphis
Et belli et pacis, par, Ludovice, tuis.
Answered.
VATES estMendax, Versus mentitur uterque,
Nam minor urbs orb est, et minor urbe domus.
Verbera tot Verax habeat, quot praemia Mendax,
Sic quae non meruit praemia uterque feret.
Utraque si injusta est Merces, erit utraque juri
Et belli et pacis, par, Ludovice, tuo.
Translated.
THIS Palace like a City lifts its Heads,
And like a World the ample City spreads.
O Louis how thy Monuments increase?
Alike thy Trophies both of War and Peace!
The Answer.
How far from Truth the shameless Bard declines!
And like Him lie his ignominious Lines.
In the wide World the lesser City stands,
And less than That the boasted Pile ascends.
Now, for these Truths, had I as many Stripes,
As for his Lies the flattering Poet bribes,
O Louis, 'twould to future Times declare
Alike thy Justice both of Peace and War.
The CONFLAGRATION.
IN some calm Midnight, when no whispering Breeze
Waves the tall Woods, or curls the undimpled Seas,
Lulled on their oazy Beds, the Rivers seem
Softly to murmur in a pleasing Dream;
The shaded Fields confess a still Repose,
And on each Hand the dewy Mountains drowse;
Mean time the Moon, fair Empress of the Night!
In solemn Silence sheds her silver Light,
White twinkling Stars their gilmm'ring Beauties show,
And wink perpetual over the heavenly blue:
Sleep nodding, consecrates the Deep serene,
And spreads her brooding Wings over all the dusky Scene:
Through the fine Ether moves no single Breath;
But all is hush as in the Arms of Death.
At once, Great GOD! thy dire Command is given,
That the last Tempest shake the Frame of Heaven.
Strait thick'ning Clouds in gloomy Volumes rise,
Gather on Heaps, and blacken in the Skies;
Sublime through Heaven, redoubling Thurders roll,
And gleamy Lightnings flash from Pole to Pole.
Old Ocean with presaging Horror rores,
And rousing Earthquakes rumble round the Shores;
Ten thousand Terrors over the Globe are hurled,
And general Dread alarms a guilty World.
But Oh! what Glory breaks the scattering Glooms?
Lo! down the opening Skies, he comes! he comes!
The Judge descending Flames along the Air;
And shouting Myriads pour around his Car:
Each ravished Seraph labors in his Praise,
And Saints, alternate, catch the immortal Lays;
Here in melodious Strains blessed Voices sing,
Here warbling Tubes, and here the vocal String,
Here from sweet Trumpets silver Accents rise,
And the shril Clangour echo's round the Skies.
And now, O Earth! thy final Doom attend,
In awful Silence meet thy fiery End.
Lo! rising radiant from his burning Throne,
The Godhead, thundering, calls the Ruins on.
" Cursed Earth polluted with the Prophets Blood,
" Thou, the vile Murderer of the Son of GOD,
" Full ripe for Vengeance, Vengeance be thy due,
" Perish in Flames, refine, and rise anew.
Thus as he speaks, all Nature owns the GOD.
Quiver the Plains, the lofty Mountains nod,
The hollow winding Caverns echo round,
And Earth, and Sea, and Air, and Heaven resound.
Now ratt'ling on, tremendous Thunder rolls,
And loudly crashing, shakes the distant Poles.
Over the thick Clouds, amazing Lightnings glare,
Flames flash at Flames, and vibrate through the Air.
Roaring Vulcanoes murmur for their Prey,
And from their Mouth curls the black Smoke away
Deep groans the Earth, at its approaching Doom,
While in slow Pomp the mighty Burnings come.
As when dark Clouds rise slowly from the Main,
Then, in swift Sluices, deluge all the Plain,
Descending headlong down the Mountains sides,
A thousand Torrents roll their foamy Tides,
The rushing Rivers rapid roar around,
And all the Shores return the dashing sound:
Thus awful, slow, the fiery Deluge low'rs,
Thus rushes down, and thus resounding rores.
But O! what Sounds are able to convey
The wild Confusions of the dreadful Day!
Eternal Mountains totter on their Base,
And strong Convulsions work the Valley's Face.
Fierce Hurricanes on sounding Pinions soar,
Rush over the Land, on the tossed Billows rore,
And dreadful in resistless Eddies driven,
Shake all the crystal Battlements of Heaven.
See the wild Winds, big-blust'ring in the Air,
Drive through the Forests, down the Mountains tare,
Sweep over the Valleys in their rapid Course,
And Nature bands beneath the impetuous Force.
Storms rush at Storms, at Tempests Tempests rore,
Dash Waves on Waves, and thunder to the Shore.
Columns of Smoke on heavy Wings ascend,
And dancing Sparkles fly before the Wind.
Devouring Flames, wide-waving rore aloud,
And melted Mountains form a fiery Flood:
Then, all at once, immenfe, the Fires arise,
A bright Destruction wraps the crackling Skies:
While all the Elements to melt conspire,
And the World blazes in the final Fire.
Yet shall ye, Flames, the wasting Globe refine,
And bid the Skies with purer Splendor shine;
The Earth, which the prolifick Fires consume,
To Beauty burns, and withers into Bloom;
Improving in the fertile Flame it lies,
Fades into Form, and into Vigor dies;
Fresh-dawning Glories blush amidst the Blaze,
And Nature all renews her flowery Face.
With endless Charms the everlasting Year
Rolls round the Seasons in a full Career;
Spring, ever-blooming, bids the Fields rejoice,
And warbling Birds try their melodious Voice;
Wherever she treads, Lillies unbidden blow,
Quick Tulips rise, and sudden Roses glow:
Her Pencil paints a thousand beauteous Scenes,
Where Blossoms bud amid immortal Greens,
Each Stream, in Mazes, murmurs as it flows,
And floating Forests gently bend their Boughs.
Thou, Autumn, too, sitt'st in the fragrant Shade,
While the ripe Fruits blush all around thy Head:
And lavish Nature, with luxuriant Hands,
All the soft Months, in gay Confusion, blends.
The holy Nation here transported roves
Beneath the spreading Honors of the Groves,
And pleased, attend, descending down the Hills,
The murmuring Music of the running rills.
Anthems divine by every Harp are played.
And the soft Music warbles through the Shade
Hither, my Lyre, thy soft Assistance bring,
And let sweet Accents leap from String to String;
Join the bright Chorus of the future Skies,
While all around loud Hallelujah's rise,
And to the tuneful Lays the echoing Vault replies.
This blessed Hope, my ravished Mind inspires,
And through my Bosom flash the sacred Fires:
No more my Heart it is growing Joy contains,
But driving Transports rush along my Veins;
I feel a Paradise within my Breast,
And seem already of a Heaven possessed.
ETERNITY.
NO more of murmuring Streams, or shady Groves,
Of fleecy Flocks, or of their Shepherds Loves;
No more fair Myra, on thy Name I Will dwell,
Nor in soft Notes to you my Passion tell:
These trifling Themes, no more shall tempt my Tongue,
A nobler Subject asks the adventurous Song;
Scenes of eternal Wonders court my Eyes,
And bid the Muse on soaring Pinions rise.
As in the Stars their lanquid Light's decay,
When the full Sun bursts forth and pours the Day,
So from my Mind the meaner Topics run,
When vast ETERNITY comes rolling on
ETERNITY, O thou unfathomed Deep,
In thy dark Womb, what hidden Wonders sleep?
How am I lost in thee! who can explain
The past Revolvings of thy mazy Reign?
Or who his Mind is able to dilate
To the long Periods of thy future Date?
Strange Labyrinths my puz'led Soul confound,
And wind mysterious in an endless Round.
Before this System owned the central Sun;
Or Earth its Race about its Orbit run,
When Light never dawned, nor Form displayed its Face,
But shapeless Matter filled the unmeasured Space;
Ever Chaos self with jarring Discords rung
Or the rude Elements were together flung;
Then, then, ETERNITY, thy Power was known,
Then did thou sit on thy unshaken Throne,
Thy Scepter flourished, never to decay;
IMMENSITY the Kingdom of thy Sway.
Anon, Creation rose in infant Bloom,
And smiling Light dispel'd the horrid Gloom.
Heavens mighty Vault was like a Curtain thrown,
Where the Stars twinkled, and the Either shone,
Time leaped to Life, and sped his March from far,
Seated on Motion, his triumphal Car:
Through all the Worlds of Light his Axil rung,
And rolling Wheels resistless smok'd along --
Yet, O ETERNITY, all Time to Thee,
Is a small Bark that floats in an unbounded Sea.
But, O my Muse, with wondering Eyes, behold
Scenes that remain, and Ages yet untold.
Look! where Duration yet unborn appears,
In the long Train of still succeeding Years!
The vast Extension stretches unconfined,
My Thoughts perplexes, and o'erpow'rs my Mind.
The Day shall come when this stupendous Ball
Shall haste to Ruins, and to nothing fall.
When Thou, Great GOD, shall in the Clouds descend,
Lift up thy Hand, and swear that Time shall end.
Hark! the dread Trumpet breathes the mighty Sound,
The swelling Accents through the Air rebound;
See! the Graves teem; the waking Saints arise;
And the new Bodies glitter up the Skies;
Then the last Flames, commissioned, downward pour,
Melt the rough Rocks, consume the burning Shore,
While the Sea bubbles in its final Roar.
All Nature sinks, and every World destroyed,
Leaves a waste Darkness, and a tractless Void.
Now fainting Time, in one vast Wreck overthrown,
Sinks dying down, and gives its latest Groan;
ETERNITY who first its Being gave,
Its fruitful Mother once, becomes its Grave:
So Streams which from the Sea their Birth obtain,
Flow swift along, there to be lost again.
But, Oh! what Prospects open to my View!
What distant Scenes, my wondering Eyes pursue!
I see the gloomy, ever burning Caves,
Where, in eternal Storms, the melted Brimstone raves;
Loud roar the Flames, while rising Cries resound,
And endless Shreeks, and Blasphemies go round:
There Sinners waken from their idle Dreams,
And raging Devils curse the glowing Flames.
There coyls the Old Serpent, struggling with his Chain.
Still hisses dire, and bites the Brass in vain.
ETERNITY, thy Breath the Flame inspires,
And adds new Torment to the incessant Fires.
Far other Scenes my joyful Lays invite,
And heavenly Visions swim before my Sight,
I hear soft Music glide along the Air,
And Songs of Seraphs echo in my Ear.
I see the pious Souls with Pleasure crowned,
And over the holy Hills Delights abound.
But Oh! the Raptures which my Powers confess
When JESUS shines in his refulgent Dress!
From his wide Wounds perpetual Streams of Light,
For ever rush, and strike the dazzled Sight:
ETERNITY, here thy high Joys are known,
The top most Gem in the REDEEMER'S Crown,
Ten thousand Raptures by thy Hands are given;
ETERNITY, Thou art the Heaven of Heaven!
Added by a Friend, upon reading the foregoing.
THere thou, O Friend, shall join the Angelick Throng,
(The only Rivals of thy heavenly Song)
Our Friendship there shall in Perfection shine,
And there, as here, thy Flames shall kindle mine.
There JESUS still shall animate thy Lays,
And thy sweet Tongue still celebrate his Praise.
His Praise, which here so ost thy Muse has sung,
While on thy Lips thy Friends transported hung;
Still asked the lofty Music of thy Lyre,
And from thy Bosom caught the deathless Fire;
For, from thy Hand, they own the borrowed Bays.
And, like my Muse, confess thy generous Rays.
In those blessed Realms thy heaven-born Soul shall stand;
And sing superior in the radiant Band;
And while thy Hands the Palm caelestial claim,
ETERNITY shall consecrate thy Fame.
While this great Thought employs my infant Muse,
And she with fluttering Wings the Task pursues,
On you, dear SIR, she casts her anxious Sight,
Indulge, propitious, and assist her Flight;
To you the grateful Offering she would bring,
You claim her Song who formed her Voice to sing.
Taught by your Rules, by your Example fired;
She heard, she learnt, and Instant was inspired:
Still by your Influence she exerts her Powers,
And every varying Note she strikes is yours.
O could I think in such a lofty Vein,
And in just Numbers emulate your Strain,
Had I your Muse which every Hearer warms,
For ever raises and for ever charms,
Transports your Friends, who urge its heavenly Airs,
And drink the Harmony with ravished Ears,
Then, all-melodious should my Accents flow,
Worthy ETERNITY -- and worthy You.
THE END.
THE CONTENTS
THE Almighty CONQUEROR. p. 1. The GOD of Tempest. p. 4. The Complaint and the
Consolation. p. 8. The altogether Lovely. p. 10. The Comparison, the Choice,
and the Enjoyment. p. 13. On a very profane Compliment in a noble and devout
Poem. p. 15. HYMN to CHRIST for our Regeneration and Resurrection p. 17.
GOLIAH's Defeat. p. 18. ODE, for Palatine Tune. p. 23. Written in MILTON'S
PARADISE LOST. p. 25. To the Memory of a young Commander slain in a Battle with
the Indians, 1724. p. 34 Written in Dr, WATTS'S Poems; given to a young Lady.
p. 38. An ELEGY addressed to His Excellency Governor BELCHER: On the Death of
his Brother-in-Law, the Honorable DANIEL OLIVER, Esquire p. 39. To a Friend, on
the Death of a Relative, p. 44. Hymn at Sea, p. 48. To an ingenious young
Gentleman, on his dedicating a Poem to the Author. p. 49. The BLOOM of LIFE,
fading in a happy DEATH. p. 58. A Poem on the Death of King GEORGE I. and
Accession of King GEORGE II. p. 61. To His Excellency Governor BURNET, on his
Arrival at Boston p. 68. To His Excellency Governor BELCHER, on the Death of
his LADY. p. 76. To Pollio, on his preparing for the Press a Treatise against
the Romish Church. p. 79. On the Death of the QUEEN. p. 81. To the Reverend Dr.
WATTS, on his Divine POEMS. p. 86. To PICTORIO, on the Sight of his Pictures p.
89. Epitaphs. p. 93, 94, 95. To a young Lady. Written with a Silver Pen,
presented by her to the Author. 1725. p. 96. Written in the Blank Leaf of a
POEM entitled Aetna. p. 98. An Epigram, written upon a Pile of Building,
erected in Paris by Louis xivth after the Peace with Queen ANNE. p. 98. The
CONFLAGRATION. p. 100. ETERNITY. p. 106.
ERRATA.
Omitting a very few lesser Typographical Errors, those which tend more to
disturb the Sense, are thus corrected.

PAge 23. Verse 7. read plain. p 26. v. 5. from Bottom, r. Lightning. p. 64. v.
8. from Bottom, r. Dome. p. 74. v. 6. r. Glories. p. 103. v. 5. from Bottom, r.
Crystal. p. 106 v. 4. from Bottom, r. Lights.

