A CALL TO THE Unfaithful Professors OF TRUTH. WRITTEN BY JOHN ESTAUGH In his
Lifetime; and now Published for General Service. TO WHICH IS ADDED Diverse
EPISTLES Of the same AUTHOR.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed by B. FRANKLIN, M,DCC,XLIV.

ELIZABETH ESTAUGH's TESTIMONY
To the Memory of her beloved Husband JOHN ESTAUGH, deceased.
SINCE it pleased Divine Providence so highly to favor me, with being the near
Companion of this dear Worthy, the Author of the following Sheets, I cannot be
altogether silent, but must give some small Account of the early Beginning of
the Working of Truth in him. He was born in Keldevon in Essex in Great Britain,
on the 23d of the 2d Month, 1676, of religious Parents: But he grew uneasy with
the religious Professions of both Father and Mother (they being of different
Persuasions) and being a Seeker, sell in with the Baptists, and liked them so
well he was near Joining them. But a Friend, a Neighbor, being dead, it so
happened, that he was invited to the Burial, where that worthy Minister of the
Gospel, Francis Stamper of London, being led to speak with Life and Power
directly to his State, it made such deep Impressions on his tender Mind, that
put him upon Search into the Principles of Friends, and being fully satisfied,
joined with them in the seventeenth Year of his Age.

About the eighteenth Year of his Age, he came forth in the Ministry, and being
faithful he grew in his Gift, fo that in some Time he traveled to visit
Friends in the North of England, and Scotland: After which he was concerned to
visit Friends in America, and having the Unity of the Brethren, embarked in the
Year 1700, and was enabled by the great Hand that drew him forth, to perform
that Service to the great Satisfaction of Friends, and the Reward of Peace in
himself.

Being then, and for some time after, freed from any Concern to travel in the
Service of Truth, we were married to each other, viz. on the first Day of the
Tenth Month, 1702, and settled at Haddonfield in the County of Gloucester, and
Western Division of the Province of New Jersey. In the fore Part of his Time he
traveled pretty much; but in the latter Part he was troubled with an Infirmity
in his Head, which rendered him unfit for the Service; and his Good Master, that
requires no Impossibilities of his Servants, favored him with being very easy
at home; where, through Mercy, we lived very comfortably: For I Will venture to
say, few, if any, in a married State, ever lived in sweeter Harmony than we
did. Oh! he was a sweet Companion indeed! A loving tender Husband; an humble
exemplary Man; a Pattern of Moderation in all Things; not lifted up with any
Enjoyments, nor cast down at Disappointments. Oh! what shall I say of him, but
that he was a Man endowed with many good Gifts, which rendered him very
agreeable to his Friends, and much more to me, his Wife. -- My Loss is as far
beyond my Expressing, as is his WORTH.

Now after some Years (as before is observed) of Indisposition, it pleased the
Lord to restore him to a State of Health; and soon after he had a Concern to
visit Friends at Tortola. This brought on him a deep Exercise, but when he was
confirmed it was really required of him so to do, he gave up to it; Home, and
the Company there, which used to be so pleasant to him, he was then weaned
from. He first wrote to them; but finding this would not excuse him, he durst
no longer delay, but go he must. So, on the 13th of the 8th Month, 1742, we
parted in the Aboundings of Love and Affection on that Occasion.

And now, the most acceptable Account I can give the Reader, of his Service in
Tortola, is extracted from two Letters which I received from a Friend of that
Place, directed to me, and to the Effect following, viz. That On the 8th of the
9th Month, 1742, he arrived at the House of John Pickering with his Companion
John Cadwalader, where they were received with much Love and great Joy, being
made to rejoice together in the tender Mercies and Love of God, which was
greatly manifested that Day, to the Honor and Praise of his great Name, and
also to the Comforting of his poor People. -- The Testimonies of these Servants
of the Lord were with Life and Power, and were as Clouds filled with Rain upon
a thirsty Land. --

But to be more particular concerning thy dear Husband, whose Memory is dear
and precious to me, and many more whose Hearts were open to receive the Glad
Tidings which he brought. His godly Life and Conversation spoke him to be a
true Follower of the Lamb, and Minister of Jesus Christ, whom he freely
preached, and by the effectual Power of whose divine Love, was he called forth
to our Assistance, for which we bless, praise and magnify the God of all our
Mercies: And as a faithful Messenger, with much Love, in a tender Frame of
Spirit, would be invite all to the Fountain which had healed him. O! the deep
Humility that appeared in him in the Time of his public Testimony; and when in
private Conversation with his near and dear Friends, as he often said we were
to him, how cheerful and pleasant would he be, in that blessed Freedom wherein
Christ had made him free. Innocent, harmless, of a cheerful Countenance, yet
not without a Christian Gravity well becoming the Doctrine he preached. He was
valiant for the Truth to the last, and though he is gone to his Grave, his Memory
is sweet and precious.

He had his Health very well until the Death of his dear Companion; but going
to his Burial, we were caught in a Shower of Rain, which we, and he, believed
was the Occasion of his Illness. However, he was mightily favored with the
Divine Presence, which enabled him to answer the Service of that Day; and the
next, being the first Day of the Week, we had a blessed Meeting, the Lord's
Presence accompanying us; and though thy dear Husband was so near his End, his
Candle shined as bright as ever, and many that beheld it, were made to glorify
God on his Behalf. This was the last Opportunity on this Island, save his
Farewell upon his dying Bed, where he both preached and prayed, a little before
his Departure.

On the next Day, being the second of the Week, he went to a little Island
called Jos Vandicks, accompanied with several Friends; but on the 3d day in the
Morning he complained very much, yet was enabled to go to Meeting, where were a
pretty many People waiting to hear the Word of Life declared, and a blessed
Opportunity we had together, to the tendering and melting our Hearts into a
heavenly Frame.

But he, who never spared his Labor whilst amongst us, extending his Voice as
a Trumpet of the Lord's own sounding, was so inwardly spent he was ready to
faint. However, he went on board the Sloop that Afternoon, and next Morning
came ashore at our House; where he had not been long before a shivering Fit
seized him, and a Fever soon followed, which kept its constant Course every
Day. This being the 1st day of the 10th Month, he took great Notice that it
ended Forty Years since his Marriage with thee; that during that Time you had
lived in much Love, and parted in the same; and that thou wast his greatest
Concern of all outward Enjoyments. And though the last two Days he was in much
Pain, yet he was preserved under it in much Patience and Resignation, and had
his perfect Senses to the last, exhorting Friends to Faithfulness, etc. And on
the 6th Day of the 10th Month, about 6 a Clock at Night, he went away like a
Lamb, with Praises and Thanksgivings in his Lips but about two Minutes before.
-- Thus far from the said Letters.

And thus finished this dear Worthy in the 67th Year of his Age, at the House
of William Thomas on the Island of Tortola; highly favored by his great and
good God in the very extreme Moments; the Consideration whereof, and the
Account given of his Service, afford me, at times, some Relief; but, alas! my
Wound is so deep, nothing but the healing Balm from above can effect my Cure.
My Loss is inexpressible; yet since it is the Will of the Almighty, it becomes
me to submit, though it be hard so to do.

Oh! a sweet and blessed End indeed to go away as in Raptures of Life, gathered
by the Almighty as a choice Flower, in full Perfection and Fragrancy! For sure,
few, if any Man, ever left a sweeter Savor, both at home and abroad, than he
has done: Having lived beloved, is gone lamented in general; and therefore it
is no Wonder that I, who am so much the greatest Loser, lament and bemoan my
great, my great Loss! And yet in the Midst of all, I have a secret Satisfaction
in that I was enabled to give him up (though so dear to me) unto the Service into
which he was called. This is but just a Hint for those who may be under the
like Exercise and Trial, that they may not hold back, but submit, and freely
give up their All, leaving the Consequence to the wise disposing Hand, who
knows for what Cause it is He is pleased so nearly to try his People, some with
Life itself, others near it, and the Cause yet hid.

ELIZ. ESTAUGH.
Haddonfield, in New Jersey, the 5th, 5 mo. 1743.
THE TESTIMONY Of FRIENDS of the Monthly Meeting of Haddonfield, concerning our
dear Friend JOHN ESTAUGH, deceased.
OUR worthy Friend having been a faithful Labourer in the Work of the Gospel
amongst us great Part of Forty Years; and many of us knowing by Good Experience
the Effects of his Service, we find ourselves engaged to give in this Testimony
on his Behalf, viz. That by and through the Divine Virtue and Power by which he
was first reached and wrought upon, he was early called to the Work of the
Ministry, and made a chosen Vessel fitted to hold the heavenly Treasure which
dwelt plentifully in him. A true Gospel Minister, dividing the Word aright; his
Doctrine at Times having dropped as Dew, and his Speech distilled as the small
Rain upon the tender Plants, Deuteronomy. 32.2. A Man of great Humility and
Compassion, sympathising with the Afflicted in Body or Mind; being sometimes
enabled, as with healing Oil, to comfort the Sorrowful, the heavy-hearted and
sincere Seekers of Christ Jesus: In this he had an extraordinary Talent; and
yet, on the other hand, was close in his Reproofs and Exhortations to the
Careless and Disobedient; of which the following Sheets are a Specimen.

He was zealous for preserving good Order in the Church; and for maintaining
Love and Unity, that Badge of true Discipleship.

Oh! we are sensibly and sorrowfully affected with our Loss; and yet we must
not repine; nor dare we say to the Almighty, What do thou?

Since his first Settlement among us, he visited England, Ireland, and
New England; and the West India Islands several times. And when at home, as he
had some Skill in Chemistry and Physic, he freely bestowed much Labor and
Time therein, for the Good of the People of the Neighborhood where he dwelt;
and especially on the Poor, for whom he was much concerned; so that it may
justly be said, the Blessing of those who were ready to perish came upon him,
Job 29.13.

The last Visit that he made, was to the Island of Tortola, where, after his
Service was over, he was taken sick, and departed this Life. And we make no
doubt but that he is in the Fruition of that Glory and Happiness which will
never have an End. Almighty God, if it be consistent with his Divine Will,
raise up, spirit and employ more such faithful Laborers in his Harvest, Mat.
9.38. to the Gathering of many to himself; and that Praise and Honor may be
ascribed to his great Name, who is worthy both now and forever!

Haddonfield, the Ninth Day of the Eleventh Month, 1743. Signed in and on
Behalf and by Directions of the said Meeting, by Joshua Lord, Josiah Foster,
Samuel Lippincott, John Hollinshead, Joseph Heritage, Joseph Cooper, Timothy
Matlack, Thomas Redman, Ephraim Tomlinson, John Wood, Joseph Kaighn, Ebenezer
Hopkins.


THE AUTHOR'S PREFACE, To the READER,
Friendly READER,
LEST thou should fall under some Misapprehensions, and judge contrary to the
Truth, by thinking the Author of the ensuing Sheets was induced to put forth
the same, through Fondness to appear in Print, I take the Liberty to assure
thee it sprung not from so mean and vain a Motive; but purely from the Love of
God which I felt to fill my Heart; wherein I was led to call to such, who are
making Profession of the Truth, but are not duly concerned to walk therein; and
to such as are the Offspring of our worthy Ancients; that they may solidly
consider, whether the Way wherein they are going, be agreeable to that holy
Path of Truth, in which their tender Parents walked, and for which some of them
deeply suffered, and underwent many Cruelties, long and hard Imprisonments,
etc. from Men of dark and corrupt Minds. If this my tender Call shall have
Place with any of the careless and negligent Ones, so as to turn them to
Christ, it will answer the Desire of him, who was unwilling to have thus
exposed himself.

JOHN ESTAUGH.

A CALL TO THE Unfaithful Professors OF TRUTH.
THE great Courage and Zeal of our worthy FRIENDS, who first received the Truth
in this latter Age of the World, has been often brought to my View. Many were
the Hardships which for Christ's Sake they underwent, Matthew. 5.11, 12.
yet in all they rejoiced, looking upon it as a Blessing from God, that they
were thought worthy to suffer for him; counting the Loss of all things but as
Dross and Dung, Phil. 3.8.
that they might win Christ. Thus with their All, they purchased the Truth;
Math. 13.44, 45, 46.
and having gained it were tender of it; watching over themselves and one
another in Love, so that no Evil might get up among them, to hinder the Growth
of that pure Seed which God had sown in their Hearts.

And here, Math. 13.23.
as the good Ground brought they forth plentifully of those Things which the
great Lord of the Vineyard was well pleased with, who blessed his Work in their
Hands, and gave them Dominion over their Enemies, adding daily to their Number,
such as should be saved. Acts 2.47.


Here it may be observed, what blessed Effects Faithfulness to God does
produce; by it the Heart comes to be purged from all Deceit and Filthiness, and
the Soul beautified with Righteousness; and then from within, Matthew: 12, 35.
out of the good Treasure of the Heart, are good Things brought forth: But the
contrary where the Heart is not made good; for the Evil Man out of his Evil
Treasure, brings forth Evil Things (to wit) Pride, Covetousness, Malice, Envy,
Deceit, and all Things that are bad: And to my Grief, I have seen too much of
these appear amongst many, who are shrouding themselves under the Profession of
Truth. But woe! unto you, ye false-hearted ones; for the Face of the Lord is
against you, because of these Things; and the Time is coming, wherein you shall
be made to know, a Profession will not do, although it be of the Truth it self.

Therefore in the Fear of God, I warn you all, whether Young or Old, to return
in Time, before it be too late; for the Lord will not always strive with you,
Genesis 6.3.
although he is merciful and long-suffering to- you-wards, and has often visited
you both immediately and instrumentally, laying open your Conditions before
you; but Oh! how have you rejected him, and had those in Derision, who in Love
to your Souls, have in the Fear of God sometimes reproved you, for your light
and frothy Behavior, which is out of Truth, and is prejudicial to your Souls
everlasting Well-being: And other times, for your running into the vain
Fashions and pernicious Ways of the World; and notwithstanding the Evil of
these Things has been laid before you, from time to time, yet some are saying,
they see no Evil in them, or that they should be let alone to see it in
themselves: Others are crying, such or such things they are but small Matters;
and thus the Devil is endeavoring to uphold his Kingdom in you; that if
possible he might throw down that by you, which through the Mighty of God has
been built in his faithful Children, whom he has called to his Work and
qualified for his Service, who as good Soldiers are making War in Righteousness
against all Unrighteousness, 2 Cor. 19.4.
and the Weapons of their Warfare are not carnal, but spiritual, and mighty
through God to the pulling down the strong Holds of Sin and Satan, that so
Reformation may go forward in the Nation.

But ye Libertines are against this Work; for you are endeavoring, to weaken
the Hands of those who are concerned therein; and thus do ye make the Hearts of
those sad, whom the Lord has not made sad; but the Mighty God will call you to
Account for these Things, Luke 12.49.
and appoint you your Portion amongst the Unbelievers, if ye repent not:
Therefore seek the Lord whilst he is near, Isai. 55.6.
lest the Kingdom be rent from you; and then what will all the World avail you?
ye shall then cry and mourn; but there will be none to pity you; for he whom
you have slighted will slight you again, Prove. 1.26.
and even laugh at your Calamity and mock when your Fear comes; thus will the
mighty God who is just Ezekiel. 18.25.
and equal in all his Ways, deal with the rebellious Children, who take Counsel
but not of Isai. 30.1.
him, and that cover with a Covering but not of his Spirit.

I therefore warn you in the Love of God to take care in time, and withdraw
yourselves from the Evil Counselor, for his End is to destroy you, and to
deprive you of eternal Happiness. Therefore be ye awakened, and incline your
Minds unto the Lord, who is the Shepherd and Bishop of Souls, that out of all
things which are hurtful he may gather you, Heb. 6.7.8.
that so no longer you may remain, as the Ground which drinks in the Rain
that comes upon it, and brings forth Briers and Thorns, and so is nigh to
Cursing: But the Desire of my Soul is, that you may through harkening to the Word
of Power, Isaiah 35.6, 7. chap. 44.3. chap. 58.^1.
witness your Barrenness to be turned into Fruitfulness, and your dry Ground
into Springs of Water, that Glory to his Name you may bring: For says our
Savior, John 15.8.
Herein is my Father glorified, in that you bear much Fruit; yet it must be
that of his own Spirit, 1 Cor. 12.7.
the Manifestation whereof is given to every Man to profit withal; therefore
sink ye down in your Measures, and yield Obedience to the Living Manifestation
of the Son of God, then will you know a Profiting aright, in the Way of the
Lord, and here you will witness the strong Man Luke 11.21 22.
to be bound and cast out of his Possession; then will all Jarrings and
Janglings come to an End, and instead of shy Looks, and evil Surmisings one
against another, there will be a Meeting of each other in that Love which is
without Dissimulation: And thereby it will be known that ye are the Disciples
John 13.35.
of Christ, for by this, said our Lord, shall all Men know that ye are my
Disciples, if you have Love one to another: But where this undefiled Love is
wanting, there also will the Mark of a true Disciple be wanting; and if that be
wanting, it will not be any ones Say-so which will render him, or her, to be
such; but according to our Fruits shall we be Matthew. 7; 16. chapter 12.33.
judged: Therefore let all consider what Fruits they are bringing forth; for
he, or she, Gal. 5.20, 21.
which brings forth Strife, or appears in a peevish envious Spirit against the
Brethren, James 3.14, 15, 16.
are thereby judged to be of the corrupt Tree; for no such sower Grapes are
seen upon those Branches which abide in the Holy Vine, and draw their Life from
the Divine Root Christ Jesus: For they are of a peaceable Spirit, seek not
Revenge, are not proud nor covetous, but of an humble Mind, 1 Pet 3.3, 4.
and so are adorned with that holy and inward Adorning that the Apostle spoke
of, and which too many are Strangers to, who yet are making Profession with us.

For the Sake of these I am concerned, that the Gift of God may be stirred up,
and have its Liberty in them in whom it has been long stifled Amos 2.13.
and oppressed as a Cart with Sheaves: Many go bowed down in Spirit because of
the Scandal, which through the Carlessness of these has been brought upon the
Truth (which is altogether pure and without Blemish in itself) who are
crucifying the Lord afresh Heb. 6.6.
unto themselves in his spiritual Appearance, and put him as to open Shame;
causing many to blaspheme his worthy Name.

Oh! ye careless and unfaithful Stewards, do ye not consider, that one Day you
must give an Account of your Stewardship; 1 Pet. 4.18.
and if the Righteous scarcely be saved, where shall the Ungodly and the Sinner
appear? who have rejected the Counsel and Will of God, and followed their own
Hearts Lusts, through which ye have been drawn from the Father's House, and now
are spending your Portions as among Harlots; but the Lord grant, says my Soul,
if it may stand good with the Pleasure of his Divine Will, that as the Prodigal
came to Luke 15.
himself, and saw from whence he was fallen, and in Humility resolved to
return, so you, in like Manner, may come to a Sense and Sight of your
Conditions and humble your selves before him. Then shall you feel of the
Father's Love, and he will rejoice over you in your Return to him; Luke 15.7.
For there is more Joy over one Sinner who repents, then over ninety and nine
just Persons which need no Repentance. Oh! how is the Love and Favor of God
herein set forth for the Encouragement of all to draw nigh to him, who are in
any Measure made sensible of their lost Estate and undone Condition, if not
pardoned by the Lord; and assuredly, he takes not Pleasure in the Destruction
of any: For, as I live, says the Lord God, I have no Pleasure Ezekiel 33.11.
in the Death of the Wicked, but that the Wicked turn from his Way and live:
And happy will all you be, who come to true Repentance, in the Day of your
Visitation, and with Willingness go down into spiritual Jordan, 2 Kings 52 14.
that so you may be purged from the Leprosy of Sin, Peter 21 2.
and as newborn Babes may come again to desire the sincere Milk of the Word,
that ye may grow up thereby into a Life of Righteousness, and be filled with a
Holy Zeal for God: 2 Cor. 13.8.
Then you can do nothing against the Truth, but for the Truth; and will join
Hands with those who are sincerely concerned to keep up the Ancient Testimony
of God's eternal Truth; for the sake whereof many of our ancient Brethren were
great Sufferers, and bore the Burden in the Heat of the Day. But blessed are
they, for their Reward is sure; and having turned many to Righteousness, Dan.
12.3.
they shall shine as Stars in the Firmament of Glory for ever and ever. But
unhappy are all you who have suffered your Minds to wander from the Lord, and
have let in Hardness of Heart, and are now like the deaf Adder that stops
her Psalm. 58.4.6.
Ear, which will not hearken to the Voice of the Charmers, charming never so
wisely; yet are assembling your selves amongst God's People, and because you
have got the Lamp, would be esteemed as wise Virgins: But I testify unto you in
the Name of the Lord, ye are in the Way of the foolish Virgins, Matthew. 25.1.
and in danger of being shut out of the Bridegroom's Chamber; should this be
your Case, although you may then come to the Door and knock, crying, Lord open
unto us, and may have to say, we have eaten and drank in thy presence, Luke ^31
25. 26.
and thou have taught in our Streets; he from within will answer you, saying,
depart from me ye Workers of Iniquity, for I know ye not: so as the Goats shall
ye be separated from the Sheep, and turned to the left Hand, into everlasting
Sorrow, and shall see the Difference between those who have served God and such
as have not. Therefore I beseech you in the Bowed-downness of my Spirit, to
take these Things into serious and weighty Consideration; and whilst the Day of
your Visitation lasts, cry mightily unto God, that he may take away your stony
Hearts, Ezekiel. 11.19.
and give unto you Hearts of Flesh; that Tenderness may be seen upon you, and a
right Spirit renewed within you; that so, ye no longer may be found doing
Despite to the Spirit of Grace, Heb. 10.29.
which has appeared unto you, to teach you your Duty toward God, and how you
ought to live in this World. Titus 2.11.
For faith the Apostle, the Grace of God that brings Salvation, has appeared
to all Men, teaching us that denying Ungodliness and worldly Lust, we should
live soberly, righteously and godly in this present World. You therefore, who
neglect its Appearance, are slighting your own Salvation, which the Living God
has freely offered unto you; Deuteronomy.; 30.15.
and so are choosing Death rather than Life, and for a Mess of this World, are,
Esau-like, Genesis 25.33.
selling your Birthrights: but there was a Time, in which he sought the same
with Heb. 12.16, 17.
Tears and could not find it; and such a Time will certainly overtake you, if
you continue in this State, and will by no Means be prevailed on to seek the
Lord, whilst he is yet willing to be found of you. But be ye prevailed on, and
rowsed up out of this your careless Frame of Spirit, Phil. 2.12.
and now begin and work out your Salvation with Fear and Trembling before the
Lord, and so make your Calling and Election sure with him, John 11.9.
doing your Dayswork in the Daytime, for the Night will come, in which no Man
can work: Eccl. 11.3.
For as the Tree falls, so it lies, whether to the North or South; and as Death
leaves, Judgment finds; there is no Repentance in the Grave; therefore prize
your Time and dwell no longer at Ease in your Minds, for ye are far behind-hand
in your Dayswork; although some of you have been called as in the Morning of your
Days; therefore the greater will your Condemnation be, and upon you is the Woe
pronounced against them Amo. 6.1.
in Old Time, who were at Ease in Sion, pleasing your selves with your own
Self-Conceits; but are not grieved for the Afflictions of Joseph: Am. 6.6.
But a Day is coming, wherein the Mighty God, will mightily disturb your
Couches and Beds of Ease whereon ye are Am. 6.4.
stretching yourselves; and the Wine of your Sweetness, shall be turned into
the Gall of Bitterness; and your delightsome Land into a waste howling Psalm.
107.33.
Wilderness. Thus will the Lord revenge himself on the careless and slothful
Ones, who have no regard to Truth; but are turning their Backs on it, because
they cannot have an undue Liberty therein; no, not so much as in the smallest
Matters; but there must be a Coming to Judgment, which is every way unpleasant,
to you who love to gratify a vain Mind; and therefore, the Way seems too
straight for you that you cannot walk therein; and yet you would be looked on,
as such, who do walk in the Truth: And one is saying, I have been convinced so
long; and another, I go no where but to Friends Meetings; and others from Birth
and Education, lay claim to Truth, and it would be ill taken, if it should be
said, they are not of our Society; although the Latitude and undue Liberty they
are frequently taking, too much declares it; and thus are manifesting a Desire
of being Heirs of two Kingdoms, which will not be granted; Luke 16.13.
for a Man cannot serve two Masters, as said our blessed Lord; for either he
will hate the one and love the other; or else, he will hold to the one, and
despise the other. We cannot serve God and Mammon. Consider then, I beseech
you, to whom ye are yielding your selves; for to whom ye yield your selves
Servants to obey, his Servants ye are; whether of Sin unto Death, or of
Obedience unto Righteousness; and whosoever commits Sin, John 8.34.
is the Servant of Sin, said our Savior, and if Servants of Sin, Romans 16.20.
free from Righteousness, says the Apostle Paul: And whilst Sin remains and is
delighted in, vain are all Pretensions to Religion. And according to what the
Apostle Peter says, 2 Pet. 2.20, 21.
if after having escaped the Pollutions of the World through the Knowledge of
the Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, they are again entangled therein, and
overcome, the latter End is worse with them than the Beginning: For it had been
better for them not to have known the Way of Righteousness, than after they
have known it, to turn from the Holy Commandment delivered unto them. Oh! here,
you that own your selves to have been reached unto by Christ, and convinced of
his Eternal Truth, may clearly see, that without a steady Adhering to the
Truth, your being convinced can be of no Advantage, but a Disadvantage it will
be to you in rejecting so merciful a Visitation, by which you are drawing down
God's Displeasure upon you: For as said the Apostle Paul, Romans 1.18.
the Wrath of God is revealed from Heaven against all Ungodliness and
Unrighteousness of Men, who hold the Truth in Unrighteousness; and unto the
Wicked God says, Psalm. 50.16, 17, 18, 19.
what have thou to do to declare my Statutes, or that thou should take my
Covenant in thy Mouth? seeing thou hate Instruction, and castest my Words
behind thee: When thou saw a Thief, then thou consentedst with him, and have
been Partaker with Adulterers: Thou gave thy Mouth to Evil, and thy Tongue
frames Deceit: Thou sit and speak against thy Brother: Thou slanderest
thine own Mother's Son. And may it not with Sorrow be said, this is become too
much the Case of many in our Time, that are of the Stock and Offspring of pious
and godly Men and Women: But, Ezekiel. 18.4.
as the Son was not to suffer for the Father's Offenses, so on the other Hand,
if the Son refuse to obey God, his Father's Happiness will not be entailed upon
him; for, said the Lord to the Prophet, all Souls are mine, as the Soul of the
Father, so also the Soul of the Son is mine; the Soul that sins it shall
die; and surely it will fall heavy on such young People as have had, or that
now have the Opportunity to observe the pious and godly Example of tender
Parents, and yet take no Regard either to their Examples or Precepts, but let
loose the Reins of their Minds to many Corruptions; and yet some of these
would, nevertheless, have it thought, that they are of the same Principles with
their Parents: But alas! you are but like the foolish Virgins before mentioned,
that hold a Lamp without Oil, and so at last deceive yourselves; wherefore take
Warning in Time, least the Alarm be sounded, when you think not of it: Gal.
6.7, 8.
For surely, such as Men sow, such shall they reap, and if they sow to the
Flesh they shall reap Corruption; but if to the Spirit, then Life everlasting;
and to be carnally minded is Death; Romans 8.6.
but to be spiritually minded is Life and Peace. Therefore in the Love of God,
I call unto you, to forsake the corrupt Ways of the World, and close in with
the Spirit of Christ; that so you may know the Deeds of the Flesh mortified:
For, said the Apostle, Romans 8.13.
if ye through the Spirit, do mortify the Deeds of the Body ye shall live; and
would you not live eternally with God? Yes surely, Number. 23.10.
all are willing to die the Death of the Righteous, and to share with them in
heavenly Mansions of Glory; but this cannot be, but as you come to dwell under
the Cross of Christ, and give that to the Fire that is for the Fire, and to the
Sword that which is for the Sword; so that all may be slain in you which is not
of God; then you will not only have to tell of being convinced; but experience
That which converts the Soul to God. And here also may you who are the
Offspring of the faithful Children and Servants of God, come to inherit the
Crown of immortal Life with your Parents, who may be gone before and are now
reaping an endless Reward for their Obedience to Christ; Heb. 11.6.
for the Lord is a rich Rewarder of all them who faithfully serve him.
Wherefore, be ye prevailed with to hearken to his Call. Oh! mind his tender
Invitation; let it not be any longer made in vain to any of you; but break off
from the Folly and Corruption of the World, and come and humble your selves,
like the Prodigal of old, so shall you meet with a merciful Reception; For the
heavenly Father's Bowels of Mercy roll toward you; Matt. 23.37.
and as he spread forth the Wing of tender Love to Jerusalem, so is he opening
it to you, even you, who are of the Stock and Offspring of his People: But take
Care you do not weary him out, for if so, then shall you feel that instead of
sweet Visits of Love and Mercy, he will turn his Hand in Judgment upon you, and
though you may cry to him he will not answer your Desires; because, when he, the
Holy One, called to you, ye would not answer, but turned the deaf Ear unto him,
like Jerusalem: But Oh! what a dreadful Day brought she upon her self thereby!
may the Consideration thereof take Place with you, who are in the same
rebellious Nature; that so, whilst there is yet a little Space between you and
Destruction, you may sue for Peace with the Lord, who is full of Compassion to
his Creatures. Yet he said, my Spirit shall not always strive Genesis 6.3.
with Man, for that he also is Flesh: and therefore, as it was said, Heb. 3.7,
15.
to Day if you will hear my Voice, harden not your Hearts, Hos. 14.4.
but turn to the Lord and he will heal your Backslidings; and as ye are willing
to put away the Evil of your Doings from before the Isa. 1.18.
Lord, then may you come and he will reason with you, and if your Sins be as
Scarlet, they shall be as white as Snow; though they be red like Crimson, they
shall be as Wool.

But this Thing of coming to Judgment, is what many who are Lovers of Pleasure
more than God, care not to hear so much of: Isa. 30.10.
But would have (as of old) the Seers to see not; and say to the Prophets,
Prophecy not unto us right Things, speak unto us smooth Things, prophecy
Deceits: But alas! were it to be so, what Benefit could that be to loose and
careless Ones to be dawbed with untempered Mortar? For both the Dawber and the
Dawbed were to suffer together; as we find in the Prophet Ezekiel, the Lord
would accomplish his Wrath upon the Wall, Eze. 13.15.
and upon them that have daubed it with untemper'd Mortar; and will say unto
you, the Wall is no more, neither they that daubed it. Thus we may take notice
how the Hand of God turned in Judgment upon both Prophets and People who were
corrupt. And do any think, that there is a greater Liberty under the
Dispensation of the Gospel allowed to Men, than there was under the Law: Oh!
surely nay, for God is of purer Eyes than to behold Evil with Allowance: For
our dear Lord said, John. 16.7.
he would send the Comforter, the Spirit of Truth to his Disciples; and when he
is come, he will reprove the World of Sin; and are you not reproved? 2 Pet.
1.19.
is not that sure Word of Prophesy declaring to you, what your End must be if
you deny Christ before Men? Oh! will he not deny you before his Father?

But it may be some will say, how do we deny him, since we profess Faith in him
and own and believe he is the Savior of the World? it may be answered, that
notwithstanding you may thus believe, yet by Works you deny him; and so are
making void your Faith which becomes dead through Disobedience, how lively soever
it may have once been. Whilst you remained under true Subjection to the Will of
God, you felt your Faith in Christ to increase; for his divine Virtue filled
your Souls, the Sweetness whereof was such as marred the Glory of this World;
and there was nothing in so much Esteem with you as the pure Enjoyment of that
Life, which our Lord and Savior gives to all them, who truly believe in and
obey him.

And, he did not only come and give us Life, but that we also might know the
Aboundings and daily Increase thereof; which, praised be the Name of Almighty
God, a Remnant do witness; and can truly say, there is nothing they so much
desire as the Continuation of his divine Favor unto them; and in order
thereunto, are carefully watching over themselves, that they may not be
mistaken, or led into Corruption; and are diligently coming to the Light, John.
3.21.
to examine every Thought, Word and Action; that so their Deeds may be made
manifest, John. 15.5.
that they are wrought in God. Oh! these are the Living Branches, that abide in
the holy Vine, and are daily supplied with Life and Virtue from that
never-failing Root, which enableth them, Day by Day, to bring forth such
Fruits, as renders them truly acceptable to God; which those, that abide not in
him, cannot do.

For, John. 15.4.10.
said Christ, the Branch cannot bear Fruit of itself, except it abide in the
Vine; no more can ye, except ye abide in me; and if (said he) ye keep my
Commandments, ye shall abide in my Love; but such as are yielding to Pride,
Drunkenness, Covetousness, Whispering, Backbiting, etc. are not keeping his
Commandments, and so are depriving themselves of his Love. And what greater
Injury can any one do himself, than to deprive himself of the Love and Favor
of God? Sure nothing can exceed it. Therefore, says every faithful and upright
One to the Lord, whatever low or worldly Enjoyments thou feast meet to deprive
me of, Oh! let me not be deprived of the inward Influences of the Virtues of
thy divine Love: For what is this World, or all the Glory and Friendship
thereof? it is as nothing to the true Followers of Jesus Christ, whose Love and
Delight is placed in the Lord. And as the Mind is stayed on him, Isa. 26.3.
he will keep such in perfect Peace, and make his abode with them. And whilst
he in his great Wisdom and Power, does measurably reside, and take up his Abode
in us, our Hearts are filled with pure Zeal, such as is consistent with true
Knowledge; in which, those who enjoy it are led in all Things agreeable to the
Will of God: And what they do tends to his Glory: Being careful to discharge
themselves of what they know is their Duty, and great is, and will be, the
Peace that rests upon the Souls of such, notwithstanding the many hard
Reflections which may be cast upon them, by such whose loose and libertine
Behavior they have reproved and testified against; which with some, is
Provocation enough, to abuse and bespatter, if possible, such of the Lord's
faithful Servants, who cannot wink, or connive at Wickedness, let it appear in
whom it will, whether Rich or Poor; but must bear a faithful Testimony against
it.

For although those who walk in the Light, 1 John. 1.6.
have true Fellowship one with another, yet they cannot have Fellowship 2 Cor.
6.14. 15.
with such as walk in Darkness, though they may be making an outward Profession
of the Truth with us, and pretend to believe in the Light, as many in this easy
Summer's Day seem to do. To be called a Quaker is not now attended with so much
Difficulty as it wont to be; People may now go to Meeting without the Hazard of
being sent to Prison, and from the Prison to the Whipping-Post; which was the
Lot of many of our ancient Friends, some of whom did not only suffer many cruel
Beatings, but even Death itself; and all for their Love and Obedience to
Christ, whose Sayings they were fully bent to keep, and to do. And so approved
themselves to be of the Number of those, whom our Lord likened unto a Wiseman
who built Matt. 7.24.
his House upon a Rock; and although the Rain descended, the Floods came, and the
Winds blew, and beat upon that House, it fell not: For it was founded upon a
Rock. And praised be the Name of the Lord, there are yet a Remnant, whose Feet
are fixed on the Holy-Rock, where they stand for the Cause of God, and are
truly concerned, that the Camp of spiritual Israel may be kept clean: Josh. 7.1.
and that no Achan may lodge within it. Therefore they are often making Search,
and hunt out every corrupt Thing; in order that Unrighteousness may not lodge,
or be secretly encouraged among us the Lord's People; knowing that there can be
little room to expect the Church of Christ should flourish, where any thing is
countenanced that is not consistent with the Purity of the Gospel; and
therefore, the faithful Followers of the Lamb, are, as formerly, for having
every thing kept under and destroyed, which is not of God, that so Truth may
still be known to flourish in all who profess it. And that there may be no just
Cause given for People to say, the Quakers are not so strict as they used to
be; but come nearer to them, and can act as they do. For although this may be too
true with respect to some Particulars, yet it is not in the general; for the
same godly Care which rested upon the Hearts of the Faithful formerly, yet
lives and remains upon many to this Day: And they are as zealously concerned to
bear a Testimony against the vain and corrupt Ways of the World, now, as much
as ever: For the Faithful know the Truth is the same it ever was; and that it
allows of no Liberty to commit Unrighteousness.

And yet, notwithstanding all the Labor and Christian Care of the Faithful,
there is (we must allow) too much room for such a Saying, respecting some in
Profession with us, who can shape themselves according to the Company they are
with; when among the Sober and truly Religious, they appear demure, and seem
very careful to use the plain Language; but let them but turn their Backs, as
it were, and the Quaker shall in a Moment be all thrown off; and being in
Company with those who can give Compliments one to another, they are as ready
with them as any of those who were never restricted from, but instructed and
trained up in the Use of them.

But for you who are of the Stock of Friends, to be found in such sort of
Behavior, is ridiculous; and those you are thus imitating, though they may
seem pleased with these Appearances in you, yet behind your Backs make a
Ridicule and Sport of it, and bestow the Title of Bastard Quakers upon you; for
they know it is not consistent with the Quakers Principles to be found in such
sort of Behavior; and could the Parents of some who now practice such Things,
have complied with pulling off the Hat, and with the usual Ceremonies, they had
not suffered so much Cruelty as they did, because for Consciencesake they could
not do it: For the Lord had convinced them of his holy Truth, through which
they saw the Emptiness and Vanity of such kind of Compliments, both in Male and
Female: And that it was not the Spirit of Christ which led into them; but that
they sprung from a proud ambitious Mind in the Creature, which seeks to be
adored and set up. Jam. 4.6.
But God resists the Proud, 1 Pet. 5.5.
and will punish the World for their Evil, Isa. 13.11.
and the Wicked for their Iniquity, and cause the Arrogance of the Proud to
cease, and will lay low the Haughtiness of the Terrible.

Wherefore consider in Time, you who are of the Stock and Offspring of the meek
Followers of holy Jesus, and break off from all such vain Imitations, which
corrupt your Minds, and tend only to please and gratify proud Flesh which is to
be mortified; for it is of the Kingdom of Antichrist, and must be brought down:
And the Day is come, and coming more and more, which the Prophet spoke of, Mal.
4.1.
which shall burn as an Oven, and all the Proud, yea, and all that do wickedly
shall be Stubble; and the Day that comes shall burn them up, faith the Lord of
Hosts, that it shall leave them neither Root nor Branch. And praised be the
great Name of God, a Remnant are brought in a great and good Degree inwardly
and spiritualto experience, that as the Fire in the Oven burns inwardly to the
consuming of all that is Fuel to it, so does the Word of God secretly and
inwardly burn, to the consuming and taking away of both the Root and Branch of
Unrighteousness out of the Hearts of them who are subject to it; and all that
are in good earnest to have a Place among the Sanctified and Redeemed of God,
desire this holy Word and Fire of the Lord may not cease burning in them, until
all be consumed which is not of Christ. And so may be ever more in Substance
than in Show, and to become firmly fixed in the divine Root, and so settled
upon the Foundation of God, that neither things present nor to come, may ever
be able to shatter or move them from the holy Way of the Lord, And doubtless
those who truly Witness such a pure inward Heart-work wrought in them, by the
Power of God; are those that can answer to what the Prophet Isaiah mentioned,
Isa. 33.14. 15.
when he cries out, Who amongst us shall dwell with the devouring Fire? who
amongst us shall dwell with everlasting Burnings? He then proceeds and gives
Account who it is that should be able; it is he that walks righteously, and
speaks uprightly; he that despises the Gain of Oppressions, that shakes his
Hand from holding of Bribes, that stops the Ear from hearing of Blood, and
shuts his Eyes from seeing Evil.

Oh! here the Loose, the Libertine, the cruel and vain unrighteous Men, may see
themselves unable to stand against the mighty Force of the Fire of God's Word,
should it break forth without Mixture of Mercy upon them, by Reason of their
having rejected the Visitation of the Love and Favor of God, and are so averse
to his Call, that instead of Listening thereunto, they are stopping their Ears,
and even shut their Eyes when any Thing from Jesus Christ is tenderly offered
them for their future Good. But let the Enemy whisper to them of something that
is agreeable to their vain Appetite, Oh! how quick the Libertine Person can
hear, and with great Pleasure open his Eyes and look upon Folly and Corruption,
and receive Iniquity with Greediness: But whoever thou art, that thus yield up
thyself to the Government of Satan, and pleads for it, saying, There is nothing
but sweet and delicious Meats, alas! though it may to thy corrupt Mind and
depraved Senses, appear sweet in the Mouth, it will be bitter in the Belly;
there is such a Sting will follow upon all thy sinful Pleasures, which will
never cease from afflicting thee, and as a Corrosive will gnaw upon thy Soul,
and fill thee with continual Pain, and if the Day of God's Mercy shall be near
expired, where then art thou?

Oh! thou poor Soul, whoever thou art, whether high or low, rich or poor, that
art disobedient to Christ, and got from under the Holy Cross, thou art now
rejoicing in that which will procure a bitter Cup for thee, if not timely
repented of: Wherefore all you corrupt and libertine Ones, stand still and
listen to that small but living Voice of Truth in your Hearts; for it is when
the Mind is retired into a degree of Stillness, that a proper Distinction can
be made, between the Voice of Satan, and the Voice of God. And such has been,
and still is, the Piercingness of God's Word in the Soul, that how stout soever
any have been, and though they may have thought nothing should ever bring them
to confess they had done any thing contrary to the Truth, or worthy of Blame,
and so may have braved it out, until Stillness was commanded, and the Voice of
the holy Judge heard, and the true and just Witness having liberty to arise,
will so justly accuse such, as that all their Stoutness will be broke down, and
instead of saying they are not be blame, there will be a Suing for Peace, and
craving Pardon for the many Offenses committed against the Rules and Orders of
the Government of Christ, which had been set up in the Heart.

And such is the Goodness and Mercy of him, the great and holy One, that upon
humble Submission to him, such truly penitent Ones have met with Forgiveness,
and through the Operation of his holy Power in them, have been set free from
their many Corruptions and Defilements, and have then been led to admire the
great Mercy and Goodness of God to them, in that he was mercifully pleased to
bring them to a true Sense of Conviction; and did not in his Displeasure cut
them off.

Oh! faith my Soul, that all such that are now pursuing the Corruptions of
their own Minds, might be thus seized and taken hold of, and timely brought to
see the Want of a Physician; left it should be said to them, Depart from me, I
offered my Help, but ye refused; I told you what the Consequence would be if ye
went on in the Way wherein ye were; but you would have none of my Counsel,
looking upon yourselves whole, and wanting no Physician. Oh! here, a Day of
Distress will come like an armed Man upon those who will not be won upon, or in
any ways hearken to the Voice of the Lord. Ah! methinks, there are many who
must assent to this Truth, and say it is not for want of being called unto,
that we are found pursuing a vicious Life; for that the Lord has often called
immediately by his Spirit, and also by his Ministers and other his faithful
Servants; but Alas! may not such say, we have disregarded both; though we have
at times been a little touched with the heavenly Influences of the divine Mercy
of God, yet, it was to us but as the Seed which fell on the Highway Ground;
for the Enemy's Inticements were so prevalent in us, that those tender
Visitations and inward Touches of the Love and Favor of God, we were soon
deprived of; and so fell from the Appearance of Grace, into Wantonness again,
by which our Hearts are become hardened. This is undoubtedly true, for by
frequent neglecting the Visitations of the Holy One, Men may at last be so left
to themselves, as to be locked up in such a State of Death and often concerned
for; that as ye have entered into the Way and Path of Life, you may be
preserved therein, and feel your growth to be in Christ the Living Vine; John
15.
and where that is witnessed, the good Fruits are not wanting: For whoever
grows in Christ, grows in all Holiness of Life; for what is received from him,
is of a holy, pure and divine Nature; purging to the purifying of the
Consciences of Heb. 9.14.
them that believe. And makes of such who once were Sinners to become Saints.
And they who were once Blind have by believing in him received Sight, and given
to look into the Mystery of the Kingdom of God, in which his Glory is beheld,
the least Glimpse whereof tends to mar all the Glory of Satan's been preserved
and upheld, to the Praises and Glory of God; and by him made as the Salt of the
Earth; for being filled with the Life and Virtue of Christ, and standing singly
devoted to the Service of God, such have been, and diverse yet are, made
eminently serviceable in his Hand, to reach to the divine Witness in others;
who through the Operation of the holy Measure of Life, have been brought to
believe in Christ, and to become subject to the Government of his Spirit, and
so have had Right to call him Lord and Master, by Reason they are subject to
his Commands, and in all things seek to honor him, and living under a pure
Sense of the Mercy of God to them, in that whilst they were Transgressors, and
even Enemies to his Rule and Government, he was pleased to stretch forth his
Hand of Love and Mercy, and make bare the Arm of his Salvation, whereby they
now feel themselves set in a good Degree of Liberty from their old Master,
whose Aim and Design was to have kept them in Bondage, and so to have cut them
off from Happiness, or having any Place in the Kingdom of God's Glory.

Oh! let me now say to all you who have thus seen what the Lord can do for them
that believe in him, has not he brought you out of Egypt spiritually? And
although you may sometimes have apprehended that the Enemy was pursuing you, and
the Sea before you, which brought you under doubtful Apprehensions, and filled
you with a Fear of being carried back into the old miserable State again; yet
having in the midst of this, humbly besought the Lord, he has arisen and made
way for you through the various Difficultys which attended you in the Course of
your Pilgrimage and Progress Sion-wards. So that there is no Room, or Reason,
for any to sink under Discouragements; Isa. 49.15.
there may be a possibility of a Woman's forgetting her sucking Child, yet it
cannot be, that the Lord should neglect such as are faithfully obeying his
Divine Will.

Therefore, be not faint-hearted, or let in Unbelief, or think that because
some whom you looked upon to be much before you in a spiritual Growth in the
blessed Truth, have yet been overcome by the Enemy: But let me say to such, who
are thus be-Look not out this Way; for here it is, that the subtle Adversary is
endeavoring to undermine your Faith, and so by degrees will deprive you of
what should be your Support, and take from you that holy Shield Ephesians. 6.16.
which is the Quencher of the fiery Darts of the Enemy.

Oh! this has been the Way which the Serpent has beguiled some Innocent Ones,
and brought such a thick Vail of Darkness over them, and bereaved them of the
Light and Life of Christ, that some of these have not stuck to say there is
nothing in Religion, it is but a mere Bubble: And so have given way to the
Gratifying themselves in whatsoever their corrupt Minds led them unto: Such are
fallen under something of the like Condition, with which the Apostle had just
Reason to upbraid the Galatians, where he says, Oh! foolish Galatians, who has
bewitched you, that ye should not obey the Truth; Gal. 3.1, 2, 3.
before whose Eyes Jesus Christ has been evidently set forth crucified amongst
you; this, said he, would I only learn of you, received ye the Spirit by the
Works of the Law, or by the hearing of Faith? are you so folish? having begun
in the Spirit, are ye now made perfect by the Flesh?

Here we may see, how necessary it is to keep a constant Watch upon our Minds,
for notwithstanding a State of Convincement may be come to, and some degree of
the Operation of God's Spirit experienced in the Soul, yet such a State may be
soon lost, through looking out too much at the Failures of others. Had the
Apostles been so feebly affected toward their great Lord and Master, they
might have all fell; for what a Shooking thing it must have appeared to be,
there being but Twelve of them, and that one of them should betray his Lord,
into the Hands of Murderers. But we do not find it had any such ill Effect upon
the other Eleven, as anyways to lessen their faithful regard to Jesus Christ,
their holy Lord. Oh! then why should any whom the Lord has mercifully
favored, with a true Sense and Feeling of his inward and spiritual Appearance,
become offended, so as to disbelieve the Truth, because of the Failures of some
who once may have been zealous Professors thereof? and so to think it a
sufficient Reason to decline having any further Regard to that holy and pure
Principle manifested in your Hearts, and not only so, but become filled with
Prejudice against the whole Society, and are led into a malicious uncharitable
Spirit, to judge all for the Unfaithfulness of some. And as this may have
happened to some, whereby their Faith is overthrown, let all such, as now are
ready at times to look out this Way, take Warning in time, and instead of
looking at that which is attended with so much Prejudice, rather seek and
diligently labor to get your Minds girded with the Girdle of Truth; and
consider, that although one should fall to the right Hand, and another to the
Left, yet God's Way is perfect, even and good; and he that has a single Eye to
it, shall be blessed with the Renewings of the Love of God, upon his Soul; and
he, or she, who holds out to the End, will be saved. It was the unfaithful
Servants slighting and Matt. 25.27.
neglecting the Talent the Lord had mercifully favored him with, which was the
Cause of his being condemned.

Wherefore, whosoever thou art, that have been favored with the least
Appearance of the Light of Christ in thy Soul, be thou faithful to it; it is
given thee to lead thee out of Darkness, and will, as thou follows the pure
Leadings thereof, bring thee where thou may have free Access to Christ, and
through Faith draw of his divine Virtue to thy Soul, in which thy Strength in
him will be so increased, and thy Understanding brightned, that instead of
stumbling at the Missteps of others, thou will see it highly necessary to take
heed to thy own Standing; and being truly subject to the Order and Government
of the Spirit of Christ, instead of turning thy Back on the Truth, thou will
then stand up for it, and in the Authority of God's Power call to those who are
backsliding, and whether they will hear, or not, thou shall find great Peace
and Comfort in the true Discharge of thy Conscience toward thy Brother, whom
thou saw going astray from the Lord.

But instead of this Christian Labor with those thou may see forsaking the
Way of Truth, if thou should suffer the Adversary to get in upon thy Mind,
and fill thy Heart with Prejudice against the honest and faithful Followers of
Christ, here thou will come to sustain an irreparable Loss, by being turned
back into the Wilderness again, where, by reason of Unbelief thou must be left
to perish, as many of the Israelites did, Number. 14.26. 27.
who were Murmurers against God and slighted his Servant Moses.

Wherefore, Oh! Soul, whoever thou art, and who may read these Lines, if
under the like Besetment as above expressed, my Heart is deeply affected for
thee, and my sincere Breathings to God are for thy Preservation. The Lord has
extended of his Goodness to thee in causing his Day of Light and Salvation to
dawn upon thy Soul, and thou have clearly seen in some good Degree, what is
agreeable to the Will and Mind of God, so that there is no room to plead and
say, thou did not know what his Will was. Consider therefore what Christ said
concerning Luke 12.47, 48.
that Servant, who knew his Lord's Will and did it not; he was to be beaten
with many Stripes. But he that knew it not, and committed things worthy of
Stripes, was to be beaten with few Stripes. For unto whomsoever much is given,
Act. 17.30.
of him shall much be required. In the times of Ignorance it is said God winked,
but from those to whom he has given of his good Spirit he is requiring
Obedience, and a strict Conformity to his revealed Will; and such who fall
short therein, may expect to meet with the like Repulse as those
beforementioned, who came to the Door and knocked, saying, Lord, Lord, open
unto us; but he answered and said unto them, Luke 13.25.
I know ye not, whence you are; depart from me all ye Workers of Iniquity.

And here it may be considered, that it was their being found in
Unrighteousness which caused the Door to be shut against them; and although such
may have to say, we have eaten and drank in thy Presence, and thou have taught
in our Streets, yet all this could make no Way for an Entrance, since they had
disobeyed the Teachings of Christ, and were clothed with Unrighteousness. And
we read that no impure, or unholy Thing must enter into the Kingdom of Heaven.

Wherefore, Oh! all ye careless Ones, who now are making Profession of the pure
Truth, but live a Life very contrary thereunto, and so are in Danger of being
shut out from the Mansions of Eternal Glory, (should you be cut off in your
Transgressions) whilst the Lord is pleased to call unto you in his Love, turn
not the deaf Ear unto him, but listen to his Voice; that so ye may be quickened
and made alive thereby, and be raised up out of the State of spiritual Lethargy
wherein you are so stupefied, that it is not easy to make you sensible the Way
wherein you are going is the Way that leads down to Death and Destruction. But
if ye once come to be quickened, and made alive anew; and have a touch of the
Divine Eye Salve from Christ, then shall ye behold that God is full of
Compassion, in that he cut you not off in your Iniquity, but was pleased to
lengthen out the Day of his tender Mercy to you; and as there is a Turning from
your Backslidings, then, as was said to Israel, I will not (said the Lord)
cause mine Jer. 3.12.
Anger to fall upon you, for I am merciful, says the Lord, and I will not keep
Anger forever.

And now, dear Reader, if thou art one who have been a Backslider, here is
Encouragement for thee to come and humble thy self, and freely to acknowledge
before the Lord thy Transgression and Disobedience to him; and as thou comes in
an awful Fear, and makes thy Addresses in Humility of Spirit, the Lord in Mercy
will look down upon thee, and heal thy Backslidings. And that thou may be
thus happily recovered out of an Estate of Unrighteousness, and brought to a
true and solid Settlement in the unchangeable Truth of God, is the Desire of
one that seeks and prays to God for thine, and the Redemption of all
Transgressors out of Sin, through the Faith of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ.

JOHN ESTAUGH.
Haddonfield, the 15th of the 7th Month 1742.
AN EPISTLE FROM JOHN ESTAUGH, To the Quarterly Meeting of Friends, for Newton,
and Salem, in New Jersey.
DEAR Friends, as it has been the Lord's Love which took hold on my Mind, and
drew me forth from you, to visit his People in other Parts, so it is from a
Sense and Feeling of the same heavenly Spring of the Father's Love, in which I
am now drawn toward you, for ye are fresh in my Remembrance, and as at many
other times, so at this time, is my Concern for you, that as God of his
infinite Goodness has been pleased to reach unto you, and by the Shepherd's
Crook of his Love has taken hold, and gathered you near unto himself in some
degree, and has often given you to partake of the Bread and Water of Life,
through the Virtue whereof your Loves were at first raised to him, and ye
filled with heavenly Zeal, and were made willing to leave all for his Sake, and
with the Apostle to esteem Phil. 3.8
the Loss of all things but as Dross or Dung, so you could but win Christ. And
that this heavenly Mind may grow and increase in you, is what I am often
concerned for; that as ye have entered into the Way and Path of Life, you may
be preserved therein, and feel your growth to be in Christ the Living Vine;
John 15.
and where that is witnessed, the good Fruits are not wanting: For whoever
grows in Christ, grows in all Holiness of Life; for what is received from him,
is of a holy, pure and divine Nature; purging to the purifying of the
Consciences of Heb. 9.14.
them that believe. And makes of such who once were Sinners to become Saints.
And they who were once Blind have by believing in him received Sight, and given
to look into the Mystery of the Kingdom of God, in which his Glory is beheld,
the least Glimpse whereof tends to mar all the Glory of Satan's Kingdom, in
them who are thus favored with the Dawnings of the Day of God's merciful
Visitation upon their Souls. With which, my dear Friends, you have been
favored, and largely given to partake thereof, 1 Cor. 12.12.
with many others, and by the one Spirit have been baptized together as into
one Body: 1 Cor. 10.4.
And have drank at the one Heavenly Divine Spring, and united together in that
pure Love which flows from God, through Christ, to true Believers; and great was
that Care which came upon you, for the Maintaining of that Love and Unity which
Truth had brought you into; and when anything appeared, which struck thereat,
how readily did you then join Hand in Hand, to get that cast out from amongst
you, which had so ill a Tendency in it. And God, who delights to behold his
Children united together in his Love, failed not to bless your Endeavors.

And dear Friends, if the same Care be continued, you will then feel the Lord will
not be wanting to support you in what tends to his Honor; Psalm. 34.15.
for his Eyes are upon the Righteous, and his Ears are open to their Cry. And
for their Help he will arise, and what is wrong must be judged down by him.
Therefore, let not any give Way to favor any thing which is from under the
Cross of Christ, for those who would favor the Cause of such as are not
willing to bear the Yoke, will thereby hurt themselves, and bring a Vail of
Darkness over their own Understandings, and if Darkness prevails, Love will wax
cold to Brethren, and that Care for maintaining Love and Unity will be lost,
and instead thereof, Bitterness gets up, and hard Speeches are uttered, and
grievous Reflections past on them who cannot give Way for any thing to be
countenanced or encouraged in the Church of Christ, but what is consistent with
his Will whose dwelling is in Holiness, Hab. 1.13.
and is of purer Eyes, than to behold any Evil with Allowance.

Wherefore, my dearly beloved Friends, be all careful to keep a strict Watch,
each over his own Mind; that nothing that is wrong may get up, to harden your
Hearts or darken any one's Understanding which God has opened; and is the
Watch be well kept up at home, and no evil thing encouraged there, then, such
will become more and more in the Lord's Hand, as proper Instruments to watch
over others, and to lend a helping Hand unto them who stand in need. And
indeed, he that would help another out of the Mire, must first get out himself,
and be washed from his own Defilements, before he can be helpful in so good a
Work; for should Help be offered from such an one, who has not passed under
the refining Power and mortifying Word of God, it might well be rejected, and
turned back again, and to him said, Oh! thou deceitful Hypocrite, first get a
clean Heart created in thyself, before thou offers Help to me. Psalm. 50.16. 17,
etc.
And God faith to the wicked, what have thou to do to declare my Statutes, or
that thou should take my Covenant in thy Mouth? seeing thou hate Instruction
and casts my Words behind thee; when thou saw a Thief then thou
consentedst with him, and have been Partaker with Adulterers. And dear Friends,
seeing there were such in many Generations that are past, who did presume to
appear as Servants of God, and were not truly such, we need not wonder if there
be some such in this Day; for there is the same old Deceiver, Job 1.7.2.2.
that is going about seeking whom he can devour, and he is not without his
wicked and evil Instruments, by whom he is working: And as is their Master, so
are they, full of Subtilty, and often under a seeming Show of Goodness, and a
feigned Humility, gain upon the Minds of some, and get a Place in their
Affections; which being once fixed is hard to move; and so it proves, many
times, of ill Consequence, when such an One comes to be discovered, and judged
to be no other than a Deceiver.

Wherefore, Dear Friends, in order that That and all other Dangers may be
avoided, let every one keep close to the Gift and Measure of Christ's Spirit in
himself, against which no Device or Enchantment of the Enemy can ever prevail:
For if we are deceived, it is for want of keeping a single Eye to our holy and
heavenly Guide, Christ Jesus; to whom, for all the Mercies we enjoy, be Glory
and Praise for ever.

And, dear Friends, as to my Travels, I may with Comfort say, the Lord has
been with me in this my Service and Labor of Love to his People, so that my
Way has been made easy, and so far as have felt it opened, I have answered; and
now finding my self free and clear of that Concern, which lay as a Weight on my
Mind, and, being at Liberty, think the Time long, till I am again with you. And
if this Opportunity had happened the Beginning of last Month, I should have
came this Fall: But the Winter is now too near to attempt it: I have therefore
dropped the Thoughts of coming until Spring. My dear Wife gives her dear Love to
you all, and through Mercy we are in a good State of Health, praised be the
Lord. And may it please him, our heavenly Father, to protect and preserve us
all in the Way and Path of Life, unto the End of our Time here, and at last
give us an Entrance into the Kingdom of eternal Glory, is the sincere Desire
and Prayer of your truly concerned

Friend, JOHN ESTAUGH.
London, the 20th of the 7th Mon. 1722.
AN EPISTLE FROM JOHN ESTAUGH, To the little and new-gathered Flock of Christ
in the Island of Tortola, Greeting.
DEAR and welbeloved Friends, having lately been favored with the Perusal of a
Copy of a Letter from Friend Pickering, Governor of the said Island, to Friends
at Philadelphia, in which is set forth the great Goodness of God unto you, and
that through the Operation of his divine Power, diverse are not only brought to
confess, but truly to obey the Truth; taking up the Cross, and following our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ; and thereby a daily Growth is witnessed; which
Account is Joy and Rejoicing to me and many more.

Soon after, this good Account was received, our much esteemed and well beloved
Friend, Thomas Chalkley, was in the Love of God drawn to visit you, and after
his Arrival there, he gives an Account to his Wife, not only of his kind
Reception, but also confirms the above good Account: And likewise takes notice,
how the Lord had blessed his Labor of Love, and made his Visit truly
beneficial to you, which affords great Comfort to all faithful Friends, who
desire the Prosperity of God's holy Truth. And I doubt not, but it was a Time
of Comfort and spiritual Joy with you, that you were favored with the Company
and Benefit of the Labor of one of the faithful Ministers of the Gospel of
Christ. But we hear, that the Lord saw meet in his Wisdom to take this worthy
Instrument to himself, and though it may to you, and us, look as a Loss to the
Church, yet as it was consistent with his divine Will that it should be so, it
becomes us to be easy and content therewith, and now rather to look to our own
standing, that we may through Faith and true Obedience maintain a Hold and
Interest in Christ: So shall we have truly to experience what the Apostle gave
Testimony 1 Cor. 12.12.
of, which is, that by one Spirit, said he, are we all baptized into one Body,
whether we be Jews or Gentiles; whether we be Bond or Free; and have been made
to drink into one Spirit, and being thus united into one Body, of which Christ
is Head, we cannot but have a Spiritual Sense, and Feeling of each other, though
outwardly Strangers. And it is in the spiritual Sense that the true Children
and Servants of God, both know and are well known one to another; and can
symphathize together when under Affliction; and also rejoice together, when any
Part of the Body is favored with the Extendings and holy sweet In-flowings, of
the Divine Virtue of Christ. In the Reading of the above Accounts, my Heart was
deeply affected with a Sense of the great and wonderful Loving Kindness of God
unto you, in that he has caused his great Day of Light, Life and Salvation to
break forth unto you, and through the Comings-up of the Life and Virtue of
Truth, into Dominion in your Souls, the Glory and Gaiety of this World, with
all its sinful Delights, are now become marred in your Sight; and to be
accounted Fools for Christ's sake is your Choice, rather than to enjoy the
Pleasures of Sin which are but for a Season, and will come to an end; but leave
a Sting behind, upon the Souls of them, who run out the whole Time of their
Lives in Sin, and will not regard the Invitation of Christ.

But, praised be his holy Name, he has highly favored you, in that he has
not only called to you, but even taken you as by the Hand, and led ye out of
Babylon, and as with David, plucked your Feet out of the Mire and Clay, Psalm.
40.2.
and has set them upon the Rock where there is Safety. But yet, my dear and
tender Friends, it will be well for you to take heed to your Standing, keeping
a constant Watch, lest the subtle Adversary come upon you at an unawares, and
through some Stratagem or another get in upon your Minds, and thereby draw by
Degrees a Cloud of Darkness over the Eye of your Understandings, which God has
opened; whereby you have not only been given to see, the vile Ways and Works of
Satan; but also, in the Name of Holy Jesus to testify against him, and all his
corrupt and defiled Ways. But, Beloved, as you have thus broke off from him, by
denying his Kingdom and Government, he will be laying wait to overset, if
possible, the Work of God, in the Hearts of Believers in Christ. And where
gross Sins will not be received, he then will assume another Shape. For the
Apostle Paul writing to the Corinthians, signifys, Satan was transformed into
an Angel of 2 Cor. 11.14.
Light, in which false Appearance, he has sometimes deceived some unwary and
young convinced Ones, filling them with strange Notions and Opinions, that were
contrary to the Gospel of Christ, and so, they have not only suffered Loss
thereby, but have likewise brought great Trouble upon the Church, by causing
Divisions and running into Heats and Parties.

But, my dear and tender Friends, I mention not this to discourage you, but
that ye may be the more put upon you. Guard, and as you faithfully abide in the
Light of Christ, you will be able to discern Satan in all his Transformations,
and in the Authority of God's Power to stand against him, and keep him out; and
so disappoint him of breaking that Peace, Love, and Concord, which you now have
and enjoy in the pure Truth of God: And so can join with David, and from true
Experience say, Psalm. 133.1.
behold how good and pleasant a Thing it is, for Brethren to dwell together in
Unity! Psalm. 133, 2.
It is, said David, like the precious Ointment upon the Head, that ran down
upon the Beard, even Aaron's Beard, that went down to the Skirts of his
Garments; and as the Dew of Hermon, Psalm. 133.3.
and as the Dew that descended upon the Mountains of Zion; for, said he, there
the Lord commanded the Blessing, even Life forevermore. John. 13.34, 35.
And Christ said to the Believers, a new Commandment I give unto you, that you
love one another, as I have loved you, that you also love one another; and
then, said he, by this shall all Men know that ye are my Disciples, if you have
Love one to another. And John declared, 1 John. 1.5.
that God is Light, and in him is no Darkness at all; and, said he, if we walk
in the Light, as he is in the Light, we have Fellowship one wit another, and
the Blood of Jesus Christ, his Son, cleanses us from all Sin. And these are
true Sheep of the good Shepherd; John. 10.4.
and when he puts forth his own Sheep, he goes before them; and the Sheep
follow him, for they know his Voice, and a Stranger will they not follow, but
will flee from him; John. 10.5.
for, said our Lord, they know not the Voice of Strangers. And, said David, I
have set the Lord always before me, because he is at my Right Hand, I shall not
be moved.

Oh! my beloved Friends, whatsoever your Trials or Besetments may happen to be,
here will be your Safety, in keeping your Minds purely staid upon the Lord, and
waiting to feel your spiritual Strength renewed. For though its said the Youth
shall faint Isa. 40.30, 31.
and be weary, and the young Men shall utterly fall; yet they who wait upon the
Lord shall renew their Strength; they shall mount up, says the Prophet Isaiah,
with Wings as Eagles, they shall run and not be weary, and they shall walk and
not faint. And these as living Branches abiding John. 15.1. etc.
in the Vine, they feel daily Supply from the Root. For, said our Lord, as the
Branch cannot bear Fruit of itself, except it abide in the Vine, no more can
you, except you abide in me, and my Words abide in you.

And therefore, Oh ye tender and beloved Ones of Christ, take ye heed to the
pure Word of God, which, is quick and powerful, and sharper (says the Apostle
Paul) than any twoedged Heb. 4.12.
Sword, piercing even to the dividing asunder of Soul and Spirit, and of the
Joints and Marrow, and is a Discerner of the Thoughts and Intents of the Heart,
Heb. 4.13.
neither, said he, is there any Creature that is not manifest in his Sight; but
all Things are naked and opened to the Eyes of him with whom we have to do. 2
Pet. 1.19.
This also, is that Word of Prophecy which Peter recommended to the Believers,
to take heed unto, as unto a Light that shines in a dark Place, until the Day
dawn, and and the Day Star arise in your Hearts; and this is what, I believe,
you have had living Experience of; and can now say, though for a Time things
appeared but darkly; yet, as you had Faith in that small Appearance, and did
wait in hope the Lord would make farther Discoveries to you, the merciful God
has looked down upon you, and has caused the Sun of Righteousness to arise
upon you, by whom all Mists are taken away: And the true Light shining, you see
things clearly; and being certainly assured of the Way of God, you are led to
bear Testimony to the Truth, and to own and acknowledge with John. 4.29.
the Samaritan Woman, Christ has told you all that ever you have done. And, as
he had convinced and satisfied her, what the true Worship of God is, so he has
let you see, it is not a bare outside Performance, but an inward and spiritual
one, which is aceptable to God. And being convinced that the Father seeks
such to John. 4.24.
worship him, who worship him in Spirit and in Truth, and as the Way of God was
so clearly cast up before you, ye found it unsafe to abide with those who hold
a Form of Tim. 23.5.
Godliness, but deny the Power thereof; So have fallen in with the Apostle's
Advice, which was, to turn away from such.

And as it has pleased Almighty God thus to favor you, with a true and right
Beginning, that you may be preserved in true Humility, having at all times a
pure and single Regard to the Leadings of his Romans 8.38, 39.
Spirit, so that as the Apostle said, neither Death nor Life nor Angels, nor
Principalities nor Powers, nor Things present, nor Things to come, nor Height
nor Depth, nor any other Creature, shall be able to separate you from the Love
of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord, is the Desire and Prayer, of your
Friend and Brother in the unchangeable Truth of God.

The 15th of the ast Month 1741, 2. JOHN ESTAUGH.
P. S. Dear Friends, if either of you can find Freedom to write, it will be
very acceptable to me to hear that the blessed Truth of Christ prospers among
you.



A SECOND EPISTLE Prepared by JOHN ESTAUGH, for Friends at Tortola, but not
sent.
DEAR Friends, I have received by our worthy Friend, William Thomas, three
Letters, viz. one from my esteemed Friend John Pickering, one from Jeremiah
Martin, and one from Fat-Hog Bay signed by nine Friends, all which are very
kindly received, and truly acceptable to me; and by them I understand, you had
received my Epistle sent via Antigua, directed to our aforesaid Friend J.
Pickering; and by him I understand, it was read at the Close of a public
Meeting, and was to the Edification and Comfort of those present, which I am
glad of, and also to hear, that our heavenly Father was so graciously pleased
at the Reading thereof, to favor you, with the Renewings of his Divine
Goodness, in opening the free Spring of Life amongst you, so that the Thirsty
in Israel were refreshed, and could sing to the holy Rock, and rejoice in the
God of their Salvation; and being afresh baptized and influenced with a renewed
Sense of the Life and Virtue of Truth, were therein and thereby led (I doubt
not) to renew your Covenants with the Lord, and to take up fresh Resolutions,
and to hope, through Divine Assistance, ye should never shrink, or turn your
Backs of what the Lord has shown, or manifested to you, to be your Duties to
him; but were ready to conclude, with good old Joshua, Jos. 24.15.
let others Choice be as it will, as for you, ye will serve the Lord.

And now, Oh! ye tender and beloved Ones of Christ Jesus, in order that these
pious and godly Resolutions may be kept to, keep ye under a close and strict
religious Exercise, waiting to feel the Operation of the holy Power of God in
your Hearts, and then in his divine Light, you shall not only see your own
Weakness, but for your Comfort, shall also behold Christ, on whom help is laid:
And, as he told the Believers of old, so his Children and faithful Servants at
this Day, find, that without him, they cannot do any thing which will tend to
God's Glory, John. 15.5
or to the Peace and Happiness of themselves; and therefore under a true Sense
of their own Feebleness, such as these, by the Spirit of Christ, are rightly
led and guided into a right Prayer to God for daily Bread. And as Bread natural
is to the natural Man called the Staff of Life, or is that on which the natural
Life depends, so long as the Lord in his divine Wisdom may seem meet to allow a
Being here, (For this outward Bread cannot be any other ways serviceable to
that noble Part, the Soul in Man, than to support the outward Tabernacle, in
which she is allowed a Being for a little Space) so the Bread, the Soul is to
live upon, and which is to be daily sought and prayed for, John 6.51. etc.
is the living Bread, which comes down from God out of Heaven: And is the holy
Staff of Life, whereon every true Member in the Church of Christ, may safely
trust and lean upon, without the least Danger of being deceived by it; nor has
it ever been known to fail any, though the least of the Servants of God, who has
stood up faithfully for the Cause of the holy Truth, choosing to suffer the
greatest Cruelties that Man could inflict upon them, rather than to deny Christ.

Oh! it was this divine Power from God, in and by which our ancient and worthy
Friends were supported in the first Appearance in the dark World: and as the
Work, they were called to, was very great, the Lord did in Proportion thereunto
fit them with Life and Power, and in the Name, and with Authority of the King
of Kings, and Lord of Heaven and the whole Earth, they were led to proclaim the
Rev. 17.3.4.5.
Downfall of the great Whore, and false Church, which John saw clothed with
Scarlet and Purple, and sitting upon the Scarlet-covered Beast, having a Golden
Cup in her Hand, full of Abominations and Filthiness of her Fornication; and
upon her Forehead was a Name written, Mystery, Babylon the Great, the Mother of
Harlots, and Abominations of the Earth. Rev. 6. etc
And, said John, I saw the Woman drunk with the Blood of the Saints, and with
the Blood of the Martyrs of Jesus. But as soon as those faithful Servants of
Christ, began to open their Commission, and in the Name of their Master to call
the Children of Men to forsake her dark, sinful and adulterous Ways, she soon
appeared full of Rage, and caused such of her Servants, as got their Wealth and
Riches by trading and dealing with her, to bestir themselves, inventing many
barbarous and cruel Ways to afflict the faithful Servants and Messengers of
Christ, imagining thereby to have extinguished and hindered the pure Gospel
Light from shining; and in order thereunto cast many of the Lord's Servants
into Prison, and dark nasty Dungeons, having first slashed and cut their tender
Bodies, and stripped them of their Goods; banished Husband from Wife, and Wife
from Husband, and all for their faithful Obedience to Christ; But all this was
not able to discourage those truly begotten and faithful Servants of God; for
being filled with the divine Life of Jesus they bore all things with Meekness;
submitting their Cause to God: And were not at all deterred, or any ways
affrighted, or put by their Duty and Obedience to Christ: But faithfully
followed him, and his Regard was to them; and in the Enjoyment of his divine
Love and Life, could in the Prison and dark Dungeons sound forth living Praises
to the most high God, esteeming it as a Blessing that they were thought worthy
to suffer for Christ's sake; and when the Lord had let their cruel Prosecutors
see, that it was not in their Power to stop his glorious Work, he then damped
their hot and fiery Day of Persecution, and gave Rest and Ease to his faithful
Servants.

And now, you tender and beloved ones, if it should be your Lots to be in some
things tried a little for Christ's sake, yet be not discouraged, but stand
faithful to your great Lord and Master, who is still as able as ever to carry
on the Work which he has begun, and will not fail to relieve and comfort his
humble and faithful Followers, who are cheerfully given up to be ordered and
directed so as may be consistent to his Divine Will: And may the Lord be with
you all, and increase your Faith and Hope in him, is the Desire and Prayer of
your sincere Friend, who in the Love of God tenderly salutes you, and bids you,
in the Lord, farewell.

JOHN ESTAUGH.
Haddonfield, the 11th of the 7th Month, 42.
THE END.

