Just arrived from LONDON, For the ENTERTAINMENT of the CURIOUS and OTHERS, And
is now to be SEEN, by Six or more, in a large commodious ROOM, at the House of
Mr. Vidal, in Second-Street; The Solar or Camera Obscura MICROSCOPE, INVENTED
by the Ingenious Dr. LIBERKHUN.
IT is the most Entertaining of any MICROSCOPE whatsoever, and magnifies
Objects to a most surprising Degree. The Animalculae in several Sorts of
Fluids, with many other living and dead Objects, too tedious to mention, will
be shown most incredibly magnified, at the same Time distinct; also the
Circulation of the Blood in Frog's Foot, a Fish's Tail, also in a Flea, and
Louse, where you discover the Pulse of the Heart, the moving of the Bowels, the
Veins and Arteries, and many small Insects, that one Thousand of them will not
exceed the Bigness of a Grain of Sand; with their Young in them; ^^ls in Paste,
which have given a general Satisfaction to all that ever saw them. This
Curiosity was never shown by any Person that ever traveled. Price Eighteen
Pence.

Each Seed includes a Plant, that Plant, again
Has other Seeds, which other Plants contain:
These other Plants have all their Seeds, and those,
More Plants again, successively enclose.
Thus, every single Berry that we find
Has, really, in itself, whole Forests of its kind.
Empire and Wealth one Acorn may dispense
By Fleets to sail a Thousand Ages hence.
Each Myrtle Seed includes a Thousand Groves,
Where future Bards may warble forth their Loves:
So Adam's Loins contained his large Posterity,
All People that have been, and all that ever shall be.
Amazing Thought! what Mortal can conceive
Such wondrous Smallness! -- yet, we must believe
What Reason tells: for Reason's piercing Eye
Discerns those Truths our Senses cannot descry.
Note, The MICROSCOPE may be seen at Gentlemen's Houses, giving half an Hour's
Notice, the Sun permitting only from Ten in the Morning to Four in the
Afternoon, in my Room.

THE unparalled MUSICAL CLOCK, made by that great Master of Machinery DAVID
LOCKWOOD: This great Curiosity performs by Springs only; it is a Machine
incomparable in its Kind; it excels all others in the Beauty of its Structure;
is most Entertaining in its Music; and plays the choicest Airs from the most
celebrated Operas, with the greatest Nicety and Exactness: It performs with
beautiful Graces, ingeniously and variously intermixed, the French Horn Pieces,
performed upon the Organ, German, and Common Flute, Flageolet, etc. as
Sonata's, Concerto's, Marches, Minuets, Jiggs, and Scot Aira, composed by
Corelli, Alberoni, Mr. Handel, and other great and eminent Masters of Music.
Price Eighteen Pence.

This beautiful Curiosity has been shown twice before the KING, in his Royal
Palace at St. James's, where His Majesty was pleased to make an Observation on
the Excellence of its Beauty, and declared, He thought it the Wonder of this
Age. It is allowed by all who have seen it, to be more worthy to adorn a King's
Palace than of being exposed for a common Sight.

N. B. This surprising Piece of Machinery has given such general Satisfaction
to the Lovers of Art and Ingenuity, that the Nobility are continually
commanding it to their Seats to satisfy their Curiosity, and is to be SOLD by
the Owner EDMUND RISINO.

The Inside of this Machine may be viewed by Gentlemen and Ladies, and is to be
seen from Eight in the Morning till Eight at Night.

For the Evening Diversion,

THE Clock and Camera Obscura, with the Battle of Dettingen, and several
Italian Landskips, representing Armies, both Horse and Foot, going through
their Exercise at the Word of Command: Likewise Views of Ships fighting at Sea,
with the Fish playing above Water, and Variety of Country Dances by Figures,
six or eight Foot high, performed in a beautiful Manner by the Camera Obscura.
This Curiosity is esteemed one of the best Pieces of Painting of the Kind that
ever was brought from Italy.

Fore SEAT Two Shillings. Second Ditto One Shilling. To begin at Seven a Clock.


