GOD Glorious IN THE Scenes of the Winter. A SERMON Preached at BOSTON.
December 23. 1744.

By Mr. BYLES.

John x. 22, 23. It was Winter. And JESUS walked in the Temple.

BOSTON: Printed by B. GREEN and Company for D. GOOKIN, over against the old
South Meeting House. 1744.

GOD Glorious IN THE Scenes of the Winter.
PSALM cxlvii. 16, 17. He gives Snow like Wool; he scatters the hoar Frost
like Ashes.

He casts forth his Ice like Morsels; Who can stand before his Cold?


THE Glories of God the Creator, are every where seen in his Works, and
preached in his Word. Look where we will in his World, we see them; and attend
where we will to his Word, and we hear them. The holy Scriptures begin with the
Declaration, That In the Beginning God created the Heavens and the Earth; and
the Account is carried on, and interspersed through all the sacred Pages. The
Honors of God are here celebrated, in his Power and Sovereignty, and creating
Attributes. Psalm. lxxiv. 16, 17. The Day is thine, the Night also is thine:
Thou have prepared the Light and the Sun: Thou have set all the Borders of the
Earth: Thou have made the Summer and the Winter. The great Frame of Nature is
the Work of God: He orders all the Motions of Nature, and is himself the first
Mover. He is the Owner and Proprietor of Nature then; and the Day and Night,
the Light and Sun, the Summer and Winter are his.

But it is the Winter Scene that now opens. And the Skies and the Earth around,
and the sacred Volume before us unite to claim our Honors to the God of Glory,
as he appears grand at the Head of this Part of Nature and Providence, He
sends forth his Commandment upon Earth; his Word runs very swiftly. He
gives Snow like Wool; he scatters the Hoar-frost like Ashes. He casts
forth his Ice like Morsels; who can stand before his Cold?

The Theme before us is, GOD is adorable in the Scenes of the Winter. How does
it appear? And what Evidence can we bring for it? It is proved every Way: And
Conviction pours in upon us from all Quarters. He has created it; He has
established it; He still continues to bring it upon the Earth; He gives us the
Sensation of it; a Capacity to feel it, in the Disposition of our Bodily
Organs: And he acts, and operates in all the second Causes, that conspire to
form it.

1. He has created it. The Cold it self is a Creature of God. Some have argued
Cold to be only the Privation of Heat, as Darkness is only the Privation of
Light. But even in this Sense, God who forms the Heat and the Light, is the
Author of the Cold and the Darkness. He lays his Claim, in the Letter as well
as the Metaphor, I form the Light: I create Darkness. But there is something
further in the Nature and Philosophy of Cold, than a bare Privation. A
Nonentity and Cold one would think were different. A cold Nothing were an
absurd sort of Curiosity. Cold has really something material in its Nature; and
it is not barely the Privation of Heat. The God of Nature has filled the Air
with the Nitre, which so penetrates the Pores, and even cuts the Skin, in the
bleak Winds of the Winter. By this he swells and fixes the frozen Water, and
binds the Sea and Rivers in Fetters of Ice, bringing the Globules of the Fluid
into that Attraction which we call Cohesion. He created the Causes of the Cold.

2. He has established the Winter. He formed all the Causes, and contrived all
the Laws of it: And he has proclaimed the Laws, and keeps them in Force and
Authority. Genesis viii. 21, 22. The Lord said, While the Earth remains, Seed
time and Harvest, and Cold and Heat, and Summer and Winter, and Day and Night
shall not cease. We know not how far the Flood it self contributed to this
Inequality of Seasons, and brought the Sun and Earth to slant to one another,
as we find they now do: But this we know, that at the Flood the Law of Summer
and Winter, was confirmed and established.

3. It Is he who still continues to bring it upon the Earth. He keeps up the
Performance of his own Laws, and leads on the Summer and Winter in their
perpetual Circle. The Wheels of Nature would stand still, were it not for his
powerful and unerring Hand: But having first communicated Motion to them, he
maintains it, and keeps them rolling to this Day. The steady Return of the
annual Cold, is a Proof that there is some intelligent Agent at work, to bring
it so orderly and usefully onward. The whole Voice of modern Philosophy, is
aloud for this, that the Motion of the heavenly Globes is owing to the
perpetual Energy of God. It is demonstrable from Principles of Nature, that
should the great God spend his Power one Moment, all the Planets would leave
the Sun, and scatter through Immensity. Summer and Winter would cease in a
Moment, and the Inhabitants of the Earth would wonder to see the Sun lessen so
fast to them, as our Globe, shot off in a right Line, into eternal Cold and
Darkness. What shall I say! Should the great God withdraw his Operations, we
should no more have the Sun go off and return as the Cause of Winter and
Summer: But on the contrary, the Earth and Sun would separate forever, and
retire to further and further Distances in the immense Space, to all Eternity.
God, then, who still keeps the Sun, (to speak in the Language of the Vulgar) in
its Circle, and makes it approach and retire; makes it shine aslant, or direct,
is the Author of the Summer and the Winter. He made the Winter: For he is still
forever at Work to bring it on us. Not only did he create it at first; and
establish it by a stated Law; but he stills puts this Law in Execution. He
makes the Winter: He made This Winter. He does not leave the Year to run Riot;
but still orders and produces and changes all the Seasons.

4. He has made the Power in us to perceive the Scenes of Winter. He has given
us the Faculties of Sensation, to hear the Tempests roar, to see the Snows
descend, and to feel the chill and cutting Blasts. To what Purpose would the
material Scenes of the Winter be, if our Organs were not disposed and adapted
to perceive them? Nay, if our Souls were not furnished with a Power of forming
Ideas from them, different from what are in the Objects themselves? There is,
in our Perceptions of Cold and Heat, no Connection between the material Object,
and the conceived Idea, but the unaccountable Will of God. He it is, who has
made the Snow, and the Winds, and the Cold; and he it is that gives us the
Power to perceive them. He has filled the Winter Sky with the pointed Frost,
and impregnated it with the Particles of Nitre: And he has given us the Power
to apprehend Cold, from these different Causes. We depend upon him to keep
these Senses in Exercise; for it is the continual Exertion of his Power by
which they act. Our Senses are the Springs of these Perceptions; and in this
Sense, All our Springs are in him. He keeps them acting, as he at first
awakened them in us. He ranged and modified our Nerves; he filled them with the
animal Spirits; he formed the Imagination and Fancy in us, by a Combination of
all which, we feel the Cold, and shudder at the keen Winter. He first contrived
the small pointed Matter, and then he contrived our Pores to receive these
little Particles; then he formed our animal Spirits to convey the Sensation to
our Brain; and after all he lighted up the Imagination, to perceive the Idea,
and pronounce upon it, Cold. Thus is the great God adorable in the Winter. It Is
all his strange Work, within us, and without us. It Is intricate, and
mysterious! We know but Part of his Ways; nor can we find them out unto
Perfection. We amuse our selves, and wonder, and adore. Our Philosophy reaches
a little Way: And where that ceases, our Devotion goes on, and our Ascription
to God must still be, It Is His Ice, it is His Cold.

5. He has made all those Things which unite to form the Winter. The Cold, the
Snow, the Winds, the Frost and Ice, the Nitre in the Air, the Obliquity of the
Sun, and all the shivering Attendants of the Winter, are the Productions of his
Hand. For he says to the Snow, be thou on the Earth, -- Job xxxvii. 6, -- 10.
It Is all ascribed to God, to the Voice of God, to the Breath of God. The Snow
falls, and the Ice thickens at his great Command: And by his Cold he seals up
the Hand of every Man, and puts a Stop to his Work. As soon as ever his Word is
given, all the Terrors of the bleak Winter, collect and muster together. He
sends forth his Commandment upon Earth, his Word runs very swiftly: Swift
as his Command, his Creation obeys him, and performs his sovereign Order. He
bids his Wind blow, and the stormy Wind fulfills his Word. It rushes out, and
roars aloud; it blusters and sweeps the Earth, and battles in the Air; it
raises the Ocean, tosses up the Billows in white Foam, and dashes Wave upon
Wave, and Cloud upon Cloud. If he enlarges his Commission, it roots up Forests,
and a whole Grove shall fly before it is Rage; and Cities shall be overturned
and laid waste in an Instant. In all this, the lawless Tumult of the Winds is
strictly governed by God: They do but blow his Praises, as with the Sound of a
Trumpet. When he Commands, they retire, and are hush; a profund Calm ensues;
not a Whisper, not a Breath of Air moves a Sprig of the Trees, or bends the
Smoaks of the Chimneys: The Sea smooths its shining Surface, and the Sky gleams
serene in Silence. It Is this same God, who orders his Cold to chill the Air,
and strip the Forests: To arrest the Rivers in their rapid Motion, and bind
them in Fetters of Ice: To seize the living Creation, slacken the Motion of the
Blood, and make the Limbs shake, and the Teeth chatter. It Is this same God, who
makes his snows gently descend, sport in the light Air, and whiten the soft
Ground. At his Order, the beautiful Fleeces cover the Fields with a dazzling and
a warm Robe. He it is, that forms the slippery and glistering Paths, and
finishes the Looks and the Form of the rugged Lanskip. Every little Rising
about us, the Banks of Snow, or the shining Ice, are the common Works of him,
the God who made the Winter. He has made all the various Parts of it, and
furnished and completed the whole Scene.

Thus I have illustrated and confirmed the Doctrine; I come now to apply it to
the holy Ends of Plety and Devotion.

1. Learn the adorable Perfections of this GOD. See his Grandeur and Majesty,
in the terrible Work! How contemptuous is his Challenge to mortal Man, in those
Operations of his Hands? Job xxxviii. 22, 23. Have thou entered into the
Treasures of the Snow? Or have thou seen the Treasures of the Hail? Which I
have reserved against the Time of Trouble, against the Day of Battle and War?
How grand and majestic is the God who has such Magazines of Artillery; such
Armies of various Destruction all at his uncontrollable Command. See the
Winter, and own the almighty Power and of the God who produced it. What a
resistless Arm must he have, who rolls on the Seasons in their Order, and forms
all the strong Cold, and Wind, and Frost of the Winter? Who can stand before
his Cold? Who then can stand before him when once he is angry? Who knows the
Power of his Anger? Even as his Fear, so is his Wrath.

See the Winter, and own the Mercy of God, to bring Good out of Evil, and make
it beneficial to the Fruitfulness of the Year, and the Health of Mankind. See
his Mercy in providing us Shelter from the keen Air, and Clothes as the
Covering from the Cold. He has built our Houses for us; else had the Artificers
labored in vain. He has given us Fire to oppose the Cold, and defend us from
its unsufferable and mortal Rigor. He gave our first Father Coats of Skin, and
he gives us all our useful and beautiful Raiment, to hide us from the fatal
Cold. The Winter all over shows the Mercy of the God who made it.

See the Winter, and behold his Justice also. 'Twas for Sin that Cold became
painful, and executes part of the Curse upon the barren Earth. It Is not
improbable, that the Position of the Earth to the Sun, has been altered since
the Sin of Adam: And how far the Flood which came upon the World of the
Ungodly, has contributed to this, is disputed among the Learned. It Is no unfair
Conjecture, that the Disruption of the Abyss, and the general Concussions of
the Globe at that Time, might unhinge the Poles, and alter the Course of the
Year. Perhaps this is hinted at, when God said to Noah immediately after the
Flood, that now there should be no Cessation of Winter and Summer, and Cold and
Heat. However that may be, we know the Curse on the Earth for Sin, became more
completed by the Flood, which has very much altered the Form of the Earth, and
the Healthiness of the Air; and shortened the Life of Man. And we know the
Painfulness and Unfruitfulness of the Winter Cold, is Part of that Curse
brought upon us by Sin. But I would not enlarge; let us see the Perfections of
God in his Work.

2. Let us serve God in the Winter. It is his Time: We ought then to render it
to him, and fill it up in his Service. 'Twas for his own Glory that he made it:
For this is his End in all his Works. For his Pleasure they are and were
created. It Is just then that we should make the Winter conduce to his Glory,
and glorify him in it, and for it. We are apt indeed to be rendered sluggish and
sloathful by the Winter-Cold. Prove. xx. 4. The Sluggard will not Plough by
reason of the Cold. But far be this Character from us! Amidst the Cold let us
be diligent: not slothful in Business, but fervent in Spirit, serving the Lord.
Let not our Love wax cold with the Season. Away with the invidious Proverb,
Cold as Charity. Let us now, as far as God gives us Capacity and Opportunity,
relieve the Necessities of our poor Neighbors. If a Brother of Sister be naked
and destitute of daily Food, and one of you say, Be ye warmed, be ye clothed,
notwithstanding ye give them not those Things which are necessary for the Body,
what does it profit? Your Faith is dead, unless it inspires these Works. And
the great Demand of Christ at last will be concerning these Works and Labors
of Love. And as we, in these Instances, deal by his Members, he will look upon
himself honored or abused. -- I was naked, and ye clothed me not -- Or, I was
naked, and ye clothed me. Inasmuch as ye have done it unto one of the least of
these my Brethren, ye did it unto me. Then shall not a Cup of cold Water lose
its Reward, much less shall a warm Garment, or a comfortable Fire, or a
refreshing Meal. -- And as there are Duties peculiarly adapted to Winter, I
shall conclude with a few profitable Meditations pertinent to the Season. We
may serve God, in his Winter, by making the Winter itself contribute to our
sacred Contemplations.

For Instance, When we feel the Cold of the Winter, let us fear the God who
made the Cold. How easily can he kill us by this one Creature? There have been
Instances of Persons passing over the northern Mountains, seized and stiffened
at once, and left like Lot's Wife, a Pillar to be wondered at in after Years.
In a dreadful Sense, they stand before his Cold; stand by it, and are kept
standing, the Monuments of his awful Power. So Dr. WATTS has described them.

Fly to the polar World, my Song,
And mourn the Pilgrims there, (a wretched Throng)
Seized and bound in rigid Chains,
A Troop of Statues on the Russian Plains.

Who would not fear this God!

When we see the Snow around us, let us meditate on the unspotted Holiness of
the God who made it. The Snow is not pure in his Sight. Let us reflect on our
own Guilt and Blackness, and take up the Prayer, Psalm. li. 7. Wash me, and I
shall be whiter than the Snow. Let us plead the Promise of God, Though your
Sins be as Scarlet, they shall be white as Snow. Let us repair to Christ for
his unsullied Righteousness, as the fine Linen white and clean, which is the
Righteousness of the Saints. Let us seek Sanctification of the Holy Spirit,
that we may be Nazarites purer than Snow.

When we see the Ice shine in the slippery Paths, let us be cautioned to walk
with Care; and remember the Admonition of God, Let him that stands, take Heed
least he fall. Let the short Days of the Winter admonish us, to work in haste,
and what we do, do quickly. Let the slippery Paths and the short Days unite to
persuade us, to walk circumspectly, redeeming the Time. This I say, Brethren,
the Time is short; Oh! shall we not fill up the short Time as full as ever we
can. Let the cold Day put us in Mind of the Cold of Death; and the short Day of
our short Life. -- But I consider the Cold, and I would not stand too long
before it. Let us improve the Winter well in this World, and quickly we shall
be taken to that blessed State, where the Winter shall cease from tr^^bling,
and the Weary are at rest. Death will arrive to us with that Message from Jesus
our Lord, Cant. ii. 10, 11. Rise up and come away, for lo, the Winter is past,
the Rain is over and gone, the Flowers appear on the Earth, and the Time of the
singing of Birds is come: Rise up, and come away.

FINIS.
HYMN.
I.
SEE the young Spring, with annual Green
Renew the waving Grove;
While Riv'lets through the flowery Scene
In Silver Mazes rove.
II.
By tuneful Birds of every Wing,
Mellodious Strains are played;
From Tree to Tree their Accents ring,
Soft warbling through the Shade.
III.
The painted Meads, and fragrant Fields
A sudden Smile bestow;
A golden Gleam each Valley guilds,
Where numerous Beauties blow.
IV.
A thousand gaudy Colors flush,
Each odorous Mountain's Side;
Lillies turn pale, and Roses blush,
And Tulips spread their Pride.
V.
Thus flourishes the wanton Year,
In rich Confusion gay;
'Till Autumn bids the Bloom retire,
The Verdure fade away.
VI.
Succeeding Cold withers the Woods,
While hoary Winter reigns,
In Fetters binds the frozen Floods,
And shivers over the Plains.
VII.
And must my Moments thus decline?
And must I sink to Death?
To Thee, my Spirit I resign,
Thou Sovereign of my Breath.
VIII.
JESUS my Life, has died, has rose:
I burn to meet his Charms!
Welcome the Pangs, the dying Throws,
That give me to his Arms.

