A LETTER From the Rev. Mr. James Davenport, to Mr. Jonathan Barber Preacher of
the Gospel at Bethesda in Georgia: Published with the free Consent of Mr.
Davenport.
Very dear Brother,
YOU have I perceive, sustained the Loss of a dear Creature-Comfort, your
little Daughter. I rejoice to hear that the Lord has not only supported you
under this Affliction, but given his Blessing with it to your dear Soul. Has
not the Lord, dear Jonathan, much more than made up the Loss by Himself; while
the Stream failing, he has ^^^sted your Soul, and filled it up to the Brim at
the Fountainhead, with others of his dear Children, of whom he has graciously
and gloriously increased the Number among you of Late, There was, the Spring
before the Date of this Letter, a (...) Revival of Religion at (...), wherein
there (...) You or (...) hopefully converted.
as I understand by your kind Letter.

Blessed, yea, blessed for evermore be the great and worthy Name of our
Immanuel! Well! Glory to free pure Grace: The Wilderness is become a fruitful
Field, and made to blossom as the Rose: The Rose of Sharon appears in
transcendent Glory. Lo! now the Winter is past, the Rain is over and gone, the
Flowers of Grace appear, the Time of the singing of Birds, young Converts,
sweet Birds of Paradise is come, and there they are chirping forth the Praises
of the Lamb on the Boughs of free Grace; and the Voice of the Turtle, the
blessed Spirit is heard in your, as well as in our Land: This is the more
refreshing to me, as the dear Lord himself drew out my Soul much, (I believe
for more than a Month) the latter End of last Winter, and beginning of the
Spring, that he would give you, my dear Brother, much Asistance, Comfort, and
Success etc. as I wrote to you in a Letter about that Time. Oh! He is a
Prayer-hearing, a Wonder-working God! He makes his Name appear glorious and
excellent indeed! Glory to God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, Amen.

The Letter that comes enclosed to you, beloved Barber, from our dear Brother T
-- was perused by me when it came to Hand; that I might find out what remained
for me to write, and I am glad he has given you some Hints of what has passed,
and somewhat particularly: But a full Narration must be left untold till we see
one another here below, or meet in the Upper-House; just as our Father pleases:
But if it be his holy Will, I should indeed be glad, my dear Brother, yea very
glad to see you again while we are in this World. Oh my dear Brother! When will
you come over to your longing and loving Brother Davenport, and others that are
dear to you? The Lord give me to wait, and you to come in his Time.

But to return, I would add to what Brother T -- has written on the awful
Affair of Books and Clothes at New London, which affords Grounds of deep and
lasting Humiliation. I was, to my Shame be it spoken, the Rignleader in that
horrid Action. I was, my dear Brother, under the powerful Influence of the
false Spirit, almost one whole Day together, and Part of several Days. The Lord
showed me afterward that the Spirit I was then acted by, was in its Operations
void of true inward Peace, prompting me to lay the greatest Stress on
Externals, to neglect the Heart, to be full of Imdatience, Pride, and
Arrogance: Although I thought in the Time of it that 'twas the Spirit of God in
a high Degree, (awful indeed!) My Body, especially my Leg Were much disordered
at the same Time, which Satan and my evil Heart might make some Handle of. When
the Lord showed me and my Brethren T. -- and S -- our Sin, he disposed us to a
free and full Confession. Presently upon it a Light shone into my Soul,
discovering the Wisdom of God in leaving us, and me particularly to fall; that
however Shame belonged to me, yet Glory to him for his Wisdom especially; but
this Light I soon shut my Eyes against, because it was sweet, I could not bear
it. I thought, having committed so grievous a Sin, I must have much more
Bitter, before I had any Sweet. Thus I tried to be humbled, crying in my Soul
for more Weight, seeking after a legal Repentance; and thus I continued from
some Part of the Forenoon, till near Night. Although this sweet and pleasant
Light was offered to my Soul almost or quite all the Time; but I durst not
admit it for the Reason aforesaid: Yet at last it increased to that degree, and
became so powerful that I could withstand no longer, I was constrained to
praise the Lord, especially for his Wisdom, in leaving me to fall as I did. At
the same Time my Sin in falling appeared never the less, but indeed more odious
and Abominable; but still I must praise the Lord, while I condemned and loathed
my self. The dear and merciful Lord took from me a legal Spirit of Heaviness
and gave me a Garment of Praise; and I found Gospel Repentance to be quite
another Thing than I imagined in my legal Frame, viz. to take Part with the
Lord fully against my self. He gave me truly to loath what I had done, and my
self for it; and he made me willing if it was his Pleasure, and for his Glory
to be stoned by the whole World together, not to make Atonement, but in
Testimony against, and Abhorrence of the Sin; yet still I must praise the Lord
if I went through Hell to him, I must praise, I could not bear to refrain from
that one Minute. I believe most of God's dear Children around could not receive
it, that I should enjoy the Lord so soon after so awful a Fall. However the
Lord purified my Comforts in this Way, and I could not wonder at them, having
been my self just before in the same legal Frame and Track. Quickly after one
told me, he believed I had confessed that to be the false Spirit that was the
true, I gave heed to him, and presently began to murmur against the Lord, and
felt about a Quarter of an Hour, as if I was sinking into the Belly of Hell;
but the Lord in great Love came again and brought to my Soul a sweet and
powerful Sense of his Wisdom in leaving me to fall; that I might thus be purged
of idolizing my self, others of God's Children purged of idolizing me,
Hypocrites also discovered, yea, and the Elect converted; while others are
hardened in righteous Judgment, etc.

Thus was my poor ill deserving Soul in Free Grace refreshed for a Day
together, and sometimes even feasted. The next Day I felt still, but had not so
much Sweetness, but the Day after, the Wisdom, Power, Love and Faithfulness of
God shone in clearly and warmly together on my Soul from Morning to Night. In
the Afternoon in those Words, He does all Things well! Thus was my Soul fed,
yea sometimes filled with Comfort, while my dear Brethren that fell with, or
rather after me, who had not been near so guilty as I, were filled with racking
Distress, Darkness and Temptations. Oh my Brother! This was sovereign Grace
indeed! By this Time my complicated Disease was come near to a Crisis: For I
had the long Fever on me, and the Cancry Humor broken out in one Leg, raw and
swol'n round and over it from my Knee to my Foot at the same Time, and running
Friday Night and after, near the Middle of March, I believe I may say Quarts in
some Hours; and now for a Day together I expected nothing but to die, and that
soon; all about me expected the same. But Oh! my dear Brother, I cannot tell you
in Words, how refreshing this was to my Soul; although I concluded it would be
looked upon by the World, and even by most Christians as an immediate Judgment
of Heaven, and that so I should die in their Eyes as a Hypocrite and
Malefactor: Yet, blessed be God, I think this did not at all damp, but sweetly
purify my Joy, my Evidences for Heaven, through pure rich Grace, were then clear
without Doubt, and a secret inexpressible Thirst for Eternity given and
continued to my unworthy Soul most of the Time with much Composure, sometimes
with Rapture. Oh! my beloved Brother, you must think, for I cannot tell you how
I felt, when I thought thus; Oh! am I indeed within a few Days, or a few Hours
of Eternity, blessed Eternity! What so near the End of my Course here? And
especially, am I so near the End of all Sin, that which my Soul could not bear,
and longed to be freed from above any Thing else! Difficulties and Troubles
seemed as nothing in comparison of it! Oh! am I so near pure and perfect Glory
above! Oh I shall then be like my glorious God, and dear Redeemer? For I shall
see him as he is, etc. I shall sin no more, no more for ever, etc. Here let
your Soul Fire in Meditation and join with me in Praise to the blessed Father,
Son and Spirit, Amen! Once indeed I was thought by some to be actually dying,
when I was just a fainting. I did not think I was going then, but I hoped in a
few more such Turns that I should take a clear Flight to the Realms of Glory.
It seemed to be a Foretaste of Death, and I had presently a Foretaste of Glory,
which the Children of God enter into in a Moment, when they leave their Bodies
and this World. Oh! What heavenly Light and ravishing Joys broke in then upon
my Soul! Blessed be the Lord for evermore.

But the Lord was pleased to order me to return, and though it was truly hard,
the Lord enabled me to say, Thy Will be done. I seemed indeed to those about
me, as one rising from the Dead, particularly to Brother S -- and T -- and the
Lord comforted my Soul with a fresh Sense of that Word in Heb. 11.12. Therefore
sprang there even of one, and him as good as dead, etc. Also the Lord set home
that Word powerfully, and caused a feeling Sense of it to continue near a Month
together; Go tell the Disciples and Peter that he goes before you into
Galilee. As if the Lord had said himself, Go, tell my Disciples that have
forsaken me, and Peter that has denied me in a most awful Manner, tell them,
etc. Tell Peter the guiltiest of all, the vilest of all, comfort his drooping
Soul, let him be distinguished by Grace, free sovereign Grace, though he has
distinguished himself by Sin; call him by Name, tell him I go before him into
Galilee with my comfortable and successful Presence, let him stand up in the
Day of Pentecost, and speak, let my Power go forth and Three Thousand be
converted etc.

Thus was my poor Soul refreshed and satisfied, that the dear Jesus would
further comfort and improve me, would go before me, etc. Oh! My Brother, never
did I behold so clearly and so sensibly apprehend the Lord's sovereign Grace
with respect to his Children, the most backsliding of them, as at this Time I
am speaking of; and then for near a Month, and at sometimes since, Glory to God
alone. The Lord Jesus was also pleased to give a fixed, sollid and sensible
Union to his Children where ever they were, and what ever their Frames might
be, or their Thoughts or Treatment of me, be it ever so wrong (they then being
to be pitied) I say, Union to them as and because they were Fellow Members of
the same Body of Jesus, more purely I think, than ever before: And blessed be
God, this was a great Support and Comfort to me in the uncommon Trials I met
with from the Children of God at that Time. Say of me, or do with me what they
would, still I must love them dearly, inexpressibly; and if they pulled from
me, they seemed to pull the Heart Strings of Love the tighter; my very Soul
through Grace loved them and pitied them, and those dear Christians, that spoke
and acted most against me, I think I may say through, rich Grace, were made as
dear, if not dearer to my Soul than any, Glory to God! Had it not been so, my
Trials then would have been exceeding cutting. Thus the Lord stood by me, and
strengthened me, and comforted me a vile Mortal: Blessed be his Name
forevermore, who so wonderfully displayed his Covenant-Love and Faithfulness,
even to the most backsliding of his Children.

Oh! My dearly beloved Brother, the Lord give you to take Warning by this
terrible Fall and give you to watch and pray that you enter not into
Temptation. Oh be humble through Grace, and be not proud of the Gifts and Graces,
the Assistance and Success the Lord has given or may give you, take no Part of
the Glory to your self, neither lean to your own Understanding. Oh! be not wise
above what is written, nor ever leave the sacred unerring Oracles of Truth. The
dear Lord save you from Extremes on both Sides the Path of Duty, and continue
his Presence, yea fill you still more with his Spirit, and give you Grace for
Grace. Grace, That you may rightly improve, and not sadly abuse, the Grace that
he gives, etc. The Lord bless you my dear Brother, and bless these mournful and
yet joyful Lines to you and to any other that may hear them. Do write to me as
soon and as often as you can, or rather let me see you Face to Face, that we
may speak about Jesus together, and I trust he will come in the Midst and say,
Peace unto you. -- I cannot but hope, if my dear Brother Whitefield return, and
it be the Lord's Will, I may see you in these Parts in the Spring, or soon
after. The Lord's will be done.

These Lines come filled with Love to you, and the dear Children of God with
you. Tell those poor Orphans and others that are unconverted, I long for them
to come to Christ without Delay: For, If they don't come to Christ and believe
on him, they must be damned and burnt in Hell for ever. Mat. 16.16. John 3.16.
Dreadful indeed! Oh! Jesus offers Mercy freely, ( John 7.37.) and can they bear
to stay behind in this glorious Time, when others through Grace are flocking to
Christ, and longing for them. ( Luke 7.41, 32.) You may improve upon this with
them, as the Lord may enable you.

The good Lord bless it to their dear precious Souls! When Brother Whitefield
returns, give much Love to him, and desire him to pray, yea join with him in
praying for Your poor fallen Brother, yet mercifully treated in our dear and
blessed IMMANUEL.

James Davenport.
Maidenhead, in N. Jersey, Nov. 30, 1743.
Extracts of a Letter from Mr. Jonathan Barber, to the Rev. Mr. Davenport, in
Answer to the Foregoing.
My very dear Brother Davenport,
JOIN with me in giving Golory to the Name of our GOD, for what he has been
doing among us at Bethesda of late, as well as formerly. Surely your Heart must
leap for Joy, when you hear what the Lord has done for us, and that he made use
of you as an Instrument. Indeed, we have had a Spring of new, and very
wonderful Delights. This desert Land is made to rejoice and blossom like a
Rose. We have seen somewhat of the Glory of the Lord and the Excellency of our
God. He is indeed excellent in Working. Oh! that I could suitably admire and
set forth his Work unto you. When you read, you must think what you have seen
in Time past, and may the Lord give you a lively and refreshing Sense thereof.
For some Months past there has been some Stir among the dry Bones in this
Valley. -- Several were awakened and made to cry earnestly after the Lord. And
about a Month ago, one of our Laborers was hopefully converted, a Man of about
forty Years of Age.

The last Day of last Month, I received Yours from Maidenhead of the 30th of
November last, for which I thank you. I read it over to some of my Friends that
Evening; but being some what wearied in Body, having been abroad all Day, I
found no Disposition to deliver your Message in public that Night; but the
next Evening I thought I must do it, and so took your Letter in my Pocket when
I went to Prayers, and after Prayers, I read about a Page and Half at the
Beginning, and delivered the Message at the latter End, and as the Lord
enabled, I did enlarge upon it both to the Converted and Unconverted, and the
Hearts of some of God's Children were warmed and some others cried out under
Concern. After Public Worship was over, they got together in another Room, and
the Spark was soon kindled into a Flame. -- The Love of God was shed abroad in
many Hearts, and they sang Praise to free Grace. One and another came running
to me telling me how the Lord had revived their Souls. You will have a Taste of
their Loves by the Letters they have sent you, and I hope you will write them
an Answer as soon as you can. But my Brother, I have not told you the one Half
yet. The same Night that the Children of God were revived, was a Night of God's
Power to four poor Souls. I cannot particularly relate to you the Manner of
their Conversion, it was very evident and wonderful to all around, most of the
Night was spent in Prayer and Praise. Oh! How sweet was it, your Experience
must Witness? The next Morning, another young Woman, that had been crying with
the Rest the Night before, was brought out of Darkness into marvel-Light. --
Most of that Day and the next, many Souls were filled with the Love of God,
some were even overcome with the Power and Sweetness thereof.

In the Day of God's Power his People shall be willing. Some Days past we have
had no great Stirring, what the Lord has further to do here, I know not. I
cannot yet tell, whether the Lord will let me leave Bethesda, but Time will
discover what the Will of the Lord is.

I thank you my dear Brother, for your loving and seasonable Warning, may the
Lord enable me to take it, and keep me from falling. Blessed be God that he has
humbled and raised you up again. Your Letter upon that Head is very pleasing to
me and others. I hope and trust it will be a Means of your standing more
steady, not in your own but the Lord's Strength, but I cannot dwell upon it. May
the Lord keep us both from a sinful conformity to the World: For what Communion
has Light with Darkness. May the Lord abundantly bless your Labors where you
are, and wherever he sends you. How glad should I be to see you; let me hear
from you as often as you can.

from your loving Brother, Jonathan Barber.
Bethesda, March 10, 1743-4. P.S.

My dear Brother,

I must add a few Lines in haste to let you know, that our dear Lord is
carrying on his Work among us still. Many have been comforted, and two Women
that came here from Savannah under Concern, were converted last Week, what the
Lord will do, I know not. Pray for us still, my dear Brother, and accept Love
once more from my dear Wife and from your Brother,

J. Barber.
March 19, 1743-4.


There being a Referrence made in the foregoing Letter, to some others from
several of the Orphans at Bethesda, it is thought proper to subjoyn them
thereto, which are as follows.
A Letter from -- to the Rev Mr. Davenport.
Rev. and dear Sir,
IT has been upon my Mind to let you know what the sweet Lord Jesus has done
for my Soul. Indeed, he has done great and mavelous Things for me, blessed be
his holy NAME. He brought me out of my native Land, and brought me to this
House of Mercy. Soon after I came here, at Times I was under some Concern about
my poor Soul, but it would soon wear off. At the Death of dear Mr. Barber's
Child, the Lord was pleased to renew my Convictions again, and made me cry out,
What shall I do to be saved. I continued in great Distress about Six Months,
and one Sabbath at Meeting, my Soul was in great Anguish, so that I cried out.
I continued so till the Friday following, and could not rest Night nor Day,
then did I see that if the Lord had not Mercy upon me, I must go to Hell, it
was but what I deserved, yea I deserved a Thousand Hells: But when I was
stripped of my own Righteousness, then the Lord put on me the Robe of Christ's
Righteousness: Yea, he passed by me, and saw me polluted in my Blood, and said
unto me live, and I did live. Then did he afford unto me that Peace, which
passes all Understanding, and the Joy of his free Spirit. O What a Love did I
then feel to God and all his Children! Indeed my Soul was ravished at God's
free Grace that had chosen me, and left Thousands to perish for ever. Then did
I think that I would never be sorry any more; but lest I should be exhalted
above Measure, the Lord saw fit to hide himself behind the Wall, and then did I
think, that My Lord had forsaken me, and my God had forgotten me. But O! He has
showed me that those that he has once loved, he will love to the End: For he in
loving Kindness visited my Soul again. O blessed be his holy Name. He has
brought me to his banqueting House, and his Banner over me is Love, yea he
stays me with Flaggons, and comforts me with Apples. He is come leaping over
the high Mountains, and skipping over the Hills of Separation. O! What reason
have I to praise the Lamb for ever and ever: For he is a forgiving God, he
heals all my Backslidings, and loves me freely, not for any Thing in me, but
for his own Name's sake. The last Night the Lord stood in the midst of us, and
spoke Peace to many that were troubled. Indeed, your sweet Letter was a Means
of reviving my Soul, I felt such a love for you, that I could have wished to
have been with you, that we might praise the Lord together. The Glory of God
shone amongst us: O! How does he ride conquering amongst us: For in a very
little Time he has been pleased to call to him self five poor Souls, and has
comforted many of his dear Children! O! How shall we praise the Lord enough
that there is Peace on the Earth, and good Will toward Men? Indeed, this
Wilderness is become a fruitful Field, and an Habitation that the Lord delights
to dwell in; both old and young Converts are praising Free Grace, surely the
long distressing Winter is past, the Rain is over and gone, the Flowers appear
on the Earth, The Time of the singing of the Birds is come again, and the Voice
of the Turtle is heard in our Land. Glory! Glory! Be to his Holy Name? How does
the Love of Christ revive our Souls! And if so little a Drop revives us here,
how shall we be when we come to the Fountain, where we may drink to the full?
Dear Sir, I would beg your Prayers for me, that the Lord would keep me humble.

So I remain your unworthy Servant --
Bethesda, March 2, 1743-4.
A Letter from -- to the Rev. Mr. Davenport.
Rev. and dear Sir,
I Write these few Lines to you, that you may know, that I am very well in
Health, as I hope you are also. I lived in this House of Mercy four Years, and
the Lord was pleased to let me know what a miserable Sinner I was, and he made
me able to wait upon him. It is nothing but Free Grace in Christ, and not for
any Thing we can do, but for his Names Sake, that he should look upon such
rebellious Worms of the Dust as we are. Indeed, It is wonderful that God has
been pleased to look upon so many of us here at Bethesda: For the Lord has
brought us out of the Horrible Pit, and out of the Miry Clay, and he has set
my Feet upon a Rock, and has established my Goings, and he has put a new Song
into my Mouth, even Praise for evermore: For he is my Shepherd, he makes me to
lie down in green Pastures; he makes me to rest in his everlasting Arms. O!
Sweet it is to lie in Jesus's Bosom? O! I long to leave this House of Clay,
that I may live with God in a House not made with Hands eternal in the Heavens,
to sing Hallelujah's for evermore. O! What blessed Time it will be, when we all
meet together, when we all sing the same Song, even Praise to the Lamb, who
laid down his Life for us, that he might rescue us from going down to the Pit
of everlasting Destruction. O! What shall we render to him for all his Goodness
to us, who has made us meet to be Partakers in his everlasting Kingdom? O! It
is good to be in the Lord's Family. The Night before I wrote to you, Mr. Barber
preached upon your Letter. Indeed, the Word came with much Power upon my Soul.
O! How sweet it was! It was a sweet Feast unto my Soul? Dear Sir, this House is
an House of Mercy to many Souls, so it is to me. Dear Sir, your sweet Letter
has stirred up many poor Souls, and has been a Means of the Conversion of
Five, and many of the Children of God were filled with Comfort. And many more
wait at the Pool for the Stirring of the Water. Dear Sir, I hope you will not
take it amiss, because I am a Stranger to you. So no more at present. Grace,
Mercy, and Peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.

I remain your unworthy Servant --
Bethesda March 2, 1743-4.
A Letter from -- to the Rev. Mr. Davenport.
Rev. and dear Sir,
I Must tell you, what the Lord has been doing among us of late. O! Dear Sir,
don't you long to hear good News from the Orphan-House.

Indeed, I can tell you, that the Lord has been working wonderfully among us of
late. For last Night and this Morning, there was no less than five Souls
brought out of Darkness into God's mavelous Light. Indeed I never saw so much
of the Power of God in all my Life Time. It seemed like Heaven upon Earth. O
dear Sir, don't your Soul rejoice to hear such glad Tidings? Last Night Mr.
Barber read your sweet Letter that you sent him in public Worship. O! How
sweet is was?

I think I could hear it read a Thousand Times over, it is so sweet. I Am sure
the Lord put it into your Heart to write it: For the Lord has been pleased to
make it a means of stirring up many Souls to seek after the Lord Jesus Christ,
and of comforting all his dear Children. I Am sure the Lord has heard your
Prayer for the poor Orphans. You said last Spring you found great Power to pray
for this Family. I am persuaded the Lord has answered your Prayers. Indeed,
you brought past Times fresh, unto my Mind, when you compared young Christians
unto the sweet Birds of Paradise. O! How sweet them Words tasted! The Lord
filled my Soul with his sweet Love. Indeed, I can say, that my beloved is the
chiefest among Ten Thousand, and one altogether lovely. O! there is nothing to
be compared with him for Loveliness. O! Dear Sir. My Heart burns with Love to
you. Indeed I long to see you, I think, then I could tell you better what the
Lord has been doing among us. Indeed, The Winter is past, the Rain is over and
gone, the Time of the singing of Birds is come, and the Voice of the Turtle is
heard in our Land. O! What glorious Times we have in Bethesda! We see Souls
flocking to Christ, as Doves to their Windows.

No more at present, I remain your unworthy Servant --
Bethesda, March 2, 1743-4
A Letter from -- to the Rev. Mr. Davenport.
Rev. and dear Sir,
I Must tell you what the Lord has been doing in this Wilderness for us. O! He
has been doing wonderful Things at the Orphan-House. He has made the Lame to
leap as an Heart, and the Tongue of the Dumb to speak, and the dead to walk!
Dear Sir, Mr. Barber received your kind Letter the 29th of Feb. at Night, and
the First of March at Night, he read some of it in public Worship; and there
were some Texts of Scripture, which Mr. Barber expounded, and it pricked some
to the Heart, and made them to cry after the Lord Jesus Christ for Mercy; and
the Lord heard five of them that Night and next Morning; and it was a Means of
rejoicing many Souls to hear how you talked about young Converts, and young
Birds of Paradise. O! how sweet is it to my Soul to hear Souls blessing and
praising God! O that we may see Converts fall as Morning Dew. Oh! what a
glorious Sight that will be to see Souls flying to Christ, as Doves to the
Windows. I see some Souls flying to Christ, and resolved to stay no longer.
Dear Sir, I hope you will have many Souls for the Crown of your rejoicing in
the Day of the Lord Jesus. Dear Sir, pray for me that the Lord would not suffer
me to forget my first Love. Dear Sir, I can say, my Beloved is mine and I am
his -- He feeds among the Lillies -- Let my Beloved come into his Garden and
eat his pleasant Fruits -- make have my Beloved, and be thou like to a Lo, or
a young Heart upon the Mountain of Spices. Dear Sir, I hope it will rejoice your
dear Soul, when you hear that your Letter was the Means of converting five
Souls. Dear Sir, If you thought that your Letters would have been a Means of
the Conversion of one Soul, I am sure you would not begrudge your Labor. Dear
Sir, since I heard of your Letter, I have been so full of Comfort, I thought it
was like the Day of Pentecost. Dear Sir, I long to see you once in the Body;
but if not we shall all (I trust) meet you in Heaven, singing Hallelujah! No
more at present, this is from

Your unworthy Servant --
Bethesda March 6, 1743-4.
A Letter from -- to the Rev. Mr. Davenport.
Rev. and much honored Sir.
I Hope you will not take amiss the Boldness and Freedom I take in writing
these few Lines to let you know the Comfort and Benefit I have had in hearing
your Letters to our dear Mr. Barber, namely the Night after they came to Hand.
Mr. Barber thought of reading that Passage you sent to the Children in Public,
accordingly he did: He first began at the Beginning, and read some Way; he was
soon filled with Power from on High, and enabled from those Texts of
Scriptures; that were in your sweet Letter, to speak largely to them that were
present; both the Converted and unconverted.

But O how was my Soul filled with the Love of Jesus Christ! I longed for all
poor Sinners to come to Christ, Indeed my Heart was ready to burst for them. I
could do nothing but beg and pray, that Christ would come and get to himself
the Victory, in the Hearts of all poor Souls amongst us. Indeed it was a
glorious Night to many Souls here, both to the Revival of many of God's dear
Children, and to some that had sat in Darkness and the Shadow of Death: Among
whom was a Sister who now writes to you, M. A.

But Oh! Glory be to God, that he was pleased to bring her with three others
that Night, and one the next Morning to lay hold of Jesus Christ for their
Savior and merciful Redeemer, who redeemeth their Life from Destruction, who
crowns them with loving Kindness and tender Mercy, satisfies their Mouth with
good Things, so that their Youth is renewed like the Eagle.

Dear Sir, Will not your Heart rejoice and be glad, to hear such joyous Tidings
from a far Country; that the Gospel flourishes in this Wilderness Land, that
Souls are daily flocking to Christ, as Doves to their Windows. Indeed it filled
my poor Soul with Joy and Gladness to hear that the Gospel runs and is
glorified in these our Days in your Land. O Glory, Glory, Glory, be to his holy
Name, for sending Christ into the World to die for Sinners, of whom I am chief,
that he did not suffer me to fall into the Pit of everlasting Destruction, but
when he saw me in my Blood, said unto me live. Yea, he passed by me and said
unto me live. Indeed then was a Time of Love; but O now I want an enlarged
Heart to praise him more than I do: For that he has done such wonderful Things
for me, and the dear Lambs of his Flock here.

Dear Sir, I make no doubt, but that the Lord has drawn out your Heart to pray
for us, that our dear Mr. Barbar may have a plentiful Harvest of Souls this
Spring, as well as the last. Blessed be God that he should put it into your
Heart to pray for us at such a Distance as this, and give an immediate Answer
to it. Surely our great God is a God hearing and answering Prayers: He will
surely reward you an hundred Fold for your Work of Faith, and Labor of Love
for us; which is the earnest Prayer of -- Honored Sir, your

unknwon and unworthy Servant in Christ --
Bethesda, March 2, 1743-4.
A Letter from -- to the Rev. Mr. Davenport.
Rev. and dear Sir,
I Must tell you what the Lord has done for my Soul. No, never did I see such a
Sight, nor my Ears hear such a Sound, as the last Night at our usual Meeting
together. Dear Mr. Barber read the Letters that you sent him Indeed every Word
he read seemed to pierce as if a Sword had been run through me. He spoke first to
those that were converted last Spring. O; how it cut me to hear him putting
them in mind of the glorious Time last Spring. But after he spoke to us that
were in a natural State. Oh! he entreated poor Sinners to believe on the Lord
Jesus. O indeed I thought it was all in vain: For I thought I must sink down
into everlasting Burnings; for I thought Christ would not save me. Indeed God
seemed to be stirring up many; and I could not bear it; but I would cast my
self at his Feet, seeing I deserved nothing but Hell.

But indeed I did not lie long there before he told me my Sins were forgiven
me. O indeed Sir, the Lord has surely heard your Prayers for us! Indeed, the
Time of the singing of Birds is come, and the Voice of the Turtle is heard in
our Land. Sweet Birds of Paradise indeed, chirping forth the Praises of the
Lamb that was slain. Sure it is a glorious Sight that I saw! Five of us espoused
as it were at once unto the Lord Jesus! Surely I can say this Verse, I that am
drawn out of the Depth,
Will sing upon the Shore:
I that in Hells dark Suburbs lay,
Pure Mercy will adore.


Blessed be free Grace! There is nothing in us that we should be so highly
favored. O what a Wonder is it that we are not lifting up our Eyes in Hell
Torments. Oh! how shall I praise such free Grace!

O! Dear Sir, I am sure it will rejoice you to hear that God is a working so
gloriously in Bethesda. Oh! what a blessed House of Mercy is this, to many poor
Souls ready to perish; but, O! there is nothing in the House, if the Lord had
not been there. But the Lord says, ( Psalm 102) He will regard the Prayer of the
Destitute and not despise their Prayer. And I am sure he has heard mine. O
dear Sir, pray for me that I may be a chaste Vrigin to the Lord, that he may
keep me close by his Side; that I may never run a stray: For I trust, he bath
bought me with a Price, even the Price of his own Blood. O what a blessed Time
will that be when we shall all meet in Heaven, there to praise the Father, Son
and Holy Ghost ever more. No more at present,

I remain your unworthy Servant --
Bethesda, March 2, 1743-4. O For Doves Wings to soar away
To Regions of eternal Day,
To flowery Banks of lasting Peace,
Where we may see our Savior's Face.
Even there to join the happy Quire,
Our Breasts inspired with heavenly Fire,
To sing the Victories of Grace,
And still be Burgess in the Place.



