THE COMET: A POEM.



BOSTON: Printed and Sold by B. GREEN and Comp. in Newbury-street, and D.
GOOKIN, at the Corner of Water-street, Cornhil. 1744.

THE COMET.
DESCEND, Urania, and inspire my verse,
I raise my song to sing your kindred stars;
I aim to rove where glittering comets stray,
Trace the bright wand'rers through the Aetherial way,
And all around the Almighty's power proclaim,
Where worlds can roll, or suns incessant flame.
See! heavenly muse, view with attentive eyes,
The ruddy wonder of the evening skies!
From star, to star, the burning ruin rolls,
Beams through the Ether, and alarms the poles:
Around the earth the wondering nations gaze,
On the dire terrors of the lengthened blaze,
While, trailing on, they dream its sparkling hair,
Shakes famine, earthquake, pestilence and war:
Illusions vain! remote from human things,
Where other planets roll in other rings
It travels vast; and all around proclaims
A world in chaos, or an earth in flames.
So, through the Ether, swept the ancient earth,
Ere time, and form, and beauty first had birth,
Unshap'd and void, through space immense it roam'd,
Till spoke the GOD -- and Eden instant bloomed.
What ruin! what confusion might be hurled,
By such a ball, upon our guilty world?
Witness, ye waves, which in the deluge spread,
Whelmed over the earth, and stretched the nations dead.
Down heaven's high steep, wide-spread the steaming train
Rushed on the fields, and poured the floods of rain;
The dark abyss, attracted into day,
Gushed over the mountain-tops, and ror'd away;
The tossed ark, tottering, through its fabric shook,
Involved in clouds and darkness, foam and smoke,
By tempests plunged along from steep to steep,
Bounds to the clouds, or dashes down the deep.
Ye angels! guard her through the stormy scene,
Till the gay rainbow arch the heavens serene.
But, O my muse, swift must the time come on,
When fresh inspired, and fervid from the sun,
The flagrant Stranger shapes a different path,
And from its annual orbit drags the earth.
Ye fancy, mortals! distant as ye are,
All calm and placid round the sailing star,
In gentle rays serenely gleams the head,
And easy luster through the train is spread:
Ah, ye perceive not what loud tumult reigns
Through the hot regions of its wild domains;
What hideous thunder the wide Ether shocks,
Of tumbling mountains, and of crashing rocks:
Fierce seas of flame beat round the burning shores,
And every tempest raves, and every furnace rores.
To this devoted earth it marches on,
And midnight blazes with the glare of noon;
Big, and more big, it arches all the air,
A vault of fluid Brass the skies appear:
From their foundations, where they ancient stood,
Down rush the mountains in a flaming flood;
The min'rals pour their melted bowels out,
The rocks run down, the flying rivers spout;
The earth disolves through its disjointed frame,
Its clouds all lighten, and its Aetna's flame;
The sea exhales, and in long volumes hurled,
Follows the wandering globe from world to world;
Now at the sun it glows, now steers its flight
Through the cold deserts of eternal night,
Warns every creature through its trackless road,
The fate of sinners, and the wrath of GOD.

