ABSTRACT OF Military Discipline; More particularly with Regard to the MANUAL
EXERCISE, EVOLUTIONS, AND Firings of the FOOT.

From Col. BLAND.

BOSTON: Printed by B. GREEN, and Comp. for D. HENCHMAN in Cornhill, 1744.

AN ABSTRACT OF Military Discipline From Col. BLAND.
CHAP. I. The MANUAL EXERCISE of a Foot-Company, or Battalion: With an
Explanation.
WHOEVER exercises a Battalion, or any Number of Men, should place himself
opposite to the Center, at such a Distance that he may take in the whole at one
View. And as the performing the Exercise well, depends a great deal on giving
the Words of Command, those who exercise should deliver the Words clear and
distinct.

Whoever would attain to any Perfection in it, must study the Compass of his
Voice, that he may not overstrain it, left it cause an immediate Hoarseness:
and should lay the Emphasis in the right Place, and make proper Stops or
Pauses, when the Command is too long to be pronounced at one Breath; which when
judiciously done, is of great Service to the Men, in giving them Time to think
on the Word of Command before it is fully delivered, and consequently preparing
them to perform it with Life, Vigor, and Exactness.

I shall only now before I proceed to the manual Exercise of the Foot, give one
or two Directions for the Position of a Soldier under Arms.

I.
A Soldier having his Firelock shouldered, must stand with a strait Body,
holding up his Head without moving, and always looking toward the Commanding
Officer, or he who exercises the Battalion; nor must he use any Motion but what
the Word of Command, when given, directs.

II.
His Feet are to be at one Step Distance, the Heels in a strait Line, and the
Toes turned outward.

III.
The Firelock must lie on the left Shoulder, and the left Hand on the Butt-End,
the Thumb being placed in the Hollow thereof, pressing the Guard hard against
the Breast, that the Muzzel may be mounted; the Lock must be turned a little
outward, 'till the under Part of the Butt-End is brought opposite to the Middle
of the Body.

IV.
The left Elbow must be turned a little outward from the Body, but without any
Constraint to the Arm; and the right Arm must hang in an easy Posture down the
right Side, with the Palm of the Hand turned to the Thigh.

The Company being drawn out, and the Files opened, as directed in the IIId
Chapter.

The first Word of Command is Take Care.
On the giving this Command, there must be a profound Silence observed through
the whole Battalion; nor must the Soldiers make any Motion, but such as are
required for the performing the following Words of Command:

I. Join your right Hands to your Firelocks. 1 Motion.
The Firelock being carried in the forementioned Position, you turn the Lock
upwards, with your left Hand, and at the same Time take hold with the right
Hand behind the Lock, placing the Thumb on the lower Part of the Stock, and the
Fingers on the upper Part, keeping both Elbows square; the Muzzel of the
Firelock must be kept at the same Highth as when shouldered.

N. B. The first Motion of every Word of Command is to be performed immediately
after it is given; but before you proceed to any other of the Motions, you must
tell, one, two, pretty slow, by making a Stop between the Words; and on
pronouncing the Word two, the Motion is to be performed.

II. Poize your Firelocks. 1 Mot.
At this Word of Command, with both Hands and a quick Motion, bring up the
Firelock from the Shoulder, thrusting it from you at the same Time with your
right Hand, (and letting your left Hand fall down your left Side,) turning the
Lock outward, the Thumb inward directly opposite to your Face, and your Feet in
the same Position as when shouldered.

III. Join your left Hands to your Firelocks. 2 Mot.
Turn the Firelock with the Barrel toward you, and at the same Time seize it
with your left Hand just above

XI. Shut your Pans. 4 Mot.
Let fall the Primer and take hold of the Steel with the right Hand, placing
the Thumb on the upper Part and the two Fore-Fingers on the lower; tell one,
two, and shut the Pan; tell one, two and seize the Firelock with the right Hand
behind the Lock; then tell one, two, and bring your Firelock to a Recover, as
in Explanation VII.

XII. Cast about to Charge. 2 Mot.
Turn the Firelock with both Hands till the Barrel comes outward, then tell
one, two, and let go the right Hand, bring down the Firelock with the Left,
take hold of the Muzzel with the right Hand, stepping one Pace forward at the
same Time with the right Foot, but not directly before the Left, but a little
to the Right. This Motion must be performed so that the bringing down the
Firelock, stepping forward, and taking hold of the Muzzel, be done at the same
Instant. Hold the Barrel downward, place the right Thumb upwards, keep the Body
strait, and the right Knee a little bent, hold the Firelock with out-stretch'd
Arms, directly before your Body, the Muzzel standing to the Front.

XIII. Handle your Cartridges. 3 Mot.
Bring the Firelock with both Hands strait to your Body; tell one two, and quit
the Firelock with the right Hand, (holding it with the Left about the Middle in
a Balance) and at the same Time take hold of one of your Cartridges; then tell
one, two, and bring it within an Inch of the Side of the Muzzel, the Thumb
upwards.

XIV. Open your Cartridges. 2 Mot.
Bring the Cartridge to your Mouth and bite off the Top; then tell one, two,
and bring it again to the former Place near the Muzzel.

XV. Charge with Cartridge. 2 Mot.
Bring the Cartridge just above the Muzzel, and turning up the Hand and Elbow
fix it in the same; tell one, two, and slap your two Fingers on the Cartridge
to put it quite in the Barrel, and remain so with your right Elbow square 'till
the following Word of Command.

XVI. Draw your Rammers. 4 Mot.
Seize the Rammer with the Forefinger and Thumb of the right Hand, the Thumb
upwards; tell one, two, and draw it out as far as you can reach; tell one, two,
and take hold of it close to the Stock, turning the Thumb downwards; then tell
one, two, and draw it quite out, holding it between the Thumb and the two
Fore-Fingers, the Arm stretched out, and in a Level with the right Shoulder,
the small End of the Rammer toward you, and the other in a direct Line to the
Front.

XVII. Shorten your Rammers. 3 Mot.
Move the little Finger which supporteth the Rammer, turn the thick End
downwards, holding it full in your right Hand, the Thumb upwards, your arm
stretched out in a Line with your Shoulder; tell one, two, and place the thick
End against your Breast; tell one, two, and slip your Hand down the Rammer
within an Hand's Breadth of the lower End, keeping it in a Line with the
Barrel, the Thumb upwards, and the Elbow turned a little out from the Body.

XVIII. Put them in the Barrels. 6 Mot.
Bring the Rammer a little above the Muzzel, and place the thick End on the
Cartridge; tell one, two, and thrust down the Cartridge as far as your Hand
will permit; tell one, two, raise your Hand and seize the Rammer about the
Middle; tell one, two and thrust it down 'till your Hand touches the Muzzel;
tell one, two, and seize it again at the Top; then tell one, two, and thrust it
down as far as it will go, holding the Rammer in your Hand with the Thumb
upwards.

XIX. Ram down your Charge. 2 Mot.
Draw out your Rammers as far as your Arm unforced will permit; tell one, two,
and ram down the Cartridge with a moderate Force, but a quick Motion, holding
your Rammers as before.

XX. Recover your Rammers. 3 Mot.
Draw the Rammer with a quick Motion until Half of it be out of the Barrel;
tell one, two, quit the Rammer, and seize it close to the Muzzel, with the Hand
turned, the Thumb downwards; then tell one, two, and draw it quite out of the
Barrel, holding it with the thick End toward your Shoulder, observing the same
Position as in Explanation 16.

XXI. Shorten your Rammers. 3 Mot.
Turn the small End of the Rammer down; tell one, two, and place it against
your Breast; then tell one, two, and slip your Hand down the Rammer 'till it
come within a Foot of your Breast, observing further as in Explanation 17.

XXII. Return your Rammers. 6 Mot.
Bring the small End of the Rammer with a gentle turn under the Barrel, and
place it in the Stock; tell one, two, and thrust it in as far as your Hand will
permit; tell one, two, raise your Hand and seize the Rammer about the Middle;
tell one, two, and thrust it down again 'till your Hand touches the Muzzel;
tell one, two, raise your Hand and place the Palm of it on the upper End of the
Rammer; then tell one, two, and thrust it quite down.

XXIII Your right Hands under the Lock. 4 Mot.
[NOTE, This was formerly performed by two Words of Command, but there being
only four Motions in both, the first is omitted and included under the second
Word of Command.]

Hold the Firelock firm to your Breast with your left Hand, and throw off your
Right, extending it in a Line with your Shoulder; tell one, two, and take hold
of the Firelock with a full Hand, placing the Thumb even with the Muzzel; tell
one, two, and thrust the Firelock from you with both Hands, observing the same
Position as is shown in the second Motion in Explanation 12; then tell one,
two, and face on your left Heel to the Left, and turning the Muzzel up at the
same Time, seize the Firelock under the Cock with the right Hand, keeping it
from your Body, and your Hands as low as your Arms without Constraint will
permit.

XXIV. Poize your Firelocks. 1 Mot.
Come briskly to your proper Front, by facing to the Right on your left Heel,
and at the same Time bring the Firelock before you with the right Hand, letting
your Left fall down by your Side (extending the right Arm as in Explanation 2
is directed) so that the bringing up the Firelock, letting the left Hand fall,
and the setting down the right Foot, be done at the same Time.

XXV. Shoulder your Firelocks. 3 Mot.
Bring the Firelock with the right Hand opposite to the left Shoulder, turning
the Barrel outward, and the Muzzel strait up, and at the same Time seize the
Butt-End with your left Hand, placing the Thumb in the Hollow; tell one, two,
and bring the Firelock with both Hands down upon the left Shoulder, keeping
both Elbows square; then tell one, two, and quit your right Hand, letting it
fall down your right Side, and sinking your left Elbow at the same Time:
Observe the Posture as described in Explanation 1.

XXVI. Rest your Firelocks. 4 Mot.
Join your right Hand to your Firelock, as in Explanation 1; tell one, two, and
come to your Poize, as in Explanation 2; tell one, two, and seize your Firelock
with the left Hand, as in Explanation 3; then tell one, two, and come down to
your Rest, as directed by the second Motion of Explanation 3.

XXVII. Order your Firelocks. 3 Mot.
Keep the right Hand in the same Position, and raise the Muzzel in a
perpendicular Line with the Left; tell one, two, and quit the Firelock with the
right Hand, sinking it with the Left, and seize it at the same Time with the
right Hand near the Muzzel, the Thumb upwards; then tell one, two, quit your
left Hand, and place the Butt-End with your Right on the Ground on the Outside
of your right Foot even with the little Toe. This Motion must be done briskly,
that the right Foot and the Butt-End come to the Grounds at the same Time. The
Heels must be in a strait Line, the Toes turned outward, and the right Arm,
from the Hand to the Elbow, must run along the Outside of the Firelock, and the
Left hang down by the left Side.

XXVIII. Ground your Firelocks. 4 Mot.
Turn the Firelock 'till you bring the Barrel toward you, and the Lock
pointing to the Rear, and at the same Time make an Half-face to the Right, lift
up your right Foot and place it against the flat Side of the Butt: tell one,
two, and step directly forward a moderate Pace with the left Foot, slipping
down the right Hand at the same Time to the Middle of the Barrel, lay the
Firelock on the Ground in a strait Line to the Front, the Lock upwards; tell
one, two, and raise yourself up again, bringing back your left Foot to its
former Place, and keep your Body half faced to the right; then tell one, two,
and turn your right Foot on the Heel over the Butt-End, and bring your Body at
the same Time to its proper Front; let your Arms hang down your Sides in an
easy Posture.

XXIX. Take up your Firelocks. 4 Mot.
Turn the right Foot on the Heel to the Right, bringing it over the Butt-End of
the Firelock, and placing it behind it; tell one, two, and step forward with
the left Foot a moderate Pace, taking hold of the Firelock with the right Hand
about the Middle of the Barrel; tell one, two, and raise up yourself and
Firelock, bringing back the left Foot, at the same Time to its former Place;
then tell one, two, and slip your right Hand up as high as the Muzzel, turning
the Barrel toward your right Shoulder, and at the same Time raise up your
right Foot, and place it on the Inside of the Butt; observing the same Position
as is directed by Explanation 27.

XXX. Rest your Firelocks. 3 Mot.
Turn your Thumb inwards and slip your right Hand down the Barrel as far as
your Arm without Constraint will permit; tell one, two, raise the Firelock with
the right Hand before you, and at the same Time take hold of it with the Left
just under the Right; then tell one, two, let go your right Hand and place it
under the Lock, stepping back with the right Foot at the same Time; Observe the
same Position of Body, Feet, and Firelock, as is directed in Explanation 3.

XXXI. Club your Firelocks. 4 Mot.
Keep the Firelock firm in your left Hand, and cast it about with the Right,
bringing up the right Foot at the same Time, and taking hold of the Firelock
with the right Hand as low as you can reach without Constraint, placing the
Guard opposite to your Eyes, the Muzzel and left Thumb downwards, and the Lock
from you; tell one, two, and let go the left Hand and raise the Firelock with
your Right opposite to the left Shoulder, seizing it at the same Time with the
left Hand within an Inch of the Muzzel, keeping your Arms stretched out, and
the Firelock in a perpendicular Line, with the Butt upwards; tell one, two, and
bring it to your left Shoulder with the Lock upwards, keeping your Elbows
square; then tell one, two, and quit the Firelock with your right Hand,
bringing it down nimble to the right Side, observing the same Position of Body
as directed for shouldered Arms.

XXXII. Rest your Firelocks. 4 Mot.
Turn the Firelock with the left Hand, inwards, taking hold of it at the same
Time with the Right an Handful above the left, keeping the Elbows square; tell
one, two, and bring the Firelock with both Hands before the Center of your Body
in a perpendicular Line, raising the Butt high and extending your Arms; tell
one, two, let go your left Hand, sinking the Firelock with your Right, 'till
the Guard comes opposite to your Eyes, seizing it near the Lock at the same
Time with the left Hand, with the Thumb downwards and the right Thumb upwards;
then tell one, two, let go the right Hand and turn the Firelock with the left,
bringing the Butt-End down, and come to your Rest by placing the right Hand
under the Cock, and at the same Time stepping back with your right Foot.

XXXIII. Secure your Firelocks. 3 Mot.
Come briskly to your Poize; tell one, two, and bring the Firelock opposite to
your left Shoulder, turning the Barrel outward, and keeping the Muzzel
directly up, seizing it at the same Time with the left Hand about four Inches
above the Cock; then tell one, two, quit your right Hand and bring the Firelock
with the left under your left Arm, placing the Lock a little below the Elbow,
the Barrel downward, and the Muzzel within a Foot of the Ground.

XXXIV. Shoulder your Firelocks. 5 Mot.
Bring the Firelock with a quick Motion before you with the left Hand, the
Muzzel upwards and the Lock to the Front, and at the same Time seize it under
the Cock with the right Hand; tell one, two, and throw it from you with the
right Hand, letting your Left go, at the same Time come to your Poize; tell
one, two, bring it opposite to your left Shoulder, and clap your left Hand on
the Butt; tell one, two, and place it on your left Shoulder; then tell one,
two, and quit your right Hand, according to the Directions in Explanation 25.

The Exercise of the Bayonett is here omitted, but those who have a Mind to see
in what Manner it is performed, may meet with full Satisfaction in Col. BLAND'S
Military Discipline, from Page 29 to 34. It is only necessary to add here, that
when the Battalion is to make ready at three Words of Command, it is to be
performed in the following Manner:

I. Make ready.
At this they are to perform all that is contained in the first four Words of
Command of the Manual Exercise.

II. Present.
At this Command they are only to perform what is directed by the 5th Word of
Command of the said Exercise.

III. Give Fire.
This is performed as in Explanation 6 is directed; after which they are to go
on with the Exercise, 'till they have prim'd and leaded, and when they come to
the shouldering of the Firelock they are to finish, which includes the 25th
Word of Command.

The END of the MANUAL EXERCISE of the FOOT.

CHAP. II.
The EVOLUTIONS of the FOOT.
THE Evolutions of the Foot, as they were practiced by the Foot during the late
War in Flanders.

Note, When the Evolutions are to be performed, the Officers are to be at their
Posts of Exercise in the Rear, and the Files open.

Have a Care to perform your Evolutions.

As soon as this Notice is given there must be a profound Silence observed
throughout the Battalion, and the Soldiers are immediately to straiten their
Ranks and Files. To straiten their Ranks, they must take Care that neither Head
nor Body be seen before or behind one another, and their Heels must be placed
in a strait Line. To straiten the Files, those in the Front Rank are to divide
the Ground equally between them; and those of the other five Ranks, who stand
in file, must stand with their Faces directly opposite to the middle of the
Neck of the File-Leader. They must carry their Firelocks firm on their
Shoulders, and raise their Muzzels high, that they may not clash in their
Facings.

The Major, or other Officer, who exercises the Battalion, then proceeds,

I. Rear half Files, to the Right double your Front. -- March.
The three rear Ranks, that is, the fourth, fifth, and sixth, are to march up
and double the front half Files to the right; thus the fourth doubles into the
Front, the fifth into the second, and the sixth into the third.

Upon the Word March, (between which and the other Words of Command, there
should be a considerable Pause) the aforementioned Ranks are to step at once
forward with their left Feet, marching slowly and counting twelve Paces, the
last of which brings them to the Right of those they are to double. They are to
march very slow, and take great Care that the Whole move like one Man, carrying
their Heads and Bodies upright, and their Arms high and firm on their
Shoulders. In all Movements to the Front they are to begin with their left Feet.

These are standing Rules, and constantly to be observed.

II. To the Left as you were.
The Ranks that doubled face at once to the Left on their right Heels, by
stepping half a Pace backwards with the left Feet; and stand thus 'till the
following Word of Command:

III. March.
The forementioned half Files list up their left Feet, and march back to their
former Ground, their right Feet making the twelfth and last Step; in which
Position they are to remain 'till the next Word of Command:

IV. Halt.
The said half Files face to the Right about on their Heels, and immediately
dress their Ranks and Files.

V. Rear half Files, to the Left double your Front. -- March.
The rear half Files step forward with their left Feet, and double to the Left
of their Leaders, as they did before to the Right; and observe the same
Directions in their marching as are given in Explanation 1.

VI. To the Right as you were.
Those who doubled face to the Right on their left Heels, by stepping half a
Pace backwards with their right Feet.

VII. March.
The said half Files march to their former Ground, their left Feet making the
twelfth and last Pace, which they are to set down in the same Place they were
before, keeping the right Feet a little behind the Left, in which Position they
remain 'till the next Word of Command.

VIII. Halt.
The foresaid half Files face to the Left about on their left Heels, and
straiten their Ranks and Files.

IX. Front half Files, to the Right double your Rear.
The first, second, and third Ranks face to the Right about on their right
Heels, and stand thus ready to march and double at the next Word.

X. March.
Those who faced step at once toward the Rear with their right Feet, marching
slow, 'till the third Rank doubles the sixth, the second into the fifth, and
the first into the forth; and by counting twelve Paces their left Feet makes
the last, which they are to place by the right Feet of those they double,
facing full to the Left of the Battalion, and the Muzzel of their Firelocks
(which they are to carry high on this Occasion) pointing in a Line to the
Right, and so remain 'till the following Word of Command.

XI. Halt.
The foresaid front half Files face to the Right on their left Heels by falling
briskly back with their right Feet.

XII. Front half Files, as you were. -- March.
The half Files that doubled step forward with their left Feet, and march
slowly in twelve Paces to their former Ground, taking Care to place their Heels
in those Places they stood on before; after which they are to straiten their
Ranks and Files.

XIII. Front half Files, to the Left double your Rear.
The foresaid half Files face to the Left about on their left Heels, and stand
ready to march.

XIV. March.
Those who faced step with their left Feet toward the Rear, and counting
twelve Paces, march slowly 'till they come to the Left of those they doubled
before to the Right, and place their right Feet close to the lest of those they
double, turning at the same Time their Faces and Bodies full to the Right of
the Battalion, and the Muzzel of their Firelocks pointed to the Left, remain in
that Position 'till the following Command.

XV. Halt.
The foresaid half Files face to the Left on their right Heels, by falling back
with their left Feet.

XVI. Front half Files, as you were. -- March.
The said half Files step forward with their left Feet, and march to their
former Ground, as in Explanation 12 is directed.

Note, As the Foot are always to be drawn up three deep, that is in three
Ranks, when they are to go upon Action, or through their Firings; the Use of
doubling the front and rear half Files is self evident, since it is by those
Movements that a Battalion is brought from six to three deep, and therefore
necessary for the Men to perform now and then.

XVII. Half Ranks to the Right, double your Files by Divisions.
As every Division is sub-divided into two, the Half on the Right of each
Division is called the Right half Ranks, and that on the Left is the Left half
Ranks. At this Word of Command the left half Ranks face to the Right on the
left Heels.

XVIII. March.
The half Ranks that faced lift up their left Feet together, and step in a
direct Line to the Rear, a moderate Pace; after which they are to face together
to the Left on their left Heels, and then march, beginning with their left
Feet, in a strait Line to the Right, 'till the right Hand Men of those who
double come opposite to the right Hand Men that stood, at which they are all to
stand, taking Care to place their left Feet foremost, and directly in a Line
with the left Feet of those whom they are to double, looking full to the right
of the Battalion.

XIX. Halt.
The aforesaid half Ranks face to the Left on their left Heels, and immediately
straiten their Ranks and Files.

XX. Half Ranks that doubled, to the Left as you were.
The aforesaid half Ranks face to the Left on their left Heels; and so remain
'till the following Word.

XXI. March.
Those who faced lift up their left Feet together, and march in a strait Line
to the Left, 'till they come opposite to the Ground they first stood on; at
which they are to make a short stand, and face at once nimbly to the Right on
their right Heels; after which they are to make another short stand, and then
march forward, beginning with their left Feet, into their former Ground.

XXII. Half Ranks to the Left, double your Files by Divisions.
The right half Ranks, or those who stood, face at once to the left on their
right Heels.

XXIII. March.
The half Ranks who faced, lift up their right Feet together, and step a
moderate Pace directly to the Rear; after which they are to face to the Right
on their right Heels, and then march, beginning with their right Feet, in a
strait Line to the Left, 'till they come opposite to the left Hand Men who
stand, placing their right Feet foremost, and directly in a Line with the right
Feet of those Men whom they are to double, looking full to the Left of the
Battalion.

XXIV. Halt.
The foresaid half Ranks face to the Right on their right Heels, and
immediately straiten their Ranks and Files.

XXV. To the Right as you were,
The half Ranks that doubled face to the Right on their right Heels.

XXVI. March.
The foresaid half Ranks step at once with their right Feet, and march in a
strait Line to the Right, 'till they come opposite to the Ground they stood on
before, and then making a short stand, they are to face to the Left on their
left Heels, and after a short Pause, march up to their former Ground.

Ranks doubling of Files may be performed by the half Ranks of the whole
Battalion, the Use of which was to enlarge the Intervals, to make Room for
Battalions or Squadrons to pass through them; but as the doubling the Files in
that Manner in Time of Action, would take up too much Time, they have fallen
upon a quicker and more safe Way of doing it, by wheeling back two or three
Plattoons, or as many as are requisite, and as soon as the Troops are passed,
the Plattoons are immediately wheeled up again; for which Reason the doubling
the half Ranks of the whole Battalion has been disused. But as the half Ranks
of every Division doubling their Files, is of singular Use in the marching of
any Number of Troops for the passing of Defiles, Bridges, or Passes, not broad
enough to contain the Front of a Division entire, they are then to march off by
half Ranks, as is above shown, by the doubling; and as soon as they are passed
they are to move up again, for which Reason they have been continued in the
Evolutions now practiced.

After the doubling of the half Ranks, the Officers are to be ordered to take
their Posts in the Front of the Battalion.

XXVII. To the Right and Left, close your Files to the Center by Divisions.
Each Division faces to the Right and Left inwards, thus, the right half Ranks
face to the Left on their right Heels, and the left half Ranks to the Right on
their left Heels; the half Ranks of each Division facing one another. The
Officers are to face with the Men, and on the same Feet they do, according as
they are posted on the right or left of the Ranks.

XXVIII. March.
At this Word of Command the Officers and Soldiers are to lift up their Feet
together, beginning with those they faced on, and marching slowly toward the
Center of each Division, they are to close within half a Pace of one another,
and then stand, placing the Feet foremost they faced on.

The Officers and Sergeants are to march and keep an equal Pace with the Files
opposite to them, and to stand when they do.

XXIX. Halt.
At this Command they are all to come nimbly to their proper Front on the Heels
they before faced on, viz. the right half Ranks on their right Heels, and the
others on their left Heels.

XXX. Rear Ranks, close your Front. -- March.
The front Rank stands, the other five step at once forward with their left
Feet, and marching very slow, close their Ranks within a Pace of one another,
and then stand. ( See after No. LV. Page 24.)

Before we proceed to the following Words of Command, which are for the
Wheeling, it will be proper to lay down general Rules for the performing them.

General Rules for Wheeling.
The Circle is divided into four equal Parts: Wheeling to the Right or Left, is
only a Quarter of the Circle.

Wheeling to the Right or Left about, is one Half of the Circle.

When you wheel to the Right, you are to close to the Right so near as to touch
the right hand Man, and to look to the Left (without turning the Head) in order
to bring the Rank about even.

When you wheel to the Left, you are to close to the Left, and look to the
Right as above directed.

This Rule will serve for all Wheelings by Ranks; as when a Battalion is
marching by Sub-divisions, with their Ranks open, then each Rank wheels
distinctly by it self, when it comes to the Ground on which the Rank before it
wheeled, but not before.

In wheeling, the Men are to take particular Care neither to open nor close
their Ranks, and to carry their Firelocks high and firm on their Shoulders.

In wheeling, the Motion of each Man is quicker or slower according to the
Distance he is from the Right or Left, the Circle that every Man wheels being
larger according to the Distance he is from the Hand he wheels to.

XXXI. To the Right, wheel by Divisions. -- March.
At this Command they all step forward with their left Feet, and wheel to the
Right a Quarter of the Circle.

The right hand Man of the front Rank of every Division must turn on his right
Heel, without taking it out of its Place, and bring his Body and left Foot
about with the Rank, according as it moves quicker or slower.

All the Men in the front Rank are to keep their Bodies in a direct Line with
the left hand Man of their Division.

All Wheelings are to be done slow; and even those Men on the extreme Parts of
the Ranks, are not to exceed a moderate Pace.

The Officers are to wheel on the Head of their several Divisions, and the
Sergeants on the Flanks and in the Rear.

As soon as the Divisions have wheeled a Quarter of the Circle, the Major is to
proceed to the next Word of Command.

XXXII. Halt.
At this they are to stand and dress their Ranks and Files.

XXXIII. To the Right wheel. -- March.
All the Divisions wheel a Quarter of the Circle again to the Right, which
brings the Battalion to face to the Rear. The Directions in Explanation 31,
must be punctually observed.

XXXIV. Halt.
As in Explanation 32.

XXXV. To the Right, wheel. -- March.
As in Explanation 31 and 33, by which they face to the Left of the Battalion.

XXXVI. Halt.
As in Explanation 32 and 34.

XXXVII. To the Right wheel, -- March.
This Wheel compleats the Circle, at four Times, and brings them to their
proper Front.

XXXVIII. Halt.
As in Explanation 32 is directed.

XXXIX. Wheel to the Right about, -- March.
By this Word of Command all the Divisions are to wheel one Half of the Circle
to the Right.

XL. Halt.
As in Explanation 32.

XLI. Wheel to the Right about, -- March.
This Wheel compleats the Circle at twice, and brings them to their proper
Front.

XLII. Halt.
As in Explanation 32

XLIII. To the Left wheel, -- March.
The Divisions are to wheel to the Left a Quarter of the Circle, as they did
before to the Right; with this Difference, that the left Hand Man of the front
Rank of each Division, must keep his left Heel in its Place (as the right Hand
Men did their right Heels, when they wheeled to the Right) and by casting his
Eye to the Right, bring his Body and right Foot about with the Rank, according
as it shall move quick or slow.

All the Men in the front Rank are to keep their Bodies in a strait Line with
the right Hand Man, that the Rank may be kept even in wheeling.

The rear Ranks are to incline a little to the Right when they wheel to the
Left, observing further as in Explanation 31 is directed, as also the general
Rules for wheeling.

XLIV. Halt.
As in Explanation 32.

XLV. To the Left wheel, -- March.
As in Explanation 43.

XLVI. Halt.
As in Explanation 32.

XLVII. To the Left wheel, -- March.
As in Expla. 43.

XLVIII. Halt.
As in Expla. 32.

XLIX. To the Left wheel, -- March.
As in Expla. 43. which compleats the Circle.

L. Halt.
As in Expla. 32.

LI. Wheel to the Left about, -- March.
This Wheel is one Half of the Circle to the Left.

LII. Halt.
As in Expla. 32.

LIII. Wheel to the Left about, -- March.
This Wheel brings the Divisions to their proper Front, and compleats all the
Wheelings that are now practiced in the Evolutions.

When you would shorten them, it may be done by wheeling only twice to the
Right, and then to the Right about; and the same to the Left.

LIVE. Halt.
As in Expla. 32.

LV. Rear Ranks, to the Right about as you were.
The front Rank stands; the other five, which had closed forward, face to the
Right about on their left Heels, and wait for the following Words of Command to
march back to their former Distance.

The second Rank must raise the Muzzel of their Firelocks very high, that they
may not clash against those of the front Rank in facing.

LVI. March.
They are to begin with the Feet they faced on, the rear Rank moving first, and
when they have marched three Paces, the fifth Rank is to begin; and as soon as
that Rank has marched three Paces, the fourth Rank is to move; the third and
second Ranks observing the same Rule, are all to march slowly, each Rank
counting the following Paces, viz. The Rear or sixth Rank to march fifteen
Paces; the fifth Rank twelve; the fourth Rank nine; the third Rank six; and the
second Rank three Paces; which brings them all to their former Distance of four
Paces between each Rank; after which they are to stand placing the left Feet
foremost.

If the lifting up and setting down of the same Feet together is duly observed,
they will all come to their Ground at the same Instant of Time.

LVII. Halt.
The foresaid Ranks face to the Left about on their left Heels, and immediately
straiten their Ranks and Files.

LVIII. Files to the Right and Left outward, open to your former Distance.
The right half Ranks of every Division face to the Right on their left Heels,
and the left half Ranks face to the Left on their right Heels; by which facing
the half Ranks of every Division stand Back to Back.

The Officers are to face as the half Ranks do on which they are posted, at the
same Time and in the same Manner as the Men; if there are three Officers on a
Division, those in the Center of the Division stand still without facing. The
Sergeants are to follow the same Directions.

LIX. March.
The right and left Hand File of each Division lift up the Feet they faced on
together, and march slowly to their former Ground, and then stand, placing the
same Feet foremost, which are those next the Front.

No File is to move 'till the File before it is got to its proper distance. See
the Directions for opening the Files in the III. Article of the III. Chapter,
to which the Officers are likewise reserr'd for their's.

LX. Halt.
At this Word of Command, both Officers and Soldiers face to their proper
Front: The half Ranks on the Right face to the Left on their left Heels; and
the half Ranks on the Left face to the Right on their right Heels; and
immediately straiten their Ranks and Files.

LXI. Rest your Firelocks.
As in Explanation 26 of the Foot Exercise, Page 9.

LXII. Order your Firelocks.
As in Expla. 27.

LXIII. Ground your Firelocks.
As in Expla. 28.

LXIV. Face to the Right about.
The whole Battalion must face to the Right about on their left Heels, and wait
for the following Word of Command.

LXV. March.
At this they are to lift up their left Feet together, and march between the
Files of Arms 'till they have all got beyond the rear Ranks; after which they
are not obliged to keep their Ranks and Files, but may mix together; however
they must do it in such a Manner that they may be ready to repair to their Arms
on the first Order; which may be done by beat of Drum or any other Signal, as
the Commanding Officer shall think proper.

The Officers are not to march into the Rear with the Men; but after they have
fixed their half Pikes in the Ground, may walk about in the Front.

The Ensigns are to do the same with the Colors, and to place one of the Men
with his Sword drawn, Sentinel over them. The Sergeants are likewise to fix
their Halberts in the Ground.

LXVI. To your Arms.
As soon as this Word of Command is given, the Men are all to run to their
Arms, drawing their Swords, and holding them in their right Hands with the
Points up. The Officers at the same Time are to repair to their Posts.

LXVII. Return your Swords. 3 Mot.
They are to turn the Point of their Swords downwards, and looking to the Left
enter them in the Scabbards; tell one, two, and thurst them quite in; then tell
one, two, and bring their right Hands back to their right Sides.

LXVIII. Take up your Firelocks.
This is done as in Explanation 29 of the Manual Exercise. Page 11.

LXIX. Rest your Firelocks.
As in Expla. 30. Ibid.

LXX. Shoulder your Firelocks.
Bring your Firelock to a Poize, as in Explanation 24. tell one, two, and clap
your left Hand on the Butt; tell one, two, and lay it on your left Shoulder;
tell one, two, and bring down your right Hand, as in Explanation 25 is directed.

The END of the EVOLUTIONS.

CHAP. III.
Directions for forming a Battalion, posting of Officers, etc.
Article I.
WHEN the Companies are come to the Place where they are to form into
Battalion, they draw up according to Seniority, thus; The Colonel's Company, or
eldest, on the Right; the Lieut. Colonel's, or second, on the Left; the
Major's, or third Company, on the left of the Colonel's; the fourth on the
right of the Lieut. Colonel's; and so on from Right to Left, 'till the youngest
comes in the Center. As the Companies draw up, the Subalterns are to move up to
the Front, Method of Officers posting in Companies.
the Lieutenants placing themselves on the right of the Captains, and the
Ensigns on the Left, toward the Flanks of the Companies. The Sergeants are to
form themselves in the rear of the rear Ranks; and the Drummers are to march
about thirty Paces in the Front, where the Drum-major is to form them into a
Rank entire, opposite to the Center and facing the Battalion, in which Position
they are to remain 'till the Major orders the Officers to their Posts.

Let it be a standing Rule for the Companies to leave an Interval of a good
Space between them, when they draw up in Battalion, and march in with their
Files complete; and if they have any odd Men, let 'em fall in the Rear of the
rear Rank, where the Adjutant or Serjeant-major should join them together, form
them into Files, and draw 'em up in the Intervals between the Companies. As the
Companies draw up, the Captains should immediately face their Men, and order
them to cover their File-leaders, and see that they do it: after which they are
to face to their proper Front.

The Intervals which remain between the Companies after the odd Men are formed,
must be closed by facing the Companies to the Right and Left inwards, or by
ordering the flank Men of those Companies, where the Intervals happen to divide
the Ground between them; which is the shortest Way.

If there be any Grenadiers, they must draw up to the Right of the Colonel's
Company, and have an Interval between them equal to the Front of the Company,
that when the Files are opened they may join the Battalion.

When the Battalion draws up six deep, the Grenadiers are to do the same, but
if the Battalion, on Account of its Weakness, draws up but four deep, the
Grenadiers draw up but three deep.

Article II.
SO soon as the Men are formed and the Intervals closed, the Major orders the
Officers to take their Posts in Battalion; which is done by Seniority of
Commission, Method of Officers posting in Battalion.
thus; The eldest Captain is to place himself on the Right of the Battalion;
the second Captain on the Left; the third on the Left of the eldest; the fourth
on the Right of the second; and so on, 'till the youngest Ensign comes to the
Center.

The Captains and Subalterns are to dress in the same Line, about two good
Paces before the front Rank, and to divide the Ground equally between them, so
as to cover the Front of the Battalion.

There must be a Sergeant placed on the right and left Flank of each Rank, to
dress them: The rest of the Sergeants are to range themselves in the Rear of
the Battalion, about four Paces from the rear Rank. If there are not Sergeants
enough, then there must be but three placed on the right Wing, and three on the
left, in this Order. On the Right, a Sergeant to the 1 st, 3 d, and 5 th Ranks;
and on the Left, a Sergeant to the 2 d, 4 th, and 6 th Ranks.

The Drummers are to divide into three Divisions; the Drum-major with the
First, are to post themselves on the Right of the Colonel's Company; the second
Division on the Left of the Lieutenant Colonel's Company, and both to dress in
a Line with the front Rank of Men; the third Division of Drums, with the
Hautboys, are to post themselves in the Rear of the Ensigns in the Center.

When the Battalion is drawn up, the Colonel's Post is in the Center, about
four Paces before the Ensigns with the Colors. The Lieutenant Colonel's Post
is a little to the left of the Colonel's, about three Paces from the Rank of
Officers.

When there is no General or superior Officer present to see the Exercise
performed, the Colonel does not take his Post at the Head of the Battalion, but
remains in the Front, without taking his half Pike in his Hand, to give the
Major necessary Orders about the Exercise; in this Case the Lieutenant Colonel
is to post himself at the Head of the Battalion, with his half Pike in his
Hand: But if the Colonel is absent, he then remains in the Front in the same
Manner as before mentioned for the Colonel, the sole Command then devolving on
the Lieutenant Colonel.

When ever the Regiment is drawn out, no Officer must be absent without Leave,
but each stand at the Post assigned him, with his Arms in his Hand, expecting
such Orders as he may receive, either to exercise the whole Battalion, a Part
of it, or a single Company, as the commanding Officer shall direct; which he is
always to perform with his half Pike or Partisan in his Hand.

Article III.
AFTER the Divisions are told off, the Major is to proceed to the opening of
Files, by the following Words of Command:

To the Left, open your Files.
At this both Officers and Soldiers face nimbly to the Left on their right
Heels, excepting the File on the Right of the Battalion, and the eldest
Captain, who must stand still.

The Sergeants on the right Flank of the Battalion, and the first Division of
Drummers, face at the same Time to the Right on their left Heels, in which
Position the Whole are to remain 'till the next Word of Command. But before we
proceed to that, it is necessary to give Directions for the proper Distances of
Ranks and Files, according to the several Occasions, which are as follow, viz.

In drawing up a Battalion for Exercise or Review, the Ranks are to be at four
ordinary Paces Distance from one another.

When they are to fire, either by Ranks, Plattoons, the whole Battalion, or in
the Square, the Ranks are to be moved up to half Distance, or two Paces.

In all Wheelings, either by Division, or the whole Battalion, the Ranks are to
be closed forward to close Order, which is one Pace Distance.

The Files are to be opened to the Distance of one Pace, or the Length of an
out-stretch'd Arm; that is, When the Men are faced to their proper Front, order
the front Rank to stretch out their right Arms to the Right, and if they can
touch the left Shoulder of their right hand Men, they have their proper
Distance; and then let the Men of the rear Ranks dress with their File-Leaders,
or those in the Front.

When they are to fire, the Files are to be at half a Pace Distance; that is,
such a Distance that when the Arm is set bent against the Side, the Elbow is to
touch the right hand Man.

In marching or wheeling, the Files must be so close as that the Men may almost
touch one another with their Shoulders. These Things being known, I proceed to
the second Word of Command in opening the Files, viz.

March.
As soon as this Word is given, the Division of Drummers on the Left lift up
their right Feet together, and march very slow (without opening their Distance
from one another) in a direct Line to the Left: The Sergeants on the left Flank
carrying their Halberts with both Hands before them, the Spear upwards, move at
the same Time to the Left, beginning also with the right Feet; and as soon as
they have opened to a Pace Distance from the left hand File, that File is then
to move, and so on, one File after another, 'till the Whole are opened to their
proper Distance, as is already directed.

In opening the Files, each File must move at once, all the Men in it beginning
with the same Feet, and taking them up and setting them down together; for this
End, the Men in the front Rank, who are called File-Leaders, must not begin to
move 'till those before them are at a proper Distance; the other five Ranks
being to observe their Motions: In order the better to effect which, observe
the following,

Rules for the opening the Files, viz.
In the opening and closing the Files, or marching all together to the Right or
Left to change their Ground, they should begin with the Feet next the Front.
When they face to the Right it must be done on the left Heels, and so vice
versa. And as soon as the Men of the first File on the Left of the Battalion
lift up their right Feet a second Time, the Men of the second File are to lift
up their right Feet; and when those of the second File lift up their right Feet
a second Time, the Men of the third File are to begin with their right Feet;
and so the rest of the Files are to follow the same Directions 'till the Whole
have opened.

In doing this they are to take but short Steps, and to move on very slow, but
with an equal Pace, all lifting up and setting down their right Feet together,
and doing the same with their Left. And this being constantly observed will
bring the Men to walk with a bolder Air, giving them a freer Use of their
Limbs, and a Notion of Time; by which Means they will perform their Exercise
with the greater Exactness.

The Men of the five rear Ranks must keep in a strait Line with their File
leaders, and neither close nor open their Ranks in marching; but carry their
Arms high and firm on their Shoulders, looking up and keeping their Bodies
strait.

The Officers are to carry their half Pikes or Partisans downwards, and the
Ensigns to advance the Colors.

No Officer is to move 'till the File opposite to him does; and when the Men of
that File step forward with their right Feet, he is to do the same with his,
keeping an equal Pace, and in a direct Line with them.

The Sergeants in the Rear must observe the same Rule; only they must carry
their Halberts as is directed for those on the Flank.

As soon as the second File on the Right of the Battalion, which is the last to
open, steps forward, the Major then proceeds to the next Word of Command.

Halt.
On giving this Word of Command the Officers and Men are to face briskly to the
Right on their right Heels, those Feet being then foremost, if the foregoing
Rules are observed. But least they should not, a Stroke of a Drum should be
given when they are to stand, that they may have Time to place their right Feet
in a Line with the Left, or a little before them; and after a Pause of half a
Minute, the Major is to give the Word, Halt. And as soon as they are faced, the
Sergeants must dress the Ranks and Files.

When the Ranks and Files are dressed, the Officers are to take their Posts of
Exercise in the Rear of the Battalion; which is done, either by Word of
Command, or Signal by the Drum. If by the Drum,

First, a Preparative is beat, then a Flam; at which the Officers advance their
Pikes at two Motions, and at the same Time the Sergeants their Halberts, in the
same Manner, and stand so 'till the second Flam; at which the Officers face on
their left Heel to the Right about, and the Sergeants to the Right and Left
outward from the Center. Upon the Troop, the Officers march slow 'till they
are twelve Paces beyond the rear Rank, the Sergeants marching at the same Time,
but quicker: Those on the Right and Left of the front Rank march strait out,
followed by the others, until they have got eight Paces farther into the Front
than where the Major has posted himself, and then face to the Right and Left
inward, each marching from thence in a strait Line until their Leaders meet in
the Center, having twelve, six or four on the Flanks, as the Number then in the
Field will admit of. The Hautboys and Drums march out to the Front, and post
themselves between the Major and the Sergeants. At the third Flam, the Officers
face on their left Heels to the Left about, and the Sergeants in the Front face
to the Right and Left inwards. At the fourth Flam, the Officers and Sergeants
are to order their Arms, and continue in that Posture during the Exercise, or
until they are commanded otherwise.

When the Officers are ordered back to their former Posts, a Preparative will
beat, after that a Flam; upon which the Officers advance their Pikes, and the
Sergeants their Halberts; the Sergeants in the Front face to the Right and Left
outward from the Center, and those on the Flanks to the Right and Left about.
Upon the Troop, the Officers march slow to the Front; the Sergeants, Hautboys
and Drums quick to their former Posts, and then face to their proper Front. On
the second Flam the Officers and Sergeants order their Arms, except the
Grenadier Officers, who are to rest their Fusees on their left Arms.

If by Word of Command; in Place of the Preparative, OFFICERS TAKE CARE: For
the first Flam, ADVANCE YOUR ARMS: For the second Flam, TO THE RIGHT ABOUT: For
the Troop, MARCH: For the third Flam, HALT: For the fourth Flam, ORDER YOUR
ARMS.

In ordering them back to their Posts; in Place of a Preparative OFFICERS TAKE
CARE: For the first Flam, ADVANCE YOUR ARMS: For the Troop, MARCH: For the
second Flam, HALT.

The Officers are to perform every Part of the foregoing Ceremonies together,
both in advancing their half Pikes and ordering them, facing, marching, and
halting; for the doing of which, they are to take every Motion from the Officer
on the Right.

Article IV.
AS soon as the Officers, etc. are returned to their Posts, the Files are to be
closed, by the following Words of Command:

I. To the Right, close your Files.
The eldest Captain, and the right Hand File of the Battalion, stand as before
directed in opening; all the rest face at once to the Right on their left
Heels. As soon as they are faced, the Ensigns advance the Colors, and the
Sergeants their Halberts: And then the Major proceeds:

II. March.
At this Command they all lift up the Feet they faced on, and march slow 'till
the Files are closed to their former Distance, that is of half a Pace.

The Officers march with their Arms downwards, the Ensigns with their Colors,
and the Sergeants with their Halberts advanced; and all observe the same Rules
in closing as in opening, and the Men are to observe to lift up and set down
the same Feet together; and when they are closed to their proper Distance they
are to stand, placing the Feet they faced on a little before the other: Alter
which the Major gives the following Word of Command.

III. Halt.
At this Word, all face to their proper Front, on the same Feet they just
before faced on, and immediately straiten their Ranks and Files.

If the Battalion is to be dismissed as soon as the Files are closed, the
Colors are to be lodged by a Detachment from the Companies to which they
belong, headed by the Lieutenant and the Ensigns, carrying the Colors advanced
and flying; and as soon as they are arrived at the Place they are to be lodged
in, the Detachment is to be drawn up, and the Colors to be furled and lodged,
and then he is to order the Detachment to rest their Firelocks, then Club, and
dismiss them with the Ruff of the Drum.

After the Colors are lodged, the Major orders the Officers, Sergeants, and
Drummers to their Companies, and then orders the Whole to Club, by these Words,

I. Rest your Firelocks. II. Club your Firelocks.
And as soon as these Motions are performed, the Companies may be ordered to
march off from the Right or Left, to their Barracks, or Place where they are to
be dismissed.

When ever the Men march with club'd Arms, the Officers are to advance their
half Pikes, and the Sergeants their Halberts; the Captain and Ensign are to
march in the Front (the Ensign a little behind the Captain) and the Lieutenant
in the Rear of the Company or Detachment, the Drummers are to march between the
Ensign and the front Rank, beating the Troop.

When the Regiment draws out, the Major and Adjutant should be always on
Horseback, it being impossible for them to perform their Duty on Foot, in the
Manner it ought to be done: They are to exercise the Regiment on Horseback, but
no other Officer is to do it mounted, unless such, who in their Absence are
appointed to their Duty.

When the commanding Officer orders any of the other Officers to exercise the
Battalion, or a Part of it, they are to do it on Foot, with their half Pikes or
Partisans in their Hands: And this should be frequently done for the
Instruction of the Officers.

CHAP. IV. Containing Directions for the different Firings of the Foot.
Article I.
AS soon as the Exercise is over, and the Officers returned to the Front, the
next Thing which they generally proceed to, is the different Firings; for which
End the following Particulars are to be first performed.

First, The Rear half Files are to be doubled to the Left, as in Explanation 5,
of the Evolutions.

Secondly, The Grenadiers are to be divided on the Right and Left of the
Battalion, in the following Manner, viz.

The Company of the Grenadiers is to be divided into two Platoons, the Captain
and second Lieutenant placing themselves at the Head of that on the Right, and
the first Lieutenant on that on the Left. One Sergeant and one Drummer are to
remain with the right Platoon, the other two Sergeants and Drummer are to march
with the Left.

When the Grenadiers are thus divided, the first Lieutenant, with his Platoon,
is to march along the Ranks of the Battalion, 'till the right hand File of his
Platoon has got one Pace beyond the left hand File of the Battalion, and then
Halt, and make them dress with the Battalion.

The Front Rank of the Grenadiers marches between the Officers and the front
Rank of the Battalion; the center Rank of Grenadiers, between the front and
center Ranks; and the rear Rank of Grenadiers, between the center and rear
Ranks of the Battalion.

As soon as the left hand Files of the right Platoon of Grenadiers comes within
a Pace of the right hand File of the Battalion, the Captain is to order them to
halt, and make them dress with the others.

Thirdly, The Major is to order the Men to fix their Bayonetts, it being the
Custom to perform the Firings with the Bayonetts fixed; which however may be
omitted in common Exercise; but never in Service.

Fourthly, When the Bayonetts are fixed, the Battalion is to be divided into
Platoons; the Number of which must depend on the Strength of the Battalion, and
the particular Firings you intend to perform. Neither is a Platoon composed of
any fixed Number of Files; (I mean those of three deep, which are commonly
called Half-files, because a File of Men are taken for fix, in the ordinary Way
of speaking; whereas, the true Meaning of the Word File, signifies all those
Men who stand in a direct Line from Front to Rear: So that there being three,
four, or six deep, does not alter the Sense, or change it from being a File)
but may be more or less, as the Battalion will allow it: However a Platoon is
seldom composed of less than ten Files, which are thirty Men, or more than
sixteen Files, which are forty eight Men; because a Platoon composed of less
than ten Files would not be of Weight enough to do any considerable Execution;
and those above Sixteen, would be too great a Body of Men for an Officer to
manage upon Service.

In dividing the Battalion into Platoons they should be composed of an equal
Number of Files, or at least not above one File stronger than another, and
those should be the Flank and Color Platoons.

As soon as the Platoons are told off, there must be an Officer appointed to
each to command them; taking an equal Proportion of Captains, Lieutenants and
Ensigns, for that Purpose.

The Lieutenant Colonel, with the remaining Part of the Officers, are to march
and post themselves in the Rear of the Battalion, in the same Manner as they do
at Exercise. The Lieutenant Colonel opposite to the Color Platoon.

The Sergeants should be divided to the several Platoons, and posted in the
Rear of them.

The Colonel and the Ensigns with the Colors, remain in their former Posts, at
the Head of the Battalion.

The Interval between each Platoon should be but one Pace, and the Officer who
commands the Platoon, is to fall into it when they fire.

The Officers in the Rear are to keep the Men up, and see that they do their
Duty in Action; and also to lead the Battalion off in Order, when they are
commanded to retire.

The Method which is now practiced, and which is found to be the most useful,
is the dividing the Platoons into several Firings; each Firing being seldom
composed of less than four Platoons, or more than five, which Firings are not
kept together in one Part of the Battalion, but the Platoons of each firing
distributed into different Parts of the Regiment. The Reasons for it are these,
viz.

First, The disposing the Platoons of each Firing into different Parts of the
Battalion, will extend your Fire in such a Manner, as to do Execution in
different Parts of the opposite Regiment.

Secondly, By their being divided in this Manner, should the Enemy and you join
before those Platoons have Time to load, not any one Part of your Battalion is
very much weakened.

Thirdly, Should the Platoons of each Firing be together, too great a Part of
the Battalion would be exposed in one Place before the Men could load,
particularly the flank Firings.

Lastly, The Firings being thus disposed, it makes the Exercise appear more
beautiful, and accustoms the Men to hear firing on their Right and Left,
without touching their Arms 'till they have Orders for it.

Article II.
FOR the better explaining the different Firings, and the Distribution of the
Platoons of each Firing, in several Parts of the Regiment, there is hereunto
annexed three Plans, the first consisting of eighteen Platoons, composing three
firings of five Platoons each, and a Reserve of three Platoons: The second Plan
consists of fifteen Platoons, divided into three Firings of five Platoons each;
the third is of twelve Platoons, divided into three Firings of four Platoons
each.

The two Platoons of Grenadiers are included in the above Number, and always
make a Part of the Reserve; but when the Battalion is told off only in three
Firings, they are then included in the last firing.

The Platoon marked with the Letter A, in the annexed Plans, are those of the
first firings.

Those marked B, of the second firings.

Those marked C, of the third firings.

And those marked D, are of the reserve.

By which Means the different Firings may be seen at one View, and how the
Platoons of each firing fall into the several Parts of the Battalion.

The Rule laid down in these Plans may be varied, if the commanding Officer
thinks proper otherwise to dispose of the Platoons of the different Firings;
because the Circumstances of Time and Place, or the Situation of the Enemy may
require a different Disposition.

PLAN I. Consisting of Eighteen PLATOONS.
FRONT of the BATTALION. Grenadiers, D Reserve. A I St Plat. of the 1 st string
First Pla. of the 3 Firings. B I st Plat. of the 2 d firing C I st Plat. of the
3 d firing A 3 d Plat. of the 1 st firing Third Pl. of the 3 Firings. B 3 d
Plat. of the 2 d firing C 3 d Plat. of the 3 d firing A 5 th Plat. of the 1 st
firing Fifth Pl. of the 3 Firings. B 5 th Plat. of the 2 nd firing C 5 th Plat.
of the 3 rd firing Colors, D Reserve. A 4 th Plat. of the 1 st string Fourth P
of the 3 Firings. B 4 th Plat. of the 2 nd firing C 4 th Plat. of the 3 rd
firing A 2 d Plat. of the 1 st firing Second P. of the 3 Firings. B 2 d Plat.
of the 2 d firing C 2 d Plat. of the 3 d firing Grenadiers, D Reserve. PLAN II.
of Fifteen PLATOONS.
FRONT of the BATTALION. Greand. C 1 st Plat. of the 3 d firing First Plat. of
each Firing. A 1 st Plat. of the 1 st firing B 1 st Plat. of the 2 d firing C 3
d Plat. of the 3 d firing Third Pla. of each Firing. A 3 d Plat. of the 1 st
firing B 3 d Plat. of the 2 d firing A 5 th Plat. of the 1 st firing Fifth
Plat. of each Firing. Colors C 5 th Plat. of the 3 d firing B 5 th Plat. of
the 2 d firing A 4 th Plat. of the 1 st firing Fourh Pl. of each Firing. B 4 th
Plat. of the 2 d firing C 4 th Plat. of the 3 d firing A 2 d Plat. of the 1 st
firing Second Pl. of each Firing. B 2 d Plat. of the 2 d firing C 2 d Plat. of
the 3 d firing PLAN III. Of twelve PLATOONS.
FRONT of the BATTALION. Greand. C 1st Plat. of the 3d firing First Plat. of
each Firing. A 1st Plat. of the 1st firing B 1st Plat of the 2d firing C 3d
Plat. of the 3d firing Third Pl. of each Firing. A 3d Plat. of the 1st firing B
3d Plat. of the 2d firing Colors C 4th Plat. of the 3d firing Fourth P. of
each Firing. A 4th plat. of the 1st firing B 4th Plat. of the 2d firing A 2d
Plat. of the 1st firing Second P. of each Firing. B 2d Plat. of the 2d firing
Greand. C 2d Plat. of the 3d firing

Before we proceed further, it will be necessary to explain the Platoon
Exercise; that is, what Number of Motions of the Manual Exercise they are to
perform at each Word of Command.

There are but three Words of Command used in the Platoon Exercise, which are
as follows,

I. Make ready. II. Present. III. Fire.

By the first Word of Command the Men are to perform all the Motions contained
in the four first Words of Command of the Manual Exercise. And immediately
after the performing the last of the said Motions, which is Cocking, the Men of
the front Rank are to kneel down on their right Knees, placing the Butt-End of
their Firelocks on the Ground, keeping their Thumbs on the Cocks, and their
Fingers on the Trickers. The center and rear Ranks close forward at the same
Time with recovered Arms; the Men of the center Rank placing their left Feet on
the inside of the right Feet of their File-Leaders, bringing their right Feet
to the Right, but not in a Line with the Left, only in the same Position as
when they rest. The Men in the rear Ranks place their left Feet on the inside
of the right Feet of those in the center Rank, bringing their right Feet to the
Right, as those in the Center did.

The placing the Feet in this Manner is called in military Terms, Locking; by
which the Men of the center Ranks present their Firelocks over the right
Shoulders of their FileLeaders, and those of the rear Ranks present to the
Right of the centre-rank Men, which brings their Firelocks, when they present,
to the Intervals between the Files.

By the second Word of Command, they are to present their Firelocks, as in
Explanation 5 is directed.

By the third Word of Command, they are to Fire, as in Explanation 6: After
which they are to recover their Arms, the front Rank rising up, and the center
and rear Ranks falling back to half Distance, it being a standing Rule to move
the Ranks up to that Distance before they are ordered to make ready; and as
soon as the center and rear Ranks have fallen back, they are all to proceed to
half-cock, prime, load, and shoulder, performing the several Motions together,
as directed in the Manual Exercise, with this Difference, that in the Platoon
Exercise, after priming the Men are not to bring their Firelocks to a Recover
in order to cast about to the Left, but after they have shut their Pans, they
are to seize their Firelocks with their right Hands behind the Lock, as in
Explanation 11, Motion 3; and with both Hands, without moving their Feet from
the Ground, or changing their Aspect, bring their Firelocks up before them, and
at the same Time they are to quit the Butt with their right Hands, and take
hold of the Muzzel when it comes opposite to the right Shoulder, which they are
to bring that Way with their left Hands; by which Means the Position of the
Firelock will be the same as in Explanation 12, only this Difference, that by
the Men being faced to the Right, the Butt will point to the Front, as in the
other it does to the Rear.

That this may be done without too much Constraint to the Men, they may change
the Position of their Feet, by turning on their Heels when they seize the
Muzzel with their right Hands, bringing the right Toe to point to the Rear, and
the Left along the Rank, forming a T to the Rear as they did before to the
Front.

The Reason for their performing it in this Manner, is both to gain Time and to
prevent the Men from being too much fatigued. Great Care ought to be taken in
making up the Cartridges to such an Exactness, that after they are placed in
the Muzzel, one Thumb with the Butt-End on the Ground, may make them run down
to the Breech of the Barrel; but as the ramming down the Cartridges, is, for
many Reasons very necessary, it ought by no Means to be disused.

In dividing the Platoons into the several Firings, the Major should take
particular Care to let the Officers and Soldiers know distinctly what Firing
they belong to, whether of the first, second, or third, or the Reserve, as also
what Number each Platoon is of in the different Firings, as the first, second,
third, fourth, or fifth Platoon, of the first, second, or third Firing, or of
the Reserve.

In order to know if they have rightly understood their telling off, the Major
may try the Platoons of each Firing apart, by making these Platoons perform
some Motions together, as Resting, and Shouldering: The same may be done by the
Platoons of each Firing singly.

He must likewise let them know what Firings they are to perform, and in what
Manner they are to do it, whether Standing, Advancing, or Retiring, or all
three; as also whether the Platoons of each Firing are to fire in their Order,
that is, one after another, or together.

The Signals usually made on these Occasions, is by Beat of Drum.

At the beating of the March, the Regiment is to march strait forward,
beginning with the left Feet, and when the Drum ceases they are to halt.

When a Retreat is beat, the Battalion is to face to the Right about (the Men
performing it on their left Heels) and march toward the Rear, and when the Drum
ceases, they are to face to their proper Front, by coming to the Left about on
their left Heels.

At the beating of a Preparative, all the Platoons of that Firing which is to
come next, are to make ready together as is explained in the Platoon Exercise.

A Flam, or double Stroke, is the Signal for the Platoons to begin to fire: The
particular Directions for which, are shown in the following Article.

Article III.
THE Battalion being prepared according to the foregoing Directions, we now
proceed to the Firings, and begin with those in the first PLAN, consisting of
18 Platoons, composing three Firings and a Reserve.

To go through the Firings standing.
The Major is to order the Drummers to beat a Preparative, at which all the
Platoons of the first Firing are to make ready, and at the same Time the
Officers who command them, are to place themselves in the Right and Left of
their Platoons, facing toward the Colors; thus, The Officers to the Right of
the Colors to place themselves on the Right of the Platoons, and the Officers
to the Left, on the Left of the Platoons, advance a short Pace before the front
Rank, to make the Men level well.

Then the Major orders the Drummers to beat a Flam; at which the Officer
commanding the first Platoon of that Firing, gives the following Words of
Command:

Present. Fire.
As soon as the Word Fire is given to the first Platoon, the Officer commanding
the second, is to give the Word Present, and then Fire. The Officer commanding
the third Platoon, is to observe the same Rule when the Word Fire is given to
the second Platoon. The Officers commanding the fourth and fifth Platoons of
that Firing, are to follow the same Directions.

The Officers who give the Words of Command, are to speak them clear and
distinct, and not to proceed to the Word Fire, 'till the Men have presented as
they ought, nor wait too long after they have.

When the Battalion is to fire, the two Divisions of Drummers on the Right and
Left, are to post themselves on the Flanks, and dress in a Line with the front
Rank. When the Colour-Platoon makes ready, the Centre-Division of Drummers are
to move to the Platoons on the Right and Left of it, and when that Platoon has
loaded again, they are to return to their Posts.

As soon as the first Firing is over, the Major orders a second Preparative to
beat; at which the Platoons of the second Firing make ready, the Officers
commanding those Platoons posting themselves in the same Manner as those of the
first Firing did.

After this a Flam; when the first Platoon of the second Firing presents and
fires, and the other Platoons of that Firing follow in their Order.

The same Method must be observed for the Platoons of the third Firing, as also
for those of the Reserve; but before the Platoons of Grenadiers kneel and lock,
they are to wheel to the Right and Left inward an eighth Part of the Circle,
which as being on the Flanks, they are always to do, in whatever Firing they
are placed, by which Means their Fire is thrown toward the Center of the
opposite Regiment, and consequently takes a great Part of their Front.

When the Colour-Platoon makes ready, the Colonel, Ensigns with their Colors,
and Hautboys, are to move to the Platoons on the Right and Left: and when it
has fired they are to return to their former Posts.

By the Platoon Exercise, the Men are to lead as soon as they have fired, and
when loaded to shoulder.

The Battalion having gone through their Firings standing, we shall next show
how they are to perform them advancing.

How to Fire advancing.
Upon the Major's ordering the Drummers to beat a March, the whole Battalion is
to march (...) forward as slow as Foot can fall. The Officers in the Front are
to be only two Paces advanced before their Platoons. The Officers in the Rear
are to keep their former Distance.

When the Drummer ceases beating, which he is not to do, whether advancing or
retiring, 'till he is ordered, the Battalion is to halt; and the Officers
commanding the Platoons are to place themselves on the Right and Left of the
Platoons, facing toward the Colors.

Then the Preparative is to beat, at which the Platoons of the first Firing is
to make ready. After that a Flam, to begin firing; which they are to perform in
their Order.

As soon as they have fired, the Drummers must be ordered to beat a March; at
which the Battalion moves forward as before, the Officers in the Front marching
at the Head of the Platoons; and the Platoons which have fired are to load in
marching.

When you would begin the second Firing, the Drummers must be ordered to cease;
at which the Battalion is to halt, and the Officers to post themselves on the
Right and Left as before; then a Preparative for the Platoons of the second
Firing to make ready; after that to proceed to fire as those of the first did.

The same Method is to be observed for the third Fire and the Reserve; the
Grenadiers wheeling inward as is before directed.

How to Fire retiring.
The Battalion having gone through their Firings in advancing, the Major is to
order the Drummers to beat a Retreat; at which the Battalion is to face to the
Right about upon their left Heels, and march very slow to the Rear. The
Lieutenant Colonel at the Head of the Officers in the Rear, leads the
Battalion. The Officers who were in Front march in the Rear of their Platoons,
the Colonel in the Rear of the Ensigns.

As soon as the Battalion has marched as far as is proper, the Major orders the
Drummers to cease beating the Retreat, and give the Ruffle; at which the whole
are to face to the Left about upon their left Heels.

When the Battalion is faced, the Major orders the Preparative; at which the
Platoons of the first Firing make ready, and the Officers in the Front fall
into their Posts, as before directed: After this they are to fire in the same
Manner as they did advancing.

As soon as these Platoons have fired, the Drummers beat a Retreat, at which
the Battalion is to face again to the Right about, and march toward the Rear
as before.

When the Drum ceases to beat the Retreat, and the Ruffle is given, the
Battalion is to halt; then the Preparative for the Platoons of the second
Firing is to make ready and fire, as those of the first Firing did.

In Retiring, the Meaning of the Word Halt, is to face to the proper Front, but
in Advancing it is to stand still.

And the same Rules are to be observed for the third Firing, and the Reserve;
which compleats the several Firings in Retiring.

And after they have performed the above Firings, it is customary to make one
Fire by the whole Battalion.

Article IV.
WHEN the Foot are attacked by Horse, whether they are drawn up in the Line of
Battle, or in a Square, it is proper for them to reserve their whole front
Rank, and fire only the center and rear Ranks by Platoons. In this Case the
front Rank is not to fire 'till they are put to the last Extremity, and then
not to fire 'till the Horse are so close that they have but just Time to charge
their Bayonets Breast-high after they have fired; that they may be sure of
placing both their Balls and Bayonetts in them, in almost the same Instant.

And upon an Enemy's sudden Approach and attacking a Battalion in the Line of
Battle, the following Method may be used, viz.

The two rear Ranks to be the first Fire.

The front Rank and Grenadiers the second Fire.

And again, The rear Ranks the third Fire.

At the Preparative, the two rear ranks make ready, and at the same Time the
whole front Rank kneels and drop the Points of their Bayonetts to the Ground.

At the Word Fire, the rear Ranks fire; the front Rank and Grenadiers keep
their Fire, the rear Ranks fall back two Paces and load with Expedition.

At the second Word Present, the front Rank and Grenadiers present, and at the
Word of Command they fire, then rise and charge their Bayonets Breast-high.

At the third Preparative the two rear-Ranks make ready at the Word of Command,
present and fire.

The Words of Command and Signals for the Performance are,

First Preparative. Upon which all make ready.

Present. Front Rank and Grenadiers drop their Muzzels.

Fire. The rear Ranks fire, fall back and load.

Second Praparative. Front Rand and Grenadiers make ready.

Present. They present.

Fire. They fire, rise and charge their Bayonetts Breasthigh.

Third Preparative. The rear Ranks make ready and close up.

Present. They present.

Fire. They fire, then fall back and load.

NOTE, The Firings of the second and third Plans are to be performed in the
some Manner as is directed for the first.

As a Battalion is strong or weak, it may be told off according to one of the
foregoing Plans; as for Example.

A Battalion of Six Hundred Men may be told off according to the first.

A Battalion of Five Hundred Men, according to the second. And,

A Battalion of Four Hundred Men, according to the third Plan.

Article V.
Firing by Ranks.
TO fire by Ranks, is meant to fire only one Rank of the Battalion at a Time,
beginning first with the rear Rank, then the center Rank, and last the front
Rank. The Manner as follows,

The whole Battalion is to make ready at the same Time, and immediately kneel
and lock.

Then the Major gives the following Words of Command:

Rear Ranks, -- Present, -- Fire.
As soon as the rear Rank has fired, they are to recover their Arms, fall back
to their former Distance, prime, load and shoulder.

After the rear Rank has fired, the Major proceeds:

Center Ranks, -- Present, -- Fire.
After firing, the center Rank recovers their Arms, falls back, primes, loads,
and shoulders. When the center Rank has fired, the front Rank is to do the
same, either kneeling or standing up.

This Method of firing by Ranks is seldom or never used in Service, though
sometimes practiced in Exercise; but another Method is now substituted in its
Room; which is that of saving the Fire of the whole front Rank of the Battalion
to the last, and firing the two rear Ranks by Platoons; it being the compact
Fire which does the Execution requisite to break a Squadron; whereas the Fire
of a single Rank is so thin that it will not easily stop their Progress if
their Resolution don't fail them.

Article VI.
Parapet Firing.
THIS Firing is only used in fortified Towns when besieged, in Intrenchments
that are attacked, or that you are to fire over a Hedge or Wall at the Enemy.

There are two Ways of performing it; the one by Ranks, the other by Files.

By Ranks.
As the Breast-work, Parapet or Hedge is before the Men, they are obliged to
fire standing, and therefore no more than one Rank can fire at a Time, which
begins with the front Rank, who as soon as they have fired, are to form in the
Rear, that the center Rank may march up and fire; and when they have fired they
are to form in the Rear also, that the rear Rank may do the same.

There are two Ways of doing it by Ranks; the one with the Files open, the
other with them closed; but as the performing it with the Files closed is
generally preferred, as containing the most complete Fire, and doing most
Execution, that Method only is here inserted, and is as follows;

Parapet firing by Ranks, with the Files closed.
In this Case the Battalion must be told off by Platoons, leaving an Interval
of a large Face between each. When the whole front Rank of the Battalion has
fired, they are to recover their Arms, and face to the Left on their left
Heels; but the left Hand Man of each Platoon must face to the Left about on his
left Heel, which brings him opposite to the Interval on the left of his
Platoon. As soon as they have faced, the left Hand Men of the Platoons are to
march strait down their several Intervals to the Rear, all the rest following
them to the Left, and as each Man comes opposite to the Interval on the left of
his Platoon, he is to face again to the Left, and march down the Interval,
those of each Platoon following their left Hand Men. As soon as the left Hand
Man of each Platoon has got one Pace beyond the rear Rank, they are to face to
the Left and continue marching 'till they come to the Right of their own
Platoons (the others following in File in the same Manner) and then halt,
forming then the rear Rank, of which before they were the Front. After they are
formed in the Rear, they are immediately to load, and as soon as loaded to make
ready, and march forward as before directed. When the front Rank has fired and
marched clear of the Front, the center and rear Ranks are to march forward, the
Center into the Ground of the first Rank, and the Rear into that of the Center;
then the center Rank is to fire, recover their Arms, face to the Left, march
down the Intervals, and form in the Rear of their own Platoons, as the front
Rank did. The rear Rank is then to march forward, fire, and form in the Rear as
the others.

This is a Sort of counter-marching by Ranks, by bringing the Left of each
Platoon to the Right, and the Right to the Left; with this Difference, that
instead of keeping the same Station, each Rank in its turn forms the Rear, and
as those before them fire, they move up to the former Ground.

Parapet firing by Files.
The Battalion must be fold off in Platoons, as in the other Firing, and drawn
up three Paces distance from the Parapet, etc. and the Whole ordered to make
ready together, as far as recovered Arms; and when the Signal is given for them
to begin to Fire, the Files on the Right and Left of each Platoon (that is, one
File from the Right, and one File from the Left of each Platoon) move forward,
and when the File-Leaders come up to the Breast-Work, they are to face to the
Right and Left inwards (that is, the right and left Hand Men of each Platoon
face toward one another) those of the Center and Rear following their
File-Leaders, 'till the two front Men join, and then they are to halt; by which
the two Files of each Platoon form a Rank of six Men in the Front of their
Platoons. As soon as they are thus formed in the Front, they are to present,
and fire; then recover their Arms, face to the Right and Left outward, and
march back to their own Places in the same Manner they came. When the first
Files have fired, those Files which stood next them are to march out and draw
up in the Front of their Platoons, in the same Manner as the others did, and
fire; then recover their Arms and march back to their former Places. The two
next Files of each Platoon are to march out, fire, and return to their former
Places in the same Order as the others; and so on 'till the two center Files
have fired: After which the flank Files of the Platoons are to begin again,
unless ordered to the contrary.

To avoid Confusion in the drawing up in the Front of their Platoons to fire,
the File-Leaders should always form in the Center as before directed; those Men
of the center and rear Ranks drawing up on the outside of them; which must be
done when the two center Files move out, they being to march up strait to the
Parapet. And the Men of the center and rear Ranks are to face outward and draw
up on the Right and Left of their File-Leaders: However it may be done
otherwise, with the two center Files of each Platoon, by making the
File-Leaders face to the Right and Left outward when they come up to the
Parapet, bringing the Men in the Rear to form in the Center of each Rank.

As soon as the Files are returned to their Places after firing, they are to
face to their proper Front, prime, load, make ready, and wait with recovered
Arms to fire again in their Turns; all which must be done without any further
Word of Command than what was at first given to begin, and not to discontinue
it 'till ordered so to do.

Article VII.
Street Firing.
IT is so called from your being obliged to engage in a Street or narrow
Passage, where no more than ten, twelve, sixteen, or twenty Files can march in
Front; so that according to the breadth of the Place your Platoons must be
stronger or weaker.

The Manner of performing it at Exercise, is thus; The rear Ranks are to be
closed forward to close Order, and the Battalion is to wheel to the Right or
Left by Platoons, in the same Manner as they do by Sub-divisions, only the
Officers who are appointed to the Platoons, remain with and march at the Head
of them; whereas, when a Regiment marches by Grand or Sub-division the Captains
march all in Front and Rear: So that when the Officers are posted to the said
Platoons, and march at the Head of them, it ought to be called marching by
Platoons, in order to distinguish it from marching by Division; the one being
formed for immediate Action, but the other only for common marching.

By the wheeling of the Platoons they fall in the Rear of one another, so that
no more than one Platoon can fire at a Time.

As soon as the Platoons have wheeled, they should march in that Position, in
order to open their Ranks to two Paces Distance: Besides, the Firing will
appear more graceful when it is begun while the Regiment is in Motion.

When the Ranks are opened, and the whole Regiment in Motion, the Major should
give the Signal for the Firing to begin; on which the Officer who commands the
front Platoon is to halt his Men, order them to make ready, kneel, and lock,
then present and fire; as soon as they have fired they are to recover their
Arms, face from the Center to the Right and Left outward, march down the
Flanks of the other Platoons, and form again in the Rear of the last, and
immediately load and shoulder.

As soon as the Word Fire is given to the first Platoon, the Officer who
commands the second must order his Men to make ready, and to march with
recovered Arms to the Ground the first fired on, as soon as the others have got
on the Flanks; and when his Men have kneeled and locked, he is to give the
Words Present, Fire; and when fired to recover, face outward, march along the
Flanks, and form in the Rear of the first. The rest of the Platoons are to
observe the same Directions.

The Platoons are to keep up pretty close to one another, and to move or halt
as those in Front do.

When this is to be put in Practice on real Service, the Front of the Platoons
must not be equal to the breadth of the Place you engage in; but there must be
a small Space of Ground left on your Flanks, that those who have fired, may,
after they have faced to the Right and Left outward, have Room to march back
and form in the Rear.

It is in this Manner, when you have not Time to raise a Breast-Work, that a
Pass, Bridge, Road, or Street is to be maintained against an Enemy, by the
Platoons sustaining one another, and firing in their Turns; which may be
continued as long as there is Occasion, almost without Intermission, by one
Battalion only.

THE END of the FIRINGS of the FOOT.
CHAP. V.
Containing some short Directions for passing in Review.
THE Regiment must be told off by Grand and Sub-Divisions, and the Officers
appointed to them, and the Files opened before the General comes, that after he
has viewed them standing, they may immediately proceed to the Exercise. When
Notice is given of the General's Coming, the Major is to order the Men to
shoulder their Arms, him which Position they are always to rest their Arms when
that Compliment is to be paid; and as soon as he approaches near the Flank of
the Battalion, the Major is to order the Soldiers to rest their Arms by the
following Words of Command:

To the Front present your Arms.

At the performing the fourth and last Motion of the above Command, all the
Drummers are to beat a March, and the Major is to take his Post immediately on
the Right of the Battalion, and the Adjutant on the Left, dressing in a Line
with the Rank of Officers.

As the General passes along the Front, the Officers are to salute him with
their half Pikes or Partisans; and to time it in such a Manner that each may
just finish his Salute and pull of his Hat when he comes opposite to him.

The Ensigns who carry the Colors are to drop them (if the General is to be
saluted with Colors) bringing the Spear pretty near the Ground, just when the
Colonel drops the Point of his half Pike, pulling off their Hats at the same
Time, and not raise the Colors 'till he has passed them.

As the Major and Adjutant are to be on Horseback, they are to salute with
Swords; and when the Major has finished his Salute, he is to repair opposite to
the Center of the Regiment, that he may be ready to order the Men to face when
the General goes round the Battalion.

And the Battalion is to be ordered to face to the Left as the General comes to
the left Flank (supposing he began at the Right) and so again when he comes to
the Rear, and right Flank, 'till be comes round again to the Front.

And the Major should be very careful in drawing up the Battalion, to do it in
such a Manner that the right Flank may be open, that the General may come to it
without Difficulty; for this End the Ground on which you are to be reviewed,
and the Avenues leading to it should be considered. If this Particular is
neglected, the Major or Officer who commands the Regiment, will be thought
either careless or ignorant in his Profession, unless it plainly appear that
Necessity and not Choice obliged him to it.

When the Battalion is ordered to face, the Officers, Sergeants, Drummers, and
Hautboys are to do the same, and all remain at their Posts, without going
through the Battalion to the Rear, when the General passes along it, or
saluting him any more than once standing.

The Sergeants in the Rear are to pull off their Hatts without bowing their
Heads, when the General passes them, holding their Halberts in their right
Hands, as the Officers do their half Pikes.

N. B. When the Officers pull off their Hatts after saluting they are not to
bow their Heads.

END of the Directions for passing in REVIEW.
THE Words of Command for the Exercise of the Bayonet, with their Explanations,
which have been omitted in other Impressions of this Book, being esteemed of
some Use in this Abstract, are here inserted: And although it is impossible at
present to put them in their proper Place, yet it may be of equal Benefit here.
The Numbers of the Words of Command are continued from the last Number of the
Words of Command in the Manual Exercise, Page 13.

XXXV. Poize your Firelocks. 2 Mot.
This is performed as in Explanation 1, and 2, of the Manual Exercise.

XXXVI. Rest on your Arms. 3 Mot.
Sink the Firelock with your right Hand as low as your Arm, without Constraint,
will permit, seizing it at the same Time with your left Hand about the Height
of your Chin, the left Elbow turned out, and the Muzzel upright. Tell 1, 2,
quit the Firelock with your right Hand, and sink it in a perpendicular Line
near the Ground with your Left, seizing it at the same Time with your right
Hand near the Muzzel. Then tell 1, 2, and bring the Butt to the Ground,
slipping your left Hand at the same Time up to your Right, and keep your Elbows
square.

XXXVII. Draw your Bayonets. 2 Mot.
Seize your Bayonet with your right Hand; then tell 1, 2, and draw it out
briskly, extending your Arm before you the height of your Shoulder, holding the
Point of the Bayonet upwards, and your Thumb on the Hollow of the Shank, that,
when you fix it on the Muzzel, the Notch of the Socket may come even with the
Sight of the Barrel.

XXXVIII. Fix your Bayonets. 4 Mot.
Place the Socket of the Bayonet upon the Muzzel of the Firelock; tell 1, 2,
and thrust it down as far as the Notch will permit you; tell 1, 2, turn the
Bayonet from you, and fix it; then tell 1, 2, quit the Handle of the Bayonet,
and seize the Firelock just under it with your right Hand, placing the Palm on
the Back of the Left.

XXXIX. Rest your Bayonets. 3 Mot.
Raise the Firelock with your right Hand, in a perpendicular Line as high as
your Forehead, and slipping down your Left at the same Time, seize the Firelock
about the middle of the Barrel; tell 1, 2, quit the Firelock with your right
Hand, and raise it with the Left, turning the Barrel toward you, and at the
same Time seize it with your right Hand under the Lock, observing the same
Position as directed by Explanation 7. Then tell 1, 2, and come to your Rest,
as in Explanation 3.

XL. Charge your Bayonets Breast high. 3 Mot.
Bring the Firelock strait up before you as in the Recover, with this
Difference, that you must turn the Lock outward in the bringing of it up; tell
1, 2, hold the Firelock fast with the left Hand, and clap the Palm of the Right
on the Butt-end, the Thumb and Barrel pointing to the Right; then tell 1, 2,
fall back with the right Foot a moderate Pace, and in a direct Line behind the
Left, and at the same Time come to your Charge, by bringing down the Firelock
to a Level, and supporting it with your left Arm by raising up your Elbow from
your Body, the Stock lying between the left Thumb and the Forefinger, and the
Butt-end in a full right Hand, the Thumb on the upper Part of it, with the
Barrel upwards, and the Bayonet pointing directly to the Front, about Breast
high. The Right Knee must be kept stiff, and the Toe pointing directly to the
Right; but the left Knee must bend a little forward, with that Toe to the Front.

XLI. Push your Bayonets. 2 Mot.
Push your Firelock with both Hands strait forward, without raising or sinking
the Point of the Bayonet, bringing the Butt-end before the left Breast; then
tell 1, 2, and bring it back to its former Place.

XLII. Recover your Arms. 2 Mot.
Seize the Firelock with your right Hand behind the Cock; then tell 1, 2, and
come to your Recover, as in Explanations 4 and 7.

XLIII. Rest your Bayonets on your left Arms. 2 Mot.
Turn the Lock to the Front; then tell 1, 2, and stepping with the right Foot
to the Right, let go the left Hand, sinking the Firelock at the same Time with
the Right, take hold of the Cock and Steel with the Left, the Cock lying on the
middle Finger, and the Steel on the lower Joint of the Thumb, the under Part of
the Stock resting on the Bend or Middle of the left Arm, the Barrel upwards,
and the Butt sloping downwards toward the middle Space between your Thighs,
keeping both Hands as low as you can without Constraint. The Butt and Muzzel
must be kept at an equal Distance from your Body, the Firelock running in a
triangular Line.

XLIV. Rest your Bayonets. 3 Mot.
Slip your left Hand, without moving the Firelock, and take hold of it above
the Lock, placing the Thumb upwards; tell 1, 2, and bring the Firelock to a
Recover, as in Explanations 4 and 7. Then tell 1, 2, and come briskly to your
Rest, as in Explanation 3.

XLV. Shoulder your Firelocks. 4 Mot.
Bring your Firelocks to your Poize, as in Explanation 24. Tell 1, 2, and clap
your left Hand on the Butt; tell 1, 2, and lay it on your left Shoulder; then
tell 1, 2, and bring down your right Hand, as in Explanation 25 is directed.

XLVI. Present your Arms. 4 Mot.
These four Motions must be performed, as is directed in Explanation 26.

XLVII. Face to the Right. 3 Mot.
Bring the Firelock to a Recover, as in Explanation 4. Tell 1, 2, and face on
the left Heel to the Right a Quarter of the Circle, keeping the Firelock
recovered. Then tell 1, 2, and come nimbly to your Rest, stepping back a little
with the right Foot, as in Explanation 3.

In the performing of the second Motion, which is the Facing, the Soldiers must
take care not to move their left Heels from the Ground, but only to turn on
them, that they may keep their Ranks and Files strait; as also to place their
right Feet in a Line with their Left, keeping their Firelocks in the true
Position of a Recover, 'till they perform the third Motion, which is the Rest.

XLVIII, XLIX, L. Face to the Right. 3 Motions each.
Each of these Words of Command must be performed at Three Motions, as is above
directed in Explanation 47; which compleats the Circle in four Times.

LI. Face to the Right about. 3 Mot.
This is performed at three Motions, as in the foregoing Explanation, only they
face half the Circle to the Right.

LII. To the Left about as you were. 3 Mot.
This is done on the left Heel, as in the above Explanation 51, only they face
half the Circle to the Left, which brings them to their proper Front.

LIII, LIVE, LV, LVI. Face to the Left. 3 Motions each.
These Facings must be performed in the same Manner as those to the Right, on
the left Heel; with this Difference only, that they face to the Left.

LVII. To the Left about. 3 Mot.
This is half the Circle to the Left.

LVIII. To the Right about as you were. 3 Mot.
You are to face half the Circle to the Right, which brings you to your proper
Front, and compleats the Facings.

LIX. Poize your Firelocks. 1 Mot.
Come briskly to your Poize, as in Explanation 24 and 45.

LX. Rest on your Arms. 3 Mot.
This must be performed as in Explanation 36 is directed.

LXI. Unfix your Bayonets. 3 Mot.
Slip the Bayonet up with your right Hand; tell 1, 2, and turn it toward you.
Then tell 1, 2, and slip it quite off of the Muzzel, thrusting it from you at
the same Time, and holding it in that Position, as is shown in the second
Motion of Explanation 37.

LXII. Return your Bayonets. 4 Mot.
Turn the Point of the Bayonet down, bringing it between the Firelock and your
Body, and entering the Scabbard. Tell 1, 2, and thrust it quite in. Tell 1, 2,
and bring your right Hand before you a little to the Right of your Firelock.
Then tell 1, 2, and seize the Firelock near the Muzzel, as in the third Motion
of Explanation 36 is directed.

LXIII. Poize your Firelocks. 3 Mot.
The first Motion is performed as directed by the first Motion of Explanation
39. Tell 1, 2, and raise the Firelock with your left Hand, seizing it at the
same Time under the Lock with the Right, keeping the Lock outward. Then tell 1,
2, and come to your Poize, by thrusting it from you with the right Hand, and
dropping your Left.

LXIV. Shoulder your Firelocks. 3 Mot.
This is performed as in Explanation 25.

The End of the Exercise of the BAYONET.
Words of Command in the Manual Exercise.
Take Care. No. of Mo. I. Join your right Hands to your Firelocks, 1 II. Poize
your Firelocks, 1 III. Join your left Hands to your Firelocks, 2 IV. Cock your
Firelocks, 2 V. Present, 1 VI. Fire, VII. Recover your Arms, 1 VIII. Half cock
your Firelocks, 2 IX. Handle your Primers, 3 X. Prime, 2 XI. Shut your Pan, 4
XII. Cast about to charge, 2 XIII. Handle your Cartridges, 3 XIV. Open your
Cartridges, 2 XV. Charge with Cartridge, 2 XVI. Draw your Rammers, 4 XVII.
Shorten your Rammers, 3 XVIII. Put them in Barrels, 6 XIX. Ram down your
Charge, 2 XX. Recover your Rammers, 3 XXI. Shorten your Rammers, 3 XXII. Return
your Rammers, 6 XXIII. Your right Hands under the Lock, 4 XXIV. Poize your
Firelocks, 1 XXV. Shoulder your Firelocks, 3 XXVI. Rest your Firelocks, 4
XXVII. Order your Firelocks, 3 XXVIII. Ground your Firelocks, 4 XXIX. Take up
your Firelocks, 4 XXX. Rest your Firelocks, 3 XXXI. Club your Firelocks, 4
XXXII. Rest your Firelocks, 4 XXXIII. Secure your Firelocks, 3 XXXIV. Shoulder
your Firelocks, 5

The Words of Command for the Exercise of the Bayonet.
No. of Mo. I. Poize your Firelocks, 2 II. Rest your Arms, 3 III. Draw your
Bayonets, 2 IV. Fix your Bayonets, 4 V. Rest your Bayonets, 3 VI. Charge your
Bayonets Breast high, 3 VII. Push your Bayonets, 2 VIII. Recover your Arms, 2
IX. Rest your Bayonets on your left Arms, 2 X. Rest your Bayonets, 3 XI.
Shoulder your Firelocks, 4 XII. Present your Arms, XIII. Face to the Right,
four Times over, XIV. Face to the Right about, XV. To the Left about as you
were, XVI. Face to the Left, four Times over, XVII. Face to the Left about,
XVIII. To the Right about as you were, XIX. poize your Firelocks, XX. Rest your
Firelocks, XXI. Unfix your Bayonets, XXII. Return your Bayonets, XXIII. Poize
your Firelocks, XXIV. Shoulder your Firelocks,

FINIS.

