Copies of the TWO LETTERS Cited by The Rev. Mr. CLAP, Rector of the College at
NEW HAVEN, In his late printed Letter to a Friend in Boston, concerning what he
has reported, as from Mr. EDWARDS of Northampton, concerning the Rev. Mr.
WHITEFIELD. Communicated in A Letter to a Friend. With some Reflections on the
Affair those Letters relate to, and Rector CLAP'S Management therein.

By JONATHAN EDWARDS, A. M. Minister of the Gospel at Northampton, and Writer
of those Letters.

BOSTON: Printed and Sold by S. Kneeland and T. Green in Queen Street. 1745.

SIR,
I Have lately had a Sight of a printed Letter from the Rev. Mr. Clap, Rector
of the College at New Haven, to his Friend in Boston, concerning that he has
declared that he heard me say, that Mr. Whitefield told me, of a Design he had,
of turning out the Generality of the Ministers in the Country, etc. -- wherein
he cites two Letters that I sent to him about that Affair. The Representation
he makes of what I said in those Letters, make it necessary, in my Opinion,
that those Letters should be published at large. I therefore here send you a
Copy of each of them; and would pray you to publish them as soon as may be.

The LETTERS are as follows:

A Copy of the first Letter cited by the Rev. Mr. Clap.
Rev. Sir,
I Have often heard that you, when you was down at Boston and Cambridge the
Summer past, did before many Persons, declare that you heard me say, that Mr.
Whitefield told me, that he had a Design of turning out of their Places, the
greater Part of the Ministers in New England, and of supplying their Pulpits
with Ministers from Great Britain and Ireland. Particularly Mr. Williams of
Pomfret told me that he was there, and heard you say it: But only instead of
Great Britain and Ireland, says, that you said to him, Scotland and Ireland.
And says that he could scarcely believe it: and therefore was particular in
enquiring of you; taking Care that he might not misunderstand you: and you
asserted to him more than once. I was exceedingly astonished to hear it; not
only because that I knew that I never had said it to you, nor to any Mortal, as
well as it is possible for me to know a Negative, or to know that I had not
said any Thing whatsoever that could be mentioned; but also, because when I
first heard this Report, the Thought of Mr. Whitefield' s saying any such
Thing, was perfectly new to me. Indeed I heard Mr. Whitefield say that he had
Thoughts of bringing over a Number of young Men from England, into the Jerseys
and Pennsylvania, to be ordained by the Tennents; but said not one Word of any
Design of their supplying the Pulpits of other Ministers (made vacant by their
being turned out) either there, or in New England. I have also on some
Occasions mentioned it as my Opinion, that Mr. Whitefield was formerly in the
Opinion and Scheme of People's forsaking unconverted Ministers, which possibly
you might hear of from others; for I have no Remembrance of my ever having any
Conversation with you about Things of this Nature; and think it on some
Accounts very unlikely that I should; I have had but very little Opportunity of
Conversation with you, as you know, since Mr. Whitefield has been in the
Country; and I have always known that your Thoughts of Mr. Whitefield, and the
late Work, were generally supposed to be diverse from mine, and less
favorable: It is much more unlikely on that Account, that I should enter into
Conversation with you, tending to confirm Prejudices against Mr. Whitefield.
But however, THIS I DECLARE, that I have no Manner of Remembrance that I ever
heard Mr. Whitefield express, or hint any Design he had of turning out the
greater Part of the Ministers of New England, or any Part of them, and
introducing others into their Places, from Great Britain and Ireland, or any
other Place, or any Thing like it; nor have I any Imagination that I ever heard
Mr. Whitefield say any Thing of this Nature, any more than that I heard him say
he had a Design of dethroning the great Turk, and introducing a new Sultan to
sit upon his Throne: And I have equal Reason to be confident that I never
represented, that Mr. Whitefield said the former, as I have, that I never
represented that he said the latter. If I have ever reported any such Thing to
you, who are at so great a Distance from me, and with whom I have had so little
Conversation; it is exceeding likely that I have told others the same; But I
challenge the whole World besides you, to say that they ever heard me say any
such Thing. Therefore I desire you to do me and Mr. Whitefield the Justice, as
publicly to correct your Mistake in this, which you have so publicly
declared; which I perceive has been very much taken Notice of, and has been
much the Subject of Talk. I cannot but think, that when you come to consider of
the Matter, you will soon be sensible that you have been greatly mistaken; and
have by some Means or other, strangely confounded Things in your Mind; and that
Justice and Integrity will constrain you speedily to declare your Mistake to
the World. In Expectation of this I remain,

Sir, Your humble Servant, Jonathan Edwards.
Northampton, Oct. 18. 1744.

A Copy of the second Letter cited by Mr. Clap.
Rev. Sir,
THE Relation you give in your Letter of October. 12. of the Conversation that
passed between us as we rode together through Leicester, the last May was
Twelvemonth, is one of the most amazing Things to me that ever I met with in my
Life. I don't remember our having any Conversation about Mr. Whitefield: But
that might be, and I might forget it. But if I told such a Story about Mr.
Whitefield, and what passed between him and me, with so many Particulars and
Circumstances (which must have been altogether of mine own Invention, without
the least Foundation in Truth) I don't believe I should have forgot it. I have
sometimes said to others, (as I informed you, in my late Letter to you) that I
supposed that Mr. Whitefield was formerly of the Opinion, that unconverted
Ministers ought not to continue in the Ministry: And I do suppose he
endeavored to propagate this Opinion, and a Practice agreeable to it. But all
that ever I have said about it, has been only as expressing my Opinion; and not
any declared Design of Mr. Whitefield. You are express in it, that I said that
Mr. Whitefield not only spoke to me of bringing over Ministers from England,
but also from Scotland and Ireland: which is peculiarly wonderful to me: For I
not only, never heard Mr. Whitefield say any Thing of bringing Ministers into
America from those Countries last mentioned, and from neither of the Countries
into NEW ENGLAND: But I had never heard, at that Time when Mr. Whitefield was
here, of his having any Followers in those Countries; and I suppose he had
none: The wonderful Work that has been in Scotland has been all since, and Mr.
Whitefield's Design of going to Scotland, was I suppose formed afterward: Some
Things that he told me of his Designs, seemed inconsistent with his having
formed the Design thon. But the most amazing of all is, that Ireland should be
mentioned as one of the Countries from whence Mr. Whitefield would supply
New England with Ministers. If I had ever heard any such Thing from Mr.
Whitefield, doubtless I should have remembered it; for I should have looked
upon it very strange; having never heard of any Thing like a Revival of
Religion, of late in Ireland; or any Interest that Mr. Whitefield had there; or
any Expectations he had from thence. I don't know that Mr. Whitefield ever so
much as mentioned the NAME of THAT LAND to me. You say that I told you, "That I
took all Opportunities to talk with Mr. Whitefield alone about this Matter* But
when Mr. Whitefield saw that I did not approve of his Design in that Matter, he
did not seem to choose to say any Thing about it; he would either turn off the
Discourse upon something else, or go out of the Room." This Account is amazing
to me: It is all of it perfectly new to me. Nor can I conceive what any
Imagination, that ever I said any such Things, should arise from. I indeed have
told several Persons, that I once purposely took an Opportunity to talk with
Mr. Whitefield alone about Impulses: and have mentioned many Particulars of our
Conference together, on that Head: That I told him some Reasons I had to think
he gave too great Heed to such Things: and have told what Manner of Replies he
made; and what Reasons I offered against such Things. And I also said that Mr.
Whitefield did not seem to be offended with me: but yet did not seem to be
inclined to have a great deal of Discourse about it: And that in the Time of it
he did not appear to be convinced by any Thing* I said. I have also said that I
at that Time talked with Mr. Barber (who came to my House with Mr. Whitefield)
about some of his Impulses; dealing plainly with him; whereby he seemed to be
displeased, and replied with Earnestness and Zeal. It is also true (though I
don't know that ever I spoke of it before) that I thought Mr. Whitefield liked
me not so well, for my opposing these Things. And though he treated me with great
Kindness; yet he never made so much of an Intimate of me, as of some others. It
is also true, that I once talked with Mr. Whitefield (though not alone) about
judging other Persons to be unconverted. But that I took all Opportunities to
talk with him, about a Design of his, of turning out the Generality of the
Ministers of New England, or any Ministers; or that I took any one Opportunity
to talk with him about it; or that I ever said a Word to him, or he to me,
either alone, or with others, about any such Design; or that I took many
Opportunities to talk with him about any of his Errors, (as your Expression
seems to imply) or that he ever went out of the Room when I was talking with
him about any of his Errors, so putting an End to, or avoiding the Discourse;
or that be ever turned off such Discourse to any Thing else; I SAY THESE THINGS
ARE NOT TRUE. And if I ever told you any such Things as these when we were
riding through Leicester, or at any other Time, I was beside my self and knew
nothing what I said; or else I am beside my self now, and have had some strange
supernatural Change passed upon me, so obliterating my own Ideas, and all
Memory of most remarkable Things that formerly I knew, and remembered for a
long Time, so as to give a particular Account of 'em to you; that they are to
me as if they never had been. I do solemnly declare in the Fear of GOD, that I have not the least Trace or Footstep of any one of these Things in my Memory,
either as true in Fact, or spoken by me. And dear Sir, if these remarkable
Things are true, is it not strange that I should keep these great Secrets shut
up in my own Breast, from all Mankind, to reveal 'em to you only; that when I
knew such remarkable Things of one so famous as Mr. Whitefield, and so much the
Subject of Conversation through New England, I should make you, above all the
World, my Confident, to declare them so freely to you, after I had kept them
secret for two or three Years. If I had mentioned such remarkable Things to any
other, it could not but be much taken Notice of by them: and it would doubtless
have been talked of by somebody else besides you. These Things are all new to
my nearest Friends; they never heard of any of them, 'till they heard of them
as coming from you. And I am willing that all my Acquaintance, and those that I
have been most conversant with, Ministers or others, in this Town or elsewhere,
should be enquired of, whether they ever heard me report any such Thing. I have
most diligently searched my Memory as to what passed between Mr. Whitefield and
me, to find out what there was that I could say about it, from whence it should
be possible for you so to conceive of Things. And I cannot conceive what it
should be. Whether you have heard some Report from somebody else, that in
Length of Time is become insensibly blended with something that I might say,
and you might misapprehend, I cannot tell; if you diligently enquire, you will
be most likely to find out: But certainly there has been some strange and
wonderful Misapprehension and Confusion arisen in your Mind, by some Means or
other, that caused you so confidently, publicly and plentifully to report
these Things of me. I beg of you thoroughly to consider it; and insist upon it,
as what Justice to others Characters does greatly require from you, publicly
to correct these gross Mistakes.

I am, Sir, your humble Servant, J. E.
Northampton, Oct. 29. 1744. P. S. Rev. Sir, I just now received your Letter of
Oct. 28. and would only say, That I don't say it was not possible for you to
mistake any Thing I might say to you, about Mr. Whitefield, going to Boston; so
as now to think that I said as you have represented. I do suppose that it
arises from some strange Mistake, that you have reported as you have. Though as I
said, I remember no Conversation about Mr. Whitefield at that Time (though I
remember considerable of other Conversation, as about my Book, and about
Connecticut Laws) yet it is possible I might say to you, that I believed Mr.
Whitefield did aim at People's forsaking unconverted Ministers, and to
endeavor that there should be a Supply of converted Ministers, as far as in
him lay; or something to that Purpose. In the same Discourse it is possible I
might mention what Mr. Whitefield told me of his Design of bringing over a
Number of young Men from England, to be ordained by the Tennents, in the
Jerseys: And might say that I thought I dealt more plainly with Mr. Whitefield,
about his Errors, than any other Minister: And that when I talked with him
about Impulses, he did not seem to like to have much Discourse about it. And
how far you might mistake any such Things, I might say, I do not determine: But
certain I am, that by some Means or other, you have labored under an exceeding
great Mistake.

I am yours, etc. -- J. E.
Northampton, Nov. 3. 1744.



These Sir, are the Letters that Mr. Clap mentions, and cites, in what he has
lately published about this Affair. These are some of the Letters that have
passed between us, (and those of 'em which he cites as most to his Purpose)
considering which, he tells the World, that it was very unexpected to him, to
hear that I should write a Letter to Boston, to be printed, wherein there is a
Denial of some Things which he had reported: insinuating to the World, that in
these Letters, I had in Effect owned all. Whereas it appears that I have owned
no Part of his Report, but have most solemnly denied every Article of it. These
are the individual Letters, of which he says expressly, that in these Letters;
though I have not used exactly the same Terms with him; yet I have used a Variety
of those which are equally full and strong: And if we still differ, it is only
about some particular Terms, and inconsiderable Circumstantials, which are not
worthy of any Dispute. These are the Letters in which Mr. Clap* plainly
insinuates, that I in a Manner had conceded to all that he had reported, by
sundry fair and ingenuous Concessions to him, as he expresses himself; slightly
adding these Words, Indeed Mr. Edwards seems not willing to allow that he
mentioned Ireland; because he never heard of any Interest Mr. Whitefield had
there etc. Just as though this was almost the only Circumstance wherein he and I
differed; and as though I scarcely denied that; though (as he says) I seemed not
willing to allow it; because I never heard of any Interest Mr. Whitefield had
there. Now dear Sir, you have Opportunity to compare these Letters with what he
has published to the World about them. And I am willing to leave it with you,
and every one that pleases, to judge how full his Paper is of Artifices,
entirely to mislead the Minds of his Readers, as to their Conception of the
whole Import and Drift of these Letters; not only in what has been mentioned,
but in his Manner of introducing and intermingling broken Scraps of these
Letters, and his Manner of joining together distant Sentences, and broken
Pieces of Sentences, (that have no Connection in the Letters themselves) as
though they were a continued Discourse, and his Manner of discanting on them.

I am willing that every Reader, who has read his Paper, should judge for
himself, whether in reading it his own Mind was not lead to conceive of these
Letters, as Things extremely diverse from what he finds them to be. Doubtless
Mr. Clap trusted to it, that I had kept no Copies of my Letters; otherwise he
would never have so exceedingly exposed himself: I am willing that you and
others should judge for themselves, how far, one whose Conscience will not
restrain him from making such Representations of Letters written, that he may
destroy others Characters, and render 'em odious to the World, is capable of
unfair dealing in representing private Conversation; where there are no
Witnesses, or written Words, that can be produced to confute him. And who can
be safe in human Society, if such Liberties are taken, in order to ruin their
Fellow Creatures and Brethren, by Gentlemen from whom so different Things might
be expected? If it had been true, that I had said just as Mr. Clap has
reported, yet how vehemently has that Practice been cried out of, by Gentlemen
on that Side of the Controversies of the present Day, of publicly making Use
of private Conversation, and the Report of single Persons, to destroy the
Characters of others? And especially how ill does this become Rector Clap,
after he knows that that single Person that he says thus reported to him, does
so strongly and solemnly deny it, entreating of him therefore to forbear? What
a Treatment is this of Christian Brethren! -- This dear Sir, is a Specimen of
the Manner and Spirit, in which the Controversies of the present Day are
carried on against Mr. Whitefield, by many Persons (for I am far from thus
charging all his Opposers) the Persons frequently hiding themselves, and
concealing their Names. And though I think it but to little Purpose, to carry on
a Controversy with these Persons from the Press, unless when forced to it by
gross Slanders; yet I cannot but say on this Occasion, that it seems to me
worthy greatly to be lamented, by all true Lovers of the Christian Religion,
which consists so much in Love and Forgiveness, that Mr. Whitefield should be
pursued with so much Violence, and Appearance of inveterate Opposition, and
indefatigable Endeavors to blacken him to the utmost; and with such Artifices,
as it would be mean to use, with Respect to the basest Miscreant; and that for
former Errors, which are not at all to be wondered at, considering his Youth,
and the Circumstances of his Education etc --; when there seems to be so little
Appearance of Obstinacy and Incorrigibleness in him, and so much of the
contrary; and when so little can be found, by his most watchful Enemies, now,
to blame him for. I think this is a proper Occasion, for the meek Followers of
the Lamb of God, to lie low before God, and lament the Corruption of human
Nature, and the Sin and Shame of their dear Country, and cry humbly to Christ,
that he would ride forth prosperously, because of Truth, Meekness, and
Righteousness.

And with Respect to the Affair that is the Subject of the preceding Letters,
doubtless so great a Contradiction between Mr. Clap and me, in such a State of
Things as the Country is now in, and relating to a Person, concerning whom the
Country is so much divided in their Sentiments, with Spirits so deeply, and
contrarily engaged, will cause a Variety of Reflections and Censures; and every
one will say as he is disposed. However, I think my self now called openly to
make this DECLARATION: That ever Mr. Whitefield said any Thing to me, or I to
him, of any Design of his of turning out the bigger Part of the Ministers of
New England, or any where else, or ever so much as hinted, either he or any of
his Company, any Thing of that Nature; or of his bringing over any Minister, or
Candidate for the Ministry, from Scotland, or Ireland, into any Part of
America, or from any one Country in Europe, into New England; or that I ever
reported any such Thing to Mr. Clap, or any other Person, or that ever any
Thought of Mr. Whitefield's saying, or hinting, any Thing like either of these
Things, ever entered into my Heart, 'till I heard 'em as coming from Mr. Clap;
or that Mr. Whitefield ever intimated to me, any Design of his going to
Scotland, or making any Interest there; or that he ever mentioned the Name of
Ireland in my bearing; I say that any of these Things ever were, I have no
Remembrance: God is my Witness who searches my Heart, and will bring to Light
the hidden Things of Darkness, and make manifest the Counsels of the Heart. And
whether it be probable that I should wholly forget all these Things, if they
indeed had been; especially those remarkable, great Things, that Mr. Clap has
reported that I said, after I had well remembered them for two Years and an
half, so as to give Him a distinct Account of them, I leave others to judge.
And whether I have a Conscience sufficient to restrain me from Lying with this
Solemnity or no; yet, I must also leave it to others to judge, whether it be
likely that when I had so grand a Secret committed to me, of a Scheme to bring
about so great a Revolution, as the turning out most of the Ministers in the
Country, and bringing over four or five Hundred from Europe, to settle in their
Places, I should carefully keep it secret from every Mortal for two or three
Years, and declare it freely to Mr. Clap, and never to any other Person before
or since. For I now publicly Challenge the whole World besides Mr. Clap to
declare, if they ever heard me report any such Thing.

Mr. Clap says, he and I well agreed to condemn many Errors etc. --: That might
be; for all the Land knows that I ever condemned many Errors. But there was
little in our Conversation, in the Journey Mr. Clap speaks of, to draw me to
such a Confidence in him, as to choose him above all the World, to reveal my
greatest Secrets to: For he immediately fell upon me, as he knows, as soon as
ever we began to ride the Road together, about some Passages in my Book,
concerning the Revival of Religion, greatly blaming me, earnestly disputing
(...) suppose, for Hours together. After this we had (...) Dispute about
Connecticut Laws. And these Disputes were about the same Part of the Journey,
in which he says I told him this about Mr. Whitefield.

Thus dear Sir, I have endeavored to set forth this latter as it is* Public
Controversy from the Press, (...) especially public Contradiction, is not, for
it is (...) desirable, but much otherwise; and is (...) a great Aversion to.
But Mr. Clap has (...) to carry Things to that Length, that I (...) rendered it
my indispensible Duty, publicly to contradict him. I therefore desire that you
(...) publish what I now send you, as soon as may be herein you will oblige.

Sir, Your affectionate Friend, and humble Servant. Jonathan Edwards.
Northampton, Feb. 4th 1744, 5.

