MEDITATIONS Representing A Glimpse of Glory: OR, A Gospel-Discovery OF
EMMANUEL's Land. Whereunto is subjoined, A SPIRITUAL HYMN, Entitled, The dying
Saint's Song; and some of his last LETTERS.

By Mr. Andrew Welwood, Brother to Mr. JOHN WELWOOD, late Minister of the
Gospel in SCOTLAND.

Col. 3.4. When Christ, who is our Life, shall appear, then shall ye also
appear with him in Glory.

Isai. 60.19, 20, 21. -- The LORD shall be unto thee an everlasting Light, and
thy GOD thy Glory. Thy Sun shall no more go down, neither shall thy Moon
withdraw itself: Thy People also shall be all righteous, they shall inherit the
Land for ever.

Rev. 21.22. -- The LORD GOD Almighty, and the LAMB are the Temple of it. --
For the Glory of GOD did lighten it, and the LAMB is the Light thereof.

BOSTON, Reprinted by ROGERS and FOUL, for W. Mc ALPINE, near the
Mill-Bridge. 1744.

The Publishers TO THE READER.
Christian Reader,
THOU have here presented to thy View, A GLIMPSE of GLORY from the heavenly
Zion, so bright and lively, as nothing of humane Composure, yet extant, can
equal. A Ray of such heavenly Fire, as, being received into an Heart affected
with Eternal Objects, may prove a blessed Mean to inflame it into a Divine
Rapture of holy Longing, to see, and enjoy these unseen Things, which are here
in so bright Colors represented. Whosoever will in Sincerity, and with
Attention, peruse this small TREATISE, will be led into such a delightful
Contemplation of divine and heavenly Things, as may, in a Manner, transport his
very Soul into that heavenly Paradise; carry him along the beautiful Banks of
that pure River of the Water of Life; and represent to the Eyes of his Mind,
that noble and glorious Company that stands about the LAMB, on Mount Zion, in
white Robes, with Palms in their Hands, singing a new Song of Praise to JEHOVAH
and the LAMB. Here shall he find the incomparable Beauties of that upper
Paradise, and royal Palace of the King of Kings, described so brightly, in such
high and lofty Expressions, as well suit these sublime and supernatural
Objects; and yet withal so easy to be understood, that the meanest Capacity,
exercised in spiritual Things may apprehend the true Sense and Meaning of them.
The holy Heart of the Author has been so much in Heaven, that from the End of
the Prelude, to the Conclusion, he talks altogether like one in Heaven already,
and as a Possessor of the GLORY he describes: Which is to be attentively
noticed, for the better understanding of the Scope and Intent of the Discourse.

Besides the Description of Heaven, and the Glory which the Saints shall enjoy
there; (which is the professed Subject of the Book:) There are not a few other
excellent Subjects interspersed, and pretty largely handled. How sweetly does
he expatiate upon the Praises of Christ, the ever-blessed Redeemer? How lively
does he describe him, in his humbled State: his humble, laborious, sorrowful,
yet holy Life; his painful, shameful and accursed Death; his infinite Love to
his Chosen, that put him upon all that voluntary Humiliation and Suffering?
With what Ravishment does he admire the Difference of these Two, so distant
Estates? In what sweet, lively and bright Expressions does he declare the
mutual Intercourse betwixt this glorious Redeemer, and his Chosen, especially
in the upper HOUSE? It is also another great Aim of the Author, to display the
Attributes of GOD, to his Glory: His Grace and Mercy toward the Elect; his
Sovereignty in his Works of Creation, Providence, and especially Election; his
Truth and Faithfulness, in making good all his Promises; his Unchangeableness,
in his Purposes of Love and Grace to his own; his spotless Holiness and
Justice, in punishing the Wicked. How lofty is he in describing the Sovereignty
of God over his Creatures; either to create, or not create, elect, or pass by,
as he pleased? How sweet, large and ravishing is he, in holding forth the
FREEDOM and RICHES of REDEEMING GRACE! And how does he exult and glory in the
Unchangeableness of God, which secures the same to all Eternity? His wonderful
Wisdom, in contriving the Saints Way to the Kingdom, through a Life of
Sufferings, Afflictions, Poverty, Labors, Watchings, Sorrows, etc. is
pleasantly cleared up; and many mysterious Providence, relating thereunto,
judiciously unfolded; which may serve much for Confirmation and Consolation to
many poor drooping Believers. In describing the Holiness and Justice of God, in
the eternal Punishment of the Damned, he takes Occasion largely to delineate
the miserable Estate of the Ungodly: Nor is this improper for his Subject; for
Contraries, set beside other, serve to inlighten one another. He sets forth
their extreme Misery from the Greatness of their Torments; the great and
inconceivable Loss they undergo, in their eternal Banishment from the Presence
of GOD and the LAMB; the Eternity, yet Justice of their Punishment: Which
Justice he founds not on an arbitrary Constitution, but on the infinite
Holiness, Justice and Sovereignty of God, against whom Sin is an infinite
Offense, as striking against his very BEING and GLORY; and therefore deserving
an Infinity of Punishment. The Blasphemies they continually belch forth against
their Creator, for his punishing them, though at the same Time their Consciences
approve him just; and their horrid Inclination to fulfill their Lusts, though they
cannot: All which he reckons their Punishment, as well as their Sin, for he was
at no Loss to believe, That there is Sinning in Hell. And finally here is set
forth the holy Triumph of the Righteous over the Wicked, Devils and Men, once
their mortal Enemies; now laid low under the Soles of their Feet, and for ever
banished their holy and happy Society. All which the Author describes in such a
moving and pathetick Manner as might cause an Adamantine Heart to relent and
tremble, and to enquire, What must I do to be saved? How shall I escape the
Wrath to come?

And indeed, to bring Souls to such a serious Enquiry, and draw Hearts from
this base, empty Earth, to an Inquest after Heaven and Salvation, is the great
Aim of the Author through all this Book. And hence, how pathetick and vigorous
is he, in his Inviting, Persuading, and Reasoning with the Unconverted (whom he
commonly styles Worldlings, because yet entangled in the Lusts of the World) to
awaken them to a due Concern about heavenly Things, and wean their Hearts from
earthly Vanities; and by lessening their Esteem of them, to draw their
Affections from them?

And that such as are persuaded, seriously to mind and apply themselves to this
noble and necessary Study, may not want an Help at Hand, to discover to them
the Goodness or Badness of their Estate: He has added in the Conclusion of the
Work a considerable Number of Excellent Marks or Notes, whereby a Christian may
discern his being in Christ, and whether he be in an heavenly Frame, or not;
also by them a formal Hypocrite may be detected.

If there be any Flights of lofty and sublime Thought, here and there, that may
offend the Censorious, it is desired, That before they censure, they would first
compare them with the Similitudes and Expressions of holy Scripture, and next
with the Sentiments of sound Divines, giving some Grains of Allowance, on
Consideration of the sublime and rapturous Way of writing, here used; and, it is
confidently presumed, they will find Nothing, but what is most agreeable to
Truth, in this whole Tractate. There is a Sentence, Sect. 54, where he seems to
make Sincerity the Condition of the New Covenant, as Perfection of Obedience
was the Condition of the Covenant of Works; which may perhaps offend some, who
dislike the very Term Condition in a Covenant of Grace. But whosoever considers
how large and pathetick he is, in describing the free Grace of God, and
ascribing all the Glory of Redemption and Salvation to Christ, and only to
Christ, must be persuaded, he cannot mean, that the Believer's Sincerity, or
any Grate of his whatsoever, is the Condition of the New Covenant, in a legal
Sense; for so Christ's Righteousness alone is the Condition of that Covenant.
Nor can we charitably judge, That this Term, Condition, is in any worse or
stricter Sense affirmed of Sincerity, which presupposes and includes Faith,
than it is of Faith it self, in the 32 Answer of our Larger Catechism. It is
clear then, That the Author takes Condition in a large Sense, for any Thing
required or accepted in the new Covenant: And so it is true, That as Adam's
Works were to be perfect, in Order to Acceptance; so the Believer's good Works
cannot be accepted without Sincerity; and will, through Christ, be accepted when
Sincere: Which must certainly be all the Author intends by Condition in that
Place.

He is also pretty positive in his Opinion of the Renovation of the Earth and
visible Heavens, at the Day of Judgment; which he describes in bright and
beautiful Emblems. The Opinion is indeed controverted among the Learned: But
most of the Orthodox are of the Author's Side. Hence, when he is speaking of
Things in that renewed State, after the Day of Judgment, none needs marvel,
that he calls Sun, Moon and Stars everlasting, and the Earth an eternal
Monument, as in Sect. 43; Or, stumble at any such uncommon Expressions: For he
speaks as one beyond Time in Eternity.

Moreover, the intelligent and observing Reader will here find such a
surprising Variety of the most profound Gospel-Mysteries, interwoven in such a
beautiful and artful Contexture, as will every where entertain his
Understanding, with an uncommon Delight.

It Is hoped, none will desiderate Method, or quarrel the Want thereof as a
Defect; if it be but reminded, That devotional Books, amongst which this may
justly claim a chief Room, are not usually astricted to the Rules of Art and
Logical Method: It being the Design of such Writers, not so much to please the
Fancy, or entertain the Understanding with an orderly Ranging and Methodizing
of Things, as to quicken and inflame the Affections with divine and sublime
Meditations: Where, not a Gingle of empty Eloquence fills the Ear; but heavenly
and supernatural Objects, brought down, as it were, from the eternal World of
Spirits, and made familiar to the Understanding, move and engage the Heart, and
elevate the Soul to follow hard after these only worthy and substantial
Delights. And besides, the intelligent Reader will find upon due Perusal, that
it is not a mere rude Heap of indigested Matter; but that there is really a
comely Order observed, in the Disposing of the Thoughts herein contained, which
will sufficiently gratify the Understanding, while the incomparable Matter
melts and inflames the Affections.

As for the Titles of the Sections, the Publishers were not assured, whether
they were added by the Author himself, or by some other Hand: Nay, they did not
want Ground of Suspicion, both from the Difference of Expression, and sometimes
from the Unsuitableness to the Matter, that some less skilful Person had added
them. Yet having no Copies save one (except the Letters, and Saint's Song,
whereof we found several Copies) to compare, 'twas though it safest to retain them,
lest any Thing might be desiderate that was in the Manuscript: And the
judicious Reader is left to his Choice, whether to read on the Matter, without
Regard to these Titles, or otherwise; for it must be owned, That, considering
the Variety of heavenly Purposes, sometimes comprised in one of these
Paragraphs, it is no easy Matter for any Man to devise an apposite Title, to
express the Substance of the Matter therein contained.

There is no Doubt, but the Reader, by this Time, will be longing for some
Account of the Author: And it were to be wished, that a true and genuine
Relation of the Life of that pious Youth could have been recovered, in order
further to oblige the Public; which had it been practicable, no Pains would
have been spared to transmit it: And without all Doubt, such a Life would have
been a rare and excellent Draught, worthy of Christian Imitation. He was the
Son of a godly Father, Minister of the Gospel at Tondergirth in Annandole;
concerning whom there is related this remarkable Passage. When the LORD had
taken away from him his beloved Wife, the Desire of his Eyes, he spent the
whole ensuing Night in Prayer and Medication in his Garden. One of the Elders
of the Parish coming next Morning to visit him, and condoling his Want of Rest
by Reason of the Dispensation so lately befallen him, he replied thus, or to
this Effect: I declare I have not all this Night had one Thought concerning the
Death of my Spouse; I have been so wholly taken up with the Meditation of
heavenly Things. I have been this Night upon the Banks of Ulai, plucking an
Apple here and there. This Passage plainly shows what a heavenly Soul this holy
Man has been; and how plentifully this gracious Youth, his Son, has been
blessed with the same Spirit, is abundantly evident from the ensuing Treatise.
His Brother Mr. John Welwood was a Person well known to many, and his Memory
still favory to all that knew him, for his Holiness, Diligence in the Labors
of the Ministry, amidst many Perils from Bloody Persecutors and false Brethren;
his undaunted Zeal and Courage in the Cause of Christ, though under a very weak
and sickly Constitution of Body. What a Life of Faith he lived in these
Perilous Times, is evident from several Letters of his, written to his Godly
Acquaintances, and Friends, yet extant in Manuscript. And as he excelled in the
Grace of Faith, so this holy Youth, the Author, seems to have peculiarly
abounded in that of Love, as will be abundantly manifest from the whole of this
heavenly Tractate. And how zealous he was for the royal Prerogatives of his
lovely Redeemer, usurped by wicked Rulers; and the public Concerns of His House
and Glory; may be gathered from several Passages in this Treatise, though the
Nature of the Subject did not permit him to enlarge much this Way. It appears
plainly, from his Letters annexed to this Treatise, that he designed to have
served the Lord Christ in the Work of the Ministry, if it had pleased the Lord
to have continued his Abode here below: But the good Lord was pleased early to
transport him from the Wilderness of Earth to the Paradise of Glory; and to
accept the Will, in that Matter, for the Deed, as himself speaks. He died at
London, in Time of our late Persecution, as would seem, of a Consumption; under
which Affliction, how much he profited and grew in Grace, appears also
evidently from the same Letters. He concluded his holy and happy, though short,
Life, with the sweetest Assurance of obtaining that Celestial Blessedness, he
here describes, and quietly slept in the Lord. And though the rest of the History
of his Life cannot here be committed to Writing, (as was designed, if certain
Information could have been obtained) yet there is here a genuine Transcript of
it to be read; for no doubt he endeavored to live what he wrote, and such a
lasting Monument erected to the Glory of his Redeemer, as will also serve to
transmit his Memory embalmed to Posterity, without needing an Elogium from any
other Hand.

To conclude, the Treatise it self will, upon due Perusal, so approve it self
to every gracious Heart, by its heavenly and divine Strain; the noble Design it
drives, namely to exalt Christ, and allure Souls to him, by its most sweet and
taking Composure; its Style being both lofty, as to the Subject, and
condescending to the most I^literate; and finally by the sweet Discoveries it
makes of that holy City, the heavenly Jerusalem, the Hope, Rest and Joy of all
the Saints: The Treatise, I say, will so recommend it self, as that it shall
need no Ivy to be hung out to invite the Passenger; and will only need to be
known, to recommend it sufficiently to every devout Soul.

That the Almighty Lord, with whom is the Residue of the Spirit, and who only
can command the Blessing, may make this TREATISE a blessed Mean, in the Hand of
his holy Spirit, to build up and comfort Believers, to quicken them to
Heavenly-mindedness, and draw them from the too eager Love of this Earth; and
awaken, allure and draw Sinners to JESUS CHRIST, charmed and ravished with the
unspeakable Glory of the great Reward, here described, which He has promised
to all them that turn from Iniquity, and sincerely love Him; is the earnest
Desire of the Publishers.

A POEM, Written by a Friend of the Author, upon the Sight of this rare Piece,
in Commendation of both.
YOU exc'llent Souls, whose lofty Minds aspire
To higher Objects only, whose Desire
Disdains o'er-valu'd Dung, vile Worldlings Choice,
Is not allured with Siren's empty Voice,
And scorns to aim below the Zenith High,
Whither refined Perfections all do fly;
Here is an Object highest Thoughts transcending,
Yet unto mean Conceptions condescending:
Here Is Heaven, and Glory, higher Eden come
TO unhappy Earth, a sweet Elysium:
Here Is Glory brought to us, or happy we
To Glory made, by nimble Wings, to flee,
On Seas of brinish Tears, poor we are tossed,
With boist'rons Winds, and lofty Waves are crossed;
Cannot see our dearest native Soil, or Lover:
But, here is a curious Prospect, to discover
That Land afar off* those sweet Hills, and Vales,
Where blow these fragrant, Soul-refreshing Gales,
Which rouse these fainting Souls, whose Feet do stand
Within the Borders of Emmanuel's Land;
Where shines the Eternal, with celestial Showers,
Ne'er-ending Blessings on the ransomed Powers,
The soaring Author has flow'n up above,
Drawn by the Cords of his Redeemer's Love;
Has walked along the Green, and flowr'y Banks
Of Life's sweet River, viewed the curious Ranks
Of Glory's stately fruitful Trees; has tasted
Their Fruits most pleasant, and delicious; feasted
His Eyes, on Glory's Land, most lovely, fair;
His Taste, with Nectar, and Ambrosia rare;
His Smelling, with Heaven's Spring's Embroidery;
His Hearing, with harmonious Raptures high;
His Touch, upon the silken Carpet's Lap,
Which Glory's Fields and Alleys does inwrap:
His Mind, upon the elevated Things,
And deep Contrivance of the King of Kings:
His Love, on Joys, which Eye has never seen,
Which Man's capacious Heart did never contain,
He Is sad, that Mortals in foul Mire should wallow,
And greedily vile Lumps of Earth should swallow:
Most friendly bids you share some Drops with him
Of Pleasures Streams, in which the Saints do swim:
He ( Israel's Spy) ripe Graces from promised Land
Has brought (to inflame them) with a liberal Hand.
Thy Pen mounts higher, than the Eagle's far;
Thy sharpest Eve, more than the Eagle's, dare.
Thy Draught Apelles Tables far outvies,
More curious thy Picture is than his.
Thy Raptures future Ages shall admire,
And these shall light their Tapers at thy Fire.
Th^u'st trod a lofty Path, never trod before,
And which shall be, it seems, by none trod more:
Thou ha^t out-stript and shamed the Ages gone,
And by thy rarest Writings graced thine own:
The Times to come may trace thy stately Pace,
But still thou wilt get the Honor of the Place.
Who would see Glory off the nearest Shores,
Draw near it with these curious mighty Oars;
Cast out on Glory's beauteous Skirts your Eye,
And there, O Saints, your ravished Souls shall spy
A Paradise, whose lowest Parts excel
This vilest Dunghill, in which Mortals dwell:
A Paradise, each Glimpse of which shall fill
Your Minds with Wonder, and with Joy your Will:
In short, a Paradise, whose every Part
Shall so inflame your ever ravished Heart,
That longing you shall never rest, till ye
Have Heaven in you, or you in Glory be.
A Glimpse of Glory: OR, A Gospel-Discovery of EMMAUEL's Land. The PRELUDE.
ROUSE thee, O my Soul, from this base and contagious Earth: Why should lower
Thoughts, and base Aims possess thee thus? What have thou here, that may draw
thee aside from the Center of thy Felicity, but for one Moment? If this World,
in her rosy and youthful Constitution, be very Vanity and Vexation of Spirit;
what must there be now in her sad and withered State? If in her Smiles, she be
not worth the regarding; what Folly is it, to court a frowning Nothing?

2. Is it Time, O my Soul, to place one Beam of thy Affection upon such a
filly, base Dunghill, so as to give it an affectionate Look? Trample it under
thy Feet: Carry thy self after the Manner of these, who expect the Kingdom. GOD
has formed thee of such a capacious Constitution as nothing can satisfy thee
below his infinite SELF; and should thou be confined, in thy Outgoings,
within the Limits of this lower, smoky Region? Mount up swiftly, far above the
Sun, Moon and Stars, beyond the Borders of this narrow Vault, where thou may
sweetly bathe thy self, in these Oceans of Joys and Felicity, that know neither
Brim nor Bottom: Thou art not to waste away thy Conceptions on Things to Day in
their Vigor, and to Morrow they are not: Shadows, empty Nothings, Night-dreams
and Vanities, insufficient Objects for the Faculties of such a noble Being, to
fix upon. Art thou not beginning to consider of a more enduring Substance? The
Kingdom that cannot be shaken, Emmanuel's glorious, stately and ever
flourishing Land, the smiling, rosy Place where his Servants do incessantly
serve him, and see his Face eternally, without a Cloud; where our all-lovely
WELBELOVED does corporally dwell, and shall for ever take up his eternal Abode;
a fruitful, fragrant, beautiful, delightsom Soil, overflowing with the true and
real Nectar and Ambrosia; a Garden of Delights, a Paradise of Pleasures,
planted at the Beginning by the Almighty's own Right Hand, whereon he has
manifested, in an high and transcendent Manner, the incomprehensible Glory of
his Power, Love and Goodness, wonderfully, above what Eye has seen, Ear has
heard, or the Mind of Man, within the Tents of Mortality, considered: What a
wonderful Frame is this! O the alluring Objects up above! The first Thought
whereof set all on a Flame: O what Desires! O what Longings! When shall
Mortality be swallowed up of Life, Death of Victory, Time of Eternity, Miseries
of Blessedness, Sorrows of Joys, Pains of Pleasures, painted Enjoyments and
Delights of his Love and eternal Sweetness?

3. All Creatures are ever in Action, especially these of the highest and most
noble Rank, which must necessarily have some Object or other, to fix their
Outgoings upon: The most excellent and sublime are then to be chosen; and what
more excellent, than what will fill all the Powers and Faculties of blessed Men
and Angels throughout all Eternity?

4. To take a View of the higher Canaan, is neither Curiosity nor Audacity, but
a necessary Duty, lying upon all, who are traveling thither: The Advantages of
such a noble Study cannot be told, nay, nor conceived, but by the Exercised
therein.

5. According to the Knowledge, so are the Affections, both as to Kind and
Degree: What we know not, that we cannot love; and what we behold lovely, we
cannot but love it. Seraphick Spirits, no Wonder you are ofttimes ravished from
your selves! Ah silly Worldlings, you cannot but have a drooping Life of it;
since you know nothing but Earth: Had you an half Glimpse of the more enduring
Substance of the ever-flourishing, never-fading Glory, how should you be in an
unexperienced Frame of Joy and Admiration! How should you disdain all the
lesser Beauties on this Side of Time! But ah! you never saw the enduring Glory;
and what Wonder you are as you are?

6. Mortality has no greater Joy, than the solid Hope of Glory; the Sweetness,
arising from the solid Hope of so great Things, fills the Soul with wonderful
Ravishments, and perfumes the lowest of earthly Enjoyments: Surpassing Joys to
my Soul: These temporal Things, my LORD bestows upon me, are as Pledges of the
fair Inheritance. And are not all visible Things as so many Emblems of the
Invisible? Wordlings, you are Fools, to imagine, We have a sad and melancholy
Life: None live but we; though we may be said to be, as to this Life, Of all Men
the most miserable; it is only as to the Bulk of Externals: You know not our
Joys, nor the Manner of our Enjoyments; neither can ye know them.

7. Of Necessity we must search after another Life, than this evan^shing Vapor.

May not the Vanity and Vexation of Spirit, in the Pursuit of every sublunary
Enjoyment, force us to the searching after another Life? If we search not for
the Glory to come, then let us search after nothing at all. Sirs, what Madness,
to notice this Earth, unless in Order to Eternity? Do you not clearly see all
your temporary Enjoyments die in the Birth? Are not the glistering Shows of Men
on this Stage of the World, like the Appearance of Aerial Things in the Clouds?
Here are Armies engaging one another, there are Ships under Sail, yonder are
Men riding in the Equipage of Kings, Queens, etc. other where is are Towns,
Castle, Rivers, etc. All appear real to the Spectators, but anon all evanishing
to nothing, and where are they? Fools! are they considering, That thus it is
with all the Glories of Time? Verily, to all Eternity, they shall be as if they
not been.

8. The small Study of Glory proves us, in a great Part, carnal.

Is it not evident, we have our Eyes too much upon Shadows, and that we divide
our Looks betwixt Heaven and Earth; since our Joys are more carnal than
spiritual, and our Longings and Desires run so little heavenward? Ah, our Love
to the only WELBELOVED, is not unlike that that every Nation carries to their
God; else we would be often crying out, Is not my Welbeloved gone unto another
Country? and shall not my Heart and Love for ever dwell there, and only there?
Sit I down here, When he has removed himself to another Place? Can there be
any Thing desirable where he is not? O, all ye Beauties of this lower World,
what are you to me, if my LORD be absent? Let me pass through all possible
Difficulties, even through ten thousand Oceans of burning Fire and Brimstone;
providing I land at last, on that ten thousand times happy Place, where he for
ever dwells; that these Arms may be blessed in embracing, these Eyes in eternal
beholding, and all my Faculties may be filled with his eternally ravishing
Sweetness. Oh, when shall I behold thy Countenance! When shall I hear thy
Voice! When shall I stand amongst these happy, happy, happy Ones, who stand in
the immediate Presence of thy all-glorious Majesty, and have the naked,
immediate and clear Vision of thine eternally ravishing Godhead; Ah, how is it
I think of any Thing, but Heaven? Why are we not ever in an impatient Longing,
to be in his everlasting Embraces? Know we what it is, to take him for our only
WELBELOVED? Is not every Sounding of his very Name, melodious Harmony in our
Ears? Does not every Hearing or Reading of him, affect us with a wonderful
Sweetness? Do not the Tho'ts of our being in his naked Embraces ere long, fill
us with an Ecstasy of Joy? Are we not often challenging Years, Months and Days,
that they succeed so leasurely one another; and contending with Sun, Moon and
Stars, that they run their Course so slowly; looking upon every Hour, as an
Age, in his Absence; and Death as of a sweet and lovely Countenance, since it
opens us a Passage to the full Enjoyment of him; and the Marrow of all
Creature-Excellency, as a Mass of Deformity, if it should eclipse for a Moment,
the sweet Enjoyment of his Alsufficient Self?

9. Students of Glory, overlook the Difficulties and Vexations of Time.

Sweet, sweet is the Way to my blessed Home! Can the Way be thought tedious,
that leads to such boundless Joy? O the goodly Country I behold lying at the
End of my Race! Hell in my Way should be as a pleasant Paradise: What though
Sadness assault me? Yonder are Oceans of Joys at the End of my Journey; though
Weariness, yonder are green Pastures, with an eternal May; though Death, yonder
are Floods, the Rivers of Life, of which I shall drink, and drink again, for
evermore. Does Poverty and Contempt interveen? Lo, the rich Inheritance, the
Golden and Pearly Cit^, the splendid Household Stuff! O the rich Inhabitants!
How do mine Eyes affect mine Heart! O blessed Christ, I have seen thee in thy
Beauty; and O how is my Soul in an uninterrupted Motion, to be at thee! The
Affairs of Time move not as such. O what Allurements! Who can see, and not run?
O thy violent, sweet, attractive Virtue! How strongly and quickly do thou
draw thy Members up to Heaven after thee! See I not thee, O WELBELOVED,
standing with the massy Crown of Glory in thy Hand, crying, Run, and have it?
And shall I not run, even run with Patience and cheerfully unto the Death? How
cheerfully did my LORD go up to Jerusalem, to purchase the Crown for me! a
Crown to be purchased through a World of Sorrows and Difficulties! What am I
doing? Why stand I thus? All is purchased already, and the Word is to me, ENTER
and POSSESS.

10. The Study of Glory is so alluring, that the more we study, the more we
love to study it.

Had we a Discovery of the only excellent Things, how difficult would it prove,
to get our Thoughts plucked off them? Most lovely Things, seen in their
Loveliness, captivate the Affections most* and consequently determine the
Tho'ts: Do we not think most upon what we love most? Worldlings I appeal to
your Consciences, if your Tho'ts run not out most upon earthly Things: Why? You
know them only, and esteem them most: But, had you a View of the real World,
the Outgoings of your Soul would run in an higher Orb. Had we the Impressions
of Glory on our Spirits, lower Objects should not easily draw down our Tho'ts,
or turn them aside; yea, our higher Powers should be so strongly affected, as
that the lower Powers should be regulated even in Sleep; our Imaginations would
be composing and dividing the Ideas of the Life to come, they received,
according to their Natures, from the higher Faculties. How often would we be, in
our Dreams, walking up and down the Streets of the golden City, the Beds of
Lilies and Roses, in the higher Paradise of Glory, the Banks of that River of
Water of Life? Days-Thoughts have Influence upon Night-Dreams: the Disposition
of the Fancy follows that of the Mind. Ah, ye Sons of Men, what Wonder your
Fancy run out after so foolish a Manner! The Strength of your sublime Powers is
wasted on Dunghil-concernments, your Tho'ts are full of Earth, and all your
lower Powers are full of it also.

11. Creatures are only to be esteemed more or less excellent, according to
their Knowledge; it being the primum Mobile of all other Endowments.

Creatures are Excellent according to their Knowledge: Let Beasts imagine, that
the Scenical Garbs of Riches, and Titular Honors, add any Thing real to Men:
It is only Knowledge that differenceth; without it a Man is but a Beast; and
with it, in its elevated Pitch, he is a glorified and immortal Creature: This
is Life Eternal, That they might know thee, and Jesus Christ whom thou have
sent. And is not the Knowledge more Noble, according to the Excellency of the
Objects, they being taken up congruously? O then, are they not seraphick
Creatures, whose Minds are set upon the only Excellent Things? had we a sight
of that surpassing Glory, how would our Minds be elevated wonderfully above
this base Dunghill? How should we look down upon the greatest Things of Earth,
as inconsiderable Trifles, far below our sublime Spirits? how should we trample
on Crowns and Sceptres, yea, many Worlds though existent, when elevated, on our
high Places, clothed with the Sun, and having the Moon under our Feet? How
should we laugh at silly Earthworms, crawling over one another with great
Trouble and Vexation; Ah Childish Spirits! are you contending and wasting your
Inch of Time on Trifles and shining Nothings? what is the Gain, when all your
Projects are accomplished? Heirs of Glory, no wonder, you are termed by Truth
it self, the Excellent Ones of the Earth; none of excellent and generous
Spirits, but you. The Opinions of blind Worldlings concerning you is of no
Value; the Excellency, and Baseness of Mankind is not yet laid open: Mortality,
and its black Retinue, obscure all: A little Patience, and the Almighty shall
unmask the whole Race of Mankind.

12. A clear View of so great Rewards, heartens to all Duties.

The clear Sight of the great Recompense of Reward, makes the Creature cheerful
in Duty; Am I so slow in my Race, and the matchless Inheritance at the Stake?
Cries not my Lord unto me, Be thou faithful unto the Death, and I will give
thee a Crown of Life? Is there such a necessary Connection betwixt a Momentary
Fight, and an Everlasting Triumph? O the Disproportation! who would not fight?
who would not wrestle? O let me run to the Death.

13. The better we are versed in the Study of Heaven, the more we are fitted
for it.

Is not Grace young Glory? and the Forethoughts of Heaven, a Preparation for
Heaven? even as black Nature is a Preparation for Hell, the height and
Perfection of Wickedness: A Sutableness is congruous betwixt the Creature and
its Condition. High Spirits are not for base, low Things; as creeping Spirits
are not for high. What Things in Heaven can delight a carnal Soul? Earth,
Earth, and only Earth, is its known Object: Give him Earth, and he desires no
more. There is Congruity, and Discongruity betwixt the Capacity and Object:
Beasts have no uptaking of intellectual Things; neither carnal Men (termed
Beasts in Scripture) of the Things of GOD. O sweet! How do the Saints smell of
Glory, before they enter in? May they not say, Whither I go, I know, and the
Way I know? Were I ignorant of the World I remove for ever into, could I be
thus in so joyful a Frame? My Soul is going to the Place, where my Heart is
already. I know in whom I have believed, and what is his Reward, O Joy
unspeakable, and full of Glory.

14. Noble Uptakings of Glory, make us in Part Possessors of Heaven and Glory.

Serious Meditating on Heaven, renders us, in some Manner, Possessors thereof:
Our Conversation is in Heaven, says the Apostle; and again, You are come (not
to the Mount visible) unto Mount Zion, and to the City of the living God.
Converse and Presence is only by Benefit of the Mind; were we dwelling in
Heaven by Faith, we might be said to be in Heaven, before we were there; or
rather Heaven would come down unto our Souls; Christ and all his glorious Train
would be intimate unto us. O then! we might say, my Company is sweet, My
Fellowship glorious: He, whose Presence enlightens, enlivens and beautifies
Heaven, is ever present with me: I have set the LORD always before me, because
he is at my Right Hand, I shall not be moved. A Bundle of Myrrh is my
Welbeloved unto me, He shall ly all Night betwixt my Breasts. O passing Joys
and Sweetness! the Source of all Joys and Sweetness does possess my Heart.
Blinded Worldlings, you see but the outward Garb of Saints; saw you what were
within, you could not but admire their Happiness: The King's Daughter is all
glorious within. Saw you your own selves, in your own genuine Colors, ye would
run from yourselves, if it were possible: Hell lodges within you, and you know
it not; but anon, when the Conscience is awak'ned, ye shall know it, to your
dreadful Experience.

15. Heaven is the proper Place, where all Excellency dwells: Should we not
then dwell mentally there?

As the Fields are most pleasant, fertile and beautiful, which lie nearest the
perpendicular Rays of the Sun; so the more nearly we approach the Sun of
Righteousness, the more vigorous and lively shall our Condition be: How shall
we bloom and flourish like a Tree planted by the Rivers of Waters? O how
beautiful shall we become in the Eyes of God, Angels, and Saints! Worldlings,
you live in a cold Climate: Can any Thing befall you, except Withering and
Decay? Come hither, this is the Sunny-side of the World; were ye here, ye could
not but cry out, The Lines are fallen to me in pleasant Places; yea, I have a
goodly Heritage.

16. We are allowed to have our Mind no where else, but in Heaven, that only
being free of the Contagion of Sin.

To have the Mind in Heaven, is safe; to let it fall down to Earth, is most
dangerous: Mostly from this do Satan, the World, and our vile Hearts get such
Advantage against us: This is the Place where Satan dominiers; to dwell here,
implies a Submission to the Scepter of his Government. No Wonder so many
Mischiefs befall Earthworms. Heaven is the Saints proper Soil: If ye be wise, O
Citizens of the New Jerusalem, range not without the Borders of your Kingdom,
lest some Evil befall you.

17. According to the Excellency of our Knowledge, accordingly is the Sphere of
our Activity; and consequently our Fitness for doing great Things for our
LORD's Glory.

Who are most accomplished for the greatest Actions and Sufferings for Christ?
Who, but these who are most above? If the Study of humane Sciences renders a
Man in some Measure excellent, What will the Study of this Hyperphysical
Science do? All other Sciences are subordinate to this; it being a practick
Science, directing and illuminating our Minds, in the right and solid Uptaking
of all Things. Know much of GOD, and know much of all Things.

18. What we know and affect, that we are; if Earth, we are earthly; if Heaven,
we are heavenly.

The Difference betwixt Saints and all Wordlings, lies much here; as the Man
is, so are his Thoughts. Do the Faculties of thy Soul run most out on Heaven
and Glory? Does Heaven more affect thee than Earth? Is It the ordinary Frame of
thy Spirit? O the Blessedness of thy Condition! little can thou conceive what
thou art coming to. But, does thy Mind run most upon Earth? is it the most
delightsom Object? and is Heaven a framed and strange-like Subject to meditate
upon? Is that the ordinary Harmony of thy Spirit? O thy dreadful Condition! who
can conceive it? But thou shall know it ere long.

And how sweetly and cordially are we invited to come up from this base Earth,
and partake of that noble Fellowship with the Father and the Son? The Gates of
Glory are cast wide open to all; the Wells of Salvation are not sealed: If you
be eternally thrust out blame your selves. He complains, exhorts, arguments, Ye
will not come to me, that you may have Life. Why will ye die? Whosoever will,
let him come, and take of the Water of Life freely. Ah Fools, what are ye
doing? Doubt ye whether to come up or not? what have ye there but broken
Cisterns? Here, O here, are the Fountains, the Rivers, the Oceans of Living
Waters. Beware, Sirs, this become not your eternal Complaint, Heaven was wide
open, and I would not come in; and now, Woe, Woe, Woe for evermore! the Gates are
for ever shut against me.

19. It is dangerous to take a superficial View of Glory, and no more: We are
to search, and die searching; since Earth has so strange a Power upon
Creatures composed of Earth.

O Heirs of this never-fading Glory, need we speak of the Things you have a
View of, far above all our Expressions! See you not what is inexpressible? are
you not ravished with the Goodness of your Lot? have you not been often upon
the Top of Mount Pisgah, viewing the higher and lower World; the vast
Difference betwixt the Childrens Inheritance, and that of the Bastards? have ye
not received a Taste of the delicious Fruits that grow on the Tree of Life?
have ye not received in your Souls, some Sparkles of that heavenly Joy and
Love? have you not experimentally seen the Nothingness and Vanity of all
created Enjoyments? How is it then; that so many of you are so base and carnal
in your Deportment, as it is difficult to discern betwixt your Walk, and that
of the Sons of the Earth? What! back to the Earth again, after you have
received so high an Elevation? You somewhat resemble the fallen Angels. Sirs
(if it be so, that you are fallen indeed) it is an Hundred to One, if ever you
approach so near Heaven, on this Side of Time: Apostasy, in the smallest
Degree, is very dreadful. Be it so, you cannot totally and finally become Earth
again; yet, is it not sad, never to come near to the first Seize? as it
mostly falls out in fallen Saints: Even David's last Ways were below his first.
But however, Can ye endure so to disgrace your Lord's Glory, before the Eyes of
vile Worldlings, who esteem Heaven a well invented Chimera? Can you feed their
Atheism? And dare you shake the Faith of weak ones, and be the sad Occasion of
many's going back at the Birth? Either walk in an heavenly Manner, or profess
no Religion at all: If your Converse be like that of Dunghil-wretches, wherein
do ye glorify GOD more than they? Yea, you do dishonor him more a Thousand
Stages. Christians, can you forget your sweet Country, in this melancholy
Wilderness; is not Death at your Hand? Our Time is short, for making ready for
Eternity; ere we get a Sight of the vain World, Death will assault us. What is
Time, but a Preparation for Eternity? Were there not Connection betwixt these
two, verily, Time were of no Consideration: Have we lost the real Use of our
Senses? Do not all we see, or hear, invite us to go up, and leave this
despicable World? Every earthly Enjoyment has Vanity written upon it; every
Thing here has a frowning Countenance: Are we not looking for a City whose
Builder and Maker is God? Let us be persuaded of the Truth of so great Things;
let us embrace the Promises, and confess, we are Strangers and Pilgrims on
Earth, that the Natives of this World may perceive we seek a Country. Cry out,
Sirs, Adieu, you gilded Enjoyments, abstracted from the Life of all
Enjoyments, ah glistering Nothings! what are you all to me! What to One who
has sound the enduring Substance? Welcome, a Thousand Times Welcome, eternal
Joys, substantial Pleasures, enduring Comforts. Welcome Enjoyment of God, in
any Measure, though through a Glass. Mount up, O my Soul, on the Seraphick Wings of
heavenly Meditation: Though thou have lien among the Pots, yet shall thou be as
the Wings of a Dove, covered with Silver, and her Feathers with yellow Gold.
Let not a low Sight content thee, never rest, until thou be over the Borders of
Time, where thou shall be at Rest, and free of Trouble: Here is nothing but
Vanity and Vexation of Spirit.

20. Scripture gives us a Discovery of Things beyond Time.

By a spiritual Uptaking of the Scriptures, in their own genuine Sense, we
might attain unto the sublime Knowledge of excellent Things: They are wisest,
who are best studied in them: Faith is an Instrument, whereby the Soul takes up
aright the Things contained therein. And does not every Page smell of Heaven
and Glory? The Glory of God, and intellectual Creatures, and everlasting
Enjoyment of him, is the Subject and Scope of all. Nay, this great Volume of
this visible All, demonstrates somewhat invisible, of a far higher Nature: The
Heavens declare the Glory of God: The invisible Things of him from the Creation
of the World are clearly seen, being understood by the Things which are made.
How many Draughts and Emblems of Glory may we behold, in the glorious Fabric
of Heaven and Earth; how does the Spirit set before our Eyes, that
inconceivable Glory to come, in Types and borrowed Terms, drawn from the
Glories of this lower Region? Verily, they have the Advantage of others, who
have Spirit and Opportunity, for searching into the admirable Works of God's
Creation: For, such is the Nature of Things visible, that they lead us to these
that are invisible.

21. Glory is not to be considered after a Philosophical Manner, being
altogether supernatural.

To enquire metaphysically into the Nature of this excellent Glory, is not our
Intention: We desire not to speak other Things, than what is written. Subtle
Inquities are cold, having small Influence on the Affections, the Inflaming of
which is our Aim. A Gospel View of Glory, in a Scripture Dialect, is our
Design. That the Scripture terms Heaven, a City; and again, a Bride, shows
that all Emblems come wonderfully short, in representing such inconceivable
Things; and therefore Discourses thereof are not to be examined, according to
vulgar Rules. Glory may be understood, either formally, or subjectively, which
is the supernatural Elevation of the Creature; or objectively, which is the
Manifestation of GOD to the Creature: The Glory then to be revealed, is a
supernatural Perfection, and that in Kind. Natural Wisdom, never so intense, is
not Glory: The Splendour of the Sun, though a thousand Stages gradually augmented
above what it is, is still but natural Glory, and not a supernatural Elevation.
Every Thing is perfect, beautiful, excellent or glorious (which Terms express
the same) in its own Kind; but in Heaven, are all supernaturally excellent, as
being elevated far above the Reach of their natural Beings.

22. All Creatures from the highest to the lowest, are passively capable of
supernatural Elevation.

What baser Things than Dust? and yet that is admitted within the New Jerusalem:
Yet may intellectual Beings be said (Gr. kat' exochen, i. e. by way of
Eminence) to be only capable of Glory: And then we may say, Glory is the
highest Elevation (actual) of a Creature, in its Being, Faculties, Virtues,
Operations and Relations, by which it is enabled to enjoy God to the full.

23. Nothing leads us so excellently to the Knowledge of Glory, as Grace its
Forerunner.

Grace being an Endowment above the Strength of Nature, what is it else, but
young Glory? For that the Knowledge of the one will lead us by the Hand unto the
Knowledge of the other: As Glory is Grace in the Bloom and fullest Vigor, so
Grace is Glory in the Bud and first Springing; the one is Holiness begun, the
other Holiness per^ected; the one is the Beholding of God darkly, as through a
Glass, the other Beholding him Face to Face. Christians, are you considering,
that in Part you are glorified already? Though it be small, like a Grain of
Mustard Seed, and obscured by Corruption and Mortality; a little Patience, and
you shall see it grow out wonderfully in all Dimensions, and flourish, and
bloom, and be fruitful and fragrant through never-ending Ages. You have tasted
that the Lord is good; you shall swim, ere long, in the Oceans of Goodness: You
have had his amiable Countenance lifted up upon you; a little hence shall ye
for ever dwell under the Noonday Rays of his ravishing Face: Some Drops of
celestial Joy have fallen into your Hearts, unto Ravishment; you shall enter
into the Ocean it self ere long: You are walking with the Lamb, in the Days of
your Pilgrimage; you shall follow Him anon whithersoever he goes. May ye not
then attain to some Conception of Glory? the Tree may be known by its Seed; the
direct Rays, by the reflex. As for you, Worldlings, who know not what it is to
have Communion with GOD the very natural Consideration of such dazzling Glory,
may rouse up your Senses, and cause you to understand what you never heretofore
considered.

24. Saints get some Discoveries more evident, than through a Glass, which may
be termed Glimpses of Glory.

The Saints, on this Side of Time, are not seldom more than Victors; they have
Sights above that of Faith: O the Sights, O the Sweetness, O the Ravishments,
more like those of Overcomers, than Fighters, which the Saints experience! Why
may we not then attain to some Apprehensions of the Glory above? may not the
Experience of our selves and others lead us into the Discovery of wonderful
Things? No Doubt, the New Creation is a supernatural Elevation, which we shall
never be able to attain unto, through the ordinary and connatural Influencing
of the Spirit on our congenite Faculties; His mavelous Light is of another
Nature, than that common Light which he communicates to every one that comes
into the World. Natural Excellency, never so gradually perfected, is still
natural; gradual Difference changes not the Kind. Join all common Graces of
Reprobates together, could they make up a Saving or Supernatural? Many Carnals
make not a Heavenly; many material Excellencies, make not up a Spiritual: Grace
is a heavenly, new Principle infused, not the perfecting of what has been
already, in the Worldling. O Sirs, beware of a Beguile here: The intense
natural Knowledge of Divine Mysteries, with the Overflowings of Love and Joy
arising there from, may dazzle our own Eyes, and the Eyes of the Spectators.
Look that you have Heaven indeed within you, else you cannot enter there. O to
be Partakers of the Divine Nature! O for the Noble Mind of Christ! O to be
transformed in the Spirit of our Minds! Cause thy Wind to blow on our dry
Bones, and we shall live. Be not beguiled, Sirs; as ye saw, so shall you reap:
Have you the immortal Seed within you? Look well to it, let it not be choked
with Cares, Anxieties and Vanities; Though the Beginning appears small and
inconsiderable, the End will be wonderfully glorious and excellent: The Wonders
to be manifested upon thee, will be the Perfection of what thou have got
already: If the Spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the Dead be in you, He
shall also quicken your mortal Bodies, by the Spirit that dwells in you.

25. All Things invite to this excellent Study, and no Argument against (...).

We heartily beseech you, to step up to the Top of Mount Pisgah, and take a
View of our ravishing Country: What have you to say against the Business? COME
and SEE, will answer all your Objections: whatever you can say against the
Matter, will prove it. Speak ye of Melancholy? O what Sweetness is here! Of
Inability, and Dimness of Knowledge? O the Lightsomness of this City! All
Things are obscure and smoky below. Speak we of Hindrances from our necessary
worldly Affairs? O how does the Sight of this Glory oil the Wheels, and cheer
up to every Duty! Will any term it, An unknown Subject? Nothing more fruitful,
and fuller of Varieties: Nothing more lightsom than Glory. Art thou
worldly-minded? O then, study Heaven; The Excellency of the one, will cause the
other to disappear. Think thou Hell and Destruction are more to be
considered by thee? Come, and thou shall behold, that the Discovery of Glory
discovers all Things; since there is no Danger, for a trembling broken hearted
Sinner: The Way to Glory is the Path of Life, the new and living Way. We are
not come unto the Mount that might not be touched, and that burned with Fire;
but unto Mount Zion, the heavenly Jerusalem, the innumerable Company of Angels,
and to the Spirits of just Men made perfect, to Jesus the Mediator of the new
Covenant, to GOD the Judge of all, and to the Blood of Sprinkling, that
speaks better Things than that of Abel.

26. This Skill is only from above, and to be begged of GOD.

Thou inexhaustible Original of all Light, Life and Fullness, draw up our Minds
to thee, from this proper Habitation of the Devil and his Slaves; and hold us
ever with thee, lest we fall down to this Dunghill again: Then shall we be
joyf^l in Glory, we shall sing aloud in our Beds, we shall speak of the
Grea^^ess of thy Kingdom, of the Excellency of thy Majesty, and of the Glory of
thine Inheritance, in the Saints in Light: Then shall we go out with Joy, and
be led forth in Gladness; the Mountains and the Hills shall break forth before
us into Singing: Then shall we renev^^^ our Strength, we shall mount up with
Wings, as Eag^^s; we shall run, and not he weary; and walk, and not be faint.

INVITATION.
HERE Tabor's Tops, surmounting far the Marches
Of those Etherial most majestic Arches,
Reaching beyond the Azure Canopie,
(Which envious Mask hides Glory from our Eye)
Into the new Creation, whose bright Glory
Would cause Earth's Splendour vanish, make us sorry,
We Have placed a Grain of Love on Things below,
Since only 'bove this World all Sweets do flow.
Ascend the Mount, aspiring Souls, and enter
Within the Cloud, fear not, draw near Love's Center:
Go in to the privy Chambers of the King,
If princely Minds, and flowing Hearts you bring:
But wanting these, I straightly you command,
In my LORD's dreadful Name, aloof to stand.
There shall you see your LOVER's lovely Face,
His heavenly Gesture, His divinest Grace:
There shall his Voice melodious charm your Ears,
And from your Hearts shall banish quite all Fears:
There shall the Smell of's Garments, all perfumed,
Refresh your fainting Spirits, with Cares consumed:
There shall you feast upon the cheering Wine,
That Crimson Liquor of the only VINE.
You and your LORD shall clasp in one Love-tie,
Never to be loosed through all Eternity
Your Thoughts shall dive into Love's deep Abyss,
And scan, what without all Dimensions is:
Your heart (surpassing Joy!) in your LOVE's Breast,
And his in yours, eternally shall rest.
In fine, your Senses, Soul and all shall lie,
Bathing in Sweetness everlastingly.
A Glimpse of Glory: OR, A Gospel-Discovery of EMMANUEL's Land.
THOU Glory and Beauty of the higher Paradise, fulfill thy Promise upon me, in
letting me see Thee in thy Beauty, and that Land that is very far off. A
Discovery of thine Excellency, a Taste of thy Sweetness, should cause me to
overlook all sublunary Things, should enable my Glory to proclaim thine aloud
before the Sons of Men. Let thy Strength appear in Weakness: Thou can
perfect Glory and Praise by Babes, and Nothings; get thy self Glory, and I have
all I can desire.

2. All Joys! Am not I exalted on the high Places of the Earth? Wonderful! what
strange Things are these? What has God done? Shall I write, or shall I not?
What avails Earth's Idiom here, which falls short in the full Expression of
earthly Things? Shall I not debase my LORD's Glory, if I endeavor to represent
it by the low, base and childish Expressions of Earth's Idiom: But since our
condescending LORD is pleased, in borrowed Terms, to express these
inexpressible Enjoyments, which neither Eye has seen, nor Ear has heard, or
the Heart of Man conceived, we will follow his Footsteps; being certain, though
our Expressions reach not the Brim of that Ocean, yet they may surpass most
Men's Esteem of it. May we not then, in borrowed Speeches and dark Emblems,
delineate the Glory of his Kingdom, the Excellency of his Person, and the
Riches of his Inheritance in the Saints in Light, until we come unto the
Fullness of the Stature of Christ: When we shall see and express Him, as He is.

3. The Soul must be elevated on the Wings of heavenly Meditation, before it
get a Sight of the promised Land.

Now, my Soul, thou art got up to the Top of this sublime and majestic
Mountain overlooking the celestial Canaan. Ah, my Senses are not celestial! Yet
do the Things I see and hear, fill me with Joy unspeakable, and full of Glory:
I cannot tell what my Faculties are filled with. Words are narrow for such high
and wide Things. But should we not express these Things according to our
Measure?

4. Glory is rather to be admired by Mortals, than understood.

I am quite amazed, confounded and ravished at once. O eternal Dewlling Place
of blessed Men and Angels, and of the MAN infinitely more excellent than all!
How am I affected with thy various Beauty, excellent Glory, and delightsom
Sweetness! What appearest thou now, O lower World? Thou art the Dunghill; this
the Palace-royal: Thou art the Footstool, this the Throne. Were the Curtains
betwixt the higher and lower World drawn aside, all lower Glories would
disappear: All Glories are here, and only here: This is the World. Where shall
we find Emblems any where else, sufficient to represent, in the thousand
thousand Part or Property, one of the infinite Beauties, various Glories,
admirable Excellencies, transcendent Virtues, wherewith this Land is stored?
Verily it is a large Land indeed, like a Confluence of infinite Number of
Worlds. O my Lord, thy Report was true, In my Father's House are many Mansions.
The Earth is Nothing to the visible Heavens, and the visible to the invisible.
O vast Land! Are they not shallow Fools, who boast themselves of Shovelfuls of
Earth? But Worms are much taken up with Dunghils. Nothing below this narrow
Vault of the visible Heavens can bound the Outgoings of capacious and sublime
Spirits.

5. We may imagine, in this our Childhood, childishly; and so conceive of Glory
in a metaphorick Way.

And O the Beauty and Sweetness, wherewith this blessed Land is adorned! Earth
in its May-clothing, with its various Beauties, appeared somewhat delightsom
before; but all former Apprehensions are swallowed up; all the Senses and
Faculties are lost in the endless Maze of infinite Varieties of Beauties and
Excellencies. Are not the Eyes almost ravished from their proper Orbs, by the
strong attractive Virtue of ravishing Objects? Are they not dazzled and
confounded? What Varieties! what Glories! what numberless Numbers! Every Object
is enough to allure unto Ravishment: But the Conspiration of them all cannot be
told. How are the Ears charmed with numberless Variety of melodious Raptures!
so that the Ears become Harmony itself. How do incessant and full Gales of
odoriferous Exhalations perfume and fill with a passing Sweetness, not only the
Brain, but every Vein, Artery and Sinew I That which enters the Mouth, every
where, surpasses Ambrosia and Nectar. The circumjacent Spirits have so
pleasant Embraces, as they still refresh the Body, that cannot be weary. What
shall I say? Am I not nonplus'd here? Lo, all Beauties, both material and
immaterial, here! All Things are here in an eminent formal Manner. O mighty
God, this World is a Masterpiece of thy Power, Wisdom and Goodness indeed. Did
I never see more of thy ravishing Attributes, than what is imprinted on this
golden World, should I not be ravished with an eternal Rapture? This is a Land
befitting the Inhabitants; all Things are ever in their May-clothing, do bloom
and flourish with an eternal and glorious Verdue, seeming, as it were, all to
outbrave one another, in wonderful Beauty and Excellency: What would an earthly
Paradise appear here? Shall we speak of Gold and Gems, trampled upon by Beasts?
Sure the Sun in its Strength would blush to let forth its Rays on so beautiful
a Place, the least Stone here would look him out of Countenance; Nothing in the
lower World, which is not here; and nothing here, which is to be seen in the
lower World. If we speak any Thing in earthly Idiom, it must be in perfect
Contradictions; all is covered over with all Varieties of Beds of Lilies, and
Roses, and dropping sweet smelling Myrrh, every where the Vines flourish, the
Mandrakes send forth an odoriferous Exhalation, the Pomegranates bud, the
Grapes and all Fruit hang in goodly Order; all is overslown with Ambrosia, Milk
and Honey; all is an Orchard, all a Champain Field; every Place is the sunny
Side of the Hill, and also a pleasant Shadow; every Place is filled with
odoriferous Gales, and yet there is nothing but one sweet and endless Calm: The
Winds that blow here are like vital and animal Spirits. Are they not these
Heart-refreshing, and Soul-rejoicing Breathings of the Spirit of Life? All are
planted with Trees, every one of which does specifically differ from one
another, and bears every Month, every Hour, every Minute, Ten thousand Kinds of
Fruits; and every Fruit contains Ten thousand Qualities; and every Quality
Ten thousand Virtues, and every Virtue Ten thousand Delights, and every Delight
is enough to confound Myriads of Worlds of Men and Angels. All Things send
forth melodious Notes, odoriferous Perfumes, and what may charm Thousands of
Senses, differing specifically from one another: All Things here do more than
contain all the Virtues and Excellencies of Sun, Moon and Stars. O what every
Thing is, how inconceivable, and beyond Imagination! This World is all Things,
it is a Palace, also it is a glorious and stately City, decked with the Glory
and Comeliness of her Builder; Whose Light is like unto a Stone most precious,
whose Walls are high and beautified with Twelve Gates, and at the Gates are
Twelve Angels, whose Figure is Apiece, whose Circuit Twelve thousand
Furlongs, and the Height of the Wall an Hundred forty four Cubits; the Building
thereof is of Jasper, and the City of pure Gold, as it were transparent Glass.
If the Foundations thereof be of Pearl, the Houses, Streets and Walls of Gold,
what must the Deckings of the Houses be? If the ordinary Stuff exceed the Price
of the Diamond, who can weigh our most noble JEWEL of the New Jerusalem? Sure
all the Excellency of this lower Universe would be of no Reckoning here; yea,
many Worlds are not to be valued. Must not this be a glorious and delightsom
City, which is immediately enlightened with the uncreated Glory of JEHOVAH, and
the LAMB? All the Kings of the Earth bring in their Glory and Honor hither:
All other Glories and Excellencies are swallowed up, and concentred here: All
Joys, all Pleasures, all Contentments, all Desires are for ever here.

6. We cannot be so high, in our own Conceptions of Glory, but still we may be
higher.

But let us draw near, that we may discover more of these wonderful Things:
What ravishing Melody is this? Were it not Heaven to dwell within the Sound of
Heaven's Melody? I am altogether ravished! O it is good to be here! O the
sweet, sweet, sweet Frame the Inhabitants are in! Their Hallelujahs have
converted me almost into Joy itself. But what can I say? The Idiom of Glory
has a wonderful Efficacy and Deepness, beyond our shallow Uptakings, as far
transcending Earth's Language, as Immortality does transcend Mortality: And I
want an Ear celestial, musical, to perceive distinctly, and understand these
angelical Songs, and wonderful Expressions of Joy, Love and Admiration in the
higher House: But the very Sound is enough to ravish all our Senses. Hear I not
something like the Song of Moses and the Lamb?

We will sing unto the Lord; for he has triumphed gloriously, his Enemies has
he over whelmed with everlasting Shame: He is our Strength, and our Song, and
he is become our Salvation: Thy Right Hand, O Lord, is become glorious in
Power; who is like unto thee? Glorious in Holiness, fearful in Praises, doing
Wonders. Thou in thy Mercy have led forth thy People, which thou have redeemed;
thou have guided them in thy Strength, unto thy holy Habitation: We have a
strong City, Salvation has our God provided for Walls and Bulwarks. We will
greatly rejoice in the Lord, our Souls shall incessantly and eternally be
joyful in our God; for he has clothed us with the Garments of Salvation, he
has covered us with the Robes of Righteousness. Thou have awaked, and put on
Strength, O Arm of the Lord; Art not thou it, which dried up the Red Sea? that
has made the Deeps of the Sea a Way for thy Ransomed to pass over? Therefore
the Redeemed of the Lord do return, and come with Singing unto Sion, and
everlasting Joys upon their Heads; and Sorrow and Sighing has fled away. Sing
ye Heavens, shout ye lower Parts of the Earth, break forth into Melody, ye
Mountains; for the Lord has redeemed Jacob, and glorified himself in Israel.
Behold, we dwell on high, our Place of Defense is the Munition of Rocks: Our
Eyes do see the King in his Beauty; our Eyes do behold Jerusalem a quiet
Habitation, a Tabernacle that shall never be taken down. And in this Mountain
has the Lord of Hosts made, unto all People, a Feast of fat Things; and has
swallowed up Death in Victory, and has wiped away all Tears from all Faces.
The Lord is a Sun and Shield: He has given Grace and Glory; no good Thing has
he withheld from these who have walked uprightly. How excellent is thy
Loving Kindness! We are abundantly satisfied with the Fatness of thy House, and
thou have made us drink of the Rivers of thy Pleasures: Thou have turned our
Mourning into Dancing; thou have put off our Sackcloth, and girded us with
Gladness: The Lines are fallen to us in pleasant Places; yea, we have a goodly
Heritage: Thou have showed unto us the Path of Life; in thy Presence is Fullness
of Joy, and at thy Right Hand are Pleasures for evermore. Worthy is the Lamb,
that was slain, to receive Power, and Riches, and Wisdom, and Strength, and
Honor, and Glory, and Blessing; for thou wast slain, and have redeemed us to
God, by thy Blood, out of every Kindred, and Tongue, and People, and Nation;
and have made us unto our God, Kings and Priests; and we shall reign for ever
and ever. Cry and shout, thou Inhabitant of Zion; for great is the holy One of
Israel in the Midst of thee. What a golden Life is this? Am not I come into
Mount Zion? Know I not now by Experience, that the Converse of Mortals may be
above? O what a ravishing Frame am I now in! The Melody of Heaven draws me
nearer and nearer; I cannot, I will not, I may not rest, until I look within
the Vail.

7. Christ, the Desire of all Nations, because he is God, most fully manifested
to finite Capacities.

O strange! Nothing but wonders! Are not the whole Inhabitants of the higher
Canaan all in a Sea of Delight, Love and Admiration? Are they not all flocking
round about, as contending, who shall be most satiated with the matchless
Beauty and Loveliness of the WHITE and RUDDY ONE, the STANDARD BEARER among Ten
thousand? O the Days-man, betwixt God and Creatures! the Wonder of Wonders, the
Glory and Triumph, and Shame of Creatures, the Beauty of Heaven, the Admiration
of Earth, the Compend and Model of Heaven and Earth, and all Things, the Life
of all Joys, Marrow of all Loves, Flower of all Desires, Fountain of all
Sweetness, Sun of all Glory, the everlasting Delight of the Father, and
Ravishment of Men and Angels, the Center whereunto all Hearts, all Loves, all
Eyes do eternally and incessantly run, the Brightness of the Father's Glory,
the express Character of his Person! Christ Jesus, God-Man, the
ever-flourishing Stock and the Stem of Jesse, the Plant of Renown! All are
chanting thus.

Speak no more of Beauties; Men and Angels, all lesser Glories are quite
swallowed up: This is the only Beauty, the only Excellency, by the borrowed
Rays of whose Loveliness, we are all rendered glorious: Out of his Fullness have
we all received; let us down with these massy Crowns of Glory at his Feet; For
of him, and by him, and through him, and to him are all Things.

8. No Manifestation of God, so full and sweet to Creatures, as through
Emmanuel; so infinite is the Distance.

O! my only WELBELOVED, thou art God, thou art God, the infinite JEHOVAH; and
therefore thou art become my ALL, and only One; none but Him! I disdain all
Yesterday-beings, for a Welbeloved: Yet, since thou art a Creature also, thou
art more lovely as to me; were thou not Man, as well as God, I could not enjoy
thee so familiarly and nearly: Though Sin in its self cannot be the Object of
Joy, yet the Result thereof is passing joyful: This World of free Grace,
transcends never so many Worlds of another Kind. The Enjoyment of God, as a
Redeemer, Husband, Brother, is another Manner of Enjoyment, than of God
Creator. Happy, happy we, that ever we were miserable! We had been undone, if
we had not been undone. We ruined our selves, but thou have made us up, far,
far above all that we had to lose: O sweet Debt of thy free redeeming Grace!
Shall not every Moment of Eternity augment my Obligation? I am thy bound
Dyvour, O my Lord; and therefore my Happiness shall grow and bloom throughout
all Eternity.

9. One Sight of Christ is enough to ravish never so many.

The first Sight of thine Eyes has stricken me with everlasting Admiration!
Many excellent Beauties do my blessed Eyes behold, but thou do infinitely
transcend them all. Thy Countenance has a Beauty and Excellency above all
possible created Glory! Increated Glory rays through the Vail of his humane
Nature! My blessed Eyes, a thousand Times blessed Eyes, which behold the Man,
who is God! Fellow-Beholders, this Sight has cast us for ever into a wondering
Frame! the more we behold, the more we are inflamed; the more we love, the more
we behold! O Wonderful eternal Circle! Hence Joys inutterable, inexpressible;
hence the sweet praising Disposition, hence Admiration, hence Beholding; and
thus throughout Eternity.

10. All our Enjoyment nothing, till we see him Face to Face.

O Flower of Excellency! O Ocean of Loveliness? Mortality could take up no
considerable Portion of thee; the most excellent of their Discourses was
childish Nonsense: Nothing, but seeing thee Face to Face, can discover thy
Worth. Verily I never saw thee until now; and therefore Love and Joy were never
in their highest Vigor. I love, I love now indeed! What though I might be said
to love thee in thy Absence, and to be filled with Joy unspeakable and
glorious, with the very Sound of thy Name? These Drops are nothing to the
Ocean, the Tasting to the Banquet. O sweet, sweet, Nothing but Joy! who can
stand beside infinite Love, and not be inflamed? Am I not almost converted into
Love it self? O delightsom ravishing Fire! What greater Happiness, than to burn
here for evermore.

11. The Soul is not perfectly happy, until it rest, without Interruption, in
the Welbeloved's Love.

Now we are for ever in one another Arms; the Days of Heaven shall not put a
Period to these Love-Embraces: Thou have set me as a Seal upon thy Heart, as a
Seal upon thine Arm; for Love is strong as Death, the Coals thereof would burn
up Hell itself. Nothing but full Eternity, incessant Enjoyment, will satiate
this burning Love; and therefore art thou unto me as a Bundle of Myrrh, which
lies forever betwixt my Breasts. This is the Place where Love does bloom, with
an eternal Verdure: No Ups and Downs, and Hidings of his Face; no Lovesickness,
through the want of personal Possession; no need of Apples, or Flagons of Wine;
no contending with Time and Days, because of their seeming lazy Pace; nor with
interposing Clouds, lingering Death, Sin and Mortality: Nothing, but full
Enjoyment; I am as I would be: I see thy Face to the full; and therefore my
Happiness overflows the Banks.

12. The mutual Interest betwixt Christ and his Chosen, is an eternally sweet
Consideration.

Thou art mine, my dearest Lord, and I am thine; I was thine from Eternity, and
thou art become mine to Eternity. O my large, wide, broad Inheritance! Thou art
mine in full Possession: O my Happiness, my Happiness! my Loves overflow, my
Joys are in their Springtide! Even thou art mine, and thy Desire is towa^ds
me. No Wonder I am ravished with thy Beauty: But art thou ravished with mine?
Wast thou not at Rest, until thou had brought me to these higher Chambers of
Glory, that thou might be delighted forever in my Fellowship? What am I to
thee? If there be any Thing in me can draw one Look from thee, it is thine,
only thine, and not mine own. If the Rays of this borrowed Loveliness in me
redound back upon thee, Thou have received but what is thine own. Beholdest
thou ravishing Loveliness in me, who am, what I am only of thee? what boundless
Ocean of Sweetness, what infinite Worlds of Beauty are in thy matchless Self!
Many an excellent Object have I seen, but thou have ravished my Heart from them
all. I have found, I have seen him, who is only lovely: This fair One has my
Heart for evermore. Choicest Beauties of Yesterday, were it possible for you to
draw my Affections in the least aside? I have tasted of Creatures Sweetness,
but they could not satisfy: Shall it not be my endless Exercise, incessantly to
kiss, and draw ravishing Consolations from the Lips, that brought the joyful
Tidings of this boundless Happiness? None but Thee! If I love and delight in
other Beauties, it is as they are decked with thy Loveliness; as they are
Emblems, Shadows and Reflections of thee, who art altogether lovely: But thou
art the substantial Beauty, thou art the Beauty! Let innumerable Millions of
Worlds of Beauty stand round about Thee, one Ray of thy Transcendancy would
eclipse them all. Beholders, can you tell what you see? O his Beauty, his
Beauty! What more can be said, than that it infinitely transcends the
Conceptions of Men and Angels?

Other Loves are but the Picture and Resemblance of Love, to this sublime and
noble Love of JESUS: This is Love indeed; should I speak of Flames? am I not
entered into the Ocean? The I Floods, the Worlds of Love, for God is Love, and
he that dwells in Love, dwells in God, and God in him. Is not this a sweet
ravishing Habitation? What Joy to think, This is my eternal Repose? I dwell in
the Midst of hot burning Flames, without Harm, as in a Bed of Roses, and an
Orchard of Delights.

13. The glorified Soul, reflecting on former Things, looks upon all, as
childish.

This is the Fullness of the Stature of Christ: How capacious, to receive
incessantly Floods of Love! Before, my Soul was narrow, now it is larger than
the Heaven of Heavens. O the Outrunnings of my Soul after Thee! Before, they
were small Streams; now they are huge Floods; small Things are not now noticed;
all our Desires are now swallowed up. What is the Moon when the Sun does
appear? How massy, massy art thou, O Love of Jesus! would thou not down-weigh
innumerable Worlds? Had I known, in the Ten thousand Part on Earth, what now I
know, the World would have imagined me quite beside my self: How wonderfully
would I have spoken, written and done? But, ah, how poorly and childishly did
we speak of thee; What Joy, that Mortality is done away!

14. Saints and Angels shall be ever going forth into the matchless
Excellencies of their WELBELOVED; and running them, as it were, over and over
again.

Though I behold thee, as thou art; yet am I ever supplied with new Matter of
Admiration: When more Ages are past, than Atoms in the Creation, I shall not be
jejune, to express thine infinite Excellency. Men and Angels, when shall you
dive so deep, as you may dive no further? But shall I not for ever delineate
thy Beauty now, when I have thee in my Arms? Sirs, shall we not for ever speak
of him, of whom too much cannot be spoken? No Injury is here done to the Father
and blessed Spirit; Their Glory and Excellency do visible shine here: And do
these Arms embrace God, these Eyes see him? O the Mystery of Godliness! Men and
Angels, you are all astonished: God visibly manifested! O Wonder of Wonders! Is
not thy Name rightly termed, WONDERFUL? O my elevated Thoughts! O Eternity,
Eternity thou shall be filled with Wondering: What Glory shines in this Man's
Face! Thy Countenance, Welbeloved, has a non-such Majesty. The Saints have the
Face of glorified Creatures, and no more; but the Majesty of thy Countenance is
altogether Divine. O Perfection's Flower, and Marrow of Loveliness! None, who
see thee, will enquire, What art thou more than another Beloved? O thy Face,
thy ravishing Face! Indeed thou art the White and Ruddy, the Standard Bearer
amongst a Myriad: Thy Face; my Welbeloved, is like the Face of the Son of God;
every Smile is full of inexpressible Joy; For God, thy God has anointed thee
with the Oil of Gladness, above all thy Fellows. Is not this He, Men and
Angels, Whose Visage was more marred than any Man's; in whom the world saw no
Beauty, or Desireableness? Is not this He, whose Face was spit upon by the
Filth and Offscourings of Men? Verily, Welbeloved, though thou art the same,
Yesterday, to Day, and for evermore; yet appearest thou far changed, from what
thou appearedst on Earth. O but then thou did strangely mask thy Divine
Beauty with the Vail of Mortality, which now thou have done away, that thy
Glory may shine forth in its full Splendour before thy Chosen! O thy stately
Majestic Head, only worthy to be crowned with Glory and Honor, to be exalted
far above all Creatures! Strange! this majestic Head, that was once beset with
a Crown of Thorns, is now surrounded with the Brightness, which carries in its
Bosom boundless Joys. This was the Joy than was set before him. O Blessed we,
that have such an Head! The Head of this golden World is of fine Gold. O how
beautiful are the Adornments of thy Head! O thou would entangle all Creatures
for ever in the Folds of overcoming Love! How am I ravished with thine Eyes!
Heaven and Glory dwells in every Look; the first Glance of them did strike
Heaven and Love into an eternal Rapture: Nothing can resist their overcoming
Emanations of Love. And, did these Eyes gush forth Tears, through bitter Grief
and Sorrow? Could ever the least Sadness and Darkness enter into such Divine
Orbs of Light and Joy? Thou have overcome me with thine Eyes, my fair One. One
Look of Thee, and no more, would ravish Ten thousand Worlds of Men and Angels.
O the Noonday Light of thy Countenance for ever and ever! And who can tell the
Comeliness of thy fragrant, beautiful Cheeks? And what can be said of thy rosy
Lips? How do they perfume this Land with their fragrant Myrrh, that
incessantly drops from them! O what boundless Ocean of Grace is poured into
them! Therefore, God has blessed thee for evermore. Every Kiss of them is an
Heaven of Sweetness. I am filled and overcome with this Mirror of Glory! The
Smell of thine Ointment, afar off, did ravish my Heart; but now I am more, Ten
thousand Times more, than ravished! One Drop of this Myrrh would sweeten ten
thousand Oceans of all imaginable Bitterness: And O thy princely Hands, fit to
sway the Scepter of this ever-flourishing Kingdom, delightsome Habitation! Can
there be a more blessed Posture? His Left Hand is under my my Head, and his
Right Hand does embrace me. Am not I circled in the Arms of unsearchable Love?
The eternal God is my Refuge, and underneath are everlasting Arms. These
blessed Arms, that were stretched upon the Cross for me, do embrace me sweetly,
for evermore. Whether thy Love does more shine forth in the first, or latter
Posture, cannot be told: But sure thy Love, in all its Resplendency, passes
all created Understanding. O the Glory, Sweetness and Excellency of thy Belly!
O thy Bowels of Compassion! O what Rivers of Water do from thence flow out
incessantly upon us! And what is comparable to thy stately Legs? How glorious
are thine Outgoings among us! O my King and God, when thou trod upon the high
Places of the Earth, its Foundations were shaken. How did thou trample the
People in thine Anger, and the Kingdoms in thy Fury? Thou came skipping over
the Mountains, leaping over the Hills, for the Salvation of thy People. Blessed
Men and Angels, what can be conceived or expressed, of such a wonderful Person?
O his stately Deportment! Every Part of him, so to speak, is an infinite Mass
of Beauty. What a Beauty then must all these numberless Beauties, composed in
one, be? Is not thy Countenance as Lebanon, excellent as the Cedars? Thy
Majesty is wonderfully various, and every Variety the Height of Excellency. By
sweet Experience, I may say, The Mouth is most sweet: The Relicts of the
Impression of one of thy Love-kisses may fill the Soul with passing Joys,
throughout endless Ages. Suppose a Creature filled with all possible
Creature-Sweetness, one Kiss of the most sweet Mouth would swallow up all. O
the Words of thy Mouth, passing in Sweetness the Honey distilling from the
Honeycomb! Thy Voice, thy ravishing Voice! Even to stand without the Gates of
New Jerusalem, and hear the Sound thereof, might wrap up a Creature in eternal
Ravishment. And, is it possible, my matchless One, to attain the furthermost of
thy infinite Perfections, though but one simple Excellency? Let me rather further
and further into the Ocean of thy Loveliness, through endless Ages; yet shall
ever be in the Entry: Nevertheless will I pay thee the Tribute of Praises, and
cry up thee before Men and Angels; and speak of thine Excellency, while my
Being remains. I praise thee not, because I am able to show forth thy Worth
fully; but strong Love does constrain me, that forever I must be expressing,
and for ever the Conclusion must be, THOU ART ALTOGETHER LOVELY; for to Thee
alone does this Epithet appertain. You chiefest of created Excellencies, can
this agree to you? Are you nothing but Masses of pure, essential and unmixed
Love? Who but he, even he alone is altogether lovely? He is all Loves, all
Sweetness, all Ravishments: Nothing but Loveliness in Him! His Weakness,
Infirmity, Poverty, Contempt, Crosses, Losses, Pains, and Death, flash forth
the ravishing Resplendencies of surpassing Love and Sweetness. Heart and Love,
and all is gone from me. O the sublime Thoughts of my elevated Understanding! O
this Frame! this Love! this Sweetness! All are inutterable, all are
inexpressible!

15. Even to stand beside the Chief of Ten thousand, is a Dignity unconceivably
above the Excellency of all Creatures.

That we might be ever with thee, and behold thy Glory, was one of thy great
Petitions, in the Days of thy Flesh; Thousand, thousand Times blessed I, that
ever this was asked! Thou asked nobly, and thy Father granted like a King. Can
we have more than to dwell in thy immediate Presence? Any Enjoyment of thee,
surpasses that of the Flower of created Sweetness: A Sight of thee in a Vision
of the Night, through a Glass, or any Way, is ravishing; as I often have
sweetly experienced, in the Days of my Pilgrimage: To touch the Hem of thy
Garment, or to see Thee in thy Infancy, was a Happiness inexpressible. What
shall we say to our Lot, who are as near thee as out Heart can desire? O this
high, high, high Dignity! O beloved Estate! far above the Heaven of Heavens;
Nay, Numberless Heavens supperadded to one another! And am I in thy immediate
Presence, even in the Chambers of Presence with Thee? O lovely one who inhabits
Eternity! what Honor is this? What shall I say of it? But, thy Ways are
incomprehensible. This is the Prerogative of the Saints, this is it! What shall
be done unto the Man, whom the King delights to honor? Spoke he not in good
earnest, when he told us of Dignities, Thrones, Crowns, Priesthoods, and
Possessions of all Things? Shall I never enough wonder at the Honor of the
Saints? This is the Dignity of the Overcomers, to wear the Laurel, the Badges
of Honor, the Garlands of Glory. How came thou to all this, O silly Self? have
thou been born to wear an immortal Crown, to be overladen within and without
with so great a Weight of Glory? Thou appears, indeed, in the Equipage of a
King, decked with Majesty, Glory and Honor; arrayed with wonderful Excellency
and Comeliness. Waft thou not once, O thou silly I, a base Worm, defiled with
the very Filth of Hell? How have thou robbed the Almighty of his Glory,
dishonored his Excellency, wronged his Holiness, trampled upon his most
precious Things, on his Blood; done what thou could to precipitate thy Self
into eternal Perdition; violented the Gates of that woeful Prison, O undone
Soul, to cover thy Self with utter Darkness from the charming Beams of the Sun
of Righteousness? yet am here, even here, surrounded with inexpressible Glory!
Many Thousands, less deserving, are in the Place of utter Darkness. O thy Love!
thy Love! which passes all Understanding! O thy free, free Grace! O the
Height, and Depth, and Length, and Breadth of thy Ways! My Enjoyments are more
than free; has he not brought me over my Deservings? But nothing can stand in
the Way of infinite Love. Thou loved me, because thou loved me; and because
thou loved me, I became lovely in thy Sight. Not unto us, not unto us be the
Glory; but unto JEHOVAH, and the LAMB be Praise for ever and ever.

16. The Nearness of Saints and Angels to their Creat^r, and Redeemer,
astonisheth them eternally.

What astonishing Condescendency, to admit Bits of Nothing so near thee! Can
this thy Way be ever enough admired? It is strange thou should daign
Creatures with either thy Love, or thy Hatred! What is Man, that thou should
visit him? that thou should notice him, and bring him into Judgment? But more
wonderful! Have thou not crowned him with Glory and Honor? Thou have made him
sit down beside thy Self! He treads the lower World under his Feet, he
walks on the high Places of the Creation: O thy Bounty! O thy Condescendency!
Should I stand so near my Lord, the King? Since free Love will have it thus,
and it is not his Way, to create Desires, and not fulfill them: Strong Love can
take Rest no where, but in his naked Embraces. On Earth I was unsatisfied,
oftentimes complaining of Distance and Absence; and when I found Thee, I would
not let thee go, but held thee fast, until weentred into those glorious
Mansions: And how are my Thoughts heightened, by ^ holding Thee Face to Face?
The neater Thee, the ^^^her Esteem and Reverence, none can have low Tho'ts of
Thee, but they that know thee not.

17. No Knowledge, no Evidence unto the Noonday Evidence of Glory.

The first Ray of thy infinite Glory upon me, discovers infinite Varieties of
Wonders; Men and Angels, are we not all an Assembly of eternal Wonders? and all
the Product of the Noonday Vision of Glory, not of Ignorance? All the Things
of Time, from the greatest to the smallest, are now seen to be Wonders; howbeit
that little of them was discerned, and that in a brutish Manner. Strange! O
Beloved, thou art another Manner of Christ than we spoke of, in the Days of our
Mortality: Thy very Name was scarce conceived. How came I hither with so little
Conceptions? Have I not begun to know, in the very first Entry of Eternity? My
Knowledge on Earth was of no Evidence, in Comparison of this Noonday V^^ion of
Glory: As the Man looks back on his Infancy, ^s a mere brutish Ignorance; and
the Man awakned, on his b^-past Dream; so do I now, on my most refined
Conceptions on Earth. O the clear and sharp Uptaking of a glorified Capacity!
Do I not behold every Thing, as it is in its own proper and naked Being? All
Shadows have fled away: What Wonder, to think what we were, and what we are! O
the infinite Power of Omnipotent JEHOVAH! What a Perfecting is this! but what
cannot my Lord do?

18. To be Witnesses of the Glory of JEHOVAH and the LAMB, is an inexpressible
Dignity.

And do thou manifest thy Self, in such a Manner, to us! What is essential
Eternity to Beings of Yesterday! Are we fit Witnesses of thy Glory? O infinite
Jehovah, are we not before thee, as Nothing and Vanity? May not the Greatness
of thy Glory, if thou should let it forth to the full, confound, even
confound us to Nothing? In Infiniteness nothing can comprehend, but an infinite
Understanding: The furthermost of all created Glory is Nothing and Vanity in
thy Presence, though it might seem somewhat among its like. Dart forth the full
Rays of your Glory, all you Creatures; you shall not dazzle these Eyes, which
are fixed on a higher Object.

19. What he manifests to us, is a Wonder; but the Way of his manifesting it,
is a Wonder of Wonders.

Shall we not wonder again and again, and for ever, at the Way thou have taken
to manifest so nearly and familiarly unto us, thy incomprehensible Glory? Have
thou no assumed the Nature of a Creature, that thou might converse the more
intimately and condescendingly with us? To enjoy thee any Way, requires an
infinite Condescendency; the Disproportion being infinite: But this, this is
the most wonderful Condescendency possile! O this is the most excellent of all
possible Ways! O the wonderful Soul-alluring Glory that does most sweetly dart
upon us from the Man, who is God! O eternally blessed I, who have such a
WELBELOVED, in whom is all Fullness; Thou art a marrowless One indeed. We have
done for ever with other Beloveds. What Wonder, I am so deeply in Love with
thee? What Wonder I swim in Floods of eternal Satisfaction, who enjoy thee so
familiarly? Can a Creature be more happy? I am full, I am full, and can desire
no more!

20. To consider the Change Christ has undergone, is an eternally ravishing
Consideration.

Is this He, who was born of the Virgin Mary, in a Stable, and laid in a
Manger! who for the most of his Days was in a poor, obscure, contemptible
Condition; who was a Man of Sorrow, and acquainted with Grief; or no corporal
Beauty in the Eyes of the Beholders, and subject to all the Infirmities of
feeble Mortals, except Sin; Who was deserted of the Outgoing of the Sweetness
and Love of GOD; Nay, did drink, from Brim to Bottom, the bitter Cup of his
Father's Wrath; Who was apprehended in an ignominous Manner; betrayed, denied
and forsaken of his own Disciples; violently haled away to Judgment, reviled,
mocked and buffeted, and spit upon: accused of Blasphemy, Treason, Madness, and
whatever hellish Heads could devise; then scourged, and set forth to the
Opprobry and Laughing of the rascally Multitude; then condemned to the vile and
shameful Death of the Cross, for Blasphemy and Treason; and that by the
Petition of the vast Multitudes gathered together to the Passover, who
preferred a base Robber before him! The Sentence was not sooner pronounced,
than executed; for he was hanged betwixt two Thieves, in the Sight of the
Multitude, to the Insultation of Devils, and their Slaves, who beheld this
matchless One nailed to the cursed Tree, and bled to Death in great Torment,
and Anguish of Spirit: White the Sun, clothed in Mourning for his Lord,
contrary to the Course of Nature, sympathized with the eclipsed Creator, and
withdrew its Beams from these, who had eclipsed the Light of the whole
Creation. Thus did my Welbeloved continue for a long Space, and gave up the
Ghost in great Torment of Body and Spirit, yes was buried, continued under the
Power of Death for a Time: And this, even this is the same. Behold, Men and
Angels, behold and wonder at the Man, who is the Wonder of Wonders, and whose
Name is termed Wonderful! Welbeloved, thou appearest to be far changed, though
thou be ever the same! Thou only have done heroically, O mighty Captain of the
Lord's Hosts! this was thy Design from Eternity: Ought thou not first to
have suffered, and then to enter into this incomprehensible Glory? Thou have
graciously overcome, and satisfied incensed Justice, against the Children of
thy eternal Delights: Having spoiled Principalities and Powers, thou made a
Show of them spenly, triumphing over them on the Cross: For though thou, being in
the Form of God, though it it no Robbery to be equal with God; yet made thou thy
self of no Reputation, and became obedient even unto the Death: Wherefore God
also has highly exalted Thee, and given thee a Name above every Name, that at
the Name of Jesus every Knee should bow, in Heaven, Earth, and under the Earth.
Wast thou not as low as the Grave? And yet have ascended on high, led Captivity
captive, and received Gifts for Men! Art thou not He, who lives, and was dead?
And behold, Thou art alive forever more! Who is exalted, and waft low and
despised; and behold, thou art exalted above all created Heavens forever; who
rejoicest, and did weep, and sigh, and groan, and behold, thou art surrounded
with boundless Joys for evermore! Who reignest victoriously, and waft in the
Form of a Servant; and behold, thou reignest in glorious Majesty for evermore!
Art thou not a wonderful One indeed! Shall Men and Angels ever enough admire
thee? Though every Moment of Eternity shall be filled with Admiration of my
ravished Heart.

12. God manifested in the Flesh, for ever a Mystery.

And is Dust and Ashes for ever exalted to such an incomprehensible Pitch of
Glory? O Dust, how came thou hither? Strange! that the Almighty has exalted
thee above Sun, Moon and Stars; and has brought thee into his immediate
Presence, to carry the least Tincture of supernatural heavenly Glory upon thee,
to become the Temple of the Holy Ghost! But, Men and Angels, what are your
Conceptions of this Dust, to be the Temple wherein the high and lofty One, the
almighty Jehovah, the eternal consubstantial Son of God, does personally dwell,
and with which he is personally united? Is not this a Mystery? Is not this an
infinite Abyss, Men, and Angels, into whose Furthermost you shall never be able
to dive?

22. That God should bring about the highest Exaltation of humane Nature, through
Man's horrid Ingratitude, an Ocean of Wonders.

To think, That these bodily Eyes behold my Redeemer, might astonish ten
thousand Worlds: Are we not all overwhelmed in Astonishment? Is not every one
crying, What has God done? O thy incomprehensible Ways! O thy irresistible
Power! O thy unsearchable Wisdom! O thy Love, thy boundless Love! Love that
passes all Understanding! Strange! has the Almighty exalted thee, O Man's
Nature, unto this incomprehensible Dignity? It was much thou receivedst the
Characters of Divine Majesty and Excellency; yet more to be admitted into
Friendship and Converse with that great and dreadful Former of all. O are not
such Gradations of Wonder, like Millions of Worlds, placed above Millions of
Worlds, and again, and again, and for evermore? Is not Man infinitely obliged
to such a Sovereign? If the crawling Worms be infinitely obliged for their
Being, what shall be said of Man, created with so noble a Being, in so noble a
Condition: Was it possible he could ever have loved, feared, praised him
enough? was it possible a Creature, thus dealt with, could rebel? Yet strange!
when this dreadful Prodigy did enter the Creation, O astonishing Rebellion!
monstrous Ingratitude! From thenceforth, what could be expected but pure
Vegeance, like an overflowing Flood, should destroy Head and Tail, Root and
Branch, with an eternal Destruction? Could any Mercy have been expected from
Heaven to Earth, when Earth had denounced open Enmity against Heaven? What
should thou have done, dread Sovereign of all Things, with base, monstrous
and ingrate Mankind, but make it wholly the Butt of thy unmixed Wrath? What are
never so many Worlds of Men and Angels to Thee, that thou should spare them,
if once they dare to utter one World against thee? Should thou reduce to
Nothing, what thou have created? What have thou lost, since thou could
produce, in this very Moment, Millions of Millions of Worlds? Yea, and if
produced, what are they, but as so many Millions of Shadows and Nothings before
thee? O the Conscendency, the Sweetness of thy Nature! O the boundless Riches
of thy Grace! O the Height, the Depth, the Length, the Breadth of thy
unsearchable Ways! Have thou become Friends with Man again? entered into a
Treaty of Peace and Reconciliation with him? held out the golden Scepter, as a
Manifestation of the Thoughts of boundless Love, that flamed in thy Heart from
all Eternity? erecting a glorious Throne of free, altogether free Grace, upon
the horrid Apostasy and Rebellion of ungrate Man? Who could have imagined such
a Dispensation as this? Were you expecting this, you glorious Angels, when ye
beheld Man backslide so monstrously? Were you thinking so prodigious
Ingratitude would come to this? Were you not amazed at such a second Covenant,
after the breaking of the first? Yea, are we not all in the same admiring
Frame? O Eternity, thou art sufficient to make the Impression old, which God
has enstamped on the Minds of Men and Angels. The Objects are wonderful! Our
Faculties are wonderfully evelated! What Wonder, my Heart is fixed! O this
Frame of Spirit! I see, I see, that a World of altogether free Grace, was the
only Design of Eternity! even that Heaven should be filled for ever with a
Song, To him that sits on the Throne, and to the Lamb, for ever and ever.
Lord, what have thou done? Not only have thou become Friends with Man again;
not only have thou made him thine everlasting Minion, but thou have also
personally assumed his Nature: that thou might draw him nearer thy Self, and
manifest thy Glory unto him, in a more familiar, intimate, sweet and wonderful
Way, than was possible in the first Dispensation. Wonderful! Did Man cast off
the Image of his Maker? And, did his Maker take upon him Man's Image, to
restore all again? Did thou, O my God, assume personally our Nature, even in
its lowest Estate, that thou might weep, and sigh, and groan, and sorrow, and
die for undone Man? Is not this Love indeed! Man had destroyed himself, but did
our excellent Welbeloved step in betwixt eternal Wrath, and the miserable
Sinner; and all the Billows of Divine Vengeance did he receive, till Divine
Fury was pacified! No Sorrow, no Shame, no Pain could terrify him: Infinite
Love is invincible. I will not spare base Man, said offended Majesty, in the
Day he rebels against me, as I have said, he must die the Death; for the Word
has gone out of my Mouth. Be it so, says the Son of God; here am I, a Man
ready to suffer all Sorrow, Grief and Pain, of Soul and Body, unto the very
Death: Has Man sinned? Man shall bear the Punishment. I, even I will die the
Death: Sacrifice and Offerings thou will not accept; but a Body thou have given
me. I will bear their Grief: I will carry their Sorrows. My Father, I am glad
thou lay upon me the Iniquity of them all; they are thine and mine from
Eternity: This was our Transaction before all Ages, That in the Fullness of
Time, I should lay down my Life for these, thou have given me out of the World;
Therefore, Thou, O Father, do love me, because I lay down my Life for my
Sheep.

23. The Relations betwixt God and us, an everlasting Amazement:

Who can search into the Depths of thy boundless Love? Thou have delivered us
from going down into the Pit; Thou have found a Ransom: This is a Draught of
infinite Wisdom, the eternal Wonder of Men and Angels! Verily, thy Loves are
incomprehensible, matchless, boundless and unchangeable; which, though we
sometime doubted, in the Days of our Absence, yet all are now evident, as the
Noonday Light; past, present and to come, present themselves for ever. O then
my Happiness overflows its Banks! Am not I overjoyed, as at the first Entry?
How familiarly and sweetly do I converse with thee, O excellent Weldbeloved!
Myriads of Ages appear not a Moment in thy Presence. This Dispensation is an
eternal Wonder! Would not this have been thought a horrid Petition, before the
Promulgation of the Gospel? O that thou were as my Brother, that sucked the
Breasts of my Mother: when I should find thee without, I could kiss thee: His
Left Hand should be under my Head, and his Right Hand should embrace me. I am
my Beloved's, and his Desire is toward me. Indeed our Dignity before our Fall
was high and glorious: But, O this Dispensation of Love! Sirs, is not God our
Brother, our Husband, our Redeemer, our only Welbeloved? O our Happiness! What
shall we do throughout Eternity, but wonder? God manifested in the Flesh, O
strange? Lord God Almighty, what could thou do more to Creatures?

24. Men and Angels run themselves in an eternal Circle, of beholding and
admiring God visibly manifested.

Shall I not behold and admire, admire and behold, and flame and love, while
this immortal Being remains? The Vail is drawn aside, and we behold clearly the
Man, Christ Jesus, filled with the Godhead! Indeed the Earth is full of a
Divine Glory, the Heavens also in a more special Manner, Saints and Angels
wonderfully and eminently; yet all in Measure: But Glory dwells in this Man
above all Measure! He is God equal with the Father. No Nearness to the Fountain
of all Glory, unto that Nearness of the humane Nature of our Welbeloved, with
the Godhead! O then the Emanations of thy inexhaustible Fullness! Even thy
Glory, Beauty and Sweetness, shall overflow their Banks for ever and ever. We
are ever filled and over-filled with thy Fullness; yet there still remains as
much behind. Infinite Worlds of Men and Angels could thou satiate, and make
to run over with thine overcoming Love and Sweetness. Upon whom may, and does
not thy Light shine? Thou art the Sun, we are the Stars: What should we be,
did thou draw in thy Glory? Wherever thy Glory is peculiarly manifested*
there is Heaven. Let me be any where, so be thou shine upon me. They have the
sunny Side of the World, who behold thy Face in Righteousness. A World of all
Creature-Beauties and Delights, is a Hell without Thee: I should count them a
Mass of Deformity, should they for one Minute stand in betwixt me and thy
ravishing Countenance. None but JEHOVAH and the LAMB! Had I h^^ this Sight but
for one Moment on Earth, would I in the least have regarded the glistering
Vanities of Time? In thy Light I see Light; every Thing appears as it is: They
are enlightened to the full, who dwell under the Beams of thy ravishing
Countenance. Blessed ones, what must He be, whose Glory and Beauty, darting in
upon us, does beautify us all? What were we, if this fair One were not amongst
us? By thy darting upon me, I am Partaker of Divine Nature, even transformed
from Glory to Glory. O thy attractive, lovely Emanations! I cannot, will not,
but follow thee, whithersoever thou go, though without the Borders of this
great All, or through the Lake that burns with Fire and Brimstone: These then
should be no more what they are, but Worlds of Joy and Delights. O thy Glory,
thy Glory, thy Glory! Cursed Monsters, who are under eternal Vengeance, for
your Hatred to his Excellency, had you a Glimpse of this transcendent Glory,
should not your Misery and Torment be quite forgotten? But ye are banished from
his Presence and Glory, and therefore you are unutterably miserable. O my
Happiness? Is it not good to be here? Wonderful! was I ever loath to come here?
My Lord is here, are not then all Things here? Was I ever loath to come here,
because silly harmless Death did stand in the Way? But what is it to pass
through Ten thousand black Deaths, Ten thousand Ages of all imaginable Torment?
One Hour here, will do more than make up all. O massy, real, substantial,
enduring Glory! Am I not happy, eternally happy? Happiness is here in its full
Bloom and Verdure. I have thee in my Arms, O Welbeloved; and is it possible I
can be more blessed?

25. The Glorified only capable of understanding Glory fully: Mortality can
conceive little.

By thy Blood, and only by thy Blood, have we entered these Oceans of
unspeakable Happiness; Through Thee have we such full Access to the Father:
Thou art our Wisdom, Righteousness, all Things. O perfect Security for ever and
ever! What Wonder this could not enter the Minds of Mortals? This is onl^ to be
conceived by manly Capacities. Before, we res^mbled thee, in Part; because we
saw thee by Faith, as ^^ough the Glass of thy Word, but in Part: Now we are
^pacious! now thou shinest upon us in full Splendour, whereby thine Image is
fully impressed upon us: We know thee Face to Face, as thou art, without the
Benefit of interposing Creatures, and Ideas extracted from other Things. O
immediate Vision of God! O clear Discoveries of infinite Perfections! I see, I
see the Infinite ONE Face to Face, as I am seen, and my Life is preserved. I am
fully satiated, ravished, overcome with thy lovely Image. What Wonder! I am
like Thee, who partake of thy Nature, the Beams of thy Excellency every where
darting upon me. O this Illumination! O the high, high Pitch of Glory! O the
everlasting Smiles of my Lord's Countenance! O Manifestations of more and more
throughout Eternity! All the Enjoyments of Eternity are as one Moment; All Ages
are as swallowed up in the infinite Depths of boundless Excellencies.
Creature-enjoyments are empty, and may be received; but infinite Love ravisheth
throughout Eternity: When more Ages are past than there are Atoms in the
Creation then shall I be, just as I am now, ever swiming and diving in the
Depths of thy infinite Perfections, and never attaining the furthermost. This
is a Life! How sweet to dwell under the Noonday Beams of thy ravishing
Countenance? All Darkness and Ignorance are quite dispelled; every Thing is
known as it is, in its own proper Essence: Here Wisdom flourishes in its
highest Region; my former Seize are swallowed up, like the ^ight of a
Candle beside the Sun. O this light Day o^ E^ernity! O Eternity, thou art not
sufficient, wherein I may delineate what my elevated Heart does conceive! All
are inexpressible: Mysteries are no Mysteries, and yet eternal Mysteries! How
was I beset with Darkness, and could not attain suitable Uptakings of thee? How
was I vexed with low and unbeseeming Thoughts of thy all-glorious Majesty?
Whence Deadness and Unfitness of Spirit for worshipping of thee aright. Now I
am enlightened with the full and immediate Beams of thy Glory: And O how great
and precious are my Thoughts of thee! O this ravished Frame of Spirit! How am I
all inflamed with divine Love? I am rendered Divine; therefore I bend to thee
with an incessant and eternal Propension: Holiness before was in Part, now the
Copestone is upon it. How beautiful and comely are we become, through the Blood
of the Lamb! I see, WELBELOVED, thou can wash black Hell fair and white, till
it become a Lump of Heaven and Glory. Sirs, are we not far changed? May not
every one of us say, I am not I? Might we not misken our selves, were it
possible such a Thing were compatible with Glory?

26. The beholding of God, in his Way of Subsistency, and Outgoings to
Creatures, is endless Ravishment.

The wonderful Mystery of thy being One in Essence, yet Three in the Way of
Subsistence, was only to be believed by Mortals, and not to be understood
demonstratively: But now I behold with a Noonday Evidence, what I believed.
Thou art One, in the most simple Manner; and yet there are Three in the blessed
Godhead, every One of which is God, who are only distiguished by proper Ways of
Subsistence. I believed in the Land of Darkness, this, as all other Mysteries,
should be fully manifested in the Land of Glory: Now all, all is accomplished!
My Hope has not made me ashamed: He has fulfilled the Desire of those that
fear him. O blessed I, for evermore! What a Life is this, thus to swim in the
Oceans of Delights! O this Enjoyment! O my heavenly Father, first Person of
this all-adorable, eternal, co-essential Generation! O thou Brightness of the
Father's Glory, and express Character of his Person! O Holy Ghost, the eternal
Conspiration of Love betwixt the Father and the Son! O ravishing Sights? Shall
I not behold, with an eternal overcoming Delectation? What is God? will take
Eternity to answer; though we behold Thee as thou art, one View of thy infinitely
amiable Essence, and Way of Subsistence, would seal up innumerable Worlds of
Men and Angels in everlasting Ravishments. Can I express what I behold? Should
I write new Volumes through Millions of Ages, until the Creation were filled,
they should contain nothing to that my Heart is filled with: Should I write to
all Eternity new Songs of thine immortal Praises, should I not be ever a
beginning, and never fully begun? O sweet, sweet Fellowship with the Father,
Son and Holy Ghost! O my Redeemer, do I not behold Thee! the Brightness of thy
Father's Glory, the express Character of his Person: his Efficacy and his
Wisdom, by which he made all Things? The Lord possessed thee in the Beginning,
ere ever the Earth was; even then thou waft by him, as One brought up with him,
and was daily his Delight, rejoicing always before him: Immortal Blessings and
Praises to thee. O God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, art thou not
lovely, excellent, full of all Delights and Sweetness, who have begotten such a
matchless super-excellent One, as Christ Jesus, our excellent Welbeloved, our
Redeemer, our Head, our Days-Man, our All in all! Thy substantial Image is
lovely, O my heavenly Father! O then thy Loveliness! Men and Angels, you are
but as so many painted accidental Draughts of God's Excellency; but Christ
Jesus is the substantial Image of God, his very Power, Efficacy, and
Excellency, by which he does all Things; his very Self. None but Christ! Is he
the Father's Darling? and is he not ours? Is he his Wisdom, Joy and Delight?
and is he not ours also? O eternal Ravishments! God has given to, and for us,
the Son of his everlasting Love and Delights! Sent he not only his only Son and
Heir into a Base and inhumane World, that he might save and gather together the
Sons of his eternal Choice? O blessed Counsel from Eternity of the glorious
Trinity! O happy we, that ever free, free Love bowed and condescended so! What
could Jehovah do more for us, than he has done? Had thou any greater Gift,
than the only Son of thy Love? Did thou give thy ^osom-Delight to be a
Propitiation for us, the Off-scourings of all Things? Is not this Love
infinitely transcending all finit^ Capacities? That thou vouchsafed a Being on
us, was a great Bounty; but more, that Thou created us after thy lovely Divine
Image; yet more, thou condescended to enter into a Covenant with us; and yet
higher, to be appointed thy everlasting Minions! But what shall we think, Men
and Angels, has he not given unto us the Son of his everlasting Delight? This
Gift can never be enough admired and esteemed! O Almighty Jehovah, Thou give
like a King! too great a Gift indeed, for us to receive, but not too great for
Thee to give. Nothing can be too great for Thee; and this was the greatest Gift
that thou could give: Had thou given us Ten thousand Worlds of Beauty,
stored with all imaginable Paradises of Pleasures, with innumerable created
Heavens of Sweetness, with infinite Legions of Men and Angels, should they not
have been esteemed rich and noble Gifts? But all is just nothing to matchless
JESUS. It is a Shame to lay any Thing in the Balance with him: One Ray of his
Godhead would confound all possible created Excellencies to nothing. O thy
Excellency! thy Excellency! Am I not overjoyed, am I not overjoyed, that I
shall cry thee up through numberless Ages? Ye may hide your selves, Men and
Angels: for all your Beauties and Glory, what are you to him? It is astonishing
Condescendency, he admits you to stand beside him! I can but extol Thee, before
innumerable Assemblies of Men and Angels. My Heart is fixed, eternally fixed.
Shall we not, as it were, contend, who shall extol Thee most? And said thou,
Amen, My Welbeloved, to the blessed, a Thousand Times blessed Bargain of the
New Covenant? Verily, that Love thou manifested in the Fullness of Time, did
show the Love that flamed in thy Heart, before all Ages: Though thou waft in the
Bosom of the Father, ever delighting him, and delighting in him; yet did thou
come down to base Earth, and conversed familiarly with silly, sinful, frail
Man! and was found to be a Man, that Thou might save him lost and undone to the
uttermost. Men and Angels, you are all looking in, with Astonishment: To behold
God Personally, clothed with the humane Nature, is a Sight, we can never enough
view and admire! The Mirror, wherein we behold the Love of God to Creatures, in
its full Splendour. Waft thou never enough near and intimate with us, until thou
becamest Bone of our Bone, and Flesh of our Flesh? until thou becamest one with
us, who art one with the Father; For both he that sanctifies, and they that
are sanctified, are all one: For which Cause, thou art not ashamed to call us
Brethren. O essential Love; art thou not here manifested transcendently? That
Sentence was comely in thy Mouth, Love your Enemies. Have thou not loved thy
mortal Enemies, to the Death? Were we not Heirs of Wrath, born Enemies against
thy Highness? but, in Despite of our Enmity, did thou love with an
everlasting Love. Nothing can stand in the Way of infinite redeeming Love. No
Matter what I have been, since I am lovely in thy Sight: It Is wonderful
Loveliness, to become the Object of thy eternal Love! and this only will I
glory in. The more vile and lothsom I have been, the more does the Loveliness,
Nobleness, and Freeness of thy Love appear, which will neither be budded, nor
hired. Sovereignty shines forth in all thy Actings. Who shall give thee, and it
shall be recompensed? Not unto us, not unto us, but unto him that sits upon
the Throne, and unto the Lamb, be Glory forever end ever. O blessed Spirit of
Grace, the eternal Aspiration of Love, and Outgoing of the Father and the Son,
thou great Jehovah, blessed for evermore, how sweet a Cooperation have thou in
this glorious Work of Redemption! This transcendent Manifestation of altogether
free Grace! How sweet have thou been unto us, in the Days of our Pilgrimage!
How did thou convince, convert, enlighten and comfort! We should have
perished in our Journey to this goodly Land, had thou not strengthened us, in
our inward Man. And waft Thou so sweet in the Days of our sinning? Art thou not
now sweet, infinitely more than sweet? O the full, incessant, eternal Flowings
of the Spirit of Love! This South Wind breathen strongly, causing the Spices of
the higher Paradise exhale a ravishing Fragrancy every where: How, in every
High-tide, nothing but ravishing Perfumes? no Winds, but the Breathings of the
Holy Spirit. O what Rivers, Oceans, Worlds of Consolation! One Drop of this
falling upon the Heart, appeared Heaven itself; but this is more than Heaven!
Every Drop of this boundless Ocean of Sweetness, I am entered for ever into,
would ravish Ten thousand Worlds of Men and Angels. This could not be conceived
by Mortals, unless in a childish Manner; the first Fruits surpast their
Apprehensions, and yet had no Proportion considerable with the Harvest. None
can apprehend this, except they be experienced therein; and none can be capable
of this Experience, but those, who are raised to this wonderful Pitch of Glory.
These Floods of Sweetness would have undone us, in a Moment, had we entered them
in our frail Mortal Estate. O miraculous Elevation of Glory, which can bear
such Sweetness! Are we not as so many Trophies, and Monuments of thy
transcendant Power, in its high Victory? Much of thine Excellency was to be
seen in thy Kingdom of Nature; much more in thy Kingdom of Grace, but most in
this of Glory: Here shine forth thy infinite Excellencies, in their Noonday
Splendour.

27. Nothing but Rivers, Oceans of Joy, overflow Emmanuel's Land.

O Joy inexpressible, and altogether glorious: Now, now I find to the full, by
sweet, sweet Experience, That in thy Face there is Fullness of Joy, and at thy
Right hand are Pleasures for evermore! In the Days of my Pilgrimage, Thou put
more Joy and Gladness into my Heart, than in the Time, when Worldly Enjoyments
abounded in Worldlings: Then have I been so ravished with the Glimpses of thy
Countenance, that earthly Joys could take no Place; so that I could not but
imagine my self in Heaven already; thinking that the Vintage had come in place
of the first Fruits: Now, O now! I am in thy immediate Presence. Thy Sweetness,
O thy ravishing Sweetness; The Floods, Oceans, Worlds of eternal ravishing
Delights treasured up at thy Right Hand, wherein I am entered and swim for ever
and ever! Thy Land, O Emmanual, overflows with Pleasures. Never, never did I
know what Joy was, until now. Now I feel, Light has been sown for the
Righteous, and Joy for the Upright in Heart. Joy is come to its May blooming
Vigor. O the Rivers of Pleasures, that sweetly run through all the Faculties
of the Soul and Body! O the full Gales of the Spirit of Consolation! Am I not
almost Joy it self? Are these the Joys that were so much spoken, and written
of, on the other Side of the Water? Surely, Earth's Idiom has come wonderfully
short! Thy Word was written to Children, and therefore did express all in a
Manner suited to childish Capacities; but nothing low and childish here! O
Massy, Solid, Substantial, Enduring Joys! O Sublime, High, Manly Frame! None
to the Joy of my Lord! Heretofore I was sometimes filled with Joy; but now I am
entered into Joy it self. I live and dwell in Joy! Nothing, but Joy for
evermore! Thou have brought me into these glorious Mansions of Glory: How shall
we for ever be glad, and rejoice in Thee! As the Apple Tree among the Trees of
the Wood, so art thou among the Assembly of Men and Angels. O surpassing
Delights, in sitting under thy Shadow! The Sweetness of thy Fruits, the
Fragrancy of thy Perfume, no Tongue can express! They who come under the Covert
of thy Wings, never desire to remove from thence. Sirs, is not this a Life of
unmixed Joy and Sweetness, to sit under the Boughs of this Tree of Life? Is it
not good to be here? Have not the Lines fallen unto us in pleasant Places? Have
we not a goodly Heritage? and after such a World of Woe and Tribulation, to
enter over Head and Ears, in these super-abundant Joys! O sweet Dispensation!
first to be afflicted, and then comforted; to weep, and then to rejoice, to
run, and then to rest! O High-tide of overflowing Joys! which has swallowed up
all former Griefs and Sorrows. The first Sight of thy ravishing Countenance, O
my God, made me, as it were, forget that ever I was on Earth! This Land has a
sweet smelling Countenance: Pain and Sadness should be converted here into Joy
and Delight. Here is an eternal Spring; For the Winter is past, the Rain is
over and gone, the Flowers appear on the Earth, the Time of the Singing of
Birds is come, and the Voice of the Turtle is heard in our Land. Now we have
everlasting Joys for Sorrow, the Oil of Gladness for the Spirit of Heaviness.
We exceedingly rejoice with Jerusalem, who have loved her! We suck, and satiate
ourselves with the Breasts of her Consolation: we milk and delight ourselves
with the Abundance of her Glory: For the Lord extends Grace to her, like a
River. Our Eyes do see this, our Hearts do rejoice, and our Bones do flourish
like an Herb. He has made us an everlasting Excellency, a Joy of many
Generations: Sing, O Heavens, for the Lord has done it: Shout, ye lower Parts
of the Earth; break forth into Singing, ye Mountains; For the Lord Jehovah is
my Strength and my Song, He also is become my Salvation: Therefore with Joy
will I draw Water out of the Wells of Salvation. Cry out, and shout, O ye
Inhabitants of the higher City; Let your Joys sound throughout the whole
Creation. O Sirs, is not our Lot far changed? Nothing on Earth was heard among
us, but the confused Noise of Warriors, the Sighs and Groans of Men in an
Agony. Now the Heavens of Heavens are filled with the joyful Melody of Heroic
Conquerors. We sowed in Tears for a Moment; and now reap in Joy for evermore!
Thou have made us glad, unconceivably above the Days Thou had afflicted us:
Thou have arisen, and thine Enemies are scattered, and all thy Haters are fled
before Thee; as Smoke is driven away before the Wind, so are they evanished
before thy terrible Presence: But all the Righteous are glad, and they rejoice
before Thee; yea, they exceedingly rejoice.

28. This Land of Joys is filled with undone Dyvours. Glory, Glory, Glory to
the Purchaser of this everlasting Blessedness! Let the Crown flourish on his
Head throughout all Ages. O my Happiness, who shall ever praise Thee. And was I
elected before all Ages, to be the everlasting Beholder, and Extoller of thy
infinite Glory; Had Thou such wonderful Thoughts of Love to me, when I was
not? Were I in the Place of my Deserving, should I not been even now
Blaspheming thine all-glorious and exalted Name? O thy free, free Love! O the
unsearchable Riches of thy Grace! who chose abominable me, out of the base and
hellish Mass of Mankind, to be a Vessel of Glory and Honor, in the high Hall
of Glory. Lord, what have thou done? O Wonderful Bargain of the new Covenant! O
the infinite Depths of all Wisdom, Power and Excellency, to be seen in this
great Salvation! O the Contrivance! O the Carrying on! O the Copestone thereof!
Strange! how have Thou brought me hither? I see, thy Counsels cannot, in the
least, be frustrate by all the Power of Creatures. When I was a wretched, lost
Creature, lying in my Blood, and no Eye pitying me; then did Thou, in thy
By-going, cast a Look of Love on me, and said unto me, Live: And that Time
became a Time of Love. Free Love was the Rule thou walked by; not my
Diservings, or Willingness. Had I been left to my hellish Will, I should for
ever have destroyed my self: But Thou sweetly and connaturally, ere ever I was
aware, did ravish Heart and all from me; So that my Will could not but stoop
to thy overcoming Loveliness. When I was following after the monstrous
Imagnations of my evil Heart, debauching my Loves and Joys on
Creature-enjoyments, despising the only Excellent Things, then did Thou
discover thy irresistible Lovliness unto me; which bowed, transformed, and
enamoured all the faculties of my Soul; so that I could not but yield, most
willingly yield: Connaturally did the Influences of thy Spirit work on the
Powers of my Soul; So that I closed with Thee on thine own Terms, as freely as
I had been absolute Sovereign of myself; and yet as infallibly as I had been no
intellectual Agent. Verily Thou, Thou alone, art the absolute Sovereign of all
Things. O thy wonderful Way of Working! who can trace thee in all thy
Proceedings?

29. The Glorified, reflecting on the Way to the Kingdom, see it to be an
inconceivable Draught of Divine Wisdom.

O piercing Joys and Sweetness, that ever I heartily and sincerely received
thee, on thy own Terms! How well have thou kept, what I have committed unto
thee, and presented it spotless and glorious before the Father? Now I behold
all thy Promises completely accomplished. Thou have ever held me in thine Hand,
through all the dangerous Wilderness, I have overpast; Thou have guided me by thy
Counsel, and at last brought me to Glory. How has thy Strength been seen in
Weakness? How many Temptations have I overcome? How many Crosses have I
wrestled through? How many Floods have I overpast? How many boisterous Storms
have I set my Face against? How have I escaped through all the Assaults of the
Devil, the World, and the Flesh? And yet my Lord has set me fairly above all
Hazards and Difficulties! My Feet for ever stand now within the glorious Land
of Emmanuel's blessed Conquest. All the united Strength of blessed Saints and
Angels could not have bro't me hither. Sirs, shall we not be telling to one
another throughout Eternity, what God has done for us in Time? That Eternity
may be filled with a Song to Jehovah, and the Lamb. Who should exalt, and love,
and fear, and obey, and serve Thee, if not we? Did thou love us from
Eternity? And shall we not praise thee to Eternity? And can we but extol thee?
Not so much because thou art Good to us, as because thou art Good in thy self.
But, O how is my Heart inflamed, to think, how thy Love from Eternity brake
forth in Time! How did thou show forth the Acts of thy free sovereign Love?
in that thou had written my Name for eternal Life! How bravely have all
Exigences, and cross Dispensations conspired to my Welfare? Now I see, All
Things work together for the Good of those that love Thee. The saddest and most
cross Junctures of Providence have been the best: When thou seem to be
smiting, thou wast healing! When thou appeared to be destroying, thou wast
making up! Shall I not for ever declare thy wonderful Ways? Happy I, who shall
ever have Eternity before me! Thy Ways to me in Time are the Matter of an
eternal Song! All Exigences of Time did so jump together, as every one has
proved a Step to this inexpressible Glory. Free redeeming Love has been
written on all the Passages of my Pilgrimage! and most in the last Water; when
I began to sink, thou held me up in thy Arms, and put my Head in thy Bosom, and
said, Be of good Cheer my Love, thy Sins are forgiven thee; fear not, my Dove,
but rejoice exceedingly; for thy God, thy Head, thy Lord, thy Husband, thy
Savior is here, holding thee in his Arms. Have I bought thee so dearly,
suffered so many Griefs, and Woes and Pains, yea, Death it self for thee?
Carried thee through the hazardous Wilderness, so circumspectly, and tenderly;
and will I let thee perish now? Never fear, my fair One; Am I not willing? Am I
not able? Have not I overcome Death and Hell? I have dried up this River with
the Soles of my Feet; nothing remains for thee to do, but enter in, and possess.

30. The Fellowship betwixt Christ and every one of his, as intimate and
familiar, as if he had but one.

And has not the Sound of thy Welcome, on this Side of the Water, an immortal
Permanency on my Heart? The Impression is indelible: In my first Landing on the
Shore of this sweet Land, did not thou run, and fall on my Neck, and embrace
and kiss me? Saying, Welcome a thousand Times, with all my Soul, ^ this
purchased Possession: O my fair One, it ravisheth my Heart to behold thee here!
With Desire have I desired thine intimate Fellowship, and could not rest, till
I had bro't Thee hither, that strong Loves might be satiate with full and
mutual Enjoyment. And now shall these Arms be exercised in embracing; We shall
for ever be twisted in the nearest Connection of Love, and swim in the boundless
Ocean of Delights. Have thou been faithful over a few Things? And shall I not
make thee Ruler over all Things? Enter thou into the Joy of thy Lord, thy Love:
See thou not the Treasures of all Joys and Blessedness, I have laid up for
thee, even for thee, my lovely One? I had not forgot thee, while I was on
Earth; and no Wonder, since from Eternity I loved thee. What are thy Thoughts
of such great Preparation? Is not this a ravishing Place? How is it stored with
all Manner of Delights, suitable to thy highest Capacity? Does not thy Sight
show, That thy Imaginations of these on Earth was nothing? Lo, al^ this is the
Fruit of my Sufferings and Death: And now, how shall I entertain thee, since
thou have come hither? Thou longed, in thy Pilgrimage, for the naked and
immediate Enjoyment of me: And now enjoy me, as thy Heart can desire. Thou art
mine, and I am thine: We eternally feed among the Lilies. I will satiate thee
with my choicest Love-dainties, and fill thee to the Full, with my eternal
overcoming Sweetness. These victorious Brows do I adorn with this massy Diadem
of Glory: With these fair and resplendent Robes of Righteousness do I array
thee, that all the Spectators shall admire thy Majesty and Glory. Thy
Excellency on Earth was obscured, by the Vail of Corruption and Mortality: Now
have I removed all thy Infirmities, healed all thy Diseases, raised up thy
Faculties unto such a wonderful Pitch, as thou art fit for conversing with me
Face to Face. And did thou, my Delight, desire nothing more than the
immediate and full Enjoyment of me? and despised the World, in its most smiling
Condition, in Comparison of my matchless Excellency; looking on all Pains,
Sufferings and Difficulties, for my Name's Sake, as delightsom; making my Glory
and Exaltation thy chief Joy and Aim? And shall I not deck thee with passing
Majesty, and Glory? This, This is the Man, O my Friends, whom I have honored,
and will honor him; for he is worthy: Because he set his Love upon me;
therefore have I delivered him: I have set him on high; because he has known
my great Name. This is the Man, O my Father, who has been with me in my
Temptations, who has glorified me on Earth, and done great Things for me: Even
this is the Man, who has kept the Word of my Patience; Who has known, that
all Things, whatsoever thou have given me, are of thee; for I gave unto him the
Words which thou gave me, and he has received them, and did know surely,
that I came out from thee, and believed, that thou did send me. How great a
Friend was he to me on Earth? When I was hungry, he gave me Meat; when thirsty,
he gave me Drink; when a Stranger, he took me in; when naked, he clothed me;
when sick and in Prison, he visited me. Verily, in my Eyes he is worthy of
eternal Glory. Whatever thou have been in my Sight, thou art worthy of eternal
Glory and Renown. Heroickly done! Thy Sufferings and Actions for my Name's
Sake, I heartily acknowledge excellent Service: Receive then these enriching
Palms of of Victory into thy valiant Hands, as an everlasting Sign of thy
Conquest over the Devil, the World and the Flesh: And thy majestic Head be
graced with these Laurels of Triumph, while thine Enemies shall for ever lie
under thy Feet. All that thou beholdest are thine; for they are mine, and I am
thine: And now thy Happiness superabounds, and overflows its Banks. Now do I
rest in my Love to thee, and thou do rest in thy Love to me: I rejoice over
thee; yea, I exceedingly rejoice with Singing. How shall we ever dwell in these
everlasting Love-embraces? How shall we be filled with Love through Eternity?

31. Visible Things, a most imperfect Representation of Invisible.

O inexpressible Ravishments of Love! O most holy, sweet and condescending
Nature of my Welbeloved! Every Hour of Eternity is like the first Hour: Thy
Love is green and blooming through never-ending Ages. Is not this a sweet Life,
O Inhabitants? This Soil overflows with Milk and Honey. Have we not undergone an
advantageous Transportation? The Outfields of this Land wonderfully excels the
lower World! Indeed, the very Earth is full of thy Glory: What passing
Delectation have I found in meditating on thy Works of the lower World? How did
every Thing I heard, or saw, show forth thy eternal Power and Godhead? But, O
the Difference betwixt Heaven and Earth, could never enter within my
Conceptions on Earth! O glorious World! should we, in the State of Mortality,
have strained our Conceptions to the highest, and imagined all the Glory our
Eyes could then behold, augmented and perfected more Stages higher than there
are Atoms in the Creation; yet, should such a World have been a deformed Mass
to thee. Lower Excellency, gradually perfected, will never attain unto that
Excellency, which is essentially of an higher Degree. I thought in my
Childhood, that the lower World might somewhat resemble the higher; howbeit I
knew the Differance was inconceivable, and that here should be no Ebbings or
Flowings, Bloomings or Fadings, or what could imply the least privative
Imperfection: But now I see they have no Likness to one another, either in
Whole or in Part; even as to the smallest external Resemblance. No Beauties, no
Comeliness, no Joys, no Delights here, if we speak according to Earth's
Dialect; yet, here are all Things in an high and eminent Manner. O my God, how
incomprehensible art thou in thy Works? How ravishing in that Reflex of thy
Glory, which shall endure for ever? Thou shall for ever rejoice in thy Works;
every Work of thine is a Deepness, a ravishing Wonder to my elevated Capacity!
Might not the mediate Enjoyment of thee, through thy Creatures, render a
Creature eternally happy? How excellent is thy Name in all the Earth! who have
set thy Glory above the Heavens. What Wonders are written in those Heavens of
Heavens? The choice Masterpiece of Thee, who art perfect in Knowledge, and
excellent in working. This is a World stored with all Manner of Riches, the
Inhabitants here inherit all Things.

32. All Excellency, spiritual or corporal, on Earth, is augmented in Glory, by
Myriads of Stages.

We knew on Earth by the Word, that when the Clay-house of our Tabernacle
should be dissolved, we were to receive a Building of God, an House not made
with Hands, eternal the Heavens: For in that we did groan, not desiring to be
unclothed, but clothed upon with our House from Heaven; that Mortality might be
swallowed up of Life. And now, every one of us, in our own Kind, appears the
Perfection of Beauty! Whose very Clay-Tabernacles are now conformed to his
glorious Body; and whose Souls are made perfect in Holiness! And did our
Bodies, when terrestrial, so degrade? how does the celestial, united to an
elevated Soul, perfect with passing Excellency? Did our vile clubbish Bodies
impede the sublime Operation of our Heaven-born Spirits? How do these glorious
Bodies perfect perfected Souls, in all their Outgoings? If, when sown in
Corruption, they rendered us frail and contemptible, in many Things like the
Beasts; how excellent, glorious and majestic are we now, when Vileness and
Corruption is swallowed up of Glory? Yea, if it might been said of our Souls,
when darkened with Mortality and Sinning, They were in their Operation quick;
what are they now, when exalted to such a supernatural high Pitch of
Excellency? Did we behold, by Faith, a ravishing Fullness and Beauty in thy
Face; what do we now behold, when made so capacious and divine? Were our
Bodies, when animal, such stupendous Pieces of thy unsearchable Wisdom and
Power, as every one of us was amazed, and said, I am fearfully and wonderfully
made! How excellent and curious are these heavenly Bodies, conformed to the
glorious Body of the Son of God? Did our Wisdom shine, in our mortal Faces?
what Majesty and Glory dwells in every Cast of our Eye now? Where the Potsherds
of the Earth so vigorous, strong and valiant, that many of us through Faith
excelled in these Perfections, which brutish men were only taken with, whereby
we subdued Kingdoms, stopped the Mouths of Lions, quenched the Violence of the
Fire, escaped the Edge of the Sword, waxed valiant in Fight, turned to Flight
the Armies of the Aliens? O now, our wonderful Strength and Vigor, when our
very corporal Parts become spiritual, and of a Divine Nature! Had some of us
Hearts, in our dull earthly Condition, enlarged as the Sand on the Seashore?
How capacious are our Hearts now, when widened above the Dimensions of many
Worlds? What is Earth to Heaven? What is Darkness to Light? What is Childhood
to manly Estate? O high, high Capacity of Glory! O superexcellent and only
Glory in its Blooming! O the ravishing Frame, that we are for ever into! Are we
not the self-same Persons we were on Earth? and yet we are not the same! Every
one of us is like our All-lovely and WELBELOVED! whom we eternally behold, with
our bodily Eyes, according to our proper Measure; every one of us is at the
highest Pitch of created Perfection: This is a wonderful Transformation indeed!
O Sun, Sun of the lower World, I can look thee out of Countenance, and dazzle
thee with every Cast of mine Eyes! Is this, sometime poor, frail, despicable I?
Surely this is I! this self-same I, who was so silly in mine own Eyes, and the
Eyes of all the Beholders. Wonderful! Am not I crushed under such an exceeding
Weight of Glory? But Glory, and only Glory, can sustain it self. Thy eternal
Power and Godhead is manifested upon us, in a transcendent Manner; Thou have
gone beyond, by almost infinite Degrees, the Limits of Nature: The natural
World is quite abolished; what now is natural, and agreeable to created Beings,
before was miraculous and naturally impossible.

33. The highest Manifestations of God in Time, are but mere Emblems of the
Noonday Manifestation.

The most signal Foretaste of this Glory on Earth, was thy Transfiguration, O
Welbeloved, in the Days of thy Mortality, on the holy Mount, when thy Face
shone as the Sun, and thy Raiment was as the Light; so that mortal Beholders
were amazed, and confounded: Such an Unsuitableness there is betwixt Mortality
and Immortality! Weak Heads would not be able to bear one Draught of this
celestial Wine. And was thy Face so majestic and glorious, in the Days of thy
Mortality and Sorrow? Is it not more than Majestic and Beautiful, now in the
Days of thy Joy and Exaltation, when Thou have seen all the Travel of thy Soul,
and art satisfied? More Loveliness is to be seen in every View of thy divine
Countenance, than on infinite Numbers of excellent, beautiful Worlds. One Sight
of thee, and no more, may set never so many Myriads of Men and Angels in the
burning Flames of immortal Loves! Much was spoken, in Time, of thy Acts, and
Glory, and Majesty; but lo, the thousand, thousand Part has not been told!
Indeed thou art a Beloved, more than another Beloved. All Joys, that I ever
took thee for my All, and only One! That ever I cried heartily, Amen, to the
blessed Bargain of the new Covenant, and renounced my Vanities and came to
thee! That ever I subjected myself to the Obedience of all thy Commandments!
That ever I preferred a holy, heavenly, mortified Walking, in Time, to the
fulfilling my vain fleshly Inclinations! That ever I esteemed the Reproaches of
Christ greater Riches than the Pleasures of Sin for a Season! Now I clearly
behold, That I have chosen the good Part, that shall never be taken from me. O
happy I! that ever I sold all, and bought this matchless Pearl of invaluable
Price! O my Riches, my Riches! Since I have Thee, O Welbeloved, what can I have
more? Strange! wast thou despised by base Worldlings? But they knew thee not;
thy ravishing Loveliness was hid from their blinded Eyes; which if they had
seen, how should the whole Race of Mankind run after thee? Men and Angels, all
Beauty, all Loveliness, all Excellencies are here to be seen: Much is to be
seen in this visible Fabric of this great Creation; but no Manifestation of
Glory to this! Who can desire more, than to stand beside thee? O Flower and
only Beauty of Heaven, what are all created Heavens? Thou art only Heaven thy
self. No Wonder, Mary Magdalene, you inordinately desired such an Armful, as
the dead Body of this lovely Lord Jesus; since you knew it was, though a dead
Lump of Clay, the Body of the Man, who is God, infinitely above the Value of
innumerable, glorious created Heavens. What a sweet Armful now, when exalted to
such an high Pitch of Glory?

34. The Saints are every Way like their WELBELOVED; since full Love must have
full Similitude.

Love desires the nearest Similitude, and Conjunction: As Thou becamest like
us, assuming our Nature; so have Thou made us like Thee, both in Spirit and
Body. We are in every Part transformed into thy lovely Image: Whatever before
was Terrestrial, is now Heavenly and Divine. These Tabernacles were sown in
Corruption, Dishonor and Weakness; Now they are raised in Incorruption, Glory
and Power. They were sown natural Bodies; they are raised spiritual: For as
once we bare the Image of the earthly Adam, so now we bear the Image of the
heavenly. O thy vivifying Spirit, that raised Thee from the Dead! By whom thou
have made us incapable of any the least Change, tending to Corruption! And what
though it were not so? Here is the Tree of Life, whose very Leaves are Medicines
of Mortality. Thou art the Light and Life of the higher House; thy sweet,
lively Influences can make dead Clay live eternally. O thy sweet Shadow! Thy
pleasant Fruit! Thy ravishing Perfume, filling all with immortal Vivacity! Is
it possible any can die beside Thee, O Fountain of Life! What Wonder, I am so
lively, who have the Beams of Life ever darting upon me? The Inhabitants here
cannot say, They are sick. Here is perfect Security; our Iniquities are blotted
out, and quite abolished. O excellent Life of God, in its Perfection!
rendering, not only the Spirit, but also the Body, every Vein, every Artery,
every Sinew, active with immortal Vigor; for all is filled and over-filled
with Joy. O my Beloved Thou art excellently termed, The Prince of Life, the
Resurrection and the Life. Verily, Thou wast in good Earnest when thou criedst
He that believes on me, out of his Bell shall flow Rivers of living Waters. O
the Power and Strength of Immortality! We are become mighty, we have the
Strength of an Unicorn; The Lord Jehovah is become our Strength. We will walk
upon the high Places of the Universe. He has given Power to them that were
faint, and to them, who had no Might, He increased Strength. What was the
Strength of Clay to heavenly Vigor? The Disproportion betwixt the Excellency
of the Terrestial, and Celestial, cannot be told: And no Wonder we are so
vivacious and strong; since our earthly Part is become heavenly and glorious:
Flesh and Blood is done away, as incompatible with such heavenly Majesty. These
Bodies, though substantially the same, yet are they quite other as to the
Qualities, which are Heavenly, Spiritual and Divine. Naked Beings, considered
as such, are endowed with no Excellency: It is only by supervenient
Modifications they are rendered intrinsically more, or less, excellent, or
base. What Wonder we are thus? Whose Essences are clothed over, and perfected,
without and within, with superexcellent Perfections, merely heavenly and
divine. O the Comeliness and Beauty wherewith Soul and Body is adorned! O what
Beauty, when two excellent Beauties are united in one! O sweet Union! O
pleasant delightsom Fellowship! In the Days of Mortality, the Consort betwixt
them was, in a great Part, jarring and unpleasant, the one did obscure the
Excellency of the other: But now the Soul in the Body, is like the Sun shining
in its proper Sphere; or like the Light darting through a perspicuous Body,
adorned with various modifying Beauties, whereby the Rays are variously
perfected, in their modified Outgoings: All the Properties, Perfections,
Faculties, and Actions of Soul and Body, are modified and perfected by their
substantial Connection. Indeed, my Lord, we have gained wonderfully, by losing
our first Excellency; which was excellent in itself, and glorious and heavenly
in Comparison of our sinful Condition, we precipitated ourselves headlong into:
But was earthly, (...) Comparison of this. Who could have imagined that an
earthly animal Creature, should have been exalted to the State of Angels? How
silly is Man, in an earthly State? How excellent, in an heavenly? and all by
the Power and Virtue of the Man, who is infinitely more than a Man.

35. Complete Blessedness is the complete Enjoyment of God, every Way,
mediately and immediately.

We are blessed, and more than blessed, who enjoy thee every Way: We drink
abundantly, both out of the Fountain and Streams, at once; being satiate with
the reflex and direct Emanations of thy eternal Sweetness. Even thou thy self
art in an incomprehensible Way delighted with the Reflections of thy Glory,
where with this beautiful All, but especially thy Spouse, is adorned. Art thou
not inamoured with thy ravishing Image imprinted on her? So that thou criest
out, Thou have ravished my Heart, my Sister, my Spouse; thou have ravished my
Heart with one of thine Eyes, with one Chain if thy Neck: Thou art all fair, my
Love, there is no Spot in thee. The Love of Complacency arises from
Similitude: O then show thy Love to us; our Love to thee, and one another! We
are become altogether fair, by washing ourselves in thy most precious Blood.
What can be our Exercise through Eternity, but sweet Embracing? O our ravishing
sweet Entertainments of Love, among these ravishing Mountains of Roses and
Spices! O what Compellations! What Love-Kisses! O the overcoming Perfume of the
vast Mountains of Myrrh, and Hills of Frankincense! O the Smell of his
Lebanon-Garments! O his fragrant Ointments! O his Soul overcoming Emanations!
Every Hour here is Heaven, and more than Heaven. What Joy to see Christ, and
all his Members together, in the royal Palace of Glory? Are we not all gathered
up to these heavenly Pastures? and none is wanting. We all longed to be here,
sought to be here, prayed to be here, ran to be here, groaned and wept to be
here; and behold, we are all here for evermore! We helped and comforted one
another in our Journey hither; and behold, we are here for evermore! Satan and
the World, our Corruptions, yea, and oftentimes ourselves strove to hinder our
Course hither; and yet we are here for evermore! Now we are personally all come
to Mount Zion, and unto the City of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem; and
unto an innumerable Company of Angels, to the general Assembly of the Church of
the Firstborn, which are written in Heaven; and to God the Judge of all, and
to the Spirits of just Men made perfect; and to Jesus, the Mediator of the New
Covenant; to the Blood of Sprinkling, that speaks better Things than that of
Abel. O sweet Converse! O excellent Fellowship! O the Frame of my Heart! O the
high Motions of Joy and Love! O Eternity! is it possible thou can prove
wearisom? Ten thousand Ages seem not one Hour! Who can set forth the Sweetness
of thy Land, O Emmanuel? Is it not an House, an Orchard, a City, a Kingdom, a
World, a Commonwealth of a most comely Order? How good and how pleasant is it,
for them t^ dwell together in Unity? It is as the everlasting Dwellings of the
Spirit, that dwells on these everlasting Mountains of Zion; for here has the
Lord commanded the Blessing, even Life for evermore.

36. Christ i^ the everlasting King, Priest, and Prophet of his People.

Friends of the Bridegroom, are you not overjoyed, because of the Bridegroom's
Voice? No Wonder it was said of him, Never Man spoke like this Man. How does he
ravish us with his sweet Compellations of Love? Our Souls fail us not when he
speaks; Mortality is swallowed up of Life. Sirs, is not our Welbeloved and we
in these green Pastures together? O his ravishing Smiles! O his Looks of Love
toward us! O his Voice, his Voice! I am inflamed! Is he not saying, in the
boundless Joys of his Spirit, Father, behold me, and the Children which thou
have given me, are forever in the most intimate Fellowship of one another, here
in these highest Mansions, which I have prepared, wherein we might be satiate
with Loves, throughout Eternity? According to thy Promise, I do see the Travel
of my Soul, and am satisfied; for Thou have divided me a Spoil with the Great,
and I divide a Portion with the Strong; because I poured out my Soul unto
Death. We all reap the Fruits of our Groans and Tears, Afflictions and Labors:
My Chosen are comforted, and I am comforted. All the Children of our
everlasting Love are here, beholding my Glory, which thou have given me; for
thou do glorify me with thine own self, even with the Glory I had with thee,
before the World was. Now the Cope-stone is put upon our everlasting
Contrivance of free redeeming Grace: Those, whom from Eternity we chose for our
Minions, have I effectually called in to me, in Time; and caused them willingly
and sincerely to cry, AMEN, to the Bargain of the New Covenant: And I have
brought them through a World of Temptations, Snares, Afflictions, and all
imaginable Impediments, into this Haven of everlasting Blessedness. As from
Eternity I loved them; so to Eternity will I enjoy them: As I made them Sharers
of my Sufferings and Sorrow; so have I made them Partakers of my Glory and Joy:
As I have entered into the Oceans of boundless Joys; so have I made them to
enter also. The Desires of my Soul are fully accomplished: My fair Ones Joys
are full: As their Afflictions were my Afflictions, their Sorrows my Sorrows;
so their Joys are my Joys: For we are One, and they are One in us, even as we
are One: For I have given them the Glory, which thou have given me; I in them,
and thou in me; whence they are made perfect in one. As thou have loved me, so
do I love them; and they eternally abide in my Love: And Thou have loved them;
for they have loved me, in Despite of all Opposition, in a vain World. Behold,
my Father, how fair, and beautiful, and lovely, and sweet I have made my
Spouse! She is all desirable, and comely; no Spot, no Blemish is to be found in
her. Offended Majesty has nothing to say? I have redeemed her, I have washed
her in my own Blood. Here I stand an high Priest for ever, after the Order of
Melchisedeck, as a Monument that Justice is pacified, and all is in sweet
Terms: As thou lookst upon me with infinite Love and Delight, and art well
pleased with all my Sufferings and Actings, for thy Glory, and on her Behalf;
so art thou well pleased with her. Since of thine own good Pleasure, from
Eternity, thou accepted of the Bargain, Vengeance has Nothing to exact: I was
wounded for my Chosens Transgressions, I was bruised for their Iniquities; and
in my Eyes they are worthy to walk in glorious Robes, up here with me, before
the Throne. They kept their Garments clean in the Midst of a filthy and
polluted World; they accounted all the Glory and Excellency of Time, but Dross
and Dung, unto my Glory and Exaltation; and looked on all Afflictions and
Difficulties, as easy, for my Name's Sake: They subjected themselves to the
universal Obedience of all my Commandments: They fought the good Fight, they
finished their Course, they kept the Faith. O how heroically have they done,
for the Crown of Life, which forever adorn their victorious Heads! As thou, O
Father, have set me down on thy Throne, so have I given unto them to sit down
on my Throne; for I have glorified and exalted them, as thou have highly
glorified and exalted me: And now we are forever exalted, above all our
Enemies; Thou have made them our everlasting Footstool: Death and Hell are cast
into the Lake, that burns with Fire and Brimstone. Our Joys are full, our
Glory perfected, our Happiness boundless, our Praises incessant for ever and
ever.

37. An Astonishment, that the high and lofty One should look on Creatures.

Men and Angels, are we not all amazed and confounded with this infinite Love
of JESUS? What are we to Him, that he should cast one Look, either of Love or
Hatred, upon us? What are our Tho'ts? O the wonderful Frame of my ravished
Heart! He loves us, he delights in us, his Eyes are fixed upon us, his Heart is
opened to us, his Arms are stretched forth to us, his Voice is of us, and to
us; Who, but We! O my Lord, what have thou done? O Love of Jesus! I will cry
thee up again and again, and forever I will cry thee up. Blessed I, who have
such a glorious Assembly to help me, with an high, eternal Note of Praise! O
this is Life! O more than Joy! more than Happiness! more than full Satisfaction!

33. Earth and Heaven quite opposite Things.

Yea, surely they are lovely, who are arrayed with his Comeliness; and what does
the Spouse want, that the Bridegroom has to give? O then she is endowed with
all possible Excellency! This is an Assembly of Kings and Priests; every one is
a noble, magnificent and royal Person; all are Children to the King of Kings,
all are Princes of the Blood Royal of Heaven, all are Possessors of all Things.
Here is the Flower and Perfection of all Beauties connected together. This is
the Company God has chosen, and with which for ever he will dwell. Great is
the Lord, and greatly to be praised, in the City of our God, in the Mountain of
his Holiness. Beautiful for Situation, the Joy of all Nations, is Mount Zion:
How compactly is it built together? It lies apiece. No Temple here; for
the Lord God Almighty, and the Lamb, is the Temple thereof. None needs teach
another; we are all fil^ed with thy Fullness: We behold Thee, Face to Face. No
more mediate Enjoyment, Shadows have fled away. Now, and never until now, are
we lifted up above Ordinances: Prophecies have failed, Tongues have ceased,
Knowledge has vanished away: We knew in Part, and prophesied in Part; But that
which is perfect is come, and that which was in Part is done away. When I was a
Child, I spoke as a Child, understood as a Child, thought as a Child: But when
I became a Man, I put away childish Things: For now I see Face to Face; but in
my Childhood, I saw through a Glass darkly: Now I know, even as also I am
known. And what Wonder? since our Minds are illuminated by the Rays of thy
transcendent Glory. No need of created Light, Thou art become all and in all
unto us. We wonderfully enlighten one another, Men and Angels; but all is
Nothing to the infinite Light. O the Glory of Jehovah, which ever shall be
admired, and never comprehended! How nearly and sweetly is it communicated unto
us through the DAYS-MAN, CHRIST JESUS? And how richly is thy City stored, O
Emmanuel! Here are all Manner of Things, New and Old, which thou have prepared
for thy Friends. Were they Fools, who forsook all, they possessed on Earth, to
become Citizens here? Here is the Abundance of all good Things, all Joys, all
Delights, all Beauties; all are here, in a most eminent and superabundant
Manner: Nothing like Imperfection here; no Darkness, the Sun is ever in his
Meridian, the Light of his Countenance is ever lifted up upon us; for ever does
he look upon us, in a sweet, smiling, loving Manner; for His Anger is turned
away, and he comfort us, O joyful, O white, O blessed, O radiant Day of
endless Eternity! This is the Day, which the Lord has made; we will rejoice
and be glad in it: Even this is the Day, which has taken its Birth from his
infinitely amiable Countenance. O these Rivers of Consolations, that make glad
the City of God! O the eternal Emanations of All-fulness, flowing out from the
Throne of God, and of the Lamb! No Mixture of Creature-imperfections, all
proceed immediately from the Fountain! O my God, how was I tormented with
Thirst in the Wilderness? I was ever full of Wants, and Desires: But O now! now
I am drunk, ravished, filled and satiate with the eternal overflowings of thy
surpassing Sweetness, which run over this vast Multitude of Men and Angels,
like a mighty Inundation. In the Days of our Vanity, we sat by the Rivers of
Babylon, and wept; when we thought on the sweet Life the Inhabitants of this
higher House, this higher Jerusalem had, we could not but groan forth, When
shall the Night be gone, and the Shadows evanished? When shall Time be out of
the Way, that I may enter into the pure River of the Water of Life. and satiate
my self with all the Fullness of God? My Soul thirsts for God, the Living God;
when shall I come to appear before God? How long shall I dwell in a dry and
parched Wilderness, wherein there is no Water? Woe is me, that I sojourn so long
in Mesech; for my Days are consumed like Smoke, and my Bones are burnt as an
Hearth: By Reason of the Voice of my Groaning, my Bones cleave to my Skin, My
Days are like a Shadow that declineth, and I am withered like Grass. But O, now
is the joyful and white Side of Providence turned up! My Youth is renewed like
the Eagle's: I swim in the Ocean of Life. Who can tell what ravishing Solace is
under the Branches of the Tree of Life? Divine Vengeance cannot dart through:
Yet behold I fully thy Countenance, O Jehovah! We are thy Servants, ever
serving thee, and beholding thy Face; having thy Name written on our
Foreheads. I went mourning to the Grave, because of my Unfitness for serving
thee on Earth: But O! now I serve thee in as heavenly and divine a Manner, as I
would: I am become altogether like thee! I am filled with thy Glory and thy
Beauty: no Need to ask, Show me thy Glory: Thy Face incessantly and eternally
do I behold, and live.

39. Nothing in Glory, but Songs to Jehovah and the Lamb.

This is Zion, the Perfection of Beauty the Joy of the whole World: This is the
City which God has made, even which he has made in a peculiar Manner. O what
Glory! O what Majesty! O what Joy! O what Blessedness! As we have heard, so
have we seen in the City of the Lord of Hosts, God has established it for
ever. The Lord our God does save us this Day, as the Flock of his People; for
we are the Stones of a Crown lifted up, as an Ensign, upon his Land: For how
great is his Goodness, and how great is his Beauty! Sing, O Daughter of Zion;
shout, O Israel; be glad and rejoice with all thy Heart, O Daughter of
Jerusalem: For the Lord thy God, in the Midst of Thee, is mighty; He has saved
Thee, and rejoiceth over Thee with Joy; He rests in his Love, He joyeth over
Thee with Singing; He has healed our Backslidings, He has loved us freely:
For his Anger is turned away, and he comfort us. He is as the Dew unto us,
we grow as the Lily, and cast forth our Roots as Lebanon. He has made us, and
the Places round about his holy Hill a Blessing, and causes the Showers to
come down in their Season; even Showers of Blessing for evermore. And the Tree
of the Field does yield her Fruit, and our Land does yield her Increase; and we
are safe in our Land, and do know the Lord. Behold, He has brought us from all
Countries, and gathered us from the Coasts of the Earth: For the Lord has
redeemed Jacob, and ransomed him from the Hand of him that was stronger than
he; therefore are we come to, and sing in the Height of Zion; and flow together
to the Goodness of the Lord, for Wheat, and for Wine, and for Oil, and for the
Young of the Flock, and for the Herd: And our Soul is as a watered Garden; And
we shall not sorrow any more at all: For behold, the Lord has created a new
Heaven, and a new Earth, and the former is not remembered, nor does come into
Mind. Our Gates are open continually, they shall not be shut Day nor Night; for
Brass we have Gold, and for Iron we have Silver, and for Wood Brass, and for
Stones Iron. Violence is no more heard in our Land, Wasting nor Destruction
within our Borders. But we call our Walls Salvation, and our Gates Praise. The
Sun shall no more go down, neither shall the Moon withdraw her self; for the
Lord is unto us an everlasting Light, and the Days of our Mourning are ended.
We are all Righteous, we inherit the Land for ever: We are the Branch of his
Planting, the Work of his Hands, that He may be glorified. Our Light does break
forth as the Morning, and our Health springs forth speedily: And our
Righteousness does go before us, and the Glory of the Lord is our Reer-ward. We
are saved of the Lord with an everlasting Salvation; we shall not be ashamed,
nor confounded, World without End. O Lord, Thou art my God, I will exalt thee,
I will praise thy Name; for thou have done wonderful Things; Thy Counsels of
Old, are Faithfulness and Truth; for thou have been a Strength to the Poor, a
Strength to the Needy, in his Distress; a Refuge from the Storm, a Shadow from
the Heat: And have brought down the Noise of Devils and their Slaves, as Heat
in a dry Place. And have swallowed up Death in Victory, and wiped away Tears
from all Faces. Lo, this is our God, we have waited for Him; He has saved us,
we will be glad and rejoice in his Salvation: He extends Peace to us like a
River, and our Glory is like a flowing Stream. Our Heart rejoiceth, our Bones
flourish like an Herb: And the Hand of the Lord is known toward his Servants,
and his Indignation toward his Enemies; for he has punished the World for
their Evil, and the wicked for their Iniquity; and has caused the Haughtiness
of the Proud to cease; and has laid low the Pride of the Terrible, and broke
the Staff of the Wicked, and the Scepter of the Rulers. Hallelujah, Salvation,
and Glory, and Honor, and Power unto the Lord our God: True and righteous are
his Judgments; for he has judged all his Enemies; and the Glory of Avenging
Justice is for ever displayed. Let Israel rejoice in Him that made him: Let the
Children of Zion be joyful in their King; for the Lord takes Pleasure in his
People: He has beautified the Meek with Salvation. Praise the Lord, O
Jerusalem: Praise thy God, O Zion; for he has strengthened for ever the Bars of
thy Gates, He has blessed thy Children within thee: He makes Peace within thy
Borders, and fills thee with the finest of the Wheat: The Lord has chosen
thee for his Rest, here will He for ever dwell; for he has desired it.

40. The Happiness of the Saints superabundant, since they have all Manner of
Enjoyments.

Are we not more than blessed? United Happiness has the greater Force. O the
sweet Fellowship of Blessed Men and Angels! All Manner of Enjoyments are here!
All our natural Propensities are fully satisfied, and we are every Way filled
with God: As our Fellowship with him was interrupted, imperfect, and at a
Distance on Earth, so our Converse with Creatures was of small Profit: Vanity
(as to us) was poured out on all Creature-enjoyments; since our Faculties were
in a great Part, vitiate, was not our Fellowship on Earth oftentimes for the
worse, as well as for the better? for that our Converse savoured strongly of
Earth, differing little from that of Worldlings. But, is not this a wonderful
Change? We look like an Assembly of Kings and Priests indeed. Are we not all
one, in Mind, in Love, in Joy? for we have the Mind of Christ. All of us
resemble advantageously that perfect and only Pattern of Holiness, that
infinite World of ravishing Beauty, and boundless Ocean of overcoming
Sweetness, that only Delight, Love, Satisfaction, Wonder, and All, of Men, and
Angels. I am like Thee, O my WELBELOVED: I am like Thee. O Joy! superabounding
Joy! This one Thought bears in its Bosom, Ten Thousand Heavens. O Sirs, are not
his Glory, his Excellency, his Sweetness diffused among us? We are one in
Christ; and therefore one among our selves, being united by the Spirit of Love.
Thou art the Head, we the Members: All Treasures of Excellency are communicated
from Thee, unto us, as from the Root to the Branches, which are the same Tree.
We are one with thee; for both He that sanctifies, and they that are
sanctified, are one. Are you not excellent then, O ye Angels? Were not passing
excellent, and only delightsom, O ye excellent Ones of the Earth, when
encompassed about with innumerable Infirmities; and are you not now, so many
Masses of Excellency and Delight? If, when clothed with Mortality, you were of
sublime and princely Spirits; what are you now, when Mortality is swallowed up
of Life? Was our Converse sweet in the Valley of Tears and Sorrows? and is it
not more than pleasant in this Paradise of Joys and Delights? Was our Lamenting
our Distance from God, to one another, sweet? What Ravishments in our mutual
Congratulations of these overflowing Delights, and Happiness, in the immediate
Presence of JEHOVAH and the LAMB? What a golden Life is this! As this full
Enjoyment of Thee, O my God, does swallow up all other Enjoyments; so does it
perfect them also. Until our Love to thee was perfected, never did we love one
another perfectly. The more thou art loved, the more of thy Image. Thou art the
Center of all my Faculties; All my Love to Saints and Angels terminates in
Thee; Thou have clothed them with thy Loveliness, and they are become Lovely:
Yea, though they were not, yet, since they are the Object of thy Love; therefore
will I love them: But, because thou have loved them, therefore have thou made
them wonderfully lovely; and therefore, how are we all kindled together, into
an eternal Flame! O what a wonderful Sympathy! As we suffered in one another's
Afflictions; so do we rejoice in one another's Joy. O this superabundant Joy
and Happiness! Since all your Joy and Happiness, Men and Angels, are mine; even
me they affect; I am as filled with them: The Happiness of Thousands, and
Myriads of Thousands, are abridged into one Happiness. And how discovering is
the Light of thy Glory! I know every one of you in particular, as by Name, and
what was your Lot on Earth. When our Converse is more joyful, shall not our
Fellowship now be passing excellent? The Faculties are great, the Objects are
great, and great is Eternity, which we have ever before us in our Fellowship:
We are not confined, as on Earth, to Days, Hours and Years; but shall speak to
one another of his infinite Excellencies again and again and more and more, and
for ever speak: And what new Delights, since Earth's childish Dialect is done
away! Words, Sentences, Orations, and Volumes, were as dark Shadows, of little
or no Signification: But O the profound Idiom of Immanuel's Country! Every Word
is like a Talent, representing more than Ten thousand excellent Volumes, in
Earth's Language. How admirably do Mortality and Immortality differ in all
Things! Cry out then his matchless Praises; Shall we not contend, who shall
speak most excellently of his Glory? shall we not be for ever recounting his
wonderful Goodness to us, in Time and Eternity? O ravishing Fellowship with Men
and Angels! O more ^han ravishing Voice of the Son of God! Were it not the
Prerogative of Glory, that one Enjoyment cannot divert from another, I should
for ever shut all my Faculties against you, O Fellow Creatures, that they might
only be filled with JESUS my only WELBELOVED, whatever I enjoy, still I enjoy
thee perfectly and fully; with whomsoever I converse, continually I am with
thee. Thou art the Beginning, Middle, and End of all. O the eternal high Tides
of Joys in my Heart! Nothing can separate me, in the least, from this immediate
Enjoyment of thee. The Members are not hindered from receiving Influences from
the Head, because of their mutual Commerce among themselves; reflex Rays hinder
not the direct; the enjoyment of the Thing included eminently, hinders not the
Enjoyment of that which includes. I enjoy Thee; and therefore I enjoy all
Things; and my Enjoyment of Creatures, is no new Enjoyment, but another Manner
of enjoying of Thee; like the beholding the Light of the Sun darting from the
Moon: Every one of us reflects the Beauty, wherewith thou adornest us.

41. All the Attributes of God contribute to our eternal Blessedness, but His
Unchangeableness is the Crown of all.

How do all smile with a ravishing Countenance, whether we view in Time on
Earth, these present Enjoyments; or their Flourishing throughout Eternity? The
Consideration of God's wonderful Providence in Time, will fill the Thoughts
with enless Admiration. And am I not ravished, in looking back into infinite
Perfections, before all Ages? Here there is ever a Further; but it is according
to finite Conception, to look upon Thee, as past, present and to come. Thou art
eminently all Things, yet not formally, and in their own proper Nature: We
change every Moment, and have still new Actings; because we are finite Beings:
But with thee there is no Variableness, nor Shadow of Turning. Whatever thou
do, from Eternity thou do it: Thy Actings have neither Beginning, Middle,
nor Ending; Which are but one simple Act, the same with thy Self, though,
virtually and equivalently, it contains in its Bosom innumerable Actions; even
as thy Everlastingness, innumerable Days, Years and Ages. Who can admire enough
thy Simplicity? All thy Excellencies are but one Excellency, equivalent unto
infinite Worlds of Excellencies. O what a blessed Life have we, Men and Angels,
in dwelling in God, the Almighty, Alsufficient JEHOVAH! in whom is contained
infinite Varieties of all Joys, all Pleasures, all Sweetness, all Contentments,
all Beauties, all Glories, in a transcendent, eminent, and most perfect Manner.
O happy I! who have such an infinite One, boundless One in all Perfections, to
be my Portion! O thou (...), eternal, unchangeable in thy Wisdom, Power,
Holiness, Justice, Goodness and Truth. Everlasting Ravishments! He, who loves
us, is unchangeable; He, in whom we trust, is the Rock of Ages, whose Goings
forth have been from Eternity. O then! thy Smiles are everlasting. Our
Happiness is eternal; it is Joy upon Joy, to consider, this Life can have no
Period: It has neither Middle, Progress nor Ending; But shall ever be a
Beginning, and shall be ever, ever alike far from the Period of my Joys and
Happiness, ever in this same ravished unspeakable Frame of divine Love and Joy,
I am just now into! Shall it ever be high Tide? O more than Happiness! It
overflows its Banks: It is much I bear this Joy! O my Joys, my Joys, you are of
an immortal Duration! O my excellent Welbeloved, now have thou with Eternity
crowned all my Happiness! To think ever to be disjoined from thee, would
imbitter all the present Sweetness: The greater the Enjoyment, the greater the
Loss. Temporary Enjoyments nothing affect me: What will end, will be as if it
had not been. Never so many Ages are nothing in the Minds of elevated
Creatures: Only Fruits are taken with Time. Nothing is real and substantial,
but what is enduring. Nothing vain and empty now: All Things here shall be ever
in the self-same State, we are now in. So are all Things in Hell also. The
Fashion of this World shall never pass away: All are now solid and enduring:
Vanity is for ever banished out of the Universe; all Things shall be for ever
as they are. O ^y Joys! though you were low, yet the Thoughts of your e^ernal
Permanency may cause you to swell over your Banks. O Glory, Glory! how massy
art thou? Not a Thing glistering now, and anon evanished. O the more enduring
Substance! The Kingdom immovable! These everlasting Arms incircle us
eternally! For the Lord shall reign for ever, even thy God, O (...), to all
Generations. We that trust in the Lord, are like Mount Zion, that cannot ^e
removed, but abides for ever. The Glory of the Lord shall endure for ever: He
shall rejoice in all his Works. The Children of thy Servants shall continue,
and their Seed shall be established before thee: With long Life do thou
satisfy them, and show them thy Salvation. Thou art the Strength of their
Heart, and their Portion for ever. O real, solid, substantial, enduring
Portion! Indeed, thou art the Rock of Ages. All the innumerable Ages past,
present, and to come, do roll upon thee, as their Foundation. Thy Years are
throughout all Generations: Of old did thou lay the Foundations of the Earth;
and the Heavens were the Work of thine Hands: They did perish, but thou shall
endure; yea, all of them waxed old, like a Garment; as a Vesture thou changed
them, and they were changed: But thou art the same, and thy Tears shall have no
End. O my passing Happiness shall have no End! O Life, and Marrow of Joys! I
shall be ever with thee, O most lovely WELBELOVED! Some transient Glimpses of
thy Loveliness upon my Soul, was an Heaven upon Earth: But O, the permanent and
full Outlettings of thy Beauty, Sweetness, and all Excellencies, are more than
Ten thousand Heavens of Happiness! I am here dwelling within the boundless
Circle of Eternity! O sweet for evermore! only because of my sweetest
Welbeloved, whom I fully and eternally enjoy! What Good would my Life do unto
me, were I not to enjoy him, throughout eternal Ages? Not, that I account it
not an invaluable Happiness, to receive one Love-kiss, and no more, from thy
sweetest Mouth: Should not its wonderful Impression leave a passing ravishing
Sweetness, throughout endless EVERMORE? One Sight of thy only excellent Beauty,
one Smell of thy ravishing fragrant Garments, one Love-smile of thy overcoming
lovely Face, transcendently excels the Height of all Creature-Enjoyments. Any
Thing of Thee, my matchless ONE, is of incomparable Excellency: Thy very Frowns
are inconceivably sweet, because thine.

42. That we are altogether Christ's and not our own, is our only Happiness.

Thy Kingdom, O Emmanuel, is an everlasting Kingdom; the Scepter of Glory do
thou sway to all Generations. Indeed, when Time and Days come to a Period, and
thou had put down all Rule, and all Authority and Power, thou delivered up
the Commission of governing the Church, and (in Part) bringing the World back
to thy Father; and art subject as Days Man betwixt God and Creatures, that God
may only fill the Faculties of Men and Angels, with his uncreated Sweetness:
Yet, as Days-Man, thou art for ever King, Priest and Prophet of thy Chosen; the
eternal Head of Men and Angels; The Firstborn among many Brethren, having the
Preheminency in all Things: Thou art the great Lord Mediator, the crowned King
of Zion, for ever and ever: We are under Thee so many crowned Kings in Zion:
But thou art exalted above all; upon the Throne of thy Father David do thou
sit; and of thy Kingdom there shall be no End. The Lord has laid Help upon One
that is Mighty, he has exalted One chosen out of the People; He has made Him
his Firstborn, higher than the Kings of the Earth: His Mercy does he keep for
him, for ever; and his Covenant stands fast with him: His Seed also has he
made to endure for ever, and his Children as the Days of Heaven: All Kings fall
down before him; all Nations serve him. There is an handful of Corn in the
Earth, on the Top of the Mountains; the Fruit thereof does shake like Lebanon:
And they of the City do flourish like the Grass of the Earth. O PLANT of
RENOWN, Men and Angels are as so many Branches ingrafted in Thee eternally! or
else we should in a Moment wither. To all Eternity we stand in Need of a
Days-Man; we are not able eternally to stand on our own Legs; neither are we
able to behold God so fully and familiarly, as in the Face of EMMANUEL, the
White and the Ruddy! And what amazing Dignity, Men and Angels, for us to reign
over all, as Coheirs with this essential Heir of all Things? Do I reign with
thee, O KING of Kings? Wonderful! Thou have given me Power over the Nations,
and I do rule them with a Rod of Iron; as the Vessels of a Potter are they
broken in Shivers; even as he received of his Father! What were earthly
Kingdoms and Principalities, but evanishing Vapors, Night-dreams and Vanities?
What were the Shields of the Earth, but Bits of half-dead Clay, breathing for a
few Hours, Days and Years, at the most, and then returned to Dust again? No
Wonder he loaded the basest of Men with the greatest Portion of thick Clay:
Such a Dunghill was a fit Portion for Dunghil-worms: No wonder he gave so little
of Earth to his Chosen; such Gifts are below sublime, heavenly and Divine
Spirits. Sirs, have we not been ordained for far better, and more excellent
Things than Earth's silly Glory? It was not our Father's Will we should be
troubled with many Nothings: Much Clay would have clogged us, in our Way. He
knew best what was for us, who cut us short of Creature-Enjoyments. What have
we lost, who have received Gold for Clay, Diamonds for common Stones, solid
Satisfaction for vexing Vanities, Heaven for Earth, Eternity for Time, all
Things for nothing? All Glory to him, that sits upon the Throne, and the Lamb.
Let the Crown eternally flourish on the Head of the Purchaser of such
superabundant Happiness. O the great Things we have escaped? O the great Things
we have attained! And were these Joys purchased by Sorrow? This golden Life, by
a shameful and cruel Death? This Glory, by Shame and Contempt? This Rest, by
Labor and Wrestling? This Exaltation, by Lowliness and Submission? O the
Price, the Price! Every Sight of the Man who is God, would overvalue, and
overbuy Ten thousand excellent Worlds. O my Happiness! Art thou not of infinite
Value, though thou were not, in the thousand Part, what thou art? What can we
render unto the Lord for his wonderful Goodness? What can we, thy eternally
bound Dyvours, do but cry aloud, Thy Excellency? And, the more we praise thee,
the more our Obligation grows upon our Hand. O, let us ever, in this Manner,
run our selves into thy Debt. No greater Liberty, n^ higher Prerogative, than
to be eternally obliged Debt on to thy free Grace, redeeming, exalting Grace. O
then! shall I not praise thee, my Redeemer, my Exalter? Shall not boundless
Eternity be filled with thy Praises? Is my Happiness, Life-immortal? And shall
not my Praising be immortal also? O this high, high praising Frame! Nothing but
ravishing Hallelujahs throughout Eternity. O Sirs, is not this Frame altogether
inexpressible, wholly inconceivable?

43. The Manifestation of God, in Time, nothing to that of Eternity; and that
of Eternity, nothing to what dwells hidden in Himself.

Even the small Breathings of these full Gales of the Spirit, that blow
strongly in this higher Region, falling down upon the Land of Grace, filled my
Heart with such passing Sweetness, that I could not but cry out, Lord, my Heart
is fixed, my Heart is fixed, I will sing Praise unto thee. O let all Creatures,
in all Places of thy Dominion, sing forth thy Excellencies. Let me behold thy
Name set on high, and the Desires of my Soul are accomplished. I am ravished, I
am ravished with thy surpassing Sweetness, thy overcoming Loveliness! Is not
this Heaven, even Glory come down to Grace's Region? Or, what can Glory be
more? But now, now I clearly find, these have been but the first Fruits, some
Drops falling off this boundless Ocean; and no Wonder little seemed exceeding
great to a little Child; then I could not be capable of Glory, in the
Perfection and Bloom thereof. The Ground sufficient to bear a Tree, in its
first arising through the Earth, would not be able to bear the least Branch when
it attained its perfect Pitch. Yet the Remembrance of thy Ways to me, in my
Childhood, is full of Delectation. How thou have bro't thy Sons to Glory, is an
eternal Wonder! O to think of the wonderful Discoveries of thy self to weak
Mortals! whence Thou evidenced, that thou could show forth thine Excellency
by Weakness and Emptiness, Did I not sometimes, even when a blockish Mortal
live rather by Sight, than Faith? O the strange Discoveries of thy infinite
Beauty! from whence arose high flaming Love, then Zeal, for setting Thee on
high, far above all. Continually were thy Praises in my Mouth; I desired, that
all I though it, spoke, or did, should tend to thy Glory, for whom are all Things.
How tormented was I, to see so few on Earth, for extolling Thee! To see almost
All minding their own Things, and very few Thine. How vexed was I, that my
Heart was so shallow, and my Faculties so unfit for glorifying Thee? Therefore
did I long to be here, for nothing more than to praise Thee aright, before this
glorious Assembly of Men and Angels. How often have I been crying out, O to be an
Instrument of his superexcellent Glory! Let me be eternally confounded,
(abstract from sinning) if thereby his Excellency may be manifested. What are
all Creatures to him? Let him be exalted, let him be praised, though we all
should be abased for evermore. O the inexpressible Sweetness, my Soul finds in
praising Thee! In the Bosom of this Divine Exercise is contained a great
Reward. It is both the Work and the Wages. It is Happiness to extol Thee; it is
only Hell, not to be for thy Glory. O praise him, for ever praise him, all his
Works. It is a light Thing that thou alone should praise Him, O silly I! O
when shall I stand among the innumerable Assembly of Praisers, and tell, and
hear told over thine Acts, and Glory, and Wisdom, and infinite Excellencies
forever and ever! Verily all thy Promises are Yea, and Amen, to those who put
their Trust in Thee. Thou have given unto me all the Desires of my Heart: Now,
O now, I am in the Land of Praises, in to Midst of you, O glorious Creatures,
who for ever sing forth Hallelujahs, to Him that sits upon the Throne, and the
Lamb. It was but the Weakness of mortality caused small Stirrings to appear
high and mighty Overflowings. O Glory, Glory! Thou art indeed substantial and
massy. Since Glory cannot fully delineate thy Excellency, I behold thy amiable
Countenance to the full, O God of Glory; and O then the Enlargement of my
Heart! O then, the wonderful Flames of Love! Nothing was known, was felt; until
now: I have heard some Rumor of Thee; but now I behold and perceive, that all
possible Creatures, exalted to the highest Pitch of Excellency, can never be
able to praise thee to the full: Even because of this, I will praise Thee, that
Thou art infinitely above all Praises. Were thou not infinite, Thou should
not be the eternal Object of my Praises: Created Enjoyments cannot satiate for
ever. How am I overjoyed, Thou have thus fitted me for setting Thee on high!
How am I lifted up in my Capacity, almost infinite Stages above the highest
Pitch of Mortality! Sirs, This is another Manner of Praising than was to be
found within Mortality's Tents: Our Songs can only be learned by these who have
attained the Height of wisdom; even who are filled with all the Fullness of God.
What are finite Things in the Way of our Conceptions? We are past from the low
Conceptions of Mortals: Earth's putid Idiom, in its highest Strain, composed
and divided by all possible Ways, or portrayed down in as many Books as would
fill the Creation, should not express in the thousandth Part, so much of the
Excellency of our never-enough exalted One, as one Sentence of this Song of
Glory. What is expressed by dull Sound, or tuned out in Black and White, is not
now worth the Noticing; yet, had I no other Way of expressing thy Excellency,
before Men and Angels, I should for ever and ever be writing Songs of thy
matchless Praises, that all the Beholders might, in some Measure, conjecture
the high Tho'ts of my Heart. Were there Oceans of Ink greater than Ten thousand
Worlds, and Paper and Pens conformable thereunto, I should soon exhaust them,
in writing new Songs of thy matchless Praises; and yet the Thoughts of my
elevated Heart should not in the least be diminished; but should be, like an
eternal Fountain, ever inditing new Matter, ever sending forth new Streams of
Praises. What Wonder? I am filled with thine Image: I behold thee Face to Face,
and therefore see more and more of Thee to all Eternity. Ever, ever shall I
have new Discoveries, and yet for ever shall I have the same; for I behold Thee
as Thou art. What Wonder we are in such an high praising Frame, O blessed Ones!
who, being framed so capacious, to receive the full Emanations of his infinite
Glory and Sweetness, stand continually in his immediate Fellowship? Are we not
ravished in praising? It Is the only Happiness to be thus exercised; The only
Misery, to have the Faculties exercised in other Things. No Monster to a
Creature careless of thy Glory! You abominable Prodigies of Nature, who are not
for extolling your Creator, Preserver and Benefactor, Can the Desperateness of
your State be told? Should you not praise him, eternally praise him? He is the
Potter, you are the Clay; He is the absolute Sovereign, you his eternal bound
Vassals: All that you are, and have, is of him: If you are miserable, it is
only of your selves: Nothing from Him, but that which is good. He is a pure
Mass of Holiness, Excellency and Desirableness. O cursed! O desperate! O
astonishing Frame! to have the Heart hardened against the Original of all Joys
and Blessedness. Thousand Times happy I, who am thus, thus conformed unto the
Divine Nature! O this sweet, sweet Frame of Heart I am altogether for Praises:
This is the Land of Praises; the whole Assembly resounds with Praises. O my
blessed Ears! which are eternally filled with the melodious Raptures of
Emmanuel's ravishing World. Is it possible Sorrows can enter here? All is
filled with superabounding Joys: Every where thy Beauty is fully manifested.
Let us dive deep, and look, and look again, ever shall we find new Matter for
Love-Songs. Does not a sweet willing Constraint lie upon us to praise Thee?
Inundations of all Goodness do flow out from thee, O inexhaustable Ocean of all
Excellency: And must they not incessantly run back to Thee again? Yea, who can
but extol Thee, O alsufficient JEHOVAH? because Thou art essentially beautiful
and excellent. What though little of thy Goodness were let forth on Creatures?
the Manifestation of thy Goodness to Creatures adds just Nothing to Thee:
Whether Thou create or not create one Creature, on a World, or Millions of
Worlds, all is the same to Thee. Thou art infinitely above the Praises, or the
Blasphemies of Creatures. Thy Glory is unchangeable; before all Ages did thy
infinite Perfections shine forth, in the same infinite Splendour; So that, in
the Fullness of Time, when it pleased Thee, to show forth thy Glory, in the
Production and Adorning of finite Beings, nothing in the least was added to thy
boundless Excellency: Thy Creating was the Manifestation of what was from
Eternity; not the bringing forth of what was not at all: As when the Sun should
dart forth his Light, which before he kept within himself; or a Box of precious
Ointment, when broken, exhales a Perfume, which before lie hidden.

And what have Thou manifested on Creatures, to that which thou might, if so
it had pleased thy Sovereign Will! What is this World existent, but as a vast
Ocean should let forth one Drop, when it might pour forth M^ll^ons of Millions
of Showers for ever and ever? What are these Handful of Creatures, unto these
vast numberless Armies, eminently contained within the Compass of thine
infinite Power? whence, thy Dominion over Things that are not created, is
greater, than over Things that are. From all Eternity had Thou the Sovereign
Disposition of all possible Beings, and they are for ever at thy Beck. Had
Thou never determined to create any Creature, Thy Power and Sovereignty should
ever have shined forth in as full a Splendour, in order to these self-same
Creatures existent, as now it does: To restrain a Being from existing, or to
cause it exist, are alike Acts of infinite Sovereignty. Men and Angels, shall
we not cry up the Incomprehensible Excellency of our God? What can we
contribute even to his declarative Glory? Are we any Thing, to the Infinite
Armies in the Womb of his Omnipotency? and yet has He appointed us the only
Criers up of his Praises; the only Spectators, throughout all Ages. O how
inconceivable are thy Ways! Have Thou chosen these few out from among
innumerable Armies of Excellent Creatures, contained within the Bosom of thy
Excellency? Might Thou not have Numberless Worlds of Men and Angels just now
serving Thee, and not one of us existent? How is absolute Sovereignty, and free
Grace to be seen every Where? Creation is an Act of free Grace and Goodness. O
thou whole Handiwork of God, how ought Thou to praise thy Sovereign Lord?
You Sun, Moon and Stars, for ever exalt him, who conferred upon you an
everlasting Being, passing by infinite Numbers of others; and only you has He
chosen, as never-ending Monuments of his transcendent Excellency. Thou Earth,
with thy various Beauties, praise thy bountiful Creator, who has appointed
thee an eternal Monument of his Justice and Mercy, passing by innumerable
possible Ones. O thou glorious and majestic Heavens, sing forth the high
Praises of thy Almighty Former; though thou art the Top and Flower-excellency of
this vast All, what art thou to these innumerable possible Heavens, Jehovah
could produce? Thou whole Creation, though thou art exact in Number, Weight and
Measure, what art thou to what Incomprehensible Jehovah can effect? What are
you, O all ye Creatures? you are infinitely every Way within the Limits of his
infinite Power; yea, though it were not so, one Blast of his Nostrils, could
confound you to nothing in a Moment. Down with your Glory before Him, all
Creatures; acknowledge your eternal Sovereign: Shall not Eternity resound with
his incessant Praises? shall not this great All be ever in a rejoicing,
praising Sound? shall not the Earth clap its Hands, the Heavens leap for Joy,
before Him, who has formed them eternal Monuments of his superexcellent Glory?
This is the only World God has been pleased to make; from Eternity to Eternity
there is no other; neither shall this undergo Changes any more: How sweet a
Savor does the Almighty smell? pronouncing that the Vicissitudes of Day and
Night, Seed-Time and Harvest, Winter and Summer shall for ever cease; and that
an eternal Springtide, an endless Summer, an incessant Harvest shall remain.
This is the golden World; all Things have a smiling Countenance: Wickedness
shall triumph no more. It was but for a Moment, they opened their Eyes, and
behold they are not: But the Righteous are in everlasting Remembrance. Thou
lower World, how art thou loosed from that bitter Servitude to the Filth and
Off-scourings of all Things? being the Stage of horrid Rebellion against thy
great Former; the Place where created Enjoyments were preferred before that
Fullness of all Sweetness in the Alsufficient Jehovah. Our Eyes behold what we
believed, and hoped for: O glorious new Heaven, and new Earth, wherein dwells
Righteousness! Are we not now Masters of all? through the Heir of all Things,
do we inherit all Things? All Things before were ours in Title, now they are
ours in full Possession; for our Minority is expired.

44. All the Promises are in Part fulfilled in Time, and fully in Eternity.

Your Folly is even manifest to your selves, cursed Worldlings, who imagine^ us
Fools, who laid our Hope and Confidence on the great Promises of the Almighty:
Lo, all that ever he promised unto us, he has performed, to the Full, and more
than to the Full. Lo, we inherit Heaven and Earth, and all Things, and delight
our selves in Abundance of Peace. We behold the Floods of Honey and Butter, and
heap up Gold as the Dust: Yea, the Almighty is our Defense, and we have
plenteous Silver: Our Eye is clear, as the Noonday; we shine forth, and are as
the Morning: Our Flesh is fresher than a Child's, and we return unto the Days
of our Youth. The Lord is our Keeper, the LORD is our Shade, on our Right Hand.
The Sun does not smite by Day, nor the Moon by Night. And the Lord preserves
our going out, and our coming in, from this Time forth and for evermore.
Behold, we eat, cursed Wretches, but ye are hungry: Behold, we drink, but ye
are thirsty: Behold, we rejoice and triumph, but ye sorrow and are ashamed. Lo,
He that sits upon the Throne, has made all Things new; and the former
Things shall not come into Mind. Behold, a new Heaven and a new Earth! for the
first Heaven, and the first Earth are passed away; and there is no more Sea.
Behold, the Tabernacle of God is with Men, and he does dwell with us, and we
are his People, and he is our God: And he has wiped away all Tears from our
Eyes: And there is no more Death, nor Sorrows, nor Cries, nor Pains; for the
former Things are passed away. Vile Wretches, though your everlasting Dungeon be
situate within the Verge of that Dunghill, you adored heretofore; yet shall you
never set your Head within this glorious Fabric, but shall abide for ever, in
utter Darkness: Ye possessed the Earth for a Moment, and carried your selves,
as all had been yours, bearing down the excellent Ones of the Earth: But now,
we have you under our Feet for evermore. Now, it is manifest, who were the true
Heirs of the Earth: Now it is clear, who were really Excellent. What think ye
now of your Pleasures of Sin for a Season? Have ye not built your House, as a
Moth, and a Booth that the Keeper makes? As Drought and Heat consume the
Snow-water; so has the Grave consumed you. Your Triumphing has been short,
and your Joy but for a Moment. Though your Excellency might seem to mount up to
the Heavens, and your Heads reach unto the Clouds; yet are you perished for
ever, like your own Dung: You are fled away, as a Dream, and are not found; all
Darkness is hid in your secret Places, a Fire not blown has consumed you. Your
Strength is Hunger-bitten, and Destruction is ever at your Side, it does devour
the Strength of your Skin; even the Firstborn of Death does devour your
Strength: Brimstone is scattered upon your Habitation, your Root is dried up
beneath, and above your Strength is cut off: You are driven from Light into
Darkness, and chased out of the World; for God is jealous, and revengeth; the
Lord revengeth, and is furious, and will not at all acquit the Wicked: The
Mountains quake at him, and the Hills melt, and the Earth is burnt at his
Presence; yea, the World and all that dwells therein: With an overflowing
Flood does he make an utter End of the Wicked; and Darkness does for ever
pursue his Enemies. The Lord is good to all, and his tender Mercie^ are over
all his Works: He has fulfilled the Desire of them that fear him, he has
heard their Cry, and saved them. All thy Works shall praise thee, O Lord, and
all thy Saints shall bless thee. Thou have delivered us from our Enemies. We
have fled unto thee, and under the Shadow of thy Wings we ever rejoice. Thou
have led us unto the Land of Uprightness: And as for the Head of those that
compassed us about, the Mischief of their own Lips has covered them; burning
Coals have fallen upon them, they are cost into the Fire, into deep Pits, that
they rise not again. But the Righteous give Thanks unto thee; the Upright for
ever dwell in thy Presence: Many a Time have the Wicked afflicted us from our
Youth, yet have they not prevailed: But all that hated us are confounded, and
turned back, and are as the Grass on the House-tops, that withers before it
be grown up. When the Wicked did spring as thee Grass, and all the Workers of
Iniquity did flourish, it was that they might be destroyed for ever. The Lord
is a Sun and Shield; He has given Grace and Glory; no good Thing has he
withholden from those that walked uprightly. Blessed is the Man that trusted in
thee! We trusted in thee, and were delivered; For thou have considered our
Trouble, thou have known our Soul in Adversity, and have not shut us up into
the Hand of the Enemy: Thou have set our Feet in a large Place. We were in
Trouble, our Eye was consumed with Grief; yea, our Soul and our Belly: Our
Strength failed because of our Iniquity, and our Bones were consumed: We were a
Reproach to our Enemies, a Derision to a phanatick World. But we trusted in
thee, O Lord; we said, Thou art our God: And lo, Thou have delivered us, for
ever, from the Hand of all our Enemies: Thou have made thy Face to shine, in
its full Splendour, eternally upon us; Thou have saved us, for thy Mercies Sake.
O how great is thy Goodness, which thou have wrought for them that trusted in
thee, before the Sons of Men! O love the Lord, all ye his Saints; for the Lord
preserves the Faithful, and plenteously rewards the proud Doer: His Anger
endures but a Moment; in his Favor is Life. Weeping may endure for a Night,
but Joy comes in the Morning. Surely Goodness and Mercy shall follow us all
the Days of our Life, and we will dwell in the House of the Lord for ever.

45. All the Attributes of Jehovah, especially his Jus^ice and Sovereignty, are
seen evidently in the Damnation of the Wicked.

All Joys! How does the Glory of Mercy and spotless Justice shine forth before
the Eyes of all? Within the Limits of Time, some small Forerunners there were,
of what we now most evidently behold. How did thou drown almost a whole
Generation for their Iniquity? How did thou make thine Earth to devour and
swallow up thy rebellious Blasphemers? Yea, in all Ages thou broughtst down
signal Strokes of thy Displeasure on a vile World; burning up their Cities,
destroying their Fields, and making their cursed Carcasses to be like Dung upon
the Earth: So that thy most impious Enemies could not but say, Verily there is
a God that judges in the Earth. And every Stroke of thy Vengeance was Mercy to
thy Chosen; for, how often have thou compelled thy sworn Enemies, to come
bending unto thy People? Such were small Skirmishes, and partial Victories over
Parties of thy Foes. Since Earth, by thine Appointment, was the Place, where
every one was to act their Part, in order to Eternity; and the Wicked to fill
up their Cup of Wrath against this eternal Day of Wrath; Is not Hell a Part of
our Heaven? Is not the displaying of the Banner of Justice, Matter of Eternal
Exultation? By the horrid Rebellion of wicked Men and Devils, thou appeared to
be robbed of that Honor and Glory due to thee, from all thy Creatures. How does
thy Excellency for ever break out from under the Clouds, that seemed to darken
it heretofore? Thy vile Enemies, through thy Long-suffering, did pass on in
their Rebellion, some Time unpunished: Nay, in their abominable Ways, through
thy wonderful Providence, they prospered, they lived, they become old, yea,
were mighty in Power: Their Seed was established in their Sight, and their
Offspring before their Eyes: Their Houses were safe from Fear, neither was the
Rod of God upon them: They spent their Days in Wealth, and in a Moment went
down to the Grave. Yea, one Event happened to all: He destroyed the Perfect and
the Wicked; when the Scourge slew suddenly, he did laugh at the Trial of the
Innocent. In the Place of Judgment Wickedness dwelt: Yea, there were just Men,
to whom it happened according to the Work of the Wicked; Again, There were
wicked Men, unto whom it happened according to the Work of the Righteous. No
Man knew either Love, or Hatred, by all that was before him. The Wicked were
buried, who had come and gone from the Place of the Holy. O golden Year of
Jubilee! wherein every Thing is reduced to its proper Order; every Man rewarded
according to his Work; the most hidden Things of Darkness are laid open: The
Innocence of the Righteous, and the Perverseness of the Wicked, are laid open,
before all. All Things are in a right Order now. No more to be seen exalted
Folly, or debased Wisdom: The histrionick Fancies of Riches, and titular
Honors, are quite done away; Fools shall no more rule over the Wise. Heroic
Spirits eternally possess the State of Princes; and slavish Spirits are bound
in everlasting Chains of Darkness. How does the Equity of thy Proceedings
appear, O righteous God! What though monstrous Reprobates roar out their horrid
Blasphemies against thy spotless Holiness? Thou art of purer Eyes, than to
behold Iniquity; and wilt not at all acquit the Guilty. What Joy! to behold
Truth vindicated from all the horrid Aspersions of Hellish Monsters. I Am over
joy'd, in hearing the everlasting Howlings of the Haters of the Almighty; what
a pleasent Melody are they in mine Ears? O eternal Hallelujahs to JEHOVAH and
the LAMB! O sweet! sweet! My Heart is satisfied. We committed our Cause to
thee, that judge righteously; and behold, thou ^ast fully pleaded our Cause,
and shall make the Smoke of their Torment for ever and ever to ascend in our
Sight: For Righteous art Thou, O Lord, and just in all thy Ways. Cursed
Creatures, your Consciences tell you the Equity of Jehovah's Ways. Are you not
the Creatures, that banished God out of your Thoughts? And it is most equal you
are banished eternally from the Presence of God, and the Glory of his Power;
Being given up to a Reprobate Mind, hardened against your great Former and
Preserver. Are you not all most worthy of divine Vengeance, who hate your
Creator, and preferred your base selves before him; who in the Midst of his
Bounty, when he gave you Abundance of created Enjoyments, contemned and
abhorred Him? Who are so desperately mad against that infinite Original of all
Goodness, that though he should remove from you his just Punishments, and restore
unto you your former Enjoyments; yet should you stand out ungratefully against
him? O horrid Monstrosity! That which might be known of God, was manifested
unto you; For the invisible Things of him from the Creation of the World, were
clearly seen, being understood by the Things which were made; even his eternal
Power and Godhead: So that you were without Excuse; because that when you knew
God, you glorified him not as God, neither were thankful: But became vain in
your Imaginations, and your foolish Heart was darkened: Professing your selves
wise, ye became Fools, and worshipped, served and loved the Creature, more than
the Creator, who is God blessed for evermore. Even your own selves being
Judges, vile Wretches, is not your Lot suitable to your abominable Nature,
which showed it self, in your Way of walking in Time? The Characters of a Deity
were so written on your Heart, as it was impossible to cancel them; yet ye
sacrilegiously strove to eradicate such noble Draughts, written by the Finger
of God, and banished from your Minds the Thoughts of his Mercies, or Judgments:
Self, and only Self, was the ultimate Center of all your Designs and Projects:
Whence you preferred the Enjoyment of Creatures, before that of the
Alsufficient Creator; esteeming it a more desirable Lot, to live eternally in
the Midst of earthly Riches, Honors and Pleasures, than in an immediate
Fellowship with God. And is it not most just, he remove these Enjoyments, you
basely placed in his Room? Your own Glory was more designed by you than his;
and should not he confound, and put to Shame the Nothing-beings, you adored,
and set above him? What should he otherwise do unto you, monstrous Wretches?
Should he restore the Enjoyments you used against him? Should he cut you off to
Nothing, who have desired to be his eternal Enemies, and would have essential
Eternity destroyed? Did you not care to see his Cause and People debased? and
is it not most just, you be Spectacles of Shame and Vileness, throughout
Eternity? Would you be above the Most High? And should ye not ly under his
Feet, while his Glory remains? Are you stated Enemies against him? And may not
your Adversary use his Power against you, and tread you under his Feet, as you
would do to him, if your Power did answer your monstrous, abominable Will? Do
you curse him, and want a relenting Heart to acknowledge your Madness; And are
so dreadfully hardened against him, that ye would despise and blaspheme Mercy,
even Mercy offered unto you? And is it not most just, you continue for ever, in
that most terrible Condition? No wonder your Consciences gnaw you so fearfully:
You cannot but be dreadfully affrighted at your monstrous selves; God in his
Equity having so wonderfully sharpened your Faculties, as that you are able to
understand your own Wickedness most clearly and fully. Your Wickedness, in
Time, was in its Bud, now it is at its Height; the Smell of Hell was upon you
even then, but now you are so many black Lumps of Death and Hell, cast into the
Lake of Fire. You were not afraid to speak irreverently of him; now you
directly (O monstrous Madness!) curse him to his very Face. The Sentence is now
fully accomplished, To him that has, shall be given; and from him that has
not, shall be taken away, even that which he has. Did you hate the lovely
Image of God? And is it not most just, the Remainders thereof, you had on
Earth, be quite abolished? Some Loveliness, some Excellency you are endowed
with, through the Creator's Bounty: Now you are stripped of all, and are nothing
but vile Lumps of Deformity. Your Torments on Earth might have raised
Compassion in the Hearts of Fellow Creatures, but now your Malice and Deformity
is so monstrous, as you cannot become Objects of Compassion: No, the beholding
of the Smoke of your Torment is a passing Delectation. O my GOD, Thou art holy
in all thy Ways, and righteous in all thy Works: Thou art not the Cause of
their everlasting Ruin, though they blasphemously father it upon thee. Cursed
Wretches, who has turned your Hearts against God? Has he turned them against
himself? This is repugnant. Or, was he obliged to hinder your Rebellion; or to
turn your Minds again toward him, when you fought against him, with all your
Strength, Soul and Mind.

46. Sovereignty the first Mover of all Things.

How gloriously does thine absolute Sovereignty shine forth in all thy Ways?
Thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive Glory, and Honor and Power; For thou have
created all Things, and for thy Pleasure they are and were created. Because, so
it pleased thee, will abundantly answer all Questions concerning thy
Proceedings. Why are we here such and such by Name? Because so it pleased thee.
We, that are praising thee, might have been thine eternal Blasphemers; and
those who are cursing thee, might have been thine eternal Praisers; But
absolute Sovereignty would have it otherwise. That all Things are thus, is
because of thy free Will: These Creatures might have been in another State; or
others in their Room, or none at all; if so it had pleased thee. All the
external Lots, in Time, the most contingent Things, were eternal Draughts of
absolute Sovereignty. Is not the eternal Resound of our endless Songs, Not unto
us, not unto us, but unto Thee, O absolute Sovereign of all Things, be the
Glory forever! Wicked Men and Devils have mightily endeavored, to obscure the
Glory of thy absolute Sovereignty, by ascribing undetermined and absolute
Sovereignty to intellectual Agents over their Actions: Stupid Madness! Are not
all Things at thy Beck? Whatever pleased thee, have thou done, in Heaven and on
Earth: The Hearts of Men are in thine Hands, as the Rivers of Waters, thou
turnest them whither soever thou will. Thou removest the Mountains, and they
know it not; Thou overturnest them in thine Anger; thou take away the Heart
of the Chief of the People of the Earth, they grope in the Dark without Light:
Though thou art not the Cause of such a Monster as Sin; yet, Sin could never have
entered within thy Creation, without thy infinite Counsel: Its Existency, or not
Existency was at thy Disposing; for Thou will have Mercy on whom thou will have
Mercy; and whom thou will, thou hardnest. Have thou not Powet over the same
Lump, O great Potter, to make of it any Vessel thou please, either of Honor
or Dishonor? May thou not do, in thine own Things, what thou will?
Blasphemous Miscreants, your Blasphemies redound to his Glory; for this were
you created, that his absolute Sovereignty might be clearly manifested over
you, the Vessels of Wrath fitted to Destruction: And that Sovereignty is cast
in Justice-mould; So that ye most deservedly undergo eternal Wrath: He shall
have eternal Glory over you, O Haters of his Glory! These Beings of yours are
so many ever-standing Monuments of his ravishing Perfections. O the Depths of
the Riches, both of thy Wisdom and Knowledge! How unsearchable are thy
Judgments, and thy Ways past finding out? For who has known thy Mind? Or who
has been thy Counselor? For of thee, and through thee, and to thee are all
Things. Here is my Heart satisfied; since the Disputers of thy Ways are
eternally confounded. Rore out now your Blasphemies, vile Creatures; you are
indeed in your Enemy's Hand, Divine Justice has overtaken you. Every Billow of
Vengeance, that runs over Soul and Body, might dash to nothing ten Thousand
Worlds; But he holds you up with one Hand, and dashes on with the other. Strong
Influences, for sustaining a Being, are ever shower'd down upon you. Why strive
you against him, silly Bits of Nothings? For He gives not Account of any of his
Matters: Far be it from him, that he should do wickedly; for the Work of a Man
is rewarded unto him. For He lays not upon a Man more than right, that he
should enter into Judgment with him. Can a Creature be more just than God? Can
a Creature be more pure than his Maker? Behold, He puts no Trust in his
Servants, and his Angels he charge with Folly: Behold, he takes away, and
none can hinder. Who may say unto him, What do thou? Can we by Searching find
out him? Can we find out the Almighty unto Perfection? Shall Creatures shape
thee out, according to their finite Conceptions? Shall they think to comprehend
thy Ways? Art thou not altogether wonderful in thy Working, O Infinite? What
comprehends infinite Excellency, except an infinite Understanding? Shall we
not be ever diving further and further, and ever a beginning to dive? Were
thou, and thy Goings out from Eternity, comprehensible by us, then were thou
not GOD, the infinite JEHOVAH: Thou dwell in Light, which no Man can
approach unto; Thou art he, whom no Man has seen, or can see. Can we stoop low
enough before thy Throne? What are Beings of Yesterday to thee? What are never
so many Worlds before thee? Shall empty Nothings quarrel at what they cannot
comprehend? Thy Tho'ts are not as our Tho'ts, neither are thy Ways as our Ways.
Who has directed thy Spirit? or, being thy Counselor, has taught thee? Who
instructed thee, and taught thee in the Path of Judgment? Behold, all Creatures
are before thee as nothing, less than nothing, and Vanity. O boundless Ocean of
all Perfections! We are forever swallowed up in thy infinite Fullness. O
Super-abundancy of all Happiness and Joys! O more than perfect Satisfaction, in
the full Accomplishment of all Desires! O more than Sweetness, surpassing all
Sweetness! O Heaven! O Glory! how massy, solid, real, substantial and enduring
art Thou? O only Life: O Marrow, Flower and Vigor of all Lives! O Life of
Beholding, Praising, Rejoicing, Wondering! O Life of Ravishments? O Life of
Living! O Life of Lives!

47. A World of free redeeming Grace, the most excellent World possible.

What speak we, Men and Angels, of the Limits of divine Power? What talk we of
his manifesting his Excellency in one, or many, or innumerable Worlds? Is it
not manifested to the uttermost? The Production of never so many Armies of
Creatures can add nothing thereto: Since the Manifestation of God in the Flesh
is the principal Design of Eternity; And all other Manifestations are in order
to this. There stands One among us all who is the Firstborn of every Creature
existent, or possible: Here is the Man, in whom is visible to be seen, such
Glory, Majesty, Loveliness, Sweetness, Compassion, Mercy, Justice, Wisdom, and
all Treasures of overflowing Fullness of Excellency, in such an
incomprehensible, transcendent eminent and superabundant Manner, as all the
Beholders are overwhelmed in a Sea of delightsom Ravishments for evermore.
Could thou, O my God, manifested thy self more clearly, familiarly, sweetly,
condescendingly? Away with other Worlds, though they were; this is the only one,
since my all-lovely WELBELOVED dwells here. Thy Beauty, my fair One, darts
round about thee, and fills this World with passing Glory; yea, were this World
Myriads of Myriads of Stages, and never so many Times greater than it is, one
Ray of thy Countenance, one Glance of thine Eye, would enlighten and adorn it
all. What though we could view and comprehend at once Thousands of Thousands of
created Paradises of Beauty? one Sight of thy God-like Visage would swallow up
all. Angels, had you such a sweet Manifestation of Divine Beauty in the
Beginning, as now! Is not our Heaven now two Heavens? Since the essential Image
of God stands here, clothed with the humane Nature, as our everlasting King,
Priest and Prophet, the great Lord Mediator of the new Covenant, the boundless
Treasure of all Fullness, out of which we shall all be filled and satiate for
evermore. Are we not, as it were, constrained betwixt standing back, and
drawing near? Those who behold thee, what can they think of themselves? Yet,
who can see, and take Rest until they be folded in thy ravishing Embraces?
Verily thou art both the Shame and Glory of Creatures: Created Excellency is
exalted in thee, to the highest Pitch; and all created Excellency is beautified
and obscured before thee. This is the MAN (Men and Angels) by whom all Things
in Heaven and Earth do flourish and bloom: This is the Tree of Life, the great
Vine of Glory, into which we are all ingrafted, as so many Boughs and Twigs:
All the Glory of his Father's House hangs upon him; the Offspring and the
Issue, as so many Chips and Pieces, darting out from him. This is he, in whom
we have been ordained to this Blessedness from Eternity: This is he, who was
promised to the People, under the first Dispensation of the Gospel; who was
held forth by Types and Shadows unto them: This is he, by whom the carnal and
beggarly Elements of the World were destroyed; the clear, evident
Gospel Dispensation was brought in; the Handwriting of the Law cancelled; the
Vail betwixt Jew and Gentile was rent asunder; the Nations were ingrafted into
the old Stock of the peculiar People; the abstruse Secrets of Eternity were
opened; the Kingdoms were shaken, the Princes of the Earth were set up, and
pulled down; the Church was preserved, and flourished, in Despite of all the
World. This is the Man, who wounded the Heads over many Countries; who trod
the Wine Press alone, and trampled the People in his Fury, until all his
Raiment was stained with Blood. This is he, whose Name is called Wonderful,
Counselor, the Almighty God, the everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace: Of
the Increase of his Government and Peace there is no End. This is the Stone cut
out without Hands* which smote all the Power, Strength and Might of Kingdoms,
Nations and Languages: And lo, all Principalities, and Thrones, and Powers, and
Dominions are broken to Pieces together, and become like the Chaff of the
Summer Threshing-Floor, that the Wind has carried away. And behold, this
Stone, which has smitten to nothing all transitory Glory, is become exceeding
great, and fills all in all. This is he, whom nothing could overcome: He
entered the Lists with Death and Hell, and gave them an eternal Foil; So that
they ly under his Feet, and the Feet of his Chosen, for ever and ever. Could
Ten thousand Deaths overcome Him? Were not Devils and wicked Men Fools, that
imagined to bind him with any Ties? What would Chains greater than many Worlds;
What would infinite Numbers of Mountains of Brass, be to hold him down, that he
rise not again? How did this Lion of the Tribe of Judah, rouse himself from the
Sleep of Death, like a mighty Man after Wine; and made Heaven and Earth, and
all to quake? Who but the Standard Bearer among Ten thousand; Who, but the
Prince of the Kings of the Earth; Who but the mighty Captain of the Lord's
Hosts, could have done so valiantly? Thou only have done heroically, O
Welbeloved. You little Heroes of Time, your Magnanimity and heroic Acts vanish
here; Even though ye had done all you did, in your own Strength, and not by his:
What though you subdued Kingdoms, wrought Righteousness, stopped the Mouths of
Lions, quenched the Violence of Fire, through Weakness became strong, put to
Flight the Armies of the Aliens? All these were done through Faith in him. Yet,
what have ye done? Could you have trod the Wine Press alone, and drunk the Cup
of the Wrath of the Almighty, from Brim to Bottom? Could you have stood in the
Gap, when infinite, eternal Vengeance, like a mighty Flood, was rushing in,
upon rebellious Mankind? Who else could have turned back the mighty Current of
such Floods of Wrath, and pacified offended Majesty, bringing Rebels to stoop,
and be received into Mercy and Favor again? Who other could have given Hell
such a Blow, as it shall never be able to rise; and raised Men and Angels to
such a Pitch, as that they shall never fall? Who other could have led Captivity
captive, and purchased Gifts for Men, even for the Rebellious? Who other could
have opened the Gates of this celestial Paradise, shut upon base, ungrate Man;
and exalted him, by thousands of Stages, to more Glory, and Excellency, than he
fell from? Thou art All in all, thou art Marrowless, O WELBELOVED! No more
Comparisons betwixt Thee and Creatures. Hide your selves, and be confounded,
all lower Excellencies: Be ye silent, all Creatures, when he begins to speak;
cover your Faces, all you little Glories and Beauties, when he does show his
Face: You are nothing, you are Vanity, compared to him; He is all Things.
Verily in him dwells all Fullness. Thou art not, O Heaven of Heavens, worthy to
be a Footstool for his glorious Feet. Infinite Worlds, erected above one
another, were low for him to tread upon. What are you, Men and Angels, that you
should thus stand beside him; That you should set your Head within that World
he is pleased to dwell in? Did he not wonderfully condescend, you might run out
without the very Creation? What is our Strength and Beauty? On whose Legs do we
stand? Are we able, for one Moment, to persevere in our Integrity without him.
Should we not all become deformed, and fall a-sinning, did he draw in to
himself what he darts forth? How is this Paradise of God planted with goodly
Trees, blossoming and flourishing with an eternal Verdure? But, did they not
receive Sap and Life, and all, from this golden Branch of the Stem of Jesse;
how in a Moment should their golden Blossoms wither, their Fruit fall off,
their Leaves decay, and their Root dry up? It is ten Heavens of Joy, O Welbe*
loved, to know that thy Love is unchangeable, and that these that are united to
thee by Faith in Time, and immediate Beholding in Eternity, shall never be
disjoined from thee, but shall ever remain close locked in the Arms of eternal
Love. What are your Thoughts, O ye Ransomed Ones, of this astonishing
Dispensation? What an inconceivable Transportation is this; that any of the
cursed Stock of Mankind should be adopted Coheirs with the essential Heir of
all Things! Of him are we in Christ Jesus, who of God is made unto us Wisdom,
Righteousness, Sanctification, Redemption, and all. Thousand Times blessed
Counsel of Eternity! that chose us in him before the Foundation of the World;
having predestined us unto the Adoption of Children by Jesus Christ unto
himself, according to the good Pleasure of his Will, to the Praise of the Glory
of his Grace; wherein he has made us accepted in the Beloved: Having made
known unto us the Mystery of his Will, according to his good Pleasure, which he
had purposed in himself; that in the Dispensation of the Fullness of Time, he
might gather together in one all Things, in Christ, both which are in Heaven,
and which are on Earth. It was not thy Purpose, Dread Sovereign, that any
should inherit Glory, through their own Obedience: A World of Working was but
for a Time that this of altogether free Grace might shine forth more
gloriously. Free Grace's Banner is the only Pavilion, we should for ever abide
under. How greatly did the Devil befool himself, in endeavoring to obscure the
Glory of his Maker, by the Rebellion of Man? Was he not herein an Instrument in
the Hand of the great Sovereign, whereby He made Way for his chief and only
Purpose? What should our Blessedness have been, to what now it is, if we had
wanted thee, O EMMANUEL, the Man of God's right Hand, the very Breath of our
Nostrils? Our eternal Songs should not have been so melodious; the Praises of
free redeeming Grace should not have been heard here: Glory to the Lamb, that
was slain, and lives for ever, should never have been sung. No Worlds to this
World! No Happiness to this Happiness! This is the Flower and Top of all
possible Dispensations! Here is a Confluence of innumerable Providence, that
shall never be comprehended. Many, O LORD my God, are thy wonderful Works,
which thou have done; and thy Thoughts which are to usward, they cannot be
reckoned up in Order to thee. How evidently do I now see, that thy Love passes
all Understanding; that thy Ways are innumerable, and thy Thoughts
unsearchable? My Eyes are eternally fixed upon thee, O Flower of all Beauty and
Loveliness; thou art the Center whereto all Desirableness and Excellency
betakes itself: In beholding thee, I behold all Things. Art thou not Love,
discovered to the Full? Mercy manifested, in its highest Perfection? Judgment
and Righteousness visibly, in its full Splendour? What have we, which is not in
thee? And what can Creatures want, which is not in thee? Shall we not, O
Enjoyers, be satiate, beautified, ravished, blessed, for evermore, with that
infinite Fullness of all Excellency, which dwells in him? We behold, to the
Full, thy Glory, as the Glory of the only begotten Son of the Father, full of
Grace and Truth: And of thy Fullness have we all received, and Grace for Grace.
We have received thy Testimony, have set to our Seal that God is true; That
thou, whom he sent into the World, speak the Things of God: For He gives
not the Spirit by Measure unto thee. O how great is the Mystery of Godliness,
God manifested in the Flesh, justified in the Spirit, seen of Angels, preached
unto the Gentiles, believed on in the World, received up into Glory! If this
was wonderful in Time, is it not ten thousand Times more now, when the bright
Day of Eternity has broken up? If a Sight of this, by Faith, was ravishing; am
I not now passed all the Limits of such Motions? O this Frame! O Glory, Glory!
thou art massy indeed!

48. The Work of Salvation, a never-enough admired Draught, and all drawn
through the Channel of Exigencies.

Immortality, Glory, Praise, and Dominion to the Highest, that ever it pleased
Him, thus to communicate himself to Men and Angels; That ever he purposed in
himself to give unto us the eternal Son of his Delights, as our everlasting
Days-Man, Redeemer, Husband, Head, Lord, and all Things. To have enjoyed thee,
according to the first Dispensation, had been unspeakable Happiness; but to be
chosen in Christ, is overflowing Happiness! O! were we predestinate to be
conformed to the Image of the Son, which in Time was begun, and now is
perfected? Any Tincture of thee, O Welbeloved, any Perfume of thy Garments, is
passing glorious and excellent. O then, thousand Times blessed I! who am
clothed with the Robes of thy Righteousness, the Garments of thy Beauty; who am
satiate with thy Likeness, filled with thy Sweetness, adorned with thy
Loveliness, decked with thy ravishing Graces. I am like thee, I am like thee!
Here is all my Happiness. This, thy ravishing Image, was beg^n in me, in Time;
and now thou have brought it to the high Bloom and Perfection. What passing
Joys! to think how thou have made me grow up, from my Childhood, to this manly
Constitution: How have thou been making me grow up until thou transplantedst me
from thy lower Garden of Grace, to thy higher Paradise of Glory! Once I was a
small Shrub, scarce discernable from the base Thorns and Briers, that overgrew
the Earth: But now I am through thy infinite Excellency, a mighty and flourishing
Cedar, in this higher Lebanon. Strange! now, thou have brought me to this
glorious Condition; and still from lesser to greater, until I have arrived at
Perfection! Is it not most evident, that the Path of the Just is as the shining
Light, that shines more and more, until the perfect Day? Though our Beginning
was small, yet our latter End is greatly increased: Our Beginning was full of
Ignorance and Infirmity; now our Age is clearer than the Noonday. We shine
forth as the Morning! Thou have brought forth our Righteousness as the Light,
and our Judgment as the Noonday. And thus has been thy Way, in all thy
Proceedings. How small was thy Church in the Beginning? How few in Number among
the numerous Multitude of Mankind? Yet, how did thou increase and multiply
her, as the Sand in the Seashore, in Despite of Devils and wicked Men? And
appearedst thou not, O Welbeloved, as a small Stone, cut out without Hands? And
yet have become great and filled all. Thou shewedst thy self, at thy first
Manifestation in the Flesh, unto the Sons of Men, in the Form of a Servant; So
that thou waft of no Reputation in the Eyes of a stupid World, who are only
affected with external Shows: How did thou make thy Gospel to go through the
World, without any earthly Pomp or Observation? So that the wise Men of the
World, for a long Time, did little notice it; yet, did thy Name break forth
before all Nations: The whole World spoke of thy Glory. It had been a light
Thing, that thou should only have raised up the Tribes of Jacob; but thy God
did also give thee for a Light to the Gentiles, that thou might be his
Salvation unto the Ends of the Earth. When Darkness did cover the Earth, and
gross Darkness the People, thou filledst them with thy Glory, and made the
Place of thy Feet glorious: For the LORD sent the Rod of thy Strength out of
Zion, and caused thee to rule in the Midst of thine Enemies, and made thy
People willing in the Day of thy Power; and at thy right Hand did strike
through Kings in the Day of his Wrath: Thou judged among the Heathen; Thou
filled the Places with the dead Bodies; Thou woundedst the Heads over many
Countries. How vain has the Judgment of Worldlings proved, who despised the
Seeds of Glory, sown in the Hearts of the Chosen? They considered not the
Noonday Brightness, succeeding the Dawning. Fools! were only taken with what
filled the external Senses: Transitory Glory was a dying Blaze. It is gone,
eternally gone! The Bastard's Portion did flourish, and seem to eclipse the
Childrens for a Moment; because it was then the Bastard's Harvest, but the
Children's Seed time: Because thou would show thou could lead thy Chosen,
in their weak and childish Estate, into this Kingdom through Fighting, and
Wrestling, and great Opposition of all Kinds: Whereby our eternal Song is drawn
up higher, in exalting thy Wonderful Providence, in bringing us to Glory. What
astonishing Things do I behold, concerning my Pilgrimage, which then I could
not perceive! O Time! Time! thou fills Eternity with Admiration. Wonderful!
thou brought us not hither at the first Production of our Beings: And was an
Inch of Time a Prelude to Eternity? Did a Moment's Fighting usher in an eternal
Triumphing? A Life of Faith, a Life of Beholding? A small Intercourse by
Letters and Love Tokens, an eternal, full, and naked Enjoyment? O wonderful! O
sweet Dispensation! O pleasant Conspiration of diverse Providence, and all
linked together in the most comely Order! What an excellent Connection, between
Time and Eternity? What Joy, to be viewing them both at once, and comparing
them together? It is wonderful! to consider the Difference betwixt the Workings
of thy Spirit upon me now, and then, together! Was it not the Day Star, that
arose then in my Heart? Now all is fully illuminated. I am placed under the
full Rays of thy Glory. How is this Being of mine filled with thy Divine
Nature? All is perfected! O my elevated Faculties! All my Accomplishments in
Time, are so perfected, as they are swallowed up; And so may be said to be done
away, as a small Drop, by the Approach of a vast Ocean. What higher Happiness,
than thus to resemble thee, O Fullness of all Happiness! O everflourishing
Estate of Joys! Every Moment is a golden Life, every Day is ten thousand
Heavens of Blessedness.

49. Our Blessedness, one eternal Act of Marrying, Feasting, Triumphing,
Solacing in the Bed of Love.

This is the Day of our King's Espousals, and the Day of the Gladness of his
Heart: This is the Day we longed, prayed, sighed, weeped and wrestled for. And
may not every Minute obliterate Millions of Millions of Ages of Sorrow and
tormenting Labor? This is the Day wherein it is ever Morn, ever Noonday; but
never a declining Shade. You Sorrows, you Griefs, you Labors, you cannot enter
this thrice blessed Day of Eternity! It is our Marriage-Day, the Day of the
Gladness of our Hearts. No Nights, Weeks, Months, or Ages; all is after the
same. Eternity is but one Day; the Day of the great Consummation of the Match
betwixt our glorious Bridegroom and us. In Time we were betrothed unto him, by
the Mediation of his Ambassadors, and there passed Love Tokens as a Seal of the
Willingness of Parties, and such were sufficient until the full Accomplishment.
Now, O Now! are we met together, in this majestic Marriage-hall of Glory,
prepared for the Solemnizing of this eternal Marriage. All are now in the
Marriage-robes. Attendants of the Bridegroom, you are majestickly arrayed, as
it well becomes the Ministers of so magnificent a Prince. O how does the Father
of the Prince, the Bridegroom, appear in his Glory, and Majesty! What wonderful
Manifestations of JEHOVAH are here? and how is the BRIDEGROOM adorned? O my
Head and Husband! How have thou arrayed thyself in thy royal and gorgeous
Apparel? Thou appearest indeed like a Prince, in his Marriage-day! O but thy
Raiment is far changed! Thou have cast from Thee the base Garb of Mortality,
that in a great Part obscured thy matchless Glory and Loveliness, and have
decked thy Self with ravishing Divine Majesty and Loveliness, as with a
Garment. Thou sought and wooed thy Bride in a low and contemptible Equipage;
Thou made it known thou could draw Hearts to Thee in the most low and
despicable Condition: It would not have been so wonderful, if thou had
allured, and gained Consent, appearing in thy royal and majestic Estate. But
here is the Wonder! yet, no Wonder: Since Lowness, Weakness, Shame and
Contempt, cannot but change their Nature, and become Exaltation, Vigor, Glory
and Renown; if once Thou assume them. But now, Thou art altogether gloriously
arrayed, suitable to the Person and the Day. O the Beauty! O the ravishing
Perfume of thine Apparel! All thy Garments smell of Myrrh, Aloes and Cassia,
out of the Ivory Palaces, whereby they have made thee glad. The very Perfume of
his Raiment is two Heavens! What Sweetness then, to stand within the Place
filled with such ravishing Fragrancy. But O! to be ever thus, in an eternal Act
of Marrying, Espousing, Embracing, Kissing, and full Communications of Love, is
ten thousand Lives of Satisfaction, ten thousand Worlds of perfect Blessedness,
all beaten in one Mass. Who but CHRIST, and US! How has he arrayed us,
according to his Grandeur and Excellency? All is embroidered with Gold and
Gems; every Diamond, every Rubie, every Sapphire transcends, by innumerable
Stages, the Sun of the lower World, shining in his Strength. And does not this
great ALL appear in joyful Apparel, as befitting the Espousals of so glorious a
COUPLE? All Things dance and sound forth melodiously, our Epithalamium. What a
Life is this? ever to be Marrying! ever to be at the Marriage Feast! ever to be
entering the Bed of Love! This Feast is furnished with all Delights, it ravishes
every Moment, and throughout all Eternity! O what Variety! O what Efficacy in
every Delicate! Every one does forever satiate: and yet Delights are ever
renewed! This Land is nothing but a Table furnished with all Abundance of
Fruits always. All Milk, all Spices, all Delights, every where superabound
eternally. And in what a ravishing Manner art thou ever inviting! Eat, O
Friends, drink yea drink abundantly, O Beloved: Drink and drink again, and
forever drink. This is a Day of Gladness and Rejoicing; this is the Day of the
Accomplishment of all our Desires. The POMP of this Day is glorious indeed!
Verily, my GOD, Thou have made us as happy as can be! This Dispensation
transcends inconceivably all other! This Delight and Love is ever blooming and
green! O this sweet and delightsom Bed of Love! One Sight and Smell of it, afar
off, is ravishing. How is it all strewed over with ever-flourishing, and
overflowing Roses and Lilies; with infinite Kinds of odoriferous and beautiful
Flowers of infinite Virtues? All my Faculties are filled, and overfilled with
all Manner of Delights and Sweetness! Is not this Wine of Glory, O Enjoyers, of
wonderful Efficacy? who can endure to pull the Cup from the Mouth? and yet
every Draught does satiate to the full. And is it not endowed with all possible
Virtues? Do not its Spirits fill all the Faculties and Powers with an immortal
Vigor; an unspeakable Sweetness, and surpassing Joys? Great Things have thou
prepared, O WELBELOVED, far above all our Conceptions! What shall be my
never-ending Exercise, but to be satiate and ravished with thine uncreated
Sweetness? If my Closing with Thee, though absent, was passing joyful, how shall
I now rejoice, and exult, in solemnizing the BARGAIN, in satiating my self for
ever with fully-manifested LOVES, in this Bed of Love? The Wooing-time seemed
small and inconsiderable; O the Marriage is wonderfully glorious and excellent!
What esteemed a base World of thy great Call, when thou sent thine Ambassadors
to call them unto this everlasting Supper? How did they slight such an
astonishing Dispensation, as a well-invented Fancy, and turned themselves
wholly to their Earthly Enjoyments, as being the only real Things, which
affected their brutish Minds? Do you not now see your desperate Madness, O vile
Worldlings? Is not your Apprehension wonderfully changed? Did you slight the
sweet Invitations of the Almighty, to such boundless Happiness? Well, you shall
never taste it, through all Eternity. You have gotten your Choice, a momentany
Enjoyment of Earth have you received: This boundless Joy you never cared for.
If you have done wisely, rejoice therein throughout Eternity. O happy I! that
ever I gave up my Name into the Number of thy espoused Ones! That ever Thou
inclined my Heart to take Thee, for my Lord, Head and Husband! O blessed
Choice! thousand Times blessed Choice! Had I known in Time, how happy a Bargain
I had made, should I not have been overjoyed unto the Death? And was there such
Difficulty, to get the Children of Men to say, Amen, to such an advantageous
Bargain? Did Thou knock, and knock again, O Welbeloved, at the Doors of our
Hearts, before we would heartily accept? did Thou argument, beseech, threaten
and weep for a Consent? Who would have thought, but one serious Invitation had
been enough for all Mankind! O blockish Mortality! O stupid brutish Madness!
Thou have not Cause here to exalt thy self, O empty Self, who despised, and
overlooked, so much this glorious Match: Who stood more out against these
glorious Offers? Did thou not play fast and loose with JESUS, as all others?
When He saw, he could not prevail with thee, more than others, (all Mankind
being alike in their Orignal) He put in his Hand by the Hole of the Door, and
then caused thy Bowels be moved for him: He filled thine Heart, ere ever thou
wast aware, with his overcoming Love and Sweetness. Thou wast hearing the Sound
of this Gospel in a dead and natural Way, but he breathed upon all thy
Faculties, and said unto thee, Live; and thou arose from the Dead, and heard,
and saw Wonders in the Gospel, that blind stupid Worldlings could never
perceive. Had he suffered thee to follow thy natural Inclinations, thou had
marched on, to endless Destruction, contrary to all his loving Invitations.
Nay, but since from Eternity he had chosen thee, of his own good Pleasure, out
of the Mass of Mankind, He could not but manifest his Love to thee, in Time, in
a special Manner; and therefore he past from Entreaty, to Ravishments, and drew
thee with such strong Cords of Love, that thou could not but yield. O my holy
One, no Creature can resist thy overcoming Beauty: When thou dartest forth thy
Love, all is set in a Flame; Hell and Death could not resist thee. Ever have
thou been drawing Sinners up to Heaven after thee, unto this great Marriage;
and now we are all within the Bed of Love. Love! Nothing but ravishing Love! O
what Looks of Love! Nothing but Kisses, but eternal Embraces! Men and Angels,
is it possible we can be more happy? What can Creatures have more? Is there any
more sweet and lovely than the Chief of Ten thousand? Can there be any greater
and nearer Fellowship with him than this? He is our Friend, our most intimate
Friend; we speak with him Face to Face. Nay, He is our Brother, near of Blood
unto us; we will kiss, eternally kiss, and shall not be ashamed. Nay, He is our
Husband, One with us, as he is One with the Father, One in Nature, Spirit, Mind
and Affections: He is ours, and we are his. O what great Communications of Love
shall we eternally be filled with! Are you not chanting forth Marriage-Songs, O
ye Angels? are ye not foe ever inventing Love-Songs of your matchless
Bridegroom, O ye Saints? O thou whole Creation of God, art thou not in a
smiling exulting Posture? And is not all this Glory and Blessedness the Object
of your Grief and Sorrow, vile Miscreants? are you gnashing your Teeth, through
Torment and Sorrow, and Envy, when the whole Creation claps its Hands, for
exceeding Joy? Is it not most just, that you are the Curse and the Derision of
all? You judged your selves unworthy of this boundless Happiness, and are you
not justly shut out from this joyful Marriage-Supper of the Lamb? No more
crying, Come unto the Marriage: All is past and done, nothing to do; all Things
continue in this very Condition they are in. O now, who but JEHOVAH and the
LAMB! Who but the Lamb and his Spouse! who are now Masters of all, who are now
the eternal Triumphers. Behold, Men and Angels, behold your King and Head, and
Welbeloved, in his Robes-royal, with such a massy Diadem of Glory on his
Majestic Head, as would crush in Pieces Ten thousand Myriads of Worlds: Every
Ruby of his Crown transcends all Valuation; the Diamonds and Pearls for ever
dazzle the Eyes of the Beholders: All the Spectators are amazed and confounded;
they sparkle and ray forth Beauty and Loveliness throughout all Generations. Is
it possible you can restrain your Eyes, O Spectators! must not all your
Faculties bend thither eternally? Who can express the Thoughts of his Heart?
who can tell what he clearly beholds? who can behold enough what appears most
evident? This is the SIGHT, the only Sight: What greater Happiness, O Prince of
Glory, than to follow Thee, whithersover thou go! What Glory, to run after
thy Chariot, in this Day of thy Glory and Power! What Honor, to bear up thy
Train, in this thy Marriage-Day! Follow thee! Could we but follow thee, though it
were but through innumerable Worlds! Never, never, shall we be disjoined from
Thee. O strange World! O wonderful Estate, ever to be triumphing! ever to be
marrying! ever to be solacing in the Paradise of Loves! ever to be riding in
the Chariot of Honor! This Chariot is of the Wood of Lebanon, the Pillars
thereof are of Silver, the Bottom of Gold, the Covering of Purple; the Midst
thereof being paved with Love for the Daughters of Jerusalem. Is not this a
Majestic Chariot, that contains such a great Company of Kings and Priests?
What a Life is this, thus to ride in the Chariot with the great King of Glory,
whose Goings forth have been from Eternity! Is this the Honor of the Saints?
Is this the Glory we heard, and spoke so much of, on Earth? Is this the
Accomplishment of my Expectations? This is more than ever I could ask, or
think; thus to triumph, in at the Gates of this golden City, up and down its
golden Streets, along the Border of this pure River of living Water,
overshadowed with this delightsom Tree of Life! O astonishing Exaltation! O
silly I, art thou not highly exalted! It was much thou could expect this, but
more thou can bear it. One Beam of thine infinite Excellency, O my excellent
Welbeloved, has a wonderful Efficacy, that can render Dunghill Wretches of such
sublime royal Spirits, as that they can carry, bravely, the highest Exaltation
and Glory! Thou art worthy, O Flower of Excellency, thus for ever to ride
gloriously, and all thy redeemed Ones after Thee! Thou fought and overcame; and
shall not all be crowned with immortal Glory and Honor, thou art pleased to
cast thy Favor upon? Thou wooed and sought thy Bride through Labor, and
Shame, and Pain, and Sorrow, and Death, though deformed and vile, slighting all
the Manifestations of thine infinite Love; and shall thou not deck and beautify
her, and be delighted in her eternally? O this sweet, sweet Union and
Communion! O the mutual Compellations of vehement and mutual Love! Nothing but,
O thy Fairness, thy Beauty! Behold, thou art fair, my Love; behold, thou art
fair! Behold, Thou art fair, my Beloved! Thou art all fair my Love, there is no
Spot in Thee! Thou have ravished my Heart, my Sister, my Spouse; thou have
ravished my Heart with one of thine Eyes, with one Chain of thy Neck! O the
Fairness of thy Love, my Sister, my Spouse! The most rejoicing Liquors, the
most refreshing Fragrancies, are nothing comparable thereunto! O thy honied
Lips! O thy ravishing sweet Tongue, passing all Rivers of Sweetness! O thy
Lebanon Garments! they smell like a Field, which the Lord has blessed. I am my
Beloved's, and my Beloved is mine; he feeds among the Lilies. Come, my
Beloved, let us enter the Bed of Loves, and eternally satiate our selves with
overcoming Delights: O then, I will be satisfied with Love-kisses and Embraces!
I will cause thee to drink of all my Delicacies: Thy Left Hand shall be
eternally under mine Head, and thy Right Hand shall embrace me. I shall be for
ever a Seal upon thine Arm, upon thine Heart. Strong burning Love requires the
nearest Enjoyment. O what a green and blooming Love is this! We are ravished
with the Love of Espousals! throughout Eternity, every Hour is the first Hour,
every Enjoyment as the first Enjoyment! All is like the Lilies, Roses,
Paradise-Flowers round about us, that laugh and smile with an immortal Verdure!
Dance, and dance eternally, thou whole Creation of God; let the Manifestations
of thy Joy be for ever manifested: Rejoice, even rejoice for ever, in these
wonderful glorious ESPOUSALS of the LAMB; for upon every Part of Thee has its
Excellency an Influence. Had JEHOVAH so admirably adorned Thee, O thou Heaven
of Heavens, were it not for the Glory and Majesty of these everlasting
Espousals? Would he have adorned thee with such glorious Mansions, if it had
not been for the Glory and Delights of his Bride? Would the Mountains of Myrrh
and Frankincense been filled with such passing Ravishments; all the Gardens of
Love with such Rarities of Beauties? Would the Walls, the Houses and Streets be
made so wonderfully excellent and delightsom; were it not for the Honor and
Delight of such a glorious COUPLE? Would thou been renewed after so glorious
a Manner, O thou lower World; were it not that thy Maker will have all to
smile, and appear in a sweet, joyful and Marriage-apparel, in this Day of the
boundless Joys of his Heart? O joyful Creation of God! O my Heart, thou
overflows with Ravishments! O Flower and Excellency of all Lives! O highest Top
of all Felicity! O boundless Oceans of eternal Ravishments!

50. The full Enjoyment of God, consists in the nearest mutual Conjunction.

O blessed Self, that rests so sweetly in the Arms of thy only WELBELOVED! Thy
Head eternally lies in his Bosom: The Heat and Life arising from his flaming
Heart, has a Virtue, would cause Death and Sorrow to live and be cheerful.
Hell and Devils, though I were in the Midst of you all, I could not fear you, who
rest within these invincible Arms. You Flower and Excellency of all
Creature-beauty and Loveliness, you could not allure me, to leave, for one
Moment, this ravishing Repose. This was a Counterpoise in all thy Difficulties
through the Valley of Tears: The Fore-thoughts of this, added Strength and
Courage in all thy Faintings and Infirmities: The Hope of this sweet Rest has
not been vain. Had I had suitable Apprehensions thereof, how valiant had I been
for the Truth upon the Earth? How should I ever contended to the uttermost, for
the smallest Things of my WELBELOVED? How should I raised up against me the
Tongues and Opprobries of the most excellent Saints on Earth? How should I have
been so courageous, and zealous for his Interests, as that I should have proved
a Man of Contention, in the purest Times? The Threatenings, Opprobries and
Mockings of either Friend, or Foe, should have been Nothing regarded by me: But
I should have so carried, that I should have scarce escaped capital Punishment,
in the best of Times. How should I have acted to Admiration? How should I have
run and fought, and fought and run, ever with Joy unspeakable and glorious? Can
there be greater Blessedness, than to dwell within these Arms of Love; My
Labor, my Grief, my Sorrow, has been just nothing: One Moment's Repose in thy
Bosom, sweetest Welbeloved, might swallow up Ten thousand Ages of all Labor,
Pain and Sorrow. Now I need no more pray for Kisses; and I will also kiss, and
be ever drawing Sweetness from these blessed Lips; for we shall never change
this blessed Posture. No Need to charge any, That my Beloved be not provoked to
arise till he please. I am overjoyed, that all Sinning and Vanity is done away,
which did much separate us a sunder! O sweet, sweet, that thou have made me
pleasant and desirable in thine Eyes! What can I desire more, than that I am
lovely and delightsome in the Eyes of my Lord the King? Rejoice and be glad, in
what is thine own: Even rejoice over me with Singing, and rest in thy Love
toward me. Drink and drink again of that Sweetness, wherewith thou have filled
me: Be delighted always with this Loveliness, I am Partaker of by thy Bounty
and F^vour. Let mine Eyes for ever ravish thee, for ever da^^ forth Rays of
Loveliness upon thee; and be satisfied with my Breasts at all Times. My
Blessedness can be no greater; Thou art mine, and thy Desire is toward me.
Wonder, and be greatly amazed, O all Creatures, the eternal ONE, and
Yesterday-beings are for ever in the mutual Delights of Love, in the ravishing
Solaces of one another! Dive, and dive eternally, Men and Angels, you shall
ever be infinitely from the furthermost of this Abyss of Wonders. Who can
comprehend this Exaltation? Who can conceive this Condescendency? What think
you, That GOD and Creatures converse so familiarly together! What think you,
That he is our Brother, our Husband, One like us, One with us, One for us, One
ravished with our Fellowship, for evermore! Who can show the Thoughts of his
ravished Heart? Who can fully reflect on the astonished Apprehensions of his
elevated Mind? Have thou not shown, what infinite Power can do? How low
infinite Love can stoop! How highly infinite Bounty can exalt; How wonderfully
infinite Excellency can make beautiful and excellent! O my Faculties! you shall
be ever filled with Astonishment: Ever satiated with his uncreated Sweetness!
Can I suffer any Want in thy Bosom, O Fountain of Excellency? Shall I not be
filled, whom am set down beside this Well of living Water, under the Boughs of
the Tree of Life, whose delicious Fruits are ever falling upon me? I am satiate
with thy Love, my fair One; some Glimpses thereof on Earth, were ravishing,
wonderfully above what the Abundance of Corn and Wine could produce: The Report
of thine Excellency and Glory filled the Heart, with passing Sweetness: Thy
ravishing Emanations cannot be contained within this large Land: but had
Influence upon the lower World, causing many of the Inhabitants to be deeply in
Love with thee, whom they never saw; so that they renounced the Love of all
Things for thee, strove exceedingly to be like thee, and please thee in all
Things: Fought against all Opposition, endeavored to the uttermost, for
exalting thy Glory, and continued in a longing Frame, to behold thee Face to
Face: And so remained faithful unto the Death. Thy Lovers are never satiate,
till they have thee in their Arms: The Enjoyment of thee afar off is ravishing
sweet, and cannot but cause the Beholder to run with all his Might, until he be
at thee, even innected in thine eternal Embraces. O my Life, my Life! O sweet,
sweet, sweet for evermore!

51. The Life of Glory, the only Life, that overtops all other Lives, and
swallows them up.

All Creatures live according to the Capacity of their Being, but no Life to
that which is Divine! The Animal Life is dead and dark, and without Efficacy
and Beauty; the Intellectual is a low and base Thing: But this Life of Glory
does only excel all other Excellencies. All other Lives are swallowed up here!
That which is in Part, and imperfect, is done away, by that which is the
Perfection of Excellency. O my Lovely One, thou art indeed the Prince of Life!
Thou art the Life of all the Inhabitants of this majestic City: Did thou
withdraw what thou have communicated, should we not be so many Lumps of Death
and Deformity? Thou art my ALL in all, my fair One! Thou art my Life, and
Vigor of all my Joys and Desires. That divine Life, by which thou eternally
live, have thou breathed into me; so that I am become inconceivably above a
living Soul, or an intellectual Creature: This noble divine Life did thou
communicate unto me, in my dead and sensual Condition, but in a small Measure,
that it was much obscured by Sin and Corruption; then being the Time of
Childhood and Wrestling: But how has it grown more and more, until it has
overtoped, and swallowed up all other Lives; so that now I am filled with all
thy Fullness? Even thy Nature, thine Image, thine Excellency have thou fully
impressed upon me: So that, as thou art, so am I. O secure Estate! I Christ is
my Life; is not then my Life eternal? My Life lies in the Fountain; and shall
it not be ever in its Vigor and full Strength? Other Lives are like small
Drops, separated from the Ocean, and may vanish: How soon did animal, rational
and intellectual Lives fall from their native Constitution? Nothing permanent,
which is not Divine; nothing everlasting, which lies not immediately without
the Mixture of Creature-imperfections; The nearer thee, the safer; the further
off thee, the more dangerous; to be quite cut off from thee, is perfect and
only Misery. Cursed Men and Angels have no other Influence from the Fountain,
but that which conserves their natural Beings, in their natural Operations. O
Welbeloved, not only in thee do I live, move and have my Being, but thou art my
All in all! I am filled with all thy Fullness. O my Life, my Life! Do I not live
for evermore?

52. No Necessity of Creatures in Heaven: Jehovah is eminently all Things.

All Things are swallowed up in thine infinite Excellency! Created Enjoyments
are cried down, Times and Days are for ever fled away: All Things are
immediately subjected to JEHOVAH, even the SON himself. All Rule, all Authority
is put down; no Subordinations among Creatures; one Thing stands not in Need of
another; every Thing would be, as it is, though all other Creatures were done
away: All flourish by the immediate Rays of the Sun of Righteousness; GOD does
maintain all Creatures without the Concurrence of Creatures: No Connections of
second Causes, no Dependencies of one Creature upon another: Nature's World is
quite abolished; the Conditions of Beings are altogether changed: Yet, in how
sweet an Order do all Things agree? All are independent; yet, all conspire in
one; the Bond of Love betwixt all, is strong and immortal; the mutual Aspects
of all are pleasant, and superabounding, in Beings accomplished, every one in
their own Measure, immediately from the Original of all Perfections. You
Creature beauties, the full Emanations of your Loveliness and Sweetness are
ever darted upon me with Delight; yet, am I happy to the uttermost, whether I
enjoy you, or not: Time was when I could not well have wanted you; But now,
whether I enjoy you, or not, I am ever the same; being filled and satiate with
his eternal Sweetness: You are the Adornments, Outfields and Pendicles to my
great Inheritance, and no Addition thereunto. And art thou, O my GOD, become
All unto me? The Want of all my temporal Enjoyments is a Gain, that cannot be
told! How have I been vexed, and wearied, with being occupied about vain,
empty, unsatisfying Nothings; So that I was glad of a borrowed Vision of thee,
of a reflex Manifestation of thy Glory and Excellency; and was so covered over
with Shadows, that I could neither order right Expressions, nor Conceptions,
because of Darkness. How often have I bemoaned, When shall the Day dawn, and the
Shadows fly away that I may be filled immediately with his Glory? This Sight of
his Beauty, this Taste of his Sweetness is tormenting, as well as delightsom: I
cannot rest, until I get full Enjoyment: Still I would have more and more of
GOD, until I be filled with all his Fullness: But Oh! I cannot; Ten thousand
Things stand in betwixt me and him, through this earthly and sinful Estate; so
that I am oftimes so confused and disordered, that I can desire nothing at all:
How does this poor Life depend every Moment, on ten thousand Things? Here am I
diverted, through Mortality, by every Thing that comes in my Way; innumerable
Creatures having a commanding, diverting Influence over me: Must I be ever
sleeping, eating, drinking, conversing in this and that Trifle? Must I draw
Consolations from this, and the other, and the third Creature; and have a
Fellowship with my GOD, by Benefit of Means and Ordinances, which ever have the
Tincture and Savor of Imperfection? And are not the Conduits oftimes so
corrupt, as that they imbitter my Enjoyments? And are they not so stopped, as
that I am almost dead son Want? How am I drawn aside hither and thither; this
feeble Flesh being apt to receive new Impressions, every Moment, from every
Thing that comes in the Way! And how vexing are all these Enjoyments, though most
necessary? What a nauseating Round do I run, ever tossing the same Stone? That
which has been, is that which shall be, and there is no new Thing under the
Sun. What Profit has a Man of all his Labor? For though the Eye is not
satisfied with Seeing, nor the Ear with Hearing, so that new Enjoyments are
ever required; yet, must the same Things be run over, and over again: And what
might seem more excellent, than by the serious Search and Study of Things, to
have the Heart filled with great Experience of Wisdom and Knowledge? Yet, I
perceive, that this also is Vanity and Vexation of Spirit; for in much Wisdom,
is much Grief; and he that increases Knowledge, increases Sorrow. Run fast, O
Time, and Days, that this World may be cried down for ever, and God may become
All in all. Silly Worldlings desire to have these Enjoyments eternally; because
they know no better: Something the Faculties must be exercised with, though with
vexing Vanity. O but I have a Sight of the only satisfying Object! O to have
all these out of the Way! Were it not thy good Pleasure I should continue thus
for a Time, I could not but die through longing for the immediate Vision of
God. Scattered Streams, and Drops are become bitter; When shall I enter, Body
and Soul, into the Ocean, and be filled, and swallowed up for ever and ever?
When shall I receive the direct Rays of all Excellency from the Sun of
Righteousess; no Clouds intervening throughout Eternity? O Flower of all
Blessedness! O golden Life of all my Desires! I am past from the Light of the
Sun, and of the Moon; I am past from the necessary Help of Shadows, and
Nothings. The LORD JEHOVA His my only Strength, and Light, and Life, and Joy,
and Song, and all Things. Is it not sweet living thus, in the immediate
Presence of Jehovah and the Lamb? O Emmanuel's World, thou art an excellent
Habitation! How sweetly and commodiously art thou situate, directly against the
SUN, and ORIGINAL of all Light, and Life, and Joy, and Sweetness? Who can but
be lively and joyful here? Indeed, this is the smiling World, the rosy, and
sunny Side of the Creation. What more can be said of my overflowing Happiness,
than that I am here for evermore?

53. Glory is an eternally blooming Thing.

Is not the Fountain of Life deep? Men and Angels, is it possible you shall
ever draw it dry? Nay, is it possible you can draw so much, that less remains
behind? Yea, what could Millions of Millions of Angels multiplied do here? Not
only drink, and for ever drink; but enter in, and you shall be, as so many
Nothings, swallowed up, as it were, and lost forever. What infinite Springs of
Sweetness, and Consolation ly hid? Dig further and deeper for ever, and still
you shall find new Springs: Still there remains as many hid, as at the first
Searching. What boundless Varieties of Joys and Sweetness? Every Draught, every
Tasting may eternally ravish: yet, every Moment, every Instant is filled with
new Delights, new Ravishments: For what can exhaust infinite Delights and
Sweetness? We may feel, and taste, and enjoy it, as it is; but can we
comprehend it, and search it out unto Perfection? When we are all filled, the
boundless Ocean is nothing diminished. And since we are ever drinking, ever
drawing in Floods of increated Sweetness, are not our Delights infinitely
various, and renewed every Moment? Which is an Enjoyment of the same, after
diverse Manners, according to its infinite Varieties of Perfections, which
eminently and virtually dwell therein. O then, the various and wonderful
Conceptions of Men and Angels! O the ever green and flourishing Communications
of ravishing Loves, and Joys! Shall there not be, every Moment, a new Love-song
of Praises? Shall not infinite Perfections, more and more seen, supply forever
with new Expressions of the Excellency, Glory, Loveliness, Sweetness and
Kindness of HIM, that sits upon the Throne, and the LAMB? We are past from
augmenting of our Knowledge, by borrowed Visions; or perfecting it, by striving
to know more, and more evidently, and distinctly: All Confusion and Darkness is
done away; Error, Ignorance, and false Uptakings, are no more: We know as we
are known, even nakedly, immediately, and Face to Face; without a prospective
Representation, or Clouds interveening: So that, as to Kind, Knowledge is
perfect; yet, shall we not ever be searching into the unsearchable Riches of
this bottomless Mine, filled with all Varieties of Silver, Gold, Gems,
Diamonds, Rubies and Sapphires, of inconceivable Value and Excellency? Are we
not as so many Divines, searching, preaching, discoursing more and more of the
transcendent Excellency of that Fountain of all Fullness! Do we not, in this
ravishing Exercise, run over again, in the same Round? O then, throughout all
Eternity our Happiness shall ever be increasing. In the very first Entry, all
superabounds and overflows its Banks; so that nothing is wanting, in the least,
to perfect Happiness, Satisfaction and Fullness: Yet shall these overflowing
Tides of Loves, and Joys, and Ravishments for ever swell higher and higher; so
that the succeeding Moment shall be more superabounding than the immediately
preceding. O then, the Growth and Flourishing of ten thousand Myriads of Ages!
And does not this River increase proportionable to its Greatness? O then! after
Myriads of Ages, according to the Number of the Atoms of the Creation; how
shall it be augmented above the Number of all these Atoms, thousands of Times
multiplied by themselves? So that, to all Eternity, we are ever changed from
Glory to Glory, and ever ascend higher and higher, and still the Steps become
wider and wider; the Faculties ever are more and more clear and extended; and
the Discoveries more and more wonderfully ravishing. This infinite World of all
Perfections is beheld clearly and immediately as it is; yet, who can comprehend
all the Beauties, Delights, Excellencies and infinite Perfections, wherewith it
is stored? Or, who can reach the infinite Number of Paradises, Mountains,
Valleys, Rivers? Yea, who can reach the ten thousand thousandth Part of its
Immensity? So that eternally we shall follow the LAMB, through new Gardens,
Orchards, Paradises, Mountains, and ever be going directly forward, making
greater and greater, and more wonderful Discoveries. All the Powers and
Faculties become more and more powerful and vigorous; so that Joy, and Delight,
and Love, and Ravishment, shall swell more and more in Height, and Breath, and
Length, and Depth throughout Eternity. Men and Angels, is not our Inheritance
inconceiveably large and fertile, rich and beautiful, and delightsom? Can we
among us all but reckon over our Palaces, Cities, Paradises, Countries,
Kingdoms and Worlds? O what high Stretchings of Mind! and what further and
further Stretchings, to let in these boundless Inundations of increated
Sweetness, that overflow incessantly, rapidly, and eternally? O my God, this
Happiness is more than superabounding! Who can express? who can conceive, what
a Life it is, to be received into the Bosom of thy infinite Excellencies? to be
admitted into the eternal Enjoyment of thy incomprehensible SELF! O what
eternal Manifestations of the GODHEAD, to Men and Angels, in the Face of
CHRIST! What Outlettings of new and various Influences from the Sun of
Righteousness! What incessant Showers of the Dew of our WELBELOVED's Youth!
What high, full, constant, lively and cherishing Gales of the sweet ravishing
Breath of JEHOVAH! What Wonder then, all the Trees of this Paradise of Glory
ascend higher and higher, spread their Branches further and further, and
increase eternally in their Strength, Verdure and Blooming and Fruitfulness?
Poor Life, that depends on Creature-influences and Creature-enjoyments! Neither
are they satisfying in themselves; nor can they yield new Sweetness eternally.
Was it not the highest of all Madness and Folly, to forsake the eternal
Fountain of living Waters, and rest an broken Cisterns, that can hold no Water?
O Joy of all Joys, that ever I rested upon Thee, as my only Portion! O my
Happiness! my Happiness surpasses all Expression!

54. Emmanuel's Land is altogether of free redeeming Grace, yet is it given by
way of Reward.

And what is this great Assembly of such glorious and majestic Creatures, but
a Number of bound Debtors to the free Grace, altogether free redeeming Grace of
JEHOVAH and the LAMB? Are ye not, O blessed Creatures, so many Monuments of the
free and undeserved Bounty and Love of Him, whose Love passes all
Understanding? Away with Deserving and Merit! what can Creatures do to Thee?
what can their Acting, or Suffering for Thee, merit at thy Hand? If any have
any Thing of its own, or can do any Thing of it self, then may it glory in what
is its own. If all Creatures are not eternally obliged to love, and obey, and
serve Thee, with all their Might and Vigor; then let them ask Wages for
obeying. Yea, is it not an eternal Wonder, Thou should make Men, or Angels
Actors, or Witnesses of thy infinite Glory and Excellency? What are all
Creatures to thee, that thou should open thine Eyes upon them? what unspeakable
Dignity, to be allotted to the lowest Piece of Service for Thee? The more
Creatures adore, and love and obey Thee, the more they are run into the Debt of
thy free Grace: Yea, though Creatures could deserve, the very active Glorifying
of thee carries in its Bosom full and overruning Recompense. And what
Proportion imaginable is there betwixt the Acting or Suffering of a finite
Creature, and one Moment of these boundless Joys? The Service is finite, but
the Reward is invaluable. Though it had been possible for Creatures to persevere
under a Covenant of Works; yet could they not have deserved, nor earned Wages,
except by Virtue of Paction, a Product of wonderfully free, and condescending
Grace: Which Way of Earning is under this second Covenant, and that in a more
sublime and glorious Manner. Perfect Obedience was the Condition of the First;
Sincerity of the Second. Continuation of a national Life, in an earthly
Paradise, so long as the Creature persevered, was the Reward of the First;
Eternal Duration of a divine Life, in this celestial Paradise, the Reward of
the Second. The First was made with the earthly Adam, as the Head, and
principal Person of the earthly Horse; the Second, with the heavenly Adam, as
Head and principal Person of the heavenly: But the First ruined both himself
and his; not being able to fulfill the Bargain: The Second has made up both
himself, and his, for evermore, by perfect Obedience, and full Satisfaction,
and Excellency of Power, in transforming his Children into his heavenly Image,
and bringing them all infallibly to Glory. The Covenant was principally made
with our WELBELOVED; all the Promises of the new Covenant were made to him, as
the Chief and Firstborn of many Brethren; So that it was impossible, that any
of his Chosen from Eternity could be lost; being put into so sure an Hand, who
was countable to the Father for every one of them; having from Eternity
received them from Him, as his Spouse, his Children, his Brethren, his
Coheirs, his Pupils, to be guided and tutored by Him, in Time and Eternity: So
that all the Stress and Care of our Salvation was laid upon our great Lord
Redeemer's Shoulders; according to which Trust, He has Called, Justified,
Sanctified us, Enabled us, kept us from falling away, in the midst of
Infirmities, Difficulties, Temptations; and presented us without Spot, or
Blemish, before his Father. Our first earthly Father played the Bankrupt with
all, and left us poor, vile, miserable Wretches, lying in our Blood, and no Eye
pitying us; our Nature being in his Loins, as the Root and Original of us all.
Did he not degrade and debase; So that from excellent rational Creatures,
created after the ravishing Image of our Maker, we became Brutish, Vain,
Foolish and Vile? But in came our Welbeloved, and assumed our Nature, in its
low and base Condition, with all its Infirmities and Passions, yet without Sin,
and raised it up to a far, far higher Pinnacle of Excellency, than ever it fell
from. Before, its Excellency was natural, but now it is supernatural; before
earthly, now heavenly and divine. What are our Thoughts of the inconceivable
Rays, and ravishing Resplendencies of free, free, free Grace, shining from the
Godhead, in the Face of Christ, to undone Creatures? What could we do for our
selves, when broken and lost? was not our Condition on most desperate-like? We
could not keep our selves in our first Condition, when entire and in our full
Vigor; What then could we do, when broken in Pieces and destroyed? Had we not
been obliged to Him, who had restored us to our former Estate, or merely saved
us from eternal Wrath, though no more? But O! what astonishing Bounty, Love,
Mercy, Condescension, Compassion, Kindness, Patience, and infinite Wonders
shine here! Sirs, what have we lost, by our great and unspeakable Loss? Our
Fall was abominable, dreadful, monstrous, ungrate and astonishing; yet what
have we lost? Ah! no Thanks to us, that we are not eternally undone: Utter
Destruction may be ascribed for ever to us, though the Guilt thereof is eternally
cancelled; let all the Glory and Praise rest upon his Head, unto whom it does
alone appertain; even on his glorious and majestic Head, who is the Author and
Finisher of this great Salvation. We are thine! we are thine, O excellent
WELBELOVED; even thine upon all possible Accounts! In our first Condition we
were thine by Creation, thine by Covenant, and these were sweet! But O now! Now
we are also thine by Redemption, thine by Purchase, thine by a better
Covenant-Foundation, a better Foundation than by Conquest; thine by a new
Creation, thine by Exaltation to this glorious and divine Estate. O sweet,
sweet! we are altogether thine, and nothing our own! O boundless Joys! I am
eternally tied to thee, by all Obligations! O my inconceivable Happiness! Self
has not the least Occasion to boast of itself: No Creature, Man or Angel, has
any Thing to glory in, before thy Presence. O thou Heaven of Heavens, shall
thou not be filled with Songs of free redeeming Grace? What should we do with
our Diadems, our Sceptres, our Palms, our Robes, our glorious Adornments? What
should we do with all that we are and have, but cast them down at the Feet of
him, who has created, redeemed, and sanctified us? even at the Feet of him,
who has redeemed us to God, by his own Blood, and made us to our God, Kings
and Priests? and we shall reign for ever and ever. O excellent! The less our
own, the better; the more thine, the more blessed Condition! We are altogether
thine; all our Excellency, all our Actings, all our Sufferings, all our Glory,
is only thine. This Kingdom thou alone did purchase, without the Help of any:
All, all are the Product of free, eternally free Love; all is given to us most
freely! From Eternity were we chosen to all this Blessedness, most absolutely,
without Respect of foreseen Excellency, or Deserving. All is most free to us;
but dear to our WELBELOVED! What could thou give more, my dearest Lord, than
thy Life, thy Blood, thy very Self? Could thou lay down a greater Pawn for
our Salvation, than thy noble, super-excellent, and glorious Self? Could Love
have been manifested in a more transcendent, glorious and excellent Way? What
could thou have done more than thou have done? Is not this in excellent
Inheritance, Men and Angels? Is not this Land a beautiful, rich and pleasant
Land indeed? Does this look like the Field of Blood? Our Emmanuel conquered all
this by his Blood and Death: He rode over Hell and Devils, and vanquished all
the Opposers of this boundless Blessedness. Thousands and ten Thousands were
nothing in his Way. He made Nations and Languages Sacrifices to divine Justice.
He rent the Heavens, and came down; the Mountains flowed down at his Presence:
He trod down the People in his Anger, and made them drunk in his Fury; and did
bring down their Strength to the Earth. He gave Egypt for our Ransom, Ethiopia
and Seba for ^s. Were not these great Things: Has he not redeemed Zion by
Blood? Has he not made a noble Conquest? Yea, He slew Death it self; He went
to the Land of Death and Destruction, and vanquished his strongest and most
cruel Enemies, in their own native Soil. O wonderful! He led Captivity captive,
by being led Captive! By undergoing Shame, and Pain, and Grief, and Ignominy,
He conquished boundless Joys and Delights, and Glory, and Renown: By dying, he
vanquished Death, and him that had the Power thereof. Here, O here is the
invaluable Price! The Life, the Life, the Blood of God! Wonder, and stand in an
eternal Amazement, all Creatures! The Life of the Lord of Life, was laid down a
Ransom for us! as the Price of our eternal Blessedness. Who can value the Life
and Blood of the Man, who is GOD, blessed for evermore? Shell we speak of Ten
thousand Millions of Millions of Excellent Men, of glorious Angels? That is
just nothing. Shall we speak of Myriads of Myriads of Worlds, more excellent
every one than another? That is just nothing also: So many Creatures, so many
Nothings. Never so many Worlds are so many Shadows, in Comparison of the
enduring Substance. O the Price, the Price! Do not the Thot's thereof heighten
the Conceptions of Men and Angels beyond all Conception? What strange Flamings
of Love! What high Motions of Joy! What overflowing Tides of Admiration, at
every Thought of the wonderful Way, wherein God has done all this to us! All
this Honor says, Behold the Son of God shamed! All this Glory says, Behold
eternal, essential Glory obscured! And this joyful and flourishing Life says,
Behold the Prince of Life in a great Agony, bleeding to Death, even the
shameful and painful Death of the Cross? O highest Manifestation of infinite
Love! All is come through the Bowels of our dearest Lord Jesus, whose Love to us
was so strong, that nothing could in the least quench it: He labored through
Love, sorrowed through Love, wept through Love, He died of Love. When cold Death
began to seize on his Heart, he found it all flaming with the Love of his
dearest Spouse; neither could he destroy these immortal Flames, which flash and
dart forth their overcoming Rays, throughout Eternity. O thy incomprehensible
Love! Bend hither all your Faculties, Men and Angels, and be amazed for
evermore! O my heavenly Father, by thy infinite Gift, thou have lost nothing;
the Son of thy everlasting Love and Delights is ever in thy Presence. O my
Redeemer, thou have lost thy Life, yet thou have not lost it; behold, Thou art
alive for evermore. The Price of all does eternally remain, else should the
Things bought be nothing. Let no Creature speak of its Excellency, or Acts;
what can they conquest? What can they purchase? Our Emmanuel has purchased all
Things: Indeed by Birthright he is the eternal and essential Heir of all; yet
has he added a new Right, and made all his over again by Conquest. Not unto
us, not unto us; but unto Thee be all the Glory, Dominion, and Praise, for ever
and ever: Yet, O wonderful Bounty, Condescendency and Love! Thou have put on
our Heads the Crowns of Conquerors, the Laurels of Triumph: Thou have put in
our Hands the never-fading Palms of Victory: Have thou done all? And shall we
bear the Honor of, Well, and Heroically done, for the great and massy Diadem
of Glory? Have thou conquered? And shall we triumph, as Purchasers of Heaven
and All? Have thou suffered? And shall we enter into this Glory, as having
undergone all the Assaults of Hell and Death, in our own proper Strength? This
is a sweeter, more condescending and wonderful Dispensation, than it thou had
brought us immediately out of the State of Nature into this State of Glory; or
created us in the Midst of this incomparable Happiness. O sweet, sweet! to
think, That Grace has ushered in Glory; a L^fe of Believing, a Life of
immediate Vision; a Life of Labor and Difficulty, this Life of eternal Repose;
a Life of Shame and Reproach, this Life of immortal Glory and Renown; a Life of
Fighting, this Life of everlasting Triumphing; a Life of Tears, Pain and
Sadness, this Life of boundless Joys and Delights; a Life of Fears and
Weakness, this Life of perfect Security and Might! How wisely has my Lord
connected all Things together? that our Glory might be more than Glory; our
Happiness more superabounding Happiness. This Glory, this incomprehensible
Glory, and Renown will he have to rest for ever upon our Heads. Words of
Amazement! to hear my LORD say, in the Presence of all, to every one, Well
done, good and faithful Servant, thou have been faithful over a few Things, I
will make thee Ruler our many Things; enter thou into the Joy of thy LORD:
Heroically done, for this massia Diadem of Glory: Worthy art thou to walk with
me in White; for thou have kept clean Garments, in the Midst of a polluted
World: Thou have valiantly fought and overcome; and art thou not worthy to
triumph with me, throughout the vast Ages of endless Eternity? As I have done,
so thou have suffered patently, even unto the Death; and therefore, it well
becomes thee to enter into this unspeakable Glory. What, Lord! must I, poor
silly I, once base, sinful, wretched and undone I, must even I possess this
undefiled, incorruptible, never-fading Inheritance? What have I done? Or, what
have I suffered for thy excellent Name? Yea, what have I not done, endeavored
and desired against thy Holiness? Yet, even I must enter here, as worthy of
all! I must wear the Conqueror's Crown! I must bear the Palms of Victory! Even
thus it must be, thus it should be; since it is the good Pleasure of my LORD
the King. When our Bridegroom has made his Spouse the Perfection of Beauty;
How is his mystical Body composed of various Members, every one endowed with
its own proper Beauty? Every one is not graced with the same Measure of
Excellency; since every Member conduces to the beautifying of the whole:
Varieties of Glories in the same is wonderful, ravishing and pleasant. Even on
Earth, the Spouse was adorned with various Excellencies, chiefly for Beauty,
and not for Necessity: Nay, the Heavens and the Earth are not defective herein:
Were every Star like the Sun; or all the Stars of equal Glory; or, the whole
Expansion adorned with equal Glory; or were every Part of the Earth covered
over with the same Beauties, so that nothing did excel another; Were all
Heaven, or all Earth; or were Earth of equal Glory with Heaven; or were all a
Sun; or were the higher and lower World nothing differing in Glory; all would
be every Way the same; and so nothing so beautiful as it is. Indeed the Head is
loving to all the Members, and is alike affected with them all; yet, every
Member is in its own Order, According to his good Pleasure, which from Eternity
he purposed in himself. As he distributed, after diverse Degrees and Manners,
his Gifts and Graces, to his Chosen in Time; so does he make the Harvest
correspondent to the Seed-time, the manly Constitution to the Infancy, the
Vigor and Blooming to the Budding and first Springing forth. According to the
Grace given unto us in Time, and the Improvement thereof, in acting, or
suffering for his Glory; accordingly is every one of us rewarded: As he did
promise and testify, That as every Man should receive according to his Works;
So they that are wise, shall shine as the Firmament, and they that turn many to
Righteousness, as the Stars forever and ever. The Connection betwixt Time and
Eternity here, is not natural, from the Nature of Things, as if so much Grace
deserved so much Glory; so much, or so long Acting or Suffering, such or such a
Diadem of Honor: But merely from his good Pleasure, who disposes all Things
most absolutely and freely: I^ so it pleased him, he might have disposed
otherwise; but this is the most excellent, because he has done it. All our
Excellency, and all our Acting, or Suffering, was only of him, and not of our
selves: He alone did work in us both to will, and to do, of his good Pleasure.
The more we were graced, the more we were enabled, the more we were obliged:
Only it has pleased his infinite Bounty to perfect in Eternity, according as
he did begin in Time; and to give us the purchased Possession, by Way of
Reward. In our LORD's Distribution of his Rewards, he considers the Multitudes
of Talents, and the Improvement of them, and Way of Improvement; as, if with
Vigor and great Sincerity; also Perseverance therein, and Duration, with more
and more Magnanimity unto the Death; also the Greatness of the Opposers is
considered: Also the Effects, and extending of Talents, for the Good of others;
as when the Man acts bravely, before Sun and Moon, whereby great Glory does
redound to him, for whom are all Things; and many are strengthened, and
converted unto Righteousness: Suffering is considered in itself, as such,
excelling Acting; which is more or less excellent, even as acting according to
other various Circumstances. O the wonderful Way thou have taken to beautify
thy Spouse! How does the Head shine most eminently above all the Members; and
every Member, according to its Measure, aloted from Eternity? Every one of us
was appointed, before the Foundation of the World, to this Measure of Glory,
most absolutely and freely, without any Respect to Excellency, or good Works in
Time: And yet, O eternal Admiration! He has rewarded every one of us,
according to our Righteousness; according to the Cleanness of our Hands he
recompensed us: For we kept the Ways of the LORD, and have not wickedly
departed from our GOD: For all his Judgments were before us; and we did not put
away his Statutes from us; we were also upright before him, and we kept our
selves from our Iniquity: Therefore has the LORD recompensed us, according to
our Righteousness, according the Cleanness of our Hands in his Eyesight: For
with the Merciful thou have showed thyself merciful; with the upright Man, thou
have showed thyself upright; with the Pure, thou have showed thyself pure; and
with the Froward, thou have showed thyself froward: For thou have loved the
afflicted People, and have brought down the high Looks. All thy Promises to the
Overcomers have thou perfectly accomplished. Boundless Happiness for evermore!

55. All Things are fully discovered in Glory, which lay hid in Time.

All Things are laid open before the Eyes of all: How passing clear and evident
is the Light of Glory? Do I not know you all, and every one? not only according
to your proper Essences, and Weight of Glory; but also, what Manner of Persons
you were in Time, as to all these Circumstances, by which Men were differenced
from one another: So that we may say, This, and this is the Man who was such
and such an Instrument in Time, for the incomprehensible Glory of our
never-enough exalted Redeemer; who will manifest all the good Works, and
Excellency of every one before his Father, and before his Angels. He from
Eternity knows by Name, and has manifested the Name of every one, before the
whole Creation. Are you not eternally shamed and confounded, you Haters of the
only excellent One? You are declared by Name before all, and every one in
singular; the most hidden Things of Darkness are now laid open for ever and
ever: All your Thoughts, your Words, your Deeds; All your Inclinations, your
Purposes, your Projects, your Impieties are made known perfectly to the
Consciences of every one of you, to one another, and to us all. Hide your
selves now, if you can; neither your selves, nor your Wickedness, shall ever
henceforth escape our View. Now we are inconceivably elevated above all natural
Sagacity! Natural Illumination was wonderful discovering, as the Sagacity of
Man in his first Estate did show; the Light of Grace was more piercing, as
discerning Things far above the Reach of Nature; but all are scarce Emblems of
this Light of Glory. How just and holy art thou in all thy Ways, O my holy ONE?
Thou have for ever unmasked the two great Companies of Men an Angels; all now
appear in their genuine Colors: Our Innocence is manifested; and their
Wickedness is laid open. How many Things did we refer unto this Day? as
indiscussable by dim-e^ed Mortals, who judged according to Externals,
Conjectures and Probabilities; and not according to the Things as they were in
themselves; Whence the condemning of the Innocent, and justifying of the
Guilty: Whence many went off the Stage of the World, branded with the
opprobrious Name of Hypocrites, New-gospellers, Traitors, Seditious, Factious,
Phanaticks, and what not? who were the Glory, Flower and Excellency of the
Generation: How many of the most excellent of the Earth were cried out against
on every Side, because of their singular Holiness, and Fervency of Spirit for
the Interests of Christ and Power of Godliness, above others; because of their
Testifying against the proper Sins of their Generation; that even some of the
weakest of the Saints did cast abroad soul Aspersions on them; did hate, and
persecute them, as Troublers of the World? And how many were accounted, by the
Generality, true and sincere Saints, because of their selfish prudential Way of
Carriage, in all Exigencies, and among all Sorts of Persons; because of their
larger Recommendation of all, and Baseness of Spirit, in the public Interests
of God; though rejected, deserted, blasphemed, and trodden upon by almost all;
because of their Compliance with the Humors of most, and insinuating of
themselves upon both by Good and Bad, in an humble and loving Manner; because
of their sinful Reservedness, in the Matters of God, in a declining Time;
because of their keeping themselves free from gross Outbreakings; because of
their Counterfeiting of real Saints, by acquiring a fine outward Carriage, and
a huge literal, notional Knowledge of divine Things; that they might pray,
write and discourse like Men, much in the intimate Fellowship of Jesus: As
also, because of their outward Prosperity, which gave Men a brave Luster in the
Eyes of dull Mortals. All, all is now unmasked! Now, now it is manifest, who
were excellent, who were not; who have been the real Friends of the Bridegroom,
and who have been counterfeit. How sweet is the Righteousness of God, now
vindicated! What Delectation, to behold all Things drawn out of Darkness! My
Hatred to Impiety and hellish Madness is so great, and my Zeal for the Glory of
my never-enough exalted Lord and Redeemer, is so violent and strong, that all
natural Affections, in their highest Bens^^, would here be swallowed up to
Nothing: To see the Glory of Divine Vengeance manifested on Father, Mother,
Sister, Brother, Son or Daughter, now black and ugly Lumps of Hell, and Haters
of the Fountain of all Loveliness and Sweetness, is a Sight eternally
delightsom.

56. Among the many Pendicles of the fair Inheritance, the sweet Fellowship of
Men and Angels, is very considerable.

O how sweet a Dispensation! How wonderful is divine Providence! You who were
sweet and profitable Company to me in my Pilgrimage, for ever walk with me on
the Tops of glorious and majestic Mount Zion. Sirs, I esteemed and loved you
above all then, as the only excellent Ones of the Earth, in whom was all my
Delight; But now, Love is in its Bloom and full Perfection. What a golden Life
would I have esteemed it on Earth, to live in the Company of the most wise and
excellent in all Ages? O now! all the Excellent of the World are my Companions;
every one of which transcends, by Millions of Stages, in Wisdom and Excellency,
the most excellent mere Man on Earth, O ye beloved Ones, is not your Fellowship
far changed? Old Things are past away, all Things are become new. All earthly
Ties are broken asunder, which did much hinder the Fellowship of Saints on
Earth: We are every Way free! Spiritual Relation has swallowed up all other.
No Obligation betwixt us, but that of Love: We hold not any Thing mediately;
Jesus, the Firstborn of the Almighty King, is our immediate Superior in all
Things. O glorious magnifick Kingdom! O let the Crown for ever flourish on the
Head of the Conqueror; What though all this Assembly of Men and Angels should be
abased, if he be exalted? What though all should decrease, if he increase? What
is the Flower and chief Excellency of all created Glory? He is the Beauty and
Triumph of all Creatures, the Head and Firstborn of every Creature, infinitely
more than all Creatures; He is Jehovah.

57. The Saints are eternally acquitted; and all their Faculties are filled up
with his ravishing Voice.

All Things are eternal: The Saints are eternally acquitted and justified; and
all the Wicked are ever impanelled and condemned. In how ravishing a Manner
does our Welbeloved smile upon us? Forever does he stretch forth the Arms of
his Love to embrace us? O the Sweetness of his Lips! The Loveliness of his
Voice; Honey and Butter is under his Tongue, and the Smell of his Nose is as the
Smell of Lebanon: His Eyes are ever fixed upon us; every Look, every Beckning
of the Hand manifests a Love, ever to be admired, and never to be comprehended.
O his Voice, his Voice! Is he not saying, Behold, and for ever behold your
Lord, your Head, your Husband, your King, your Maker, your only Welbeloved, who
loved you with an eternal Love; washed you, when polluted, in mine own Blood;
and made you Kings and Priests to my Father, and your Father? Did I love you,
when vile and abominable? and shall I ever hate you, when made fair and lovely,
through my perfect Comeliness? Come my fairest Spouse, come my lovely one, let
us satiate our Selves with ravishing Loves, while the Heavens remain. Behold
these Arms, that were stretched out upon the Cross, for your Sakes, are ever
ready to embrace you: With Desire have I desired this golden Day of mutual
Loves and Delights, even this Day of my Espousals and Gladness of Heart; and
therefore I have put on my Marriage-Robes, arrayed my self with Glory and
Majesty, as with a Garment: And you also have I decked with passing Glory. And
can we be but ravished! Thou have ravished my Heart, my Sister, my Spouse! Even
when thou wast black, thou wast precious in my Eves: Sin and Vileness is
Nothing in the Way of my infinite Love. I loved thee, because I loved thee: And
because I loved Thee, therefore have thou become exceeding lovely. Are you not
dear unto me? are you not my Delights and Rejoicing? You are the Fruit of my
Labors, Sufferings, sad Hearts, Tears, Sighs, Groans, Fear, Pain, Shame,
Reproach: In seeing you I behold my Seed, the Travel of my Soul, and am
satisfied: Enjoy me now, as much as your Soul desires. All Mountains are
removed, all Shadows are fled away. The Occasions of your Doubtings,
Jealousies, Dispondencies, are no more: We shall enjoy one another to the Full.
Love shall be no more pained and sick of Delays. Have I not hasted to this
eternal Day of Enjoyment: How have I dispatched much in a small Time? I have
come skipping over the Mountains, leaping over the Hills. I swimmed through
Seas of Blood, Oceans of Tears, Worlds of Woes and Griefs; trod the Wine Press
of the Wrath of God Almighty; crushed the People in mine Anger, and trampled
them in my Fury; made my Name to sound throughout the whole World; filled the
Earth with the Knowledge of my Name; erected a glorious Church on Earth of Jew
and Gentile; put away Time and Days; cried down for ever all earthly Pleasures,
Pomps, Glory, that we might enjoy this eternal Day of Love's fullest
Manifestations: And behold, I am become All in all unto you for evermore. Rest,
my dearest Spouse, in my Bosom: Rest in your Love unto me; behold, I rest in my
Love unto Thee, and rejoice over Thee with Singing. Have thou labored with me?
Here is an eternal Repose. Had thou mourned? Partake of my boundless Joys.
Have thou suffered for my Name's Sake? Thou shall eternally ride with me in my
majestic, triumphant Chariot of Glory: Thou shall no more be sick o^ Love
through Absence and Want of the Light of my Countenance; whence ill Thoughts,
and Doubtings of mine unchangeable Love. Kiss, and kiss for ever, and take thy
Fill of Love-embraces. His Banner of Love shall ever overspread us! It Is
Nothing what thou have been; since I have elected Thee, and washed Thee, and
made thee passing beautiful and excellent; and thou have become mine. My Life,
my Blood, my Soul did I give for thee: I have become like thee, and made thee
like unto me; that our Fellowship might be most intimate, and sweet. And what,
my fair One, could I have done more, to make thee superabundantly blessed? Have
I not fitted thee for my Fellowship? Have I not adorned thee with
superexcellent Beauty, Glory and Majesty? Nothing can show forth thy
Pleasantness, thy surpassing Excellencies: All Trees, all Flowers, all Roses,
and Lillies, all the Beauties that adorn the spangled Heavens, would blush, to
contend with thy surpassing Beauty; all their Perfections are but Emblems of
that substantial Excellency, wherewith I have beautified Thee. Thine Eyes would
overcome me, I could not look upon thy Beauty, if thou did not draw near;
that Love may be satisfied with full Enjoyment. Can there be greater
Blessedness? can there be more intimate Fellowship? O what Love-embraces! What
Love-kisses! What overcoming Smiles! We bathe ourselves in the Oceans of pure
unmixed Love! The very Smell of thy Garments, my fair One, ravish my Heart;
they exhale a Fragrancy, like a Field which the Lord has blessed! Even my
Father has blessed thee, and thou art blessed for evermore. All, who have
cursed thee, have been cursed; and all, who have blessed thee, have been
blessed. The eternal God is thy Refuge; and underneath are everlasting Arms:
And he has cast out the Enemy from before thee; and has said, Destroy them.
Thou dwell in Safety, alone; the Fountain of Jacob is open unto thee. O
People saved of the Lord, the Shield of thine Help, and who is the Strength of
thine Excellency: And thine Enemies have been found Liars unto thee; and thou
have trodden them, upon their high Places. O are you not blessed, eternally
blessed, who have been appointed to so great Things? Glory, Excellency,
Strength, Beauty, Honor and all are yours! Behold, behold, ye Children of my
everlasting Loves and Delights, these precious Crowns, these Garlands of Glory,
wherewith I adorn you! Behold, behold, all Creatures, Devils and wicked Men,
thus is it done eternally unto the Men, whom the King delights to honor.
This is the Majesty I clothe them with, who have loved, feared, and obeyed me,
unto Death, in their Generation. This is the Kingdom, these are the glorious
Mansions, I have set them down into. I spoke not to you, my fair Ones, of
earthly Kingdoms, and Possessions: These celestial Habitations were you
ordained unto, as your everlasting Country. I told you of Worlds, and Kingdoms,
and Crowns, and Sceptres, and Cities, and glorious Mansions; and behold,
inconceivably more than I promised: Yea, did you not inherit Time also? Did you
ever want Journey-bread, as long as on the Way to this Country? Though, for your
Good, I did not laden you with the thick Clay of the Earth, I ever cut out that
Lot, which was best for you; which was not a Life of earthly Abundance: If it
had been otherwise, I should have made you the only Sharers of Earth, the only
Potentates of Time; But Dunghill Earth, was far below your Divine Minds. How
degrading had it been, to see my Fellow-heirs vexed, tormoiled, and distracted
with Dunghil-Concernments? No, your generous Spirits were exercised with high
and excellent Things, and were not brought down by the empty Concernments the
Sons of the Earth were only occupied with. My Way to this unspeakable Glory,
was through Contempt, Reproach, Afflictions, Poverty, Shame; I could not dignify
you, more than by making you Partakers of my Lot, my excellent Ones: If I had
plunged you in the Midst of earthly Prosperity and Abundance, you should have
missed the greatest Glory, which is Suffering for my Name's Sake; your Crown
should not have been so massy and glorious: And where would have been the
Exercise and Trial of all your Graces? Your Patience in Tribulations, your
meek, quiet and contented Spirit, when the vilest of Men were exalted, and did
abound in Temporal Enjoyments, sharing the Earth among them, as if they alone
had only derived their Pedigree from Adam? Where had been manifested your
Confidence in your heavenly Father, if Sense had not seemed to contradict the
Promises? Thus was the Draught of my infinite Wisdom, that your Way to the
Crown should be through all Manner of Trials, Afflictions, and Oppositions.
Great was your Agony with Devils, with wicked Men, with your inbred
Corruptions, with many external Disasters; even unto Hunger, Thirst, Nakedness,
and sore Trouble for your Daily-bread* And should it not have been thus? For,
if no Enemies, no Fighting; if no Fighting, no Victory; and if no Victory, no
Triumphing: Is not here a golden Chain of wonderful Wisdom and Love? Possess
for ever this glorious Kingdom, my valiant Ones: a Kingdom ordained for you
most freely and absolutely without Respect to Work or Excellency; yet, possess
it by Way of Conquest: My free Grace, given to you in Time, do I crown with
this eternal and exceeding Weight of Glory: All this Kingdom is for every one
of you, as if there were none else; all of you are Possessors of all Things. I
have redeemed you from eternal Wrath, Misery and Sinning; I have purchased all
Things for you; I have prayed to my Father, that you, whom he had given me,
might be for ever with me, where I am, to behold my Glory, which he has given
me; for he loved me, before the Foundation of the World. These, lo, all these
are your Portion. Earth was a Portion for the Bastards only; and therefore, I
divided it most largely amongst them, casting Crowns and Principalities, and
the greatest earthly Things of Time, to the vilest of them: To indulge your
Childishness, I gave sometimes to some of you large Portions of the Earth; for
many Ends, known only to my self; and for giving you a breathing Time, best the
Spirit that I had made should have been brought to nothing: But earthly
Portions were only fit for base Spirits; poor and empty were the Donations I
vouchsafed upon them, in Comparison of this. When I give to you, I give like a
King indeed: When I have ascended on high, and led Captivity captive, I share
no less among my Friends than everlasting, ever flourishing Kingdoms and
Principalities; and this is the Manifestation of free Love, before the
Cornerstone of the Earth was laid: Here, as every where does my absolute
Sovereignty shine. I am Alpha and Omega. No Cause of my Actings without my
self: By me, through me, and for me are all Things: For you have I chosen
Vessels of Glory and Honor, that on you I might show forth that infinite
Bounty, Love and Compassion that dwells in me.

58. Reprobates are already judged and condemned; and all their Faculties are
filled with the dreadful Roarings of the Lion of the Tribe of Judah.

How does our holy One fill the Senses of cursed Reprobates with his dreadful
Voice, wherewith Ten thousand Worlds might be shaken to nothing! How does the
Lion of the Tribe of Judah roar forth! Be eternally confounded from my amiable
Presence, vile Wretches, you are a Smoke in my Nostrils, a Fire that burns
all the Day long. Your Soul abhors me. O prodigious Monsters! and my Soul
abhors you. Betwixt us this unquenchable Hatred shall increase, throughout
Eternity: As your hellish Violence, and monstrous Abominations do increase,
eternally will I kindle the Flames of my Fury upon you; so shall I be eased,
refreshed and comforted. I have been wearied with refraining: Now is this
unquenchable Fury, that burned in my Breast, broken forth, and my Soul is
delighted. Did such an hellish Madness possess you, as to think you might
escape my avengeful Hand? And knew ye not your selves, Bits of Creatures,
rebelling against me, the Omnipotent Sovereign of all Things? Let your own
selves accuse your selves of your horrid Villainy against me, the boundless
Original of all Excellencies, Loveliness and Sweetness; which you experienced,
ungrate Wretches: Did you prefer, and love and desire only your selves? Shall
the Creature be set up above the Creator? The Monstrosity of this does
eternally affright you! your selves are intolerable Torments to your selves;
for you behold your Vileness, as it is. Did you not think, because of my
Silence, that I was like to base you? But now I will eternally reprove you, and
set your Sins before your Eyes: Now you see your Wretchedness. What think you
of your holding the Truth in Unrighteousness? So that you become vain in your
Imaginations, and your foolish Heart was darkened; professing your selves wise,
you became Fools, and changed the Glory of the incorruptible God, into the vain
Fancies of your desperately deceitful Hearts; still looking upon him, as one
like your selves. What think you of delighting more in created Enjoyments, than
in me, the Fountain of all? Your Affections bended most to Nothings and
Vanities; the Fountain of all Blessedness you abhorred. Did you not say, Let
him depart from us; for we desire not the Knowledge of his Name? What Profit is
there in serving him? What Pleasure in being in his Fellowship? Yea, what a
Weariness is it? Let us have earthly Enjoyments, and we desire no more; these
are the only Things we delight in. What think you, that you are born Enemies,
Haters of me from your very first Original? With your first Breathings of Life,
did you breathe forth Malice against your Creator, Preserver and Benefactor;
and what can you do eternally, but roar with your malicious Blasphemies? But
what avails either your Malice or Goodness? I am infinitely above all
Creatures. What is that to me, whether Creatures obey, or disobey? What are
you, that I should be mindful of you, and bring you into Judgment? What are
you, that my Anger should burn eternally against you? Yet is it my Pleasure,
that upon you be manifested the Glory of my avenging Justice: As I have sworn,
so have I performed, That every Knee shall bow to me. You, stiff-necked
Wretches, would you not yield to the Scepter of my Government? I will make you
stoop, and lick the Dust, like Serpents, under my Feet, and the Feet of my
Chosen, whom you hated and despised in a vain World. I alone will be exalted,
and my Glory will I not give unto another. Would you not be the actual
Instruments of my Glory? I will eternally make you the passive Proclaimers
thereof: Your Cursings and Howlings shall set me on high, even proclaim the
Glory of my spotless Holiness, throughout all Ages. Cursed Creatures, whom my
H^^ds formed to serve, and obey, and glorify me; Shall I not recompense your
Hatred and Rebellion upon your own Heads? Shall not my Soul be fully avenged
upon you? You are the Abomination of my Soul; and therefore Vengeance shall be
my eternal Delight. I am of purer Eyes, than to behold Iniquity: Triumph I not?
I, the righteous Lord, love the Righteous; my Countenance does behold the
Upright: But the Wicked, and him that loves Violence, my Soul abborreth.
According to my absolute Sovereignty, might I have made out of you any Thing I
pleased; but thus have I done, that the Glory of my spotless Holiness might
eternally shine forth: But as I said, so have I done; and it is known, whose
Word stands, yours or mine. Said you, in the Stoutness of your Hearts, Our
Tongues are our own, who are Lords over us? We are Lords, we will no more come
unto thee? And shall you not find, to your eternal Misery, who is the great
Former, and absolute Sovereign of all Things? And you the vilest of all
Vileness, of whom most lovingly I offered my Heart, my Blood, my Life, my
Kingdom and all Things; and yet you slighted and neglected all; as Things of no
great Excellency: O mine Enemies, mine Enemies! slain and destroyed ye shall be
eternally before mine Eyes: I have no Enemies like you, unto whom I most
condescendingly revealed my Will, appointing your Lot within the Pale of the
Church. I have found you, O mine Enemies, you Haters of my Holiness, and
Despisers of mine Excellency, who at the most loved a Form of Godliness, but
denied the Power thereof. Did I rise up early and late, crying unto you? Did I
beseech, entreat, protest, obtest, sigh, weep and groan over you, that you
would come out from your vain Conversation, and partake of a blessed Communion
with my Father and Me? And shall I not cause you to howl, and roar, and weep,
and gnash your Teeth, in utter Darkness for ever and ever? Have I not entreated
long? should I wait for ever upon Creatures, madly serious against me? I have
sworn by my Holiness, That after Death no more Forbearance; the Word has gone
out of my Mouth, it cannot be recalled: I am not a Man, that I should change. I
appointed a Time for every Thing; a Time of Forbearance, and a Time of
Punishment: This is the eternal Day of Wrath; the endless Day of Vengeance is
in my Heart; The Year of my Redeemed is come: I curse you, bitterly curse you;
all the Woes that ever I pronounced, fall upon you; let them be written upon
your Foreheads, and on your Hands, and fill all the Powers and Faculties of
Soul and Body: Woe, woe, woe! World of Woes and Curses fall down incessantly and
eternally upon you all, according to your Wickedness: As every one of you has
sown, so shall you reap. Woe unto you, who have joined House to House, and Field
to Field, extruding Adam's Fellow-Heirs. Woe unto you that have mingled strong
Drink. Woe unto you that have drawn Iniquity with Cords of Vanity; who have
called Good Evil, and Evil Good. Woe unto you who were wise in your own Eyes,
and prudent in your own Sight. Cursed be you, that placed your Confidence in
Creatures, and not in the Lord Jehovah. Woe unto you, that shut Heaven both upon
your selves and others: Woe unto you, who devoured the Needy, and for a Pretense
made long Prayers: Woe unto you, who compassed Sea and Land, to draw others unto
your Faction, under the Pretense of the Salvation of Souls: Woe unto you, who,
by your foolish Subtilties, did cast a Mist upon all the Duties of Religion: Woe
unto you, who were strict in the Circumstantials and Externals of Religion, and
careless of the Power and Life thereof: Woe unto you, who pretended Love and
Reverence to the dead Saints, because they could not testify against you; But
maligned, persecuted and contemned the living Ones, because of their standing
out against the Sins of the Generation wherein they lived. O cursed Wretches,
the Flames of my Rage shall feed themselves upon you: Try your Stoutness and
Magnanimity now; the Threatening of my Fury and Indignation did little affect
you: You gave me the Lie, and said, It is not the Lord, neither shall Evil
befall us. When my Hand was stretched out, you would not see; but now you see,
and feel, and are everlastingly ashamed: Your Atheism is quite done away; know
ye not now, that I am a God of Truth and Equity? Have I not performed all upon
you, that ever I spoke? Are you not filled with Wrath? Is not Soul and Body
tormented with the dreadful Flames of my Fury? Shower I not down upon you
incessantly Fire and Brimstone, and an horrible Tempest of all Manner of Pains,
Griefs, and Torments? Devils and wicked Men, tear and torment, and curse one
another; you concurred bravely in sinning, concur in your punishing; you loved
the Fellowship of one another, be eternally together: Companions in Time, and
Companions in Eternity. The Fellowship of any holy Ones you little esteemed; I
have made betwixt them and you a vast Gulf of eternal Separation: Had you known
their Dignity, you should have wondered, that I suffered you to abide in the
same World with them. What think you now of provoking me, vile Wretches? Are
you the Creatures, that though it highly of sinning? Are you able to despise and
mock at the just Punishment thereof? No more vain Laughing and Jollity; the
Fuel of your base sinful Delights have I taken for ever from you: Not one
Smile of Joy from henceforth. All the Mercies I vouchased upon you, did ye use
against me; the more I continued my Bounty, the more you rebelled and vexed my
holy Spirit; though in me you lived, moved and had your Being, yet you forgot me,
and minded your own worldly Things, more than my Glory and Interests through
the World. All your Actions were subordinate to base Self; even your most
excellent-like Actings and Sufferings for my Cause, were ever out of one
selfish Design or other: I will fill you with your own Ways. You shall not be
troubled with Offers of Mercy any more, or with the Exercises of Godliness any
more: Nothing but Blasphemy fills your hellish Mouths. You shall not be vexed
with the Company of my Saints any more: You shall have your Fill of one
another hellish Fellowship throughout Eternity: Your Choice and Delight shall
not be taken from you. Know you not who I am? Am I not he, whom you despised
and forgot? Am I not he, whose Yoke ye brake asunder from your Necks? Am I not
he, whom you defied, and proclaimed War against? Gird up now your Loins, like
Men, and maintain your Quarrel valiantly; show, by your magnanimous Deportment,
the Justness of your Enmity against Me. Desperate Wretches, you have not the
Heart to submit; neither are you able to stand against one Billow of my
Indignation. It was plainly manifested unto you, all would come to this; but
your Minds were filled with Vanity: I am free from the Ruin and unspeakable
Misery of you all; only your selves have destroyed your selves: Madly and
desperately have you run to your own Destruction; and who was obliged to stand
in your Way? Who has struck you with such a monstrous Hatred to all Good, and
Inclination to all Evil? Are ye not naturally wicked, and abominable? Are you
not Haters of my Holiness and Excellency? Had ye not from the Beginning a
strange Averseness from my spotless Holiness? Blasphemous Wretches, you see my
Ways are equal, to your eternal Torment and Confusion; your Mouths are for ever
stopped, and you are found guilty: Nothing have you to say for your selves,
your monstrous hellish Frame is as a thousand Witnesses against you. Should not
I alone be exalted? Should I not crush to Pieces all the Despisers of my Glory?
Shall I not for ever cause you to drink the pure and unmixed Wrath of the
Almighty, that is poured forth without Mixture? That ye may be filled with my
Fury and Indignation, and may be drunk, and made mad, and torment and tare, and
devour and curse yourselves, and one another; that every Thought may bring in a
dreadful Horror, and hellish Pangs. O mine Enemies! mine Enemies, whom I made
the Shields of the Earth, who became greater in Wickedness, than in your
worldly Greatness: You Ringleaders of Iniquity, Betrayers of the great Trust I
dignified you with; the Ruin of thousands shall fall on your Heads. Did you
tyrannize, without Law, or Reason? Alleging, You were accountable to none for
Outrages, but unto me; that you might fulfill your wicked Desires without
Countroulment? O vilest of Wretches, whom I set over my Church, to defend Her
from all external Damages, to hold her in all her glorious Privileges, that I
left her, in my Legacy; and to hold the Crown, upon my Head, in Despite of the
Opposers: Did you make Havoc of her? Did you rob her of her Adornments? Did
you pull the Crown off my Head, and put it on your own? Did you neglect the
Affairs of my Church, and subordinate them to your own temporal, vain,
transient Affairs? Did you put the Sword in the Bowels of my Chosen, which I
gave you to protect them with? O mine Enemies! I will neither fight with small
or great, in Comparison of You; even you, I will ever be avenged upon; you, and
all your Parasites, Executors, Applauders, Connivers and Consulters to your
horrid Rebellion. Durst you, you base, you vile Wretches, be so monstrously
audacious, as to usurp my Prerogatives? Durst you destroy, imprison, banish,
torment, and be as Thorns in the Sides of my excellent Ones? What you did to
every one of them you did to me; I will recompense it. It had well become you,
to stoop and lick the Dust at the Feet of my Brethren: It had well become you,
to hold up the Train of my Robe-royal, in the Day of my Wounding: It had well
become you, to have honored, and reverenced every one of them, from the
highest to the least: Had you considered their Dignity, you would have wondered
I permitted you in my Providence to dwell in that World they inhabited; far
more to have had any Manner of Superiority over them. Here I meet you, my
cursed Enemies; know you with whom you contended? Am not I He, whom you
contemned, despised, impoverished, imprisoned, banished, maligned, and spewed
out the Venom of Hell against? I am He, whose Blood you esteemed as Water; my
Brethren you hated, because they bare my Image; for my Sake, even for my Sake,
you persecuted them; whatever was your Pretensions, the Power of Godliness was
the Butt of your Malice: Durst you malign the Exercising of my Spirit of Grace,
in its highest Actings, as a Spirit of Sedition, and rebellious Combinations?
Did you take it upon you, to shape out the Government of my Church according to
your foolish Fancy, as an indifferent Thing? As if I had left any Blanks in my
Testament, for you to fill up according to your hellish Pleasure: You, even
you, with the Betrayers of my Interests and People, will I place eternally in
the Brunt of my Fury. Be eternally confounded, all mine Enemies together;
Sects, Ranters, Civilians, devout Naturalists, Formalists, carnal Gospellers,
Latitudinarians: You have I chosen, before all Ages, Vessels of Wrath and
Dishonor, fitted to Destruction; that over you I might show forth my absolute
Sovereignty, Long-suffering, Power of my Wrath, Purity of my Holiness, and
infinite Perfections.

59. All the Creatures are Sharers of this eternal Day of Joy: Except reprobate
Men and Angels.

Clap your Hands, and be exceeding joyful, O thou Creation of God, who art
forever loosed from Vanity and Bondage: This is the Day which the Lord made,
rejoice and be glad in it: This is the eternal Day of the Restitution of all
Things: Shout, and cry aloud, ye lower Heavens, and dance thou Earth; Sing
melodiously, O ye heavenly Hosts, Sun, Moon and Stars: O ye Mountains, are ye
not eternally skipping, like Lambs? You Valleys, you pleasant Fields, are you
not ever smiling, and shouting for Joy? You have been wearied, and worn out, in
serving sinful Creatures; you have been defiled, and written over with Vanity;
But now are you renewed, and made pure and clear. How earnest was your
Expectation of the Manifestation of the Sons of God! for you were made subject
to Vanity, not willingly, but by Reason of him, who had subjected you in Hope:
Because you were also to be delivered from the Bondage of Corruption, into the
glorious Liberty of the Children of God. O fair, beautiful and delightsom
Creation, all Things now are Thousands of Stages more excellent, than at the
Beginning! Nothing dwells here, but Righteousness! Thou art not now, O Earth,
the Stage of all Wickedness and Rebellion against thy Creator; thou groans not
under the Weight of sinful abominable Wretches. You Fields, you are not
divided, and possessed by the vilest of Men, who, by the Benefit of the
Revenues cast out of your fruitful Womb, were, in their own Eyes, and in the
Eyes of silly Fools like themselves, excellent and considerable Persons; you
furnish not Fuel for their stinking Pride, tyrannizing, and villainous
Pleasures: It was by you, under the Appointment of your Creator, the vile Worms
of the Earth appeared somewhat; being clothed over with the scenical Garbs of
Riches, and titular Honors, else they had been vile in one another Eyes, as
now they are to all Eternity; having no internal, real, or personal Excellency
worthy to be accounted of. Out of thee, O Earth, do not come the precious
Fruits, for filling the bellies of wretched Miscreants, who did eat and drink
largely, and wallowed in all earthly Delights; when the only Excellent of the
Earth, through Oppression, were sometimes pinched in the Necessaries of a mortal
Life: Out of thee do not come Instruments of Cruelty the Weapons of War, with
which the Seed of the Serpent did kill, and torment, and persecute the
Blood Royal of Heaven: Out of thee do not come the Beasts, wearied with
serving, and holding up the Filth and Off-scourings of all Things: The Horses
are not groaning under Lumps of Death and Hell, riding in a brave and gallant
Manner, with a fine Train; joining Battle with the Camp of the Saints, that
they might destroy the Righteous from the Earth, and have none to stand in the
Way of their hellish Endeavors, their monstrous Triumphing and Tyrannizing, as
absolute Sovereigns of all: The Sheep are not wearied in furnishing Coverings,
and ranting Apparel for the vilest of Creatures: Now they have not a Rag to
cover their Nakedness; No Silk, and brave Embroideries for the vile Carcases of
hellish Monsters: The excellent Creatures are not now slain to hold in the Life
of base Miscreants, Ten thousand Stages below the lowest of Beasts. Thou Air,
thou art not an Instrument any more, whereby the wretched Souls and Carcases of
cursed Sinners are kept together, in a tolerable Condition; base and
treacherous Enemies to GOD and Man, do not now defile thee, by drawing thee in,
and out, for the Conservation of their abominable Life. Thou Water, thou art
not now used by the Devil and his Slaves, as Instruments of their Cruelty
against the only princely and noble Persons, the Coheirs of Heaven and Earth,
and all Things. Thou art not, O Fire, compelled violently, against thy Nature,
to reduce to ashes, with great Torment, the precious Bodies of Zion's Children,
comparable to fine Gold. You Sun, Moon and Stars, you shall not shine upon the
Wicked, as well as the Righteous, my more: You do not lose your sweet
Influences upon the Abomination of Heaven and Earth, and all Things: Are you
not in your own Kind happy, by being freed from such grievous Bondage; more
grievous, than to be corrupted, destroyed and broken in a Thousand Nothings: O
what Joys! all dance, and rejoice! all are in a melodious Frame! the Virtue of
my WELBELOVED's Suffering and Exaltation extends by Superabundance to all
Things. No Wonder, we are plunged in the Oceans of unspeakable Joys and
Delights! Though all were in a mourning Apparel, we could not but eternally
superabound in Joys! This is the eternal Day of our Redemption, the Day of the
Restitution of all Things.

60. All Things are renewed, and glorified; Nothing anihilated.

O thou lower World, thou art made new indeed! O such a majestic, glorious
Fabric out of the Ashes of a Dunghill! O heavenly Earth! or earthly Heaven!
Wonderful! not a new Creation, but a renewing of the Old, that perished by the
Fire of his Indignation! O my LORD, thou can make any Thing out of any Thing
thou please: Beings, and no Beings, are all alike to Thee! Verily this is a
Change, wherein infinite Excellency is highly manifested. What Joy, to behold
the Face of all Things! Our Seeing of the first Temple will not cause us to
weep, because of this Second: Here is a magnificent Royal Palace reared up, in
the Place of a Dungeon; A stately Majestic City, in the Place of a few poor
Cottages. Was the former Fabric real? or was it not rather imaginary? Were
they not Fools, who were only delighted with it? Were they not bewitched, and
led away with Fancies, Night-Dreams and Vanities? I thought the former Earth,
in the Days of my Mortality, full of the Glory, Bounty, Riches and Excellency
of the great Former; and was it not? Yet, was it a dark Shadow, to what mine
Eyes behold. This is a Change could never have entered within the Conceptions of
the most excellent Creatures; This is materially the Former, and yet not the
Former. It is manifest, my ALMIGHTY ONE, thou can create never so many
Worlds, differing altogether in Excellency from one another: But thou have done
it, because it so pleased Thee: Just, and holy, and wise, and true art thou, in
all thy Ways. This is the Stage whereon thou actedst most wonderful Things, as
a Prelude to this endless Day of Eternity: Whereon thou ran an inconceivable
Mass of various Dispensations, which will fill Eternity with Admiration: Here
did thou display the Banner of thy Mercy, and Justice, in the very same
Traces of Providence, as the wisest of Mortals could not trace thy Footsteps;
Here thou wroughtst the never-enough admired Work of our Redemption; here thou
wooed thy Bride; here thou prepared thine Enemies for the Time of Vengeance;
here thou made all Things ready for this everlasting Day; and therefore in
thy Wisdom have thou continued it, an eternal Monument. Oh! thy Sovereignty
runs in the Channel of thine infinite Love and Bounty! Thou might return all
Things back to their Original again: But thy Goodness is for ever extended over
the Works of thine Hands: Thy Glory endures for ever; Thou do rejoice in all
thy Works; Shall I not then rejoice in them? shall not I, considering them, be
eternally ravished? Might it not render a Creature eternally blessed, to
consider thy infinite Glory, and Perfections, written on thy Handiwork? Even
in the Days of my Childhood, I could not open mine Eyes, on the most ordinary
Productions of thine Excellency, without strange Stirrings, Love, Joy and
Admiration. O the ravishing sweet Sights, that even then I have seen of Thee,
through the Glass of the Creature! How have my Thoughts run a Maze of ravishing
Delights and Sweetness, in considering the Vastness and Expansion of the Canopy
of the lower World! the Beams of thy Chambers, laid in the Waters; the Clouds,
thy Chariots, whereon thou did gloriously ride; the Winds the Pavement
whereon Thou walk; Thy Omnipotent Power, in laying so firmly the Foundations
of the Earth, that it cannot be moved; The prodigious Overflowing of the
Waters, when they overwhelmed the Earth; The unsearchable Manner of bounding
the boistrous Waves of the raging Sea, by sandy Bulwarks; Thy Wisdom, in
watering the Valleys from the Mountains, and the Mountains from the Sea and
Heavens; that the Fowls of the Air, and the Beasts of the Field might drink
abundantly: The Excellent Virtues of base Dunghil-Earth, manifested in its
rich, pleasant, sweet, various and lively Offspring; as, Grass, Herbs,
Flowers, Shrubs, Trees, and innumerable Multitude of Beauties, filling all the
Senses with passing Delectation, and subservient to all the Defects of indigent
Mortals; as Nutriment, Medicine, Clothing, and Habitation: The wonderful Eye of
thine omniscient Providence over the most inconsiderable Creatures; as, the
Conies, and Goats, who were provided of fit Refuges from all Danger: The exact
Ordina^^^s of Sun, Moon and Stars; The Vicissitudes of Light and Darkness, for
the several Exigencies of Men and Beasts. In the Midst of such ravishing
Thoughts of thy Power, Wisdom and Goodness, how have I been filled, according
to the Measure of Mortality, with inexpressible Joy and Sweetness? So that I
could not but cry out, with ravishing Astonishment, O LORD, how manifold are
thy Works? In Wisdom have thou made them all! The Earth is full of thy Riches!
And again fell into the deep Contemplation of the Greatness of the Sea, its
innumerable Progeny of small and great Animals; Thy Wisdom, in Appointment of
Navigation; and Power, in the Leviathan's playing there; thy rich Bounty, in
holding a well-furnisht Table, to so numerous a Family, as the People of
Heaven, Earth, and Sea; Their necessary Dependence on thee, every Instant, in
their Living, Moving, Being; so that they are not, if Thou draw in thy Self and
the Vivifying Spirit thou communicates unto them. Have I not, O my GOD, been in
many such sweet Meditations, until I have been wrapped up in a Frame of Spirit
inutterable, inexpressible? and sung forth in the midst of such Sweetness, The
Glory of the LORD shall endure for ever; The LORD shall rejoice in all his
Works: I will sing unto the Lord as long as I live; I will sing Praises unto my
God, while I have my Being; my Meditation of him shall be sweet; I will rejoice
in the Lord. How often have I thought, Is the Wilderness so sweet and pleasant?
What must the Inland be? Is there such ravishing Variety of Beauty, Glory, and
Sweetness, all along in my Pilgrimage? What can I imagine to behold in my
Native Country? Is the Habitation, where Devils, wicked Men and Beasts inhabit,
so excellent and glorious? What can I think of the Place where JESUS, the
EMMANUEL, with his fair white Company of Saints and Angels, everlastingly
abides? Is my God's Footstool so glorious? What must his Throne be? Is the
under Vault of this base Dun^^^ so Majestic? O the higher Hall of Glory! where
the glorious King, and his magnificent Court remain! Does the Habitation
symbolize with the Inhabitants? The higher World must inconceivably transcend
this lower. And is this Earth so sweet, when cursed, and defiled, because of
its abominable Inhabitants? what shall it be, when renewed, and made only an
Habitation of Righteousness? Shall not every Place excel Eden? and Eden the
Celestial Camps? Indeed, O lower World, we might, in our Mortality, conceive
something confusedly of thy Renovation; but could never have imagined, thou
should have been thus: O Earth, thou appearest to be placed after the former
Manner, to be of the former Magnitude, and Figure, as to every Point
corresponding to the same Points of the Heaven of Heavens; also the lower
Heaven differs not in Magnitude, Situation, and Number of Tapers, from the
former; and only herein do the old and new World agree: Now, the smallest Star
would have confounded the Inhabitants of the old, and made the very Sun to
evanish in its Light: The Beams of Light darting every where are substantial;
filling not only the Eyes, but all the Senses with passing Delight; it
containing innumerable Perfections and Virtues, not to be perceived by Mortals;
their Senses being few, and capable of little: But now, every Sense is
equivalent to Ten thousand thousand differing in Kind from one another: The
Light of one Luminary confounds not the Rays of another, though all are united
and made one: The Moon appears to change Faces, by the nearer, or further,
Approach of, or Distance from her King; yet she is ever more glorious than the
Sun in his former Condition: Every Star showers down Millions of Millions of
various Influences, which in a Moment would convert the former Earth to a Lump
of Gold and Gems: All are transparent, even the Sun, Moon and Stars, though
compact solid Globes of Light: No Vail drawn betwixt the higher and lower
Habitation: No smoky Fumes betwixt Heaven and Earth: No Winds, nor Storms,
Tempest^, pinching Cold, nor pierceing Heat: No Vicissitudes of Summer and
Winter: Nothing but an eternal Springtide, and endless Summer, a constant
Harvest: All are in their blooming Estate, and fullest Perfection. What Wonder!
Is it not the Center of infinite Influences? the sweet Influences of Pleiades
are never bound up, but are every Minute showered down; the Bands of Orion are
ever loosed: And is not the heavenly Earth so impregnate, with such infinite
Virtues? Is it not so lively and vigorous; so full of the Seeds of innumerable
Excellencies, as that, in it self, it is beautiful, fruitful and excellent,
without Influences from Creatures of an higher Nature? In its own Nature does
it contain the Virtue and Operations of Sun, Moon and Stars. How infinitely
various are the Sensitive Vegetables? What Beauty, and Glory, and Virtue is to
be found in every One? The smallest Pile of Grass might alone banish Darkness
from the whole Universe. O the Roses and Lilies! every one like a Star in its
proper Orb: All Things are like Lamps of Light; yet, nothing hindering the
Varieties of Colors, which are infinitely various, and wonderfully lively: All
the Rays of such innumerable Beauties and Excellencies, though united in one, are
nothing troublesome, through their Intensity, but the more delightsom: And all
Lights, all Colors, all Excellencies as infinitely intended. O then! their
passing Pleasantness! every Thing appears endowed with all Manner of
Excellencies, as Colors, Figures, etc. and so to be a little World. What may
be said of this, in comparison of the former? This is Beauty, the former was
Deformity: This is Light, the other Darkness: This is Liveliness and Activity,
the other Deadness and Laziness: The former was a confused, deformed and
lothsom Chaos; out of which is made this excellent, beautiful and glorious
Fabric. Who can behold, and not smile and le^p for Joy, at the Bounty and
Power of JEHOVAH, so visibly manifested? And what sweet, cheering Breathings do
so harmoniously sound among the stately Trees of this universal Paradise? O
what Diffusing of delightsom, odoriferous Exhalations! One Gale would cause
Death it self to be lively; being a thousand Times more excellent, than the
most pure and refined Animal Spirits of Mortals: One Gale of this, would have
rendered the former Earth a fertile Eden for many Ages: Eyes and Ears, and all
the Faculties, are lost in an endless Maze; To find a Beginning, Middle and
Ending, is a Task for Eternity. All is one Orchard, one Paradise, one Field,
one Garden of Delight! The most curious Artifice of Cities, Palaces, or what
else, would be Deformity. Nature now cannot be bettered by Helps: JEHOVAH has
ordered all, in an Order above the Invention of all Creatures: Eden here would
be like a black Spot on a fair and beautiful Face. Every Drop of Dew, that
dangleth on these Trees of God, excels Rubies and Carbuncles. All the Rivers
run Liquors above the most precious Quintessential Extractions of the former
World. May it not be called indeed, The Golden Age? They who behold Thee, see
the Floods of Honey and Butter. May they not heap up Gold, as the Dust; and Gold
of Ophir, as the Stones of the Brook? How excellent is thy Loving Kindness, O
God! therefore the Children of Men put their Trust under the Shadow of thy
Wings. We are abundantly satisfied with the Fullness of thy House; And Thou
make us drink of the Rivers of thy Pleasures. Thou visitest the Earth, Thou
waterest it, Thou greatly enrichest it with the Rivers of God, which are full
of Water; Thou crownest the Year with thy Goodness; and all thy Paths drop
Fatness: The Hills, the little Hills and Valleys shout for Joy, and sing, The
Lord is our Keeper, the Lord is our Shade, on our Right Hand; the Sun does not
smile us by Day, nor the Moon by Night; We are secure for ever and ever: All
thy Promises are more than fully accomplished. Men and Angels, the Product of
his everlasting Counsels is all brought forth: It is done, thus it is because
it thus pleased him. Holy, holy, holy LORD GOD Almighty, which was, and is, and
art to come! Thou art worthy to receive Glory, and Honor, and Power; For thou
have created all Things and for thy Pleasure they are, and were created.

61. The Triumphing over the Wicked, is a Part of the Saints Glory and
Happiness.

O beautiful, glorious and joyful World! All have been sad-like until now: Who
can open their Eyes, and not be over-joyed, though they extracted their Delights
only from Creatures mediately? But what is this to you, Lost Wretches, shut up
in utter Darkness? Your best World has eternally vanished: This is a black
miserable World to you. What have you to do with this fair Creation? It is
ours, only ours; for we are Christ's, and Christ is God's. Even the former
Earth, you took for your Country, Heaven and Happiness, was only yours by
Usurpation and Oppression; but now you shall usurp no more: If any Thing be
yours, it is that bottomless Lake, wherein you crawl, like so many filthy
Toads, Snakes and abominable Vermin: To behold you, would confound any
Creature, not endowed with Immortality. O monstrous Sights! O the Infinite
Power of JEHOVAH! that can shape-out after this Fashion: Your Structure
symbolizeth with your Vileness; your Countenance corresponds excellently to
your hellish Minds; and you cannot but affright one another with your desperate
hellish Looks and Minds; Blasphemy, and horrid Desperation is written on your
Foreheads, even the Wrath and Fury of JEHOVAH and the LAMB: One of your ghastly
Looks would affright Millions of Mortals out of their Wits: You are, O dreadful
Vileness; extremely miserable; yet, not Objects of Pity: You might stirr'd-up
Compassion in the most zealous Breasts on Earth, because then you were endowed
with some small Relics of the Image of your Creator; but how fully is the
Saying of our WELBELOVED accomplished on you? From him that has not, shall be
taken away even that which he has. All the Spunks of Goodness are evanished;
and what can remain, but a Mass of all Impiety, and direct Hatred of God?
Nothing like this was seen on Earth. Now you appear in your own Colors; God
has stripped you naked of all. Where are all your excellent Gifts, your
Prudence, and Civility, your fine natural Disposition; your Love to God, you so
much talked of? Now it appears, That the Heart of Man is deceitful above all
Things, and desperately wicked, above Imagination. On Earth, because of natural
Ties, we could not but love you; your eternal Rebellion not being manifested to
us: But now you are for ever our Lord's stated Enemies; that though he would
offer you Pardon, your cursed Hearts would no less rise against him; your
Hatred is unquenchable, and augments throughout Eternity. Fools, are you belching
out the Venom of Hell against him, who for ever tramples you under his Feet?
Does not your Cursings and horrid Blasphemies sound forth the Justness of his
avenging Wrath? Not because of his Wrath, and Displeasure against you, are you
mad against him; in the midst of his Bounty did you continue in your Enmity.
His Holiness, his spotless Holiness is the Butt of your hellish Malice: Your
Wickedness is come to its Perfection: Mortality was not capable of outing the
ten thousandth Part of what is now manifested: Ever were you averse from the
Fellowship of the ever-blessed God: Now you directly avouch your Enmity, as
just and equitable, in Despite of your Consciences, showing Right and Wrong.
Know you not, That he against whom you have eternally sworn your selves
Enemies, may use his Power over you? And you would do so over him and his. What
would you do with his holy Ones, if you had their everlasting Lot at your
Disposing? Is not his Mercy over all his Works? Since he lays not upon you
the ten thousandth Part of that Punishment he could, and his Sovereignty and
Displeasure carves out the Measure of your Punishment: But is there any
Measure, which he might not in Justice inflict? When it is augmented with never
so many Ages, and your Strength augmented to bear it; never can it be said, He
inflicts more than is meet; since Your Rebellion is against an infinite
Majesty, and is of an endless Nature: Since You are ever sinning more and more;
therefore are You obliged to his everlasting Mercy and Bounty. O my GOD, what a
delightsom Change is this! I will rejoice, yea, I will for ever rejoice in
beholding! What now, you Some bodies of Time, where is your gay Clothing, your
fine well-pampered Carcasses? What think you of these vile, abominable, ugly
clubbish Bodies, which You only cared for, and would have so finely decked, as
if they had been made of some celestial Substance, and not of the same Lump,
that all Mankind was made of? What is come of the excellent Majesty and
Reverence, silly flattering Fools made you believe, had been enstamped upon
your very bodily Visage? Where is your brave Attendance, you imagined followed
You, for Your real Excellency? Where is that Admiration, had of you, beastly
Wretches, because of Advantage? What think ye, base Sycophants, of the Men you
trusted to, and adored above God alsufficient? See you now any Majesty, or
Excellencies in such poor, base, trembling Catives? Are they not the same, that
they were? only the Fig Leaves that covered them are taken away. They imagined
themselves Some-bodies, while they possessed earthly Abundance: How highly did
they look: because they seemed to have some more Shovelfuls of Earth than
others? But now the lofty Looks of Man are humbled, and the Haughtiness of Man
is bowed down; and the Lord alone is exalted in this Day. What now, Tyrants,
silly Catives; are you the very same Men, that made the Earth to tremble? The
Lord has broken the Staff of the Wicked, and the Scepter of the Rulers: Your
Pomp is brought down to the Grave, and the Noise of your Viols cease the
Worms are spread under you, and the Worms cover you; Are you not despised in
the Eyes of all, whether in Heaven or Hell? The Almighty has laid open Your
Nakedness, he has discovered Your secret Parts: Fools, were you never thinking
that it would come to this? Did you imagine, That the vilest of Men should
domineer over the most Excellent, and no more of it? That the Wicked might
oppress the Man more righteous than himself, and yet no more of it to all
Eternity? Did the Almighty create Man after his Image, to eat and drink, and
pass away an Inch of Time, and no more? Was it the Purpose of the wise Disposer
of all Things, that Men should be ranked according to the Fancies of Riches and
titular Honor acquired by Vanity, and maintained by Folly? What think you now
of those You contemned not long ago, whom You esteemed as the Filth and
Off-scourings of all Things, whom You thought unworthy of Your excellent
Presence, because they were not laded with the thick Clay of the Earth? What
Distance and Reverence looked You for from Fellow Creatures, as if they had
been made for so base an End, as to hold up Your Yeas and Nays? As if Caping
and Cringing, and such histrionick Vanities had been requisite for the Sons of
Wisdom? O joyful Day of Eternity! wherein all Things are unmasked; all Odds are
made Even. The Fore tho'ts of this held up my Heart, in my sad Pilgrimage. Now,
Wretches, it is evident, who on Earth should have been most honored and
esteemed, who should have had the chief Place among Men; Who sees not now, That
Wisdom is the principal Thing? How vain was the Esteem of the World! Were they
not Fools who in the least regarded it? Who considered Things only according to
their external Shows. Catives, what think you of your Fools-paradise? Your
golden Dream has miserably beguiled you: Earthly Riches are cried down; the
vain Denominations of Time are fled away. Only Wisdom for ever remains. What
then, are you, poor wicked Wretches, exposed to the Shame, Contemp^ and Mockery
of all the World? Are you not made a Gazing-stock to God, Angels and Men? You
snatched at Fancies, and neglected Wisdom, which would have rendered you
excellent for ever and ever. They that practiced best your foolish Modes and
Inventions; that could comply best with your foolish Humors; that knew best,
how to scrape together the Pelf of the Earth, were esteemed wise and
accomplished by you: As for the truly Wise (who were ever very rare, and the
Wonders of their Age) you contemned, and reproached them, as the Dregs of
Mankind. How did you triumph over the Poor, and Meek of the Earth? while your
World remained, which was but for a Moment. An everlasting World is now come;
May we not triumph Time-about? Which of us have chosen the better Part? Judge
ye: Present Things you esteemed only real; and wondered at our Folly, that
lived upon the Hope of Things to come; yea, and to come after Death, and the
Dissolution of all Things: And are you not Fools, who neglected Immortality and
Glory, and Honor, though you had a miserable, pining Life on Earth, earning your
daily Bread by sore Labor and Grief? Could not a frowning vexing World loose
your base Minds from it? O vile Wretches, esteemed you Earth, in its
Wintergarb, before the eternal Enjoyment of the Fountain of all Blessedness?
Verily your Mouth is eternally stopped. Wretches of Wretches, who were endowed
with the Knowledge of the only excellent Things; who spoke, and wrote to the
Good and Admiration of others: Wonderful! knew you so much of the Alsufficiency
of JEHOVAH, the Emptiness of all Things below him; and yet did not put your
Trust in him, did not care for a near Fellowship with him, but placed your Love
and Delights on Vanities? You are to be doubly punished, who knew your Master's
Will, and did it not: Good had it been for you, vilest Wretches, that you had
been Idiots and Sots: How did you despise some of the Excellent Ones of the
Earth; because of your more sagacious Nature, in uptaking? Your Heart has not
been upright before GOD; your Knowledge puffed you up; Charity has been away;
your Gifts and Abilities have you not used to his Glory for whom are all
Things: But Self has been the End of all your Endeavors. What a glorious
Luster had you then among weak Saints! The Rottenness of your Heart was
overvailed with a Multitude of natural Gifts, and Education: But he, who
knows all Things, has found you out; he has weighed you in an even Balance,
and ye are found wanting. Now, it is manifest, who is the Searcher of the
Hearts, and the Trier of the Reins: Were they not wise, who overlooked the
Approbation of Men, and gave all Diligence to be approved to thee? What thy
Tho'ts are concerning a Creature, that it is indeed. Many Hypocrites have
passed off the Stage of Time, with the Pasport of many of the Saints; but thy
Well done has only landed fair in thy blessed Kingdom. Indeed, LORD JESUS, in
Time thou made a brave Separation betwixt the Righteous and the Wicked; how
often have thou sifted thy Church over, and over again, with smaller and smaller
Sieves? So that the Difference betwixt the Wheat and the Chaff was very
discernable. How often have thou drawn the Controversy betwixt thy Friends, and
thy Enemies, to smaller and smaller Concernments? So that many, who, for Shame,
could not, inpalpably gross Things, comply with the Devil and his Slaves; yet
in Matters that seemed of less Consequence, did they side with them; whence
their Hypocrisy and Luke warmness in the Matters of GOD did appear. O
Apostates and Betrayers of the Interests of Jehovah and the Lamb, your Mouth is
eternally stopped! Many fine Excuses did your hellish Minds invent,in the Midst
of your Villainy: Your fine Subtilties, drawn from Prudentials and Politics,
are now laid open before Sun and Moon. You were too wise and prudent to take
the plain Way, and come to the Streets for GOD: You were of too meek a Nature
to hold the Devil and his Slaves at long Weapons: You were of too fine and
subtle a Spirit to speak in plain Terms of the Controversies of the Time, and
Sins of the Generation you lived in; You were too courteous and submissive to
contend with the very Shields of the Earth, in every Concernment of the Prince
of the Kings of the Earth: No, You were not such Fools, as to incur the deadly
Fewd of those, who had Authority and Power in their Hands: Yet would many of
You been ranked in among the Camp of the Saints; whereby you were esteemed as
excellent amongst some of the weaker Ones: Now it is evident, You were base
Traitors, playing with all Hands, for your greater Security and Advantage; and
that you have been lukewarm and indifferent in the royal Prerogatives and Honor
of the great and mighty LORD of all Things, and the Welfare of his Spouse. You
stated Enemies against JEHOVAH, and the LAMB, what think you of your desperate
Madness? Thought you to conquer and destroy the Friends and Darlings of the
high and mighty One? Imagined you, that you were triumphing, when you prospered
in persecuting of his Church? Fools, that was one of the great Ends, that the
Almighty raised you up for; that you might scour and rub the Vessels of his
Temple: Useful Instruments were you in the Hand of the great Actor; by you he
hammered and polished the Stones of his House; by you he cleansed it of Filth;
by you he pulled it down, in Order to a more excellent Fabric: You, you did
the Almighty use, as Slaves in all servile Employments; and when he had
fulfilled his Intentions with you, he cast you into the Fire. Vile Wretches, is
it not a dreadful Torment, to look our LORD JESUS in the Face? How does his
Presence and the Presence of his holy Ones abash you? Where are Your high and
lofty Looks now? What feared and astonisht-like Countenances! Are you the Men
that spoke so highly against the Work and People of GOD? Are you the Men, who
mocked his holy Ones, or not? Are you the Men, who cared not for our
Fellowship; but thought the World might be well enough without these heavenly
Creatures? Were you weary of our Neighborhood, as troublesome; because of our
stoic (as you fancied) and ^ecise Principles, contrary to your loose and
worldly Way of walking? Now you have your Will, you are no more troubled with
our Fellowship; the Tares and the Wheat are eternally separate: Now your Hatred
and Envy cannot reach us; we tread you for ever, as Dung among our Feet. What
are your Cursings and Blasphemies to our LORD, and us? Could a filthy Toad
defile the Sun by spitting Venom upwards? Could the Smoke of the lower Region
darken that Lamp of Light? Could the blustering Winds make the Stars to tremble?
Could the proud Ocean, with its turbulent Swellings, beat down the pearly
Foundation of the higher House? Your Envy and Malice is a vehement Flame,
burning up eternally your Soul and Body: Your own Wickedness is poured upon
you, and it burns as the Fire; it devoureth the Briers and the Thorns, and
kindles in the Thickets of the Forest, and they mount up, like the lifting up
of Smoke. Wickedness contains its Punishment in its Bosom. All our Desires
are fulfilled: The Zeal of our GOD's House did eat up our Heart, in the Days of
our Pilgrimage; but now we are overjoyed in beholding of the Vengeance: Much of
the Vengeance of the Wrath of our GOD did we, with exceeding Joy, behold, when
we lived within Time. How often did he appear, for the Salvation of his People,
with Garments rolled in Blood? How did he overturn a whole World by an
universal Inundation of Waters? How did he burn up Countries and Cities in one
Hour? How did he make Earth's devouring Jaws swallow up many of those, that it
was burdened with? By Sword, by Famine, by Pestilence, by the Beasts of the
Field, how has he made the Carcasses of his Enemies to be spread like Dung
upon the Face of the Earth? What strange Judgments have we seen upon Families,
and Persons, conform to their Iniquities? How signal was his Providence over
the Children of Men? So that Men were convinced, and could not but say, Verily
there is a GOD, that judges righteously in the Earth: Verily there is a Reward
for the Righteous and Wicked; a Difference (...) twixt him that fears GOD,
and him that fears hi^ not But all was Emblems, Types, Shadows and
Representations of what now we behold: All the Vengeance inflicted on cursed
Wretches, was just nothing. What was Mortality capable of? All the Wrath
inflicted in Time, compounded in one, was nothing, to one Moment of this
everlasting Day of pure and unmixed Vengeance: The inflicting of Punishment in
Time, was only for the Sake of the Spectators, that the Inhabitants of the
World might learn Righteousness. Vile Creatures, do you not know, whom you
should have feared? What think you of your prodigious Madness, who feared
feeble nothing Creatures, like your selves, and forgot and despised the
Threatenings and Judgments of the infinite ONE? What could all Creatures do? All
their Wrath and Fury, compared to the Vengeance of the Almighty, is like a
small Drop to a boundless Ocean. Find you not now, that it is a fearful Thing
to fall into the Hands of the living GOD? O what Billows of divine Vengeance!
What Oceans of Wrath has he treasured up at his Right Hand! Every Drop whereof
might confound ten thousand Worlds. The Lord has come out of his Place, to
punish the Inhabitants of the Earth, for their Iniquity: The Earth also has
disclosed her Blood. For behold, the LORD, a mighty and strong One, who, as a
Tempest of Hail, and a destroying Storm, as a Flood of mighty Waters
overflowing, does cast down to the Earth with the Hand: The Name of the Lord is
come, burning with his Anger; and the Burden thereof is heavy. His Lips are
full of Indignation, and his Tongue as a devouring Fire, and his Breath as an
overflowing Stream, does reach unto the Midst of the Neck. How does the LORD go
forth, as a Mighty Man? How does he stir up Jealousy like a Man of War? He
cries, he prevails against his Enemies, I have long Time held my Peace,
says the Almighty, I have been still, and refrained myself: Now will I cry,
like a ^^avelling Woman: I will destroy and devour, at once Multitudes,
Multitudes in the Valley of Decision; for the Day of the LORD is in the Valley
of Decision. He has come down, and trod upon the high Places of the Earth; and
the Mountains were molten under him, and the Valleys were cleft: As Wax before
the Fire, and as Waters that are poured down a steep Place. The Nations saw,
and were confounded; they laid their Hand upon their Mouth; they licked the
Dust like a Serpent, they moved out of their Holes like Worms of the Earth; and
were greatly afraid, and confounded because of the LORD our GOD: For he is
jealous, and revengeful; He revengeth, and is furious; Who can stand before his
Indignation? And who can abide in the Fierceness of his Anger? His Fury is
poured out like Fire; and the Rocks are thrown down by him. O thou Enemy,
Destructions are come to a perpetual End: But the LORD's Anger endures
forever: He has prepared his Throne for Judgment. Sing Praises unto the Lord,
that dwells in Zion. When he makes Inquisition for Blood, be remembers
them: He has not forgotten the Cry of the Humble; the Needy have not always
been forgotten; the Expectation of the Poor has not perished for ever. Upon
the Wicked thou rainest Snares, Fire and Brimstone, and an horrible Tempest:
This shall be for ever the Portion of their Cup. O love the Lord, all ye his
Saints; for the LORD preserves the Faithful, and plentifully rewards the
proud Doer. The LORD is righteous, and all his Works are done in Truth. All my
Bones shall say unto the LORD, Who is like unto thee? who deliverest the Poor
from him that was too strong for him. Thy Mercy, O LORD, is in the Heavens, and
thy Faithfulness reaches unto the Clouds: Thy Righteousness is like the great
Mountains, thy Judgments are a great Deep. Many, O LORD my GOD, are the
wonderful Works, which thou have done, and thy Thoughts, which are to usward,
they cannot be reckoned up in Order unto thee; If I would declare and speak of
them, they are more than can be numbered. Sing Praises, unto GOD, sing Praises,
sing Praises unto our King, sing Praises. The Heathen raged, the Kingdom were
moved; He uttered his Voice, the Earth melted: The LORD of Hosts is with us,
the GOD of Jacob is our Refuge; Selah. Through GOD we do valiantly; for it is
he that treads down our Enemies. Surely Men of low Degree were Vanity, and
Men of high Degree were a Lie; To be laid in the Balance, they were altogether
lighter than Vanity. GOD has spoken once, twice have I heard this, that Power
belongs unto GOD; also unto thee, O LORD, belongs Mercy; for thou rendrest
unto every Man according to his Work. Thou have ascended up on high, thou have
led Captivity captive; thou have received Gifts for Men: Thou have broken Rahab
in Pieces, as one that is slain: Thou have scattered thine Enemies with thy
strong Arm: But mine Horn have thou exalted, like the Horn of the Unicorn; I am
anointed with fresh Oil: Mine Eyes see my Desire upon mine Enemies, and mine
Ears have heard my Desires of the Wicked, that rose up against me. Who is like
the Lord our God, who dwells on high, who humbles himself to behold the
Things that are in Heaven? He raises up the Poor out of the Dust, and lifts
up the Needy out of the Dunghill; that he may set him with Princes. I will exalt
thee, my God, O King, I will praise thy Name for ever and ever: I will speak of
the Honor of thy Majesty, and of thy wondrous Works: Thy Kingdom is an
everlasting Kingdom, and thy Dominion endures to all Generations: Bless the
Lord all ye his Angels, that excel in Strength; Bless the Lord, all ye his
Saints: Bless the Lord, all ye his Works, in all Places of his Dominions: Bless
the Lord, O my Soul. Hallelujah.

62. Reflections upon the victorious Power of Faith, and on the Folly of
faithless Worldlings.

I, thus to triumph over Death, and Hell! am I eternal Victor over so strong
and numerous Enemies? O ye Gates of Hell, could ye not prevail against me?
Might ye not have destroyed Ten thousand Worlds of the like of me? What has
come of all your Boastings, when you have not been able to destroy Poor ME,
when assisted and helped by my Welbeloved? Strange! have not I overcome you in
the midst of great Weakness and Infirmity? O the Strength of Faith! I laid hold
on him, who is mighty; I trusted in him, and therefore I could not be moved: I
took hold on the Rock of Ages; and what could Ten thousand raging Seas have
done unto me? These who hold Grips of Him, may swim safely through the Lake,
that burns with Fire and Brimstone. Devils, and wicked Men, you were Fools to
assault us: Did you think, because of our Weakness and Mortality, to vanquish
us, and carry away the Day? If you might have overturned the Rock of Ages, then
might you have overturned us; for we relied upon Him: and it was a Repugnancy,
to imagine, He might fail us. No Wonder, Devils, that you strove to bring us to
Doubtings, and Distrust; for in Faith did our Strength lie* Had you ruined our
Faith, and brought us to Diffidence, or presumptuous, foolish Boldness, ye had
ruined us for ever: but our WELBELOVED prayed to his Father, that our Faith
should not fail us; and he is greater and dearer in his Father's Eyes, than to
be said Nay, in so earnest a Request. Now it is manifest, that all Things have
been done by Relieving; It has been the Sun, Original, and King of all other
Graces: Because I believed, therefore I spoke and did for him on Earth;
Therefore did I place the Flower and Vigor of my Love upon him; Therefore did
I contemn all the Glory and Excellency of Time, for my Portion; Therefore did I
exceedingly endeavor to do the Things that are Well-pleasing in his Sight, and
to be more and more like him; Therefore did I long to see him Face to Face. Men
and Angels, through Faith in his Name, am I entered this blessed Place: Not by
my Holiness, not by my Strength, and Integrity, is this wonderful Thing come to
pass; but by laying hold on him, who is mighty to save unto the uttermost.
Wicked Men and Devils, I have vanquished you; I have thrown you eternally to
the Ground; not by the Excellency of mine own Vigor and Courage, but by laying
hold on his Strength, who sustaineth all Things. Faith was the Substance of
Things hoped for, the Evidence of Things not seen. For by it we have all
received an everlasting Name. We believed, that what he had promised, He would
perform, though we saw them not, either intuitively, or rationally; though we had
not received the Promises, but only had a View of them afar off, yet were we
persuaded of them, and embraced them, and confessed our selves Strangers and
Pilgrims on Earth; Declaring plainly to Worldlings, that we were seeking a
Place of eternal Abode, overlooking the Wilderness, as a Wayfaring Place. O
fairest WELBELOVED, how was I enamoured and ravished with thy very NAME, when I
had not seen thee! How was I persuaded of the Truth of all thy Promises and
Threatenings, as if I had beheld them fully accomplished? How gladly and
cheerfully did I loose my Heart and Love from all temporal Concernments, that
they might be set wholly upon the great Things to be revealed? I believed all
thou spoke; because I counted thee both Faithful, Willing and Powerful to
accomplish: I consulted not with Flesh and Blood, to go and reason, Is it
possible such a Thing can be? Nay, I overlooked all Objections, though never so
plausible and strong; and stopped the Mouth of all earthly, sensual and
devilish Wisdom, with, The Mouth of the LORD has spoken it. But, O my fair
One, how does Beholding inconceivably transcend Faith! I trusted Thou would
perform above all I could ask, or think; but how confused, general and childish
were my Conceptions of what now I enjoy? The highest I could bend my
Conceptions, was, to imagine, that Eye has not seen, Ear has not heard,
neither has it entered into the Heart of Mortal, what thou had prepared for
those that waited for thee: All I could conceive of this boundless Happiness,
was, to consider it, as passing all Conception. How have I been vexed with the
Baseness and lowness of my Apprehensions? and have endeavored to strain them
above their proper Measure; not considering that childish Estate was not
capable of manly Conceptions; and that Mortality must be swallowed up of Life,
else the Creature cannot behold thy Face, and live. It was Wisdom to long for
this Day of immediate Fellowship; but Folly to desire it within the Tents of
Mortality: All I could then have of Thee, was thy Portraiture, Thou set down in
thy Testament. Love Letters I received from Thee, in Earth's childish Dialect:
Thou told me of Kingdoms and Cities, Diadems and Honors, Riches and Pleasures:
Thou told me of thy Greatness, and Majesty, and Loveliness; all which were
Things of the lower World much esteemed: But here are neither Kingdoms, nor
Diadems; but Things transcendently above all such Trifles. How ignorant have I
been of my Happiness? Wonderful! that the Hope of this made me not overjoyed to
the Death. O silly, hungry Wilderness, when I cast back mine Eyes upon thee,
Can I but smile at the childish Folly of Worldlings, who only desired,
endeavored, contended for Portions, and Inheritances out of thee? They that
purchased most, have acquired Nothing; and they who purchased least, can be in
no poorer Case. What have you gained, base Worldlings? Enjoy the Fruit of your
Expectation and Labor; Now, when the End of all Things is come, gather
together your Purchase, and rejoice for ever in it: What! have you provided
Nothing for the last Days? Laid you up no Treasures for this Time? Were you not
thinking on this endless Day of Eternity? Have you been all such brutish Fools,
as to provide Nothing for the last Day? Strange Folly and Madness! Had none of
you but that much Consideration as to think, Possibly there might be a LIFE
after an Inch of Time? Were ye Wise, or were ye Fools, who consumed all your
Time, in providing for Time? Base Fools, did God create you for an Inch of
Time? Thought you his Wisdom made you only to eat and drink, and mind your base
selves, to provide only for your sensual decaying Life, and never to aim at his
Glory, To whom, and through whom, and for whom are all Things? Did you imagine
it just, that the lower Creatures should serve you; and yet you to neglect the
CREATOR? Did you forget him; and should He have minded you, and given your Rain
and fruitful Seasons, filling your Hearts with Food and Gladness? O ingrate
Wretches! O abominable Fools! shall we not tread you eternally under our Feet,
as the Dross, and Off-scourings of all Things? Dross you have coveted and
desired, as your Portion; Dross you have loved, feared and served; and
therefore baser you are than the basest Dross. Did you not consider what lay
beyond Time? and was Earth your only Desire? Then have You judged your selves
unworthy of any more. Did you seek for no higher Life, than the dying,
evanishing, natural Life? and have you not excluded your selves this sublime,
excellent and immortal Life? Would you not believe the faithful and true
Witness, who testified unto you, of what excellent Things were laid up in Store
for those, who feared, loved, obeyed, and walked with God, in their Generation?
Would you not rely upon him, for Time and Eternity; but laid hold on a present
vain World? yea, and in such a base and brutish Manner, as you did not
acknowledge him, and depend upon him, in your earthly Enjoyments; but trusted
to your Wisdom, your Labors, and a Thousand Vanities? Reap the Fruit of your
own Sowing; you have received your Choice, and what would you have more? Had
you chosen this endless Happiness, you had gotten it; and immortal Life would
have been, by Ten thousand Times, more sweet than it was. And did you mock, in
your Hearts, at our Folly, who overlooked all visible Things, and placed our
Hope, our Joy, our Portion, our Blessedness on Things, that neither Eye could
see, nor Heart conceive? And shall we not for ever insult over You now, when
your Folly is manifest, even to your selves? Our Hope has not made us ashamed:
But what has come of all your Aims and Hopes? Now, we have you eternally, as
Dust under the Soles of our Feet. O Death and Hell, we have vanquished you for
ever; Never shall you be able to rise again. O Grave! O Death! ^how the
Trophies of your Victory. Through God we have done valiantly; for he it is that
has beat down our Enemies. You seemed to overcome us, and hold us in Prison;
but, through his Strength, we have broken all your Bands, and ruined You
utterly. The Victory was ever ours: But all now is fully accomplished; not once
Enemy is able to shake a Weapon any more. Everlasting Hallelujah to our God,
who has given us the Victory, through our LORD JESUS CHRIST. O what an endless
Triumph; Wicked Men and Devils, you were ordained for the Pomp and Glory of
this Day. Our WELBELOVED has made our State every Way excellent and glorious;
therefore has he ordained Enemies for us to combat with, vanquish, and
triumph over, for ever and ever. That our State might want nothing of the Top,
and Flower, and Perfection of Glory and Exaltation; you have we, as a Foot
stool, for ever to trample upon; All Things are ours, and for our Honor and
Glory. Now it is evident who were the really great Ones. Now does appear what
Manner of Persons we are. Who but the LAMB, and his Followers! Who but the
FIRSTBORN, and his Brethren! O the Height, and glorious Dignity of a Saint!
Sirs, What think you? are we not made great Persons? Knew we our Dignity, when
we were on Earth? Surely not in the Ten thousand thousandth Part: Mortality
could not have born it. Have we not been like young Minors, who considered not
the Glory and Majesty of our vast Inheritance, we were coming unto? and
therefore, we sometimes degraded our selves with the familiar Converse of base
Worldlings, and crouched so creepingly as if such Beasts had been fit
Companions for us: But in our Childhood we could not conceive these
superexcellent Royalties. Indeed, I ever looked upon all the Saints, as the
only Excellent of the Earth; and was oft-times struck with Reverence and
Admiration, at the Sight of the least of them: Yet, then I knew them not;
Mortality could conceive little. Worldlings, know you not now, whom you have
despised? Time was, when a Saint, as a Saint, was a despicable Nothing in your
Eyes: Pelf, worldly Grandeur, and Applause, rendered Persons only excellent in
your Esteem. What was a Man's Holiness to you, but some imaginary Fancies and
Opinions, he had learned by Education and Teaching, and entertained through
Conceitness and Fancy? Some precise Tenets, which were needless and
superfluous: For Religion, in your Judgment, was an easy and trivial Matter;
the Generality were Saints: A large and wide Charity had you for every one, not
transgressing the Limits of common Humanity; Civilians, Moralists, Formalists
illuminated, were all, in your Opinion, fit for the glorious and majestic
Kingdom; fit for entering this golden CITY, and conversing familiarly with
JEHOVAH and the LAMB, in this royal Hall of Glory: Us you reproached, as
Censorious and Uncharitable; because we looked upon Holiness, as a difficult,
rare, and excellent Thing: because we counted the Way to this unspeakable Glory
strait, and traveled by few; because we looked upon the Saints, as so many
miraculous Signs and Wonders. Who have judged right, is now manifest to the
whole Creation. We have sought, we have vanquished! Glory, Glory, immoral Glory
to the CAPTAIN, the Author and Finisher, for evermore.

63. What appeared on Earth, is really in Heaven; for there are really all
Things.

O pleasant and melodious World! The former was jarring, every Part in
Opposition to another: All Things were full of Labor, Groaning and Traveling,
until this glorious Birth was brought forth. It could not stand, being divided
against it self, being full of intestine Wars, and Desolations; it could not
but come to ^ought, and this fair Fabric arise in its Place. Behold, nothing
now but Peace and eternal Friendship: Nothing is out of Order; Every Part
agrees with the whole, for sounding forth an eternal Hallelujah to the great
Former. All Contention and Violence are banished out of this blessed World,
into utter Darkness: Nothing but deep Peace and Security; all Things seem to
kiss and embrace one another; these eternal Gales have no Flux or Change, though
they are for ever blowing. Sirs, is not this gentle Breathing passing
delightsom, after so sore and hot a Battle? All is perfumed with Myrrh and
Frankincense! One Blast might cause Ten thousand Worlds to live. What a Life
have thou, O blessed Self? Who art filled with, and drawest in these full Gales
of the Spirit, that blows where it lists throughout Eternity. O these Wells
of Salvation, infinitely transcending the Pools of Baca' s Vail! One Drop is
more delightsom and satisfying, than the Oceans of all earthly Sweetness. What
were the broken Cisterns, that Fools were drinking of? They were inflaming, not
quenching; more fantastical than real. O Fools! were you not imagining, you
were swallowing down huge Varieties of all Manner of Sweetness? But you awaked
and behold it was a Dream. Are you not confounded, when your Eyes are opened,
to perceive so deep a Delusion? Were you not imagining your selves enjoying
Riches, and Honors, and Pleasures? But now the glorious Day of Eternity is
broken up, and where are they? Here are Realities: This Land is filled with
eternal Springs of living Waters of all Sweetness and Satisfaction; Strange!
ever drinking, and never cloyed and surcharged: the deeper, and more Draughts,
the greater Delectation! O my Conceptions on Earth! O my Enjoyments now! I did
not in the least conceive them. O my eternally present Enjoyments: And yet, I
have all I could conceive. Whatever Pleasure, Satisfaction, and what can
conduce to a Life filled with all Manner of Excellencies, Delights and
Sweetness, is here in the Top and Flower of all Perfection. When I strained my
Conceptions to the highest Pitch of Mortality, and imagined Glory, Excellency
and Sweetness, augmented and perfected, by Myriads of Myriads of Stages, above
all the Glory I could perceive or imagine; still I have fallen wonderfully
below this: And yet my Conceptions, in Part, represented this; for all Things
are here: Here is an eternal Confluence of all Manner of good Things: Who can
imagine any Thing, which might be here, and is not: What want we, O Inhabitants
of this wealthy City? Is not this the Center, whither all Glory and Sweetness
run, like a flowing Stream? And what Wonder? This is the City-royal of the
eternal KING Here, here He manifests, immediately, and in open View, his
unsearchable Riches, transcendent Glory, infinite Power, boundless Goodness,
and the infinite Varieties of his unconceivable Excellencies. Were they Fools,
who overlooked base Earth, and laid out their whole Strength, for acquiting a
Right to the glorious Possession, and the unsearchable Treasures of this Ten
thousand Times blessed Land of EMMANUEL? Poor Earth, with thy glistering,
nothing Enjoyments, whither art thou gone? O real, solid and substantial
Enjoyments! all the Glorious, Beauties and Excellencies of Time were mere
Shadows and Resemblances of what I behold. What, there, was in Appearance, is
here indeed; the real Springtide is here: Here are the true Gardens and
Orchards of Delights: Here are the substantial Roses, Lilies and Violets: Here
are the true Pearls, Rubies and Diamonds; all the former were but Counterfeit,
and in Appearance such. I see the Difference betwixt Things here, and what were
in Time, is such, as is between the bare Show, and the Substance. I thought, I
saw Crowns and Sceptres, Honors and Renown; but they were Vapors, glistering
after their Similitudes, which are now evanished eternally to nothing; and
behold the real Diadems, Sceptres, and Honors; I thought, I found some
Pleasure and Delight; I thought, I beheld great Varieties of all Kinds: But the
Night is gone, and the Day is broken up, that dispelleth glistering Shows and
Vapors, in discovering the real and substantial Things: All Things are here in
Substance, which in Time were in Appearance. Here are the real Dwellings,
Cities, Orchards Hills of Frankincense, Mountains of Spices. We were far
mistaken, O Inhabitants, to speak of any Thing, as existent any where else than
here; else all our Speech and Conceptions, within Mortality's Region, were
merely figurative: For, to conceive of Things properly, as they were on Earth,
there was neither Sun, Moon nor Stars; neither Lilies nor Roses, nor Beauties,
nor Excellencies; they are here, and only here for evermore. Were they wise,
who placed their Delights on Shadows, and evanishing Nothings? Were they Fools,
who overlooked all the vain Fancies of Time, and fixed their Minds only on this
enduring Substance? I have found the Substance, for the Shadow: I, even I am
Possessor of the World of eternal Joy and Satisfaction.

64. A frowning tormenting Time, the Prelude of Eternity.

All Shame, and Sorrow, and Vexation, you are eternally gone, as if you had not
been: Sometimes you possessed us, but the fair and white Side of Providence is
turned up for ever. I see, it was the Ordination of Eternity, That the Head and
Members should be every Way conformed: All that are here, were of no Beauty or
Desireableness sometime in the Eyes of Mortals; but were despised and rejected
of Men, Persons of Sorrow, acquainted with Grief; being destitute, and
afflicted, and tormented: Many Moralists, and Formalists, and lukewarm
Christians, went for Saints, in the Eyes of almost all: But one Thing among a
Thousand, might have discovered what they were, even that they underwent not
the Lot of him, whom they professed to be following; the World smiled upon
them, because they were of the World: Other Entertainment did they meet with,
in their Progress through Earth, than the Chief of Ten thousand, in the Days of
his Flesh: Though my Lord could have brought his Chosen to this unspeakable
Glory, through the Abundance of earthly Ease, Peace, Glory, Joy and Del^ght;
yet, this has been the Way of his infinite Wisdom. O ye Angels, could you have
found out such a noble Draught! Could you have invented such an admirable Way,
of bringing poor, feeble, sinful Mortals to Glory? O sweet, sweet Dispensation!
Base Earth, that is now for ever evanished, was not my Country, but the Place
of my Exile; not my Abode, but my Pilgrimage; and therefore it was well it
frowned upon me, and appeared like the Thing that indeed it was, a vain, empty,
glistering Nothing. My Lord has been tender of his Darlings, and could not
suffer Night-Dreams and Fancies to beguile them; which they might, they being
in their childish and mortal Condition, if they had appeared with a smiling
pleasant Countenance. O my God, the greatest Snares that ever thou rainedst
upon thine Enemies, was when thou gave them the Desires of their Heart: Earth
they desired, and Earth thou made to look kindly upon them; and therefore
they are ruined for evermore. I see the Dispensation, that most crossed my own
natural Disposition, has contributed most for my Advantage: My Lord has
withheld no good Thing from me: It was best I should have had a Life of Sorrow,
Torment and Vexation; it was well I was cut short of earthly Enjoyments. My
only Desire was to finish my Course, for this unspeakable Happiness, and that
it should be swift and vigorous; and how excellently have thou fulfilled the
Desire of my Heart!

65. Glory causes a total Change in all the Powers, Faculties and Virtues.

O my Heart, thou art changed indeed! How tormenting a Burden have thou been
unto me, in the Days of my Absence! even when I kept most observant and
strictest Watch over thy Frame, thou played me a Slip, and bended often from the
Original of all Blessedness, unto Vanity, How wast thou drawn hither and
thither, by all Dispensations? When I imagined, I had got thee wrought up to a
sublime heavenly Frame; how soon did thou become carnal and earthly again!
When thou seemed all in a Flame of Divine Love and Zeal, how did thou become
cold and indifferent, ere ever I was aware? When I rejoiced in finding thee, in
a lively, tender, Gospel-frame, how quickly did thou become dead and
senseless like a Stone! When I could not but cry out, O my Heart is fixed, my
Heart is fixed; I will sing; yea, I will forever be altogether for Praises: How
soon wast thou unsettled, and tossed up and down with the Winds of Vanity! When
I could say, I will trust in him, and not be afraid; I will not fear, though
the Earth be removed, though the Mountains be cast into the Midst of the Sea,
the Lord Jehovah is my Strength and my Song, and He also is become my
Salvation: How soon did thou become despondent and fearful, afraid of Worms
and Nothings, and forgetting the Lord thy Maker, that stretched out these
Heavens! When thou wast in so sweet a Frame, as I could not but wish, When
shall I be in the WELBELOVED's immediate Embraces: I value not that small Brook
that lies betwixt me and him; Though I walk in the Valley of the Shadow of
Death, I will fear no Evil; for he is ever with me: Yet, how soon wast thou
overclouded, and darkened with Doubtings and Confusion; so that thou would
have given Ten thousand Worlds, if at thy disposing, for the fixed Persuasion
of a CHRIST, and a BLESSEDNESS! How wast thou sometimes in a strong, enlarged
and cheerful Frame, running the Ways of the Lord's Commandments! Thy Cry was,
What is the Will of my Lord? All his Commandments are easy, because his: Anon,
thou would neither lead nor drive; His Worship and Service was a Burden. O my
Heart, thou art now as I would! O all my Faculties, you are altogether heavenly
and divine: All, all is swallowed up in full immediate Beholding: After him do
ye go, with an uninterrupted, eternal Bensil: It is impossible for thee, my
Soul, now in thy Lord's immediate Embraces, to fall away from this divine
Frame; thou cannot but incessantly serve and glorify him with unspeakable Joy
and Alacrity, since thou eternally beholds his ravishing Countenance: Can
Doubting enter this Noonday VISION of Glory, when we have attained the Height
and Perfection of Evidence? Who can fear, that is incircled within these
everlasting Arms? This City of Refuge is situate above the Reach of Ten
thousand Worlds of wicked Men and Devils. Who can dwell thus, with an infinite
Love, and not be all inflamed with unquenchable Fires? The first Sight of thy
goodly Visage, my fair One, has captivated all my Faculties unto Thee.

66. Heaven the sweeter, the more Dangers we have escaped,

How have I been choked with the pestiferous Contagion of a vile World? So that
I had almost lost my Life. The hellish Sights and Sounds, that have entered my
Faculties, against my Will, made Hell and Death familiar unto me: I found it
one of the most difficult Commandmen^ of my Lord, To stop m^ ^^ars from hearing
of Blood, and st^t^ ^i^te Eyes from se^^^^ o^ Evil: Even when I set a Guard
upon all my Senses, my inbred Wickedness betrayed the Fort-royal, and sensibly
received the Sparks that fired up all. How could feeble, mortal I, but be
confused, and diverted, and deadned with the Hurry, and Noise, and Vexation of
an hellish World? How often have I complained, Fearfulness and Trembling is come
upon me, and Horror has overwhelmed me? O that I had Wings like a Dove; for
then would I fi^e away, and be at Rest: Lo, then would I wander far off and
remain in the Wilderness: I would hasten my Escape from the windy Storm and
Tempest! Ah! my Senses are filled with Vanity and Mischief: The Beholding, and
Hearing of Blood and Evil, has vitiated my Faculties, and made Folly and
Madness seem common and ordinary to my Apprehensions; so that I cannot attain
unto any suitable Abhorrence of Wickedness, when my Love and Desire after God is
faint and weak; being high, or low, according to my Abhorrence and Hatred of
Evil. It Is wonderful, O my Lord, it is passing wonderful, how I have landed in
this choice happy Place with my Life! The humane Nature in its Integrity, might
have been corrupted and destroyed, in such a noisome and pestilential Air, as
filled the lower World; while it was the proper Habitation of Devils, and their
base Slaves: But, who can suffer Hardship, whom thou once take into thy
Tutorage? These whom thy Father has given thee, have thou safely preserved,
and none could be able to pl^ck them out of thine Hand. The most entire and
excellent Nature, committed wholly to its own Guidance, could not have been
able to persevere, through the Ten-thousandth Part of the Difficulties and
Temptations I have overpassed: But what cannot thy infinite Excellency do? No
Security, but in being altogether thine, and Nothing our own, which happy I
have experienced, to my eternal Sweetness. O now the Danger is past! O lively
and delightsom Air of Emmanuel's Country! Nothing dwells in this World of my
Welbeloved's Conquest, but Righteousness! You Off-scourings of all Things, I am
not vexed with your abominable Vileness any more: Sometimes you vexed and
tormented me, that the wonderful Efficacy of my WELBELOVED's Graces might be
the more evidently manifested; but you are evanished, unto Smoke are you
evanished away. O now my Senses, you are only filled with the only ROSE and
BEAUTY of this everlasting, ravishing Paradise! No Sweetness, no Fullness, no
Excellency, but that of the BRANCH: Yea, could the abominable Smoke of ten
Thousand Hells ascend this sweet Region, it would not be perceived; but be
lost, like a small Drop of Bitterness in a boundless Ocean of Sweetness. And O
the delightsom Aspect of the Lamb's fair and white Company, that follow him
whithersoever he goes! What a golden Life, in so ravishing a Fellowship!
Nothing, but the mutual Emanations of surpassing Sweetness! Nothing but sublime
Hallelujahs to him that sits upon the Throne, and to the Lamb, throughout
Eternity: O my blessed Senses, you are no more filled with Vanity and Vexation!
Now, Devil, and his Slaves, what can you do? Your tempting vexing World is
evanished for ever: Yea, though it were not, what are you to us! Like base
Cowards, you assaulted us in our childish Estate; but what are you all, to one
of us in our manly Vigor? Were you all drawn up in Battle Array against me,
whom once You though it unworthy of the least of your Assaults, should I not with
one Lifting-up of mine Arm vanquish You for ever? Nothing in me can yield to
Hell; Sin and Mortality is swallowed up of Life.

67. The Inhabitant shall not say, I am sick.

All thy Infirmities and Sickness, O my Soul, are quite eradicated; since I am
in the Arms of all Life, Joy and Satisfaction. How have I been, in the Days of
mine Infirmity, sick of Love for my only Welbeloved? Strong Love was like to
die for want of full and personal Enjoyment, even when I had the greatest
Manifestations on Earth: And no Wonder; the clearer Discoveries of Loveliness,
the more ardent Desire of the nearest and fullest Enjoyment. O my ravishing
Welbeloved! no sooner I saw thee afar off, by a borrowed Vision, than I longed
and desired for nothing more, than to have thee in my Arms, and be eternally
incircled in thine immediate Embraces: No sooner did I embrace thee, as thou
offered thyself and was espoused to thee; but I longed with exceeding Longing
for this blessed Day of eternal Marriage. Letters, Love Tokens, Intercourses by
Ambass^dors, and all Manner of mediate Fellowship could not give full
Satisfaction: Nothing but Faintings, Longings and Desires, until I have thee in
my naked Embraces. Apples and Flagons of Wine could scarce hold up my swooning
Heart in thy Absence: The most excellent Enjoyment could do no more than hinder
an eternal Deliquium: Only thy Self could cheer up the fainting Soul. O thy
SELF, thy All-excellent Self! What, but thy noble-Self, i^ worthy of Desire?
None but Thee, none beside Thee! O Flower of my Desires, I am well, eternally
well! My fair One, since I have Thee in my Arms, my tormenting Love-sickness is
quite abolished from my Mind! The beholding of thee Face to Face, has
swallowed up all former Things. I enjoy Thee fully, and am I not at the
furthermost of all my Desires? Thou have for ever, my dearest Lord, cut off all
Matter of Complaint. Sirs, I need now be a Supplicant to none of you, for the
Use of your Moven with my Royal Welbeloved, that ye tell him my Love-sickness,
through his seeming Unkindness. Can there be greater Intimacy, than now,
betwixt my Lord and me for evermore? I have entered thy very Heart, I lie
betwixt thy BREASTS. Can Sickness, or Sorrow, or Infirmity dwell within the
Circle of thine Arms? Were there any Sickness, it should be through
Superabundance of overcoming Loves; but the Vessels are fitted for the
superabundant Oil of Gladness, and Overflowing of Joys. If this Ambrosia and
Nectar of Glory be strong and sprightly, the Bottles are new, and of a durable
Structure. What can I say more of my Happiness, than that I cannot conceive and
express the full Emanations of thy infinite Love and Sweetness?

68. Grace an excellent Prelude to Glory, yet the Difference betwixt them
inconceivable.

Whatever Sweetness and Delight I enjoyed in Time, is now augmented, Myriads of
Myriads of Stages: By my leaving of Earth, I have lost no Enjoyment, not only
because of Recompense, and Enjoyment of an higher Nature; but also because all
Kinds of Enjoyments are here in an eminent and divine Manner. Thy Land, O
EMMANUEL, is stored with all Manner of precious Things, New and Old, which thou
had prepared for thy Chosen, before all Ages. All the Joys and Delights that
I met with in Time, were as so many light Essays and small Preludes of these
substantial and enduring Pleasures; All have been slight Fore-tastes of this
superabounding Harvest of Eternity: What was then in Drops, is now in Oceans;
for I am entered for ever into the FOUNTAIN of all Fullness and Satisfaction: And
what Sweetness, before, I experienced blockishly and in Part, I find now in the
most evident, sublime and vigorous Manner: Even my most refined Enjoyments of
thy blessed Self, were but low, childish Motions, arising from shallow improper
Apprehensions, raised by the Contraction of a Multitude of borrowed Ideas,
extracted from lower Objects; which indeed were passing glorious and sweet for
the Time, filling Mortality almost above its Measure, appearing Childhood-Glory
fallen down on Grace's Country: But O the vast Difference betwixt Mortality and
Immortality! Who can but smile at his former Apprehensions! No Wonder earthly
stupid Creatures apprehend this unspeakable Glory in a stupid earthly Manner.
Every Extraordinary may appear above what Eye has seen, the Ear has heard, or
Mind can imagine. Unto the Mind that has known this more by Faith, than Sight:
more by certain Report, than evident Experience; for what can the Mortal
imagine higher, than by the sweet Outletting of the Glory and Desire of Men and
Angels, to be filled and overfilled with Joy unspeakable and full of Glory? But
a Drop that would overfill a Vessel of the narrowest Size, would be as just
Nothing to one of the Capacity of many Worlds. Yet, what Delight and
Admiration, to look back and consider, how my Lord made Bits of half-dead Clay
to be ravished with the highest Objects, far above the Reach of an earthly,
mortal Condition! But Creatures of all Conditions are enamoured, ravished,
satiate and over come, when once Thou beginnest, in the least, to discover thy
matchless Loveliness. What Delights, to conceive Bits of childish Nothings
enamoured with Thee they never saw! and chanting forth their Love-Songs of
Praises in the midst of the saddest Dispensations, which were able to torment,
bear down, and crush low, feeble Mortality! O what Jo^, to consider (with the
same Eye) my Converse sometimes with THEE in Time, and now in E^ernity; and to
parrallel them together! How excellently does the Espousing agree with the
Marriage? How nobly does Walking with thee by Faith, usher in the personal
Following of thee whither soever thou go? I find thy Dealing to the Saints,
in Time, is a M^stery above the Reach of Nature in its highest Pitch, as well
as thy Way with them in Eternity. Little did, or would the World consider, what
a golden Happiness I had in the Days of my Pilgrimage, in thy Fellowship: The
choicest of their Religion was a formal outside Homage they mocked thee with;
but a familiar Converse with thee, was a Thing they had no Experience of: They
worshipped thee as a dumb Idol; for no mutual Intercourse did they know, or
desire: Thou wast near in their Mouth, but far from their Reins. O the golden
Hours I have had, in thy ravishing Fellowship, within the ^e^^s of Sorrow, in
Absence! Eternity cannot cancel the Memory of thy passing Kindness to me, in my
low and despicable Condition: I have most sensibly found thy strengthening,
cheering Presence, in all Afflictions and Difficulties; I found thee another
Manner of GOD, than the foolish World imagined thee to be, even a present Help
in Times of Trouble, and that gave Ear to my Prayers, and answered them
speedily; both by the Influences of thy Spirit on my Heart, and thy
Dispensations. Though then I was a Child, yet did thou teach me to discern
betwixt thy Frownings, and thy Smiles; the Light of thy Countenance lifted up,
and the turning away of thy Face: Thou made thy self familiar unto me; So
that I approached unto thee, in all Exigencies, as unto a near and intimate
Friend, of whose Kindness and Help I was persuaded, and trusted accordingly: I
depended and trusted on Thee as a Father, casting all my Cares upon Thee; so
that I was careful for nothing: I learned to know my Duty, and the Way of its
Performance, and committed the Event of all to my LORD and Sovereign
absolutely, without the least Reservation; being persuaded that he would
completely fulfill all Things fully committed unto him, because he had promised;
and would not make them ashamed, who placed their Confidence in him. And now I
may testify before the whole Creation, that thou have been better to me, in my
Pilgrimage, than I could imagine, or desire; and that the Lot Thou carved out
for me, in Time, has been best for me: I would not for Ten thousand Worlds it
had been otherwise, as to the smallest Dispensation; the most cross and
Ruin-like Dispensations, as to Sense, have been the sweetest, having had the
noblest Effects, and nearest Manifestations of thy Love and Sweetness
accompanying them: If any have proved any Thing bitter and disadvantagious, it
was because I brought them on my own Head, by my sacrilegious Boldness, in
disposing of my Self, and what concerned me, without his Approbation and
Consent: Yet, even these he turned to my Good; his Power being so
transcendently excellent, as to bring Light out of Darkness; and his Love being
so boundless, to those whom he had chosen from Eternity, that he would suffer
no Harm to befall them, but make all Things to contribute to their Good. O! can
we but wonder at, and rejoice in the incomparable Condescendency, Wisdom and
Excellency of our LORD, who has contrived and effected our eternal Happiness
after so stupendous a Manner! Could we ruin our selves, since it was his Will
to save? Could we in the least stand in the Way of our Happiness, since it was
his sovereign eternal Pleasure, to make us as happy as can be? O eternal
Astonishment! the more we have undone our selves, the more he has made us
happy; the more we have degraded our selves, the higher has he exalted us; the
more we have hated and provoked him, the more kind and intimate is he become to
us! Men and Angels, could you have found out such a Way to manifest the Glory
and Excellency of FREE GRACE? Is it not here manifested in the highest Manner?

69. Praises to Jehovah for the Accomplishment of his Promises to his People,
and of his Threatenings against the Wicked.

Is it not an eternal Question, Men and Angels, whether the Excellency of our
WELBELOVED manifested, or lying hid, be more astonishing? But sure each of them
is an everlasting Ravishment, which would plunge never so many Worlds in an
Ocean of never-ending Astonishment: One Ray of his divine Excellency, now
immediately beheld, does implicitly discover, that more and more eternally may
be seen; What then should be our immortal Exercise, but to bend all our
Faculties to search, and look in, and admire, and flame in Love, and extol the
transcendent Excellencies of HIM that sits upon the Throne, and the LAMB,
throughout all Ages? JEHOVAH, altogether excellent, lovely! JEHOVAH is a Deep,
we have for ever lost our selves in! What are we, Men and Angels, that we
should set Him on high? What contribute we to the Declaration of his infinite
Glory? Though we should wear out, to a Period, endless Eternity with our
incessant Hallelujahs, could we, Bits of nothing, conceive in the least this
infinite One? Did he not bow and humble himself infinitely below himself, that
he may be apprehended, as he is, by our finite Capacities, with his increated
Loveliness and Sweetness. It Is strange! He should satiate Nothings with all his
Fullness! This is a Mystery, a Wonder! Nothing but Wonders upon Wonders! Every
precedent Act is the Admiration of the following, and so through out Eternity.
What Stretchings of Capacities! What Bending of all the Faculties! O the
Beauty, the Goodness, the Sweetness, that dwells from Eternity to Eternity in
HIM! O the full Outlettings upon us! Though He were not excellent to us; yet, are
we not constrained to love, and adore, and extol him, who is an infinite Mass
of all Excellency? Though he be infinitely above all the Praises of all possible
Creatures; yet can we but cry him up, to whom all Glory is due? Are we not
constrained, who see his Face, to express, and again and again throughout
Eternity, to express his INFINITE PERFECTIONS? As Creatures, we are bound to be
all for him; but these stupendous Obligations superadded, above all Production
and Preservation, have elevated unto such a Frame, that common Ties are almost
swallowed up and evanished. O his Goodness, his Goodness! How great is his
Goodness! and how great is his Beauty! Every Ray, every Outletting would ravish
never so many Creatures. I will extol Thee, my GOD, O King, and I will bless
the Name for ever and ever. Great is the LORD, and greatly to be praised; and
his Greatness is unsearchable. I will speak of the glorious Honor of thy
Majesty, and I will declare thy Greatness. Yea, all thy Works shall praise
Thee, O Lord, and all thy Saints shall bless Thee. While I ^^ve, I will praise
the Lord; I will sing Praises to my God, while I have my Being. Praise him, all
ye his Angels; praise him, all his Hosts; praise him, Sun and Moon; praise him,
all ye Stars of Light; praise him, ye Heavens of Heavens, ye Waters above the
Heavens: Let them praise the Name of the Lord; for he commanded and they were
created; He has also establish^d them for ever and ever. O Sing unto the Lord
a new Song; Praise him in the Firmament of his Power; praise him for his mighty
Acts; praise him, according to his excellent Greatness: For in this Day is the
BRANCH of the Lord beautiful and glorious; and the Fruit of the Earth excellent
and comely: For them that are escaped of Israel, and that are left in Zion, and
that remain in Jerusalem, are called Holy. There has come forth a ROD out of
the Stem of Jesse, and a BRANCH has grown out of his Roots; and the Spirit of
the Lord does rest upon him, the Spirit of Wisdom and Understanding, of
Counsel, Might, Knowledge, and of the Fear of the Lord: With Righteousness does
he judge the Poor; and reprove with Equity, for the Meek of the Earth: And he
smote the Earth with the Rod of his Mouth; and with the Breath of his Lips did
he stay the Wicked. And Righteousness is the Girdle of his Loins, and
Faithfulness the Girdle of his Reins. The Wolf does dwell with the Lamb, and
the Leopard does lie down with the Kid and the Calf, the young Lion and the
Fatling together, and a little Child may lead them; for the Earth is full of
the Knowledge of the Lord, as the Waters cover the Sea. O Lord, Thou art my
GOD, I will praise Thee, for thou have done wonderful Things; thy Counsels of
old are Faithfulness and Truth: For thou have brought down all those, that r^s^
up against Thee; and art for a CROWN of Glory and a DIADEM of a Beauty to thy
People. Judgment does dwell in the Wilderness, and Righteousness remains in the
fruitful Field; and the Work of Righteousness is Peace, and the Effect of
Righte^usness Quietness and Assurance for ever. An high Way is here, and it is
called the Way of Holiness: No Lion is here, no ravenous Beast goes up
thereupon; But the Redeemed walk therein, and the Ransomed of the Lord do
return, and come to Zion with Songs, and everlasting Joy upon their Heads; They
have retained Joy and Gladness, and Sorrow and Sighing have fled away. We are
the everlasting Witnesses of thy Glory and Excellency, O dread Sovereign, and
thy Servant whom thou have chosen: Before Thee there was no God formed, neither
shall there be after Thee: Thou, even Thou art the Lord, and beside Thee there
is no Savior: Before the Day Thou art He; and there is none that can deliver
out of thine Hand: Thou workest, and who shall let Thee? We remember not the
former Things, neither consider the Things of old: Behold, Thou do a new
Thing, and it springs forth and we understand it: Thou do even make a Way
in the Wilderness, and Rivers in the Desert. The Beasts of the Field honor
Thee, the Dragons arid the Owls; because Thou give Water in the Wilderness,
and Rivers in the Desert, to give Drink to thy People, thy Chosen. Us have thou
formed for thy Self, we shall show forth thy Praise. Thy Righteousness it near,
thy Salvation is gone forth: And thine Arm did judge the People; The Islands
did wait upon thee, and upon thine Arm did they trust. The Heavens evanished
like Smoke; and the Earth did vax old like a Garment; and they that dwelt
therein did die in like Manner: But thy Salvation is for ever, and thy
Righteousness shall not be abolished: The Mountains did depart, the Hills were
removed; But thy Kindness has not departed from us, neither shall the Covenant
of thy Peace be removed from us. I will mention the Loving Kindness of the
Lord, and the Praises of the Lord, according to all that the Lord has bestowed
upon us. Thou rent the Heavens, and came down, the Mountains flowed down at
thy Presence; and thou trod down the People in thine Anger, and made them drunk
in thy Fury; and did bring down their Strength to the Earth. Though many of the
Earth heaped up Silver as the Dust, and Raiment as the Clay; yet the Just put
it on, and the Innocent divided the Silver: Terrors have taken Hold on them, as
Waters; a Tempest has stolen them away in the Night: For thou have cast upon
them, and not spared; they would fain flee out of thy Hand. We clap our Hands
at them, and have hissed them out of their Place. But thou have delivered us in
six Troubles; yea, in seven no Evil has touched us. In Famine he has redeemed
us from Death, and in War from the Power of the Sword; we have been hid from
the Scourge of Tongues; neither were we afraid of Destruction when it came: At
Destruction and Famine we did laugh; we knew also that our Seed should be
great, and our Offspring as the Grass of the Earth; and that our Enemies
should for ever be made our Footstools: For thou have destroyed them for ever,
O GOD; and have made them to fall by their own Counsels: Thou have cast them
out, in the Multitude of their Transgressions; for they rebelled against thee.
They are brought down, and fallen; but we are risen and stand upright; for thou
have saved the afflicted People, and have brought down high Looks. We will
extol thee, O Lord; for thou have lifted us up, and have not made our Foes to
rejoice over us: Thou have brought up our Souls from the Grave; thou have kept
us alive, that we should not go down to the Pit. Sing unto the Lord, O ye
Saints of his, and give Thanks, at the Remembrance of his Holiness; for his
Anger endures but for a Moment; in his Favor is Life. Weeping may endure for
a Night, but Joy comes in the Morning. We have delighted our selves in the
Lord; and he has given us the Desire of our Hearts: We have committed our Way
unto him, we have trusted in him; and He has brought it to pass; and has
brought forth our Righteousness as the Light, and our Judgment as the Noonday.
We have not fretted our selves, because of him that prospers in his Way;
because of the Man that brings wicked Devices to pass: But we have waited
patiently, and behold the Wicked are not; they are for ever banished unto utter
Darkness: But we inherit the Earth, and delight ourselves in Abundance of
Peace. Many have been our Affl^ctions, but the Lord has delivered us out of
them all: He has kept all our Bones, that one of them is not broken: But Evil
has slain the Wicked, and they that have hated us are desolate: We were not
afraid, when one was made rich, when the Glory of his House was increased: for
when he died, he carried nothing away, his Glory did not descend after him: The
Way of the Wicked was their Folly; like Sheep they were laid in the Grave,
Death did feed upon them; we have now Dominion over them in the Morning; and
their Beauty did consume in the Grave from their Dwelling. But God has
redeemed our Soul from the Power of the Grave; for he has received us. Selah.

O sing unto the Lord a new Song; for he has done marvelious Things; his right
Hand, and holy Arm has gotten him the Victory. The Lord is God, his Mercy is
everlasting and his Truth endures to all Generations. The Right hand of the
Lord is exalted, the Right hand of the Lord does valiantly. Praise ye the Lord,
O Jerusalem; Praise thy GOD, O Zion; for the Lord shall reign for ever, even
thy God, O Zion, to all Generations. Hallelujah.

The CONCLUSION.
1. We ought to write of such Things with a trembling Hand.

AH! WELBELOVED, I am beginning to be afraid that I have ^a^kned Counsel by
Words without Knowledge. Ah! has this been the Effect of my ravishing View of
thy superexcellent Glory to be revealed, to talk so poorly and childishly of
such great and excellent Things! A ready Way to bring down the low Thoughts,
that the Sons of Men have of Thee, much lower! A Destruction to my Design here,
-- the Flower of my Desire, which is only to ravish the Judgments and
Affections of the Sons of Men, concerning the Excellencies of thy PERSON, the
Greatness of thy Kingdom, and the Glory of thine Inheritance in the Saints, in
Light. My dearest One, let this never see the Light, if it be apt to produce
any other Effect. Pardon, dear LORD, my childish Boldness, and accept the Will
for the Deed: Thou know, it is my Design, to set thee on high! But ah my
Stupidity! Ah my childish Ignorance! I may say, in thy Sight, I am more brutish
than any Man; and have not the Understanding of a Man: I neither learned
Wisdom, nor have Knowledge of the Holy. When shall my Childhood be gone? When
shall I come to my manly Estate? How long shall my Faculties be stupid, marred
and out of Order? If, even now, I am wondering at my childish Expressions of
such superexcellent Things, what will my Reflections be, when attained to the
Fullness of the Stature of Christ? It quiets my Mind somewhat, that I have
expressed more, and ascended higher, than the Conceptions of most; and that all
Expressions, and Discourses of sublunary Excellencies shall blush and think
Shame to appear here: And that though, whatever I shall be able to say, be
unw^rthy of the meanest of thy Saints; yet, may it be an Occasion, to some of
them of stirring themselves up to a more heavenly Frame of Spirit, and more
serious and profound Apprehensions of the Things that are invisible.

2. The Essence of a Saint consists much in Heavenly-Mindedness.

Heirs of Glory, What think you of your goodly Inheritance? the delightsom
Countries, the pleasant Habitations, the unspeakable Joys, the everlasting
Pleasures, the inconceivable Felicity, that ly a little before you, and to
which you are posting? Are you not amazed with the Consideration of your
wonderful Prerogatives? Is it possible you can bear the Fore-tho'ts of what you
are coming to? Shall you ever be able to pluck your Minds down from such
ravishing Things? Have not all sublunary Excellencies disappeared in your
Sight? What are the Stars, when the Sun does appear? I think I hear every one
of you say, I have done for ever with the painted Clay-Images; for I have seen
and found the only real and substantial Things. O Joy unspeakable and full of
Glory! You Delights, you Sorrows of Time, you are much overlooked by me, while
I ly thus, within the View of eternal Ravishments. One Moment's immediate
Converse with JEHOVAH, and the LAMB, shall eradicate all the Impressions of
Sorrow and Grief, that I can possibly undergo. Shall I not see him, as he is?
Am I not to see him Face to Face? These Arms, even these very Arms, shall
embrace the Chief of Ten thousand: I shall be for ever satiate with his
infinite Sweetness; even drunk and overfilled with his overcoming Loves. O the
Frame of my Spirit! I can say nothing; Expressions fail me, for representing
the high Thoughts of my Heart! Where am I now? Am I not almost in Heaven
already? Heart, and Love, and all have fled thither; nothing remains here, but
this vile Clay tabernacle; and, ere it be long, it shall be there also. Verily
I am come to Mount Zion, to the City of the Living GOD; my Converse is no more
here.

3. Earthly-minded Creatures might be convinced of the Reality and
Desireableness of heavenly Things, by due and deep Consideration.

Silly Worldlings, what think you of our World? Speak Men, I appeal unto your
own stupid selves, which of us are wisest, wealthiest, merriest, most renowned
and excellent? Are you not beginning to consider your desperate Folly and
Madness? Are you not admiring the Foolishness of your by past Vanity, in
spending your Strength for transient, evanishing Shadows? Are you not almost
beginning to fall in Love with our blessed Country? Yea, are you not content to
renounce the Love of your Dunghill for it? Are you not come to such a blessed
Change, in your Tho'ts? Come hither, the Bargain is done, Heaven is yours; for
it is, Love, and have it. What mean you Sirs? Why should any of you thus stand
wavering? Must you not have Heaven? If you lose it, what can you purchase? Is
there any Impediment? Be willing, and welcome. Dare any of you doubt of the
Reality of the only real Things? What, because they fall not under your brutish
Senses? Then you may doubt whether you conceive, or not. Are ye such Brutes, as
to think, there is no Up-taking but sensual, when the mental are Myriads of
Stages more evident and real? Sirs, can there be any so mad, as deny all the
Countries he never saw with his Eyes; when attested by Multitudes of
Eyewitnesses, of diverse Sorts and Ages? And have not Numbers, of all Ranks
and Conditions, of the most Excellent in all Ages, attested their most
excellent Discoveries of this happy World? One of whose Attestations is more
worthy, than the Testimony of Ten thousand of ordinary Men. O Sirs, want of
Consideration causes you to look upon the only substantial Things, as
uncertain Fancies. But consider Eternity seriously, and you shall find your
selves moved in another Manner, than those, who are led away with Enthusiasms.
Sirs, enter into your own Hearts, enquire at your Consciences, and you shall
find Heaven and Hell written upon them. Speak never so much, Worldling, against
our happy World, thou but manifests thy Desires, not thy real and serious
Thoughts; thou fights against thy Conscience: The Way of thy Blaspheming
bewrays thee.

4. Transient Thoughts of Glory, signify nothing.

Ah! Sirs, I fear many of you have taken but a View of our WELBELOVED's
Country, on the by, and no more: Will ye not bend hither all your Faculties,
and consider profoundly again and again what you have seen, until an enduring
Impression be left upon your Spirits? What! shall your Thoughts be so
superficial and transient, as you shall undergo no Transformation in the Spirit
of your Minds; but still remain earthly? What, still earthly? and presently
back to Earth again! Are you like earthly Exhalations, which by Bensil of a
slight fiery Impression, though seen while aloft, yet still retaining the drossie
Nature, they fall down again. Shall Glory be so soon forgotten, as if it were
like a Nine-Days Wonder? How are you affected? Are you not in some heavenly
Frame? And will you suffer it to evanish by Negligence, vain Conceits, worldly
Thoughts and Words, and fleshly Lusts? Shall Dunghil-earth eclipse the
ravishing View, you have gotten? Will you become as low and creeping in your
Conceptions, as you have been? May such a sad Sentence be sai^ of you, The
Glory you have seen to Day, you shall behold no more? W^^^ ^e prove like Balaam
who tell to his accustomed Baseness, after the elevated Sight of Israel's
comely Tents? Shall you be ranked with the fallen Angels, who fell from the
highest Places of the World to the lowest? Keep your Situation, if you be wise;
fallen Stars are most ab^minable: The higher Pitch, the lower Fall: Better you
had never known such excellent Things, than to slight and to forget them; and
be as base and earthly, as if the Sound of such astonishing Things had never
come to your Ears.

5. An Invitation to exchange earthly for heavenly Things.

Launch out further and further into the Depths of infinite Excellencies: Ah!
what can we speak of such massy, sublime Things? Though we should write as many
Volumes, as would fill the whole Creation; Earth's shallow Dialect is
insignificant in such substantial Things; Words here are but silent Shadows, of
no Efficacy: Come and see, and taste, would tell the Matter. Sirs, have you any
Thing to say? Is not the Business past all Debate? Need we say any more? Can
you be so mad, as to be indifferent and inconsiderate in such a weighty
Concernment? Sir, How long shall you halt betwixt two Opinions? Stand no more
back: O come, come, come away, and be everlastingly blessed! Are you not out of
Conceit with Time's Worm-eaten Glory? Are you not lamenting your former Vanity
and Madness? Are you not wearied in the Things, that cannot profit? Are you
considering Things, never entered within your Conception before? What lets you
then, that you become not heavenly and divine? Are you not altogether in Love
with our WELBELOVED, the Author of all? Are you not closing with him, on his
own Terms, as he has offered himself, in his Testament? Are you not heartily
embracing, and striving to grow more and more conformed to his lovely Image,
until you shall grow up unto the perfect Stature of his Fullness? O then!
welcome, a thousand times welcome unto this glorious World of Emmanuel's
Conquest: You are come unto the joyful and lightsom Side of the Creation. I
dare pawn my Salvation, you shall never repent of so sweet a Translation: Your
Light shall more and more break forth, unto the perfect Day; Your Progress,
through all the Difficulties of Time, even Death it self, shall be cheerful and
sweet.

6. The Hope of Glory swallows up all imaginable Sorrow.

Be of good Courage, ye Saints of the most High, you Princes of the World; all
are yours; for ye are Christ's, and Christ is God's. It is all one whether
Dunghill Worms contemn, or esteem you: It is below you to fear such feeble
Beasts. Overlook the scenical Graduations of Time; it is below Princes, born to
so great Things, to take Notice to such Trifles: Stand to your royal
Prerogatives; fall not down from your ennobling Exercise; Set the Lord always
before you, and you shall never be moved: Let the World reel to and fro; Let
the Mountains be cast into the midst of the Sea; Let Thousands, and Ten
thousands fall on every Hand; yet can you undergo no Harm. Death, in any Garb,
is Gain unto the Person, who is in Heaven already.

7. Earthworms, who will be such, have nothing to do with Heaven.

You, who will still be grovelling upon base Earth, who though ye should read and
hear never so often, of the only excellent Things, will back to the Dunghill
again, and will vex and torment your selves with the Cares and Vanities of a
transitory Life; who will endeavor and desire to be laden with thick Clay; we
have only this to say unto you, He that is filthy, let him be filthy still. You
have made a brave Choice, poor Fools, your Paradise is base, empty, hungry and
transient, well befitting such noble and high Spirits as you: In whatever
Account you seem to be, in the Eyes of a base World, you are vile despicable
Worms: Craul, and set up your Crist, on your stately Dunghill: But know, if ye
can understand, that these vile Bodies and Souls of yours shall never ascend
higher; under our Feet shall we eternally trample you; your Kingdom being the
Office-house of our Palac^-royal. Fill your selves with Dust, as the Serpents;
le^ your Day-thoughts, and Night-thoughts run out upon Dunghill Concernments;
add House to House, and Land to Land heap up Treasures for many Days; and when
you encounte^ Death, or a Day of sad Affliction, cast up your great and
precious Gains: Have you accounted your selves unworthy of such unspeakable
Blessedness? you shall ne^^tast it; but be everlastingly shut up, in that
horrid, abominable Lake; a suitable Dewlling Place for such (...) Wretches:
This dark smoky Region you only affect, and to utter Darkness shall you be
driven, Where there is Weeping and Gnashing of Teeth.

8. Christ alone to be exalted and esteemed, who is the Purchaser of this noble
Inheritance.

Let Glory and Renown remain for ever upon the Head of the Author and Purchaser
of so great a Salvation! Can Angels ever enough admire Him? Can the Saints ever
enough praise Him? Where shall we get a Throne to set this Majestic One upon?
All our Glory and Excellency is too base and low a Footstool for his Feet:
Thousands of thousands of excellent Worlds, erected above one another, were too
base and low a Foundation for him to trample upon. Men or Angels, what have
you, or can you say worthy of him? Were your Hallelujahs tuned up never so many
Stages higher; yet, still they should fall infinitely below his matchless
Worth: What can we do, in extolling such a lofty One? For ever is he infinitely
exalted above all our Praises; yet praise him we shall, eternally shall we
praise him: All our Strength, Soul and Might must be fully let forth to his
Glory; though all we can do be just nothing: Who is worthy of Glory, except our
Welbeloved? Whom should we love, but Him? Whom should we praise, but Him? Whom
should we admire, but Him? Who but He! None but Him. O let all our Powers and
Faculties be eternally filled with Him. Ah! its black Shame the Sons of Men
should think, and speak, and write so much of empty Nothings; and so little of
this only excellent One! When shall our Welbeloved be great among all Nations?
Ah, he is Nothing, or little known among the Sons of Men: little do they
discourse of him; and what they discourse is cold and common. Alas! Men talk of
him, as if he were a common Beloved! Men esteem JESUS, some ordinary One: They
hear of one JESUS that was slain at Jerusalem; and they are as little affected,
as if they read, or heard of some common History: The News of his excellent
Kingdom have small Impression upon them; they think they hear of new Worlds,
never seen, or traveled to by any. CHRIST is an unknown Person to the most;
the Sound of his Name has filled the Ears of all; the Letters of his Name are
well known, and no more: But who have been ravished with his good Ointments?
Who has been filled with the odoriferous Emanations of his Lebanon Garments?
who has tasted of his Soul overcoming Sweetness? Who had him, as a Bundle of
Myrrh all Night betwixt their Breasts? Who have found him, and held him, and
would not let him go? Who have been led into his Chambers of Presence? Who
cannot live (though in never so great Abundance of earthly Things) without a
familiar and intimate Fellowship with Him?

9. Religion is another Thing than stupid Wordlings imagine. Close Walking with
GOD, if an hid Mystery unto them.

Poor Worldings, the best of you are but Formalists, occupied about the Outside
and Shell of Religion: Through Custom, and a natural Conscience, you go through all
the Bulk of the Exercises of Godliness; you hear, you pray, you read, you
confer, you meditate; you perform Duties betwixt Man and Man, through Custom
and Formality, through Shame of others, through vain Glory, through the
Gnawings of a natural Conscience, which you must somewhat quiet, one Way or
another. But know you what it is, to do all Things to the Glory of our
WELBELOVED? To be afraid, that in the best of your Performances, you offend
Him, and stir him up before he please? Know you what it is, to look more to the
Manner of your Duties, than the Bulk of them? To the Principle, from whence
they flow, than any Thing else? To the Intention and Frame of your Heart, in
Duty? Know you what it is, to watch over your Heart? To have a stricter Eye
over your Thoughts and Intentions? To be most troubled with, and in guarding
against these secret Sins of the Thoughts and Intentions, which no Creature can
see, but your selves? Know you what it is, to keep up a near and intimate
Communion with Jesus? To have a mutual Intercourse with him? Know you what it
is, to wrestle with, and to lay hold upon him, and to constrain him, in a
Manner, to bless you? Know you what it is, to account all Things Dross and Dung
unto the Knowledge of the Excellency of JESUS, the only WELBELOVED? Are you
indifferent to all Things, but CHRIST? Is the World, in all its Glory, Pleasure
and Profit, a dead and crucified Thing in your Eyes? Is the Cry of your Heart,
CHRIST, CHRIST, and only CHRIST; give you Him, and you desire no more? O Sirs,
have you seen Him? have you heard him? have you found him? Know you his Smiles,
the Lifting-up of his Countenance, his Love embraces? Ah! Worldlings, I am
speaking of strange Things, unexperienced by you!

10. The Saints only know the Life and Mysteries of Godliness; and Strangers
intermeddle not with their heavenly Delights and divine Joy.

You Saints of the most High, you are Witnesses of the Truth of all we have
spoken: Have we not spoken poorly and childishly of so great Things? It is
nothing we have said, to that which even you experience in the Land of Absence.
O then! sincere One, has not thy WELBELOVED written more of this his
transcendent Beauty, Sweetness and Excellency upon thy Heart, than all the
Learned of the World can put down, in Black and White? What can be written, or
spoken of such great Things? Come see, and taste and feel, will manifest the
Business Best. It was not our Intention, O ye excellent Ones of the Earth, to
write to you of Things which are in other Manner of Characters imprinted on
your Faculties; but only to put you in Mind, lest you suffer such noble
Impressions to decay, in the Midst of wordly Affairs, Temptations and
Difficulties: That you may perceive the vast Difference between all Expression,
and Feeling; that you may be stirred up to acquire the noble Gift of Utterance;
that you may manifest to the Ignorant the Excellency and Loveliness of your
WELBELOVED, and what he has done to your Soul. We have written to you, Babes,
who are young Students in Christianity; even to you, O Daughters of Jerusalem,
who are enquiring after our matchless BRIDEGROOM, having only heard the
ravishing Sound of his Name, but never have seen hi^ amiable Countenance, nor
entered his pleasant Beds of Spices. O might we be eternally honored, in
leading you in by the Hand unto him! Draw near, O draw near! And ye shall see
more, Ten thousand Times more, than even you heard tell of; you shall begin to
laugh at your putrid and childish Talking of such wonderful Things.

11. The woeful State of Worldings, Excellency of Holiness, and Necessity of
Conversion, with Marks thereof.

We have written unto you, Worldlings, what we have seen and found, that you
may know that there are excellent Things indeed, which never fell under your
brutish Senses; and to let you know that Godliness is another Manner of Thing,
than ever entered within your Conceptions, that you may enquire after the
Reality of such excellent Things, and strive to get a Sight of him, who is
invisible; that in seeing, you may love him; and in loving, may be blessed for
evermore. Poor Worldlings, we cannot but pity you, who cannot pity your selves:
You see not your own base and low Condition; for if you could, your Condition
were changed. Were it possible to demonstrate your Vileness and Misery? Are you
affected with nothing so much, as what falls under your Senses? What
Pre-eminence have you above the Brutes of the Field! The Joys and Desires and
Intentions of both are confined within an Inch of Time: Both are earthly, Loath
are temporal, both decay in a Moment, and come to Naught. I appeal to your
selves, base Worldlings, If they may be termed high-spirited, whose Thoughts
and Projects are only upon Earth, the Fashion of which passes away; as you
cannot but perceive with your very bodily Senses. Ah Sirs, is it not even sad?
Earth is the Center of all your Love and Desires; earthly Glory, earthly
Riches, earthly Delight affects you most; let you have Abundance of Earth, and
that eternally, and eternally you can live without the Enjoyment of JEHOVAH and
the LAMB: The Kingdom above these visible Heavens appears strange Utopian-like
Inventions, which, though ye give an historical Faith to, yet you are affected
little or nothing with the News of such astonishing Things; and labor and
endeavor, and project more for these perishing Things: Which snows, You are
base Earthworms, who have chosen this Dunghill for your Country; despised and
undervalued the enduring Substance; and have not stirred up your selves, to the
deep Persuasion of the Truth, and Reality of such wonderful Things; but embrace
Earth, and confess your selves its Natives, and home-born Slaves. May you not
at last see your own Baseness and Slavery? Are you not ashamed of your former
Vileness? Are you not beginning to perceive, that the Saints are the only
excellent and noble Persons? Are you not looking upon it, as the greatest
Misery and Baseness, to be earthly in your Mind and Affections? Are you not
accounting it the only Dignity and Accomplishment, to be humble and divine?
Again, we beseech you to be ingenuous, and not to lull your selves asleep, in
Security's Lap, with a Number of careless Will-bees, and May-bees. What, Sirs?
Confess you the Reality of these wonderful Things to come? Confess you, that
Heaven and Hell is the eternal Lot of all Mankind? Which of them are you making
for? You know, according to your Preparations here, so are you hereafter to be;
as you sow, shall you not reap? If you sow to the Flesh, shall you not reap
Corruption? And if you sow to the Spirit, shall you not reap eternal Life?
Whether will you travel the Way to the one or the other? Choose you: GOD sets
Life and Death before you; beguile not your selves; God will not be mocked.
Will you remain earthly; and yet think to enter the pure heavenly City? Is
there a Foot-breadth for Earthworms there? If earthly-minded Creatures,
remaining earthly, may expect to enter the fair and clean Jerusalem, then shall
Heaven be filled with all Sorts of Cattle, and Hell shall be for ever empty;
which is indeed the Opinion of stupid Worldlings, whose extensive Charity
reaches all Men that ever were, or shall be: Who are of so sweet and mild a
Disposition, as that they dare not, cannot judge any, and are not ashamed to
say of the basest Dunghill Worldling, It may be he has somewhat Good. But,
believe it, Earthly-mindedness is a palpable gross Vileness, to all, who have
their Senses, in the least, exercised. Enter your own Hearts, poor Wretches,
and behold your own Practice, and the Practice of the Generality of all who are
about you; and you shall perceive your selves smell strongly of Earth. Do not
all your Aims and Projects tend Earth-ward? Are not your last Tho'ts in the
Evening, your first Thoughts in the Morning, the most of your Thoughts all the
Day long, running upon lower Concernments? Earth, only Earth, fills your base
Minds: Few, transient and brutish are your Conceptions of Things above:
Eternity you make your By-aim, and Earth your chief Design. Do you not esteem
earthly Glory and Riches most? Are not these, who are most ladned with the
thick Clay of the Earth, greatest in your Eyes? Had you not rather have
wealthiest, the Men of most Account and Power in Time, to be allied to you,
than the afflicted People? Can you not converse familiarly with
Dunghil-worldlings, without any Trouble or Antipathy? Yea, have ye not the
cursed Heart, to become one Flesh with a black Lump of Death and Hell, if so be
they be laden with the Earth's worm-eaten Trash, or please your carnal
Inclination, and foolish Fancy? Are you not more taken up with your own
private, petty affairs, than with the great Concernments of Christ, and his
Church? Have you not more Delight in earthly Enjoyments, than in the Exercises
of Godliness? Are you not more sensible of your temporal Losses, than of your
spiritual? Do not your Joys ebb and flow, according to the Ebbings and Flowings
of worldly Things? Are you not ignorant of Rejoicing in Tribulation, because of
the Smiles of Jehovah's amiable Countenance? And of Sorrowing, in the midst of
earthly Abundance, because the WELBELOVED has frowned, with dawn himself, and
is gone? Worldlings, Is it not even thus with you? Let your Consciences speak,
Men and Women; O hear them, that God may hear you. I say, Is it not most
evident to your selves, that thus it is with you? And are you for Glory? Are
you for the clean and holy City? Are you for dwelling with everlasting Burning?
Are you for walking with the Lamb, clothed with the white and beautiful
Garments of Holiness? Are you for standing among the fair delightsom Assembly
of Saints and Angels, who eternally surround the Throne of Jehovah and the
Lamb? Are you? Ye base Worldlings, as long as ye are what you are, you have
nothing to do with Glory: Stand aback, touch not the Mount. Beasts are not to
meddle with so great Things: Heaven is only for holy Ones; for without Holiness
no Man shall see the Lord. Believe it, Sirs, you are Ten thousand Miles from
Holiness: Holiness is a strange, unknown Thing in the World: The most refined
Moralists, Civilians, Carnal Gospellers, and brave Formalists, have scarce
heard the Sound thereof: There is a Path that no Fowl knows, and which the
Vulture's Eye has the seen, and the Lion's Whelps have not trodden it, nor the
fierce Lion passed by it. But, where shall Wisdom be found? And where is the
Place of Understanding? Man knows not the Price thereof; neither is it found
in the Land of the Living: The Depth says, It is not in me; And the Sea says,
It is not with me. It cannot be gotten for Gold; neither shall Silver be
weighed for the Price thereof: No Mention shall be made of Coral, or of Pearls;
for the Price of Wisdom is above Rubies.

Believe it, Holiness, or Wisdom, is a rare Thing: A Saint is a Wonder. God
has placed them among the numerous Multitude of Mankind, like so many Signs
and Wonders: So many Saints in the World, so many Miracles of Nature: A Saint,
in the Calendar of the Generality of Professors, is an ordinary Person; but, in
Christ's, most extraordinary. There are fewer real Christians, than the most
precise, and strictest in their Censures, can imagine. If the Nature of
Holiness were well known, we should wonder, that there is, among all Mortals,
one holy One; for, in very Truth, a Saint is nothing else, but a Piece of
Heaven, a new Creature, transformed from the Image of Hell, into that of Glory,
One whose Conversation is only above, who is come unto Mount Zion, and unto the
City of the living God: A Saint has not the Stamp and Fashion of this World;
his Heart and Love are quite gone from him to another Place; his Words, his
Actions, his Deportment manifest he seeks a Country above, and that he
despises and overlooks all Things here, as Things inconsiderable, dead and
crucified in his Eyes: His Joys, his Pleasures, his Contentments, his Treasures
lie not here: His Torments, his Griefs, his Misery lies not in temporal Things;
his Mind is elevated far above the Laughings or Frownings of a transitory
World: Its Ups and Downs, its Ebbings and Flowings cannot affect him: His
sublime Mind is set upon higher Objects; for he looks not to the Things that
are seen; but to the Things that are not seen: For the Things that are seen,
are temporal; but the Things that are not seen, are eternal. Heaven is his
Soil, his Element, the Center of his Love and Desires: He longs, he prays, he
greatly desires, he weeps to be there. The Desire of the full and naked
Embracements of The Chiefest of Ten thousand, overtops, and swallows up his
Desire and Love to all other Things. What though he has fair, pleasant
Possessions of Earth, many dear Friends, and pleasant Companions? What though he
have an excellent Wife, and hopeful Children? All these are but Dross and Dung,
unto the very Knowledge of the Excellency of JESUS his LORD: They are good and
pleasant, but nothing to the only WELBELOVED. He can leave them all gladly, to
be with him. O my Comfort, my Children, my Friends, my Possessions, my Hopes
here away, my Life, I could not but with exceeding great Grief, be thus
separate from you, were I not going to One, who is sweeter, dearer and more
lovely to me, above all Expression, than you all: The Loss of all Things is no
Loss; if I go to the full Enjoyment of Him, whom my Soul loves. Whom have I in
Heaven, or on Earth, but Him? Whom do I love and desire, but Him? No Enjoyments
whatsoever ^n quench my Longing to be with Him: He is my All, and only One.
Farewell, all lower Enjoyments, the Love of my fairest WELBELOVED swallows up
all other Loves. Be closed, my blessed Senses, from receiving any more
sublunary Objects, that ye may be everlastingly filled with his transcendent
Loveliness, Sweetness and Excellency. And no Wonder the Saint cannot want
Christ, since he is transformed into his lovely Image, a Partaker of his divine
Nature; one, who is endued with the same Mind that was in him; one, who has
Christ dwelling in him; one, who has the Kingdom of Heaven within him: So that
it is natural unto him to tend Godward, and Heavenward; even as it is natural
for the Worldling to tend Earth-ward and Hell-ward. Every Thing has a
Propensity and Love to its own Center and Like; and bends off from its
Opposite: The Fire ascends toward the Center and great Glob of Fire; every Bit
of Earth disjoined, tends back to the whole again. Though there were neither
Reward, nor Punishment; yet a holy One must love, serve, obey, praise and adore
his God; for Heaven must operate like Heaven, even necessarily, though freely,
sweetly, and without Compulsion. Again, Worldlings must tend Earth-ward, though
they should find never so much Vexation, Torment and Grief in it; though he
should never be so often threatened, and persuaded of all the Miseries that
follow an earthly, sensual and brutish Way of living; since he is all Sense,
Earth and Corruption, altogether destitute of the Divine Nature: In a Word, a
Worldling is a visible incarnate Devil; a Saint, a visible incarnate Angel:
Only Hell, on this Side of Time, is not fully accomplished in the one; nor
Heaven fully perfected in the other. The holy One smells strongly of Glory; and
the nearer he approaches to his Journey's End, the more resplendent a Luster
has he of Heaven: The Path of the Just being as the shining Light, that
shines more and more unto the perfect Day. O Tincture of Heaven! Their Actions
have still a greater Smell of Glory; but all is nothing to the Glory and
Excellency of their invisible and inward Operation: Little or nothing appears
without, in Comparison of that which is within. O the noble and seraphick
Thoughts! O the strange Motions of Love, and Joy, and Admiration, above all
possible Expression! O the ravishing Perfumes of passing Joys and Sweetness,
wherewith the Beloved fills the Heart! It is impossible for the Saint, to put
down in Black and White, what he feels on his Soul: All the Tongues of Men and
Angels cannot manifest his sweet and noble Thoughts of his only WELBELOVED. He
would gladly express them to all that are about him, but he finds it
impossible. He is sometimes contending with his narrow Fancy, that it cannot
find out a more sublime, clear and excellent Way of expressing the matchless
Worth of his Welbeloved: Other whiles, he is angry at the cold, shallow and
putid Manner of others Discoursing: He would have all Men speak nobly, write
nobly, do nobly, for Jesus. Nothing vexes him more than to perceive the
Generality of Men forget him: Or, when they speak of him, to talk so coldly and
creepingly, as if he were a common, ordinary Beloved. He would have his Lovely
One filling the Hearts and Mouths of all: He hates the Fellowship where he is
not highly esteemed, loved, praised and adored: He greatly honors, and loves
that, (though otherwise never so low and despicable) where he is praised,
worshipped and much accounted of. It is his continual Torment and Affliction,
he has so low and unbeseeming Thoughts of him: He is in great Rage at his
Heart, that it should, at any Time, go astray, from such an excellent Object,
after Vanity: He lays Bands on, watches over, and commands his Heart, that it
have noble and excellent Thoughts of him; and entertain no other Beloveds
beside him: He desires Nothing more, than to have his Heart wholly set upon
him, and forever ravished and overcome with his Love. And no Wonder; since
Christ, and he are One; One in Nature, Mind, Affections, Spirit, and all
Things: As the Lord Jesus is, so is he, in a great Part. Every one of the
Saints resembles the Children of the King of Kings: Among all the Sons of Adam,
there are none their like; for they are a chosen Generation, a royal
Priesthood, an holy Nation, a peculiar People; that they should show forth the
Praises of him, who has called them out of Darkness unto his mavelous Light.
The Generality of Mankind has, ever from the very Beginning, looked upon them,
as strange Manner of Persons, and nicknamed them with various and strange
Sorts of Names, according to the Iniquities of the Times and Places they lived
in, because of their Rareness in Number, Singularity in their Way of Living and
Practice, Preciseness in their Principles, and opposing the Sins of the Times
their Lot is cast into.

Ah! poor Worldlings, do ye not see, that a Saint is another Manner of Person
than you imagined? Do you not perceive, that you are as far below real
Holiness, as Earth is below Heaven? Is it not manifested to yourselves, that
you are not the Creatures, whose Minds and Affections are heavenly and divine?
that you are not of a more noble and excellent Spirit than your Neighbors?
True, your own desperate, deceitful Heart will cause you to imagine your selves
rare Pieces of Excellency; yet it will give you no Demonstration, but only
cause I, as such, appear great; and so confound every Thing, as you may evade
us, one Way or another. So desperate are Worldlings, that they cannot abide to
examine their Conditions; and when others hold out the Light, that they may
discover them, they wink, lest they behold their own Misery and Vileness. But,
Worldlings, may you not see your Nakedness, If you will but ask seriously, at
your selves, a few ordinary Questions, and solve them faithfully, according to
the answer of your Conscience?

First, Have you ever felt the Pangs of the new Birth? Are you Strangers to
this? Know you not, Except a Man be born again, he cannot enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven? This is strange! A Saint, a regenerate Creature, a Man born
over again; and yet without Pain, or Labor! Such a great Mutation, without
great Symptoms and Concomitants, cannot be. Ah! most Men's Religion has come
to them in a Night-dream.

2 dly. Were you ever at What shall I do to be saved? Here, blessed Jesus, I
subscribe a Blank, put in any Thing thou will; and, in thy Strength, I will
gladly endeavor the Performance of all; only save me; O save me, else I
eternally perish. It is strange, you have not come this Length that many
Reprobates have come, and yet imagine your selves Saints.

3 dly. Has the great Salvation appeared so great, in your Eyes, filled so
your Minds, that it has overtopped, and swallowed up the Thoughts of all other
Concernments? Are you not come this far, that some Reprobates have, for a Time,
attained unto? And can you imagine your selves Partakers of the great
Salvation? Ah, mad Delusion!

4 thly. Were you ever sick of Sin? Have you been more burdened under your
Iniquities, than ever you were under an earthly Affliction? Do you not find the
grievous Weight of a Body of Death? Yea, go you not lightly under your
Iniquities? Only some of the grossest of them torment your natural Conscience;
As for Original Sin, your know it more by Speculation, than by Feeling: This
does show you are dead in Sins and Trespasses, alienated from the Life of God.
Can you then imagine your self such a noble Creature as a Saint?

5 thly. Were you ever sick of Love for JESUS? Were you ever running after him,
with the Tear in your Eye, with your Hands upon your aching Sores? Were you ever
weeping, and groaning, and sighing at his Feet, for Mercy, and Pardon, and
Reconciliation, and the Lifting-up of his amiable Countenance? Were you ever
wrestling with Sin, as for your Life, and saying, Blessed Jesus, I must have
Thee; Thee to be my Lord, my Head, my Advocate, my King, my Priest, my Prophet,
my only Beloved, or I cannot live? Ah! Sirs, you, who know not experimentally
what I am saying, have your Religion to seek yet.

6 thly. Were you ever crying, as it were, O Daughters of Jerusalem, I charge
you, if you see my Beloved that you tell him, that I am sick of Love? Have you
been fainting, because of an absent and withdrawing Lord? Have you had a
wearisom Night without Sleep for Christ, because you could not find him? Know
you not, by Experience, what I am saying? O then! you are Strangers to Christ.

7 thly. Are not your Thoughts of Christ so high, that you cannot, in the
thousandth Part, express them to others? Are not all Things Dross and Dung to
you, in Comparison of Christ? If you can express all your Thoughts of him, you
want the Mind of a Saint.

8 thly. Though an eternal Enjoyment of all possible created Paradises of Joy
and Delight, filled with all Smells, all Tastes, all Sights, all Melodies, all
Delights the Heart of Man can imagine, were placed on the one Hand; and the
eternal Enjoying, Praising, and Adoring JEHOVAH and the LAMB, on the other;
which of these two Lives would your Heart most affect, and run after: It may
be, you will say, I had rather enjoy Christ, than all Things. How then comes it
to pass, you long not to be with him? How comes it to pass, you have more
Delight in earthly Enjoyments, than in the Exercises of Godliness? Why is
Meditating on him, the Excellency of his Person, and the Glory of his Kingdom,
so melancholious, and seldom an Exercise! Why are you not making it your Study
and Delight, to keep up a near and intimate Fellowship with the Father, and the
Son? Ah! poor Things, you are altogether ignorant of your selves; and therefore
you talk, and you know not what.

9 thly. Find you in your Soul a strong and ardent Longing and Desire after
God, and still to have more and more of him, till you be filled with all his
Fullness? Have you a greater Thirst after him, than ever you had after cold
Water in an unquenchable Thirst, through a burning Fever, or great Heat, Labor
and Weariness? Surely, if you be Partakers of his Nature, you cannot but bend
to him with a strong Bensil. Are your Desires after him cold and indifferent,
and broken Cisterns can quench your Thirst! Be assured, you are dead, and have
not your Senses exercised.

10 thly. Can you discern betwixt the Exercises of Godliness, and God in the
Exercise? Are you sometimes seeking him, and cannot find him? Are you not
calling unto him, and he gives no Answer? Are you ignorant of a mutual Converse
with him? Find you not him speaking into your Heart, as really as you spoke up
to him? Know ye not what it is, to receive an Answer of Prayer? Ah! ye are
Strangers to the Mystery of Godliness.

11 thly. Find you more Delight in his Fellowship, when you are alone, than
ever you found in all your earthly Enjoyments? Have you not been brought into
his Chambers of Love, and rejoiced and been glad in Him? Have you not found his
Love better than Wine, and the Savor of his good Ointments most cheering and
refreshing? Nay, found you not, in some Measure, to your own sweet Experience,
all the Intercourses written down in the Song of Songs? What say you? Are you
Strangers to these Things; and yet, an espoused Soul to Christ? That cannot be.

12 thly. Have you not a Respect to all his Commandments, since you have
resigned your self wholly over to him, without Reservation? Dare you contradict
a known Precept, and can sacrilegiously cut and carve upon his Latter will, and
put your own carnal Glosses upon his clear Commands, for your own worldly and
carnal Ends? And yet Saints! and yet Lovers of JESUS! That Is impossible.

13 thly. Does your Goodness reach the Saints, the Excellent of the Earth, in
whom is all your Delight? Is there any in your Eyes, by a thousand Stages, so
great, as a Saint? Is not a Creature the more lovely, excellent and esteemed in
your Eyes, the more wise he is, the more he is like All-lovely Jesus? As for
the several Fancies of Riches and Honor, you value them not, these are not the
Things that heighten and depress Persons in your Account: But on the contrary,
are you the People, that esteem Persons, according to Gay-clothing, Multitude
of Trash, much of earthly Honor, Power, Authority and Renown? Affect you more
to have a really honorable Consort, Children, Kinsmen, and Friends, than to
have them wise and holy? Art thou such a Creature, that thou love the
Converse of the Wealthy and Prosperous; and can take a Wordling, known to be
such, to be the inseparable Companion of thy Life, because of worldly
Advantages; And can converse familiarly and merrily with Worldlings, without
any Antipathy, or Hurt to the Frame of thine Heart? Art thou such an one, and
yet a Saint? Ah! poor Thing, thou art a Stranger to Holiness. It may be thou
art a Formalist; that is, a Person illuminated, who has a Custom of reading,
and conferring, and meditating, and praying; and it may be, weeping, and
hearing the best, it may be with Jeopardie; but the Life and Marrow of Religion
thou art altogether ignorant of.

14 thly. Do not the Affairs of Christ's Church through the World, and
especially through the particular Church He does most own, lie nearer your
Heart, than all other Things? May you not say, If I forget thee, O Zion, let my
Right Hand forget her Cunning; If I prefer not Jerusalem to my chiefest Joy?
Are not your own Affairs oft-times forgotten by you; so much are you taken up
with the Affairs of CHRIST? That Christ may be great, his Interests glorious,
and his People exalted, is the Flower and Top of your Desires. You are
exceeding angry against, not only his open persecuting Enemies, but all who are
indifferent or lukewarm in his Matters; Thou can abide none, but the zealous
Ones; Art thou not, as it were, burnt up with Zeal for the Glory of the only
excellent ONE? So, that thou art crying out, Let the Sinners be consumed from
the Earth; Let the Wicked be no more; Let all his Enemies perish; but let
those, that love Him, be like the Sun, going forth in his Strength. But on the
contrary, do thine own Affairs share largest of thy Thoughts? thou art
oft-times so occupied with them, that the Affairs of Zion are almost forgotten:
It may be, thou wishes well unto her, and had rather she did swim, than sink;
yea, would undergo a considerable Loss, upon Condition she might be exalted:
But would thou have the Affairs of Christ great, merely out of Desire to his
Glory and Exaltation? Do thou desire the Rising of his Interests, though it
were upon thy Fall and Ruin? Are thy great Affairs, even what concerns Life,
and the greatest Affairs of thine own, small, and of no Consideration in thine
Eyes, in Comparison of the smallest Things of CHRIST? Yea, art thou not One,
who can overlook, and cede many Things to the Enemy? Not an Hoof, is too great
Preciseness to Thee. And is not thy Hatred, and Indignation, at his Enemies,
weak and indiscernable? Thou can hear his Work and People spoken Evil of,
unconcernedly, and be little or nothing moved: Thou art a very meek and
moderate Man in his Cause; and art thou one of his? Has he the Flower of thy
Love? Is that Love burning in thine Heart, which many Waters cannot quench? Art
thou a genuine Son of Zion? Never think it; poor deluded Creature, thou have
Religion yet to seek.

15 thly. Do all earthly Things appear dead and crucified-like unto thee? Do
thou look upon this Earth as a melancholic Wilderness? And have thine Heart
and Eyes still upon thy Country? Yea, do thou look with a disdainful Eye upon
this base World, so full of Wickedness, Vexation, and Vanity; wherein thy Lord,
and all his Followers, have got so bad Entertainment? But, on the contrary,
do thou look upon thine Enjoyments in a lovely and warmly Manner, and have
sweeter and more pleasant Thoughts of them, than of the Life to come? When the
World smiles upon thee, do thou smile upon it again; and can easily bear
the Want of the full Enjoyment of GOD; being so well pleased with an easy,
earthly Life, either in Reality, or in Imagination; as thou art saying to thy
self, It is good to be here? Art thou thus, and yet a Saint, a Pilgrim, who is
traveling heaven ward, a Creature, whose Heart and Love is in another Country,
and not here? This is a Repugnancy; never think it, Man: Think thy self the
Thing thou art, an Home-born Slave; and then thou art a Step in the Way to true
Liberty.

16 thly. Art thou longing to be in the immediate Embraces of the Chief of Ten
thousand? To behold him Face to Face, and be satiate with his immediate
Fellowship? Is it often the Cry of thy longing Heart, When shall I see him as he
is, and that white and beautiful Company following him whithersoever he goes?
When shall I see the Bridegroom and the Bride kiss and embrace one another?
When shall he set his majestic Head through these visible Heavens, and appear in
his royal Marriage-robes, before the whole Creation? Ah! the envious Heavens,
that hide him from my longing Eyes! Ah! the longsom Days, that ly betwixt me
and him! When shall we be eternally in others immediate Embraces? But on the
contrary, can thou live contentedly, in the Midst of earthly Abundance, with
small or no Desires of his immediate Fellowship? Is this the ordinary Frame of
thy Spirit: And yet a Saint! It cannot be. Can the chaste Spouse not long for
her absent Bridegroom? Can the true Lover live patiently, without beholding the
Beloved's Face? Ah! Sirs, you have not been really espoused to him. Have you
not received his Love Tokens, nor been ravished with the Smell of his fragrant
Ointments? and what Wonder, you are as you are?

17 thly. Are you depending on God in every Thing? Acknowledge you him in all
your Ways, and in every Exigency that befalls you? Cast you all yours Cares upon
him, and trust in him for all Things in Time and Eternity? So that you find
your Mind greatly eased; as having One to your Father, who is both able and
willing to carry you through all Difficulties and Afflictions? Are you
endeavoring to do his Commandments, and commit the Event of all absolutely
unto him, who, you know, brings all to a good Issue? Have you renounced the
Disposing of your selves, and resigned that, with all your Concerns, even unto
him? And dare not do any Thing without his Approbation? Or, on the contrary, do
you rely on this Thing, and that Thing? If there be Money in the Purse, or
Calves in the Stall, then you hope, you shall not want: You trust in hu^ane
Probabilities; but if those fail you, you are dispondent; Thou have not the
Confidence in GOD, that may hold up thy Heart, in as cheerful a Condition, as
when Corn and Wine abounded unto Worldlings. Thou cannot lay as much Weight on
the large Promises in the Book of GOD, as Worldlings on their Charters in
earthly Possessions; and therefore, thou art ever anxious about the event, and
commits not the Disposing of thy self to him: Thou walk by the Compass of
Riches, Ease, Reputation, etc. And whether it be the Will of Christ, is thy
last Consideration: Whether it be a Course, that will most glorify him, and
make thy Progress swifter to Glory, does not so much trouble thee; as whether
it be a Course, will render thee prosperous, full of Ease, Wealth and Esteem in
a World. Does thine Heart dictate unto thee such an Occupation, such a
Marriage, and such an Interprize will bring in great Wealth, much worldly Joy,
a Multitude of Friends, greater worldly Honor, etc? Therefore it is to be
followed. Ah! deluded Wretch, walk thou by earthly, carnal Rules; and yet
such a noble Creature, as a Saint? Never entertain such Fancies: The Saints
walk as Christ walked, He is their Forerunner, and Captain.

The Difference between a Saint and a Worldling, may, in some Manner, be
apprehended from what we have spoken. Ask seriously, at your selves, such
Questions; reflect upon your Way of Walking; see what is the constant Frame of
your Heart, and what your Heart affects most; what your have been, and what you
are aiming at, and seeking most; what you rejoice most in; what the Thoughts
and Intentions of your Heart run out most upon. O Sirs, be not beguiled in so
weighty a Concernment: If you err here, you are eternally undone: It is Satan's
great Endeavor, to hinder you from considering your self, or your Condition;
he delights to see you pass away your Time, in considering your natural
Abilities, your corporal Endowments, your Estate in the World, etc. But he is
afraid you consider your spiritual Estate, how it stands betwixt God and you;
whether you be in friendly Terms with him, or not: If not, how you may attain
unto a near Fellowship; and how you may keep your self in his Love and Favor,
and grow more and more familiar with him. He loves, and endeavors to divert
your Mind off eternal Concernments to temporal. But, Sirs, ought you not to
give Eternity the first Place, the First, and Flower, and Choice and Might of
all your Endeavors? Make sure Work in so great, great a Matter: Thy eternal
Weal, or Woe, is upon the Wheels, Man; what shall be your Lot throughout endless
Ages, is a Concernment above all you can conceive, or endeavor. Know thou
not how the Matter stands? Is not the Time short, thou have to prepare thy self
i^^o? Is not thy Life most uncertain? Is not the Work of Salvation a great, a
long, a difficult Work? Is it not most ordinary, that Men die, as they live;
and most certain, that their eternal Condition is, as they die? Know thou
not, that it is written, To Day, if ye will hear my Voice, harden not your
Hearts? Thou know not what a Day may bring forth. Come, O come, and embrace
so friendly a Call. Have you any Excuse? Are you about any Business of such
Concernment? Is any succeeding Hour better than now? Does not thine Heart draw
on a new Scruff of Hardness? Why then, fall to Work in good earnest, as for
Life and Death: Make sure Work, build not upon Sand, but on the Rock? Never
rest, till you have Christ indeed, and not some Fancy in his Place; be sure you
get an Interest in him. Never think your selves right, until you have a
familiar and lively Fellowship with the Father and the Son; until there be
mutual Communications of Love betwixt Christ and you; until you have heartily,
and for ever, given your self wholly over to him, and taken him wholly over to
you, to be your King, Priest and Prophet; to be your All, and only One; until
you be enamoured with his matchless Beauty, overcome with his passing
Sweetness; until Earth, in its best Condition, be an empty Nothing, and Vanity
in your Eyes; until Heaven become your native Country, were Heart, and Love,
and all do ly; so that it shall be as natural for you to be heavenly-minded, as
for Earthworms to be earthly. O then! we shall greet you, by the excellent and
princely Name of Saints. O then, you shall be no more Beasts, but Creatures of
an high and seraphick Nature, the Sons and Minions of the High and Lofty One;
the Princes and Heirs of Heaven, and Earth, and all Things; for then all Things
are yours, whether Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas, or the World, or Life, or
Death, or Things present, or Things to come: All are yours, and ye are
Christ's, and Christ is God's.

A Soliloquie to GOD, Prayer-ways.
DIspatch, O WELBELOVED, and hasten the Day of our eternal Marriage; put Time,
and Days out of the Way: Great Things have thou to do, before thou descend
visibly to this lower World: Thou have been making great Dispatch, since thou
ascended; and still the nearer thy second Coming, thou still hastenest thy Work
the more: These few Years immediately preceding, How have thou put many and
great Things through thy Hand? And now thy Kingdom is upon the advancing Hand;
though it seem almost all tottering and decaying. That great and glorious Work,
thou promisedst of old, is just now in the Birth, and near the breaking forth:
Thy grand Enemies have begun to fall before Thee, and have still lost Ground;
and though now they seem to have the Advantage, it is but in Appearance: Thou art
but making thy self to flee before them, that thou may draw them all out
after Thee; but, ere ever they shall be aware, thou will make thine
Ambushcado's to assault them on the Rear; and in a Trice thou will environ them
on every Side, give them an irreparable Rout. Thou art, O mighty Captain, as it
were, retiring thy self, that thou may come back on thine Enemies with the
greater Force: Thou art at the crying out, Ah! I will ease me of mine
Adversaries, and avenge me of mine Enemies: For, behold, thou make the Earth
empty, and make it waste, and turnest it up-side down, and scatterest abroad
the Inhabitants thereof: Thou art coming out of thy Place, to punish the
Inhabitants of the Earth, for their Iniquity; for, Thou shall rise up, as in
Mount Perazzim; Thou shall be wroth, as in the Valley of Gibeon; that thou
may do thy Work, thy strange Work; and bring to pass thy Act, thy strange
Act. At the Noise of the Tumult, the People shall flee; at the Lifting up of
thy self, the Nations shall be scattered, and their Spoil shall be gathered,
like the Spoiling of the Caterpillars; as the Running to and fro of Locusts, so
shall thou run upon them; for thy Sword shall be bathed in Heaven, it shall
come upon Idumea, and upon the People of thy Curse, unto Judgment: Thy Sword
shall be filled with Blood, and shall be made fat with Fatness: For, Thou have
a Sacrifice in Bozra, and a great Slaughter in the Land of Idumea: And the
Unicorns shall come down with them, and the Bullocks, with the Bulls; and their
Land shall be soaked with Blood, and their Dust made fat with Fatness: For the
Day of Vengeance is in thine Heart, and the Year of thy Redeemed is come. Thou
art looking, and there is none to help; and thou wonderest that there is none
to uphold; therefore thine Arm shall bring Salvation unto thee, and thy Fury it
shall uphold thee: Thou will put on Righteousness, as a Breast Plate, as an
Helmet of Salvation upon thine Head: And Thou shall put on the Garments of
Vengeance for Clothing, and shall be clothed with Zeal as a Cloak: And Thou will tread down the People in thine Anger, and make them drunk in thy Fury; and
wilt bring down their Strength to the Earth. Gird thy Sword on thy Thigh, O
most Mighty, with thy Glory and thy Majesty; and in thy Majesty ride
prosperously, because of Truth, Meekness, and Righteousness; and thy Right Hand
shall teach Thee terrible Things: Be thou a Refuge for the Oppressed, a Refuge
in Times of Trouble. When thou make Inquisition for Blood, remember them:
Forget not the Cry of the Humble; that they may show forth all thy Praise, in
the Gates of the Daughter of Zion: That thou may be known by the Judgment
thou executest, when the Wicked is snared in the Works of his own Hands: Let
not the Needy always be forgotten: O! let not the Expectation of the Poor
perish for ever. Arise, o Lord, let not Man prevail; put thine Enemies in Fear,
O Lord, that they may know themselves to be but Men: Behold, they travel with
Iniquity, and have conceived Mischief, and have brought forth Falsehood: They
have made a Pit, and dug it; Let them fall into the Ditch, which they have
made: Let their Mischief return upon their own Hand, and their violent Dealing
come down upon their own Pate: But those that trust in thee, let them rejoice,
let them ever shout for Joy, because thou defendest them. Even let the
Righteous rejoice, when he sees the Vengeance; Let him wash his Feet in the
Blood of the Wicked; so that a Man may say, Verily, there is a Reward for the
Righteous: Verily, thou art a God, that judge in the Earth. Remember this,
that the Enemy has reproached, O LORD; and that the foolish People have
blasphemed thy Name. O deliver not the Soul of thy Turtle-Dove unto the
Multitude of the Wicked: Forget not the Congregation of thy Poor for ever: Have
a Respect unto thy Covenant; for the dark Places of the Earth are full of the
Habitations of Cruelty. O! let not the Oppressed return ashamed; Let the Poor
and Needy praise thy Name: Forget not the Voice of thine Enemies; the Tumult of
those, that rise up against Thee, increases continually. They have taken
Crafty Counsel against thy People, and consulted against thine hidden Ones:
They have said, Come let us cut them off from being a Nation, that the Name of
Israel may no more be in Remembrance; for they have consulted together, with
one Consent; they are confederate against Thee. O make them like a Wheel, O my
GOD, as the Stubble before the Wind; that Men may know that Thou, whose Name
alone is JEHOVAH, art the most High, over all the Earth. O LORD GOD, to whom
Vengeance belongs; O GOD, to whom Vengeance belongs, show thy self: Lift up
thy Self, Thou Judge of the Earth, render a Reward to the Proud. O LORD, how
long shall the Wicked, how long shall the Wicked triumph? How long shall they
utter and speak hard Things? and all the Workers of Iniquity boast themselves?
They break in Pieces, thy People, O LORD, and afflict thine Heritage: Yet, they
say, The Lord shall not see, neither shall the GOD of Jacob regard it. But Thou
shall arise and have Mercy upon Zion; for the Time to favor her, yea the set
Time is come: For thy Servants take Pleasure in her Stones, and favor the Dust
thereof. For thy Mercy is great above the Heavens, and thy Truth reaches unto
the Clouds. Be Thou exalted, O GOD, above the Heavens; and thy Glory above all
the Earth, That thy Beloved may be delivered, save with thy Right Hand. Will Thou not give us Help from Trouble; For vain is the Help of Man. Through Thee
we shall do valiantly; For Thou art He that shall tread down our Enemies. Our
Mouth shall be filled with Laughter, and our Tongue with Rejoicing: Thou shall
put a new Song in our Mouth; Each one of us shall sing forth, O LORD, Thou art
my God, I will exalt Thee; I will praise thy Name, for Thou have done wonderful
Things; Thy Counsels of Old are Faithfulness, and Truth: For thou have been a
Strength to the Poor, a Strength to the Needy in his Distress; A Refuge from
the Storm, and a Shadow from the Heat, when the Blast of the terrible One is as
a Storm against the Wall. Lo, this is our God, we have waited for him, and he
will save us: This is the LORD, we have waited for him; we will be glad and
rejoice in his Salvation. We have a strong City, Salvation will God appoint for
Walls and Bulwarks. Open ye the Gates, that the righteous Nation, which keeps
the Truth, may enter in. I cannot but smile, and leap for Joy, through the
Fore-tho'ts of the glorious Days we shall see a little hence. Verily,
WELBELOVED, Thou have persuaded me with a strong Hand, that the Glory of the
second Temple shall far surpass the Glory of the first; and that such a Day of
thy Power and Excellency shall arise very shortly upon BRITAIN, as shall dazzle
the Eyes of all the Beholders, confound and put to Shame all thy Adversaries,
rejoice exceedingly the Hearts of thy now sadned and fainting Friends, and have
a strong Influence and Resplendency throughout all the whole Earth. We are thy
covenanted People, thine in a more peculiar Manner, than any People, Nation, or
Language throughout the Universal World: Thy Name is called most signally over
us, thy Glory and Renown is most especially concerned in our Affairs: Greater
Mercy, Power, Wisdom and Sovereignty have Thou not manifested on any People,
since Thou ascended on high: How majestic and glorious have thy Outgoings been
among us? As if here had been the chief Place of thy Dwelling on Earth. Such
majestic Banners of Mercy and Justice have thou erected among us, as have
amazed the Nations about: And though, ere it be long, Thou will pour out our
Blood like Water, by the Force of the Sword, because of our horrid Apostasies
and Inventions; Yet, Thy Loving Kindness shall Thou never remove from us, but
shall erect a Banner of Love over us, until the Day of thine Appearance. Thou
have manifested, that Thou art well pleased with thine Espousing of us, and
that thou stand to the Bargain, by thy begetting a Progeny of Sons and
Daughters, which appear to exceed, in Number and Excellency, all others through
the Habitable World: Though our Iniquities testify against us, and cry for utter
Desolation, until we be like Admah and Zeboim; Yet, what will thou do for thy
great Name, which will be greatly blasphemed throughout the World, if Thou
utterly consume us? Have Thou begun a Work, and shall thou not perfect it? Have
thou laid the Foundation; And shall Thou not erect it, unto the Cope-stone,
that all may cry, Grace, Grace unto it? Have Thou not ever frustrated the cruel
and hellish Intents of thine Enemies, and made their Devices to fall on their
own Heads; And shall Thou not now plunge them in the midst of their own
Mischiefs, as that the Inhabitants of the World shall cry out, Higgaion, Selah?
Have Thou such a numerous and excellent Remnant, according to the Election of
Grace; And shall they not hold Thee from removing altogether from hence? Yea,
so hold Thee, as Thou shall dwell most gloriously amongst us, and bless us with
a double Blessing. Art Thou the Hearer of Prayer; And shall not the Sighs and
Tears and Groans of thy afflicted, persecuted Ones prevail strongly with Thee?
Are there not Thousands of Thousands of Prayers lying before the Throne, yet,
not answered? How many strong Wrestlers have prayed and weeped for thy
vindicating thy Work and People, and died Praying? Though Sighs and Tears did not
move Thee, yet will Thou not regard the Cry of the Souls under the Altar, who
testified for the very smallest of thy Interests unto the Death? Is not thy
Kingdom now upon the advancing Hand, and the glorious Days at the Close of
Time, which of old thou have promised, at the Door? Anon, Thou will tread upon
the high Places of the Earth, and the Inhabitants shall tremble, and be amazed:
And the Loftiness of Man shall be bowed down, and the Haughtiness of Men shall
be made low, and thou alone shall be exalted in that Day. Thou art coming forth
in great Fury, and shall tread the Wine Press without the City, up to the
Horse-bridles: And the Carcases of the Men of this Generation shall be like
Dung upon the Earth; for the Sword shall devour from the one End of the Land,
even to the other: No Flesh shall have Peace, because the Earth is defiled
under the Inhabitants thereof; since they have transgressed the Laws, changed
the Ordinances, broken the everlasting Covenant: For, from the least of them
even unto the greatest of them, every one is given to Coveteousness; and from
the Prophet unto the Priest, every one deals falsely: They have healed the
Hurt of the Daughter of thy People slightly, saving, Peace, Peace, when there
is no Peace: They be all Adulterers, an Assembly of treacherous Men; and they
bend their Tongues, like their Bow, for Lies; but they are not valiant for the
Truth upon the Earth. Behold, thy Whirlwind, shall go forth in Fury, even a
grievous Whirlwind, it shall fall grievously upon the Head of the Wicked. Thou
have not sent these Prophets, yet they ran; Thou have not spoken to them, yet
they prophesied; Therefore will Thou cast out the Carcases of these Prophets,
and these, to whom they have prophesied into the Streets, and the Fields, to be
devoured by the Fowls of the Heaven, and the Beasts of the Field: For Thou will
cut off from this Generation Head and Tail, Brar^h and Rush in one Day: And it
shall be as with the People, so with the Priest; as with the Servant, so with
his Master; with the Maid, so with her Mistress; as with the Bu^er, so with the
Seller; as with the Lender, so with the Borrower; as with the Taker of Usury,
so with the Giver of Usury to him: For Wickedness burns as the Fire, it shall
devour the Briers and Thorns, and shall kindle in the Thickets of the Forest;
and they shall mount up, as the lifting up of Smoke. Through thy Wrath the Land
is darkened, and the People shall be the Fuel of thy Fire: No Man shall spare
his Brother; the^ shall eat every Man the Flesh of his own Arm; Manasseth
Ephraim, and Ephraim Manasseh; and they together shall be against Judah; and
the Streets shall be filled with Blood, and the Fields shall be soaked with
Blood and Fatness, for it is the Day of thy Fury, and Revenge for the
Controversy of Zion: But yet in it shall be a Tenth, and it shall return* and
shall be eaten, as a Tyle-Tree, and as an Oak, whose Substance is in them, when
they cast their Leeves: For the Holy Seed shall be the Substance thereof. And
in that Day, shall the BRANCH of the Lord be beautiful and glorious; and the
Fruit of the Earth shall be excellent and comely, for them that are escaped of
Israel: And in that Day shall Thou be for a Crown of Glory, and for a Diadem of
Beauty unto the Residue of thy People; and for a Spirit of Judgment to him that
sits in Judgment; and for Strength to them, who turn the Battle to the Gate.
For Thou in the Midst of us art mighty; Thou will save: Thou will rejoice over
us with Joy, Thou will rest in thy Love: Thou will rejoice over us with
Singing: And thou will gather them that are sorrowful for the solemn Assembly,
even them to whom the Reproach of it was a Burden; and thou will create upon
every Dewlling Place of Mount Zion, and upon her Assemblies, a Cloud, and Smoke
by Day; and the shining of a flaming Fire by Night: For upon all the Glory
shall be a Defense. Who is a GOD like unto Thee, that pardonest Iniquity, and
passest by the Transgression of the Remnant of thine Inheritance? Thou
retainest not thy Anger for ever; because Thou delightest in Mercy. O may thou
be glorious and exalted through Britain, and the whole World! When shall the
Night be gone, and thou arise with Healing under thy Wings? When shall thou
pour down the Spirit from on high, and make unto thy self a willing People?
Hasten these Days, for thine Elect's Sake: Be an Hiding Place to thy Chosen,
from the Storm and Tempest, and the Blast of the terrible Once; according to
thy Promise: Cover us with thy Feathers, and under thy Wings make us to trust:
Let thy Truth be our Shield and Buckler: Then shall we not be afraid for the
Terror by Night, nor for the Arrow that flees by Day, nor for the Pestilence
that walks in Darkness, nor for the Destruction that wastes at Noonday: a
Thousand shall fall at our Side, and Ten thousand at our Right Hand; But it
shall not come near us; only with our Eyes shall we behold, and see the Reward
of the Wicked. O let us see the Good of thy Chosen, and rejoice with thy
Nation, and be glad with thy People: Let us see Good, according to the Days
wherein we have seen Evil, and according to the Days Thou has afflicted us. And
perform thy great Promises, now in the End of Time and Days; as thou have
already poured the Vials of thy Wrath on the Seat of the Beast: Now, our mighty
One, dry up the River, the great River; and let there come a great Voice from
the Temple of Heaven, from the Throne, IT IS DONE: That thou may have a
glorious Church of Jew and Gentile; such a Day of thy Power, and Beauties of
Holiness, as that the Clearest Days we or our Fathers ever saw, were but Days
of Darkness and Ignorance, in Comparison of them. Haste, O WELBELOVED, that
Thou may cry down Time and Days; and become All in all unto thy Chosen,
throughout Eternity.

The dying Saint's SONG.
Farewell, you Beauties of the lower Story
Of God's great All; Adieu, thou painted Glory
Of silly Earth; farewell, you Dreams, you Toys,
Clothed in the Garb of true Delights and Joys:
Yet, were you such, as to the World you seem,
What Place now can you have in mine Esteem?
Since all you lesser Beauties disappear,
In Western points of my Heart's Hemisphere;
You rose, shone, set, yet shall you not again
Shine on my Soul, while Heaven of Heavens remain:
No more shall painted Loves my Soul bereave,
No more shall glist'ring Shades my Mind deceive,
No more shall empty Hopes cause Discontent,
No more shall carping Cares my Soul torment;
No more shall Pain cause me to groan and sob,
No more shall Fears cause stifled Heart to throb:
No more shall crackling Joys my Spirits exhal,
No more shall vain Conceits my Thoughts inthral;
No more shall vain Delights choke solid Pleasure,
No more shall Store of Clay appear a Treasure;
No more shall childish Rage my Blood inflame,
No more shall fond Desires possess the same:
No more shall my Conceptions be obscured,
No more shall my Affections be obdur'd:
No more shall Damps asleep my Senses lull,
No more shall clubbish Earth Soul's Actions dull;
No more shall Sickness my Clay-house possess,
No more shall Exercise cause Weariness:
No more shall silly Body cause a Lothing,
No more shall't stand in need of Food and Clothing;
No more shall Men contemn, if these fall low;
No more shall Men esteem, if these o'verflow:
No more shall Sin remain, Source of all ill,
No more shall Sin Man's glorious Structure spill:
No more shall Sin lodge near to heavenly Grace,
No more shall Sin eclipse Christ's lovely Face:
No more shall Sin pull Heart from Things divine,
No more shall Sin my Heart to Earth incline.
Would thou, in short express all said before?
Blessed Self, say this, That Sin shall be no more.
Welcome, O gentle Death, I think thy Face
Appears not grim, but has a pleasant Grace;
What though thy Looks are glostly, sad and sow'r
Unto the Wicked, whom thou do devour?
Not so to us, Servants cannot appal;
For ours are Death, Life, Heaven and Earth and all:
First Sight of thee, Friend Death, caused languid Heart
Leap, for exceeding Joy, and every Part
To spring, with Floods of Pleasure: I was slain
With sad Delays, but am revived again:
I Will no more call thee Death, but Life's; I find
In thee, not Death's, but Life's Symptoms combined.
True, Death thou art unto the wretched Band,
Stark dead in Sin, and under thy Command.
O but all Things have changed their Kind and Face,
Unto the Sons of Light, and Life and Grace!
Sweet Christ has turned, for us, all Blacks to White,
All Woes to Joys, all Sadness to Delight:
He past the Lists with Foes, and gave the Foil,
And made all Foes, to Friendship back recoil.
With thee, O Death, he grapled Hand to Hand,
And led thee Captive from thy native Land:
Now thou art tamed, and lost thy fatal Sting;
Foes without Harm can no Disaster bring.
Enter this Heart, Friend Death, and thou shall hear
Thy Praises sung, with a melodious Cheer:
O sweet Beginner of all Joys and Pleasure,
Of all Content, and Fullness passing Measure?
O joyful Ev'ning-period, without Morrow,
Of Wants, and Pains, and Tears, and Griefs and Sorrow!
And which is most, O blessed outmost Border
Of all Corruption, Sinning and Disorder!
Once past this March, I may with Coldness cry,
All Sin is gone, Adieu all Misery,
O safe Refuge! O sweet eternal Port;
To which all weari'd Pilgrims do resort.
O Silver Stream! O pleasant passing Strand
From clownish Earth, to fair Emmanuel's Land!
O gladsom Boat-man! giving safe Convoy
From weeping Earth, unto the Land of Joy.
O quiet Sleep! which weari'd Sense assails,
And Spirits and Powers with sweet immortal Gales.
O just Umpire, which does the March discry
Of flying Time, and vast Eternity.
O skilful Sower of Earth's mortal Grain!
That it in heavenly Glore may rise again.
O noble Usher, who by the Hand do bring
Us to the Hall of the immortal King.
Would I thy Praises in one Word express?
I Will only say, O Source of Happiness!
From thee did never-fading Glory grow;
From thee did ever-blooming Joy overflow:
By thee eternal Death was vanquished,
By thee eternal Life did it succeed.
O strange! The Source of Life did purchase more,
By dying, than all Creatures lost before:
Yea, more by infinite transcendent Stages,
Than can be told through endless Store of Ages.
By thee the Saints their Heritage possess:
By thee Earth's too too numerous Folks decrease.
Thou art more mild, of a more pleasant Nature,
In these last Ages of the lower Creature,
Than in the first, when thou did suffer Men,
To run a longsom Race of Sin and Pain.
O without thee our strongest Hope would fail,
Our Joys would die, Despair would us assail.
The Thoughts of thee brought to my Heart Relief,
In all my Wand'rings through the Vale of Grief:
Indeed my longing Soul was sore oppressed
With sad Delays, when thou seemed not to haste
Thy wished Course, and to forget thy Call:
Now, now thy Coming has redressed all.
O now my Heart's rejoiced! Sweet Death and I
Are in each other's Arms; thrice happily
I bravely flee out over the March of Time,
Unto that happy, happy glorious Clime;
Where stored are enduring boundless Treasures
Of Loves, and Joys, and Heart-contenting Pleasures.
All Joy, Death's shady Vale, in drawing near
Thy dark'ned Borders, strange! thou do appear
Another Thing, than what I did conceive;
Mistakes cause needless Fears, and Joys bereave.
Thee did my Thoughts present an ugly Den,
Overspread with Horror, Sadness, Fear and Pain:
Sight tells the Truth, O thrice delightsom Place!
Stored with refreshing Shades of sweet Solace,
Cast by these stately Trees of fragrant Fume,
Which do overspread this true Elysium,
And do adorn this Trance, which Pilgrims brings
Into the Paradise, which ever springs.
Now do I set my Feet within this Vale,
What Gales of Joys are these, which me assail
In this first Entry? O this Grave might be
A ravishing Repose through all Eternity!
All here do laugh, and smile, and spring and sing;
Were Sadness here, it could not Sadness bring:
Were placed here all Griefs and Woes of Creatures,
Would they not change unto melodious Natures?
And can, O fairest One, thy Word command
Death's saddest Vale into a joyful Land?
How does the Place, where Thou do ever dwell,
In Glory, Beauty and all Things excel?
But what if this be it? O heavenly Frame!
My Mind's enlarged, my Heart is in a Flame!
O sweet Aspects! with what a pleasant Grace
Do heavenly Hosts surround me, in this Place?
I Am ravished with the Raiment of that ONE,
Whose Fragrancy transcendeth Lebanon:
His Voice, his Soul transporting Emanation
Strikes me in an eternal Admiration!
No, this is Glory's Port; I see the Hall,
Where Lovely Christ, with Crown in Hand, does call;
Come, come, my Fair, thy princely Head I Will crown
With these great Bays of Glory and Renown:
I Will thee adorn, in such a brave Attire,
That all, who thee behold, shall thee admire.
O Love, thou ever have been, in my Sight,
A Mass of Beauty, Sweetness and Delight:
But now, my Fair, I Will thee so beautify
With the resplendent Rays of Majesty,
And passing Glory's Beauty; I Will so fill,
With Store of heavenly Grace, thy Mind and Will,
And all thy Powers; thy Glore so flourish shall,
And bloom, and shine and ray, through Ages all,
That most envying Seers shall confess,
Thou art a Mirror of all Happiness.
O have thou fought thy Foes, and vanquished,
By offering Violence unto all, who did
Thy Course to Heaven oppose? And shall not I
Put in thine Hands these Palms of Victory?
O did thou gladly suffer, and despise
All Losses, Pains and Woes that did arise
For my Name's Sake, O Love? And shall not I
Cause thee to reign, in glorious Majesty?
Wast thou to all created Things denied,
Esteeming them but Dross and Dung, and Eyed
Me as the only One? And shall not I
Thee with my matchless Beauty satisfy?
O have thou bid Farewell, for evermore,
To earthly Things, which thou enjoyed before;
That thou might come to me? And shall not I
Give full Enjoyment through Eternity?
O then, arise, my Fair, and come away;
Behold, the eastern Beams of this fair Day
Of vast Eternity dart in thy Face,
Causing all Shades retreat and flee apace.
O come, and enter this thrice happy Place,
Thou now beholdst. What ravishing Solace
Dwells here! what passing Joy! what boundless Pleasures
Flow in this Land, like Fountains, Floods and Rivers!
Nay, Nothing here, but Sweetness! every Part
Is filled with all Delights of Mind and Heart:
Here every Ray's a white and joyful Day;
Here every Bloom's a fragrant smelling May:
If once thou enter here, thy Rain is gone,
Thy Winter's past, and all thy Woes are done.
This is the holy Place, within the Vail,
Wherein once entered, shall for ever dwell:
This is the Place of Old, I did prepare,
To be the Stage, whereon I might declare
My Beauty, Glory and Excellency,
Before this glorious, stately Company
Of Men and Angels, who shall see my Face,
And shall for ever in my Sight find Grace:
Lo, here behold, these rosy, fragrant Groves;
We'll satiate our selves with mutual Loves.
O here our Blessedness shall bloom for ay!
Arise, my Love, my Fair, and come away.
Thus speaks my LORD, this is his Invitation,
Thus sounds his Voice; O endless Admiration!
Transporting all: O Fires dart from above,
Transforming all into a Flame of Love!
His Soul-alluring Voice, His heavenly Grace,
That shines in every Look, His fairest Face,
His lovely Eyes, His Countenance Divine
Has ravished quite away this Heart of mine:
At first Aspect, his Shade, a Draught might prove,
Would quite eclipse Ten thousand Worlds of Love.
Thrice blessed Saints, thrice blessed Angels, you,
Who stand within the near immediate View
Of such an One, all in your proper Places,
Encircled with essential Love's Embraces!
It Is like two Heavens of Joy, to think upon,
That I shall be within these Arms anon!
More solid Joy the Hope of Glory brings,
Than all Enjoyments of created Things.
LETTERS Written by Mr. Andrew Welwood, from London, a little before his Death.
I. A Letter to his Mother.
London. Dear Mother,
IF I were able to dictate now, when I am entering into Eternity, I could tell
you the Consolations, wherewith I am comforted of God, even when the chiefest
Delights of the World, these Trifles, upon which the Sons of Men dote, can be
no Comfort to me. Alas! what are all the Comforts, that flee away at Death?
Even the Vanities of Time, which cannot convoy a Man without the Borders of
Time; and far less endure with him through Eternity. My Death would seem
Judicial-like to blind Worldlings, who see no Judgment, but to be deprived of
the empty and tasteless Vanities of Time; But I see, That all Things work
together for Good to them, who are the Called according to his Purpose: Even
Difficulties Temptations, Griefs and Woes have all an happy End to the Godly:
Out of the Eater comes Meat, and out of the Strong comes Sweetness: So, even
eating and consuming Griefs, Sickness and Losses, which make the outward Man
decay, renew the inward Man, and make him flourish; Even the strongest
Difficulties, Temptations and Foes, when overcome, yield the sweetest Victory:
And the Thoughts of having rushed through so many Enemies, and so strong, shall
be sweet throughout Eternity. I see clearly, all the Steps of divine Providence
toward me, have conspired to a blessed Close; even the most difficult of them,
especially this Half-Year: I would not, for never so much, but that I die were
I die, and am sick in this Place; for his Dispensations have a wonderful Depth
in them, and cannot well be discerned, but by Eyes enlightened from above. But
Worldlings are blind, and vary strangely in their Judgment of Things; and even
the Saints, while here, are much blinded with Sin and Infirmities of this
over-powering Mortality: Death has indeed a terrible Face to these, that place
all their Happiness in this Life; but I fear it not; it is not Death, but an
Harbinger of Glory unto me: It is an hard-favoured Messenger, sent from my
sweet Lord to me; It Is a dark and sad Chariot carrying to the Land of Light and
Joy. My LORD has done to me, what he has determined from Eternity; and all
his Purposes, even all the Tho'ts of his Heart, are full of Love, infinite
Love, to those that wait upon him. I resolved to glorify him on Earth, and
dedicated my Life wholly to my LORD's Service; and I know it is all one with
him, as if I had done it: And I shall, in another Manner, exalt and serve him
above, than I could have done here below, weighted with Mortality, and
innumerable Infirmities. My Lord has said to me, It would weary thee, to stay
too long in this Valley of Tears and Misery; I take it, as if thou had done
me many Years Service: I have abridged thy Days, but not thy Life: I have
shortened thy Toiling, but not thy Reward. And O what a blessed Thing it is,
that He takes the Task of many weary Years Service off my Hand! My Warfare is
ended; O the joyful Change I am undergoing! When shall I see Him, as He is;
When shall I get my Fill of lovely Jesus? O his Beauty, his Beauty, his Beauty!
Men and Angels may admire the Freeness of his Grace, and admire it, and ever
admire it! But what can they say, or comprehend of it? O the Freeness of his
Grace! that he should admit the like of me to stand eternally before him, and
to be for ever in his Presence; to be one of his honorable Train; Nay, to
enjoy him, as near as can be! O! think ye, I lose any Thing, who get the
Forestart, and become Possessor of that Inheritance? The Inheritance of many a
more excellent and ancient Saint than I; nay, the Inheritance of the Heir of
all Things? It Is little of Heaven I know, being obscured with Mortality, and
living by Faith, and not by Sight. But O to think of the Expressions of
Scripture concerning it; Eye has not seen, nor Ear heard, nor has it entered
into the Heart of Man to conceive, what GOD has prepared for those that love
him: If Heaven could be conceived by us, I should not so much esteem it. But O,
it is a massy Thing! O strange! that GOD should make Bits of mortal Men (and
what a poor worthless Thing Man is, let any behold in a dying and dead Carcass)
not only as happy as we can desire, or conceive, but as happy as can be! O, the
beholding of the Face of the Ancient of Days! But I know in whom I have
believed; and that he is able to present me spotless before the Father, with
exceeding great Joy. If I perish, let him see to his Promise. I have laid all
upon him: If I perish (through the Strength of my LORD, by whom I can do all
Things) I shall perish believing. I expect much of Heaven, more than I can
conceive; But, O! I think I shall be exceedingly deceived, (O sweet Deceit!)
for I shall find more than Ten thousand Worlds can comprehend. I shall see my
Father ere long; Many sweet Days have he and I had upon Earth: Many innumerable
Ages shall we have in Heaven together. O Heaven! O, the Difference betwixt this
melancholious, smoky Inn, and the Magnificent Hall of Glory! O the Change I am
undergoing! I go from the Twilight of the Sun and Moon, to the Noonday of the
Splendor of Glory; from a Dunghill, to a Throne; from bodily Infirmities,
Distresses, Diseases, and Pains, to a Land, whose Inhabitants do not say, I am
sick; from wearisom Labor and Toiling, into an inconceivable sweet Paradise,
where I shall rest for evermore; from a mortal Company, to an innumerable
immortal Company of Angels, to the General Assembly, and Church of the
Firstborn, which are written in Heaven; and to GOD the Judge of all; and to
the Spirits of just Men made perfect; and to JESUS the Mediator of the New
Covenant. O! what think ye, to be eternally, even for ever and ever among such
sweet Company? Are there any more honorable and amiable Company, than they? O!
what shall I say? What shall I think? that filthy and unworthy I should show my
Face among so glorious an Assembly. What is here, but Vanity and Grief of
Heart? O do you not long to be gone, to be in that sweet and inconceivable
Paradise? Cast your Anchor within the Vail, and then you need not fear Death,
come when it will. But O, long Life, or Death rather! For the sooner at our
Journey's End, the better; and the longer we are clogged with Sin and Misery,
the worse; but the more we will love to linger in this Sodom. It Is hard to get
our Hearts drawn quite off Time: We look kindly to the Bastard's inheritance;
and therefore we abhor Death, and can frist Heaven longer than any Thing else:
But if we could get a Sight of the King in his Beauty, and of the Land that is
afar off; then, O to be gone! O to be up above these visible Heavens, and
amongst these glistering Companies, who enjoy him to the full! O! if Man knew
how vain a World this is! O! but they are happy, and inconceivably happy, who
escape fairly the Temptations, Snares and Difficulties that are in this Valley
of Tears, and who are fairly landed on that odoriferous, flowery Land, an that
ravishing Land, which infinite and eternal Love did contrive to be the royal
Theater, whereon should be shown, to Men and Angels, the Height and Breadth,
Depth and Length, of that Love, which passes Understanding! If you run fast,
you cannot be long behind me; and we shall see one another immediately: Death
is no Separation to the Saints; For Time is nothing: For what is it to be
separated for a few Hours, to them that are to dwell eternally together? What
is transient Time to never ending Eternity of Joys! Death is far mistaken by
the most Part of Saints, they have a wrong Conception of it; It is a sweet
Repose to a weary Soul, and loses the Soul from the Bands of Mortality,
letting it out from a filthy, stinking Prison, unto the sweet and fragrant Air
of Glory; It ends all Sorrows and Sighings, and begins unspeakable Joys: It Is
but a dark Cloud ushering in the bright Dawning of eternal Glory. O but my Lord
has excellently circumstantiated my Death! O I admire his Love! I could tell
many sweet Passages of Providence he has cast in my Way: But I delay, until I
be sitting upon the Brink of the River of Life; and then I shall number them: I
cannot now praise him; Alas that I am so stupid and dull; but I shall praise
him anon, I shall eternally praise him! O be glad and rejoice in our God! O
sweet! that poor, dying, miserable I was not left to Uncertainties, not to know
what to do; but to have such a sweet and kind Lord to repose on! Had I stayed
longer in this wretched Life, I was resolved to have shown my self as faithful
to you as I could: But I commit you unto his Grace, who has cared for me, even
unto Death: Commit your self to him, he will bring all to a good Issue that is
trusted to him. We are not our own; therefore we are not to dispose of our
selves. CHRIST is a good Tutor and Governor, and carries all these well
through, that commit themselves to him. See that Mary neglect not Seeking of
God, Praying, Reading of the Scriptures; Let her not frequent ill Company. O
the Worth of a Soul! and the Reward of these, that are instrumental in gaining
of a Soul! Our Bodies must go to the Dust; but our Souls are of more Worth than
Ten thousand Worlds. I am not able to say more, I am so weak. O! run fast,
Death is at the Door. We are all stepping into Eternity; What is Time, but a
Preparation for it? Overlook Time, and live, as daily Dying, as one that must
pass away immediately, and never be here any more. They build Castles in the
Air, who imagine any Rest here; Let Worldlings dream of Rest here; Ours is
above; our Hearts are gone; and we are dead to the World. Farewell for a few
Days. These are the Words of

Your dying Son, A. W.

II. A Letter to his Brother James.
Dear Brother,
I Hope, the last Words of your Brother, who is now stepping into Eternity,
will have some Weight with you; and this Consideration will make you not to
neglect them. Know you why you came into the World? I am sure, and you are as
sure, Not to eat, and drink, and pass away your Time in earthly Business; but
to get the Work of your Salvation well wrought and finished, before Death
assault you: It is most uncertain, and steals upon Men, as a Thief in the
Night, when they are secure, never dreaming of such a great Change: Though truly
my Gracious LORD lets me see Death still approaching nearer and nearer; that I
may draw ever nearer and nearer him, who is Life. O! it concerns you, to try,
Whether you shall be a base Miscreant, crawling in the Bottomless Pit, with
unspeakable Torments, in the Midst of wicked Men and Devils, blaspheming
Jehovah and the Lamb to Eternity; or, a glorious Saint, conformed unto the
Image of the SON of the eternal GOD, loving, praising, adoring him, that
sits on the Throne, and the Lamb, for ever and ever. Consider what I say,
The Business is so weighty, so exceeding weighty, that Time, with all its Well
and Woe, is to be overlooked, in Comparison of this absolutely and only
necessary Thing: I tell you, There is an absolute Necessity, that you be holy
(let not the Poor Name affright you; for Holiness is the sweetest, and most
easy Thing in the World, to them that are holy:) For, Without Holiness, no Man
shall see the LORD: And Salvation must be nearer your Heart, by many Degrees,
than all other Concernments, though they were Ten thousand Worlds. You must know
the Bargain of the New Covenant, and close heartily with it, in all its
Fullness, without the least Reservation: Upon it, I recommend unto you Mr.
Guthry's Trial of a saving Interest in CHRIST; and desire you to read it, till
you become such an one, as he describes. Believe it, Godliness is profitable
for all Things; having the Promises of this Life, and that which is to come.
Though it may seem troublesome in the Beginning; and though Christ's sweet and easy
Yoke may seem an hard Wreath; yet believe me, there is Nothing in the World,
but it, which can give Rest, and full Satisfaction to the Soul: All Things here
are unsatisfying, though you had all that you can desire of them. O this is a
vain World! These who are near Eternity will say so. O the vast Difference
betwixt Time and Eternity! I assure you, if you had all that your Heart could
wish or desire of the Pomp, Treasures and Pleasures of Time, you would find no
Contentment in them: And when you shall be in such a Condition, as I am in,
when pale Death shall be staring you in the Face; then all the Glory of Time
will be, in your Eyes, nothing but a withered Flower. But alas! we are drunk
with this World; and we never know well what we are doing, till Death make us
sober. I must say again, and again, O the Difference betwixt Time, and
Eternity! They that get Heaven, can get no more; for, alas! What are all
Additions of Time? What is a few Days Eating, and Drinking, and Trifling? Yea,
what are all the massy Exercises of Time, compared with the Exercises of
Glory? We place too much of our Happiness in this Side of Time; and therefore
Death is a great Disappointer: But we should be indifferent to all Things in
Time, and have our Eyes ever fixed upon the Thoughts of Eternity: Then it is not
at all to be regarded, in what Time of a Man's Life he die, if he die in the
Lord: Yea, it is an invaluable Blessing for the Prisoner, or weary Pilgrim, to
have all his Toilings by his Hand, and to win to his native Soil. You may
think, I put a hard Task upon you; because our Nature is all polluted, and we
are accustomed to do Evil. But the Ways of Holiness are sweet, and all its
Paths are Peace: If you were once acquainted with the Ways of it, you would
say, That Sin is the most base and vile Thing in the World; and Holiness is the
most noble Ornament. And consider this, The more you set your Mind on Holiness,
the more sweet and easy will you find it. As for temporary Things, take no Care
for them; they are but Additions to the Son's Inheritance. I may say by
Experience, He has made good his Word to me in all these Things of Time; He
has made it good unto the End of my Race, in a most strange and wonderful Way:
So that I have tasted more of my Lord's Goodness, and wonderful Providence, in
this last Half-year of my Life, than in many Years before: I think it a
merciful Dispensation, that he has weaned my Heart from the World, more in
this Half-Year's Sickness, than in many Years Health; This whole Half-year of
my Life has been a continual Winter, for bearing down my Corruption, both
Original and Actual: And now the World has no Relish to me. Farewell, vain
World, I heartily submit unto Death, if it were for no more, but because it is
the good Pleasure of my Lord, who most mercifully takes me away from the
Bondage of my Corruption, and from the dreadful Evils to come. Meditate
seriously on Death: It is a Business most weighty, a Business upon which your
eternal Well or Woe depends: The End crowns the Work; die well, and you are
well, even well for evermore. And O! is not EVERMORE a massy Word? You shall
find Death easy, if you be a diligent Seeker of God in your Lifetime: If
otherwise, you shall find it the forest Battle, that ever you fought; and you
shall quake, when you shall hear an avenging God speaking audibly in your
Conscience, He is not mine, take his evil Soul, Devils; pull him to Pieces, and
hale him away to utter Darkness: The poor Soul wrestles in vain, but an
avenging God leaves it for a Prey to Devils. Look not on Death, as afar off:
Little will be the Difference betwixt my Death and yours. This Generation will
quickly be gone: Time is a glistering Star, appearing something beforehand,
but indeed it is a transient Nothing. And one that dies at Sixty Years of Age,
and another that dies at Twenty Years, think both alike, their bypast Time is a
Dream. Short, or long Time is not to be regarded, but in Preparation for
Eternity: And he that is prepared, has lived long enough. I could give you
many Instructions, were I not very weak: Beware of ill Company; never think to
see God, if you walk with ill Company: Companions in Time, and Companions in
Eternity. Lay some Vows upon your self; but remember this, That you vow to do
nothing, in your own Strength; for you shall find, that when you are weakest in
your own Eyes, then are you strongest: I say, Lay some Vows upon your self, as
to pray thrice a Day seriously and conscientiously; to read so much Scripture;
and to mediate. Not that Men are tied to particular Times, but it is most
profitable to lay Bands upon our loose Corruptions, which else will plead for
too much Liberty. Imagine not your Thoughts to be free; vain Thoughts are the
Source of vain Words, and unprofitable Actions; the Mind is the Spring of all.
Beware of the Sins of the Time, as you would shun the terrible Judgments that
threaten an apostate Generation: The Pastors are become brutish, they are Sons
of Belial, and know not the Lord; therefore they, who hear them, are Partakers
of their Abominations. I need say no more. You never have rightly sought God,
until it be your chief Delight to seek him; therefore, never rest till you can
say, I will go to God, my chiefest Joy. O then you are as happy as God can make
you (to speak so, with Reverence to that High and Lofty One, who inhabits
Eternity) and can you be more happy? I take to witness against you, your own
Conscience, and the great Judge of the Quick and the Dead, that, if you
continue in any vain Imagination, living without God in the World, neglecting
so great a Salvation, you are a Trampler under Foot of the Blood of the
Covenant, and a Despiser of all Admonitions: But all this will do little, until
He, who made Heaven and Earth, regenerate you. It may be he will hedge up your
Way on every Side by Affliction, that you may be constrained to flee unto him,
who is a present Help in Time of Trouble. This, if you follow it, is the best
Legacy I could have left you; for, if you knew the Danger of the Pelf of this
World, little of it would suffice. I would not for a World, I had been born to
be rich: The lighter burdened with thick Clay, the better; it is hard to get up
the Mount, though ye had but a very small Weight upon your Back: For our
Corruptions are weighty enough, without any Addition. If you neglect that,
which not I, but Christ commands you, Farewell for ever. If you obey, Farewell
for a few Days; and then you and I shall meet, in the only Paradise, the Flower
of the whole Creation: We shall sit down upon the flowery Banks of the River of
Life, and ravish our selves for ever and ever, with everlasting and unspeakable
Joys. This is from

Your dying Brother, A. W.

III. A Letter to his Sister Helen,
Dear Sister,
I Am sorry, I did not write sooner, before my Strength and speech did fail;
but I would be glad to spend my last Breath upon you, if I could do you any
Good. I cannot forget you, even when I have forgotten the Vanities of the
World; you are precious unto me, since I knew you in some Measure a Seeker of
God. O what Advantages there are in seeking of Him! I defy Men and Angels to
number and comprehend them: Endless Eternity shall be short enough to lay open
the inconceivable Gains of Godliness. If you seek him diligently, sincerely and
constantly, you shall have all Things: And O is not that a vast Word, ALL
THINGS? All shall be yours, whether the World, Life or Death, Things present,
or Things to come; all these shall be yours, even the Great ALL, and whatsoever
is his. O but the Saints have a long, large and full Charter! If you had a
Charter for many Lands, it were but a narrow Thing: But now every Place where
you tread on is yours; and what can you desire more? Beheld the Heaven, and
consider even the Heaven of Heavens; for these are yours: Is it possible, that
a Saint, the Heir of all Things, and Joint-Heir with the Son of the Eternal; Is
it possible, I say, that he can want any Thing? Nay, the great Eternal, the
Maker of all Things, He is yours; and what can you desire more? Is it possible,
that a Saint can want any Thing, whether spiritual or temporal? I mean any
Thing that is good for him: And he alone knows what is best for us. When I look
through the Passages of my Life, I see my Lord and Guide has led me the best
Way; and these have been the sweetest Dispensations, which crossed most my
natural Disposition, and which seemed most Judgment-like to carnal Eyes. We are
like ignorant Children, that have no Judgment to make Choice of Things; but
would swallow down sweet Poison, and give away a rich Inheritance for painted
Trifles. No Wonder then, the World be Fools and Madmen in their Choice. My
Life has been but a Tract of Afflictions, and I would not for a Thousand
Worlds it had been otherwise. Though my Old Man desired still to be swiming in
the Ease and Vanities of the World; yet I see my Lord has been kindest, when I
esteemed him most cruel. The last Part of my Life might seem Judgment-like: But
O you would wonder, if you knew what I know, and what my Lord has done for me,
in this last Half-year of my Life, both as to Things temporal and spiritual: I
cannot understand them now, but I shall very shortly; and they shall be to me
Matter of eternal Praise. Though I had abounded with all the Ease, Delights, Pomp
and Glory, and Riches of Time; yet would I be glad to die, and leave the Puddle
of swinish Pleasures, and drink of the pure River of everlasting Joys, that
flows from beneath the Throne of GOD. This World quite mistakes Death: O! who
would not willingly leave such a vain perishing World? wherein we are still
dishonouring our God; a World wherein the Saints get bad Entertainment; a World
wherein the LORD of Glory was, and is daily, crucified: What is here? All the
Glory and Excellency of the Creation is up above: A few imperfect Saints are
only here. But it is above, I shall see and embrace all these Worthies, the
Courtiers of the King of Glory. You need not be sad for my Death; and will not,
if you post hard after me, and follow on to know the LORD: For Time is just
Nothing. We shall be glad and rejoice, with Joy unspeakable and full of Glory,
throughout all Eternity, in that Land of Glory, and inconceivable Joys. O, if
you knew but a little of the Excellency of that Land of Blessedness! You would,
in a Manner, envy those who go before you. Though you should pass never so many
sweet Days ere you can get thither, you would weary: For your self, you are yet
in an Hell, of Sorrow and Sin, while out of Heaven, and while they are in an
Heaven of Joy, and Pleasure. O! Beware of Worldly-mindedness, and carping
Cares; Commit all to your Father: Seek first the Kingdom of Heaven, and the
Righteousness thereof; and then all other Things shall be added unto you. Fear
not, It is your Father's good Pleasure to give you a Kingdom: And he that gives
Heaven, will give as much Earth as will suffice you, and more than is
sufficient, is a heavy Weight, that will pull you down the Mount. O mark this!
He that gave his only begotten Son, out of his Bosom, to be tormented unto
Death for you; Will he not also with him freely give you all Things, even every
Thing that pertains to Life and Godliness? As for Things temporal, the less of
the World, the better: All the Saints will testify it, at least when they are
leaving it. I can put my Seal to it now, when I am entering into Eternity, that
it is most dangerous to be entangled either with Riches, Honors, or Pleasures;
And that it is the sweetest Dispensation, to be afflicted, and cut short of
them; for Prosperity is the Neck-break of the Life of Godliness, as the
Experience of many a deceived Professor may testify; who seemed Something, when
afflicted; but when once they got the Bag, betrayed Christ. It Is hard for a
Camel to go through a Needle's Eye: The more we are inveigled with this
deceitful World, the less do we value Heaven. Now Nothing more glews a Man's
Heart to the Earth, than Riches, which have weighed many a Man down to the Pit;
where he is weeping and gnashing his Teeth, cursing Riches, and tormenting
himself, that ever he desired them: Whereas, if he had been poor, he should
have been now (as Men may conjecture) rejoicing amongst these glorified Ones.
Remember, that it is utterly impossible to serve God and Mammon; And if your
Treasure be not in Heaven, neither will your Heart be there. I bless my LORD
for mine Afflictions (which have been still greater and greater, till now, I am
leaving them all) as much as for any Mercy, I ever received: For now I reap the
peaceable Fruits of Righteousness, And though now I be weeping, while I sow; yet
shortly shall I have as much as I can bear of the masie Sheaves of
unconceivable Glory. Weep and howl, ye rich Men, for your Misery that shall
come upon you: For you now receive your good Things, and the Saints their evil
Things; therefore immediately shall ye be afflicted and tormentod, and they
shall be comforted. Blessed are they that mourn now, for they shall be
comforted. For the Saints weep, while the World rejoiceth; but our Sorrow shall
be turned into Joy, and their mad Mirth into unspeakable and eternal Horror.
O! if Men did consider this, they would not toil for their Ease and Pleasures
of Sin, which are but for a Moment; nor would they envy the rich Gluttons, but
rather the poor Lazarus's, that are despicable in the Eyes of all. Fret not
when you see the Wicked prosper; nor value Poverty, Shame and Contempt; since
the only excellent Ones, of whom the World was not worthy, wandered about in
Sheepskins, and Goat Skins; being destitute, afflicted, and tormented: And the
honorable Apostles, and Followers of the Lamb, were accounted the Offscourings
of all Things. O if the Saints would take Time, sit down and consider these
Things! they would find it sweet, to be conformed, in Sufferings, to their
Lord, who was a Man of Sorrows, and acquainted with Grief; That they might also
be conformed to him in Glory. I fear Earthly mindedness may be your
Predominant; therefore strive most against it: For, how can one set their Heart
upon Trash, and earnestly desire it, and Heaven also? I persuade you, the only
Way to have as much of the World as is necessary and good for you, is to commit
your temporal Lot wholly to Christ, without the least Reservation: This is
best; for Nothing can be committed to him, and go wrong: Try him, and if ye do
not find that he will carry you bravely through, so that you shall lack Nothing
that is good for you, then call him a Liar: Yet, never any of the Saints could
say, he failed them in a Jot of what he promised them. And how great are his
Promises! as you will find in Scripture: They are all comprehended in this, The
Lord is a Sun and Shield; he will give Grace and Glory; and no good Thing will
he withhold from them that love him, and walk uprightly. Trust all to him; for,
whether should you tutor your self, or he? Which of you is wisest? Cast all
upon him, to the least Bit of Bread! and ye shall find a great Ease. They are
miserable, who must care for themselves, and what concerns them, and have not a
GOD to run to, on whom they may lay themselves, and all their Burdens. O! learn
to trust in God for all Things, temporal and eternal: It is an hid Mystery to
many Saints, in many Things, especially, to trust against Sense, to hope
against Hope; when there is no humane Probability, then to rely upon the bare
Word of him who is true, is a Difficulty; where his Providence seems to
contradict his Promises, or to make his Promise a Liar: But will you trust him
for Heaven, and not for a Moment of Time? Think you, he will withhold
Journey-bread, if you be a Traveller to the higher Canaan? It were a great
Absurdity, to command any to go a Journey, and not to give what is necessary
for it. Go on to Heaven, hold your Face still thitherward, and Christ will
still be supplying all your Wants: Indeed he will not satisfy your carnal
Disposition, nor give you more than a Pilgrim needs; so that you should forget
the Race set before you, by being entangled with a Number of Superfluities. I
would say more, If Breath and Strength would permit: You know not what a World
you are into; It Is full of Snares and Difficulties. You will find it hard to
keep clean Garments; unless you commit your self unto him, who can carry you as
with Eagles Wings, and strengthen and support you, when you are ready to fall.
Though you should be the precisest of all round about you; you will find all
little enough, when you come to Death: O! Death is a weighty Business. You have
scarce Time to prepare for it: All our Time is little enough for Preparation,
though we should cut our selves short of our indifferent earthly Exercises: What
Need had we then, to beware to pass our Time vainly? It Is precious every Moment
of it having a Relation to Eternity. O Eternity! Eternity! Get some Sight of
it, and your Thoughts shall be wonderfully changed: For, I tell you, could you
get a Glimpse of that massy Thing, called, ETERNITY, all the Things in Time
should be no more in your Eyes, than a childish Toy in the Eyes of a Man. Even
the World decked in its best Robes, seems such a poor Thing to me, that I would
not be at the Pains to stretch out my Hand, if I had it for the taking up; and
such will it seem ere long to many. Worldlings are but Beasts; and the richest
and most flourishing of them, could you see them with my Eyes, are but mean
Dunghill Worms; their Meditations cannot flee over Time. Then look upon the
World as mad, they know not what they are doing; they value only Time, and yet
they know not how to get it past away. Be a great Reader of the Scriptures; for
there shall you find Instruction, to make you wise to Salvation; and thereby
you may guide your Steps warily, in an evil Time: There shall you find
Threatenings, to rouse you up; and Promises, to comfort and sustain you in the
saddest of Conditions. Reverence the Ordinances, administered by faithful
Pastors; for they are the Ambassadors of the Lord, our King: But, abhor false
Prophets, which lead Men into Destruction. Alas that there should be any of
Christ's Servants, who give an ill Example to these that are Simple,
counselling them, by their Practice, to follow Thieves and Robbers, whose Voice
Christ's Sheep will not hear. Set, at least, three Times a Day apart, for
Prayer; for when we neglect that, our Hearts are cold all the Day long; and
then we are easily snared with any Temptation we meet with. Sometimes meditate,
and consider your Self, and others; that so you may not go on in your Journey
like the World, who never ponder their Way, but are led to Destruction by their
earthly Desires, rushing into it, as Horses to the Battle. What have you to do
here, but to mind Salvation? Consider this; for Death will strip you naked of
all Things here; but choose the one Thing necessary, that shall never be taken
away. Remember then, that all Things here are subordinate to Salvation: Our
Time is short and uncertain, we flee away. Death will be upon you ere you be
aware; it surpriseth alike all Sorts of Ages, Young and Old: Choose you, whether
you will have Death sweet or bitter. For my Part, I fear not Death; my LORD
has said to me, Son, be of good Cheer, thy Sins are forgiven thee. O who would
not go hence, if it were but to stand at one of the Gates of the golden City,
and see the Lord, with all the Ransomed Ones, the noble Company of Priests and
Kings, standing round about the LAMB, crowned with Honor and Glory! One Hour
of Heaven, yea, one Sight of the Face of the Ancient of Days, would do more
than make up all the bitter Afflictions I have swimmed through in Time: Nay, I
think the very Fore-thoughts of Glory do already swallow up all the Impressions
of the Tribulations of Time, that have seized on me: They are nothing now; they
are gone, and shall never return again; Yea, they are, as if they had not been.
This shall be Matter of high Praises, through endless Eternity, for evermore. O
vast Eternity! But O silly Time! No Wonder Paul said, We look not at the Things
that are seen, but the Things that are not seen; for the Things that are seen,
are temporal; but the Things that are not seen, are eternal: The Things that
are seen, were not from Eternity, neither shall they be to Eternity. O then!
overlook them: Close your Eyes, as it were, upon them; and you shall see
strange Sights, which shall make your Course to Glory swift and cheerful? O!
what think you of Christ? Is there any like him? is there any but He? If you
have him, you have all Things: His Words cannot be told. What think you of it,
to be saved from everlasting Burnings? What think you of it, that sinful
wretched we should be as happy as can be? Even eternally, and unconceivably
happy! and all this purchased by the Death and Blood of our kindest LORD JESUS?
O who would not love such an One? Surely, it is impossible to know him any Way
a right, and not to love him: He is the Ravishment of Men and Angels. Increated
Glory shines through the Vail of his humane Nature: We cannot enjoy God more
sweetly, familiarly and fully, than through him: He is the blessed Days-Man
betwixt God and Man; the Man Christ Jesus. Him I wish I could declare evermore:
But my last Words, though they were fewer, may have a strong Impression upon you.
Run fast, lose not the Crown; Heaven is well worth an Inch of Time's Running.
Cross corrupt Nature's Disposition; as you sow, so shall you reap: And
consider, That Death will teach you, that all that you do is fruitless, which
tends not to the great Salvation: All other Mercies are not worth, in
Comparison of this great Salvation; and a short Time will spend them all: But
it shall endure for evermore. O but the News of Heaven, such a sweet Heaven to
weary Pilgrims, such a ravishing Paradise to these that are in this smoky
Dunghill; I say, They are the greatest News that can be! And this whispered in
your Ears, Run for you shall have the Crown, is another Kind of News, than,
Run, and you shall have Riches, Honor, and Pleasures. Bless him at all Times,
who has disposed your Lot so, as these only great Things have taken you by the
Heart, Be not weary in Well-doing; for in due Time you shall reap, if you faint
not: And we shall see one another shortly, in the Midst of such Joys, as the
Tongues of Men and Angels cannot in the least express: Therefore, you have no
Cause of Sadness, but of Rejoicing, that you have another Friend gone before
you, who will welcome you shortly into your Lord's Joy. Grace be with you.
Account it all one, as if I had spoken all this to you Face to Face. These are
the Words of

Your Dying Brother, A. W.

IV. A Letter to his Cousin Thomas Welwood.
My Dear Cousin,
THough I be almost amidst Death's Pangs, I cannot forget you; because of the
sweet Friend^hip we have had together; and because you are (I Am persuaded) one
of the Heirs of Glory, and among those who wrestle through manifold
Temptations, unto the Land of eternal Consolations! O if I could tell you what
my Lord has done for me unto this very Hour; and much more since I came
hither, than in many foregoing Years! I think, if I had Time, I could fill a
whole Volume with wonderful Experiences of his Loving Kindness, strange
Providence, and sweet Chastisements: So that an Half-Year may be better than
an hundred. It Is not the Length of Time, we are to look to: We have a race to
run to Heaven; and when we have finished it, we have done. Oh! Cousin, even a
Saint may live long, and make very small Progress to Glory: Yea, many go
backward; and it were better for them, they died ere that be, before they
dishonored God by their backsliding Carriages: Therefore run fast, Eye the Joy
that is set before you, and patiently endure all the Temptations and Troubles
in Time; for your Lord has promised, that He will never leave you nor forsake
you: And none shall be able to pluck you out of his Hand. Indeed you may have
sore Trials, both outward and inward; but be of good Courage, and he shall
strengthen your Heart: For you are not to bear your own Burden, but to cast it
fully over upon Him. And I promise you, in my Lord's Name, you shall be
sustained: He is our Strength, our Wisdom, our Righteousness, and our All; even
all that we want, all that we can desire. Never notice long or short Life: but
live to die, and then you die to live eternally. O! think much upon Eternity,
and you shall think Nothing of Time. Alas! alas! the Things of Time fill our
Eyes so, as we never regard Eternity: Yet, Time will be at a Close ere ever we
be aware. I have somewhat the Advantage of you in getting the Fore-start: But
we shall be together perpetually, even immediately; and we shall have another
Manner of Converse, than possibly we could have had on Earth. In Heaven they
are not confined to Moments, Days and Years; we shall have Eternity to rejoice
and be glad in: O what a Life shall we have, when you and I shall follow the
Lamb whither soever he goes! When we shall have Sin, Temptations and Miseries
done away! We know not the Excellency of our invaluable Inheritance; and
therefore are we so much taken up with earthly Trifles, and Shadows, that are
Nothing; which bewitch all the Worldlings out of their Wits, and the Saints
too, in a great Measure: It were more Wisdom in us, to use the World, as not
abusing it, as not setting our Hearts upon it. Beware of the Cares of the
World, and the Deceitfulness of Riches, wherewith you may be entangled, in the
Condition you are in; if you take not Heed, your Course to Glory will be the
more slow, and you will drive your Chariot-Wheels heavily up to the higher
City; yea, the thick Clay will make them come back upon you. O consider how
great a Business Salvation is! We can never consider it enough. You will think
so, when you come to Death, which you ought to look upon as at the Door.

I speak not these Things, as if you knew them not already; but I put you in
Remembrance, desiring to communicate a little of my Mind to you, now, when I am
at the Brink of Time; because Providence has so ordered that we cannot speak
Face to Face these Things, which are the true and genuine Thoughts of my Heart.
Beware of the Pollutions of the Times. It is comfortable to me that I had
Little or Nothing to do, as to outward Things, with this horrid, cursed
Defection. Hate the Garments spotted with the Flesh: Clean Garments are of
great Worth; and these few, in this woeful Time, that have kept their Garments
clean, shall walk with our Lord in White; for they are worthy. To keep clean
Garments, that is, to be pious alone; pious in your Family, in your Worship;
pious in your worldly Employments; full of Charity, despising the World;
walking wisely toward these that are without, and toward these that are
within. And as to the Times, let your Zeal be wise, and your Wisdom zealous.
You may believe a dying Man, I am fully persuaded that this Prelacy is
abominable Antichristianism; and that the Prelates and Curates are the
Ministers, not of CHRIST, but of Antichrist and Satan; and that it is utterly
unlawful to hear them, or do any Thing, that may show you esteem them
Ministers, or any Way strengthen their Hands. O the dreadful Wrath, that is
hanging over these Lands like a Cloud, which will fall down in a Deluge of
Divine Vengeance. God will make this Land to swim in Blood; even the Blood of
all Sorts, Great and Small, Rich and Poor, Old and Young, shall be poured out
like Dust: He shall be a strange Man, that shall happily escape such a
Consumption. I will not speak much of the Matter, but I see fearful Things
coming. But, O the glorious Days succeeding these! I cannot apprehend the Glory
that shall shine in Britain, which shall enlighten to the Ends of the Earth. I
fear not Death, it is Sin only we ought to fear; The Sting of Death is Sin; That
being taken away, it is most harmless. It is sweet to die in Christ! O what an
Exchange do I make! I shall see him, and that glorious Company of Saints and
Angels, following Him whithersoever He goes: The first Hour of Glory shall, in
a Manner, make me forget that ever I was upon Earth. My Afflictions have been
greater than the Spectators could imagine; and still greater and greater, until
I arrive at the Haven of eternal Rest. O it is sweet! O it is sweet! after a
great-Toil and Labor. My Lord is taking me in the fittest Time; for both Body
and Soul are very weary and sore tossed: But this Body shall get a sound Sleep,
and a ravishing Wakning. O the great Difference betwixt what it is now, and
what it shall be shortly! Who can conceive what Christ has done for the
Saints? O the Depth of free, altogether free Love and Grace! It shall take up
Eternity to cry up the inconceivable Love of JEHOVAH and the LAMB. O to think
that Bits of Clay, sinful Clay, like you and me should be conformed unto the
Image of our only Lord Jesus! That is a wonderful Exaltation! wonderful in the
Eyes of all these, that see their own Emptiness and Vileness. O admire! O
praise! O adore! Let these Things be still imprinted on your Heart; all other
Things are but Trifles. Look upon the World, as a Number of mad Bodies: They
are Beasts, whose Conceptions are confined within an Inch of Time: They are
poor Spirits, who gape after Time's Riches, Honor and Pleasures. If the World
knew what they were doing, they would wonder at themselves; at least, they
would begin to question, whether their Life on Earth was real, or only empty,
and a Night-dream. O such a Sight as I have gotten of the World! O it is but
vain, Vanity of Vanities: The Flower and Choice of it is cursed, and altogether
Vanity. O if I could tell you of the Nothingne^s of the World, and of Things
temporal; and of the Massiness of Things eternal! Compare them together, and
you will wonder at the Difference! The most Part of Professors (among whom I
put my self) take an easy Way to Heaven: And O where will you find the Man, or
Woman, that studies a close Walk with God! It Is recorded of Enoch, that He
walked with God Three hundred Years: But who can say, He has walked with God
one Day? We lose God in the Midst of our worldly Employments, and cannot say,
We have set the Lord always before us; Therefore, we cannot say, We shall not
be moved. We approach to Him, in the Morning, Evening, and at other Times; but
we neglect our Thoughts: Whereas to live full of holy divine Tho'ts, is to live
a Saint: As the Man is, so are his Thoughts. Alas! I may say it, by sad
Experience, Unwatched-over Tho'ts have made me, many a Time, not to differ much
from a Worldling. Keep your Thoughts right, and all shall be right: Keep thine
Heart with all Diligence (says the Spirit of God) for out of it are the Issues
of Life. If your Thoughts be right, your Prayers will be seasonable, your Words
and Actions will be seasonable, for, out of the Abundance of the Heart the
Mouth speaks, and the Hand acts. Commit all your Affairs, temporal,
spiritual and eternal, wholly to your heavenly Father, without the least
Reservation: He cares for you; Therefore, be careful in nothing, but in every
Thing give Thanks. Run, run with Patience, the Race that is set before you;
Laying aside every Weight, that may bear you down: Entangle not your self with
the World; have as little ado with it, as you can: The Righteous shall scarcely
be saved; they, who go uprightest, shall find hard enough Work: We are so full
of Corruptions original and actual, that Holiness is quite contrary to our
corrupt Natures: I mean not the common Holiness, which even those, that are
strict, are thought to have; but that which our Lord commands; He that loves
Father or Mother, Sister or Brother, or the World, or himself better than me,
is not worthy of me. O it is an unknown Thing, to deny all, to take up their
Cross daily, and follow CHRIST. I had a great Desire to preach CHRIST; But He
will accept the Will for the Deed: I go to better Exercise, whereof one Hour is
better than all the Preachings betwixt this, and Christ's second Coming,
compendized in one. All here are but Shadows; all above is Substance. O what
elevated Divines are above! They are all filled with all the Fullness of God;
and do preach and cry up the transcendent Excellencies of JEHOVAH and the LAMB:
There is a perpetual Crying-up of Christ. In Canticles, He can never enough
speak of his Spouse: Up above, his Spouse can never enough speak of Him. There
all are ravished with the Ancient of Days! Who, but the Ancient of Days? Who
but CHRIST? Who, but the Saints? Then, let never Earth and Heaven be compared
together; for I tell you, Earth, is but a tormenting Hell, in Comparison of
that unspeakably delightful, and altogether ravishing Land, unto which unworthy
(but happy) I am going, O methinks, I am touching the Skirts of the fragrant
Breathings of the Mountains of Spices! And O how I must be ravished, when I
shall draw in no other Air, but the Breathings of the higher Paradise? They
have the Advantage, that get the Fore-start to Heaven, and seeing the Face of
JEHOVAH first; and being more ancient Possessors of that excellent Inheritance.
Why should any be afraid to go to Heaven too soon? Why should any be afraid he
be too soon happy? Let Worldlings desire to crawl long on their Dunghils: But
let us ever be longing to be dissolved, and to be with our LORD, which is best
of all. I commit you, your Mother-in-law, your Wife and Children, to the
Protection of the Almighty; and pray for temporal and eternal Blessings to be
poured out upon you. These are the Words of

Your dying Cousin, A. W.

V. A Letter to Mr. Davidson.
Right Reverend,
THough I be stepping into Eternity, and was thought to have been just entering
into it about Half an Hour ago, I could not but remember you and dictate a
little of my Mind unto you: Not that I intended to write any Instructions unto
you, but only show, That God is good to them that seek him; and that in his
Providence, his Promises are all accomplished to the Full, to me. I cannot tell
what he has done for my Soul; but I think, He has brought me to the End of my
Days, to the End of my Race, by such a wonderful Chain of divine Providence,
that I would not, for Ten thousand Worlds, He had brought me any other Way; or,
that my Race had been either longer, or shorter. He lives long enough, who
lives till he get Heaven: All other Things are but Pendicles. He lives short
While, who is unprepared for it; of whatsoever Age he be: Therefore my Death
needs not offend any Man; for, what can I get more, than the Kingdom
immovable, undefiled, and that fades not away? I desired to live, for no
other End, but to preach my Lord to the great Congregation; And think you not,
He will accept the Will for the Deed? I dedicated my Life for his Service; and
I hope, He will graciously take it off my Hand, as if I had done him many Years
Service. And I must tell you, He has many wonderful Ways of Bringing his
Children unto Glory: I could tell you it by sweet Experience, if my Weakness
and Breath would permit. I would not, for all the Glory, Riches and Pleasures
of a vain World, my Lot had been another than my Lord has appointed it; yea,
my last Half-Year's Providence has been a golden Chain, which neither I, Men,
nor Angels can sufficiently value. Would you know, what I think now of Heaven?
Though I were out of this State of Mortality, I could never think of it enough!
O! O! O! the Joy of being with JEHOVAH and the LAMB! O the Excellency of the
Knowledge of Christ Jesus, even on this Side of Time! But to see Him as he is,
O who can tell what a Sight it is? Even these who see Him Face to Face, see, as
it were, but the Skirts of his Beauty and Excellency: And let them dive still
deeper and deeper, till Eternity, as it were, be at an End, they shall still be
but beginning, and yet never well begun. To show my great Love and Respect I
have ever had to you, both formerly and now, I write unto you, even when the
Dead-Rittle is in my Throat: And though I be in a great Agnoy, I find the only
Way to Heaven, that New and Living Way, is only by the Blood of the Son of GOD:
There is no other Way, but, Believe in Christ and be Saved. But it is a lively,
purifying, loving and believing Way. I cannot say much, I am in Death's Pangs.
But, O Death! where is thy Sting? O Grave! where is thy Victory? I am like to
have a sharp Combat; but, I hope, Christ will not be an indifferent Spectator.
The End crowns the Work. And if once I were within Emmanuel's surpassing sweet
Land of Conquest, then should I trample Death and Hell under Foot; and triumph
over all the Miseries and Afflictions of Time, which seemed to triumph over me.
O Death what art thou, in mine Eyes! My LORD has swallowed thee up in Victory:
And can a freeborn Son, and Conqueror, through the Blood of the everlasting
Covenant, be afraid of a conquered Slave? Rev. 14.13. Hell, Sin, Devil and
Death are conquered Slaves. I rest,

Dear Sir, Yours, A. W.

FINIS.
In debitam Libri and Authoris Laudem POEMA.
QUicunque aetherii fieri cupis Incola Coeli,
Hunc ades; hunc parvum saepe revolve Librum.
Invenies perquam nitidis descripta Figuris
Atria, quae sanctis sunt habitanda Viris:
Atria summa DEI, superi Palatia REGIS;
Angelicis Sanctis condecorata Choris:
Quae pius hic Juvenis, coelesti percitus Oestro,
Dat non vulgari delineata modo.
Hoc duce carpe Viam Coeli per pulchra Vireta,
Per Loca mortali non adeunda Pede:
Attamen illa patent Animo Penetralia Sancto,
Sordida qui Terrae Gaudia nulla putat:
Sed super Astra volat, CHRISTI inflamatus Amore,
Et Comitem Superis se quasi jungit ovans.
Talis non dubie fuit hic, qui Scripta reliquit
Haec Signa Ingenii vix imitanda pii.
De Coelo et Superis veteres quaecunque Poetae,
Carminibus soliti sunt celebrare suis,
Fabula cuncta Animis apparent sordida Sanctis;
Parvulus hic quanto fert meliora Liber?
Pro Jove, sancta TRIAS coelesti regnat in Arce:
Proque Diis falsis, Angelus astat ei,
Omnia Jussa DEI facere atque capessere promptus;
Seu tutare bonos, perdere sive malos.
Non Genii Heroum, sanctarum est Turba Animarum
Aligeris Sacris par similisque Manus.
Quos sua non Virtus radiantibus intulit Astris;
Justitia ast Christi, Patris et almus Amor.
Ergo huc tend Oculos avidos, age, Candide Lector;
Hic tibi Pisgai Verticis instar erit:
Unde Cananaeam coelestem cernere possis:
Clarior haud alia est optica Tuba, puto.
Ponitur ante Oculos Patriae coelestis Imago,
Quae rapiat Mentem mox super Astra piam:
Ut videat, quae non Oculis, non Auribus hausit
Mortali quisquam Carne gravatus Homo,
Nempe AGNUM sine Labe, Hominum qui Crimina tollit,
Sordida profuso Sanguine Corda lavans,
Victorem Inferni, stantem super Arce Sionis:
Ac REGEM cingit Turba redempta suum,
Quorum Palma Manus decorat, Diadema Capillam,
Aurea quae nullo Tempore Marcor edit:
Vestibus alba nitet lotis in Sanguine CHRISTI:
Atque Redemptori Carmina laeta canit:
Et sequitur REGEM per amoena Rosaria Coeli,
Ille triumphanti dum premit Arva Pede.
Hic simul Angelicas videas astare Phalanges,
Qui Capti CHRISTO non minus alta canunt
Carmina, nam quamvis non hos a Morte redemit,
Attamen, ut starent in Pietate, dedit.
In Solio aeternum residentem cernere PATREM,
Hic non obscure, sed sine Nube, licet:
SPIRITUS hic etiam Sanctus, Amor, Auraque Patris
Et Nati, ambobus par similisque sedet,
Hic sancta Urbs Gemmis nitidis constructa decoro
Ordine, fundavit quam Lanus ipsa DEI.
Cui pellucenti sternuntur Compita ab Auro
Urbs haec non ullo Lumine Solis eget:
Gemmula quaeque potest solare extinguere Lumen,
Ast Urbis Lux est AGNUS et ipse DEUS.
In Sedem hanc cuncti Regem referuntur Honores.
Nox nulla hic: Porta est semper aperta Die.
Non Plangor, non Luctus inest, Morbusve, Dolorve:
Abstersit Lachrymas nam DEUS ipse Genis.
Morte caret, superas quicunque has incolit Aedes:
Nam vitalis Aquae Flumina pura fluunt.
Arbor item Vitae riguae stat Margin Ripae,
Quae fructuet Foliis Gentibus apta Salus.
Hic, Vitam quodcunpue facit servare beatam,
Oceani in Morem larg^ter usque fluit.
Scribitur imptimis Deco^ ^ic, et Gratia Christi,
Quamque humili in Terris vixerit ille Modo:
Quas Vita Aerumnas, et quos in Morte Dolores
Pertulerit, Sponsae accensus Amore suae,
Quam nunc in Coelis sublimi est Sede locatus;
Ad dextram aeterni, dignus Honor PATRIS:
Quem solum agnoscit non tantum Ecclesia Regem;
Sed merito huic Regi flectitur omne Genu.
Quanto Homines miseros fuerit complexus Amore;
Quique itidem in Coelis mutuus ardet Amor,
Dum CHRISTUS placidis puros amplectitur Ulmis;
Dumque stupet Sponsi Men's pia Amore sui.
O! quam Felicis, tantis qui Amplexibus haerent!
Nec se divelli Tempus in omne timent.
Omnia sublimi, et long meliore Cothurno,
Ipse tibi dederit delineata Liber.
Nam Scopus Autoris rapere in sublimia Mentem,
Quae nimium Mundi Stercore mersa jacet.
Et ponam in Terram, ac Rerum coelestium inanem
Allicit, et superi accendit amore Poli.
Et ne quid desit, quo longo obsepta veterno
Men's expergiscat, Tartara nigra ciet,
Atque aperit diras Fauces fumantis Averni;
Ut pateant Poenae, quas mala Turba luit,
Ut sanctum in Dominum Blasphema horrendaque jactent:
Conscia Men's justum dum tamen esse putat.
Ut miseris DEUS insultet justissimus Ultor:
Nec minus et Sancti, dum datur omnis Hono^
Justitiae aeterno REGI, qui contudit Hostem
Sub Pedibus Christi, sub Pedibusque suis.
Sentiet haec pia Men's Studio quam digna fideli
Omnia cum legerit, quae exhibet isle Liber.
In Nomen doctissimi and pientissimi Authoris Acrosticum.
MAgnus in Terris, super Astra fulges
Angelos inter, Superumque pura
Gaudia aeternum bibis Ore pleno,
Illa, que tantum sitiebas olim.
Scripseras nobis equidem stupenda:
Tu tamen sentis meliora long
Esse, que profert Domus haec Decori
Regia Coeli.
Almus in Coelis superis REDEMPTOR,
Nube non tectus, tibi se videndum
Donat: O felix tua Sors! supremi
REGIS in sancto Gremio quiescis;
Et Voluptates sine Fine Carpis.
Aura te Coeli vegetat fovetque,
Spiritus almus.
Walwode, aeternis Opibus abundas
Aureum cinget Diadema Crinem.
Lactis et Mellis bibis usque Rivos.
Vasta jam lustras spatiosaque Arva,
Omnibus quae Deliciis abundant.
Dicis et Lauds Genitoris almi.
Unico Nato Melos usque cantas
Spirituique.
INDEX.
THE Prelude Introductory Page 15 Some Sections exciting to this Divine Study.
Sect. 7. Necessity of seeking everlasting Life Page 17 Sect. 8. Neglect of
Glory proves us carnal Page 18 Sect. 9. Students of Glory overlook Time Page 19
Sect. 10. The Study of Glory is very alluring Page 20 Sect. 11. Creatures are
esteemed by their Knowledge Sect. 12. A clear View of Glory excites to Duty
Page 21 Sect. 13. The more we study Heaven, the fitter for it Page 22 Sect. 14.
Right Uptakings of Glory are Possession in Part Sect. 15. Heaven is the Place
of all Excellency, etc. Page 23 Sect. 16. Our Minds should be wholly there,
etc. Sect. 17. As is our Knowledge, so our Activity, etc. Page 24 Sect. 18. As
we know, and affect, so we are, etc. Sect. 19. A slight View of Glory,
insufficient, etc. Page 25 Sect. 20. Scripture discovers Things beyond Time
Page 27 Sect. 21. Supernatual Glory not to be naturally considered Sect. 22.
All Creatures someway capable of Elevation Page 28 Sect. 23. Grace, the
Forerunner, leads to Glory etc Sect. 24. Saints get Discoveries called
Glimpses of Glory Page 29 Sect. 25. All Things invite to this rare Study, etc.
Page 30 Sect. 26. Knowledge is from above, and to be asked, etc. Page 31
An Invitation in Heroic Verse Page 32 A Gospel-discovery of Emmanuel's Land
Page 33 Sect. 1 and 2. Invocation and Admiration, etc. Sect. 3. The Soul to be
elevated in heavenly Meditation Page 34 Sect. 4. Glory more to be admired than
understood Sect. 5. We can but conceive childishly of Glory Page 35 Sect. 6.
Higher Conceptions of Glory attainable Page 37 Sect. 7. Christ, the Desire of
all, fully manifested, etc. Page 39 Sect. 8. No Manifestation of God so full,
as through Christ Page 40 Sect. 9. One Sight of Christ is ravishing to all Sect.
10. All Enjoyments nothing, till we see him Page 41 Sect. 11. The Soul not
happy, till it rest in his Love Sect. 12. The Interest of Christ and his Chosen
mutual Page 42 Sect. 13. The Glorified look on Time's Things, as childish Page
43 Sect. 14. They ever commemorate Christ's Excellencies Page 44 Sect. 15. To
be beside Christ, inconceivable Dignity Page 47 Sect. 16. The Glorified's
Nearness to God, astonishing Page 49 Sect. 17. No Knowledge to the Evidence of
Glory Sect. 18. To behold the LORD's Glory, is a Dignity Page 50 Sect. 19. His
Manifestations, and the Manner thereof wonderful Page 51 Sect. 20. The Change
Christ underwent, a ravishing Consideration Sect. 21. God manifested in the
Flesh, a lasting Mystery Page 53 Sect. 22. Wonderful, that God exalts Man's
Nature by Sin Sect. 23. The Relation betwixt God and us amazing Page 56 Sect.
24. The Glorified admire God manifested, etc. Page 57 Sect. 25. They only
capable to understand Glory Page 58 Sect. 26. The Subsistence of the Divine
Persons, a Mystery Page 60 Sect. 27. Oceans of Joy overflow Emmanuel's Land
Page 65 Sect. 28. This Land of Joys is filled with Dyvours Page 67 Sect. 29.
The Glorified reflect on the Way to the Kingdom Page 68 Sect. 30. Familiar
Fellowship betwixt Christ and his Page 70 Sect. 31. Visible Things imperfectly
represent invisible Page 72 Sect. 32. All Excellency augmented in Glory, etc.
Page 73 Sect. 33. No Manifestation of God, to that in Glory, etc. Page 75 Sect.
34. Saints in Glory conformed to Christ Page 77 Sect. 35. Full Enjoyment of God
is complete Blessedness Page 79 Sect. 36. Christ ever his Peoples King, Priest
and Prophet Page 80 Sect. 37. Astonishing, that God should look on Creatures
Page 82 Sect. 38. Earth and Heaven quite opposite Things Page 83 Sect. 39. Only
Songs to Jehovah and the Lamb in Glory Page 85 Sect. 40. The Saints Happiness
superabundant Page 88 Sect. 41. All divine Attributes add to their Blessedness
Page 91 Sect. 42. That we are wholly Christ's, is our Happiness Page 94 Sect.
43. GOD manifested in Eternity most, etc. Page 96 Sect. 44. All the Promises
fully accomplished in Eternity Page 102 Sect. 45. GOD's Attributes all seen in
damning the Wicked Page 105 Sect. 46. Sovereignty the first mover of all Things
Page 110 Sect. 47. A World of redeeming Grace most excellent Page 112 Sect. 48.
The Work of Salvation most admirable Page 118 Sect. 49. Our Blessedness an
eternal Act, etc. Page 121 Sect. 50. The full Enjoyment of God, in Nearness,
etc. Page 129 Sect. 51. The Life of Glory the only excellent Life Page 132
Sect. 52. No need of Creatures in Heaven, Jehovah is All Page 133 Sect. 53.
Glory is an eternally blooming Thing Page 136 Sect. 54. Emmanuel's Land is of
free Grace, etc. Page 139 Sect. 55. All Things are fully discovered in Glory,
etc. Page 148 Sect. 56. Fellowship of Men and Angels, a Pendicle of Glory Page
150 Sect. 57. The Saints eternally acquitted, and filled, etc. Page 151 Sect.
58. Reprobates are judged, condemned and terrified Page 157 Sect. 59. The
Creatures share in the Joy of that Day Page 165 Sect. 60. All Things are
renewed, and glorified, etc. Page 167 Sect. 61. Triumphing over the wicked,
Part of Saints Glory Page 174 Sect. 62. Reflections on the Power of Faith, etc.
Page 184 Sect. 63. The Reality of all Things in Heaven Page 191 Sect. 64. A
frowning Time, the Prelude of Eternity Page 193 Sect. 65. Glory totally
changes all the Faculties, etc, Page 195 Sect. 66. Heaven the sweeter, the
more Dangers escaped Page 196 Sect. 67. The Inhabitants shall not say, I am
sick Page 198 Sect. 68. Grace an excellent Prelude to Glory etc. Page 200 Sect.
69. Praises to God, for fulfilling his Promises, etc. Page 203
The Conclusion, in several Sections. Page 208 Sect. 1. Such Things to be
written of with Fear Sect. 2. A Saint should be heavenly-minded Page 209 Sect.
3. Earthly-minded Persons to be convinced, etc. Page 210 Sect. 4. Transient
Thoughts of Glory, insignificant Page 211 Sect. 5. Invitation to change earthly
for heavenly Things Page 212 Sect. 6. Hope of Glory dispels all Sorrow Page 213
Sect. 7. Earthworms have no Place in Heaven Page 214 Sect. 8. Christ, the
Purchase of Heaven, to be praised Page 215 Sect. 9. Religion an hidden Mystery
to Worldlings Page 216 Sect. 10. Saints only know the Mysteries of Godliness
Page 217 Sect. 11. The sad State of Worldlings, the Excellency of Holiness, the
Necessity and Marks of Conversion Page 218
A Soliloquy to God, Prayer-ways Page 235 A spiritual Song of the dying Saint
Page 243 1. The Author's Letter to his Mother Page 250 2. A Letter to his
Brother Page 255 3. A Letter to his Sister Helen Page 259 4. A Letter to his
Cousin Thomas Welwood Page 268 5. A Letter to Mr. Davidson Minister Page 273


