DISCOURSES ON SEVERAL Important SUBJECTS.

By GILBERT TENNENT, A. M. Minister of the Gospel in Philadelphia.

PHILADELPHIA. Printed by W. BRABFORD at the BIBLE in Second-street, MDCCXLV.

THE CONTENTS.
SERMON I. ^AL. ii. 16. Knowing that a Man is not justified by the Works of the
Law, but by the Faith of Jesus Christ; even we have believed in Jesus Christ;
that we might be justified by the Faith of Christ, and not by the Works of the
Law: For by the Works of the Law shall no Flesh be justified. Page 7. SERMON
II. ^M. iii. 31. Do we then make void the Law through Faith? God forbid: Yea ^e
establish the Law. P. 99 SERMON III. (...). iii. 31. Do we then make void the
^aw through Faith? God forbid. P. 134 SERMON VI. The same Text. P. 186 SERMON V.
PHIL. ii. 12.13. Work out your own Salvation with fear and trembling. For it is
God which works in you both to will and to do of his good Pleasure. P. 249
SERMON VI. The same Text. P. 311
The Nature of JUSTIFICATION opened:

A SERMON. PREACHED AT PHILADELPHIA, January the 27th, 1744-5. On GALATIONS II.
16 WITH ENLARGEMENTS.

By GILBERT TENNENT, A. M. Minister of the Gospel in Philadelphia.

Published at the Desire of the Hearers.

Romans iii 28. Therefore we conclude, that a Man is justified by Faith without
the Deeds of the Law.

Romans xi. 5, 6. Even so then at this present Time also there is a Remnant
according to the Election of Grace. And if by Grace, then it is no more of
Works; otherwise Grace is no more Grace. But if it be of Works, then it is no
more Grace: Otherwise Work is no more Work.

Titus iii. 8. This is a faithful Saying, and these Things I will that thou
affirm constantly, that they which have believed in God, might be careful to
maintain good Works: These Things are good and profitable unto Men.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed by W. BRADFORD, at the Bible in Second Street, 1745.

THE PREFACE.
CANDID READER,
THE following Discourse treats upon a Foundation-Point of the Christian
Religion, which it concerns all to understand well, and which I fear, many have
but very superficial Notions of: This has doubtless a bad Influence upon their
other religious Sentiments and Practice.

There is no other sure Foundation b^ CHRIST JESUS, if we build not upon him
for Pardon, Peace and Happiness, the Fabric will surely fall, (debile
Fundamentum fallit opus.) I have endeavored to open this grand Article of
Religion in the plainest Manner I could, that so the weakest Minds may have
just Conceptions of it.

The Light in which I have set this Point, is agreeable to the Series of sacred
Scripture, and the harmonious Suffrage of the reformed Churches of Scotland,
Holland, France, Geneva, England, Germany, etc. expressed in their Confessions
of Faith; which although licentious Wits, who are disposed to be as loose and
inconsistent in their Sentiments as Morals, may deride and burlesque as slavish
Systems beneath their Notice, will notwithstanding be esteemed by the Sober and
Judicious, as instructive and valuable Summaries of divine Truth, so long as
there be any Remains of true Religion in these Nations!

Its affecting to think how Mankind are inclined to run from one extreme to
another. Some who have left the Principles of Arminius, not thoroughly
understanding the Doctrines of Grace, run into the contrary extreme of
Antinomianism, which is as dishonorable to Religion, and injurious to the
Interest of it as the other, if not more so!

Now as Virtue consists in a Mediocrity between two Extremes, so do the
Doctrines of Religion, and especially this of Justification, we should
therefore beware, least while we labor to shun Scilla, we rush upon Caribdis.

I had no Intention of publishing this Discourse when I preached it, having
offered to the Public a Sermon upon Justification some Years agone, but was
induced hereto, by considering the Difficulty and Importance of the Subject,
and the wrong Notions that many have of it, with design to give check to them.
I was also informed, that a few of the Hearers were dissatisfied, and many more
entertained with a Method of handling the Subject different from what they had
heard; and therefore to remove the unreasonable Censures of some, and satisfy
the Desires of others, I consented to its publication; not knowing that it had
committed any Thing worthy of bands or of death. May it please the God of Truth
to bless what is here offered for the Good of his Church, I add no more, but
remain thine and the Churches Friend and Servant,

G. TENNENT.
Philadel. Feb. 15th, 1744-5.
GALATIANS II. 16. Knowing that a Man is not justified by the Works of the Law,
but by the Faith of Jesus Christ, even we have believed in Jesus Christ; that
we might be justified by the Faith of Christ, and not by the Works of the Law:
For by the Works of the Law shall no Flesh be justified.


MY Brethren! As God the Father has from Eternity purposed to confer saving
Benefits upon the Elect in Time Epes. i. 4.
, so the Son of God in consequence hereof has made a Purchase of them by his
Blood and Obedience Rev. v. 9.
; and these very Benefits does the Holy Spirit apply in time to the Heirs of
Salvation John xvi. 8, 9.
. Before which Application by the Holy Spirit's Influence, and Union of the
Elect to Christ by Faith, they have no actual Right to the Blessings of
Redemption, but are Children of Wrath and under condemnation. Ephesians. ii. 3 John
iii. 18.36.
. Jesus Christ must be made of God to us (i. e. by application) Wisdom,
Righteousness, Sanctification and Redemption 1 Cor. i. 30.
. The Elect must be sanctified by the Spirit unto Obedience, and sprinkled with
the Blood of Jesus 1 Pet. i. 2.
: And hence Christ and his Benefits are frequently compared in Scripture, to
such Things as do not profit us without Application; such as Clothes, Meat,
Drink and Medicine. Rev. iii. 18. John vi. 54, 45.
Meat not eaten will not nourish us, Drink not drunk will not refresh us, a
Garment not put on will not warm us, and Medicines not applied will not heal
us: And therefore we may safely assert, that the Application of Redemption to
the Soul, by the Holy Spirit's Influence, is as necessary in its Place in order
to Salvation, as the Purchase of it by Christ's Blood and Obedience. As we are
not condemned actually, on the Account of the Sin of our first Parents, until
we actually exist and are united to them naturally, by partaking of a vitiated
Nature derived from them: So neither are we actually justified by the
Righteousness of the second Adam, until we are spiritually united to him as our
mistical Head by Faith John i. 12. Romans v. 19.
. But so soon as this Union is obtained, an actual Communion in the Benefits of
Redemption immediately ensues, among which Justification is a primary and
principal one: Of this the Apostle treats in the Words of our Text. To
understand which let it be considered, that the Occasion of writing this
Epistle to the Churches of Galatia, (a Country in the Lesser Asia) was partly
to reprove and reduce some Members of these Churches, who had as shamefully as
perilously Apostatized from the important Doctrine of Justification by Faith
alone, through the corrupt Influence of some false Teachers who crept in among
them, and taught the Necessity of Circumcision and other Works of the Law, in
order to the Justification of a Sinner before God; and this they did with a
political Design, to screne themselves from that Persecution which all the
Christians were then exposed to who were not Circumcised; and in order to
promote their new and pernicious Doctrine, they pursued the Method which is
common to Heretics and Seducers in every Age of the Church, viz. They made
great Shows of Religion, commended themselves, traduced and vilified the
Apostle Paul, insinuating that he was no Apostle, that he had learned all he
knew, from James, Peter and John, and yet differed from them in Doctrine and
Practice, as well as from himself. Now the Apostle does not only in this
Epistle labor to reclaim the erring Galatians, but likewise to vindicate his
Character from the unjust and invidious Charges of the false Teachers: To this
purpose the first and second Chapters of this Epistle are chiefly spent^ The
inspired Writer does therein prove himself to be a true Apostle, and not to
have learned what he taught from Peter, James or John, but that he had it by
Revelation from Jesus Christ. In the Verses immediately preceding our Text,
the Apostle shows that he was so far from receiving the Gospel he preached from
Peter, that he faithfully reprov^d him for his judaizing Dissimulation, and
then in the plainest Terms asserts Justification to be by Faith only. Knowing
that a Man is not justified by the Works of the Law, but by the Faith of Jesus
Christ, i. e. being persuaded that a Person is not freed from the Guilt of Sin,
and adjudg'd righteous in the Sight of GOD by Acts of Obedience to the Law of
Moses, either Ceremonial or Moral; but by Faith in Christ, which as an Eye
beholds and as a Hand applies his Righteousness. The moral Law was doubtless
intended by the Apostle as well as the Ceremonial: For it is Manifest, that
although this Question about Justification by Works began about Circumcision, and
Works done in Obedience to the Ceremonial Law, yet the Determination of it
extended farther; for the Apostle by the Law understands that Law by which is
the Knowledge of Sin Romans iii. 20.
. Now the Knowledge of Sin is neither, only or chiefly by the Ceremonial Law;
nor did ever any of those against whom the Apostle argues, think that Men
could be justified by Obedience only to the Law contained in Ordinances; nor
could boasting be excluded if Men might be justified by Works done in Obedience
to the Moral Law: Nor was it the Violation of the Ceremonial Law only that
wrought Wrath, and exposed Men to the Curse. Romans vi 15. Gal. vi. 10. vid Pool^
Anotati. in Loc.
The Apostle proceeds to say, even we have believed in Jesus Christ that we
might be justified by the Faith of Christ, and not by the Works of the Law.
Here observe that the Apostle represents Justification not as a Thing past but
future, and as following Faith; as if he had said, We Jews as well as the
Gentiles, are in a State of Wrath and Condemnation before Faith,
notwithstanding of our Religious Privileges, which being made sensible of, as
well as the utter Insufficiency of any Acts of Obedience we have or can
perform, to free us from the Guilt of Sin, and acquire for us a Right to
Happiness; and being persuaded of the Safety of entire Dependence upon the
Righteousness of the Mediator for our Acceptance with God, we have consented to
embrace him upon Gospel Terms, and reject all Refuges besides him, and that
because, by the Works of the Law shall no Flesh be justified, i. e. no mortal
Man can reasonably expect, or ever attain to be declared Righteous before God,
on the Account of his Obedience to the Law of God, because of its Imperfection.

From what has been said it appears, that the Point to be discoursed upon from
this Text, is the Manner of a Sinner's Justification before God. It cannot be
Justification before Men, or the evidencing of the reality of our faith to them
that is here intended; for good Works would not then be wholly rejected, being
of principal Use in that Case; by those, as the Apostle James observes, our
Faith is shown or discovered. Jam. 2.18.
i. e. Its reality is manifested to others, and evidenced to our selves. And
hence he concludes that a Man is justified by Works and not by Faith only, Jam.
ii. 24.
i. e. in the sight of Men. High Pretenses to and a great Bluster about Faith
and Experiences, when these Things are not crowned with a holy and humble
Conversation, are justly rejected by the Sober and Judicious, as Instances of
Hypocrisy and Delusion. That Faith that don't produce good Works is dead and
unprofitable, Jam. ii. 14, 17.
and therefore cannot be the Instrument of our Justification before God. What
has been said serves to remove the seeming Contrariety between the two Apostles
Paul and James and show their Harmony: To which let me add, that they wrote to
different Sorts of People, Paul directed his Discourse of Justification without
Works to Pharisees, and such as were of a Self-righteous Cast, who depended
securely upon their Acts of Obedience, and though it thereby in some Degree at
least to procure the divine Favor: These ambitious Babel-builders, the Apostle
Paul labors to shake from the Summit of their Self-righteousness in point of
Dependence, that so being made poor in spirit, they might learn to submit to,
and lean alone upon the Mediator's Righteousness for acceptance with God. Phil.
iii. 8, 9.


But the Apostle James had to do with a Club of Libertines, who made high
Pretenses to Faith and Justification by it, while they went on in a Course of
Impiety in Practice: These hardy Hypocrites he takes to task and shows the
Vanity of their Pretenses, by declaring, that that Faith that justified us
before God, was a vital active Grace, productive of good Works; and that good
Works were necessary to evidence to the World about us, the Truth of our Faith
and the reality of our Justification, whatever lawless Libertines might
unjustly mutter against them notwithstanding! But to return: As it is not
Justification before Men that is intended in our Text, as appears from what has
been said; so neither is it a Justification in the Sight of Conscience, for
good Works are of great Use to evidence thereto the Safety of our State: Hereby
(says the Apostle John) we do know that we know him, if we keep his
Commandments; and he that says I know him, and keeps not his Commandments,
is a Liar and the Truth is not in him 1 John ii. 3, 4.
: (And elsewhere he assures us) that if we say we have Fellowship with him and
walk in darkness, we lie and do not the Truth; but if we walk in the Light, as
he is in the Light, we have Fellowship one with another 1 John i. 6, 7
: i. e. If we go on in a Course of Holiness, which is here called Light, we
have an Evidence of true Communion with God, which is a Fruit of Reconciliation
to him.

It remains therefore, that it is Justification before God only, that the
Apostle treats of in our Text, and asserts to be by Faith without the Works of
the Law. This being the Substance and Scope of the Text, I shall in order to
prepare it for Improvement, speak upon the two following Heads, viz: I. Attempt
to explain the Nature of Justification. And II. Prove that it is without the
Works of the Law.


That the Word justify is not to be taken in a moral Sense, as intending a
real, inward Change of the Temper and Disposition of the Soul, as the Papists
imagine, (for that is properly called Sanctification) but in a Law-Sense, as
importing a juridical Act of God, whereby as a Judge he acquits the Sinner from
Guilt and accepts him into Favor, appears from the following Considerations,
viz.

First, From the etymological Derivation of the Word justify, it is derived
from a Word that signifies Right, as judicially pronounced according to law.
Dicaiutai a dice.


Secondly, From its common Acceptance in Scripture, the Passages that treat of
Justification can admit of no other than a Law-Sense; Ex. xxiii. 7. Deuteronomy. xxv.
1. Job ix. 1, 2. Psalm cxliii. 2. Prove. xvii. 15. Luke xviii. 14. Romans iii. 4,
5, 6, -- 24, 25, 26.
and hence the judicial Process is described in the sacred Writings; mention is
made of the Law accusing, and of the Guilty arraigned, as being without
Apology, having their Mouths stopped; Romans iii. 19.
and divine Justice is likewise represented as demanding Punishment. Romans iii.
25, 26.
And Christ is set forth as an Advocate pleading our Cause, by the important
Argument of his Sufferings, and thereby of his Satisfaction to Justice; and
hence the Apostles John and Paul inform us, that we have an Advocate with the
Father, Jesus Christ the Righteous, who ever lives to make Intercession for us
1 John ii. 1.
; and elsewhere Christ is said to appear as a Lamb slain in the midst of the
Throne, Rev. v. 6
and that his Blood speaks better Things than the Blood of Abel Heb. xii. 24
. The Scripture also mentions a Throne of Grace before which we must come, Heb.
iv. 16.
and speaks of God as a Judge, passing the Sentence of Absolution. Romans iii.
19, 20. Romans iv. 5.


Thirdly, Justification in Scripture is opposs'd to condemnation; to this
Purpose are these Words of the Apostle in his Epistle to the Romans, viz. Who
shall lay any Thing to the Charge of God's Elect? It is God that Justifies,
who is he that condemns? Romans viii. 33, 34.
Now as Accusation and Condemnation are in Judgment, so by consequence is
Justification.

Fourthly, The equivalent Phrases in Scripture whereby our Justification is
described, relate to Judgment or a Course of Justice; hence our Lord says,
that he that believes on him that sent him, shall not come into Judgment; John
v. 24.
for so the orignal Word primarily signifies; Crisin a crine ^o.
it is likewise called Reconciliation, Romans v. 10.
remission of Sin, and imputing of Righteousness. Romans iv. 6.


Well, seeing the Word Justify, is evidently a Law-Term, and alludes to civil
Courts of Judicature, it will therefore help us to understand Justification, if
we compare it with the Process of Civil Courts, which consists especially in
three Things, viz. (1st.) A Person is charged with guilt. (2dly,) He pleads to
his Charge. (3dly,) If the Plea be relevant or sufficient, he is discharged by
the Judge; thus it is in Justification.

1st. The Elect are charged with guilt by the Law and Justice, and hence the
Apostle assures us in his Epistle to the Romans, that whatsoever the Law says,
it says to those that are under the Law; that every Mouth may be stoped, and
all the World may become guilty before God. Romans iii. 19. Hupidocos to theo (O
hupo ten dicen oon) under God's condemnatory Sentence.
Here observe my Brethren, that the Elect before they are enabled to believe in
Christ, are under the Law and guilty before God, (or in his Sight) now what is
guilt, but an Obligation to suffer eternal Punishment for Sin? The Almighty
having made reasonable Creatures capable of moral Government, was pleased to
give them a Law to direct them in it, and that armed with the Threatening of
eternal Death against the Transgressor; the Threatening being but equal to the
demerit of Sin, and necessary as a Guard to screen the Law from Insult and
Contempt; and God having denounced it, his Justice and Truth were engaged to
see to the Execution of it upon the Transgressor: Now we have sinned or
transgressed the Law, and therefore are bound by the Threatening annexed to it
to suffer Punishment.

2dly. The Sinner being accused, must plead for himself, either in his own
Person or by Proxy or Advocate, for Silence gives consent to the Condemnation.
The English Law orders those that will not plead to be pressed to Death. If a
Person be not accused, he may be indeed praised but cannot be justified, and if
he is accused he must plead or die. Now

3dly. What shall the Sinner plead? he cannot plead not guilty truly, for we
have all sinned and come short of the Glory of God. Romans iii. 23.
And Every Sin deserves Death and the Curse of God: Romans vi. 23.
Yea as the Apostle James observes, he that offends in one Point, is guilty of
all: James ii. 10.
i. e. He despises that Authority by which all are established, and becomes
infected with a Disposition to violate all.

And a false Plea will not avail to Justification, except there be some defect
in the Judge, Evidence or Law, neither of which can be justly applied to the
present Case, for God is inviolably Holy and inflexibly Righteous: Deuteronomy. xxxii.
4.
Conscience is as a thousand Witnesses, yea and all Events happen under the
Judges Eye and Cognizance; to him the Darkness is as the Light, and the Night
shines as the Day. Psalm cxxxix. 12.
Add to this, that the Law by which the Sinner is to be tried is holy, just and
good. Romans vii. 12.
An invariable Standard of Equity, the very copy and exemplar of the moral
Excellencies of the divine Nature. Well, seeing the judge is impartial, the
Evidence demonstrative, and the Law strictly and unalterably Just, grounded on
the Nature, Reason and Relations of Things; then it follows necessarily, that a
false Plea instead of serving our Interest, does but increase our Guilt and
Danger.

Indeed the Angels that never fell, or Adam in Innocence, might plead not
guilty and be justified upon the Plea, but this our Apostasy from God has
rendered impossible for us.

We being guilty, there remains but one of the three Pleas for us to make that
I know of. The

First of which is Mercy, for Mercy's sake, and indeed this is not to plead at
all, but beg; and were a Person discharged so, it would be pure Pardon but no
Justification; for there shines no Beam of Justice in such a Discharge, and
truly such a Way of removing Guilt, does not suit with the governing Wisdom,
Justice and Truth of God, or with his Holiness, which disposes him to hate Sin
and manifest his Indignation against it. To hate Sin is essential to Holiness,
(says Mr Clarkson) and this includes a Will to punish it. Via Sermon p. 230.
I may add, that such a Method of removing Guilt, interferes with the public
Good of the Universe, by bringing into contempt tho Governor of it, and that
Law by which it should be ruled, the Observance whereof tends so much to its
true Interest: How can the Honor of the Law be preserved, or the Design of
Government answered, when the rebellious Violaters of it are ever pardoned with
Impunity, without any Satisfaction made equal to the Offense? We are sure that
such a Method of proceeding is contrary to the Sentiments and Practice of
Mankind in the Affairs of civil Government.

Nor will a Composition, or as some term it, an Acceptilation answer the Design
of Government: i. e. When something is accepted which is far from an Equivalent
to the Guilt contracted; e. g. as if a Creditor should accept of a few Pence
instead of a Thousand Pounds which was due; this is in Substance the same with
a free Pardon, and therefore the Reasons that militate against the one, do
likewise hold good against the other, to which for the Sake of brevity I shall
not add, but proceed to a

Second Plea, which is proper Payment, and this is also vain, for the Sinner
cannot do it himself without being eternally miserable, and the surety has not
done it for him. To understand which let it be considered, that Payment,
properly so called, is when that is precisely performed, which was in the
Obligation in all its Circumstances and Accidentals in which the Creditor is
obliged to rest satisfied, and by which the Debtor is freed without any Grace.
This does not take Place in Redemption my Brethren, for the Mediator did not
endure all those bodily and spiritual Penalties threatened by the Law, such as
the Pestilence, Deafness, etc. Deuteronomy. xxviii. 15. to the 68 Verse.
Neither did he bear our spiritual Death or the Eternity of Hell Torments. I
say our Lord did not endure those Penalties now mentioned precisely and
circumstantially, according to the Letter of the Law's threatenings, considered
as they respect Man already fallen, and under a Reprieve. The Law obliged all
Sinners to suffer personally, universally and eternally. But Christ was no
Sinner realy or inherently, being holy harmless and undefiled, Heb. vii. 26.
otherwise he could not be a surety for Sinners, and would be unworthy of our
Trust: And therefore, when he is said to be made Sin and a Curse for us, who
knew no Sin, no more is intended then that the Guilt of the Sins of the Elect
was reckoned to him as their Surety or Representative, or which is the same,
the Punishment due for their Sins, was laid upon him under the aforesaid
Character, and that he was made a Sacrifice for their Iniquities. Although the
blessed JESUS by his Father's Constitution became one with the Elect in Law,
and is our Kinsman by his Incarnation, which prepare the Way for his redeeming
us, yet he is not one Person with us naturally.

Christ Jesus was but one Man, (in respect of his human Nature) and did not
suffer eternally, otherwise he would be suffering now, which we are assured by
the Testimony of the inspired Writings is false, Phil. ii. 8.9.
and therefore proper Payment cannot be truly plead.

The Almighty was not obliged in strict Justice (without Respect had to the
Covenant of Redemption) to accept on the Account of the Elect what Christ did
and suffered for them. And hence there surely was Grace in the Proposal, and
Acceptance of this Scheme, as well as there is in the Application of it to us.

In the mean Time as our Sins are called Debts in a large and less proper
Sense, so that by which their Guilt is removed may be called Payment in the
same Sense.

3dly. The only Plea therefore, that remains for a poor guilty Creature, is to
ask Pardon and Mercy on the Account of some equivalent offered to divine
Justice, whereby it is appeased and the Honor of the Law supported. This the
Sinner cannot offer for himself, being both imperfect and finite: Whereas Sin
is objectively Infinite, being committed against an infinite God, and a Breach
of infinite Obligations to him. Now Justice requires that there be a Proportion
between the Crime committed and the Satisfaction paid; but it is impossible
from the Nature of Things that a finite Cause should produce infinite Effects,
and therefore the Sinner must have recourse to what Christ has done and
suffered as Mediator, which is properly called a Satisfaction: By which, not
that precisely which is in the Obligation to the Creditor, is performed, but
something equivalent (or of equal Value) which the Creditor in strict Justice
is not obliged to accept, and therefore in Satisfaction, some Moderation of
Right Epeceia Juris.
or Grace is required, by which strict Justice is not urged. The Law of Works
(says Professor Haliburton) by an Act of Sovereignty was relaxed, not as to its
Obligation simply, but in so far as it respected Man himself as the Subject of
the Obligation to doing or suffering, nor was the Law simply relaxed as it
obliged Man, even elect Sinners to do or obey; but in so far as it obliged them
to obey in order to Exemption from the Curse, and a Title to Life. vid a mod.
enq. p. 3

-- N^xa caput sequitur nisi accedat indulgentia judicis, si ergo ista pena non
infligatur ipsi veo, sed in alium quempiam transferatur, et si judex s^lutionem
istam ab alio, preslitam quam non tenetur admittere, sed ex rigore juris
recusare potest, in gratiam rei acceptat et admittit, nonne recte eo Sensu and
Satisfactionem a vade recipere, and simul penani peccatori, and reo remittere
dicetur, -- Ut hic habeamus semel and sinnil legis Impletionem and
Relaxationem, opus gratiae and justitiae, Solutionem debiti and ejus
Condonationem, lex impletur poena l^ sa^ita, sed relaxatur quia non solvit is
qui debebat, sed alius, -- vid dispu. Profesoris Turret, de satisfac. Christi p
226.

Doctor Bates observes respecting the Satisfaction of Christ, that God is to be
considered as a Governor who may, by pure Jurisdiction, dispense with the
Execution of the Law upon those Considerations which fully answer the Ends of
Government. The Law is not executed according to the Letter of it, for then no
Sinner can be saved; but repenting Believers are free from Condemnation. Nor is
it abrogated, for then no Obligation remains as to the Duty or Penalty of it:
But Men are still bound to obey it, and impenitent Infidels are still under the
Curse: The Wrath of God abides upon them. But it is relaxed as to the Punishment
by the merciful Condescension of the Lawgiver.

Some Laws are not capable of Relaxation in their own Nature; because there is
included moral Iniquity in the Relaxation. As the Commands to love God and obey
Conscience, can never loose their binding Force. It Is a universal Rule that
suffers no Exception, God cannot deny himself; therefore he can never allow Sin
that directly opposes the Perfections of his Nature. Besides some Laws cannot
be relaxed ex hypothesi, upon the Account of the Divine Decree which makes them
Irrevocable, as that all who die in their Impenitency shall be damned. Now
there was no express Sign annexed to the Sanction of the original Law, to
intimate that it should be unalterable as to the Letter of it. The Threatening
declared the Desert of Sin in the Offender, and the Right of punishing in the
Superior; but it is so to be understood as not to frustrate the Power of the
Lawgiver to relax the Punishment upon wise and just Reasons. vid. Harm. p.
147. 148.

To those that have been mentioned, did not the Fear of Prolixity forbid, I
might add the concurring Suffrage of many more great Names, such as Dr. Van
Mastricht Mr. How, Dr. Edwards, Mr. Clarkson, etc.




The Satisfaction of our Lord may be therefore discrib'd thus, viz. That it is
that mediatorial Act of Christ, whereby being put in the Room of elect Sinners
he offered a Ransom to God equivalent to their Guilt, and so purchased
Reconciliation to God for them.

Here observe that three Things are necessary to make Satisfaction, viz. The
Innocence of the Person satisfying; his voluntary Substitution in the Room and
Place of others; and a sufficient Price of Redemption equivalent to the Guilt
of Sin.

The Person satisfying must be Innocent, for he that is under personal Guilt
has need to satisfy for his own, and therefore cannot satisfy for another
Sins, now our Lord was holy harmless, undefiled, the immaculate Lamb of God.
Heb. vii. 26. 1 Pet. i. 19.


There must be also a voluntary Substitution in the Room and Place of the
Guilty, that so the Person satisfying may represent them and endure Penalties
due to them. This Substitution (or standing in the Place of others) was
prefigur'd by all the Jewish Sacrifices, and especially by the Scapegoat. Lev.
xvi. 20, 21, 22.
Morover our Lord is called in Scripture our Surety, Heb. vii. 22.
who as all acknowledge, is substituted in the Room of the principal Debtor to
the Creditor. Thus JESUS in the eternal Covenant of Redemption consented that
his Soul should be made a Sacrifice for Sin. Isa. liii. 10.
In Consequence whereof, the Father is said in the New Testament to make him
Sin for us who knew no Sin, that we might be made the Righteousness of God in
him: 2 Cor. v. 21.
And likewise the Son is said to give his Life a Ransom for many; Mat. xx. 28.
the Origi-Word signifies a Ransom-price. Antilutron 1 Timothy ii. 6.
Moreover our Lord is said to have bore our Sicknesses, and to be made a Curse
for us; Mat. viii. 17. Gal. iii. 13.
to have laid down his Life for his Sheep, the Just for the Unjust, that he
might bring them to God; John x. 15.1. Pet. iii. 18.
to have born our Sins in his Body on the Tree; 1 Pet. ii. 24.
( i. e. the Punishment due for them) and, to be delivered for our Offenses.
Romans iv. 25.
All which Places of Scripture, and many more of the like Kind, do plainly
prove that the Mediator stood in the Room and Place of the Elect.

Another thing necessary in Satisfaction, is a sufficient Price of Redemption
equivalent to the Demerit of Sin; this the sacred Scriptures do also frequently
ascribe to the Mediation of Christ: Hence we are said to be bought with a
Price, 1 Cor. vi. 20.
and to have Redemption through his Blood, the forgiveness of Sins according to
the Riches of his Grace. Col. i. 14.
Yea Christ is said to have redeemed us (perfectly) from the Curse of the Law,
being made a Curse for us: Gal iii. 13. Exegorason.
And elsewhere we are told, that he entered once into the holy Place, having
obtained eternal Redemption for us: Heb. ix. 12.
And by one Offering perfected forever them that are sanctified: Heb. x. 14.
And he himself declared upon the Cross, that it is finished. John xix. 30.
i. e. all was completed by his Obedience and Sufferings that was necessary to
satisfy divine Justice and purchase eternal Happiness for his People.

But in order to understand this important Point, it will be necessary to
enquire, what is the Ransom Christ has paid, and wherein appears its
equivalency to the demerit of Sin?

Now the Ransom Christ has offered, was not the essential Sanctity or
Righteousness of his divine Nature, for this could neither be offered or
accepted for our Guilt, this he had from Eternity, but the Scriptures speak of
a Ransom in Time; neither could that Righteousness be made any way ours, unless
we became God and were united to him, either essentially, as the Persons of the
Trinity among themselves are one in Essence, which is impossible in it self and
blasphemous to imagine, or personally as the human and divine Nature are united
in the Person of Christ, which is also absurd and blasphemous; for there is
(but) one God and one Mediator between God and Man, the Man Christ Jesus. 1 Timothy ii. 5.
And truly if the Righteousness of the divine Nature could be made ours, (which
is impossible) it would destroy the Necessity of that Righteousness, which was
purchased by the Life and Death of our dearest Lord, because being infinite, it
would be alone sufficient.

Nor is the Ransom the great Redeemer paid, the original and inherent
Righteousness of his human Nature, because that was necessary in the Person of
the Mediator, as a previous (or foregoing) Qualification, in order to his
making of Satisfaction: The Priest that was to offer for us, must of Necessity
be holy and harmless, one that knew no Sin, and was a Stranger to Guile and
Deceit. 2 Cor. v. 21. 1 Pet. ii. 22.
The inherent Righteousness of our Lord, may more properly be called, the
Righteousness of his Person than of his Merit.

But positively, the Ransom paid by Christ to divine Justice, consists in the
Obedience he performed to the Law of God as Mediator, and in the Sufferings
which he endured for the Sins of the Elect in their Room and Place; and hence
he is said, to be made of a Woman, made under the Law, to redeem them that were
under the Law, that we might receive the Adoption of Sons. And we are expressly
said to be redeemed by his precious Blood and Death: Ephesians. i. 7. Romans v. 10.
And assured that by the Obedience of one, many are made Righteous. Romans v. 19.


Now that the Ransom our Lord offered was equivalent to the Demerit of Sin
appears thus: The Guilt of all the Elect could be no more than infinite, for
more cannot be in the Nature of Things; now the Price that Christ paid could
not be less, if it be considered, that it was not corruptible Things, such as
Silver and Gold, but the precious Blood of the spotless Lamb of God, (yea) of
the only begotten Son of God, yea my Brethren of God himself. Act. xx. 28 Acts
viii. 32*
i. e. of a Person who was truly and really God-Man. Add to to this, that our
Lord suffered in the most perfect Manner, both willingly and patiently: In the
Volumn of thy Book, (said he) it is written of me: Lo, I come to do thy Will, O
God, and thy Law is within my Heart. Psalm. xl. 7, 8.
He was led as a Lamb to the Slaughter, and as a Sheep before her Shearers is
Dumb, so he opened not his Mouth. Act. xx. 28 Acts viii. 32*
He not only endured Severities from Men in Name and Body, but which was
infinitely more, he trod the Wine Press of his Father's Wrath alone, and of the
People there was none with him. Isa. lxiii. 3.
This passive Obedience of Christ answers in Substance to, or is an equivalent
for the Law's Penalty threatened against Transgressors.

And the active Obedience of Christ to the Law, by which he fulfilled all
Righteousness, Mat. iii. 15.
answers the Law's Precept, or is an Equivalent for our want of that perfect
Obedience which the Law requires; it was necessary that as Sin had reigned to
Death, so Grace should Reign by Righteousness to eternal Life, through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Romans v. 21.
A Dignity of Meriting belonged to the Obedience of Christ on account of the
Perfection of the Work and infinite Excellency of the Worker.

By performing without Defect the precept of the Law, he acquired a Right to
that Reward which is promised to the Obedient. Lev. xviii. 5.


And the Person obeying, being infinite in Excellency and Glory, not only
merited a Freedom from Evil, but a Right to all Kinds of Good.

The Merit of our Lord dosn't spring wholly from any Covenant, as the Merit of
our first Parents did.

Nor merely from a Kind of Congruity, from which, without any Debt or Promise,
the Almighty does sometimes confer an outward Reward in Consequence of the good
Works of the unregenerate; i. e. materially Good.
hence it is said, after a Relation of the Kindness of the Egyptian Midwives to
the Israelitish Women, therefore God dealt kindly with them. E^ i. ^0.


But Christ's Merit arises also from the condignity of his Obedience, inasmuch
as not only a divine Person, one in the Form of God and equal to him obeyed,
but the Obedience it self considered, as proceeding from God-Man was not due;
the Law only obliges Men to Obedience, not GOD-MAN; the Law obliged the Guilty
to suffer, but not the Innocent.

It is well observed by Doctor Ridgley, That the Satisfaction demanded by the
Justice of God, for the Expiation of Sin, must contain in it two Things: Namely
1st, It must be of infinite Value, otherwise it would not be sufficient to
compensate for the Injuries offered to the divine Name by Sin, which is
objectively infinite. And

2dly: That it must bear some Similitude or Resemblance as to the Matter of it,
to that Debt which was due from those for whom it was given. Here we must
consider, that the Debt due from us was twofold.

1st: A Debt of sinless Obedience, whereby the Glory of God's Sovereignty may
be secured, and the Honor of his Law maintained: This Debt is still justly
demanded, because we have lost the Power of performing it through our own Default.

2dly, A Debt of Punishment proportioned to the Demerit of Sin, as the Result
of the condemning Sentence of the Law, which threatened Death for every
Transgression and Disobedience. Vid. Doct. Ridg. Body of Div. Vol. 1. p. 425, 6.


Now the Satisfaction Christ has made, has these Ingredients; the Person
satisfying, was and is of infinite Dignity, which cannot but derive an infinite
Value on his Performances and Sufferings as a Surety; and what he did and
suffered did bear some Similitude to the Debt we owed, as to the Matter or
Substance of it: e. g. He perfectly obeyed in our Place the Precept of the Law
and endured the Penalty of Death. As to natural or temporal Death, he bore it
strictly and properly, as well as some Resemblance of a spiritual Death, in his
being Deserted by his Father, and in Consequence thereof, enduring his Father's
Vengeance in a Degree to us incomprehensible, which his Groans, his bloody
Sweat in the Garden and Outcry on the Cross sufficiently Evidence! And although
our Lord did not endure eternal Death in respect of Duration, which Doubtless
must be the Design of the Threatening as it respected fallen Man: Yet as Doctor
Ridgely observes, The infinite Value of Christ's Sufferings, did compensate for
their not being Eternal. Page 4^3.
And it ought also to be considered, that the eternal Duration of Death, Does
not belong to the Essence of Punishment, but results from the Condition of the
Punished, when they are such that they cannot pay the Debt another Way. Vid.
Profess Van Mastricht Theolog. Treovet. Prac. p. 6^2.


From all which Considerations complexly considered, it appears that the
Obedience of Christ was of infinite Value, and therefore an equivalent
Satisfaction to Justice for the Sins of those he represented: And seeing that
the active and passive Obedience of Christ, was not due from him to the Law,
considered as God-Man, it might be therefore imputed to others.

But because this Point of the Satisfaction of Christ, is of infinite Moment in
the Christian Religion, I would therefore offer the following Hints before I
proceed farther, in Confirmation and Illustration of it.

Natural Reason instructs us that there is a God, from whom all Things are
derived, and by whom they are governed.

This supreme Being having made intelligent Creatures capable of moral Homage,
it was but reasonable that he should give them a Law to direct them in it,
especially seeing they could not know such Precepts as took their Rise from his
absolute Sovereignty, (which deserves Honor, as well as his other Attributes)
without some Intimations from himself.

A Law being given, it is highly reasonable that Obedience to it should be
enforced by Penalties equal to the Transgressions thereof.

Now seeing by every Violation of the Law, the infinite Majesty of the
Legislator is affronted, and infinite Obligations to serve him, which the
Creature is laid under, by reason of the essential Excellency and communicative
Goodness of God are broken, therefore an infinite Guilt is contracted by every
Sin.

This Guilt, the Judge and Legislator, because of his natural Holiness, his
governing Wisdom, Truth and Justice, cannot pass by without an equal
Satisfaction.

But this the Sinner cannot perform, because he is finite, and therefore either
he must suffer eternally, or a Surety undertake for him, and do and suffer in
his Room and Place, what he was and is incapable of.

Now the Person that so interposes must be Man, that he might be capable of
suffering, for the Deity is impassible; and it is but just and reasonable that
the Nature that sinned should suffer, that the Sin of Man should be punished in
Man.

And indeed it is as necessary, that the Person interposing be God, that so the
human Nature should be Supported under its Sufferings, which being equal to the
Demerit of Sin, and consequently infinite, would otherways destroy it. It is
also necessary, that the Mediator should be God, that so an infinite Dignity
might be put upon the Sufferings and Obedience of his human Nature by its Union
to the Divine, that so the Satisfaction made might be Equivalent to the Debt
contracted.

Now there is no God-Man but our JESUS; it remains therefore, that he is the
only Mediator, who by performing the Righteousness of the Law, has purchased
for the Elect a Freedom from the Guilt of Sin, and a Right to eternal
Happiness. This Right purchased for the Elect by their Surety, 'twas previously
concerted in the Covenant of Redemption, should be applied to them in Time by
Faith. Zech. vi 13. Ps xl. 7. Isa. liii. Isa. xlii. 6. Isa. xlix. 8, 9. Isa. l.
5, 6. Tit. xii. 2 Timothy i. 9.
It must be confessed that the Father and the Son who devised the Scheme of the
Sinners Happiness, without their Council or Consent, had a Right to determine
the Time when, and the Order in which an actual Right to it should be conferred.
I may add, that the Son's offering not the proper Payment in Specie in all
Circumstances which the Law required, gives farther Light and Force to this
Argument; not to say that it is reasonable to suppose, that the Order should be
such as does consist with the Holiness of God and Wisdom of his Government,
which is not like to be answered, unless Faith be considered as the Instrument
of a Sinners Justification before God.

The Right purchased for the Elect is kept in the Hand of the Mediator, until
the Time for their actual Investiture appointed by the Decree of God, and
agreed on in the Covenant of Redemption, comes. 1 John v. 11. Col i. 19.


Then is the elect Sinner arraigned by Justice for the Violation of the Law,
which Charge being true the Sinners Mouth is shut, and all his Pleas are
silenced: But Christ the Faithful Advocate interceeds with the Father, and
urges that the Claim of Right he bought by Blood for them, be now communicated
to them, and they absolved. John xi 42.


The Advocates Plea is immediately accepted, and Orde^ given that the Sinner be
put in actual Possession of the Privileges purchased for him.

To this End therefore the Holy Spirit forms Faith in the elect Sinner, and
enables him thereby to accept the Redeemer.

Hereupon immediately God, as a Judge, acquits him from Guilt, declares him
Righteous, and receives him into Favor, only on the Account of the
Righteousness of Christ imputed to him.

This Brief Representation of the Manner of a Sinners Justification, which I
have given, is grounded on that Train of Scriptures which assert Justification
to be by Faith, and is particularly agreeable to and hinted by those Places of
sacred Scripture, that speak of Christ's being first delivered for us and
(then) given to us, and with him all Things; Romans viii. 32.
and that it is given us in behalf of Christ to believe: Phil. i. 29.
Here it is intimated that Faith is conferred on the Elect, as what is of right
due, on Account of Christ's purchase. And hence we are said, to receive Faith
at the First through the Righteousness of God, and our Savior Jesus Christ. 2
Pet. i. 1.
Add to this the continual Intercession of Christ in Heaven, and it fully
proves the laboring Point. Heb. vii. 25.
To what purpose is his Advocate-ship, but to procure the Application of the
Benefits he has purchased to those he represented at the Time and in the Order
prefixed?

I may add that it is also in Substance agreeable to the harmonious Sentiments
of the reformed Protestant Churches in their Confessions of Faith.

Having spoken something concerning the Term Justification, together with its
Allusion to Civil Courts, and Mode, I shall proceed to offer a brief Gloss upon
the venerable Westminster Assembly's Description of its Nature, which is as
follows, viz. Justification is an Act of God's Free Grace, whereby he pardons
all our Sins and accepts us as Righteous in his Sight, only for the
Righteousness of Christ imputed to us, and received by Faith alone.

Now there are these following Particulars contained in the aforesaid
Description which deserve our Notice, viz.

First, The Author of Justification, and that is GOD. This the Apostle
positively asserts in his Epistle to the Romans in the following Words, It is
God that justifies Romans viii. 33.
It is against God that Sin is committed, and therefore none can forgive it
authoritatively but him. Mark ii. 7.
Jehovah alone is Judge of all the Earth, and Author of that Law by which Man
is to be ruled, and according to which Judgment must pass; and therefore it is
only he that can acquit from the Violations of it, and judicially declare
Persons to be Righteous: Without this in our Favor our justifying ourselves, *
or others justifying us, will be to no avail.

Secondly, The General Nature of Justification, an Act, the General Assembly
call it so, and not a Work as I conceive for two Reasons:

1st. To prove that the Change produced by it is only relative of the State,
and not real or inward of the Temper and Dispositions of the Soul. We come into
the World in our fallen State, under a twofold melancholy Disorder, viz. Moral
and Penal, i. e. we are not only under the Power and Pollution of Sin, but
likewise under the Guilt of it, or exposed by it to Condemnation. Now
Sanctification cures the former, and Justification the latter. Supposing a
Person was condemned to die for Rebellion, and at the same Time labored under
bodily Diseases, such as the Leprosy and Consumption, you know the removing of
the Sentence of Condemnation would not heal the Diseases; a proper Application
must be made to them of a suitable Medicine besides the other, otherwise the
Person would still be miserable.

2dly. Another Reason is to signify that the Sentence of Justification passes
upon the Sinner at once; when he believes, in a Moment his State is altered he
is no more under the Law, (i. e. as a Covenant of Works) but under Grace. Romans
vi. 14.
There is therefore now, no Condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus, who
walk not after the Flesh but after the Spirit. Romans viii. 1.
Here observe that in the Apostles Judgment the Elect, before a vital Union to
Christ, are under Condemnation, but being united to him by Faith they are freed
from it entirely and at once; seeing Justification respects the Person he must
be either wholly justified or condemned, there is no Medium. There are, no
doubt, various Degrees of our Persuasion of this Matter respecting ourselves;
but that does not alter the Case at all, for ye know my Brethren that there is
a vast Difference between the Knowledge of a Thing and the Thing itself.

From what has been said it appears, that Justification is no immanent Act of
God, for all such are Eternal, nor are they distinct from God himself; but the
Act of Justification is at the Time of believing and not before, and has an
Effect without him; it terminates on the Sinner, and makes a relative Change
respecting his State.

Neither does the Notion of an immanent Act answer the End of Justification,
which is to free the Sinner from Law Charges, whereby he was before impleaded,
and therefore we may safely assert, that Justification, as it proceeds from
God, and alters the State of the Person upon whom it terminates, is a transient
Act. But,

Thirdly, Another particular in the Assembly's Description is, the impulsive or
first moving Cause of Justification, and that is Free Grace. The Fountain from
which the Act of Justification flows is pure Grace, this the Apostle asserts in
his Epistle to the Romans in the following Words, being justified freely by his
Grace. Romans iii. 24.
The first Wheel that sets all the rest in Motion is the unmerited unexcited
Kindness of God, or the Good Pleasure of his Will. Ephesians. i. 5.
Justification is an important Privilege which all are by Nature equally
unworthy of, and equally unable to acquire or requite; and yet it is conferred
on some, which manifests the Glory of Sovereign Grace, and shows us that God
has Mercy on whom he will have Mercy. Romans ix. 18.
We are all by Nature like Children lying in the open Field in our Blood and
Polution, in the most ruinous and exposed Circumstances; and yet even then the
gracious God has Compassion on the Elect, and says to them Live. Ezekiel. xvi. 6.


Fourthly: The next Particular in the aforesaid Description, respects the Parts
or Branches of Justification, which are these two, viz. Pardon and Acceptance.

Now Pardon is properly a cancelling, or dissolving the Sinners Obligation to
suffer Punishment, by virtue of the Threatening of the Law against
Transgressors. Pardon supposes (1st,) a Law given for the Government of
Mankind, and that recommended by Sanctions or the Threatening of Punishments
against Delinquents, etc. without this it would be but an Advice, and no Law,
properly speaking. (2dly,) It supposes a Breach or Transgression of the Law,
which the Apostle John calls Sin. 1 John iii. 4.
(3dly) It supposes an Obligation to suffer Punishment for Sin, arising from
the Sanction of the Law. Romans vii. 6.
On the other Hand, Pardon implies the Removal, not of the intrinsic Evil or
Desert of Sin, for that always remains vile and deserves Punishment, but only
of the aforesaid Obligation to suffer it by reason of the Law; though there be no
Condemnation to those that are in Christ Jesus, Romans viii. 1
yet there is something condemnable in them, and hence the Psalmist pronounces
a Blessing upon those whose Iniquity is forgiven, and whose Sin is covered.
Psalm xxxii. 1.


When a Person is Justified, all his Sins past are actually pardoned, and a
Remedy is given in the Righteousness of Christ against Sins to come; which
before they are pardoned must be lamented, and the Righteousness of Christ
applied, by the renewed Exercise of Faith. I acknowledged, (said the Psalmist)
my Transgressions unto thee, and thou forgavest the Iniquity of my Sin. Psalm
xxxii. v.
And hence we are instructed in the Pattern of Prayer our Lord has given us, to
pray daily for the Remission of Sins. Mat. vi. 11, 12.
Sins not committed, cannot be forgiven actually; where no Guilt is, it cannot
be taken away.

Although Justification be properly of the Law-State of the Person and
unalterable, Romans viii. 34, 35
so that the Partaker of it shall never by Sin come under the Condemnation of
the Law, as a Covenant of Works, being under another Dispensation, the Law of
the Spirit of Life in Christ Jesus, having made him free from the Law of Sin
and Death. Romans viii. 2.


Yet the Dispensation of Grace under which the Believer is, has also its
Sanctions; and hence its called, the Law of Christ. Romans vi. 2.
Jehovah hereby requires Obedience of his People, 1 These. iv. 1, -- 3.
and threatens to chastise their Iniquities with Rods; Psalm lxxxix 30, -- 33.
and assures them that he is provoked with their Impieties. Psalm lxxxv. 4.
Deuteronomy. i. 37.
Now this expossedness of the justified Person to the Corrections of the
Almighty, both outward and inward, is a Kind of Guilt, which may justly excite
an awful Fear of God, Psalm cxix. 120.
and is not to be removed without the Exercise of Repentance and Faith.

But to proceed: The other Part or Branch of Justification, is God's accepting
of us as Righteous in his Sight; and hence the believing Elect are said to be
made Accepted in the Beloved; Ephesians. i. 6.
Jehovah first accepts their Persons, and then their Performances; and hence he
is said, to have had a Respect to Abel and to his Offering. Gen iv. 4.
Though the Almighty does not find in us such an inherent Righteousness as the
Law requires, yet on the Account of the Righteousness of Christ imputed to us,
which is equal to the Demands of the Law, he authoritatively Declares us
Righteous as a Judge; and therefore in this respect, he beholds not Iniquity in
Jacob, and Peverseness in Israel. Now by this judicial Declaration, the
believing Elect are entitled to Happiness; and therefore it is represented, as
a Crown of Righteousness given by the righteous Judge. 2 Timothy vi. 8.
This leads me to a

Fifth Particular contained in the Assembly's Description; and that is the
meritorious Cause, or Matter of our Justification, which is the Righteousness
of Christ, viz. Of his Life and Death. That this is equal to the Demands of the
Law and Justice, and therefore a sufficient Foundation for Justification, I
have before shown, and therefore for the Sake of Brevity, must only add, an
Instructive Answer of the Reverend and Ingenious Mr. David Clarkson, to an
Objection of some, against the Necessity of the Imputation of Christ's active
Obedience, because of the supposed Sufficiency of his passive without it, to
free from Punishment, and procure a Title to Happiness. To this Objection, he
replies in the following Manner: Indeed we should not separate what the Lord
has not disjoined: The Obedience and Sufferings of Christ are not disjoined in
themselves, in their Virtue or Effects. Not in themselves: He suffered in all
his Obedience, and obeyed in all his Sufferngs. -- There was Obedience in all
his Sufferings, because he suffered in Compliance with his Father's Will: And
there was sufferings in all his Obedience, because his Acts of Obedience, were
Acts of Humiliation and Abasement, all performed by the Son of God in the Form
of a Servant.

Nor in their Virtue: His Obedience was both meritorious and satisfactory; and
his Sufferings were both satisfactory and meritorius. His Obedience was not
only meritorious, but also satisfactory; if not as Obedience, yet as it was
Penal.

And his Sufferings were not only satisfactory, but also meritorious; if not as
they were great, yet as they were obediential.

Nor in their Effects: His Sufferings could not have satisfied Justice, without
his perfect Obedience. Because Sufferings, simply considered, without
Obedience, find no Acceptance with God; his perfect Obedience could not have
procured for us a Title to Life; for this we could not have, unless freed from
Condemnation by his Sufferings. (...) Discour. p. 241.


I proceed to enquire how Christ's Righteousness becomes ours?

Now this the Assembly observes is done two Ways, viz. by Imputation and Faith.
And

First: God imputes the Righteousness of Christ to the believing Elect: By
imputing, we understand God's reckoning, or placing to our Account, what was
done and suffered by Christ as a Surety in our Room and Place, as much as though
we had done and suffered these Things in our own Persons. This the sacred
Scriptures assert, while they signify the Blessedness of the Man unto whom God
imputes Righteousness without Works; Romans iv. 6.
and declare that Christ was made Sin for us, that we might be made the
Righteousness of God in him. 2 Cor. v. 21.
And elsewhere he is called, the Lord our Righteousness, Jer. xxxiii. 16.
and the End of the Law for Righteousness, to every one that Believes. Romans x.
iv.
And we are farther told, that as by one Man's Disobedience many were made
Sinners, so by the Obedience of One, shall many be made Righteous. Romans v. 19.
i. e. when they believe.

Surely if ever Man be Justified, he must have a Righteousness to justify him
equal to the Demands of the Law; the Judge of all the Earth must needs do
right, and therefore cannot pronounce those Just that are not so; in that
Degree the Law requires, either inherently or imputatively, the Sanctions of
the first Covenant, because of the Justice and Truth of God establishing them
must be fulfilled; hence our Lord himself assures us, that till Heaven and
Earth pass, one Jot or one Tittle shall in no ways pass from the Law, till all
be fulfilled. Mat. v. 18.


Now there is no Righteousness but that of the blessed Jesus, that can answer
the Law's Demands. The Law requires perfect and perpetual Obedience, and
threatens Death for the least Defect. Gal. iii. 10.
But we have all sinned and come short of the Glory of God. Romans iii. 23.
There is not a just Man on Earth that does good and sins not. Eccles. vii.
20.
If we say we are perfect, our Mouth shall prove us perverse. Job ix. 20.
If we say we have no Sin, we are Liars and the Truth is not in us. 1 John i. 8.


So that without another Righteousness besides our own, we cannot be saved. Now
the Righteousness of Christ cannot be made ours any other Way than by
Imputation; his individual Righteousness cannot be infused into us, individual
Actions and Passions terminate in the Subject of them. I may add, that the
aforesaid Imputation is sufficient to our Justification appears thus, viz.

First: The Covenant of Works though it made no mention of a Surety, yet it did
not exclude one, in case there ever should be a Necessity.

Secondly: The active and passive Obedience of Christ as a Surety, answered the
Law's Precept and Sanction; yea magnified it and made it honorable, and so
gave room for the Display of those divine Perfections, which were engaged to
issue the Threats of the first Covenant; and thus God may be Just, and yet the
Justifier of him that believes in Jesus, Romans iii. 26.
and declare his Righteousness in the Remission of Sins that are past through
Christ's Propitiation.

Thirdly: The Almighty having in infinite Condescension provided a Surety and
accepted of his Satisfaction under that Character, as appears by his Release
from the Prison of the Grave, and triumphant Ascension to the Seat of the
Blessed. He was taken from Prison and from Judgment, delivered for our Offenses
and raised again for our Justification; God manifest in the Flesh and justified
in the Spirit; i. e. openly acquitted, as his Peoples Representative, by his
Resurrection from the Dead, which was performed through the holy Spirit's Agency.
As Mediator he offered a Sacrifice to God of a sweet smelling Savor. The
Apostle lays great Stress upon the Resurrection of Christ, while he assured the
Corinthians, that if Christ be not raised their Faith was vain, and they were
yet in their Sins: The Reason is this: The Lord Jesus being Arrested by Justice
as the Surety of the Elect, in order to pay the Debt they owed; if he had
continued under the Arrest, it would have proved his Insolvency, or Inability
to perform his Engagements; but having paid the Debt, or finished his
Purchase, God has raised him up, having loosed the Pains of Death, because it
was not possible he should be holden of it. Now I say, the Father having
accepted what our Lord did and suffered as a Surety, it is but reasonable that
he should impute what he did and suffered to those whom he represented, at the
Time and in the Manner prefixed by his Purpose. Which brings me to speak upon
the

Second Way by which the Righteousness of Christ becomes ours, and that is
Faith; 'It is received by Faith alone.' say the Assembly.

When a Person believes, he has a right to conclude that he is Justified, and
to claim all the Privileges that issue from it, and not before. This is what we
Term Justification by Faith, which therefore cannot be before Faith; for that
which conveys a Claim of Right, must it self necessarily exist before the Claim
conveyed by it.

The sacred Scriptures frequently represent Justification to be by Faith; thus
it is said in the Epistle of Paul to the Galatians, the Scriptures foreseeing,
that God WOULD Justify the Heathen through Faith, preached before the Gospel unto
Abraham. Gal. iii. 8.
And elsewhere it is said, seeing it is one God who SHALL Justify the
Circumcision by Faith, and the Uncircumcision through Faith. Romans iii. 30.
Now it was not written for his Sake alone, that it was imputed to him, but for
us also to whom it SHALL be imputed, if we believe on him. Romans iv. 23, 24.
There are many other Places of Scripture of the like Tendency, the Words of
which I have not Time to mention. Romans iii. 22 -- 28. Gal. iii. 24. and v. 5.
Ephesians. iii. 12, -- 17. Phil. iii. 9. Gal. ii. 20. and iii. 22. Romans i. ii. 25.
Gal. iii. 14.
And therefore proceed to observe, That the Nature of that Faith by which we
are Justified is well represented by receiving Christ. John i. 12.
This not being capable of a natural, must needs be taken in a moral Sense, and
as such considered, it supposes

1st: A firm assent of the Mind to the Declarations of the Gospel, respecting
Christ's Person and Offices, viz. That he is God-Man, every Way able and
willing to save the Sinners, that take their Flight to him, from all the Evils
and Miseries they labor under; Heb. vii. 25.
and that he is clothed with Authority by his Father for this purpose. John
vi. 27.


2dly. It supposes the Judgment's high Aprobation of Christ, particularly in
the aforesaid respects.

3dly. It supposes an entire renouncing of all other Refuges as insufficient to
satisfy divine Justice, and save them from Sin and Ruin. Phil iii. 8, 9.


2dly. It implies the Wills consent to accept of Christ as the Gospel offers
him, viz. Deliberately after having counted the Cost, Luke xiv. 28.
freely as the Gift of God, Isa. lv. 1. Joh. iii. 16.
and fully in his Person, Offices and Relations, together with his Law and
Cross. Mat. xvi. 24.


2dly. It implies an entire Dependence on him for Justification and Salvation.
Phil. iii. 8, 9.


3dly. It implies a sweet Complacence in him, and the Way of Justification
through his Righteousness alone, without any Mixture of ours as a Concause. The
humbled Sinner is willing to resign himself to Christ's Guidance and
Government, to lean alone upon his Merit for Acceptance, and to ascribe to him
all the Glory of its Happiness, this Gospel Method of Salvation it is pleased
with, and heartily acquiesces in. Mat. v. 15. Cant. v. 16.


Now Brethren the Faith that I have mentioned, as it is preceeded with a
distressing Sense of Sin and Danger, such as excites to the most anxious
enquiries and the most earnest Use of all appointed Means for relief, Acts ii.
37. Romans viii. 15.
So it is followed with good Effects upon the Heart and Practice: The governing
Temper of the former is heavenly, and the general Tenor of the latter is Holy.
Phil. vi. 20. Romans vi. 14.
That Faith which is the Instrument of Justification purifies and humbles the
Heart, Acts xv. 9.
overcomes the World, and works by Love. Gal. v. 6. 1 John v. 4.


Now we are justified by Faith not considered as a Work, for then we should be
justified by Works, but as a Mean or Instrument apprehending the Person and
applying the Righteousness of Christ to us. There is no worth in Faith to merit
our Justification, when a Begar stretches out his Hand to receive a Purse of
Gold, it is not the Hand but the Gold received by it that enriches him: And it
should be farther observed that Faith is the Gift of God Ephesians. ii. 8.
wrought in us by his Almighty Power, Ephesians. i. 19.
which we cannot exercise without the renewed Influencies of the holy Spirit.
Cant. i. 4
Observe farther, that it is Faith alone that receives the Righteousness of
Christ to the Justification of a Sinner, Faith indeed is not alone in the
Person justified, no, by no Means! For Faith being a Part of the new Creature,
all the other Train of Graces included therein must needs be connected with it.
Justification and Sanctification, though they be really distinguished, yet are
never separated: 1 Cor. vi. 11.
That Man that is justified before God has really the Principles of
Sanctification in himself.

But though Faith be not alone in the justified, yet it justifies alone,
(instrumentally) And hence the Righteousness apprehended by it is called the
Righteousness of Faith, Romans iv. 13.
not the Righteousness of Repentance, Love or any other Grace.

It has pleased God to employ the Grace of Faith in the Business of
Justification rather than any other Grace; because of its fitness for this
Office: The Eye is employed in seeing, the Ear in hearing, and not the Foot,
because of their Fitness for such Functions. Thus seeing we are justified not
by giving to God any thing that we do, but by receiving from God what Christ
has done for us: Faith being the only receiving Grace, is therefore only fit
for this Office, the other Graces have their Exercise and Use in order to
Salvation, Luke xiii. 3.
but do nothing toward our putting on the Robe of Christ's Righteousness. Faith
humbles the Creature and sets the Crown upon the Head of Christ: This the
Apostle's Query proves in his Epistle to the Romans, when speaking of Free
Justification before God he enquires, where is boasting then, it is excluded,
by what Law, of Works, nay but by the Law of Faith. But to illustrate this
Matter a little further let it be observed, that our actual Union or Relation
to Christ is the Ground of our actual Right to his Benefits: And hence we are
told, that he that has the Son has Life, and he that has not the Son has
not life: 1 John v. 12.
And that Christ Jesus is made of God Righteousness to such as are in him: 1
Cor. i. 30.
And that the Elect are made accepted in the beloved. Ephesians. i. 6.
The Marriage Relation of the Wife to the Husband is Doubtless the Ground of
her Joint Interest in his Estate: Communion is founded in Union, being united
to or made one with Christ, we have Communion in his Benefits.

Now Fath is (upon our Part) the Bond of the aforesaid Union. And hence it is
represented in Scripture by coming to Christ, Mat. xi. 28.
receiving of him, John i. 12.
leaning upon him, Cant. viii. 5.
as well as by eating his Flesh and drinking his Blood: John vi. 56.
And those that want Faith are represented in Common, be they Elect or not
Elect, as in a State of Distance, of Death, of Wrath. Hence it is that the
Blessed Jesus lamented the Case and Course of the unbelieving Jews, that they
would not come unto him that they might have Life. John v. 40. Ephesians. ii. iii.
12, 13 But now in Christ Jesus, ye who were sometimes far off are ma^e nigh by
the Blood of CHRIST.
And Paul declares in his Epistle to the Ephesians concerning some converted
elect Persons, that they WERE by Nature Children of Wrath even as others, i. e.
before Faith Wrath was their Inheritance, or belonged to them by Right, or
according to Law and Justice as well as to the non Elect: But now since they
were quickened the Case was altered, their State was changed. Faith therefore
justifies as it unites to Christ, for as our natural Union to the first Adam is
the Ground of our Condemnation, so our spiritual or mistical Union to the
Second, is the Ground of our Justification.

What has been said is Doubtless intended by the Westminster Assembly, when
they tell us That Faith only receives the Righteousness of CHRIST. i. e. In
Contradistinction from every other Grace in us, and all the Works of Holiness
and Righteousness done by us.

The Representation which the Church of England give of Justification in the
eleventh Article, is exactly agreeable to that of the Westminster Assembly,
which I have explained and is as follows, viz. We are accounted Righteous
before God, only for the Merit of our Lord and Savior JESUS CHRIST by Faith,
and not for our own Works or Deservings. Wherefore that we are justified by
Faith only, is a most wholesome Doctrine and very full of Comfort, as more
largely is expressed in the Homily of Justification. This leads me to the

II. General Head, which was to prove, that Justification is without the Works
of the Law.

Now this is not only expressly asserted in the Words of our Text, but likewise
in other Places of Scripture: Romans iii. 28. Romans v. 1. Romans iii. 20. Gal. iii.
11, 24.
To which let me add the following Arguments, viz.

First. The Law requires a Perfection of Obedience in order to Justification by
it, and denounces a Curse upon those that want it. Gal. iii. 10.
Now seeing we are destitute of that perfect and inherent Righteousness, in
Habit and Act which the Law requires; Romans iii. 12, -- 18.
it is impossible we should be justified by it; neither will it avail to reply
that the aforesaid Perfection was necessary under the Law, but not under the
Gospel; for the Relaxation made under the Gospel is not that an imperfect
Righteousness should be accepted for a perfect one; for thus the Justice of God
would be wronged: Neither is it consistent with the Truth of God to declare
those Righteous, that are not perfectly so, either inherently or by Imputation.
But the Relaxation made under the Gospel, consists in accepting of the
Righteousness of the Surety, in the Room of that which the Law required of the
Sinner personally.

Secondly. We have broken the Law, and cannot make Reparation equal to the
Offense, and less than this, divine Justice will not accept. Our after
Obedience, upon the Supposition it was perfect, (which in the mean time cannot
be reasonably expected from imperfect Creatures) would not make Satisfaction
for our past Disobedience; the Reason of which is this: We are under a double
Debt to God, viz. Of Duty and Penalty; as Creatures, we owe the former to God's
Law, and as Transgressors we owe the latter to his Justice; now the Payment of
the one, cannot discharge the other, which is of a different Kind. Let me add,
that the Penalty threatened, being equal to the Demerit of Sin, Romans vi. 23.
is such as we cannot endure without being eternally miserable. Because the
Sufferings of a finite Creature, cannot be infinite in Degree or Value, they
must be infinite in Duration.


Thirdly, We cannot be justified by Works, because that Works done before Faith
are not pleasing to God, but full of Sin; and so soon as Faith is given, it
immediately receives Christ, and so we are Justified before we perform Works
that are spiritually Good. Romans viii. 7, 8.
And hence the Almighty is said to Justify the Ungodly: Romans iv. 5.
i. e. Such as have never done any acceptable Service to God. The Church of
England speak excellently upon this Point, in the 13th Article, which is as
follows: Works done before the Grace of Christ and the Inspiration of his
Spirit, are not pleasant to God, for as much as they spring not of Faith in
Jesus Christ; neither do they make Men meet to receive Grace, (or as the School
Authors say,) deserve Grace of congruity: Yea rather for that they are not done
as God has willed and commanded them to be done, we doubt not but they have
the Nature of Sin.

Fourthly, We cannot be Justified by Works, because then the Reward would be
reckoned of Debt and not of Grace; Romans iv. 4.
but the Reward is of Grace, and hence the Man is described as blessed, to whom
God imputes Righteousness without Works: Romans iv. 6.
And if of Grace, it is no more of Works, otherwise Grace is no more Grace. But
if it be of Works then it is no more Grace: Otherwise Work is no more Work.
Romans xi. 5, 6.
To be justified freely, (which the Word Grace signifies) without any Regard to
our Works, as Causes thereof either in Part or in whole, and to be justified
partly or wholly by Works, are absolute and unreconcileable Inconsistencies.

Fifthly. Seeing the Righteousness of CHRIST is perfect and of infinite Value,
equal to the Demands of the Law and Justice, as has been before proved, then
there is no need of adding ours to it with Design to purchase in Part our
Justification before God: And truly this Notion is Injurious to the Honor of
CHRIST as Mediator, for it interpretatively says, that his Satisfaction is
incomplete; and if the Case were so, surely ours could never complete it,
because it is at least imperfect. Isa. lxiv. 6.
And thus no Flesh could be saved.

6thly. We cannot be justified by Works, because that thus Man would have Cause
of boasting, which the Apostle assures us is excluded, Not by the Law of Works
but by the Law of Faith. Romans iii. 27.
It tends to puff up the Pride and Vanity of the Creature to imagine that there
is any Merit in his Works. And how unreasonable is the Supposition, that we
should merit Good from God by returning to him what is his own?

7thly. It is reasonable to conclude, that we are justified in the same Manner
that Abraham the Father of the Faithful was. Now this was by Faith, for says
the Apostle, If Abraham were justified by Works, he has whereof to Glory: But
he denies that he had Cause of glorying before God, and therefore he was not
justified by Works, No he believed God and it was imputed to him for
Righteousness. Romans iv. 2.3.
In the mean Time, as the Apostle James observes, this Faith of Abraham by
which he was justified, was a living Operative Principle which evidenced its
Reality by good Works, that flowed from it as Streams from a Fountain.

8thly. Our Righteousness answers not the Demands of the Gospel no more than of
the Law, and so falls short of every Rule of Righteousness. The Gospel requires
Perfection as well as the Law, to imagine the Contrary is in other Words to
say, either that the Imperfections of Believers are no Sins, or that the Gospel
allows of Sin, both which are equally absurd.!

It is true the Gospel promises the Pardon of Imperfections to believers ^on
the Exercise of Faith and Repentance, which the Law does not, yet in the mean
Time it obliges to the Contrary, and therefore cannot accept of that as a
Righteousness for Justification, which falls short of its own Demand, unless it
be supposed to declare those Righteous which, according to its own
Prescriptions, are not so, and this would be to assert what is false in Fact:
He that is Imperfect is Guilty, then surely the Righteous God will by no means
quit such, except they have another Righteousness than their own to screen them
from divine Vengeance.

Surely as the Prophet expresses it, we are all as an unclean Thing, and all
our Righteousnesses are as filthy Rags. Isa. lxiv 6.
We have lost our Original Integrity, and in the Room thereof contracted the
vilest Polution and Depravity, which has spread through all our Powers, and
consequently mingles with and taints every Principle and Spring of Action, and
makes them of a base Allay. Isa. i. 56.
This Sentiment had much Impression upon the Heart of Job, as appears by the
following strong Lines of his, If I wash my self with Snow Water, and make my
Hands never so clean, yet shall thou Plunge me in the Ditch, and mine own
Clothes shall abhor me. Job. ix. 30, 31.
Behold I am vile what shall I answer thee? I will lay my Hand upon my Mouth.
Job. xl. 4.
I have heard of thee by the hearing of the Ear, but now mine Eye sees thee,
wherefore I abhor my self and repent in Dust and Ashes. Job. xlii. 5.6.
And if our inherent Righteousness be thus Defective, it will necessarily
follow that so are all the Acts that proceed from it, the Streams cannot, in
the Nature of Things, be better than the Fountain from which they proceed: And
hence the Wise Man assures us, that there is not a just Man upon Earth that
does Good and sins not. Ecles. vii. 20.
The Apostle Paul laments the Principle of Corruption that was in him in the
Language of Agony and bitter Passion! O wretched Man that I am! and freely
confesses that he was thereby hindered from doing the Good that he would, and
led (in some Instances an unwilling) Captive to the Evil he would not. Romans
vii. 19.
And James likewise asserts that in many Things we offend all. James iii. 2.
Now how can such a Righteousness answer either the Demands of the Law or
Gospel? A Man (says Bishop Hopkins) might more reasonably expect to buy Stars
with Counters, or to purchase a Kingdom with two Mites, than to think to
purchase the heavenly Kingdom, by paying down his own Duties and good Works
which are no Ways profitable to God, and bear no more Proportion to the
Infinite Glory of Heaven than a single Cipher to the numberless Sands of the
Sea. Page 382.


Not to add, that if any Righteousness of ours was the Matter or Cause of our
Justification before God, the Covenant of Grace would be unhinged, and a
Covenant of Works put in the Room of it. Pray what was the Reason why the
Covenant of Nature was called a Covenant of Works? But because Man's
Righteousness and Obedience was therein to be the Ground and Reason of his
Acceptance.

To assert that there is more Grace in the new Covenant than in the Old, will
not alter the Case, so long as the Condition of both is supposed to be the
same, because that more or less in Degree does not alter the Kind. And hence we
may conclude, that the Notion of Justification by Works, either in whole or in
Part, subverts the Gospel of Christ, and pretends to lay another Foundation for
Man's Happiness than that which is laid, which is Jesus Christ; for this
supposes that not the pure Grace of God and the Righteousness of Christ, is the
Cause why one differs from another as to the State of his Soul, but Men's Virtue
and Goodness. The Apostle therefore charges those that Preach such Doctrine as
perverters of the Gospel of Christ, as Preachers of another Gospel, and
denounces a Curse upon them in his Epistle to the Galatians. Gal. i. 6, 7, 8, 9,
And elsewhere he declares, that Israel that followed after the Law of
Righteousness, did not attain to the Law of Righteousness, (and that for this
Reason) because they sought it not by Faith, but as it were by the Deeds of the
Law, i. e. The Carnal Jews sought after Justification, partly on the Account of
their own Works, and not as the Free-Gift of God, and therefore did not attain
it: Romans ix. 31.32.
And in the following Chapter he farther confirms this by saying, that some of
the Jews had a Zeal of God, but not according to Knowledge, for they being
Ignorant of God's Righteousness, and going about to establish their own, have
not submitted themselves to the Righteousness of God, Romans x. 2, 3.
i. e. The Graceless Jews, not having an affecting Apprehension of the
Necessity and Sufficiency of the Righteousness of the Mediator to their
Justification, which was of God's finding out and Acceptance, but endeavoring
in the Room thereof to establish their own Virtue or Goodness as a Ground of
Pardon, they did not become Subjects to the Mediators Righteousness, but
proudly rebelled against the Way of Salvation by it. This Gloss the Emphasis of
the original Word will justify. Hupetagesan. See also Gal. ii. 21. -- If
Righteousness come by the Law, then Christ is dead in Vain. And Romans iv. 14.
For if they which are of the Law be Heirs, Faith is made Void, and the Promise
made of none Effect. i. e. If Persons ^o in any Degree obtain a Right to
Impunity and Life for their Obedience to the Law either Ceremonial or Moral;
then there was no need of Christ's Death to Compass that which might be
otherwise adjusted, and so Christ has died in Vain. Neither would there be any
need upon such a Plan of going to Christ by Faith for what we are supposed to
have in ourselves, or any need of the Promises of Pardon through him. What need
is there of a Savior to do that for us which we can do for ourselves, if Men
can do a little that shall in any Degree recommend them to the Favor of God:
By the same Rule, through greater Application, they may do more, and
consequently all, and so Christ is rejected and the Foundation of the Gospel
overthrown, Faith and the Promises rendered Vain and to no Purpose: Dreadful
Thought! This the Apostle farther confirms, Gal. v. 4 Christ is become of no
Effect unto you, whosoever of you is justified by the Law, ye are fallen from
Grace, i. e. Such as seek Justification by or for their Obedience to the Law do
reject Christ and renounce the Grace of God offered by the Gospel, Christ's
Righteousness is of no avail to them, Romans xi. 6. And if by Grace it is no more
of Works: Otherwise Grace is no more Grace. But if it be of Works then it is no
more Grace: Otherwise Work is no more Work, i. e. The supposed Merit of Good
Works and the Free Grace of God cannot be blended together as Causes of our
effectual Vocation, no in that Sense, they exclude and destroy each other: For
whatsoever is of Grace comes freely and not of Debt, but what comes by the
Merit of Works (or Promise for Works which is the same) comes by Debt. Now
Debt and no Debt, or what is free and what is by desert, are contrary Things,
and therefore Works and Grace can be no more reconciled considered as Causes of
our Justification than Fire and Water, Light and Darkness, Life and Death:
Grace must loose its Nature if it be by Works together with it, and Works must
loos^ their Nature if it be by Grace together with them.


I proceed now to the Improvement, in which I must be but very brief. And

First: What has been said serves to refute the false Notions of the Papists,
who blend Justification and Sanctification together; of the Socinians, who deny
the Satisfaction of Christ; of the Arminians, who deny his Substitution in the
Place of Sinners, and mix Works with his Righteousness as the Concause of a
Sinners Justification before God; of the Neonomians, who imagine that a new Law
is made which accepts of less than perfect Righteousness, or perfect
Satisfaction, for the Sinners Justification before God; and of the Antinomians,
who imagine that the Elect are justified before Faith, either from Eternity, or
at least from the Time of Christ's Death.

Seeing that the Ransom which Christ offered to divine Justice, was not proper
Payment in all Circumstances, then it necessarily follows, that God pardons
freely: We are not only beholden to Christ for Satisfying, but to God the
Father for Accepting thereof! Herein is Love, without Peer or Parallel!

And it likewise naturally and necessarily follows from the same Principle,
that none has or can have, any actual Interest in, or Benefit by Redemption,
'till they comply with the Terms prescribed by the Father and Son, seeing the
injured Lawgiver was at liberty to accept of Satisfaction or not, he has of
Necessity the Right to prescribe his own Terms, when and how he will admit the
Sinner to an actual Claim to the Benefits of it. And surely, the Mediator is
engaged with equal Tenderness, to promote the Interests of both Parties, seeing
he possessed the Nature of both, and therefore must needs concur, that the
Application of his Satisfaction be made in such a way as is consistent with the
Honor of God, his Law and Government, which End cannot be attained without
establishing Faith as the Mean of it, and urging Holiness as the Way to
Happiness.

It is true, a Surety in a strict Sense, only represents the Debtor and minds
his Indemnity, and when he pays the pecuniary Debt in kind, the Bond is
cancelled. But our Lord is a Surety only in a large Sense, for he is a Mediator
as well as a Surety, a Friend to both Parties, engaged by Nature and Office, to
seek the Honor and Interest of both; besides what he paid as before observed,
was an Evquivalent, and this in Consequence of an Agreement with the Father,
respecting the Plan of Man's Happiness, which was surely well ordered in all
Things.

Our Case Godward, my Brethren, is not properly that of Debtors, but that of
Criminal-Subjects, and God's Aspect toward us, not strictly that of a
Creditor, but that of a Rector and Judge; and therefore the Part Christ acted,
was not in a strict Sense that of a Surety, paying the very Debt in Kind, in
every Circumstance, and so Discharging the Bond, but that of a Mediator,
expiating our Guilt by Satisfaction.

This rightly understood, saps the Foundation of the Antinomian Delusion,
concerning eternal Justification. To which I may add, that if the Person must
first be charged with Guilt before he be Justified, as has been before proved,
then eternal Justification must fall to the Ground. If it be supposed, that Sin
is charged as well as discharged from Eternity; it may be replied, that then
Men would be condemned and Justified at once, because there is no prior or
posterior in Eternity, which is an unreconcileable Contradiction.

The Wit of Man can never reconcile the Notion of eternal Justification with
the Doctrine of original Sin, the Current of the Scriptures, the Convictions of
the Holy Spirit before Conversion, the Necessity of Faith, Repentance and
Holiness. If it be supposed that any were Justified from Eternity, they have
lost it by the Fall of Adam, and so need a new Justification: We have not only
the infallible Testimony of the sacred Scriptures without us, that before Faith
we are Guilty before God, and under Condemnation; but such as are convinced of
Sin, have the Witness of God's Spirit within them, to the same Truth: And hence
the Spirit of God is called, a Spirit of Bondage to fear. The Notion of eternal
Justification, destroys the absolute Necessity of Faith, Repentance and
Holiness; for according to it, upon the Supposition an Elect Person went on in
a Course of the grossest Impieties, such as Murder, Uncleanness and Robbery
till Death, and never believed or repented, the Almighty would have no more to
charge against such a Person, than against the Angels that never sinned! It
tends to make Sin of the most crimson Kind, appear to be but a mere Trifle
unworthy of our Fear or Sorrow, and so to banish all Holiness from the Earth,
yea and to eradicate all Civil Society!

Objection 1st. Christ was a public Person, and as such Justified.

Answer. What then, as none are guilty of Adams Sin actually, until they exist
and partake of the same Nature; so none are actually Justified, till by Faith
they are united to the second Adam.

Obect. 2d. God's Nature is unchangeable and his Love eternal, and therefore
the Elect were Justified from Eternity.

Ans. I deny the Consequence; though God is not Changeable, we are; and there is
a manifest Difference between the Purposes of God and the Execution of them:
Although God did from Eternity purpose to create the World, yet it was not
created till Time began; and this being done according to God's Purpose, makes
no Change in God. As to the Love of God, the usual Distinction of Divines
concerning it is just, viz. that of Benevolence and Complacence; the former
signifies God's gracious Purpose from Eternity, of conferring special Good upon
the Elect in Time. John iii. 16.
The latter intends, the actual conferring of the Good designed, together with
the Suitableness of the State and prevailing Temper of the Elect to the
approbative Will of God; on which Account he is represented as taking Delight
in them when converted. Cant. ii. 14.
Now it is only in the former Sense that God is said to love the Elect before
Conversion. Besides it should be considered, that God's Love is no Passion in
him, as Love is in us, and therefore only intends the Posture of his Will
toward the Object, either in Respect of Purpose before Time, or Approbation in
Time, agreeable to his Purpose before it. Neither is their any Inconsistency in
this, that an Elect Person upon whom God intends to confer special Good in
Time, should be, in Respect of his present State, exposed to the Condemnation
of the Law before the Good designed be conferred; for God's Purpose does not
alter the State, till it be put in Execution; and this is what orthodox Divines
intend by God's Love and Hatred, respecting the Elect before Conversion.

Object. 3d. Things to come are present with God, one Day, is with him as a
Thousand Years.

Answ. Things to come are not present with God actually, but only in respect of
his Knowledge and Purpose respecting their Futurity. If Things to come were
actually present with God, then these Absurdities will unavoidably follow, viz.
That all Things are Eternal, and that they are and are not at the same Time and
in the same Sense! Besides the same Rule would hold as to Things past, and then
we must say concerning the World, that it is still a Creating in the Sight of
God, and that the Flood now covers it, and that the People of Israel are
passing through the Red Sea: Who sees not that this is rediculous? Surely Jehovah
looks not on Things in a false Light. What wild Work would it be, if we should
form our Prayers according to the aforesaid Scheme? For thus we must now pray
for the Protection of Adam in Paradise, of Noah in the Flood, and of Lot in
Sodom^

Object. 4th. Justification by Faith, is but a Manifestation of Justification.

Ans. But how can this be? Surely it is not so in Relation to God, for known to
him are all his Works from the Beginning. And as to others, it is not Faith
alone that makes our Justification manifest to them, but principally good Works
that flow from it, as the Apostle James observes. James ii. 18.
Nor can it be justly understood, of the Manifestation of Justification to our
selves, for then all that believe would know that they are Justified at all
Times, which is contrary to the express Declaration of God's Word, that assures
us, that such as fear God and obey the Voice of his Servant, do sometimes walk
in Darkness and see no Light. Isai. ^.
Again the Scripture excludes our own inherent Righteousness and Works, from
any Agency in that Justification which is by Faith: But to say that all the
Graces of the Spirit and Duties of Gospel Obedience, are excluded from being of
any Use in the Manifestation of our Justification, is to contradict both
Scripture and Reason; hereby, (says the Apostle John) we do know that we know
him, if we keep his Commandments. 1 John ^. ^.
To suppose that the Apostle should take so much Pains to state the true Notion
of Justification, and to defend it against the carnal Jews and false Teachers,
and mean no more than a Manifestation which we might be saved without, and
which is as uncertain as the Wind, is most Ridiculous!

To certify us of our Good State, is not the Design of the first Act of Faith,
but of after Acts; and hence the Apostle observes concerning the Ephesians,
that after they believed, they were sealed with the Holy Spirit of Promise.

If Faith only gave us the comfortable Knowledge of our State, then it would
alter our Frame but not our State; but the Scriptures declare the Contrary,
while they inform us, that hereby we obtain a Right to become the Sons of God.

Object. 5th. The sacred Scriptures represent, that God was reconciling the
World to himself, not imputing their Trespasses to them: 2 Cor. v. 19.
And that Christ has made Peace through the Blood of his Cross: Col. i. 20.
And that the Grace of God in Christ was given us before the World began.

Ans. The aforesaid Places of Scripture, can consistently with the Current of
Scripture, the Analogy or Proportion of Faith, and Dictates of right Reason, be
supposed to mean no more than these Things following: (1st.) That there was a
gracious Purpose of God from Eternity, to vouchsafe Blessings on the Elect in
time. (2dly,) That there was a sufficient Foundation laid in the Covenant of
Redemption, as well as in the Sufferings and Obedience of Christ in pursuance
of it, for the purchasing and securing the actual Reconciliation of the Elect
in time. (3dly,) That there was and is a Sufficiency of Grace treasured up in
Christ as the Head of his Church and Fountain of Influence, to be communicated
to the Elect upon their Closure with him; which in some Places of Scripture, is
represented by the Time past, to show the Certainty of the Event: For the same
Reason, the Coming of our Lord to Judgment, is represented by the Apostle John
as present, though it be future: Behold he comes with the Clouds!

It Is well observed by Professor Haliburton, That upon Christ's yielding the
Satisfaction demanded, there did result a Right for the Elect, to Freedom from
the Curse, and to all the Benefits of his Purchase: This Right is not what the
Lawyers call, Jus in re, but Jus ad rem. It Is more properly said, there is a
Right for them, then that they have a Right; since they know not of it, it is
not actionable by them, nor is it actually Vested in their Persons, yet with
God it is righteous, that they for whom Justice is satisfied, a Price paid,
Redemption purchased, etc. should at the Time and in the Order agreed on, be
put in actual Possession of those Privileges.

To say that the Elect are Justified from Eternity, is in effect to say, that
nothing sinned from all Eternity, and that nothing was Justified, which is
absurd! For the Elect before they Exist, are nothing in respect of actual Sin.

If it be Objected that what has been said, will oppose the Decrees: I Answer,
no not at all! For the Decree considers future Beings and future Actions,
Ephesians. i. 4.
but Justification respects Persons present, or existing, and Actions past, and
hence God is said, to Just^fy the Ungodly. Romans iv. 5.
But can a Person be actually Ungodly before he has a Being? The Almighty
decreed from all Eternity to glorify as well as justify the Elect, are they
therefore actually Glorified from Eternity? If it be said that there was more
than a Decree, viz. Christ's Engagement as a Surety to redeem the Elect. Ans.
What then, so there was a Covenant Engagement between the Father and Son, that
Christ should be made a Curse for his People in Time: And was he therefore
actually made a Curse from all Eternity? No surely!

To assert the Elect are actually justified and actually condemned at the same
Time, is as gross a Contradiction as to say that Light is Darkness, and
Darkness is Light, it is impossible in the Nature of Things: Such as are
actually justified are actually freed from Condemnation, and therefore cannot at
the same Time be actually under it. But I must conclude these polemical Hints,
and proceed to mention a

Second Infference from what has been before said, and that is the comfortable
State of Believers. Who these are I have before shown, by explaining the Nature
of Faith, which I advise the Reader to examine himself by.

Now such as do find in themselves the Characters of Faith have Reason to
rejoice under the most gloomy Aspects of Providence: For however Men may
condemn them God will not, there is no Condemnation to those that are in Christ
Jesus, who walk not after the Flesh but after the Spirit. Romans viii. 1.


And we may likewise learn the Necessity and Excellency of Faith through which
alone we can be justified, and that the Greatness of Sin is no Bar to
believing, seeing the Righteousness of Christ is able to make the most Crimson
Sins white as Snow; and that it is freely offered to all Believers.

To conclude, justified Persons should be exceeding humble, seeing that
boasting is excluded by the Law of Faith, and Holy also in all Manner of
Conversation, evidencing thereby their Justification to the World about them. I
conclude in the Words of the Apostle Paul to Titus, That being justified by his
Grace we should be made Heirs, according to the Hope of eternal Life. This is a
faithful saying, and these Thngs I will that thou affirm constantly, that they
which have believed in God, might be careful to maintain good Wooks: These
Things are good and profitable unto Men. Tit. iii. 7, 8.


Vindicae Legis: OR, THE LAW established by FAITH.

THREE SERMONS, PREACHED AT PHILADELPHIA, February the 24th, and March the
10th, 1744-5. On ROMANS III. 31.

By GILBERT TENNENT, A. M. Minister of the Gospel in Philadelphia.

Romans vii. 12. Wherefore the Law is holy; and the Commandment holy, and just,
and good.

John xiv. 15. If ye love me, keep my Commandments.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed by W. BRADFORD, at the Bible in Second Street, 1745.

ROMANS III. 31. Do we then make void the Law through Faith? God forbid: Yea we
establish the Law.


A JUST View of the Harmony that subsists between the Law and Gospel, is of
great Importance in the Christian Religion: To promote this, is therefore the
Design of our present Meditations, to which the Text I have chosen directly
leads.

To understand which let it be considered, that the Apostle Paul having in the
preceding Verses of this Chapter, proved at large by a Train of close
Reasoning, that the Justification of a Sinner before God is by Faith only.
Foreseeing that some would be tempted to abuse that precious Doctrine of Grace
to the Contempt of the Law; in order to prevent this vile Abuse, he
proleptically States the Objection of such by way of Query or Interrogation,
and rejects it with a vehement Negation, or with great abhorrence! Do we then
make void the Law by Faith? The Objection more fully Stated is this: The
Apostles by their Doctrine of Justification by Faith, make the Law
unprofitable, useless, vain; they abolish and abrogate it, and destroy all
Obligation to obey it.

The Apostle replies with a God forbid! As if he should say, I abhor the
Thought! That so valuable and excellent a Rule of Life should be made void! O
dreadful, detestable Suggestion! This Objection is the same in Substance with
the slanderous Report which some spread concerning the Doctrines of Grace,
which the Apostles preached, affirming that they said, let us do Evil that Good
may come. This Calumny Paul rejects with equal Detestation, in the following
Words, whose Damnation js just: See Verse 8 of Romans iii. Chap.
i. e. Says Poole, Their Damnation is just, who teach such Doctrine and
Practice accordingly; or they justly deserve Damnation, who calumniate the
Apostles and publishers of the Gospel, and raise false Reports and Slanders of
them: -- Who affirm we say or hold, that Evil may be done that Good may come
thereof. Vide Poole's Annotations in Locum.
Now seeing the abolishing the Moral Law as a Rule of Action, tends to destroy
all Holiness entirely, (as I shall afterward labor to make evident) it must
needs be a great Evil; and if this be done that Good may come, it is in
Substance what the Apostle rejects with so much Warmth in the preceding Part
of this Chapter!

It is the Moral Law that the Apostle here Discourses of, for in this Chapter
he shows that both Jews and Gentiles are under Sin by breaking of it: Now the
Gentiles were not under the ceremonial Law, and so could not transgress it, and
therefore it must needs be the Moral Law that is intended in our Text.

Besides it is certain that the Gospel Dispensation of Faith, does make void
the ceremonial Law; when the Substance came the Shadows fled away, the Types
must needs give Place to the Antitype, that Handwriting of Ordinances was
nailed to the Cross of Christ. But in what Sense does the Apostle oppose making
void the Moral Law?

I answer, not as a Covenant of Works; for himself elsewhere shows, that it is
in that Respect made void to Believers, and asserts, that they are not under
the Law but under Grace. Romans vi. 14.
Since Man's Apostasy, the Law cannot give Life as a Covenant through our
Default, forasmuch as it requires a Perfection of Obedience to that Purpose,
which we have rendered ourselves unable to perform. It is therefore the
Destruction of the Moral Law as a Rule of Life, or its Obligation to Obedience
under that Character, which the Apostle opposes.

To make this the more easy to be understood, let it be considered, that a Law
in general may be thus described, viz. That it is a Rule of Duty, or of Things
to be done and avoided, prescribed by the Almighty, and enforced by the
Threatening of Punishment upon the Transgressor.

Now there are two Kinds of Laws, namely, positive and moral: The former take
their Rise entirely from the Legislator's Pleasure, and enjoin Things that are
not essentially or intrinsically Good in their own Nature, antecedent to the
Command, and are therefore Good only because commanded, and Evil because
forbid: Of this Kind was the primitive Prohibition, of abstaining from the
Fruit of a certain Tree, which before, was no doubt, lawful to be eaten: of
this Kind was also the ceremonious Observances of the Jewish Church, and
likewise their judicicial or political Laws, at least such of them as were
peculiarly adapted to the State of the Jewish Nation: These Commands are
alterable because they are not grounded on the intrinsic Goodness and
Reasonableness of Things, but upon the Legislator's Pleasure.

But the latter, viz. moral Preceps, have an essential Equity and
Reasonableness in them, they conform us to the Attributes and Actions of God,
which are the Pattern of our Imitation; they are exactly adapted to the Frame of
Man's Faculties, and to his Condition in the World, and serve to maintain the
Primitive Dignity of human Nature, and good of Society, and therefore cannot be
altered; for the Things are enjoined because they are good, and forbidden
because they are in themselves Evil.

This Law is called Moral, to distinguish it from positive and ceremonial
Institutions; and likewise the Law of Nature, because it was at first, as to
the Substance of it, made C-onatural to Man, and, as it were, engraven on the
human Soul (or Conscience) when it came at first out of the Hands of God. But
Man's understanding being darkened, and his Will and Affections being depraved
by Sin, there was need of a Second Edition of it for our Direction in Practice;
which God in infinite Condescension gave in two Tables of Stone upon Mount
Sinai.

This Law does virtually contain in it an Obligation to believe and obey what
God should afterward reveal and enjoin, and therefore all positive Precepts of
a Divine Original were and are established by the Moral Law, during the Time
appointed for their Continuance.

This Law was never given to any since the Fall of Man with Design to obtain
Justification before God by Obedience to it, though many carnal Persons took it
in this Light to their great Prejudice, but was added to the Covenant of Grace,
because of Transgressions, as an Appendix to promote its grand Intention by
convincing Sinners and directing Saints, and so it is not against the Promises
of God but greatly serves them by making Offenses to abound in the
Unregenerate, i. e. as to their View of them and by working Wrath, i. e. Making
them sensible of the Wrath they deserve for Sin, and so disposing them to
accept the Redeemer by Faith, and by guiding Believers in the Paths of Purity,
and humbling them for their Defects.

And though under the Gospel Dispensation, the Church being come to mature Age,
Believers are not under so severe a Discipline as obtained during the Jewish
Economy, but are freed entirely from the Bondage of the Ceremonial Severities
as well as from so frequent an Inculcation of the Terrors of the Moral Law,
attended with but obscure Discoveries of Gospel Grace, which were necessary to
prepare the Jewish infant Church to embrace with readiness a brighter and
milder Dispensation, and so may be said to be no longer under the Law as a
Schoolmaster; yet they need it as a Rule of Practice.

Now the moral Law was given to innocent Man, both as a Rule of Duty and a
Covenant of Life. Man was not only to be directed by it as a Rule enforced with
a Penalty, but it was given also in the form of a Covenant, a promise of
Happiness being annexed to Man's perfect Obedience to it, together with the
positive Precept before mentioned.

The Moral Law therefore can be supposed to be made void, but in two Respects,
viz. Either as a Covenant or as a Rule.

Now it cannot be the former Sense that the Apos^ opposes, because he in other
Places asserts, that Believers are dead to it in that respect, and therefore it
must be the latter, for in no other Lights can the moral Law be considered than
these.

The Phrase make void, signifies to render unprofitable and vain to abolish,
antiquate, Abrogate. Catargumen, inutilem vel irritum redimus, vel abolemus,
antiquamus, abrogamus, via. Poli. Synop. in Loc.


The Apostle farther observes, that instead of making void the Law (i. e. as a
Rule) by Faith, we establish it. The Word establish Istomen, stare faicmus, i.
e. honorem ei suum defendimus, ^ulcimus. vide Poli Synop in Locum.
signifies to make a Thing stand the more firmly, and maintain its Honor. By
Faith we are to understand by a Metonimy the Doctrine of Justification by
Faith, of which the Apostle had been before discoursing, or the Gospel
Dispensation in general, so that from the Words of our Text we may gather this
Position, viz. That the Doctrine of Justification by Faith or Gospel
Dispensation, instead of making void the moral Law as a Rule of Life, does
farther establish it.

In discoursing upon which I shall,

I. Offer some Considerations tending to manifest that the moral Law as a Rule
of Life is not, nor cannot be made void. And

II. Show how it is established by the Doctrine of Justification by Faith, or
Gospel Dispensation, and then proceed to the Improvement.

To confirm and illustrate the first Head of Discourse, I shall only offer the
few following Particulars, viz.

1st. Man is necessarily under a Law to God, he having received his Being and
all his Benefits from him, it is but reasonable that he should return some
grateful Homage for them.

Besides as the infinite Excellency of the Supreme Being deserves religious
Reverence, so it is but reasonable that it should be offered, and especially by
Creatures who had received Power adapted to that Design: But how shall this be
acceptably performed without a Law? Hence we may conclude that the infinitely
Wise God, who has made nothing in Vain, has given intelligent; Creatures a Rule
to direct them in his Service, and this indeed the sacred Scripture assures us
of.

2dly. This Law being Moral, grounded on the Nature of our Relation to God and
one another, must needs be perpetually binding at least as a Rule, because it is
Foundation is invariable. viz. The Nature of God and the Reason of Things: And
hence it is that the Moral Law has such honorable Epithets given it in
Scripture as these following, viz. The Royal Law, -- the perfect Law of
Liberty, -- a spiritual Law, -- yea that it is Holy, Just, and Good. -- i. e.
It has an intrinsic and invariable Goodness which changes not with Time; it
is the Copy of God's Moral Excellencies; the pure Miror in which we may behold
his amiable and untainted Perfections: The Relation therefore between God and
Man, as a Creator and Creature, Governor and Subject, must be extinguished,
before an Obligation to the Duties which result from it can cease; God must
cease to be God, and Man must cease to be Man before the Obligation of the
latter to obey the former expires and terminates. And hence our Lord assures
us, That he came not to destroy (or dissolve Catalusai dissolve it is Obligation
as a Rule.
) the Law, but fulfill it, and that till Heaven and Earth pass, not one jot or
tittle shall in no wise pass from the Law till all be fulfiled. i. e. 'till the
Consumation of all Things, or the End of the World
And in our Text the Apostle Paul asserts, that the Law instead of being made
Void by Faith, is thereby established; and elsewhere he informs us, that we are
not without Law to God, but under the Law to Christ. 1 Cor. ix. 21.


If it be objected that the same Apostle tells us that the Believer is dead to
the Law, by the Body of Christ. Romans vii. 4.
It may be replied, That the Apostle speaks not there of the Law as a Rule of
Duty; for in that Sense he calls it in the same Chapter Holy, Just and Good,
but as a Covenant of Works: In this Respect all that believe are dead to it, i.
e. they do not expect Justification on account of their Obedience to its
Precepts, but desire to be found in Christ not having their own Righteousness,
which is of the Law, (i. e. not depending upon it for Acceptance with God) but
that which is through the Faith of Christ, the Righteousness which is of God
through Faith. Phil. iii. 9.


The Apostle likewise considers the Law in the same Sense, viz. as a Covenant
of Works; when he says in another Place, That Believers are not under it, Rom
vi. 14.
else he would not consist with himself.

But it may be again objected, That the Law is said not to be made for a
Righteous Man. 1 Timothy i. 9.


I answer with Doctor Witsius, That there are two Things to be considered in
the Law of God, since Sin has had it is Entrance in the World, viz. A Rule and
Direction to Obedience, and a Power of restraining from Disobedience by Terror
and Condemnation: When therefore the Apostle teaches, that the Law is not laid
upon a good Man, he does not Design that, concerning its first and principal
Work which is Essential to it, but concerning the other which is Accidental and
came by Sin, from which justified Persons are freed by Christ. In lege dei post
pecatum duo sunt consideranda, 1. Norma and directio ad hupotagen. 2. Vis
frenandi, and compescendi terrore and Metu, ac denique just Condemnandi.
Quando ergo Apostolus docet, legem justo positam non esse non inteligit id de
primo ac precipuo legis opere, quod ipsi essentiale est, sed de altero illo
accidentario, quod per and post pecatum superacessit, and a quo justi per
Christum Liberati sunt. Wits. Economy. Lib. 1. Cap. 3. Sect. 9.
And that which tends to confirm this Gloss, is that the Apostle after the
aforesaid Words, immediately makes mention of the grossest Kind of Sinners:
Doubtless the Terrors of the Law are of Service to restrain some such in a
Measure, otherwise civil Society would be destroyed. It is certain that
Believers are free through Christ from the Condemnation of the Law, and that it is
principal Use to them is not to affect their fear by its Threats, but to inform
their Judgments and direct their Practice by it is Precepts: They are chiefly
influenced by the free ingenuous Principle of Love that inclines them to obey
the Law of Choice, which the unregenerate are drove to against their
Inclination. But some other Interpreters do not without Reason think, That the
Original Word translated, made for, Keitai.
would have been better translated, laid upon; to signify that the Holy Law of
God is not laid upon a Righteous Man as a Burden, as it is upon the Wicked.
Such as fear God value his Law above the finest Gold, and it is sweeter than
Honey to their Taste. Psa. xix. 18.
None of God's Commandments are grievous to them. But on the Contrary the
Wicked look upon the Law of Liberty to be a State of Bondage, and Obedience to
it a Weariness. Mal. i. 13.


The Sum of the Moral Law, as our Lord observes, is love to God and our
Neighbor; and can any imagine, that the Law enjoining this, should not be of
perpetual Obligation? Can it be thought, with any Shadow of Reason, that God
would destroy, by any succeeding Dispensation, what is so just and Reasonable,
and thus deface his own Image? It cannot be!

It is true, the Moral Law was originally given to innocent Man, for two
important Purposes, viz. As a Rule to direct his Obedience, and as a Covenant
between God and him, by keeping of which, he was to expect, according to the
Promise of God, a confirmed State of Blessedness; but on the Contrary, nothing
but Misery and Death. Genesis ii. 17.
Now as soon as Man broke the Law, it become weak through the Flesh: i. e.
Unable to give Life or Justify as a Covenant through our Default, Romans viii. 3^
and on the contrary, exposed to condemnation all the human Race; and hence
it is called, a Ministration of Death and Condemnation. 2 Cor. iii.
This all unconverted Sinners are under, not having complied with the Term of
the New Covenant, they are under the Curse of the Old: Gal. iii. 10
And hence it is said to hold (or bind) the Unregenerate; Romans vii. 6.
it binds them to Death and Hell. This indeed Believers are delivered from, yet
they are under the Law as a Rule. But to proceed

III. Almighty God having given a Law of inflexible Equity, for the Government
of his intelligent Creatures, the Perfections of his Nature were and are
engaged to Support its Honor; particularly his Wisdom, Holiness, Justice and
Truth.

To destroy a reasonable and Righteous Law, which is expressive of the Beauty
of the divine Nature, and adapted to support the Dignity, and compass the
single and social Benefit of the Human, would argue Weakness and Want of
Wisdom. What is the Law of Nature or the Moral Law? but the Obligation of the
rational Creature, to admire, adore, love and obey his Creator, (and to express
this by all those positive Duties, which God may from Time to Time by his
Sovereignty require,) and for the Sake of his Creator, to love his Brother
sincerely, perseveringly, effectually. This Law is so noble and rational, so
conducive to promote God manifestative Glory, as well as our Honor and
Benefit, that our Happiness consists in Conformity to it; and therefore it
contains the highest Reflection upon God's Wisdom and Goodness, to suppose that
he would destroy it, or suffer the Honor of so excellent a Rule of Government
to be eclipsed! which it certainly would be by a Satisfaction less than the
Demerit of Sin. This famous Mr. How has well expressed in the following Lines:
It were manifestly more honorable and worthy of God, not to have exacted any
Recompense at all, than to have accepted in the Name of a Sacrifice, such as
were unproportionable, and beneath the Value of what was to be remitted and
conferred; for what had been lower, must have been infinitely lower: Let any
thing be supposed less than God, and it falls immensely short of him; such is
the Distance between created Being and uncreated, that the former is as nothing
to the latter; and therefore bring the Honor and Majesty of the Deity to any
thing less than equal Value, and you bring it to nothing; and this had been
quite to loose the Design of insisting upon a Recompense, it had been to make
the Majesty of Heaven cheap, and depreciate the Dignity of the divine
Government, instead of rendering it August and Great. Vide op Dom. How Vol. 1.
p. 195.
And to make it a Maxim of Government, that no Offender should be punished though
of the most enormous Kind, in case he professed Penitence, would be to render
all Sanctions insignificant Scare-crows, and of no Moment and Validity; or to
declare in other Words, that there was no great Danger in Sin, and that the
Transgressors might easily escape with Impunity, which tends to destroy all
Government!

Nor will the untainted Holiness of God endure the Destruction or Disparagement
of that Law, which is so bright an Expression of its Beauty and Purity, the
invariable Rectitude of the divine Nature, whereby he is infinitely removed
from all Moral Evil which is essential to God, and represented in the sacred
Volumn as his peculiar Glory, inclines him to hate and therefore to punish Sin,
or a Transgression of his Law as its contrary. The Opposition of God to Sin
results from the glorious Purity of his Nature, which therefore he cannot
dispense with; and hence he is represented, as of purer Eyes than to behold
Iniquity; Heb. i. 13.
that Sin is the abominable Thing that he hates; Jer. xliv. 4.
and therefore that Sinners cannot stand before this holy Lord God. Ezra ix.
1415.
Yea we are told by the Prophet, that his Soul loathes them; this therefore
indispensably requires the perpetual Duration of the Moral Law, as a Standard
or Scale of Action and Rule of Government, as well as equal Reparation made for
the Dishonours done to it by Sin.

And can we with Reason suppose, that the inflexible Justice of God, which is
essential to his Being, and in its Nature disposes and determines him to give
to every one his due, will at the same time incline him to pass by the
Transgressions of his Law with Impunity, or pardon them without an equal
Reparation: Will not the supreme Lord and Judge of all do right? Has not
himself assured us, that he will by no means clear the guilty. Ex. xxxiv. 7.
Far be it from God, says Elihu, that he should do Wickedness, and from the
Almighty that he should commit Iniquity; for the Work of a Man shall he render
unto him, and cause every Man to find according to his Ways, Job xxxiv. 10, 11.
In the same Strain speak Job and Joshua; If I Sin then thou markest me, and
will not ^oquit me from mine Iniquity. Job x. 14
Ye cannot serve the Lord, for he is a holy God, he is a jealous God, he will
not forgive your Transgressions nor your Sins: i. e. without equal
Satisfaction. Josh. xxiv. 19.
What is the Relative Justice of God, but a Display of his Holiness in the
Government of intelligent Beings, whereby he not only prescribs a Law as the
supreme Lord, but executes the Sanctions of it, or dispenses Rewards and
Punishments as supreme Judge? Neither does the Almighty's insisting on
Satisfaction, as has been represented, in the least disparage his glorious
Sovereignty; for as judicious Mr. How observes, It has not been said that God
can forego none of his Rights, it is plain he does when having a Right to punish
a Sinner, he by Pardon confers on him a Right to Impunity; but he cannot do it
to the Prejudice and Dishonor of his glorious Excellency's, and the Dignity of
his Government; and therefore if some Reparation were requisite to his doing
it, consistently with the due Honor and Reputation thereof, Justice toward
himself required, he should insist upon it, which is no more a Detraction from
his Absoluteness, than that he cannot lie, or do any thing unworthy of himself;
he is so absolute, that he can do whatever he pleases, but so just, that he
cannot be pleased to do an unrighteous Thing, Vide How Vol. 1. p. 190
Excellent Doctor Owen has offered the following Confirmation of what was
before observed: What God cannot do in respect of one divine Attribute, he can
do it in respect of none; or that which cannot be on account of one essential
Property, cannot be by all. Doctor Owen Diatribe de just. p. 206.
The Reason of which is so evident, viz. a Necessity of Harmony among the
divine Attributes, or Jehovah's Self-consistency, that it need not be mentioned.

Again, the inflexible Truth of God requires Satisfaction; the Law being
violated divine Truth is engaged to execute the Threatening of Death which was
denounced against the Sinner, that thus he may make good what he had declared
to be his Resolution, Jehovah had and still does declare by his Law, that the
Soul that Sins shall die: Now unless this Sentence be executed upon the
Sinner or a Surety in his Place, the Truth of God fails. There is, (says
Doctor Edwards) a Disposition in every Legislator, that enclines him to execute
Threatenings annexed to his Law upon Transgressors, without which they would be
insignificant. -- These Things (says he) are to be found in all Laws, and all
Lawgivers, whether human or divine, the Reason being the very same, and common
to them all. Vide Edwards Preser. Part 3. p. 85.


Surely the sacred Rights of divine Government must be inviolably preserved, as
well as the Honors of divine Justice and Truth, the faithful Guardians of the
Law maintained.

Can Sin that exposes to the Curse, vacate the Law that denounces it? Can the
Creatures Rebellion lessen the Creator's Authority, or Right to his Obedience?
Shall the voluntary Iniquities of Worms, make the great Jehovah quit his Throne
and renounce his Claim of Right? No surely!

To suppose that the Gospel frees us from the Moral Law as a Rule of Life, is
to cast a most dishonorable Reflection upon it, and make it unworthy of our
Acceptance: For thus it would militate against right Reason, against all the
valuable Interests of Society, against our own Honor, Comfort and Happiness,
against the Image of God, yea God himself! It is no Liberty, but base Bondage
and Slavery, to be deprived of the Law as a Rule; the Law of God, is a Law of
Liberty, and it is sweet Freedom to obey it from Faith and Love; but it is vile
Slavery to serve Sin and run after the Whims of our deceitful Hearts, wild
Imaginations, or the Delusions of the Devil transformed into an Angel of Light.
Christ has not come to allow a Liberty to Sin, by his Gospel and Grace, but to
destroy the Works of the Devil. Pious Doctor Cotton Mather, puts the Request of
one who holds the licentious Principle I am opposing into the following
Language, which naturally flows from it, and serves to beget a Horror of it in
all that fear God, viz. Great God I pray thee to allow me the Sacrifice of my
Savior, that it may defend me from thy Wrath, to which my Sin will otherwise
expose me, and let it excuse me in my Neglect of thy Worship and Service, and
let me be indulged now to trample on thy Law, to blaspheme thy Name, to assault
thy Throne, and to do all that thy grand Enemy the Devil can tempt me to.
Language fit for none but the Mouth of a Devil; and yet when this Thought is
working in the Heart, I may make the more bold with Sin, because the Blood of
my Savior will shelter me from smarting for it: This, this, is the Language of
it; you cannot imagine that a justifying Faith, will commit so enormous a
Villainy! Vide Sermon upon the Law established by Faith.
But I proceed to the

II. Proposed, which was to show how the Moral Law is established by the
Doctrine of Justification by Faith, or Gospel Dispensation. And

1st. The Grace of Faith which is the Instrument of Justification, establishes
the Moral Law various Ways, viz. by its Antecedent, Nature, Concomitants and
Effects.

The Antecedent of Faith, namely, Conviction of Sin, establishes the Law; for
by this the Sinner is alarmed out of his Security, and arraigned before the Bar
of the Law, and made to confess the Purity of its Precepts, and Equity of its
condemnatory Sentence, together with his Desert thereof by Sin. Convinced
Sinners know that they are Guilty before God, and therefore their Mouths are
shut, and all their Pleas silenced. Romans iii. 18.
Now the Moral Law is the Ordinary Mean of Conviction, for by this is the
Knowledge of Sin.

Yea the very Nature of Faith establishes the Law, for what is this but a
receiving of CHRIST as a KING and LORD as well as a SAVIOR, John i. 12.
and this cannot be without consenting to obey that Law which is the Rule of
his Government. The Erand of Faith to CHRIST is certainly for Holiness, as well
as Pardon: Christ has come by Water as well as by Blood to deliver from the
Tyrany of Sin as well as from the Guilt of it, and as such true Faith receives
and desires him, and therefore in its Nature it includes a Regard to the Rule
of Holiness the Moral Law: And hence the Psalmist valued it above the finest
Gold, and it was sweeter than Honey to his Taste, Psa. xix. 10. Psa. cxix. 127.
and declares that he esteemed all God's precepts concerning all Things to be
Right, Psa. cxix. 128.
and admired the Extent and Perfection of them. I have seen (said he) an End of
all Perfection, but thy commandment is exceeding Broad. Psa. cxix. 96.


Again the Concomitants of Faith establish the Law: Faith is but a Branch of
the new Creation, the Nature and Genius of which God himself represents by
writing his Law upon the Heart, Jer. xxxi. 33.
which surely signifies the Infusion of a Holy Principle of Action inclining to
honor, love and obey the Moral Law: All the Graces infused in Regeneration
dispose to Holiness; and indeed God himself is glorious in Holiness. Now
Regeneration is but a renewing us after his Image, without Holiness we cannot
see God, or assend his Holy Hill. Heb. xii. 14. Psa. xxiv. 4.
Now what is Holiness ( as Doctor Mather justly observes) but a continual
Concern to have the great God glorified by the Observation of the Law that he
has given us?

And the Effects of Faith do also establish the Moral Law, a true justifying
Faith purifies the Heart, and Works by Love. Well if it purifies the Heart, it
must needs dispose to regard the Rule of Purity, and if it Works by Love to
God, it must needs produce a Respect to his Image, which is his holy and
righteous Law. Can one sincerely love a Person and slight his Picture that is
well drawn? And is not Love the fulfiling of the Law? But one remarkable Effect
of Faith, which the Prophet Zacheriah mentions, is to bewail with Bitterness
our Breaches of the Law, the Words are these, And I will pour upon the House of
David, and upon the Inhabitants of Jerusalem the Spirit of Grace and
Supplications, and they shall look on me whom they have pierced, and mourn for
him as one mourns for his only Son, and shall be in Bitterness for him, as
one that is in Bitterness for his first Born. Zech. xii. 10.
Here observe, that mourning for Sin through a believing View of a pierced
Redeemer, whom we have crucified by it, is a new Covenant Promise: And what is
Sin but a Transgression of the Law? Well seeing Faith in a crucified Savior
inclines us to mourn over the Breaches of the Law, it hereby puts great Honor
upon it in confessing its Justice, Equity and Obligation. And I cannot but
observe likewise under his Head, that the Almighty himself declares, that his
writing his Law in the Heart is a Blessing of the New Covenant, after those
Days says the Lord I will put my Law in their inward Parts, and write it in
their Hearts, and I will be their God, and they shall be my People. Jer. xxxi.
33.
And elsewhere walking in God's Law and Statutes, is represented as a Promise
of the New Covenant by the Prophet Ezekiel, and I will put my Spirit within
you, and cause you to walk in my Statutes, and ye shall keep my Judgments and
do them. Ezekiel. xxxvi. 27.
Keeping God's Statutes is here likewise represented as a Fruit of Conversion,
as appears by comparing the Scripture just now quoted, with the preceding
Verse. Again,

2dly. The Doctrine of Justification by Faith, or Gospel Dispensation,
establishes the Moral Law by Proposal, Precept, Promise, President, and
Gratitude.

It establishes the Law by proposing a Righteousness equal to its Precepts and
Penalties, viz. The Righteousness of the Mediator God-Man, performed in our
Nature in Obedience to the Law; And hence he is said to be made of a Woman made
under the Law. Hereby the Law was magnified and made Honorable, more than it
would have been by the perfect Obedience or endless Sufferings of the whole
rational Creation; for by this God himself was, as it were, brought to it is
Bar! Hereby the Equity of the Law's Penalty was solemnly and openly declared
before Men and Angels: What is the Language of CHRIST'S Sufferings but that the
Violation of God's Law is an infinite Evil? Else why did Jesus endure so much
for it, and tread the Wine Press of his Fathers Wrath alone? Sacrifices and
Offerings could not avail, nor Ten Thousand Rivers of Oil, nor the yiedling of
our first born as Victims to expiate our Guilt, nothing else than the precious
Blood of the Son of God could at one for our Crimson Iniquities in violating
the Divine Law! Well, if the Transgression of the Law be so great an Evil, the
Law itself must needs be Holy and Good; and indeed if it were not so the
Blessed God would not stand so much upon the Honor of it, as to make his own
beloved coequal Son endure such intolerable Anguish and Agonies to repair it,
as the Evangelists represent! What is the Righteousness of Christ, which Faith
relies on for Justification, but Christ's Conformity to the Law, and Sufferings
for our Breaches of it? By both which it is honored, and its Equity and
Excellency established!

Moreover the Gospel Dispensation called the Law of Faith, of which
Justification by Faith is a principal Branch, establishes the Moral Law by
Precept, while it enjoins us to be Holy in all Manner of Conversation, as he
who has called us is holy. 2 Pet. ii. 11
Now what is this Imitation of God in Holiness but a Conformity to the Moral
Law, the Rule of Holiness? And hence Christ preached the Law, Mat. v. Chap.
and urged Obedience to it, but if thou will enter into Life, keep the
Commandments. This was our Lord's Answer to one that asked him what good Thing
he should do that he might have eternal Life? And immediately after our Savior
shows that by the Commands he meant the Moral Law, by mentioning some of the
Precepts of it. Mat. xix. 17.18.
The Blessed Jesus frequently inculcated the Moral Law, and likewise cleared it
from the false Interpretations of the Pharisees; Mat. v. John. xiv. 15. Mat.
xxii. 37.38.39.
and Persons are commended in the Gospel for obeying the Moral Law. 1 Pet. ii.
21. Jam. 2.8.


And did not the dear Redeemer exactly fulfill it is Righteousness and conform to
its Precepts? And has he not hereby left us an Example that we should follow
his Steps.

The Dispensation of Faith does likewise establish the Law by promising to
assist us in Obedience to it. Ezekiel. xxxvi. 26.27.
When Man had broken the Law, and thereby rendered himself unable to obey it to
Perfection, an Aversion against it was contracted, and it is Authority slighted:
But Faith by proposing Pardon for Imperfections, and promising Assistance,
enlivens our Hope, conciliates our Regard, and procures our Obedience. It is a
Soul supporting Promise of the New Covenant that Sin shall not have Dominion
over us. Romans vi. 14.


Again the Dispensation of Faith, or Doctrine of free Justification by it,
establishes the Law in Point of Gratitude. The pure Grace and Love that God
gives his People to partake of by the Gospel, cannot but powerfully constrain
them to ingenuous Gratitude to so Blessed a Benefactor! For Love is surely
Love's Lodestone, the greater the Love is that is expressed toward us, the
more by Consequence must our Love be inflamed by it. Now Love being the great
Source of acceptable Service, the greater the Cause the more noble and
abounding will be the Effects! Surely the Language of the Soul on this
Occasion, must be like that of the Psalmist, What shall I render to the Lord
for all his Benefits toward me? Being redeemed by so great a Price, Gratitude
must constrain them to glorify God by their Bodies and Spirits which are his.
But how can this be done without Obedience to his Law, and avoiding all that is
contrary to it? Surely the dying Love of Christ for the Sins of his People, and
the Consideration of their Bodies being Members of Christ, and Temples of the
Holy Ghost, are powerful Arguments to detest and avoid Sin, and abound in the
Duties of Holy Obedience, and these are suggested by the Law of Faith.

Faith, by opening to our View at once the unsearchable Riches of Divine Love,
and the dreadful Glories of Divine Justice in the Redeemer's Death, tends to
incite our Love and alarm our Fear; and by both, to procure our Obedience to
God's Law and Reverence of his Majesty! And it likewise raises our Hope by
assuring us that we shall reap if we faint not in our Religious Diligence.

Let what has been said, my dear Brethren, excite you to esteem and value God's
Holy Law in your Judgments, and to conform thereto in your Practice, but in the
mean Time beware of depending upon your Obedience for Acceptance. Labor with
that Earnestness and Steadiness as though you could gain Heaven by your Works,
and after ye have done all ye can, depend no more upon them than if ye did
nothing. On the one Hand, let us avoid the Error of the Arminians and Papists
who depend upon their Works: And on the other, let us with equal Care avoid the
Antinomian Sloth and Negligence, let us walk in the middle Way between these
two Extremes. May GOD bless his Word: I add no more at present.

SERMON II.
ROMANS III. 31. Do we then make void the Law through Faith? GOD forbid.


HAVING, in a preceding Discourse, briefly spoken upon what is expressed in
this Text, I am now to treat upon what is supposed by it: While the Apostle
rejects with so much Abhorence, the Notion of making void the Law, it is Dignity
and Excellency is hereby necessarily supposed. This therefore is the Point I
have at present in view, in discoursing upon which I purpose,

I. To show the Honors which Almighty GOD put upon the Law at it is
Promulgation. And

II. Explain the excellent Characters or Properties which are ascribed to the
Moral Law in sacred Scripture, and then offer some Improvement from the whole.

But before I insist upon the Method proposed, I shall beg leave to premise a
few Words concerning the various Acceptations of the Word LAW. The Latin Word
for it, is derived from Participles that signify reading and binding, because
Laws were wrote to be read by all, and have a binding or obligatory Power: Lex
vel a Legendo ut isido: vel a Ligando ut Thomas quasi vinculo ad obedientiam
ligant.
And hence they are frequently compared in Scripture to Bands; thus the
Psalmist represents the Wicked, as setting themselves in Opposition to and
conspiring against the LORD and his anointed, saying let us break their Bands
asunder and cast their Cords from us. Psa. ii.
These Children of Belial would not be subject to CHRIST as a KING, but basely
renounced Allegience to his Government; they would not have this Man to rule
over them; they were impatient of restraint, and would not come under the
Obligation of his Laws and conform themselves to their Direction; they judged
them a Burdensome Imposition upon their Liberty and Pleasure, and therefore
were determined to reject their Authority and violate their Enclosures* But for
this arrogant Rebellion the Almighty threatens to have them in Derision, and
vex them in his sore Displeasure: And Jeremiah complains of some in his Time,
that they broke the Yoke and burst the Bands. Jer. v. 5.
They insolently refused to be controlled in impious Courses by the Bands of
GOD's Law, and would not bear the Yoke of his Government, but broke through and
burst in Pieces, with presumptious Violence their Obligations to their
Sovereign. The Greek Word for Law is derived of a Verb, which signifies both to
rule and distribute. Nemos a nemo tri^o distribuo rego vide pasoris Lex:
The Moral Law is not only the Rule of Practice, but of Judgment: The final
Distribution of Rewards and Punishments shall pass according to this LAW.

Some learned Men observe, that the Hebrew Word for Law is derived from a Root
that signifies to teach or point out the Way, p^sori^ Lexicon. Tu^e^ The^lo^.
elenct, Vol. 2. Pa. 1. Doctor Ridgley's body Divinity, Vol. 2. P. 2^.
because Men are instructed by it concerning their Duty.

This Word is taken diverse Ways in Scripture, either (1st.) more largely for
the whole Word of God, Psa. i. 2.
the whole Old Testament, John xii. 34.
the whole Jewish Economy, or Dispensation of God's Worship to that Nation:
And hence it is said that the Law was given by Moses, John i. 17.
and for the five Books of Moses as distinguished from the Prophets and Psalms.
Luke xxiv 44.
It is likewise taken for the Psalms themselves, John x^ 34.
and sometimes it intends the ceremonial Law, in which Respect it is said to be
a Shadow of good Things to come. Heb. x. ^
Sometimes by a Synecdoche it only intends the Condemnation of the Law; in
which Sense these Words of the Apostle to the Galatians are to be understood,
against such there is no Law. Gal. v. 23.


Sometimes it is taken strictly for the mosaic Dispensation, as opposed to the
New Testament, in which Sense these Words of Paul to the Hebrews are to be
understood, for the Priesthood being changed, there is made of Necessity a
Change also of the Law, Heb. vii. 12.
a Disanulling of the Commandment going before, for the Weakness and
unprofitableness thereof. Heb. vii. 18.
The Weakness and unprofitableness of the mosaic Dispensation to many, arose
chiefly from their Abuse of it, in expecting Pardon and Sanctification by it,
without minding the Promise, which preceeded it Four hundred and thirty Years,
to which it should have led them: They depended on their outward Obedience, and
slighted Christ and his Sacrifice, which proved fatal to them. The following
Words of John the Evangelist are to be taken in the same Sense, for the Law was
given by Moses, but Grace and Truth came by Jesus Christ: i. e. Through Moses as
God's Minister and Servant, a more obscure and terrible Dispensation was
introduced, which many abused in the Manner before represented to their Ruin.
But Jesus Christ has brought in by the Gospel, a brighter and more comfortable
Dispensation, which has a Glory that excels; it is attended with clearer
Light, and for the general, with larger Distributions of Grace and Comfort,
than the legal Dispensation. Sometimes the Word Law is taken strictly, for the
Covenant of Works precisely, as contradistinguish'd from the Covenant of Grace;
in which Sense the Apostle to the Romans says, that Believers are not under the
Law but under Grace. Romans vi. 14
But more generally it signifies the Ten Commandments; and this is undoubtedly
the Sense of it in our Text as has been before proved.

Now the Dignity of the Moral Law, appears from the following Considerations,
viz.

First: Almighty God put Honor upon it, in the Manner of its Promulgation; it
was given forth with the most awful Solemnity, and Ensigns of commanding
Majesty, that thereby Reverence and Obedience might be procured to it. The
great God himself spoke all the Words of the Moral Law, Exodus xx. 1.
and at the Time of the giving of it Jehovah descended in visible Glory from
the Mansions of Light, the Seat of his special Residence upon Sinai's Mount;
which the Psalmist represents with great beauty and grandeur of Diction; He
bowed the Heavens and came down, he rode upon the Cherubims, and did fly upon
the Wings of the Wind, he made Darkness his Pavilion round about him, at his
Presence the Earth shook, and the Foundations of the Hills were moved, and
particularly (as it were for fear of the descending God) Sinai trembled, and
was wrapped in Fire and Smoke! Psalm xviii.


The Terrors of that Day were likewise increased, by the loud and long Blasts
of a Trumpet, by successive Peals of Thunder and Flashes of Lightning, which
opened a most tremendous Scene!

To what has been said we may add, the divine Injunction, that the People must
prepare themselves to hear the LAW; they were to sanctify themselves and wash
their Clothes: Now though this was a ceremonious Usage peculiar to the Jewish
Economy, yet doubtless the Sanctification of the Heart was thereby signified.
They were also to abstain from conjugal Liberties, that they might attend on
the Hearing of the Law with greater Solemnity!

And Bounds were set to the Mount that none might touch it, in order to create
a Reverence of that Law that was then to be proclaimed! Ex. xix. 9. to the 22.
Verse.


Secondly: Another Instance of Honor put upon the Moral Law, was the writing
of it upon Tables of Stone by the Finger of God: Ex. xxxi. 18.
By which we are doubtless to understand his Power and immediate Operation:
This was surely designed to represent in a familiar Manner, the eminent Dignity
and perpetual Duration of the Moral Law.

Thirdly: Jehovah's repairing the Tables after they were broken, is an
additional Argument for the Dignity of the Law: Jehovah commanded Moses to hew
two Tables of Stone like unto the First, and promised that he would write upon
them the Words which were in the first Tables, that Moses broke: Ex. xxxiv. 1.
Here it is evident, that the writing upon the second Tables, was done
immediately by God himself, like that of the First.

Fourthly: The Shine upon the Face of Moses was so great, that the Israelites
could not steadfastly behold him without a Vail. This the Apostle Paul applies
to the Ministration of the Law, in his Epistle to the Corinthians, 2 Cor. iii.
and acknowledges that it had a great deal of Glory in it, but such as was to
vanish; not that the Law it self was to vanish, no by no Means! but only that
particular Dispensation of it of which he speaks, which was attended with many
Ceremonies and Types, that when the Antitype came, of their accord evanished.

When the Apostle calls the Law, a killing Letter, a Ministration of Death and
Condemnation; he speaks of it only as separate from, and set in Opposition to
the Gospel, 2 Cor. iii.
which it never was (says excellent Mr. Flavel) since the Fall, but by the
Ignorance and Infidelity of unregenerate Men. Vide Vindix p. 664.
Again

Fifthly: The Preservation of the Law in the Ark, and that by virtue of the
Order of God, is another Evidence of its Dignity and Excellency: 1 Kings viii.
9.
To which might be added, the Time of Moses's being on the Mount at the giving
of it, and his Preservation for the Space of Forty Days, without Meat or Drink,
which doubtless was a Miracle wrought in Honor of the Law of God. But I
proceed to the

II. Proposed, which was to show the Excellency of the Moral Law, from the
Characters or Properties ascribed to it in the divine Word.

Now the Moral Law has the following Characters in Scripture, viz.

First, It is called the Royal Law, to signify that it is enjoined by the
Authority of God as a King; and if so, then it must needs be an Instance of
Loyalty to obey it, and of Rebellion against the King and Lord of all, to
disclaim and reject it. The royal Law is the King's Law: i. e. The great Law,
which is the same to all rich and poor, the common Rule by which all are to
act, as the King's Way: Numb. xxi. 22.
i. e. the great, plain Way, in which all are to travel. Vid. Pool's Annot.
This Sense of the Words the Apostle James confirms, by saying in the same
Verse, if ye fulfill the Royal Law according to the Scriptures, ye do well: Now
that he means the Moral Law, appears plainly from what is expressed in the same
Text, thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self. Jam. ii. 8.
The Word fulfill, or as the Original may be rendered, perfect, Teleite.
considered in connection with the preceding and following Verses, can intend
no more than a sincere Endeavor to keep all the Precepts of the Law
impartially, which he opposes to their Partiality in the Law, by respecting
some Precepts and neglecting others.

This Law is full of royal Majesty, both on the Account of the Author and
Matter of it; it is enjoined by the King of Kings and Lord of Lords, who has
Power to bind and loose the Consciences of Men, and is only able to save and
destroy; and the Equity of its Matter, does likewise establish its universal
and unceasing Empire, and venerable Majesty; and hence it is the same with the
Law of Nature, from which, as a Fountain, all other good Laws do spring, to
every of which it is superior and by which they are all judged, but it is
judged by none!

Secondly: Its a spiritual Law: We know says the Apostle Paul, that the Law is
spiritual, we know it both b^ Inspiration and Experience; the Law is spiritual
in respect of its Author, Extent and Tendency, God who is a Spirit has formed
it, and made it extend to the Spirit or Soul of Man; it not only regulates our
overt Actions, but prescribes Bounds to our Thoughts and Desires, as appears
from our Lord's Explication of it. Matt. v. 28.
It requires spiritual Duties, such as pure Love to the blessed God, Faith in
his Word, and a Reverence of his Majesty, as well as outward Acts of Obedience
from spiritual Principles, and therefore it tends to make those that are
subject to it, spiritual in the Frame of their Minds, and so conform them to
that God who is a Spirit.

Thirdly: It is a holy Law; the Law is holy, and the Commandment holy: Romans
vii. 12.
The Law is not only holy in respect of its Author, but likewise in regard of
its Nature and Effects; it proceeds from a holy God, and ^joyns universal and
persevering Holiness upon the Creature; it is holy in all its Branches, and
especially in its Precepts, which recommend nothing but what is pure and holy,
and agreeable to the divine Will; and hence the Psalmist assures us, that the
Commandment of the Lord is pure, enlightening the Eyes: Psalm xix. 8.
Particularly the the Law is holy in respect of the Duties toward God which it
enjoins, such as a Dedication of our selves and our all to God's Glory and
Service, with Trust, Reverence and Love.

It is a crystal Image of the blessed God, in it, as in a Glass, we may behold
a bright, a beauteous Emblem of his Justice and Purity; and indeed the Design
of the Law is to conform us thereto, and of this, through the holy Spirit's
Influence, it is a happy Instrument; and hence is the following ^pression of
the Psalmist, thy Word is very pure, therefore thy Servant loves it: And
elsewhere, the Words of the Lord are pure Words, as Silver tried in a Furnace
of Earth, purified seven Times. The whole Word of God, and especially his Law,
is perfectly Pure and inexpressibly Precious!

4thly. It is a Just Law. Romans vii. 12.
This is especially applicable to the second Table of it, the Precepts of which
require the strictest Justice and Equity in our Dealings with Men, and forbid
the Contrary, they require that we should do to others what we would they
should do unto us. This, says our Lo^ is the Law and the Prophets, Mat. vii. 12.
i. e. (...) the Substance of the second Table o^ the Law, according to the
Explication thereof by the Prophets: The Law is just and reasonable, grounded
upon the plainest Maxims of natural Equity and Right; agreeable hereto is that
beautiful Expression of the Psalmist, the Statutes of the Lord are Right,
rejoicing the Heart. Psa. xix. 8.


5thly. It is a good Law. This the Apostle Paul asserts, not only in his
Epistle to the Romans, Romans vii. 12.
but likewise to Timothy, in these Words, knowing the Law is good, if a Man use
it lawfully. 1 Timothy i. 8.
The moral Law is always good absolutely, or in it self considered, because it
is the Image of the Divine Excellency, and grounded upon the invariable Nature,
Reason and Relation of Things; neither does the abuse thereof any more affect
or alter it in this Sense, than the abuse of Christ or the Doctrines of Grace
alter them.

But the Law is only good relatively, or in respect of us when we use it
agreeable to its Design: The Apostle confirms his Position respecting the
Goodness of the Law by his own and others Experience. We know, i. e. we
Apostles, we Christians know by Experience, that the Law is Good, it has had
good Effects upon us. It works Goodness, ( says Mr. Pool) in the observer of
it, and is conducive to his temporal and eternal Good.

Not only the Author of the Law is Good, incomprehensibly and inexpressibly
Good, essentially and communicatively Good; Psalm. cxix. 68.
but the Matter thereof is good also. What can be more rational than the Fear
of God, Faith in him, and Love to him, and Acts of Homage and Worship flowing
from such noble Principles which are recommended by the first Table of the Law?
And what can be more rational in itself, and necessary for us, (in its Place)
than the Duties of Justice and Charity recommended by the second?

Things that are merely positive, are Good because they are commanded, and
therefore alterable; but Things that are Moral are commanded because they are
intrinsically Good, and agreeable to that eternal Justice and Goodness that are
in God himself: And hence it necessarily follows, that to suppose that God may
command contrary Things (in a moral Sense) is to suppose that God may
contradict his own Nature and so deny himself, which is Blasphemous?

And indeed the Contrary of the Moral Precepts, does not only destroy all
Religion, but likewise civil Society at a Stroke!

Neither did the Command of God to Abraham to slay his Son, and to the
Israelites to borrow Jewels of the Egyptians, contradict the Precepts of the
Moral Law: For in the former Instance the Sovereign Lord of Life and Death did
but give Authority to Abraham to take away a Life which he was the sole Author
of, and therefore could remove when he pleased; but Murder is the taking away
of a Life without just Authority. And in the latter Instance, the Almighty, who
made all Things, and is consequently absolute Owner of them, did but transfer
the civil dependant Right of the Egyptians to the Israelites; and this indeed
was but a just Compensation for their hard Services. May not the Lord do with
his own what he pleases? But Theft is the taking away what belongs to another
without just Authority or Right.

And it may be farther observed, that the Egyptions gave their Vessels freely
to the Israelites, neither did they ask them again when they left that Part of
the World but drove them away with the Vessels in haste; neither was the other
Precept to Abraham absolute, but only a Command of Trial.

But to proceed. The Matter of the Law is Good, not only in respect of it is
Precepts but Sanctions. It is accompanied with Promises both of spiritual and
temporal Good, as appears from the second and fourth Commands: It was therefore
wicked in the heretical Manichees (who infested the Church about the fourth
Century, whom blessed Augustine faithfully opposed) to say that the Law was
only Carnal, and had only carnal Promises; whereas it is certain that the
Jewish Church had for Substance the same Faith, which we now, through divine
Goodness, enjoy. And the Threatenings annexed to the Moral Law are Just, and
therefore Good.

Again, the Law is Good in regard of it is Use. Now the Use of the Moral Law, is
either general to all Men or particular to some. And,

1st. The Moral Law is of Use to all Men, ( say the Westminster Assembly in the
larger Catechism) to inform them of the holy Nature and Will of God, and of
their Duty, binding them to walk accordingly; to convince them of their
Disability to keep it, and of the sinful Polution of their Nature, Hearts and
Lives; to humble them in Sense of their Sin and Misery, and thereby help them
to a clear Sight of the need they have of Christ, and of the Perfection of his
Obedience.

The Moral Law is a Declaration of God's Will to Mankind, respecting their Duty
to him and each other, obliging them to personal, perfect and perpetual
Obedience.

As we are Creatures we are Subjects, he who gave us Being has a Right to
demand Obedience from us, to what he prescribes.

And though we have made ourselves unable to perform perfect personal Obedience
to the Law, yet God's Right to it remains firm; our Sin cannot lessen that: And
though Provision is made through Christ for the Justification of our Persons upon
believing, and the Acceptance of our sincere, though imperfect, Services through
him; yet are we bound by the Law as a Rule to seek after a Perfection of
Holiness in our own Persons, and to lament from Love our Defects. The Design of
Christ's coming into the World was to strengthen the Obligation of the Law as a
Rule, by Arguments of Ingenuity and Gratitude instead of dissolving it. Here
observe,

1st. That the Law informs all Men of the Holy Nature of God and their Duty to
him: The divine Perfections are impressed on the Moral Law in large, legible
and indelible Characters; his Sovereignty in demanding Obedience; his Wisdom,
Holiness and Righteousness in the Nature of the Duties required, which are
reasonable, pure, equal, and his Goodness in their Use and Benefits to us: What
is the Language of the Law, but Holiness toward God and Righteousness toward
Man?

2dly. The Moral Law binds the Consciences of all Men to Obedience, so that
none have Reason presumptuously to conclude to their Ruin, We may live as we
list, and who is Lord over us? And indeed the Wisdom and Goodness of God shine
with equal Glory and Luster in continuing our Obligation to Obedience as the
Way to future Blessedness: This Method tends to prevent the pregnant Woe and
Ruin which would ensue the Withdraw of our Allegiance from our Creator and
Sovereign Lord.

3dly. The Moral Law being spiritual, pure, perfect, the exact Model and
inflexible Standard of Integrity has a noble Tendency to show us that we are
carnal, impure and imperfect. When this Law by the Spirit's Influence enters
into the Soul and Conscience, then does Sin abound in our View, in respect of
its Number, Aggravations and Demerit; and thus we are convinced of our
Inability to fulfill it, and humbled under a Sense of Sin and Misery, as well as
thereby induced to behold our absolute Need of a Redeemer's Obedience together
with the Perfection of it, to answer the Law's Demands.

But the particular Use of the Moral Law either respects the Unregenerate or
Regenerate. Now,

In respect of the Unregenerate the Law has a five-fold Use,

(1st) To convince them of Sin: And hence the Apostle Paul says, he had not
known Lust, except the Law had said thou shall not covet. What shall we say
then? Is the Law Sin? God forbid! Nay, I had not known Sin but by the Law. The
Apostle rejects this Inference with Abhorrence, viz. Because that Sin sometimes
takes Occasion to rage the more, because of the Law's Restraints; that
therefore the Law itself is Sin, God forbid! says he: Romans vii. 7.
When the Sun shines upon the Dunghill it sends forth a more noisome Smell, of
which its pure Beams are not the Cause, but Occasion only. The Apostle farther
informs us, that he was alive without the Law once, but when the Commandment
came, Sin revived and he died: Romans vii. 9.
i. e. Before the Law of God was brought home with Power to his Conscience, he
had a false Peace and a false Hope; but so soon as the Law came in its
Spirituality and Power, he lost them, and saw he was a dead Man; and elsewere
we are told, that by the Law is the Knowledge of Sin. Romans iii. 20.
-- It Is true the Holy Spirit is the efficient Cause of Conviction, but the Law
is the Instrumental.

(2dly.) The Law is of excellent Use to condemn for Sin. And hence the Apostle
informs us in his Epistle to the Romans, That what Things soever the Law
says, it says to them who are under the Law: That every Mouth may be
stopped, and all the World may became Guilty before God. Romans iii. 19.
The Condemnations of the Law shut the Sinners Mouth, and silence his
Self-righteous Pleas.

(3dly.) The Law is good to restrain from Sin; and hence it is said, to be
added because of Transgression. Gal. iii. 19.
The Law is added as it were, as an Appendix to the Covenant of Grace, to
promote the great Design of it, by convincing of, and restraining from
Transgression! The Terrors with which t^ Law is armed, tend to deter the
Unregenerate from those Impieties which otherwise they would commit: Indeed
without this, human Society could not well subsist, however pious Souls are
influenced chiefly by nobler Motives. Self is the main Spring of the Actions of
the Unregenerate, and on this Account the Threatenings of the Law are peculiarly
adapted to influence their Fear; and this seems to be the Apostle's Scope, when
he says, that the Law is not made for a righteous Man, but for the Ungodly, and
Sinners, Unholy and Profane. 1 Timothy i. 9.


(4thly.) The Law is of excellent Use to drive Sinners to Christ for Shelter
and Safety, through a Sight and Sense of their Undonness, and Helplesness without
him. To this Purpose the Apostle speak^ in his Epistle to the Galatians, in the
following Words: Wherefore the Law was our Schoolmaster, to bring us unto
Christ, that we might be justified by Faith. Gal. iii. 24.
The Law as a Schoolmaster, scourges rebellious Sinners out of their Security
and Sloth, and makes them flee for Refuge to the Hope set before them, as the
Avenger of Blood did the Manslayers of old, to the City of Refuge appointed for
their Reception. The Law by opening the Sinner's deadly Wounds, compels him to
seek in haste and earnest the Balm of Gilead, and the Physician that is there;
till this, Christ is neglected, for the Whole need no Physician, but the Sick;
and hence the Apostles used alarming Methods in their Sermons, in order to
rouse a secure World, and constrain them to fly as for their Lives, from future
Wrath to Christ; Knowing the Terrors of the Lord (says blessed Paul) we
persuade Men. Christ is therefore said to be the End of the Law, Romans x. 4.
which respects not only his Fulfillment of its Demands, by his active and
passive Obedience, but also signifies that he is pointed to by i^, as it is
added to the Covenant of Grace. It Storms the Sinner out of his false Refuges,
and shuts him up to Christ as the only Door of Hope, in whom we may obtain the
Righteousness of the Law. Romans viii. 4. Dicaioma ^mu.
To the same Purpose, these Words of the Apostle to the Galatians are very full
and conclusive; For I through the Law am dead to the Law, that I might live
unto God: i. e. I through the Law as an Instrument, am become dead to all
Obedience to the Law as a Covenant; or in other Words, through the Application
of the Law to my Conscience by the holy Spirit, I am drove from all Expectation
of Justification by Obedience to it, and this every Man must feel or
Experience, before he lives to God's Glory as his highest End; without which
single Eye, as our Savior expresses it, we are in Darkness, and all our sacred
Service is unacceptable, because it issues chiefly from a selfish, Principle.

(5thly.) The Law of God is also a Mean of Conversion to him: This is expressly
asserted by the Psalmist in the following Words; The Law of the Lord is perfect
converting the Soul. Psalm xix. 7.
If it be said, that the Law in the aforesaid Scripture, is to be taken in a
large Sense: I answer, what then, it does not weaken the Argument, except it be
taken in such a Sense as to exclude the Moral Law, which cannot be proved,: It
is absurd to suppose, that the Psalmist under the Term Law, should recommend
all the Word of God, except that of which he spoke expressly; especially
considering that the Moral Law, together with its Explication, was the chief
Part of the Scriptures at that Time.

Nor is it reasonable to imagine, that our Lord in his first Sermon, would have
used a Method which had no direct Tendency to convert his Hearers. Now we are
sure that that Sermon was spent in opening the Law, in freeing it from the
false Glosses of the Pharisees, and in urging the Duties of it. Mat. v.


Why should that Influence and Effect, be denied to any Part of the Word which
the Spirit of God ascribes to the Whole? All Scripture is said to be profitable
for Doctrine for Reproof, for Correction, for Instruction in Righteousness,
that the Man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished into all good Works. 2 Timothy i.i. 16, 17.
Now seeing every Part of the Scripture has its partial Fitness to produce the
aforesaid Effects, why should any Part be rejected? Is not the Word in general
compared, to Seed sown that brings forth Fruit. Matt. xiii.


Neither Law or Gospel have any physical or inherent Virtue in them, to convert
Men to God; for then Persons would be always converted at the Hearing of them,
which we know is not fact. Take the Gospel as well as the Law without the
Spirit, and it is, as to Influence, but a dead Letter. The Word of God concurs
to Conversion only objectively and morally. As an Object it presents Truths to
the Mind, directs, informs and persuades, in a moral or rational Way, but has
no abiding, efficacious Influence without the Spirit's Concurrence; in that
Respect it is like the Pool of Bethesda, whose Waters had no healing Influence,
but at such Seasons when an Angel descended and troubled them.

Now seeing the Law has that objectively in it, which may work exceedingly
upon the Heart when accompanied with the Spirit's Influence, then why may it
not be used instrumentally, as well as the Gospel in the Conversion of Sinners?
When that pure Glass is opened in its spiritual Extent and divine Excellency,
by which it resembles the Nature of God himself, why may not the blessed Spirit
accompany it, to inflame the Heart with love to the Author of it?

If the Law may be blessed for the increase of Grace, why not to the beginning
of it? but it, doubtless is to the former. Do not pious Souls know by
Experience, that the Law helps to humble them, and consequently incites them to
prize Christ the more? Why therefore may it not be a Mean of the latter, namely
Conversion? But to this, that saying of Paul to the Galatians is objected, viz.
received ye the Spirit by the Works of the Law, or by the Hearing of the Faith?
Gal. iii. 8.


Ans. The Meaning of the Place, as appears by the Context is this: That the
Galatians were not made partakers of God's Spirit, either in his ordinary or
extraordinary Gifts, by the corrupt Doctrine of the false Teachers, (who had
not long before too easily seduced them from the Simplicity of divine Truth, by
blending or mixing the Righteousness of Christ and Works together, in the Point
of Justification,) but before while they heard the pure Doctrine of Christ; and
therefore that it was their Folly, having begun in the Spirit to end in the
Flesh. As by the Hearing of Faith, we are doubtless to understand the Doctrine
of of Faith, so by the Works of the Law, the Doctrine of the Works of the Law,
which the false Apostles taught.

It is unfair and unreasonable, for any to compare the Law considered without
the Spirit, with the Gospel attended with it, for by the same Rule, we may
prefer the Law before the Gospel: e. g. We may suppose a Minister opening the
Duties of the Law in imitation of our Lord, Matt. v.
and the Spirit concurring therewith to the Conversion of Men: And on the other
Hand, suppose one preaching the Gospel in all its Riches and Charms, without
the Spirit's Influence and no Effect produced.

Having shown the relative Goodness or Usefulness of the Law to the
Unregenerate in diverse Instances, I proceed to show its Use to the Regenerate.
Now to such the Law is a Rule, to direct them in their Duty to God and Man,
without which we cannot discern the Depth of Sin. According to this Rule, as
explained and recommended by the Doctrines and Precepts of the Gospel, and the
Grace of God we ought to walk: Let us, says the Apostle to the Philipians, walk
by the same Rule, and mind the same Thing: Phil. iii. 16.
There is an Allusion in this Figure to Architects, Soldiers or Racers, who all
have a Rule to act by, or a certain Measure of their Motions prescribed and
prefixed, to which they should conform with exactness: While the Apostle
mentions the same Rule, he surely had in his Eye some certain, well-known
Cannon or Rule, which had the Stamp of divine Authority upon it, by believing,
loving Conformity, to which, (as a Mean) God's Israel may expect Peace; Gal.
vi. 16.
and this can be no other than the M^al Law explained, etc. as before; for
besides this there is no certain, complete, well-known Rule of Action, enjoined
upon us by divine Authority.

Now the Law as a Rule, is of excellent Use to regenerate Persons, in the
following Respects.

1st. It discovers Heart Sins: The Apostle had not known the Evil of Lust, if
the Law had not said, thou shall not covet. Romans vii. 7.
There is more Pollution in us than we do or can discover; Who can understand
his Errors, says the Psalmist, cleanse thou me from secret Faults. Ps. xix. 12.1
Now the Law of God being exceeding broad and spiritual, requiring Holiness in
our Thoughts, Dispositions and Designs, and forbiding the Contrary, John iii.
15.
must needs have a Tendency to discover to us our spiritual and secret
Impieties.

(2dly.) By the aforesaid Discovery, it tends to humble us, and consequently to
drive us from a Dependence upon our own Wisdom, Power and Righteousness to
Christ, for understanding, Pardon and Strength: When we are made to see how far
we come short of that Righteousness the Law requires; nothing tends to humble
us more, and make us loath our selves and all we do! which is a Blessing
promised by the New Covenant, as the Prophet Ezekiel informs us: And there
shall ^e remember your Ways and all your Doings, wherein ye have been defiled,
and shall loath your selves in your own Sight, for all your Evils that you have
committed. Ezekiel. xx. 43.
And therefore we should study the Law more and more, and pray to Jehovah in
the Psalmist's Strains, open thou mine Eyes, that I may behold wondrous Things
out of thy Law. Psalm cxix. 18.


It is surely Ignorance of God's Law, that makes Men proud and Self-righteous,
and conceit that they are perfect. What made the Pharisees so confident upon a
false Foundation, so Conceity and full of Prejudice against Christ and his
Gospel, but their Ignorance of the Spiritual Extent of the Law? This puffed
them up with ambitious Disdain of others, and inclined them to say, as the
Prophet expresses it, stand by thy self, come not near to me, for I am holier
than thou, Isai. lxv. 5.
and therefore thou are not good enough to converse with me, I am not as other
Men are, or even as this Publicans Luke 18.11.
Nothing makes Men more odious to God, than a proud Conceit of themselves and
Contempt of others; these are as Smoke in the Nostrils of God, Smoke that comes
from a Fire of wet Wood that has nothing in it but what is offensive. Isaiah
lxv. 5.


(3dly.) The Law tends to make us prize Christ by showing us our need of him.
After Paul was enlightened and alarmed by the Law, he was the inclined to prize
Deliverance by Christ: Romans vii.
Jesus Christ is certainly a Believers Life, to me to live is Christ, Phil. i.
21.
i. e. The Grace of Christ was the Spring of his Life, the Glory of Christ was
the Scope of his Life, and the Offices of Christ the Support of his Life: The
true Believer lives daily upon Christ in his Offices, Prophetical, Priestly and
Kingly. Now the Law by showing him his Ignorance, Guilt and Weakness, incline^
him to seek Light from Christ as a Prophet, Pardon from Christ as a Priest, and
Stength to conquer Sin and perform Duty from Christ as a King, and thus he is
led by the Law to come up out of the Wilderness of this World leaning on his
beloved. Cant. viii. 5.
,

(4thly.) The Law excites to Duty, both by its Precepts and Penalties: As a
Good it rouses the Believer out of his Sloth and Security, and excites him to
work out the Work of his Salvation with fear and trembling. Although the
Regenerate have a new Nature, which disposes them to Holiness, and are
principally influenced to Obedience from Love; yet they need the Discipline of
Fear: Nor is there any inconsistency between a predominant Love to God as a
Father, and a Fear of offending by Sin, as well as the Consequences of the
Offense.

I may add, that the Law is of singular Service to the People of God, in
bringing them to a compassionate and merciful Frame of Spirit toward others
that have fallen, by showing them their own Deformities and Blunders! And as
this is a noble Attainment in it self, so it is of great Use in promoting the
Good of Society. The Law is likewise of great Use to Believers, (as the
Westminster Assembly justly observe) in showing them how much they are bound to
Christ for his fulfiling it, and enduring the Curse thereof in their Stead and
for their Good, and thereby to provoke them to more thankfulness, and to
express the same in their greater Care to conform themselves thereunto as the
Rule of their Obedience.

The Believer is under a peculiar and superadded Obligation to obey the Law,
for he is not only bound by God's Sovereignty, over him in common with others,
as he is God's Creature, but he is constrained by the dying Love of Christ, as
he is a Believer. Now inasmuch as the Precepts and Penalties of the Moral Law
being exact and great, they serve to show the Riches and Greatness of the
Redeemer's Love, who was willing to be made under the Law, and did fulfill its
Demands for us; and thus our Gratitude is incited, which cannot be better
expressed then by a willing, unfeigned, unfainting, universal Obedience to
God's Law, which we owe to God as our rightful Lord and Sovereign, our Creator,
Benefactor and Father; to Christ as our King and Redeemer, and to the Holy
Spirit as our Sanctifier.

But beside these spiritual Benefits of the Moral Law to the Unregenerate and
Regenerate, which have been mentioned, the Law promotes the temporal Good of
both; this is the Guardian and Barrier of all that is naturally dear to us;
hereby our Names and Estates, our Liberties and Lives are protected from
Injustice and Violence!

But I proceed to offer a Word of Improvement. And

First: Methinks what has been said concerning the Use of the Moral Law, should
excite you to examine your Consciences, whether you have found the aforesaid
Effects of it in your selves? O! have ye felt its convincing and condemning
Power? Have ye been thereby through the Influence of God's Holy Spirit, brought
to see not only the Evils of your Practice, but also that Fountain of
Corruption in the Heart from which they proceed? Particularly have ye been
convinced of your Unbelief? Your total Want of true Faith and Inability to
Believe, as well as your utter Unworthiness of the Gift of Faith from God? O!
were ye ever made sensible that ye were in a perishing State with the Prodigal?
And has the Spirit of God become a Spirit of Bondage to fear to your Souls?
Showing you through the Condemnation of that righteous Law ye have broken, the
Greatness, Certainty and Eternity of that Misery you were thereby exposed to,
in such a strong Light as to affect your Souls with bitter Anguish and
Distress, and excite anxious Enquiries after the Way of Deliverance therefrom?
And were ye Restless, till being made to despair of your own Wisdom, Power and
Righteousness, and of sufficient Help from any mere Creature, ye were enabled
by the Holy Spirit, upon a Discovery of Christ's Sufficiency and Willingness,
(to help poor sin-sick Souls that fly to him for shelter) to venture your
wounded, weary Souls by believing upon him, as the only Foundation of
Acceptance with God? And have ye been since inclined to love the holy Law of
God as a perfect Rule of Life, because of its Author, its excellent Properties
and Effects? And has it been your chief Desire and Endeavor in general to
conform to it in Heart and Practice, from Love to him as a Father, and Fear of
him as a Master and Lord? And have your Defects therein been for the general
your chief Grief? If you can answer with a good Conscience in the Affirmative,
you are sincere and in a gracious State. O! what cause have ye to love God, my
dear Brethren, to exalt him and rejoice in him, in all Changes of outward
Circumstance! O how distinguishing and affecting is the Mercy of God toward
you! in bringing his blessed Law to your Hearts, and you thereby to the holy
Jesus? And that while many others sit as senseless Stones under the same Word;
the very Sermon which was blessed to your Conviction or Conversion, perhaps
some poor, ignorant, conceity Creatures in the same Assembly, cavil'd with and
snarl'd at, and went away and told gross Lies about it, in order to blacken the
Speaker instead of getting Good by it. O admire! admire! the rich, the glorious
Grace of God! and let that Law that the blessed God has made a Mean of such
Good to your Souls, be ever esteemed by you; take it as the Rule of your
Practice, meditate upon it all the Day, and let it be the chief Labor of your
Life to conform to it in Heart and Conversation. O make Use of the Law of God
to convince you of Sin, to humble you for Sin, and excite you to thankfulness
and practical Holiness. Dear Brethren! Let not your Religion lie chiefly at the
Tip of your Tongues, but watch your Hearts, and bring forth the Fruits of
Holiness or Obedience to God's Law in your Lives.

But alas! how much is the Case of such to be pitied and lamented, who want the
aforesaid Experiences! All ye to whose Hearts the Law of God has not been
brought in its condemning Influence, who have not seen the false Grounds of
your Hopes, the Filthiness of your Hearts, and the Badness of your States, and
who have never been shut up to Christ as the only Door of Hope by the Law, are
false-hearted Hypocrites!

And what ground is there to suspect the State of such who grow weary of
Obedidience to God's Law, and look upon it to be a State of Bondage? i. e. In
other Words, it is bondage to be Holy, in their Opinion; for Obedience to God's
Law, from Love to God and regard to his commanding Authority, is the very
Nature of Holiness, as I have proved before: They therefore neglect the stated
Performance of Duty in their Closets and Families, and count this Christian
Liberty, whereas it is only a fleshly Gratifying the wicked Sloth of Nature:
Christian Liberty is a Freedom from Sin, and not from Righteousness; as free
(says the Apostle Peter) and yet not using your Liberty as a Cloak of
Maliciousness, but as the Servants of God. Those that are Christ's Freemen, are
God's Servants, and do manifest it by Obedience to his Authority. Christ has
never purchased by his Blood, a Liberty, or rather a License for any to commit
Wickedness. O! its a Sign of an unholy Heart in any, to be weary of the Yoke of
God's Precepts, and to say with the Wicked, let us break their Bands asunder,
and cast their Cords from us. Those that are sincerely Holy, love God's Law, it
is their Meditation all the Day, and they look upon Obedience to it, to be
sweet Liberty!

But on the Contrary, obstinate Transgressors break the Yoke, and burst the
Bands. Sirs! it is a dreadful Instance of Wickedness, to pretend that the
Gospel or Grace of God, frees from Obedience to the Law; that is, to make the
Gospel an Instrument of the vilest Iniquity, and to say in other Words, that it
gives Men license to renounce God's Authority over them, and rise up in
Rebellion against his Crown and Scepter! or that it has put an End to all
Holiness in those that accept it. No worse Dishonor can possibly be put upon
the Gospel by the Sons of Men than this! Whereas on the Contrary, it is the
Design of the Gospel, to deliver us from the Hands of our Enemies, that we may
SERVE him without fear, (i. e. slavish Fear) in Holiness and Righteousness
before him all the Days of our Life; to destroy the Works of the Devil, and to
make us zealous of good Works.

My Brethren! The World and the Church have been infested with Libertines of
this Cast for a long Tract of Time: The Epicureans were Libertines among the
Pagans, and so were the Saduces among the Jews, who were very Heretical in
their Principles, and had no regard to the divine Law. And there were some such
among the Christians in the Time of the Apostles, whom Paul represents as
speaking in the following Language: Is the Law Sin? and elsewhere, shall we
continue in Sin that Grace may abound? i. e. Since we are delivered from the
Condemnation of the Law, may we not take Encouragement from thence, to cast off
the Law altogether, and go on in Sin? To which the Apostle repeatedly replies
with great Indignation and Abhorrence, God forbid! God forbid! Romans vi. 1, 2.
Romans vii. 7.
And in another Place after having mentioned a scandalous Report that some
spread about of the Apostles preaching, as if it was of this Tenor, Let us do
Evil that Good may come; He rejects the Charge with the same Abhorrence in
these Words, Whose Damnation is just! Romans iii. 8.
And not long after the Nicolatians, Gnostics and Valentinians troubled the
Church with the same pestilent Principles, and encouraged themselves in the
greatest Immoralities. Of the Principles and Practice of the former, the Lord
Jesus expresses a great Abhorrence (...) these Words; And this thou have, that
(...) hate the Deeds of the Nicolatians, which I also hate. Rom ii. 6.
So have thou ^so, them that hold the Doctrine of the Nicolatians, which thing
I hate! Rev. ii. 1^.
The Holy God hates such Doctrines and Deeds as are contrary to his Law!
Corrupt Principles naturally lead to evil Practice: And in the Time of
Augustine the Manichees and Marcionites cast contempt upon God's Holy Law, whom
that excellent Servant of God faithfully opposed; The Ma^kees held, that the
Devil made the old Testament, and condemned it from these Words, Exo. vii 3.
Vede pe^av de deo C. 6.
And the Aetians and Eunomians who lived in the same Age, arrived to that
shameless Pitch of Wickedness as to hold that the Commission of and Continuance
in the vilest Crimes, would do no harm to such as were partakers of their
Faith. Augustinus de cu^mio dicit, "Fertur etiam usque ad^o fuisse bonis
moribus in^ious, ut assever^ret qu^d ni^il ^uiq ob^sset, quorumb^t p^etratio,
ac p^se^tia pe^atorum, si ^s que ab illo do ^b^ fidei par^ps ^ps esset. Vide
agust de here is. cap. 54.
And since the Reformation from Popery, the Antinomians have brought great
Scandal upon the Doctrines of Grace, and done much Injury to practical
Religion, they receive their Name from their Opposition to the Law of God. The
first of them that appeared was one John Agricola, of Isleby, in Germany, who
abused some unguarded Expressions of Luther's Writings, contrary to his
Intentions, whom Luther opposed: But the first of them that appeared in England
was one Eaton, who wrote a Book called the Honey Comb, etc: Vide Leigh Body of
Divinity, P. 497, Etiam Rutherford 's Surveigh. Mr. Leigh says of the
Antinomians, that under a Color of advancing Free Grace, they cry down the Law
of God, and so are Enemies to God, to the People of God, and to the Gospel,
1st. To God in crying down his Law; this is to let every one be at Liberty, and
do what he list. 2dly. To the People of God: The Law is to them a Light, a
Guide, a Rule, a Councellor. 3dly. To the Gospel: The Law is subservient to it,
1st. In discovering of Sin; by the Law comes the Knowledge of Sin, and it is
Malignity against God and the Souls of Men. 2dly. In driving Men to Christ.
Gal. iii. 24. 3dly. In exalting Free Grace, 1 Timothy i. 13.14. and the value of
Christ's Blood. Vid^ Body of Divinity, P. 36.
Whatever Charity be exrecis'd toward the Persons of such who through Ignorance
are led astray into some of their Notions, but do not Practice accordingly, yet
certainly there is no Charity due to the Principles themselves, for they have a
Tendency to destroy Religion entirely.

I would advise such to weigh well the Characters that God gives his Law in the
Scriptures, and consider the Danger of Opposing it while Repentance is to be
had. O! that such would look into the perfect Law of Liberty, and be doers of
the Work of Holiness, for in obeying the Moral Law they will do well,

And such conceity ignorant Bablers are to be reproved who make a Noise about
Christ and his Blood and Justification, while they slight the Law and oppose
Obedience to it: These, as Natural brute Beasts, speak Evil of the Things they
understand not; such should especially be swift to hear, and slow to speak,
slow to Wrath, and consider of the Mischief they are doing to the Souls of Men
by their confused and inconsiderate Speeches! Yea all that go on in a Course of
any Kind of Wickedness may be judged contemners of the Holy Law of God,
Whoremongers and Adulterers God shall judge: These shall be especially punished
who walk after the Flesh, in the Lust of Uncleaness: These filthy Vermin shall
not enter into the Kingdom of God, but be burnt in the Flames of Hell, except
they repent; and Thieves and Liars shall have their Portion in the Lake that
burns with Fire and Brimstone. He that sows to the Flesh shall of the Flesh
reap Corruption; but he that sows to the Spirit, shall of the Spirit reap Life
everlasting. The Ax is laid to the Root of the Trees, every Tree that brings
not forth good Fruit, shall be hewn down and cast into the fire. Know ye not
that the Unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of God? Be not deceived,
neither Fornicators, nor Idolaters, nor Adulterers, nor Effeminate, nor abusers
of themselves with Mankind, nor Thieves, nor Covetous, nor Drunkards, nor
Revilers, nor Extortioners, shall inherit the Kingdom of God. The Curse of the
broken Law lies upon all such Transgressors, and except ye repent ye shall all
likewise perish.

And now I must conclude this Discourse with a few Words of entreaty to
different Sorts of Persons. And

1st. I exhort the Secure to use the Law as a Mean to convince and alarm them
out of their deep and dangerous Sleep. Think, Sinners, that ye have broke the
Law, and are therefore held by its Curse to suffer eternal Fire: Whatsoever the
Law says, it says to those that are under it; that every Mouth may be stopped,
and the whole World become Guilty before God. Inasmuch as ye have not complied
with the Terms of the Gospel, ye are under the Law, i. e. bound by its Precepts
to perfect Obedience upon Pain of Death for the least Default: For cursed is
every one that continues not in all Things that are written in the Book of the
Law to do them, and bound, by its Penalties, to endure the Wrath of God,
because ye have broke the Law. O dreadful Case! Look into this pure Glass and
see what filthy Creatures you are in Heart, in Speech, and in Practice: The
habitual Corruption of Nature that is in you, in as much as it is contrary to
every Precept of the Law, and permanent, it is therefore a Breach of the whole
Law at once, and a constant Breach of it every Moment; and all your Thoughts,
Words and Actions, inasmuch as they come from unrenew'd Nature, are therefore
tainted with Sin, he that is in the Flesh cannot please God; so that ye deserve
Damnation for the Iniquity that cleaves to every one of them, O dreadful! O let
the Condemnation of God's Righteous Law come into your Hearts, and scorch you
into Life and Sense; awake, Sinners, awake, before the Burnings of the Damned
arrest you, and there be no Remedy: What meanest thou O sleeper? Arise, call
upon God that thou perish not. And

2dly, I exhort the convinced and wounded, to use the Law as Mean to drive them
to the dear Redeemer. Poor Sinners! you feel that you are condemned by the Law,
and that ye cannot fulfill it: O therefore hasten as for your Lives, to an
Almighty and merciful Savior, who is able to save to the uttermost, all that
come to the Father by him, and will by no means cast them out. Behold the Lamb
of God, that takes away the Sins of the World! And rest by Faith your wounded
weary Souls upon his Blood and Obedience, and ye shall be saved! There is a
Balm in Gilead, there is a Physician there! But O be careful of quenching
Convictions, and of false ease! If your Trouble be but superficial, use the
Hammer of the Law to fasten the Nail, and drive it to the Head!

3dly, I exhort the Converted to esteem, love and obey God's holy and righteous
Law, whatever contempt others cast upon it, O let it be dear to you to the
Death! Be not deceived, my Brethren, with the Nonsense of Enthusiasts, who make
a Separation between Duty and Privilege in Religion; to say that it is a
Privilege to do that which is not commanded in religious Worship, is to say,
in other Words, that it is a Privilege to commit Iniquity; for in God's
Worship what is not commanded is forbid! and therefore doing what is not
commanded in the Case aforesaid, is like offering strange Fire, very abominable
and provoking, it is a Breach of the second Commandment; and though the Thing be
commanded which we do, yet if we have not a respect to the Command in the doing
of it, it is Will Worship, and voluntary Humility, it is a Serving of our
selves and not God, yea it is Rebellion against him, for therein we disclaim
his Authority, and obey our own Will as our Lord and Master! On the contrary,
to serve God truly, is both our Duty and our Privilege; it is our Duty,
because he enjoins it, and our Privilege, because of the Honor, Pleasure and
Profit that attend it.

It is a great Honor to have free access to the Throne of so great and
glorious a Sovereign! It is an unspeakable Pleasure to have intimate Communion
with so gracious and blessed a Being! And eternal Advantage follows upon the
sincere Service of God; Godliness is profitable unto all Things, having the
Promise of the Life that now is, and of that which is to come. They which have
believed in God, must be careful to maintain good Works; these Things are good
and profitable unto Men. O it is the Beauty and Glory of Religion! that the
great God has graciously made that which is our Duty, as we are his Creatures,
our Privilege, as we are his Children, and that not only by giving us his
Presence therein, but by opening before us the sure Prospect of eternal
Felicity, to be obtained in this way of Holiness or Obedience to his Law! Which
may God help us to persevere in to the Death, that so through Christ, we may
obtain a Crown of Life, that shall never fade away. Amen, Amen!

SERMON III.
ROMANS iii. 31. Do we then make void the Law through Faith? God forbid.


DEAR Brethren! Seeing the right Understanding of the proper Use of the Law of
God, together with its Dignity and Excellency, is of so great Moment in
Religion, I hope you will not think it strange that I have repeatedly insisted
upon so important a Subject, and especially considering, that it is somewhat
difficult to explain and state in an easy Light, to the Overthrow of all the
Cavils and Sophisms with which it has been obscured and opposed, either by the
Designing or Injudicious: This I could not do in a very narrow Compass, and
therefore have been led reluctant to Proxility.

I have been likewise induced, my Brethren, the more to ruminate upon this
Subject, because it is much misunderstood by some, and slighted by others in
the present Day!

It is certainly our Duty in a special Manner, to labor to understand well
those precious Truths, that are controverted in the Times and Places in which
we live, (especially if they concern practical Religion, and have considerable
Influence upon it) that so we may be preserved from the Infection of the Times,
and glorify God as his Witnesses, in bearing a judicious and faithful Testimony
to God's Truths, however they are ignorantly opposed by some, and basely
disserted and betrayed by others!

It is as the Apostle Peter observes, the ignorant and unstable, that wrest the
Scriptures to their own Destruction: It is these simple, silly Souls, that
false Teachers deceive with their good Words and fair Speeches, and therefore
it is no wonder they cry out against Head-Knowledge, because it obstructs the
Spread of their erroneous, inconsistent and nonsensical Sentiments, though in the
mean time, the God of Truth on the contrary denounces his awful Judgments upon
the Ignorant, this is a People of no Understanding, and therefore he that made
them will not have mercy on them, and he that formed them will show them no
favor.

My Dear Brethren! forget not to abhor and oppose that vile Popish Notion, that
Ignorance is the Mother of Devotion! If they had said that it was the Mother of
Superstition, Enthusiasm and Nonsense, they would have said right, but true
Religion is grounded in Knowledge. I pass from this to observe, that I have in
the preceding Sermon, endeavored to show you, the Dignity and Excellency of
the Moral Law, by mentioning the Honors that the blessed God put upon it at
its Promulgation, as well as by explaining five honorable Characters, that the
Holy Scriptures assign to it. What remains now, is to offer some more
scriptural Characters or Properties of the Moral Law, to answer some
Objections, and then proceed to the Improvement of the whole. The

Sixth Character therefore that I would mention, is, that it is a perfect Law.
Now the Law of God is perfect in the following Respects, viz. Essentially,
Extensively, Intensively, and Finally.

The Law is perfect in its Nature and Essence, so as to contain in it a
complete Rule of all things, that are to be done and avoided by every one,
toward God and toward his Neighbor; so that there is no Work truly and
properly Good, which does not agree with it, and is not prescribed by it.
Whatsoever is neither commanded nor forbid by it, is in its Nature indifferent,
and left to Men's Liberty, except that Liberty be restrained by some possitive
Precept.

The Moral Law is likewise perfect extensively, in respect of its Parts, it
enjoins Love to God and Man, and therein includes all the Duties we owe to
both; and therefore the People of Israel were forbid to add any Thing to it, or
diminish any thing from it. Deuteronomy iv. 2.


Again the blessed Law of God is perfect Intensively, in respect of Degrees; it
requires perfect Love, the most supreme, transcendent and intense Affection,
tha^ which greater cannot be, as I shall show afterward.

Add to this, that the Moral Law is perfect Finally, in respect of its orginial
Use and Design; it could give Life to the perfect Observers of it: This the
Almighty himself declared to Moses in these Words, ye shall therefore keep my
Statutes and my Judgments, which if a Man do he shall live in them. Lev. xviii.
v.
Man's contracted inability to keep the Law to Perfection, is his own Fault,
and therefore cannot be justly charged upon the Law of God.

The Perfection of the Law appears from the Design of Christ's coming, which
was not to destroy, but to fulfill it. The original Word, Plerosai.
by a Hebraism, signifies to do what was enjoined by it. Mat. xxii. 37. Romans
xiii. 7. compared with Deuteronomy. vi. 5. Lev. xix. 18.


The Lord Jesus fulfilled the ceremonial Law, by showing in himself the Truth
of all its Types and the Substance of all its Shadows: And he likewise
fulfilled the Moral Law two ways, viz. Doctrinally and Practically. He
faithfully Opened, solidly Confirmed and nervously Vindicated its Doctrine by
his Preaching; and he perfectly and constantly conformed himself to its
Precepts, as a Rule in his Practice. Had he corrected the Moral Law, he would
have destroyed but not fulfilled it; and indeed if the Case was so, the Law must
be either imperfect before, or made so by the Correction, both which are
equally absurd!

But it is evident, my Brethren, from the sacred Records, that our dear
Redeemer has not given other Precepts in the New Testament, either by himself
or his Apostles, than what were delivered by Moses, neither has he offered any
other Explication upon them than what was inculcated by the Prophets, and hence
the Command of Love is called by John, both old and new. ^hn ii. 7, 8.
Old, in respect of its first Promulgation under the Old Testament
Dispensation, and new in respect of Renovation and Illustration under the
Gospel. Brethren I write no new Commandment unto you, but an old Commandment
which ye had from the Beginning: And hence we may safely conclude, that the
Moral Law is perfect. To suppose that God gave an imperfect Law at first, is to
charge him with Want of Wisdom, Holiness or Fidelity, and to imagine that
Christ altered it, is to impute Iniquity to him, both which are blasphemous!

No my Brethren! Christ has added no new Precept to the Law of a Moral Nature,
the Prophets of the Old Testament, and our Lord under the New, do but explain
it, and add not any Moral Duty different from it; the Law of the Lord is
perfect converting the Soul, the Testimony of the Lord is sure, making wise the
simple: The Statutes of the Lord are right, rejoicing the Heart. Psalm xix. 7,
8.


It is true, under the Old Testament Dispensation, many Things were expressed
more obscurely and grossly, yet the Duties commanded were as spiritual as under
the Gospel; the Differences as to the Manifestation of Duties, is not in Kind
but Degree only: This will appear by the following Induction of Particulars,
viz.

First. The Law required Faith. The first Table of it enjoined Persons to take
the Lord for their God in a covenant Way; which cannot be done without Faith.
The Almighty commanded the People of Israel to worship in an acceptable Manner,
which necessarily supposes Faith.

Secondly. The Law under the Jewish Dispensation required Love, and that in the
highest Degree of Eminence; and hence our Lord in his Explication of the Moral
Law observes, that the Sum of it is Love. And thou shall love the Lord thy God,
with all thy Heart, and with all thy Soul, and with all thy Mind, and with all
thy Strength: this is the First Commandment, and the Second is like, namely
this, thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy Self: There is none other
Commandment greater than these. Mic. vii. 9.
Does or can the Gospel require stronger Love, than what our Savior shows to
be demanded by the Law? No surely! For more cannot be in the Nature of Things.

Thirdly. It required spiritual Aims in religious Worship. And hence the Lord
complained, that some of the People of Israel fasted, but not to him; and on
this Account Israel is condemned, as an empty Vine, because he brought forth
Fruit to himself: Hos. x. 1.
But on the contrary, how spiritual and noble were the Aims of the Prophets
Mica and David? who spoke in the following Language: I will bear the
Indignation of the Lord, because I have sinned against him. Mark xii. 30, 31.
Against thee, thee only have I sinned. Psalm li. 4.


Fourthly. The Law preferred Mortification and internal Piety, before outward
Services. And hence the Psalmist assures us, that a broken and contrite Heart
was more acceptable to God, than burnt Offerings and Sacrifices. Mark xii. 30,
31.
The Prophet Isaiah likewise Psalm li. 16, 17.
expresses in the strongest Terms, God's Abhorrence of all external Acts of
Religion, when due care is not taken to get the Heart sanctified and the Life
reformed: To what Purpose is the Multitude of your Sacrifices unto me? Says
the Lord: I am full of the burnt Offerings of Rams, and the Fat of fed Beasts:
bring no more vain Oblations: Incense is an Abomination unto me -- Your New
Moons and your appointed Feasts my Soul hates, they are a trouble unto me; I
am weary to bear them: Your Hands are full of Blood: Wash ye make ye clean, put
away the Evil of your doings from before mine Eyes. Isaiah i.
Now what can be more spiritual and excellent than this, to prefer inward
Graces to outward Duties?

Fifthly, The Law under the Jewish Dispensation, required a Worship issuing
from the Heart; to make this evident let it be only considered as a general
Rule, that whatsoever Moral Duty the Prophets urge, they do it as explainers of
the Moral Law; their Instructions and Inculcations respecting Things of Moral
Nature, are but the unfolding of the Law!

Now how often is the Heart required under the Old Testament? To this purpose
are the following Passages recorded by Solomon and Jeremiah, My Son give me
thine Heart, and let thine Eyes observe my Ways. Prove. xxiii. 26.
Plow up your fallow Ground, and take away the fore-skins of your Heart, ye Men
of Judah. Jer. iv.
And elsewhere the Jews were enjoined, to make them a new Heart. Ezekiel. xviii 31.
To turn to God with all their Hearts, and with Fasting, and with Weeping, and
with Mourning, and to rent their Hearts and not their Garments. Joel ii. 12, 13.


It is true, the most were unacquainted with the spiritual internal Part of
Religion, and rested upon Externals: And is not it so now under the Gospel
Dispensation? Yes surely! But such as were truly Religious, labored to get
their Hearts duly engaged in God's Service; an Instance of this we have in the
Psalmist, who prayed, that God would unite his Heart to fear his Name. Psalm
lxxxvi 11.
Our Thoughts and Affections are apt to be divided and scattered in Acts of
Worship, partly by reason of our inward Corruptions, and partly by Temptations
from without, which obstruct both our Comfort and Benefit: This the Psalmist
was aware of, and therefore prays against a divided Heart.

Sixthly. The Law under the Jewish Dispensation required Joy, or Complacence in
God, more than in Creatures; and is not this a high Pitch of Spirituality
recommended by the Gospel? Hence we are bid to rejoice in the Lord always: i.
e. We should seek the Seed of divine Joy by Conversion, and a Right to it by
Justification, and use all proper Means to acquire and preserve a Temper of
Mind disposed to constant Complacency in God's Attributes, Word and Works, and
express this outwardly on all proper Occasions; for every Thing, as Solomon
observes, is beautiful in its Season: And we are elsewhere commanded to set our
Affections on the Things above, and to have our Conversation in Heaven.

And had not Asaph this divine Temper of Mind? How scr^phick and sublime is his
Language? Whom have I in Heaven but thee? And there is none upon Earth that I
desire besides thee. Psalm lxxiii. 25.
Did not Joh esteem the Words of God's Mouth more than his necessary Food. Job
xxiii. 12.
And the Psalmist prefer them to Gold for worth, and Honey for sweetness. Psalm
xix.
How did his Soul at Times cry out after God -- and at other Seasons rest in
him? Psalm cxvi 7.
And when banished, his chief Desire was to see God in the Beauties of
Holiness, while in the mean Time he is entirely silent about his Crown, his
Court, his Kingdom! Agreeable to this was the Temper of the Prophet Habakkuk,
who would rejoice in the Lord, and joy in the God of his Salvation; although the
Fig Tree did not Blossom, and there was no Fruit in the Vine, but the Labor of
the Olive failed, and the Fields yielded (...) Meat; and although the Flock was
cut off from the Fold, and there was no Herd in the Stalls. Heb iii. 17, 18.


Seventhly. The Law under the Jewish Dispensation required Self-denial,
enduring the Cross, and the Imitation of Christ. For when we are commanded to
love God above all, we are consequently commanded to deny all, and endure all
for him, that we may be called to in the Course of Providence, rather than
forsake his Truths and Service. Without this the Sincerity of our Love cannot
be manifested, and while the Law prescribes so frequently our Imitation of God,
it at the same Time enjoins the Imitation of Christ, who is the true God. And
what is the Imitation of Christ required, but in respect of those Moral Virtues
of which the Law is Rule, under which Christ as Man was made, and to which he
perfectly conformed?

And what shining Examples have we, my Brethren, of the Virtues now mentioned,
under the Jewish Economy? What Self-denial did Abraham express, in leaving his
native Soil? And in his Attempt to slay his darling Son! The Son of the
Promise, the Son of his aged Years, and of his pregnant Hopes; the Staff of his
Comforts in ^he Wane of Life; yet having a divine Injunction, he immediately
denies all that is naturally dear, and by superior Resolution surmounts the
strong Ties of Nature, and passionate Yernings of a Father's Bowels, and takes
the sacrificing Knife to give the mortal Stroke! O amazing Prodigy of
Self-denial! Be astonished ye Heavens, and wonder O Earth at this! And how
glorious likewise is the Instance of Job, who under a Complication of the most
distressing Calamities of various Forms, bore the formidable Shock with
unbroken Magnanimity, and blessed his God! Pray Brethren, does any Instance of
the Saints Self-denial under the Gospel exceed these? No surely! And to these
we might add, the Example of Moses, who refused to be called the Son of Pharaoh
's Daughter, choosing rather to suffer Affliction with the People of God, than
to enjoy the Pleasures of Sin for a Season, esteeming the Reproach of Christ
greater Riches than the Treasures of Egypt: And we should likewise take the
Prophets (as the Apostle James observes) for an Example of Suffering,
Affliction, and of Patience.

And although the Law does not directly and formally command Repentance, because
it opens 10 Door of Hope to a Sinner, and so it properly belongs to the Gospel,
yet it is referr^d materially and indirectly to the Law, because by that a Rule
of good living and pleasing God is prescribed, which is the Scope of
Repentance. It should be also observed, that under the Duties enjoined by the
Law toward God and our Neighbor, Duties that respect our selves are included,
without which the other cannot be performed.

Although the Jewish Dispensation was not so clear as the present, yet you may
see that some who were diligent in God's Service, arrived to great Eminence in
goodness: Where is there any under the Gospel that exceed?

We declare with the reformed Churches, in Opposition to the Manichees, Turks,
Papists, Scocinians, Arminians, Antinomia^. and Enthusiasts, that our Lord,
excepting a few positive Precepts, has made nothing Duty now, which was not so
before.

The Law is perfect, as has been proved before; and to that which is perfect
nothing can be added of the like kind; and hence the People of Israel were
enjoined, not to add to it or detract from it. Deuteronomy. iv. 2.


Although the Gospel far exceeds, in respect of the Remedy prescribed for poor
Sinners, and the Display of divine Grace therein, yet there cannot be a more
excellent Way of Holiness than the Moral Law prescribes, because of its
conformity to the divine Nature.

Nothing greater or more noble can be required, than those Duties recommended
by the Moral Law, which have been mentioned. The Moral Law not only points to
the best End, but prescribes the best Measures to attain it.

Nor did our Lord in his Sermon on the Mount, correct or increase the Moral
Law, but only remove the Rubbish of the false Interpretations of the Pharisees,
that so it might break out and shine in its own native Beauty and Glory.

As to those Passages in the Writings of the Apostle Paul, wherein he speaks
diminutively of the Law, they are to be understood either of the ceremonial
Law, that Handwriting of Ordinances which was nailed to the Cross of Christ,
or of the whole Jewish Dispensation, compared with that brighter Dispensation
of ^e Gospel which we enjoy, or of the ^al Law considered as a Covenant of
Work, or depended on for Justification. We are sure that Paul speaks highly of
the Law, and therefore cannot speak meanly of it in the same Sense, otherwise
he is not consistent with himself, which is absurd to suppose! He himself gives
us a Key to open those Difficulties, by assuring us in his Epistle to Timothy,
that the Law is good if a Man use it lawfully. 1 Timothy i. 8.
It is the abuse of the Law which the Apostle opposes, in most Places where he
seems to speak diminutively of it. Now the Law is abused various Ways, viz.

(1st.) When Men turn it into frivolous and unprofitable Disputes, when they
darken it with obscure and impertinent Questions of no Moment, and do not
labor to lead Men to Christ by it: This is doubtless what Paul reproves some
false Teachers for in his Epistle to Timothy, desiring, says he, to be teachers
of the Law, understanding neither what they say, nor whereof they affirm. 1 Timothy i. 7.
These Teachers gave heed to Fables, and endless Geneologies, turned from
Faith, Love and a good Conscience to vain jangling, and were but Ignoramusses
in respect of Knowledge: But after the Apostle had reproved the aforesaid
Bablers he immediately adds, Knowing this that the Law is good, if a Man use it
lawfully. He mentions this to open his Meaning, and show that it was not the
Law it self he spoke against, but the abuse of it.

(2dly.) The Law is abused when it is interpreted in a gross and carnal Manner,
so as to restrain it is Meaning to Externals. This the Pharisees of old were
Guilty of, whose corrupt Glosses ou^ Savior exposes in his Sermon on the
Mount, showing that it extended even to the Thoughts and Desires of the Heart.
And the Papists do likewise corrupt the Law in making it in a great Part to be
as a Council and not Obligatory, and by making the Power of Man the Measure of
his Duty.

(3dly.) The Law is abused when Men oppose it to Christ; and this was doubtless
the great Error of the Jews, against which the Apostle argues in his Epistles
to the Romans and Galatians, their laboring to mix the Righteousness of Christ
and Obedience to the Law together, as the Matter of their Justification before
God, was to oppose them to each other, for if it be of Grace it is no more of
Works.

(4thly.) When Persons, with the Papists and Arminians, look for Justification
as the certain Consequence of their Obedience to the Law, and imagine that they
can commend themselves thereby to God, and lay him under any Obligation to
forgive their Sins. This is to establish a Way of Justification of Debt, and
not of Grace: This is injurious to the Sovereignty of God, and darkens the
Glory of divine Grace: This opens a new Covenant of Works, flatters the
Creatures Pride, and fixes him upon a false Foundation, it is not of him that
wills, or him that runs, but of God that shows Mercy.

(5thly) The Law is abused when any, with the Manichees and Antinomians, reject
it as a Rule of Life, and consequently judge Obedience to it unnecessary. This
is in other Words to reject Holiness altogether, as appears thus, If Sin be a
Transgression of the Law, as the Apostle John observes, then it follows by the
Rule of contraries, that Holiness is a Conformity to it: But if the Law be
utterly rejected, how can it be conformed to? And without Ho^ how shall any Man
see the Lord?

If the Law should be rejected, because we have not a Power to keep it
perfectly, then the Gospel must be rejected too by the same Rule; for who can
believe and repent to Perfection? To do a Thing out of Love to God and
Obedience to his Law are not inconsistent; for the one is but a Fruit of the
other. If ye Love me (said the Blessed Jesus to his Disciples) keep my
Commandments: he that has my Commandments, and keeps them, he it is that
loves me. John xiv. 15.21.
Agreeable to this the Apostle John observes, He that says I know him, and
keeps not his Commandments, is a Liar, and the Truth is not in him: But whosoever
keeps his Word, in him verily is the Love of God perfected. John ii. 4, 5.
Surely those that love God sincerely, will be thereby inclined to regard his
Authority. Adam while he stood obeyed from Love, and yet had a Respect to the
Command: And was there not a Commandment laid upon CHRIST to fulfill the Law for
us? 1 John x. 18.
And yet he did it out of Love. John xiv. 31.
The Mother of Moses had a Command to nurse him, and yet she obeyed from Love.

Its in vain to pretend, to advance the Grace of God in Opposition to the Law;
he that destroys the one, must the other also. Who will regard the Physician,
but the Sick, or behold the brazen Serpent but the Wounded, or fly to the City
of Refuge, but the pursued? If Christ and the Law could be under the Old
Testament together, why not under the New?

Shall Obedience to the Law be utterly rejected because it dosn't Justify? Then
Faith it self must be rejected also, for that dosn't justify considered as a
Work: Because Gold cannot be eaten, is it therefore of no use, and must it be
cast away? But to proceed,

(7thly) It is a Law of Liberty: This the Apostle James asserts in the
following Words; But whosoever looks into the perfect Law of Liberty, and
continues therein, he being not a forgetful Hearer, but a doer of the Work,
this Man shall be blessed in his deed. James i. 25.
i. e. In the way of sincere Endeavors after the Knowledge of our Duty, by a
careful inspecting into the Meaning of the Moral Law, and a believing, loving,
persevering Performance thereof. In Obedience to said Law, a Man can only
expect Blessedness hereafter, and possess true Liberty here. This Sense of the
Words is agreeable to the general Scope of this Epistle, which is to
demonstrate the Necessity, Excellency and Advantage of good Works, in
opposition to Libertines, who depended upon a dead, ineffectual Faith, and
outward Privileges unimproved, as well as to the preceding and following
Verses, which press practical Holiness and show the Insufficiency of external
Privileges, and pious Pretenses without it.

To confirm what has been said, I shall beg leave to offer a Translation of a
Gloss that learned Mr. Pool has in his Critics upon the aforesaid Place of
Scripture, which runs thus: Or Secondly, the Moral Law, which he opposes to the
ceremonial, upon the Observation of which they depended; see Heb. vii. 19. For
the Law made nothing perfect, but the bringing in of a better Hope did, by
which we draw nigh unto God. Heb. xi. 9. Which was a Figure for the Time then
present, in which were offered both Gifts and Sacrifices, that could not make
him that did the Service perfect, as pertaining to the. Conscience: and x. i.
For the Law having a Shadow of good Things to come, and not the very Image of
the Things, can never with those Sacrifices, -- make the comers thereunto
perfect. Which is called, (1st) Perfect, as Ps. xix. 7. Romans xii. 2. because it
contains a perfect Rule of living. (2dly) a Law of Liberty, and that either
(1st) It condemns all Transgressors freely, without respect of Persons, sparing
none. Compare Jam. ii. 12, 13. So speak ye and so do, as they that shall be
judged by the Law of Liberty. For he shall have Judgment without Mercy, that
has showed no Mercy. Or (2dly) From the Subject, because it agrees with
Christian Liberty; Gal. v. 13, 14. For Brethren, ye have been called unto
Liberty; only use not Liberty for an occasion to the Flesh, but by love serve
one another. For all the Law is fulfilled in one Word, even in this, thou shall
love thy Neighbor as thy self. In which Sense it agrees well with the Scope of
this Epistle, which is, that Christians may be instructed not to abuse their
Christian Liberty to Licentiousness and a Contempt of the Law of God, but to
use it to Obedience. Or (3dly) From the Adjunct, i. e. The Law is now free from
a Yoke of Ceremonies which was joined to it under the Old Testament
Dispensation: Gal. v. 1. Stand fast therefore in the Liberty wherewith Christ
has made us free, and be not entangled again with the Yoke of Bondage. Or
(4thly) From its Effects in the Regenerate, whom it frees both from its Rigor
and Condemnation by the Satisfaction of Christ, and from the Dominion of Sin by
the Grace of Christ conjoined with it; because the Law is a Rule of Life which
the Holy Spirit uses, to make Persons know and perform their Duty to it, and
that they may obey the Law, not with servile Fear but freely, and with
voluntary Obedience, Romans vii. 25. I thank God, through Jesus Christ our Lord.
So then with the Mind I my self serve the Law of God; and viii. 15. which
undoubtedly is true Liberty. Vide po^ Synop in ^oc. Now the aforesaid Gloss is
confirmed by the following great Names, Gomarus, Gataker, Beza, Piscator,
Ludovicus de dieu, and Simplicius.
John viii 36. 2 Cor. iii. 17. If the parallel Place, viz. Jam. ii. 10, 11, 12.
be compared with the Text which I have offered, the aforesaid Gloss upon it
fully confirms the Sense that has been given. Obedience, my Brethren, to the
Moral Law from right Principles, or in other Words, sincere Holiness, is true
Liberty, and the Contrary is base Bondage; it is as perilous as slavish, to
follow the wild Freaks of our own uncertain, though heated and confident
Imaginations, or the transformed Impulses of a satanick, ambitious Spirit! But
to proceed,

(8thly) The Moral Law is a pleasant Law, considered as a Rule of Life, and as
it is added to the Covenant of Grace. I say it is pleasant to all good Men, and
that for this Reason, because it is perfectly Holy. Converted Persons having a
holy Principle implanted in them by the blessed Spirit, are thereby induced to
love Holiness, and therefore they love God not only because of his Mercy, but
also because of his Holiness. The Purity of God's Nature appears dear and
venerable to them, and hereby they in some Degree imitate the Example of the
Seraphims, who are much delighted with the Views of God's Holiness, and in
pleasing transport proclaim its Glory, as the Prophet Isaiah witnesses. And
now inasmuch as the Moral Law is a bright Emblem of Jehovah's Purity, they
cannot but be delighted with its Beauty; for therein, as in a Glass, they
behold the Holiness of God, which is exceeding agreeable to their new Nature:
And hence the Psalmist represents it to be the Character of a good Man, that he
delights in the Law of the Lord, and meditates in his Law Day and Night. Psalm
i.
And he expresses his own Love to it and Delight in it in the following Manner:
I hate vain Thoughts, but thy Law I do love. Psalm cxix.
Thy Testimonies have I taken as a Heritage for ever: For they are the
rejoicing of my Heart. Ps. cxix.
O how love I thy Law! It is my Meditation all the Day. Ps. cxix.
Thou through thy Commandments has made me wiser than mine Enemies, for they
are ever with me. Ps. cxix.
How sweet are thy Words to my Taste, yea sweeter than Honey to my Mouth. Thy
Word is a Light to my Feet, and a Lamp to my Paths. All these Expressions, and
many more of the like kind, are in the cxix Psalm. Therein we are also told,
that Rivers of Waters run down the Eyes, (of that Man after God's own Heart)
because that Sinners did not keep God's Laws. And elsewhere he informs us, that
the wicked dislike the Restraints of God's Law, and therefore combine together
to break its Bands and cast away its Cords from them. Ps. ii.
Horror (says he) has taken hold upon me, because of the Wicked that forsake
thy Law. Ps. cxix. 53.
It is time for the Lord to work, for they have made void thy Law. Ps. cxix.
The Prophet Nehemiah likewise gives the Wicked the same Character,
Nevertheless they were disobedient and rebelled against thee, and cast thy Law
behind their back. Psalm cxix.
Graceless Sinners speak much of God's Mercy, and seem to be pleased with it
from a selfish Principle; but being under the Government of Sin, they have by
consequence an Aversion against its contrary, namely Holiness, and therefore
dislike the Rule of it God's Law: And hence we are told that the carnal Mind is
Enmity against God. The Law of God forbids the Evils they love, and condemns
them for them; and so makes them uneasy, and therefore they have a Grudge
against it, and want to cast it off, that so their Fancy or Lust may give them
Law.

Once more: The Moral Law is a perpetual Law. The Righteousness of God's
Testimony is Everlasting. -- And every one of his righteous Judgments, endures
for ever. Psalm cxix.


The Law of God is not only necessary for the Ungodly to bring them to true
Religion, but it is many ways necessary for the People of God as a Rule, and
that even under the Covenant of Grace: For this Covenant does not only contain
the Promise of Grace and Glory upon God's Part, but also an Engagement upon
ours to evangelical Obedience. As God promises to be our God, in respect of
Protection and Portion, so we promise to be his People, in regard of Love,
Reverence and Obedience. 2 Cor. vi. 16.
Yea I may say, my Brethren, that the Moral Law is necessary, as a continual
Rule to Believers, on the Account of God the Father, Son and Holy Ghost; yea
and likewise on account of Grace here, and Glory hereafter.

God the Father who takes us into his Family is hereby related to us, both as a
Father and Lord; and to him therefore under those Characters, we for ever owe
Honor and Obedience. This the Almighty himself informs us of by the Prophet
Malachi; A Son honors his Father, and a Servant his Master. If then I be a
Father, where is my Honor? And if I be a Master, where is my Fear? Mal. i. vi.


And God the Son bears not only the Relation of a Prophet and a Priest to us,
in instructing us by his Word, and satisfying divine Justice for us by his
Blood and Obedience; but also of a Head and King, who works in us and rules us
by his Spirit. In the former respect he fulfilled the Law for us, and in the
latter, he in some degree fulfils the Law in us. Two Things he requires of us,
namely, that we be united to him by Faith, and so partake of his Merit, and
express our Love by a Conformity to our Head in Obedience to his Commands; and
hence his Death is represented, not only as a Price of Redemption, but a
Pattern for our Imitation: He has left us an Example, that we should follow his
Steps.

The Holy Spirit who consecrates us as the Temples of his Residence, has not
only the Office of a Comforter but Sanctifier: In the former Respect he
comforts us against the Curse of the Law, and in the latter he conforms us to
its Precepts.

Yea, my Brethren, the Grace of God conferred upon us, requires Obedience to the
divine Law, as the proper Fruit of that divine Seed, as an Expression of
Gratitude for so great a Benefit, and the very Mark to which it is directed.
Holiness is the great Design of our Election, Redemption and effectual
Vocation. Heb. xii. 14.
Surely the true Grace of God teaches to deny all Ungodliness and worldly
Kusts, and to live soberly, righteously and godly in this present World. And
what is this but to obey the Moral Law? And dosn't the Glory that we expect,
show the Necessity of the Continuance of the Law as a Rule? For believing,
loving Obedience to it, has the Respect of a Medium to that End, without which
we cannot attain it. It has likewise a Reference to eternal Blessedness, as a
Way to a Mark, Seed to the Harvest, Epes. ii. 10. Gal. vi. 7.
and the first Fruits to the whole Vintage. Romans viii. 23.
Yea it is the choicest Part of our Happiness, to be conformed to the blessed
God in Holiness, by Obedience to his Law.

Did not Christ and the Apostles confirm and commend the Moral Law, to be
observed by all? Thou shall Love the Lord thy God with all thy Heart and with
all thy Soul, (said the blessed Jesus) this is the first and great Command.
Matt. xxii. 36, 37.
Owe no Man any Thing but Love, (says Paul) for he that loves another has
fulfilled the Law. Romans xiii. 8, 9.
If ye fulfill the Royal Law ye do well, (says James.) I write no new
Commandment unto you, (says John) but an old Commandment, which ye had from the
beginning. Yea we are commanded, to hear Moses and the Prophets, and therefore
to obey their Commands, without which the other would be vain and to no
purpose. They have Moses and the Prophets, let them hear them. Luke xvi. 29.
And although this was spoken by Christ to the Jews of his own Time, yet because
the Argument of our Lord's Discourse is not special, but general to all, both
Jews and Gentiles, who would escape eternal Torment; therefore all such
according to our Lord's Direction and Command, must hear Moses and the Prophets.

Although Christian Liberty, my Brethren, frees us from the Curse of the Moral
Law, the Yoke of the Ceremonial, the Rigor of the Jewish Dispensation, the
Tyranny of the Devil, and Bondage of Sin, yet it does not free us from the
Necessity of Obedience to God, which is indispensable from every Creature
considered as such. What though Persons be regenerated and adopted, yet they
remain God's Creatures still; yea these Mercy's lay them under greater
Obligations to Obedience: A Liberty from Sin necessarily infers, the Servitude
of Grace; Being then made free from Sin, ye became the Servants of
Righteousness. Romans vi. 18.
Yea our Liberty consists in Subjection to God, for it is not a fleshly
Liberty, that indeed is inconsistent with the Moral Law, but a spiritual
Liberty, which agrees well with it and is inseparable from it. The Words of the
Apostle to the Galatians are excellent to this purpose; For Brethren ye have
been called to Liberty, only use not Liberty for an occasion to the Flesh. --
For all the Law is fulfilled in one Word, even in this, thou shall love thy
Neighbor as thy self. Gal. v. 13, 14.
Here it is as plain as well can be, that Paul judged a Freedom from the Law as
a Rule, a fleshly Liberty. And truly so it is, an abominable, filthy Liberty,
to be abhorred by all that fear God!

And why is the Gospel sometimes called a Law? the Law of the Spirit of Life,
but to show, that there is a wise Constitution of God under the Gospel
Dispensation, without a Compliance with which, we can have no Benefit by its
gracious Proposals; and also to signify that the Gospel is not without the
Moral Law, which is now indeed proposed to Believers, in a more mild and gentle
Dress, than obtained under the Jewish Economy; but nevertheless it still
obliges all rational Creatures to Obedience that enjoy it.

But the perpetual Duration of the Moral Law, as a rule of Life to all
intelligent Creatures, appears especially from the following Considerations
namely, the Depend^e^ of the Creature upon God; the Nature of its Precepts; the
Difference between them and the ceremonial Law as well as from their Conformity
to the Divine Nature, and their sameness for Substance with the Law of Nature.

That the Creature is necessarily Dependant on God, is a self evident
Proposition; for otherwise it would not be a Creature, In God we live, move and
have our Being. Now, an Obligation to obedience flows necessarily from this, as
appears thus: Jehovah has a Right to the Creature's Service, not only because
of the Independance, Self-existence and transcendent Perfection of his Being,
but because he is the Author of the Creature's Being and all its Benefits. Now
seeing the Almighty gave to Man a Capacity to perform Acts of Worship and
Obedience to his Creator, it is but reasonable that the Almighty should require
his Due. And on the Contrary its very unreasonable to imagine that God gave
Powers to his Creatures to no purpose, or cast off all Care about them! It is
equally absurd to suppose, either that God should make his rational Creatures
for no valuable End, or that he should not propose proper Means to attain it,
or cease requiring a Compliance with those Means!

Again let it be considered, my Brethren. that if the Moral Precepts be
alterable, then they are only of a positive Nature; and if so, the Almighty
might either not have enjoined those Things, or have enjoined the Contrary, and
so according to this Scheme the Blessed God might not only have neglected
giving a Law to the reasonable Creature to love and Worship him, but have
commanded him to blaspheme and disobey his Creator, to believe in no God at
all, or to worship false Gods, yea to worship the very Devil himself! And so
the worst of Crimes would commence Virtues, viz. Atheism, Blasphemy, and Lying,
etc. because commanded, which is so monstrous that it needs no Confutation! The
Almighty cannot command such Things without denying himself, and contradicting
his own Nature: GOD is Holy and True, and therefore it is contrary to his
Nature to command what is base and false!

And indeed, Brethren, if the Precepts of the Moral Law might be disanull'd,
there would then be no Difference between it and the Ceremonial, and so no
greater Obligation to Obedience to the one than the other, and consequently no
greater Evil in violating the one than the other; and so the Man that touched a
dead Body, or eat swines Flesh, would be guilty of as great a Crime as he that
blasphemed the Name of God, or murdered his Father, which is quite rediculous
to imagine!

Nor can the Moral Law as a Rule be destroyed, because of it is Conformity to
the Divine Nature, it is the Rule of God's Image in Man, in which Jehovah has
expressed his Righteousness and Holiness: Now it is unreasonable to think that
God would destroy his own Image.

Without Conformity to the Moral Law we cannot imitate the Example of God, to
which we are so frequently urged in Scripture, and therefore its Observation is
^oyn'd as often as Holiness is recommended therein, and especially where we are
enjoined to imitate God, and to be Holy because he is Holy; and thus it follows
by a necessary Consequence, that the Moral Law is unalterable, and of perpetual
Obligation.

Moreover, Sirs, the Moral Law, as to it is Substance, is the same with the Law
of Nature, which is immutable, and founded in the reasonable Nature of Man.

By the Law of Nature I understand the Light of Nature, or the practical
Notions of the Difference between Moral Good and Evil, which we receive with
our Nature; or a practical Rule of Moral Duties, which was originally impressed
on the human Mind when Man was first formed, to which all Mankind are by Nature
obliged.

Although this Law of Nature was much broken by the Fall of Man, yet that there
be some Remains of it in all, we have abundant Evidence from Scripture,
Conscience, the consent of Mankind, and the Voice of Reason.

The Holy Scriptures assure us, that the Gentiles, who had not the Law, (i. e.
the written Law of Moses) did by Nature the Things contained in the Law, and so
were a Law to themselves, and showed the Work of the Law written in their
Hearts. And does not the Conscience of every Man inform him, that Good is to be
done, and Evil to be avoided? What else is the Source of those Uneasinesses for
secret Evils which do not fall under the Cognizance of human Laws, with which
the Wicked are tormented, and all their brutish Delights allayed with the
Forebodings of future Misery?

If there was no Law of Nature, why should the most savage and uncultivated
Nations own a supreme Being, and that he is to be adored as well as our Parents
honored, and justice maintained? Whence flow all the Laws of Nations
respecting Honesty and Justice, if there was no native Rule of Right implanted
in the human Mind?

And Reason likewise gives its Suffrage to the Reality of the Law of Nature
thus: Seeing the Creature as such depends unavoidably upon its former, and is
governed by him phisically, it is absurd to suppose that it should not be
governed by him also in a Moral Way, agreeable to its Nature, which cannot be
without a Law. It therefore follows that either Man must be made independent,
or have a natutal Law impressed upon his Mind!

And indeed innumerable Inconsistences follow the contrary Sentiment, e. g. If
nothing be in its Nature Just, but that which Men judge profitable to them,
then it follows that Men are born for themselves and not for the Glory of that
Being to whom they owe their Original! Or for the Good of Society, and then all
Things would be equally lawful, to love God, or hate him; to honor our
Parents, or cut their Throats! Thus every Man's Lust would be his Rule of
Actions, and so a Scene of Confusion and Blood would open to the utter
Destruction of the Human Race! If the Law of Nature be destroyed, my Brethren,
then are the Foundations of civil Justice unhinged, from which Fountains issue
Human Laws: Hereby a Way is opened to Atheism in Principle, and the most sordid
Evils in Practice, so that all Religion, Virtue, Order and Government are
hereby entirely subverted, and left expiring in the Agonies of Death.

Now the Law of Nature and the Moral Law are the very same in Substance, the
same Duties toward God and Man, which are prescribed by the Moral Law, are
contained in the Law of Nature: The Sum of the Moral Law, as I have before
observed, is to love God and our Neighbor, and this is the very Law of Nature:
All the Precepts of the Moral Law are impressed on rational Nature, and may be
discovered by its Light: There is nothing in them but right Reason dictates or
approves of; nothing but what belongs to all Nations in all Ages of the World;
nothing but what is necessary to Human Nature to obtain its proper End, and
therefore it ought to be of perpetual Obligation; for rational Nature is ever
the same, and like itself, and consequently so must that which is grounded upon
it.

The Difference between the Moral Law and the Law of Nature, is only in
Accidentals and Circumstantials as follows: What is contained in the Law of
Nature, is more clearly and distinctly declared in the Moral Law. The Law of
Nature was much obscured by the Fall of Man, and therefore there was need of a
Renovation of it: The Law of Nature was wrote upon the Mind of Man, and binds
all; but the Moral Law upon Tables of Stone, and belongs to those that are
privileged with the Knowledge of it: The Law of Nature has nothing but what is
Moral in it; but the Moral Law contains some Things that are positive or
ceremonial, not in its Precepts but in the Arguments exciting to the
Performance of them. Thus the first Command is enforced by an Argument of
Gratitude peculiar to the Israelitish Nation, viz. God's bringing them out of
Egypt. And so as to the Fourth, though the Duty enjoined be Moral, namely the
Dedication of a seventh Part of our Time, or one Day in Seven to the Worship of
God; yet the Specification of one Day rather than another for that purpose is
only positive and therefore alterable; for there is no real Difference in the
several Parts of Time as to their Nature, all Time is alike in itself, and
therefore equally fit for Religious Worship: And thus it evidently appears that
the Specification of one Day rather than another cannot be moral Natural, or
grounded upon the Nature and Reason of Things. This, learned Mr. Pool
represents in the following Manner. The Moral Law required no more than one Day
of Seven to be kept as a Day of Holy Rest, not this or that particular Day; the
Jews learned it from the Ceremonial Law, as Christians learn theirs from
Christ's and the Apostles Practice. Nor is it any Objection against this that
the seventh Day from the Creation is mentioned in the Law to those who know how
to distinguish betwixt the Precept and the Argument, the Seventh from the
Creation is not in the Precept but in the Argument: For in Six Days, etc. Now
there is nothing more Ordinary than to have Arguments of a particular temporary
Concernment used to enforce Precepts of an eternal Obligation; where the
Precepts were first given to that particular People, as to whom those Arguments
were of Force, an Instance of which is in the first Commandment as well as in
this: As on the other side Arguments of universal Force are often annexed to
Precepts which had but a particular Obligation upon a particular People for a
Time. Thus in the Ceremonial Law we often find it is an Argument to enforce
many Ceremonial Precepts: For I am the Lord thy God. Vide Pools Annotations
upon Mat. v. 17.


I may add that what has been said is farther confirmed by an Argument or
Excitement of a temporary Nature, which is annexed to the 5th Commandment, That
thy Days may be long upon the Land which the Lord thy God gives thee. This
certainly intended the earthly Canaan which was promised to the Jews, and so
had something in it peculiar to that Nation which does not extend to us. Now I
say excepting those Arguments mentioned, which are annexed to the First,
Fourth, and Fifth Commands, the whole Moral Law is the very same with the Law
of Nature, and therefore perpetually binding.

The Law of Nature being Natural, Universal, and Rational, must needs endure to
the last Period of the Line of Time. And the Moral Law being the same in
Substance with it, must needs be of the same Duration.

But I proceed to the Improvement of this Subject. And First: From what has
been said, you may learn the Necessity of preaching the Moral Law, seeing it is
a Mean of so many and important Benefits to the Unconverted and Converted, and
that those who neglect it do great Injury to the Souls of Men, and use a Mean
which tends but to deceive Men and flatter them to their Ruin! He is a foolish
Builder, that pretends to raise the Fabric before he lays the Foundation, or
attempts to lay it without digging, in order to it. He is a foolish Physician,
that pretends to cure a Lethargy by Anodynes. He is a foolish Surgeon, or
something worse, that pretends to cure an old Ulcer without probing it and
searching it first. He is also a foolish Farmer, that pretends to sow before he
plows. To sound the comfortable Strains of Peace and Pardon, and a Savior's
Blood, only in the Ears of a secure World; though it pleases them and may
possibly move the softer Passions of some; yet like a lul-a-by, it tends to
rock or soothe them into a deeper Sleep of Security to their endless
Destruction! Such Preachers daub with untempered Mortar, and slay the Souls of
Men by promising them Life, as the Prophet expresses it.

Such Ministers as have preached the Law most, have been most successful;
witness Hooker, Hildersham, Baal, Bolton, Rogers, and an Army of others of
precious Memory. And here give me leave to mention the Testimony of one of the
most learned and pious Divines of the English Nation, I mean the Reverend
Doctor John Owen, who in his Treatise of Justification speaks thus:

Let no Man think to understand the Gospel, who knows nothing of the Law.
God's Constitution and the Nature of Things themselves, have given the Law the
Precedence with respect unto Sinners; For by the Law is the Knowledge of Sin;
and Gospel-Faith is the Souls acting for Deliverance from that State and
Condition, which it is cast under by the Law. And all those Descriptions of
Faith, which abound in the Writings of learned Men, which do not at least
include in them a virtual Respect unto this State and Condition, or the Work of
the Law on the Consciences of Sinners, are all of them vain Speculations! There
is nothing in this Doctrine which I will more firmly adhere unto than the
Necessity of the Convictions mentioned, previous unto true believing, without
which, not one Line of it can be understood aright, and Men do but beat the Air
in their Contentions about it. Vide Owen of Just. p. 133.
If any will call us legal Preachers, because we preach the Law; we Answer,
that we follow our Lord's Example in so doing, and if they will reproach us for
our imitating him, we hope our Master will support us under those unjust
Censures, that condemn his Practice as well as ours, and in such Company we
need neither be afraid or ashamed.

Secondly: We may learn that there is a beautiful Harmony between the Law and
Gospel, they mutually honor and establish each other. The Law sends us to
Christ for Justification, and Christ sends us back to the Law for Direction.
The Law helps us to see the absolute Need of the Gospel, and the Gospel opens
before us the transcendent Excellency of the Law. O let us admire the Wisdom,
the Goodness, the Holiness and Love of God, displayed in this Harmony!

Thirdly: From what has been said, we may learn the Danger of rejecting the Law
of God. This strikes at the Foundations of the Christian Religion, and directly
tends to destroy it entirely! For

Hereby an awful Bar is put in the Way of Conviction, Faith, Repentance,
Conversion, Justification, Consolation, and so by consequence of eternal
Salvation! How shall poor Sinners be convinced if that Law be destroyed by
which is the Knowledge of Sin? And is there any probability that such as are
whole in their own Eyes, will apply in earnest to Christ for a Cure? Or that
those who see no Danger, will fly by Faith to the Refuge set before them?

If there be no Law their can be no Transgression of it, or in other Words, no
Sin: And if there be no Sin, what need is there of Repentance? Shall People
repent over what is not? No surely! And what need is there of a Savior, to
deliver from nothing?

And if the Moral Law is destroyed, does not Justification fall with it? For is
not that a Sentence judicially pronounced according to Law? And how cruel and
pernicious is it to rob poor Sinners of a Mean of their Conversion to God?

Neither can their be any such Thing as Sanctification or Holiness upon Earth,
without the Moral Law. For what is Sanctification, but an inward and outward
Conformity thereto, or a renewing us after the Image of God, which is his Law?
Without this, all Acts of Virtue and Religion, inasmuch as they are neither
required by God, nor done in Obedience to his commanding Authority, (according
to the Scheme I propose) are all Superstition and Will Worship; and
consequently instead of being pleasing to God, do provoke his Indignation;
because they imply a Reflection upon his Wisdom, Goodness or Fidelity; as if he
either knew not how to furnish his Creatures with a perfect Law for their
Direction, or wanted Goodness and Faithfulness to act in pursuance of his
Wisdom!

When Men reject the Law of God, they renounce Interpretatively, his Dominion
over them, and commence their own Lord's and Masters. And as to their Acts of
Virtue and Religion, this Query spoils them all, Who has required these Things
at your Hands? And how shall those that are converted, prize Christ as a
Fountain, when the Glass that discovers their Blemishes is broken and cast
away? Or how shall they live daily upon his Offices, without a Sight of their
Need of them?

Nor is Ignorance of our Sins in Heart and Life, the Way to true and real
Humility: For how shall those be discovered to us, without comparing our selves
with that Law of God, of which Sin is a Transgression?

And are we like to extol the Glory of pure pardoning Grace, while the Sins
forgiven are hid from our View by rejecting the Law of God?

Is there any Perfection of the blessed God, more venerable and amiable than
his Holiness? Of this the Seraphs shout with Joy and Transport, saying, Holy,
Holy, Holy, is the Lord of Hosts! And certainly a Gladness, and Satisfaction
arises to the Saints on Earth in some degree from a View thereof. Now does it
not tend to mar their Joy and Satisfaction in this Attribute, when the Law,
that Image of the divine Purity is rejected? Surely in keeping God's Commands
there is a great Reward.

If our Peace and Joy be not built upon a right Foundation, they are worse than
none. And is the Foundation like to be well laid, while we are ignorant of our
Sins through a Slight of the Law of God, the appointed Mean of Self-Knowledge?

Not to say that it is hard to conceive how any should be acquitted at the last
Day, if that Law were destroyed which is to be the Rule of Judgment.

From what has been said, considered complexly, methinks this Conclusion
naturally and freely flows, viz. That the rejecting the Moral Law, directly
tends to destroy all Religion and Virtue at one dreadful Stroke, and
consequently, to plunge Mankind in a Deluge of Impiety, Confusion and Ruin? To
the Law and to the Testimony (as the Prophet Isaiah speaks) If they speak not
according to this Word, it is because there is no Light in them. Isai. viii. 20.
The Lord complains and threatens by the Prophet Hosea in the following
Language: My People are stroyed for lack of Knowledge. Because thou have
rejected Knowledge, I will also reject thee, that thou shall be no Priest to
me: Seeing thou have forgotten the Law of thy God, I will also forget thy
Children. Hos. 4.6.
The Words of God by the Prophet Malachi are likewiie remarkable upon this
Head: For the Priests Lips shall keep Knowledge, and they should seek the Law
at his Mouth; -- But ye have departed out of the Way, ye have caused many to
stumble at the Law, therefore have I made you also contemptible and base before
all the People, according as ye have not kept my Ways, but have been partial in
the Law. Mal. ii. 7, 8, 9.
And our Lord himself in his Sermon on the Mount, after he had asserted, that
he came not to destroy the Law, -- and that not one Jot or Tittle should pass
from it till Heaven and Earth pass, he says, Whosoever therefore shall break
one of these least Commandments, and shall teach Men so, he shall be called the
least in the Kingdom of Heaven. But whosoever shall do and teach them, the same
shall be called great in the Kingdom of Heaven. Mat. x. 17, 18, 19.
If it be objected against what has been spoken upon this Subject, That the
Life of Christ is a sufficient Rule without the Law, I answer: If Christ had
sustained all the Characters or Relations that are among Men, for any
considerable Space of Time, and all that he had said and done had been
recorded; no doubt it would have been a complete Explication of the Law, and
therefore, a perfect Directory for our Practice. But inasmuch as Jesus Christ
did not sustain all Relations, had but a short abode in the World, and many
Things he said and did are not recorded; therefore his Life is not a sufficient
Rule to us without the Law; neither do we find that it is any where recommended
to us in Scripture as such. His Practice was entirely perfect and without
Stain, and therefore so far as it is revealed to us, it is both our Honor, our
Duty, and our Privilege to imitate it, (excepting such extraordinary Cases
that concerned him peculiarly as Mediator) but what is not revealed we know
not, and therefore cannot imitate.

Nor is it reasonable and safe for us to follow our Hearts as Rules or Guides,
seeing they are by Nature deceitful and desperately Wicked. And there are too
much of the Remains thereof in the best of Men, which Paul bewailed over in
very moving Strains; saying, O wretched Man that I am, who shall deliver me
from this Body of Sin and Death? And Peter was so far deceived by it, as to
dissuade his Lord from suffering! Yea all the Apostles were so sensible of it,
that they groaned within themselves, waiting for the Redemption of their
Bodies! The Case being so, Solomon justly observes, that he who trusts in his
Heart is a Fool, simple indeed in the worst Sense.

And to expect the Direction of God's Spirit, while we neglect or contemn the
Means God has appointed for our Instruction, is great and dangerous
Presumption; for all these Things God will be inquired of. i. e. applied to in
the Use of proper Means. To follow immediate Impulses either wholly without the
Scriptures, or without examining such Passages thereof as are brought to our
Minds by the sober Use of our Reason, in comparing Scripture with Scripture,
and considering the Consequences of different Interpretations, and their
Agreement with or Disagreement from the Analogy of Faith, exposes to all Manner
of Inconsistency and Delusion: The Devil has hereby an awful Opportunity to
betray us into the most perilous Principles, under the Appearance of an Angel
of Light, or guise of Truth and Good, and we have no Defensative: For without
the humble Use of Reason, how can we try the Spirits by the Word, or have any
just and consistent Apprehension of its meaning? In short by this Notion the
Scriptures are rendered Useless to us in Effect; for its much alike whether we
want the Scriptures altogether, or want the true Knowledge of them in
Fundamentals: For it is by the Notion we have of the Meaning of the Scriptures
that we are directed in Practice, and not by them considered absolutely. It Is
absurd to suppose, that an infinitely Wise God would first give Reason to his
Creatures, and then order them to cast it entirely away in order to become
Religious; that is, first to commence Beasts before they become Christians.

But some object against the Law, that Place of Scripture in the Epistle of
Paul to the Galatians, where it is said, That the Law is not of Faith. I answer
with Turretine: That the Law is said not to be of Faith, not as it is taken
largely for the whole Mosaic Economy, but strictly for the Moral Law
abstracted and separated from the Promises of Grace, in which Sense the
Self-righteous Jews understood it, who sought Life by it; for that Faith was
commanded in the Sinai Covenant is evinced.

Let us therefore, my dear Brethren! be entreated to esteem and value God's
holy Law, whatever Contempt others cast upon it; let it be dear to us to the
Death, more precious than fine Gold, and sweeter than Honey!

O Brethren! let us avoid with all Care and Caution, the Abuses of the Law
before mentioned; beware that ye depend not upon your Obedience to it for
acceptance with God: And likewise take care that ye do not oppose Law and
Gospel to each other, or advance the one to the others prejudice, for in so
doing ye wound the Christian Religion, as well as your own Souls exceedingly! O
there is a sweet Harmony between them, which we have reason to admire and adore
God for! And indeed the Thoughts and Knowledge of this blessed Harmony and
mutual Subserviency, tends to strengthen our Belief in the Divinity of the
Christian Religion!

O ye unconverted Souls! use and apply the Law's Threatenings to alarm you out
of your Iron Slumbers. Let the legal Lancet run into your secure Hearts and
open your Wounds, that ye may be sick of Sin and flee to Jesus!

Surely it is Ignorance of God's Law that makes some despise it. If we may
slight that, we may also the whole Old Testament with it, which is for the most
part but an Explication thereof. And if the Old Testament be destroyed, what
shall become of the New that is built on that Foundation? Let us therefore
study the Law, and pray to God that he would show us the Breadth of it, and
wonders contained in it.

Let the People of God be entreated to observe it as the Rule of their
Practice. Obey it, dear Brethren! from a Principle of Love to God, and with an
Eye to his Glory: And lean on Jesus by Faith, that for his sake your
Imperfections may be pardoned and your Acts of Obedience accepted; and thus ye
may expect that Peace will be upon you and the Israel of God. Which may God
grant for Christ's Sake. Amen.

Vindicae Operum: OR, THE Necessity of GOOD WORKS Vindicated.

TWO SERMONS, On PHIL. ii. 12, 13. PREACHED AT PHILADELPHIA, MARCH 24th, 1744-5.

By GILBERT TENNENT, A. M. Minister of the Gospel in Philadelphia.

2 Pet. i. 5, 6, 7, -- 11. And besides this, giving all Diligence, add to your
Faith, Virtue; and to Virtue, Knowledge; and to Knowledge, Temperance; and to
Temperance, Patience; and to Patience, Godliness; and to Godliness,
Brotherly-Kindness; and to Brotherly-Kindness, Charity, -- For so an Entrance
shall be ministered unto you abundantly, into the everlasting Kingdom of our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed by W. BRADFORD, at the Bible in Second Street, 1745.

SERMON I.
PHILIP. ii. 12, 13. Work out your own Salvation with fear and trembling.

For it is God which works in you, both to will and to do, of his good
Pleasure.


THE Design of Knowledge in Religion, my Brethren, is Practice; and without the
latter, the former will only serve to increase our present Guilt and future
Punishment: To him that knows to do good, and does it not, to him it is Sin.
Jam. iv. 17.
And that Servant which knew his Lord's Will, and prepared not himself, neither
did according to his Will, shall be beaten with many Stripes. Luke xii. 47.


Nor have the People of God any Writ of Exemption from Obedience to their
Creator and Father. It is so far from this, that they are under special
Engagements thereto, by Reason of the distinguishing Expressions of God's
Kindness toward them.

This the Text which I have chosen to discourse upon at present, represents in
strong Terms: To understand which, let it be considered, that the Apostle
therein addresses the Saints at Philippi, i chap. 1 ver. Philipi, a City in
Macedonia, on the Confines of Thracia, seated on a little Hill near the Pangean
Mountain. Appia^
and exhorts them to practical Holiness by diverse Arguments.

Having mentioned in the Preceding Verses, the Obedience and Humiliation of
Christ, together with the blessed Fruits thereof, he takes occasion from
thence, to excite them to religious Diligence and humble Holiness. Let this
Mind (i. e. humble Mind) be in you, which was also in Christ Jesus. Who being
in the Form of God -- took upon him the Form of a Servant -- and became
obedient unto Death. -- Wherefore God has highly exalted him, and given him a
Name above every Name. --

It is as if the Apostle should say, Seeing the blessed Jesus who is God over
all, has, to purchase our Salvation, assumed human Nature in its humblest Form,
and became obedient therein to the Law to Death, and that of the most abasing
and formidable Kind; ye should be hence induced to use all Diligence, to get
the purchased Salvation applied really and satisfactorily to your own Souls at
present, as well as to obtain increasing Meetness, for the full Enjoyment of it
in the Life to come.

And to encourage them herein, the Apostle not only uses an endearing
Compellation in his Address, but prudently commends them for their past
Diligence; Virtus laudata cres^cit, Virtue praised grows.
Wherefore my beloved, as you have always obeyed, not as in my presence only,
but now much more in my absence. Work out your own Salvation. He excites them
to persevering Obedience to God's Law and Gospel, and especially in his
absence, that so it might appear to all, that not merely a Reverence to their
Pastor, but a prevailing Love to Christ and their own Souls constrained their
Obedience; and likewise because in his Absence their Danger was increased,
through the Want of his Councils and the Presence of Seducers. Work out your own
Salvation with fear and trembling. For it is God which works in you, both to
will and to do, of his good Pleasure. These Words contain three Things worthy
of Observation, viz. I. A Duty is enjoined, Work. II. The Manner of performing
it is prescribed, work out your own Salvation with fear and trembling. And III.
Arguments exciting hereto are mentioned; It is your own Salvation, and it is
God that works in you, both to will and to do, of his good Pleasure. I shall
therefore in discoursing upon this Subject, endeavor to explain the aforesaid
Particulars, and then proceed to the Improvement.

I. The Duty enjoined, is pactical Holiness, or Obedience to God's Law. And
hence the Apostle commends them for their Obedience, in the first Part of the
Verse; Wherefore my Beloved, as ye have always obeyed. --

Here it may be inquired, what is required to acceptable Obedience? (or good
Works.)

I answer these four Things are necessary to constitute it; namely, a good
Principle, a good End, a good Rule, and a good Mode. And

First. There must a good Principle, viz. a renewed, believing Heart. And hence
the Apostle observes to Timothy, That the End of the Commandment is Charity,
out of a pure Heart, and of a good Conscience, and Faith unfeigned. 1 Timothy i. 5.
And our Lord informs us, That a good Man out of the good Treasure of his
Heart, brings forth good Things: And an evil Man out of the evil Treasure,
brings forth evil Things. Matt. xii. 35.
And that a corrupt Tree cannot bring forth good Fruit. Mat. vii. 1^.
But that whatsoever is born of the Flesh is Flesh. John iii.
And the Apostle Paul informs us, That he that is in the Flesh cannot please
God. Romans viii. 8.
And that without Faith it is impossible to please him. Heb. xi. 6.
Unless the Fountain be good, the Streams cannot be so that proceed from it.
The Salt of converting Grace must therefore be cast into the Spring of our
Action, and as our Savior directs us, we must make the Tree good, that the
Fruit may be good. But

Secondly. Another Thing that is necessary to constitute a good Work, is a good
End, and that is the Glory of God: To this as our highest Mark or Scope, all
our Actions, whether natural, civil or religious should be directed; and to
this, every Thing else should be subordinated; Whether in eating or drinking,
or whatsoever we do, we should do it all to the Glory of God. 1 Cor. x. 31.
For the want of this, the Worship of the Pharisees, though specious in
appearance, was rejected. Mat. v. 20.
In all religious Actions, we should more especially, actually intend God's
Glory; for our aiming at the chief Good should then be most express, and not
interrupted by any other Intentions. But in civil and temporary Matters, it is
not precisely necessary, that the Glory of God be always actually intended
(though that should be attempted as much as may be.) If in the mean time, the
Glory of God be the virtual and general Scope, to which all our Works are
referred. Our dear Redeemer lays much Stress upon the Sinceri^ of our
Intentions, and informs us, that our Eye be single our whole Body is full of
Light, but if otherwise, full of Darkness: i. e. If in the Course of our
Actions we do not aim at God's Glory above all, it is an Evidence of our being
in a dark and dismal State toward God!

Thirdly. A good Rule is likewise necessary to constitute a good Work, or
acceptable Obedience. Now this Rule is the Law of God, not ceremonial, which
directed the Worship of the Jews, in Things peculiar to the Infant State of the
Church, under that (comparatively) dark and terrible Economy. Forasmuch as
that prefigured the Mediator to come, as the Shadow the Body, he being come it
is abrogated. Col. ii. 16, 17.
Nor is this Rule the Judicial Law, which directed the Jewish Commonwealth in
civil Matters, forasmuch as that was in a great Measure peculiarly adapted to
the political State and Circumstances of that Nation, which were in some
respects singular, particularly considered as a Theocrasy, and under a
ceremonious Dispensation, and was never given to the Gentile World as a Rule of
Judgment, but to the Jewish, it necessarily follows, that it must expire with
the Dissolution of the Jewish State. (at least so far as it peculiarly
respected it) Nor are we under any formal Obligation to a Law, that was never
imposed upon us by divine Authority, or ever was adapted in many of its Strokes
to our Circumstances. The grand Design of the Scriptures, is not to suggest
general Maxims of civil Policy, but Rules of holy Living. The Scope of the
sacred Volumn is not to make us subtle Politicians, but sincere Christians; not
to give us Rules of Judging about the Rights of Kings to their Crowns, but to
direct us in the Way to a Crown of Life that shall never fade away.

It remains therefore, that it is the Moral Law that is the perpetual Rule of
human Action; this therefore we must have in view in our sacred Service, and to
this unalterable Scale of Holiness, we must strictly and invariably conform,
Deuteronomy. iv. 2. Is. viii. 20. G^l. vi. 16.
and without a Regard to this, in our Acts of Obedience, in vain do we worship
God, teaching for Doctrines the Commandments of Men. Mat. xv. 9.
Wherefore (says the Apostle to the Colosians,) if ye be dead with Christ, from
the Rudiments of the World; why -- are ye subject to Ordinances; touch not,
taste not, handle not, (which are to all perish with the using) after the
Commandments and Doctrines of Men? Which Things have indeed a Show of Wisdom,
in will Worship, and Humility. Col. ii. 20, -- 23.
To all such, the Almighty God may propose the following silencing Question;
Who has required this at your Hand? Is. i. 12.


Fourthly. Another Ingredient in a good Work, is a good Mode, or Manner of
Performance; i. e. It must not be only outwardly, but inwardly conformed to the
Law of God, which is a spiritual Law, and requires Purity in the Thoughts and
Dispositions of the Soul. Romans vii.


Now Obedience to God's Law is called a Work in our Text, to signify its
Difficulty, and the Pains that must be taken to perform it to purpose.

We have many Things to do, in relation to God, our Neighbor and our selves;
which to perform in their proper Season and order, in a constant and harmonious
Series, is attended with no little Difficulty!

Yea the very Duties that respect our selves, are numerous and not of easy
Performance; to use all appointed Means with seriousness and steadiness, to
obtain a Principle of Grace, to pluck out our right Eyes, and cut off our right
Arms: i. e. To forsake our darling Sins, which are to us, while unrenew'd, in
respect of affection, like those Members of our Bodies. O how hard and
Difficult is it!

And when converted, to continue in the steadfast and earnest Use of all
instituted Means, in order to obtain the exercise of every Grace proper for all
the various Occasions of Life, as well as to attain and retain the Growth of
Grace, the Assurance of Grace, and Perseverance therein to the End: and that
contrary to the Tendency of strong Corruptions from within, and innumerable
Temptations from the Devil and World without. ( i. e. both in respect of the
Objects of it, and the Men of it) is exceeding Difficult.

And it is peculiarly so to deny ourselves; to undo all that we have done amiss
by repeated Acts of Penitence; to crucify our vicious Propensities; to maintain
a humble Confidence in God; a transcendant Affection to him, and unfaling
Complacence in him, in the Midst of Sins, of Sorrows and Temptations of various
Forms: And hence it is that our Lord compares acceptable Obedience or sincere
Holiness to a straight Gate and narrow Way, and assures us, that but few ( i.
e. comparatively) are possessors of it, Enter ye in at the strait Gate; for
wide is the Gate, and broad is the Way that leads to Destruction, and many
there be that go in thereat; because strait is the Gate, and narrow the Way
that leads unto Life, and few there be that find it. Mat. vii. 13, 14.
And elsewhere we are informed that the Righteous are scarcely (i. e.
difficultly) saved. 1 Pet. iv. 18. Molis.


Again it is called a Work of Salvation, to show us the Necessity of Obedience
in order to the Possession of Salvation in the future World, as well as the
inseparable Connection, by Virtue of Divine Promise between Good Works or
Holiness here and Happiness hereafter.

Sometimes the Word Salvation in Scripture intends no more but a Deliverance
from some great Danger or Calamity: And thus when Israel were environed round
with inextricable Difficulties, the Egyptian Army behind them, and the Red Sea
before them, and impervious Eminencies or impassible Mountains on each Side,
Moses bid them stand still and see the Salvation of God. But more generally the
Word Salvation, signifies a spiritual Deliverance from Sin, and the Miseries
consequent upon it, begun by Grace here, and perfected in Glory hereafter. When
our Lord visited Zaccheus, and conferred spiritual Mercy's upon him, he
informed him, that that Day, Salvation came to his House: i. e. At that Time, a
Right to Salvation was conferred upon him by Justification, and the Beginnings
of Salvation were implanted in him by Regeneration and Consolation. But the
Word generally signifies the full Enjoyment of God in the Life to come; and in
this Sense it is undoubtedly to be taken in our Text. Work out your own
Salvation: i. e. diligently Study and faithfully Perform these Duties that
relate to your eternal Salvation; that tend to clear up your Title to it, and
make you meet for the Possession of it. This Phrase does in strong Terms
represent, the Necessity and Usefulness of the good Works of the Faithful to
promote their Salvation; and hence it is frequently represented to us as a
Reward, which is not meeted out to us for our Works, but according to them; God
will render to every one according to his Works; to them who by patient
Continuance in well-doing, seek for Glory and Immortality eternal Life. Romans
ii. 6, 7.


But in vain do the Papists infer a Merit of Works from this Text! The good
Works of the Saints, cannot deserve eternal Happiness, for the following
Reasons:

1st. Because they are imperfect, all our Righteousnesses are as filthy Rags:
Imperfection cleaves to the best of our Services, on which Account we need
Forgiveness, as our Lord informs us in the Pattern of Prayer he has given us,
and therefore cannot merit any good at the Hand of God.

2dly. Believers owe all to God, and therefore can merit nothing of him, by
offering to him what is his own. They are God's Servants; Luke xvii. 10.
they are not their own but bought with a Price: Now it is the Property of a
Servant not to be Sui Juris, at his own Dispose or Command. They cannot dispose
of themselves or their Time, or their Work, because all these belong to their
Master: And how then can they deserve any thing by doing what they are bound to
do? And hence our Lord speaks to his Disciples in the following Words; Likewise
when ye shall have done all these Things that are commanded you, say we are
unprofitable Servants: WE HAVE DONE THAT WHICH WAS OUR DUTY TO DO. Luke xvii.
10.
If a Master rewards his Servant for doing his Duty, it must be pure Liberality
and not Merit.

Besides, Believers receive all the Good they possess from God, It is God that
works in them, to will and to do of his own good Pleasure, and they have
nothing but what they have received. 1 Cor. iv. 7.
Who has first given to God and it shall be recompensed to him again? Romans xi.
35.
The Case being so, they cannot possibly merit, by returning to God what is his
own, for that is but an Act of Justice. Again

3dly. Good Works are rewarded merely out of God's Mercy and pure Grace, and
therefore not of Merit, for these are opposed to each other; and hence we are
told, that it is not by Works of Righteousness that we have done, but through his
Mercy he has saved us. Tit. iii. 5.


4thly. Eternal Life is given to Believers, by Way of Inheritance, and
therefore not by way of Merit; for the one is a Gift and the other is a
Purchase; If Children then Heirs, Heirs of God and joint Heirs with Christ.
Romans viii. 17.
If the Inheritance be of the Law, it is no more of promise, but God gave it to
Abraham by promise. Gal. iii. xviii.
i. e. If Salvation be conferred for our Obedience to the Law, it is no more of
Promise.

5thly. The good Works of Believers are not equal in value to eternal Life, and
therefore cannot diserve it; for I reckon (says the Apostle) that the
Sufferings of this present Time, are not worthy to be compared with the Glory
that shall be revealed in us. Romans iii. 18.


Now the Sufferings which the Saints of choice endure for Christ, are the best
Instances of their Obedience; and therefore if those do not merit Happiness,
far less their other Services. In order to demerit, there must be an Equality
in Worth between the Work and the Reward; but the Reward is infinite in Value
and Duration, and our Works are both finite and imperfect; now between these
there is no Proportion of Equality, but on the contrary an infinite
Disproportion.

6thly. Eternal Life is the Gift of God, and therefore not deserved by our Good
Works; It is your Fathers good Pleasure to give you the Kingdom. Luke xii. 32.
The Wa^s of Sin is Death, but the Gift of God is eternal Life. Romans vi. 23.
Observe the Antithesis between the two; Death is inflicted in a way of Justice
as the desert of Sin, as the Wages of a Hireling are due for his Work. But
eternal Life is the Gift of God, free and altogether undeserved by us: Gift or
Grace and Debt are certainly opposed; what we properly owe, we cannot be said
properly to give, and so e contra. --

I may add, that seeing the Saints cannot do any thing that profits the
Almighty, or recompense him for Benefits received, it is unreasonable to
imagine that they should merit more; Our Goodness does not extend to God,
neither is it any Gain to him that we are righteous. If a Son cannot return
equal to his Father, for the Being he has received instrumentally from him,
how much less can he requite God, from whom he has originally received his all?

And indeed the Papal Notion of Merit is Dishonorable, both to God, the Father
and the Son!

It eclipses the Fathers Liberality, and subjects him to his Creature. The
greater any good is, the more communicative and liberal it is. Now he that
gives freely, is more liberal than him that gives out of Debt or Desert.

And he that owes another, (according to Justice) is in some Measure subject to
him; the Borrower (as Solomon observes) is Servant to the Lender. Prove. xxii. 7.
And therefore if the Almighty be a Debtor to fallen Man, on Account of any
Merit in his Works, he would not act so freely as if no such Obligation lay
upon him.

Nor can the Merits of Works be cleared of derogating from the Redeemers Glory;
for whoever merits any Thing, acquires a Right either in whole or in part to
that which he had not before, and thus there would be something in eternal Life
which Christ had not merited, which is absurd in it self and inglorious to
Christ! It is in vain to pretend that Christ has purchased for his People a
Power of meriting, for this is in other Words to say, that the Satisfaction of
Christ is incomplete, and that he needs the Help of others to perfect what he
left unfinished! It is more for the Redeemers Honor to purchase all himself,
than to enable others to do it, either in whole or in part: As he is more
bountiful who gives another a large Inheritance out of his own proper Goods,
than he that enables him to purchase an Estate by his Labor.

To work Salvation does not signify to effect it, but to labor about it, to do
those things that have a Relation to it; and in this Sense the original Word is
frequently taken in Scripture. Ex^adso. John vi. 27. 1 Cor. ix 13. Rev. xviii.
17. Vide Poli. Synop. in Loc.


But though from what has been said it appears, that the Popish Notion of the
Merit of Works cannot be fairly inferred from these Words; yet they strongly
assert the Necessity of good Works in order to Salvation, against the
Antinomians and Libertines.

To understand which, let it be observed, that Works may be considered in a
threefold Light, viz. as respecting Justification, Sanctification or
Glorification. In respect of Justification, they are neither antecedents,
efficient or meritorious Causes, but Consequents and declarative Signs: In
respect of Sanctification, they are Ingredients that constitute and promote it:
In respect of Glorification, they are Antecedents and Means, which tend to
promote our Meetness for the Possession of it; they bear the Relation to it of
a Way to the End of a Journey, of the beginning of a Thing to its full
Completion: For Grace is the beginning of Glory, as Glory is the Consumation of
Grace. But to confirm and illustrate this important Point, let the following
particulars, respecting the necessity of Good Works, be duly weighed, viz.

1st. Good Works are Necessary, as the Way to the Kingdom of Heaven by divine
Appointment, though they are not the Cause of our reigning there, as Bernard
excellently observes. And hence we are said to be his Workmanship, created in
Christ Jesus unto Good Works, which God has before ordained that we should
walk in them. Ephesians. ii. 10.
And elsewhere we are told, that without Holiness no Man shall see the Lord.
Heb. xii. 14.
Though eternal Blessedness be not strictly and properly a Reward, yet it is
given in some respect after the Manner of a Reward: Inasmuch as the Elect are
not admitted to the Possession of it (ordinarily) till they have labored for
God, nor are they treated as Conquerors, until they have fought Jehovah's
Battles, they must run the Race of Holiness before they possess the rest of the
Crown of Happiness: And hence the Apostle informs the Thessalonians, that God
from the Beginning chose them to Salvation through the Sanctification of the
Spirit and belief of the Truth. 2 These. ii. 13.


2dly. Good Works, or Obedience to the Law of God, make us meet to be partakers
of the Inheritance of the Saints in Light. Col. i. 12.
Besides a Right to the Inheritance, a Meetness to enjoy it, is also necessary,
which consists in a Temper of Mind fitted for, or attemper'd to the Business
and Enjoyments of the heavenly State, without which they cannot make us Happy.
Now this Temper of Mind, which is so necessary from the Nature of Things, in
order to our Happiness, is Holiness in Heart; which is increased by Good Works.
The actual Exercise of Grace has a natural Tendency to enlarge and confirm the
Principle of Grace as well as engages the Promise of Divine Influence to that
End: And hence the Almighty has told us by the Prophet Isaiah, that he will
meet those that wait upon him in his Way, and work Righteousness. Isa. lxiv. 45.
And elsewhere we are commanded to ask; and informed that in so doing, we shall
receive. Mat. vii. 7.
Doing Good is certainly the Way to grow better, we get Grace while we act it,
the more we use our Limbs, the more nimble we grow; abounding in good Works,
increases the Principle from which they proceed, and so ripens us for Glory;
Those that wait upon God shall renew their Strength. Isai. xl. 31.
And though the blessed God is the principle Efficient, in preparing us for
future Blessedness, yet under him we act, and with him we concur, being drawn
we run, and through his Spirit we mortify the Deeds of the Body, that we may live.

3dly. Good Works are necessary to evidence our Faith, our Love our Sincerity;
and hence is that notable Expression of the Apostle James, Show me thy Faith
without thy Works, and I will show thee my Faith by my Works. Though Faith as it
works does not justify, yet it is only a working Faith that does justify. That
Faith is only of the right Stamp, that purifies the Heart and Works by Love.
Now seeing Faith is the Root of good Works, by these Fruits therefore, we must
discern the Tree from which they spring. Our Love is likewise hereby evidenced
to be real, and not in Word and in Tongue only; If ye love me, (says our Lord)
keep my Commandments. -- And he that says he loves me, and keeps not my
Commandments, is a Liar, and the Truth is not in him.

And do not good Works make our Sincerity evident, not only to others but to
our selves? To this purpose Hezekiah mentions them, when he had received a
Message of Death by the Prophet; I beseech thee, O Lord, remember now how I
have walked before thee in Truth, and with a perfect Heart, and have done that
which is good in thy Sight. 2 Kings xx. iii.
Yea my Brethren, good Works do evidence our eternal Election and effectual
Vocation; and hence we are enjoined, to give Diligence to make our calling and
Election sure, and informed, that if we do these Things we shall never fall,
but have an abundant Entrance ministered to us, into the everlasting Kingdom of
our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. 2 Pet. i. 10, 11.


4thly. Good Works are necessary to glorify God, to imitate Christ, to Comfort
our selves and edify our Neighbor; Herein (said the blessed Jesus) is my
Father glorified, that ye bear much Fruit, so shall ye be my Disciples. John
xv. 8.
The more the Beauty of Grace appears, the more God is glorified; now it opens
it Oriency and unfolds its Riches and Charms when it is exercised in good
Works. Grace in the Creature, is but the Imitation of some divine Attribute in
God to which it corresponds; and therefore the more we exercise it in Works of
Piety and Charity, the more we manifest Jehovah's Excellencies, or as the
Apostle phraseth it, show forth his Virtues. 1 Pet ii. 9. aretas.
And thence it is evident, that good Works are the most effectual Way of
glorifying God, because they offer the most convincing Demonstration of his
adorable Excellencies to Men.

It is certainly our Duty as well as Privilege, to imitate the blessed Jesus;
and hence we are commanded, so to walk even as he walked. 1 John ii. 6.
And he is said, to have left us an Example, that we should follow his Steps.
Now Jesus Christ obeyed the Law, and therefore so must we, if we say we abide
in him: The dear Redeemer was not only inherently, but actively holy, he went
about doing good.

Moreover, good Works promote our own Comfort exceedingly, and that not only as
they are the Way, in which we can only expect, with Reason, the Fulfillment of
God's gracious Promises toward us; but as they prevent much Guilt, which would
be contracted by spiritual Sloth, and farther our Assurance of being in a
gracious State! Surely to him that orders his Conversation aright, will be
shown the Salvation of God. Psalm. l. 23.
Negligence grieves the blessed Spirit, whereby we are sealed to the Day of
Redemption; causes the Life of Grace to languish, and blots our Evidences for
Heaven. But on the contrary, good Works, give a Spring to our Joy in God, by
giving Evidence to the Sincerity of our Faith in him, as well as the Reality of
our other Graces. Habits are known by their Actings, and we judge of a Fountain
by its Streams. Now it is the Knowledge of our Covenant Interest in God, that
is the Source of Sweetness; the Comfort of a Believer ebbs and flows with that;
and therefore those that desire the Comfort of Grace, must be diligent in the
Exercise of Grace. I might add, that the Approbation of Conscience in a Course
of religious Labor, together with the grateful Gust, that attends the Exercise
of Grace therein, is no small Part of a Christians Delight, and therefore no
inconsiderable Incentive to good Works.

Again, my Brethren, our Neighbors Edification is promoted by good Works; and
hence our Lord enjoins us, to let our Light so shine before Men, that they may
see our good Works, and glorify our Father which is in Heaven. Mat. v. 16.
And we are likewise bid to shine as Lights in the World, that those who seek
to accuse our good Conversation in Christ, may be ashamed: i. e. Through their
not finding just Matter of Accusation against us. The Apostle Peter exhorts
Wives to the Performance of their Duty, that by their Conversation their
Husbands may be won to Christ. 1 Pet. iii. 1.
By these Instances it appears, that good Works have a noble Tendency to excite
Men to glorify God, to silence Gainsayers, and to bring Men to Conversion.

5thly. Good Works are pleasing to God; to do good and to communicate forget
not, for with such Sacrifices God is well pleased. Heb xiii. 16.
The Holy God delights in Holiness, and in those good Works which are the
proper Fruits of it; hence is that of the Psalmist, the righteous Lord loves
Righteousness, his Countenance beholds the upright. Ps. xi. 7.
God delights first in himself, and next in his nearest Resemblance, which is
Holiness. Good Works come from God, and therefore no Wonder he Delights in them!

Having spoken upon the Duty enjoined in our Text, I proceed to Discourse upon
the Manner of performing it therein prescrb'd, which is the

II. General Head. Now we should perform the Duties of Obedience required of us.

1st. Painfully and Earnestly: This is doubtless intended by the Word Work; and
hence we are commanded in other Places of Scripture, to strive to enter in at
the strait Gate; and informed, that many shall seek to enter in but shall not
be able. Luke xiii. 24.
The original Word signifies to agonize: i. e. to labor as in an Agony.
Agonidsz^sthe.
We are likewise commanded, to run so that we may obtain. 1 Cor. ix. 24.
So to fight that we may lay hold on eternal Life. 1 Timothy vi. 12.
So to wrestle, that we may be able to stand. Ephs. vi. 11, 12.
And we are dehorted from fainting in our Minds, and growing weary in
well-doing; and assured, that we shall reap if we faint not. Heb. xii. Gal. vi.
9.
And are not the fervent Prayers of the Righteous, said to avail much? Now have
all those Expressions no Meaning? Or can we strive, run, wrestle and fight, by
loitering or doing nothing? Pray is there any Need to caution us against
fainting, and growing weary in well doing, if we have no Work to do at all?

2dly. We must labor perseveringly; Work out the Work of your Salvation;
perfect what ye have begun, continue in your religious Course, until ye reach
the Mark. It is in the second Creation as in the first; God does not finish his
Work at once, but by Degrees. The Work of Salvation even as Conversion, is
sometimes in Scripture ascribed to God and sometimes to Men, to signify that
God is the Principle Cause, and Men only subminstring Causes, whose Pains are
required to promote it. To begin well in Religion, without Continuance, will
not do, it is only those, that persevere to the End that shall be saved: such
who begin in the Spirit, and end in the Flesh, such who have known the Way of
Righteousness, and turn from the Holy Commandments, -- to their former
Pollutions, like a Dog to his Vomit; the latter End is worse with them than the
Beginning; it had been better for them, not to have known the Way of
Righteousness. 1 Pet. ii.
The Backslider in Heart shall be filled with his own Ways. If any Man draw
back, he draws back to Perdition. My Soul (says the Almighty) shall have no
Pleasure in him. Hebi x. 38, 39.
Time Believers have a flush of Affection for a while, like a Land Flood in
Summer, they seem to run well for a Time, and set out fair for Heaven, as Lot's
Wife out of Sodom for the Mountains, but by and by they are hindered, by and by
they are offended at strict Religion, grow weary in well-doing, and tack about
to find a broader and easier Way, they cannot bear the Thoughts of constant
Labor, frequent Sorrow for Sin, of running, wrestling and fighting till they
die! Will the Hypocrite, (says Job) always call upon God? Job. xxvii. 10.
Hence the Almighty complains of the wicked Israelites, in the following
affectionate Strains; O Ephraim! what shall I do unto thee? O Judah! what shall
I do unto thee? For your Goodness is as a Morning Cloud, and as the early Dew
it goes away. As our Lord observes, No Man having put his Hand to the Plough,
and looking back, is fit for the Kingdom of God. O the Injury, that Backsliders
and Apostates do to the Honor and Interests of Religion! Woe to the World,
because of Offenses! that come through their Means, and so they exceedingly
grieve the Spirit of God, and are in danger of committing the unpardonable Sin!

But the Time requires that I should proceed to some Improvement from what has
been spoken. And

First. From hence we may learn, the Falsehood and Danger of the Popish
Doctrine of a Merit in Works on the one Hand, as well as of the Antinomian
Doctrine on the other, which casts contempt upon good Works, and represents
Obedience to the Law as unnecessary.

Both these Doctrines are equally unreasonable in themselves, dishonorable to
God, and detrimental to us. Those who being ignorant of the Righteousness of
God, and go about to establish their own, rebel against the Government and
Righteousness of Christ, and rob him of his mediatorial Crown and Dignity. Such
who seek after Righteousness, as it were by the Works of the Law, shall not
attain it: i. e. Such who think to deserve Good at the Hand of God by their
Works, or (while unconverted) thereby to ascertain their Salvation in regard of
the Promise of God, they build the Fabric of Happiness upon their own
Righteousness, and so turn their Backs on Christ and trample upon his Merit,
without which there is no Salvation!

And those likewise do as great Dishonor to God, who run into the contrary
Extreme, and imagine that God by his Gospel and Grace, has freed us from
Obligations to obey his Law as a Rule of Practice. This is to turn the Grace of
God into Wantonness, and make the Gospel a Pillow to Sloth and Laziness, a
Mystery of Iniquity, Rebellion and Mischief, unworthy to be received by any
reasonable Creature! Those who do not seek, are never like to find; those that
strive not, shall not enter into the strait Gate; those who work not, are not
like to obtain the Reward; those who run not, cannot with reason expect the
Rest prepared for the People of God; The Kingdom of Heaven suffers Violence,
and it is the Violent, (and none but they,) that take it by Force. Know ye not,
that the Unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of God. Be not deceived,
neither Fornicators, nor Idolaters, nor Adulterers, nor Effeminate, nor Abusers
of themselves with Mankind, nor Thieves, nor Covetous, nor Drunkards, nor
Revilers, nor Extortioners, shall Inherit the Kingdom of God.

The proud Pharisee that depends on his Works, and the lazy Libertine, that
neglects them, are like to dwell together in the same Hell; Those that compass
themselves about with Sparks of their own kindling, and walk in the Light
thereof, shall lie down in sorrow. The Pharisee that boasted of his
Performances, and said he was not as other Men, but fasted, gave Alms, etc.
went away unjustified, and the unprofitable Servant that hid his Talent in a
Napkin, was cast into utter Darkness.

Truth and Duty lie in the middle between these two Extremes. O therefore! let
us be careful, lest while we labor to avoid the one, we run into the other. But

Secondly. I may take occasion, my Brethren, from what has been said, to
enquire of you, what is your Case and ^ourse? Are you at Work about your
Salvation, or are you idle? Are you asking who shall show you any (temporal)
good? Or are ye enquiring the Way to Zion, with your Faces thitherward, weeping
as ye go? O! is this your anxious Enquiry, Men and Brethren, what shall we do
to be saved? I would to God that this were the Case of all of you that are
unconverted. O it will never do till it comes to this!

If you are at work, let me ask you again, what are your Works? And how do ye
Work? Have your Works the Properties of a good Work, before mentioned and
explained? Do they proceed from a right Principle? Are they directed to a right
End, regulated by a right Rule, and performed in a right Manner? Do ye work
with a View to Salvation? earnestly, incessantly and humbly, with fear and
trembling, being sensible of your Unworthiness of Mercy!

If your Works have the aforesaid Ingredients, give to God the Glory of his
Grace vouchsafed upon you; for who has made you to differ from others, and what
have ye that ye have not received? And why should you therefore glory as though
you had not received it. In the mean time, take the Comfort of the Grace
conferred, which is the Seed of Glory. There is a certain Connection, my
Brethren, between such good Works, as have been now mentioned, and eternal
Blessedness; For God is not unjust to forget your Work and Labor of Love.
Therefore, my beloved Brethren, be ye steadfast, unmovable, always abounding in
the Work of the Lord, for as much as ye know, that your Labor is not in vain
in the Lord. But Perseverance is not to be expected without your Concurrence
and Diligence.

And therefore evidence the Reality of of your Grace by your Lives; Bring forth
Fruits meet for Repentance, and think not to say within yourselves, that you
have Abraham to your Father, for unless you do the Works of Abraham, you are
not his Children, (in a saving Sense.)

Don't imagine, my Brethren, that your Work is over when you are converted, and
that you have then nothing to do, but to sport and play, like the Leviathan in
the Waters, or to sing like the indolent Grashoper upon the Land, who spends
the summer Season in careless, fruitless Singing one Kind of Song, till it
meets unprepared, the Winter cold; go to the Ant thou Slugard, consider her
Ways and be wise; which having no Guide, Overseer or Ruler, provideth her Meat
in the Summer, and gathers her Food in the Harvest.

Sirs, your Salvation Work is but just begun when ye are converted; then and
not till then ye have a Capacity to perform spiritual and acceptable Service,
which was given you to be improved and increased by Diligence to the Praise of
its Author, your own Comfort and Salvation.

You have much to do for God, your Neighbor, and your own Souls: The
Commandments of God are exceeding broad. The Duties required of us, though they
be all reasonable, are many, and difficult to be performed.

The Time you have to do this Work in, is short and uncertain, and much of it
(as to some of you) already spent; and but little, it may be feared, is done,
at least compared with what is due from us and with the Seize of others.
Alas! For our Leanness and low Stature in Religion, how little have we done for
the good God? (who has done so much for us) And how much against him? O let
this excite our Sorrows, and incline us to abound in Religious Labors! Awake
my Brethren, awake to your Work, and move not like Snails A Snail was not
offered to God in Sacrifice under the Jewish Economy, because, says
Belarmine, it was animal Tardigradum, a sluggish, or slow paced Animal.
in the Christian Course, but imitate the flamie winged Diligence of the
Seraphims in God's Service; and so run that ye may obtain, for your Salvation
is nearer than when ye believed.

O! be entreated to work the Works of God while it is Day, for the Night comes
when no Man can work. The Night of Death hastens fast toward us, and threatens
to cover us with its sable Shades, to put a final Period to our Labors here,
and hide us in the Retreats of Darkness and Oblivion! And dear Brethren, to
what purpose has the Blessed God kindled the Torch of Conscience within us, and
set the Sun of Truth in the Hemisphere of the Church above us, but to light us
to our Labors? And shall we waste our Master's Candles and not do his Work?
God forbid! O, while ye have the Light walk in it, and work by it, least God in
just Judgment gives you up to strong Delusions to believe Lies: Or chastise
your Iniquities with other Rods which may break your Bones and make your Lives
miserable! In a Course of Negligence you are in danger of being made
Major-misabibs, a Terror to your selves and all about you; or a scandal and
reproach to your present Profession, by falling into damnable Heresies in
Principle, or enormous Evils in Practice!

Though your Work be great, my Brethren, yet your Support therein is great also,
your Success sure, and the Crown before you immortal and glorious!

It is true, of our selves we are very Weak, and not able to think, much less
to Will or do Good: But in CHRIST we are Strong, through him we can do all
Things; and he it is that works in us both to will and to do of his own Good
Pleasure: And indeed when we are Weak, then are we Strong, i. e. when we are
most sensible of our own Weakness, then do we receive most Strength from him.

Nor do we run as uncertain of the Issue, our Perseverance is secured by the
Mediator's perfect Satisfaction, by his perpetual and prevalent Intercession,
as well as by the Purpose, the Promise, the Power, and Covenant of God: His
Purpose is invariable; his Promise faithful; his Power Almighty, and his
Covenant eternal. In Respect of the Duration of its Benefits, which are
therefore called sure Mercies, our Life is related to and wrapped up in the Life
of Christ; the Members of whose Body we are. So that as long as the Head lives,
the Members cannot dye (spiritually): And hence is that precious saying of our
dearest LORD to his Desciples; Because I live, ye shall live also; while the
ungodly walk in a vain show, and vex themselves in vain; while they Labor in
the Fire, and weary themselves for very Vanity. While they are crossed with a
Succession of Disappointments, and grasp after a Dream, a Shadow, which often
flies from their Embraces; and if obtained disappoints their Hopes, and does
but whet instead of satisfying their Desires! We seek a solid and satisfactory
Good which we are sure, through Grace, of obtaining in the Way of Means: Being
confident of this very Thing, that he which has begun a Good Work in you, will
perform it until the Day of Jesus Christ. And, dear Brethren, the Good we seek
when obtained, will more than balance all our Labors and Sufferings in quest
of it: It is Spiritual, Sublime, Immense, Noble, Eternal; as it will suit the
Nature of our Souls, so it will exceed their Expectations, and equal their
Duration and Desires!

But it may be, some here present rest satisfied with Works which are Good only
as to the Matter of them, without attending to or being concerned about the
Manner of Performance. To such I shall only say, that some of the Pharisees
were, as to the Letter of the Law, blameless, in Regard of outward Conformity,
and yet our Lord assures us, That except our Righteousness exceeds theirs, we
cannot enter into the Kingdom of God.

And some others it is probable, are going on in a Course of Works that are
materially Evil, in a Course of open Impiety and Profaneness: Sirs, the Master
you^ ^e is a Tyrant, his Work is Slavery and his Wages Death!

The Way of Transgressors is hard, they travel with Iniquity, and draw Sin (as
it were) with Cart Ropes: i. e. Their Evil Courses cost them much Labor and
Solicitude. It Is hard to extinguish all the Remains of Reason and of
Conscience, and entirely to banish all Fear of a future Judgment, Starts of
Thought concerning the Evil Day, will crowd into your reluctant Minds,
notwithstanding of all your preventive Measures, and mix Wormwood and Gaul with
your brutish Delights.

And likewise as your Master Satan is an Usurper, and has no Right to your
Service, so he is rigorous and inconsistent in his Demands, and is never
satisfied with the Homage of his Vassals!

But that which completes the doleful Scene, is the Terribleness of the Reward
for which you Work, while ye persist in Sin and Impenitence: It is a Reward, my
Friends, of Darkness, of Death, of Misery and Ruin!

The Wrath of the avenging God will be adequate to all the Circumstances of
your Crimson Guilt, in wounding your selves, and slighting the Remedy provided
by indulgent Heaven, and in pouring Contempt upon the great Salvation set
before you by the Gospel, and purchased by no less a Price than the BLOOD OF
GOD? O dreadful Portion! O unsupportable, unavoidable, and eternal Vengeance!
How awful art thou? Sinners what Mind can conceive, or Tongue express your
doleful Doom? Believe it Sirs, it is a fearful Thing to fall into the Hands of
the living GOD! Who has measured the Waters in the Hollow of his Hand, and
meeted out the Heavens with a Span; who has comprehended the Dust of the Earth
in a Measure, and weighed the Mountains in Scales, and the Hills in a Balance.
Before whom the Pillars of the Earth tremble, and are astonished at his
Reproof: Before whom all Nations are as nothing, and counted less than Nothing
and Vanity: His Head and Hairs are white like Wool and Snow; and his Eyes are
as a Flame of Fire; and his Feet are like unto fine Brass, as if they burned in
a Furnace; and his Voice as the Sound of many Waters. He has in his Right Hand
seven Stars, and out of his Mouth goes a sharp two-edged Sword; and his
Countenance is as the Sun shining in his Strength. O Sinners! how will ye be
able to bear up under the Terrors of the final Advent of this great God from
Heaven to Earth? When all Nature shall be in the utmost Agony, behold he comes
with the Clouds, and every Eye shall see him, and they also which pierced him,
and all the Kindreds of the Earth shall wail because of him! O how will you be
able to behold him descending to the Judgment Seat, in all the Pomp of Heaven,
with shining Millions round about him, in their most gorgeous Robes of Beauty
and Light, while the Earth TREMBLES, the Heavens THUNDER and BURN, and the
Ocean ROARS! How will ye be able to behold him on his awful Throne, which shall
be like the fiery Flame, and his Wheels as burning Fire, a fiery Stream shall
issue from before him, Thousands of Thousands shall minister unto him, and ten
Thousand times ten Thousand shall stand before him, while the Judgment is set
and the Books are opened. O the woeful Plight of the Impenitent in that Day!
Poor bereaved Creatures! They shall have none in Heaven or Earth to help them.
How will you cry to the Mountains to cover you from the Face of the Lamb that
sits upon the Throne? How will you tremble before the dreadful Bar of the GREAT
GOD when you hear your condemnatory Sentence denounced by the Mouth of CHRIST?
Go ye accursed into everlasting Burnings prepared for the Devil and his Angels.

O the Horrors of being for ever separated from the blessed God, and all the
Sweets of Paradise! And sunk in the gloomy Vault of Fire, Horror, Despair,
Revenge and Grief! Under the Weight of the Wrath of Omnipotence, the
Upbraidings of your own guilty Minds, the Reproaches of Infidels and Insults of
Devils. Poor Sinners! your Labor and your Sorrow might now be of Service to
your Souls; but then the Time, the Time of Mercy is expired and gone, and never
to be recalled! Then your passionate Bewailings of the Loss of Time, of Talents
and Salvation, will be to no purpose, all in vain and too late!

O the Self-revenge that will then tear your wretched Souls! For your present
Madness and your Guilt; In Hell (says our dearest Lord) will be weeping and
gnashing of Teeth.

And is this the Reward ye labor so hard for? Yes surely! Though you have it not
in view, it is the certain Consequence of your impenitent Impieties, He that
sows to the Flesh, shall of the Flesh reap Corruption. Except ye repent, ye
shall all likewise perish. And are ye poor Sinners, fond of your own
Destruction? Why hasten ye so fast to Ruin? Why labor ye so hard for Death and
Hell?

But others it is probable are slothful and indolent, and neglect religious
Labor altogether; such I would accost in the following Language: Why stand ye
all the Day idle?

Is there not a vast Eternity before you, to which you are fast hastening, and
from which there is no returning?

Have ye not precious and immortal Souls within you, which are of a noble
Original, spiritual Nature and perpetual Duration? And must be in a little Time
perfectly Happy or inexpressibly Miserable there! And that unalterably,
according to your State and Conduct in this Life, in which you are Candidates
for Eternity! Is not the glorious God a blessed Master? Who in regard of his
incommunicable and essential Excellency, deserves your Service, and in regard
of his Communications of being and Good to you, has a right to it in Point of
Justice and Gratitude; Shall a Man plant a Vineyard, and not eat of the Fruit
of the Vineyard? (milk a Flock, and not drink of the Mi^ of the Flock? Add to
this, that Jehovah h^s All Sufficiency, to make you happy in his ^rvice, and to
this his Goodness enclines him.

And is not the Work to which he calls you, possible, necessary and noble?

Though ye cannot change your Hearts, or perform spiritual and acceptable Service
by your own Strength, and that partly because ye want a spiritual Principle,
yet the Almighty has graciously proposed to confer this, and to give together
with it, his Assistance and Influence, to such as wait upon him in the Way of
Duty: I say, there is a probability of obtaining these Mercies in this Way,
while the Impotent wait at the Pool of Duty, for the Moving of the Waters, and
try to stretch out their withered Arms. The gracious God is wont in a sovereign
Way, at Times to move the Waters, and give Healing and Strength.

And if a Probability of Success, is the only Spring of all that Labor and
Industry about temporal Things which fills this lower Globe, why should it be
thought too small an Incentive to religious Diligence? Seeing that the Business
of Religion we are not equal to, and the Benefits of it we cannot deserve!

It is absolutely necessary, my Brethren, to labor for the Salvation of your
Souls; What shall a Man give in Exchange for his Soul, (said our dearest Lord)
if he should gain the World, and loose the same? May I not then address you
Sirs! in the Language of our Redeemer to Martha; Martha, Martha, thou art
careful about many Things, but one Thing is needful: NEEDFUL above them all,
and what is that, but to serve God sincerely, in order to secure the Salvation
of your Souls? This, this, is the better Part, which shall not be taken away.
Wherefore then do ye spend your Money for that which is not Bread, and your
Labor for that which satisfies not? Incline your Ear to God, and comply with
his gracious Injunction in our Text, that your Souls may live. Work out your
own Salvation with fear and trembling, for it is God that works in you, both
to will and to do of his own good Pleasure.

Nor has the Work to which you are called, any thing mean and sordid in it, but
is entirely rational, sublime and noble; this tends to exalt the degenerate
Nature of Man to the Pitch of its primitive Dignity and Beauty, by conforming
it to the blessed God. This advances that Reason which is an Emblem of the
divine Intelligence, and by which Man is distinguished from the Beasts that
perish, to its just Pre-eminence above, and Empire over the Wilds and Mutines
of brutal Sense and Passion!

And dear Friends! is not the Reward great, which by divine Order follows your
being enabled to perform the Work of Obedience, in the Manner before expressed.
And hence it is called, an eternal Weight of Glory, and compared to a Crown,
and Kingdom; and the Place where it is enjoined, is set forth in the sacred
Volumn, by all the rarest Beauties and richest Objects of this lower World; the
Streets are of Gold, the Walls of Jasper, and the Gates composed of various
Jewels; there is the River of Life, and the Tree of God, whose Fruits are
refreshing and ravishing, and whose Leaves heal the Nations. There the sable
Shades of Night, can have no access, but perpetual Day triumphs in its bright
Meridian, without the least Vicissitude of Clouds, Darkness or Eclipse!

There the redeemed enjoy a perpetual Rest from every Evil and Misery, which in
this Life they either feel or fear, and possess a Good worthy of their exalted
Natures, and equal to their Desires and Hopes, the Issue of which, is a Joy
superior to that of the Harvest and of Victory, which never terminates!

And have ye not, my Brethren, been called to this Work, by diverse of God's
faithful Servants at different Seasons, with compassion and importunity? And
the Recompense of Reward set before you, t^ which you should have an Eye in
your religious Labors! Why then do ye stand all the Day idle?

How vast is the Disparity between the different Masters, Works and Wages,
which now court your Choice? God and the Devil, Holiness and Sin, Heaven and
Hell!

Is there any Comparison between a rightful and indulgent Sovereign, who is the
Fountain of Being, of Beauty and Perfection, who possesses every Thing that is
great and good, that is valuable and venerable, and a Rebel, Usurper and
Tyrant, who is covered with Baseness and Deformity, and breathes Cruelty and
Blood?

Is there any comparison between Conformity to the purest Excellency, and
following the Conduct of brutal Appetites, or Satan's Dictates?

Are ye at any Loss, my Brethren, to determine in so plain a Case, whether ye
will choose GOD or the Devil, Liberty or Slavery, Life or Death? O amazing
Stupidity! Why halt ye between two Opinions? (...) God be God, serve him, but
if Baal then ^llow him.

You know, Sirs, that the Work which ye ^ve to do is difficult, the Space you
have to do it in contracted and transient; you know not, what a Day may bring
forth; your Life is but a Vapor, which appears for a little Time, and then
vanishes away. And yet on this Breath that plays up and down your Nostrils, on
this slender Thread, hangs the Weight of your eternal Weal or Woe. O if this
Buble breaks, this brickle Thread is cut, while you are negligent of your
Salvation-Work, you are ruined for ever! And dear Sirs! What innumerable
Accidents is it liable to? O! how can ye keep from trembling, when ye think of
pale Death, and the Consequences of it to you, in your present Condition? Sirs!
Sirs! ye may be arested by it in a few Moments, and put beyond Hope of
Recovery, if ye do not awake to your Work! O how dreadful is it, to be in the
Iron Arms of Death, in a graceless, christless State!

The beauteous Morning of Life has expired with some of you, which is a Season
best adapted to the Labors of Religion, and has expired in vain; and with
others it is past Midday; and some draw near a setting Sun: And yet are
(spiritually) Idle, and have not struck one right Stroke toward their
SALVATION; but are sleeping securely under the pregnant Vengeance of Heaven,
amidst the Dangers of Death, amidst the awful Thunders of Sinai, and gentler
Charms of Gerezim; they will neither be alarmed nor alur'd to their WORK. O the
Infatuation of Mankind! wonder ye Heavens, and be astonished O Earth at this!

My Friends, it is no small MERCY that ye are under a Command to labor for
SALVATION, and that there is any Encouragement given by GOD of obtaining it in
this Way.

To be WITHOUT LAW and COMMANDS, is the unhappy PRIVILEGE of the DEVILS and
DAMNED SPIRITS, inasmuch as GOD intends no MERCY for them he neither requires
or receives any DUTY of them!

O if the Almighty did send a Message of Mercy to those forlorn Spirits,
intimating that in the Way of OBEDIENCE, or working for their SALVATION, there
was not only a Possibility but a Probability of obtaining LIFE and BLESS; there
would be a joyful JUBILIE among the DAMNED! All Hell would rejoice, and every
Inhabitant of that dark abode, would with gladness shake the massey Shackles
with which it is bound! Yea it is probable, they would stoop to the severest
Service to obtain that Happiness which they feel so much the Want of, and which
you now so basely slight!

Do you grumble at the Strictness of the Law, and want to be freed from it as a
Rule of Duty? a Rule which all the Choirs above, both of Saints and Seraphims
with Delight obey, and shall be under (in respect of all its Strokes that
respect pure unembodied Spirits) to all Eternity. And do you count that a
PRIVILEGE to be delivered from the HAPPINESS of HEAVEN, O strange!

Well if it will be any Comfort to you, I must inform you, that you may have
this Lust gratified in Hell: There the damned are freed from this dreadful LAW
which you count so heavy a YOKE: There the Almighty requires no more DUTY, no
LOVE, no OBEDIENCE, no REPENTANCE: If you count this a Privilege I shall not
envy your Happiness, but pity your Infatuation! and pray to be delivered from
your lawless Comfort, and kept eternally under the Law to God!

See Brethren, the Pains and Labors many take to amass the momentany Triffles
of Time, which are unsatisfactory in their Nature, and of short and uncertain
Duration; they rise up early, and sit up late, and eat the Bread of Care and
Sorrow; and all to secure what has no abiding, what cannot help them in their
greatest Extremities; such as distress of Conscience, the Approach of Death and
Judgment. And will you not take as much pains to secure your Salvation as many
do, to load (...) with thick Clay.

See the pains that many take to damn their Souls by the most effronted
Impieties! They belch out blasphemies against the blessed God, and implore his
Vengeance on them! They rush upon the Bosses of his Bucklers! O the Madness of
Sinners! Who would think that Men could so far degenerate, as to outdo the
very Devils in Impudence! O Sirs! will ye not be entreated, to take as much
pains to obtain Salvation, as those abandoned Wretches take to damn their
Souls, seeing that if ye do it, it is likely you will succeed. See the Pains the
dear Redeemer took to purchase Salvation! Behold the Labors and Sufferings of
his Life! Behold the Sorrows of his Soul, which caused a bloody Sweat in the
Garden, and an outcry on the Cross, Eloi, Eloi, lama Sabacthani! -- And can
you see a Savior unweariedly Laboring, yea sweating Blood to purchase your
Salvation, and be utterly unconcerned and indolent about your own? O strange
Stupidity! O horrid Madness! O Rock! O Adamant! See the Pains that Satan takes
to prevent your Salvation. Look how the Proteus changes Shapes to compass his
Design! Sometimes he appears like an Angel of Light, and sometimes he roars and
rages like a Lion rampant, seeking whom he may devour. O how subtle is he in
his Stratagems, and unwearied in his Applications! And will ye not take as much
pains for the Salvation of your Souls, as Satan does to damn them?

See the Pains that the faithful Servants of Christ take, to countermine the
Enemy and his Emissaries! To bafle their bloody Intrigues, and to rescue your
Souls out of their bewitching Wites, as a Bird out of the Snare of the Fowler.
They address you with Bowels and Solicitude, and would rejoice to hear of your
serious Inquiries after Salvation. Your accepting their Message, would be the
greatest Kindness you can express to them. Why will you blast their Labors and
break theirs Heart by your Obstinacy? Should not you in reason be more
concerned for your own Salvation than they? Now then we are Ambassadors for
Christ, as though God did beseech you by us. We pray you in Christ's stead ye be
reconciled to God. See the Gladness that spreads through all the Courts above, on
occasion of the Conversion of a Soul; the Father, Son and Spirit rejoice! the
joyful Cherubs clap their Wings and shout the Honors of victorious Grace; and
all the shining Ranks of Saints and Seraphims, join in harmonious Hosannahs to
God and to the Lamb that sits upon the Throne, and every of them strikes his
golden Harp. --

Again Brethren, consider that the Soul of Man is a restless, active Being,
that it will be painful in its chase of something, and cannot be at rest, so
that it is but turning its Motions into a religious Channel, and then its like
to have a happy Issue!

And now, Sirs, will ye, can ye, dare ye be idle after all? -- Well, I must
leave the Matter to God, and appeal to him, that I am clear of your Blood, if
you persist in your Indolence!

But perhaps, some poor Sinners Heart thaws by this Time, and asks with
seriousness, what shall I do to be saved?

Besides what has been already said in answer to this Question, I would add at
present these few Words: Labor orderly, begin at the right End of your Work,
and try to lay the Foundation first: Examine your State toward God
impartially, by his Word, and when you come to know that it is bad, think often
on the Badness and Miseries of it, and pray for a Sense of them, as well as of
your utter inability to deliver your selves from them; Repent of your Sins and
believe in the Lord Jesus; and O beware of quenching the convincing Operations
of his Holy Spirit!

But I must turn me to the Saints of God, and offer a Word of Council and
Excitement to them, and then conclude. My very dear Brethren! Be not lifted up
with Enlargements, nor cast down when ye want them; Consolation is no Part of
our Sanctification, you may travel when its Cloudy, as well as when the Sun
shines out. Be humbled for your Imperfections, but not discouraged by them, for
ye are complete in Christ, and your Right to Happiness is founded alone upon
his Blood and Obedience, by all means encourage your Faith in the Promises,
lean on Jesus as a Prophet, for Direction respecting the Matter of your
Labors, lean on him as a King to help you in the Manner of them, and lean on
him as a Priest for the Acceptance of them all.

Dear Brethren! Be excited to persevering Diligence, for it is as reasonable
and amiable now, as when ye at first believed. O beware of forgetting your
first Love, and falling from your first Works; and if any have been guilty of
this, remember from whence thou art fallen, and repent, and do the first Works,
least a displeased Jesus come unto you quickly, and remove your Candlestick out
of his Place, except ye repent.

Think on the noble Examples of heroic Faith, unbroken Patience, and
unfainting Diligence that shone with peculiar Glory and Luster, in the Lives of
many of God's Army that have gone before you to Glory, who were under no
stronger Engagements and had no greater Encouragements thereto than you, nay
diverse of them in some respects not so much, because of the brighter
Dispensation you enjoy. O then, let us work out our Salvation with fear and
trembling! Let us follow those, who by Faith and Patience inherited the
Promises. I shall conclude this Discourse with the Advice of the Apostle Paul
to the believing Hebrews, which runs thus; Wherefore seeing we also are
compassed about with so great a Cloud of Witnesses, let us lay aside every
Weight, and the Sin which does so easily beset us; and let us run with Patience
the Race that is set before us, looking unto Jesus, the Author and finisher of
our Faith. Who for the Joy that was set before him, endured the Cross,
despising the Shame, and is set down on the right Hand of the Throne of God.

SERMON II.
PHILIP. ii. 12, 13. Work out your own Salvation with fear and trembling.

For it is God that works in you, both to will and to do of his good Pleasure.


MY Brethren! The three principal Things in the Christian Religion, are
Knowledge, Faith and Practice, without which it cannot subsist.

The Object of Religion, the blessed God, is to be known and believed in as the
first Truth, loved as the chief Good, and obeyed as the supreme Lord.

The Subject of Religion, Man, must have his Mind enlightened with the Knowledge
of Truth, his Will adorned with the Belief of it, and Love of Good, as well as
his Life beautified with practical Holiness, or good Works.

The very Essence of Religion requires or includes Knowledge and Worship, and
therefore it is frequently represented in Scripture under the Character of
Doctrine and Truth, and eternal Life is ascribed to it.

And the End of Religion, namely Happiness, includes the Knowledge of God,
Faith in him, and Conformity to him, or Obedience. In Heaven the Saints will
see Jehovah as he is, and be like him; there Knowledge, Faith and Obedience
will be perfect.

The sacred Scriptures propose to us Doctrines to be known, Promises and
Threatenings to be believed, and Precepts to be obeyed; and indeed the one
prepares the Way for the other.

Without Knowledge, Faith is enthusiastical Rashness and Delusion, and without
Faith, Knowledge is but barren Speculation; without Knowledge, Practice is
blind Superstition, and without Faith, formal Devotion!

It is the last of the Three that I am to discourse upon at present, namely,
Practice, or Good Works, which are indeed the Fruit and Design of the former.

In the preceding Sermon, after an Introduction, I observed, that there be
three Things contained in the Text, viz. I. A Duty enjoined. -- II. The Manner
of performing it prescribed. And III. Arguments exciting thereto mentioned.


These Things I proposed to insist upon in their Order, by Way of Explication,
and then to proceed to the Improvement.

The first General Head of this Method I then spoke upon, and labored to open
the Properties of Good Works, as well as to unhinge the Popish Doctrine of
Merit upon the one hand, and to establish the Necessity of good Works on the
other, against the Antinomians. I likewise spoke a little upon the

Second General Head, Which was to show, how the Duties of Obedience, or Good
Works, should be performed. In speaking upon which, I mentioned two
Particulars, namely, that they should be performed, painfully and
perseveringly. I therefore proceed now to observe,

III. That we must work with fear and trembling, by which we are not to
understand, a slavish Fear, or distrust of God, For this is very prejudicial to
our Progress in Piety, it provokes our God, dejects our Minds, and mars our
Councils and Performances. It is doubtless, therefore, more generally, a filial
or child-like Fear, that is here recommended to the People of God: And
particularly, (1st) It is a Fear of Reverence respecting God's Majesty,
Wherefore we receiving a Kingdom which cannot be moved, let us have Grace,
whereby we may serve God acceptably, with Reverence and godly Fear, FOR OUR GOD
IS A CONSUMING FIRE. A holy Awe of the Greatness, Justice and Glory of God,
should ever possess our Minds. (2dly) In relation to our selves, it is a Fear
of Modesty, Humility, Self-suspicion and Self-diffidence; the same humble Mind
should be in us, which was also in Christ Jesus: The Apostle Paul was among the
Corinthians in weakness, and in fear, and in much trembling. 1 Cor. ii. 3.
Let us therefore fear, lest a Promise being left us of entering into his Rest,
any of you should seem to come short of it. Heb. iv 1.
Be not high Minded but fear. Romans xi. 20.
(3dly) In Relation to the Dangers with which we are environed, it is a Fear of
Solicitude; and hence Paul informs us, that he kept his Body under, least
having preached to others, he himself should become a castaway. We should in
Dangers distrust ourselves, and with anxious Care and eager haste, fly to
Jesus, as the only hiding Place from the Wind, and covert from the Tempest,
firmly trusting in him, and closely cleaving to him, as the Child in the
Mother's Arms on the top of a Precipice; so much the more as it fears a Fall,
will, with the greater eagerness and solicitude, embrace and cleave to its
Parent for Protection from the imminent Danger. (4thly) In respect of
Temptations, it is a Fear of Caution, disposing us to avoid the Appearances of
Evil; and to pray that we be not led into Temptation. The gracious Soul fearing
to offend his Father, and knowing his own Weakness, to withstand Temptations to
Error in Principle or Practice, does therefore in his general Course endeavor
with care to avoid them: The burnt Child dreads the Fire, but Hypocrites not
having sincere Love to Truth or Holiness, and presuming upon their own
Strength, are profanely bold, to the Roproach of God's Name, and their own
Dishonor and Prejudice. If we should be jealous over others, (with blessed
Paul) and fear least by any Means, as the Serpent beguiled Eve through his
Subtilty, so their Minds should be corrupted from the Simplicity that is in
Christ; we should have a godly Jealousy over our selves much more, for Charity
begins at Home, though it should not end there. 2 Cor. xi. 23


The Fear of God is certainly the Character of a truly religious Person; and
hence Job is described, to be one that feared God, and eschewed Evil. Job ^
Indeed it is the Foundation of all Religion.

Now a gracious Person does not only fear the Goodness of God, Hos. iii. 5.
least he should displease and loose it by unworthy Behavior; and hence we are
bid to keep our selves in the Love of God; and indeed the Use of Means to this
End is very consistent with God's Promises. Ezekiel. xxxvi. ^7.
Fear (says Augustine) is the Flight of the Soul least it should loose what it
l^ves. Fuga Anime ne perdat quod Diligit.
The dutiful Child fears to offend its Parents, and the chaste Wife fears to
displease her Husband.

I say, the gracious Person does not only fear God's Goodness, but his Justice;
the Threatenings of the divine Word, should, and do influence his Fear.

The infinitely wise God has implanted no Power or Passion in the human Soul in
vain, they all serve when regulated in their Motions and Tendencies, one
uniform, noble Design, worthy of their Author and original Situation.

And this is indeed the grand Design of the Christian Religion, which is
admirably adapted to affect every of them; this by its Precepts fires our Love;
by its Doctrines, Naratives and Proposals, it strikes our Admiration and
Ingenuity, our Gratitude and Grief. By its Threatenings it alarms our Fear, and
by its Promises allures our Hope, those cardinal Springs of Action!

Jehovah never devised a Religion, to destroy any Power or Passion he himself
had formed, but only to direct them to proper Objects, and regulate their
Degrees of Motion; which being observed, they conspire in harmony to promote
God's Glory, and the Creature's Honor, Comfort and Benefit in his Service.

Every Affection should therefore be exercised upon its proper Object, as the
Love of God is the incentive of our Love, so is his Justice (together with the
Threatenings of his Word which are the Declarations thereof) the Object of our
Fear. By these (in part) the Spirit of God as a Spirit of Bondage to fear,
brings the Soul to a Closure with Christ at first, and by these Threatenings it
is afterward influenced (in part) to walk in the Way to Blessedness.

There is a Fear of God's Judgments, which has not only God's Spirit for its
Author but Concomitant; and hence he is called a Spirit of Fear. Romans viii. 15.
This Method the Holy Spirit uses with us, while we sojourn in these clay
Tabernacles, to influence us to Obedience.

Otherwise to what purpose are the Threatenings propounded to Believers so
frequently in the Holy Scriptures? Unless it be to excite their Fear? Surely
Paul understood the Gospel thoroughly, and yet he enjoins Believers in our
Text, to work out the Work of their Salvation with fear and trembling. And
elsewhere he Exhorts them, to serve God acceptably with Godly Fear; and that
because God is a consuming Fire. And did not our Lord urge his Disciples to
fear him, that after he has killed, has power to cast into Hell. Luke xii. 5.
The Psalmist expresses the solemn Sense he had of the Judgments of God in the
following Manner; My Flesh trembles for fear of thee, and I am afraid of thy
Judgments! Ps. cxix. 120.


Although the Command of God, be the ground or formal Reason of our Obedience,
yet the Fear of him should be a subordinate Motive.

And indeed there is a beautiful Harmony between the Grace of Fear, and Faith,
Love, Hope and Joy.

Faith produces Fear, and Fear confirms Faith; By Faith Noah being warned of
God, of things not seen as yet, moved with fear, prepared an Ark. Heb. xi. 7
All Men shall fear (says the Psalmist) and trust in him. Psalm. lxiv. 9.
Faith by giving the Soul a View of God's Justice and Holiness, produces a Fear
of Reverence, and this disposes the Soul the more to believe the certainty of
God's Judgments!

And Love without Fear, would become secure and irreverent, and Fear without
Love would become slavish and tormenting! There is nothing more fearful than an
ingenuous Love, and nothing more loving than a filial Fear.

There is also an admirable Harmony between Fear and Hope; without Fear, Hope
would degenerate into Presumption, and without Hope, Fear would sink into
Desperation.

Nor is there any inconsistency between Fear and Joy, for Fear qualifies Joy,
and makes it reverent, and becoming a dependent Being; and Joy sweetens Fear
and makes it pleasing and delightful. And hence we are bid to rejoice with
trembling. Psalm. ii. 11.
And the Man is pronounced blessed, that fears the Lord, that delights
greatly in his Commandments. Ps. cxii. 1.
I proceed now to the

III General Head of Discourse, which was to show, why we should perform the
Duties of Obedience required of us. And

First: This is the Command of God; Work out your own Salvation with fear and
trembling. But as he which has called you is holy, so be ye holy in all manner
of Conversation. Heb. xii. 14.
Follow Peace with all Men, and Holiness, without which no Man shall see the
Lord. Put on Bowels of Mercy, Kindness, humbleness of Mind. Col. iii. 12.
They who have believed in God, should be careful to maintain good Works. Tit.
iii. 8.
God is our unalterable and rightful Lord and Sovereign, to him we, owe by the
strongest Claims of Right, Homage and Service, seeing it is from him we have
derived our all, and on him we have a continual Dependence; his Will is
therefore our Law, to which we are obliged to conform, with the utmost
Readiness and profoundest Reverence; and in this Way only we can reasonably
expect his Acceptance. But when this is refused, a rebellious unequal War is
commenced against Heaven.

Secondly: It is a Work of Salvation; Work out your own Salvation; and
therefore its an honorable, pleasant and profitable Work.

The Work of SALVATION is honorable, in respect of its Author, Nature and
Consequences.

The Author of this Work is honorable, no other than the glorious God; he it
is that has enjoined it, and him we serve in the Performance of it. It Is
accounted an Honor to attend the Person of an earthly Potentate, but herein we
attend the King of Kings and Lord of Lords, and that as feated on his gracious
Throne, and have therein the noblest Seraphs for our Companions.

And indeed the Nature of this Work is honorable, tending to enoble our
reasonable Nature, by conforming it to the Divine. Are not the pious
Dispositions and Actions we are called to, the very same for Substance that the
Angels are continually employed about? The Nature of the Service enjoined upon
us is spiritual, pure and precious. Besides the Consequence hereof is
honorable; for thus we are not only the Servants but the Friends of God; ye
are my Friends, said the blessed Jesus to his Disciples, if you do whatsoever I
command you. John xv. 14.
And is any Title more honorable than this, to be the Friend of God? This was
the Honor to which the blessed Abraham was advanced, and with which he was
adorned.

Again, my Brethren, the Work of Salvation is a pleasant Work; Wisdoms Ways are
Ways of pleasantness, and all its Paths are peace. The Psalmist speaking of the
Commands of God, declares, that they are sweeter than Honey, and the Honeycomb.
And what can be intended by this, but that they are lovely in themselves, and
that Obedience to them is delightful?

Now this Delight in Obedience, springs in part from the Suitableness thereof
to the New Nature that is in gracious Persons, which gives a spiritual and
general Bias to all the Powers of their Souls; and therefore cannot but make
(holy) Actions, which are agreeable to that fixed Principle, easy and pleasant,
especially when Grace is in exercise. It is on this Account our Lord assures
us, that his Yoke is easy, and his Burden is light. He does not make his Yoke
easy by lessening it, but by conforming our Dispositions to it. And hence the
Apostle informs us that he delighted in the Law of God, after the inner Man: i.
e. So far as he was renewed he loved it, and was naturally inclined to obey it,
and therefore delighted therein. The new Nature is as prone to obey the Law, as
a Fountain to send out its Streams; and therefore its compared to a Well of
Water, that springs up to eternal Life. But because our Sanctification is
imperfect, therefore the Flesh lusts against the Spirit, and hinders us in Acts
of Obedience, so that we cannot do the Things that we would. And thus our
sacred Service is stained, our Peace broken at Times, and our Pleasure marred.
But when that which is perfect is come, then that which is in part shall be
done away.

But the Delight in Obedience, likewise results from that Communion with God
which is enjoined therein; this gives rest to the weary Soul, and is as Marrow
and Fatness to the Hungry, yea it is the very Life of Life. The blessed God
meets in mercy those that work Righteousness, and gives them Communications of
Light, of Love, of Peace, of Joy; and hence the Psalmist observes, that those
have great Peace, that love God's Law. -- And that in keeping his Commandments
there is a great Reward. -- This is our rejoicing, says the Apostle Paul, that
in Simplicity and godly Sincerity, not with fleshly Wisdom, we have had our
Conversation in the World.

And is not the Work of Salvation profitable, my Brethren? Yes surely! For
Godliness has not only the Promise of this Life, but of that which is to come.
If we seek first the Kingdom of Heaven, and the Righteousness thereof, all
other Things shall be added to us, says our dear Redeemer: i. e. We shall have
that Measure of the Things of Time, and that Degree of Comfort in them, which
is most for God's Glory and our Benefit. And can we reasonably desire more? But
our Reward of Mercy, is principally to be expected in a future World; there,
there, our Salvation shall be complete and perfect. Now there ^re three
Properties of that Salvation, in the Expectation of which we labor, that may
justly incite our Diligence, viz. it is great, incomprehensible eternal.

It is a great Salvation, not only in respect of the Price which was laid down
to purchase it, the Blood of the Son of God, but also in respect of the Evils
we are thereby delivered from, and the Blessings we are instated in. There is a
perfect Freedom from all moral and penal Evil, from Sin and all the gloomy
Train of Miseries introduced by it, which affect our Names, Bodies, Estates and
our Souls. In Heaven there is a perfect Rest prepared from them all! There we
shall be freed from every Remain of Evil, and all Tears shall be wiped away.

And on the other Hand, how great are the Blessings that are there possessed?
Such as an immediate Vision of the blessed God, a perfect Conformity to him, an
uninterrupted Communion with him, and unceasing Joy and Praise thence issuing!
Then the glorified shall see Jehovah as he is, and be made like to him in
Purity and Perfection! O the pleasing Transports that must result from an
immediate View of the unvailed Beauties of the Deity! The orient Glories of
IMMANUEL, and all the opened Charms of his Word, and Works of Creation,
Redemption, and Providence.

Another Property of this Salvation is, that it is incomprehensible; Eye has
not seen, neither has Ear heard, nor has it entered into the Heart of Man to
conceive, the Greatness of that Glory that is reserved for the People of God.
-- Beloved now are we the Sons of God, and it does not yet appear what we shall
be; but we know that when he shall appear, we shall be like him; for we shall
see him as he is. The richest and strongest Images we can form, faint before
the Glories of Paradise! Our Minds in their most exalted Flights, cannot
project adequate Ideas of it, and our Speech is lost in Obscurity when we
attempt the Theme.

In the mean time we may be permitted to say, that it is an eternal Salvation,
a Happiness that shall know no Interruption or End; and hence the Place where
it is enjoyed is called a City, that has Foundations, whose builder and maker
is God. It is perfectly freed from all the Changes and Vicissitudes to which
the Things of Time are Subject.

Thirdly: Another Argument used by the Apostle in our Text, to excite to
Obedience, is the Property that Believers have in Salvation; Work out your own
Salvation. Property is certainly the Spring of Labor and Solicitude about the
Things of Time, and should it not be much more so about the Things of Eternity,
which infinitely excel them in Importance and Duration? If you are wise here,
you are wise for your selves, but if foolish you alone must bear it. It is your
own Salvation, Brethren, which you are entreated to secure. And will ye not be
concerned about it, and labor for that Meat which will never perish?

Some that neglect others Business, are careful about their own, because of
their Property. Well, here is an Eternal and most important Property, the one
Thing needful, which exceeds in Value all the rest; and which unless it be
secured, all is lost; For what shall a Man give in exchange for his Soul, if he
should gain the whole World and loose the same?

And forasmuch as it is highly probable, that there are different Degrees of
Glory, as well as of Misery, and that those who have made the greatest Advances
in Holiness and Usefulness are made Partakers of the former. This is no
inconsiderable Excitement to religious Diligence; He that gained ten Talents,
was made Ruler over ten Cities; and those that turn many unto Righteousness,
are said to shine as the Stars for ever and ever, i. e. with distinguished
Luster. But the

Fourth, and last Argument, which the Apostle uses in our Text, to excite the
believing Philippians, and us through them, to work out the Work of your
Salvation with fear and tremblings, is this, that it is God which works in
us, both to will and to do of his own good Pleasure. This Argument is adapted
to work upon our Gratitude, our Fear and our Hope, as appears thus:

It is a great Instance of divine Goodness and Condescension, that he freely
and without any desert of yours, works in you by his holy Spirit a Disposition
and Capacity to do good; and therefore, Ingenuity and Gratitude for so great a
Benefit, should constrain you to comply with his blessed Operations.

It is a holy and sovereign God who, works in you of his own good Pleasure, who
if ye do not comply with his Influences humbly and speedily, will be provoked
to withdraw them, and chastise your neglect; though he will not take his loving
Kindness away, or suffer his Faithfulness to fail; yet he will chastise your
Iniquities with Rods, and your Transgressions with Stripes. This Consideration
may justly alarm your Fear.

It is a gracious God who works in you, both to will and to do: And this may
Support your Hope; though you are not equal to the Work required, God is able and
willing to help you, in case you stir up your selves to lay hold upon him, and
labor to improve the Grace ye have received; and this he has given you a Proof
of, in his working in you both to will and to do of his own good Pleasure.

Having endeavored to explain the Particulars contained in our Text, I now
proceed to the Improvement. And

First. What has been said serves to inform us, of the Folly and Danger, of the
Principles and Practice of the Antinomians and Libertines, who slight the Law
of God, and good Works done in Obedience to it, with a View to a Reward of
Grace. They cry up Faith and Grace, to the Disparagement of good Works, as if
we had nothing to do but fold our Arms with the Sluggard, and expect to be
carried to Heaven on our Couches. But the Religion of Christ, is a Mystery of
Godliness, and his Doctrines the Truth according to Godliness, pure Religion
and und^fied, is active and laborious, it disposes to visit the Widow and the
Fatherless, and to keep our selves unspotted from the World; and to add to our
Faith Virtue, and to Virtue Godliness, and to Godliness Brotherly-Kindness, and
to Brotherly-Kindness Charity. But to shed Light upon the Subject, let me
briefly answer the most material Objections against what has been said. And

1st. Some Object, That urging of good Works is prejudicial to Christ's Merit.

Answer. If we urged good Works, to be performed with the same Intention that
Christ did them as Mediator, namely to satisfy divine Justice, and purchase a
Title to Happiness in any degree, it would be derogatory to Christ's Merit, I
confess, but when we urge them to be performed with a very different Design,
namely, out of Gratitude to God, and with a View to obtain by them, (as
appointed Means for that end) a greater Degree of Meetness for the actual
Possession of that Happiness which we have a Right to, only through Faith in his
Blood and Obedience, it sweetly Harmonizes with his Merit.

The dear Redeemer, has not only purchased Glory for his Elect, but Grace to
prepare them for it, which he enjoins the unconverted to seek; and hence they
are commanded to make them a new Heart. Even Simon Magus was advised to pray,
if peradventure the Thoughts of his Heart might be forgiven him. And this Grace
the converted are enjoined to improve. Good Works are one End of the Redeemer's
Purchase; who gave himself for us (says the Apostle to Titus) that he might
redeem us from all Iniquity, and purify to himself a peculiar People zealous of
good Works.

Object. 2d. "Urging of Works is derogatory to free Grace by which we are
saved."

Ans. No! For though God gives his Grace freely of his own sovereign Pleasure,
when and to whom he pleases; yet such is his Wisdom, that he generally (in
order to incite his reasonable Creatures to Diligence) gives Grace and increase
of it in the Way of Means; and therefore he has told us, that for all these
Things he will be inquired of, and COMMANDS us to ask, that we may receive.
Besides it should be considered, that there is a Difference between a Right to
Salvation, and the Possession of it: the first is altogether by Grace, but the
latter is not to be expected without Works; (if there be any Opportunity to
perform them) for without Holiness no Man shall see the Lord.

Object. 3d. To urge Men to work out their Salvation is vain and impossible.

Ans. It is a Mistake: The unconverted may abstain from many Evils they commit,
and seriously wait upon God in the Performance of commanded Duty, which if they
do, and labor to avoid depending thereupon, there is a Probability of their
obtaining Mercy.

Besides the Calls that are given them, have a Tendency to convince them of
their Impotency, and so to humble them and prepare them for divine Grace, (I
mean in respect of Order.)

Add to this, that they are Means of divine Appointment, which God is wont to
bless for that end.

As to the converted they have a Principle of Grace, and so may stir up
themselves in some sort to lay hold on God; they may strive for the Exercise of
Grace and the Improvement of what they have received; and it is in this way
only, that they can with reason expect it; To him that has shall be given.

Object. 4th. "To urge Works is Legal.'

Ans. If Works are urged with a Design to Merit by them, it is legal in a bad
Sense, and so sinful and dangerous; For such as seek after Righteousness as it
were by the Works of the Law, shall not obtain Righteousness, but to urge them
as the Way to the Kingdom of Heaven, and as Expressions of Thankfulness to God,
is no more than what Christ and his Apostles have done, and if any will
presumptuously call them legal, they declare their own Shame. Now to do good
Works with the Design before mentioned, is to be legal in a good Sense: i. e.
conformed to the Law; or in other Words, it is to be Holy; and therefore those
Libertines that object against it, they make Holiness it self Matter of
Reproach.

The Term Legal is much abused by the Antinomians; hereby the Ignorant are
amused and prejudiced against Repentance and Holiness, by empty Sounds that
they do not understand. The English Word legal, comes from the Latin Word lex,
a Law; so that etymologically, (or originally,) it signifies what belongs to
the Law. Custom has put a bad Sense upon the Word since the Reformation from
Popery, to denote a Dependence upon Works or Obedience to the Law for
Justification, or a being discouraged in the Way of Obedience, because of
lamented Imperfections, while we believe and are sincerely laborious. Both
these Things are doubtless very bad, and to be avoided. Now the Word is only
properly used in a bad Sense when it is applied to them; but it is basely
abused when applied by way of Invective against Care and Labor in Obedience to
the Law of God. The original Meaning of the Word legal is good, it signifies a
Regard or Conformity to the Law; or in other Words to be holy; and the bad
Sense that has been put upon it in later Times is improper and figurative; so
that to say a Man is bad because he is legal, or careful to conform to the Law,
is to say in other Words, that he is wicked because he is holy, which is no
very strong Argument to prove the Point.

But my Brethren, I hope you will not suffer your selves to be prejudiced
against Truth and Holiness by ignorant Invectives, empty Sounds, and misapplied
Words.

If any are for a GOSPEL that rejects Obedience to the Moral Law, there is no
such Gospel in the BIBLE, Christ nor his Apostles never preached such a Gospel,
but the contrary: It is a MYSTERY of INIQUITY and MISCHIEF: From such a Gospel
good Lord deliver us!

Object. 5th. If we are elected we shall be saved, whither we Work or not.

Ans. The secret Purposes of God, are not the Rule of our Duty, but his Word;
Secret Things belong to God, but Things revealed, to us and to our Children.
And such as are elected, are chosen to obedience through Sanctification of the
Spirit and Belief of the Truth. Wherefore we are commanded to make our Calling
and Election sure. First, we must comply with God's gracious Calls, and then
our Election will be made sure to us, but not otherwise.

Object. 6th. To press Repentance is not suitable to the Gospel.

Ans. That Repentance is a Gospel Duty, will appear by the following
Considerations, viz.

It is commanded by God under the Gospel Dispensation; but the Times of
Ignorance God winked at, but now commands all Men every where to repent. Acts
xvii. 30.
And the Author to the Hebrews represents Repentance, to be a
foundation-Principle of the Doctrine of Christ. Heb. vi. 1.


This was the End of Christ's coming into the World, as well as of his
Exaltation; and hence he himself informs us, that he came not to call the
Righteous but Sinners to Repentance. Mat. ix. 13.
And elsewhere it is said, him has God exalted with his right Hand, to be a
Prince and a Savior, for to give Repentance to Israel and Remission of Sins.
Acts v. 3.


This is one Promise of the New Covenant, and a Fruit of Faith, as the Prophet
Zachariah instructs us; And they shall look on him whom they have pierced and
mourn. Zech. xii. 10.


This, a Seal of the New Covenant, namely Baptism confirms; and hence it is
called, the Baptism of Repentance, Acts xiii. 24
and John is said to baptize to Repentance. Mat. iii. 11.


To this are made the Promises of the New Covenant, by Christ himself; blessed
are they that mourn, for they shall be comforted. Mat. v. 4.


This is prescribed by the Gospel, as the Way to Pardon and Life; Repent ye
therefore (says Peter to the Jews) and be converted, that your Sins may be
blotted out. Acts iii. 19.
Repent therefore of this thy Wickedness (says the same Apostle to Simon Magus)
and pray God, if perhaps the Thoughts of thy Heart may be forgiven thee. Acts
viii. 22.


The Apostles and Brethren at Jerusalem, when they heard that the Gentiles had
also received the Word of God; they glorified God saying, than has God also to
the Gentiles, granted Repentance unto Life. Acts xi. 1, 19.


When the convinced Jews enquired of Peter and the rest of the Apostles, what
they should do to be saved? he advised them to repent, for the Remission of
Sins. Acts ii. 37, 38.
This our dear Lord and his Apostles preached, yea he began and ended his
preaching with Repentance; At that time (says Matthew) Jesus began to preach,
and to say, repent, for the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand. Mat. iv. 17. The
Tenor of Christ's Commission is, to bind up the brokenhearted, and comfort
Mourners. Is. lxi. 1, 2, 3.
And Luke mentions these Words of Christ to his Disciples after his
Resurrection, and said unto them, thus it behoved Christ to suffer, and to rise
from the dead the third Day, and that Repentance and Remission of Sins should
be preached in his Name among all Nations, beginning at Jerusalem. Luke xxvi.
46, 47.


Repentance, my dear Brethren, was one of the principal Subjects of Paul's
Ministry; Whereupon, O King Agripa! I was not disobedient to the heavenly
Vision, but showed first to them of Damascus, and at Jerusalem, and throughout
all the Coast of Judea, and then to the Gentiles, that they should REPENT and
turn to God, and DO WORKS MEET for REPENTANCE. Acts xxvi. 19, 20.
And elsewhere when he gives a summary Account of his ministerial Labors, he
says, that he kept back nothing that was profitable, but testified both to the
Jews and Greeks Repentance toward God, and Faith toward our Lord Jesus
Christ. Acts xx. 20, 21.


The Apostle Peter preached it to the Jews; then said Peter unto them, repent
and be baptized every one of you for the Remission of Sins, and ye shall
receive the Gift of the Holy Ghost. Acts ii. 38.


And the Apostle John declared it to both Jews and Gentiles in these Words; If
we say we have no sin, we deceive our selves and the Truth is not in us: If we
confess our Sins, he is faithful and just, (i. e. to his Promise) to forgive us
our Sins, and to cleanse us from all Unrighteousness. 1 John i. 9.


The Apostle Paul calls it, a GODLY SORROW -- a Repentance not to be repented
of; and rejoiced that the Corinthians sorrowed after a godly sort. 2 Cor. vii.
9.
Now seeing that Christ ordered Repentance and Remission of Sins to be preached
in his Name, to all Nations, as before observed, it evidently appears, that
this is one important Branch of the COMMISSION Christ gives to his Ministers,
and therefore is one Character by which we may be assisted in judging who they
are. I may add to what has been said, that Repentance is excluded by the
Covenant of Works, there is no Place for Repentance there, no Plank after
Shipwreck; Nulla tabula post naufragium, Justificati amici, L^gis efficiuntur,
says Ambrose i. e. Justified Persons are Friends of the Law.
it requires nothing but perfect Obedience, and neither enjoins nor admits
Repentance, for it admits not of Pardon; and where there is no Forgiveness,
there can be no Place for Repentance; Repentance and Forgiveness come in
therefore by the New Covenant. From what has been said upon this Head,
considered complexly, you may see, that if there be any Gospel-Duties at all,
Repentance is one, and therefore that those who reject it, as legal, understand
not what they say, nor whereof they affirm, and have found out a PRETENDED
GOSPEL different from what Christ and his Apostles preached.

Let me therefore exhort you, my Brethren! to the Exercise of Repentance, and
other good Works; Work out the Work of your Salvation with fear and trembling;
and O bewail your past Defects. To this you are obliged many ways, viz.

First: By the Covenant of Grace, which consists of two Parts, namely, God's
Promise to you, and yours to him. As he has promised to be your God, so ye have
promised to be his People: i. e. to behave suitable to the Character of such.
God's gracious Promises to assist in the Performance of Duty, does not weaken
but strengthen our Obligations thereto.

The Promise of Grace proceeds from all the sacred Three, who equally concur to
the Work of Redemption, and because of their different Manner of Operation,
bear a peculiar Relation to us thereby. The first Person of the Trinity, as a
Father, adopts us into his Family; the Second, as a Head and Redeemer, ransoms
us and unites us as a Body mystical to himself; the third Person as a
Sanctifier, consecrates us as his Temples; from all which a threefold Necessity
of Obedience results, namely, that we may live suitable to the Duty and
Character of Sons of God, of Members of Christ, and of Temples of the Holy
Ghost, being zealous of good Works.

Secondly: We are obliged to good Works by the Doctrines of Grace, which the
Gospel opens, which are not merely Speculative and entertaining to the Mind,
but Practical, which affect and renew the Will, regulate the Affections, and
reform the Practice; they are Truths that sanctify the whole Man. John xvii. 17.
A Law of Spirit and Life, which frees us from the Law of Sin and Death. Romans
viii. 2.
Which make us not without Law, but under the Law to Christ. 1 Cor. ix. 21.
The Doctrines of Grace are a Mystery of Piety, the Religion they explain and
inculcate, is pure and undefiled.

Thirdly: We are obliged to good Works, by the State of Grace and Liberty into
which the Gospel brings us, which is a spiritual Freedom from the Curse of the
Law, the Tyranny of the Devil, and the Dominion of Sin, not a FLESHLY LICENSE,
that frees us from Obedience to God's Law, but such a Liberty as engages us the
more to love and serve the blessed God, both in Point of Duty and of Gratitude;
being then made free from sin, says Paul to the believing Romans, ye became the
Servants of Righteousness Romans vi. 18.
And elsewhere he addresses the believing Gala^ans thus; For Brethren ye have
been called unto Liberty, only use not Liberty for an Occasion to the Flesh.
Gal. v. 13.


Fourthly: We are obliged to good Works by all the Benefits of Grace, whether
relative or real, whether in purpose or performance, whether past, present or
to come; For ^he Grace of God that brings Salvation, has appeared to all
Men, (to all Nations of Men, to all Orders of Men) teaching, us, that denying
ungodliness and worldly Lusts, we should live soberly, righteously and godly in
this present World. Tit. ii. 1^.
The Doctrines of Grace do not only teach this, but the Gifts of Grace oblige
and dispose to it.

Good Works are proposed to us as the Effects of eternal Election, which is
past; and hence we are said to be chosen, before the Foundation of the World,
that we should be Holy. Ephesians. i. 4.


And good Works are likewise represented, as the Fruits, Signs and Seals of
Grace present; but the Fruit of the Spirit is gentleness, Meekness, Temperance.
Gal. v. 2^.
As the Branch cannot bear Fruit of it self, except it abide in the Vine. No
more can ye, says our Lord, except ye abide in me. John xv. 4.
The Foundation of God stands sure, having this Seal, the Lord knows who
are his. And let every one that names the Name of Christ depart from Iniquity.
2 Timothy ii. 19.


Yea, my Brethren, good Works are also represented as the Seed, First Fruits
and Earnests of Glory future; He that sows to the Spirit, shall of the Spirit
reap Life everlasting; and not only they, but our selves also, which have the
First Fruits of the Spirit. We groan within ourselves, waiting for the
Redemption of our Bodies.

The Holy Scripture represents good Works as having a Respect to Happiness in
the coming World, somewhat like that of Labor to the Reward, of Means to the
End, of a Way to the Mark, of a Combat to the Crown; from all which
considerations it appears, that good Works are so necessary to Salvation, that
it cannot be obtained without them; and hence the Gospel pronounces
Condemnation upon all unholy and profane Persons, and declares that they shall
not inherit the Kingdom of God.

Dear Brethren, be excited for God's sake, and for your own Souls sake, to work
out the Work of your Salvation, with fear and trembling. O consider, that this
is the Design of the Father's electing Love, of the Death and Life of the Son
of God; he died to purchase Grace for it, and lived to give an Example of it.
And is it not the great Design of the blessed Spirit's Office to promote this?
To what but this tends every Line of the Book of God, and all Discourses drawn
from it?

To promote this all Duties and Ordinances of Worship were enjoined, and
Providence in its various Aspects, either benign or adverse, bends as a
well-drawn Line to this Center.

O therefore, let Love to God the Father, Son and Spirit and to our own Souls
constrain us to Obedience: And O let a Regard to the Glory of God and the Good
of Mankind engage us thereto.

Sirs! All Incentives of Action conspire in this. O let Honor, Interest, Duty,
and Gratitude allure, excite, and constrain you to work out the Work of your
Salvation with fear and trembling.

But why should we Work with fear and trembling? I answer, because God requires
and deserves it, and likewise it is suitable to our dependent State, and many
ways promotes our Interest and Benefit.

The commanding Will of God is express in this Matter, as our Text signifies;
and this alone should be sufficient to determine the Compliance of all
intelligent Creatures. But because we are naturally backward to our Duty,
therefore other Arguments may be suggested.

The blessed God has not only a right to our Fear and Reverence, because he has
made us by his Power, preserved us and provided for us, by his watchful and
kind Providence; but he also deserves it on account of his glorious
Perfections, every of which are proper Objects of Fear, as well as powerful
Incentives to it, when beheld in a just light. Particularly his unblemished
Purity, his almighty Power, his infinite Knowledge, and inflexible Justice, his
awful Majesty and alluring Mercy.

How affecting is the Purity of God, my Brethren! Surely Jehovah is glorious in
Holiness. This venerable Attribute of the Deity, demerits a Tribute of
Reverence from all the intelligent Creation. While the noblest Seraphims behold
it, they are overcome (as it were) by its superior Blaze and Beauty, into
Transport and Extacy, and cry out holy, holy, holy, is the Lord of Hosts, the
whole Earth is full of his Glory: they cover their Faces and their Feet with
their Wings, as unworthy to behold it and to be beheld by it. Isaiah. vi.
The Angels themselves being Creatures, cannot bear the dazzling Luster of the
divine Purity, but are ^onscious of their infinite Distance from the divine
Perfection, and therefore are full of Fear and Reverence in their Attendance
upon God. How much more then should we who are impure Creatures of a meaner
Mould? O! if we had clearer Discoveries of God's Purity, we should fear him
more. When the Apostle Peter had a Glimpse of the Glory of Christ, being
overcome with its Luster, he fell down at Jesus Knees, and said, depart from
me, for I am a sinful Man O Lord. Luke v. 8.
We cannot behold the natural Sun in his meridian Altitude, with our naked Eye
long, because its superior Brightness overcomes the weak Organs of our Sight.

And does not the Almighty Power of God deserve our Fear? A Power which has no
Bounds but his own Nature and Will; a Power, by which with a Word and in a
Moment, he spoke the stupenduous Fabric of Heaven and Earth into Being, and by
which he supports them in their present Order: A Power by which he bounds the
turbulent Deep with a Girdle of Sand, that it shall not again inundate the
World: A Power, by which he binds the Winds in his Fists, and brings the Snow
and Hail out of his Treasures, as well as the former and the latter rain: A
Power, by which he thunders in the Heavens, and breaks the Councils of his
Enemies on Earth, and does what he pleases in defiance of all Opposition of
Men and Devils, in the Kingdoms of Nature, of Grace, and Providence: Who would
not fear thee, thou King of Nations? who have a sovereign absolute Empire over
all. Fear him, says our Lord, who is able to cast Soul and Body into Hell. As
Jehovah is the most valuable Friend, so he is the most formidable Foe; For who
knows the Power of his Anger, even according to his Fear, so is his Wrath; we
cannot equal it, far less exceed it, in our most trembling, fearful Flights of
Thought, because it is infinite, and all our Ideas are finite.

And surely, my Brethren, the infinite Knowledge of God, by which all things
from everlasting to everlasting, are open at once to his Eye, is enough to
strike your Souls with a solemn Awe of God. This Consideration much affected
the Psalmist, (and well it might) Thou know (says he) my down-sitting and my
up-rising, thou understandest my Thought afar off, thou (...) passest my path,
and my lying-down, (...) acquainted with all my Ways. -- Such Knowledge is too
wonderful for me; it is high, I cannot attain unto it. The Darkness is as the
Light to God, and the Night shines as the Day. O Sirs! the Thoughts of God's
all-seeing Eye being continually upon us, beholding us in our most secure
Retreats, is enough to make us fear and tremble before him.

Add to this the inflexible Justice of God, which disposes him to render to all
according to their Works; this is impartial in its Executions, it will not
spare because of the Number or Quality of Transgressors, but render to them
exactly according to the Degrees of their Guilt, and when the Time of Probation
expires, it is inexorable; this excites Jehovah's Power, and awakes his Wrath
to Arms; this makes his Vengeance burn and sparkle against indolent and
obstinate Transgressors; this opens impending Clouds of Indignation, and makes
them break into resistless Torrents of Woe, which drown Sinners in a sudden
Death, and sweep them off the burdened Globe, into a swift, certain, and
eternal Destruction!

And how affecting likewise, dear Brethren, is the Majesty and Immensity of the
blessed GOD! which fills Heaven and Earth, and infinitely surpasses the Bounds
of Matter! Though the Globe we tread upon be very extensive, yet it is but a
Point compared with the visible Heavens, and that, it is probable, is much
exceeded by the third Heaven; and yet we are informed, that the Heaven of
Heavens cannot contain God. The Sinner therefore cannot escape his Cognizance
or Justice; this Thought affected the Psalmist, who speaks in the following
Manner respecting it; Whither shall I go from thy Spirit? Or whither shall I
flee from thy Presence? If I ascend up into Heaven, thou art there: If I make
my Bed in Hell, behold thou art there. If I take the Wings of the Morning, and
dwell in the uttermost Parts of the Sea; even there shall thy Hand lead me, and
thy right Hand shall hold me. Psalm cxxxix. 8, 9.
If we ascend Carmel's Top, or dive the Ocean's Depths, God is there. He is
wise in Heart and mighty in Strength, who has hardened himself against God and
prospered?

And does not the Goodness of God, lay us under strong and ingenuous
Engagements to fear him? O is it not the vilest Ingratitude to offend such a
faithful Friend, such an indulgent Father, such a bounteous Benefactor, and
requite him evil for good? Will not therefore our fear of displeasing him, rise
in Proportion to the Degree of our Love to him, and that in Proportion to the
Degree of our Faith in his Promises, and View of his Excellencies?

Now Sirs, if we compare our Vileness with God's Purity, our Weakness with his
Almightiness, our Ignorance with his Knowledge, our Guilt with his Justice, our
Cruelty with his Goodness, may not this View make us fear and tremble before
him? Moreover, is it not congruous to the State of a dependent Creature, to
fear and tremble before his great Lord and Sovereign, to whom he owes, and on
whom depends his All?

Yea, my Brethren, as the Fear of God is the distinguishing Character of his
People, and the Foundation of all Religion, so the constant Sense of it, is of
peculiar Service to promote its Interest in the Souls of Men: by this they are
more conformed to God in Holiness, and disposed to perform Acts of Worship to
him, with a Decency and Reverence becoming a Creature to his Lord and
Sovereign; and by this many hurtful Excesses are prevented; without this, we
are like a Vessel that has large Sails but no Ballast, and is in the mean time
beat upon with boisterous Winds and angry Waves; without this, our Faith
degenerates into Presumption, our Love into an effeminate Fondness, our Hope
into Impudence, our Joy into Froth and Lightness, our supposed Communion with
God, into an undecent Irreverence, as if we were upon a par with him, who are
but Worms of the Dust, that are crushed before the Moth, and lighter than
Vanity.

And indeed without the Fear of God, we are apt to be caught unawares, and
fall heedless and headlong into every sinful Snare that we are exposed to.
Abraham the Friend of God, excelled in this ornamental Grace. After his
extraordinary Vision, he speaks in the following Strain; How dreadful is this
Place? This is no other than the House of God, and this is the Gate of Heaven.
And upon another Occasion, with what Reverence did he address God, saying,
Behold I that am but dust and Ashes, have taken upon me to speak to God. O let
not the Lord he angry! In fine, the Fear of God is the Root of all true
Religion, the Law of God is the Rule of it, and Obedience to that Law, is the
natural and necessary Fruit thence issuing, all which Particulars, are
excellently represented by Solomon in the Close of his Book of Ecclesiastes,
with whose Words I shall conclude; Let us hear the Conclusion of the whole
Matter, fear God and keep his Commandments, for this is the whole Duty of Man.
For God shall bring every Work into Judgment, with every secret Thing, whether
it be good or whether it be Evil.

FINIS.
CORRIGENDA.
PAGE 97 line 17, read Commandments; p. 115, l. 9, read effectually; p. 118, l
23, read acquit; p 190, l. 10, read original; p 193, l 5, read difference; p
218, l. 5 read Lusts; p 235, l 1^, read displayed; p 299, l. 7, read enjoyed; p
319, l. 6, read clayie: p. 325, l. 19, read enjoyed; p. 345, l. 15, read makes.


