THE CHARTER Granted by His MAJESTY King CHARLES II. TO The Governor and
Company OF The English COLONY OF Rhode Island AND PROVIDENCE-Plantations, IN
NEW ENGLAND IN AMERICA.

NEWPORT, Rhode Island: Printed by the Widow FRANKLIN, and to be Sold at the
Town School-House. M, DCC, XLIV.

The CHARTER Granted by His MAJESTY King CHARLES the Second, etc.
CHARLES THE SECOND, by the Grace of GOD, King of England, Scotland, France and
Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc.
To ALL to whom these Presents shall co^^* Greeting.
WHEREAS We have (...) informed by the humble Petition of (...) trusty and
well-beloved Subject, John (...) on the Behalf of Benjamin Arnold, William
Brenton, (...) Coddington, Nicholas Easton, William Boulston, John (...) John
Smith, Samuel Gorton, John Wickes, Roger (...) Thomas Ol^ey, Gr^gory Dexter,
John Coggeshall, Joseph (...) Randell Holden, John Green, John Room, Samuel
(...) William Fie^d, James Barker, Richard Tew, Thomas Harris, and William
Dyre, and the rest of the Purchasers and Free Inhabitants of Our Island, called
RHODE ISLAND, and the rest of the Colony of Providence-Plantations, in the
Narragansett Bay in New England in America; That They, pursuing with peaceable
and loyal Minds, their sober, The Petition, and Grounds of the Grant.
serious and religious Intentions of godly Edifying themselves and one another
in the Holy Christian Faith and Worship, as they were persuaded; together with
the Gaining over and Conversion of the poor ignorant Indian Natives in those
Parts of America, to the sincere Profession and Obedience of the same Faith and
Worship; did not onl^ by the Consent and good Encouragement of our Royal
Progenitors, transport themselves out of this Kingdom of England into America,
but also, since their Arrival there, after their first Settlement amongst other
Our Subjects in those Parts, for the avoiding of Discord, and those many Evils
which were likely to ensue upon some of those Our Subjects, not being able to
bear (...) those remote Parts, their different Apprehensions in religious
Concernments; and in pursuance of the aforesaid Ends, did once again, leave
their desirable Stations and Habitations, and with excessive Labor and Travel,
Hazard and C^^rge, did transplant themselves into the midst of the Indian
Natives, who, as We are informed, are the most potent Princes and People of all
that Country: Where, by the good Providence of GOD, from which the Plantations
have taken their Name, upon their Labor and Industry, they have not only been
preserved to Admiration, but have increased and prospered, and are seized and
possessed, by Purchase and Consent of the said Natives to their full Content,
of such Lands, Islands, Rivers, Harbors, and Roads, as are very convenient,
both for Plantations, and also for Building of Ships, Supply of Pipe-Staves,
and other Merchandise; and which lie very commodious, in many Respects, for
Commerce, and to accommodate Our Southern Plantations; and may much advance the
Trade of this Our Realm, and greatly enlarge the Territories thereof: They
having by near Neighborhood to, and friendly Society with the great Body of
the Narragansett Indians, given them Encouragement of their own Accord, to
subject themselves, their People and Lands unto Us; whereby, as is hoped, there
may in Time, by the Blessing of GOD upon their Endeavors, be laid a sure
Foundation of Happiness to all America. AND WHEREAS in their humble Address,
they have freely declared, That it is much on their Hearts, if they may be
permitted, to hold forth a lively experiment, that a most flourishing Civil
State may stand and best be maintained, and that among Our English Subjects,
with a full Liberty in religious Concernments, and that true Piety, rightly
grounded upon Gospel Principles, will give the best and greatest Security to
Sovereignty, and will lay in the Hearts of Men the strongest Obligations to
true Loyalty. NOW KNOW YE, That WE, being willing to encourage the hopeful
Undertakings of Our said Loyal and Loving Subjects, and to secure them in the
free Exercise and Enjoyment of all their Civil and Religious Rights,
appertaining to them as Our loving Subjects; and to preserve unto them that
Liberty in the true Christian Faith and Worship of GOD, which they have sought
with so much Travel, and with peaceable Minds and loyal Subjection to Our Royal
Progenitors and Our Self, to enjoy; And because some of the People and
Inhabitants of the same Colony, cannot in their private Opinions, conform to
the Public Exercise of Religion according to the Liturgy, Forms a^^ Ceremonies
of the Church of England, or take or subscribe the Oaths and Articles made and
established in that Behalf; and for that the same, by reason of the remote
Distances of those Places, will (as We hope) be no Breach of the Unity and
Uniformity established in this Nation; HAVE THEREFORE thought fit, AND DO
HEREBY Publish, Grant, Ordain and Decla^^ That Our Royal Will and Pleasure is,
The Grant for Liberty of Conscience.
That no Person within the said Colony, at any Time hereafter, shall be any
wise molested, punished, disquieted or called in Question for any Differences
in Opinion in Matters of Religion, and do not actually disturb the Civil Peace
of Our said Colony; but that all and every Person and Persons may from time to
time, and at all Times hereafter, freely and fully have and enjoy his and their
own Judgments and Consciences in Matters of Religious Concernments, throughout
the Tract of Land hereafter mentioned; They behaving themselves peaceably and
quietly, and not using this Liberty to Licentiousness and Profaneness, nor to
Civil Injury, or outward Disturbance of others; Any Law, Statute, or Clause
therein contained or to be contained, Usage or Custom of this Re^lm to the
contrary hereof in any wise notwithstanding. AND that they may be in the better
Capacity to defend themselves in their just Rights and Liberties, against all
the Enemies of ^he Christian Faith, and others, in all Respects, WE HAVE
further thought fit, and at the humble Petition of the Persons aforesaid, are
graciously pleased to Declare, That they shall have and enjoy the Benefit of
Our late Act of Indemnity and free Pardon, as the rest of Our Subjects in other
Our Dominions and Terri^yries have: And to Create and Make them a Body Poli^ick
or Corporate, with the Powers and Privileges herein after mentioned. AND
accordingly Our Will and Pleasure is, And of Our especial Grace, certain
Knowledge and mere Motion, WE HAVE Ordained, Constituted and Declared, and by
these Presents, for Us, Our Heirs and Successors, DO Ordain, Constitute and
Declare, That they the said William Brenton, William Coddington, Nicholas
Easton, Benedict Arnold, William Boulston, John Porter, Samuel Gorton, John
Smith, Patentees.
John Wickes, Roger Williams, Thomas Olney, Gregory Dexter, John Coggeshall,
Joseph Clarke, Randal Holden, John Green, John Room, William Dyre, Samuel
Wilbore, Richard Tew, William Field, Thomas Harris, James Barker, Rainsborough
Williams, and John Nixon, and all such others as now are, or hereafter shall be
admitted, and made free of the Company and Society of Our Colony of
Providence-Plantations, in the Narragansett Bay in New England; Shall be, from
time to time, and for ever heareafter, a BODY CORPORATE and POLITIC, in Fact
and Name, by the Name of, THE GOVERNOR AND COMPANY OF THE English COLONY of
RHODE ISLAND AND PROVIDENCE-PLANTATIONS, IN New England IN America. And that by
the same Name, They, and their S^ccessors, shall and may have perpetual
Succession; and shall and may be Persons able and capable in Law, to Sue and be
Sued, to Plead and be Impleaded; to Answer and to be Answered unto, to Defend
and to be Defended, in all and singular Suits, Causes, Quarrels, Matters,
Actions and Things, of what Kind or Nature soever. AND ALSO To Have, Take,
Possess, Acquire and Purchase Lands, Tenements or Hereditaments, or any Goods
or Chattels; and the same to Lease, Grant, Demise, Aliene, B^rgain, Sell and
Dispose of, at their own Will and Pleasure, as other Our Liege People of this
Our Realm of England, or any Corporation or Body Politic within the same, may
lawfully do. Power to (...) a Common^Seal.
AND FURTHER, That They the said Governor and Company, and their Successors,
shall and may for ever hereafter, have a Common Seal, to serve and use for all
Matters, Causes, Things and Affairs whatsoever, of Them and their Successors:
And the same Seal to alter, change, break and make N^w, from time to time, at
their Will and Pleasure, as they shall think fit. AND FURTHER We W^ll and
Ordain, and by these Presents, for Us, Our Heirs and Successors, Do Declare and
Appoint, The N^mb^r of Ma^i^tra^^s, and their Du^^es.
That for the better Ordering and Managing of the Affairs and Business of the
said Company and their Successors, there shall be One GOVERNOR, One DEPUTY
GOVERNOR, and Ten ASSISTANTS, to be from time to time Constituted, Elected and
Chosen out of the Freemen of the said Company, for the Time being, in such
Manner and Form as is hereafter in these Presents expressed: Which said
Officers shall apply themselves, to take Care for the best Disposing and
Ordering of the General Business and Affairs of and concerning the Lands and
Hereditaments herein after mentioned to be granted, and the Plantation thereof,
and the Government of the People there. AND for the better Execution of Our
Royal Pleasure herein, Name^ of the first Magi^^rat^s.
We Do, for Us, Our Heirs and Successors, Assign, Name, Constitute and Appoint
the aforesaid BENEDICT ARNOLD to be the first and present (...) o^ the said
Company, and the ^ai^ WILLIAM BRENTON to be the DEPUTY GOVERNOR, and the said
William Boulston, John Porter, Roger Williams, Thomas Olney, John Smith, John
Green, John Coggeshall, James Barker, William Field and Joseph Clarke, to be
the Ten present ASSISTANTS of the said Company; to continue in the said several
Offices respectively, until the first Wednesday which shall be in the Month of
May now next coming. AND FURTHER We Will, and by these Presents, for Us, Our
Heirs and Successors, do Ordain and Grant, That the Governor of the said
Company for the Time being, or in his Absence, by occasion of Sickness, or
otherwise by his Leave and Permission, the Deputy Governor for the Time being
shall and may, from time to time, upon all Occasions, give O^der for the
Assembling of the said Company, and calling them together, to consult and
advise of the Business and Affairs of the said Company. AND That for ever
hereafter, twice in every Year, A^s^mb^^es.
That is to say, On every first Wednesday in the Month of May, and on every
last Wednesday in October, or oftener in case it shall be requisite, the
Assistants and such of the Freemen of the said Company, not exceeding Six
Persons for Newport, Four Persons for each of the respective Towns of
Providence, Portsmouth and Warwick, and Two Persons for each other Place, Town
or City, who shall be from time to time thereunto Elected or Deputed by the
major Part of the Freemen of the respective Towns or Places for which they
shall be so Elected or Deputed; shall have a General Meeting or Assembly, then
and there to consult, advise and determine in and about the Affairs and
Business of the said Company and Plantations. AND FURTHER We do, of Our
especial Grace, certain Knowledge and mere Motion, Give and Grant unto the said
Governor and Company of the English Colony of Rhode Island and
Providence-Plantations, in New England in America, and their Successors, That
the Governor, or in his Absence, or by his Permission, the Deputy Governor of
the said Company for the Time being, the Assistants, and such of the Freemen of
the said Company as shall be so as aforesaid Elected or Deputed, or so many of
them as shall be present at such Meeting or Assembly as aforesaid, Shall be
called THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY: And that They, or the greatest Part of them then
present, whereof the Governor or Deputy Governor, and Six of the Assistants at
least, to be Seven, Shall have, N^^b^r of (...) requ^site to be at an (...),
and their Power.
and have hereby given and granted unto them, FULL POWER AND AUTHORITY, from
time to time, and at all times hereafter, To Appoint, Alter and Change such
Days, Times and Places of Meetings and General Assembly, as They shall think
fit: And to Choose, Nominate and Appoint such and so many other Persons, as
They shall think fit, and shall be willing to accept the same, ^o (...) free of
the said Company and Body Politic, and them into the same to Admit: And to
Elect and Constitute such Offices and Officers, and to Grant such needful
Commis^^ons, as they shall think fit and requisite for the Ordering, Managing
and Dispatching of the Affairs of the said Governor (...) Company, and their
(...): And from time to (...) ^^ke, Ordain, Constit^^^ or Repeal such Laws,
Statutes, Orders and Ordinances, Forms and Ceremonies of Government and
Magistracy, as to them shall seem meet for the Good and Welfare of the said
Company, and for the Government and Ordering of the Lands and Hereditaments
herein after mentioned to be Granted, and of the People that do, or at any time
hereafter shall inhabit or be within the same; So as such Laws, Ordinances and
Constitutions so made, be not contrary and ^epugn^nt unto, but as near as may
be agreeable to the Laws of this Realm of England, considering the Nature and
Constitution of the Place and People there. AND ALSO to Appoint, Order and
Direct, Erect and Settle such Places and Courts of Jurisdiction, for the
Hearing and Determining of all Actions, Cases, Matters and Things happening
within the said ^olony and Plantation, and which shall be in Dispute, and
depending there, as They shall think fit. AND ALSO to distinguish and set forth
the several Names and Titles, Duties, Powers and Limits of each Court, ^aw^ how
ne^^ the Laws of England.
Office and Officer, Superior and Inferior. AND ALSO to contrive and appoint
such Forms of Oaths and Attestations, not repugnant, but as near as may be
agreeable, as aforesaid, to the Laws and Statutes of this our Realm, as are
convenient and requisite, with respect to the due Administration of Justice,
and due Execution and Discharge of all Offices and Places of Trust, by the
Persons that shall be therein concerned. AND ALSO to regulate and order the Way
and Manner of all Elections to Offices and Places of Trust, Power of the
Assemb^l ^ ^o ord^r Elect*
and to prescribe, limit and distinguish the Numbers and Bounds of all Places,
Towns or Cities, within the Limits and Bounds herein after mentioned, and not
herein particularly named, who have or shall have the Power of Electing and
Sending of Freemen to the said General Assembly. AND ALSO to order, direct and
authorize the Imposing of l^wful and re^sonable Fines, Mulcts, Imprisonments,
and Executing other Punishments, Pecuniary and Corporal upon Offenders and
Delinquents, according to the Course of other Corporations within this our
Kingdom of England. Power of the Ass^m^ly to Pard^on and (...).
AND AGAIN to alter, revoke, annull or pardon, under their Common Seal, or
otherwise, such Fines, Mulcts, Imprisonments, Sentences, Judgments and
Condemnations, as shall be thought fit. AND to direct, rule, order and dispose
of all other Matters and Things, and particularly that which relates to the
making of Purchases of the Native Indians, as to them shall seem meet. Whereby
Our said People, and Inhabitants in the said (...), may be so Religiou^^y,
^eacea^ly (...) Civi^^y Governed, as that by their good Life and orderly
Conversation, They may win and invite the Native Indians of the Country, to the
Knowledge and Obedience of the only True GOD and SAVIOR of Mankind; WILLING,
COMMAMDING and REQUIRING, and by these Presents, for Us, Our Heirs and
Successors, Ordaining and Appointing, That all such Laws, Statutes, Orders and
O^dinances, Instructions, Impositions and Directions, as shall be so made by
the Governor, Deputy Governor, Assistants and Freemen, or such Number of them
as aforesaid, and published in Writing under their Common Seal, Shall be
carefully and duly observed, kept, performed and put in Execution, according to
the true Intent and Meaning of the same. And these Our Letters Patents, or the
Duplicate or Exemplification thereof, shall be to all and every such Officers,
Superior or Inferior, from time to time, for the putting of the same Orders,
Laws, Statutes, Ordin^nces, Instructions an^ Directions, in due Execution,
against Us, Our Heirs and Succ^ssors, a Sufficient Warrant and Discharge. AND
FURTHER Our Will and Pleasure is, and we do hereby for Us, our Heirs and
Su^^cessors, establish and ordain, that Yearly once in the Year ^^^ever
hereafter; Namely the aforesaid Wednesday in May, ^^d at the Town of Newport;
or elsewhere, if urgent occasion do Require, the Governor, Deputy Governor,
and Assist^^ts of the said Company, and other Officers of the said Comp^^y* or
such of them, as the General Assembly shall think fit, shall be in the said
General Court or Assembly, to be held from that Day or time, newly chosen for
the Year ensuing, by such greater part of the said Company for the time being,
as sh^^^ be then and there present: And if it shall happen, that the present
Governor, Deputy Governor, and Assistants by these present^ appointed, or any
such as shall hereafter be newly chosen into their Rooms, or any of them, or
any other the (...) of the said C^mpany shall Dye or be Removed from his or
their several Offices or Places before the said general Day of Election, (wh^m
we do here^^ ^eclare for any Misdemeanour or Def^^lt, to be removeable, by the
Governor, Assistants and Company, or such greater part of them in any of the
said public ^^urts to be Assembled as aforesaid.) THAT THEN and in every such
Case, it shall and may be Lawful, Prov^^^^^ (...) the Gover^^^^ (...), or be
^^^oved.
to and for the said Governor, Deputy Governor, Assistants and Company
aforesaid, or such greater part of them so to be Assembled as is aforesaid, in
any their Assemblies, to proceed to a new Election of one or more of their
Company, in the Room or Place Rooms or Places of such Officer, or Officers so
Dying, or Removed, according to their Discretions. And Immediately Upon, and
after such Election or Elections made of such Governor, Deputy Governor,
Assistant or Assistants, or any other Officer of the said Company in Manner and
Form aforesaid: THE AUTHORITY, Office and Power before Given to the former
Governor, Deputy Governor, and other Officer and Officers so Removed, in
whose Stead and Place New shall be Chosen, shall as to him and them, and every
of them respectively, Cease and Determine. PROVIDED ALWAYS, and our Will and
Pleasure is, that as well such as are by these Presents appointed to be the
present Governor, Deputy Governor and Assistants of the said Company, as
those that shall Succeed them, and all other Officers to be appointed and
chosen as aforesaid, shall before the undertaking the Execution of the said
Offices and Places, respectively give their Solemn ENGAGEMENT by Oath, or
otherwise, (...) the due and faithful Performance of their Duties in their
^^veral Offices and Places, before such Person or Persons as are by these
presents hereafter appointed to take and receive the same (that is to say) the
said Benedict Arnold, Who shall giv^ and t^ke the Engag^ment.
who is he ^in before nominated and appointed the present Governor of the said
Company, shall give the aforesaid Engagement before William Brenton, or any two
of the said Assistants of the said Company, unto whom we do by these Presents
give full Power and Authority, (...) Require and Receive the same: AND the said
William ^^enton, who is hereby before nominated and appointed the pr^sent
Deputy Governor of the said Company; shall give the afor^said Engagement
before the said Benedict Arnold, or any two of the Assistants of the said
Company, unto whom we do by these Presents, give full Power and Authority to
Require and Receive the same; AND the said William Boulston, John Porter, Roger
Williams, Thomas Olney, John Smith, John Green, John Coggeshall, James Barker,
William Field, and Joseph Clark, who are herein before nominated and appointed
the Present Assistants of the said Company, shall give the said Engagement to
their Offices, and Places respectively belonging, before the said Benedict
Arnold, and William Brenton, or one of them; to whom respectively we do hereby
give full Power and Authority to Require, Administer or Receive the same. AND
FURTHER, Our Will and Pleasure ^s, That all and every other future Governor,
or Deputy Governor to be elected and chosen by virtue of these Presents, shall
give the said Engagement before two or more of the said Assistants of the said
Company for the time being, unto whom we do by these Presents, give full Power
and Authority to Require, Administer or Receive the same. AND the said
Assistants, and every of them, and all and every other Officer or Officers to
be here^fter elected and chosen by virtue of these Presents, from time to time,
shall give the like Engagements to their Offices and Places respectively
belonging, before the Governor, or Deputy Governor, unto whom we do by these
Presents give full Power and Autho^ity to Require, Administer or Receive the
same accordingly. AND WE do likewise for Us, our Heirs and Successors, give and
grant unto the said Governor and Company, and their Successors by these
Presents, that for the more peaceable and orderly Government of the said
Plantations, it shall and may be Lawful for the Governor, Deputy Governor,
Assistants, and all other Officers and Ministers of the said Company, in the
Administration of Justice, and Exercise of Government in the said Plantations,
to Use, Exercise, and Put in Executi^n such Methods, Rules, Orders and
Directions, not being contrary or repugnant to the Laws and Statutes of this
our Realm, as have been heretofore Given, Used and Accustomed in such Cases
respectively, to be put in Practice, until at the next or some other General
Assembly, special provision shall be made, and o^^ained in the cases aforesaid.
AND WE do further, for Us, our Heirs and Successors, give and grant unto the
said Governor and Company, and their Successors by these Presents, THAT it
shall and may be Lawful to and for the said Governor, or in his Absence, the
Deputy Governor, and major part of the said Assistants, Power of the Gover^^ur
and Cou^cil to ap^oin^ Comm^s^^onO^^^c^rs for the Militia.
for the time being, at any time when the said General Assembly is not Sitting,
to nominate, appoint and constitute such and so many Commanders, Governors,
and Military Officers, as to them shall seem Requisite for the Leading,
Conducting and Training up the Inhabitants of the said Plantations in Martial
Affairs; and for the Defense (...) Safeguard of the said Plantations: AND that
it shall and may be Lawful, to and for all and every such Commander, G^^ernour
and Military Officers that shall be so as aforesaid, or by the Governor, or in
his Absence the Deputy Governor, and Six of the said Assistants, and major
part of the Fre^men of the said Company present at any General Assemblies,
Nominated, Appointed and Constituted according to the Tenor of his and their
respective Commissions, and Directions, To As^emble, Exercise in Arms, Martial
Array, and put in Warlike Posture the Inhabitants of the said Colony for their
special De^ence and Safety; Power (...) making War.
And to Lead and Conduct the said Inhabitants, and to Encounter, Expulse, Expel
and Resist by force of Arms, as well by Sea as by Land; and also to Kill, Slay
and Destroy by all fitting ways, Enterprises and means whatsoever, all and
every such Person or Persons, as shall at any time hereafter A^tempt or
Enterprise the Destruction, Invasion, Detriment or Annoyance of the said
Inhabitants or Plantations; And to Use and Exercise the Law Martial in such
Cases only as occasion shall necessarily Require: AND to take or Surprise by
all ways and means whatsoever, all and every such Person and Persons, with
their Ship or Ships, Armor, Ammunition, or other Goods of such Persons, as
shall in Hostile manner Invade or Attempt the Defeating of the said Plantation,
or the Hurt of the said Company and Inhabitants: AND upon just Causes to Invade
and Destroy the Native Indians, or other Enemies of the said Colony.
NEVERTHELESS, our Will and Pleasure is, and we do hereby Declare to the rest of
our Colonies in New England, that it shall not be Lawful for this our said
Colony of Rhode Island and Providence-Plantations in America in New England, to
Invade the Natives Inhabiting within the Bounds and Limits of their said
Colonies, without the Knowledge and Consent of the said other Colonies. AND IT
IS HEREBY DECLARED, Not to Invade the Indian^ of another Colony, ^or other
(...) ^o invade the Indians of this (...).
that it shall not be Lawful to or for the rest of the Colonies, to Invade or
Molest the Native Indians, or any other Inhabitants, Inhabiting within the
Bounds and Limi^s hereafter mentioned; They having Subjected themselves unto
Us, and being by Us taken into our special Protection, without the Knowledge
and Consent of the Governor and Company of our Colony of Rhode Island, and
Providence-Plantations. ALSO our Will and Pleasure is, and we do hereby Declare
unto all Christian Kings, Prin^^^ and States, that if any Person which shall
hereafter be of the said Company or Plantation, or any other by Appointment of
the said Governor and Company for the time being, shall at any time, or times
hereafter Rob or Spoil by Sea or Land, or do any Hurt or Unlawful Hostility to
any of the Subjects of Us our Heirs or Successors; or any of the Subjects of
any Prince or State being then in League with Us, our Heirs or Successors; upon
Complaint of such Injury done to any such Prince or State, o^ their Subjects:
We, our Heirs and Successors will make op^^ Proclamation within any parts of
our Realm of England, fit for that purpose, that the Person or Persons
committing any such Robbery or Spoil, shall within the time Limited by such
Proclamation, make full Restitution or Satisfaction of all such Inj^^ies done
or committed, so as the said Prince or others so complaining, may be fully
Sati^^^ed and Contented; And if the said Person or Persons who shall commit any
such Robbery or Spoil, shall not make Satisfaction accordingly within such time
so to be Limited, that then We our Heirs and Successors, will put such Person
or Persons out of our Allegiance and Protection; and that then it shall and may
be lawful and free for all Princes or others, to Prosecute with Hostility such
offenders, and every of them, their and every of their Procurers, Aiders,
Abettors and Counselors in that behalf. PROVIDED ALSO, and our Express Will
and Pleasure is, and we do by these Presents for Us, our Heirs and Successors,
Ordain and Appoint, that these Presents shall not in any manner, hinder any of
our loving Subjects whatsoever from Using and Exercising the Trade of Fishing
upon the Coast of New England in America; ^^berty of Fishing.
But that they, and every, or any of them shall have full and free power and
liberty to continue and Use the Trade of Fishing upon the said Coast in any of
the Seas thereunto adjoining, or any Arms of the Seas, or Salt Water, Rivers
and Creeks where they have been accu^^omed to Fish; and to Build and Set upon
the Waste-Land belonging to the said Colony and Plantations, such Wharfs,
Stages and Workhouses as shall be necessary for the Salting, Drying and
Keep-of their Fish to be taken or gotten upon that Coast: AND FURTHER, for the
Encouragement ofthe Inhabitants of our said Colony of Providence-Plantations to
set upon the Business of taking Whales; it shall be Lawful for them, or any of
them having struck Whale, Dubertus, or other great Fish, it or them to pursue
unto any part of that Coast, and into any Bay, River Cove, Creek or Shore
belonging thereto and it o^ them upon the said Coast or in the said Bay, River,
Cove, Cre^^ or Shore belonging thereto to Kill and order for the best
Advantage, without Molestation, they making no wilful waste or spoil, any thing
i^ these presents contained, or any other matter or thing to the contrary
notwithstanding; AND FURTHER ALSO we are graciously pleased, and do hereby
declare, that if any of the Inhabitants of our said Colony, Lib^^ty as ^o Wines.
do set upon the Planting of Vineyards, (the Soil and Climate both seeming
naturally to concur to the Production of Wines,) or be industrious in the
Discovery of Fishing-Banks in or about the said Colony, we will from time to
time give and allow all due and fitting Encouragement therein, as to others in
cases of like Nature. AND FURTHER, OF OUR MORE AMPLE GRACE, certain Knowledge
and mere Motion, we have Given and Granted, and by these Presents, for Us, our
Heirs and Successors, do Give and Grant unto the said Governor and Company of
the English Colony of Rhode Island, and Providence-Plantation in the
Narr^gansett-Bay in New England in America; and to every Inhabitant there, and
to every Person and Persons Trading thither, Liberty (...) Transport Perso^^.
and to every such Person or Persons as are, or shall be free of the said
Colony, full Power and Authority from time to time, and at all times hereafter
to take, Ship, Transport and carry away out of any of our Realms and Dominions,
for and toward the Plantation and Defense of the said Colony, such and so many
of our loving Subjects, and Strangers, as shall or will willingly accompany
them in, and to their said Colony and Plantation; except such Person or
Person^, as are, or shall be therein restrained by Us, our Heirs and
Successors, or any Law or Statute of this Realm. AND ALSO to Ship and Transport
all, and all manner of Goods, Chattels, Merchandises, and other things
whatsoever, that are, or shall be useful or necessary for the said Plantations,
and Defense thereof, and usually Transpor^^d, Liberty to Tr^nsport Goo^^.
and not Prohibited by any Law or Statute of this our Realm: YIELDING and
paying unto Us, our Heirs and Successors, such the Duties, Customs and
Subsidies, as are, or ough^ to be paid or payable for the same. AND FURTHER,
our Will and Pleasure is, and we do for Us, our Heirs and ^^ccessors, Ordain,
(...)
Declare and Grant unto the said Gover^^^^ and Company, and their Successors,
that all and every the Subjects of Us, our Heirs and Successors, which are
already Planted and Settled within our said Colony of Providence-Plantations;
or which shall hereafter go to Inhabit within the said Colony, and all and
every of their Children which have been Born there, or which shall happen
hereafter to be Born there, or on the Sea going thither, or returning from
thence, shall have and enjoy all Liberties and Immunities of free and natural
Subjects, within any the Dominions of Us, our Heirs or Successors, to all
Intents, Constructions and Purposes whatsoever, as if they, and every of them
were Born within the Realm of England. AND FURTHER KNOW YE, that we of our more
abundant Grace, certain Knowledge, and mere Motion, have given, granted, and
confirmed; and by these Presents, for Us, our Heirs and Successors, do give,
grant and confirm unto the said Governor and Company, and their Successors,
Ro^nd^ of the Colony.
ALL THAT PART OF OUR DOMINIONS in New England, in America; Containing the
Nabantick and Nanbygansett, alias Narragansett-Bay, and Countries and Parts
adjacent; Bounded on the West, or Westerly, (...) Bounds.
to the middle or Channel of a River, there commonly called, and known by the
name of Pawcatuck, alias, Pawcawtuck River, and so along the said River, as the
greater or middle Stream thereof reaches, or lies up into the North Country,
Northward unto the head thereof, and from thence, by a strait Line, drawn due
North, until it meets with the South Line of the Massachusetts-Colony* AND on
the North or Northerly, North Boun^s.
by the aforesaid South or Southerly Line of the Massachusetts-Colony, or
Plantation: AND ^^^ending toward the East, Easterly Bounds.
or Eas^wardl^, three English Miles to the East and North-East, of the most
Eastern and North-Eastern parts of the aforesaid Narragansett-Bay, as the said
Bay lies or extends it self from the Ocean, on the South or South^ardly,
unto the mouth of the River which runs toward the Town of Providence, and
from thence along the Eas^wardly side or Bank of the said River (higher called
by the name of S^co^k River,) up to the Falls, called Paruckett Falls being the
most Westwardly Line of Plymouth Colony, and so (...) the said Falls, in a
strait Line due North, until it meet with the aforesaid Line of the
Massachusetts-Colony: AND bounded on the South by the Ocean: ^^uth Bounds.
And in particular the Land^ belonging to the Towns of Providence, Patuxet,
Warwic^, Misquomicock, alias P^^catuc^, and the rest upon the Mainland, in the
Tract aforesaid; together with Rhode Island, Black-I^^and, and all the rest of
the Islands and Banks in the Narragansett-Bay; and Bordering upon the Coast of
the Tract aforesaid; ( Fishers-Island only excepted) Together with all (...)
Lands, Soils, Grounds* Havens, Ports, Rivers, Waters, Fishings, Mines Royal,
and all other Mines, Minerals, Precious Sto^es, G^^eral Grant of all
Commodi^i^^ and Minerals, etc.
Quarries, Woods, Wood-Grounds, Rocks, Slates, and all ^^d singular other
Commodities, Jurisdictions, Royalties, Privileges, Franchises, Preheminencies,
and Hereditaments whatsoever, within the said Tract, Bounds, Lands and Islands
aforesaid; or to them, or any of them belonging, or in any wise appertaining:
To have and to hold.
TO HAVE AND TO HOLD the same unto the said Governor and Company, and their
Successors, for ever upon Trust, for the Use and Benefit of themselves, and
their Associates, Freemen of the said Colony, their Heirs and Assigns: To be
holden of Us, our Heirs and Successors, as of the Manor of East Greenwich in
our County of Ke^t, in free and common Soocage, and not in Capite* nor by
Knights Service; YIELDING AND PAYING therefore to us, our Heirs and Successors,
only the fifth part of all the Oar of Gold and Silver, which from time to time,
and at all times hereafter shall be there gotten, had or obtained, in lieu and
satisfaction of all Services, Duties, Fines, Forfeitures made, or to be made,
Claims, and Demands whatsoever, to be to us, our Heirs or Successors, therefore
or thereout rendered, made or paid: Any Grant or Clause in a late Grant to the
Governor and Company of Connecticut Colony in America, to the contrary
thereof, in any wise notwithstanding: The aforesaid Pawcatuck River having been
yielded after much Debate, for the fixed and certain Bounds between these our
said Colonies, by the Agents thereof; The Naragansett River stated.
who have also agreed, that the said Pawcatuck River shall be also called,
alias, Narrogansett or Narragansett River; and to prevent future Disputes that
otherwise might arise thereby for ever hereafter, shall be Construed* Deemed
and Taken to be the Narragansett River, in our late Grant to Connecticut
Colony, mentioned as the Eastwardly Bounds of that Colony. L^^^rty o^ Appeal.
AND FURTHER OUR WILL and Pleasure is, that in all Matters of public
Controversy which may fall out between our Colony of Providence-Plantations,
and the rest of our Colonies in New England; It shall and may be lawful, to and
for the Governor and Company of the said Colony of Providence-Plantations, to
make their Appeals therein, to Us, our Heirs and Successors, for Redress in
such Cases, within this our Realm of England. Free Tra^^ with other Colo^^es
AND that it shall be lawful, to and for the Inhabitants of the said Colony of
Providence-Plantations, without Let or Molestation, to Pass and Repass with
freedom into, and through the rest of the English Colonies, upon their lawful
and civil Occasions; and to Converse, and hold Commerce and Trade with such of
the Inhabitants of our other English Colonies, as shall be willing to admit
them thereunto; they behaving themselves peaceab^y among them: Any Act, Clause
or Sentenc^ in any of the said Colonies provided, or that shall be provided to
the contrary in any wise notwithstanding. AND LASTLY WE DO, for Us, our Heirs
and Successors, Ordain and Grant unto the said Governor and Company, and their
Successors by these Presents, That these our Letters Patents, shall be firm,
good, effectual, and available in all things in the Laws, to all Intents,
Constructions and Purposes whatsoever, according to our true Intent and Meaning
herein before Declared; And shall be construed, reputed and adjudged in all
cases most favorably on the behalf, and for the best benefit and behoof of the
said Governor and Company, and their Successors; although express mention of
the true yearly Value, or certainty of the Premises, or of any of them, or of
any other Gifts or Grants by us, or b^ any of our Progenitors or Predecessors
heretofore made to the said Governor and Compa^^ of the English Colony of
Rhode Island and Providence-Plantations in the Narragansett-Bay in New England,
in America, in these Presents is not made, or any Statute, Act, Ordinance,
Provision, Proclamation or Restriction heretofore Had, Made, Enacted, Ordained
or Provided, or any other Matter, Cause or Thing whatsoever to the contrary
thereof in any wise notwithstanding. In Witness whereof, WE have caused these
our Letters to be made Patents. WITNESS Our Self at Westminster, the Eighth Day
of July, in the Fifteenth Year of Our Reign.

By the King Howard.

The TABLE.
A
Page. ABate^ent, Pleas of. 135, 257 Accounts to be annexed to Declaration and
Answer. 189 To Justice's Warrants. 281 How to be sworn to out of Court. 305
Acknowledgment of Deeds. 50, 51 Actions personal limited. 99 Withdrawn Costs
to be recovered. 91 Transitory. 134, 156 Criminal Costs allowed. 195 Not
exceeding Five Pounds, how to be tried. 280
Acts of Assembly to be recorded. 8 Copies to be sent to the several Towns. 8
Adjournment of Courts by one Judge. 136 By one Justice. 281
Administration to be granted by the Town Council. 4 To whom to be granted. 6
To Wives of absent Persons. 47, 62
Administrators to give Bond, and render Account. 6, 63 On intestate Estates,
to give Bond. 202
Administratrix, her Husband to give Bond. 7 Admiralty (Court) Fees stated. 269
Adultery how to be punished. 118 Alarm, Fine for not appearing. 69, 233 Militia
to be mustered throughout the Colony. 2^9
Al^wives not to be obstructed in coming down Rivers. 187 Allowance to
Prisoner^ of War. 288 Amendment of several Laws. 114 Appeal from the Town
Council to the General Council, 6, 135 To his Majesty in Council regulated. 78
From theSession^totheSuperior Court. 129 From Justices Courts to the Sessions.
130, 216, 218 From the Inferior Court to the Superior. 133 New Evidence to be
allowed. 135 Reasons of to be amended. 136 To the Inferior Courts to be final.
147 From Judgments upon Bond. 153 In what Cases none to be allowed. 156 From
the Justices Courts to the Inferior Court. 282
Arms to be viewed, and who to be provided with them. 67, 69 Artificers not to
leave their Work till finished. 121 Assault and Battery. 118 Assembly General,
of whom it s^all consist, and how calle^. 2 Their Power in making Freemen. 9
Made two Houses. 24 Where they shall sit. 176, 217, 299 Their Meeting
regulated. 222 To choose Military Officers. 232
Assessors their Duty. 32 Assistants their Salary. 86 Assi^e of Ca^k. 157 Of
Clapboards and Shingles. 162
Attachments in Civil Actions regulated. 75 Of Real Estate. 192 Of personal
Estate of absent Persons. 302
Attorney General his Duty. 16, 261 His Fees. 145, 294 To give Receipts for the
Colony's Bonds. 221, 261
Attorneys their Pleading regulated. 78 To sign the Back of Writs in Case. 135
Attendance of Jurors and Witnesses. 257 Of the Attorney General. 261

B
Bail what to be taken by the Sheriff. 99 To be taken on Justices Warrants. 241
Bank the first emitted. 54, 59 The Second. 84 The Third. 103 The Fourth. 158,
166 The Fifth. 172 The Sixth. 211 The Seventh. 226, 230 The Eighth. 271
Banns of Marriage, how to be published. 30, 176 Bar, Pleas in. 135, 257
Barrels and half Barrels, their Assize. 157 Bastardy. Bears and wild Cats,
Premium for killing them. 178, 194 Beef, Pork, and Fish, shipped without the
Packer's Mark, to be forfeited. 158 Beer exposed to Sale in Cask under Assize,
to be forfeited. 158 Bills of Credit emitted. 42, 44, 45, 54, 59, 84, 98, 103,
112, 156, 158, 172, 197, 207, 211, 226, 228, 238, 243, 244, 271, 296, 298, 308.
Act against tearing them. 92 Five Pound and Forty Shilling Bills called in. 98
How to be paid in, See Bank. Of the New Tenor, at what Rate they are to pass.
237 Punishment for Counterfeiting them. 258, 288
Bills of Cost. 169, 179 Bills of Exchange protested, Act about them. 270
Births and Burials to be registered. 31, 100 Block-Island; Lands on it made a
Township. 14 Boarders taken with the Small Pox, to be informed of. 278 Boards
to be viewed and marked. 163 Bonds (the Colony's) not to pay Interest. 194 Not
to be sued at Justices Courts. 241 How to be put in Suit. 261
Bonds to be given by Executors and Administrators. 5, 20^ By Appellants from
the Town Council. 6 By him who marries an Exec^trix or Administratrix. 7 By
C^ptains of private Men of War. ^^ Fraudulent to be deemed Void. 119 By the
Guardians of distracted Persons. 2^6 By Appellants from Justices Courts. 282 In
Writs of Replevin. 307
Bonfires to be made by Direction of Authority. 165 Bounty on Hemp, etc. taken
off. 297 Breach of the Peace. 118 Bribe to Jurors, how to be punished. 119
Bribery an^ Corruption, Act against it. 193 Burglary. 116 Bylaws. 22
C
Cage or Stocks to be made in each Town. 13 Captain of the Militia, his Fine
for Neglect. 70 Cask under Assize, to be forfeited. 157 Cattle upon killing any
Person, to be forfeited. 118 Chancering Penalties of Bonds, etc. 134 Charitable
Uses, Lands, etc. given for that End. 87 Charlestown a Township. 208 Children
unruly, their Punishment. 115 Poor to be bound out Apprentices. 236
Clandestine Transportation of Persons, prohibited. 29 Marriages, Act to
prevent them. 30
Clerk (Town) See Town Clerk. Clerk of the Inferior Court, how appointed. 133,
13^, 171 His Fees. 143, 216, ^29, 292 Empowered to appoint a Deputy. 179
Clerk of the Superior Court. 138 His Fees. 142, 292 Of the General Sessions,
his Fees. 195 Of the House of Deputies* his Wages. ^^^
Clerk (Military) See Militia. 67 Collector of the Customs, his Fees stated.
266 Colonel, his Commission. 72 Colony divided into three Counties. 128 Their
Clai^ (...)* 149
Colony-house, (...) build it. 214 Sloop. 235, 297, 299 Debts, how to be
collected. 261, 294
Committee Men of the several Towns, to give Bond. 27^ Commission of Justices
of the Peace. ^^ Of Military Officers. ^^
Commission-Officers in the Militia, when excused from Training. 196 Commons
how to be divided. 21 Common Recoveries to be recorded. 107 Conanicut made a
Township. 17 Conscience, Persons of tender Conscience, their Duty on an Alarm.
234 Excused from Training. 293 Form of their Affirmation. 294
Conspiracy. 119 Constable, his Penalty for neglecting to pay Fines. 8 Fine for
not serving. 10 Their Names to be returned by the Town Clerk. 33 Duty in
collecting Rates. 33 Fees stated. 290
Coopers to brand their Cask. 157 Copies of Acts of Assembly to be sent to each
Town. 8 Cordwainers regulated. 39 Cord-Wood, Act to prevent Fraud therein. 27
Costs secured to the Inhabitants. 37 The Recovery of, in Cases discontinued. 91
Bills of, when to be taxed. 179 Allowed in Criminal Actions. 195
C0uncil (Town) to be as Judge of Probates. 4 See Town Council. Council
General, to be supreme Ordinary. 6 To grant forth Executions. 114
Council of War for each Regiment. 73 Of whom it (...) consist. 233 How many of
them to settle Watches. 24^
Counterfeiting Bills of Credit, how to be punished. 25^ County Courts. 131 See
General Sessions, Inferior and Superior Court. Courthouse and Goal in each
County. 1^^ Courts Martial appointed. 234, 239 Court of Equity appointed. 240
Abolished. 2^2
Criminal Offenses, Act against them. 115 to 121 Curriers regulated. 39 Cider
exposed to Sale in Cask under Assize, to be forfeited. 158
D
Damage done by Cattle, etc. how to be recovered. 306 Dams not to hinder the
Course of Fish. 185 Mill-dams to have WasteGates. 210
Deaths to be registered. 31, 100 Debts due from any Town, how to be recovered.
16 Debtors insolvent, their Allowance in Prison. 77, 123, 223 Absent, their
Estate to be attached. 192
Declarations when to be filed. 132 Accounts to be annexed. 189
Deeds to be acknowledged and recorded. 50 Fraudulent to be void. 119 Form of,
to be given by the Sheriff. 203
Deer, Act for their Preservation. 109 Defaulters, when to be called out. 257,
261 Defendant. Demurrer. 135 Deodands. 118 Depositions out of Court, how to be
taken. 304 Deputy Governor, his Salary. 89 His Authority, see Governor.
Deputies, who may be chosen. 2 Their Engagement. 3 Their Wages. 87 To be
returned by the Town Clerk. 182 Not to pay Ferriage.
Deputy Sheriff, how to be made. 300 Detainer and forcible Entry. 12^ Dilatory
Pleas, when to be heard. 2^^ Di^^ract^ti Person^ to haveGuardian^. 2^^ (...),
Good^ taken by. ^ Docking of E^tates Tail, repealed. 95, 197 D^^s worrying
Sheep or Cattle. ^^ Who may k^^p them. 12^
Dower, Widow not to be barred of it ^^ Drink (strong) not to be retailed
without License. 124 Drunkenness how to be punished. 83, 95, 121 Drunkards
(common) to be posted. 83, 95
E
East-Greenwich a Township. 15 Grant enlarged. 38 Divided. 234
Easton's Pond, no Net, etc. to be drawn there. 198 Election of General
Officers. 1 Of Town Officers. 9
Embargo how to be laid. 236 Engagement ofGeneral Officers. 2 Of Deputies. 3
Town Officers. 10 Military Officers. 67 Jurors. 137
Engine-Men excused from other Services. 199 Entry forcible. 122 Estate
(intestate) how to be administered. 6, 202 Estates (personal) to be secured by
the Town Council. 93 Of absent Persons, how to be attached.
Estates (real) how liable to be attached. 192 Estate, what is Rateable, and
the Value. 295 Estra^s, how to proceed with 184 Evidence new, allowed in an
Appeal. 135 Exchange Bills of, protested. 270 Executions on Goods and Chattles,
regulated. 7 When to be granted. 135, 281 Not to be stopped on a Review. 168, 284
To be levied on Real Estates* in Case. (...) To be levied by the Town Sergeant,
in Case. 206
Executors to give Bonds, and exhibit Inventories. 5 Executrix, her Husband to
give Bond. ^ Exeter a Township. ^^^
F
Fees to be paid before the Bill of Costs is taxed. 61 To the Grand Committee
for receiving Money. 10^ For Petitions to the General Assembly. 112 Unlawful,
not to be exacted. 117 Acts regulating them. 140, 201, 216, 290, 292. Of Petit
Jurors. 247 For Collector and Naval Officer. 266, 267 Of the Court of Vice
Admiralty. 269
^ences how to be made and maintained. 11 What shall be deemed lawful. 11, 96
Water Fences. 125
Fence-Viewers. 11 Ferriage at several Ferries. 265 Ferries regulated. Ferrymen
or Boatmen not to transport Slaves without a C^^tificate. 4^ ^^^^^and
Recoveries to be recorded. 107 To be tried at the Superior Court. 138
Fines levied by the Sheriff, to be paid into the General Treasury. 8 By the
Constable into the Town Treasury. 8
Fine for refusing Town Offices. 10 Not Training. 68, 233 Not having Arms. 69
Not appearing on an Alarm. 69, 233 Not Watching. 80, 248 Jurors Neglect. 147,
247 Leaving the Town after an Alarm. 289
Fire to prevent in Newport. 26 Firing of Woods, Method of Conviction. 36
Additional Penalty. 90
Fishing in Rivers regulated 81, 254, 285 Fish not to be purloined. 91 Not to
be obstructed by Dams, etc. 186, 190
Forcible Entry and Detainer. 122 Forgery, how to be punished. 119 Form of
Commissions. 23, 72 Engagement. 2, 3, 10, 67, 137 Writ of Arrest. 139 Bond to
be given by Administrators, etc. 202 Deed to be given by the Sheriff. 203 Of
Bills. 43, 226, 231 Affirmation, to be excused from Training. 294 Writ of
Replevin. 397
Fornication, how to be punished. 11^ Fort, no Vessel to pass, without a
Certificate. 35 Fraud^lent Deeds, etc. to be deemed Void. 1^^ Freeing of Slaves
regulated. 112 Freemen, their Privileges. 3 Who may be admitted such. 4, 147
Method of Admission. 9 Their Voting regulated, 252

G
Goal in each County. 138 General Officers not to be arrested. 139 General
Assembly. See Assembly. General Sessions of the Peace appointed. 129 Where and
when to be held. 129, 220, 238 To amend Reasons of Appeal. 136 Fees of the
Clerk. 144 No Part of the Charge to be paid out of the General Treasury. 217
General Treasurer. See Treasurer. Gloucester a Township. 154 Goods taken by
Execution or Distress, how to be sold. 7 Imported in infected Vessels, to be
aired. 276
Governor or Deputy Governor, to call the Assembly, on special Occasions. 2
Governor and Council to lay an Embargo. 236 Governor to appoint a Naval
Officer. 2^ To execute the Statute of Trade and Navigation. 28 To be Captain
General. 65 To appoint Military Officers, in Case. 66 His Power on Emergencies.
73 Fees for signing Commissions, etc. 169 To revive the General Assembly, in
Case. 223 To direct the Colony-Sloop's Cruizes. 236, 239 To order Men to Fort
George, in Case. 289
Grand Committee. See Bills of Credit emitted. Grand Jurors. See Jurors 130,
132, 137, 196, 257 Grants of Land in Newport, Providence, etc. confirmed. 21
Ancient, confirmed. 46
Guns not to be fired in Streets, etc. 165, 200 Gunner to stop Vessels sailing
without Certificate. 35
H
Harbor, no infected Vessel to anchor in. 274 Highways, how to be laid out.
52, 94, 164, 235 Hogs not to run at large without Yokes or Rings. 307 Horse
three Troops of, established. 71 Horses, etc. killing any Person, to be
forfeited. 118 Taken Damage Feasant. 183
Houses where the Small Pox is suspected to be, none to visit without License.
279
I
Iames-Town incorporated. 18 Impounding of Cattle, etc. 306 Damage done, how to
be recovered. 306, etc. May be replieved. 307
Indians (Native) clandestine Purchases from them. 4, 101 Slaves not to be
imported. 58 Not to be sued for Tavern Debts. 92 Dances how to be prevented.
126 Not to be made Servants without the Consent of two Justices. 152
Indians or Negroes not to be abroad at unseasonable Times. 35 Inferior Courts
established. 131 Times and Places of holding them. 131, 220, 237 To amend
Reasons of Appeal. 136 May be adjourned by one Judge, on urgent Occasions. 136
Fees. 143, 201 Suits there regulated. 156 A Fifth Judge added. 201
Inhabitants not to submit their Lands to any other Jurisdiction. 12 Not to be
clandestinely transported. 29 Costs to them secured. 37 Persons disallowed or
rejected, how to be dealt with. 103, 203
Insolvent Debtors, Act for their Relief. 223 Interest of the Banks how secured
and applied. 55, 58, 85, 86, 107, 159, 161, 173, 206, 213, 214, 218, 228, 238,
243, 255, 273, 287. None to be allowed on the Colony's Bonds. 194
(...) Estates, Repeal of the (...) about them. 113 How to be administered. 6,
202
Inventories how to be made and exhibited. 5 Judges to be chosen by the General
Assembly. 133, 171 Their Power to chancer Instruments. 134 To appoint a Clerk,
in Case. 138 One added to the Inferior Courts. 201
Jurisdiction of Justices of the Peace. 149 Jurors (Grand) how to be chosen.
130, 132, 257 Their Engagement. 137 Fine for not se^ving. 147, 247 Their
Allow^nce. ^96 To be returned by the Town Clerk. 182
Jurors (Petit) how to be chochosen. 130, 132, 250 Their Engagement. 137 Fine
for Nonappearance. 147, 247 To be returned by the Sheriff, in Case. 132 Return
of them to be made by the Town Clerk. 182 Their Fees. 247 Time of Attendance.
257
Jurors taking Bribes, how to be punished. 119 Who shall be exempt from
serving. 148, 199 Each Town'^ Quota. See Quota. Protected from Arrest^. 302 Not
to pay Ferriage
Justices of the Peace to be chosen annually. 22 Their Commission. 23 May join
Person^ in Marriage. ^^^ Appeals from them to the Sessions. 130, 216 Their
Jurisdiction. 149 To s^ize all Cask under Assize. 158
Three, to try Theft, under Ten Pounds. 215 Two, to try Civil Actions not
exceeding Five Pounds. 280 One, may adjourn the Court. 281 Appeal from them to
the InInferior Court. 282 Their Fe^s stated. 290 May grant Writs of Replevin.
306 May take Depositions out of Court. 304

K
King's Causes, where he is concerned. 133 King's County. 128 Time of holding
the Court. 220
Kingstown the Town of, erected. 15 Divided. 90

L
Labor and Sports on the first Day of the Week, forbid. 18 Ladders to be
provided in Newport. 26 Lands given for Charitable Uses, not to be misapplied.
87 Laws of England, how in Force. 28, 116 Law, Suits at, for avoiding. 46, 115
Vexatio^^, to prevent. 75, 189
Laws, Act amending several. 114 Leather, how to be tanned, curried, and
s^^led. 39 Licenses, how g^^nted. 123 None to sell ^^rong Liquors without ^^em.
124 Without (...) ^ome on Shore from in^ected Vessels. 275 Or to visit a
suspected House. 279
Light-house to be built. 214 Limitation of real Actions. 46, 115 Personal
Actions. 99
Liquid Commodities, in Cask under Assize, to be forfeited. 158 Lotteries
suppressed. 170 Loans. See Bank.
M
Magazine to be ^r^^ted in Newport. 233 Marriages clandestine, Act to prevent
them. ^0 Marri^ges, how to be solemnized. 30, 176 To be r^gistred. 31, 100, 177
Martial, C^^^ts appointed. 234, 239 Masters of Vessels to make Report to the
Governor. 28 Not to land Passengers without Leave or B^nd. 28, 127 P^^alty on
them for importing Indian Slaves. 59 Their D^ty in an infected V^s^^l. 274
Masters not to put away hired Servants without Cause. 120 Measures and Weight^
regulated. Members of the General Assembly, protected. 301 Not to pay Ferriage
Middleto^n a Township 262 Militia regulated. 65 to 74, 196, 232, 288 Military
Watches. 8^, 248, 289 Millers regulated. 97 Mills regulated. 180, ^^0 Minis^er^
Maintenance, how to be raised. 60 Empowered to marry. 176
Misemployment of Lands, etc. given to charitable Uses, how to be redressed. 87
to 8^ Moderator of a Town Meeting* (...) how to proceed. 126, 2^^ Mortgages how
to be discharged. ^^, ^66 Murder how to be punished, 116 Muster General. 69, 7^
N
Narragansett Country, Intrusion into, fo^bid. ^^ Naval Office established. 2^
Naval Officer to be appointed by the Governor. 20 To keep a Register of Persons
transported. 29 To keep a Record of Money received on the Act for the Relief of
poor Sailors. 151 His Fees stated. 267
Negroes not to b^ abroad at unseasonable Tim^s. 35 Act to prev^nt their
running away. 49 Their T^i^l ^or Theft. 77 Punishment for attempting a Rape. 263
N^^s. See Fish. Newport Grants confirmed. 21 Bounds of the compact Part. 200
Divided. 262
Newport, County of. 128 Persons taken with the Small Pox, to be removed. 279
New-Shoreham a Township. 14 Ninigret, Grants, Leases, etc. from him. 48, 224
Overseers appointed to lease ^ut his Land. 63, 207, 224 H^s Family exempted
from be^^g sued. 92 ^llo^ed to sell Lands ^o pay his Deb^s. 246
North-Kingstown a Towns^^p. 90 Divided. 256
Notary Public established, and his Fees. 37, 38
O
O^th. See E^g^gem^nt. Off^nces cri^inal, Act against them. 115 to 121 Office,
none to exercise any, without Autho^^^y. 115 O^^icers not to be th^eatned. 115
Not to exact unlawful Fees. 117
Officers General. ^^e Election, Engagem^nt, General. Town. See To^^ Officers.
Military. See Militia.
Overseers of the Poor. 9 Overseers to leas^ out Ninigret's Lands. 63, 207, 224
Oysters to be preserved. ^84
P
Packer a sworn, of Beef, Pork, and Fish. 157 P^ssengers not to be landed
without Leave. 28, 127 Paving, Charge of, how to be recovered. 79 Pawcatuck
River, the Course of Fish in it, not to be stopped. 254, 258 Peace, Breach of.
118 Pedlars, Act against th^^. 110 Pension to Persons (...), and to Widows of
the (...). 74 Personal Estate, how to be (...). ^3 Ofabsent Persons how (...).
302 Actions limited. 99
Petaquamscut River, the Fishing there regulated. 191, 285 Petitions to ^h^
General Assembly, their Fee. 112 Pleas of Abatement, etc. 135, 257 Point Judith
Ponds, the Fishing there regulated. 191 Polls, how to be taxed. 295 Portsmouth
Grants con^irm^^. 21 Possession, Twenty (...) to make a Ti^le. 46 Post not to
pay (...). Pound and Stocks, (...) in each Town. 13 Owners ofCreature^
impounded, may (...) them. ^^6
Pound-Keeper^, (...) Duty. ^^^ Their Fees. ^^7
Powder-Money to (...). ^4, ^92 Prison in each Cou^t^. ^^^ Prisoners at the
K^^^'s Suit. ^^ Insolvent, their Relief. 76, 223 Poor, upon (...) Process. 123
Of War^ their Allowance. 288
Privateers Captain^ (...) to give Bond. 23 Prizes taken by Vessels in the
Service of the Colony, to belong to the Captors. 73 Probate of Wills, and the
Fees. 5, 140 Proceedings in the several Courts, regulated. 134 Profane Swearing
and Cursing. 121 Prohibitions to be granted by the Judges of the Superior
Court. 188 Protecti^n of Witnesses. 17 Of Members of the Assembly, and J^^ors.
301
Provi^^nce ^^^nts confirmed. 21 Highways how to be laid out. 94 County of.
128, 237 Out-lands divided into three Towns. 154
Proxy Votes how to be taken. 1 All to be taken in one Day. 255, 287
Publication of Marriage. 30, 176 Purchases clandestine from the Native
Indians. 4, 101 From Ninigret. 48

Q
Quieting of Possessions. 46, 115 Quota of Jurors from each Town. 147, 155,
209, 210, 235.242, 263, 265
R
Rape, Punishment for Negroe^ attempting. 263 Rateable Estate what shall (...)
deemed such. 295 A List thereof to be presented on Oath. 32
Rate-makers how to be chosen. 1^ Penalty for not accepting. 10
Rates how to be collected, where Persons have no visible Estate. 24 Not to be
misapplied. 27 How to be assessed and collected. 32, 33 Quota of the several
Town^ in the L10,000 Rate. 296
Real Estate of Persons concealed, or absent, to be attached. 192, 205 Reasons
of Appeal when to be filed. 130, 133, 282 May be amended. ^3^
Recording of Deeds, etc. ^0 Fines and Recoveries. 108
Register to be kept of Marriages, Birth^, and Burials. 31, 100, 177 Regulation
of Procceedings in the several Courts. 134 Replevin of Cattle, etc. 30^
Residents, Costs secured to them. 37 Retailers not to sell Drink t^ common
Tiplers. 83 Review in real Actions. 168 In personal Actions. 283 By both
Parties, to be tried by the same Jury. 283 To be brought within one Year, and
not to stop Ex^cution. 284
Riding excessive, in Newport and Providence, forbid. 12 No Appeal. 156
Rioting, how to be punished. 118 Robbery, to be punished with Death. 116
S
Sail^rs not to be ^ru^^ed ^or s^^ong Li^uo^^. 19 Act f^r their R^^ief. 150 Act
about such a^ have the Small P^x. 277
Salary of the Deputy Governor. 89 Of the As^istants. ^^
Situate a Township. 1^4 S^al of the Colony appointed. 4 (...) and Searche^^
of Lea^her. 39 Sec^etary to sen^ out Copi^s of Acts of Assembly. 8 To be Cl^^k
of the Superior Co^^^. 138 His Fees. 141, 2^6 To app^i^^ a Deputy. 152 Not to
(...) out Copies of private Acts. 224
S^rjeant who sets the Military Watch, his Duty. 249 Servants, no Housekeeper
to entert^in them (...) Nine a^ Night, without L^ave. 36 Unruly, their
Punishment. 115 Not to be putaway, without Cause. 120 Not to leave their
Servi^e. 120 Not to be retained. 120
Sessions. See ^^n^ral Sessions. Sheep, etc. (...) by Dogs. 26 Sh^r^ff, to p^y
Fines into the (...) T^^ sury, on Penalty. ^ To take suf^icient Bonds. 99, 284
To r^turn Jurors in C^se. 132 (...). 144, 167 To endorse traveling Fees. 1^8
To give Deeds, in Case. 203 To give B^^d. 225 In serving Wri^s of R^vi^w, may
^ttach M^ney, and^. in hi^ own (...). 284 May c^ll special Courts. 2^5 His
Deputy to be sworn. 300 To be answer^^le for al^ Misdoings of his D^puties. 305
Shingles and Clapboards their Size, etc. 163 Slaves, Act to prevent their
running away. 49 Their more speedy Tri^l (...) Theft. 77 Manner of freeing
them. 11^
Small Pox, Act to prevent its Spreading. 274 to 280 Wilful spreading of it, to
be punished with Death. ^^^
Smithfield a Township. 1^4 Sodomy to be punished with Death. 116 Soldier,
every enlisted, how to be provided. 67 South-Kings^^^n a Township. 9^ Special
Courts may be called by Vendue-Masters. 253 By the Sheriff. 2^5
Sports and Labor on the first Day of the Week forbid. 18 No Appeal to be
allowed. 156
Squibs not to be fired in the Streets. 162, 200 Standard of Weights and
Measures. Strangers to inform the Town Council of their Arriv^l. 1^^ Bonds to
^e given, to prevent their being chargeable. 127 Trading in this Government, to
be rated. ^^^
Stray. See Est^ay^. Stocks or (...) to be made in each Town. ^^ Drunkards and
Swea^ers to be put therein. 121
Stocks of Mon^y for Charitable U^e^, how to be ^mployed. ^7 Suits, vexatio^^.
7^, 1^9 Where the Re^order or Sh^riff are Pa^^ies. 76
Summons, General (...) to be summon^d. 138 Of (...) out (...) Court. ^^4
Superior Court ^^^ablished. 1^^ Mayamen^ Re^son^ ofAppeal. 136 One Judge may
adjourn on urgent Occasions. 136 Secretary to be the Clerk. 138 Fees. 142
Judges may grant Prohibitions out of T^rm-time. 188
Surveyors of Boards, etc. 162 Swearing and Cursing profanely. 121 No Appeal^
be allowed. 156

T
Tales-M^n, by whom to be (...). 130, 132 Their F^ne for refusing to (...) 247
(...) ^egulated. 39 (...) not to trust Sailors. 19 (...) sell Drink to common
Tipl^^^. 83 (...). Notice of strange (...). 103 To (...). ^ond to keep good
O^der. 124 Not to trust Inhabitants above Twenty S^ill^ngs. 167 Act repealed.
291 To give Notice of any Person taken with the Small Pox. 278
Taxes. See Rates. Taxing Bills of Cost. 169, 179 Tearing Bills of Credit
prohibited. 92 Tender Consciences. See Consciences. Theft, how to be punished.
117 Negro and Indian Slav^s, how to be tried. 57 Under Ten Pounds, how to be
tried. 21^
Timb^r to b^ viewed and mea^u^ed. 1^^ Penal^y for cutting it on other^ L^nd.
2^6 Method of convicting Offenders. 2^6
Toll, how much to b^ taken. 97 Tongues, cutting them out, Punishment for it.
116 Tonnage. Duty on 34, 292 Towns to have a Pound, and Stocks, or Cage. 13 To
be fined for not choosing Town Officers. ^19 To make Laws ^n prudential Affairs.
22 To be provided with Weights Measures.
Town Clerk to return the Names of the Deputies. 2, 182 His Duty in regard to
Rates. 32, 33 To return the Names of Constables. 33 To record Marriages,
Births* and Burials. 31* 100, 177 His Fees. 14^, 292 To r^turn^ the Names of
Jurors. 132, 18^ Penalty for Neglect. 182
Town Council how to be elected, and their Power. 9 Regulated. 135, 177 To
prove Wills, and grant Administration. 5 Appeals allowed. 6 To lay out
High-Wa^^. 53 To have the Care of Persons entitled to a Pension. 74 To settle
Watches in Times of Pe^ce. 80 To regulate the Fishing in Rivers. 81 To po^^
common Tiplers. 83* 95 To inquire into the Improvement of Lands, etc. given for
charitable U^es. 87 To (...) personal E^tates. 93 Their Power to receive or
r^ject Str nge^^ a^ Inhabitants. 102 To (...). 114 To (...). 123 To prevent
^^sord^rly Indian (...). 126 (...) O^der^ rela^ing to Dogs. 127 To receive of
the Naval Officer, Six P^nce per Month of all Sailors Wages. 151 President to
administer Oaths. 178 Their Power relating toOysters. 184 To take Bonds from
Administrators. 202 To send away Persons rejected from being Inhabitants. 203
To bind out poor Children Apprentices. 236 To have the Care of Persons Non
Compos. 249 To take a List annually of Persons to be Ju^ors. 251 Their
Authority about the Small Pox. 275, etc.
Town Meetings ^regulated. 125, 255, 287 Town Officers to be annually chosen.
9, 42, 82, 162 Town Sergeant to warn the Deputies. 2 To warn Jurors. 130, 132
His Fees. 145, 290 To serve Writs and Executions, in Case. 76, 206
Town Treasurer to be sued for Town Debts. 16 To provide a Standard of Weights
and Measures.
Traders foreign, to be rated. 220 Tradesmen, not to leave their Work, till
finished. 121 Training, who liable to train. 65 Who are excused. 65, 199, 293
How often to be held. 68 Fine for Neglect. 233
Transitory Actions. 134, 156 Transportation, clandestine, of Persons
prohibited. 29 Travelers from infected Places, to remain five Days on the
Borders. 278 Treason, its Punishment. 116 Treasurer General, to giveBond. 146
His Salary. 146, 166 To sue Persons living out of the Colony. 287
Treesnot to be cut or carried away without the Owner's Leave. 286 Trespasses,
Act to prevent them. 285 Troops of Horse, three established. 7^ Trooper's Fine.
71, 100, 292 Trustees. See Bills of Credit emitted. Try^l of Actions not
exceeding Five Pou^ds. 280 Tonnage, Duty on. 34, 292
V
Value of Rateable Estates. 29^ Vendue-Masters established. 82 To give Bond.
241 Penalty for acting as such without Authority. 241 Empowered to call special
Courts. 253
Vessels not to sail without a Certificate to the G^^^er of the Fort. 35
Infected, where not to anchor. 274
Vexatious Suits, discouraged. 7^* 189 Vo^^, who may vote for General Offi^ers.
1, 2^2 No Rew^^d to be offered. 193 Penalty f^r putting in two Votes. 217 For
Person^ vo^ing, who are not qualified. 218
Votes (Proxy) See Proxy.
W
Warwick, Grants confirmed. 21 Township divided. 242
Waste-gates to be kept open. 210 Watches, how to be appointed. 80, 248 Penalty
for refusing or neglecting. 289
Water-Fences, how to be made and maintained. 125 Wears regulated. 81, 91, 254,
285 Weights and Measures. Penalty for selling or buying by false Ones.
Westerly, the Town of, erected. 13 Grants confirmed. 21 Divided. 208
West-Greenwich a Township. 235 Widows not to be barred of their Dower. 51
Wild-Cats, Premium for killing them. 178 Wills, how to be made and proved. 5
Fees for the Probate. 140
Witnesses from other Governments, protected from Arrests. 17 Their Allowance.
76 Time of their Attendance. 258 May be summoned by Justices. 304
Wolves, Premium for killing them. 169, 225 Wood, Firewood, Act to prevent
Frauds in it. ^7 Wood-Corder, to be sworn. 27 Woods not to be fired. 36, 90
Wounded Persons allowed a Pension. 74 Writs how to be signed and directed, when
the Recorder or Sheriff are Parties. 76 When between the Sheriff and Town
Sergeant. 301
Writs and Processes in the Inferior Courts. 131 How to be served, and when.
131, 132, 302, 301 To be indorsed by the Attorney, in Case. 135
Writs of Error, etc. to be tried at the Superior Court. 138 Of Arrest, the
Form. 139 OfReview, when to be taken out. 168, 184

ACTS AND LAWS, Of His MAJESTY'S COLONY OF Rhode Island, AND
Providence-Plantations, In NEW ENGLAND, In AMERICA.

NEWPORT, RHODE ISLAND: Printed by the Widow FRANKLIN, and to be Sold at the
Town-School-House. M, DCC, XLV.

LAWS, Made an^ past by the General Assembly of His Majesty's Colony of
Rhode Island, and Providence-Plantations, Begun and Held at Newport, the first
Day of March, 1663.
An Act regulating the Election of General Officers.
BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly of this Colony, Who shall Vo^e at
^en^ral Electio^s.
and by the Authority of the same it is hereby Enacted, That all Persons
whatsoever, Vide Act 1742.
that are Inhabitant^ within this Colony, and admi^ted Freemen of the same,
shall and may have liberty to Vote for the Electing of all the General Officers
in this Colony, either in Person or by Proxy, The Tim^ when.
upon the first Wednesday of May Annually, as is expressed in the Charter of
the Colony.

AND be it further Enacted by the Auth^rity aforesaid, That on the first
Wedn^sday of May Annually, there shall be Chosen and Elected, one General
Recorder, Gen^ral R^c^^der, Sh^^iff, A^torney-G^neral and General Treasu^er
appointed.
who shall be Secretary of the Colony, one Sheriff, who shall have the Care and
Custody of His Majesty's Goal in Newport, one General Attorney, and one General
Treasurer; for the better regulating and managing the Affairs of the
Government, and shall be Chosen in manner as aforesaid.

AND that each and every Person that shall Vote by Proxy, shall on the
Town-Meeting Day next preceding the General Election, openly in the said
Meeting, Proxy Votes how taken.
deliver in his Votes to the Town Clerk of the Town wherein he Dwells, with his
Name written at length on the backside or the bottom thereof; which Votes so
taken, shall be immediately Sealed up by the Town Clerk, and by him delivered
either to an Assistant, Justice, Warden or Deputy of said Town, who shall be by
the said Town-Meeting appointed for the same; And returned to the Assembly.
by him to be delivered to the Governor, or Deputy Governor in open Court,
before the Election proceed.

^^neral Offic^^s t^ be En^ag^d.
AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all General
Officers shall take the following Engagement, before they Act in their
respective Offices. YOU A. B. are by the free Vote of the Freemen of this
Colony of Rhode Island, The Form ^f the ^nga^e^^nt.
and Providence-Plantations, Elected unto the place of in this said Colony, and
do solemnly Engage true Allegiance unto His Malesty, His Heirs and Successors
to bear, and in your said Office, equal Justice to do, unto all Persons, Poor
and Rich within this Jurisdiction, to the utmost of your Skill and Ability,
without Partiality, according to the Laws established, or that shall be
established according to the Charter of this Colony, as well in matters
Military as Civil. And this Engagement You make and give upon the Peril of the
Penalty of Perjury.

The Reciprocal Engagement.
I Do in the Name and Behalf of this Colony, Re-engage to stand by YOU, and to
support you by all due Assistance and Encouragement in the Performance and
Execution of your aforesaid Office, according to your Engagement.



AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That no Person shall be
Elected to the Place of a Deputy to Sit in the General Assembly of this Colony,
None but Fre^men and Free-holder^ to be Deputies.
but those that are Freeholders therein, and Freemen of the sam^* And that
each respective Town in this Colony, shall Choose and Elect their Number of
Deputies as stated in the Charter, at their respective Town Me^ting^ n^xt
pr^c^eding such Court of Assembly, for the which they shall be Elected. And
that the Town Clerk of each respective Town shall grant forth his Warrant to
the Town Sergeant or Constable of said Town, to warn such Deputies as shall
from time to time be Chosen in each respective Town, to attend the Assemblies
for which they are Chosen; and also the Town Clerk shall make return of such
Deputy Chosen as aforesaid, to the General Recorder for the time being, Vide
Act 16^^.
on the first opening of the Assembly; who is hereby appointed Clerk of the
same.

On urgent Occas^ons the Governor, or Dep^ty Gov^rnour to call the Ass^mbly.
AND be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That when and so often as any
Emergent Occasions shall require an A^sembly to be called at any other times
than is expressly mentioned in the Charter, that then and in such Cases, the
Governor, and in his absence the Deputy Governor, shall, and they are hereby
fully Authorized and Empowered to Grant forth a Warrant to the Sheriff, to Warn
and Require the Freemen of each respective Town in the Colony, to Choose and
Elect their respective Number of Deputies as aforesaid, to such Court as by the
Governor, or Deputy Governor's Warrant shall be directed: their Notification
and Return to be in manner as aforesaid.

AND be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, Vide Act 1^21.
That each respective Town shall pay unto their Deputies, Three Shillings per
Diem each, during their Attendance on the Court of Assembly.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That every Person, that
shall be Elected to the Place of a Deputy shall take the following Engagement
before he shall act therein.

YOU A. B. Being Chosen to the place of Deputy, to sit in the General Assembly,
Form of Depu^^e^ Enga^ement.
Do solemnly Engage true Allegiance to His Majesty His Heirs and Successors to
^ear, as also Fidelity to this His Majesty's Colony of Rhode Island, and
Providence-Plantations, and the Authority therein Established according to our
Charter; AND YOU do furthea Engage equal Right and Justice to do to all Persons
as shall Appeal unto You for your Judgment in their respective Cases. And this
Engagement You make and give upon the Peril of the Penalty of Perjury.

An Act for Declaring the Rights and Privileges of His Majesty's Subjects
within this Colony.
BE IT ENACTED By the General Assembly of this Colony, No Free-m^n to be
imprisoned, or d^prived of hi^ Liberty, ^c. But by hi^ P^er^* ^c. No (...) or
Duty to (...) raised, but by the G^n^^al Assembly.
and by the Authority of the same it is hereby Enacted, That no Freeman shall
be Taken or Imprisoned, or be deprived of his Freehold, or Liberty, or Free
Customs, or Ou^-Lawed, or Exiled, or otherways Destroyed* nor shall be passed
upon, Judged or Condemned, but by the Lawful Judgment of his Peers, or by the
Law of this Colony, And that no Aid, Tax, Tallage, or Custom, Loan,
Benevolence, Gift, Excise, Duty or Imposition whatsoever, shall be Laid,
Assessed, Imposed, Levied or Required of or on any of His Majesty's Subjects
within this Colony or upon their Estates, upon any manner of Pretense or Color
whatsoever, but by the Act and Assent of the General Assembly of this Colony.

AND that no Man, of what Estate and Condition soever, shall be put out of his
Lands and Tenements, nor Taken, No Person to b^ (...) o^ (...) other will
molested, ^u^ by due Course of ^aw.

Al^ Persons of ^states and O^edi^nt to the Magistra^^, to h^ve liberty to
(...) to (...).


nor Imprisoned, nor Disinheri^ed, nor Banished, nor any ways Destroyed, nor
Molested, without being for it brought to Answer by due course of Law; And*
that all Rights and Privileges granted to this Colony by His Majesty's
Charter, be entirely kept and preserved to all His Majesty's Subjects residing
in, or belonging to the same; And that all Men professing Christianity, and of
competent Estates, and of civil Conversation, who acknowledge, and are Obedient
to the Civil Magistrate, though of different Judgments in Religious Affairs
(Roman Catholics only excepted) shall be admitted Freemen, and shall have
Liberty to Choose and be chosen Officers in the Colony both Military and Civil.

An Act for the p^^^^nting of Illegal and Clandestine P^^^hases of the Native
Indians in this Colony.
FOR AS MUCH as diverse Persons have made Purchases of Lands in this Colony of
the Indians, without the consent or approbation of the General Assembly, which
manifestly tends to the Defrauding, and Manifest Injury of such Native Indians,
as well as defeating the just Rights of this Colony.

All Purcha^es of the Native^ wit^out the consent of the Assembly to be void.
BE it therefore Enacted by the General Assembly, and the Authority of the
same, That no Person or Persons for the future, shall purchase any Lands or
Islands within this Colony, of or from the Native Indians within the same, but
such only as are so allowed to do by the General Assembly, upon Penalty of
forfeiting all such Lands or Islands so purchased, to this Colony; And to pay
for every such Purchase by them so made, And the Person pu^cha^ing, ^o be fined.
the Sum of Twenty Pounds as a Fine, to and for the Use of the Colony; And all
such Purchases shall be Esteemed and Adjudged Null, Void, and of none Effect.

An Act appointing a public Seal for this Colony.
BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly, and by the Authority of the same,
Colony S^^l.
That there be one Seal made for the public Use of the Colony; and that the
Form of an Anchor be Engraven thereon: And the Motto thereof shall be the Word
HOPE.

An Act for the Probate of Wills, and Granting of Administrations.
TownCoun^l'^ to (...) and (...).
BE IT ENACTED By the General A^^^^bly, and by the Authority of the same, That
the Power of proving of Wills, and granting of Administrations of the Personal
Estate of Persons deceased, shall be in the respective Town Councils of this
Colony, where such Person deceased last Dwelt or Inhabited; which said Town
Council, or the major part of them, shall have the Power, as Judge of Probates,
to take the Probate of Wills and Testaments, and grant Administrations, and all
other matters relating thereto, to Act and Do, as by the Laws of England, and
of Hi^ Majesty's Colony does belong to the said Office.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, All Will^ devising Land
shall be in Writing, and shall have 3 Witnesses.
That all Devise^ and Bequests of Land or Tenements, or of any Right or
Interest in the same, shall be in Writing, and Signed by the Party so devising
the same, And shall be Attested and Subscribed in the Presence of the said
Devisor, by three or four credible Witnesses, or else shall be Void and of none
Effect.

And be it further Enacted by the Authorit^ aforesaid, That the Town Council of
each Town, may Summons and Convent before them, all and every Person named
Executor or Executors, of any Testament, to the intent to prove or refuse the
Testament of his or their Testator; And to bring in Inventories of such
Testator's Estate; Ex^cu^ors to give Bond.
And in case such Person or Persons take upon him or them, the Executorship, by
proving the Will, that then at the same time, such Executor or Executors, shall
give Bond to the said Town Council, that within one Month after such Probate,
And make Inven^o^ies.
he or they will Exibit a true and perfect Inventory upon Oath, of the whole
Personal Estate of the Deceased, as far as shall come to his or their
knowledge; And that he or they will add thereunto, what and so much as may
afterward appear.

And be it further Enacted, That such Executor or Executors, upon his or their
making an Inventory of said Estate, Inventory how made.

And to be Ex^ibited to the Town-Co^ncil to be Recorded.


shall call two of the next of Kin, or two other honest Men, and of good Credit
of the Neighborhood, and in their Presence, and by their Direction cause to be
made a True and Perfect Inventory of all the Goods and Chattels, Wares,
Merchandises, Rights and Credit of the Testator to be Exhibited to the Town
Council, and there Recorded.

And be i^ further Enacted, Wills how pro^ed.

When proved, to be Record^d


That upon Probate of such Will or Testament, the Witnesses to the same, shall
upon their Oaths declare, that they saw the Testator Sign, Seal, and Declare
the same to be his last Will and Testament; And that in his Presence, they set
their Hands as Witnesses thereunto, and the said Testator was in his perfect
Mind and Memory, at the same time. Which said Testament being so proved,
Administration (...).
the Clerk of the said Council, shall transcribe a Copy thereof into the Book
of Record* and deliver the Original to such Executor or Executors, with an
Attest of its being Recorded. And the said Town Council, shall without Delay
give to such Executor or Executors, under the Seal of the said Office, a Power
to Ad^inister the said Estate.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That in case the Person
or Persons named Executor or Executors in a Will (being duly Summoned) before
such Town Council, to prove the Will, I^ the E^^cuto^s r^fuse to (...), to
grant Administration to the n^x^ of Kin, or to the grea^est Creditor.
shall refuse so to do, and take upon him the charge of Executorship, such his
Refusal shall be entered in the Register's Book of said Town Council, and
thereupon such Town Council shall grant Letters of Administration, with the
Will annexed thereto, to the Widow or next of Kin to the deceased Person, that
shall desire the same; And upon their Refusal, to one or more of the Principal
Creditors, ^s the said Cou^cil shall think fit.

And be it further Enacted, That when and so often as any Person shall Dye
Intestate, Administration of Intestate Estates, to be granted to the Widow, or
next of Kin.
Administration of such Intestates personal Estate shall be granted to the
Widow, or next of Kin to the Intestate that shall desire the same. And in case
of their refusal thereof, to such principal Creditor or Creditors, as the said
Town Council shall think fit.

PROVIDED always, and be it Enacted, That such Widow or next of Kin, or
^rincipal Creditor or Creditors of such Intestate, Administrators to give Bond,
and render an Account of their Administration to the TownCounc^l, when required.
desiring the Administration of such Intestate Estate, shall at the granting of
the same, give Bond to the said Town Council, with two sufficient Sureties, in
double the Sum of what the said Intestate's Personal Estate shall be by the
said Town Council Valued to be worth, for his and their true and rightful
Administration of the said Estate according to Law; And duly Exhibiting a true
and perfect Inventory of such Estate unto the Town Council, and to them at all
times when Required, to render a true and faithful Account of such his, Vide
Act 1737.
her, or their Administration.

AND be it further Enacted, That if any Party shall be Agrieved at the Judgment
or Sentence of such Town Council, for any matters contained in this Act, Appeal
to the Governor and Council, as Supreme Judge of Probates.
that in such Case, it shall be Lawful for such Person to Appeal from the said
Judgment or Sentence, unto the Governor and Council of this Colony; who as the
Supreme Ordinary, or Judge of Probates, are hereby Empowered, to hear and,
determine such Appeals, and to give such Judgment thereupon, as to them shall
appear right and agreeable with Law. Vide Act 1737.


PROVIDED always, That such Person or Persons desiring an Appeal as aforesaid,
Appellant to give Bond.
give security by Bond, to said Council, to prosecute such Appeal with Effect,
and to pay such Costs, as may be taxed against him or them.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Person shall
Marry with an Executrix, or Administratrix, He that Mar^ies ^ith an ^xecutrix,
or Admini^^ratrix to give Bo^d.
such Person upon Information given thereof by any Creditor, Legatee, or other
Person Interested in such Estate, to the Town Council, before whom the Will was
proved, or by whom Administration was granted, shall be Obliged by such Town
Council, to give Bond with sufficient Sureties, in Double the Value of such
Estate, to such Town Council, and their Successors, for the Right, Full and Due
Administration of the Estate of the Testator or Intestate, by such Executrix or
Administratrix And in case of Refusal, Upon r^fusal to (...) committed to ^oal.
any one or more of the Justices of the Peace or Wardens, belonging to such
Town Council shall Commit such Person to his Majesty's Goal in Newport, there
to remain until he shall have performed the same.

AND be it further Enacted, That upon such Persons giving B^n^, with Sureties
as aforesaid, all former Bonds given by such E^ecutrix or Administratrix, shall
be delivered up to be Canceled.

LAWS, Made and past by the General Assembly of His Majesty's Colony of
Rhode Island, and Providence-Plantations, Begun and Held at Newport, the first
Day of May, in the Eighteenth Year of His Majesty's Reign Annoque Domini, 1666.
An Act, Establishing, Settling and Regulating, the General Courts of Trials
within this Colony, in both civil and criminal Causes.
Superseded by Acts (...) A. D. 1729.


An Act for Regulating the Proceedings on Executions, and Distraints on Goods
and Chattels.
BE IT ENACTED By the General Assembly, and by the Authority of the same, That
in all civil Cases, where Execution shall be Levied on any Person's Goods or
Chattel^, Goods (...) by Di^^^es^, to be kept (...) before Expo^ed ^o Sa^e.
(...) Goods and Chattels so Executed upon, shall be kept in the Officers ^ands
Ten Days, before they shall be Offered or Expo^ed to Sale, so that the Person
that Owned such Goods or Chattels, so taken by Execution, may within the said
Time (if he think fit) Pay the Money due, together with the Charges accruing on
such Execution, and thereupon shall have his said Goods delivered to him again.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That in case any Officer
for Rates, And also all ^oods taken by Distress.
or other justifiable Cause, shall Distrain the Goods or Chattels of any
Person; that then and in such Case, the said Officer shall keep the said Goods
and Chattels, for the space of Ten Days, at the Charge of the Owner of said
Goods and Chattels, who within the said Ten Days, Paying the Money due, and the
Charges accruing thereon, shall have the same delivered to him again. But in
case the Owner shall not Redeem them as aforesaid, that then the Officer may
Sell the same by public Vendue or Outcry, and what Overplus shall remain,
after the Debt and Charges are satisfied and paid, shall be returned to the
Owner thereof.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all Fines and
Forfeitures, Fine^ to be paid into the General Treasury, by the Sheriff. Five
Pounds for every Month^ negl^ct.
that shall be Levied by the Sheriff or his Deputy, by Order of the General
Assembly, General Court of Trials, and General Goal Delivery, shall be by him
(as by Law is required) paid into the General Treasury, to and for the Use of
the Colony. And if the Sheriff shall r^fuse or neglect to pay the same as
aforesaid, by the space of one Month, he shall Forfeit for such Offense, Five
Pounds, to and for the Use of the Colony, to be recovered by the General
Treasurer for the time being, in any Cour^ of Record.

Fines to be paid into the Town Treasury, by the Constable, etc. within one
Months time after Levied, on the Penalty of Five Shillings per Month.
AND that all Constables, and other Officers of the Respective Towns within this
Colony, who are legally Authorized and Appointed to collect and gather any
Fines or Forfeitures, which of Right ought to be paid into the Town Treasury;
and shall after the Levying and Collecting of the same, Neglect or Refuse so to
do, by the space of one Month, he shall for every Month after the Expiration of
the aforesaid time, forfeit Five Shillings, to and for the Use of such Town, to
be recovered by Complaint or Information, before any one or more Assistants,
Justices of the Peace, or Wardens of such Town.

An Act for the due Recording, Preserving and Keeping the Acts of the General
Assembly of this Colony.
The Recorder to Re^ister the Acts of Assembly, and send Copies to the Towns,
on the penalty of Five Pounds for every Offense.
BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly, and by the Authority of the same, That
the General Recorder of the Colony for the time being, shall Record all the
Acts of the General Assembly of this Colony in a Book, and send forth true
Copies of the same to the several Towns in the Colony, with the Colony's Seal
affixed thereunto, by the several times, as by the General Assembly shall from
time to time be Ordered; on the Penalty of Five Pounds, Vide Act 173^
for every such Offense that he shall be wilfully guilty of, to be paid into
the General Treasury, to and for the Use of the Colony.

An Act Establishing the Election of Town Officers in each Respective Town in
the Colony.
BE IT ENACTED By the General Assembly, and by the Author^ty of the same, Each
Town ^o Elect Town Council-m^n, and o^^er T^wnOff^cers, who shall make a
Town-Council.
That every Town within this Colony, shall (...) in every Year, (on a Day to be
by the Freemen of each Respective Town appointed,) choose and Elect such and so
many Town Officers, as by the Laws of this Colony are or shall be required. And
that on such a Day, by them appointed, they shall Annually choose and elect,
Vide Acts A. D. ^7^9 and 1733.
six good and sufficient Freeholders of each Town, for the constituting of a
Town Council for each Town, who together with such Assistants, Justices of the
Peace, and Wardens, as shall Dwell and Inhabit in said Town, with the
Governor, and Deputy Governor, and each of them in such Town or Towns where
they shall Inhabit or Reside, shall be and they hereby are constituted and
appointed, a Town Council for such Town; And they or the major part of such
Town Council, Their Power.
shall be a Quorum, and have full Power to manage the Affairs and Interest of
said Town. And in all matters to Act, Do, Transact and Determine, all and every
thing or things, which shall fall within the Jurisdiction of the same.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid. That the Freemen of
each respective Town, shall Annually on the Day of Election of Town Officers,
Elect a Town Clerk, Wh^^ Officers shall be Annually (...).
(who shall be Clerk of the Town Council,) a Town Treasurer, a Town Sergeant, a
Town Packer, a Town Sealer of Weights and Measures, and so many Constables,
Rate-makers, Overseers of the Poor, Surveyors of Highways, Viewers of Fences,
and all other Officers, as each or any Town in this Colony, shall have Occasion
for.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Freemen of
each Respective Town, Towns (...) to ma^^ Freemen.
on their Respective Town meeting Days, as shall be by them appointed, shall
and they hereby have full Power granted them, to Admit so many Persons,
Inhabitants of their Respective Towns, Vide Act 1729 and 1742.
Freemen of their Towns, as shall be by them Adjudged deserving thereof; And
that the Town Clerk of each Town, shall once every Year send a Roll or List of
all Freemen so Admitted in their Respective Towns, to the General Assembly to
be held for this Colony at Newport, the Day before the General Election, and
also such Persons that shall be so returned and Admitted Freemen of the
Colony, shall be enrolled in the Colony's Book, by the General Recorder.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That whosoever shall be
Legally chosen and elected to the Office of a Constable, within any Town within
this Colony, and shall refuse to serve in said place, shall Pay as a Fine, the
Sum of Three Pounds, Constables Fine, i^ ^^fuses ^o Serve, T^ree Pounds, Six
Sh^llings and Eight Pence.
Six Shillings and eight pence, to be paid into the Town Treasury, to and for
the Use of such Town; And if the Person so chosen shall refuse to Pay the same,
that then it shall and may be Lawful for any Assistant, Justice of the Peace,
or Warden of such Town, to Grant forth a Warrant of Distress, to Distrain and
Levy so much of said Persons Goods and Chattels, as shall pay the same, and the
said Fine so Levied, to be paid into the Town Treasury as aforesaid.

And Town Sergeants and Rate-makers, F^rty Sh^llings.
AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That whosoever shall be
duly Elected to the Office of Town Sergeant, or Rate-maker in any Town within
this Colony, and shall refuse to serve therein as by Law required, shall pay as
a Fine Forty Shillings, into the Town Treasury, to and for the Use of such
Town; and if such Person shall refuse to pay the same, then it shall be taken
by Distraint in manner as aforesaid.

Town Officers to be Engaged.
And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That every Person that
shall be chosen and elected to any Town Office, in any Town within this Colony,
shall take the following Engagement, before he act in his said Office. The Form
of their Engagement.
YOU A. B. Do hereby solemnly Engage, true Allegiance unto His Majesty His
Heirs and Successors to bear; and that You shall well and truly Execute the
Office of for this ensuing Year, or until another be Engaged in your room, or
You be Legally Discharged thereof, and this Engagement, You make and give upon
the Peril of the Penalty of Perjury.



An Act for the Regulating of Fences, throughout this Colony.
FORASMUCH as Disputes and Differences, have arisen, and daily do arise between
the Owners and Proprietors of Lands within this Colony, about the making their
proportionable parts of Fence, where their Lands join and are under Improvement.

For the regulating whereof:

BE it therefore Enacted by the General Assembly, and by the Authority of the
same, That all Partition Fences, between Lands under Improvement, Partition
Fences to be equally maintained.
shall be made and maintained from time to time in equal halves, by the
Proprietors or Possessors of such Land respectively, and in Case any Proprietor
of any Land, shall Improve his Land, (the Land adjoining being unimproved,) and
make the whole Partition Fence; in such Case, the Proprietor or Possessor of
the Land adjoining and unimproved, shall upon his Improvement of the same, pay
for the one half of such Partition Fence, according to the Value thereof at
that time, and shall keep up and maintain his half part thereof for the future.
Upon Neglect, how to be prosecuted.
And in case either of the Proprietors or Possessors of adjoining Lands, shall
refuse so to do; That then upon Complaint of the Party agrieved thereby, to the
Viewers of Fences in said Town, any two of the said Fence Viewers, are to take
a View of such Fence so wanting, or not kept in Lawful repair, and upon their
certifying the same under their Hands; The said Party agrieved may make or
repair the Fence so certified to be wanting, and recover the charge and damage
thereof, if not exceeding Forty Shi^lings, by Action to be brought before any
two Assistants, Justices of the Peace, or Wardens in said Town, and if the
charges or damages are above Forty Shillings, then at the General Court of
Trials.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Person shall
withdraw his Fence from the Line, Any one that withdraws his Fence, shall yet
maintain one half of his Line.
between himself and Neighbor, the Party so doing, shall make and maintain the
one half of his said Neighbors Fence notwithstanding, saving to every Person
such Agreement, for the maintenance of their divisional Fence, as shall be by
them made.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all the several
sorts of Fences hereafter mentioned, and made as is hereafter expressed, What
Fence shall be deemed lawful Fence.
are and shall be deemed and adjuged Lawful and sufficient Fence, for the
Fencing in of any Lands, and that all other sorts not here expressly mentioned,
that shall upon the View of the Fence Viewers, Vide Acts 171^ and 171^.
be adjudged as good and sufficient as these that are hereafter mentioned,
shall be deemed Lawful Fence, against Horses, Neat Cattle, Sheep, etc. A Hedge
with Ditch, shall be three Foot high above the top of the Ditch, and well
staked at the distance of every Foot and half, bound together at the top, and
well filled; A Hedge without a Ditch shall be four Foot high, staked, bound,
and filled as a Hedge with a Ditch; And Post and Rail Fence on a Ditch or Bank,
shall be four Rails high, well set in Posts; And all Post and Rail Fence
without a Ditch or Bank, shall be made five Rails high, and well set in Posts.
And that if the above specified sorts of Fence, and other sorts not herein
expressly mentioned, be not adjudged or deemed equivalent thereunto, by the
Fence Viewers as aforesaid, shall be deemed unlawful Fence, and the Party that
shall be agrieved thereby, shall have and recover his Damages accruing thereon*
against the Possessor of such Land.

An Act for preventing any Inhabitants of this Colony, from subjecting their
Lands under any other Government.
No Person shall subject any Land^ within this Colony under any other. On the
Penal^^ of forfe^ting all such Lands, and being fined at discretion.
BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly, and by the Authority of the same, That
if any Person or Persons, Inhabiting within, or having any right to any Lands
lying within the Limits of this Colony, shall Subject, Put, or Endeavor by any
ways or means to Put, or Subject such Lands, under the Jurisdiction or
Authority of any other Government or Colony: That such Person or Persons, being
duly convicted thereof, shall forfeit to and for the Use of this Colony, and
toward the Support thereof, all such Lands by him or them so Subjected, or
Put, or Endeavored to be Subjected or Put under any other Government or
Colony; and be further Fined, at the Discretion of the Judges of such Court,
before whom convicted; and whoever shall be Procuring, Aiding, Abetting or
Assisting, any other Person or Persons in any of the aforesaid Offenses, and
being thereof duly convict, shall be Fined at the Discretion of the Judges of
the Court before whom convicted.

An Act to prevent excessive Riding in any of the Streets or Highways of the
Towns of Newport and Providence.
WHEREAS several Persons have had their Bones broke, and received other
Damages, by excessive Riding in the Streets or Highways of the Towns of Newport
and Providence.

For the preventing whereof for the future:

BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly, and by the Authority of the same,
Excessive Riding to be punished by fining, not ex^eeding Five Shillings.
That whosoever shall Ride faster than a common Traveling pace, in any of the
Streets or Highways of the Town of Newport, or shall Ride a Gallop in the
Streets or Highways of the Town of Providence, shall for every such Offense, No
App^^l. V^de Act 1730.
Forfeit Five Shillings, the one half to the Informer, and the other half to
and for the Use of the Poor of the Town, where such Offense shall be committed,
to be Recovered upon Complaint thereof made before any one Assistant, or
Justice of the Peace, of the Town where such Offense shall be committed,
together with the reasonable Charge accruing thereon, unless Justifiable excuse
shall be made to appear before the said Assistant, or Justice, that shall Try
the same.

An Act, Establishing Pounds and Stocks, etc.
BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly, and by the Authority of the same, That
each respective Town in the Colony s^all Erect, Build, Every Town to ^ave a
Pound, and a Cage or Stocks. On the penalty of Ten Pounds.
Make and Maintain at their own charge, one public Pound, for the impounding
of Horses, Neat Cattle, Sheep, etc. and one good sufficient Pair of Stocks or
Cage, for the Punishing and Securing of Offenders, in such place or places of
each respective Town, as shall be to them most convenient, on the Penalty of
Forfeiting Ten Pounds, to and for the Use of the Colony, by every Town as shall
neglect the same.

A LAW, Made and passed by the General Assembly of His Majesty's Colony of
Rhode Island, and Providence-Plantations, Held at Newport, the first Day of
May, 1669.
An Act for Erecting a Township in the Narragansett Country to be called
Westerly.
WHEREAS the Inhabitants of a certain Tract of Land, in the Narragansett
Country, called and known by the Name of Misquamacuk, alias Pawcatuck, Bounded
Westerly on the Colony Line, and Southerly on the Sea, have Petitioned this
Assembly to be Incorporated into a Township; and their being a sufficient
number of Inhabitants already settled thereon, and Land convenient for the same,

BE IT THEREFORE Enacted by the General Assembly, and by the Authority of the
same, That the aforesaid Tract of Land be, Westerly Erected a Township.
and it hereby is Incorporated a Township, and called by the Name of Westerly:
And the Inhabitants thereof* shall have and enjoy all the Rights, Immunities,
Privilege (...) Powers, as other Towns in this Colony have or do Enjoy

A LAW, Made and passed by the General Assembly of His Majesty's Colony of
Rhode Island, and Providence-Plantations, in New England, Held at Newport, the
Second Day of May, 1671.
An Act for Subsisting of poor Prisoners committed at the King's Suit.
BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly, and by the Authority of the same, Poor
Prisoner's at the King's Suit allowed Five ^ence per Diem.
That all Persons that shall be committed to Goal in this Colony, for criminal
Offenses, and are Poor, and have not wherewithal to subsist themselves, shall
be allowed Five pence per Diem, Vide Act.
out of the General Treasury of this Colony, for their Subsistence, during
their Imprisonment. Provided they demand the same.

A LAW, Made and passed by the General Assembly of His Majesty's Colony of
Rhode Island, and Providence-Plantations in New England, Held at Newport, the
Second Day of May, 1672.
An Act for Incorporating the Lands on Block-Island, a Township to be called
New-Shorcham.
WHEREAS the Inhabitants of Block-Island, have Petitioned this Assembly to be
Incorporated a Township, and there being a sufficient Number of Inhabitants
already Settled thereon, and Land convenient for the same.

BE IT THEREFORE Enacted by the General Assembly, Block-Island Erected a
Town^^ip, and called New-Shoreham
and by the Authority of the same, That all the Lands of Block-Island, be and
they hereby are I^corporated a Township, and called New-Shoreham; and the
Inhabitants thereof, shall have and enjoy all Franchises, Immunities,
Privileges and Powers, as in their Charter Granted them by this Assembly is
more largely set forth.

A LAW, Made and passed by the General Assembly of His Majesty's Colony of
Rhode Island, and Providence-Plantations in New England, held at Newport, the
Twenty Eighth Day of October, 1674.
An Act Incorporating a certain Tract of Land in the Narragansett Coun^^y into
a Township, to be called Kingstown.
WHEREAS the Inhabitants of a certain Tract of Land in the Narragansett
Country, Bounded East by the Narragansett-Bay, S^utherly by the Sea, or Ocean,
and West by the Township of Westerly, have Petitioned this Assembly to be
Incorporated a Township; and there being a sufficient Number of Inhabitants
already settled thereon, and Land convenient for the same.

BE IT THEREFORE Enacted by the General Assembly, and by the Authority of the
same, That the aforesaid Tract of L^nd in the Narragansett Country, Kingsto^^
E^ected.
be and hereby is Incorporated a Township, and called Kingstown, and the
Inhabitants thereof shall have and enjoy all such Immunities, Privileges and
Powers, as in their Charter Granted them by this Assembly, is more largely and
amply set forth.

LAWS, Made and passed by the General Assembly of His Majesty's Colony of
Rhode Island, and Providence-Plantations, Held at Newport, the Thirty first Day
of October 1677.
WHEREAS there is a certain Tract of Land in the Narragansett Country, Bounded
Northerly upon the Town of Warwick, and Easterly upon the Narragansett-B^y,
Southerly and Westerly as by Plat, returned to this Assembly, by Messieurs
Peleg Sanford, and John Smith, Surveyors, especially Empowered thereto.

BE it therefore Enacted by the General Assembly, and by the Authority of the
same, That the aforesaid Tract of Land be, East Green wi^h Incorporated a
To^nship.
and it hereby is Incorporated a To^nship* and called East (...) the
Inhab^tants thereof, shall have all such (...) as oth^^ Towns in this (...) do
enjoy.

An (...) for Granting R^^earings. Supers^ded by Act^ pass^d A. D. 1729.
An Act to Enable private Persons to Recover their Debts due from any Town, by
Action against the Town Treasurer.
BE IT ENACTED By the General Assem^^^, and by the Authority of the same, That
all Persons wha^soever, that shall have any Money due to him or them, from any
Town in this Colony, for any matter, cause or thing whatsoever, shall take the
following Method for the obtaining of the same: To wit, How Debts due from a
Town may be recovered. Account to be exhibited to the Town-meeting, and then
the Town Treasurer to be Sued for the same. If the Town Treasurer have not
sufficient to pay the same, to give Information thereof to an Assistant, etc.
who is to call a Town-meeting, to make a Ra^e for the same.

And if any Town shall neglect so to do, such Town shall be Fined by the
General Assembly.


Such person or persons shall Present to the Town Meeting, a particular Account
of such Debt or Money due, and how contracted; which being done, in Case Just
and due Satisfaction is not made him or them by the Town Treasurer of such
Town, within one Months time after such account be given in as aforesaid, that
then it shall be Lawful for such Person or Persons, to Commence his or their
Action against such Town Treasurer, for the Recovery of the same, and upon
Judgment obtained for such Debt, or Money due, in Case the Town Treasurer shall
not have sufficient of the Town's Money in his Hands, to satisfy and pay the
Judgment obtained against him, and the Charges expended in defending such Suit;
That then upon Application made by such Town Treasurer, to any one Assistant,
Justice of the Peace, or Warden of such Town, such Assistant, Justice or
Warden, shall grant forth a Warrant, to the Town Sergeant of such Town,
Requiring him to warn the Inhabitants of such Town, to hold a Town Meeting, at
such time and place as shall be Appointed, for the speedy ordering and making a
Rate, to be collected for the Reimbursement of such Town Treasurer; And in Case
such Town upon due warning given them, shall not take due, speedy, and
effectual care to Reimburse, Pay, or Satisfy such Town Treasurer such Moneys,
Costs and Charges by him Expended or Recovered against him; That then upon
Information or Complaint thereof by him made, to the next General Assembly of
this Colony, such Order shall be given therein, for the said Treasurer's
Reimbursement, with Allowance for all incident Costs, Charges and trouble
occasioned thereby; and such Town shall be Fined, at the Discretion of the said
General Assembly.

An Act Directing the Duty of His Majesty's Attorney General in this Colony.
BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly, and by the Authority of the same,
Attorney General to attend theCourts de Die in Diem, and to draw all
Indictments, and prosecute the same.
That His Majesty's Attorney General for this Colony, shall give his Attendance
at all General Courts of Trials, and Goal Delivery, where his Attendance is by
Law Required, for the Service of His Majesty: And is to give unto such Court or
Courts, due Advice and Information, concerning any Crimes, Breaches of the
Peace, or wrongs done to His Majesty, or any of His Subjects, that shall come
to his Knowledge; and to draw up and present to such Court^, all Information^
and Indictments, or other Legal Process, against any such Offenders, as by Law
is Required, and dilig^ntly by a due course of Law, to prosecute the ^ame, to
fin^l Judgment and Execution.

An Act for ^he Protection of Witnesses from Ar^est, that shall com from
another Government to give Evidence.
WHEREAS many times it falls out, that Persons living i^ other Government^, can
give Evidence against Criminals, but for fear of being Arrested, are
discouraged from giving t^^ir Personal Attendance in the Courts of this Colony,
as is needful and re^uisite in such Cases.

BE IT THEREFORE Enacted by the General Assembly, and by the Authorit^ of the
same, That where any Person shall by Notification in Writing from any
Assistant, Justice of the Peace, W^rden, Persons coming from another ^overnm^^t
t^ give Evidence, ^ot to be Arr^sted.
or from the General Recorder of this Colony, be desired to Appear before such
Assistant, Justice of the Peace or Warden, or before any Court in this Colony,
to give in Evidence in any Matter relating to any Criminal Offense; That such
Person shall be Protected, and free from all Arrest in civil Actions, during
the necessary time of his coming and giving Evidence, and returning out of this
Governmen^ again.

A LAW, Made and passed by the General Assembly of His Majesty's Colony of
Rhode Island, and Providence-Plantations, held at Newport, the Thirtieth Day of
May, 1678.
An Act for Incorporating the Island of Conanicut a Township, to be called
Iames-Town.
WHEREAS Mr. Caleb Carr,, Mr. Francis Brinly, and other Inhabitants of the
Island of Conanicut, Have Petitioned this Assembly, to be Incorporated a
Township; and there being a sufficient number of Inhabitants thereon, and Land
convenient for the same.

BE IT THEREFORE Enacted by the General Assembly, and by the Authority of the
same, That the abovesaid Island of Conanicut, Conanicut Island In^o^po^a^^d a
T^wnship, and (...) James Town.
be, and it hereby is incorporated a Township, and called James Town, and the
Inhabitants thereof shall have and enjoy all such Franchises, Liberties,
Privileges and Powers, as the Town of New-Shorcham, in this Colony Has, Does
or ought to Enjoy.

LAWS, Made and passed by the General Assembly of His Majesty's Colony of
Rhode Island, and Providence-Plantations, Held at Newport, the Sixth Day of
May, 1679.
An Act Prohibiting Sports and Labors on the First Day of the Week.
BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly, and by the Authority of the same, That
no Person or Persons, within this Colony, No Person to Labou, nor P ay on the
Fi^^t Day of the W^ek. O^ the Penalty o^ Five Shillings.
shall do or exercise any Labor or Business, or work of their ordinary
Calling, nor use any Game, Sport, Play or Recreation, on the First Day of the
Week, nor suffer the same to be done, by their Children, Servants or
Apprentices, (works of Necess^y and Charity only excepted) on the Penalty of
Five Shillings, for every such Offense, to be Levied on due Conviction thereof,
by Warrant of Distress, from any one Assistant, Justice of the Peace, or
Warden, to the Constable of such Town, where such Offense shall be committed,
to and for the Use of the Poor of such Town, together with the reasonable
Charges accruing there eon. And in case such Offender shall not have sufficient
to satisfy the same, then to be set in the Stocks, by the space of three Hours.
And that whosoever shall improve, set to work, or encourage any other Person's
Servant to Commit any of the aforesaid Offenses, shall suffer the like
Punishment as aforesaid.

An Act for preventing Sailors from being Trusted or Credited for Strong
Liquors.
WHEREAS it is the frequent Complaint of Masters and Commanders of Ships and
other Vessels, of great Damage sustained by them, by reason of the Entertaining
and Trusting of Sailors, (shipped in their Employ) by Tavern-keepers and others,
whe^^by their V^yag^s are many ways hindered.

BE IT ENACTED by the (...) Assembly, and by the Authority of (...) some, That
if any Person or Persons, keeping any Tavern, Alehouse, No (...), etc. to
(...) a ^^ilor (...) ^ive Sh^^l^ngs.
Victua^ling-house or Ordin^ry, shall Trust or give Credit to any Sailor,
shipped on Board any Ship, or (...) V^ss^l, without the Knowledge and Cons^^^ or
Order o^ the Ma^^^r or Commander of such Ship or V^ss^l, wh^reun^o such S^ilor
shall then belong, for any more or (...) Sum th^n Five Shillings, such person
or persons gi^ing (...) or T^u^^ing such Sailor for more, shall be wholly
^arr'd, using the time such S^ilor shall remain in such C^mman^^r or Master's
Service, from bringing any Acti^n for (...) me; And in case such Person shall
cause such S^ilor to b^ Arrested, detained or hindered, from following his
C^^man^ ^'s or Master's Employ on said Voy^ge, contrary to this (...); such
Commander or M^ster shall have his Action (...) such Person thereupon, and
recover his full (...) wi^h (...).

LAWS, Made and passed by the General Assembly of His Majesty's Colony of
Rhode Island, and Providence-Plantations, H^ld at Newport the Fifth Day of May,
1680.
An Act, Granting Appeals to the General Assembly, (...)
from the General Court of Trials.
An Act to Enforce the Election of Town Officers, at their Usual Days of
Election.
BE it Enacted by the General Assembly, and by the Aut^^rity of the same, If
any Town (...) to (...) Court o^ Trial to order the (...) the (...).
That if the Freemen of any Town in the Colony, shall Neglect on their Usual
Days of Election, to Choose and elect, so many Town O^ficers, as by them have
been Usually Elected, for the Management of their Prudential Affairs; That ^hen
and in such Cases, upon any such Town being Presented to the General Court of
Trials, by the (...) Jury, and duly Convicted thereof; ^uch Town or Town^ shall
be Fined at the Discretion of the (...) of such ^ourt, not Exceeding Fifty
Pounds, (...) of (...) G^neral Court of Trials, (...) ^orth an order,
appointing and ordering them to (...) and elec^ their Town Officers as Usual,
for the remaining (...) of said Year, at such time as shall be (...)

LAWS, Passed by the General Assembly of His Majesty's Colony of Rhode Island,
and Providence-Plantations, Held at Newport, the Third Day of May, 1682.
An Act for Establishing a Naval Office.
WHEREAS by Letters from His Most Gracious Majesty, to this Colony, Dated the
Twelfth Day of November, in the Thirty First Year of His Reign, it is Ordered
and Commanded, that a Naval Office be Erected in this Colony.

BE It therefore Enacted by the General Assembly, and by the Authority of the
same, The Governor to Constit^te a Naval Office. The Naval Officer'^ Duty.
That the Governor of ^his Colony for the time being, shall and hereby is
Impowe^ed ^o appoint one or more Naval Offices, in such Pl^ce or Pl^ces in this
Colony, as he shall think fit and needful, and shall Annually appoint a proper
Person or Persons as Naval O^ficer or Officers therein, to take Entries of
Vessels, and in all things belonging to said Office, to take care that the Laws
Relating to Navigation or Customs and Duties on Goods and Merchandise, be duly
observed.

An Act confirming the Grants heretofore made by the Inhabitants of the Towns
of Newport, Providence, Portsmouth, Warwick, and Westerly, and to Enable said
Towns to make Prudential Laws and Orders, for the better Regulating their Town
Affairs.
WHEREAS in the Fifteenth Year of the Reign of our Royal Sovereign Lord Charles
the Second, of Blessed Memory, there was a Charter Granted to this his
Majesty's Colony of Rhode Island, and Providence-Plantations in New England, In
which was contained many Gracious Privileges, Granted to the Free Inhabitants
thereof; and amongst others of the said Privileges, there was Granted to the
General Assembly of said Colony, full Power and Authority to Make and Ordain
Laws, suiting the Nature and Constitution of the Place; and in Particular to
Direct, Rule and Order all matters Relating to the Purchases of Lands of the
Native Indians. And this Present Assembly, Taking into their serious
Consideration, That the Lands of the several Towns of Newport, Providence,
Portsmouth, Warwick and Westerly, were Purchased (by the several Inhabitants
thereof,) of the Native Indians, Chief Sachems of the Country, before the
Granting of the said Charter; so that an Order or Direction from the said
Assembly could not be obtained therein, The Purch^ses ma e (...) the Tow^s of
N^^port etc., (...).
and it being thought Necessary and Convenient far the reasons aforesaid, That
the Lands of the said Towns should be by an Act of the General Assembly of this
His Majesty's Colony, Confirmed to the Inhabitants thereof according to their
Several and Respective Rights and Interest therein.

BE it therefor Enacted by this Present Assembly, and by the Authorit^ thereof
it is Enacted, That all the Land Lying and being within the Limits of each and
every of the aforesaid Towns of Newport, Providence, Portsmouth, Warwick, and
W^sterly, according to their Several Respective Purchases thereof made and
obtained of the Indian Sachems; Be and hereby are Allowed of, Ratified and
Confirmed, to the Proprieters of each of the aforesaid Towns, and to Each and
Every of the said Proprietors, their several and Respective Rights and
Interests therein, by Virtue of any such Purchase or Purchases as aforesaid, TO
HAVE AND TO HOLD, all the aforesaid Lands, by Virtue of the several Purchases
thereof, with all the Appurtenances, Privileges, and Commodities (...)
belonging or in any wise Appertaining, to them the aforesaid Proprietors, their
Heirs and Assign* for ever, in as Full, Lawful, Large and Ample manner to all
Intents, Constructions and Purposes whatsoever, as if the said Lands, and every
part thereof, had been Purchased of the Indian Sachems, by Virtue of any Grants
or Allowance ob^ained from the General Assembly of this Colony, after the
Granting of the aforesaid Charter.

AND WHEREAS there is within several of the Towns within this Colony,
considerable of Lands, Lying yet Common or Undivided; And for the more orderly
way and manner of the several Proprietors, their managing the Prudential
Affairs thereof: And for the more effectual making of Just and Equal Division
or Divisions of the same, so that each and every of the Proprietors may have
their True and Equal part o^ p^oportion of Land, according to his or their
proportion of Right, and that the Exact Boundaries of each and every Man's
Allotments, when Laid to him may be kept in Perpetuum.

It is further Ordered and Enacted by the Authority aforesai^, That it shall
and may be Lawful for the Proprietors of each and every such Town within this
Colony, How they s^^ll (...) the^ Commons.
being convened by a Warrant from under the Hand and Seal of an Assi^tant or
Justice of the Peace, in such Town, the Occasion thereof being specified in the
Warrant, for them or the Major part of them so met, to choose and appoint a
Clerk, and a Surveyor or Surveyors, and such and so many other Officers, as
they shall Judge needful and convenient, for the orderly carrying on and
management of the whole Affairs of such Community, and in like manner to
proceed from time to time, as often as need shall require.

And it is further Ordered, That each and every Town within this Colony, shall,
and are hereby fully Empowered to Make and Ordain, The afor^said Towns to make
Acts and Orders for their prudential Affairs.
all such Acts and Orders, for the well Management, Rule and Ordering all
Prudential Affairs, within their and each of their Respective Bounds and
Limits, as to them shall seem meet and convenient. Always Provided, and in such
Cases, such Acts and Orders, are not Repugnant or Disagreable to the Laws of
this Colony.

A LAW, Made and Passed by the General Assembly of their Majesty's Colony of
Rhode Island, and Providence-Plantations, Held at Newport, the Sixth Day of
May, 1690.
An Act, for establishing Justices of the Peace, in the Respective Towns of
this Colony.
BE it Enacted by the General Assembly, and by the Authority of the same,
Justices of the Peace to be Elected for the several Towns.
That the General Assembly that is Yearly Held at Newport, the First Wednesday
of May, shall during their Session, Annually choose and Elect so many Justices
of the Peace, for each Respective Town in the Colony, as to to them shall seem
needful and requisite, for the better Administration of Justice, in each
Respective Town.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That whosoever shall be
Elected to the Office of Justice of the Peace, Their Engagement.
in this Colony, shall take the same Engagement as the General Officers take,
before he shall Act or Officiate in said Office, and that every Justice of the
Peace shall be Commissionated before his Acting in his Office, by the Governor
of this Colony for the time being, under the Seal of the Colony, which
Commission shall be in the following Form, ( to Wit.)

Their Commission.
YOU A. B. being Chosen by the General Assembly of this their Majesty's Colony
of Rhode Island and Providence-Plantations, to the Place and Office of a
Justice of the Peace, for the Town of are hereby in their Majesty's Name, by
the Grace of God over England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, King and Queen,
Defender of the Faith ctc. Commissionated to take care for Keeping and
Preserving the Peace, and Administering the Laws throughout the Township, for
the which You are Chosen, Vid^ Act 1743.
according to the Laws of the Colony, and Statutes in such Cases Provided and
made, and to appear at all Courts of Trials, or make Return thereunto,
concerning all Delinquents, or such whom by Virtue of your Power, by the Laws
you shall Bind over unto such Courts, and upon Especial Occasion to send forth
Your Warrants, to make Hue and Cry, to Apprehend any Malefactor, upon Complaint
unto You made, in behalf of their Majesty's; which Warrents are strictly to be
Observed and Pass throughout this Colony, for the Apprehending any Person, to
Answer at the Kings Suit. And for Your so doing, this Commission shall be Your
Sufficient Warrant and Discharge.

Given under my Hand, etc.

An Act, Establishing the Proceedings and Trials of all Actions, not exceeding
Forty Shillings.
Repealed A. D. 1743.


LAWS, Made and Passed by the General Assembly of His Majesty'^ Colony of
Rhode Island, and Providence-Plantations, Held at Newport, the Fifth Day of May
1696.
An Act Regulating the Granting of Commissions to Private Men of War.
FOR the Preventing of any Illegal Actions, or Depredations by Privateers,
Commissionated by the Governor or Deputy Governor of this Colony, on any of His
Majesty's Subjects, or others in Alliance with His Majesty.

BE it Enacted by the General Assembly, and by the Authority of the same, That
no person or persons shall have any Commission given him or them, by the
Governor or Deputy Governor of this Colony, Capta^n^ (...) Priva^^ M^n of War
to (...) a Thousand Pound ^ond.
for the Equipping or Fitting out any Vessel or Vessels, for the Annoying,
Taking, Seizing or Destroying His Majesty's Enemies, before such Person or
Persons desiring such Commission, give Bond of One Thousand Pounds, Sterling
Money of England, with good Sureties for the due Observing and Acting according
to such Commission; and that neither such person or persons, or any under his
or their Command, shall at any time or place Commit any Acts of Hostility,
Depredation or Injury, to or against any of His Majesty's Subjects or his
Allies, or that are or shall be at such time in Alliance with his said Majesty,
but in all things shall Act against His Majesty's Enemies, according to the
Commission given him or them, and that all Prizes by him or them Taken from His
Majesty's Enemies, shall be brought in^o some Port within His Majesty's
Dominion, there to receive such Examination, Trial and Condemnation, as by the
Judge or Judges Appointed by His Majesty, shall be Adjudg'd Lawful.

An Act for collecting of Rates, where the Person Rated has no visible Estate.
BE it Enacted by the General Assembly, and by the Authority of the same, That
if any Person in this Colony, being Legally rated in any Town, If no (...)
E^tat^ ^o pay Ra^^^, to be Committed to Goal, until the same be paid.
and shall refuse or neglect to P^y such Rate, being by the Officer to whom
such Rate shall be Committed to Collect, Legally Demanded of such person, in
Case no visible Estate can be found by such Officer sufficient for the Payment
thereof whereon to Distrain, shall be by such Officer Committed to His
Majesty's Goal in Newport, there to remain until the same be satisfied.

An Act for regulating the Sitting of the General Assembly.
WHEREAS it has been found by long Experience, That the Sitting of the
Governor, Deputy Governor and Assistants with the Deputies for the several
Towns, h^th been a great hindrance in the Managing of the Public Affairs of
the Government.

For the Preventing whereof for the future:

BE it Enacted by the General Assembly, and b^ the Authority of the same,
Governor, D^puty Govern^ur and Assistants to Comp^ise the Uppe^ H^^se, and
Vote apart.
That at all Times hereafter, During the Sessions of the General Assembly of
this Colony, the Governor, Deputy Governor and Assistants, shall Sit apart
from the Deputies of the several Towns, and Debate and Vote in all Public
Affairs of the Colony by themselves, and shall be Termed and Called the Upper
House.

AND that the Deputies of the several Towns in this Colony, shall also Sit,
Debate and Vote, in all Public Affairs of this Colony, During each Session by
themselves, The D^^u^lc^ to (...) and vo^^ by the^^el^^^.
and shall be Termed and Be the Lower House, and shall Elect their Speaker and
Clerk, for and during the Continuance of such Assembly; and in Case the said
Upper and Lower House (for the Trial of any Appeal, or other Occasion) shall
see cause, it shall and may be Lawful for them to Resolve themselves into a
Grand Committee, and Sit and Vote together, for the better Determining of the
same.

An Act for the Preventing of any Intrusion into the Lands in the Narragansett
Country.
WHEREAS sundry Persons, have settled themselves and F^milies, in the
Narragansett Country, without any Legal Title to any Land therein, and without
the Consent and Approbation of the General Assembly of this Colony.

For the preventing the Ill Consequences thereof and the like Intrusions for
the Future.

BE it Enacted by the General Assembly, and by the Authority of the same, That
all Possessions of any Lands in the Narragansett Country, obtained by
Intrusion, without the consent and approbation of the General Assembly, All
(...) of (...) the Narragansett, wit^out the Consent of the Assembly, to be
void.
be Deemed and Adjudged Illegal and Void in Law, and shall not give unto such
Possessors, any Right, Title, Interest, Property or Claim therein or thereunto,
and the Assistants, and Justices of the Peace, of the Towns of Kingstown,
Westerly, and East-Greenwich, shall return the Names of all such Persons, that
have Intruded as aforesaid, (or that shall Intrude thereon hereafter) to the
General Assembly from time to time, that they may in such Legal manner, as they
shall think fit, order the Removal of such Intruders, and Preserve the Just
Rights of this Colony thereunto.

LAWS, Made and Passed by the General Assembly of His Majesty's Colony of
Rhode Island, and Providence Plantations, H^ld at Newport, the Fourth Day of
May School.
An Act for Preventing of Sheep and other Cattle, from being Worried and Torn
by Dogs.
WHEREAS great Damage has been done to many Persons, by Dogs Lugging, Worrying,
and oftentimes Killing their Sheep and other small Cattl^.

For the Preventing whereof,

BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly, and by the Authority of the same, No
Dog to worry Sheep, etc on the Penalty of the Owners paying the Dama^^^ for the
first Offense. And for the second Off^nce, dou^le Damages.
That in case any Person, shall have any Sheep or other Cattle, Worried, Torn
or Killed by any Dog or Dogs, that the Owners of such Sheep or Cattle, shall
Recover his or their Damages against the Owner of such Dog or Dogs, by Action
of the Case with costs of Court; and that if afterward, any further Damage be
done by such Dog or Dogs to any Sheep or Cattle, in like manner that the Owner
of such Dog or Dogs, shall Pay to the Party agrieved thereby, Vide Act 1729.
double Damages, to be Recovered in like manner as aforesaid with Costs, and
that such Dog or Dogs be Killed.

An Act for the Preventing Fires doing Damage in the Town of Newport.
FOR AS MUCH as the Buildings in the Town of Newport, are contiguous and
adjoining to one another, in most parts of said Town, whereby Fire in breaking
out may do unspeakable Damage, unless timely provided against.

BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly, and by the Authority of the same, That
the Owner or Owners, of each and every Dwelling House, Every House to provide
one good Ladder, within s^x Mo^ths, On the Penalty of One Shilling per Month.
in the Town of Newport, from the Pound at the North-East end of the Town, down
to the Sea side* and so Southward and Northward, as far as the Buildings are
contiguous or adjoining one to another; shall provide and procure, (within Six
Months from the Date hereof) for each Dwelling House, one good Ladder of
sufficient Length, to reach to the Ridge of his or their Dwelling House; and
the same continually keep in repair; that every Owner or Owners of any
Dwelling House who shall negl^ct to do the same, he, she or they so neglecting,
shall for every Month after said Six Months are Expired, Forfeit as a Fine to
and for the Use of said Town, One Shilling per Month, to be recovered upon
Complaint made, and Conviction thereof before any Assistant or Justice of the
Peace of said Town, by Warrant of Distress; excepting out of this Act, all such
Houses which have Walks or Turrets thereon, or other Convenience, as shall be
adjudged and deemed equivalent thereunto.

An Act for preventing Fraud in Firewood, Exposed to Sale.
BE it Enacted by the General Assembly, and by the Authority of the same,
Firewood to be four Foot long, and the Cord ^^^ht Foot long.
That all Firewood Exposed to Sale in this Colony, shall be Four Foot Long,
Measuring to one Half of the Carf, and shall be Sold by the Cord; and that the
Cord shall be Eight ^oot long, Four Foot high, well stowed and closely laid
togeth^^.

AND that in every Town in this Colony, where Wood is Exposed to Sale by the
Cord, Every Town (...) choose a C^^de^ of Wood.
the Freemen of said Town shall (if they think fit) Annually choose and elect,
one Wood-Corder or more, who shall take the same Engagement to his or their
Office, as other Town Officers do; Town Act Four pence per Cord.
and shall have Four pence per Cord, for every Cord by him Corded, from the
Seller of said Wood.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That whosoever shall
Sell or Expose to Sale, All Wood Exposed to Sale that is not (...) foot long
shall be forf^it^^
any Wood that is not of the Length as aforesaid, shall upon due Conviction
thereof, before any Assistant, or Justice of the Peace of such Town, where such
Offense shall be committed, Forfeit all such Wood so Exposed to Sale; the one
half to the Informer, and the other half to and for the Use of such Town; to be
taken by a Warrynt of Distress, to be Granted by such Assistant or Justice to
whom Complaint shall be made.

An Act for preventing the misapplying of the Rates and Taxes, that shall be
hereafter Assessed and Levied in this Colony.
BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly, and by the Authority of the same, That
all Rates and Taxes, No Rate^ to be mi^applied.
that shall be Assessed and Levied in this Colony for the future, shall be
applied to no other Use or Uses whatsoever, than those for which the same shall
be Assessed and Levied: Any Custom or Usage to the contrary hereof
notwithstanding.

LAWS, Made and Passed by the General Assembly of His Majesty's Colony of
Rhode Island, and Providence-Plantations, Held at Newport the Thirtieth Day of
April, 1700.
An Act for putting in Force the Laws of England, in all Cases where no
particular Law of this Colony has provided a Remedy.
BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly, and by the Authority of the same, That
in all Actions, Matters, Causes and Things whatsoever, where no particular Law
of this Colony is made to Decide and Determine the same; that then and in all
such Cases the Laws of England shall be put in Force, to Issue, Determine and
Decide the same. Any Usage, Custom or Law to the contrary hereof
notwithstanding.

An Act for the Enabling the Governor of this Colony, to put in Execution the
Statute of Trade and Navigation.
BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly, and by the Authority of the same, All
Vessels that Arrive in the Government, to make their R^port to the Governor,
etc.
That from and after the Publication of this Act, no Master of any Ship or
Vessel, that shall come into any Bay, River or Port within the Precincts of
this Colony, shall, or do presume to Land, Unlade and put on Shore, any Wares,
Goods or Merchandises, before he has made Report thereof to the Governor, or
in his Absence, to the Deputy Governor, and have Lawfully Entered the same in
the Collector's Office; under the Penalty made and Enacted by the Parliament of
England, in the Fourteenth Year of King Charles the Second, for preventing of
Frauds, and regulating Abuses in the Plantations.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Master or
Commander of any Ship or Vessel, None to Land an^ Passenger without leave.
shall Land, or put on Shore, in this Colony, any Person, or Passengers, that
shall not be a^mitted or received to Inhabit in this Colony; that then and in
such Cases, it shall and may be in the power of any Assistant or Justice of the
Peace etc. of such Town, where (...) Passenger, etc. shall be Landed, to
require and command (...) Master or Commander, to take on board his Ship or
Vessel, such Passenger or Passengers, as have been by him Landed, and him, her,
or them so taken on Board, to Transport and carry (...) of this Colony; and if
any Master or Commander of any Ship or other Vessel, shall refuse or neglect so
to do, that then it shall and may be Lawful for any Assistant or Justice of the
Peace, etc. to grant forth a Warrant, for the Apprehending of such Master or
Commander, and him commit to his Majesty's Goal in this Colony, until that he
give in one Hundred Pound Bond, with Security to perfo^m the same.

An Act for preventing of Clandestine Transportation of any Person or Persons
out of this Colony.
WHEREAS diverse Masters of Ships, and other Vessels do from time to time
transport and carry away out of this Colony, many Persons who are In^ebted to
several Inhabitants of this Colony, without giving any Account of the Names of
such Persons by them so carried; which is a manifest Injury to the Creditors of
such Persons, and some of them are hereby undone.

For the Preventing whereof for the future:

BE (...) EN ACTED by the General Assembly, and by the Authority of the same,
None to be Transported ou^ of the Colony, (...) Certif ca^e, under the Penalty
of Fifty Pounds.
That no Master or Commander of any Ship or Vessel whatsoever, shall transport
or carry out of this Colony, any Family, or Person or Persons, that have not
for the space of ten Days before their Departure, fixed up his, her, or ^hei^
Name or Names in Writing, in some public Place of the Town wherein they
Reside, and of their Intent to depart the Colony; and that the same be
Certified under the Hand of an Assistant, or Justice of said Town, under the
Penalty of Forfeiting, to and for the Use of the Colony, Fifty Pounds, in
Money, to be Recovered by the General Treasurer, upon due Conviction thereof,
in the General Court of Trials.

AND be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Assistant, or Justice,
etc. that shall give such Certificate as aforesaid, shall transmit a Copy
thereof, to the Naval Officer in Newport, who shall keep a fair Register
thereof, and of the Time of Departure, and of the Master's and Vessel's Name
wherein transported; and shall be paid Twelve-pence for the same, by the Person
or Persons desiring to be Transported.

LAWS, Made and Passed by the General Assembly of His Majesty's Colony of
Rhode Island, and Providence-Plantations, Held at Warwick, the Twenty Ninth Day
of October, 1701.
An Act for preventing of Clandestine Marriages* And also for the Registring of
Marriages, Births and Burials.
BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly, and by the Authority of the same, That
all Persons in this Colony, that are desirous to be joined together in
Marriage, shall make their Application to an Assistant or Justice of the Peace
in the Town where such Persons respectively Dwell, None to be Married without
due Publication.
who shall give them a Writing under his Hand and Seal, Declaring their
Intention of Marriage, the which shall be set up in some public Place of the
Town wherein such Persons respectively Dwell, for the space of fourteen Days;
and that if any Person shall have any Lawful Objection to make against any
Persons so published, Publications may be underwrit.
being Married; He or She shall, and may by leave of any Assistant, or Justice,
etc. of such Town, underwrite such Publication, he or she first giving to such
Assistant, sufficient Bond to Refund all Damages that shall accrue thereon.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all Persons that
shall go to be Married in another Town than that in which they were Published,
shall Produce to the Officer to whom they apply themselves to be Married, a
Certificate of their being duly Published as aforesaid: And that if any persons
shall come into any Town of this Colony to be Married from any other
Government, they shall produce a Certificate under the Hand of the Authority
lawfully Empowered thereto, of such Government where they respectively Dwell,
that they have duly Complied with such Laws and Orders as are in such
Government in force for Publication.

AND be it further Enacted, That if any Assistant, Justice of the Peace, or
Warden in this Colony, shall presume to join together in Marriage any Persons
that have not been Published as aforesaid, The Officer t^^t shall Ma^ry any
Persons not duly Pu^lished, shall for the first Offense forfeit Five Pound^,
and for the second, Ten Pounds, and be Suspended.
or any Person whose Publication has been Lawfully underwritten, and the
Impediment not removed; such Officer so offending, shall for the first Offense
Forfeit Five Pounds in Money, to the Use of the Colony; and for the second
Offense, Ten Pounds in Money, to and for the Use aforesaid, to be recovered by
the General Treasurer, in the General Court of Trials, upon due Conviction
thereof, and for the same shall be Suspended from his Office.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That whosoever shall
presume to be Married without duly proceeding as by this Act is required, And
the Persons Married shall forfeit Five Pou^d^, etc.
and thereupon shall Cohabit together; the Persons so offending, being duly
Convicted thereof, shall for such Offense, Forfeit Five Pounds in Money, to and
for the Use of the Colony; which shall be recovered by ^he General Treasurer,
upon Conviction thereof, in the General Cour^ of Trials, or shall suffer Three
Months Imprisonment.

AND ^e it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the a^ovesaid Act
shall be no ways construed, deemed or taken to extend to any Persons that shall
be Lawfully Married according to the Laws, Customs, Vi^e Act 1733.
Usage and Ceremony of the Church of England, as by Law Established* nor to
those People called Quakers, that shall duly be Married according to the
Toleration allowed them.

AND be it further Enacted, That all Marriages shall be Recorded in the Town
where they are Consummated; and the Assistant, Justice or Warden, shall return
the Names of those they Marry, and when Married, unto the Town Clerk, within
Three Months after the Consummation thereof; and shall Pay to the Town Clerk,
Three pen^^ for the Registring thereof* and he shall be Paid Three Shillings
for the same.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all Births and
Burials of all Children shall be Registered in the Town Clerk's Office, All
Births and Burials (...) be R^corded within two Months (...), on the (...) of
(...) per Mo^^h, (...) ^eglect.
in the same Town where they happen to be Born or Die, by the Parents of such
Children as shall be Born or Die, as aforesaid, within Two Months time after
the Birth or Burial thereof; for Registring of each* the Town Clerk shall be
paid Four-pence, by the Parent of such Child or Children; and that whosoever
shall Refuse or Neglect so to do, shall for every Month's Neglect after said
Two Months is Expired, Forfeit Twelve-pence per Month; to be recovered upon
Conviction thereof, in any Court of Record, by the Town Treasurer of said Town;
the one Moiety thereof for the Use of such Town Treasurer as shall Sue for the
same. V^de Act 1727.


PROVIDED always That such Suit be brought within two Years after such
Marriage, Birth or Burial.

LAWS, Made and Passed by the Gener^l Assembly of His Majesty's Colony of
Rhode Island, and Providence-Plantations, Held at Newport, the Sixth Day of
May, 1702.
An Act for Establishing and Regulating the Assessing and collecting such Rates
and Taxes, as shall at any time hereafter be Assessed and Levied on the Colony,
and all such Rates as shall be Assessed on the Several Towns in the same.
BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly, and by the Authority of the same, That
from time to time, and at all Times hereafter, as often as the General Assembly
of this Colony shall Order and Enact any Rates to be Assessed and Levied on the
Inhabitants of this Colony, The Recorder to send a Copy o^ the Acts requiring
Ra^^s to b^ made to the General Tr^asu^^r Who is to Order the Assessors to
Assess the ^ame.
the Recorder of the Colony for the time being, shall forthwith send a Copy
thereof under the Seal of the Colony, to the General Treasurer for the time
being, who upon the Receipt thereof shall send an Exact List of each Towns part
to the Town Clerk of each Respective Town, together with a Warrant to each and
every of them, requiring them to Notify the Rate-makers or Assessors of each
respective Town, to Assess and Apportion the same, on the Inhabitants of said
Town, according to the time specified in said Act of Assembly: And the
Assessors or Rate-makers of each Town, or the major part of them, shall ten
Days before they Assess or Apportion the same, set up two Notifications under
their Hands, Requiring the Inhabitants of their Town, to bring into them in
Writing under their Hands, Persons to give ^n an A^compt of their Rateable
Estate upon Engagement.
an Exact List of their Rateable Estate, by such time as is therein prefixed,
who are hereby required to give their Engagements thereto; and the Assessors or
Rate-makers are hereby fully Empowered to take the same, in the following
Engagement.

YOU A. B. do on your solemn Engagement, hereby Declare, that the Account and
List of your Rateable Estate, by you to us presented, is a true and just
Account of the whole of your Rateable Estate, The Form of the Engagement.
a^ you know of, and is in your Care and Custody, and this you Declare to be
the Truth, and nothing but the Truth, upon the Peril of the Penalty of Perjury.

AND be it further Enacted, That whosoever shall Refuse or Neglect so to do, in
case he be over-rated, shall have no Remedy for the same.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the aforesaid
Asses^ors or Rate-makers, shall forthwith upon their Assessing and Apportioning
of any Rate or Tax, The Assess^r^ ^o s^nd the Rate Bill to the Town Clerk.

And be a Copy to the ^rea^u^er, who i^ to ^ran^ forth his Wa^^ants for the
Col^e^^ing the (...).


to them committed to Asse^s, send and return a true Bill or List thereof to
the Town Clerk of such Town, to which they respectively belong, under their
Hands; and the Town Clerk shall upon his receiving thereof, draw an Exact Copy
thereof, and send the same to the General Treasurer under his Hand Indented,
and upon Receipt thereof, the General Treasurer shall Issue forth his Warrants,
to the several Constables of the Respective Towns, commanding every of them in
Her Majesty'^ Name to collect and gather the several Sums, as to them i^
^^verally committed, in Money, by such time as by Law is Re^^^ed; and when
gathered and collected, the same to bring, (...) pay (...) him, or to his
Successors in said Office.

AND be it further Enacted, That if any Constable or Constables, shall refuse
or neglect to do the same as aforesaid; that then and in such C^ses, Upon
negl^ct of ^ollec^in^, ^^w recovered
the General Treasurer shall recover the Sum against such Constable or
Constables, as shall be defective therein, by Action of D^bt, at the General
Court of Trials, to be brought at any time before the sitting of such Court,
together with the incident charges accruing; and the Defendant or Defendants,
shall have no Essoign, Protection, or Wager of Law allowed him or them. Any
Law, Custom or Usage, to the contrary hereof notwithstanding.

And the General Treasurer, shall be allowed him Sixpence per Pound, for
Receiving and Paying out of the same: And Assessors or Rate-makers shall be
Paid Three pence per Pound, (...) for (...) T^easurer^ etc
for Apportioning thereof, and the Town Clerk for copying the Rate Bill,
according as for other Copies; and the Constables Fees for collecting, shall be
Twelve-pence per Pound, all (...) said Fees to be paid out of each Respective
Rate, as it sh^^l be paid into the General Treasury.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Town Clerk of
each Respective Town, shall within ten Days after the Election and Engagement
of the Constables of the Town wherein he dwells, The Town Clerk to ^e^tu^n the
Con^tabl^s Names to (...) ^e^^ral ^^^asurer.
send a List of the Constables so chosen and engaged, unto the General
Treasurer of the Colony for the time b^ing; and that if any Town Clerk shall
neglect the same, he shall Forfeit Forty S^illings for every Offense, to and
for the U^e of the Colony, to be Recovered by the General Treasurer for the
time being, ugon Complaint made before any Court of Record in the Colony.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all Town Rates,
that shall be Levied on any Town in the Colony, Town^ Rat^s to be (...) and
Coll^ct^d, as the ^^lony Rates are.
shall be Assessed and collected in the same manner and form as the Colony
Taxes are, and the Town Treasurer shall have an Action of Debt against any
Delinquent Constable, or Constables, as the General Treasurer has; wherein no
Essoign, Protection or Wager of Law shall be allowed the Defendant.

LAWS, Made and Passed by the General Assembly of Her Majesty's Colony of
Rhode Island, and Providence-Plantations, H^ld at Newport, the Fourth Day of
January, 1704.
An Act for Levying of a Duty on Tunnage of Shipping.
WHEREAS the Colony has been at a great Charge to Build and Erect a Fort on
Fort-Island, for the Security of the Shipping and Navigation of the Colony.

For the better keeping the same in ^epair.

BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly, and by the Autho^ity of the same, That
there shall be paid by the Master of every Ship or other Vessel, Twelve penc^
per Ton D^ty on For^^gn Shipping.
of above ten Tons, caming into any Port or Ports in this Colony to Trade or
Tr^ffick, which are not wholly Owned by the Inhabitants of this Colony, every
Voyage such Ship or Vessel does make, Twelve pence per Ton, or one Pound of
good new Gun Powder, for every Tun such Ship or Vessel is in Burden by
Register; to be paid to the Naval Officer of the Town of Newport, to be
employed to and for the Use of the Fort on Fort-Island.

PROVIDED always, and it is the true intent and meaning hereof, That this Act
shall not extend to make any Master of any Ship or other Vessel, Pay Twelve
pence per Ton or one Pound of Gun Powder, for any greater part of said Ship or
Vessel, than what shall not be owned by any Inhabitant of this Colony.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That no Master of any
Ship or Vessel, shall Sail from out of the Harbor of Newport, without first
producing to the Gunner of said Fort, a Certificate, from under the Hand of the
Governor, or Deputy Governor, that he has complied with such Orders and
Law^, as he i^ Required to; whereupon the Gunner of said Fort, shall suffer the
Ma^ter of such Ship or Vessel to depart: And that if any Master of any Ship or
Vessel, shall presume to Sail or Pass by the Fort, without proceeding as
aforesaid, that then and in such Cases, the Gunner shall Use his utmost
Endeavor to stop such Ship or Vessel, pursuant to such Instructions, as he
shall receive from the Governor, for the doing of the same; who is fully
Empowered to Grant such Orders as shall be necessary ^herefor: And that i^ any
Ship or Vessel shall be Damni^^ed, Sunk or Destroyed thereby, the Master o^
such S^ip or Vessel, shall make good all D^mages that shall ^e Sustained
ther^by.

An Act Prohibiting Negroes and Indians from being abroad at unseas^n^ble time^
of the Night, and for Punishing those that shall Entertain them contrary hereto.
WHEREAS diver Thefts and Robberies have been Committed in the Night time by
Negroes and Indians, within this as well as in the Governments adjoining.

For the Preventing whereof,

BE it Enacted by the General Assembly, and by the Authority of the same, That
if any Negroes or Indians, Freemen or Slave^, shall be found Abroad after Nine
a Clock at Night, at any time throughout the Year, without a Certificate from
their Masters, or some other English Person of the Family to the which he, she,
or they belong, or some Lawful Excuse for the same; No Negroes o^ Indians to be
Ab^oad aft r (...) Nigh^, (...) of Whipping.
that then it shall and may be Lawful for any Person or Persons to Take, Seize
and Secure the same ^ill next Morning, and then bring them before an Assistant,
or Justice of the Peace of such Town, who shall upon due Proof thereof, cause
said Negroe or Negroes, Indian or Indians, to be publicly Whipped at the public
Whipping Post of such Town where such Off^nce shall be committed, not exceeding
fifteen Stripes, unles^ their in^orrigible Behavior deserve more; and the
Persons so convicted, if Freemen, shall pay the Charge of the Prosecution, etc.
and if Slaves, the Owner or Owners thereof, shall pay the same; and if the
Owner or Owners of any such Slave or Slaves shall refuse so to do, that then
the Assistant, or Justice, etc. shall Grant ^orth a Warran^ of Distress to a
^onstable of said Town, to Distrain so much of his or their Good, as will
satisfy and pay the same.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That no Housekeeper
shall Entertain any Slaves or Servants, either Indians or Negroes, No H^us-K
ep^ (...) o^ Indians or N^groes, (...) Fi^e Shillings.
after Nine a Clock at Night, as aforesaid, without the Owner of said Slave or
Servant's leave* and whosoever shall be convicted of such Offense, before any
Assistant, or Justice of the Peace, etc. shall for every such Offense, forfeit
Five Shillings, in Money, to and for the Use of the Town where such Offense
shall be committed; an^ if the Person so offending, shall refuse to pay the
same, it shall be Recovered by the Town Treasurer of such Town, upon due proof
thereof, before any Assistant or Justice of the Peace, in Manner as aforesaid.

LAWS, Ma^^ and Past by the General Assembly of her Majesty's Col^^y of
Rhode Island, and Providence-Plantations, Held at ^^ovidence the Twenty Fifth
Day of October, 1704.
A^ Act preventing of Damage to be done, by Firing of the Woods in any Town in
this Colony.
WHEREAS great Damage has been done to several of the Inhabitants of this
Colony, to their Hay, Fencing, etc. by Firing of the Woods, at unse^sonable
Times of the Year.

For the (...) whereof:

BE it Enacted by the General Assembly, and by the Authority of the same, That
no Person whatsoever, shall set any Fires, or cause any Fires to be set in the
Woods, in any part of this Colony, None to fire W^u^ds, b^t b^tw ^n the T^n^h
of Ma^ch, (...) the (...).
on any Time of the Year, save between the Tenth of March, and the Tenth of May
Annually; nor on the First or Seventh Day of any Week, during said time, under
any pretense whatsoever; and that whosoever shall be lawfully convicted of
doing the same, before any two Assistants, or Justices of the Peace, etc. of
such Town where such Offense shall be committed, either by their own
Confession, or by the Evidence of two Witnesses upon Engagement, Vide (...).
shall Forfeit Thirty Shillings in Money, to and for the Use of such Town; and
if the Person or Persons so convicted, refuse to pay the same, that then such
Assistants, or Justices, etc. shall Grant forth a Warrant of Distress, to any
Constable of said Town, to Distrain so much of the Offender's ^oods and
Chattels, as shall S^tisfy and Pay the same, to the (...) aforesaid; and all
Incident Charges thereon Accruing.

And that whosoever shall suffer any Damages by reason of such Off^nce as
aforesaid, And the Par^y (...) thereby shall (...) hi^ D^mage.
shall have an Action of Trespass upon the Case, against such Offender or
Offenders, and shall Recover his Damages and Costs accordingly, if under Forty
Shillings, before any two Assistants or Justices of such Town where such
Offense shall be committed; and if above Forty Shillings, in the General C^urt
of Trials.

LAWS, M^de and Past by the General Assembly of Her Majesty's Colony of
Rhode Island, and Providence Plantations, Held at Newport, the Second Day of
May, 1705.
An Act for securing of Costs to the Inhabitants and Residents of and in this
Colony, that shall be Arrested by any Person that are not Inhabitants and
Freeholders in the same.
BE it Enacted by the General Assembly, and by the Authority of the same, That
no Person or Persons whatsoever, that is not an Inhabitant and Freeholder in
this Colony, shall have out of the Recorder's Office, any Writ of Arrest, or
Summons, No Inhabitant of this Colony to be Arrest^d, but by a F^eeholder of
the (...) the Pla^nti^ give Bond.
against any Person or Persons Inhabiting or Residing in the same, without
first giving in Bond into the Recorder's Office, of Twenty Pounds, with
Security to Refund all Costs that shall Accrue thereon, upon non Prosecution of
such Suit, or if such Action shall be Nonsuit, or cast upon Trial: Any Law or
Custom to the Contrary hereof notwithstanding.

An Act Establishing a Notary Public, within this Colony.
BE it Enacted by the General Assem^ly, and by the Authority of the same, The
Recorder ^o be Notary Public.

Face for the same.


That the General Recorder of the Colony for the Time being, shall be Notary
Public of this Colony; and he is hereby fully Imp^wered and Authorized, to
Act, Transact, do and Finish, all and whatsoever Matters, Causes or Things,
Relating to Drawing of Protests, or Protesting Bills, etc. as are by Law
Required, and that he shall be Engaged thereto; for the which he shall take the
following Fees, and no more.

l. s. d. TO Swearing to Protests, 00 03 00 To Drawing Ditto, 00 03 00 To Seal
Ditto, 00 03 00 To Registring ditto in the Office, 00 03 00 To Copy Ditto, 00
03 00

A LAW, Made and Past by the General Assembly of her Majesty's Colony of
Rhode Island, and Providence-Plantations, Held at Providence, the Thirteenth
Day of October, 1706.
An Act for Extending East-Greenwich Township West, to the Colony West Line.
WHEREAS the Township of East-Greenwich is very small, and there is a Tract of
Land lying West of said Township, very Commodious to Enlarge the same.

BE it therefore Enacted by the General Assembly, and by the Authority of the
same, That the North and South Bound of East-Greenwich Township,
East-Greenwhich to extend West to the Colony's Line.
being Run due West, from the South West and North West corners of said
Township, to the Colony Line, and all the Land therein included, shall be, and
is hereby Annexed, to be part of the Township of East-Greenwich, and the
Inhabitants that are already settled thereon, (...) that shall hereafter settle
thereon, shall have the same Liberties and Privileges as the other Inhabitants
of East-Greenwich, have and Enjoy.

LAWS, Made and Passed by the General Assembly of Her Majesty's Colony of
Rhode Island, and Providence-Plantations, Held at Newport, the Twenty First Day
of February, 1706.
An Act for Regulating of Tanners, Curriers and Cordwainers.
FOR preventing of Deceits and Abuses by Tanners, Curriers, Shoemakers, and
Workers up of Leather.

BE it Enacted by the General Assembly of Her Majesty's Colony of Rhode Island,
and Providence-Plantations, and by the Authority of the same, That no Person or
Persons whatsoever, U^ing, or which shall Use the Mystery or Faculty of
Tanning, shall at any Time or Times hereafter, All Tanned Leather to be Sealed
before Sold.
put to Sale any kind of Leather, which shall be Insufficiently Tanned, or
which has been over Limed or burnt in the Limes, or which shall not have been
after the Tanning thereof, well and thoroughly D^yed, or that shall not be
Sealed, as in and by this Act is hereafter Directed, upon pain of Forfeiting
the whole Side or Piece of Leather so offered to Sale; and no Person or Persons
whatsoever, Using, or that shall hereafter Use the Mystery or Faculty of
T^nning, shall set his or any of their Fatts in Tann-hills, or other Places
where the Wooze or Leather that is put to Tann in the same, shall or may take
any unkind Heats, nor shall put any Leather into any Hot or Warm Wooze
whatsoever; on pain of Forfeiting Twenty Pounds, for every such Offense.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That no Person or
Persons whatsoever, Using or Occupying, or that shall hereafter Use or Occupy
the Mystery or Faculty of Currying, may, or shall Curry any kind of Leather, No
Currier to Work unsealed ^^ath^^, or undil^d.
except it be Sealed as is hereafter Provided* nor shall Curry any Hides, not
being thoroughly dried after his wet Season, in which wet Season, he shall not
Use an stale Urine, or any other deceitful, subtle Mixture of any Thing, Way
or Means to Corrupt or Hurt the same; or shall Curry any Leather Wet for outer
Sale Leather, without any other thing than Hard Tallow, nor with any less of
that than the Leather will receive, nor shall Curry any kind of Leather, meet
for upper Leather, and Inward Soles, ^ut with good and sufficient Stuff, being
Fresh, not Salt, and thoroughly Liquor'd, 'till it will receive no more; How
Leather should be Cur^^ed.
nor shall burn or sealed any Hide or Leather in the Currying, but shall work
the same sufficiently in all respects and points, on Pain of Forfeiting for
every such Offense or Act done, contrary to the true intent and meaning hereof,
every such Hide marred or hurt by his evil Workmanship or Handling.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That no Person or
Persons, Using, or shall hereafter Use or Occupy the Mystery or Faculty of a
Shoemaker or Cordwainer, No Cord (...) up any Leather not Tann^d, etc. a^
^for^said, on the P^^alty of forfeiting the same.
shall work up into Shoes or other Wares, any Leather that is not Tanned and
Curried as aforesaid, or shall Use any Leather made of Horse-hides for inner
Soles, of any Shoes or Boots, on Pain of Forfeiting of all such Boots, Shoes or
Wares, wrought up of such Insufficient Leather.

And for the more Effectual Execution of said Act,

BE be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all Leather that is
or shall be Tanned or Curried, shall before the same pass out of the Tanners or
Curriers Yards, All Leather before worked to be Se^'d.
Houses, or Places Respectively where it was wrought, be Viewed by Sworn
Searchers or Sealers of Leather, by Law directed to be Annually chosen in such
Towns where there shall be need, who shall have two several Marks or Seals, to
be procured by each Town for that purpose, with one of which they shall Seal
all such Leather, as they shall find sufficiently Tanned in all respects as
aforesaid, and with the other all such Leather as they shall find well and
sufficiently Curried, as is before mentioned, and no other.

AND the Searchers and Sealers, shall and are hereby Authorized and Empowered,
ex Officio, to make Search, and View in all respective Places or Houses, All
whole Sid^s out of the Curri^^^ possession, unsealed to be se^^'d.
Shops, Warehouses, or other Places within the Limits of their respective
Precincts, where they conceive any Leather to be wrought into Shoes, Boots, or
other Wares, or any Leather offered to be Sold, or offered to be Searched or
Sealed, and shall not be Tanned as aforesaid, and well Curried, according to
the aforecited Act, and the true intent and meaning thereof, or shall find any
Leather in whole Sides, out of the Possession of the Currier, not Sealed with
the Mark or Seal to be Used for Leather well Tanned or Curried; in all such
Cases, it shall and may be lawful for the Searchers and Sealers, to Seize all
such Leather Insufficient or Unsealed, whether it be wrought up into Wares or
not; and if the Owner or Challenger thereof, shall not submit to the Judgment
of the Officer or Officers that seized the same, such Officer or Officers shall
retain such Leather in his or their Custody, 'till Trial thereof be had, as is
hereafter directed, and Judgment thereon.

IN such Cases the Officer or Officers, How to proceed with Leather Seized.
shall within four Days after such Seizure, Inform some Justice of the Peace in
said Town thereof, who shall thereupon appoint four Persons, or more, honest
Skilful Men in Leather, to View the same in the Owner or Claimers of such
Leather's presence, or without him (if having Notice thereof he does not
appear) to Report to any Justice, the Defect they find in said Leather; which
Report the said Justice shall return unto the next General Court of Trials for
the said Colony, for a Conviction in Law on the Fine Imposed; but in Case the
Viewers shall Report that they do not find such Leather or Wares so Seized in
any respect defective, according to the Intent of this Act, the Justice that
appointed such Viewers, shall cause the same forthwith to be discharged from
the Seizure, made by such Officer or Officers.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That no Person
whatsoever, None to resist the Search^rs and Sealers on the Penalty of Five
Pounds.
shall or may wi^hstand or resist the Searchers and Sealers in the Execution of
their Office, nor in the Searching for any Insufficient Leather or Wares, upon
the Forfeiture of Five Pounds for every such Offense.

AND the Fee for Searching and Sealing of Leather, shall be One-penny per Hide,
for any parcel less than six Hides, Fees for S^alling and Searching.
and for all other Parcels, if by the Dozen, no more than Eight Pence, which
Fees the Tanner or Currier shall Pay on the Sealing thereof from Time to Time,
and shall also pay Three Pence per Mile, for every Mile any Searcher or Sealer
shall Travel above one Mile.

AND no Searcher or Sealer of Leather, shall refuse within conv^nient Time to
do his Office, No Searcher or S^aler to re^use his Duty, on the Penalty of
Forty Shillings.
nor shall allow any Leather or Wares which are not sufficient, on the Penalty
of forfeiting Forty Shillings, nor shall take any Bribe, nor ex^ct more than
his Fees, on pain of Forfeiting the Sum of Ten Pounds, for every such Offense.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, How the Fines shall be
disposed of.
That all such Fines, Forfeitures and Penalties, as shall arise or grow due by
Virtue of this Act, or any Clause therein contained, shall be disposed of it.
Manner following, viz. two third parts thereof to be paid into the Town
Treasury, to and for the Use of said Town, where the Offense shall be committed;
and the other third to the Seizer or Seizers of such insufficient Leather, or
to him or them as shall Inform and Sue for the same; to be recovered by Action,
Bill, Plaint, or Information, in any General Court of Trials within the Colony,
or before any two Justices of the Peace, when the Matter does not exceed Forty
Shillings.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That when and as often
as any L^ather shall be Seized in the H nds of either Tanner or Currier, and
become forfeited by Vir^ue of this Act, through their default, and if belonging
to any particular Person, the Tanner or Currier shall be liable to m^ke
sati^f^ction to the Owner thereof for the same; to be recovered in any General
Court of Trials, or before any two Justices of the Peace, if the Value do not
exceed Forty Shillings.

AND for the ascertaining of which Value, the Persons to be ^ppointed as
aforesaid, for viewing the Def^cts in Leather, shall (when the same is seized,
for being marred and spoiled by the Currier or Tanner through his ill
Workmanship or Handling,) be also appointed to Estimate and Judge the Value
thereof, and make Report of the same, together with the D^f^cts.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That each Town in the
Colony, shall at their Town Elections, Annually Choose two Sealers and
Searchers of Leather, Each Town to Ch^se Searchers of Leather
who shall take their Engagement to the Performance of their Office, as other
Town Officers do.

A LAW, Made and Passed by theGener^l Assembly of her Majesty'sColony of
Rhode Island, and Providence-Plantations, Held at Newport, the Third Day of
May, 1710.
An Act for the Raising and Emitting Five Thousand Pounds in Bills of Credit.
WHEREAS this Colony has received Orders from Her Sacred Majesty Queen ANNE,
for an Expedition to be Prosecuted with speed against the French and Indian
Enemies, which by Reason of the great Scarcity and Want of Silver Money, this
Colony without some extraordinary Means be used for the Effecting the same,
would be unable to perform; for Remedy whereof, and the speedy procuring and
equipping out all Things necessary for the same,

BE it Enacted by the General Assembly, and by the Authority of the same, That
there be with all Expedition, printed to the Value of Five Thousand Pounds in
Bills of Credit on this Colony, as follows, viz. Five T^ousand Pound^ in
Bill^ of Credit impressed.
One T^ousand ^ounds in Five Pound Bills, One Thousand Pounds in Three Pound
Bills, Five Hundred Pounds in Forty Shilling Bills, Five Hundred Pounds in
Twenty Shilling Bills, Five Hundred Pounds in Five Shilling Bills, Five Hundred
Pounds in Two Shillings and Six-penny Bills, and Fi^e Hundred Pounds in Two
Shilling Bills; which Bills to be Printed as aforesaid, shall be in Value equal
to current Silver Money of New England, in all public Payments, and shall have
the Anchor and Hope affixed in the Scutcheon, with such other Impressions, as
shall be thought needful by the Committee, in this Act hereafter Named, which
shall be in the Manner following.

THIS Indented Bill of Due from the Colony of Rhode Island and
Providence-Plantations in New England, to the Possessor thereof, shall be in
equal Value to Money, and shall be accordingly accepted by the Treasurer, The
Form of the Bills.
and Receivers subordinate to him in all public Payments, and for any Stock at
any Time in the Treasury. Newport, August the 16th, 1710, by Order of the
General Assembly, for the Colony abovesaid.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the aforesaid Bills
of public Credit shall be Signed by Lieutenant Colonel John Wanton, Lieutenant
John Odlin, Major Nathaniel Sheffield, Major Joseph Iencks, Mr. John
Coggeshall, and Mr. Job Green, or by any three of them, The Committee to Sign
the Bills.
who are hereby appointed and empowered to Sign the same, and deliver them unto
the General Treasurer; which Bills are, and shall be received and paid for the
same Value, and equal to the current Coin passed in this Colony, for Goods, The
Bi^ls as cu^r^nt Coin, Special^ies only exc^pted.
or any other Thing bought or sold in all Payments to be made whatsoever;
(Specialties only excepted;) for and during the space and Time of five Years
ensuing the Date hereof, if the General Assembly shall then see Cause to Call
them in; and when called in* the Possessor of such Bills shall be Reimburs'd
the Sum mentioned in such Bill or Bills, in Current Money of said Colony, by
the General Treasurer hereof; and the same shall be Levi^d and Collected by
said Act of Assembly, and duly Appor^ioned on the Inhabitants of each Town in
the Colony.

LAWS, Made and Past by the General Assembly of her Majesty's Colony of
Rhode Island, and Providence-Plantations, Held at Providence the Twenty Fifth
Day of October, 1710.
An Act for preventing Counterfeiting of the Bills of Credit Emitted,
Superseded A.D. 1743.
or that shall be Emitted by any of the Governments of New England, V de Act
1743.
and to prevent Defaceing of the same, etc.
An Act for Impressing and Emitting One Thousand Pounds in public Bills of
Credit on this Colony.
One Thousand Pounds Imprinted In Bills of Credit.
BE it Enacted by the General Assembly, and by the Authority of the same, That
there be forthwith Imprinted and Raised, One Thousand Pounds of public Bills
of Credit on this Colony, in the same Manner and Form that the Five Thousand
Pounds of Credit formerly Emitted by this Colony were, and they shall be signed
by the same Committee, and pass in all Payments whatsoever, as the other Bills
aforesaid, already Emitted by this Colony do.

A LAW, Made and Past by the General Assembly of Her Majesty's Colony of
Rhode Island, and Providence Plantations, Held at Newport, the Twenty Seventh
Day of November, 1710.
An Act for the Raising and Emitting One Thousand Pounds in public Bills of
Credit.
FORASMUCH as the Bills of Credit already Emitted by this Colony, are not
sufficient to satisfy the Debts created by this Colony, in the late Expedition
undertaken against Annapolis-Royal, in pursuance to her Majesty's Command,
whereby many Persons are very great Sufferers, and several like to be Ruined
thereby, and there not being sufficient Silver in the Colony to answer the same.

BE it therefore Enacted by the General Assembly, One Thousand Pounds of Bills
of Credit Imprinted.
and by the Authority of the same, That there be forthwith Imprinted and
Raised, One Thousand Pounds in public Bills of Credit on this Colony, and that
they be signed by the former Committee, and pass in all public Payments, as
the former Bills of Credit do and have done.

A LAW, Made and Past by the General Assembly of her Majesty's Colony of
Rhode Island, and Providence-Plantations, Held at Newport the Twenty Eigthh Day
of June, 1711.
An Act for the Raising of Six Thousand Pounds, in Bills of Credit.
BE it Enacted by the General Assembly, and by the Authority of the same, Six
Thousand Pounds Emitt^d in Bills of Credit, by this Colony.
That there be forthwith Imprinted and Raised, the Sum of Six Thousand Pounds
of public Bills of Credit on this Colony, by the former Committee that Signed
and Fin^shed the former Bills, who are hereby fully Empowered to Make, Sign,
and Finish the same, in the same Form as the former Bills were; which Bills
when Signed and Finished, the said Committee shall deliver into the General
Treasury, to and for the Use of this Colony; and they shall pass in all public
Payments as the Bills of Credit already Emitted by this Colony do.

A LAW, Made and Passed by the General Assembly of Her Majesty's Colony of
Rhode Island, and Providence-Plantations, Held at Warwick, the Fourteenth Day
of November, 1711.
An Act for Imprinting and Raising Three Hundred Pounds in public Bills of
Credit on this Colony.
BE it Enacted by the General Assembly, and by the Authority of the same, Three
Hundred Pounds of Bills of Credit Emitted.
That there be forthwith Imprinted and Raised, the Sum of Three Hundred Pounds
of Bills of Credit on this Colony, in the same Manner and Form as the former
Bills of Credit were; the which Bills shall be Signed by the fo^mer Commit,
and shall pass in Payments as the current Coin in this Colony does,
(Specialties only Excepted.)

An Act for Quieting Possessions, and avoiding Suits at Law.
WHEREAS at the first settling of this Colony, and for sundry Years afterward,
Lands were of little or no Value, and skilful Men in the Law were much wanted,
whereby many Deeds, Grants and Conveyances were weakly made, which may Occasion
great Contests in Law, if not timely prevented.

BE it therefore Enacted by the General Assembly, and by the Authority of the
same, That all Grants, Charters, Profits, Ancient Grants confirmed.
Rights and Privileges, heretofore Granted and Given by the General Assembly
of this Colony, unto any Town, Corporation, Community and Propriety, and to any
other Person or Persons, shall be, and they hereby are Ratified and Confirmed
to be Good and Effectual to all Intents and Purposes in the Law, for the
Granting and Conveying all such Lands, Tenements, Charters, Corporations,
Privileges as is therein mentioned, to the Persons therein mentioned, and
their Heirs and Assigns for ever.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That where any Person or
Persons, or others, from whom he or they derive their Titles, either by
themselves, Tenants, Leases, Twenty Years Possession to make a Title.
Has, Have or shall by the space of Twenty Years, be in the Uninterupted,
Quiet, Peaceable and Actual Seisin and Possession of any Land or Hereditaments
within this Colony, for and during the said time, Claiming the same as his, her
or their proper, sole and rightful Estate in Fee Simple, such Actual Seisin and
Possession, shall be allowed to give and make a Good and Rightful Title to such
Person or Persons, their Heirs and Assigns for ever; and this Act being Pleaded
in Bar to any Action that shall hereafter be brought for such Lands, Tenements
or Hereditaments, and being duly proved, shall be allowed to be Good, Valid and
Effectual in the Law, for Barring the same.

PROVIDED, That nothing in this Act shall be Construed, Deemed or taken, to
Extend to prejudice the Rights and Claims, of Persons under Age, Non Comp^s
Mentis, Feme Coverts, Feme Coverts. etc ex^mpted.
or those Imprisoned or beyond Seas, they bringing their Suit therefore, within
the space of Ten Years, next after such Impediment is Removed. Vide Act 1728.


An Act for granting Administrations to the Wives of Persons Three Yea^s (...),
and unheard of.
WHEREAS many Merchants and Mariners, going to (...) Voy^g^s, are of^^n absent
many Years, and unheard of, and leavi^g no Power of Attorney for Receiving of
the D^bts, R^nts and Profits of their Estates, their Wives and Fami^ies may
suffer.

For the preventing whereof for the Future,

BE it Enacted by the General Assembly and by the Authority of the same, That
whosoever has departed, or shall depart o^t of this Government on a Voyage to
Sea or otherways, and has left an Estate in this Government, If a P^rs^n (...)
abs^nt and (...) of, Admini^^^^^ion to ^e granted to the Wif^.
and be unheard of for the space of Three Years, next immediately succeeding
such Departure, and leave no Power of Attorney with his Wi^e, to Receive his
Deb^s, Rents and Profits of such Estate, which he has within this Gove^ment;
that then and in such Cases, the Town Council of such Town, where such departed
Person last dwelt, upon due Application to them made, by the Wife of such
departed Person, are hereby fully Empowered and Authorized, to Grant
Administration to the Wife of such departed Person, Enabling and Impowering her
to Sue for, Recover the Debts, Rents and Profits of the Estate of such her
departed Husband, for the comfortable Subsistence of herself and Children, if
any she have, until such time as her departed Husband shall return home, or
send sufficient Power of Attorney for the same; or until he shall be Adjudged
and Deemed Dead in Law, and then such her Administration shall cease and
determine.

A LAW, Made and Passed by the General Assembly of her Majesty's Colony of
Rhode Island, and Providence-Plantations, Held at Newport, the Sixth Day of
May, 1713.
An Act for preventing fraudulent purchases of Land of Ninigret, the Indian
Sachem in the Naraganset Country.
WHEREAS Ninigret the Indian Sachem, in the Narragansett Country, on the Twenty
eighth Day of March, 1709. did by an Instrument under his Hand and Seal,
Covenant and Agree with the Governor and Company of this Colony, that they
should have the oversight and care of his Lands, etc. and that he would not
Sell, or Hire out any of his Lands, without their consent or approbation, under
the Penalty of Forfeiting such Lands by him Sold and Hired; and notwithstanding
which several evil minded Persons for the Lucre of Gain, have Craftily and
Designedly Cheated the said Sachem of some of his Lands, and of the Profits of
his other Lands; so that he has not Sufficient to maintain himself and People
upon.

BE IT THEREFORE Enacted by the General Assembly and by the Authority of the
same, That all Deeds of Sale, Deeds of Mortgage, and Leases of any of said
Ninigret's Lands, All Grants, Leases, etc. made by Ninigret, since March, 17^9.
to be void.
which have been by him made and granted, since the said Twenty Eighth of
March, One Thousand Seven Hundred and Nine, to this present Sessions of
Assembly, be and they are hereby declared to be Null and Void, and of no Force,
Validity and Effect in the Law, to any such Use or Purpose whatsoever.

AND for the Preventing of Clandestine Proceedings for the the Future.

BE it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That no Person whatsoever,
shall Buy, Purcha^e or Hire any Lands of the said Ninig^et, Sachem, either by
Deed of S^le or Mortgage, or Lease, unless They first Have and Obtain, the
Assent of the Governor and Company of this Colony, for the time b^ing, under
the Penalty of Forfei^ing Twenty Shillings per Acre, for every Acre that shall
be so Bought, Purchased or Hired, to and for the Use of the Colony; No Person
to (...) Hire of Ninigret, on (...) of Twenty ^hillings per Acre.
to be Recovered by the General Treasurer, in the General Court of Trials;
where no Essoign, Protection, or Wager of Law shall be allowed; and all such
Feoffment, Sales Mortgages and Leases, are hereby declared to be Void, Null and
of none Effect in the Law.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That no Recorder or Town
Clerk in this Colony, He that Records any such Grant or (...) ^or^ei^^ Fifty
Pounds.
shall Register or make Record of any such Deed of Sale, Mortgage or Lease,
under ^he Penalty of Fifty Pounds, to be Forfeited to and for the Use of the
Colony, to be Recovered as aforesaid, for every such Deed of Sale, Mortgage or
Lease, that shall be by him Recorded.

LAWS, Made and past by the General Assembly of His Majesty's Colony of
Rhode Island, and Providence-P^antations, Held at Providence, the Twenty
Seventh Day of October, 1714.
An Act to prevent Slaves from Running away from their Masters, etc.
WHEREAS several Negro and Molatto Slaves, have Ran away from their Masters and
Mistresses, under pretense of being employed in their Service, and have been
transported over the Ferries out of this Colony, and suffered to pass through
the several Towns, under the aforesaid Pretense, to the great Damage and Charge
of their Owners, and many times to the loss of their Slaves.

BE it therefore Enacted by the General Assembly, and by the Authority of the
same, No Person to Transport any Slave over a F^r^y or out of the Colony,
without a Cer^i^ cat^, On the penalty o^ Twenty Shilli^gs, (...)
That no Ferry-man or Boat-man whatsoever, within this Colony, shall Carry,
Convey or Transport any Slave or Slaves as aforesaid, over any Ferry, or out of
the Colony, without a Certificate under the Hand of their respective Master or
Mistress, or some Person in Commission for the Peace, on the Penalty of Twenty
Shillings, to be Forfeited to and for the Use of the Colony, to be Recovered
upon conviction thereof, before any two Assistants or Justices of the Peace, of
such Town where such Offense shall be committed, and shall pay all Costs and
Charges that shall arise, on his or their carrying or Transporting any Slave or
Slaves as aforesaid, to the Owner thereof, to be Recovered by the Person
agrieved thereby, if not exceeding Forty Shillings, before any two Justices of
the Peace, etc. and if above Fort^ Shillings, at the General Court of Trials,
by Action of Trespass upon the Case. And all His Majesty's Ministers of
Justice, and all other his Subjects in this Colony, knowing of any Slave or
Slaves Traveling through the Township wherein they Dwell, without a
Certificate as aforesaid, All Ministers of Justice to ^ak^ up all Slaves.
are hereby Required to cause such Slave or Slaves to be taken up, Examined and
Secured, so as the Owners of such Slave or Slaves may be No^ified thereof, and
have their Slave or Slaves again, paying the reasonable charges arising thereon.

A LAW, Made and Passed by the General Assembly of his Majesty's Colony of
Rhode Island, and Providence-Plantations, Held, at Kings-Town, the Twenty Third
Day of February, 1714.
An Act for the Registring Deeds and Conveyances.
FOR the Prevention of Clandestine and Uncertain Sales of Houses and Lands, and
to the Intent that it may be the better known what Right, Title, or Interest
Persons have in, or to such Estates as they offer to Sale.

BE IT ENACTED and Declared by the present Assembly, and by the Authority of
the same, That henceforth all Deeds and Conveyances of any Houses or Lands
within this Colony, Signed and Sealed by the Party or Parties granting the
same, Conve^ance^ to be (...) and (...), Acknowledged and Recorded.
having good and lawful Right or Authority thereto, and acknowledged by such
Grantor or Grantors, before any Assistant or Justice of the Peace in the
Colony, and Recorded at length in the Registry of the Town where such Houses
and Lands do lie, within the space six Months, from the Date of such
Conveyance; every such Conveyance shall be Valid, without any other Act or
Ceremony whatsoever.

AND that from and after three Months next after Publication of this Act, no
Bargain Sale, Mortgage, or other Conveyance of Houses or Lands, made and
Executed within this Colony, shall be good and effectual to hold such Houses
and Lands against any other person or persons, but the Grantor or Grantors, or
their Heirs only, unless the Deed or Deeds thereof be Acknowledged and Recorded
in manner as is expressed.

PROVIDED nevertheless, That when and so often as it shall happen any Grantor
to Live in parts beyond the Seas, or to be Removed out of this Colony. If the
Grantor die, etc. before A^knowl^d^^m n^ (...) ^e proved by the Witnesses.
or to be Dead before any such C^nveyance by him or them made, be acknowledged
as afores^id; in every such Case, the proof of such Deed or Conveyance made by
the Oaths of the Witnesses thereto Subscribed, before any Court of Record
within this Colony, shall be equiv^lent to the Party's Acknowledgment thereof.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Grantor or
Vendor of any Houses or Lands, shall refuse to acknowledge as is aforesaid, any
Grant, Bargain, If the Grantor r fuse to acknowl^dge the same, to be Committed
to Goal.
Sale or Mortgage by him, her or them Signed and Sealed, and being thereto
Required by the Grantee or Vendee, his, her, or their Heirs or Assigns, it
shall and may be Lawful for any Assistant, or Justice of the Peace, within the
Town where such Grantor or Vendor lives, upon Complaint made, to send for the
Party so refusing, and if he, she, or they persist in such refusal, to commit
him, her, or them to Prison, without B^il or Mainprize* until he, she, or they
shall acknowledge the same; unless he, she, or they shall Appeal to the nex
General Court of Trials, in that Case, it being first m^^e appear, and proved
to be the Act and Deed of the Party refusing to acknowledge the same, by the
Oath of one or more Witnesses thereto Subscribed: And such Grantee or Vendee
filing a Copy of his Deed or Mortgage so proved in the Town Clerk's Office, in
the Town wherein the Land does lie, shall thereby secure his Title in the mean
time; and the same shall be accounted sufficient Caution to every other Person
and persons, against purchasing the Estate in such Deed men^ioned to be Granted.

PROVIDED, That nothing in this Act shall be construed, deemed or extended to
bar the Widow of any Vendor or Mortgager of Lands or Tenements, No Wi^ow to be
har^'d of her Dower by this Act.
from her Dower or Right in, or to such Lands or Tenements, who did not legally
join with her Husband in such Sale or Mortgage, or otherwise lawfully bar, or
exclude herself from such her Dow^^ and Right.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That any Morgagee of
Lands or Tenements, his or her Heirs, Executors or Administrators, having
received full satisfaction of all, and every such Sum and Sums of Money, as are
Really due to him, Mortgagees to (...) their Mortgages b^ R^^ord when paid.
by such Mortgage, shall at the Request of the Mortgagor, his Heirs, Executors
or Administrators, acknowledge and cause satisfaction and payment to be Entered
in the Margin of the Record of such Mortgage, in the Town Clerk's Office, where
the Land lies, and shall Sign the same, which shall forever hereafter
discharge, defeat and release such Mortgage, and perpetually bar all Actions to
be brought thereupon, in any Court of Record.

AND if any such Mortgagee or Mortgagees, his, her, or their Heirs, Executors
or Administrators, shall not within ten Days next after Request in that behalf
made; and tender of his, And if they refuse t^ pay the sam^, to pay all Damages
(...).
her, or their reasonable Charges, repair to the Town Clerk's Office, and their
make and sign such Acknowledgment as aforesaid, or otherwise Sign and Seal a
Discharge, and Release and Quit Claim to the Estate therein mentioned to be
granted, and acknowledge the same, before any one Assistant or Justice of the
Peace of this Colony; he, she, or they so refusing to do, shall be liable to
make good all Damages that shall accrue, for want of such a Discharge or
Release, to be Recovered by any Action or Suit in any Court of Record: And in
case Judgment pass against the Party so Sued, he, she, or they so Cast, shall
pay unto the adverse Party, treble Costs arising upon such Suit.

LAWS, Made and Passed by the General Assembly of Her Majesty's Colony of
Rhode Island, and Providence-Plantations, Held at Newport, the Fourth Day of
May, 1715.
An Act for the convenient Laying out of Highways and Roads in the several
Towns within this Colony, where wanted.
BE it Enacted by the General Assembly and by the Authority of the same, That
the Proprietors of all, and every Town in this Colony, shall with all
convenient speed, take c^re to Lay out convenient Highways, T^wn (...) out
Hig^wa^s (...) a Jury
and Roads from Town to Town, and to Market and Mill, etc. within three Month^
after the Publication hereof; and in case the said Proprietors shall refuse or
neglect so to do, it shall and may be lawful for the Town Council of each
respective Town (where such Defect shall be) to order and appoint a Jury of
Twelve, or more, lawful and Judicious Men who have no particular Interest in
l^ying out the same in such Towns where such Defect is, as shall be found most
beneficial, The Jury t^ be Engaged
for the Interest of His Majesty, and the Benefit of the Subject, the which
Jury shall be (...) duly Engaged to the true and faithful performance thereof.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That in case it shall be
found most convenient to lay out any Ro^d or Highway through any particular
Person's Land or Property, or part thereof, And (...) with the Proprietors for
the Land.
(who is not under any Obligation to allow the same;) that then the said Jury
shall agree with the Owner or Proprietor thereof, what reasonable allowance
shall be made for the same.

BUT if the Owner or Proprietor of such Land shall refuse to agree with such
Jury; then the said Jury is ordered and Empowered to Estimate and Value the
Price of such Land as shall be laid out as aforesaid, as near as they can, If
they r^fuse to agree, then to value the Land, which shall b^ paid by the Town.
to the best of their knowledge; which Estimation so made, shall be allowed
good against such Owner or Proprietor, who refuses to agree as aforesaid, and
shall be accordingly paid to such Owner or Proprietor by such Town, out of
their Town Treasury; Vide Act 172^ and 1741.
and also all other incident Charges accruing on the performance of the same.
Any Law, Custom or Usage to the contrary hereof notwithstanding.

LAWS, Made and Passed by the General Assembly of his Majesty's Colony of
Rhode Island, and Providence-Plantations, Held, at Newport, by Adjournment,
July the Fifth, 1715.
An Act for Emitting T^i^ty Thousand Pounds in public Bills of Credit.
WHEREAS it ha^h pleased GOD to suffer the French and Indians, our la^e
Enemies, to maintain a long, bloody and expensive War against His Majesty's
Subjects in these parts of the Northern Amer ca; in which calamity of War, this
Colony has been no small sha^er, a great part thereof lying exposed to the
Insults and Depredations of the Enemy both by Sea and Land, which to defend,
This His Majesty's Colony has from time to time, for these many Years past
been put to great Charge and Expenc^, which together with the extraordinary
additional Charge that accrued by Her late Majesty's Commands, to assist in
sundry expeditions, for the Reducing of Port Royal and Canada, the defraying
the Charge whereof proved so great a Burden, that it has Reduced the Money of
this Colony, and other Mediums of Exchange unto a very low Ebb, that thereby
Trade is sensibly Decayed, the Farmers thereby Discouraged, Husbandmen and
others Reduced to great Want, and all sorts of Business Languishing, few having
wherewith to pay their Arrears, and many not wherewithal to sustain their daily
wants, by reason the Silver and Gold in the first place, necessary to defray
the Incident and Occasional Charges has been exhausted; those few Bills of
public Credit put forth by this Government falling short of discharing this
Colony's Arrears, has left us little or no Medium of exchange; and whereas the
annual, necessary and unavoidable Charge of the Colony makes a confiderable
account, and that His Majesty's Fort, called Fort-Anne is gone much to Decay,
and almost every thing therein out of Repair, and that all sorts of Ammunition
and Stores are wanting, to furnish the same for Defense; especially at a time
when War seems to threaten us; And also His Majesty's Goal in the Metropolis of
this Government, is calling for speedy and considerable Repairs and
Enlargement, and many other public Emergenci s, which cannot be omitted,
Requiring considerable Sums of Money, which to effect there is no possibility
in saving that of EmittingPublickBills of Credit of this his Majesty's Colony,
to accomplish the Ends aforesaid, and to Reduce the Arrears thereof unto a
Balance, always depending on our Dread Sovereign's Countenance and Toleration
therein, unto whose Royal Commands this Colony, as in Duty Bound will at all
Times readily submit.

All which being duly considered,

BE it the^ fore Enacted by the General Assembly of this hisMajesty's C^ any of
Rhode-sland, Thirty Thousan^ Pounds Emit^^d.
and by the Authority of the same, and i is hereby Enacted, That the Sum of
Thirty Thousand Pound^ in Bills of public Credit, of the same Ten^r with those
alre^dy put forth by this His Majesty's Colony, be forthwith made, and put into
the Hands of six Trustees, hereaf^er nam^d and appointed in this present Act,
with full power to Act therein; which Trustees, or any three of them, T^uste^s
appoint^d for the same.
are hereby Empowered to Sign said Bills, and them to deliver unto the Persons
chosen for Committees of the several and respective Towns in this Colony; the
said Trustees taking Receipts from the said Committees, for such Sums as shall
be by them received, as the Proportion of such Town; which said Bills, being by
such Committee received, the same is to be Let out to the Inhabitants of their
respective Towns in this Colony, To be hired ^ut at five per Cent* upon ^and
S^cu ity for (...) Yea^*
in good and sufficient Land, or other real Security within the said Towns, at
Five Pounds per Cent per Annum, in Sums not exceeding Five Hundr^d Pounds, nor
under Fifty Pounds to any one Person, and that for the space of Ten Years.
Always provided, That all such Persons that shall take said Bills upon such
Security, shall at the Expiration of Five Years from the Date of their Deed of
Mor^gage, or other Assurance, renew the same, or give any further, and other
better Security for the con^inuation of any such Sum by them borrowed for the
remaining Five Years, if by the Trustees, then for the Time being, Bo^d to be
(...) for Interest.
such Person shall be thereunto Required; and that Persons so borrowing the
said Bills, shall before receiving of the same, give five Bonds payable to the
General Treasurer of this Colony for the Time being, Vide Act, 1727.
to the Us^ of this Colony, for the orderly and duly payment of the first Five
Years Interest; And if any such Person, at the Expiration ^f the Five Years,
shall see cause to pay down the Principal, and Discharge the Interest in like
public Bills of Credit, or cur^ent Money of said Colony: upon his or their so
doing, such Mortgage or Security shall be released and delivered up, and the
Lands, or other real Estate so Mortgaged or Engaged, discharged therefrom. And
the said Trustees and Committees for the several Towns, are hereby required,
carefully to inspect into the true Value of such Estates as shall be offered to
Mortgag^, and that they be of double the Value of the Sums Lent thereupon, and
whether the Title of the Person desiring to Mortgage his Lands, etc. appears to
be good by the Town Records, where such Land or real Estate lies, and that no
Encumbrance be thereupon, which appearing good and satisfactory, such Mortgages
to be taken by the Committee of the several Towns as aforesaid, and forthwith
at the Charge of the Mortgager, be put upon the Records of such Town where such
Estate lies; Mortgages to be R^cord^d.
and the said Deeds of Mortgage afterward with all convenient speed, together
with the Bonds for payment of the Interest, be Lodged in the Custody of the
Trustees for the Time being, for the Use of this Colony, To be made to the
Tru^^ees etc. for the Colony's Us^.
they giving Receipts for the same, to the Committee of the several respective
Towns, upon delivery of the same; the said Trustees to be always accountable
unto the General Assembly of this His Majesty's Colony for the Time being, for
all such Mortgages and Bonds, together with the Profits thereof, the which they
shall surrender up to the General Assembly of this Colony, when by them they
shall be thereunto Required; and that all Mortgages made, or to be made as a
Security for the Bills so borrowed to be to the first Trustees, and such others
as shall from Time to Time be appoin^ed by the General Assembly of this Colony.

AND be it further Enacted by the General Assembly, and by the Authority of the
same, That Lieutenant Colonel John Wanton, The first Trusteesappointed.
Captain Job Almy, Major Nathaniel Coddington, Captain Benjamin Ellery, Major
James Brown, and Mr. Robert Gardner, be, and they hereby are appointed and
chosen to be the Six first Trustees, and them, or any three of them, shall Sign
all such Bills as shall be made as aforesaid; and the aforesaid Six Trustees
are hereby appointed to be the Committee for the Town of Newport, to Let out,
and take Security for their proportion of said Public Bills of Credit
afore-described in this Act. Commi^^e^s ap^^^ ted to Let ou^ e^ch Town'sQuo^a.
And the Honorable Joseph Ien^^s, Esquire Deputy Governor, and Captain Richard
Waterman, be a Committee for the Town of Providence, to Let out their
proportion of said Bills, and that Mr. Thomas Cornell, and Mr. George Cornell,
be a Commit^ee for the Town of Portsmouth, to Execute said Trust; and Major
Ra^dal Hoalden, and Major Job Green, be a Committee for the said Trust for the
Town of Warwick; Captain John Babcock, and Captain Joseph Stanton, be a
Committee to Execute sai^ Trust, for the Town of Westerly; Captain Simon Ray,
and Captain John Sands, be a Committee to Execute said Trust, for the Town of
New-Shoreham; Captain John Eldred, and Mr. Stephen Haszard, be a Committee to
Execute s^id T^ust for the Town of Kingstown; Major Thomas Fry, and Mr. Thomas
Spencer, be a Committee to Execute said Trust for the Town of East-Greenwich;
and that Mr. John Hull, and Captain Nicholas Carr, be a Committee to Execute
said Trust for the Town of Iames-Town. All the aforesaid Committees shall be
under Oath for their due and faithful performance of the Trust reposed in them,
in the Premises aforesaid, and shall be allowed and paid for their Service
therein, Ten Shillings on every Hundred Pounds by them Let out, to be divided
amongst them as follows, (viz.) two thirds of the whole Amount unto the first
Six Trustees aforementioned, together with a proportionable part of the third part
allotted to be divided with the o her Committees, for their care and trouble in
Receiving and Signing, and Letting the Town of Newport's proportionable part of
said Bills; and delivering the rem^inder to the Committees of the several Towns
in proportion to such Money, as shall be by them Let out.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the public Bills
of Credit to be Emitted by this Colony, shall be made and finished according to
the several Sums and Values hereafter mentioned, viz. Of Five Pound Bills, The
Quanti^y and D^nomi^ation of the several Sorts of Bills.
Ten Thousand, Four Hundred and Five Pounds; of Three Pound Bills, six
Thousand, two hundred and forty three Pounds; of Forty Shilling Bills, four
thousand, one hundred and sixty two Pounds; of Twenty Shilling Bills, two
thousand and eighty one Pounds; of Ten Shilling Bills, two thousand, five
hundred and six Pounds; of Five Shilling Bills, one thousand, two hundred and
fifty three Pounds; of Four Shilling and Six-penny Bills, one thousand, three
hundred and fifty Pounds; of Three Shilling Bills, nine hundred Pounds; of Two
Shilling and Six-penny Bills, seven hundred and fifty Pounds; and of One
Shilling Bills, three hundred Pounds; being in the whole, Thirty Thousand
Pounds; which Bills shall not be Pasted, Covered or Lined on the Backside, on
any pretense whatsoever. And the said Trustees are as soon as possible to Sign
the aforesaid Quantity of Bills, and to make them of diverse Forms and
Distinctions, as much as possible to prevent Counterfeiting; and the Charges of
the same to be reimburs'd out of the General Treasury of this Colony.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if the Inhabitants
of any Town of this Colony, do not within three Months, after their Committee
has received their proportion of the aforesaid Bills, take it up and improve it
according to the Intent and Purport of this Act, that they may Let it out to
any Persons in the Colony, upon good Security as aforesaid, or return it to the
Grand Committee, whose Receipts shall be their Discharge.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That On^ ^housand Pound
out of the Interest of Thirty Thousand Pounds to be Let out, One Thousand Pound
s (...) be An (...) s^nk with the Inter^^t of (...) New.
be Annually improved for the Sinking of One Thousand Pounds of our old Bills
of Credit formerly Emitted by the Colony, until the whole be consumed; and the
aforesaid Grand Committee are hereby Empowered to Exchange the Sum of One
Thousand Pounds Annually of our own Bills of Credit, in order to be burnt,
until they be wholly sunk as aforesaid, and the remaining part of the Interest
of the aforesaid Thirty Thousand Pounds, shall be annually Disposed of for the
Interest of the Government, as the Assembly shall from time to time order and
direct.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the General
Treasurer of this Colony for the time being, shall have the same benefit and
liberty to Arrest each respective Obligor, TheGeneral Treasure^'s Po^er of
Arresting (...) Obligor^
as the General Treasurer has against each respective Constable, upon default
of paying the General Tax or Rate to him Committed.

An Act, Prohibiting the Importation, or bringing into this Colony, any Indian
Slaves.
WHEREAS Diverse Conspiracies, Insurrections, Ropes, Thefts, and execrable
Crimes have been lately perpetrated in this, and the Neighboring Governments
by Indian Slaves, and the Daily increase of them in this Government,
discourages the Importing of white Servants from Great Britain, etc. into the
same, which if not immediately Remedied, may prove very Pernicious and
Destructive to the Colony.

BE it therefore Enacted by this Assembly, and by the Authority of the same,
All Indian (...) Transportation.
That from and after three Months next ensuing the Publication of this Act, all
Indians, Male or Female* of what Age soever, Imported into this Colony by Sea
or Land, from any part or place whatsoever, to be disposed of. Sold or l^ft
within this Colony, shall be Forfeited to this Colony, to and for the Use and
Support of the same; unless the Person or Persons Importing or bringing in such
Indian or Indians, shall give Security at the Secretary's Office of Fifty
Pounds per Head, to Transport and carry out the same again, within the space of
one Month next after their coming in, not to be returned back to this Colony.

AND every Master of any Ship or other Vessel, Merchant or Person wha^soever
Importing or bringing into this Colony, by Sea or Land, any Indian or Indians,
M^le or Female, (...)
within the space of Twenty four Hours, next after their Arrival or coming in,
shall Report or Enter their Names, Number and Sex, and give Security in the
Secretary's Office as aforesaid, on pain of Forfeiting to the Colony, the Sum
of Fifty Pounds per Head, to and for the Use of the Colony; to be Sued for, and
Recovered by the General Treasurer of this Colony for the Time being, in any of
His M^jesty's Courts of Record, by Action, Bill, Plaint, Suit or Information.
And the Fee to be paid for such Entry* and Bond as aforesaid, S^cr^tar^'^ (...).
shall be Two Shillings and Sixpence and no more. Any Act or Acts, Clause or
Clause of Acts to the Contrary hereof notwithstanding.

A LAW, Made and Passed by the General Assembly of His Majesty'^ Colony of
Rhode Island, and Providence-Plantations, Held at Warwick, the Twenty Sixth Day
of October, 1715.
An Act for raising and Emitting Ten Thousand Pounds in public Bills of Credit
on this Colony.
BE it Enacted by the General Assembly, and by the Authority of the same, Ten
Tho^^^nd Pound^ (...).
That there be forthwith Imprinted and Signed, the Sum of Ten Thousand Pounds
in Bills of Credit in this C^lony, by the former Committee who Signed the
Thirty Thousand Pounds Emitted by this Colony, and by them to be delivered to
the Committees of the several Towns in proportion as aforesaid, to be hired out
upon good Security, as the Thirty Thousand Pounds aforesaid is, the said Bills
to pass in all public Payments as the other Bills are and do pass.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That every Person or
Persons whatsoever within thisColony, that have hired any Bills of Credit of
this Colony, and by their Obligations are Obliged to pay in the same specie
again, shall be discharged from their said Obligations, they paying the same in
current Money of New England.

A LAW, Made and Passed by the General Assembly of His Majesty's Colony of
Rhode Island, and Providence-Plantations, Held at Newport, the Second Day of
May, 1716.
An Act, Regulating the Maintenance of Ministers within this Colony.
WHEREAS in the Fifteenth Year of the Reign of His Gracious Majesty, Charles
the Second, there was a Charter granted to this His Majesty's Colony, which
contained many gracious Privileges for the Encouragement and Comfort of the
Inhabitants thereof; amongst others that of free Liberty of Conscience in
Religious Concernment, being one of the most Principal, it being a Moral
Privilege due to every Christian, as by His said Majesty is observed, that
true Piety rightly grounded upon Gospel principles, will give the best and
greatest security to Sovereignty, and will lay in the Hearts of Men, the
strongest Obligation to true Loyalty. And this present Assembly being sensible
by long Experience, that the aforesaid Privilege, by the good Providence of
GOD, having been continued to us, has been an outward means of continuing a
good and amicable Agreement amongst the Inhabitants of this Colony; and for the
better continuance and support thereof, as well as for the timely preventing of
any and every Church, Congregation and Society (...), now Inhabiting, or which
shall hereafter Inhabit within any part of the Jurisdiction of the same, from
endeavoring for Pre-eminence or Superiority one over the other, by making Use
of the Civil Power, for the enforcing of a Maintenance for their Respective
Ministers.

BE it Enacted by this present Assembly, and by the Authority of the same, That
what Maintenance or Sallery, may be thought needful or necessary by any of the
Churches, Congregations or Societys of People now Inhabiting, or that hereaf^er
shall and may Inhabit within the same, for the Support of their respective
Minister or Ministers, shall be raised by fr^e Contribution, and no other Ways.

A LAW, Made and Passed by the Gener^l Assembly of his Majesty's Colony of
Rhode Island, and Providence-Plantations, Held* at Providence, the Thirty first
Day of October, 1716.
An Act for the better settling the Payment of Officer's Fees, at the General
Court of Trials.
BE it Enacted by the General Assembly, He that Obtains Judgm^^^, to pay C^sts.
and by the Authority of the same, That all Persons whatsoever, whether
Plaintiff or Defendant, that shall at the General Court of Trials, Recover ^r
Obtain Judgment of said General Court of Trials, he, she, or they so Recovering
or Obtaining Judgment, shall Pay to the Recorder all Officer's Fees due in said
Case, before he, she, or they shall have their Bill of Costs Taxed; any Act or
Acts, Clause or Clauses of Acts to the Contrary hereof, in any ways
notwithstanding.

LAWS, Made and Passed by the Gen^ral Assembly of His Majesty's Colony of
Rhode Island, and Providence-P^antations, Held at Newport by Adjournment, June
the Eighteenth, 1717.
An Act for the Explanation of, and in Addition to an Act passed by the General
Assembly of this Colony, begun and held at Newport by Adjournment, the Twenty
Seventh Day of February, 1711, 12. Entitled, An Act for Granting of
Administration to the Wives of Persons three Years absent, and not heard of.
WHEREAS the ^fores^id Act of Assembly, has by Experience been (...)
Beneficial and Useful to the Wives of such S^ofaring Persons and others, as
have departed out of this Colony, and not ^eard of in three Years after
Departure, without lea^ing a good and sufficient Power of Attorne^, with any
Person or Persons, for the due R^oc^ering and Management of t^eir Estates, both
Real and Personal in their absence; but the said Act not being so full and
extensi^e as has since been ^^und necessary in such like C^s^s, for the
fur^^er Enlargement and Explanation thereof, and in addition thereunto,

IT it further Enacted by the General Assembly of this Colony, and by the
Authority of the same, If a (...) granted.
That in Case any Person being an Inhabitant of this Colony, h^^h, or shall
depart out of the same, being En^i^led unto, or le^ving any Estate, either Real
or Personal, within the Limi^s thereof, unto such Person* belonging or
appertaining, and (...) not, or shall not at his D^parture leave a good and
sufficient Power or Letter of Attorney, wi^h some Person or Persons for the due
Care, Recov^ring, M^n^gement, and orderly Disposal of the same; or in C^se such
A^torney or Attorneys by him l^f^ shall Die, whereby the said Power shall be
determined; and after hi^ Departure, has not, or shall not be heard of and
from, within the space of Three Years then next immediately succeeding such his
Departure; that then, and in such Case, it shall and may be lawful, upon the
due Application of the Wife or Childr^^, or (...) Relation or Friends of such
Persons so D^parted, unto the Town-Council of such Town in the said Colony
where such Person^ were last an Inhabitant, or did Dwell, for the said Town
Council, who are hereby Empowered, upon due and satisf^ctory proof thereof to
them made, to Grant, Authorize and Empower the Wife of such Person, if any he
has; or in C^se he has non^, then such Person or Persons as they shall think
meet and proper, for and in the name, and to the Use, B^nefit and B^hoof of
such D^parted Person to enter into, Demand, Sue for, Recover, Poss^ss and
Improve all such Lands and Hou^^s, or other Real Estate whatsoever, as at the
D^parture of such Person unto him of right did any w^ys belong or appert^in;
and ^lso ^ll such personal Estate whatsoever, consisting either in Leases,
Rents, Good^, Chatt^l^, (...), or o^h^rwise, as at the Time of such Departure
shall be left by him, to A^k, Sue for, Recover, Receive and Discharge, as fully
and effectually in Law, as if such Departed Person had himself left a good and
sufficient Power of Attorney to such Ends and Purposes.

PROVIDED always, And it is the true Intent and Meaning of this Act, That each
respective Town Council shall upon their G^^nting such Power and Authori^y as
^foresaid, take good and suff^cient Securi^y by Bond, (...)
to be given joyn^ly and sever^lly by two Fre^holders of this Colony, together
with the Person o Persons unto whom they shall Gran^ such Power as aforesaid
nto the Town Council, and to their Successors, for his and their rue and
faithful acting and d^ing the^^in, acco^ding to (...) ^^wer thereby given, for
the B^nefit and U^e of such Departed P^^son; and to render un^o ^im a just and
true Account at his Return to this Col^ny, or to any Person or Person^ by (...)
Empowered, to d^mand the s^^e, when lawfully th^r^unto R^^ui^ed; and in C^se
such D^p^r^^d Person shall after such hi^ D^parture be by Reason of his long
absence, or other due p^oof, deemed and adjudged Dead in L^w before his Return
to thi^ Colony, then to render unto the Heirs, Executors, Admin^^tr^^o^s or
Assi^n, of such D^parted Person, such Estate, both Real (...) Personal, as by
L^w shall become their, or either of their just Dues and Rights resp^ctiv^ly to
h^ve and enjoy.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That in Case such
D^^^rted Person shall le^ve any Child or C^ildr^^, o^ other Relation (...),
(...)
(...) whose Edu^^^ion and M^intainance by L^w shall be Incumbent or Oblig^tory
upon him; that then, and in such C^se, the P^^son (...) Empowered by ^he Town
Council as: foresaid, shall and may with the Con^ent and Approbation of such
Town Council, Lay out, and Expend out of the (...) of such Person Departed as
afore^^id, for the M^i^^^inance and Education of such Child or Children, or
other R^lation, the Charge of whose Maintenance or Educ^^^^n was (...) or
Obligatory upon such Dep^rted Person, such Sum or S^ms of M^n^y as shall be by
such Town Council thought (...) and convenient, which shall be all^wed him in
any Accomp^ af erward to be Adjusted.

(...) En^bling and App^inting Overseers to Lease out the (...) of Ni^igret the
Sac^^m in the Narrag^n^e^ Country.
WHEREAS Ninigret, S^^hem, in the Narraganse^ C^untry, in the Colony of
Rhode Island, etc. H^th P^titioned (...) Assembly, to appoint three Overseers
to Oversee and Rent out his Lands, to prevent his being Defrauded therein, and
has also desired this Assembly, to dispossess all those that shall refu^e to
Hire of his Overseers who shall be appointed by the Governor and Company of
said Colony, for the Time being; and also in Case he shall have need to Sell
any of his Lands, that he ma by the said Governor and Company, for the Time
being, be assisted therein.

For the complying with which Petition, and for the better securing the said
Sachem's Lands and Profits.

(...)
BE it Enacted by the General Assembly, and by the Authority of the same, That
Colonel William Wanton, Major Thomas Fry, and Captain Joseph Stanton be, and
they hereby are ^ppointed Overseers, to Oversee and Lease out the said Sachem's
Lands, as shall to them seem most conducive for the said Sachem's Interest. And
They, or any two of them are h^reby Empowered to Dispossess all and every
Person that now is, or hereafter shall be in Possession of said Sachem's Lands,
and shall refuse to agree, comply and hire said Lands, at such Rents and
Services as by them, or the major part of them shall be found most beneficial
for the said Sachem's Interest* They not Granting any Lease for any longer Term
than seven Years, the said Sachem to pay the Charge thereof, and the said
Overseers to render an Account of, and surrender up their Trust to the General
Assembly, when thereunto Required.

LAWS, Made and Passed by the General Assembly of His Majesty's Colony of
Rhode Island, and Providence-Plantations, in New England, Begun and held at
Newport, the Seventh D^y of May, 1718, and continued by Adjournments to the
Ninth Day of September following.
An Act for the Repealing several Laws relating to the Militia within this
Colony, and for further Regulation of the same.
WHEREAS the Laws for Settling and Regulating of the Military Forces within
this Colony, are increased to so great Number by Reason of the many Wars, which
from Time to Tim^ this Colony has been engaged in against French, Indians and
other Enemies, which has rendered many of them Useless, and may be for the
Future prejudicial, if not Repealed.

BE it therefore Enacted by the General Assembly of this Colony, (...) by the
Authority of the same; and it is hereby Enacted, That all Acts heretofore made,
relating to the Militia, or appointing Officers of the same, be and hereby are
Absolutely Repealed and Declared Null and Void, and that for the future, the
following Order, Regulation and Rules relating to the same, be kept and
observed by all Persons in this Colony.

First, It is Enacted and appointed, That all Male Persons Residing for the
space of three Months within this Colony, from the Age of Sixteen, to the Age
of Fifty Years, shall bear Arms in their Respective Train-bands or Companies
whereto by L^w they shall belong, All Persons to Train, from Sixteen to ^0.
Excepting only all Persons that have served in the Place of General Officers,
Justices of the Peace, or o her Commission Officers, T^es^ only (...).
one Minister or Teacher of each respective Congregation in each respective
Town, all Sworn Practitioners in Surgery and Physic, all Apothecaries and
Schoolmasters, and also one Miller to each Grist Mill, one Ferry-man to each
stated Ferry, one Jailer to each of His Maj^sty's Goals in the Colony, and all
those that have lost one of their Eyes, or are disabled by Lameness, and all
Persons that are under Oath or Engagement to any Office.

AND it is hereby Declared and Enacted, That the Governor of this Colony for
the Time being, shall be the Captain General and Commander in Chief, Captain
General, and L^eutenant General appointed.
of and over all the Military Forces within this Colony, and the Deputy
Governor for the Time being, shall be Lieutenant General of the same.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That for the better
Ordering and Training up the Inhabitants of this Colony, the several Companies
of Train-bands, The (...) divided into Compan^^^.
shall remain in the Stations, Bounds and Divisions, by the which they have
^een heretofore Divided, Known and Distinguished, until some further or new
Divisions or Bounds be Stated, Appointed or Limited by Lawful Authority.

This is to say, Three Companies in the Town of Newport, three Companies in the
Town of Providence, one Company in the Town of Portsmouth, one Company in the
Town of Warwick, two Companies in the Town of Westerly, one Company in the Town
of N^w-s^oreham, two Companies in the Town of Kingstown, one Com^a^y in the
Town of East-Greenwich, and one Company in the Town of Iames-Town.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Militia of this
Government be, and i^ is hereby divid^d into two Regiments. That is to say, The
Militia of Rhode Island, N^w-s^oreham, (...)
alias Block-Island, Conanicut, Prudence and Patience-Island be one Regiment,
and shall be the first and Eld^st Regimen^; and the Militia on the Main-Land in
this Colony, shall be one other Regiment, and shall be the second and youngest
Regiment; each of which Regimen^s shall be Governed, Guided and Led by one
Colonel, one Lieutenant Colonel, and (...) Major, which sh ll be annually
Chosen for each Regiment by the General Assembly of this Colony, during their
Si^^ing on the First Wednesday of May ^n^ually; and that each Company or
Trained B^nd in ea^h of the afor^said Regiments, (...)
shall be Guided, Conducted and Led by one Captain, one Lieutenant, and one
Ensign; who shall annually be Elected and Chosen by the General Assembly of
this Colony, during their Ses^ions on the First Wednesday of May annually; all
which Military Officers so chosen as aforesaid, shall be Commissionated by the
Governor of the Colony for the Time being, under the S^al of the Colony: And
if any Colonel, Lieutenant Collon^l, The (...).
Major, or other Commission Officer chosen as aforesaid, shall refuse to Serve
in such Office, to the which he shall be chosen, or shall happen to Die, that
then and in such Cases, it shall and may be lawful for the Governor, or in his
absence, for the D^puty Governor, by and wi^h the Consent of the General
Council, at any Time when the General Assembly shall not be Si^ting, to choose
and appoint so many other Officers to Serve in the Room and Stead of those that
shall refuse or Die as aforesaid, until the first Wednesday of May next ensuing
such choice and appointment; the which Officers so chosen, shall be
Commissionated as abov^said; and before any Military Officer shall enter upon
the Execution of his Office, he shall take the following Oath or Engagement.
The Form of the Engagement of Military Officers.
YOU A. B. B^ing by the General Assembly of his Majesty's Colony of
Rhode Island, (...)
and Providence-Plantations, Chosen and Elected unto the Place and Office of of
Do solemnly Swear true Allegiance unto His Majesty King George, His Heirs and
Successors to bear, and also good Fidelity to this His Majesty's Colony, and
the Authority therein Established, according to our Charter, And you do also
further Engag^, well and truly to Execute the Office of to the which you are
Elected according to your Commission, and to perform and observe all the Laws
made and provided for the support, and well ordering of the Militia, without
partialit^; and hat you will observe and follow such Orders and Instructions as
you shall from Time to Time receive from your Superiors. So Help you God.



AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, Th^^ it shall and may be
in the Power of a Captain, The Captain, etc of ^ach C^mpa^y (...) appoint (...)
Offic^^^.
Lieutenant and Ensign, of each respective Company, to nominate and appoint a
Clerk, and all other Inferior Officers as shall be requisite for the
Management of their respective Company; the which Clerk so chosen, shall be
under Oath or Engagement for the performance of his said Office, and the
Captain of each Company is hereby empowered and Required, to Administer the
same; the which Oath shall be in the Form following.

YOU A. B. Do solemnly Swear well and truly to perform and ^xecute the Office
of Clerk of the Company, or Train'd-Band, The Cl^r^'s Engagement.
under the Command of C. D. to the utmost of your skill and ability, without
partiality, according to the Laws of this Colony, which relate to your Office.
So help you God.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That every Listed
Soldier of the said Militia, shall be always provided wi h one good Musket, or
Fuzee, The Acc^utrement of the Militia. Whoso^ver neglects the same, shall pay
Three Shilli^gs, to be ta^^n by Distraint.
the Barrel whereof not to be less than three foot and an half in length, to
the satisf ction of the Commission Officers of the Company; also one pound of
good Gunpowder, thirty Bullets, fit for his Gun, six good Flints, fit for
Service; one good Sword, or Bayonet, a Cartouch Box, ready filled with
Cartriges of Gunpoweder and Bullets, on the penalty of Three Shillings, for
each Time he shall be found not provided as aforesaid; the which shall be
Distrained by the Clerk of the Company, by W^rrant from the Captain of said
Company, Vide Act, 1740.
and Sixpence more for such Distrain, upon the Goods and Chattels of such
defective Person, to and for the Use of such Company.

AND be it f^rther Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Captain of each
respective Company or Train'd-band, or in his absence the next Superior
Officer, The (...) etc. to (...) Company.
shall lawfully Warn and Call together the Company under his Command, and
Exercise them in Martial Discipline, two Days in each Year in Time of Peace,
and four, in War; which Days shall be at his own appointment, The Number of
Days Vide Act* 17^0
the first of which Warnings shall be by a Warrant directed to the Corporals,
to Notify them to appear completely Accoutred as aforesaid, and other Days
according to his own Discretion.

Three Shillings (...) of app aring. How taken. The (...) to be Ret^^n'd How
the (...) shall be disposed of. Vid^ Act, 1740.
AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That every Enlisted
Person, that shall Refuse or Neglect to make his Personal appearance Accoutred
as aforesaid, on such Training Days as he shall be Legally Warned to, shall for
every such Default pay to the Clerk of the Company, Three Shillings in Money,
within one Months time after such default, or make his lawful Excuse to the
Captain, or in his absence to the next Superior Officer for the same, if any
he have, and if such defaulter refuse so to do, that then the Captain, or in
his absence the next Superior Officer shall Grant forth his Warrant to the
Clerk of the Band, to take and distrain so much of the Personal Estate of such
delinquent Person, or such as shall have them in Tuition, as near as
conveniently will pay his Fine or Fines, together with Sixpence more for each
Fine distrained for the Clerk's Fees; and such Estate that shall be taken by
distress, shall be duly Appraised by Two Freeholders of said Company, under
Engagement, at the Head of said Company, and the Captain is hereby Empowered to
Administer the same, and the Overplus if any there be, to be returned to the
Owner thereof, and if he shall refuse to receive the same, then the Clerk shall
give him Credit for the same, which shall be accounted for out of the next Fine
that shall become due; and all such Fines as shall be taken as aforesaid, shall
be laid out to and for the Use of such Company, by order of the Commission
Officers thereof, for the defraying their Incident Charges.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That in case such
Persons as shall be delinquent as aforesaid, How to proc^ed with Persons that
have no visible E^^ate.
shall have no personal Estate to be found to satisfy such Fines as aforesaid,
that then the Captain of such Company, shall set such delinquent Person to
work, in mending the Highways of such Town, not exceeding one Day for each
Fine; and if such defective Person shall refuse to do the same, then the
Captain, etc. shall commit such Offenders to Prison, twenty-four Hours, or wait
further to take his Estate by Distraint.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Clerk or
other Inferior Officer of the Band, The penal^y (...) the (...) refu^ing to
obey (...) Superior.
shall refuse to obey his Superior Officer's Warrant when to him directed, he
shall forfeit for every such Offense, Ten Shillings, to and for the Use of such
Company, to be taken by Distress in Manner as aforesaid.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all such Persons
before in this Act excused from Training, All Persons to be provided (...)
Arms, etc On the (...) Shillings (...).
yet shall no^withstanding be provided with the same Arms, Ammunition, etc. ^s
by this Act is required of such as are obliged to Train, and that once every
Year, or oftener, as the Chief Officers of any Company shall see needful, there
shall be either by such Officers, or others by them appointed, a Sur^^y and
Examination made, whether such Persons are provided as by this Act is required;
and all such Persons as shall be found unprovided with such Arms as before
Required, shall pay the Fine of Five Shillings for each default, to be Levied
by Distress and Sale of the Defaulter's Goods, as in other cases.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That upon any Al^rm in
Time of War, All Persons from (...) to Sixt^, to appear upon Alarm.
or other imminent danger of any Assault or Invasion, all Male Persons, both
Listed Soldiers and others in ^his Colony, of and between the Age of Sixteen
Years and Sixty, shall upon notice of the same, Vid^ Act, 17^0^
forthwi^h Repair to the Colors and Ensigns of such Company, wi hin whose
Pre^incts they Inhabit or Dwell, provided with Arms and Ammunition required of
Trained Soldiers upon T^aining Days: And in case any Person shall not appear as
aforesaid, ^^ch Defaulter shall pay the Fine of Five Shillings, On the Penalty
of Five Shillings.
to be L^vied by O^der of the chief Officers of such Company, by Distress and
S^le of such Defaulters Goods as in other c^ses.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That it shall and may be
in the Power of the Governor and D^puty Governor of this Colony for the Time
being, or either of them, to Ass^mble and call together each of the Regiments
of the Mili^^^ in this Colony, or any Part of them, or either of them, at any
Time, as they shall think needful or necessary for the same; and if any
enlisted Soldier being duly warned to appear at any such Time as shall be
appointed, shall neglect the same, he shall Fo^feit and pay as a Fine, Five
Shillings in Money, to be taken and disposed of for the Use of the Company,
where such Defect shall be, as other Fines are.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if the Captain, or
in his absence the next Superior Officer of any Company or Train'd-band, Every
Captain etc. to (...) Company together twice ^n the (...), on the (...) Forty
Shillings.
shall neglect legally to Warn and Call together his Company under his Command,
two Days in every Year in time of Peace, and four in time of War, he shall for
every Day by him omitted or neglected, Forfeit and Pay as a Fine to and for the
Use of said Company, Forty Shillings in Money: And if such Officer so
neglecting, shall refuse to Pay the same, for the space of one Month next after
such his Default, then and in such cases the Colonel, or in his absence the
Lieutenant Colonel, of the Regiment where such Omission or Neglect shall
happen to be, shall Grant forth his Warrant to the Clerk of the Band where such
Omission or Neglect has been, to distrain so much of the Estate of such
defaulter to be disposed of as aforesaid.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That in case any
Captain, If the Captain of the Company negle^^ to grant forth hi^ Warrant for
the Coll^^^ing of the ^ines, he shall p^y the (...).
or in his absence, the next Superior Officer of any Company or Trained-band,
shall neglect to bring forth his Warrant to the Clerk of the Band, to collect
and gather such Fine or Fines as shall be due, he shall Forfeit and Pay to and
for the Use of such Company, all such Fines as shall be to them due, the which
shall be taken by Distraint, by Warrant as abovesaid.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Enlisted
Soldier, On Training D^ys the Captain to (...) Fine, (...) otherway^ such as
offend.
shall upon any Training or Muster Days, refuse to obey his Respective
Officers, or otherways misbehave himself, that then it shall be in the Power of
the Captain and other Commission Officers of each Company, to Punish such
Offender, by laying him Neck and Heels, or Riding the Wooden Horse, or Fine him
at Discretion, not exceeding Five Shillings.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Colonel of
each of the aforesaid Regiments, A General Muster to be bu^ once in Five Y^ars.
shall by and with the Advice or Order of the Captain General, or Lieutenant
General, call together the respective Regiment under his Command, to a general
Muster, to Review and Exercise the same once in Five Years, and not oftener; and
the Commission, and other Inferior Officers and Private Sentinels of each
respective Company, are hereby Commanded and Required, to yield all due
Obedience to their respective Field Officers upon a General Muster, or upon any
other Training or Muster Day, as private Sentinels are Required to do to their
otherCommission Officers, upon the Penalty of incurring the like Pains and
Forfeitures as aforesaid.

AND whereas it appears needful for His Majesty's Service, and the Defense of
this Colony, that there should be a Body of Horse Raised, for the more speedy
pursuing or opposing of any Enemy.

BE it therefore Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all proper Me^n^ be
used, Th^^^ Troops of Horse to be Rai^^d, ^o consi^t of ^^xty Men each.
and Encouragement given by the Governor, Deputy Governor, and General
Officers of this Colony, for the Raising of three Troops of Horse, each Troop
not to consist of more than Sixty Persons, including Officers, one of which
Troops is to be R^ised out of the Regiment upon the Islands, and the other two
Troops to be Raised ou^ of the Regiment upon the Main-Land: And that when there
shall be to the Number of Twenty Eight Persons Enlisted in any of said Troops,
that then upon due application to the General Assembly, there shall be by them
Nominated and Appointed such Officers for the Commanding, Ordering and
Disciplining of such Troop, as to said Assembly shall appear proper and needful
for the Ends aforesaid; which Officers shall be Engaged and Commissionated as
the Officers of the Foot Companies are: And that every Trooper shall be always
provided with one good serviceable Horse, of fourteen Hands high, one good
Saddle, Trooper's Accoutrem^n^^*
Bitt-Bridle, Holsters, Breast Plate and Crouper, one Carbine, one pair of good
Pistols, one Sword, one pound of Gunpowder, thirty sizeable Bullets, twelve
good Flints, one good pair of Boots and Spurs, upon the Penalty of Two
Shillings for ev^ry Default in every of the aforesaid Accoutrements; and that
the Field Officers of each Regiment, shall appoint the Clothing of every of
the Troops of the same.

AND be it fu^ther Enacted by the Auth^rity aforesaid, That the Captain* o^ in
his absence the nex^ (...) Officer, How many Day^ to Muster ^^ a Year. Upon
Nonappearance to be fined Five Shilling^ Vide Act, 1727.
shall War^ the (...) under his Command ^o Muster two several Days in every
^ear in Time of Peace, and four, in Time of War, at his own appointment, as the
Foot Companies are; every Trooper upon Default of Nonappearance of such
Muster, when legally Warned thereunto, shall pay as a Fine, to and for the Use
of such Troop, Five Shillings in Money, to be taken by Distress in like Manner
as the Fines in the Foot Companies are; and f^r every default of Appearance on
an Alarm, every Trooper shall pay a Fine of Ten Shillings, to be taken and
disposed of in Manner as aforesaid.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if the Captain,
Penalty on the Captain* etc. (...) neglects their Duty.
or in his absence the next Commanding Officer, shall neglect to Muster and
Exercise his Troop two several Days in each Year, etc. he shall be under the
like Fines as the Commission Officers of the Foot Company are; to be Recovered
and disposed of in the like Manner.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Commission
Officers of each Troop, Penalty on the Cl^rk.
shall have the same power to punish or fine such Troopers as shall refuse to
obey their Commands on their Muster Days, or shall otherways misbehave
themselves as the Captain of the Foot Companies have. And that the Clerk of
each Troop shall pay Ten Shillings for every Defect of his, in neglecting to
observe such Warrant as from his Superior Officers shall be to him directed.
The Form of the Commission for Colonel.
By the Honorable A. B. Esquire Governor and Captain General in and over His
Majesty's Colony of Rhode Island, and Providence-Plantations in New England.
To C. D. Gent. Greeting.
YOU C. D. Being by the General Assembly of this Colony, Elected and Chosen
unto the Post and Office of Colonel of the Regiment of Militia on the Islands
in this Colony, A Collonel's Commi^sion.
are hereby in His Majesty Name, George, by the Grace of GOD, over
Great Britain, France and Ireland, King, Defender of the Faith, etc.
Authorized, Empowered and Commissionated to exercise the Office of Colonel of
the said Regiment, and to Command, Guide and Conduct the same, or any
particular Company or Companies thereof; and in Case of any Invasion or Assault
of a Common Enemy, to infest and disturb these His Majesty's Plantations, you
are to Alarm and Gather together the Regiment under your Command, or any part
thereof, as you shall deem sufficient, and with them to the utmost of your
Skill and Ability, you are to R^sist, Expulse, Expel, Kill and Destroy the
same, in order to prese^ve the Interest of His Majesty, and His good Subjects
in these Parts. You are also to follow such further Instructions and Directions
as shall from Time to Time be further given forth either from the General
Assembly, the Governor and General Council, and other your Superior Officers:
And for your so doing, this Commission shall be your sufficient Warrant and
Discharge.



And the like Form of Commission shall serve for all other Commission Officers,
Mutatis Mutandis.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all the Commission
Officers of the Militia, shall be and remain in their respective Posts, until
the General Assembly at their Sitting on the first Wednesday of May next, shall
appoint Commission Officers for the same.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Governor and
D^puty Governor, Members of the General Council, Who shall be a Council for
each R^giment
with the Field Officers and Commission Officers of each Regiment, and the
Justices of the Peace that live within the ^ame, or the major part of them,
shall be a Council of War, ^or each of said Regiments, both in Peace and War,
Vide Act, 1740, 1741, and 1742.
to settle (...) Watches and Wards, and to put in Force and Execute the Law
Martial as need may Require, and Generally to Say, Do and Act, all and (...)
Things shall be needful, necessary or proper for a Council of War to do.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid For the securing of this
Colony, In time of any Invasi^n, etc. the Gov^^nour, or D^puty Governor to
Comm^^sionate and Equin out sufficient F^re^s to r^p^l (...) same.
and the Navigation thereof against Privateers, in Time of War, and Pirates in
Time of Peace, which may infest the same; that the Governor of this C^^ony for
the Time being, or in his absence, or by his leave and P^^mission, the D^puty
Governor of the same, shall, and may in Time of W^r, or any other emergent
Occasion, Empower and Commissionate such Person or Persons, as he shall deem
and adjudge to be Loyal, Courageous, and capable to Command such Ship o^ Ships,
or other Vessels (by and with the Advice of so many of the Council, and Field
Officers, as may be h^d at such Time) as shall be thought needful to Repel, or
t^ke any Priva^eer or Pirate, as shall infest this Colony; and also ^o ^ake up
and Impress such Ship or Ships, or other Vessels, as shall be deemed needful
for the same; and to equip and fit the some for the Sea, with Arms, Ammunition
and Provisions, and such other necessary Stores as shall be requisite, out of
the Colony's Magazine, if sufficient there be; otherwise to Seize and Impress
such S^ores and Ammunition as shall serve for the some; and also to Enlist or
Impress such and so many Seamen and others, as shall be needful and requisite
to Man out such V^ss^ls as shall be taken up or Impressed as aforesaid; such
Vessel or V^ss^ls to fitted out, not to Cruise any longer at one Time, than Ten
Days, the Danger of the Seas only excepted.

AND for the Encouragement of Seamen and others to Enlist themselves
voluntarily on such Occasions,

BE it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, All (...) taken to belong to
the Captors.
That all such Ships or other Vessels that shall be taken from the Enemy,
during such Cruise, together with their Loading and A^purtenances, shall be,
and remain to the Captors, His Majesty's D^es, and the Charge of the Outset
only excep^ed; and in case that nothing shall be taken from the Enemy during
such Cruise; the Charge thereof shall be born by the Colony.

An Act for Relieving such as shall be Maimed, and the Widows, Parents or
Relations of such as shall be Killed in the Colony's Service.
BE it Enacted by the General Assembly of this Colony, and by the Authority of
the same, Whosoever shall be di^abled in ^he Co^on 's S^rvice, to ^e maintained
at their Charge.
That if any Officer, Soldier or Sailor, that shall be employed by this Colony,
against His Majesty's Enemies, in Defense of this Colony or o^therwise, shall
be M^imed and Disabled by Loss of Limb or Limbs, or otherwise from getting a
livelihood for himself and Family, or other Relations that have Dependence on
him for Main^^inance; that then and in such Cases, such Maimed Person, shall
have his Wounds carefully looked after and healed at the Colony's charge, and
shall have an Annual Pension allowed him out of the General Treasury,
sufficient to maintain himself and Family, or other Relation whose Maintenance
is incumbent on him.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Person or
Persons shall be Slain in this Colony's Service as aforesaid, and have the
Charge of M^intaining a Wife, Children, Parents or other Relations, that then
and in such cases, such Wife, Children, Parents or other Relations, the Charge
of whose Maintenance was Incumbent on such Person Slain as aforesaid, shall be
Subsisted and Maintained by the Colony, by a Yearly Pension, to be allowed them
out of the General Treasury, as by the General Assembly shall be deemed
sufficient for the same, until such Wife, Children, Parents or other Relations
shall happen to Die, or be able to Subsist and Maintain themselves.

And for the better putting this Act in Execution.

BE it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Town Council of
each respective Town in this Colony, shall have the Care and oversight of such
Persons who Reside in their respective Towns, The Town Counci^ (...) even res^
ctive Town, to ^ee the same performed.
and are Entitled to any Pension as aforesaid, and from Time to Time to
Receive the same, and therewith supply such Persons as they shall stand in need
thereof.

An Act for the better Regulation of Attachments in Civil Actions.
WHEREAS by the Custom of this Colony of late Years, it has been allowed, tha^
the Sheriff or his Deputy's Attaching of Goods of small Value, not answerable
to the Debt or Damage Sued for by the Plaintiff, to be a good service of such
Writ, in case of the Defendants absence, which has (...) a cause that there
has not been that diligence used for the A^ ^sting the Defendant's Person as
ought to be.

BE it therefore Enacted by the General Assembly of this Colony, and by the
Authority of the same, That for the fu^ure upon a^y Writ delivered the Sheriff
in a Civil Action, (...) Plaintiff order the same.
he shall by himself, or his Deputy, U^e his best Diligence to Arrest the Body
of the Def^ndant, or Defendants, and shall not Attach the Defendant's Goods o^
Chattels, unless such Goods and Chattels so Attached be of sufficient Value to
answer the D^mages laid in such W^it; Exc^pting only where the Plaintiff or his
Attorney shall on the back of such Writ order the same under ^he H^nd of such
Pl^in^iff, or his Attorney; but in case the Plaintiff, or his Attorney, shall
so order the same, such Service shall be sufficient to bring the Cause to a
Trial.

An Act for the Distribution and Settling of Intestate's Estate. Rep^^l'd, A.
D. 172^.
An Act for Discouraging Vexations and Unjust Suits in Law
WHEREAS it has been found that Suits and Actions at Law, have been much
Increased of late Year^, by the V^xatious and Litigious Dispositions of either
Plaintiffs or Defendants, in either Suing for what is not their due, or
unjustly withholding the same from others, and are much encouraged thereto, by
Reason the Usual Costs to the Parties obtaining Judgment is not ans^erable to
what may ^easonably be allowed.

For the Discouraging the same for the future.

BE it therefore Enacted by the General Assembly of this Colo- and by the
Authority of the same it is hereby Enacted, T^^ Shill^ng^ and Si^-penc^ ^^lowed
(...).
That when and so often as either Plaintiff or Defendant, in any Action or Suit
in Law or Equity, shall obtain the Judgment of any Court of this Colony, for
him, her or them, that there shall be allowed and Taxed in the Bill of Costs,
Two Shillings and Sixpence, for every Ten Miles distance from the Place of
such Persons, Two ^hilling^ per Diem for Atte^^a^ce.
and each of the Witnesses Habitations to the Court where such Cause shall be
Tried* and Two Shillings per Day for such Person or Persons, and each of his,
her or their Witnesses, for their Attendance on said Court.

PROVIDED always, That in case the Evidence of any such Witnesses so attending,
shall appear to such Court to be fri^olous, and not material to prove the Issue
in the Cause, it shall be in the Power and at the Discretion of ^he Court to
allow them nothing for such their Travel and Attendance, in such Bill of Costs,
and the Persons who Summoned them, shall pay their Costs for Coming,
Attendance, etc.

An Act, Directing Proceedings in Actions and Suits, wherein either the
Recorder or Sheriff are Parties.
BE it Enacted by the Genneral Assembly of this His Majesty's Colony, and by
the Authority of the same, That when and so often henceforward, The Gen^ral
A^tor^^^ to Si^^ all P^oces^ ^here the Recorder is a Party.
as the Recorder of this Colony for the Time being, shall be a Party in any
Action or Suit, either as Plaintiff or Defendant, the Writ or Writs, both
Original and Judicial, shall be Signed and Sealed (as the Law in such C^ses
Requires) by the General Attorney of this Colony; All Writ^ (...), shall (...)
Town (...).
and that in all Actions or Suits wherein the Sheriff of this Colony for the
Time being shall be a Party, the Writs both Original and Judicial, shall be
directed to the Town Sergeant of the Town, for the Time being, where the
Defendant in such Action or Suit, shall be an Inhabitant to Execute the same.

An Act for the Relief of poor Prisoners.
FORASMUCH as many insolvent Debtors have been thrown into Goal upon Execution
by their Creditors, and have lain long languishing, to the destroying of
themselves and Families.

BE it therefore Enacted by this General Assembly, and by the Authority of the
same, That whosoever shall keep or continue an insolvent Debtor in Prison any
longer time than he shall be able to Subsist himself, shall find for such
Prisoner, Work sufficient to Subsist himself, during his Confinement, or shall
pay unto such Prisoner, Insolvent (...) to (...) allow d ^ix-pe^ce (...) Die^
by the C^editor.
Sixpence per Day during the some; and that if such Creditor shall ref^se to
pay the same, that then upon Compl^int thereof made to any Assistant, or
Justice of the Peace, and upon Conviction thereof, such Assistant or Justice
shall grant forth a Warrant of Distress, to di^rain so much of such Offender's
Estate as shall satisfy and pay the same.

An Act (...) the more speedy Trial of such Negro and Indian Slaves, who shall
be found Purloining and Stealing, etc.
BE it Enacted by the General Assembly of this Colony, and by the ^^thority of
the same it is Enacted, That all Negro and Indian Sla^e^ that shall be found
Purloining, N^^r^es and I^dians to be (...) committed.
Stealing or Thieving, shall be T^yed and Adjudged for the same, in the Town
where such Offense shall be committed; And the Assistants, Justices of the
Peace, and Wardens of such Town, or any two of them, are hereby fully Empowered
to Hear, Try and Adjudge the same; and upon Conviction thereof, Defini^ive
Sentence to give, as fully and effectually, by Whipping, B^^nishing, etc. as
the General Court of Trials, and General Go^^ Delivery, within this His
Majesty's Colony have been Authorized, Us^d or Accustomed to do.

SAVING alw^ys, The liberty of an Appeal to the Geneeral^ Court of Trials, and
G^n^ral D^livery, An A^peal allow^d ^o (...) General Court of T^yals, and
GoalDelivery.
if the Owner of such Slave or Slaves shall desire the same, and give Bond to
prosecute such Appeal, as in other Cases. Any Act or Acts, Clause or Clauses of
Acts to the Contrary hereof, in any wise notwithstanding.

A LAW, Made and Passed by the General Assembly of his Majesty's Colony of
Rhode Island, and Providence-Plantations, Held at Providence, the Twenty Ninth
Day of October, 1718.
An Act for Regulating Attorneys at the General Court of Trials.
FORASMUCH as it has been found very Injurious to the Country, Not above two
Atto^ney'^ to pl^ad in one Cause.
and greatly to retard the Business of the General Court of Trials, etc. in
allowing three or more Attorneys to Speak and Plead on one side, for either
Plaintiff or Defendant.

BE it Enacted by the General A^mbly, and by the Authority of the same it is
Enacted, That no Person or Persons (whether Plaintiff or Defendant) shall have
in any one Cause above two Attorneys or Lawyers, Not above two Attorney'^ ^o
pl^ad in one Cause.
to speak and plead for them in the General Court of Trials, etc. and that one
of said Attorneys or Lawyers, shall be a Freeholder, a Freeman, and an
Inhabitant in this Colony. Any former Usage or Custom to the Contrary hereof in
any wise notwithstanding.

LAWS, Made and Passed by the General Assembly of His Majesty's Colony of
Rhode Island, and Providence-P^antations, Held at Newport by Adjournment, the
Sixteenth D^y of June, 1719.
An Act for regulating Appeals to His Majesty in Council in Great Britain.
WHEREAS many Persons in this Colony appeal Home to His Majesty in Council in
Great Britain, from the Judgments of the Courts within this Colony, in Ca^es of
very small Moment, whereby many Persons of small Substance have been
necessitated to lose their just Rights, for want of ability to defend the same.

For the preventing whereof for the Future.

BE it Enacted by the General Assembly of this Colony, and by the Authority of
the same it is Enacted, That no Person or Persons whosoever, after the Date
hereof, shall have allowed him, None to Appeal to Great Britain, under an
Action of Three Hundred Pound^.
her, or them, any Appeal to His Majesty in Council in Great Britain, for any
Matter or thing whatsover, unless such Matter or thing in Controversy be of the
Value of Three Hundred Pounds, current Money of this Colony, to be Valued by
such Courts where such Appeals shall be prayed. Any Custom or Usage to the
Contrary hereof in any wise notwithstanding.

An Act Enabling the Surveyors of the Highways of the Town of Newport, to
Recover the Charges of Paving before the Land of such in said Town, who live
out of the Government.
WHEREAS Complaint has been made unto this Assembly by the Town of Newport,
that several Persons that have Land in the said Town (which Lands have been
Paved before by the Surveyors of the Highways of the said Town, pursuant to the
Acts of said Town) have lately Removed out of this Government, whereby the
Surveyors of the Highways of said Town cannot Recover of the Owners of said
Lands, the Charges of Paving the ^ame; which unless provided for, will create
great Charge unto said Town, and may possibly hinder the Paving the Streets of
said Town, which is of great Necessity to be done, for the Convenience of the
Inhabitants and Travelers.

BE it therefore Enacted by the General Assembly, and by the Authority of the
same, That whosoever has, or shall have, any Lands in the Body of the Town of
Newport, and it shall be found convenient to Pave before the said Lands, and
the Owner or Owners of such Lands shall not Inhabi^ within this Colony, and do
not within Three Month^ after such Paving shall be done, satisfy and pay for
the same, that then it shall and may be lawful for the Surveyors of the
Highways of the said Town, to apply themselves to any Assistants or Justices of
the Peace of said Town, or any two of them, and give in under Oath, or
Engagement, the Charge of such Paving which shall be Paved as aforesaid: And
such Assistants and Justices are Empowered and Authorized, to grant forth a
Warrant of Distress, to any of the Constables of said Town, to Seize and
Distrain so much of the Goods and Chattels of the Tenant or Tenants of such
Person or Persons, Tenants to pa^ theCharge of Paving L^^d^ in Newport, the
Own^rs of which li^e out of the Government.
within the Town of Newport, as will satisfy and pay the said Charge, and the
other reasonable Charges accruing thereon; which shall be by such Tenant or
Tenants discounted with the Owner or Owners of such Lands, out of the Rents and
Profits of such Lands, by him or them Hired: And if such Owner or Owners shall
refuse so to do, he shall have no Action or Suit of Law for the same. Any Law,
Act, or Usage to the Contrary hereof in any wise notwithstanding.

A LAW, Made and Passed by the General Assembly of His Majesty's Colony of
Rhode Island, and Providence-Plantations, held at Newport, by Adjournment to
the Eighth Day of September, 1719.
An Act for the Establishing of Watches throughout this Colony, both in Time of
War and Peace.
BE it Enacted by the General Assembly, and by the A^thority of the same, Vide
Act, 1742.
That the Town Council of each r^spective Town in this Colony, Be, and they are
hereby fully (...) and Empowered, to appoint, Settle and O der a Military Watch
in Time of War, in their respective Towns, of such Number of Persons as they
think proper for the same. And the Commission Officers of each respective Town,
are h^reby required to observe and see, that the Orders of such Town C^uncil as
aforesaid be duly observed and put in Force.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authorit^ aforesaid That every Person that
shall refuse o^ neglect to Watch, Penalty for Persons neglecting to Watch.
when legally warned thereto, shall pay a Fine of Three Shillings in Money, for
every such Offense, to the Commanding Officer that sets the Watch. VideAct,
1742.
And if he refuse or neglect so to do for the space of five Days, then the
Captain under whose List he shall fall, or in his absence the next Commanding
Officer, shall grant forth a Warrant to Distrain the same, together with the
Reasonable Charges accruing; which Fine so taken, shall be Improved for the
Maintenance and Support of such Military Watch.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That each respective
Town Council in this Colony, Wat^hes in time of Peace
be, and they hereby are fully Empowered to appoint and Settle all Watches in
Time of Peace; and all Persons that shall refuse to do their Duty therein, when
thereunto legally warned, shall be under the like Penalty and Fine as those
that neglect on a Military Watch, Penalty for Neglect.
to be taken and Disposed of in the same Manner, by the Constable under whose
Ward he or they shall be.

LAWS, Made and Passed by the General Assembly of His Majesty's Colony of
Rhode Island, and Provide^ce-P^antations, Held at Warwick, the last Wednesday
of October, 1719.
An Act enabling the Town Councils of each respective Town in the Colony, to
take care to Preserve and Improve the Fishing of the several Rivers in their
resp^ctive Jurisdictions, and to p^event Obstructions being made to hinder the
same.
WHEREAS Complaint has been made to this Assembly, that several Persons within
several Towns of this Colony, have, and do Daily, by Dams, Wairs, and otherways
obstruct and hinder the Passage of the Fish, up the Rivers they have been
acc^stomed to; which is very prejudicial to the Inhabitants of such Towns, and
especially to the Poor of the Neighborhood, who are many Times greatly
relieved thereby.

For the preventing whereof for the future,

BE it Enacted by the General Assembly, and by Authority of the same i^ is
Enacted, That each respective Town Council in this Colony, be, and they hereby
are, Vi^eAct, 17^7-1742
fully Empowered, to take care for the Prese^vation of the Fishery of the
Rivers within their respective Jurisdictions, Town (...) to (...) of (...) of
the Rivers.
and to remove all O^^tructions m^de in any Rivers, that may prejudice the
Inhabi^^n^s, by stopping of Fish from going up the same.

AND it is further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That whoso^ver shall,
from and after the Time of three Months after the P^blication hereof, Pe^a^ty
for (...).
Build or E^ect any Dam or Wair, across, or in any River, or draw any Sein or
Net in the same, in any Town within this Colony, whereby the Fish in their
acc^s^omed Course are hindered from going up the same, without the le^ve of the
Town Council of such Town first had and ob^ain^d: Every Person so offending,
shall forfeit for every such Offense, the Sum of Forty Shillings, to and for
the Use of such Town, upon Conviction thereof before any Assistants or Justices
of the Peace of such Town, or any two of them, to be taken by a W^rrant of
Distress from any one Assistant or Justice of the P^ace, directed to a
Constable of such Town where ^he Offense shall be committed.

An Act for Establishing Vendue Masters throughout this Colony.
BE it Enacted by the General Assmbly, and by the Authority of the some it is
Enacted, That each and every Town within this Colony, Each Tow^ to Ele^t a
Vendue Ma^t^r.
shall annually, at their Election of Town Officers, Elect and choose a Vendue
Master, if they see cause, who shall give to such Town One Thousand Pound Bond,
VideAct, 1741.
with one good Surety, and shall be Engaged as other Town Officers are, to the
Performance of the same, And such Vendue Master so Elected and Engaged as
aforesaid, shall sell all Goods of private Persons, put up at any Vendue or
public Outcry, and shall have Two and a Half per Cent for the same.

Condition^ of Sa^^ to ^e r^ad and complied with.
AND the Vendue Master, before his exposing of any Goods to Sale, shall
publicly Read the Conditions of such Sale: And the Buyers of any Goods and
Merchandise, at any Vendue or public Outcry, VideAct, 1742.
are to comply with the same.

AND if the Buyer of Goods or Merchandise at any Vendue or public Outcry,
shall neglect or refuse to pay for such Goods by them bought, by the Time
limited in the Conditions of the Sale thereof, then it shall and may be Lawful
for the Vendue Master to call a special Court for the same.

VendueMaster to pay the Own^^s of ^oods in Five Days after the Sale.
AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if the Vendue
Master shall Refuse or Neglect to pay the Owner or Owners of such Goods (by him
sold) for the same, by the space of Five Days after the Time limited for the
Payment thereof, that then it shall and may be lawful for the Owner or Owners
of such Goods, to call a special Court, for the Recovery of the same of the
Vendue Master. Any Act or Acts, Clause or Clauses of Acts, to the Contrary
hereof, in any wise notwithstanding.

LAWS, Made and passed by the General Assembly of His Majesty's Colony of
Rhode Island and Providence-Plantations, held at Newport the First Wednesday of
May, 1721.
An Act for the better preventing of Drunkenness.
WHEREAS it does manifestly appear to this Assembly, that many Inhabitants of
this Colony spend much of their Time and Money at Taverns, Alehouses, etc.
which tends not only to the utter Ruin of themselves, but also exposes their
Families to Penury and Misery, and brings considerable Charges upon the Towns
to which they respectively belong.

For the Effectual Preventing whereof for the Future.

BE it Enacted by the General Assembly, and by the Authority of the same it is
Enacted, That it shall and may be in the Power and Authority of the Town
Council of each respective Town within this Colony, upon Complaint unto them
made, Tavern^eepers, etc. pro^^bit^d Selling st^on^ Li^uors to common Tip ^rs.
that any Person or Persons so dwelling within the Limits of such Town, do
practice such evil and vile Course as aforesaid, to order Prohibitions in such
and so many Places within the respective Town to which they belong, Vide Act.
1725* and 1728.
as to them may seem needful, thereby strictly prohibiting all Retailers of
strong Liquors, as well as all others, to sell any Sort of strong Liquors,
directly or indir^ctly, to any such Person or Persons as shall be therein
mentioned.

AND in case any Retailer of strong Drink, or other Person, P^^alties so
off^nding.
shall presume, contrary to this Act, to Sell or Vend any sort of strong Liquor
to any Person or Persons as aforesaid, and shall be duly convicted thereof,
either by their own Confession, or by the Testimony of one or more credible
Witness or Witnesses; such Person or Persons so offending, shall Forfeit to the
Use of the Poor of the Town in which such Offense shall be committed, the Sum
of Twenty Shillings for the first Offense; and for every Offense in said Manner
after, Forty Shillings; to be Tried, Taken and Levied, as other Fines and
Penalties not exceeding Forty Shillings are: And the Person so convicted, shall
pay all reasonable Costs.

An Act for Raising and Emitting Forty Thousand Pounds in Bill^ of Credit, by
Way of Loan, etc.
FORASMUCH as the Silver and Gold formerly passing in this Colony is altogether
exhausted, and the Bills of Credit Emitted by this Colony are not a sufficient
Medium of Exchange; whereb^ the Commerce and Trade of this Government is
exceedingly Obstructed, and the Affairs thereof very much hindered: And also
Fort Ann calls for very speedy and great Reparations, which is impossible to be
done (for want of a M^dium) without the Raising and Emitting such a Sum as
aforesaid:

All which being duly considered,

BE it Enacted by the General Assembly of this Colony, and by the Authority of
the same it is Enacted, That the Sum of Forty Thousand Pounds in Bills of
public Credit, of the same Tenor with those which have already been Emitted by
this Government, For^y Th^usand Pound Emit^ed.
be forthwith Impressed and made, and put into the Hands of Six Trustees in the
Town of N^wport, hereafter named and appointed in this present Act, wi h full
Power to Act therein: Which said Trustees, or any three of them, have hereby
full Power given and granted them, to Sign all the aforesaid Bills, and to
order the making of them, of such Denominations as shall to them seem needful
and nec^ssary for the Uses aforesaid, not to exceed the said Sum of Forty
Thousand Pounds. And the said Trustees may make any further or other device in
the Escutcheons, or on the Body of the Bills, as they shall judge proper to
prevent the Counterfeiting thereof; and are also to provide all Materials for
the same.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That when the said Forty
Thousand Pounds is completely made and finished, then the Bills shall be
delivered by the said Trustees, to the Persons hereafter chosen Committees for
the several Towns in this Colony, the Trustees taking their Receipt for the
same. (...)
And the said Bills shall be Let out by the several Committees, to the
Inhabitants of this Colony, in their respective Tow^s, on Land Securit^, in the
same Way and Manner as the former Bills Let out by this Colony are, Vide Act,
17^^.
both for Interest and Security, and for the Term of Five Years from the
Adjournment of thi^ Assembly, not exceeding Three Hundred Pounds, nor under
Twenty Five Pounds to any one Person.

AND the Committe^s are hereby strictly charged to observe and follow such
Orders and ways in Letting out the same, as by ^n Act of Assembly past in this
Colony, July the Fifth 1715, is orde^ed, for the Letting out of the Thirty
Thousand Pounds then raised.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the aforesaid
Committees of the several Towns, None (...) any of (...) who (...) the (...)
Bills* (...) taken up by othe^^.
shall not Let any of the said Bills of Credit, to any Person or Persons that
hired any of ^he former Bills of public Credit, by the space of three Months:
But if at the end or expiration of three Months after they have received their
Proportion of Bills, there remain any of ^he same in their hands, not hired out
as aforesaid, that th^n the s^id Com^^ttees shall and may hire out the same, to
any Persons in their respective Towns, upon good Security as aforesaid, or
return the some to the Trustees aforesaid, whose Receipt shall be th^i^
Di^charge.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That any Persons
whatsoever, that shall raise and Manufacture any Hemp or Flax within this
Colony, (...) rec^^v'd (...) pay for the (...)
which shall be good and Merchantable, they shall be admitted to pay the same
into the General Treasury of this Colony, (at such Prices as shall from time to
time be set by the General Assembly of this Colony on the same) for the
Interest of the Bills by them hired: And the General Treasurer of this Colony
for the time being, is hereby required to receive the same accordingly; or
otherwise they shall pay the same in Bills of pub^^c^ Credit.

AND the Ce^^ral Treasurer of this Colony for the time being, is hereby
Empowered and Enabled, to Su^ for and Recover the Annual Interest Money, as by
the former Law, past Anno 1715, he is En^bled to do.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Honorable John
Wanton Esquire Deputy Governor of this Colony, Major Nathaniel Coddington, Mr.
Robert Gardner, Capt. Jonathan Nickols, Capt. Edward Thurston, (...)
and Lieutenant Colonel William Coddington, be, and they hereby are, appointed
and chosen to be the Six Trustees; and they, or any three of them, shall Sign
all such Bills as aforesaid. And all the Mortgages shall be made to them, on
the same Conditions as the former were to the former Trustees. And they are
also appointed a Committee for the Town of Newport to hire out their
proportionable part of said Bills.

AND Mr. Andrew Harris, and Capt. Richard Waterman, shall be a Committee to
Execute said Trust for the Town of Providence. Commi^te^'s Na^es for the (...)
Tow^s.
And Mr. Thomas Cornell, and Mr. William Anthony shall bea Committee to Execute
said Trust for the Town of Portsmouth. And Capt. John Waterman, and Mr. John
Wicks, shall be a Committee to Execute the said Trust for the Town of Warwick.
And Capt. Joseph Stanton and Mr. John Hill, shall be a Commi^^ee to Execute
said Trust for the Town of Westerly. and Captain Simon Ray, and Mr. Thomas
Mitchel, shall be a Committee to Execute said Trust for the Town of
New-Shoreham. And Mr. Stephen Haszard, and and Mr. Ierem^ah Gould, shall be a
Committee to Execute said Trust for the To^^ of Kingstown. And Mr. Thomas
Spencer, and Mr. Pardon Tillinghast, shall he a Committee to Execute said Trust
for the Town of East Greenwich. And Mr. John Hull, and Capt. Niholas Carr,
shall be a Committee to Execute said Trust for the Town of Iames-Town.

AND it is further Enacted, That all the aforesaid Committees shall be under
Oath, Trustee's and Committe^'s Allowance.
or Engagement, for the true and faithful Performance of the Trust reposed in
them, and shall be allowed for their Service therein, the Sum of Fifteen
Shillings for every Hundred Pounds by them Let, out of the General Treasury, to
be divided among them as follows, viz. To the Six Trustees, for their Service
in Signing the said Bills, etc. two thirds of the whole Amount together with a
proportionable part with the other Committees, according to the Sum or Sums Let
out for the Town of Newport's Proportion. And shall pay the Remainder to the
Committees of the several Towns, in proportion to such Bills as shall be by
them Let out.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the one Moiety, or
half part of the Interest, that shall accrue on the Letting out the aforesaid
Sum of Forty Thousand Pounds, Half the Interest to be delive^'d to the
respective Towns, acording to their proportion of Rates.
shall be by the General Treasurer of this Colony, delivered to the Treasurers
of the respective Towns in this Colony, according to their Proportion of Rates,
as now by the Law they stand stated, for such Towns to Improve as they shall
think needful, in the management of their prudential Affairs.

An Act for stating the Salary of Assistants, and Wages of the Deputies.
BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly of this Colony, and by the Authority of
the same it is Enacted, Assistants allowed Ten Pounds p^r Annum.
That the Assistants of this Colony for the time being shall each of them have
Ten Pounds per Annum, paid out of the General Treasury of this Colony for their
Service.

AND the Deputies convened in General Assembly, And Deputies Six Shillings per
Diem.
shall for every Days Service in the public Affairs, in attending in the
General Assembly, during the Session or Sessions thereof, have Six Shillings
per Diem each, for such Service, to be paid by each respective Town, as
formerly, when they had but Three Shillings per Diem allowed them.

LAWS, Mad^ and Passed by the General Assembly of His Majesty's Colony of
Rhode Island, and Providence-Plantations, held at Wa^wick the last Wednesday of
October, 1721.
An Act to redress Misimployment of Lands Goods and Stocks of Money, heretofore
given to certain Charitable Uses.
FOR AS MUCH as certain Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, and the Profits of
the same, and also Stocks of Money, Cha^tles, and the profits thereof, have
heretofore been given, limited, appointed and assined by several well disposed
Persons, to and for the Relief of the Poor, and bringing up of Children to
Learnin^; which Lands, Tenements, Hereditraments, Rents and Profits of the
sam^, and also Goods, Chattels, and Stocks of Money, and the Profits thereof,
nevertheless have not been employed according to the charitable Intent of the
givers and founders thereof, by Reason of Frauds, Breaches of Trust, and
Negligence in those that should Pay, D^liver, Improve the same for the Uses
designed.

For Re^ress and Remedy whereof,

BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly of this Colony, and by the Authority of
the same it is Enacted, That it shall and may be Lawful to and for each
respective Town Council within thi^ Colony, as need shall Require, within their
respective Jurisdictions, ^o enquire, as well by the Oaths of Twelve Law-Men,
or mo^e, of such Town, as by all other good and Lawful ways and means, of all
and singular such Gifts Limitations, Assignments and Appointments afores^id;
and of the abuses and breaches of Trust, Negligence, Misimployments, not
Employing, Concealing, Defrauding and Misconverting or Misgovernment of any
Lands, Town Co ncils impowe^'d to ^nquireinto the Improv^ment of and, etc.
given for ^haritable (...).
Tenements, Hereditaments, Rents, Profits, Goods, Chattels and Stocks of Money,
and the Profits thereof, heretofore Given, Limited, Appointed, or Assigned, to
and for any of the Charitable and Godly Uses aforesaid, Yearly, or as often as
to them shall appear requisite and needful.

AND after the Town Council (upon calling the Parties entrusted with any such
Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments, and the Rents and Profits thereof, or with any
such Goods, Chattels, or Stocks Money) shall make Enquiry by the Oaths of
Twelve good and lawful Men of the said Township (whereunto the said Parties
entrusted shall and may have and take their lawful Challenge or Challenges)
they are hereby Empowered, upon such Enquiry, Town Councils O^d rs to stand
good until altered by the Governor and General Council.
Hearing and Examination thereof, to set down such Orders, Judgments, and
Decrees, that the said Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments, Rents, Goods, Chattels,
Stocks, of Money, and the Profits thereof, may be duly and faithfully employed,
to and for the Charitable Uses and Intent of the Donors, and Founders thereof:
Which Orders, Judgments and Decrees, not being contrary or repugnant to the
Orders, Statutes and Decrees of the Donors or Founders, shall by the Authority
of this present Assembly, stand firm and good, according to the Tenor and
Purport thereof; And shall be Executed by the Sheriff of this Colony for the
time being accordingly, until the same be altered or undone by the Governor
and General Council of this Colony for the time being, upon Complaint by any
Party agrieved made unto them.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That upon the finding
any such breach of Trust, Negligence, Misimployment, Mismanagement, or Under
renting any such Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments, Rents, Profits Goods,
Chattels, or Stocks of Money, Judgments and Executions shall be given forth by
the said Town Council, against the Misimployers, Mismanagers and Misimprovers
of the same: And the same shall be Levied out of their Estates: And for want of
sufficient Estate of theirs to be found, to satisfy and pay the same, they
shall be committed to His Majesty'sGoal, until the same be satisfied and paid,
and a just Distribution thereof be made, according to the true Intent and
Meaning of the Donors or Founders.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That it shall and may be
Lawful, to and for and Person or Persons agrieved at any Sentence, Order,
Judgment or Decree of any Town Council, in any of the Cases aforesaid, to
Appeal from such Sentence, Order, Judgment or Decree, unto the Governor and
Council of this Colony for the time being, as in other Cases is usually
allowed; who are hereby empowered to Alter, Mitigate, R^verse, or Confirm such
Sentence, Order, or Judgment of such Town Council, Persons agrieved to App^al
to the Gov^^n^ur and Council.
and to give a new and final Judgment and Determination in said Case, as they
shall think f^^ and agreeable to Equity and good Conscience, according to the
true Intent and Meaning of the Donors or Fou^^ers thereof, and shall Tax and
award good Costs of Suit, by their Directions, against such Persons as they
shall find to Complain unto them, without sufficient cause, of the Orders,
Judgments and Decrees aforementioned.

PROVIDED always, That the Party or Parties desiring an A^^^al from such Town
Council, to the Governor and General Co^^cil of this Colony, do the same Day
such Order, B^^d to be given to (...) the Appeal.
Sentence, Judgment or Decree is given, request that such his or their Desire
be entered in the Records of said Court, and within ten Days after Judgment give
sufficient Bond to the Clerk of said Council for the Time being, with
sufficient Sureties to prosecute his, her or their Appeal with Effect, and to
stand and abide such final Judgment as shall afterward be given in said Cause;
or otherwise such Person or Persons shall lose his, her or their Advantage of
Appeal as aforesaid.

AND in the mean Time such Sentence, Order, Judgment or Decree of such Town
Council shall be suspended, And in the mean Time the Town Council's Order to be
suspended.
and Execution stopped thereupon: Any thing in this Act before contained to the
Contrary hereof in any wise notwithstanding.

LAWS, Made and past by the General Assembly of His Majesty's Colony of
Rhode Island and Providence-Plantations Held at Newport, the First Wednesday of
May, 1722.
An Act for Settling a Salary upon the Deputy Governor of the Colony for the
Time being.
BE it Enacted by the General ^ssembly, and by the Authority thereof, Deputy
Govern^ur to have Th^rty Pounds per Annum.
That the Deputy Governor of this Colony for the Time being, be allowed Thirty
Pounds per Annum, as a Salary for his said Office, out of the General Treasury
of this Colony.

An Act for the Dividing of the Town of Kingstown into two Towns, by the Names
of North and South Kingstone.
FORASMUCH as the Town of Kingstown is very large and full of People, so that
it is found convenient for the ease of the Inhabitants, and Dispatch of
Business to divide the same into two parts, and make two Towns thereof.

Kingstown div^^ed.
BE IT THEREFORE Enacted by the Authority of this Assembly, That the Town of
Kingstown be Divided and made into two Towns, by the Names of North and South
Kingstown; and than each of them have one Assistant, and the like Privileges
as other Towns in this Colony have and do enjoy.

A LAW, Made and past by the General Assembly of His Majesty's Colony of
Rhode Island and Providence-Plantations Held at Newport, the Last Tuesday of
August, 1722.
An Act in Addition to an Act, Entitled, An Act for preventing Damage to be
done by Firing the Woods in any Town of this Colony.
FORASMUCH as the Penalty in said Act for those that are found guilty of Firing
the Woods, is found to be so small, that many Persons Fire the same
notwithstanding; whereby great Damage is yearly done to wany Persons.

For the preventing whereof for the Future,

BE it Enacted by the General Assembly of this Colony, and by the Authority of
the same it is Enacted, That whosoever shall be convicted of Firing the Woods,
V^deAct. 17^4. Persons Firing the Woods to forf^it T^n Pounds.
contrary to the aforesaid Act, shall forfeit Ten Pounds for every such
Offense, to and for the Use of such Town where such Offense shall be committed,
to be recovered at the General Court of Trials, by Bill, Plaint or Information,
by the Attorney General, together with the Incident Charges accruing thereon:
Or be Imprisoned or Whip^.
And if such Persons as shall be convicted as aforesaid, shall have no Personal
Estate to satisfy and pay the same, that then such Persons shall be Imprisoned
for such Offense, at the Discretion of the Judges of such Court, not exceeding
three Months, or be Whipped not exceeding Thirty Nine Stripes: Any Law, Custom or
Usage to the Contrary hereof in any wise notwithstanding.

A LAW, Made and passed by the General Assembly of His Majesty's Colony of
Rhode Island, and Providence Plantations, Held at Ne^por^ by Adjournment, the
Eighteenth Day of June, 1723.
An Act for preventing the Purloining of Fish caught in any Pots, Wai^^, N^ts,
etc.
BE it Enacted by the General Assembly, and by the Authority ther^^f, That if
any Person or Persons shall be found Robbing or Drawing any Fish Pots, W^irs or
Nets, No Person to draw any Fish Pots, etc under the Penalt^ of Forty Shillings.
witin this Government, they shall be liable to be Sued by the Owner or Owners
of such Pots, Wairs or Nets; and upon due Proof thereof, shall pay to the
Owners of such Pots, Wairs or Nets, the Sum of Forty Shillings, to be Recovered
before any two Assistants, Justices of the Peace, or Wardens of each respective
Town within this Colony.

A LAW, Made and passed by the General Assembly of His Majesty's Colony of
Rhode Island and Providence-Plantations, Held at Newport, the Third Tuesday of
February, 1723:
An Act for the speedy Recovery of Costs, in all Cases discontinued.
BE it Enacted by the General Assembly, and by the Authority thereof,
Defendants to have Costs taxed.
that in all Cases where any Person or Persons shall be Arrested, and the
Plaintiff enters a Declaration, and after withdraws or discontinues his Action,
the Defendant or Defendants shall have their Costs taxed, at such Court to
which they were to appear by their being Arrested.

A LAW, Made and passed by the General Assembly of His Majesty's Colony of
Rhode Island, and Providence-Plantations, held at Newport the Twenty Third Day
of June, 1724.
An Act in Explanation of an Act, Entitled, An Act to prevent Indians being
Sued for Debt.
WHEREAS the Act of Assembly made and passed May the 7th, 1718, whereby Indians
are exempted from being Sued for Debt, has been misconstrued, and extended to
the exemption of all Indians from any Manner of Action or Suit, to the great
Damage of sundry Persons dealing with them.

BE it therefore Enacted by the General Assembly of this Colony, and by the
Authority of the same, That the aforesaid Act of Assembly, in that particular
Clause relating to Actions of Debt, Ninigr^^ and his Family only exempted from
being Sued.
shall hereafter be construed to extend to the present Family of Ninigret, the
late Indian Sachem, deceased, and to those that shall be of his Race, and to no
other Indian whatsoever; and that all other Indians (excepting for strong
Liquors and Tavern scores) shall and may be subject to Actions of Debt, and all
other Actions in the same Manner as other Subjects are: Any Law, Usage or
Custom to the Contrary, in any wise notwithstanding.

A LAW, Made and passed by the General Assembly of His Majesty's Colony of
Rhode Island and Providence-Plantations, Held at Providence, the last Wednesday
of October, 1724.
An Act for Prohibiting the Tearing the Bills of Credit.
WHEREAS the Custom of tearing of the Bills of Credit, and passing them in
Halves and Quarters, has been of late introduced in this Colony, and much
practiced, which if not timely prevented, will be great Damage to the Public,
by abating the Credit of said Bills, as well as by putting the Colony to
unnecessary Charges in Re-printing the same.

BE it therefore Enacted by the General Assembly of this Colony, and by the
Authority of the same it is Enacted, That no Person within this Government,
upon any pretense whatsoever, (from and after the first Day of January next
ensuing) shall Tear, Utter, or Pa^s away any Bill so Torn, or any Bill patched
up and compiled of more than one sort, None to tear any B^lls, on the Penalty
of Ten Shillings.
be the same of either of the Governments of New England, knowing the same to
be Torn, patched up, or compiled as aforesaid, (excepting our own Bill^ to be
changed in the General Treasury) upon the Penalty of Forfeiting the Sum of Ten
Shillings for every such Offense, to be Recovered by any Assistant or Justice
of the Peace within this Government, upon Information and Proof, or upon his or
their own Knowledge: Any Law, Usage or Custom, to the Contrary hereof, in any
wise notwithstanding.

A LAW, Made and passed by the General Assembly of His Majesty's Colony of
Rhode Island and Providence-Plantations, Held at Newport, the Twenty Ninth Day
of December, 1724.
An Act for Impowering the Town Council to secure the Personal Estate of
deceased Persons.
BE it Enacted by the General Assembly, and by the Authority of the same it is
Enacted, That from and after the Publication of this Act, all Persons within
this Colony, Personal Estate of the Dec^a^^d to be produced.
that shall have the Possession of any of the Personal Estate of any Person
that shall Decease, shall make Oath, or give their solemn Engagement, before
the Town Council of such Town where any Inventory of the Personal Estate of
such deceased Person shall be Exhibited, that they show all the Personal Estate
they have in their Custody or Possession belonging to such deceased Person.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Person or
Persons shall Refuse or Neglect to make Oath as aforesaid, before the Town
Council, on legal warning had, he, or they shall be by such Town Council
committed to his Majesty's Goal, until Oath be made as aforesaid.

A LAW, Made and passed by the General Assembly of His Majesty's Colony of
Rhode Island, and Providence-Plantations, held at Newport the Third Tuesday of
June, 1725.
An Act for Enabling the Town of Providence to lay out Highways in said Town.
FORASMUCH as laying out of Highways in the Town of Providence, according as it
has been practiced of late, puts the Town to ex^^ssive and needless Charge.

For Remedy whereof,

IT is Enacted by the General Assembly of this Colony, and by the Authority of
the same, That it shall and may be Lawful for the Town Council of Providence,
to Nominate and Appoint three Indifferent Men, (not Interested or concerned in
any such Land, where such Highways are to be run) with one Justice of the
Peace, Indifferent Person^ to be chos^n to lay out Highways. VideAct, 17^1.
and a Constable, or Town Sergeant of said Town, as need shall require, and to
agree with the Owner or Owners, Proprietor or Proprietors of such Lands, that
such Highways so laid out shall go through; and if they cannot agree in the
Value of the same, then the Town Council of Providence for the Time being,
shall set a P^ice upon such Land so taken off by said Highway, and the Damage
that the said Way does in cutting said Land, which Sum shall be paid out of the
Town Treasury of said Town, with all Charges that shall accrue in laying out
said W^y.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Person or
Person shall be agrieved at the Proceedings aforesaid, Persons a^^ieved to have
the Way relay d by a Jury.
then an^ in such Case, the Person or Persons so agrieved, shall and may have
Liberty to have the said Way relayed by a Jury according to the present Law of
this Colony.

PROVIDED, That such Person or Persons will be at the Charge of the Jury,
Provis^
and also pay all other Charges that shall accrue by relaying the said Way, if
the I^^y shall not alter the same: But if the said Way be altered, the Charge
to be paid out of the Town Treasury. And the other Way that was before laid
out, as abovesaid, shall ^eturn to the Owner or Owners thereof again.

ALWAYS provided, That the Land where the Way goes, shall be paid for out of
the Town Treasury. (...)


AND in case the Person or Persons that shall be agrieved by the laying ou^ of
the Way through hi^ or their Land, (...)
shall not make his or their Complaint thereof at the next succeeding Town
Council, after such Way i^ laid out, that then he ^r they shall be for ever
after excluded and barred from having the sai^ Way relayed out by a Iu^y: Any
other Law, Custom (...) Usage, to the Contrary hereof, in any wise
notwithstanding.

An Act for d^^^ing and ^^tting of Estates Tail, pursuant to the L^w of
Great-Brita^n.
(...)


A LAW, Made and passed by the General Assembly of His Majesty's Colony* of
Rhode Island, and Providence Plantations, Held at Warwick, the last Wednesday
of October, 1725.
An Act in Addition to an Act, Entitled, An Act for the better preventing of
Drunkenness.
WHEREAS there was an Act of Assembly past in this Colony, the First Wednesday
of May, A. D. 1721, Entitled, An Act for the better preventing of Drunkenness;
wherein amongst other Things it is Enacted, That if any Person be by the Town
Council posted as a common Drunkard, all Persons of said Town are strictly
prohibited from selling or sending to such Persons so posted, any sort of
strong Liquors whatsoever, upon such Penalties and Pains as in the said Act is
mentioned; and several Persons so posted, going into the Neighboring Towns,
there consume and waste their substance, and impoverish their Families; whereby
the Force and Intent of the aforesaid Act is defeated.

Whereupon, and for Remedy thereof,

IT is Enacted by this General Assembly, That the Town Council of each and
(...) Town within this Colony, after they have Posted any Person as a common
Drunkard, may Notify the Town Council of their Neighboring Towns of the same;
who upon such Notifications, Common Drunkards to b^ Po^ted in their
Neighbo^ring Towns
are to Post the same in some convenient Place or Places in the Town: Whereupon
the Inhabitants of such Town, shall be restrained from Selling or Vending to
such Person so Posted, any strong Liquors of any sort whatsoever, as much as
the Inhabitants of such Town are, where such posted Persons live. And if any
Person shall presume to do contrary hereunto, such Person so doing, upon
conviction thereof, shall suffer such Penalties and Pains, as in the aforesaid
Act is set upon such Offender or Offenders, and to be Recovered in the like
Manner.

A LAW, Made and passed by the General Assembly of His Majesty's Colony of
Rhode Island and Providence-Plantations Held at Newport, the Tenth Day of
January, 1725.
An Act in Addition to an Act, made and passed in the Eighteenth Year of King
Charles the Second, Entitled, An Act for the regulating of Fences throughout
this Colony.
What Stone-Wall Fence shall b^ accounted Law^
BE it therefore Enacted by the General Assembly of this Colony, and by the
Authority of the same, That a Lawful Stone-Wall Fence shall be four Foot high,
with a flat Stone hanging over on the Top thereof, or a good Pole or Rail
thereupon, well Staked, or well secured with Crotches or Posts, or a Stone Wall
four Foot and a half high, without a Pole, Rail, or flat Stone on the Top, and
no other: And that all Stone Walls so built and kept, shall be deemed a
sufficient Fence against all Creatures whatsoever.

A LAW, Made and passed by the General Assembly of His Majesty's Colony of
Rhode Island, and Providence Plantations, Held at Newport, the Third Day of
May, 1726.
An Act for the Regul^ting of Millers in their taking of Toll.
WHEREAS there is no particular Law of this Colony, for the R^gulating of
Millers in their taking Toll out of the Corn or Grain by them Ground; whereby
poor People often times suffer, by having exorbitant Toll taken from them.

For Remedy whereof,

BE it Enacted by the General Assembly, and by the Authority of the same it is
Enacted, That from and after the Publication hereof, no Miller, or Person
taking Corn or Grain to Grind, shall upon any pretense whatsoever, take more
Toll for the Grinding of the same, than a Sixteenth part, No more Toll to be
taken than a Sixteenth Part, on the Penalty of Twenty Shilling.
or two Quarts for grinding of a Bushel, and so proportionably for a greater or
lesser Quantity, upon the Penalty of Forfeiting a Fine of Twenty Shillings for
each Offense, the one half thereof to the Informer, and the other half for the
Use of the Town where such Offense shall be committed; the Offender to be Tried
before any one Assistant, or Justice of the Peace of such Town where such
Offense shall be committed: And the Party Offending, U^less by contract with
any Town on P^r^
shall be liable to pay the Party agrieved his Lawful Damages. Excepting where
any Mi ler, or Person Erecting a Mill, shall for some Reason make a particular
Contract with any Town or Person, for greater Toll; then such Miller, or Person
tending such Mill, shall not be Liable to such Penalty, except he or they
exceed the Toll contracted for.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all Millers, and
Persons tending Mills, Grain to be ground for each Person in t^eir Tur^.
shall make good Meal according to custom, and grind for each Person bringing
Corn or Grain to be ground, in their turn, without Distinction, upon the
Pen^lty abovesaid, to be recovered in Manner abovesaid, and applied one h^lf to
the Informer, and the other half to and for the Use of the Town where such
Offense shall be committed.

LAWS, Made and passed by the General Assembly of His Majesty's Colony of
Rhode Island, and Providence-Plantations, Held at Newport by Adjournment, the
Fourteenth Day of June, 1726.
An Act for calling in the Five Pound and Forty Shilling Bills, Emitted in the
Years 1715 and 1721.
WHEREAS it appears, that some Persons have Counterfeited the Bills of public
Credit emitted by this Colony, and particularly the Five Pound Bills and the
Forty Shilling Bills, of the new Impressions of this Colony, emitted in the
Year, 1715, and in the Year, 1721, in Imitation whereof, those wic^ed Persons
have Engraved a Plate, and uttered some Forged Bills stamped therefrom; the
Consequence whereof, may prove very Injurious to the Currency of said Bills.

BE it therefore Enacted by the General Assembly of this Colony, and by the
Authority thereof it is Enacted, That the aforesaid Five Pound and Forty
Shilling Bills, Five Pound and Forty Shilling Bills called in b^ the First of
May, 1727.
Impressed from the aforesaid Plates, in the Years 1715 and 1721, by this
Government, be called in, and returned into the General Treasury of the Colony,
by the First of May next ensuing, which will be in the Year of our Lord, 1727.

AND from and after the First Day of May next, the Currency of the said Five
Pound and Forty Shilling Bills shall be stopped; And ^orbidden to pass after
that time.
and they shall thereafter for ever be rendered insufficient to pass from Man to
Man, as Money, as they have been hitherto Authorized and Received to pass.

AND all such Bill^ of the aforesaid Impression of Fi^e Pounds and Forty
Shillings, The true Bills to be c^anged.
that are returned into the General Treasury aforesaid, that are Genuine and
not Forged, shall be changed; and the Persons bringing them shall have other
Bills equivalent, in Lieu thereof.

An Act for the Limitation of personal Actions, as they are Limited to be
brought within a certain Term of Years, in the Statute of the 21st Year of King
James the First, and Chapter the 16th; and for putting the Statute in full
Force, and Limitting said Action^ in this Colony.
BE it Enacted by the General Assembly of this Colony, and by the Authority of
the same it is Enacted, That from and after the End and Time of Six Months
after the Adjournment of this Assembly, the aforesaid Statute of Limitation,
made in the Twenty first Year of King James the First, and Chapter the
Sixteenth, Statute of ^^mi^ation in ^orce in t^is C^lony.
for the Barring of all Actions of the Case, Trespass, Detin^e, etc. a^ in the
said Statute is expressly mentioned, after such Times as are therein Limited,
shall be in ^ull Force, Strength and Authority in t^is Colony, to Bar all such
Actions of the Case, Trespass, Detinue, etc. as fully and amply, as they are in
and by the said Statute Barred: Any Act, Custom or Use, to the Contrary hereof,
in any wise notwithstanding.

A LAW, Made and passed by the General Assembly of His Majesty's Colony of
Rhode Island, and Providence-Plantations, held at Newport the Thirteenth Day of
June, 1727.
An Act for Repealing an Act, made and passed in the 21st Year of King Charles
the Second, Entitled, An Act directing what Bonds the Sheriff shall take, of
Persons Arrested in Civil Actions.
WHEREAS the Act of the General Assembly of this Colony, directing what Bonds
the Sheriff shall take in Civil Actions, Dated the 21st of King Charles the
Second, has by Experience proved very hurtful and prejudicial to sundry People,
by evil minded Persons running themselves in Debt, and sheltering themselves
under a small Freehold.

BE it therefore Enacted by the General Assembly of this Colony, and by the
Authority thereof it is Enacted, That the aforesaid Act be Repealed, and
rendered Null and Void; Sufficient Bond to b^ taken.
and that the Sheriff and his Deputies, in taking Bonds as aforesaid, be
governed and Act pursuant to the Law of England, by taking good and sufficient
Security: Any Law, Custom or Usage, to the Contrary hereof, notwithstanding.

LAWS, Made and passed by the General Assembly of His Majesty's Colony of
Rhode Island and Providence-Plantations, Held at Warwick, the last Wednesday of
October, 1727.
An Act in Addition to an Act, for Recording Marriages, Births and Burials.
WHEREAS there is an Act of the General Assembly of this Colony, made in the
Year 1701, Requiring all Marriages, Births and Burials, to be Recorded in
Manner as is therein expressed, and upon the Pains and Penalties therein
contained, which has proved ineffectual hitherto, to compel Persons to Register
their Marriages, and the Births and Deaths of their Children and near
Relations, by Reason the Town Treasurer, who is not the Recorder of such
Marriages, Births and Burials, was Empowered to Sue for the same.

For remedying whereof for the Future,

BE it Enacted by the General Assembly of this Colony, and by the Authority of
the same it is Enacted, That the Town Clerk of each respective Town in this
Colony, be, and he is hereby Authorized and Empowered, to Sue for and Recover
of all and every Person or Persons, Town Clerk to Su^ for Penalty for
neglecting to Re^ister Marriages.
that shall refuse or neglect to Register his or their Marriage or Marriages,
or the Birth or Death of his or their Children, as by the aforesaid Act is
enjoined, (...) on the same Penalties, the one Moiety to be to and for the To^n
Clerk if he Sues for the same, and the other Moiety to and for the Use of the
Town, to be Recovered before any Justice of the Peace, Warden, etc.

An Act for Enlarging a Trooper's Fine, from Five Shillings for a Days
Nonappearance, to Ten Shillings.
BE it Enacted by the General Assembly of this Colony, Fi^h Tro^per to pa^ Ten
Sh^lling^ for Non-^pp^a^^
and by the Authority of the same it is Enacted, That every inlisted Trooper,
belonging to any Troop of Horse in this Colony, who shall be legally Cited or
Notified to meet and Troop, upon any Day or Days, as by Law is required, and
shall refuse or neglect to give his Appearance at the Time and place appointed,
shall for every Days defect in not appearing, Forfeit and Pay a Fine of Ten
Shillings, to be taken and dispos^d of as by the former Law of this Colony is
Directed and Ordered.

An Act in Addition to an Act, made in the Sixteenth Year of the Reign of King
Charles the Second, Entitled, An Act for the ^reventing Illegal and
Clandestine Purchases of the Native Indians in this Colony.
WHEREAS in the aforesaid Act it is Enacted, That no Person or Persons
whatsoever, shall purchase any Lands or Islands in this Colony, of or from the
native Indians within the same, but only those who are so allowed to do by the
General Assembly, upon Penalty of Forfeiting all such Lands or Islands, etc. to
this Colony, etc. And on such other Penalties as in said Act is expressed; and
no regard is had in the said Act to prevent taking of Leases of the native
Indians, or to prevent any other Way of Granting Lands.

BE it therefore Enacted by the General Assembly of this Colony, and by the
Authority of the same it is Enacted, That from and after the Publication of
this Act, No Lease^, etc. to be taken of the Native Indians, without the Assent
of the Assembly.
no Person or Persons whatsoever, shall take or receive any Deed of Gift,
Grant, Conveyance, Assurance, or Mortgage of any Lands whatsoever, of or from
any Indian or Indians, Natives of this Colony, or any Lease or Leases, of, for,
or concerning any Land, etc. without the Assent of the General Assembly of this
Colony first had and obtained. And any Person doing contrary hereunto, shall
Forfeit all such Lands, etc. so given, granted, conveyed, or assured, and all
their Rights in Lands so Leased, to the Colony, for and toward the Support
thereof: And any such Person or Persons offending herein, shall pay a Fine to
the Colony, to and for the Support thereof, not exceeding One Hundred Pounds,
to be Recovered by the Attorney General for the Time being, in any Court of
Record within the Colony, by Bill, Plaint or Information, where no Assoign,
Protection, or Wager of Law shall be allowed.

LAWS, Made and passed by the General Assembly of His Majesty's Colony of
Rhode Island, and Providence-Plantations, Held at Newport, the last Tuesday of
February, 1727.
Continued 1731 and 173^, and r^pea^^^ 1741.
An Act for the Encouragement of Raising and well Manufacturing of Hemp in this
Colony.
An Act Enabling the Town Council of each respective Town in this Colony, to
receive or reject any Persons from being Inhabitants in the same.
WHEREAS it happens oftentimes that diverse Vagrant and Indigent Persons, as
well as others, get into the several and respective Towns within this Colony,
and are by some of the Inhabitants thereof, (to the great prejudice of others)
entertained and sheltered some considerable Time, before the Town Councils have
any Knowledge thereof; and oftentimes by their cunning Insinuations, so far
prevail upon some of the Inhabitants (who are of flexible Disposition) as to
tender Bonds for them, to the Town Council of the respective Town in which they
are. And forasmuch as there is no Law in this Colony, which enables the
respective Town Councils to send such Persons as aforesaid out of the several
Towns, after sufficient Bond to endemnify such Town from Charge is tendered; yet
nevertheless, such profligate Persons, by their corrupt Morals, two often prove
pernicious to Towns, in Debauching of Youth, and enticing of Servants to Pilfer
and Steal from their Masters, etc.

For Remedy whereof,

IT IS ENACTED by this present Assembly, and by the Authority thereof, That the
Town Councils of each of the Towns within this Colony, Town Council to allow or
disallow of Bonds ^ender'd.
be, and they are hereby fully Empowered, upon the Tender of such Bond as
aforesaid, for any Stranger that comes into any Town in this Colony, at their
Discretion, to allow or disallow thereof, the Tender of such Bond
notwithstanding.

AND it is further Ordered and Enacted, That all Foreigners and Strangers,
Strangers to inform the Town Council of their Arrival.
that hereafter shall come into any Town within this Colony, with an Intent
therein to settle, or to con^inue any considerable Time, shall within one
Month's Time after his or her so coming into such Town, apply themselves to the
Town Council ^hereof, and inform them of their Intention; and upon any such
Person or Persons neglecting to inform the Town Council as ^fores^id, it shall
be lawful for any Assistant, Vide Act, 1737
Justice or Warden of the same Town, upon Information thereof given him, by hi
Warr^n o the Constable or Town Sergeant, forthwith to convey such P son or
Persons out of said Town.

AND it is further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, Tha^ in c^se any
Tavern-keeper, Inholder, Victualler, Tavern-keepers, etc. to give Notice of
Strangers entertained by them.
or other Person whatsoever, inh^^iting in any Town, within this Colony, shall
en^ertain any Family coming out of any other Government, or any other Parts,
for more than one whole Week, without giving Notice thereof to an Assistant,
Justice of the Peace, or Warden of the same Town, that then such Tavern-keeper,
Inholder or Vic^^^ller, or any other Person or Persons whatsoever so offending,
sh ll pay a Fine not exceeding Forty Shillings for every such Off^n^e, to be
recovered by the Town Treasurer of each respective Town, before two
Magistrates, or Justices, or Wardens, to and for the Use of such Town.

AND if any Person shall be sent out of any Town, and disall^wed to be an
Inhabitant thereof, Punishment for Persons sent out of any Town, and returning.
and shall return again without the L^^ve of the Town Council of such Town,
they shall suffer co po^^ Punishment, by being whipped (not exceeding Thirty Nine
(...)) or be fined, not exceeding Forty Shillings, at the Town Council's
Discretion.

LAWS, Made and passed by the General Assembly of His Majesty's Colony of
Rhode Island and Providence-Plantations, Held at Newport, the first Wednesday
of May, 1728.
An Act for Impressing and Emitting of Forty Thousand Pounds in Bills of Credit
on this Colony, by Way of Loan.
WHEREAS an Act of the General Assembly of this Colony, made the 29 th Day of
December, 1724, in Addition to two Acts made and past in said Colony, in the
Year 1715, Orders and directs the Forty Thousand Pounds, being the first Bank
^mitted in this Government, to be called in out of the Hands of those Persons
entrusted therewith, and let out again to other Persons not having before had
Money upon Loan, in manner as in and by said Act is expressed: Which Affair
having been duly weighed and maturely considered, and it appearing, that the
Ends and Purposes for which said Bank was first emitted, were fulfilled and
accomplished, and that therefore it is most Consonant to Justice, and most
agreeable to the Honor and Integrity of the Government, not to keep out said
Bank longer than Necessity required, or to the Prejudice of said Currency.

IT being also in like manner considered, that the Persons who took said Money
upon Loan, have been very punctual and exact in the Payment of the Interest
thereof, for the carrying on those wise Ends and Purposes for which the same
was emitted; and that sundry of them by paying Interest as aforesaid, have been
so exhausted in their Stock, that for the Government to exact the Payment in of
said Bank in complete Sums at one time, as the same was emitted, would
inevitabl^ tend to the Ruin and Destruction of many Families, good Subjects of
the King: And the General Assembly aforesaid, having a due Regard to the
aforesaid Inhabitants of the Government, involved as aforesaid, as well as to
the public Fund of the Colony, and judging it an Infringement upon the
Liberties and Privileges of the English Subjects, to enrich the one at the
immediate Ruin of the other,

DO ORDER and Direct, The Calling-in and Sinking said old Forty Thousand Pound
Bank, in and by the following Manner and Means.

AND it is therefore Enacted, That the aforesaid Act, made the 29th Day of
December, 1724, for continuing out the said Forty Thousand Pounds, be, and it
is hereby Repealed, made Null and Void, to all Intents and Purposes whatsoever.

AND be it further Enacted by the General Assembly, and by the Authority
thereof it is hereby Enacted, FortyThousand Pounds (...) the Year 17^5,
co^^inu^d (...) Y^ars.
That the Forty Thousand Pound Bank, emitted in the Year 1715, by two Acts of
Assembly, one entitled, An Act for raising and emitting Thirty Thousand Pounds;
and the other entitled, An Act for raising and emitting Ten Thousand Pounds,
be, and it is hereby continued upon Interest, on the same Terms as first Let,
for three Years after the Expiration of each particular Mortgage given for the
same; and at the End and Expiration of which time,

IT is hereby Enacted and Declared, That the same shall no longer be continued
upon Loan, but shall be paid into the Grand Committee, or Colony Trustees, in
the Term and Space of ten Years, commencing as aforesaid, to be consumed in the
Presence of the General Assembly, in the following Manner, that is, one tenth
P^rt thereof annually, by each particular Person who hired the same, according
to the Sum contained in the respective Mortgages by them given.

AND for the facilitating and making said Payments more regular and free from
Error,

IT is further Enacted, That each Person having of said Money as a^^res^^,
shall give ten distinct Bonds to the Grand Committee, T^n distinct B^nds to be
^iv^n.
or other Committees in their Names, for the Sum contained in their r^^^^ctive
Mortgage; VideAct 173^
each Bond to contain one tenth Part of the S m contained in the Mortgage, and
one of said tenth Parts to be (...) annually, for ten Years, commencing as
aforesaid, until (...) w^ole of the said Bank be paid: And in and upon any
Pers^n^ discharging and taking up any of said Bonds, the Sum or Sums by him or
them paid, shall by one or more of said Grand (...), be endorsed upon the back
of such Person's Mortgage, Sums paid to be endorsed.
until the whole be paid; and when the same shall be effected, by a (...)
Payment of the whole Sum, then every such Mortgage Deed shall be discharged, by
an Entry to be made in the M^^gin of ^he Record, where such Mortgage Deed is
registered, by the Town Clerk of each respective Town.

AND it is further Ordered, That the Grand Committee, or Colony Trustees, for
their Trouble in receiving said Money, to be p^id in as aforesa^d, Committee'^
(...).
shall take of the Person's paying in the same, Ten Shillings for every One
Hundred Pounds, and proportionably for a greater or lesser Sum.

MOREOVER, It is hereby Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all the Bonds
given for the Payment of the Interest of the aforesaid old Bank Money, be
cancelled, and hereby rendered Void, excepting the two first Bonds, given for
the Payment of the two first Years Interest, after the Date of the respective
Mortgages, which Bond shall be held good and paid; and each Person having of
said Money as aforesaid, shall give one other Bond for the Security of the
Payment of the full Interest of said Money one Year more, as this Act above
expresses the same to be.

AND whereas the General Assembly of this Colony, at their last Sessions,
passed a Vote for the sinking and dissolving the first Forty Thousand Pound
Bank, emitted by this Government, which this General Assembly have formed into
an Act, and regulated for the Effecting thereof: And at this Iuncture, there
being so great a Scarci^^ and Want of a proper Medium of Exchange, that not
only Trade and Commerce, which are the Nerves and Power of the Gover^^ent,
begin in a sensible Manner to decline, stagnate and decay; but the public
^ffairs of this Colony, of the greatest Importance, and t^ose Things whereon
de^end our Peace and Safety, for want of a proper and ^uf^^cient Medium of
Exchange, cannot be put in proper Ord^r and Regulation; Fort Ann requiring a
considerable Sum for the Finishing th^r^of, and Ammunition Stores, and other
Things n^cessary, a^e much wanted, especially at this Iuncture, when the Peace
of Europe has been so long disturbed by an obstinate and powerful Enemy, which
must be expected to affect us in these remote Parts of the World, except God
s^all please to crown his present Majesty's wise Endeavors with Success: And
that such a Medium of Exchange may run through thi^ Government, at this present
Time, (which portends Difficulty and Trouble) and that the Inhabitants of this
Government may subsist, and preserve, in some Measure their former Station and
Commerce; and that those Thing s already begun, for the Defense of our^elves
and the neighboring Gove^nments, may be carried on speedily, and fully
perfected, so that we who live in the Face and Front of the Continent of
New England, may be above the Fear of any Attack from our Enemies, and in a
Capacity to live peaceably and undisturbed.

BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly of this Colony, and by the Authority
thereof it is hereby Enacted, That the Sum of Forty Thousand Pounds in Bills of
public Credit, Forty Thousand Pounds ^^itted.
of the same Tenor with those which have been already put forth by this
Government, be forthwith impressed and made upon the Plates heretofore used by
this Colony, and put into the Hands of the six present Trustees of the Colony,
called the Grand Committee; which said Trustees or any three of them, have
hereby full Power given and granted them, to sign all the afores^id Bills, and
to order and regulate the Making of them, of such Denominations as shall to
them seem most convenient for the Use aforesaid, not exceeding the aforesaid
Sum. And the s^id Trustees are hereby autho^ized to make any further or other
Devise in the Escutcheon, or other Part of said Bills, as they judge
advant^geous for the Preventing said Bills from being counterfeited, and s^id
Committee shall provide all Materials necessary for the M^king the same.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority ^f^res^id, That when and as soon as
the said Forty Thousand Pounds is made and finished, And d^liver^d to the
pr^sent (...).
then the said Bills shall be delivered to the present Trustees, for the
respective Towns in the Government, in such Manner and Proportion as the last
Forty Thousand Pound Bank was distributed, said Grand Committee taking a
Receipt for the same. And the said Bills shall be let out by the several
Committees of the respective Towns, to the Inhabitant^ of the Colony,
primarily, that have not heretofore had any Money of the Colony, upon Loan, or
Land Security, in the same Way and M^nner as the last Bank emitted of Forty
Thousand Pounds was regulated and let out, both for Interest and Security, for
the Princip^l, but for the Term of Thirteen Years; and the Regulation of the
Sum^, shall be the same as the last Bank, that is* no Person ^o have above
Three Hundred Pounds, or under Twenty Five Pounds, and those O^ders and Rules
in Part, more fully laid down in the former Acts for letting out Money, are
strictly enjoin^^.

AND be it further E^acted by the Authority aforesaid, (...) the ^foresaid
Commi^tees of the several Towns, None to be let in any Persons who hired any of
the ^ormer ^ills, until the Expi^^^ion of Three Months.
shall not le^ ou^ any of the said Bills of public Credit to any Person that
(...) a^y of the former Bills, for the Space of three Months (...) they receive
the same: But if after the Expiration of said Term, any shall remain unhired to
such Persons that have not had of he Colony'^ Money before, then said Committee
shall and may ^i^e out the same to any Person in their respective Towns, on
go^d Securi^y, as aforesaid, or return the same to the aforesaid (...)
C^^mittee, who shall discharge them therefrom.

AND it is further Ordered, That Mr. Samuel Vernon be by the Grand Committee
empowered to impress said Bills.

An ACT for Recording of Fines and Common Recoveries.
FOR the appeasing of Suits, the avoiding of false Pr^cti^^s* Deceits, Devices
and Misdemeanors, and for helping of Negligences, Mistakes, and Misprision of
Clerks and Officers, dangerous of Men's Lands and Hereditaments.

BE IT EANACTED by the General Assembly, and by the Authority of the same, That
every Writ of Covenant, and other Writ whereupon any Fi^e heretofore has been
levied, or hereaf^er shall be levied, the Return thereof, W^itt^, etc. (...) to
be ^^corded
the Writ of Dedimus Potestatem, made for the Acknowledging of any of the said
Fines, the Return thereof, the Concord Note, and Foot of every such Fine, the
Proclamations made thereupon, and the King's Silver, and also every Original
Writ of Entry in the Post, or other Writ whereupon any common Recovery has
been suffered, o^ hereafter shall be suffered or passed, the Writ of Summons Ad
Warrantizandum, and every Warrant of Attorney, had or to be had, as well of
every D^mandant and Tenant, as Vouchee, Extant and Remaining, or that shall be
Extant and in Being, may upon the Request or Election of any Person, be
Recorded by such Person, and for such Conderations as hereafter in this Act
shall be mentioned; And that the Recording the same, or any Part thereof, shall
be of as good Force and Validity in the Law, to all Intents, Respects and
Purposes, for so much of any of them so recorded, as the same being Extant and
Remaining were or ought by Law to be.

No Fine, etc. to be reve^sable.
AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That no Fine,
Proclamation upon Fines, or common Recovery, heretofore had, levied, suffered,
or passed, shall be reversable by any Writ of Error, for any Rasu^e,
Inte^li^^ing, Misentring of any Warrant of Attorney, or of any Proclamations,
Misreturning, or not Returning of the Sheriff, or other Want of Form in Words,
or for that the Process and Proceedings thereupon is in English and not in
Latin, nor for any other Matter or Cause, that is not Matter of Substance.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That there shall be
forever one Office for the Recording the said Fines and Recoveries aforesaid,
Justices of the Cour^ of Trials to have the Care of the Records.
which shall be and continue an Office forever, called, The Office for
Recording Writs for Fines and Recoveries; And that the Justices of the General
Court of Trials, for the Time being, shall have and take the Care and Direction
of the Records aforesaid, and the Nomination and Appointment of such Officer as
they shall think proper for the Execution thereof; who for his Charge and
Pai^s, and Travel therein, shall have and take for the Recording of every Fine,
and the Parts thereof aforementioned, and for the Recording the said Parts of
every Recovery, and the Ex^mination thereof, and for every Exemplification of
the En^olm^n^, or Recording of any Fine or Recovery, and for the
Ex^mplification of every Writ of Entry, Summons, and Warrantizands, and
Warrants, and for the Search of the Rolls and Records of one Year, and for the
Copy of one Sheet of Paper, containing fourteen Lines, according as are
allowed, taxed, and settled, in the Court of Common Pleas in Great Britain, at
the same Discount as the other Officers concerning Docking of Esta tes Tail,
have or shall be allowed.

AND it is also further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Forms and
Proceedings in Docking Estates Tail, used in the General Courts of Trials,
shall be as good and authentic in the Docking of Estates Tail within thi^
Government, as the Methods, Forms and Customs used in Great Britain, etc.

LAWS, Made and passed by the General Assembly of His Majesty's Colony of
Rhode Island, and Providence-Plantations, Held at Newport, by Adjournment, the
Third Tuesday of June, 1728.
An ACT for the Preservation of Deer in this Colony.
WHEREAS many Persons yearly kill and destroy Deer at un^easonable Times, when
the Skins and the Flesh are of little or no Value, which may be of great
Prejudice to the Colony, and hinder their Increase.

For the Preventing whereof for the Future,

BE it Enacted by the General Assembly, and by the Authority of the same,
Penalty for destroying Deer a unseasonabl^ Times.
That no Person or Persons whatsoever within this Colony, shall from and after
the first Day of January next, until the last Day of June in the Year 1729, and
between the first Day of January and last Day of June annually forever,
hereafter kill and destroy any Deer or Fawn, by himself, Child, Servant, or
Dogs, on the Penalty of forfeiting Six Pounds for every Deer or Fawn so killed
or destroyed, upon Conviction thereof before any one or more Assistant or
Justice of the Peace for such Town where such Offense shall be committed, the
one Half to the Informer, and the other Half to and for the Use of the Town; to
be levied by a Warrant of Distress from such Assistant or Justice, directed to
a Constable of said Town. And any Person being found with the Skin, Meat or
Horns green, the same shall be sufficient to convict him of killing the same,
unless he can prove that he had it of some Person else, who shall be under the
same Restriction.

AND it is further Enacted by this Assembly, and by the Authority of the same,
That the Act made in the Fourth Year of the Reign of Queen ANNE, entitled, An
Act for the Preservation of Deer in this Colony, be, and it is hereby repealed,
and made Null and Void for the future.

An ACT for preventing Pedlers from selling of Goods in this Colony.
WHEREAS Trade has been greatly hurt by Hawkers, Pedlers, and Petty Chapmen,
passing to and fro through the Colony, making it their Business to carry Goods,
Wares, and Merchandise, from House to House, and from Town to Town in this
Colony, and there vend and dispose of the same.

For Remedy whereof,

BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly, and by the Authority of the same, That
from and after the Publication of this Act, no Hawker, Peddler, or other Trading
Person or Persons, going from Town to Town, or from House to House, and
traveling either on Foot or with any Horse, Pedlers not to ^ell Goods from
Town to Town, on the Penalty of Fo^f^lting all such Goods.
Horses, or otherwise carrying to sell, or exposing to sale either in any
House, or in any Market, or other public Place in any Town in this Government,
whereof such Person or Persons is not an I^habitant, any Goods, Wares or
Merchandise, shall be permitted or suffered within this Colony, on pain of
Forfeiting all such Goods, Wares, and Merchandise, by him or them exposed to
sale, or so conveyed or transported as aforesaid; One Third Part thereof to and
for the Use of the Colony; One Third Part thereof to and for the Use of the
^oor of such Town where such Off^nce is committed, and the other third Part
thereof to him or them that shall inform against, and prosecute such Offender
or Offenders for the same, to be recovered by Bill, Plaint or Information, in
his Majesty's General Court of Trials in this Government. And every such
Offender convicted as aforesaid, shall further incur the Penalty of Forty
Shillings, to be recovered in manner as aforesaid.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That any Assistant, or
Justice of the Peace in this Colony, shall and may, Offenders to be bound over
to the Court of ^ryals, or committed to G^al.
upon View, Complaint or Information to him made of any such Breach or Offense,
summon, or otherwise cause to come before him, and bind over such Offender or
Offenders to the next General Court of Trials held in this Colony: And for want
of sufficient Surety, shall and may commit such Offender or Offenders to the
common Goal, to answer to such Complaint as shall then and there be exhibited
against him or them; and shall also secure all such Goods, Wares and
Merchandise, until such Trial.

AND all Justices, Town Sergeants, Constables, Officer's D^t^.
and all other Officers, are hereby strictly enjoined and required, to exert
their utmost Vigor and Power, to see that this Law be put in Execution.

PROVIDED, That this Act shall not extend unto, or be p^t in Force against any
Person or Persons, transporting from one Town to another, or from any other
Government into thi^ Colony, any manner of thing whatsoever, grown, raised or
^^nufactured in thi^ Government, or any of the Neighboring Governm^^^s on this
Continent.

An ACT f^r Regulating the Payment in of the Forty Thousand Pounds, emitted by
this Colony in the Year 1721; and also for Regulating the Payment in of the
Forty Thousand Pounds emitted in May last.
WHEREAS an Act has been passed, regulating the Calling in and Sinking the
first Bank ^mitted by this Government, but the Time of calling in the second
Bank not being yet settled and d^term^ned, and it being upon due Consideration
thought just and reasonable, that said second Bank be under the same Regulation
as the (...) and for the Advancement of the Currency, to have the Time of the
Calling-in and Sinking the same limited and determined.

BE It Therefore Enacted by the General Assembly, and by the Aut^ority of the
same it is Enacted, That when the second Forty Thousand Pound Bank, emitted by
this Colony, in the Year 1721, shall have been out upon Loan for thirteen
Years, The Methods in a former ^ct r^fe^r^d to, to be observed.
from the Time of the first Emitting the same, then the same shall be called in
and sunk, in the same Manner, and by the same Method^, as the first Bank is
prescribed to be sunk, by an Act of this Assembly, that is, in ten Year's Time,
by sinking the Int^r^st, after said Thirteen Years is expired, and by paying in
One T^nth Part of the Principal annually, as said Act before referred to, more
particularly expresses; and those Methods laid down in said Act referred to,
for the facilitating and rendering the Payment of the first Bank easy, shall be
the Rule and Standard, in all Respect^, for the Regulation of the aforesaid
second Bank: Any former L^w to the Contrary hereof notwithstanding.

AND be it further Enacted by this Assembly, That after the Time for which the
new Bank of Forty Thousand Pounds, now to be emitted by an Act of this
Assembly, is expired, to wit, Thirteen Years, then said Bank shall be sunk, in
like manner as is above expressed, without Interest, and in the Calling-in and
Sinking, shall be regulated in every Respect as the two former Banks were.

An ACT for stating the Fees for Petitions preferred to the General Assembly.
BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly, and by the Authority thereof, That all
Persons petitioning this Assembly, shall pay Ten Shillings for each Petition
preferred, before the same be heard; Fee for Petitions.
the one Half thereof to be applied to and for the Use of the House of
Magistrates, and the other Half to and for the Use of the House of Deputies.

An ACT for the Raising of Two Thousand Pounds, for a speedy Supply for
carrying on the Building of Fort ANNE.
BE IT ENACTED by this Assembly, That for the carrying on the Building of Fort
Ann, there be the Sum of Two Thousand Pounds in Bills of Credit, Two Thousand
Pounds ^mitted.
impressed and signed by the Trustees of this Colony; and that the same be paid
again out of the Interest Money as it shall come in hereafter,

LAWS, Made and passed by the General Assembly of His Majesty's Colony of
Rhode Island, and Providence Plantations, Held at Newport, by Adjournment, the
Third Tuesday of February, 1728.
An ACT relating to the Freeing Molatto and Negro Slav^s.
FORASMUCH as great Charge, Trouble and Inconveniences, have arisen to the
Inhabitants of diverse Towns in this Colony, by the manumitting and setting
free Molatto and Negro Slaves.

For Remedy whereof for the Future,

BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly of this Colony, and by the Authority of
the same it is Enacted, S curity to be giv^n for Molatt^^s and Negroes pon
their b ing made free.
That no Molatto or Negro Slave shall be hereafter manumitted, discharged, or
set free or at Liberty, until sufficient Security be given to the Town
Treasurer of the Town or Place where such Persons dwell, in a valu^ble Sum, not
less than One Hundred Pounds, to secure and indemnify the Town or Place, from
all Charge for or about such Molatto or Negro, to be manumitted and set at
Liberty, in case he or she by sickness, lameness, or otherwise, be rendered
incap^ble ^o support him or herself.

AND no Molatto or Negro hereafter manumitted, shall be deemed or accounted
free, for whom Security shall not be given as (...), Or their Freedom to be vo^d
but shall be the proper Charge of their respective Masters or Mistresses, in
case they should stand in need of Relief and Support, notwithstanding any
Manumission, or Instrument of Freedom to them made and given; and shall be
liable at all Times to be put forth to service, by the Justices of the Peace or
Wardens of the Town.

An ACT for Repe^ling an Act made and past in this Colony, in the Fourth and
Fifth Years of the Reign of King GEORGE the First, 1718, entitled, an Act for
the Distribution and Settling Intestate Estates.
FORASMUCH as the aforesaid Act is by Experience found very prejudicial in this
Colony, by destroying Inheritances.

BE IT THEREFORE ENACTED by the General Assembly, and by the Authority of the
same it is Enacted, That the aforesaid Act, entitled, An Act for the
Distribution and Settling Intestate Estates, be, and it is hereby repealed,
made Null and Void, and every Clause thereof shall be repealed and of no Force
or Effect for the Future, for the Settling and Distribution of any Intestate
Estate that shall hereafter happen to be.

AND it is further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That thy present Act
shall not be deemed, construed, or extend to be deemed or construed, to alter
or defeat any thing that has been heretofore done or settled, by the Fo^^e of
the Act for Distribution of Intestate Estates, or to hinder the Settlement of
any such Intestate Estate, the Owner whereof died Intestate before the
R^pealing of the aforesaid Act; and the Town Council for the Time being,
hereafter shall have Power to distribute such Estates, of the Person or Persons
dying Intestate before the Repealing of the said Act, notwithstanding the
aforesaid Act is repealed.

An ACT for the Amendment of, and in Addition to several Laws, made and past in
this Colony, as is herein after expressed.
WHEREAS there is an Act of Assembly of this Colony, made in the 16 th Year of
the Reign of King Charles the Second, entitled, An Act for the Probate of
Wills, and granting of Administrations, wherein it is Enacted, That the
Governor and Council of this Colony, who, as the Supreme Court of Probates, are
empowered to hear and determine Appeals from the Town Councils, and to give
such Judgment thereupon as to them shall appear right and agreeable with Law;
and are not empowered by said Act to grant forth Execution, to enforce their
Judgments.

Governor and Counci^ as judg^ of Probates to grant forth Ex^cutions.
WHEREFORE it is Enacted by this General Assembly, That the Governor and
Council, as Suprerm Ordinary or Judge of Probates, be, and they hereby are
fully authorized and empowered to grant forth Execution, to compel and enforce
all their Decrees and Judgments by them made and given, on personal Estates, as
other Courts in thi^ Colony are enabled to do.

AND it is also further Enacted, That in further Amendment of said Act, the
Town Council of each Town are also hereby empowered to give forth Execution, to
compel and enforce the Observation and Performance of their Sentence or
Judgment, given on Personal Estates, if an Appeal therefrom be no^ prayed.

WHEREAS there is an Act made and passed in this Colony in the tenth Year of
the Reign of Queen ANNE, entitled, An Act for quieting of Possessions and
avoiding of Suits at Law; and therein is no Provision made for saving the Right
of Persons having any Estate in Remainder or Reversion, Expectant, or
Depending, in Lands, Tenements, etc. after the End or Determination of an
Estate for Years, Life, etc.

For Amendment whereof for the Future,

IT IS ENACTED by the General Assembly, and by the Authority of the same, That
neither the aforesaid Act of Assembly, nor any thing therein contained, shall
extend, Title to be pursued within ten Years after Right o^ Action accrues
or be construed, or deemed to extend, to bar any Person or Persons, having any
Estate in Remainder or Reversion, Expectant or Depending, in any Lands,
Tenements or Hereditaments, after the End or Determination of Estate for Years,
Life or Lives, such Person or Persons pursuing his, or their Title by due
Course of Law, within ten Years after his, her or their Right of Action
accrues: Any thing contained in the aforesaid Act to the Contrary
notwithstanding.

An ACT for punishing Criminal Offenses.
BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly, and by the Authority of the same, No
Person to ex^rcise any Office, without b^ing authorized.
That no Person shall presume to take upon him, or exercise or officiate in any
Office or Place of Authority within this Government, without being authorized
thereunto: And in case any Person shall presume so to do, and be thereof
lawfully convicted, in any Court of Record in this Colony, that then such
Offender shall be amerced, acccording to the Discretion of such Court, not
exceeding the Sum of Ten Pounds.

AND for that Respect and Obedience that is due from Inferiors to their
Superiors.

BE it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, None to threat^^, etc. any
O^^^^er in the Execution of his Office.
That if any Person shall threaten, assault, strike, abuse, or refuse to obey
any General Officer, Justice of the Peace, or Warden, or any other Officer in
this Colony, in the Execution of his Office, such Offender or Offenders being
duly convicted thereof, before any Judge, or Court of Record within this
Colony, shall be amerced, as such Judge or Court of Record shall think fit,
according to the Nature of the Offense, not exceeding Ten Pounds.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Child or
Servant, Punishment for unruly Children and Servants.
shall contrary to their Obedience due to their Parents, or Masters, resist or
refuse to obey their lawful Commands, they shall be sent to the House of
Correction, and there remain, until they have humbled themselves to their
Parents or Masters Satisfaction: And if any Children or Servants shall presume
to ass^ult, or strike their Parents, or Masters, upon Complaint of any such
Parent or Master, to any Assistant, Justice of the Peace, or Warden of such
Town: Such Child or Servant so offending, shall be whipped, at the Discretion
of such Assistant, Justice or Warden, not exceeding Ten Lashes.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That whosoever shall be
convicted of High Treason, Petit Treason, Wilful Murder or Manslaughter, shall
be punished for such Offense, Punishment for Tre^son, Murder, etc.
according to the Statute Laws of the Realm of England; the Benefit of the
Clergy reserved where allowable: And shall forfeit his Lands, Goods and
Chattels, to the Colony, according to his Majesty's Charter, to be disposed of
by the Assembly, as they shall think fit; All necessary Charges of Prosecution,
Condemnation, and Execution, being first duly deducted.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That whosoever shall
wilfully and maliciously cut out the Tongues, Punishment for cutting out
Tongues, etc.
pull out the Eyes, or cut off the Ears, of any Person or Persons within this
Colony, he shall be proceeded against, prosecuted and punished, as by the
Statute of the 5th of Hen. IV. Chap. v. is ordained.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That Witchcraft is,
Witchcraft to be pu^ished with Death.
and shall be Felony; and whosoever shall be lawfully convicted thereof, shall
suffer the Pains of Death.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That Burglary is, and
shall be Felony; and whosoever shall be lawfully convicted thereof, Burglary to
be punished with Death.
shall suffer the Pains of Death.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That Robbery is, and
shall be Felony; and whosoever shall lawfully be convicted thereof, Robbery to
be punished with Death.
shall suffer the Pains of Death: And upon Complaint made to any Assistant,
Justice of the Peace, or Warden of any Town within this Colony, of a Robbery
committed therein, he shall forthwith grant forth a Warrant to a Constable of
said Town, to make Hue and Cry after such Robber or Robbers, for the
apprehending and taking of them, and such Proceeding so being made in such Town
wherein any Robbery shall be committed, shall not be chargeable for the Moneys,
Goods andChattels of the Person so robbed.

AND be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That whosoever shall perpetrate
and commit the detestable and abominable Crimes of Sodomy, Sodomy to be
punished with Death.
or Buggery, and be thereof lawfully convicted, shall suffer the Pains of
Death, as in Cases of Felony, without the Benefit of the Clergy.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That whosoever shall
steal or purloin any Moneys, Goods, Wares, or Merchandise, and be thereof
lawfully convicted, Punishment for Theft.
at the General Court of Trials, (who are hereby fully empowered to have
Cognizance of the same) shall for the first Offense, Vid: Act 1718.
restore to the Owner of such Moneys, Wares, Goods, or Merchandises so stolen,
Twofold, and shall be fined, or whipped, at the Discretion of the Judges of
said Court, not exceeding thirty nine Lashes; and upon a second Conviction of
such Offense, to restore Twofold as aforesaid, to the Owners of such Moneys,
Wares, Goods, or Merchandises so stolen, and Fourfold to the Colony, and be
whipped or fined at Discretion, by the Judges of said Court.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if the Person so
offending, and convict thereof as aforesaid, shall not have Goods and Chattels
sufficient to satisfy and pay the Judgment of such Court as aforesaid, That
then, and in such Cases, For want of Goods, and Chattels to be sold by the
Sheriff.
the Offender shall be sold by the Sheriff, at the Direction of the Judges of
said Court, to satisfy such Judgment as shall be given, as aforesaid.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Person shall
wrongfully and maliciously spoil, burn, or destroy any Frame prepared for
building of either House, Mill, Punishment for several Offenses.
or Barn, or spoil any Cart, or Wood heaped and prepared for Coals, or other
Use, or cut out the Tongue, or otherwise Dismember any Beast being alive, or
shall bark Fruit Trees, or procure any of the said Offenses to be done, the
Person so offending shall pay the Owner thereof treble Damages, with Cost of
Court, and pay a Fine to the Use of the Colony, according to the Discretion of
the Judges of the Court where such Offender shall be convicted, not exceeding
Five Pounds.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Officer
within this Colony shall exact or extort any more or greater Fees than by Law
is stated him, Any Officer extorting unlawful Fees, to pay Treble Damages.
or that under Pretense of executing his Office, shall levy any more or greater
Sums of Moneys than by any Judgment, Execution, Order or Decree, he is ordered
or allowed to do, and be thereof lawfully convicted, he shall forfeit to the
Party agrieved, treble Damages, which shall be (according to the Damage
received) recovered by the Party, before any Court, or Judge of Record, by
Action of Trespass upon the Case.

AND be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That whosoever shall Violate
their Marriage Contract, by being guilty of the vile Sin of Adultery, Adultery
to be punished with Whipping o^ Fining.
and be thereof duly convict before the Judges of the General Court of Trials,
and General Goal Delivery, who shall have Cognizance of the same, shall be
whipped, not exceeding Thirty-nine S^ripes, or fined at the Discretion of s^id
Judges, not exceeding Ten Pounds.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That whosoever shall
commit Fo^nication, Fornication to be punished with Whipping, or a Fine of
F^rty Shillings.
and be thereof lawfully convicted, before any two Assistants, Justices of the
Peace, or Wardens of the Town where such Fact shall be committed, who are
hereby empowered to have Cogniz^nce thereof, shall be publicly whipped in s^id
Town where such F^ct shall be committed, wi^h Ten Stripes and no more, or pay a
Fine of Forty S^illings into the Town Treasury, to and for the Use of the Poor
of such Town.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all Persons that
shall be l^wfully convicted of a Riot, Punishment for Rioting.
shall suffer Twelve Mon^h's Impris^nment, or p^y a Fine of Ten Pounds to the
Use of the Colony.

AND be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That any Assistant, Punishment
for Br^ach of Peace.
Justice of the Peace, or W^rden in this Colony, upon Convicting any Person or
Persons before him, for Breach of the Peac^, by S^riking, etc. shall and may
Fine such Offender or Off^nders at Discretion, not exceeding Twenty Shillings,
or bind them over to the General Court of Trials, with two sufficient Sureties,
where they shall be fined as the Nature of the Offense may require; such Fine
to be for the Use of the Poor of such Town where such Offense shall be
committed.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That in all Cases of
Assault and Battery, Assault and Battery.
the Person ass^ulted or battered shall have an Action of Trespass at the
Common Law, against the Persons committing such Assault or Battery, and shall
recover his Damages received thereby.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Person
happen to be killed by Carts going over him, or by a Horse's kicking of him,
Horses, Neat Cattle, etc upon ^hei^ killing an^ Person, to be forfeited.
or by any sort of Neat Cattle goring him, or kicking him, or by any other
suchlike Accident; that then, the Coroner of such Town where such casual Death
shall happen to be, shall with an Inquest of twelve lawful Men, enquire into
the Means of the Death of such Person; and on the Coroner's Return, that such
Person was killed by any of the aforesaid Accidents, etc. then the Coroner with
his said Inquest upon Oath, shall apprize the Value of such Cart, Horse, or
Neat Beast, etc. which shall be forfeited as a Deodand, and given to the
Oversee^s of the Poor of such Town where such Casualty shall h^ppen.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, Fraudulent Bonds, etc.
to be do^m'd void.
That all Bonds, Bills, Deeds of Sale, Gifts, Grants, or other Conveyances or
Obligations whatsoever, that shall be made by any Person, with In^ent to
defraud or deceive others, or defeat such Person or Persons Creditors of their
just Debts and Dues, shall be Null, Void, and of none Effect; and the Party
injured or agri^ved thereby shall recover his double Damages, together with
Cost of Suit.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, Punishment for
Conspiracy, etc.
That in case any Person or Persons shall be lawfully convicted of Conspiracy,
according to the Statute of the 23d of EDWARD the first, en^itled, A Definiti^^
of Conspirators, or shall be convicted of Champerty; he or they that shall be
so convicted, shall suffer one Year's Imprisonment, and make Fine to the
Colony, as the Judges of the Court where such Person or Persons convic^ed shall
award; Remedy for Persons agri^v^d.
and the Party agrieved shall have his Remedy, and recover his Damages, by an
Action (...) Trespass on the Case.

PROVIDED always, Provi^^.
That this Act shall not extend to any Person or Persons who honestly, and
without any unjust Des^gn, shall assist with Moneys or otherwise, such Person
or Persons as are not of Estate or Ability sufficient to carry on a Suit in
Law, for the Recovery of their just Right and Estate.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That in case any Person
or Persons, being impannelled and sworn upon a Jury, shall take any Reward to
bring in a Verdict; Pu^ishment f^r (...) givi^g, and Jurors (...) a Reward.
or in case any Person shall embrace a Juror so to do, the Parties both giving
and receiving such Reward, being thereof duly Attaint, in any Court of Record,
according to the Statute of the 20 th of EDWARD the Third, Chap. 12th, shall
pay Five Times the Value of such Rew^rd, One Hal^ to the Use of the Colony, and
the ^^her H^lf to such Informer as shall sue for the same; and on Def^^l^ of
Payment shall be imprisoned one Year.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Person shall
forge, raze, embezel, or take away any Record, W^it, Return, or Process
belonging to such Record, or any Part of the same, by Reason whereof Judgment
shall be reversed; Punishment (...) Forgery, etc.
or shall forge any Deed, Obligation, Acquittance or Record, or shall wilfully
and designedly make false Entry of Pleas, or alter Verdicts, or shall be
Procuring, or Confederating, or Abetting, such Doings, such Person or Persons
being thereof duly convicted, shall be imprisoned and grievously fined,
according to the Discretion of the Judges of such Court, where such Person or
Persons shall be convicted: And such Person or Person^, as shall be agri^ved
thereby, shall have Remedy by Action, to recover his or their Damages.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That any Person
whosoever that shall contract and agree with any Servant, for One Year's
Service, or more or less Time, shall not put away his or her said Servant,
Punishment for ^utting away Servants without Cause
before the Time agreed on be expired, unless upon good and sufficient Cause,
made appear before one or more Assistant, Justice of the Peace or Warden of
said Town, where said Master or Mistress dwells. And if any Master or Mistress
of any Servant or Servants, shall put away any such Servant, before the Time
agreed be expired, he or she so doing, without a sufficient Discharge from one
or more Assistant, Justice of the Peace, or Warden of said Town, shall forfeit
to such Servant agrieved, Forty Shillings in Money to be recovered before any
two Assistants, Justices of the Peace, or Wardens of such Town.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That no Servant hired as
aforesaid, for any Term of Time, shall depart from the Service of his said
Master or Mistress, No Servant to l^^ve his Services wit^ou^ suff^cient Cau^^
under the H^^d of one or more Assistant, etc.
until such Time of Service agreed on between them be fully ended, without some
justifiable Cause, which shall be allowed of under the Hand of one or more
Assistant, Justice of the Peace or Warden of said Town, where his Master or
Mistress shall dwell; and if any Servant shall depart from his said Master and
Mistress's Service (before his Term of Time of Service agreed on, be fully
ended) without License first had or obtained from one or more Assistant,
Justice of the Peace or Warden of said Town as aforesaid, shall for his or her
Offense, upon due Proof thereof before any one or more Assistant, Justice of
the Peace or Warden of said Town, be committed to Prison, there to remain until
he or she so doing, find sufficient Surety to perform his or her Contract, as
agreed on.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That whosoever shall
wittingly or knowingly retain any such hired Servant as aforesaid, Punishment
for retaining Servants.
that is not lawfully discharged as aforesaid, shall for every such Offense,
forfeit to the Person agrieved thereby Five Pounds, to be recovered at any
Court of Record by Action of the Case.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That no Artificer or
Handicrafts-man, No Artificer to leave his Work till ^inish'd.
that shall agree or contract with any Person, for the Performing of any Piece
or Parcel of Work, relating to his or their several Occupations, or shall agree
to work for any certain Time, shall depart from his or their Work before the
same be finished.

AND that if any Artificer or Handicrafts-man upon any Contract with any
Person, for the Performing any Work as aforesaid, shall depart and leave his
said Work before finished, On the Penalty of Five Pounds.
without the Leave or Assent of his Employer, he shall forfeit to the Person
agrieved thereby, Five Pounds, to be recovered in any Court of Record within
this Colony, by Action of the Case.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That any Assistant,
Justice of the Peace, or Warden, shall and may upon lawfully convicting of any
Person or Persons of being drunk, Punishment for D^unkenness.
either by one sufficient Evidence, or by his own Knowledge thereof, Fine such
Person so Offending, Five Shillings for the first Offense (to be paid in^o the
Town Treasury of such Town where such Offense shall be committed) or cause the
Offender to be set in the S^ocks, at the Discretion of such Assistant, Justice,
or Warden, not exceeding Th^ee Ho^rs: And upon a second Convicti^n of the like
Offense, such Person shall pay as a Fine, Ten Shillings to and for the Use
aforesaid.

PROVIDED always, Provi^o.
That such Complaint be made within Ten Days after such Offense be committed.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That whosoever shall
profanely swear or curse, Punishment for profane Swe^^ing and Cursing.
within the Hearing of any Assistant, Justice of the Peace, or Warden, or be
thereof convicted, either by his own Confession, or by the Evidence of Two
Witn^sses upon Oath or Egagement, before any one Assistant, Justice of the
Peace, or Warden, shall for every such Oath or Curse, be fined Five Shillings,
to and for the Use of the Poor of such Town where the Offense shall be
committed, or be set in the Stocks at ^he Discretion of such Assistant,
Justice, or Warden, not exceeding Three Hours.

PROVIDED always, That every Offense against the Law, Provi^o.
be complained of within Ten Days after such Offense be committed.

An ACT directing the Proceedings against Forceable Entry and Detainer.
BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly, and by the Authority of the same, That
in any Town in the Colony, where a forceable Entry or Detainer of Lands, or
Houses, shall happen to be committed or done, Upon Complaint of (...) and F^tty
and (...) a Jury of Inquest.
by any Person or Persons, whatsoever, upon Complaint or Information thereof
given by the Party agrieved, to any Two or more Assist^nts, Justices of the
Peace or Wardens of the Town where such House or Land lies, the said
Assistants, Justices or Wardens, shall issue out their Warrant to the Sheriff
of the Colony, or his Deputy, requiring him in the King's Name to impanel a
Jury of Inquest, of Twenty Four good and lawful Men of the Neighborhood, to
come before them, to make Enquiry upon Oath or Engagement concerning the same:
And in case the said Jury shall find the Bill or Complaint against such Person
or Persons complained of, that then such Assistants, Justices or Wardens, shall
cause such Force to be removed, and restore to the Person or Persons
complaining, peaceable Possession of the same.

PROVIDED always, That such Complaint or Information appears to be made within
three Years after such Forceable Entry and Detainer be committed, Pro^is^.
and not after.

AND be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Assistants, Penalty for
refusing to Aid the Assistants
Justices of the Peace, and Wardens, in case of any Resistance made in the due
Performing their Duties, by this Act required, about Forceable Entries or
Detainers may command the Assistance of any of His Majesty's Subjects of this
Colony, who are required to Aid them therein, on the Penalty of Twenty
Shillings to each Person that shall refuse so to do; to be recovered by Suit or
Information before any one Assistant, Justice, of the Peace, or Warden of this
Colony.

AND the said Fine of Twenty Shillings so recovered, shall be paid into the
Town Treasury, for the Use of the Town, where such Forceable Entry and Detainer
shall be committed.

AND it is further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That in case the Jury of
Inquest, Upon the Jury's not ^ndin^ the Bill* the Person Complaining to pay
Co^^s.
on Inquiry as aforesaid, shall not find the said Bill or Complaint against the
Person or Persons complained of as aforesaid, that then the Person or Persons
complaining, shall be condemned by the said Assistants Justices or Wardens, to
pay the Costs of Courts, as is usual in other Cases.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if the Sheriff or
his Deputy, to whom such Assistants, Sheriff to execute h s Warrant, on the
Penalty of Twenty Pounds.
Justices, or Wardens, Warrant is delivered, does not duly execute the same; he
shall forfeit the Sum of Twenty Pounds, lawful Money, to be recovered by Bill,
Information, Suit or Complaint, in any Court of Record, within this Colony.

An ACT for the Relief of poor Prisoners, that are not able to find Bail upon
mean Process.
WHEREAS it often happens, that poor Persons for want of Bail, are committed to
Goal upon mean Process, and after Judgment made up against them, the Plaintiff
neglects to take out Execution against them, upon the Account of saving Six
Pence a Day, which by Law they are obliged to pay, after Execution granted.

For Remedy whereof for the Future,

BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly of this Colony, and by the Authority of
the same it is Enacted, That where any Person shall be committed to Prison in
any Action upon mean Process for want of Bail, Execution to be taken (...)
within one Month after the Rising of the Court.
in case the Party at whose Su^^ the Action is commen^ ed, shall obtain
Judgment against such Prisoner in said Action, and shall Neglect to take out
and deliver to the Sheriff of this Colony, an Execution on the said Judgment,
within the Space of one Month after the End of the Court where said Judgment
shall be obtained, that then and in such Case, it shall and may be lawful for
the said Sheriff to discharge the said Prisoner from his said Imprisonment, etc.

An ACT Enabling the Town Council of each Town to grant Licenses for the
Retailing Strong Liquors, and to prevent the Selling of such Liquors by Retail,
without License first obtained.
BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly, and by the Authority thereof, Town
Counc^ls empowered to grant Licenses.
That the Town Council of each respective Town in this Colony, shall have the
sole Power of Granting Licenses for the keeping Taverns and Alehouses, and
Retailing Wines, and all other Strong Liquors within their several Towns, and
shall take for each License Discretionally, not exceeding Fifteen Pounds for
one License; which Money shall be paid into the Town Treasury where such
License is granted, for the Def^aying the public Charge of the Town.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Person or
Persons, shall sell, or suffer to be sold, by their Wives, Children, or (...),
any Wine, Rum, or other Strong Liquors whatsoever, None to sell Strong Liquo ^
in any less Quantity than a Gal^on, on the P^nalty of Four Pounds.
by Retail, in any less Quantity than a Gallon, without a License first
obtained from the Town Council, where such Person dwells, and be thereof
lawfully convicted before any one Assist^nt, Justice of the Peace, or Warden,
of any such Town where such Offense shall be committed, either by his or her
Confession, or by good Evidence, he or they shall for every such Offense,
forfeit the Sum of Four Pounds, one H^l^ ^hereof to the Informer, and the other
H^lf to the Use of the Poor of the Town where the Offense is committed; which
Fine shall be recovered by a Warrant of Distress, at any Time within One Year
after the Fact is committed, and not after.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That it shall and may be
lawful for any Assistant, Justice of the Peace, or Warden, to sum^on and
convent before him, any Person or Persons he shall think fit, Assistants, etc.
to sum^on Evidence.
to give Evidence against any Person that shall sell by retail as aforesaid,
any Strong Liquors, without License, and to cause such Person or Person^ to
give their solemn Oath or Engagement thereto: And such Persons who shall refuse
so to do, when thereunto required, to commit to His Majesty's Goal in Newport,
until he or they purge themselves by Oath or Engagement.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Person shall
think himself agrieved at the Sen^ence or Judgment of any Assistant, Persons
agrieved a lowed an Appeal.
Justice of the Peace, or Warden, in any Matter or Thing founded upon this Law,
it shall and may be lawful for such Person to appeal to the next General Court
of Trials, he or she paying Cost, and giving in Bond to prosecute such Appeal
to such Court, and complying with the Rules prescribed, in Appeals had from
Justices Courts to the General Court of Trials in civil Causes.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all Persons keeping
Taverns or Alehouses, Tavern-Keepers to give Bond.
shall give such Bonds or Recognizances to the Town Council, granting them
License, as such Council shall think proper, for their Maintaining good Order,
and keeping regular Houses.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That it shall and may be
lawful for the Town Council of each Town, Town Council (...) withd aw Licenses
from diso^derly Houses.
upon any Persons being convicted of keeping a disord^rly or irregular Tavern
or Alehouse, contrary to the Bonds or Recognizance by him given, immediately
to withdraw such Lic^nce, and further prosecute such Persons for their Offenses.

An ACT directing how Water-Fences shall be made and maintained.
BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly of this Colony, and by the Authority of
the same it is Enacted, Wat^r-Fences how maintained.
That where any Persons Land join together on the Water, and is under
Improvement, the Possessors thereof shall equally make and maintain a
sufficien^ Water-Fence between them, such as the Fence-Viewers shall deem
sufficient for the Preventing Cattle, Horses, etc. trespassing upon one
another's Ground. And if any Person shall refuse so to do, To be such as the
Fence-Viewers shall deem sufficient
he shall be obliged thereto in the same Way and Manner, as Persons refusing to
make and maintain Partition Fences on their Lands, are obliged to do by the
Laws of this Colony.

LAWS, Made and passed by the General Assembly of His Majesty's Colony of
Rhode Island, and Providence Plantations, Held at Newport, the Third Monday of
June, 1729.
An ACT for Regulating the Proceedings of Town Meetings, in each Town in this
Colony.
WHEREAS there has been great Disturbance in Town Meetings within this Colony,
which has arisen from the Moderator's refusing to put such Proposals to vote,
as have been offered or presented by a Number of Freemen there met. And
forasmuch as all Controversies in Town Meetings, relating to Town Affairs,
ought to be decided by a Majority of Voices.

Therefore,

BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly, and by the Authority thereof it is
Enacted, That for the Future, to prevent further Trouble, Moderator to (...)
Town (...) when (...) S^v^n Fr^-Men.
every Moderator in this Colony, when legally chosen in Town Meetings, after
having heard the Freemen's Allegations respecting the Business of the Town, and
being called upon by Seven Freemen to put any particular Part of the Town's
Business to Vote, shall forthwith grant the same, upon the Penalty of being
suspended from the Office of Moderator (and pay a Fine of Forty Shillings, V^de
Act 1742.
to be recovered by the Town Clerk for the Use of the Town where such Meeting
is held) and another Moderator forthwith chosen in his Room.

AND be it further Enacted, That no Vote be past in any Town Meeting,
concerning Money in the Treasury, disposing of Land, B^sin^ss relatin^ to
Mon^^, Land, etc. t^ be (...) in the Warrant.
or making a Rate, unless it be mentioned in the Warrant given out to warn the
Freemen to said Meeting; and that the Town Clerk of each respective Town in
this Colony, be the Person appointed to give out such Warrants, unless where
the Law prescribes otherwise.

An ACT Impowering the Town Council of each respective Town, to prevent
Disorderly Indian Dances.
WHEREAS it is very common in this Colony, and especially in Westerly and
South-Kingston, for Indians to make Dances, which has been found, by
Experience, to be very prejudicial to the adjacent Inhabitants, by their
excessive Drinking, and Fighting, and Wounding each other; and many Servants
are enticed to out-stay their Time at such Dances, and then run away from their
Masters.

BE IT THEREFORE ENACTED by the General Assembly, and by the Authority of the
same it is Enacted and Declared, That the Town Councils of each Town in this
Colony, have full Power to make such Laws and Orders, for the better regulating
of such Indian Dances in their respective Towns, as they shall think needful
and necessary; and to Fine all such Persons, either English, Indians, or
others, that shall sell or give any Strong Liquors at any such Dances, not
exceeding Forty Shillings.

An ACT for Preventing of Strangers coming into this Colony, from any Parts
whatsoever by Sea, excepting Great Britain, Ireland, Iersey, and Guernsey, from
being Chargeable to any Town in this Colony whereunto they shall come.
BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly, of this Colony, and by the Authority of
the same it is Enacted, That all Masters of Vessels that shall import and bring
into this Colony, any Persons or Passengers whatsoever, Bond to be given by
Masters of Vessels (...) in Strangers.
into any Town in this Colony (except from Great Britain, Ireland, Iersey, and
Guernsey) shall give an Account of all such Persons or Passengers, by him so
imported, to the Naval Officer of this Colony for the time being, and give in
Bond to the said Naval Officer, in the Sum of Fifty Pounds for each Person by
him imported, that such Person shall not become Chargeable to such Town wherein
they shall be landed: And the said Naval Officer shall be paid by such Master,
Five Shillings for such Bond. Any Law, Custom, or Usage to the Contrary hereof
notwithstanding.

An ACT Enabling the Town Councils of each Town in this Colony, to make Laws in
each of their respective Jurisdictions, for the Regulating the keeping of Dogs.
WHEREAS there is great Damage often done, by Dogs killing of Sheep and Lambs,
and other small Cattle in this Colony.

For the Preventing whereof for the Future,

BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly of this Colony, and by the Authority of
the same it is Enacted, That the Town Councils of each Town in this Colony, be,
Town Council's (...), to be Binding.
and they are hereby fully authorized and empowered, to make and ordain such
Laws, Orders and Determinations, as shall be necessity and suitable for their
respective Towns, for the preventing Dogs doing Damage, in Flocks, or
otherwise, and to determine who shall keep Dogs, and how, and in what Manner
the same shall be kept. And such Laws, Orders and Determinations, shall be good
and binding; and whosoever shall break or go contrary to the same, and be
lawfully convicted thereof, shall be fined, at the Discretion of the Town
Council of such Town where such Offense shall be committed, not exceeding Forty
Shillings.

An ACT for the Dividing the Colony of Rhode Island and Providence-Plantations
into Three Counties, and Ascertaining the Bounds and Limits of each of said
Counties.
WHEREAS the Number of Inhabitants in this Colony is much increased, and the
Bounds thereof are so extensive, that that Part thereof called the Main-Land,
especially the more remote Inhabitants, are put to great Trouble and Difficulty
in Prosecuting their Affairs, in the common Course of Justice, as the Courts
are now established.

Therefore,

BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly of this Colony, and by the Authority of
the same, The Colony divided into Three Counties.
That this Colony shall be divided into three distinct and separate Counties
(whereof the whole Colony shall consist) in the following Manner.

THE Towns of Newport, Portsmouth, Iames-Town, New-shoreham, The County of
Newport.
and the rest of the Islands adjacent, heretofore within the Jurisdiction of
either of said Towns, shall be constituted, and are hereby made one County, and
shall be known by the Name of the County of Newport; and Newport shall be the
County Town.

THE Towns of Providence, Warwick, and East-Greenwich, and all such Places
within the Jurisdiction of said Towns, The County of Providence.
shall be constituted, and are hereby made one other County, and shall be known
by the Name of the County of Providence; and the Town of Providence shall be
the County Town.

THE Towns of South Kingston, North Kingston and Westerly, and all Places
within the Bounds of either of said Towns, shall be constituted, King's County.
and are hereby made one other County, and shall be known by the Name of King's
County; and South Kingstown shall be the County Town.

An ACT for the Establishing of Courts of General Sessions of the Peace, and
Ascertaining the Times and Places for the Holding of the same.
BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly of the Colony aforesaid, and by the
Authority of the same, General Sessions of the Peace appointed.
That within each respective County within this Colony, there shall be held and
kept yearly, and every Year, at the Times and Places in this Act after
mentioned and expressed, a Court of General Sessions of the Peace, by the
Justices of the Peace of each County respectively, or any Five of them, who
shall be a Quorum, and are hereby empowered to hear and determine all manner of
Matters and Things, relating to the Conservation of the Peace; And the
Punishment of Offenders, and all Pleas of the Crown, (capital Crimes excepted)
shall be therein Cognizable: And they are empowered to give Judgment, and award
Execution thereupon.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Times and
Places for the Holding said Courts of General Sessions of the Peace, The Times
and Places of holding the same.
within the respective Counties in this Colony, shall be as follows; that is
to say, For the County of Newport, at Newport, on the last Tuesday of May, and
on the third Tuesday of November. For the County of Providence, Vide Act 1741.
on the first Tuesday in June, and on the second Tuesday in December. And for
the County of King's County at South Kingston, on the last Tuesday in June, and
on the first Tuesday in January. Vide Act 1738.


AND be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That it shall and may be lawful,
for any Person agrieved at the Sentence of the Justices in any Court of General
Sessions of the Peace, A^peal to the (...) allowed.
to Appeal from such Sentence given as aforesaid, unto the next Superior Court
of Judicature, Court of Assize, and General Goal Delivery, to be held at
Newport, as heretofore the General Court of Trials, and General Goal Delivery,
has been accustomed to be holden, where the aforesaid Matter or Thing shall be
further considered.

PROVIDED, That such Appeal be prayed at the Time of the Sentence being
uttered; Proviso.
And the Appellant shall also enter into a Recognizance, with two good and
sufficient Sureties, du^ing the Sitting of said Court, in such reasonable Sum
as the said Justices shall set, for his or her Appearance at the Court appealed
to, and Prosecution of such Appeal there with Effect; and to do, abide, and
perform what said Court shall Enjoin, Order or Sentence thereon, and to be of
good Behavior in the mean time: And the Party Appealing shall remain in
Custody until Security is given as aforesaid; and the Officer shall not take
above Six Pence per Hour for Attending.

PROVIDED ALSO, That every such Person Appealing, Proviso.
do file Reasons of Appeal in the Clerk's Office of the Court appealed unto,
seven Days before the Sitting of said Court; and also at his own Cost, shall
bring to said Court a Copy of the whole Case attested: And the Appellant shall
pay the like Fees at the said Court appealed to, as in Appeals in civil Causes.

Vide Act 1742.
AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That each respective
Town in the Counties aforesaid, shall choose Jurors for said Court, Jurors to
b^ chosen (...) ^^e seve^al Towns.
at their Town or Quarter Meeting, next preceding the Sitting of said Courts.
And the Town Clerk of each respective Town, shall return the Names of such
Jurors to the Clerks of the respective Courts: And the Town Sergeant of each
Town, shall warn said Jurors to appear, and be allowed for the same Twelv^
Pence per Juror by said Town. And if any of said Jurors be chall^nged, or
otherwise there be not a sufficient Number of good and lawful Men, to make up
the Jury or Juries, to serve at any of said Courts, then in such Case, the said
Jury or Juries shall be filled up De talibus Circumstantibus, to be returned by
the Sheriff or his Deputy.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That it shall and may be
lawful, Persons sentenced by Justices for any Criminal Offense to be allowed an
Appeal.
for any Person sentenced for any Criminal Offense, by any one or more Justice
of the Peace out of Sessions, to appeal from such Sentence, unto the next Court
of General Sessions of the Peace, to be held within the same County, every such
Appellant recognizing with Sureties, in a reasonable Sum, for his Appearance at
the Court appealed to, and for the Prosecuting his Appeal there with Effect,
and to abide the Order and Sentence of said Court thereon, which shall be
final, and in the mean time to be of good Behavior: And every such Appellant
shall be held at the same Rules, and observe the same Measures for the bringing
forward said Appeal, as was herein before laid down, for the Prosecuting an
Appeal from the said Court of General Sessions of the Peace, to the Superior
Court of Judicature, Court of Assize, and General Goal Delivery, and shall pay
the like Fee for entering and in all other Respects.

An ACT for Establishing Inferior Courts of common Pleas, in the several
Counties of this Colony.
BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly, and by the Authority thereof, That
there shall be holden and kept in ^^ch respective County in said Colony,
Yearly, and every Year, Inferior Court of Common Pleas appointed.
a^ the respective Times and Places in this Act after mentioned and express^d,
an Inferior Court of Common Pleas, by Four judicious and skilful Persons, Vide
Act 1737.
to be appointed and commissionated a^ Justices of the said Court, in each
County, and any three of whom shall be a Quorum for holding of said Court, who
shall have Cognizance of all Civil Actions arising or happeni^g within such
County, Tryable at the common Law, of what Nature, Kind, or Quality soever. And
said Judges are hereby empowered to give Judgment therein and award Execution
thereon.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Times and
Places for the holding and keeping said Inferior Courts of common Pleas,
within the aforesaid several and respective Counties shall be as follows,
that is to say, For the County of Newport, at Newport, Times and Places for
said Courts appointed.
on the last Tuesday in May, and on the third Tuesday in November. For the
County of Providence at Providence, Vide Act 1741.
on the first Tuesday in June, and on the second Tuesday in December. Vide Act
173^.
For the County of King's-County, at South Kingston, on the last Tuesday in
June, and on the first Tuesday in January, and so Yearly, and every Year.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all Writs and
Processes, for the bringing any Cause or Suit to Trial, in any of the said
Inferior Courts, Writs to be issued out of the Clerk's Office.
shall issue out of the Clerk's Office of such Court in His Majesty's Name,
under the Seal of the said Court, to be signed by the Clerk, and directed to
the Sheriff of said County, or to his lawful Deputy. And if such Process shall
be against the Sheriff, then the same shall be directed to the Town Sergeant of
such Town where the Sheriff dwells, who is hereby empowered to serve the
same. Except when the Clerk is Plaintiff or Defendant.
And where the Clerk of any of the said Inferior Courts, shall be Plaintiff or
Defendant in any Suit, the Writ or Process shall have its Sanction from one of
the Judges of said Court.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all Original Writs
and Processes, issued out as ^foresaid, shall be served twenty Days before the
D^y of the Sitting of such Court, Writs to be s^rved Twenty Days; D^claratio
(...) Twelve Da^s, and the (...) ^ix Days before the Court.
from whence issued and are returnable: And the Plaintiff shall declare
thereon, and file his Declaration in the Clerk's Office of said Court, Twelve
D^ys ^^fore the Sitting of such Court: And the Defendant shall file his Plea or
Answer Six Days before the Si^ting of said Court, with the aforesaid Clerk; or
else the Plaintiff may enter wi^h said Clerk a Nihil Dicit, and Judgment shall
go against the Defendant for Default.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That no Action not
exceeding Forty Shil^ings, V^^e Act.
sh ll be brought into any of the aforesaid Inferior Courts of Common Pleas,
unless where any Man's Freehold is concerned, or by Way of Appeal from any
Justices Court. Vide Act Feb. ^29.


AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That each respective
Town wi hin the Coun^ies aforesaid, shall at the Quarter Meeting p^eceeding the
aforesaid Inferior Courts of Common Pleas, Each Town to choose Jurors.
respectively take care to choose and elect so many good and lawful Jurors, to
serve at such Court, as shall be by the General Assembly ordered; which Jurors,
when chosen as aforesaid, shall be by the Clerk of each Town wherein chosen,
returned to the Clerk of such Court whereto chosen by Name, Vide Act 1742.
and shall be by the Town Sergeant of each Town where chosen, warned
accordingly. And if by Reason of Challenge or otherwise, there do not appear a
sufficient Number of good and lawful Men to make up the Jury or J^ries, in any
of said Inferior Courts, in such Case the said Jury or Juries shall be filled
up De talibus circumstantibus, to be returned by the Sheriff or his Deputy.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That there shall be
holden at Newport, within and for said Colony, two Superior Courts of
Judicature, Courts of Assize, and General Goal Delivery, S^perior Court to be
held at Newport.
for the Trial of all Causes, Matters, and Things, both Civil and Criminal; the
one Superior Court of Judicature, Court of Assize, and General Goal Delivery,
on the last Tuesday of March, Annually, and the other on the first Tuesday of
September; which said Court shall be composed and consist of the Governor,
Deputy Governor, and Assistants of this Colony, of which the Governor, or in
his Absence, the Deputy Governor, and three Assistants, shall be a Quorum, and
in case of the Absence of both the Governor and Deputy Governor, then any Five
of the Assistants to be a Quorum, who shall have Cognizance of all Pleas, real,
personal, and mixed, as also Pleas of the Crown, and Causes criminal, and
Matters relating to the Conservation of the Peace, and Punishment of Offenders,
and generally of all other Matters, as fully and amply, to all Intents and
Purposes whatsoever, as the Court of Common Pleas, King's Bench, or Exchequer,
in His Majesty's Kingdom of England, have or ought to have, and are empowered
to give Judgment therein, and to award Execution thereon, and make such
nec^ssary Rules of Practice, as the Judges shall from time to time see needful:
But no Cause, Matter or Thing, (Writs of Error, Fines, and common Recoveries,
capital Crimes, and such Causes where the King is concerned only excepted)
shall be brought in^o said Court by any Original Writ or Process, but by
Appe^ls had from the aforesaid Inferior Courts of Common Pleas, in the Counties
aforesaid: Any Law or Usage to the Contrary notwithstanding.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That it shall be at the
Liberty of either Plaintiff or Defendant, who shall think themselves agrieved
at any Judgment of any Inferior Court of Common Pleas within this Colony,
Liberty of App ^l to the Superior Court.
to appeal to the next Superior Court of Judicature, Court of Assize, and
General Goal Delivery, where the Party agrieved shall have a Hearing of said
Case, provided he shall file his Reason^ of Appeal in the Clerk's Office of
said Court, Fourteen Days before the Sitting of said Court appealed to, and
shall bring the whole Attested Copy of the said Case, taken out of the Clerk's
Office of the Court appealed from: And shall within Five Days after the Rising
of such Court appealed from, give Bond to the Clerk of said Court, to prosecute
such Appeal with Effect, or in Default pay Costs. And the Judgment and
Determination of said Superior Court, shall be a final Issue and Determination
of all Causes there tried, excepting only, and saving an Appeal to the General
Assembly in all Personal Actions, Vide Act 1741.
and from thence to the King in Council, where the Matter in Controversy will
admit thereof, and an Appeal directly to the King in Council in all Causes not
Cognizable before said Assembly, that by Law will admit the same.

AND be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That there shall be appointed
and chosen by the General Assembly of this Colony, Jud^^s and Cl^rks to be
appointed by the Gene^al A^sembly.
four skilful Persons in each County in the Colony, for Judges of the Inferior
Courts of Common Pleas therein holden (who shall be commissioned by the
Governor for the Discharge of said Office) and one Clerk in each Inferior Court
of Common Pleas, which said Judges and Clerks shall sustain their Offices
Quamdiu se been gesserint. Vi^^ Ac^ 1^33.
And there shall be annually appointed and chosen by the General Assembly
aforesaid, one Sheriff to each respective County.

An ACT for the Regulation of sundry Proceedings in the several Courts within
this Colony.
WHEREAS it has been adjudged most conducive to the Ease of the Inhabitants of
this Colony, and to the speedy Attaining of Justice, to erect Inferior Courts
of Common Pleas in the several Counties within ^he same.

For the better Regulating and Settling the Proceedings whereof, and also of
the Courts of Justices, the Town Council, etc.

BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly of this Colony, and by the Authority of
the same, That no Person shall, at one and the same Time, be either a Judge, or
a Clerk of any of the Inferior Courts of Common Pleas within this Colony, What
Persons are (...) ^or Judges and Clerks of the Infe^io^ C^urt^
and sustain the Office of an Assistant, or any other Place whereby he is
created a Judge of the Superior Court of Judicature, Court of Assize, and
General Goal Delivery, where Appeals are brought from said Inferior Courts:
Nor shall any Person sit as a Judge in any of said Inferior Courts of Common
Pleas, or in the Courts of General Sessions of the Peace in any Case wherein he
has before given Judgment as a Justice of the Peace.

AND be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That both the Judges (...) the
Superior and Inferior Courts aforesaid, in entering up judg^^nt upon any Bond,
(...) Power to chanc^^ Ins^ru^^n^^
or other Specialties. conditioned for the Payment of Money, shall have Power
to chancer down such Instru^^nt to the just Damages.

Vi^e Act 17^^.
AND (...) Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all transitory Action^ may
be brought forward and tried at any of the Inferior Cou^^s in this Colony,
(...) any Inf^ri^r Count in the (...).
at the Election of the Party suing, and the Writs issued forth from any of
said Courts shall run throughout this Colony, to be directed to the Sheriff of
the County where the Defendant lives, or is sued.

AND be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, No Ex^cut^^^ to (...) obtain^d
in an^ (...) until (...) Day^ after Rising.
That no Execution shall be granted forth out of the Superior Court of
Judicature, Court of Assize, and General Goal Delivery, or any of the Inferior
Courts of Common Pleas in this Colony, on any Judgment obtained therein, until
Eight Days after the Rising of such Court; and that every such Execution be
returnable to the next succeeding Court that granted the same.

AND be i^ ^urther Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, New (...) allowed i^ an
Appeal.
That in any Appeal from the Judgment of one or more Justice of the Peace in
this Colony, to any of said Inferior Courts of Common Pleas, or Courts of
General Sessions of the Peace, or from any of said Inferior Courts to the
Superior Courts, both Appellant and Appellee shall have the Benefit of any
further or new Evidence relating to the Case.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Person who
is not a Freeholder, and an Inhabitant in the Colony, Attorney to (...) of
Writs, in (...) those (...) are not Freeholders.
shall commence an Action in any of said Inferior Courts of Common Pleas, that
then the Attorney to such Person being a Freeholder, shall sign the Backside
of the Writ with his Christian and Surname, which shall oblige him to pay Cost
in case the Plaintiff is Cast, Non Suit, or Discont^^ues his Action, as though
Bond had been given in the Clerk's Office, and the Clerk shall have Two
Shillings for the same, as though Bond were given.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That in any Case
commenced at any o f the aforesaid Inferior Courts of Common Pleas, In cas^ of
Pl^as (...) and^* (...) to the Superi^^r Court.
and where there are offered Pleas of Abatement, Pleas in Bar, or Demurrer,
relating to said Action, it shall be in the Power of either Plaintiff or
Defendant, who is dissatisfied with the Judgment thereon given, to reserve the
same to the Superior Court, for a further and final Judgment concerning the
same: And in like Manner from a Justices Court to said Inferior Court of Common
Pleas.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That no Person that is a
Member of the General Council whereto Appeals are brought from the Town
Council, shall at any Time hereafter have any Voice in any of the Town Councils
in this Colony: Any Law, Usage or Custom to the contrary, notwithstanding.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Justices of the
Superior Court of Judicature, Court of Assize, and General Goal Delivery,
Superior Court to amend mistaken Reasons of Appeal.
at their respective Sessions are hereby allowed, and empowered, in all Cases
coming before them by way of Appeal from any Inferior Court, or Sessions of the
Peace in this Colony, upon the Appellant's paying reasonable Costs to be taxed
by said Court, to order an Amendment of such defective or mistaken Reasons of
Appeal as shall be brought before them, and to proceed to Trial as though no
such Error had been committed.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Justices of the
Inferior Courts of Common Pleas, and Courts of General Sessions of the Peace,
InferiorCourts to do the same
in the several Counties within this Colony, shall, and hereby have the same
Power granted to them, in case of any Lapse or Mistake in Reasons of Appeal,
from the Sentence or Judgment of any of his Majesty's Justices of the Peace
that shall come before the said Courts: Any Law, Usage, or Custom, to the
Contrary notwithstanding.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That when and so often
as it shall happen the Superior Court of Judicature, Court of Assize, and
General Goal Delivery, or the Inferior Court of Common Pleas in any of the
respective Counties within this Colony, cannot be held and kept on the Day by
Law prefixed for the Holding of the same, by reason of Death or Sickness
befalling any of the Justices of such Court, or an providential, necessary, and
unavoidable Let or Hindrance of their Attendance, The s^veral Courts to be
adjourned on urg^nt Occasions.
it shall and may be lawful to and for any one of the Justices of such Court,
respectively by Wri^ under his Hand and Seal, directed unto the Sheriff of the
County, therein inserting the Occasion thereof, to adjourn the said Court unto
a further Day, as in the said Writ shall be expressed, at as little distance of
Time as possibly may be from the Day whereon by Law the Court should have sat,
that so Justice be not deferred or delayed: And the Sheriff upon Receipt of the
said Writ, shall cause Publication to be made of the same, at the usual Place
of the said Court's Sitting, and some other of the most public Places within
the same County; and also to cause a Signification of such Adjournment, and the
Time unto which it is made, to be posted up at or near the House or Place where
the said Court uses to sit, and other public Places as aforesaid, to the
Intent that unnecessary Travel, Charge and Attendance of all Persons concerned,
may be prevented: And the Sheriff is to return such Writ with his Doings
thereon, into the Clerk's Office of such Court: And all Pleas, Writs, Actions,
Suits, Plaints, Process, Precepts, Recognizances, and other Thing and Things
whatsoever returnable, or having Day or Days in the said Court, shall stand,
abide and continue unto the said Adjournment, and b^ h^ld, deemed* and
adjudged, to be as good, effectual and av^il^ble in L^w, to all Intents,
Constructions, and Purposes, as if such Court had been held and kept on the Day
by L^w for holding of the same, and no Adjournment thereofhad been ma^e.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That every Grand and
Petit Juryman chosen as aforesaid, Jurym^n to be e^gag'd.
before his acting as such, shall take each his respective Engagement following.

YOU A. B. being of the Grand Inquest on the Behalf of our Sovereign Lord the
King, do hereby Promise and Engage to make a true Return to this Court, of all
such Bills as shall be presented to you, or such Breakers of Law, as shall come
to your Knowledge. And this Engagement you make and give, upon the Peril of the
Penalty of Perjury.

YOU A. B. being of this Jury of Trials, shall well and truly try the Issue of
this Case, and all Cases that shall be committed unto you from this Court,
between the Parties, Plaintiff and Defendant, according to Law and Evidence,
and to keep together until you agree of a Verdict in the Case o^ Cases
committed to you, and make true Return of the Verdict or Verdicts unto this
Court, and to keep your Own and Fellows Secrets. And this Engagement you make
and give, upon the Peril of the Penalty of Perjury.

YOU A. B. being of this Jury of Trials, shall well and truly try, and true
Deliverance make, between our Sovereign Lord the King and the Prisoner at the
Bar, according to Law and Evidence, and to keep together until you are agreed
of a Verdict or Verdicts in the Case or Cases that shall be committed to you
from this Court, and to keep your Own and Fellows Secrets. And this Engagement
you make and give upon the Peril of the Penalty of Perjury.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That no General Officer
of this Government, during his continuing such, General Officers to be summoned.
shall be arrested or attached, either in Body or Goods, in any civil Case,
upon mean Process; And that in all civil Cases that any Person may have against
a General Officer, upon mean Process it shall be by Summons, and no otherwise.
And all Writs of Arrest or Attachments upon mean Process, that shall be granted
forth contrary hereunto, shall be Null and Void in Law, and the Defendant shall
have his Costs and Damages accruing thereon.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That there be fo^thwith
erected in each respective County, one County Courthouse, Courthouse and Goal
to be erected in each County.
and one County-Goal, where one is already erected, meet and convenient for the
Holding of Courts, and Security of Prisoners; the Charge whereof to be defrayed
and paid out of the General Treasury.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That on the first
Wednesday of May annually, there shall be chosen and elected one Secretary for
the Colony, Secretary to be Clerk of the Superior Court
who shall be Clerk of the Superior Court of Judicature, Court of Assize, and
General Goal Delivery within the same.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if the Clerk of the
Superior, or of any of the Inferior Courts for the Time being, shall be absent
at any time from any Court or Courts of Judicature, (either by Sickness or
other Occasions) where he is ordered or appointed to attend: that then and in
such Cases, it shall and may be lawful for the Judges of such Court to appoint
another Person to officiate in his or their Room and Stead, during such Absence.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all Writs of Error,
Fines, and common Recoveries, brought forward or suffered within this Colony,
shall be heard, tried, passed, suffered, and adjudged, at the Superior Court of
Judicature, Court of Assize, and General Goal Delivery, who shall have
Cognizance thereof.

AND this Form of a Writ of Arrest, shall be used in all the Counties of this
Colony. ss. (...) GEORGE the Second by the Grace of GOD, of Great Britain,
France, and Ireland, KING, Defender of the Faith, etc. To the Sheriff of our
County of (...) or to his Deputy, Greeting.
WE Command You to arrest the Body (...) of (if (...) may be found in your
Precinct) and for want of (...) Body, to Attach (...) Goods and Chattels, and
(...) or them in safe Custody keep, until (...) give sufficient Bond,
returnable according to Law, to answer the Complaint of (...) at the next
Inferior Court of Common Pleas, to be holden at (...) within and for our said
County of (...) on the (...) Tuesday of (...) next ensuing the Date hereof, in
an Action of (...)

As by Declaration to be filed in Court will be fully set forth (...) To the
Damage of the Plaintiff (...) Pounds, Current Money of New England. Hereof fail
not, and make true Return of this Writ, with your Doings thereon. Witness (...)
Esquire at (...) this (...) Day of (...) in the (...) Year of our Reign, Annoque
Domini, 172(...)



An ACT for the Establishing and Regulating of Fees.
BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly of this Colony, and by the Authority of
the same, That the Establishment of the Fees of the several Officers in this
Colony, shall be as follows, viz.

Fees for Probate of Wills, etc.
L. s. d. FOR the Probate of Wills, where the Inventory exceeds One Hundred
Pounds, Six Shillings. 00 06 00 For every Hundred Pounds, above One Hundred
Pounds, Two Shillings, ^o the Town Council. For Probate of Inven^ory, where no
Will appears, and where the Inventory exceeds not One Hundred Pounds, Six
Shillings. 00 06 00 If above, for every Hundred Pound more, Two Shillings to
the Town Council.

Clerk's Fees.
L. s. d. FOR Entering a Caveat against the Probate of a Will, or granting of
Administration. 00 01 00 For taking Bond, and granting Administration under the
Seal of the Town Council. 00 04 00 For Registring a Will or Inventory, not
exceeding one Page. 00 01 06 If above one Page, for every Page, Twenty Five
Lines in a Page. 00 01 00 For a Copy of Ditto from the Record, if not above one
Page. 00 01 06 If above one Page, for every Page, Twenty Five Lines in a Page.
00 01 00 For every Citation and Summons. 00 00 06 For Bond and granting
License, under the Town Council Seal. 00 05 00 For Bond of every Person that
comes to dwell in the Town. 00 01 00 To the Town Sergeant or Constable, for
serving every Summons or Citation, if not above a Mile from home. 00 01 00 If
above a Mile from home, for every Mile, Three Pence.

AND the Town Clerk shall have and take the same Fees, as the Clerk of the
Council, for Recording of Instruments, and granting Copies of the same.

Secretary's Fees.
FOR Engrosing the Acts or Laws of the General Assembly, Ten Shillings each, to
be paid out of the General Treasury. 00 10 00 For every Commission for the
Justices of each County, Ten Shillings, to be paid out of the General Treasury.
00 10 00 For every Commission for a Military Officer, Three Shillings, to be
paid out of the General Treasury. 00 03 00 For a special Warrant or Mittimus,
by Order of the Governor and Council, Two Shillings and Six Pence. 00 02 06 For
every Commission under the Colony Seal, for Places of Profit, Ten Shillings. 00
10 00 For every Bond. 00 02 00 For every Order of Council, to the Benefit of
particular Persons, Two Shillings and Sixpence. 00 02 06 For every Petition to
the Governor and Council, or General Assembly. 00 03 00 For transcribing the
Acts or Laws, passed by the General Assembly, into a Book, Twelve-pence a Page,
each Page to contain Twenty Five Lines, and Eight Words in a Line, and so
proportionably, to be paid out of the General Treasury. For a^tending the
General Assembly and Superior Court of Judicature, Court of Assize, and General
Goal Delivery, and General Council, Ten Shillings per Diem, to be paid out of
the General Treasury. For fixing the Colony Seal to any Commission or other
Writing. L. s. d. 00 05 00 For Entering a Protest in Court. 00 01 00

In the Superior Court.
Justices Fees.
FOR Entry of every Action for Trial. 00 15 00 Out of which to the Clerk. 00 02
06 For taking every special Bail. 00 02 00 For allowing of a Writ of Error. 00
03 00 For allowing a Habeas Corpus 00 02 00 For confessing Judgment. 00 02 00
For acknowledging Satisfaction of a Judgment on Record. 00 01 00 In all
criminal Cases, where a Fine is set. 00 06 00 For Taxing every Bill of Cost. 00
01 00 Clerk's Fees.
FOR filing Reasons of Appeal. 00 01 00 For a Copy of Ditto, not exceeding on^
P^ge. 00 01 06 If above one Page, for every Page above, Twen^y Five Lines in a
Page. 00 01 00 For filing an Answer. 00 01 00 For a Copy of Ditto, not
exceeding one Page. 00 01 06 If above one Page, for the first Page. 00 01 06
For every Page above one. 00 01 00 For every Action called. 00 01 00 For a Copy
of Record, not exceeding one Page. 00 01 06 If above one Page, for the first
Page, 00 01 06 For every Page above one. 00 01 00 For a Scire Facias and Seal.
00 02 06 For Recording Judgment and Verdict. 00 02 08 For Entering up Judgment
upon Default. 00 01 08 For a Writ of Execution. 00 05 00 For a Distringas, 00
01 06 For Acquittal of Felony, or Suspicion thereof 00 02 00 For Entering a Rule
of Court. 00 01 08 For every Bond taken. 00 02 00 For Entering Traverse upon
Indictment. 00 01 08 For filing an Inventory of Goods taken by Execution. 00 01
00 For Entering an Order of Court for Reference to Auditors. 00 01 08 For every
Person summoned. 00 00 06 For filing every Return in Court. 00 01 00 For every
Evidence read in Court. 00 00 06 For withdrawing an Action. 00 01 00 For the
Discharge of any Person upon Bail, to the Peace, etc. 00 02 00 For every
Petition read in Court. 00 01 00 For Order thereon. 00 01 00 For Examining
Bills of Cost. 00 01 00 For searching of Records, One Shilling, and if above
one Hour, for every Hour above one, Twelve Pence.

In the Inferior Court.
Justices Fees.
FOR Entry of every Action. 00 12 00 Of which the Clerk is to have. 00 02 00
For taking special Bail. 00 02 00 Confessing Judgment. 00 01 00 Of which the
Clerk one Quarter. For acknowledging Satisfaction of Judgment on Record. 00 01
00 For Taxing every Bill of Cost. 00 01 00 Clerk's Fees.
FOR every Writ and Seal. 00 01 06 For Entering Appearance. 00 00 06 For Entering
Judgment and Verdict, etc. 00 02 08 For Copies of Records, the same as in the
Superior Court. For every Action withdrawn or Nonsuit. 00 01 00 For every
Execution. 00 03 06 For every Return to Court. 00 00 08 For filing every
Declaration. 00 01 00 For Copy thereof, not exceeding one Page, 00 01 06 If
above one Page, for the first Page, One Shilling and Six Pence, and every Page
above one. 00 01 00 For filing every Plea. 00 01 00 For a Copy thereof, not
exceeding one Page. 00 01 06 If above one Page, for the first. 00 01 06 And
every Page above one. 00 01 00 For filing Reasons of Appeal. 00 01 00 For Copy
of Ditto, not exceeding one Page. 00 01 06 If above one Page, the first 00 01
06 And every Page above one, 00 01 00 For filing an Answer to Reasons of
Appeal. 00 01 00 For Copying the same, as for Reasons of Appeal. For every
Action called in Court. 00 01 00 For Entering Nihil Dicit. 00 01 00 For Scire
Facias and Se^^. 00 02 00 For a Di^tri^g^^ ^0 01 00 For Entering a Rule of
Court. 00 01 08 For Bond in the Clerk's Office. 00 02 00 For filing an
Inventory of Goods taken by Execution. 00 01 00 For Entering an Order of Court
for Reference to Auditors. 00 01 08 For every Person summoned. 00 01 04 For
every Evidence read in Court. 00 00 04 For wi^hdr^wing an Action. 00 01 00 For
attending the Court, Five Shillings per Day. For searching of Records, One
Shilling, and if above an Hour, Twelve Pence for each Hour. Clerk of the
Sessions of Peace, his Fees.
FOR Entering Complaint or Indictment. 00 02 00 For Discharge of a Recognizance.
00 01 00 For making forth Process against Criminals. 00 01 06 For every
Summons. 00 00 04 For every Warrant for the Peace of good Behavior. 00 01 06
For Acquittal of Felony, or Suspicion thereof. 00 01 00 For Searc^^ng of
Records, One Shilling, and for every Hour above one, Twelve Pence. Sheriff's
Fees.
FOR Serving a Writ; not above a Mile from home, (if above one Mile, Two Pence
forward, and Two Pence backward.) 00 02 00 For attending a Prisoner, before
imprisoned, by the Day, Two Shillings and Six Pence. 00 02 06 For a Copy of a
Writ. 00 01 06 For attending the Court by the Day. 00 06 00 To Attendance in
every Action. 00 01 00 For Discharge of any Person upon Bail, to the Peace. 00
01 00 For every Evidence read in Court. 00 00 04 For Bail Bond in civil
Actions. 00 00 02 For Bond to the Peace of good Behavior. 00 04 00 For Serving
Execution, if not exceeding Ten Pounds, One, Shilling and Six Pence per Pound.
If above Ten Pounds, and not exceeding Fifty Pounds, Twelve Pence per Pound. If
above Fifty Pounds, and not exceeding One Hundr^d Pounds, Nine Pence per Pound.
If above One Hundred Pounds, and not exceeding Two Hundred Pounds, Sixpence
per Pound. If above Two Hundred Pounds, and not exceeding T^ree Hundred Po^nds,
Four-pence per Pound. For all Executions above Three Hundred Pounds. Twopence
per Pound. For all Executions served out of the Town where the Sheriff lives,
Twopence per Pound, backward and forward. For turning the Key on every
Prisoner committed. 00 03 04 For Discharge of every Person upon Bail to the
King. 00 02 00 Attorney General's Fees.
FOR every Bill of Indictment drawn and found by the Grand Jury 03 00 00 For
every Ditto drawn and past to the Court, if not found by the Grand Jury. 00 05
00 For every Criminal executed to Death. 02 00 00 For Discharge of every Person
upon Bond to the Peace. 00 10 00 For every Days Attendance in the Court. 00 06
00 Other Fees allowed in Court.
FOR Attorneys and Council's Fees. 00 15 00 For Drawing a Bill of Cost. 00 01
00 For every (...) discharged from Bail to the King, to the Sergeant. 00 01 06
For every Evidence attending the Court by the Day. 00 02 00 For every Action
called by the Sergeant. 00 01 00 For every Days Attendance by the Sergeant. 00
05 00 For the Jury paid down by the Plaintiff. 01 04 00 For Power of Attorney,
and Probate of the same. 00 04 00 For Travel of every Plaintiff and Defendant
recovering Cost, Two Pence per Mile to the Court, and the same back again. For
every Witness summoned, the same.

A LAW, Made and passed by the General Assembly of His Majesty's Colony of
Rhode Island, and Providence Plantations, Held at Warwick, the last Wednesday
of October, 1729.
An ACT Stating the General Treasurer's Salary, and for taking Security, etc.
BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly of this Colony, and by the Authority of
the same it is Enacted, That the Person who shall be the General Treasurer,
shall give in Bond to the Recorder of this Colony, and to his Successors, in
the ^um of Twenty Thousand Pounds, for the faithful Execution of his Office,
and the Trust reposed in him; and that all succeeding General Treasurers that
shall from time to time be elected and chosen, General Tr^^surer to gi^^ Bond.
give in such Bond to the General Recorder for the Time being, for the Use of
the Colony, as the General Assembly shall think necessary; Vide Act 1731.
and that the Salary of the General Treasurer be One Hundred Pounds per Annum,
and so in Proportion for a lesser Time; and that the former Act for the
Treasurer's Allowance, be, and it is hereby repealed.

LAWS, Made and passed by the General Assembly of His Majesty's Colony of
Rhode Island, and Providence-Plantations, Held at Newport, the last Tuesday of
February, 1729.
An ACT for stating and proportioning each Town's Quota of Iurymen, to be sent
to the Inferior Courts of Common Pleas, etc. in the several Counties in this
Colony.
BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly of this Colony, and by the Authority of
the same, it is Enacted, That each Town in this Colony, send to each of the
Inferior Courts of Common Pleas, and General S^ssions of the Peace, in their
respective Counties, the following Number of Jurymen, Num^^r of ^ra^d and (...)
J^ror^, to (...) sent from (...) Town.
viz. Newport, the Number of Nine Grand Jurors, and Eight Petit Jurors;
Portsm^uth, Three Grand Jurors, and three Petit Jurors; Iames-Town, One Grand
Juror, and one Petit Juror; Vide Act 173^ 173^ 1741 1742 1743
Providence, Eight Grand Jurors, and seven Petit Jurors; Warwick, Three Grand
Jurors, and three Petit Jurors; East-Greenwich, Two Grand Jurors, and two Petit
Jurors; Westerly, Five Grand Jurors, and four Petit Jurors; North-Kingstown,
Four Grand Jurors, and four Petit Jurors; and South-Kingstown, Four Grand
Jurors, and four Petit Jurors.

An ACT in Addition to an Act made and past by the General Assembly, sitting by
Adjournment the Third Monday in June, 1729, entitled, An Act for the
Establishing Inferior Courts of Common Pleas in the several Counties of this
Colony.
BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly of this Colony, and by the Authority of
the same it is Enacted, On an Appeal to the In^^rior Court, the Judg^ent to be
f^nal.
That in all Appeals from Justices Courts, to the Inferior Courts of Common
Pleas, the Judgments of the said Inferior Courts of Common Pleas thereupon,
shall be final.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That each and every
Person who shall be chosen a Juror, to serve in any of the Inferior Courts of
Common Pleas in this Colony, J^rors Fine for Neglect.
and shall refuse or neglect to serve therein, shall be fined the Sum of Thirty
Shillings, Vide Act 1742.
to be taken and recovered in manner as heretofore has been accustomed, upon
the Neglect of Jurors in the General Court of Trials.

An ACT directing the Admitting of Freemen in the several Towns in this Colony.
BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly of this Colony, and by the Authority of
the same it is Enacted, Who are to be admitted Freemen.
That no Person whatsoever, shall be admitted a Freeman of any Town in this
Colony, unless the Person admitted be a Freeholder of Lands, Tenements, or
Hereditaments, in such Town where he shall be admitted free, to the Value of
Two Hundred Pounds, or Ten Pounds per Annum, or the eldest Son of such a
Freeholder. Vide Act 174^.
And if it be made appear, that any such Freedom has been obtained, through any
fraudulent Means or Contrivance, such Freedom shall, and is hereby made Void;
Any Law, Custom, or Usage to the Contrary hereof in anywise notwithstanding.

An ACT declaring who shall be exempt from serving Jurors, in any Court or
Courts of Judicature, Common Ple^s, etc. in this Colony.
BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembl^, and by the Authority of the same it is
Enacted, That the Persons following, and no other, shall be exempted from
Serving as Jurors in the sever^^ Courts in this Colony; to wit, All that have
sustained the Post of Members of the General Council, Secretary, Who are Exempt
from serving as Jurors.
Sheriff, Attorney General, General Treasurer, and those that have been
Justices of the Courts of Common Pleas, all Justices of the Peace in
Commission, and all Military Officers in Commission, also all Persons that are
actually Members of any Town Council, Vide Act 1737.
Ministers of any Congregation, Practitioners of Physic^, Apothecaries,
Millers, Ferrymen, Constables, Town Sergeants, Town Clerks, and Clerks of the
Inferior Courts of Common Pleas: Any Law, Custom, or Usage to the Contrary
hereof, in anywise notwithstanding.

LAWS, Made and passed by the General Assembly of His Majesty's Colony of
Rhode Island, and Providence-Plantations, in New England, Held at Newport, on
the first Wednesday in May, 1730.
An ACT for Settling and Ascertaining the Jurisdiction of the Justices of the
Peace throughout this Colony.
BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly of this Colony, and by the Authority
thereof, it is Enacted, That the Justices of the Inferior Court of Common
Pleas, be created and made Justices of the Peace of the respective Counties to
which ^^ey belong, in Criminal Cases, and that they be commissionated
accordingly; and that the Justices of the Peace, (...) of (...) ^^f^rior Co^rt
t^ be Justi^^^ of the P^ace in their respective C^u^ties.
and Wardens for each Town in this Colony, be chosen and commissionated for
their respective Towns, in all Matters of a Civil Nature, as heretofore; but
that their Power in all Criminal Affairs, and for the Preservation of the
Peace, etc. extend throughout the County: Any Law, Custom, or Usage, to the
Contrary hereof, in ^nywise notwithstanding.

An ACT asserting the Claim of this Colony to the Jurisdiction the Gore of Land
to the Eastward and Northward of Pautucket River.
WHEREAS sundry of the Inhabitants of a Tract of Land that lies between
Pautucket River, and the North Line from P^^tu^ket F^lls, to the South Line of
the Massachusetts Bay, having made Application to this Government at sundry
Times, and in diverse Manners, that they might be taken into the Jurisdiction
thereof, being Part and Parcel of the same; but more especially a^ the present
Sessions of Assembly have earnestly insisted upon that Matter, as t^eir Right
and Privilege, according to the Royal C^arter, granted by King CHARLES the
Second, Anno Domini, 16^3.

Whereupon this Assembly are moved to take the same into Con^ideration, and
thereupon do consider the Premises in the following Manner.

First, That upon -- Application formerly made by the Petitioners, this
Government asserted their Right, by Virtue of said Charter, to the Jurisdiction
of that Part of the Government.

Secondly, That upon a further Prayer made at the Sessions of Assembly held the
last Wednesday of October, Anno Domini 1729, the said Assembly addressed the
Government of the Massachusetts to appoint a Committee to meet ours, appointed
for the Ascertaining the Boundaries between the two Governments. And although the
Honorable Council of the Province passed a Vote for coming into those
Measures, yet the Honorable House of Representatives non-concurred therewith.

AND the Petitioners still repeating their Prayers and Petitions to the
Assembly of this Colony, at their Sessions in February last, they made a
farther Address to the Government of the Massachusetts, desiring them to join
with us in so necessary a Work, by appointing a Committee as aforesaid* which
Matter was to be entered upon by our Committee on the last Tuesday of April
last, who had Power to join with a Committee of the Government of the
Massachusetts, in Case they appeared for that Purpose, otherwise to proceed to
run the Line in that Part of our Government, according to o^r Charter, which
they, viz. our said Committee accordingly did, and have made Report thereof to
this Assembly, wherein and whereby we find, that the Petitioners, with diverse
other P sons thereabouts, are within the Jurisdiction of this Governmen,
according to the plain and express Boundaries and Circumscrip^ion in our said
Charter.

UPON which Considerations, This Assembly do declare all that Part of ^he Land^
p^ss^ss^d by the Peti^ioners, and others within the Line lately run by our
Commissi^ners aforesaid, (...) Claim ass^rt^d.
to be, and they are hereby decl^red to be within the Jurisdiction of this
Colony, and for the Fu^ure shall be within ^he Jurisdiction of the Town of
Providence, for that the same is Part and Parcel of he Lands contained in our
said Charter.

An ACT for the Relief of poor Sailors and their Families.
WHEREAS it manifestly appears, by long Experience had, that great Expense and
Charge has arisen to the Town of Newport, by poor Sailors, being taken sick,
wounded, or lame, and dying; and at the same Time leaving, or having little or
nothing to support themselves or Families, under those deplorable
Circumstances, and often suffer for want of Relief, before the Authority of the
Town have Notice thereof: And excessive Charges are often brought against the
said Town, by Persons who lodge the said Sailors, in ^xpectation to be paid
accordingly.

For Remedy whereof,

IT IS EAACTED by the Governor and Council, and General Assembly of this
Colony, That from and after the Publication of this Act, all Sailors, Mariners
and others, that sail out of this Government, in any Ship or other Vessel, the
Master only excepted, Six Pence per Month to be deducted out of Sailors Wages.
shall allow, and have deducted out of their Wages, at the Rate of Six Pence
per Month for each Person, as shall appear to be due by the Master's Portlage
Bill, a true Copy whereof the said Master shall deliver in upon Oath to the
Naval Officer of this Colony, for the Time being, to whom the said Master of
every Ship or other Vessel, that disch^rges his Men within the same, shall pay
the aforesaid Six Pence per Month, at the Time of his Entering said Vessel,
after his Arrival from his Voyage: Which Money so paid, shall be deducted out
of the Sailors Wages by the said Master, and the same applied to the Use and
Benefit of such poor Mariners and their Families as aforesaid, at the Direction
of the T^wn-Council for the Time being, to and for the Use as aforesaid.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the s^id
Naval-Officer shall have administered unto him an Oath for the fai hful
Performance of his D^^y, Naval Officer to be under Oath.
in respect to this Act, both as to receiving the Moneys, and delivering or
paying the same by O^der of the said Town Council, according to the Tenor of
this Act.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, Tha^ the said Naval
Officer for the Time being, shall keep a fair Book of Record of what he shall
receive and pay by Virtue of this Act, as also the Master's and Vessel's Name,
and the Place where she belongs; And to keep a Book of Record.
for the Doing and Performing whereof, the said Naval Officer shall be allowed
out of the said Moneys by him received as aforesaid, at the Rate of Ten per
Cent. for all such Moneys that shall pass through his Hands by Means of this Act.

PROVIDED, AND be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, Pro^iso.
That when and as often as any Moneys deducted and paid as aforesaid, out of
the Wages of any Mariner that belongs to any other Town in this Colony, the
same shall be disposed of by the Town Council of the Town where such Mariner
belongs, for the Use and Ends aforesaid: Any thing in this present Act
contained to the Contrary, in anywise notwithstanding.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That any Mariner,
Seafaring Man, or other as before described, being taken sick, lame, or the
like, within this Colony, in any Family, or herein brought, and under those
Circumstances, the Master or Mistress thereof shall give Notice of the same to
some Justice of the Peace or Town Council Man, Upon any Sailo^s being taken
st^k, Notice thereof to be given.
within six Days after they are so taken or brought, upon the Penalty of Forty
Shillings, to be recovered by a Warrant of Distress from the said Town Council,
and the same to be applied to and for the Use as aforesaid: Any Law, Custom, or
Usage to the contrary whatsoever notwithstanding.

LAWS, Made and passed by the General Assembly of His Majesty'^ Colony of
Rhode Island, and Providence Plantations, in New England, held at Newport by
Adjournment, on the third Monday of June, 1730.
An ACT enabling the Secretary of the Colony for the Time being, to surrogate
and appoint a Deputy under him.
BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly, and by the Authority thereof it is
Enacted, That i^ shall and may be lawful for the Secretary of the Colony for
the Time being, to surrogate and appoint a Deputy under him; who is hereby
authorized and empowered to act and ^o, D^puty Secretary a Power.
in the Absence of the Secretary, all Things, by Law required of him, as fully
and amply in all Things* and to all Intents and Purposes, as the Secretary
himself might or could do, were he personally present, he appointing such a One
as the Governor shall approve of.

An ACT to prevent Indians being abused and wronged by designing and ill-minded
Persons, in making them Servants.
WHEREAS several evil-minded Persons in this Colony, of a greedy and covetous
Design, often draw Indians into their Debt, by selling them Goods at
extravagant Rates, and get the said Indians to be bound to them for longer Time
than is just and reasonable, to the great Hurt and Damage of the Indians, and
to the Dishonor of the Government.

For the Preventing whereof for the Future,

BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly of this Colony, That no Indian shall be
bound an Ap^rentice or Servant to any of His Majesty's Subjects in this Colony,
without the Consent, Allowance and Approbation of two Justices of the Peace,
Indi^n^ to be (...) by two Ju^ti^^s o^ Wa^d^^s.
or Wardens of this Colony, and for good Consideration therefore, and testified
to under the Hands of such Justices or Wardens: Any Law, Custom, or Usage to
the Contrary, in any wise notwithstanding.

A LAW, Made and passed by the General Assembly of His Majesty's Colony of
Rhode Island, and Providence-Plantations, in New England, Held at Providence,
on the last Wednesday in October, 1730.
An ACT for Regulating Appeals from Judgments obtained upon Bond, at any of the
Inferior Courts in this Colony.
BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly, and by the Authority thereof it is
Enacted, Persons Appealing to p^y double Cost.
That all Persons appealing from a Judgment given upon Bond for Money, at any
of the Inferior Courts in ^his Colony, to the Superior Court, shall pay down
the Cost, and give Bond to prosecute the same; and if cast at the Superior
Court, shall pay double Cost and Damages.

LAWS, Made and past by the General Assembly of His Majesty's Colony of
Rhode Island, and Providenne-Plantations in New England, held at Newport, by
Adjournment, on the third Tuesday of February, 1730.
An ACT for Erecting and Incorporating the Out-Lands of the Town of Providence,
into three Towns.
FORASMUCH as the Out-Lands of the Town of Providence are large, and
replenished with Inhabitants sufficient to make and er^ct thr^e Townships,
besides the Town of Providence, and the Land lies convenient for the same;
which will be of great Ease and Benefit to the Inhabitants of said Land, in
transacting and negotiating the prudential Affairs of their Town, which for
some Time past has been very heavy and burdensome.

BE IT Therefore Enacted by the General Assembly, and by the Authority thereof
it is Enacted, That from Warwick Township, eight Miles and an half be measured
on the Seven Mile Line (so called) in said Providence, (...)
and a Boundary there fixed, and from the said Boundary a Line be drawn to
Pautucket River, to a Place called the Ware, about half a Mile northerly of
Pautucket Falls; and that for the Time to come, the Town of Providence extend
no farther West and North than the aforesaid Lines.

AND it is also Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all the rest of the
aforesaid Out Lands, to the E^stward of the aforesaid Seven Mile Line, and to
the Northward of the Bounds of the Town of Providence, be, and they are hereby
incorporated and ^rected a Town, called and known by the Name of Smithfield;
and that the Inhabitants thereof, from time to time, Smithfi^ld.
shall have and enjoy the like Benefits and Privileges with other Towns in this
Colony, according to our Charter.

AND it is further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all the rest of the
aforesaid Out-Lands to the Westward of the aforesaid Seven Mile Line, be
erected and made into two Towns, the dividi^g Line between them to begin at the
North East Bounds of the Town of Providence, at the Bounds and Monument there
made and erected on the aforesaid Seven Mile Line, and from thence to extend
West Six Degrees and Thirty Minutes North, to Connecticut Colony. And all the
Lands to the Westward of the said Town of Providence, and to the Southward of
the said Dividing Line, and to the Northwa^d of the Town of Warwick, be, and
they are hereby erected and incorporated a Town, to be called and known by the
Name of Situate; Situate.
and the Inhabitants thereof, from time to time, shall have and enjoy the like
Liberties and Privileges as other Towns in this Colony by our Charter do.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Rest and
Residue of the aforesaid Out-Lands, that lie to the Westward of the aforesaid
Seven Mile Line, and to the Northward of the West Line drawn from the Northwest
Corner of the Town of Providence, bounded North on the Province of the
Massachusetts Bay, and West on the Colony of Connecticut be, and they are
hereby erected and incorporated a Town, Gl^ces^^r.
and called by the Name of Gloucester; and the Inhabitants thereof for the Time
being, shall have and enjoy the like Liberty with other Towns in this Colony,
agreeable to our Charter.

AND be it further Enacted, That the Justices of each of the respective Towns
of Smithfield, Situate, and Gloucester, Town (...) to be cal^'d ^or choosing
Town-Officers.
grant forth a Warrant in some convenient Time, to call the Inhabitants of each
Town together, to choose and elect such Town Officers as they shall h ave
Occasion for, as the Law directs, and to appoint the Time of their Town
Meetings, and the Places.

AND each of the Towns aforesaid, are to send two Deputies to the next General
Assembly, and so on, Number of Deputies.
as by the Charter is ordered.

AND that Major William Smith, and Captain Richard Waterman, take wi^h them a
Surveyor, and from the Northwest Co^ner of Providence Town, run up a Line to
Connecticut Colony, West, Six Degrees North, according as the Assembly has
ordered and appointed the same.

AND that Providence send one Grand and one Petit Juryman to the Superior
Courts. Smithfield the same; Number of Jurors to be sent from each Town.
and Situate and Gloucester each one Petit Juryman; and Providence send four
G^^nd Jurors and three Petit Jurors to the Inferior Court, and Smithfield two
Grand and two Petit Jurors, and Situate one Grand Juror and one Petit Juror,
and Gloucester the same.

AND b^ it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Town of
Providence, Smithfield, Situate and Gloucester, Each Town to (...) Bank Money.
have each their P^oportion of the Interest of the Bank Money appropriated to
the Use of the Towns of this Colony, according to the Sum^ that the Lands lying
in each Town are mortgaged for; (...) that what Money the Town Treasurer of
Providence has adv^nced for the Town before the Division thereof be repaid him
out of the whole Interest Money, before Division thereof be made.

An ACT for Raising and Emitting One Thousand Pounds in Bills of Public Credit.
WHEREAS the General Treasury is quite exhausted of small Bills, none being in
the Treasury under Twenty Shillings for Exchanging.

IT is therefore Enacted, That the Sum of One Thousand Pounds ^e made upon the
small Plates of Four Shillings and Six Pence, Three Shillings, Two Shillings
and Six Pence, and One Shilling, and delivered into the General Treasury for
Exchanging; and that there be One Thousand Pounds of old Money set apart in
lieu thereof, and presented to the next Assembly following, in order to be
burnt: And that the Grand Committee be, and they are hereby appointed to make
said Bills, and agree with Mr. Vernon for impressing the same, and be paid out
of the General Treasury.

An ACT for preventing Appeals from the Judgment of the Justices, given against
Persons for profane Swearing and other Crimes.
WHEREAS it has been allowed to appeal from the Judgment of the Justices given
on Persons guilty of pr^^hane Swearing or Cursing, and upon Persons that Labor
on the First Day of the Wee^, or use any unlawful Recreation thereon; and also
those that have been convicted of Galloping: Which is found to be very
troublesome, and tends to the Perversion of Justice.

For the Preventing whereof for the Future,

BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly, and by the Authority thereof, That
henceforward no Person whatsoever shall have the Liberty of appealing from any
Judgment given, against him by any Justice or Justices of the Peace, on being
convicted of any of the aforesaid Crimes.

An ACT for the better Regulating the commencing of Suits at the Inferior
Courts in this Colony.
WHEREAS by a Clause of an Act, entitled, An Act for the Regulating of sundry
Proceedings in the several Courts within this Colony, sundry Suits have been
commenced out of the Counties where both Plaintiff and Defendant live, which is
conceived irregular and contrary to the Ease of the Inhabitants.

For the Preventing whereof,

BE IT ENACTED by the ^eneral Assembly of thi^ Colony, and by the Authority
thereof, it is Enacted, That after the Publication of this Act, in all
transitory Actions commenced in any County in this Colon y, the Plaintiff or
Defendant in the (...), if an Inhabitant of this Colony, Transito^y A^^^ons
(...) commence^ in the County (...) l^ves or the Defendant i^sued.
shall be an Inhabitant or Residen^ in the County where such Action shall be
commenced, or the Defendant shall be arrested within the same. And all Actions
commenced contrary hereunto, shall be deemed to be wrong brought, and shall
abate.

LAWS, Made and passed by the General Assembly of His Majesty's Colony of
Rhode Island, and Providence Plantations, in N^^-England, held at Newport by
Adjournment, on the second Monday of June, 1731.
An ACT for Regulating the Assize of Cask, and preventing Deceit in packing
Beef, Pork, and Fish for S^le.
BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly, and by the Authority of the same, it is
Enacted, Assize of Cask.
That henceforth all Barrels and Half Barrels made in this Colony, shall be of
the Assize following, viz. Barrels Thirty One Gallons and an Half. Half B^rrels
Fifteen Gallons and three Quarts, and be made of good, sound, and well-seasoned
Timber.

AND that every Cooper making such Cask, shall set his Brand-Mark on the same,
with the two first Letters of his N^me.

AND that all Barrels and Half Barrels more than a Gallon under the Assize
aforesaid, shall be forfeited, Those under the Assize, to be forfeited.
one Moiety thereof to the Informer, and the other Moiety to and for the Use of
the Poor of such Town where the same shall be seized, to be paid to the Town
Treasurer, for the Use aforesaid.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all Cask,
containing either Beef, Pork, or Fish, before it be expos^d to sale, Beef, etc
to be viewed.
be duly viewed and examined by a sworn Packer of this Colony, who is carefully
to see that the same be good and merchantable, and well packed, before he shall
set his Mark ther^^n.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That in case any Beef,
Pork, or Fish, shall be shipped on board any Ship or other Vessel for
Exportation, (...) shipped ^^thout the P^ck^^'s Mark, to be forfeited.
not having the Packer's Mark thereon, as aforesaid, the Master of such Vessel
shall forfeit the Value of such Beef, Pork, or Fish, so shipped; the one Half
to the Informer, the other Half to and for the Use of the Colony: To be
recovered by Bill, Plaint, or Information, in any Court of Record in this
Colony.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority afore^aid* That in case any Tarr,
(...) Com^odi^ies i^ (...) to be forfeited.
Cider, Beer, or other liquid Commodity, be exposed to sale in this Colony, in
any Barrels, or Half Barrels, that are not of the Assize aforesaid, the some
shall be forf^ited, the one H^lf to the Informer, and the other Half to and for
the Use of the Colony; to be recovered (...) aforesaid.

AND that any Justice of the Peace, or Warden, upon Complaint or Inf^rmation to
him made, shall grant forth his Warrant for seizing and securing the same, to
and for the Use aforesaid.

AND that this Act be not in Force until three Months after the Rising of this
Assembly.

An ACT for Emitting Sixty Thousand Pounds in Bills of Public Credit.
WHEREAS the Soil and Climate of this Government is very suitable and proper
for the Raising and Curing Hemp, and the Situation thereof very convenient for
the Promoting the Whale and Cod Fishery.

AND Forasmuch as it is conceived, that a Premium, or Bounty, for the
Encouragement of the Hempen Manufactury, and of the Whale and Cod-Fishery,
would be of great Advantag^ and Benefit to Great Britain, our Mother Country;
and at the same time relieve the Government under its present Difficulties and
Distresses, by giving Trade and all other Business a different Turn; so that by
Industry and Labor, the Government may not only be Serviceable to his Majesty,
in raising Hemp and furnishing the Navy with Naval Stor^s, etc. but be able to
call in and sink the Bills of Public Credit formerly emitted, according to the
several Acts for that Purpose, and carry on their Affairs public and private,
for the f^ture, without the present Difficulty and Trouble.

Which being duly considered:

BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly of this Colony, and by the Authority
thereof, it is hereby Enacted, Sixty Thousand Pounds (...)
That the Sum of Sixty Thousand Pounds in Bills of Credit, of the same (...) or
of those already emitted by this Government, be fo^^hwi^h impress^d and made,
upon the Plates heretofore used by (...) Colony, whereof Two Thousand Five
Hundred Pounds shall ^e of the Denomination of Ten Shillings and under.

AND said Bills shall be in the Hands, and under the Care of the Six present
Trustees of the Colony, Grand Committee to sign the Bills.
called the Grand Commit^ee; ^y Three or more of whom shall have full Power and
O^der ^v^n them, to sign all the aforesaid Bills for the Use of the Colony.

AND the said Trustees are hereby authorized to make any (...) other Device in
the Escutcheon, or other Part of said (...), Any further Devic^^ ^ay be mad^ by
them.
(...) they shall judge necessary for the Preventing said Bills (...) being
counterfeited; and shall provide all Materials (...) for the Making the same,
at the Charge of the (...).

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That w^^n and as soon as
the said Sixty Thousand Pounds is made and (...), To be deliv^red to the
Trustees.
he same shall be delivered to the Trustees for the resp^ctiv^ Towns in thi^
Government, in such Manner and in the s^m^ P^oportion as the last Bank was
distributed; said Grand Committee taking Receipts for the same.

AND said Bills shall be let out by the several Committees of the respective
Towns in this Colony, To be let upon Land Security.
upon Land Security of double the Value of the Money taken up, in the same Way
and M^nner as the former Bills of the Colony were let out.

AND the Time said Bills shall be emitted for, shall be Ten Years, at which
Period, from the Emitting the same every Mortage shall be out, and the Money
due thereby payable to the Colony.

AND every Person t^kin^ up s^id Bills in the aforesaid Man^^^, shall give Bond
for the Payment of the Interest thereof, Bond to be given for (...) Int^r^st.
at the Rate of Five Pounds per Cent* unto the General Treasurer, to and for
the Use of the Colony, t^ b^ ^pprop^i^^^d to the Ends and Purposes (...).

AND be it further Enacted by the A^t^ority aforesaid, That in the Letting out
said Bills, no Person be supplied with above Three Hundred Pounds, What Sum^
are to be ^et, and to who^.
or be suffered to t^ke up l^ss th^n Twent^ Five Pounds; and that those Persons
that have taken of the former Banks, to the Sum of Three Hundred Pounds, upon
their own Privilege, be not admitted to take of said Bill^, until others be
supplied: But if any Bills shall remain in the Hands of the Committee for three
Months after received, then said Persons excluded, shall have equal Liberty
with others.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Hon. John
Wanton, Esquire Deputy Governor, Lieut. Col. William Coddington, The Trustees to be
a Committee for Newport.
Mr. George Goulding, Mr. Iab^e^ Brenton, jun. Lieut. Col. Daniel Updike, (...)
Gideon Wanton, be, and they are hereby appointed and chosen to be the Six
Trustees of the Colony; and they are also appointed a Committee for the Town of
Newport, to hire out their proportionable Part of said Bills.

AND the following Persons are chosen and appointed Committees for the other
Towns in the Colony, to hi^^^ out the proportionable Part of said Bills that
fall to each respective Town, Viz.

FOR the Town of Providence, Col. Nicholas Power, and Mr. Richard Waterman.

FOR the Town of Portsmouth, Mr. William Anthony and Mr. Gideon Freeborn.

FOR the Town of Warwick, Mr. John We^ks, and Mr. John Rhodes.

FOR Westerly, Lieut. Col. Joseph Stanton, and Capt. John Babcock.

FOR New-Shoreham, Capt. T^omas Mitchel, and Mr. Samuel Rathbone.

Names of the Committees for the other Tow^s.
FOR North-Kingston, Mr. Francis Willet, and Mr. I^remiah Gould,

FOR South-Kingston, Mr. Rouse Helm, and Capt. I^^n Potter.

FOR East-Greenwich, Mr. Pardon Tillinghast, and Mr. Thomas Spencer.

FOR Iames-Town, Capt. Nicholas Carr, and Mr. Tideman Hull.

FOR Smithfield, Maj. William Smith, and Mr. Jonathan Sprague, jun.

FOR Situate, Mr. Stephen Hopkins, and Mr. Benjamin Smith.

FOR Gloucester, Mr. Elisha Knoulton, and Mr. Walter P^t^place.

AND be it further Enacted, Rule^ for (...) the Money.
That the Committee for signing said Bills, and the several Committees for the
Letting out said Bills, shall in all other Cases, regulate themselves by the
Rules and Practices prescribed and made use of in the Letting out the former
Banks.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That out of the Interest
of said Money, for the Encouragement of the Hempen Manufactury, there shall be
paid out of the General Treasury, Nine Pence per Pound for every Pound of good
Water-rotted, well manufactured Hemp raised in this Colony; B^^^ty on (...) and
F^^x, Vi^^ Act 1727. and 172^.
the Proof of which is to be made as the former Law relating to Hemp ^irects:
And in like Manner Four Pence per Pound of well-manufactured Flax raised in
this Colony, and hatchelled; which shall be viewed as the Law directs, in
Relation to Hemp, and whereof Proof shall be made as the Law directs, relating
to Hemp.

AND the aforesaid Bounty, or Premium, shall be continued for the Space of Ten
Years from the Publication of this Act. Vide Act 1744.


AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That for the Promoting
the Whale and Cod-Fishery, there shall be paid out of the Interest of the said
Money, Bounty on O^l, W^al^-bone, and Fi^h.
the Bounty of Five Shillings for every Barrel of Whale Oil, One Penny for
every Pound of Whale-bone, and Five Shillings per Quintal for every Quintal of
good Merchantable Cod-Fish, which shall be caught in any of the Vessels owned
in this Colony, and sailing out of some Part thereof, and by Fishermen residing
therein.

PROVIDED, said Oil be tried, and said Fish be made in thi^ Government, or the
said Fish, Oil, or Whalebone be taken in the Vessels owned as aforesaid,
Prov^so*
and brought into the Government, and disposed of therein: The Proof of which
Facts shall be made out to the Treasurer, by Certificate from such Officers as
shall be appointed for that Purpose.

AND the aforesaid Bounty, or Premium, shall continue for Ten Years after the
Publication of this Act. Vide Act 1744.


AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That in each and every
Town in the Government, where there shall be a Necessity thereof, there shall
be annually chosen, at their Town Meetings for Election of Town Officers, one
or more Persons for the Viewing and Examining Whale-Oyl, B^n^* and Cod-Fish,
Officers to view Oil, etc.
brought into the Colony; who shall have Power and Authority of swearing or
engaging the Persons claiming the Bounty for the same, or any other Person as
he or they shall think fit; and shall determine what Whale-Oyl, B^ne or
Cod-Fish, is merchantable and good, and entitled to the Bounty given by the
Government, according to this Act.

AND the Certificate of such Person chose, as aforesaid, and engaged, Their
Fees.
shall be a sufficient Order to the General Treasu^er, for the Payment of the
Bounty given by this Act. And every such Officer shall be allowed Four Pence
for every H^ndred Weight of Whalebone, and Four Pence for every Barrel of Oil,
and Four Pence for every Q^intal of Fish viewed as aforesaid; to be paid always
by the Persons claiming the Bounty as aforesaid.

An ACT for stating the Size of Clapboards and Shingles, and the better
Regulating the measuring of Boards, Plank, Timber, etc.
WHEREAS Boards, Plank, and Timber, are usually sold by the Measure set upon
them at the Mills wh^re they are sawn; and Bundles of Shingles and Clapboards
are marked for a greater Number than they contain: Wherein great Fraud and
Deceit is too often pr^cticed by ill-minded Persons.

For Prevention whereof:

BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly, and by the Authority of the same, it is
Enacted, That in each Town within this Government, where Boards and Plank,
Shingles, Clapboards and Slitwork, are usually imported or brought for Sale,
Officers to be app^lute^ for viewing of Boards, etc.
or exported beyond Sea, there be two or more honest Persons, that are skilful,
annually elected by such Town, at the Time of the Anniversary Choice of their
Town Officers, to be Surveyors and Measurers of Boards and Plank, Timber and
Slitwork, and of Shingles and Clapboards; who shall be sworn or engaged as
other Officers are, to the faithful Performance of the Duty of their Office.

AND all Boards, Plank, Timber, and Slitwork, imported or brought for S^le,
before their Delivery, shall be viewed, surveyed and measured by one of the
said Officers, where he shall have any Doubt of the Measure; having
Consideration of the Drying and Shrinking: Their Duty.
Also shall ma^k anew all such to the just Contents, making reasonable
Allowance for Rots, Splits and W^ins.

AND the B^yer shall pay the Officer Twelve Pence per Thousand for viewing
only, And F^es.
and Twelve Pence per Thousand for m^^su^ing and marking, and pro Rato for a
lesser Quantity than a Thousand Feet.

AND no Boards, Plank, Timber, Slitwork, Shingles, or Clapbo^rds, shall be
delivered upon Sale or Exportation beyond Sea, before they have been viewed and
surveyed, (...), etc. to be ma^^'d.
and also measu^ed, if Occasion be, and marked anew by one of said Surv v^^s,
on Pain of being forfeited, or the Value thereof, by the S^ ler or Shipp^^, to
the Use of the Poor of the Town where they are sold or shipped.

AND be it further Enacted by the General Assembly, That all Shingles and
Clipboards exposed to sale by Quantities in B^ndles that do not hold out the
Number they are marked for, S^ingles, etc. (...) the Nu^^er they are marked for.
unl^s^ it appears some have been drawn or shaken out of the Bundles after
packing, shall be forfeited to the Use of the Poor of ^he Town where they are
exposed to sale; the Charge of searching and telling them to be first deducted.

AND every Bundle of Shingles and Clapboards, which according to the sound
Judgment of the Surveyor will hold out one wi^h another Four Inches and an half
in Breadth, shall be (...) merchantable; provided the Shingles are Fifteen or
Eight^en Inches in Length,; and the Clapboards not less than Fou^ Foot and an
Half long, Their Size.
and the least to be Four Inches in Breadth and upwards, and one Half of an
Inch thick, or upwards; and all that are otherwise to be culled and burnt, and
so many more, if need be, till what are left of said Bundles will bear four
Inches and an Half, according to the Judgment of the Surveyor; who shall have
for his Service Four Pence for every Thousand surveyed, and Four Pence per
Thousand for telling, to be paid by the Buyer, where no Forfeiture is for want
of Tale, to satisfy the Charge: And for every Thousand he culls and binds up
again, Twelve Pence per Thousand, and proportionable for less Qu^ntities, to be
paid by the Ow^^r and Seller of said Shingles and Clapboards, returning the
Remainder to the Owner, if any be, after the Charge is deducted: Any Law,
Custom, or Usage, to the Contrary hereof, notwithstanding.

AND it is fu^ther E^a^ted by the Authority aforesaid, That this Act be not in
Force until Three Months after the Rising of the Assembly.

An ACT for impowering the Towns of Smithfield, Situate, and Gloucester, to
lay out their High Ways in the same Manner as they are laid out in Providence.
FORASMUCH as the Town of Providence was, by an Act of Assembly made and passed
in this Colony, the third Tuesday in June, 1725, enabled to lay out their High
Ways by indifferent Persons appointed by the Town Council, etc. as in and by
said Act is required: And the Towns of Smithfield, Situate, and Gloucester,
being since taken out of Providence,

IT IS ENACTED by the General Assembly of this Colony, and by the Authority
thereof, That it shall and may be lawful to and for the Town Council of the
respective Towns of Smithfield, Situate and Gloucester, to lay out all such
High Ways as they shall hereafter lay out in their respective Towns, in the
same Way and Manner as the Town of Providence do and have done, Vide Act 1725.
by Force and Virtue of the aforesaid Law. Any Law to the Contrary hereof,
notwithstanding.

An ACT for securing the Interest of the Second Bank, for the three Years yet
to come, before the Payment of any Part thereof.
IT is Ordered and Enacted by the General Assembly, and by the Authority of the
same, That the several Committees of the several Towns forthwith proceed to
take Bonds of the Mortgagers of the Second Bank, Bonds to be taken.
for the three Years the Sum is to continue upon Loan; and also to take Bonds
for the several Payments of the Principal in Ten Years, by one Tenth Part
yearly, as was taken and done in the first Bank.

LAWS, Made and passed by the General Assembly of His Majesty s Colony of
Rhode Island, and Providence Plantations, in New England, held at Warwi^k, on
the last Wednesday of October, 1731.
An ACT for preventing Mischief being done in the Town of Newport, or in any
other Town in this Government, by firing of G^ns and Pistols, and throwing of
Squibs, F^^e-Works, etc. in the St^eets or Lanes ^f the Town of Newport, or
other Towns, or in any Tavern in any Town in this Colony.
FORASMUCH as Damage has often been done in the Town (...) Newport, and other
Towns in this Government, by f^ ^ing ^ G^ns and Pistols in the Streets or
Taverns in the said T^wns, and by Firing and Throwing of Squibs, Rockets, and
other Fire-Work^, ev^n to the Endangering the Loss of several Lives, and firing
of the Towns.

For the Preventing whereof for the Future,

BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly of this Colony, and by the Authority of
the same, it is Enacted, No Gun^, etc to be fired after dark.
That no Person whatsoever presume to fire any Gun or Pistol, o^ fire or throw
any S^uib, Rocket, or other Fire-work, in the S reets of any of the Towns of
this Government, or in any Tav^^n of the same, after dark, on any Night
whatsoever.

AND if any Person shall do contrary hereunto, he, she, or they so offending
and doing, shall upon Conviction before one or more Justice or Justices of the
Peace of the County where such Offense shall be committed, pay a Fine of Five
Shillings for the first Offense, and for the second Offense Ten Shillings,
Fine. Vide Act 1737.
and for every other Offense Twenty Shillings: And no Appeal shall be from any
such Judgment.

AND no Bonfire shall be made on Gun Powder Treason Day in any Town in the
Colony, but by Direction of the Authority of such Town, (...) to be (...)
Direction of Authority.
upon the Penalty of the Offenders being (...) according to the Discretion of
the Justices, not exceeding Twenty Shill^ngs, to be for the Use of the Town
where such (...) is commi^ted: Any Law, Custom, or Usage to the C^^^rary,
notwithstanding.

An ACT in Addition to an Act, entitled, An Act for emitting Sixty Thousand
Pounds in Bills of Public Credit; made and passed in this Colony, in June,
1731.
FORASMUCH as in and by said Act, the aforesaid Sixty Thousand Pounds is (...),
for ten Years, and no Provision made for the Calling-in the same; and it being
equitable and just, and worthy the Care of the Government, to see that all its
Members have Justice done them.

BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly of this Colony, and by the Authority of
the same, it is Enacted, That at the Expiration of the ten Years the aforesaid
Sixty Thousand Pounds are let out for, each Person having of the aforesaid
Money, shall give ten distinct Bonds to the Grand Committee, or other
Committees in their Names, Ten distinct (...) to be (...).
for the Sum contained in their respective Mortgages; each Bond to contain one
tenth Part of the Sum contained in the Mortgage, and one of the said tenth
Parts to be paid annually wi hout In^erest, for ten Years, as aforesaid, un^il
the whole of s^id B^nk be paid in.

AND upon any Person's discharging and taking up any of s^id B nds, the Sum or
Sums by him or them paid, shall by one or more of the s^id G^^nd Committee,
Sums p^^d to be (...).
be indorsed upon the Back of such Person's Mortgage, until the whole be paid.

AND when the same shall be effected by a complete Payment of the whole Sum,
then every such Mortgage Deed shall be discharged, Mortgage Deed^, how
discharged.
by an Entry to be made in the Margin of the Record where such Mortgage Deed is
registered, by the Town Clerk of each respective Town.

An ACT for the Enlarging, and further Augmentation of the General Treasurer's
Salary.
THERE being a considerable Quantity of Paper Bills emitted by this Colony upon
Loan, and the Interest payable in the same Specie; and the said Bills by often
passing wear and decay, which causes them often to be exchanged in the
Treasury; and for which the Treasurer has no sufficient Allowance.

BE IT THEREFORE ENACTED by the General Assembly, and by the Authority thereof,
it is Enacted, That the Treasurer's Salary be, Tr^asurer's Salary.
and it is hereby augmented to the Sum of Two Hundred Pounds per (...), this
Curr^ncy.

LAWS, Made and past by the General Assembly of His Majesty's Colon^ of
Rhode Island, and Providence-Plantations in N^w-England, held at Newport, the
second Monday in June, 1732.
An ACT for Establishing the Sheriff's Traveling Fees.
BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly, and by the Authority of the same, it is
Enacted, Sheriff's Tr^velling Fees from the County-house to the Habitation of
the Defendant.
That the Sheriff of ^^ch County shall have his traveling Fees from the
County-^^^se to the Dwelling House or Place of Habitation where the (...) sued
shall be arrested by the said Sheriff, and not from his own House.

An ACT prohibiting the Inholders and other Retailers within this Colony, from
trusting the Inhabitants thereof above Twenty Shillings.
WHEREAS there was a Petition preferred by several of the Inholders or Vintners
of this Colony, setting forth the man^ Inconveniences that many Persons in
this Government have la^^ured under, by their Extravagant Expenses at Taverns,
and other Alehouses.

For the Preventing whereof for the Future,

BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly, and by the Authority of the same it is
Enacted, That if any Inholder, No Inhabitant to be trusted by Taverns above 20
^, on P^in of losing th^^r Debts.
Retailer, or Alehouse-keeper in this Colony, trust any Inhabitant of this
Colony, for Liquors, above the Sum of Twenty Shillings; All Actions brought for
the same, shall be barred.

An ACT for Payment of the Bounty upon Flax and Hemp, raised Anno Domini 1731.
BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly, and by the Authority of the same, it is
Enacted, Bounty on F^ax, etc. when to b^gin.
That the Bounty upon Flax and Hemp raised in this Colony, Anno Dom. 1731, be
paid by the General Treasurer, out of the Interest of the Fourth Bank, when due.

An ACT for Review of Real Actions, relating to Titles of Land.
WHEREAS there should be no Failure of Justice; and that the Party against whom
Suit is commenced be not foreclosed by a Judgment against him, whereas upon a
new Trial be might be better provided of new and further Evidence for his
Defense; R^view in real Actions.
which probably could not be obtained in so short a Time as by Law is allowed
for a Trial by Appeal.

BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly of this Colony, and by the A^tho^ity of
the same, it is Enacted, That it shall be in the Libe^^y of ^he Par^y aggri^ved
at the Judgment given in the S^perio^ Count of Ju^icature, No Person to r^view,
without having obtained one Judgment of Court.
by new Process to review the said Cause ^nce in said Court. Provided, the said
Party has obtained a Judgment either at the Inferior or Superior Court, and no
other Person whatsoever.

AND the Party bringing such Action of Review, shall produce attested Copies of
the whole Case; and each Party shall have the Privilege of any further Plea and
Evidence upon the Review. (...) Case.


PROVIDED no Action of Review shall be brought after the Expiration of one Year
from the Time of rendering the Judgment to be reviewed: To ^e broug^t in a (...)
Time.
And that the said Writ or Summons shall be taken out three Months before the
Setting of said Court, to which the Review shall be brought; and that the
Reasons of said Review shall be therein contained. Writ 3 M^nths before Si^^ing
of the Court.
Saving unto any Infant, Feme Covert, or Person imprisoned, or beyond the Sea,
the Term of one Year, after their coming of Age, or such Imperfection removed,
to b^ing his or her Action of Review, and not afterward: Any Law, Custom, or
Usage, to the Contrary, notwithstanding.

AND it is further Enacted, That Execution shall not be stayed or suspended by
Reason of any such P^ocess or Action of Review; (...) for to ^e stopp^d on
R^view.
and the Party recovering on the Review, shall recover all former Costs
dispended: And said Judgment on Review shall in no ways hinder the Party
ag^^ieved wi^h such Judgment, App^al home, (...) other (...)
to appeal to His Majesty in Council in Great Britain, in all Cases where the
Law of the Colony permits and allows the same: Any Law, Usage, or Custom, to
the Contrary hereof, in any wise, notwi^hstanding.

LAWS, Made and passed by the General Assembly of His Majesty's Colony of
Rhode Island, and Providence Plantations, in N^w-England, held at Providence,
the last Wednesday of October, 1732.
An ACT for the further Encouraging the Destroying of Wolves in this Colony
WHEREAS the former Encourag^^ent for Destroying of Wolves in this Colony, For
destroying of Wolves.
is found by Experience to be not sufficient for the Extirpating and Rooting
them out of this Government: But they are very often doing great Damage, by
killing Sheep, young Cattle, etc.

BE IT THEREFORE ENACTED by the General Assembly, and by the Authority of the
same, it is Enacted, That whosoever shall kill any Wolf or Wolves in this
Colony, shall be allowed and paid out of the General Treasury, Ten Pound^ per
Head.
Ten Pounds per Head, for every Wolf killed as aforesaid; Vide Act 1740.
he or they p^ocuring a Certificate for the same, in Manner as was required by
the former Act: Any Law, Custom, or Usage, to the Contrary hereof, in any wise,
notwithstanding.

An ACT Stating the Governor's Fees for signing Commissions, and taxing Bills
of Cost.
BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly, and by the Authority of the same, it is
Enacted, That the Governor shall be paid out of the General Treasury,
Commissions, Five Sh^llings.
Five Shillings for every Commission that he shall sign for any Officer in this
Government: and that his Fee for taxing Bills of Cost, Bills of Cos^, Two
^hil^ing^ and Si^ Pen^e^
be augmented to Two Shillings and Six Pence each.

A LAW, Made and passed by the General Assembly of his Majesty's Colony of
Rhode Island, and Providence-Plantations, in New England; held at Providence,
the Fourth Tuesday in January, 1732.
An ACT for Suppressing of Lotteries.
WHEREAS there has been brought up within this Go^ernment, certain unlawful
Games, called Lotteries, whereby unwary People have been led into a foolish
Expense of Money, Lotter^es.
which may tend to the great Hurt of sundry Families; and also the Reproach of
this Government, if not timely prevented:

For Remedy whereof,

BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly, and by the Authority of the same, it is
Enacted, That no Lottery shall be published or set forth within this
Government, from and after the Publication hereof; None to be drawn after 30^^
of April, 1733.
and that from and after the thirtieth Day of April, Anno Dom. 1733, none shall
publicly or privately exercise, keep open, show, or expose to be played at,
thrown at, drawn at, or shall draw, play, or throw at any such Lottery, either
by Dice, Vide Act 1744.
Lots, Cards, Balls, or any other Numbers or Figures, or any other Way
whatsoever; and every Person so exercising or drawing any such Lottery, in
Manner as aforesaid, shall for every such Offense, On Penalty of (...) Pounds.
forfeit Five Hundred Pounds: To be recovered, by Bill, Plaint, or Information,
or Action of Law, in any Court of Record within this Colony: One half whereof
for the Use of the Colony, the other half to the Informer, or Person suing for
the same.

AND be it further Enacted, Tha^ every Person that shall play, throw, or draw
at any Lottery, after the aforesaid thirtieth Day of April, No Pers^n to take a
Ti^k^t.
shall forfeit for every such Offense, Ten Pounds: To be recovered in Manner as
aforesaid, for the Use aforesaid. And for the more effectual Suppressing said
Lotteries, On Penalty of Ten Pounds.
after the thirtieth Day of April, all Justices, Judges, Sheriffs, Constables,
and all other Officers, within their respective Jurisdictions, are hereby
empowered and required to suppress and discountenance the same.

A LAW, Made and passed by the General Assembly of His Majesty's Colony o^
Rhode Island, and Providence-Plantations, in New England, Held at Newport, the
second Monday in June, 1733.
An ACT, repealing that Part of an Act, choosing the Judges and Clerks of the
Inferi^^ ^^urts of Common Pleas, and Gener^l Sessions of the Peace, in the
several Counties within this Colony, Quamdiu se been gesserint; and for
Electing said Judges and Clerks annually by the General Assembly.
WHEREAS there was an Act made and passed by the General Assembly of this
Colony, at their Sessions held in June, Part of an Act c^^sing Judges and
Cl^^ks of the Inf^^ior Court^ Quam diu se been g^ss^rint. Repealed.
in the third Year of the Reign of His present Majesty King GEORGE the Second,
entitled, An Act for Establishing Inferior Courts of Common Pleas in the
several Counties of this Colony, wherein the Judges and Clerks were elected
Quam diu se been gesserint; which is found very inconsistent with the
Constitution of this Government, and contrary to the same.

For Remedy whereof,

BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly of this Colony, and by the Authority of
the same, it is Enacted, That that Part of the said Act, relating to the
Choosing of said Judges and Clerks, be hereby repealed and declared null and
void, from and after the twenty-fifth Day of March, One Thousand Seven Hundred
Thirty and Four: R^p^aled after ^5th of March, 1734.
And that the said Judges and Clerks be chosen annually thereafter by the
General Assembly, at their Sessio^s, the first Wednesday in May. And that the
said Judges and Clerks now in Office, continue therein, Then c^osen at May
Sessions Annua^ly.
until the Sessions of Assembly in May next ensuing: Any Law to the contrary in
any wise notwithstanding.

LAWS, Made and past by the General Assembly of His Majesty's Colony of
Rhode Island, and Providence-Plantations in New England, held at Newport, the
second Monday in July, 1733.
An ACT for the Emitting of One Hundred and Four Thousand Pounds in Bills of
Public Credit.
WHEREAS Fort GEORGE, lately built by this Colony, for its Defense, being now
in a weak and defenseless Condition, by not having sufficient Cannon and
Ammunition suitable for such a Fort: And for Want thereof, said Fort is
rendered entirely useless; and would rather prove injurious to this Government
than a Benefit; and the Inhabitants of this Colony, His Majesty's good Subjects
might be in Danger of being destroyed in Case of an Invasion by an hostile
Enemy, so that the Intent of this Colony in building the said Fort would
thereby be defeated, if not speedily supplied with Cannon and Ammunition
necessary therefore; and there not being Money in the General Treasury
sufficient for the Accomplishment of the same.

AND whereas the Situation of this Government is very commodious for Promoting
the Whale and Cod Fishery; and that an Encouragement of the same would be very
Advantageous to the Inhabitants of this Colon^, as well as of great Service and
Benefit to Great Britain, our Mother Country. And forasmuch as it is conceived,
that the Carrying on the Whale and Cod Fishery, can be effected with
considerable less Trouble and Charge to the Persons concerned and trading
therein, in case a Peer was built or Harbor made at Block-Island, which is
judged would be very convenient, being so near the Fishing Ground for all
Vessels to resort to, using the Fishing Trade, in order to the Making and
Curing their Fish.

All which being duly considered:

BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly of this Colony, and by the Authority of
the same, it is Enacted, One Hundred and ^o^r Thous^^d Po^^ds in (...) made.
That the Sum of One Hundred and Four Thousand Pounds in Bills of Public
Credit of the same Tenor of those already emitted by this Government, be
forthwith impressed and made upon the Plates heretofore used by this Colony.
And said Bills shall be in the Hands and under the Care of the six present
Trustees of the Colony, called the Grand Committee; To be ^i^ned by the Grand
Committ^e.
and any three or more of them have full Power and Order given them to sign all
the aforesaid Bills, for the Use of the Colony.

AND the said Trustees are hereby authorized, H^ve Power to ^^ke any Devi^^ in
the (...) or oth^rwis^.

A d provide (...) for ma^ing the sa^e.


to make any further or other Device in the Escutcheon, or other Part of said
Bills, as they shall judge necessary, for the Preventing said Bills from being
counterfeited; and shall provide all Materi^ls for making the same, at the
Charge of the Colony: and draw Money out of the General Treasury as Necessity
calls for it.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, O^^ Hundred T ous^nd
(...) thereof to the (...) shall (...) ^ame.
That when and as soon as One Hundred Thousan^ Pounds, Part of the One Hundred
and Four Thousand Pounds, is made and finished, the same shall be delivered to
the several Committees for the respective Towns in the Government, in such
Manner, as the same shall be apportioned by His Honor the Deputy Gov ernor:
The said Grand Committee taking Receipts for the same.

AND said Bills shall be let out by the several Committees of the respective
Towns in this Colony, upon Land Security, To be let out on Land Secu^ity.
of double the Value of the Money taken up, in the same Way and Manner as the
former Bills of the Colony were let out.

AND the Time the said Bills shall be emitted for, Ten Years.
shall be ten Years upon Interest; after which Period, the principal Sums shall
be paid in, as is hereafter expressed. And every Person taking up said Bills,
in the aforesaid Manner, shall give Bon^ for the Payment of the Interest
thereof, ^ive per Centum per Annum.
at the Rate of Five Pounds per Centum per Annum, unto the General Treasurer,
to, and for the Use of the Colony; to be appropriated to the Ends and Purposes
hereaf^er mentioned.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, No greater Su^ than 300
P^unds* or less (...) 25 Pounds
That in the Letting out said Bills, no Person be supplied with above Three
Hundred Pounds, or suffered to take up less than Twenty Five Pounds: And that
those Persons who have taken of any one of the former Banks to the Sum of Three
Hundred Pounds upon (...) Privil^ge, be no^ admitted to take of said Bills,
(...) that (...) shall (...)
u^til others be supplied: But if any B^ll^ shall remain in the Hands of the
Committee for three Mon^h after rec^ive^, then said Persons excluded shall h^ve
equal Lib^^^y with (...).

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Honorable John
Wanton, Esquire Deputy Governor of this Colony, Trustees appointed.
Lieutenant Colonel William Coddington, Mr. George Goulding, Iahleel Brenton,
Esquire Lieutenant Colonel Daniel Updike, and Lieutenant Colonel John Gardner, be,
and they are hereby appointed and chosen the six Trustees of the Colony; and
they are hereby also appointed a Committee for the Town of Newport, Committee
for Newport.
to hire out their proportionable Part of said Bills.

AND the following Persons are chosen and appointed Committees for the other
Towns in this Colony, to hire out the proportionable Part of said Bills that
falls to each respective Town.

For the Town of Providence, Colonel Nicholas Power, and Mr. Richard Thornton.

For the Town of Portsmouth, Mr. Gideon Cornell, and Mr. Gideon Freeborn.

Committees for the several Towns.
For the Town of Warwick, Philip Arnold, Esquire and Mr. William Holden.

For Westerly, Lieut. Col. Joseph Stanton, and Mr. John Richmond.

For New Shoram, Captain Simon Ray, and Mr. Thomas Mitchell.

For North-Kingstown, Mr. Jeremiah Gould, and Captain George Thomas.

For South-Kingstown, Rouse Helm, Esquire and Captain John Potter.

For East-Greenwich, Dr. Thomas Spencer, and Mr. John Nicholls.

For Iames-Town, Captain Tiddeman Hull, and Mr. Daniel Weeden.

For Smithfield, Mr. Richard Sales, and Mr. Daniel Ienks.

For Situate, Mr. Stephen Hopkins, and Mr. Benjamin Fisk.

For Gloucester, Mr. Elisha Knolton, and Mr. Zachariah Eady.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Interest of the
said One Hundred Thousand Pounds shall be appropaiated in Manner following, The
first Years Interest to make a P^er or Harbor at Block Island, if the Charg
do^s not exceed that Sum.
viz. That the Committee appointed to go to Block-Island for the inspecting and
considering of a convenient Place for the Erecting a Peer or making a Harbor
there, shall return their Report to the next Sessions of Assembly, of the Costs
and Charges thereof; and in Case the said Sum reported by the Committee
requisite for that Purpose, exceed not the Interest of the said One Hundred
Thousand Pounds for one Year, that then the Sum reported be set apart, in order
to be appropriated for that Use; and the Remainder to be appropriated in Manner
hereafter mentioned. Provided, the Inhabitants of Block-Island shall dispose
and make over to the said Colony for the Use of the Fishery, Provided they make
over Land to the Colony suitable for the Fishery.
several Acres of Land convenient therefore: And in case the Cost and Charge of
erecting the said Peer, or making the Harbor shall exceed the first Year's
Interest of the said One Hundred Thousand Pounds, then the same to be
appropriated in Manner hereafter mentioned.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Sum of Four
Thousand Pounds, Part of the aforesaid One Hundred and Four Thousand Pounds,
The remaining Four Thousand Pounds for providing Fort George with Cannon, Shot,
Carri^^^s, etc.
be appropriated for the Providing the Fort with Cannon, Shot, Carriages, etc.
and that the same be paid into the General Treasury in Manner hereafter
mentioned: That in case the Interest of the said One Hundred Thousand Pounds
for the first Year, should not be sufficient for the Building said Peer or
Harbor, that then Four Thousand Pounds thereof be paid in, To be paid in and
Sunk.
in order to be sunk; and the one Half of the Remainder to be put in^o the
General Treasury, to defray the incident Charges of the Government; and the
other Half to be committed to each respective Town, for the Use of the same.

AND it is hereby provided, That in Case the Cost and Charge of building the
said Peer should not amount to the said Interest for the first Year, Out of the
Interest of the Hundred Thousand Pounds.
then the Remainder of what remains be paid into the General Treasury, in order
for the Sinking of the said Four Thousand Pounds; and if the Remainder should
not be sufficient for the Sinking of the same, that then Part of the Interest
of the said One Hundred Thousand Pounds for the second and third Years,
appropriated for the Use of the Colony, be appropriated for the Sinking of the
said Four Thousand Pounds.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, Of the remaining
Interest, half to the General Treasury, and half to each respective Town in
Proportion.
That what Interest remains of the One Hundred and Four Thousand Pounds for the
remaining Years after the Fort is supplied and Peer built, shall be
appropriated in Manner following; one half thereof to be paid into the General
Treasury to defray the incident Charges of the Government; and the other half
thereof to be sent to each respective Town for the Use of the same.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That at the Time of
emitting said Bills of Credit, Each Person at the Taking of the Bills to ^ive
H^^d for the Payment of the Tenths.
ten distinct Bonds shall be given to the Grand Committee, for the Payment of
the tenth Part of the principal Sum, by each Person taking, yearly, for ten
Years. And that the Payment of the first Tenth of the principal Sum, commence
in one Year after the Expiration of the Term of Ten Years given for the Payment
of the Interest of the principal Sum; To commence after the (...) of ^.
and that the same shall discharge each Person's Mortgage given for the
Security of the Money, when the whole principal Sum is paid.

An ACT for holding the General Assembly in October Session^ in the several
Counties on the main Land.
BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly, and by the Authority of the same, it is
Enacted, That the General Assembly of this Colony shall be held yearly, and
every Year, upon the main Land, (...)
the last Wednesday of October, one Year in the County of Providence, and the
ensuing Year in the County of King's County, and so on successively, at their
respective County Houses: And that the General Assembly be held the next
October Sessions at South-Kingstown, in the County of King'^ County: Any Law,
Custom, or Usage, to the Contrary hereof, in anywise, notwithstanding.

LAWS, Made and passed by the General Assembly of His Majesty's Colony of
Rhode Island, and Providence Plantations, in New England, held at Newport, the
first Monday in December, 1733.
An ACT for enabling the settled and ordained Ministers and Elders of every
Denomination of Christians in this Colony, to join Persons together in Marriage.
WHEREAS the Clergy of the Church of England, and the People called Quakers,
are empowered and tolerated to publish and join Persons together in Marriage;
and the Chart^r of this C^l^ny gives equal Rights and Privileges to all the
religions Societies in this Government; yet no Provision has hitherto been made
by any Act of Assembly, that the Ministers or Elders of the Presbyterian and
B^ptist Persuasions should have the Liber^y to publish and marry.

BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly of this Colony, and by the Authority of
the same, it is Enacted, That any Persons desirous of entering into a marriage
Estate, may make Application to either of the r^sp^ctive o^d^in^d Ministers or
Elders, Ministers and Elders of the Presbyteria^ and (...) P^^swasion to mar^^.
who are hereby authorized and allow^d d^^ing their being settled, to join such
Persons to^^ther; (...), they may l^wfully enter thereinto, and h^v^ be^n
publish^d according to the Laws of this Colony already in Fo^ce: O^ have had
their B^nes of Matrimony published in the (...) Congregation^, where ei^h^r of
the Parti^s usu^ll^ (...), thr^^ Day^ of publi^^ Worship, (...)

AND be it further Enacted, That any Persons that shall come into any Town from
another Government to be married by such Minister or Elder as aforesaid, If
from ano^^er Govern^e^t to p^odu^e a Certificate.
shall produce a Certificate under the Hand of lawful Authority of the
Government where such Persons dwell, that they have been published according to
the Laws of such Government.

AND be it further Enacted, That if any such Minister or Elder, shall presume
to join together any Persons in Marriage, that h^ve not been legally published
as aforesaid; or before lawful Objections that may be made are removed; Fines
how recovered ^f contrary thereto.
such Minister or Elder shall forfeit for the first Offense, Five Pounds, to
the Use of ^he Colony; for the second Offense, Ten Pounds, to the Use
afo^es^id: To be recovered by the General Treasurer by due Cour^^ of Law upon
Conviction thereof; and for the same shall be dive^^ed of his Power and
Authority to join any together in M^rriage for the future.

AND be it further Enacted, That every Minister or Elder shall keep an exact
Account of all Marriages performed by either of them, viz. The Names of the
Parties, An ex^ct Regi^ter to (...) k pt and once a Year to be returned to the
Tow^ Cl^rk.
and Time when married, and return the Parties Names once every Year after the
Comm^ncement of this Act, to the Clerk of the Town where e^ch marriage was
consummated, to be by him registered, when the s^id Cle^k shall be paid Six
Pence by the Minister or Elder for the R^^i^tring of e^ch marri^ge. Fe^ for
Marriage.
Moreover every such Minister or El^e^ shall b^ allowed Three Shillings by the
Parties by th^^ married, for join^ng such Persons together in marriage.

An ACT for regulating the several Town Councils within this Colony.
WHEREAS several of the Inhabitants within the resp^cti^^ T^wns in this Colony,
are dissatisfied with so great a Number of I^stices being and acting as Members
of the Town Counci^^ within said C^lony; and that in some Towns of the same,
there ^re more Justices than Town Council-men, whereby Towns are defeated of
the Privilege of having their prudential Affairs carried on by Persons of their
own choosing.

For Remedy whereof,

BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly of this Colony; and by the Authority of
the same, it is Enacted, Justice^ exclud ^ from b ing (...) Town Council.
That from and after the Publication* hereof, no Justice of the Peace within
this Colony, shall sit or act in any of the Town Councils within s^id Colony,
unless he be by the Town to which he belong^ first chosen a Town Council-man as
is usual in such Cases; saving and excepting the Towns of New Shoram and James
Town, which are under different Circumstances from other Towns by their Patents
or Charters heretofore granted by the General Assembly.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the P^esident or
eldest Town Council-man for the Time being, is hereby fully empowered and
authorized to administer any Oath or Oaths that shall or may be necessary in
said Town Councils: The major Part thereof being convened shall be a Quorum,
with full Power to act and do in all Cases as the Town Councils he^e^ofore have
done: President auth^rized to administ^^ Oath^, etc.

Vide Act 1666.


Any Law, Custom, or Usage, to the contrary hereof in anywise notwithstanding.

A LAW, Made and past by the General Assembly of His Majesty's Colony of
Rhode Island, and Providence-Plantations, in N^w-England, held at Warwick, the
first Monday in February, 1733.
An ACT for the Encouragement of killing the Bears and Wild Cats that shall be
found within this Colony.
WHEREAS it is found by Experience, that the remote Parts of this Government
have suffered considerable Damages by having their Goats, Sheep, and other
Creatures, dest^oyed by Bears and Wild Cats: And the In^abitants thereof being
new Settlers, and their Lands unimproved, to whom were a proper Encouragement
given for the Killing and D^stroying those ravenous Beasts, that Part of the
Country might with greater Ease and Advantage be subdued and cultivated; and
consequently would prove of great Service to the Public,

Which being duly considered,

BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly of this Colon^, and by the Authority of
the same, it is Enacted, That from and after the Publication hereof, if any
Person or Persons shall kill or destroy any Bear or Wild Cat within any Town in
this Government, being any of the Inh^bitants of said Colony, Inhabitants of
(...) C^t killed t^erein.

To be proved (...) T^wn wh^re kill^d.

Vid^ Act 1736.


such Person or Persons shall receive as a Premium or Reward therefore, the Sum
of Twenty Shillings for each of them; and the same to be paid out of the
General Treasury; provided the Fact be proved by Oath or Engag^ment of the
Party, or otherwise by Evidence, etc. before any Jus^ice of the Pe^ce in the
Town where it shall ^e performed; and a Certificate thereof produced to the
General Treasurer, shall be sufficient for him to pay the same.

A LAW, Made and passed by the General Assembly of His Majesty's Colony of
Rhode Island, and Providence-Plantations, in New England, Held at Newport, the
third Monday in June, 1734.
An ACT for regulating the Taxing of Bills of Cost at the several Courts within
this Colony.
BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly, and by the Authority of the ^ame, it is
Enacted, That all Bills of Cost be taxed within ten Days after the Rising of
each respective Court; To be ta^ed in ten Da^^ after Court.
and that the Attorneys have their Bills of Cost examined b^ he Clerk of s^id
Court, who shall have Twelve-pence for each B^^l by him examine d; and upon
their refusing or neglecting to h^ve their Bills of Cost taxed by said Time, O^
^ot to be ^ntr^d.
they shall lose the Bene^it of h^ving the same entered upon Record.

LAWS, Made and passed by the General Assembly of his Majesty's Colony of
Rhode Island, and Providence-Plantations, in New England; held at Providence,
the last Wednesday in October, 1734.
An ACT empowering the Clerks of the Inferior Courts of Common Pleas in each
County of this Colony, to appoint Deputies.
BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly, and by the Authority of the same, it is
Enacted, Tha^ each of the Clerks of the Inferior Courts of Common Pleas in this
Colony, be, and they are hereby fully empowered to appoint a Deputy from time
to time, as there shall be occasion, C^e^ks of the (...).
to receive Declarations and Answers into their respective Offices upon File,
and give out Copies thereof in the Absence of said Clerks; and that the said
Clerks shall be accountable for their Deputy's Mismanagement.

An ACT in Addition to an Act for the Regulating Mills within this Colony.
WHEREAS it has been found by Experience when some Persons in this Colony have
been at great Cost and Expense for building of Mills serviceable for the
public Good and Benefit of the Town, and considerable Neighborhood in or near
to where they have been erected, that in raising a suitable Head of Water for
that Service, it has sometimes so happened, that some sm^ll Quantity of Lands
or Meadows have been overflowed and damnified, not belonging to the Owner or
Owners of such Mill or Mills, whereby several Controversies and Law Suits may
arise.

^or Remedy whereof,

BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly of this Colony, and by the Aut^ority of
the same, it is Enacted, That where any Person or Person^ have already, or
shall here^fter set up any Water Mill or Mill^ upon his or their own Lands;
Persons (...) to make suitable Pond^.
or with the Cons^nt of the Proprietors of such Lands legally obtained,
whereupon such Mill o^ Mills is, or shall be erected or built, that then such
Owner or Owners shall have free Liberty to continue and improve such Pond for
their best Advantage without any Molestation.

AND if any Person or Persons find themselves aggrieved and damnified in the
Property of their Land^, by being over^^owed by the Owner or Occupant of such
Mill* Stopping or R^i^ing the Water, that in every such Case, the Party so
damni^ied in his Property or Prope^ties, Persons (...) of the Water, etc.
upon Application for Relief to the Court of General Sessions of the Peace, in
the County where such Mills or Ponds are, the said Court be, and are he^eby
empowred to issue out a Warrant directed to the Sheriff of the said County, to
summon and impanel a Jury of twelve or more good and lawful Men, at the Cost
and Charge of the Owner and Owners of such Mill or Mills: And the said Jury to
be sworn by a Justice of the Peace, to a faithful and indifferent Appraisal of
the yearly Damage done to the Person complaining of his or their Land as
aforesaid.

AND the Jurors Verdict being returned by the Hand of the Sheriff, to the next
Court of Sessions of the Peace for the County where such Mill or Pond is, being
allowed and recorded, shall be a sufficient Bar against any Action to be
brought for any Damages occasioned by the Flowing of such Lands as aforesaid,
no^ exceeding six Acres in any other Men's Lands, save only an Action of Debt
which the Complainant may bring for the Recovery of such yearly Sum or Sums of
Money, Saving (...) Ac^io^ (...) ^ea^ly Da^age^ (...).
from the Owner or Occupant of such Mill assessed as aforesaid, during the Time
of such Flowing. But if the Jury find no Damage for the Complainant, ^hen he or
they to be at the Cost of the Jury as shall be allowed by the Justices of said
Court.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That where any Persons
have heretofore, or hereafter shall erect or build any Mill or Mill^ in
Partnership, and where each of the Partners have a Property in the Place where
said Mill or Mills is, or shall be erected or built: M^thod^ to be taken, if
C^^^ ove^sies (...) a^ong the Own^^^.
And any Controversy or Dispute has arisen or shall arise between the Owners
of said Mills, whereby said Mills shall go to Ruin and become Useless; that
then, and in such case, it shall and may be lawful, for the Partner or P^rtners
who are desirous said Mill or Mills should be kept in Repair, to take with him
or them two good and credible Freeholders of the Neighborhood, and wi^h them
to go to the Owner or Partners, who do neglect to maintain, repair, and rebuild
his or their Part of said Mill or Mills, and request or demand of him or them,
to repair or rebuild his or their Part of said Mills, as the Case may requi^e;
but if the said Owner or Partners still refuse or neglect to repair or rebuild
as aforesaid, that then, and in such Case, the Owner or Partner aggrieved at
such his Refusal or Neglect, may make his or their Application to the Court of
General Sessions of the Peace within the County where such Difference arises;
which Court, upon Proof of his or their Proceeding as is is above required, are
hereby fully empowered, to grant forth a License to the Partners or Owners so
complaining, to repair and maintain said Mill or Mills so gone to ruin, and the
same to improve to their best Advantage; Always upon Condition, that he or they
shall pay, or cause to be paid to the other Owners or Partners, such and so
much yearly Rents for his or their Parts of Lands, Waters, and Privileges as
are of Necessity to be made Use of for said Mills, as the said Partners or
Owners agree upon. But in Case it shall so happen, that the said Owners cannot
agree on the yearly Rents aforesaid; that then, In case they (...) agree, a
jury to be ^mp^nnell^d, to (...) a (...) t^ereon.
and in such Case, the Owners or Partners who have neglected to repair his or
their Parts as aforesaid, may make Application to the Court of General Sessions
of the Peace, who are hereby empowred to send a Jury in manner as abovesaid, to
value the yearly Rents of said Lands, Waters, and Privileges; and the Owners or
Partners who occupied said Mills and Privileges, are to pay the Rents yearly,
according to the Value set by the said Jury.

(...)
AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if the Owners or
Partners of s^id Mil^, that have neglected to maintain ^is or their Parts as
aforesaid, after said Mills are repaired or rebuilt by the other Partners as
aforesaid, shall again desire to have his or their Parts, and improve them
themselves; that then, and in such case, the Owners or Partners who have
repaired or rebuilt s^id Mills, shall r^nder true and pe^fect Accounts of the
Cos^^ and Charge^ of Repairing and Rebuilding as aforesaid, to the other
Partner who has neglected as aforesaid, who upon the P^yment of his or their
proportionable Part of said Charges, shall and may again Re-enter into such his
Part or Proportion of s^id Mills; S^v^ng where a Co^^ a^t to the Contrary.
saving where there is, or shall be any Contr^^t to the Contrary.

An ACT requiring the Town Clerks of the several Towns in this Colony, to make
Return of Deputies and Jurors after chosen.
WHERE AS several Inconveniences arise, by Neglect of ^he Town Clerks, in the
resp^ctive Towns of this Colony, in making Returns of the Deputies and Jurors
to the General Assemblies and Courts to which they are chosen.

For Remedy whereof,

BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly of this Colony, and by the Authority of
the same, it is Enacted, That the Town Clerks of each and every Town in this
Colony, shall for the Future make a Return of the Deputies chosen, Town Cle^k
to give a (...) of the (...) to ca^r^ to (...) Cour^, (...) one o^ (...) and
^ur ^s afte^ chosen.
to the next Session^ of Assembly after chosen, by giving a Copy of the Record
to one of the Deputies, to carry with him to said Assembly; and also of Jurors,
to the Courts for which they were chosen, by giving a Copy of the Record to one
of the Jurors, to carry with him to said Court, upon the Penalty of Five Pounds
for each Neglect: To be recovered by the Town Treasurer of the respective Towns
where such Neglect shall be committed, by Action of the Case, at the Inferior
Court; and that the De^uties and Jurors to whom the Copy of Record shall be
delive^ed as aforesaid, be under the same Penalty, upon their Negl^ct of
returning the same, in manner as is above expressed.

LAWS, Made and passed by the General Assembly of His Majesty's Colony of
Rhode Island, and Providence Plantations, in N^w-England, held at
East-Greenwich, the third Tuesday in February, 1734.
An ACT for the Crying Horses, Neat-Cattle, and Hogs, within this Colony.
BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly, and by the Authority of the same, it is
Enacted, That from and after the Publication of this Act, it shall and may be
lawful for any Person or Persons within this Colony, who shall find any Horses,
Neat Cattle, or Hogs, in Damage feasant, within his or or their own L^nd^,
within any Town in this Colony, Creatures tak^^ in Damage feasant.
Notifications to be set ^p in ten Da^^, by the TownClerk
not knowing who the same belongs to, to take any Creature so found, as an
Estray, and within ten Days next after such taking-up said Creature, to repair
to the Town Clerk of the Town in which said Creature was taken up; which said
Town Clerk shall cause to be made th^ee Noti^^c^^ions, a^tested under his Hand,
setting forth ^he n^^ural and artificial Marks and Brands of said Creature; one
of which No^ifica^ions shall b^ set up in the same Town, O^^ in the Town were
^ak^n, and (...) in (...) Town^
and the other two in some public Places in the two next neighboring Towns
within this Colony: And any Creature so taken up and strayed as aforesaid,
shall by the said Person so taking it up, be kept one Year and a Day: (and case
it be a Horse, to have a With kept about his Neck all said Time) And any Person
laying just Claim to said Creature, may at any time within said Year and a Day,
upon his paying the just and reasonable Charge o^ Keeping, and Cost of Crying
said Creature, have the same again. But in case any Difference shall happen to
arise between the said Parties, about the Claim or Charge of Keeping said
Creature, the same Difference shall be referred to the two or three next
Justices of the Peace within the same Town, who are hereby directed and
empowered to hear and determine the same according to Justice and Equity; and
their Determination thereon, shall be final. And in case no Owner shall appear
within one Year and a Day, the Person or Persons taking said Creatures up, If
no Ow^^r app^a^s, (...)
and proceeding as abovesaid therewith, shall, and may again repair to the Town
Clerk, taking with him two go^d Fre^holders of the Neighborhood, who shall be
by the said Town Clerk engaged to a f^i^h^ul and exact Apprais^l of s^id
C^^a^ure; and the Person t^king up said Creature, shall pay the one ^^lf o^ the
Sum (...) Cre^ture is appraised at (after all just Charges are paid) into the
Town Cler^'s Hand; which said Town Clerk shall give the said Person a
Certificate under his Hand, that he has proceeded according to Law therewith:
And upon the Receipt of such a Cer^i^icate, the Person who took said Creature,
may convert the some to hi^ own Use, to do therewith as he pleases. And any
Person taking any Creature up as aforesaid within this Col^ny, and not
proceeding therewith, An^ P^rs^n (...): Fi^^ Pounds.
as by this Act is required, shall forfeit the Sum of Five Pounds in Money; to
be rec^vered in any Court of Record within this Colony, by Action of Trespass
upon the Case, to be brought against him by any Person that will sue for the
some; the one Half of the Money so recovered, to be put into the Town Treasury,
and the other H^lf to be for the Use of the P^^son who sueth for the same.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That each and every Town
Clerk shall keep fair Records of all their Proceedings, acco^ding ^o this Act;
and shall also return all Money by him received for any Creature strayed, Money
received for Es^^ay^ to the Town Tre^sury.
and for which no Owner appears, into the Town T^easu^y, immediately on Receipt
thereof: And the said ^lerk shall be paid for every Creature cried, Three
Shillings; and if no Owner appears, and it be appr^ised, Town Clerk'^ Fee^.
and he gives a Certificate as aforesaid, he shall h^ve Six Shillings therefore.

An ACT empowering the Town Councils of each respective Town in this Colony, to
make such Laws and Orders, as by them shall be thought necessary for the
Preserva^ion of the Oysters in the Jurisdiction of the several Towns to which
they respectively belong.
WHEREAS it has been sufficiently set forth to this Assembly, that sundry
evil-minded Persons in several Towns in this Government, have for sundry Years
past, and s^ill do practice the Catching of great Quantities of Oysters to burn
into Lime, whereby the same are great^y destroyed and diminished, to the great
Disadvantage of sundry His Majesty's good Subjects in this Colony, who are many
Times greatly benefitted thereby.

For Remedy whereof,

BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly of this Colony, and by the Authority of
the same, it is Enacted, That it shall be in the Power of the Town Councils of
each respective Town in this Colony, to make such Laws, Acts, and Orders, ^s to
them shall seem needful and necessary* for the Preservation of the Oysters in
their respective Towns in this Government; Town Co^^cil^ Pow^^ relating to
Oysters.
and for the Preventing of the aforesaid evil Practice of burning said Shell
Fish into Lime, or otherwise to destroy the same.

AND further it is Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Town Councils
aforesaid, shall have Power to put such their Laws, Acts, and Orders by them
made, into Execution, and punish the Breakers thereof.

ALWAYS PROVIDED, the said Councils of the respective Towns in this Colony, who
shall make any Laws, Acts, La^ing ^o greater Fine on others, than on their own
Inhab^tant^.
or Orders for the Preservation of the said Shell Fish in their respective
Towns, do not lay any greater Fines or Restrictions on the Inhabitants of the
neighboring Towns in this Colony, than they lay upon the Inhabitants of the
Towns, where any such Laws, Acts, or Orders, are made.

LAWS, Made and past by the General Assembly of His Majesty's Colony of
Rhode Island, and Providence-Plantations, in New England, held at Warwick, the
third Monday in August, 1735.
An ACT to prevent the Fish from being hindered in their Course, going up the
several fresh Rivers within this Colony.
BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly, and by the Authority of the same, it is
Enacted, No Dam o^ Wair to ^e obs^^ucted or k^p^ up, ^o obstruct F^^h from
passing, between the T^nth of April and twentieth of Man, with^u^ l^av^ng a
su^fi^ient Way through.
That no Person or Persons within this Colony, shall erect, or make any Dam or
Wair, across any fresh River, Brook, or Course of Water where any Fish usually
pass; nor keep up any Dam or Wair already made across any such River, etc. at
any Time between the tenth Day of the Month of April, and the twentieth Day of
the Month of May, annually, forever, except such Person shall leave and keep
open during all said Time, a good and sufficient Way through said Dam or Wair
for to pass and repass. And if any Person or Persons owning any such Dam or
Wair, shall not make a sufficient Way through his Dam or Wair, and keep it open
during the Time abovesaid, it shall and may be lawful for any Freeholder within
this Colony, to make his Complaint to any Assistant or Justice of the Peace
within the same County, that there is not a sufficient Way for the Fish to
pass; which said Justice shall by a Writing under his Hand, sent by a Constable
or Town Sergeant, notify the Person owning said Dam or Wair, that there is a
Complaint entered against him for not opening and keeping a sufficient Way
through such his Dam or Wair: And that at such a certain Day, named in said
Notification (not to be within two Days from the Date hereof) he with so many
other of the Justices of the County as shall see cause, will appear at the
Place where said Dam or Wair is, in order then, and there to judge, whether
said Way be sufficient through said Dam; and if the major Part of the Justices
so met, shall adjudge the Way through said Dam to be good and sufficient, If
the Way is judged su ^^cient, the Complainer to p^y Cost, if not, the Owner,
and the Ju^gm^nt to be fi^al.
they shall order the Complainer to pay all Costs that has accrued by his
needless Complaint, and give in their Judgment in Writing, to the Owner of said
Dam, that the Way through said Dam is suf^^ci^nt: But if the Justices so met,
shall adjudge the Way through said Dam not to be sufficient, they shall order
the Owner of such Dam to pay all Costs and Charge* th^^ have accrued by such
his Neglect, and order a sufficient Way to be made through said Dam; which said
Judgment shall be final: And that the Officer by whom the Notification is sent,
shall take a particular View of the D^m or Dams against which Complaint is
made; and if it appears that the Way is sufficient, Justices to or^er a
suf^^ci^nt Way thro^^^
but that it was made so between the Time of the Complaints being made, and the
Time of the Examination made by the Justices, that then the Person of whom
Complaint is made, shall pay all Charges. And if the Owner or Owners of any
such Dam, Fine for stopping a Way.
shall afterward presume to stop up the Way ordered open by said Justices, or
any Part thereof, within the Time aforesaid, any Person so offending, shall
forfeit the Sum of Ten Pounds, current Money of this Colony* to be recovered by
a Warrant of Distress from under the Hand of any Justice to whom the Truth of
the above Fact is made out* to be levied in the same Manner as other Distresses
within thi^ Government are.

AND be it further Enacted, That all Persons within this Government are
restricted from fishing in any River or Brook aforesaid, three Days, viz.
Saturday, Sunday, and Monday, in each Week, during the Time aforesaid (saving
with a Hook and Line on Saturday and Monday) And in case any Person or Persons
shall be lawfully convicted of fishing on any of the Days aforesaid, No Person
to (...) on S^tur^a^, Cost.
before any Magistrate or Justice of the Peace within said County, he or they
shall pay a Fine of Forty Shillings so often as convicted: And in case the
Person so convicted, shall not pay the Money within ten Days, then the Justice
shall give a Warrant to the Sergeant or Constable, to distrain so much of the
Goods and Chattles of the Offender, as will satisfy and pay the same, with the
Cost accruing thereon. No P^rso^ (...) o^stru^t the Alewives Passage down (...)
Rivers, on Penalty of Forty Shillings.
And that all Persons within said Government, shall be wholly restricted from
catching or hindering any Alewives coming down said Rivers as aforesaid, at all
Times in the Year, forever hereafter: And in case any Person shall be convicted
of hindering the said Fish coming down said Rivers, he shall pay a Fine of
Forty Shillings, to be taken as aforesaid: And the one Moiety of all the
aforesaid Fines, shall go to the Complainer, or he that shall prosecute the
same; Fines, half to the (...)* and half ^o the Town.
and the other Half shall be put into the Town Treasury where such Offense
shall be committed, for the U e of said Town: Any Act, Custom, or Usage, to the
contrary, in anywise, notwithstanding.

An ACT for allowing a Bounty on Flax raised in this Colony, and empowering the
Viewers of Hemp and Flax to administer the Oath, etc.
BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly, and by the Authority of the same, it is
Enacted, That there be Four Pence per Pound Bounty allowed on all Flax that
shall be raised in this Colony, well manufactured and merchantable; Bounty of
Fo^^ Pence per Pound, on ^l^x w^ll manufactu^ed and merchantable.
and that the Viewers of Hemp and Flax throughout this Colony, be, and they are
hereby fully empowered, to administer the Oath to every Person presenting
either Hemp or Flax to be viewed, that the same was raised in this Colony, Vide
Act 1731.
and that no Bounty has been received therefore; Vide Act 17^^*
and that that each Viewer have Twelve Pence each Time for his Trouble in
viewing and administering the Oath, to be paid by the Person that presents the
same. The Form of the Oath to be as follows,
YOU A. B. declare, That the Hemp or Flax that you here at this Time present to
my View, Oath f^r the (...) and manufa^tur^ng in t^is Colony.
was raised and manufac^ured within this Colony; and that the same has never
yet been viewed by any of the Hemp or Flax Viewers; nor any Bounty received
thereon* upon the Peril of the Penalty of Perjury.



An ACT empowering the Judges of the Superior Court, at any Time when Necessity
requires, to grant Prohibitions against the Proceedings of the Court of
Vice-Admiralty, held within this Government.
FORASMUCH as it often happens, that Causes are commenced and brought forward
to the Admiralty Court, and are therein judged and determined, though the same
are not of a Maritime Nature, and do not properly appertain to the Jurisdiction
of said Court: And there being no Provision made for the empowering the Judges
of the Superior Court of Judicature, etc. within this Colony, to grant
Prohibitions out of Term Time, whereby the Proceedings of said Court may be
impeded and stopped.

For Remedy whereof for the Future,

BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly, and by the Authority of the same, it is
Enacted, That it shall be in the Power of any Four of the Judges of the said
Superior Court of Judicature, An^ four of the ^udges of the (...) Count, a
Q^orum, to grant Prohi^itions ^ut o^ Term Time.
etc. (who are hereby constituted a Quorum) to grant Prohibitions to stop the
Proceedings of the said Court of Vice Admiralty, at any Time, in any Cause that
shall be therein commenced, if the same appear not to be of a Maritime Nature,
and not properly to appertain to the Jurisdiction of said Court.

A LAW, Made and passed by the General Assembly of His Majesty's Colony of
Rhode Island, and Providence Plantations, in New England, held at
South-Kingstown, the last Wednesday in October, 1735.
An ACT to oblige the Sheriffs of the several Counties within this Colony, and
their Deputies, to endorse their Traveling Fees on the Back of the Writs they
serve.
BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly of this Colony, and by the Authority of
the same, it is Enacted, That the Sheriffs of the several Counties within this
Colony, (...) to endorse their traveling (...) on the (...) of the W^lt^.
are hereby obliged to endorse on the Backs of all the Writs served by either
of them or their Deputies, the Traveling Fees, where any are due, before they
make Return thereof into the Clerk's Office, that the Clerks of the Inferior
Courts in each County, may be enabled to enter the same in the Bills of Costs;
otherwise such Sheriff or his Deputy, shall have no Traveling Fees where the
same are not endorsed on the B^cks of the Writs as aforesaid.

LAWS, Made and passed by the General Assembly of His Majesty's Colony of
Rhode Island, and Providence-Plantations* in N w-England, H^ld at Newport, the
Second Monday in June, 1736.
An ACT to prevent vexatious Lawsuits.
WHEREAS Persons sued for their just Debts, have frequently put their Creditors
to unjust Charges, by bringing against them cross Actions for no other End and
Purpose.

For the Preventing of which unn^cessary Suits,

BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly of this Colony, and by the Authority of
the same, it is Enacted, Tha^ all Writs issued forth in this Colony, for Goods
sold or Service done, or upon any Book Account whatever, shall have inserted in
the Body of such Writ respectively, the Sum sued for, Pl^intiff to (...) his
Account to the Decl^ration.
that the Pe^^^n s^ed may know the exact Demand made thereby, or else such W^it
shall abate, and every Person suing as aforesaid, shall, upon filing a
Declaration, annex thereunto, his Account, Defendant (...) Acc^unt if he
pleases.
or a C^^y thereof, that the Person sued, may have the timely Advantage of
^eeing the same; and the Person sued, may, if he thinks fit, annex his Account
to the Answer filed to such Declaration, and plead specially thereon, or upon
the General Issue, give the Book from which such Account was taken in as
Evidence: And in such Cas^, the Issue to be tried, (...) to be (...) w a^ is
the jus^ Balance.
shall be what the just Balance of Accoun^s is between Plaintiff and Defendant;
and in such Trial, the Plaintiff upon recovering, shall have Judgment and
Ex^cu^ion for ^he just Balance, with Cost, and no more: But if upon such
Trial, there be a Balance, found due to the Defendant or Person sued, he shall
recover his Cost, Action arising to (...) his Ballan^e.
and be entitul^d to an Action for the Balance, which the Court or Jury shall
s^ttle or make; and no Person upon being sued, shall be allowed to bring in^o
Court, hi^ Book or Account taken therefrom, to o^^ain a Deduction or Ball^nce
as aforesaid, No Account to ^e allowed (...).
except such Account be annex^d to his Answer or Plea as ^foresaid; but such
Person n^gl^c^ing so to do, shall be put to his Action for recovering his (...)
so far as the s^^e is just, and not credited for by the Pers^n su^ng him.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That whenever any Person
shall first commence a Suit against another to whom (...) is (...), or upon
being sued, shall bring a cross Acti^n, The Person first suing, ^o pay (...) o^
both Suit^, (...) ^nd^b^ed on balance.
by suing (...) Person that first took out his Writ; such P^^son, in case his
Account consis^^ of no other Articles, or if he recovers no other Sums than
what he is credited for, by the Person whose just Demand is the largest, shall
pay the Costs of both Suits, which the Courts where the said Causes are tried,
are hereby ^^powered to tax, and further empowered to prevent the Person
indebted from taking out an Execution against his Creditor, by deducting the
Sum he has obtained from the Contents of the Judgment obtained against him,
and gr^nting Execu^ion for the Balance of the two Judgments, (...) only for
the Balance.
and Costs. And the Party recovering the Balance in his Favor, in all Trials
as afores^id, may tax in his Bill of Costs, One Shilling, for annexing his
Account to his Declaration or Answer.

T^IS Act is not to be deemed, or taken to extend to, or have a^y Effect upon
the Law already in Force, (...) Law (...) to rel^t^ to (...) Courts.
for regulating Try^ (...) Justices Court, in Points where this and the former
Law still vary: But in all Cases upon Book Accounts as aforesaid, commenced at
any of the Inferior Courts of Common Ple^s in the Colony, shall be the Rule of
Proceeding, and until final Judgment A^y Law, Custom, or Usage, to the
Contrary, notwithstandi^g.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That a Law of the
Colony, made and passed by the General Assembly, at their Ses^ions, on the last
Wednesday of October, 1729, entitled, An A^t for preventing the Inhabitants of
this Colony, from being defrauded by those Persons that have left or shall
leave this Colony; which Act (it is conceived, destroys the Nature of
Specialties) shall be, and it is hereby repealed.

An ACT to prevent the Fish from being hindered in their Courses, of going into
Point-Iudith Ponds, and Petaquamscut River.
WHEREAS the Town of South-Kingstown, in King's County, did, by Petition set
forth to this Assembly, That the Fish are of late very much obs^ruc^ed in going
into Point-Judith Ponds, and Petaquamscut River aforesaid; and that the same is
occasioned by drawing Nets and Saynes for taking the Fish in the Channels near
to the Breach or Mouth of said Ponds, and the Entrance of said Ri^er, which is
^ery prej^dicial to the ^nhabitants of said Town, and to the Colony in general.

For Remedy whereof for the Future,

BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly of this Col^ny, and by the Authority of
the same, it is Enacted* That f^^m and after the Publication of this Act, No
Person from the first of (...) to the first of January, to d^aw or set an^ Sa^^
^t Point Judith
no Person or Persons shall at any tim^ from the first Day of August, to the
first Day o^ January, in every Year hereafter, draw or set any Net or Said,
for the Catching or Haling any Fish whatever, within the Extent of half a Mile
distance from Point-Iudith Breach, in the S^a, nor within the Breach, as far up
as an Island in the Ponds, commonly called Mumford's- Island, or the
Great-Island, nor i^ the Channel at the South West End thereof: Neither shall
any Person or Persons, within the Time beforementioned, in every Year
hereafter, draw or set any Net or Said, for the Catching or H^ling any Fish
whatever, within the Extent of half a Mile of each Side of the Entrance of said
Petaquamscut River in the Se^, nor within said River, Or within half a Mile of
Petaq^^mscut River.
until they come Forty Rod^ up into the Pond called Petaquamscut Pond. And in
case any Person or Persons shall be lawfully convicted of committing any such
Offense as aforesaid, before any Magistrate or Justice of the Pe^ce within said
County, he or they shall severally pay a Fine of For^y Shillings, so often as
convicted. And in case such Person or Persons so convicted, shall not pay the
Money thereupon, then such Assistant or Justice shall give a Warrant to the
Sergeant or Constable, to distrain so much of the Goods and Chattles of the
Offender or Offenders, as shall satisfy and pay the same, with the Costs
accruing thereon; and for want thereof, such Offender or Offenders shall be
committed to Prison, and there remain until such Judgment is satisfied: And the
one Moiety of all such Fines shall go to the Complainer, or he that shall
prosecute the same; and the other Half shall be put into the Town Treasury,
where such Offense shall be committed, for the Use of said Town.

LAWS, Made and past by the General Assembly of His Majesty's Colony of
Rhode Island, and Providence-Plantations, in New England, held at Providence,
the last Wednesday in October, 1736.
An ACT for making the Real Estates of Persons that have left this Colony, or
conceal themselves therein, or do not live in this Government, liable to the
Payment of Debts.
WHEREAS it often happens, that Persons who are indebted to the Inhabitants of
this Colony, and to others, move or live out of the same, or conceal themselves
therein, so that neither their Bodies nor personal Estate can be come at, to
satisfy said Debts* and no Provision is made by Law, for attaching the Real
Estate of such Persons, whereby it often happens, that Persons are kept out of
their just Debts.

BE IT THEREFORE ENACTED by the General Assembly, and by the Authority of the
same, it is Enacted, That when a Writ is taken out against any Person or
Persons, whose Bodies or personal Estates cannot be found within this Colony,
The Words R^al Est^te to be add^d in the Writ.
the Words (or Real Estate) may be added in the Writ next to the Words, Goods
and Chattels* and the Officer to whom the W^it is directed, may attach the Real
Estate of the Person or Persons indebted as aforesaid, in the same Manner as
has been heretofore customary to attach Personal Estates: And the Officer upon
attaching Real Estates as aforesaid, A Copy to ^e lef^ with the Person in
Posse^sion.
shall leave a Copy of the Writ by which the same is attached, with the Person
or Persons in Possession thereof; but if no Person is in Possession, then the
Officer shall set up Notifications thereof, in three public Places in the Town
where such Estate lies; and if such Person or Persons, Act^on to (...) one
T^^m, (...) need be.
whose Re^l Est^te shall be attached as aforesaid, shall not appear, the Court
(i^ need be) may continue the Suit for one Term; and if the Defendant make
Default, the Plaintiff, after having m^de l^wful P^oof, that the Debt is justly
due, shall recover Judgment ^^^inst the Defendant, and shall have Execution
granted a^^inst the Real Estate attached as aforesaid: And the Sheriff, after
having levied Ex^cution on said Real Estate, (...).
shall set up No^i^ications in three or more public Places in the Town where
such Estate lies, for the Space of three Months, after Exe^ution is levied,
before the same is exposed to sale, notifying all Persons co^^^rned, of the
whole Proceedings, that thereby the Owners of said Estate may have Time and
Notice to come in and redeem the same; Es^at^ to (...) r^deeme^.
but if no Persons appear to redeem said Estate, then the Sheriff shall sell
the same, If no^, to ^e sold (...) a public V^^du^. Vide Act 1737.
or so much as is sufficient to satisfy the Judgment obtained, and the Costs,
at a public Vendue: And a Deed by him given thereof as Sheriff, shall make to
the Buyer a good Estate in Fee Simple. And what shall remain of the Price of
said Estate, after all the Judgments against it are satisfied, with the Costs
thereon, shall be lodged in the General Treasury for the Owner thereof, and
liable to be attached for other Debts; Vide Act 1^3^*
and the Sheriff shall be allowed One Shilling for each Notific^tion set up as
aforesaid: And in all such Cases, where Exec^^ion is taken out upon any
Judgment where Land is not attached, in case no Personal Estate can be found,
the Party obtaining such Judgment, may levy Execution on Real Estate, in manner
as aforesaid.

An ACT against Bribery, and Corruption in voting for Officers in this
Government.
WHEREAS it has been found by Experience of pernicious Consequence, by
Persons, some giving and others receiving Money, or some other Reward for
voting for Officers, whereby they have been induced and urged to vote and act
contrary to their Inclinations and Judgments; by Means whereof, the other
Freemen and Inhabitants of the Government, entirely lose that Privilege and
Right which by the Charter and the Laws of the Government, they are well
entitled to.

For the Prevention whereof for the Future,

BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly of this Colony, and by the Authority of
the same, it is Enacted, That from and after the Publication of this Act, No
Reward to b^ offered in voting.
no Person under any Color or Pretense whatsoever, shall offer or promise any
Freeman living within this Government, any Sum or Sums of Money or any other
Reward, to vote for any Officer whatsoever, under the Penalty of forfeiting
double the Sum offered or promised, upon Conviction thereof before any one
Assistant, Warden, or Justice of the Peace; one Half thereof to be appropriated
to and for the Use of the Poor of the Town where suc^ Offense shall be
committed, the other Half thereof to the (...), who shall inform or sue for the
same.

AND be it further Enacted, That whoever shall receive any Money or other
Reward, or shall vote upon any Promise made, or for any Money or other Reward,
Or re^^ived.
for any Officer within this Government, shall forfeit double the Sum or Thing
received or promised: And upon Conviction thereof in Manner as aforesaid, to be
appropriated in the ^ike Manner. And the Person herein offending, shall
thereafter for the Space of Three Years, be excluded and debarred from voting
for any Officer whatsoever.

And for the rendering this Act still more effectual,

It is Enacted, That where any Person shall be prosecuted for a Breach of this
Act, where there is not otherwise sufficient and plenary Proo^, Persons to ^e
cleared by their own Oath.
the Party prosecuted, shall be required to purge himself by his Oath; which if
refused, it shall be deemed and adjudged that he is guilty of the Fact charged;
and Judgment shall pass accordingly.

An ACT prohibiting the several Courts within this Colony, from allowing
Interest in the Judgments made up on Bonds sued, in behalf of this Colony.
BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly, and by the Authority of the same, it is
Enacted, That for the Future, there be no Interest allowed by any of the Courts
with^n this Government, No Interest on Bonds, sued in ^ehal^ of the Colony.
in Judgments made up on any Bonds that shall be sued in behalf of the Colony,
by the Grand Committee or General Treasury.

An ACT for augmenting the Bounty on destroying of Bears in this Colony.
WHEREAS great Damage is yearly done by Bears in this Colony, by killing of
Sheep, etc.

BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly of thi^ Colony; and by the Authority of
the same, it is Enacted, That the Bounty on Bears Heads be augmented to the Sum
of Three Pounds for eac^ (...) every Bear that shall be hereafter killed within
this Colony; Thr^e P^un^^ f^r ^ach Bear'^ (...).

Vid^ Act 1^44*


^o be paid out of the General Treasury as heretofore.

LAWS, Made and passed by the General Assembly of His Majesty's Colony of
Rhode Island, and Providence Plantations, in N^w-England, held at Newport, the
last Wednesday in February, 1736.
An ACT, stating the Fees of the Clerks of the General Sessions of the Peace in
this Colony.
BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly of this Colony, and by the Authority of
the same, it is Enacted, That the Clerks of the several Courts of General
Sessions of the Peace in thi^ Colony, ^^e allowed, and take the same Fees as
are allowed to the Clerks of the Inferior Courts of Common Pleas, where none
are already stated.

An ACT for enabling the several Courts in this Colony to allow and tax Costs
in all Criminal Actions.
BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly of this Colony and by the Authority of
the same, it is Enacted, That it shall be in the Power of the Court of Assiz^*
Courts of the General Sessions of the Peace, and all Justi^^^ Courts within
this Colony, to allow and tax such further reasonable Costs in all Criminal
Cases, as well as others, where none are yet stated, against all Persons that
shall hereafter be convicted of any Crimes within said Colony; (...) that all
Constables, and other Inferior Officers, who sha^^ hereafter attend on any of
said Courts, and also for all Ser^ices in any of said Ca^es, shall be allowed
therefore. Any La^, Custom, or Usage, to the Contrary, notwithstanding.

An ACT to oblige the Commission Officers in the Militia, to train, unless they
have served Five Years, or excused by the General Assembly.
WHE^EAS it is common for Persons to take Offices in the Militi^, and keep them
for a short Time, and then refuse to accept the same, for no other Reason, but
to be excused from Training thereafter.

For the Prevention whereof for the Future,

BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly of this Colony, and by the Authority of
the same, it is Enacted, That no Persons in Commission in the Militia, Military
O^^^cers, who ^y down their Commission, not to be ^xcused from training.
shall be excused from training, for having had an Office in the Militia, if
they lay the same down, unless they have served Five Years, or are excused by
the General Assembly (but if left out against their Will, then to be excused as
heretofore) and shall be subject to the same Rules and Orders, as other Persons
in the Militia are. Any Law, Custom or Usage, to the Contrary hereof, in
anywise, notwithstanding.

LAWS, Made and passed by the General Assembly of His Maj^^^y's Colony of
Rhode Island, and Providence-Plantations, in New England, Held by Adjournment,
at Newport, the Second Monday in June, 1737.
An ACT stating the Fees of the Grand Jurors.
WHEREAS the Custom in this Colony, of allowing and paying the Expenses of the
Grand Jury, while attending on the several Courts, out of the General Treasury,
is found to be very prejudicial to the Government, their Bills being often very
extravagant.

For Preventing whereof for the Future,

BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly of this Colony, and by the Authority of
the same, it is Enacted, That for the Future, Grand Jurors (...).
each and every Grand Juror shall be allowed and paid out of the General
Treasury, the Sum of Six Shillings per Diem, for their Attendance on the
several Courts in this Colony, and they to defray their own Expenses: And those
Jurors that live out of the County where the Court that they attend on is held,
shall be allowed for one Day coming, and one Day returnin^ to and from said
Court; and the same to be certified by the P^^sident thereof.

An ACT for repealing an Act, entitled, An Act for Docking and Cutting off
Estates Tail.
BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly of this Colony; and by the Authority of
the same, it is Enacted, Repeal of the Act for Docking Estates Tail
That the Act made and passed by the General Assembly, at their S^ssions, held
at Newport, within and for said Colony, on the third Tuesday of June, A. D.
1725, entitled, An Act for Docking and Cutting off Estates Tail, pursuant to
the Laws of Great Britain, be, and it is hereby repealed, made null and void,
and of no Effect for the Future.

An ACT for the Making of Thirty Thousand Pounds in Bills of public Credit,
for the Exchanging of torn Bills.
WHEREAS the Bills of public Credit of this Government, have been much
defaced, and the same torn in Halves and Quarters, so that the true Value
thereof, could not be known and distinguished by Persons receiving the same,
which has been a Means of such Persons being much imposed upon, and hurt
thereby.

For Remedy whereof for the Future,

BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly of this Colony and by the Authority of
the same, it is Enacted, That the Sum of Thirty Thousand Pounds, in Bills of
Public Credit of this Colony, Thirty Thousand Pounds (...) exchange torn Bills
be forthwith impressed and signed by the Grand Committee, and lodged in the
General Treasury, in order to exchange the torn Bills, and such as are Halves
and Quarters: And that Samuel Vernon, Esquire be improved to procure Materials, and
get the Plates cleaned or new cut, as Necessity may require, and impress said
Bills, provided the Grand Committee and he can agree upon Terms: And if he be
improved by them, that he draw One Hundred Pounds out of the General Treasury,
to procure Paper with, for the Purpose aforesaid. And that Ten Thousand Pounds
thereof, be made upon the Plates of Ten Shillings and under; and the Remainder
upon the other Plates.

AND it is hereby further Enacted, That all the Halves and Quarters of the
Bills of this Colony, be brought into the General Treasury, in order to be
exchanged, from and after the first Day of October next, to the first Day of
January, then next ensuing; after which Time, the General Treasurer is hereby
restricted to receive any Halves or Quarters of Bills, into the General
Treasury.

An ACT to prevent the Drawing of any Net or Seine, for the Catching of Perch,
in the Pond, commonly called or known by the Name of Easton's Pond in Newport.
WHEREAS several Persons of late, have drawn their Seines and Nets in the Pond
(called Easton's Pond) and in the Creek running out of said Pond into the Sea,
and have caught great Quantities of Perch, and the same have car^ied into the
Market, and sold; and oftentimes have taken a greater Quantity then they could
dispose of; which Practice is found by Experience, to be very prejudicial to
the Inhabitants of the Town of Newport, and will if not prevented, finally end
in the Destruction of said Fish.

For Remedy whereof for the Future,

BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly, and by the Authority of the same, it is
Enacted, That from and after the Publication of this Act, no Person or Persons
whatsoever, shall under any Pretense whatsoever, No Se^ne or Not to be drawn in
Easton's Pond.
draw any Seine or Net in the aforesaid Pond or Creek adjacent, or any of the
Rivers belonging thereto, for the Catching of any sort of Fish in said Pond,
Creek, or Rivers as aforesaid, under the Penalty for every such Offense as
aforesaid, to forfeit the Sum of Twenty Pounds; to be recovered before any two
of the Justices for said Town, upon Information thereof made, who are hereby
fully empowered to have Cognizance of the same; the Half whereof, shall be
appropriated to and for the Use of the Town where such Offense shall be
committed, the other Half thereof to the Informer who shall inform and sue for
the same. And for the more effectual Discovery of Offenders against this Act,
where there is not plenary and sufficient Proof, the Party prosecuted for a
Breach of this Act, shall purge himself by his Oath or Engagement; which if
refused, it shall be deemed and adjudged, that he is guilty of the Fact charged
against him; and Judgment shall pass accordingly,

An ACT exempting the Persons appointed to work the Engines in Newport, from
several Duties. And for the more Effectual putting in Force, An Act for the
Town of Newport, made for exempting said Persons from other Duties therein
mentioned.
WHEREAS the Town of Newport have been at the C^arge of purchasing two Engines,
to suppress Fire; and by an Act passed in said Town, the 28 th Day of July,
1736, respecting the regulating said Engines, among other Things, it is
Enacted, That a Request be made to the General Assembly, that such a Number of
Men be exempted from Training and Serving as Tales Iurymen in any of the Courts
held at Newport aforesaid: And that any two of the Justices of said Town, be
empowered to take Cognizance of any Penalties that shall incur upon the Breach
of said Town Act.

BE IT THEREFORE ENACTED by the General Assembly, and by the Authority of the
same, it is hereby Enacted, Fire Engine Men to be excused from Training or
serving as Jurors.
That all such Persons as shall be appointed for the Working said Engines, be
(during their being in such Service) exempted from Training or Serving as
Jurymen in any of the Courts held in the Town of Newport. And for the better
Observation of the Act of said Town, any Two of the Justices for said Town, are
hereby empowered to take Cognizance of the Breaches of any Part of said Act, to
make up Judgment pursuant to the same, and to award Execution for the Penalties
incurred thereby: And that any Person that shall think himself aggrieved at the
Determination of said Court, shall and may have an Appeal to the next Inferior
Court of Common Pleas, as in other Cases is customary.

LAWS, Made and past by the Gene^al Assembly of His Majesty's Colony of
Rhode Island, and Providence-Plantations, in New England, held at
South-Kingstown, the last Wednesday in October, 1737.
An ACT enlarging the Fine on Offenders for Breach of an Act made and passed
the last Wednesday of October, A. D. 1731, For preventing Mischief being done
in the Town of Newpor^, or in any other Town in this Government, by firing of
Guns, Pis^ols, and throwing of Squibs, Fireworks, etc. in the Stre^^s or Lanes
of the Town of Newport, or other Towns, or in an, Tavern in any Town in this
Colony.
BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly, and by the Authority thereof, it is
Enacted, That from and after the Publication hereof, if any Person or Persons
shall be guilty of the Breach of said Act, Five Pound Fine, against (...) etc.
and be thereof legally convicted before any three Justices, such Offender
shall be fined, and pay for the first Offense, Five Pounds, and for the second
Offense Ten Pounds; and the same to be appropriated as is directed in said Act;
and for the third Offense, such Offender shall be imprisoned for the Space of
one Month. And that this Act be published in the Town of Newport, as soon as
conveniently may be, after the Rising of this Assembly.

An ACT for ascertaining the Bounds of the ^^mpact Part of the Town of Newport,
as to Watching in T^me of Peace.
BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly of this Colony, and by the Authority of
the same, it is Enacted, That for the Future, ^^unds of the compact Part of
(...) Town of Newport.
the Line for dividing the compact Part of the Town of Newport from the other
Part thereof, shall run as follows (viz.) Beginning at the South West Corner
of Samuel Dyre's Land that joins to the Sea, from thence to extend Easterly as
his Southerly Line runs, until it comes to the South East Corner of said Samuel
Dyre's Land; and from thence running and extending upon a straight Line, to the
Southerly Corner of Richard Long's Land where his House now stands; from thence
to extend upon a straight Line, to the Easterly End or Head of the Southermost
Lane, that runs Easterly out of the Lane that leads down to Benjamin
Coggeshall's in the Neck; and from thence running and extending Westerly, upon
a straight Line down to the Place where Joshua Babcock's Northerly Line of his
L^nd runs into the Sea or Salt Water: All the Land contained within said Lines
so described as aforesaid, shall be deemed and accounted the compact Part of
the Town of Newport, as to Watching in Time of Peace.

LAWS, Made and p^s'd by the General Assembly of His Majesty's Colony of
Rhode Island, and Providence-Plantations, in New England, Held by Adjournment,
at Newport, the Fourth Tuesday in November, 1737.
An ACT appointing a Fifth Justice in each of the Inferior Courts.
WHEREAS sundry Inconveniences attend the being of an even Number of Justices
of the Inferior Courts of Common Pl^as in this Colony, as where there are
offered Pleas in Abatement or Bar, on which the Court is divided in Opinion,
the Action proceeds, and is suffered to go to the Jury, to the great
Disadvantage of the Defendant; and it oftentimes happens, that the Jury returns
a Special Verdict, whereon the Court is to give a Judgment and Determination
agreeable with Law; but being divided in Opinion, the Action is continued from
one Term to another, and thereby is occasioned a great Delay in Justice, and
the Plaintiff stopped from the Recovery of his just Right.

For Remedy whereof for the Future,

BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly, A Fifth Justice added to ^ach of the
(...) Cou^ts.
That a a Fifth Justice be added to each of the Inferior Courts of Common Pleas
in this Colony, who is to be commissionated in the same Manner as the other
Justices of the Inferior Courts already are: And that Two Shillings and Six
Pence be added to the Entry of every Action brought to the said Inferior
Courts, excepting what are by the Grand Committee, and General Treasurer, when
there shall be an Addition of Fifteen Pence and (...) more, to every such
Action entered.

An ACT empowering the Town Councils of the several Town^ within this
Government, to take Bonds from Administrators, for the Rendering of Accounts of
their Administration on the Estates of Persons dying Intestate.
WHEREAS by the (...) of this Colen now in Force, directing the Town Councils
in the Receiving of Bonds from Administrators, for the rendering Accounts of
their Administration of the Estates of Persons dying Intestate, and
Administrators cum Testamento annexo, has been by Experience found
prejudicial, the Form of said Bonds being for the Administrator's rendering an
Account to the Town Council, when thereunto lawfull^ required; and it has
often happened, before the Town Council have Opportunity so to do, the
Administrators have died: And it being a personal Duty incumbent on them, the
Bond is thereby become vacated, so that Orphans and other Persons interested in
said Estates, have been great Losers.

For the Remedy whereof for the Future,

BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly, and by the Authority thereof, it is
Enacted for the Future, Tha^ the Town Councils for the several Towns within
this Government, are hereby directed and empowered to take and receive from any
Administrator or Administratrix of the Estate of any Person dying Intestate,
Administrators to give Bond, to account in ^2 Months.
or Administrators cum Testamento annexo, a good and sufficient Bond with two
Sureties for his or her faithful Administration of said Estate; and to render
an Account thereof to the Town Council, within Twelve Months after the Granting
of the Letters of the Administration. The Conditions of said Bond, shall be in
the Terms hereafter expressed.

THE Condition of this Obligation is such, That if the within bounden A. B.
Administrator of all and singular the Goods, Chattels and Credits of C. D.
deceased, do make or cause to be made, Form of the Bo^d.
a true and perfect Inventory of all and singular the Goods, Chattles and
Credits of the said Deceased, which have or shall come to the Hands,
Possession, or Knowledge of him the said A. B. or into the Hands and Possession
of any other Person or Persons for him; and the same so made, do exhibit, or
cause to be exhibited to the Town Council, on or before the Day of next
ensuing: And the same Goods, Chattle^ or Credits, and all other the Goods,
Chattles and Credits of the said Deceased at the Time of his Death, and which
at any Time after shall come to the Possession of the said A. B. or into the
Hands and Possession of any other Person or Persons for him, do well and truly
administer according to Law. And farther do make or cause to be made, a true
and just Account of his said Administration, at or before the Day of Then the
above Obligation to be void and of none Effect, otherwise to be and remain in
full Force and Virtue.

An ACT in Addition to an Act made and passed the l^st Wednesday of October, A.
D. 1727, Enabling the Town Councils of the several Towns within this Colony, to
receive or reject any Persons from being Inhabitants of the sa^e.
WHEREAS there is no Provision made in said Act, to enable said Town Council to
carry any Person out of Town, if rejected.

BE IT THEREFORE ENACTED by the General Assembly of this Colony, and by the
Authority of the same, it is Enacted, To^n (...) o^ Tow^, (...) rej^c^^d to
(...).
That it shall and may be lawful for each and every of the Town Councils within
this Colony, when any Person or Persons are before them, and rejected to be an
Inhabitant in said Town, then and in such Case, by Warrant under the Seal of
the Council, s^gned in their Behalf by the Clerk of the said Council, directed
to the Town Sergeant or Constable of said Town, to carry said Person or Persons
out of said Town when rejected as aforesaid, and delive^ the Person to some
lawful Authority obliged by Law to receive him or them; and that the said
Councils and al^ Officers under them, in the Manner of carrying said Persons,
be governed according to the Law of England and this Colony, in such Case^ made
and provided.

An ACT setting forth the Form of a Deed to be given by the Sheriff, for Lands
sold by him, after being attached for satisfying Debts.
WHEREAS by the Law of this Colony, impowering the Sheriffs to attach Lands for
the satisfying of Debts, the Sheriff is directed to give Deeds of the Lands so
attached; but no Form of such Deeds has yet been prescribed by Law.

BE IT THEREFORE ENACTED by the General Assembly, and by the Authority of the
same, it is Enacted, That the following shall be the Form of the Deed to be
given by the Sheriffs for such L^nds and Real Estate as shall be attached by
the Sheriffs, and sold for Satisfaction of the Debts sued for; and the same
shall be sufficient to pass such Estate to the Buyer thereof, viz.

TO All People to whom these Presents shall come, A. B. Esquire Sheriff of the
County of N. in the Colony of Rhode Island, etc. sends Greeting. Fo^m of a D^^d
to be given by the Sheriff.
Whereas there is an Act of the General Assembly of the Colony of Rhode Island
aforesaid, made and passed at their Sessions, held at Providence, within and
for said Colony, on the last Wednesday of October, A. D. 1736, entitled, An
Act for making the Real Estates of Persons that have left this Colony, or
conceal themselves therein, or don't live in this Government, liable to the
Payment of Debts; by Virtue of which said Act, the Lands or Real Estate of has
been attached, at the Suit of of and Judgment obtained by the said against the
said at the last Inferior Court of Common Pleas, held at within and for the
County on the Tuesday of

Since which, Execution has been levied upon said Lands, and the same sold at a
Public Vendue, and all the Steps of the aforementioned Act of Assembly,
hitherto exactly pursued. Now Know Ye, That I the said A. B. Sheriff as
afores^id, for and in Consideration of the Sum of to me in my said Capacity, in
Hand before the Ensealing hereof, well and truly paid by of who was the Highest
Bidder; the Receipt whereof, I do hereby acknowledge, and myself in said
Capacity, therewith fully satisfied, cont^nted and paid, and thereof, and of
every Part and Parcel thereof, do exonerate, acquit, and discharge, the said
his Heirs, Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, for ever, by these Presents.
Have, in my said Capacity, given, granted, bargained, sold, aliened, enfeoffed,
conveyed and confirmed; and by th^se Presents, do fully, freely and absolutely,
give, grant, bargain, s^ll, alien, enfeoffe, convey and confirm, unto him the
said his Heirs and Assigns for ever, one certain Piece or Parcel of Land, being
of the Estate of the said attached as aforesaid, To have and to hold all the
above-granted and bargained Premises, with all and singular, the Rights,
Profits, Privileges and Appurtenances to the same belonging, or in anywise
appertaining unto him the said his Heirs and Assigns for ever, to his and their
only proper Use, Benefit and Behoof for ever. And I the said A. B. as Sheriff
as aforesaid, do hereby covenant, promise and grant, to and with the said his
Heirs and Assigns, that at and before the Ensealing hereof, I am lawfully
seized and possessed of all the above-granted and bargained Premises; and have
in myself as Sheriff as aforesaid, by Force and Virtue of the aforesaid Act of
Assembly, good Ri^^t, full Power, and lawful Authority, to grant, bargain,
se^^, convey and confirm said bargained Premises in manner as above^^id: And
that the said his Heirs and Assigns, (...) and (...) f^^m ^ime to time, and at
all Times for ever here^^^er, by Force and Virtue of these Presents, lawfully,
peaceably, and quietly, have, hold, use, occupy, possess and enjoy, all the
above-granted and bargained Premises, with the Appurtenances free and clear;
and freely and clearly acquitted, exonerated and discharged of and from all and
all manner of former or other Gifts, Grants, Bargains, Sales, Leases,
Mortgages, Wills, Entails, Iointures, Dowers, Judgments, Executions, Extents,
and Encumbrances, whatsoever. Furthermore, I the said A. B. as Sheriff as
aforesaid, do hereby covenant, promise and engage to warrant, secure and
defend, all the above-granted and bargained Premises, unto him the said his
Heirs and Assigns, against the said his Heirs and Assigns, and against the
lawful Claims and Demands of all and every other Person or Persons whatsoever,
claiming or to claim, from, by, or under him, them, or any of them, for ever
hereafter. In Witness, etc.

LAWS, Made and past by the General Assembly of His Majesty's Colony of
Rhode Island, and Providence-Plantations, in New England, held by Adjournment,
at Newport, the Fourteenth Day of February, 1737.
An ACT in Addition to an Act, made and passed by the General Assembly, at
their Sesssons, held at Providence, within and for the Col^ny aforesaid, on the
last Wednesday in October, A. D. 1736, entitled, An Act for making the Real
Estates of Persons that have left this Colony, or conceal themselves therein,
or do not live in this Government, liable to the Payment of Debts.
WHEREAS there is no Provision made in the afores^id Act, what Proceedings
shall be had on any Judgment obtained against such Person leaving the
Government, or concealing himself therein, as is mentioned in the aforesaid
Act, on an Attachment of such Person's Real Estate by mean Process, where the
Sheriff i^ Plaintiff in such Suit.

BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly, and by the Authority thereof, it is
Enacted, That where the Sheriff, ^own S^r^eant to (...) when the Sh^riff
inPlaintiff.
either as Plaintiff or Defendant, shall obtain a Judgment in his Favor
against any Person leaving the Government, or concealing himself as aforesaid,
that in such Case, the Town Sergeant where the Estate attached lies, is hereby
fully empowered and authorized to levy Execution on said Person's Real Estate,
and to expose the same to sale at a Public Vendue, and to give a good Deed
thereof to the Buyer, and to act and do as fully and amply, to all Intents and
Purposes, as the Sheriff may and ought, in all those Cases where he is not
interested.

An ACT for the better Securing of the Payment of the Interest due on the
several Banks of Money emitted by this Government.
WHEREAS at the Emitting of the several Banks of Money, no other Security was
then taken for the Interest of the Money borrowed of this Colony on Loan,
saving the personal Security of such who received those Sums. And it having
oftentimes happened, that those who did hire of the Colony aforesaid, and
mortgaged their Lands, did sell and convey the Lands so mortgaged, to other
Persons, who have heretofore taken up those Mortgages, and in their own Name,
pledged the same for the Principal; but as to the Interest, no Provision being
yet made, and the Persons receiving the Money from the Colony as aforesaid,
removing out of this Government, thereby the Interest has been entirely lost.

For the Prevention whereof,

BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly, and by the Authority thereof, it is
Enacted, That for the Future, Purc^asers of Land mortgaged to the Colony, to
give ^ond for Principal and Int^rest,
the Grand Committee is hereby restricted from receiving of any Person any Deed
of Mortgage in exchange of any other formerly given by any Person, who shall
have disposed of his Land as afore^^id, unless the Party tendering such Deed
will likewise give Bonds to the Grand Committee to pay the Principal by Tenth^,
yearly, and likewise give Bond^ to the Treasurer, for the Payment of the whole
Interest of the Money due on such Principal Sum received by the Prior Mortgage,
and carry a Certificate from the Treasurer to the Grand Committee, that he has
complied with the Directions of this Act.

LAWS, Made and passed by the General Assembly of His Majesty's Colony of
Rhode Island, and Providence Plantations, in New England, held at Newport, the
first Wednesday in May, 1738.
An ACT in Addition to an Act for the Making of Thirty Thousand Pounds, to
exchange torn Bills of Public Credit.
WHEREAS the Thirty Thousand Pounds ordered to be made by the General Assembly,
at their Sessions, held by Adjournment at Newport, within and for the Colony
aforesaid, on the Second Monday in June last past, for exchanging the Halves
and Quarters of the torn Bills is thought not to be a sufficient Sum for that
Purpose.

IT Is Therefore Voted and Resolved, That Ten Thousand Pounds more be impressed
upon the large Plate, Ten Thousand Pounds e^^itted to exchange torn Bills.
by the same Person appointed to do the other, and signed by the Grand
Committee, and lodged in the General Treasury as soon as may be, in order to
exchange the Halves and Quarters of Bills torn as aforesaid, and to be under
the same Regulation as the said Thirty Thousand Pounds.

An ACT enabling and appointing the Trustees or Guardians to lease out the
Lands, etc. belonging to the Sachem in the Narraganset Country.
WHEREAS George Ninigret, Brother, and Kate the Widow of the late Sachem,
Charles, deceased, in Behalf of her Son by said Charles Sachem, and the old
Queen, Mother to the said Charles and George, with diverse Indians belonging to
their Tribe, did petition the General Assembly to appoint His Honor the
present Governor, Major Thomas Fry, Col. Joseph Stanton, and Col. John Potter,
Trustees, in order to lease out the Lands, and to take Care of the other
Interest belonging to said Sachem and Family, which greatly suffered for want
of some Persons being appointed for that Purpose.

Upon Consideration whereof,

IT IS Voted and Resolved, That the Honorable John Wanton, Esquire Governor, Major
Thomas Fry, Col. Joseph Stanton, Trustees appointed to leas^ out the Sache^^
(...).

Vid^ Act 1717^


and Col. John Potter, be, and they are hereby appointed, Trustees or
Guardians, to oversee and lease out the said Lands, as they shall judge to be
most beneficial: And they or any three of them, are hereby empowered and
authorized to dispossess any Person or Persons that shall be in the Possession
of any of the Premises, and refuse to accept and hire said Land by Lease, upon
such Terms as the said Trustees or Guardians, or any three of them, shall think
proper, they not granting a Lease for any longer Term than Seven Years; and the
Charge thereof to be paid out of the Rents and Profits of said Lands. The said
Trustees or Guardians to render an Account of, and surrender up their Trust to
the General Assembly, when thereunto required.

LAWS, Made and passed by the General Assembly of His Majesty's Colony of
Rhode Island, and Providence-Plantations, in New England, held by Adjournment,
at Newport, the Twenty Second Day of August, 1738.
An ACT for dividing the Town of Westerly into Two Towns, and the same to be
known and distinguished by the Names of Westerly and Charlestown.
WHEREAS the present Town of Westerly is very large, and its Inhabitants are
numerous, many of whom live at a very remote Distance from the Place of Meeting
appointed for the Transacting the public and prudential Affairs of the Town:
And the Rivers there (especially in the middle Part thereof) being very large,
so that the Way to said Meeting is rendered Difficult as well as Dangerous, and
many of the Inhabitants are thereby often impeded and hindered in attending
thereon, which proves a great Injury and Hurt to them.

And whereas the said Town is well situated, and lies commodious for a
Diviosin into two Towns; which will tend to the general Interest and Advantage
of all its Inhabitants.

BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly of this Colony and by the Authority
thereof, Westerly divid^d.
it is Enacted, That the Line for dividing of the said Town, be as follows,
viz. beginning Northerly where Wood River enters the Line between said Town of
Westerly and North-Kingstown, and so running by the natural Course thereof, so
far until said River emptieth itself into a River called Pawcatuck, and then to
run or extend as sai^ Pawtucket River runs by the Banks thereof Westward three
Miles, and from thence a South or Southerly Course to the Sea: And that for the
Future, the Town of Westerly extend no farther Eastward than the aforesaid Line.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all the rest of the
said Lands heretofore called Westerly, situate, l^ing, and being to the
Eastward of the aforesaid Line, be, and they are hereby incorporated and
erected a Town, and called and distinguished by the Name of Charlestown.
Charlestown incorporated.
And that the Inhabitants thereof, have all the Liberties, Privileges, and
Immuniti^^, in the same Manner as the other Towns in the Government enjoy by
Charter.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That Jeremiah Gould,
John Rice, and William Green, Esqrs; be appointed a Committee to run the Line
between the aforesaid Towns, and erect and make thereon proper Monuments and
Bounds for distinguishing the same, and to perform the same ^orthwith.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Justice of the
Peace in the Town of Charlestown, as soon as conveniently may be, issue forth a
Warrant to summon in the Preemen to elect and make choice of the Town Officers,
for the Management of the prudential Affairs of that Town, and also for the
Choice of two Deputies for said Town, to represent the same at the General
Assembly in October Sessions next, and so on from time to time, as by Charter
is appointed; and that the Town of Westerly send two Deputies, to be chosen in
manner as usual.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That each of the said
Towns have their Proportion of the Interest of the Bank Money appropriated for
the Towns in this Colony, in the same Proportion, and according to the Sums
that the Lands in each Town are mortgaged for.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Town of
Westerly send three Grand Jurors to attend on the General Sessions of the Peace
for the County of King's County, and two Petit Juro^s to attend at the Inferior
Court for said County. And that the Town of Charlestown send two Grand Jurors
to attend on said Court of General Sessions of the Peace, and two Petit Jurors
to attend on said Inferior Court.

AND it is likewise further Enacted, That the Towns of Westerly and
Charlestown, shall each send to the Superior Court, one Grand Juror and one
Petit Juror to attend on the same. And that this Act be forthwith proclaimed
under the Seal of the Colony.

An ACT appointing the Time that Waste Gates in the several Dams of this Colony
are to be kept open, for venting the natural Course of the Water to the next
Dam of any Grist Mill below the same.
WHEREAS William Randall of P^^vidence in the County of Providence, etc.
Miller, with others, did by Petition set forth to this Assembly, That he the
said Randall and his Ancestors, have had a Corn Mill in said Town for near
Forty Y^ars last past, and have kept the same in good Order, and well served
and accommodated all the Neighbors thereabout; and that said Mill stands
adjoining to a large HighWay which renders the same the more convenient to the
Neighborhood thereabout* and that within less than one Year last past, one
Richard Sprague of said T^wn, has erected a Dam and a Grist Mill on the same
Stream that the first-mentioned Mill stands on, and about Sixty Five Rods above
the same first-mentioned Mill: And the said Sprague having the Convenience of
Raising a large Pond, often stops and pens the Water so much, that the
first-mentioned Mill is rendered altogetherUseless to said Randall and the
Neighbors thereabout.

For Remedy whereof for the Future,

BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly of thi^ Colony; and by the Authority of
the same, it is Enacted, That from and after the Publication of this Act, all
and every Person or Persons owning any Dam or Mill in this Colony, (...) Gates
to be k^p^ (...) the Middle ^f (...) in the Middle of October.
shall at ^ll Times hereafter, from the middle of June to the middle of October
annually, forever, keep and maintain a Waste Gate in their said Dam sufficient
to vent so much Water as naturally runs in said River, after the Water rises to
the Height of three Foot perpendicular on his or their Flumes, that conveys
the Water to his or their Grist Mill Wheel, from Six of the Clock in the
Morning until Nine of the Clock at Night of each Day, during the Time
abovesaid, if the same be desired by any Persons owning any Mill within one
Mile below such Mill, on the same Stream, except when said Upper Mill is
grinding; at which time the Waste Gate of said Upper Mill may be kept shut down.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if at any Time or
Times hereafter, any Person or Persons whatsoever, owning any such Dam or Mill,
shall refuse or neglect to keep said Wast Gate open as aforesaid, and be
thereof duly convicted before any two or more of his Majesty's Justices of the
Peace within the Town where the Offense is committed, shall forfeit the Sum of
Forty Shillings in Money; the one Half thereof to the Informer and Prosecutor,
and the other Half to and for the Use of the Poor of said Town. Any Law,
Custom, or Usage, to the Contrary, notwithstanding.

An ACT for Emitting of One Hundred Thousand Pounds, in Bills of Public Credit.
WHEREAS the several Emissions of the Bills of Public Credit issued by this
Government, have entirely answered those Ends for which they were emitted, and
have tended (...) to the Interest and Advantage of the Public, by increasing
and promot-Trade and encouraging all Kinds of Business.

And whereas the Times of Payment of the first Bank emitted, is almost expired,
and also near one Half of the Second: There is an absolute Necessity of an
Addition to the present Medium of Exchange, in order to supply those Banks;
otherwise Trade and all other Business must inevitably D^cay, and consequently
the Public would thereby greatly suffer.

And whereas the Colony House in Newport is so much out of Repair, that the
same without great Cost and Charge cannot be refitted; and as the same at
present is very commodious for the Courts to meet in to transact the public
Affairs of this Government, it is judged necessary that a new Colony House
should be built; and there being not Money in the Treasury sufficient for that
Purpose.

AND whereas there is a Necessity of building a Light House at Beaver Tail,
which will be of singular Service for Vessels coming into the Harbor in the
Night Season, and prevent great Damage which is occasioned for Want thereof.

AND whereas the Payment of the Interest of the Bank made in the Year 1731, was
appropriated for the Use of the Fishery and Hemp Manufactures; and the same
being near expired, and considering the Increase of those Manufactures by such
an Encouragement, it is judged necessary to make some further Provision for the
same.

All which being duly Considered,

BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly of this Colony, and by the Authority of
the same, One Hundred Thousand Pounds (...).
it is Enacted, That the Sum of One Hundred Thousand Pounds in Bills of Puclick
Credit of the same Tenor of those already emitted by this Government, be
forthwith impressed and made upon the Plates heretofore (...) by this Colony,
or any other Plates, if the Grand Committee shall judge necessary: And said
Bills shall be in the Hands and under the Care of the Six Trustees of the
Colony for the Time being, called the Grand Committee. Ten Thousand Pounds of
which, shall be of the Denomination of Ten Shillings and under. Grand Co^mittee
to sign the Bills.
And any three or more of the said Committee, have full Power and Orders given
them, to sign all the ^^oresaid Bills for the Use of the Colony.

AND the said Trustees are hereby empowered to make any further or other Device
in the Escutcheon, or any other Part of said Bills as they shall judge
necessary for the Preventing of said Bills from being counterfeited; Any
furt^er Device may (...) made in them.
and shall provide all Materials for Making the same at the Charge of the
Colony, and draw Money out of the General Treasury a^ Necessity requires.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That as soon as the
aforesaid Sum is perfected, To be delive^ed to the (...).
the same shall be delivered to the several Trustees for the respective Town^
in the Government, in such Manner as the same shall be apportioned by the Grand
Committee, they taking Receipts for the ^ame: And the said Bills shall be let
out by the several Committees of the respective Towns in the Colony, upon Land
Security of double the Value of the Money taken up, (...) upon La^d S^curit^.
in the same Manner as the former Bills of this Colony were let out.

AND ^e it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Time the said
Bills shall be emitted for, shall be Ten Years, For Ten Year^*
upon In^er^^^; at which Period, the principal Sums shall be paid in, as is
hereafter expressed: And every Person taking up said Bills in the aforesaid
Manner, shall give Bond for the Payment of the Interest thereof, Bond to be
^^ven for the Interest.
at the Rate of Five Pounds per Centum per Annum, unto the General Treasurer,
to and for the Use of the Colony, to the Ends and Purposes hereafter mentioned.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That at the Time of
emitting said Bills, Bonds to be ^^ven for the Principal.
ten distinct Bonds shall be given to the Grand Committee, for the Payment of
the Tenth Part of the Principal Sum, by each Person taking yearly, for ten
Years: And that the Payment of the first Tenths of the principal Sum, commence
in one Year after the Expiration of the Term of ten Years given for the Payment
of the Interest of the principal Sum: The Mort^^^^ to secure the Interest as
well as Principal.
and that the same shall discharge each Mortgage given for the Security of the
Money, when the whole Principal and Interest is paid; which Mortgage shall be
given as well for the Security of the Interest as Principal, and shall express
the same accordingly.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, What (...) be tak^^ up.
That no Person be supplied with above Three Hundred Pounds, or suffered to
take up less than Twenty Five Pounds.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Honorable John
Wanton, Esquire Mr. George Goulding, Grand Co^mittee appointed, and to be a
Commi^^^^ (...) Newport.
Iahleel Brenton, Esquire Col. Daniel Updike, Col. John Gardner, and Mr. James
Sheffield are hereby appointed and chosen the Six Trustees for the Colony, and
they are hereby also appointed and chosen a Committee for the Town of Newport,
to hire out their proportionable Part of said Bill^.

AND the following Persons are chosen and appointed Committees for the several
Towns in the Colony, to hire out the proportionable Part of said Bills that
falls to each respective Town.

FOR the Town of Providence, Ezekiel Warner and Richard Thornton, Esqrs.

FOR the Town of Portsmouth, Mr. Gideon Cornell, and William Anthony, Esquire.

FOR the Town of Warwick, Philip Arnold and John Rice, jun. Esqrs.

FOR the Town of Westerly, Col. Oliver Babcock, and Major Joseph Pendleton.

FOR the Town of New-Shoram, Mr. Thomas Mitchell, jun. and Mr. Nathanael
Littlefield.

FOR the Town of North-Kingstown, Jeremiah Gould, Esquire and Mr. Job Tripp.

FOR the Town of South-Kingstown, Rouse Helm, Esquire and Capt. Robert Hassard.

FOR the Town of East-Greenwich, Thomas Spencer and John Ienkins, Esqrs.

FOR the Town of Iames-Town, Capt. Benjamin Sheffield, and Mr. John Pain.

FOR the Town of Smithfield, Capt. Thomas Sails, and William Arnold, Esquire.

FOR the Town of Situate, Stephen Hopkins, Esquire and Mr. Edward Sh^ldon.

FOR the Town of Gloucester, Capt. John Smith, and Mr. Richard Steer.

FOR the Town of Charlestown, Col. Joseph Stanton, and Capt. Christopher
Champlin.

The Interest of the t^o first Years to be appropriated for ^uilding a New
Colony House.
AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Interest of the
One Hundred Thousand Pounds for two Years, be appropriated and set apart to and
for the Use of building a New Colony House in Newport.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That there be a Light
House erected at Beaver Tail, The Interest of the t^i^d Year (...) be
ap^r^pria^^d for E^^cting a Light-House.
by the Directions of a Committee to be appointed by the General Assembly for
that Purpose; and the same to be paid out of the third Years Interest. And the
Interest of the remaining Years, as also what remains of the three first Years
Interest, The remaining Interest, half to the General Treasury, and half to the
respe^tive Towns
be appropriated in manner following; one Half thereof to be paid into the
General Treasury to defray the incident Charges of the Government; and the
other Half thereof to be sent to each respective Town, for the Use of the same.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all the Bounties
given by the several Acts, be continued for ten Years; V^^e Act 1744.
and that there be a Committee appointed for the Building the Colony House and
Light House, who are hereby empowered to procure Materials for the same.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That no Person tear or
deface any of the Bills of public Credit, on the Penalty of suffering as the
Law already made, in such Cases d^^^cts. And the Treasurer i^ hereby forbid to
receive any Halves or Quarters of the Bills made in Pursuance of this Act,
Halves and Qu^rter^ ^ut to be changed, except, etc.
unless the Person possessing such Halves or Quarters, gives his Engagement,
that the other Parts of said Bills were casually lost, or the same torn by
Accident. And that William Claggett be employed by the Grand Committee to
impress the public Bills of Credit, to be emitted by Virtue of this Act.

A LAW, Made and passed by the General Assembly of His Majesty's Colony of
Rhode Island, and Providence Plantations, in New England, held at Providence,
the Twenty Fifth Day of October, 1738.
An ACT empowering Three or more Justices of the Peace to try Persons guilty of
Theft, not exceeding the Value of Ten Pounds.
WHEREAS it often happens that poor Persons are found thieving or purloining of
Things of a small Value, and for the same are bound over to the next succeeding
Court of General Sessions of the Peace; and said Court being held but twice in
a Year, such Persons are often continued in Goal so long, that their Families
(if any they have) do greatly suffer thereby for want of Subsistence in the
mean time; and such Persons being often capable and able of Body to labor for
the Support of themselves and Families, if they might be set at Liberty sooner;
which might not only be an Advantage to such poor Families, but to the Public.

For Regulation thereof for the Future,

BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly of this Colony; and by the Authority of
the same, it is Enacted, That all Persons whatsoever, Three Justices to try
Theft, not exceeding Ten Pounds.
that shall hereafter be found guilty or suspected to be guilty of thieving or
purloining of any Goods, Wares, Merchandise, or Things of any Kind whatsoever,
not exceeding the Value of Ten Pounds, shall be tried and adjudged for the
same, before any three or more Justices of the Peace or Wardens of and within
any County in this Colony, where any such Offense shall be committed. And the
said Justices and Wardens are hereby fully empowered and authorized to hear all
such Cases, and t^ and adjudge the same; and upon Conviction thereof,
definitive Sentence to give, as fully and effectually, by Whipping, Fining,
Banishing, etc. as the Courts and General Sessions of the Peace in the several
Counties in this Colony, have been authorized, used, or accustomed to do.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That when and so often
as said Justices or Wardens shall see Cause to sentence any Person or Persons
to pay a Fine for any Fact committed as af^resaid; (...) granted (...) ^^neral
Sessions.
and the Person or Persons so sentenced, refuse or neglect to pay the same
pursuant to such Sentence, that then it shall be lawful ^o award Execution
thereon; saving always the Liberty of an Appeal to the next succeeding Court of
General Sessions of the Peace to be holden in the same County, if such Person
or Persons sentenced for any such Crime, shall desire the same at the Passing
thereof; Always provided, such Person or Persons praying an Appeal, do then
immediately enter into Recognizance with Sureties, in a sufficient Sum, to pay
all Costs and Damages that shall or may happen to be sustained by Reason of
such Appeal; and to be of good and peaceable Behavior in the mean time: Any
Act or Clause of an Act, to the Contrary hereof, in anywise, notwithstanding.

LAWS, Made and past by the General Assembly of His Majesty's Colony of
Rhode Island, and Providence-Plantations, in New England, held by Adjournment,
at Providence, the Nineteenth Day of December, 1738.
An ACT allowing the Clerks of the Inferior Courts of Common Pleas and General
Sessions of the Peace in this Colony, Fees for entering Judgment without
Verdict, and for administering an Oath in the several Courts.
WHEREAS it is uncertain by the Table of Fees, what is allowed to the Clerks of
the Inferior Court of Common Pleas and General Sessions of the Peace in this
Colony, for entering Judgment without Verdict.

IT IS Therefore Resolved, That the Clerks of the Inferior Courts of Common
Pleas and General Sessions of the Peace in this Colony, (...) for (...)
Ju^^ment without Verdict.
take the same Fees for entering Judgment without Verdict, as is by the Table of
Fees allowed for entering Judgment with Verdicts.

For administering an Oath in Count.
It is further Resolved, That the said Clerks take One Shilling for
administering an Oath or Engagement in Court.

An ACT restricting the Justices of the several Courts of the General Sessions
of the Peace in this Colony, from drawing Money out of the General Treasury, to
defray their Expenses.
WHEREAS it has been a Custom heretofore, for the Charges of some of the
Courts of General Sessions of the Peace in this Colony, to be paid out of the
General Treasury; which is thought unreasonable.

For the Preventing whereof,

IT IS ENACTED by the General Assembly of this Colony, and by the Authority of
the same, it is Enacted, No Char^es of the General Sessions of the Peac^, to be
paid out of the General Treasury.
That no Charges or any Money shall be hereafter paid out of the General
Treasury for any Charges or Expenses accruing or arising at any of the
aforesaid Courts of General Sessions of the Peace, excepting the Wages of such
Officers as are already allowed by Law.

An ACT in Addition to and Amendment of an Act of the General Assembly of this
Colony, made and passed at Newport, on the first Monday in July* A. D. 1733,
entitled, An Act for holding the General (...) in October Sessions, in the
several Counties on the Main Land.
BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly of (...) Colony; and by the Autho^ity of
the same, it is Enacted, General (...) the Co^^^y when first held.
That for the Futur^ all (...) in any of the Countie^ in this Colony, in (...)
be held in some One of the Towns ^n the (...) ^here first held, (...) not
adjo^rn'd out o^ said County. Any Law or Custom, to the Contrary in anywise,
notwithstanding.

An ACT to prevent illega^ Voting for Officers within this Colony.
BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly of this Colony; and by the Authority of
the same, it is Enacted, No (...) put in two Votes (...) one Time, in the
^le^tion of Officers.
That from and after the Publication of this Act, if any Freeman of this
Colony, or any Freeman of any Town in said Colony, shall at any Town Meeting or
other Place of choosing of Officers within this Colony, either by Pr^xy or
Vote, vote more than one Vote for any one Officer at one and the same time,
when voted for, whether for General Officer, Town Officer, or Military Officer,
and shall be thereof lawfully convicted before any two Assistants, Justices of
the Peace, or Wardens of the Town where such Offense shall be committed, either
by his own Confession or good Evidence, (...) to (...) Forty Shillings.
he shall for every such Offense, forfeit the Sum of Forty Shillings; one Half
thereof to the Informer, and the other Half to the Use of the Town where the
Offense is committed; which Fine shall be recovered by a Warrant of Distress,
at any Time within Six Months after the Fact is committed, and not after; and
the Person so convict^d, shall pay Costs.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That whosoever shall be
convicted as abovesaid, shall be, and they are hereby excluded, (...)
from voting for any Officer within this Colony, for the Space of Three Years
from the Time of his being so convicted. Any Law, Custom, or Usage, to the
Contrary hereof, notwithstanding.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Person who
is not ^ualified or has no Right to vote at any of the said Meetings ^r Times
of choosing Officers, Penalty for Persons voti^^, who are not quali^^^^.
shall vote for any Officer within thi^ Colony, and be t^ereof convicted as
aforesaid, shall forfeit for (...). Offen^e, the Sum of Forty Shillings, to b^
recovered in (...); one H^lf thereof to the (...), and the other H^lf to (...)
of the Town wh^^e such (...) is c^^mitt^d

AND be it further Enac^ed (...), if any Person shall think h^m^e^^ aggrieved
at the ^entenc^ or Judgment of any Assistant, Appeal ^ranted (...) General
Sessions of the Peace.
Justice of the Peace or ^^rden, in any Matter or Thing founded upon this Law,
it shall (...) may be lawful for such Person^ to appeal to the next General
(...) of the Peace to be h^ld in the County where such Offen^^ ^^all b^
committed, paying Costs, and giving Bond to prosecute such Appeal to such
Court, and complying with the Rul^^ ^rescribed in Appeals had from Justices
Courts in civil Cases.

An ACT for the better Securing the Interest Money due to the Colony, on former
Banks ^mitted.
WHEREAS there are great Inconveniences arise in this Colony, by Persons that
have given Mortgages to the Trustees of said Colony, for securing the Payment
of considerable Sums of Money taken out of the several Ban^^ heretofore
emitted, who also have given their personal Security for Payment of the yearly
Interest arising on said Sums, and frequently sell said Lands, and have the
Mortgages altered; then leave the Colony and sometimes the Country; and thereby
the Colony is defeated of the Interest.

For Remedy whereof,

BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly of this Colony; and by the Authority of
the same, it is Enacted, ^onds to be given for the ^nterest, by the Purchasers
(...) mortg^^^^ Lands
That no Town Clerk in this Colony shall receive into his Office, or record any
Deed of Sale, or Deed of Gift, from any Mortgager to said Colony, given to any
Person whatsoever, unless Certificate be first given to the Purchaser of any
such Lands as aforesaid, by the Trustees of the Town where such Land lies,
certifying, that new Bonds are given by the Purchaser, for the Interest of the
Sum for which the Land is mortgaged; and said Purchaser shall deliver the same
unto the Town Clerk.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all Mortgages given
as aforesaid, shall be good and valid, Mortg^ge^ to secure ^n^erest as well as
Principal.
to all Intents and Purposes (if personal Security be not given) for the
Interest of the Money said Mortgages are given for by the Purchaser. And that
if any Town Clerk shall act contrary to this Law, he shall be fined Fifty
Pounds; to be recovered by the Town Treasurer of the Town where such Offense
shall be committed, and be lodged in the said Town Treasury, for the Use of the
Poor of said Town.

LAWS, (...) of His Majesty (...)- Plantations, in New England, held by (...)
Warwick, on the Twentieth Day of (...).
An ACT for Rating and Assessing Foreigners and (...), trading in this
Government.
WHEREAS of late Years, Foreigners and other Persons, Inhabitants of the
neighboring G^vernments, coming hither to trade, have by indirect and b^s^
Practices, monopoli^^d the Commodities imported from other Parts, and thereby
have raised the Price of such Commodities, which has proved a great Injury and
Prejudice to the Merchants and other Inhabitants of this Government. And although
such Persons have carried on great Trade and Business contrary to the Int^rest
of the Public as aforesaid, no Provision has as yet been made by Law for
obliging them to pa^ such due Rates and Taxes as are agreeable to the Rules of
Justice and Equity, in order for the Defraying the necessary Charges of the
Government.

For Remedy whereof for the Future,

BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly, and by the Authority thereof, it is
Enacted, That for the Future, each Town within this Government is hereby
directed and empowered to choose three discreet and prudent Persons, Forei^n
Traders to be rated
Rate-makers or Assessors, for the Rating and Assessing such Foreigners and
Strangers as shall come into any Town within the Government, and there carry on
Trade and Business in Proportion to their Trade; which Sums so assessed, shall
be immediately paid for the Use of such Town where such Rate is made unto the
Collector, to be appointed and chosen by the Town as aforesaid; and upon
Refusal, Application shall then be made by such Collector to one of his
Majesty's Justices of the Peace, who i^ hereby fully authorized to grant a
Warrant of Distress, to distrain of the Goods and Chattles of such Person or
Persons, as shall be sufficient to satisfy and answer the Rates so assessed and
made; and for want of the Goods and Chattles of such Person or Persons, that he
or they be committed and secured in his Majesty's Goal, until such Rate be
satisfied and paid; and when recovered, to be put into the Town Treasury, for
the Use of such Town where the Rates are so collected.

An ACT for altering the Times of holding the Inferior Courts of Common Pleas
and General Sessions of the Peace, in the County of King's County.
WHEREAS the Judges of His Majesty's Inferior Court of Common Pleas for the
County of King's County, represented to this Assembly, that the Times appointed
for the Holding the said Inferior Court and Court of General Sessions of the
Peace for the County aforesaid, are at two Sessions of the Year very
disadvantageous and uncomfortable for the Members of said Court, and those
Persons whole Business requires their Attendance on said Courts; and therefore
prayed, that the same may be altered to such Seasons of the Year, as might best
tend to the Convenience of all Persons obliged to attend thereon.

Which being duly considered,

BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly, and by the Authority thereof, it is
Enacted, That the Times of holding the aforesaid Courts be altered from the
last Tuesday of June to the first Tuesday of August, Times of holding the i^fo
(...) Court in King's County.
and from the first Tuesday of January to the third Tuesday of February
annually: And that all Process^s issued out in the aforesaid County, and all
other Cases whatsoever, that are to be heard at the next I^ferior Court, either
by Continuance, Appeal or otherwise, be returned, heard and determined by said
Courts, to be held the first Tuesday in August next. And the Judges of each of
the aforesaid Courts, are to hear, judge, and determine in all such Cases; and
to allow the Liberty of an Appeal to the Party who is dissatisfied with any
Judgment that shall then be given, to the Superior Court of Judicature and
Court of Assize, as heretofore has been Customary and Usual.

A LAW, Made and passed by the General Assembly of His Majesty's Colony of
Rhode Island, and Providence Plantations, in New England, held at Newport, the
Second D^y of May, 1739.
An ACT directing the Attorney General to give the General Treasurer a Receipt
for all such Bonds as he shall receive, to put in Suit for the Colony's Debts.
WHEREAS Gideon Wanton, Esquire General Treasurer of the Colony aforesaid, did by
Petition, set forth, That by the late Act of Assembly, directing all Suits for
the Colony's Debts, should be brought to the Courts in the Counties where the
Debtor dwells, no Provision is made for securing the General Treasurer, upon
delivering out the Bonds in order to be sued; and that by the said Act, the
Persons sued, are put to greater Charge and more Trouble than they were at
before the making said Act; and therefore prayed this Assembly to repeal such
Part of said Act as they should think proper.

Upon Consideration whereof, and for the better Security of the General
Treasurer.

IT Is Voted and Enacted, That the Attorney General for the time being, (...)
when and so often as he shall receive any Bond^ of the General Treasurer for
the time being, in order to be p^t in Suit, shall give to the said Treasurer a
Receipt for all such Bonds a^ he shall receive as aforesaid.

LAWS, Made and past by the General Assembly of His Majesty's Colony of
Rhode Island, and Providence-Plantations, in New England, held by Adjournment,
at Newport, the Twenty First Day of August, 1739.
An ACT to regulate the Meeting and prevent the Falling of the General Assembly
of this Colony.
WHEREAS it often happens that many Assistan^s and Depu^ies of this Colony for
the time being, do not attend on the General Assembly as their Duty requires,
whereby it many Times happens, that the General Assembly falls, for want of a
sufficient Number of Members meeting to constitute an Assembly, which has many
times heretofore proved very prejudicial to the Honor of the Colony, as well
as Interest of private Persons.

For Remedy whereof for the Future,

Members of the Gene^al Assem^l^ ^o be fin^d Forty Shilling^ (...) Non-Ap (...).
BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly of this Colony; and by the Authority of
the same, it is Enacted, That any Assistant or Deputy of this Colony, that
shall not appear and attend on the General Assembly of said Colony, at any Time
when the said General Assembly does meet, Vid^ Act 1741
either on the first Wednesday in May or last Wednesday in October, or at any
other Times by Adjournment, shall forfeit and pay for each and every Day that
he shall be absent, the Sum of Forty Shillings in Money, except such Member
shall make a reasonable Excuse to the General Assembly then Sitting, to be by
them allowed and entered on Record; and if no Excuse be made and allowed of, and
entered as aforesaid, the Secretary of the Colony for the time being, is hereby
required and empowered to send forth a Warrant to the the Sheriff of the County
where such Assistant or Deputy dwells, commanding him to demand the said Fine
of such Offender; and upon Refusal to pay the same, then immediately to levy
and raise the same by Distress and Sale of the Offender's Goods. And all Fines
occasioned by the Breach of this Act, to be equally divided amongst all the
Members of any such General Assembly as shall be present at the same, after the
Charges of gathering the same are first paid.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if it so happen at
any Time hereafter, that if a sufficient Number of Members to constitute a
General Assembly, do not attend at the Time and Pl^ce adjourned to, in such
C^se, it shall and may be lawful for the Governor of this Colony for the Time
being, or in his Absence the Deputy Governor, Gov^rnor to ^^vive the General A
^embly by a Warr^nt.
by a Warrant under his Hand, to warn and call together the same Members who
should have met at the Time and Place adjourned to, to meet again at the same
Place they before were adjourned to, at some distant and suitable Time; which
Members so met, shall at all Times hereafter, be deemed and adjudged a good and
lawful Assembly. Any Law, Custom, or Usage, to the Contrary hereof in anywise
notwithstanding.

An ACT for the Maintenance of Insolvent Debtors in Goal; and for the
Repealing the several Acts heretofore made for that Purpose.
WHEREAS it often happe^s, that insolvent Debtors are committed to Goal by
their Creditors, and have there lanquished, to the Destruction of themselves
and Families. And as the several Acts heretofore made, do not answer the End
for which they were passed.

BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly of this Colony, and by the Authority
thereof, it is Enacted, That all the sever^l Acts for the Allowance of
Insolvent Debtors, heretofore made, be, and they hereby are, repealed and
declared Null and Void. And that for the Future, where any Insolvent Debtor
stands committed to any Prison in this Government, in any Action upon Me^n
Process or Execution, the Party at whose Suit the Action is commenced,
Insolvent Debt^r^ allowed (...) S^^llings per ^eek.
shall be obliged to pay the Goal Keeper Six Shillings per Week, for the
Support and Maintenance of such Deb^or, once in every Week, if required: And
if the Party refuses or neglects to satisfy and pay the same upon Notice
thereof given, Vid^ Act 1744.
that then the Goal Keeper shall have the Liberty and Benefit of suing for the
same by Action of the Case, before any Assistant, Justice of the Peace, or
Warden, by a Warrant under their Hands, directed ^o the Constable where the
Offense is committed; and upon Proof made, shall recover his Demands, with
Costs of Prosecution, and have Execution for the same.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That where any Insolvent
Debtor is committed to Goal at the Suit of more than one Creditor, that in such
Case, all the Creditors shall satisfy and pay the Six Shillings, allowed as
aforesaid, in equ^l Proportion; which if not satisfied and paid, that then the
Go^l Keeper shall have the Liberty of bringing his Action against any one of
the Creditors for the Sum allowed by this Act; and that such Creditor paying
the Goal Keeper's demand, shall recover and have, by Action of the Case, of the
other Creditor or Creditors, at whose Suit or Suits the Debtor is committed,
his or their proportionable Part of the Sum allowed as aforesaid, with Cost:
And the same to be recovered by such Creditor against the other Creditor or
Creditors, in manner as the same is recovered by the Goal Keeper as aforesaid.

An ACT in Addition to an Act for enabling the Secretary of this Colony, for
the sending out the several Acts of the General Assembly or the Copies of the
same, to the several Towns in this Colony.
WHEREAS there are several private Acts and Appeals, which do not affect the
Public, but only private Persons, and augments the Charge to the Inhabitants
of this Colon^, which is conceived to be prejudicial to the same.

For Pre^^nting whereof for the Future,

BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly of this Colony; and by the Authority of
the same, it is Enacted, That from and after the Publication hereof, the
Secretary for the Time being, The (...) out Co^^^s of private Act^.
shall send out to the several Towns, the Copies of no other Acts and Orders of
the General Assembly, than such as relate to the Colony in general, together
with a List of all the Officers that shall from time to time be chosen, either
at the Genral Election or General Assembly.

An ACT enabling the Trustees of the Indian Sachem, to lease out New
Settlements of Land belonging to him, for the Space of Fourteen Years.
WHEREAS the Honorable John Wanton, Esquire Governor of said Colony, in behalf of
himself and the other Trustees of the Indian Sachem in said Colony, represented
to this Assembly, that they are restricted from letting out any of said
Sachem's Lands for more than Seven Years. And some Persons newl^ settled
thereon, who have made Im^rovement on small Parcels of said Land, thinking it
hard to be turned off in so short a Time, whereupon said Trustees gave them
Encouragement, ^^ey would endeavor to get said Time lengthned; and therefore
prayed this Assembly to empower them to make L^ases for Fourteen Years.

Upon Consideration whereof,

IT Is Voted and Enacted, Trustees of the Sachem to leas^ out new Settlements
for 14 Years.
That the Trustees of the said Sachem for the Time being, be, and they are
hereby empowered to give Leases for the Space of Fourteen Years, to all such
Persons as they have already or shall hereafter permit to sit down upon new and
unimproved Lands belonging to the said Sachem.

A LAW, Made and passed by the General Assembly of His Majesty's Colony of
Rhode Island, and Providence-Plantations, in New England, held by Adjournment,
at South-Kingstown, on the Fourth Tue^day in February, 1739.
An ACT for augmenting the Bounty or Premium on killing of Wolves.
WHEREAS notwithstanding the Bounty already allowed by Law for destroying of
Wolves, it is represented by the Inhabitants of the Northern and Western Parts
of the Colony, that they have for some Years past, greatly suffered, by having
their Creatures killed and destroyed by those ravenous Beasts.

BE IT THEREFORE ENACTED by the General Assembly of the Colony aforesaid,
Premium for killing Wolves au^mented to Thirty Pounds per Head.
That the Bounty or Premium for destroying of Wolves, which is now Ten Pounds
per Head, be augmented to Thirty Pounds per Head for the Future.

A LAW, Made and passed by the General Assembly of his Majesty's Colony of
Rhode Island, and Providence-Plantations, in New England; held at Newport, the
first Wednesday in May, 1740.
An ACT obliging the respective Sheriffs of each County in this Colony, to give
Bonds upon their Admission into that Office, for the due Performance thereof.
BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly of this Colony, and by the Authority
thereof, it is Enacted, Sher^^^^ to give B nd.
That after the Publication of this Act, such Persons as shall be chosen and
elected to the Office of a Sheriff within either of ^he Counties in this
Colony, shall at the Time of his or their taking the Engagement to said Office,
give Bond, with sufficient Sureties to the General Treasurer, in the Sum of
Five Thousand Pounds, current lawful Money, for his due and faithful Execution
of said Office, in the several Branches thereof.

LAWS, Made and past by the General Assembly of His Majesty's Colony of
Rhode Island, and Providence-Plantations, in New England, held by Adjournment,
at Newport, the Sixteenth Day of September, 1740.
An ACT for emitting of Twenty Thousand Pounds in a N^w Tenor, to be let upon
Loan; and for the S^^king off Ten Thousand Pounds of the Old Tenor, for the
Supply of the General Treasury.
WHEREAS the Colony labors under great Charge and Expense, by encouraging,
enlisting, and fitting out two Companies of Soldiers, according to His
Majesty's Instructions for the present Expedition against the Spaniards; and
have at their own Cost, built and fitted out a private Vessel of War of good
Force, to cruize on the Coast of New England, for the guarding and securing of
Shipping and Trade; and now in time of War are under a Necessity, for the
Preservation of themselves and other Parts of New England, to which they are a
Barrier, to put themselves in a proper Posture of Defense, and for the Security
of His Majesty's Subjects and Territories here, to furnish themselves with
Warlike Stores: For the Effecting of which, and defraying the constant Charge
attending the Inhabitants of this Colony above any other Part of New England, a
proper and sufficient Medium of Exchange is of absolute Necessity.

Wherefore,

BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly of this Colony, and by the Authority of
the same, Twenty Thousand Pounds of a (...) emit^^d (...) for Te^ (...), at ^.
4 per Cent.
it is Enacted, That the Sum of Twenty Thousand Pounds in Bills of public
Credit be impressed and emitted, equivalent to Silver, stated at Nine Shillings
per Ounce, or Gold according to its proportionable Value. Which Bills shall be
put into the Hands of such Trustees as shall be appointed by the General
Assembly of the Colony, for the several Towns thereof, and be by them let out
upon Loan for ten Years, at Four per Cent. and then to be sunk by ten equal
annual Payments. And the Trustees are hereby required to take L^nd Security of
double the Value, by Way of Mortgage, for the p^incipal Sum let, and Interest
accruing thereon; and wher^in the Mortgagers shall oblige themselves, etc. to
pay the p^incipal Sum in the same Bills, or in such other Medium of Exchange as
shall be passing in the Colony, at the Times of Payment, according to the Value
of the said Bills, when emitted, or in Silver Money at Nine Shillings per
Ounce, or in Gold at a proportionate Value, according to the Face and Tenor of
the Bills, at the several Periods of sinking the same. And as a collateral
Security, the said Trustees are ordered to take B^nds of every Person taking
said Bills, for the Payment of the Interest annually, and Principal as the
Mortgage expresses; the one having Reference to the other.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the aforesaid Bills
be of the Denomination of Two Pounds, One Pound, Ten Shillings and Five
Shillings; and of the following Tenor and Form.

THIS BILL of due from the Colony of Rhode Island, Form of the Bills.
etc. to the Possessor thereof, shall be in Value equal to oz. dwt. gr. in
Silver, Troy Weight of Sterling Alloy, or Gold Coin at the Rate of L 6. 13 s. 4
d. per Ounce, or to such a Sum, in any Medium of Exchange, as shall be p^ssing
in the Government, as will be equal to so much Silver or Gold; and shall be
accordingly accepted by the Treasurer of said Colony, and the Receiver thereof,
in all Payments, by Order of the General Assembly. Newport, September 16. 1740.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That Six Persons be
appointed a Grand Committee, to purchase Plates for the Colony, and to procure
the same to be engraven in a proper Manner, to purchase Paper, and agree with
the Person that shall be appointed to impress said Bills, and to sign said
Bills, they or any three of them, and to form any Device they shall think
proper to prevent Counterfeiting.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the aforesaid Bills
be by the General Assembly proportioned to the several Towns in this Colony,
and be accordingly by said Grand Committee delivered, and afterward by the
respective Committees, proportioned to such Persons of their respective Towns
as have a Right to take the same, and let out to such Persons as will mortgage
their Land in manner as aforesaid; and whereof no one Person is to be admitted
to take more than Three Hundred Pounds or less than Ten Pounds, except such
Bills lie in the Hands of the Trustees two Months after proper Notice to the
Inhabitants; and then upon the like good Security as aforesaid, to be let in a
larg^r Q^a^tity.

The Fees to be taken by the Trustees for emitting said Bills, to be Twenty
Pence for a Mortgage, Six Pence for a Bond, and Four Pence for an
Acknowledgment, in said Tenor; and for signing and letting out, One Third as
much as formerly, in said Bills, or the same Sum in the Old Tenor.

AND he it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That Ten Thousand Pounds
be forthwith struck off the old Plates of the former Tenor, Ten Tho^sand Pounds
of the Old Tenor, to be sunk with the Interest of this Bank.
and signed by the Grand Committee, and put into the Hands of the General
Treasurer, to discharge the present Debts, and answer the Emergencies of the
Colony; and that the same be sunk, with the Interest of the aforesaid Bank, as
the same shall be received into the General Treasury.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That Messrs. Joseph
Whipple, Trustees of the Colony to be engaged before the Governor.
John Potter, Iahleel Brenton, Daniel Updike, John Gardner, and John Dexter,
be, and they are hereby appointed and chosen the Six Trustees of the Colony;
who are to be engaged before his Honor the Governor, as soon as conveniently
may be, to the faithful Performance of their Duty.

AND the following Persons are chosen and appointed Committees for the several
Towns in this Colony, to hire out their proportionable Part of said Bills that
belong to each respective Town.

FOR the Town of Newport, Messrs. Jonathan Nicholls and Thomas Gould.

FOR the Town of Providence, (...) for the several Towns.
Messrs. Ezekiel Warner and Jonathan Randall.

FOR the Town of Portsmouth, Messrs. Gideon Cornell and Stephen Talman.

FOR the Town of Warwick, Messrs. William Holden and James Rhodes.

FOR the Town of Westerly, Messrs. Thomas Hiscox and Joshua Babcock.

FOR the Town of New-Shoram, Messrs. Edward Sands and Nathanael Littlefield.

FOR the Town of North-Kingstown, Messrs. Christopher Phillips and Benjamin
Wait.

FOR the Town of South-Kingstown, Messrs. Rouse Helm and Ephraim Gardner.

FOR the Town of East-Greenwich, Messrs. Peter Mawney and Thomas Fry, jun.

FOR the Town of Iames-Town, Messrs. Samuel Clark and James Carr.

FOR the Town of Smithfield, Messrs. Resolved Waterman and David Comstock.

FOR the Town of Situate, Messrs. St^phen Hopkins and Job Randall.

FOR the Town of Gloucester, Messrs. John Smith and Richard Steer.

FOR the Town of Charlestown, Messrs. Samuel Perry and John Hill.

ALL which Persons are severally to take their Engagements before His Honor
the Governor, to the faithful Performance of their Duty, before they receive
the proportionable Part of said Bills belonging to each respective Town.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That Col. John
Coddington be, and he is hereby appointed to impress all the Bills of the New
Tenor. And that Mr. William Claggett be, and he is hereby appointed to impress
all the Bills of the Old Tenor in this Act mentioned; and both to be under Oath
for the faithful Performance of said Trust.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That one of the Grand
Committee, or an honest faithful Man to be appointed by them, and at their
Charge* be constantly with each Person that shall impress the Bills of either
Tenor. And that the Plates be lodged every Night with one of the Grand
Committees while the Bills are impressing. And when finished, said Plates are
to be lodged with His Honor the Governor.

An ACT for augmenting the Fee for Writs issuing out from the Clerks of the
several Inferior Courts of Common Pleas in this Colony.
BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly of this Colony; and by the Authority of
the same, it is Enacted, Clerks (...) for (...)
That the Clerks of the several Inferior Courts of Common Pleas in this Colony,
take Two Shillings and Six Pence for each and every Writ they shall issue out
of their respective Offices for the Future.

LAWS, Made and past by the General Assembly of His Majesty's Colony of
Rhode Island, and Providence-Plantations, in New England, held at Warwick, the
Second Day of December, 1740.
Repealed in Sept. 1742.
An ACT appointing an Attorney General in each County within this Government.


An ACT made in Addition to and Amendment of an Act made and passed the third
Tuesday in September, A. D. 1740, for the Emission of Twenty Thousand Pounds in
Bills of Public Credit.
WHEREAS since the Passing the aforesaid Act, some Instructions have been
received by this Colony from the Lords Justices of Great Britain; to which the
aforesaid Act seems in some Part not to be exactly agreeable: Therefore, in
Obedience to, and Compliance with the aforesaid Instructions; and for the
Amendment of said Act of Assembly:

BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly of this Colony* and by the Authority of
the same, it is Enacted, That in Lieu of the aforesaid Twenty Thousand Pounds,
Twenty Thousand Pounds emitte^, ^quivalent to Silver, at 61. and 9 d. per Ounce.
there be forthwith impressed and emitted, the Sum of Twenty Thousand Pounds,
in Bills of public Credit, equivalent to Silver, stated at Six Shillings and
Nine Pence per Ounce, or Gold according to its proportionate Value. Which Bills
shall be put into the Hands of such Trustees as in said Act were appointed by
the General Assembly of the Colony, for the several Towns thereof, and be by
them let out upon Loan for ten Years, Trustees to take Security as for^erly.
at Four per Cent. and then to be sunk by ten equal annual Payments. And the
Trustees are hereby empowered to take Land Security of double the Value, by Way
of Mortgage, for the principal Sum let, and Interest accruing thereon; and
wherein the Mortgagers shall oblige themselves, etc. to pay the principal Sum
in the same Bills, or in Silver Money as aforesaid, or in Gold at the Rate of
Five Pounds per Ounce. And as a collateral Security, the said Trustees are
ordered to take Bonds of every Person taking said Bills, for the Payment of the
Interest annually, and the Principal as the Mortgage expresses; the one having
Reference to the other.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the said Bills be
of the Denomination of Two Pounds, One Pound, Denomination, and Form of the
Bills.
Ten Shillings, Five Shillings, Half a Crown, One Shilling and Six Pence, One
Shilling, and Six Pence; and of the following Tenor and Form.

THIS BILL of due from the Colony of Rhode Island, etc. to the Possessor
thereof, shall be in Value equal to oz. dwt. gr. in Silver, Troy Weight of
Sterling Alloy, or Gold Coin at the Rate of Five Pounds per Ounce; and shall be
accordingly accepted by the Treasurer, and the Receiver thereof, in all
Payments, by Order of the General Assembly. Warwick, December 2. 1740.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the, Six Persons
who by said Act were appointed a Grand Committee, do purchase Plates for the
Colony, and procure the same to be engraven in a proper Manner, to purchase
Paper, and agree with the Person appointed to impress said Bills, and sign said
Bills, they or any three of them, and to form any Device they shall think
proper, to prevent Counterfeiting.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the aforesaid Bills
be by the General Assembly proportioned to the several Towns in this Colony,
and be accordingly by said Grand Committee delivered, and afterward by the
respective Committees appointed for each Town, proportioned to such Persons of
their respective Towns as have a Right to take the same, and let out to such
Persons as will mortgage their Land in manner as aforesaid; and whereof no one
Person is to be admitted to take more than One Hundred Pounds in his own Right,
or less than Seven Pounds, except such Bills lie in the Hands of the Trustees
two Months after proper Notice to the Inhabitants; and then upon the like good
Security as aforesaid, to be let in a larger Quantity.

The Fees to be taken by said Trustees for letting said Bills, to be One
Shilling and Three Pence for a Mortgage, Four Pence Half Penny for a Bond, and
Three Pence for an Acknowledgment, in said Tenor; and for signing and letting
out, One Quarter as much as formerly, in said Bills.,

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That one of the Grand
Committee, or some suitable Person by their Appointment, and at their Charge,
be constantly with the Person that shall impress the aforesaid Bills; and that
the Plates be lodged every Night with one of the Grand Commmittee while the
Bills are impressing, and when finished, said Plates are to be lodged with His
Honor the Governor.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That Messrs. Nicholas
Easton, John Rice, jun. and Immanuel Northurp, be, and they are hereby
appointed a Committee to consider in what manner the Bank to be emitted ought
to be proportioned among the several Towns.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authorit^ aforesaid, That none of the
Committees for letting out the said Bank Money, for the Future take above Two
Shillings and Six Pence of said Bills of any Person that shall tranfer his
Right in said Bank.

AND it is also further Enacted, That Four Thousand Pounds of the aforesaid
Sum, be struck off, and signed, in Bills of the lowest Denominations aforesaid.

A LAW, Made and passed by the General Assembly of his Majesty's Colony of
Rhode Island, and Providence-Plantations, in New England; held by Adjournment,
at Warwick, the Twenty Seventh Day of January, 1740.
An ACT for the more effectual putting the Colony into a proper Posture of
Defense.
WHEREAS (...) is an absolute Necessity of putting the Colony, an^ par^^cularly
the Town of Newport into a better Posture of Defense, not only in Regard to the
present War with Spain, but more especially as all Advices from abroad, suppose
a War with France inevitable in the Spring.

And whereas it has been found vastly prejudicial to this Colony, the Act for
empowering the Freemen and Soldiers to choose their own Military Officers; and
as the Fines already stated by Law, on Soldiers neglecting their Attendance on
military Duty, have been too small.

All which being duly considered,

BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly, and by the Authority thereof, General
Assembly to chos^ (...) Offi^^^
it is Enacted, That the aforesaid Act empowering the Fr^^men and Soldiers
choosing their Military Officers, be and it is hereby repealed and declared
Null and Void. And that for the Future, the General Assembly annually, at their
Sessions holden in May, choose and elect the Military Officers in this
Government; and they are to be commissioned by His Honor the Governor as
usual. And that the Military Officers already elected, be continued in their
respective Offices till the first Wednesday in May next.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, Who shall constitute a
Council of War.
That for the Future the Council of War shall consist of the Governor and as
many of the Council for the Time being as are then present, the Field Officers
and Captains of each Company and the Lieutenant in the Absence of the Captain,
and no other; who are hereby empowered to appoint such other Days as may be
necessary to discipline the Militia, and make them expert in the Use of their
Arms, over and above the Four Training Days by Law appointed in War Time; Fine
for not Training, and Nonappearance on an Alarm.
and that every Soldier neglecting to give his Attendance and do his Duty in
that Service, shall be obliged to pay as a Fine the Sum of Ten Shillings, and
Forty Shillings for each Day's neglect on an Alarm; which Fines shall be
appropriated to the maintaining a Magazine for the public Use, in each County,
after the necessary Charge of the Company is defrayed,

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That there be two more
Companies made in the Town of Newport, and proper Officers appointed over them,
by the the General Assembly.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Lower Battery
at Fort George be repaired and enlarged, so as to mount ten or more Cannon*
Lower Battery at the Fort enlarged.
and that a Committee be appointed for that Purpose; and to make all necessary
Alterations and Reparations at said Fort and Battery.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That there be a Magazine
or Powder House of Brick erected, A magazine to be er cted in Newport.
not exceeding Twenty Four Feet Diameter, in some convenient Place in the Town
of Newport, to contain the Powder that may be imported in this Colony. And that
there be ten Barrels of Powder procured at the Colony Charge, and for their
Use; and also a suitable Quantity of Ball to be lodged in said Magazine, and
the same Quantity from time to ti^e to be there kept. And that there be three
Barrels of Powder and a suitable Quantity of Ball procured for the County of
Providence, and the same Quantity of each for the County of King's County; all
for the Use of the Colony; to be under the Care of the Field Officers of each
County. Ten Fi^l^ P^ece^ to be p o^ured.
And that ten Field Pieces be procured for the Use of the Colony, to be kept in
the County of Newport, and a Committee to be appointed for the Purposes
aforesaid.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all Persons making
solemn Engagement before the Governor or any Magistrate in the respective
Counties where the Alarm is made, (...)
that it is against their Conscience to bear Arms at all, shall on an Alarm,
appear at the Governor's or Magistrate's as aforesaid, either with Horses,
though without Arms, to be employed as Scouts, Messengers, Watches, etc. or
else, if they appear on Foot, that they be divided into Companies, and obey the
Governor's or Magistrate's Order, to remove Women and Children, or sick Persons
out of immediate Danger, or to watch against or extinguish any Fires that may
be kindled at such Times, either by Design or Accident; and to do any other
Duty consistent with their Religious Principles: And any Person as aforesaid
not appearing, shall be obliged to pay the Sum of Forty Shillings for each
Day's neglect.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That one Field Officer
with the Commission Officers of each Company, Court Martial appointed. Vide Act
Iu^e 1741.
are appointed a Court Martial to punish or fine any Soldier under Arms, for
any Offense by him committed, agreeable to the Nature and Circumstances thereof.

LAWS, Made and past by the General Assembly of His Majesty's Colony of
Rhode Island, and Providence-Plantations, in New England, held by Adjournment,
at Providence, on the first Day of April, 1741.
An ACT for the incorporating the West End of the Town of East-Greenwich into a
Township; and the same to be distinguished and known by the Name of
West-Greenwich.
WHEREAS several of the Inhabitants of the aforesaid Town of East-Greenwich, by
Petition to this Assembly, did set forth, the great Disadvantage they labor
under, on account of the great Extent of said Town: And as it is conceived it
will be more for the Ease and Benefit of all its Inhabitants in transacting and
negotiating the prudential Affairs thereof, to have a Division made.

BE IT THEREFORE ENACTED by the General Assembly, and by the Authority thereof,
it is Enacted, That from the Westerly Line of the old Township, East-Greenwich
divided.
unt^ the Colony Line, be set off and incorporated a Township; and the same to
be distinguished and known by the Name of West-Greenwich: West-Green^^^h a
Towns^ip.
And that the Inhabitants thereof from time to time, shall have and enjoy the
like Benefits, Liberties, Privileges, and Immunities with other Towns in this
Colony according to our Ch^^ter.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That John Spencer, Esquire a
Justice of the Peace, living within the afo^esaid new Town, remain in his
Office till the first Wednesday in May next; and that he grant forth a Warrant
to call in the Inhabitants of said Town together, on the third Tuesday of this
Instant April, to choose and elect such Town Officers as they shall have
occasion for, and the Law directs; and to appoint the Time of their Town
Meeting and the Places; and to choose and elect two Deputies to represent them
at the next General Assembly, and so on, as by the Charter is directed.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That said Town shall
send one Petit Juror to the Superior Court of Judicature, and Court of Assize,
and General Goal Delivery, and one Grand and one Petit Juror to the Inferior
Court of Common Pleas and General Sessions of the Peace.

AND it is also further Enacted, That there be two Trustees appointed for the
said new Town, for the letting out of its proportionable Part of the Twenty
Thousand Pounds ordered to be emitted.

An ACT for regulating the laying out High Ways in the several Towns of this
Colony.
BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly of this Colony, and by the Authority
thereof, it is Enacted, That each and every Town in this Colony, Hi^^Ways (...)
to be laid out Vide Act 172^.
be under the same Regulation as the Town of Providence is, in respect to
laying out High Ways, by virtue of a Law of this Colony.

An ACT for equipping the Colony Sloop, and sending her out to cruize, etc.
BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly, That the Committee who procured the
Colony Sloop to be built, forthwith equip and fit her with Ammunition, Store^,
and all other Necessaries, suitable for a Cruize.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That His Honor the
Governor, C^lony Sloop to be e^u^pped.
and so many of his Council as shall be present, together with the aforesaid
Committee, be, and they are hereby empowered and directed, to appoint
forthwith, a Captain, Lieutenant, Master, Gunner, Boatswain, Carpenter,
Steward* Cook, and twelve other Men, upon the best Terms they can, to belong to
said Sloop constantly, until Orders from the Assembly to the Contrary.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That His Honor the
Governor, with the Advice of such of his Council as shall be present from time
to time, upon News of an Enemy being upon the Coast, G^vernor, etc. to dire^t
her Cruizes.
shall (if they shall think proper to send out said Sloop) immediately order
the Captain to beat up for Volunteers, Vide Act, June 1741.
and enlist to the Number of One Hundred Men, including them before belonging
to said Sloop, and send her out with the greatest Expedition; and if at any
Time, there does not a sufficient Number of Men enlist, that His Honor the
Governor be, and he is hereby directed and fully empowered to give out his
Warrant for impressing so many Men as there shall be a Necessity of, to make up
the Compliment; and that the Volunteers as well as those impressed, be under
Pay from the Colony, from the Time they enter or are impressed, till they are
discharged.

An ACT for laying an Embargo on Vessels bound to Sea, upon any emergent
Occasion.
BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly of this Colony, and by the Authority
thereof, Governor and Counc^l ^mpowered to l^y an Embargo on Vessels.
it is Enacted, That His Honor the Governor with such of His Council as shall
be present, be, and they are hereby empowered to lay an Embargo upon all or any
Vessels in this Colony from time to time, as they shall think needful.

An ACT empowering the Town Council of each Town within this Colony, to bind
out as Apprentices, poor Children that are likely to become chargeable to the
Town wherein they live.
BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly; and by the Authority thereof, it is
Enacted, That the Town Council of each Town within this Colony, Town Council to
(...) out poor Children Apprentices.
be, and they are hereby fully authorized and empowered to bind out to
Apprenticeship, poor Children who are likely to become Chargeable to the Town
wherein they live; and Indentures by them given, shall be as good, binding, and
effectual in the Law, as those that are allowed of in England, by the proper
Officers appointed by Law for that Purpose.

LAWS, Made and passed by the General Assembly of His Majesty's Colony of
Rhode Island, and Providence Plantations, in New England, held at Newport, on
the Sixth Day of May, 1741.
An ACT made in Addition to an Act, made and passed the Second Day of December,
A. D. 1740, entitled, An Act made in Addition to and Amendment of an Act, made
and passed the third Tuesday of September, A. D. 1740, for the Emission of
Twenty Thousand Pounds in Bills of Public Credit.
BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly of this Colony, and by the Authority
thereof, it is Enacted, Six Shilling^ and Nine Penc^ in Bill^ of the New Tenor,
equal to Twenty Seven Shilling^ in Bills of the Old Tenor.
That Six Shillings and Nine Pence in Bills of Public Credit of the last
Emission in the New Tenor shall be equal to Twenty Seven Shillings in Bills of
the former Emissions or Old Tenor, and shall be accordingly accepted as such in
all public Payments: And for every Twenty Seven Shillings of the Old Tenor,
Six Shillings and Nine Pence of the New Tenor shall be a sufficient Tender in
Law in all Payments, and in the same Proportion in a greater or lesser Sum; and
that the Courts of Judicature in making up Judgments, ar^ hereby obliged to
govern themselves accordingly.

An ACT for altering the Times of holding the Inferior Courts of Common Pleas
and General Sessions of the Peace, in the County of Providence.
WHEREAS the Judges of His Majesty's Inferior Court of Common Pleas for the
County of Providence, represented to this Assembly, that the Times appointed
for holding the said Inferior Court of Common Pleas and General Sessions of the
Peace for the County aforesaid, are at two Seasons of the Year very
Disadvantageous for the Members of said Court and those Persons whose Busin^ss
requires their Attendance on said Courts; and therefore prayed that the same
might be altered to such Seasons of the Year as might best tend (...) the
Convenience of all Persons obliged to attend thereon.

Which being duly considered,

BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly; and by the Authority thereof* i^ is
Enacted, That the Times of holding the aforesaid Cou^ts be altered from the
(...) Tuesday in June to the third Tuesday in June, Time of holding the
Infe^ior Court in the (...) of P^^^idence altered.
and from the second Tuesday in December to the third Tuesday in December, for
the Future* and that the Judges of said Court, and all other Persons concerned,
are to govern themselves accordingly* and that all Processes issued out in the
aforesaid County, and all other Cases whatsoever, that are to be heard at the
said next Inferior Court of Common Pleas and General Sessions of the Peace,
either by Continuance, Appeal, or otherwise however, be returned, heard and
determined, by said Court, to be held on the third Tuesday in June next: And
the Judges of said Court, are to hear, judge and determine in all such Cases,
and to allow the Liberty of an Appeal to the Party who is dissatisfied with any
Judgment that shall be then given, to the Superior Court of Judicature and
Court of Assize, as heretofore has been customary and usual.

An ACT for striking off Two Thousand Pounds in Bills of Public Credit of the
New Tenor, for the Supply of the General Treasury.
BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly; and by the Authority thereof, it is
Enacted, That the Sum of Two Thousand Pounds in Bills of public Credit of the
New Tenor, Two Thousand Pounds (...) of the New Te^or omitted to supply the
Treasury.
be forthwith struck off from the large Plates and lodged in the General
Treasury, to defray the present Charges of the Colony; and that the same be
sunk out of the Interest of the last Bank of the New Tenor, as the same shall
be paid in.

LAWS, Made and passed by the General Assembly of his Majesty's Colony of
Rhode Island, and Providence-Plantations, in New England; held by Adjournment,
at Newport, on the Twenty Second Day of June, 1741.
An ACT for lengthning the Time of Vessels cruising, that are employed in the
Colony Service.
WHEREAS the Time limited for a Crui^e of such Vessel or Vessels as shall be
sent out by the Colony against any Privateer or Pirate, etc. that s^all infest
this Coast, by Experience is found too short.

BE IT THEREFORE ENACTED by the General Assembly of this Colony, Governor, etc.
to limit the Time of Vessels Cruizing.
That for the Future it shall be left to His Honor the Governor and so many of
the Council as shall be present, to direct how long any such Cruize shall be,
either in the Colony Sloop or any other Vessel that shall be sent out by said
Colony: And that the Number of Men to be sent out in the Colony Sloop (to be
also at the Discretion of His Honor the Governor and so many of His Council as
shall be present) not to be less than Ninety in Number. Any Law, Custom, or
Usage, to the contrary, in anywise, notwithstanding.

An ACT in Addition to an Act, appointing a Court Martial within this Colony.
WHEREAS by the Law of this Colony, one Field Officer with the Commission
Officers of each Company, are appointed a Court Martial to punish or fine any
Soldier under Arms, for any Offense by him committed, agreeable to the Nature
and Circumstance thereof.

And whereas it may often happen, that when there is a Necessity of holding
such a Court, that no Field Officer may be present.

BE IT THEREFORE ENACTED by the General Assembly, That on any such Occasion,
Court Martial may be held without a Field Officer.
in the Absence of the Field Officers, the Captain and other Commission
Officers of each Company in the several Regiments in thisColony, shall have the
same Power to hold a Court, and corporally to punish or fine any Offender in
such Company, as fully as if a Field Officer was present.

An ACT for appointing and erecting a Court of Equity, to hear and determine
all Appeals in Personal Actions, from the Judgments of the Superior Court.
WHEREAS the Trial of Appeals by the General Assembly, from Judgments given at
the Superior Court of Judicature, has by long Experience been found
prejudicial, as well to the Parties having their Causes there determined, as to
the Government in general, by the public Business being neglected.

For Remedy whereof for the Future,

BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly; and by the Authority thereof, it is
Enacted, That the Act regulating the Appeals from the Judgments of the Superior
Court to the General Assembly, be, and it is hereby repealed, and declared Null
and Void.

Court of Equity appoi^ted.
AND that for the Future there be a Court of Equity appointed and established in
this Government, to consist of Five Judges to be chosen annually by the General
Assembly, and to be commissionated, any three of whom to be a Quorum; who are
hereby empowered and authorized to hear all Appeals from the Judgments of the
Superior Court in Personal Actions, and to give a Determination on said
Appeals, by affirming, reversing, or altering the Judgments of said Superior
Court, agreeable to Law and Equity, in as full and extensive Manner as the
General Assembly has been accustomed to do.

AND that said Court be held in Newport, to try the Appeals from the Judgments
of the Superior Court, held at Newport the last Tuesday of March every Year, on
the fourth Tuesday of April annually, and at Providence and South-Kingstown by
Turns, to try the Appeals from the Judgments given at the Superior Court, held
the first Tuesday of September, as has been accustomed heretofore by the
General Assembly the Second Tuesday of October annually.

AND for the better regulating and governing the Parties appealing from the
Judgments of the Superior Court as aforesaid, that where an Appeal is had, the
Party appealing, is hereby obliged to give Bond for the Prosecution of such
Appeal, and to procure a Copy of the whole Case, and file his Reasons of Appeal
with the Clerk, ten Days before the Sitting of such Court, where the Appeal is
to be heard and determined; and that the Judgment and Determination of the said
Court shall be final, saving an Appeal to His Majesty in Council, in those
Cases wherein the Law has already provided.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That there be one Clerk
chosen and appointed for the aforesaid Court, who is hereby entitled to take
the same Fees as has been taken in the Trial of Appeals by the General
Assembly.

An ACT in Addition to an Act made and passed in the Sixth Year of the Reign of
the late King GEORGE, A. D. 1719, entitled, An Act for establishing Vendue
Masters throughout this Colony.
WHEREAS it is found by Experience, that many Persons heretofore have suffered
considerable Loss by their Goods which they have exposed to Sale at Public
Vendue, by reason the Vendue Masters for the time being, had not given Security
sufficient to answer for the Goods by them sold, and the Moneys that they had
received for the same, and their Circumstances or Estate not being sufficient
to answer such Sums of Money that came into their Hands by virtue of their
Offices.

For Remedy whereof,

BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly of this Colony, and by the Authority
thereof, it is Enacted, That the several Vendue Masters that shall be hereafter
chosen by the respective Towns within this Colony, Vendue Masters to give Bond
in the Sum of L5000.
shall before they act in said Office, give Bond in the Sum of Five Thousand
Pounds, with one good Surety, to the Town Treasurer of the respective Towns,
for the faithful Performance and Discharge of said Office.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That in case any Person
or Persons shall hereafter assume or take upon him the Exercise of said Office,
Fine for acting a^ Vendue Master without being chosen.
without being legally chosen by the Towns wherein they live, and duly
convicted thereof before any Court of Record, shall pay as a Fine, to and for
the Use of the Town where the Offense shall be committed, the Sum of Fifty
Pounds; to be recovered by the Town Treasurer of said Town for the Time being,
by an Action of the Case.

Always Provided, It be not such Person or Persons that are allowed by Act of
Parliament, or some Act of this Colony heretofore made.

An ACT in Addition to an Act, passed by the General Assembly in September,
1741.
WHEREAS there was an Act passed by the General Assembly at their Sessions held
in September last past, empowering three Justices of the Peace to try civil
Actions to the Value of Five Pounds.

IT is Thereupon Voted and Resolved, That it was not the Intent of said Act,
Col^^y's Bond^ not to be tried at Justice^ Co^^t.
to extend to Bonds given to the General Treasurer and Grand Committee for the
Use of the Colony; but that all Actions brought for such Bonds, be tried at the
Inferior Court of Common Pleas.

It is also Voted and Resolved, That the Officers in this Colony, who shall
serve any Justices Warrants, Bail to be taken on Justices Warran^s, as in other
Cas^^.
shall observe the same Rules in respect to taking Bail, as the several
Sheriffs are held to by the Laws of this Colony.

A LAW, Made and past by the General Assembly of His Majesty's Colony of
Rhode Island, and Providence-Plantations, in New England, h^ld by Adjournment,
at Newport, on the Eighteenth Day of August, 1741.
An ACT for incorporating the West End of the Town of Warwick into a Township,
and the same to be distinguished and known by the Name of Coventry.
WHEREAS several of the Inhabitants of the aforesaid Town of Warwick, by
Petition to this Assembly, did set forth the great Disadvantage they labor
under, on account of the great Extent of said Town. And as it is conceived it
will be more for the Ease and Benefit of all its Inhabitants, in transacting
and negotiating the prudential Affairs thereof, to have a Division made.

BE IT THEREFORE ENACTED by the General Assembly, and by the Authority thereof,
it is Enacted, That the Western Part of the Town of Warwick be divided and set
off from the Eastern Part thereof, Coventry a Township.
by a North and South Line drawn through the most Western Bounds of the
Westermost of the Coweset Farms, and incorporated a Township; and the same to
be distinguished and known by the Name of Coventry; and that the Inhabitants
thereof from time to time, shall have and enjoy the like Benefi^^, Liberties,
Privileges and Immunities with other Towns in this Colony, according to our
Charter.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That Abel Potter, Esquire a
Justice of the Peace, living within the aforesaid Town of Coventry, remain in
his Office till the first Wednesday of May next; and that he grant forth a
Warrant to call in the Inhabitants of the said Town together, on the last
Monday of this Instant August, to choose or elect such Town Officers as they
shall have occasion for, and the Law directs; and to appoint the Times of their
Town Meetings and the Places; and to choose and elect two Deputies, to
represent them at the next General Assembly, and so on, as by our Charter is
directed.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That said Town of
Coventry shall send one Petit Juror to the Superior Court of Judicature, Court
of Assize, and General Goal Delivery; and one Grand and one Petit Juror to the
Inferior Court of Common Pleas and General Sessions of the Peace.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That Daniel Abbot, John
Potter, and Thomas Spencer, Esqrs; be, and they are hereby appointed a
Committee, to make a Division of the aforesaid Town of Warwick, agreeable to
this Act.

A LAW, Made and passed by the General Assembly of his Majesty's Colony of
Rhode Island, and Providence-Plantations, in New England; held by Adjournment,
at Newport, on the Sixth Day of October, 1741.
An ACT for Emitting Two Thousand Pounds of the New Tenor, for defraying the
Charge of raising and transporting a Number of Recruits to the English Camp on
the Island of Cuba.
BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly of this Colony; and by the Authority
thereof, it is Enacted, That the Sum of Two Thousand Pounds of the New Tenor be
forthwith struck off, in order to answer the present Emergency, Two Thousand
Pound^ emitted.
and the same to be impressed by Col. John Coddington, and to be signed by the
Grand Committee as usual; and when finished, to be lodged in the Hands of the
General Treasurer for the Purpose aforesaid; which Sum, if not sufficient, the
Committee are hereby empowered to draw out of the General Treasury what
Interest Money is paying in, as their Occasions for the Purpose aforesaid, may
require. And that such new Bills as shall be made, shall be paid out of the
Interest Money, as the same shall be paid in, in order to be burnt.

LAWS, Made and passed by the General Assembly of His Majesty'^ Colony of
Rhode Island, and Providence-Plantations, in New England, held by Adjournment,
at South-Kingstown, on the Second Day of February, in the Fifteenth Year of his
Majesty's Reign, A. D. 1741.
An ACT for calling in and exchanging the Twenty Four Thousand Pounds emitted
by this Colony in the Year One Thousand Seven Hundred and Forty.
WHEREAS it appears to this General Assembly, that some evil-minded Persons
have counterfeited some of the Bills of Public Credit of the N^^ Tenor emitted
A. D. 1740, by which Fraud, many Persons are likely to be great Sufferers, and
the Currency of the said Bills will be much obstructed, if the utmost Care be
not taken to prevent the same.

BE It Therefore Enacted by the General Assembly, and by the Authority thereof,
it is Enacted, That the Sum of Twenty Four Thousand Pounds New Tenor, Twenty
Four Thousand Pounds ^ad^, to exchange the Bank in (...)
which was emitted in the Year One Thousand Seven Hundred and Forty, be all
called in, and that the Sum of Twenty Four Thousand Pounds of like Tenor, be
struck off, upon new Plates of a diffe^ent Form from the former, in order to
exchange the same, in Bills of the following Denominations, viz. Twenty-two
Thou^and Pounds in Bills of Forty Shillings, Twenty Shillings, Ten Shillings,
and Five Shillings; and Two Thousand Pounds in Bills of Half a Crown, Eighteen
Pence, Twelve Pence, and Six Pence.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That Messrs. Iahleel
Brenton, Io^eph Whipple, Daniel Updike, John Gardner, John Dexter, and Edward
Scott, be, and they are hereby appointed and chosen to be the Grand Committee,
or Six Trustees of the Colony, who are forthwith to procure a sufficient
Quantity of suitable Paper to impress said Bills; and that said Committee
deliver the Paper to such Person as shall be appointed to impress the same,
taking his Receipt for the Number of Sheets.

AND be it likewise further Enacted, That His Honor the Governor and Council
provide a suitable Place in which said Bills shall be impressed; and that Capt.
Ezbon Sanford be, and he is hereby appointed constantly to attend and be with
the Person appointed to impress the said Bill^, and at all Times when they
shall be striking off, and to take an exact Account of the Number of Sheets and
particular Bills that shall be daily done, and deliver an Account thereof to
the Secretary of said Colony once in every Week; and likewise to have the
particular Care of the Plates until the aforesaid Sum be fully completed, and
then to deliver the same to His Honor the Governor. And also that there shall
be two Locks with different Keys to lock the Door of said Room in which said
Bills shall be impressed, the said Ezbon Sanford, and the Person appointed to
impress the same, each to have one Key: And when said Bills or any Part of them
shall be fit to sign, they deliver the same to any three or more of the Grand
Committee, taking their Receipt for the Number of Sheets and Bills of each
Denomination. And to the End the same may be safely preserved, the said Grand
Committee shall provide a suitable Chest, in which such Sheets and Bills shall
be kept, with three Locks thereon, and a different Key to each Lock; which
several Keys shall be kept by any three of the said Grand Committee, who are
not to sign any of said Bills, unless that Number or more shall be present, any
three of them being a Quorum, to sign said Bills; and for their so doing, to be
allowed the customary Fees.

AND it is also further Enacted, That when the said Grand Committee shall have
signed the Bills as aforesaid, they shall deliver them to the Persons appointed
to exchange the same, taking their Receipts for said Sums, viz. To William
Ellery, Esquire to exchange in the County of Newport; to the Honorable William
Green, Esquire Deputy Governor, to exchange in the County of Prov^dence; and to Mr.
James Helm, to exchange in the County of King's County; who shall be
respectively obliged to return to the General Assembly the same Sum each of
them shall so receive, either in Bills of the aforesaid Bank ordered to be
exchanged, or in the same Bills they shall receive, in order to be disposed of
as the General Assembly shall think proper. And that said Persons be allowed
Ten Shillings for every Hundred Pounds they shall exchange.

AND further, That there be immediately struck off the respective Plates of the
aforesaid Bank to be exchanged, six Sheets, which shall be delivered to His
Honor the Governor, to be inspected by the Persons appointed to exchange the
said Bills, in order to discover whether any other Bills of the said Bank be
counterfeited, besides the Bills of Twenty Shillings.

AND if any Person or Persons shall be convicted of counterfeiting any of said
Bills, they shall make good all Damages that shall accrue to this Government by
their so doing.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That William Claggett of
Newport in the County of Newport, be, and he is the Person hereby appointed to
engrave said Plates and impress said Bills, provided he shall agree with His
Honor the Governor and such of his Council as shall be present, for the Prices
thereof; and in case the said William Claggett does not so agree, then His
Honor the Governor, and such of his Council present as aforesaid, have full
Power to agree with some other good Person to perform said Services. And that
this Act be forthwith inserted in the Public Prints.

An ACT enabling George Ninigret Indian Sachem, to sell some Lands in the
Naragansett Country, for the Payment of his just Deb^^.
WHEREAS George Ninigret, Proprietor of the Lands in the Naraganset Country
undisposed of, and Sachem, did by Petition set forth to this Assembly, that he
is indebted to sundry Person^^ in all, amounting to a considerable Sum; that
there are D^bts unpaid, which were due from his Brother Charles the late
Sachem: And that there are several Pieces of Land that may be sold, with little
or no Disadvantage to the Bulk of his Lands* and it b^ing just that the
Creditors should have their Dues, and reasonable that he should have the
Advantage of his Estate when in Want, therefore prayed that he might have the
Assent of this Honorable Assembly, for selling such Pieces of Land as will
suit his Convenience, and for which Purchasers offer to enable him to pay the
aforesaid Debts.

Upon Consideration whereof,

IT Is VOTED and ORDERED, That the said George Ninigret Sachem, George Ninigret
allowed to s^ll Lands (...) pay his Debts.
be, and he is hereby fully empowered and enabled, by and with the Advice and
Consent of his Trustees or the major Part of them, to sell and dispose of to
the Highest Bidder, so much of his aforesaid Lands (that will least prejudice
his Estate) as may be sufficient to pay his present Debts: And the Deed or
Deeds by him given, and assented to by his Trustees, or the major Part of them
as aforesaid, shall be good and valid in the Law. And that public Notice be
given of the Sale of the aforesaid Lands, for the Space of one Month before the
same is sold.

A LAW, Made and past by the General Assembly of His Majesty's Colony of
Rhode Island, and Providence-Plantations, in New England, held by Adjournment,
at Newport, on the Twenty First Day of June, in the Sixteenth Year of His
Majesty's Reign, A. D. 1742.
VOTED and RESOLVED, That the Wages of the Secretary and Clerk of the House of
Deputies, Wages of the (...), etc.
be augmented to Twenty Shillings per Day each, for attending on the General
Assembly.

A LAW, Made and passed by the General Assembly of his Majesty's Colony of
Rhode Island, and Providence-Plantations, in New England; held by Adjournment,
at Newport, on the Fourteenth Day of September, in the Sixteenth Year of His
Majesty's Reign, A. D. 1742.
An ACT for Establishing the Petit Jurors Fees; and also the Grand and Petit
Jurors Fines for their Nonappearance at the several Courts, being legally
chosen.
BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly of this Colony, and by the Authority
thereof, Juror (...).
it is Enacted, That for the Future each and every Juror that shall be upon the
Trial of any Case or Cases, at any Court in this Colony, shall be allowed and
paid by the Party who commences the Suit, either by Process or Appeal, at the
Delivery of every such Verdict, the Sum of Four Shillings.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all the Jurors both
Grand and Petit, when legally chosen, Fine for N^^-App^arance.
and notified thereof in any Town of this Colony, who do not appear at such
Court for which they are ^hosen upon the first Opening thereof, shall pay as a
Fine for their Nonappearance, the Sum of Five Pounds Money; the one Third
the^eof, Vide Act March 174^*
to and for the Use of the Court where such Juror or Jurors were to appear, and
one Third to and for the Use of the Sheriff of the Cou^^^ where such Delinquent
or Delinquents dwell, and the other T^ird to the Persons that serve in the Room
of the said Delinquents: And the several Sheriffs are hereby fully empowered to
collect the same, by an Order from the Clerks of such Court or Courts.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, Fine of Tales Men.
That when any Tales Man shall be taken up by any Sheriff or his Deputy, at any
of said Courts, and refuses to serve, such Tales Men shall each of them pay as
a Fine, the Sum of Thirty Shillings Money; to be collected and appropriated as
aforesaid: Any Act or Acts (...) Contra^y ^ereof, notwithstanding.

LAWS, Made and passed by the General Assembly of His Majesty's Colony of
Rhode Island, and Providence-Plantations, in New England, held by Adjournment,
at South-Kingstown, on the Twenty Seventh Day of October, in the Sixteenth Year
of his Majesty's Reign, A. D. 1742.
An ACT for the more effectual Establishing a Military Watch in Time of War,
throughout this Colony.
WHEREAS the Acts already made, respecting Military Watches are in many Parts
deficient, as to inflicting Fines and Punishments on Offenders that shall
deserve the same; and also in appointing how many Persons shall make a Quorum
in the Council of War.

BE IT THEREFORE ENACTED by the General Assembly of this Colony, and by the
Authority thereof, it is Enacted, Who shall be a Quorum to settle Watches.
That any Five of the Members of the Council of War (whereof the Governor,
Deputy Governor, or a Member of the General Council always to be one) shall be
a sufficient Quorum, to settle all Watches and Wards in Time of War: And that
they shall have full Power to give out such Orders and Instructions to the
commanding Officer, as shall be most effectual for the better Regulation of
such Watches, and the Safety of the several Towns where it is necessary to keep
the same.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That any Person or
Persons that shall refuse to watch being legally warned, shall pay a Fine of
Eight Shillings in Money for every such Offense, Fin^ for not Watching.
to the commanding Officer that sets said Watch; and in case he or they shall
refuse or neglect to do the ^ame within the Space of five Days, then the
Captain to whose Company he or they shall belong, shall grant forth a Warrant
to distrain the same, in such manner as is directed by an Act of the
General-Assembly, made and passed the Seventh Day of May, A. D. 1718, together
with the reasonable Charges thereon; and the same to be improved for the
Support of such Watch.

AND that if any Person being set upon the Watch, shall be negligent of his
Duty, Punishment or Fine for n^g^ec^ of Duty.
by sleeping, or otherwise by absenting himself therefrom, before the proper
Time of being discharged, or being disobedient to his commanding Officer while
upon Duty, (upon due Proof thereof being made to such Council of War, or a
Quorum thereof) it shall and may be lawful for them to give Orders to the
Captain, and other Commission Officers of such Company to which ^e or they
shall belong, to punish such Offender, by laying him Neck and Heels, or Riding
the Wooden Horse, or else to fine him at Discretion, not exceeding the Sum of
Ten Shillings; to be recovered and appropriated in manner as aforesaid.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That every Sergeant who
has the Care of setting such Watch, shall every Morning give an Account to his
Captain or the next commanding Officer, of all Delinquences or Neglects,
S^^jeant to make R^port.
if any such shall happen the Night before, upon the Penalty of forfeiting the
Sum of Ten Shillings for Default thereof; to be recovered and appropriated in
manner as aforesaid. And that in case all or any of the Watch, after being set,
shall be assaulted or otherways insulted, Persons ^^sulting the Watch to be
imprisoned.
during the Time of their being upon Duty, by any Person or Persons, they have
full Power and Authority to take such Person or Persons, and commit him or them
to His Majesty's Goal, till they can be brought before the proper Authority,
already appointed to take Cognizance thereof.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Sergeant who
has the Care of setting such Watch, Sergeant not to warn above a lawful Number.
shall presume to warn any more Persons than are already or shall be hereafter
appointed to be upon Duty each Night, he shall upon due Proof of any such
Offense, be fined by the Captain of such Company to which he shall belong; to
be recovered as aforesaid, and appropriated to such Uses as shall be directed
by the Council of War, or a sufficient Quorum thereof.

An ACT empowering the several Town Councils of this Colony, to have the Care
and Oversight of all Persons who are Delirious, Distracted, or Non Compos
Mentis, and their Estates.
BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly of this Colony, and by the Authority of
the same, it is Enacted, Persons Non Compos M^^tis pu^ under the Care of the
Town Council.
That from and after the Publication of this Act, it shall be in the Power of
each Town Council in this Government, to take into their Care all Persons and
their Estates in each respective Town, who are Deliri^us* Destracted, or Non
Compos Mentis, or such who for want of Discretion in the Managing their
Estates, are like to bring themselves and Families to Want and Misery, and
thereby render themselves and their Families chargeable to the respective Town
in which such Person lives.

AND the said Town Councils are hereby fully empowered to appoint one or more
proper Person or Persons, as Guardians to such Person or Persons who now are or
hereafter shall happen to be delirious, (...) Council to (...) Guardia^s.
distracted, or Non Compos Mentis, or otherwise discomposed as aforesaid, to
have the Ordering of such Person or Persons and Families, and to improve the
Rents and Profits of their Estates, to and for the Support of such disordered
Persons as aforesaid and their Families; and also to act and transact their
secular Affairs; and to sue and be sued in the Behalf and Name of all such
Person or Persons, in as full and ample Order as they themselves could, if
Compos Mentis.

AND every such Person or Persons that shall be appointed Guardians by any Town
Council as abovesaid, Guardians to give Bond.
shall be obliged, before they act as Guardians for any Person or Persons, to
give Bond with Sureties to said Town Council, for their faithful Administration
in said Office, and also to account with such Person or Persons, whom he or
they shall act as Guardians for, if afterward restored to their Understanding,
or to their Heirs, if any shall be left by him or them, and if none, then to
such Town Council from whom he or they received their Authority.

LAWS, Made and passed by the General Assembly of his Majesty's Colony of
Rhode Island, and Providence-Plantations, in New England; held by Adjournment,
at East-Greenwich, on the Twenty Second Day of November, in the Sixteenth Year
of His Majesty's Reign, A. D. 1742.
An ACT for the better Regulating the Choice of Petit Jurors thoughout the
several Towns in this Colony.
BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly of this Colony, and by the Authority
thereof, it is Enacted, That the Town Council of each Town within this Colony,
Town Council to ^ake a L^st of Persons ^ua^^fied to serve on Ju^^^s.
shall within three Months after the Publication of this Act, take a List of
all the Persons liable by Law, and whom they shall judge able and well
qualified to serve on the Petit Juries, and lay the same before the Town, at a
Meeting to be immediately called for that Purpose, by the Direction of the Town
Council; and each Town shall respectively, at such Meeting, put the Names of
such Persons written, on separate Pieces of Paper, in a Box, provided by the
Town for that Purpose, and deliver the same to the Town Clerk, to be by him
kept under Lock and Key.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That when the Precept or
Notification according to the Custom of each Town shall have been issued forth
for returning Jurors, Method of r^turning Juro^s.
and the Inhabitants shall be assembled for that Choice, the Town Clerk, or one
or more of the Members of the Town Council in case of his Absence or Sickness,
shall carry into the Meeting the Box aforesaid, which shall be unlocked in the
Meeting, and the Town Clerk, or in his Absence, one of the Town Council, shall
draw out so many Tickets as there are Jurors required by such Precept or
Notification, who shall be the Persons that shall be returned to serve as
Jurors, saving, that if any whose Names are so drawn, are sick, or otherwise
unable to serve at that Time, in the Judgment of the Town, their Names shall be
returned into the Box, and others drawn in their Stead. And to the Intent the
same Persons may not serve too often, the Clerk or Town Council Man, who shall
draw the Tickets or Name of any Person returned to serve as aforesaid, shall
put the same into another Box to be prepared for that Purpose, until all said
Tickets be drawn out of the first Box, and then the whole to be returned into
the first Box again, to be drawn out in manner as aforesaid.

AND the Members of the Town Council shall in the same Manner, once in every
Year, List to be taken annu^lly.
during the Continuance of this Act, take a new List of such other Persons as
may become suitable and qualified, and lay the same before the Town, whose
Names being first by them allowed, shall be put into the Box in manner as
aforesaid. And at every Time, when Jurors are to be returned from any Town, to
serve at the Superior Court of Judicature, Court of Assize, and General Goal
Delivery, and also Jurors for the Inferior Court of Common Pleas and General
Sessions of the Peace for either County in the Colony, the Jurors to serve at
the Superior Court of Judicature, Court of Assize, and General Goal Delivery,
shall be first drawn out of the Box aforesaid: And when the Name of any Person
is drawn out of the Box who is disqualified to serve as a Juror, that the same
be wholly left out of the said Boxes.

An ACT for the better Regulation of the Freemen voting, either at the General
Election or any Town Meeting in this Colony.
WHEREAS by the Royal Charter granted to this Colony by his late gracious
Majesty King CHARLES the Second, the Governor and Company are directed and
empowered to admit all such Persons free of the said Company as shall desire
the same, and are of suitable Conversations, and have competent Estates: in
Pursuance whereof, there has heretofore a Law been made in this Colony,
whereby it is Enacted, that no Person shall be admitted a Freeman therein,
except he be a Freeholder of Lands and Tenements lying in said Colony, of the
Value of Two Hundred Pounds or Ten Pounds per Annum: Yet notwithstanding said
Law, it evidently appears, that many Persons have by Frauds and other indirect
Means, procured themselves to be made Free of this Colony, who really are not
possessed of such Estate, as by the abovesaid Act is required; and also many
Persons who have been heretofore possessed of such Estates as qualified them to
be Freemen according to the abovesaid Law, have afterward disposed of such
their Estates, and yet continue to act as Freemen in this Colony; from which
many very ill Consequences have already arisen to the Colony, and many more
will ensue, if not timely prevented.

For Remedy whereof.

BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly, and by the Authority thereof, it is
hereby Enacted, That from and after the Publication of this Act, no Person
whatever in this Colony, No Person to vote as Freemen, but Freeholders and
their Eldest Sons.
shall be admitted to vote or act as a Freeman in any Town Meeting in this
Colony, or at the General Election, but such only who at the Time of such their
voting, or acting as Freemen, are really and truly possessed of Lands,
Tenements, or Hereditaments lying in this Colony, of the full Value of Two
Hundred Pounds or Ten Pounds per Annum, being their own Freehold Estate, or the
eldest Son of such Freeholder.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Person in
this Colony shall attempt to vote in any Election within the same, who is
suspected not to be qualified as abovesaid, it shall and may be lawful for any
Person to inform the Moderator, Persons ^halleng^d to make Oat^ that they ^e
poss^ssed of a F^eehold.
or other Person who presides at such Election, that he has Cause to doubt,
that such suspected Person has not a good Right to vote, and to insist that
his Vote be not received without the Person suspected, will first declare on
Oath or Engagement, to be administered by the Moderator, that he is really and
bona fide qualified for a Voter, as is above in this Act required: And if any
Person suspected as abovesaid, shall refuse to declare on Oath or Engagement,
that he is qualified as this Act requires, his Vote shall not be received by
any Moderator or Person who presides at any Election in this Colony* Any
Freedom obtained, or any Law, Custom, or Usage, to the Contrary in any wise,
notwithstanding.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, Moderator to b^ fined
for rec^iv^ng a Vot^ contrary to this Act.
That if any Moderator or other Person who presides at any such Election, shall
receive a Vote from any Person who is suspected and challenged as abovesaid,
without his making Oath or Engagement as is above required, such Moderator or
President, shall forfeit the S^m of Twenty Pounds in Money, to be recovered by
Bill, Plaint, or Information, in any Court of Record in this Colony; the one
Half to the Person that will sue for the same, and the other Half to the Poor
of the Town where the Offense is committed.

An ACT empowering the Vendue Masters of the several Towns in this Colony, to
call Special Courts.
WHEREAS it often happens, that Persons purchasing Goods at Vendues, do neglect
and refuse to pay for such Goods by them bought, by the Time limited in (...)
Condition of the Sale thereof, so that theOwners of them are greatl^ injured,
and their Design of setting them up to public Sale is thereby wholly
frustrated.

For Prevention whereof for the Future,

BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly of this Colony, and by the Authority
thereof, it is Enacted, Vendue Masters empowered to call special Court^.
That the Vendue Masters of the several Towns in this Colony, be hereby
empowered, upon any Persons neglecting or refusing to pay for such Goods bought
as aforesaid at any public Vendue, to call a special Court for the same; which
Court shall consist of the Judges of theSuperior Court, any three of whom to be
a Quorum, for holding of said Court, Who are to constitute said Courts.
who shall have Cognizance of all such Actions arising or happenning in Manner
as aforesaid, and said Judges are hereby empowered to give Judgment therein,
and award Execution thereon; which Judgment shall be final.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all Writs and
Processes for the bringing any Cause or Suit to Trial, (...) of P^oceeding.
shall issue out of the Clerk's Office of such Court in his Majesty's Name,
under the S^al of the said Court, to be signed by the Clerk, and directed to
the Sheriff or his lawful Deputy: And that all such Writs and Processes issued
out as aforesaid, shall be served three Days before the Day of the Sitting of
such Court, to be by the Judges of said Court appoin^ed; and the Declaration
shall be filed on said Writ at the Opening of said Court.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Sheriff or his
lawful Depu^y, shall return to said Court, twelve good and lawful Jurors, to
try the Issue that shall be joined between the Parties.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Execution that
shall be issued in Pursuance of such Judgment that shall be given, shall be
returned to the Clerk's Office in Fourteen Days after the Execution is taken
out.

AND that the Clerk of the Superior Court be the Clerk of said Court in the
County of Newport, and the Clerks of the Inferior Courts in the other Counties
be Clerks of said Special Courts in their respective Counties: And that the
Judges and Officers of said Court be entitled to the Fees that are already
established by Law.

An ACT to prevent the Fish being stopped in their Course up Pawcatuck River.
BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly of the Colony aforesaid, and by the
Authority thereof, it is Enacted, That from and after the Publication hereof,
^^urse of Fish up Pawcatuck River not ^o b^ obstructed.
no Person or Persons whatsoever, owning Land in this Colony, adjoining to said
Pawcatuck River, or possessing the same, shall suffer any Dam or Ware to be
erected or extended across said River to their Land, or the Land in their
Possession in this Colony, or shall suffer any Seine to be extended across said
River, and there to stand for the Space of more than two Hours in one Day, or
shall any other Way obstruct the Course of said Fish, otherwise than by h^ling
after the common Manner of seining Fish, on the Penalty of Twenty Pounds; to be
recovered by Bill, Plaint, or Information, at the General Sessions of the Peace
in the County of King's County, where the Parties offending, shall be liable to
be bound to appear, by any Assistant or Justice to whom Complaint is made.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all Persons havi^g
Dams already erected across said River, shall from the Tenth Day of April to
the Twentieth D^y of May annually, Vide Act March 17^^.
leave a Sp^^e or Breach in each and every Dam Ten Feet wide, for the Fi^h to
take their ^ourse through, upon the Penalty aforesaid, to be recovered ^s
aforesaid, on Failure of opening and keeping open such Dam for the Time
aforesaid; one Half to the Informer who sues for the same, and the other Half
to the General Treasury.

An ACT for Payment of the Interest and Tenths already due, and giving Bonds
for the remaining Tenths due on the Banks emi^^ed in the Y^^rs One Thousand
Seven Hundred and Twenty Eight and One Thousand Seven Hundred and Thirty One.
WHEREAS many of the Persons who took of the Bills of Credit of the Banks
emitted by this Colony in the Years One Thousand Seven Hundred and Twenty Eight
and One Thous^nd Seven Hundred and Thirty One, have neglected to give Bonds for
the Tenths.

IT Is Therefore VOTED and RESOLVED, That if all such Persons do not by the
last Day of March next, pay all the Interest due on said Bills taken out as
aforesaid, as also so much of the Tenths as shall be then due, and give Bonds
for the remaining Tenths, agreeable to Law, that the Mortgages given for
Security of the Payment of said Bills taken out as aforesaid, be then
immediately put in Suit against the Persons in Possession of the Lands
mortgaged. And that no Bonds be received from any Persons, but such as can make
it appear, that the whole Interest has been paid. And that this Act be made
Public in each Town in this Colony by the respective Town Clerks, as soon as
by them received.

An ACT appointing the several Town Meetings for choosing Deputies, and proxing
for General Officers in this Colony, to be held on the same Days.
BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly of this Colony, and by the Authority
thereof, it is Enacted, All the Town Meetings for choosing Depu^i^^ and ^or
Proxin^, to b^ held on the same D^y.
That for the Future all the Town Meetings in this Colony for choosing for May
Sessions and for Proxing for General Officers, be held on the first Tuesday of
March annually; and for choosing of Deputies for October Sessions, on the last
Tuesday of August annually: And that no Proxies be put in on any other Day than
above mentioned.

LAWS, Made and passed by the General Assembly of his Majesty's Colony of
Rhode Island, and Providence-Plantations, in New England; held by Adjournment,
at East-Greenwich, on the Eighth Day of March, in the Sixteenth Year of His
Majesty's Reign, A. D. 1742.
An ACT for incorporating the West End of the Town of North-Kingstown into a
Township, and the same to be distinguished and known by the Name of Exeter.
BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly, and by the Authority thereof, it is
Enacted, That the Town of North-Kingstown, North-Ki^gstown divided.
in the County of King's County be divided into two Towns, by a Line beginning
at the South Side of said Town, at the Middle of the High Way that runs between
the Farm now or late of Ieoffry Hassard and the Farm of Eber Shearman, to
extend from thence Northwardly, to the Extent of said High Way, as the same
runs Northwardly, and from the middle of said Way, where it meets the cross
High Way, to extend Northwardly in a strait Line, to meet the High Way that
runs between the Land of William Hall and Christopher Spencer; and from thence
to extend Northwardly, as said High Way runs to East-Greenwich South Line: And
that the Eastward Part of said Town retain the Charter and Name of
North-Kingstown, and the Western Part to be called by the Name of Exeter, and
be incorporated into a Township, Exeter a Town^hip.
and to have and enjoy like Privileges with other Towns in this Colony.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That each Town receive
and have a Proportion of the Money in and belonging to the Treasury of said
North-Kingstown, according to the Money for which the Lands in each Town are
mortgaged to the Colony. And that all Justices living within the Bounds of said
new Town, retain their Authority, and act as such therein, until the next
General Election.

AND whereas there are two Deputies which were chosen to represent said
North-Kingstown before the Division thereof; one of which lives in said
N^rth-K^n^st^wn, and the other in Exeter.

Be it therefore further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That they act as
Deputies for the respective Towns in which they live; and that each Town choose
another Deputy on the Fourth Tuesday of this Instant March, to represent said
Towns at the next General Election: And that the eldest Justice in each Town,
put forth a Warrant immediately to call the Towns together at the Time
aforesaid, to choose said Deputies and other Town Officers. And that Mr. James
Helm be and he is hereby appointed to run out the Dividing Line between said
Towns as soon as conveniently may be.

An ACT directing the Manner of choosing Grand Jurors throughout this Colony.
BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly of this Colony, and by the Authority of
the same, it is Enacted, Gr^nd Jurors to be chos^n as the Petit Jurors are.
That the Grand Jurors be chosen from time to time throughout this Colony, in
the same Manner as the Petit Jurors are; and that the Grand Jurors be first
chose^.

An ACT directing the Attendance of the Petit Jurors and Witnesses at the
Superior and Inferior Courts in this Colony.
BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly of this Colony, and by the Authority
thereof, it is Enacted, Times of Attendan^e of Juror^ and Witne^s^s.
That the Petit Jurors who shall be chosen for the Superior Court of
Judicature, etc. and the Inferior Courts of Common Pleas, etc. in this Colony,
shall not be obliged t^ attend on said Courts, but in the following Manner,
viz. on the next Thursday after the Beginning of said Superior Court of
Judicature, etc. and the Inferior Courts of Common Pleas in King's County, and
on the next Monday after the Beginning of the respective Inferior Courts of
Common Pleas, held in the Counties of Newport and Providence: And that in the
mean time the said Courts go through with the Dilatory Pleas, and call out all
the Defaulters, if the same can be completed. And that no Witness be summoned
to appear at either of said Courts to give in Evidence to the Issue of a Cause,
until such Time as the Jurors are to attend.

An ACT in Addition to an Act, entitled, An Act to prevent the Fish being
stopped in their Course up Pawcatuck River.
WHEREAS an Act was passed at last November Sessions, entitled, An Act to
prevent the Fish being stopped in their Course up Pawcatuck River, whereby the
Persons having Dams already erected across said River, are obliged from the
tenth Day of April to the twentieth Day of May annually, to leave a Space or
Breach in each Dam ten Feet wide, etc.

Course of Fish up Pawcatuck River not ^o be stopped from the ^st of April to
the twentieth of May annually.
IT Is Further VOTED and RESOLVED, That for the Future the aforesaid Time begin
the first Day of March and continue till the twentieth Day of May annually.

LAWS, Made and passed by the General Assembly of His Majesty's Colony of
Rhode Island, and Providence-Plantations, in New England, held by Adjournment,
at Newport, on the Second Monday in June, in the Seventeenth Year of his
Majesty's Reign, A. D. 1743.
An ACT for preventing the Counterfeiting of the Bills of Public Credit
emitted, or that shall be hereafter emitted by any of the Governments in
New England, and to prevent defacing the same, etc.
WHEREAS notwithstanding all the Laws that have been made by this Colony to
prevent the Counterfeiting and Defacing of the Bills of Public Credit emitted
by this and the neighboring Colonies in New England, it often happens that the
some are counterfeited and defaced: The Consequence of which, it is conceived,
will be very Pernicious to the Interest of this Colony, if not timely prevented,

BE IT THEREFORE ENACTED by the General Assembly, Punishment of P^^sons
conc^rned in counterfeiting Bills of Public Cr^dit.
and by the Authority thereof, it is Enacted, That whoever shall at any Time or
Times hereafter, forge, counterfeit, or utter any Bill or Bills (knowing the
same to be false and counterfeit) of the Tenor or in the Imitation of any of
the Bills of public Credit emitted, or that shall be hereafter emitted by this
Colony, the Provinces of the Massachusett's-Bay and New Hampshire, or the
Colony of Connecticut, by Law established therein, or that shall council,
advise, or procure the same to be done, by forging, counterfeiting, imprinting,
or signing any such false Bill or Bills, or make and engrave any Plate or other
Instrument for that Purpose, or that shall alter or increase any Figure or Sum
in any Bill or Bills of Credit emitted, or that shall hereafter be emitted by
this or any other Government as aforesaid, or that shall Forge or Counterfeit
any Name, Hand, Stamp, or other Mark that now is or hereafter shall be made or
set thereon, or by any Ways or Means procure or encourage the same to be done,
the Person or Persons so offending therein, shall be pilloryed, and have both
his, her or their Ears cropped, To be (...), etc.
and be branded with the Letter R on each Cheek, and be imprisoned at the
Discretion of the Judges of the Court of Assize and General Goal Delivery for
the Time being, before whom all such Offenses shall be tried, and shall pay
double Damages to all Persons defrauded and cheated by such false Bill or
Bills, together with all Costs of Prosecution; the which Damages shall be
adjudged Double Interest during the Time of Possessing such Bill or Bills, to
be proved by the Oath of the Possessor; the which Oath shall be administered by
the General Treasurer for the Time being, with whom all such Money shall be
lodged, for making good such Damages.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all such convicted
Persons shall forfeit the remaining Part of their Estate (if any they have)
both Real and Personal, To forfeit all their Estates.
to and for the Use of the Colony; and that all such Real Estate as shall
happen to be hereafter forfeited as aforesaid, shall be sold by said General
Treasurer by Public Vendue, within two Months after public Notice thereof
given by said General Treasurer; and all such Moneys (after lawful Fees
deducted out) to be for the Use of the Colony: And all Deeds made of such Real
Estate of such convicted Person or Persons by the General Treasurer in Behalf
of the Colony, shall create and make to the Purchaser or Purchasers, a good and
lawful Estate in Fee-Simple.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all Deeds or other
Instruments of any Lands or Tenements or Personal Estate made by any such
convicted Person or Persons, No Conveyance of (...) Estate to be valid after
their Apprehension.
after the Time of their being apprehended for any of the aforesaid Crimes,
shall be Void and of none Effect. And the same Lands or Tenements or Personal
Estate shall be forfeited to and for the Use of the Colony, and to be disposed
of as aforesaid.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That when and so often
as any Person or Persons shall be convicted as aforesaid, that then immediately
the said General Treasurer (in behalf of the Colony) shall attach all such
Person or Persons Real and Personal Estate that may or can be found, either in
their own Possession, or in the Possession or Custody of any other Person or
Persons whatsoever, in order to be disposed of as aforesaid.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all Persons
whatsoever that shall by any Ways or Means have any of such convicted Persons
Estate, either Real or Personal in their Possession, at the Time of their being
apprehended, or any Time after, to the Time of their Conviction, shall render
an Account to the said General Treasurer upon Oath (which Oath he shall have
full Power to administer) within one Month after Conviction, of all such
convicted Persons Estate, which they have, or had at the Time of such convicted
Persons being apprehended, or at any otherTime after as aforesaid, and then
immediately to deliver up all what they have or had in their Possession, to
said General Treasurer, be it Real or Personal; and upon Failure of rendering an
Account as aforesaid, the Person or Persons so offending, shall forfeit Double
the Value of what can at any Time after be made appear, they had of such
convicted Persons Estate in their Possession as aforesaid; to be recovered by
an especial Action of the Case founded on this Act, to be brought against them
by said General Treasurer; and when recovered, to be for the Use of the Colony.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if it shall so
happen that any Person or Persons shall be convicted of any of the aforesaid
Crimes, Offenders that have no Estate to be set to wo^k or sold out of the
Colony.
and have not sufficient Estate to make good the Damages, Costs of Prosecution
and Imprisonment, that then such Offender or Offenders therein, shall be set to
work, or sold out of the Colony for any Term of Years, for Satisfaction of the
same, at the Discretion of the Judges of the aforesaid Court. Any Law, or
Custom to the Contrary thereof, in any wise, notwithstanding.

An ACT for the greater Ease of the Inhabitants in discharging their Debts due
to the Colony.
WHEREAS the Method in which the Colony's Bonds have been heretofore put in
Suit, has been attended with too great a Burden and Charge upon the Debtors.

For Prevention whereof for the Future, and for the more (...) collecting of
the Colony's Debts

BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly of this Colony, and by the Authority
thereof, it is Enacted, All (...) Colo^ny's Bonds to be (...) at the resp^ctive
Infe^ior ^ouits in the Coun^^^^ where the Debtors dwell.
That all such Bonds as shall become due to the Grand Committee and General
Treasurer, for Tenths and Interest of the Bank Money, or Money let out by this
Colony upon Loan, shall be put in Suit at the several and respective Inferior
Courts of Common Pleas in the Coun^ies wherein the Debtors dwell: All the Bonds
that are du^* to be put ^n one W^it
And that all such Bonds as shall be due to the Grand Committee from any one
Person at one and ^he same Time, shall be put into one Writ, and the same Rule
^o be observed in respect to the Bonds that shall become due to the General
Treasury for Interest, and no Pleas to be made by the D^fend^nt, but only to
the Issue.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, The Po^ds to be
delivered to the Attorney Gen^r^l two Months before the Sitting of the Court.
That the (...) Committee and General Treasurer shall for the Future, from time
to time, at least two Months before the Sitting of each of s^id Interior
Courts, deliver to the Attorney General all such Bonds (...) shall be then due
for Tenth, or Interest, in order to be forthwith put in Suit in Manner as
aforesaid, and take a Receipt for the same. And the Attorney General to be
accountable to the Grand Committee and General Treasurer, The Attorney General
to (...) accountable to the Grand Committe^ and General Treasurer.
and to render an Account to them within twenty Days after the Rising of each
respective Court: And that Executions be granted out upon the Bonds sued as
aforesaid, within two Months after the Rising of each respective Court.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all such Actions
brought as aforesaid, Actions not answered, to ^e called out the second D^y of
the (...) Sitting.
and where there is no Answer, shall be called out the second Day of the Courts
sitting, if the same can be done, and that Attendance be allowed for no longer
Time than until the Actions be called out; and that for serving Writs and
Travel, the Sheriff have the same Fees as now stated by Law; and that all other
Fees in said Actions, be reduced to one Half of what they now are.

LAWS, Made and passed by the General Assembly of his Majesty's Colony of
Rhode Island, and Providence-Plantations, in New England; held by Adjournment,
at Newport, on the Twenty Third Day of August, in the Seventeenth Year of His
Majesty's Reign, A. D. 1743.
An ACT for incorporating the North East Part of the Town of Newport into a a
Township, and the same to be distinguished and known by the Name of Middletown.
WHEREAS the General Assembly at their Sessions, held by Adjournment at
Newport, on the Second Monday in June last past, did among other Things enact,
That the Town of Newport should be divided into two Towns; and for that Purpose
appointed a Committee to run the Dividing Line, and make Report thereon to this
present Sessions of Assembly, who have accordingly reported, that they had done
the same in the following Manner, viz. Beginning at the Head of the Creek that
seperates the two Farms of the Honorable Joseph Whipple, Esquire and Godfrey
Mallbone of said Newport, Merchant, and on a South Course Nineteen Degrees and
an Half East, run a direct Line extending to the South East Corner of a Lot of
Land belonging to Job Almy of said Newport Merchant, the said Corner being
between the Houses of Elisha Card and that in the Possession of Samuel
Pemberton, Esquire and from said Corner, a strait Line South Twenty Seven Degrees
East, crossing the Bridge that lies over the Creek on Easton 's Beach, and so
into the Sea on that Course, it being the Place where the said Creek usually
runs into the Sea; and the said Report being accepted,

BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly of this Colony, and by the Authority of
the same, it is Enacted, That all the Lands to the Southward and Westward of
the said Line as before described, Newport divided.
to belong to the Town of Newport, and all the Lands to the Northward and
Eastward of said Line, to be distinguished and known by the Name of Middletown;
Middletown (...).
and that the Inhabitants of said Middletown, from time to time, shall have and
enjoy the like Benefits, Liberties, Privileges, and Immunities with other Towns
in this Colony, according to Charter.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Justices of the
Peace living within the aforesaid Town of Middletown, shall remain and continue
in their aforesaid Offices, until the next General Election; and that the First
of said Justices of the Peace grant forth his Warrant to call the Inhabitants
of said Middletown together on Tuesday next, being the thirtieth Day of August
instant, to elect and appoint such Town Officers as they shall have occasion
for and the Law directs; and to appoint the Times and Places of their Town
Meetings; and to choose and elect two Deputies to represent them at the next
General Assembly, and so on as by the Charter is directed.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That said Town of
Middletown shall send one Grand and three Petit Jurors to every Superior Court
of Judicature, Court of Assize and General Goal Delivery, and three Grand and
three Petit Jurors to every Inferior Court of Common Pleas and General Sessions
of the Peace held within the County of Newport: And that the said Town of
Newport, shall hereafter send to each of the aforesaid Courts, so many Jurors
less than they now are (...) by L^w, as is ordered to be sent by the ^foresaid
Town of Middletown.

An ACT for the more effectual Punishment of Negroes that shall attempt to
commit a Rape on any white Woman.
WHEREAS there have been Instances of Negroes attempting to commit Rapes on
white Wom^n, and there being no particular Law subsisting too punish such
Offenders.

BE IT THEREFORE ENACTED by the General Assembly of this Colony, and by the
Authority thereof, it is Enacted, Punishment of a Negro attempting to commit a
Rape on a Wh^t^ Woman.
That if any Negro shall hereafter attempt to force or to commit a Rape upon
any White Woman, and be thereof lawfully convicted, he shall be branded on each
Cheek with the Letter R, and shall be whipped in the most public Manner, at
the Discretion of the Court of Assize and General Goal Delivery, where only
such Offenses shall be tried, and shall be sold by the Sheriff of the County of
Newport (within thirty Days after Judgment pass against him) to any Purchaser
who will transport or carry him out of this Colony, never to return into it
again. And that the Conditions of the Sale of such Negro, shall be, that he
shall be transported out of this Government as abovesaid, and that said Sh^riff
have Two and a Half per C^nt. as Commissions for his Trouble.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all the Costs of
prosecuting and punishing such Offen^er, shall be paid by the Sheriff (who
shall sell such Negro) out of the Moneys he shall receive for the same: Injured
Woman to have ^ special Action of the Case for Damages.
And that the injured Woman who shall have been abused, in such Case shall and
may have at any Time within Six Month after the Sale of said Negro, a Special
Action of the Case, founded on this Law, for Damages, and hereby is empowered
to attach what Money may be left in the Sheriff's Hands for the S^le of said
Negro, deducting his Commissions and the Court Charg^s as aforesaid. And if any
Money shall remain in the Sheriff's Hand, after the injured Woman has
recovered her Damages and Costs of Prosecution, such Remainder or Balance
shall be restored to the Person who was the Proprietor or Claimer of such Negro
when he was prosecuted for such Offense as aforesaid.

AND it is further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if the injured and
abused Woman as aforesaid, does not commence her Action for Damages, within the
Six Months after the Sal^ of said Negro, that then she shall be ever after
barred and excluded from attaching such Money in the Hands of the Sheriff; but
Money liable to such Attachment, shall be paid by the Sheriff, to the
P^oprietor or ^ightful Claimer of said Negro.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if such Negro
convicted as aforesaid, shall ever be brought again into this Colony, he shall
become forfeited to and for the Use of the Colony: Such Negro, if b^ought again
into the Col^ny, to be forfeited.
And that it shall and may be lawful for any Assistant or Justice of the Peace,
in the County where such Offense shall be brought, to apprehend said Negro, and
confine him in His Majesty's Goal, till the then next Court of Assize and
General Goal Delivery shall sit, who are hereby empowered to give Order for the
Selling said Offender imm^diately; and after deducting the Charges that may
accrue on his being apprehended and sold as aforesaid, the Balance or
Remainder of such Money shall be deposited in the General Treasury, to and for
the Use of the Colony.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Sheriff of the
County of Newport, shall sell said Negro as before, and on the same Conditions
of Sale, viz. to be transported out of said Colony; and for which he shall have
the same Commissions as aforesaid.

LAWS, Made and passed by the General Assembly of His Majesty's Colony of
Rhode Island, and Providence-Plantations, in New England, held by Adjournment,
at Newport, on the Twenty Seventh Day of September, in the Seventeenth Year of
his Majesty's Reign, A. D. 1743.
An ACT for Stating the P^ices of Ferriage at several Ferrie^ in this Colony.
BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly of this Colony, and by the Authority
thereof, it is Enacted, That the Prices to be taken for Ferriage, (...) of
Ferria^^ at Providence and Portsmouth
at the several Ferries hereafter mentioned, shall be as follows, viz. At
Mason's Ferry at Providence, over Narrow Passage, Six Pence for a Horse and his
Load, and Three Pence for every Foot Person. At Borden's and Tripp's Ferries at
Portsmouth, One Shilling for a Horse and his Load, and Six Pence for every Foot
Person, and One Shilling and Six Pence a Head for Neat Cattle at each of said
Ferries. At Durfey's Ferry, now in the Hands of William Hall, jun. of
Portsmouth, Eight Pence for a Horse and his Load, for every Foot Person Four
Pence, and One Shilling per Head for Neat Ca^^le. At Howland's Ferry in said
Portsmouth, Eight Pence for each Horse and his Load, Four Pence for every Foot
Person, and One Shilling per Head for Neat Cattle. At Cook's Ferry at (...),
One Shilling and Three Pence for each Horse and his Lo^d. Eight Pence for every
Foot Person, and One Shilling and Six Pence per Head for Neat Cattle. And for
every Horse and Chaise, or Chair, at Mason's Ferry, Two Shillings; and at all
the Rest of the abovementioned Ferries, Three Shilling^.

An ACT appointing the Quota of Jurors for the Towns of North-Kingstown and
Exeter, in the County of King's- County.
WHEREAS North-Kingstown aforesaid, is divided into two Towns, one retaining
the Name of North-Kingstown, and the other named Exeter.

IT Is Therefore RESOLVED, That North-Kingstown send one Grand and one Petit
Juror, and Exeter one Grand and one Petit Juror to the Superior Court of
Judicature, Numbers of Ju^ors to b^ (...) from North-Kingst^^^ and (...).
Court of Assize and General Goal Delivery, held within this Colony: And that
s^id North-Kingstown and Exeter send each two Grand and two Petit J^rors to the
Inferior Court of Common Pleas and General Session^ of the Peace, held within
and for said King's- County. And as the said Town of North-Kingstown, before
the Division, sent but one Gr^^d Juror to the aforesaid Superior Court of
Judicature, etc. and since said Divi^ion, both Towns send Two,

It is theref^re (...) Voted and Resolved, That the Town of Newport in the
Cou^^y of (...), send to the ^foresaid Superior Court of Judicature, (...)
Grand Juror (...) her^tofore was the Quota of s^id Town.

LAWS, M^^e and past by the General Assembly of Hi^ M^^esty's Colon^ of
R^ode-Island, and Providence-Plantations, in N^^-Eng^^^^, held at S^ut^-^
ngstown, on the Twenty Sixth Day of October, in the S^venteenth Year of His
Majesty's Reign, A. D. 1743.
An ACT S^^^^ng the Fees of the Collector of Hi^ Majesty's (...), and the N^v^l
Officer within this Colony.
WHEREAS it i^ the undoubted Right of the General Assembly of this Col^^y, to
regulate and state the Fees of all the Officers within the sa^e, excepting only
in such Cases where Fees are stated (...) o^ Parliament, in which the
Plantations are ^xp^^s^ly mentioned.

AND whereas there are no Fees stated and established, either by Ac^ of
Parliam^nt as aforesaid, or by any Law of this Colony, for the Collector of His
Majesty's Customs, and the N^^al O^^^^er with^^ the same* for Want of which,
many (...) do daily arise, to the great Discouragement of Trade.

For Preventing whereof for the Future,

BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly of this Colony, and by the Authority of
the same, That from and after the Publication of this Act, the following Fees,
and no other, shall be demanded and received by the Collector of His Majesty's
Custom^, and the Naval Officer in this Colony, in Bills of Credit of the Old
Tenor.

The Collector's Fees, Viz.
L. s. d. FOR a Register, 00 10 00 For ^ndorsing the same, 00 05 00 (...)
A Certificate for Naval Stores, 00 05 00 For all Foreign Vessels Entering
Inwards, and Permit to unlade, 01 00 00 For Ditto Entering Out, and Permit to
lade, 00 10 00 For all Foreign Vessels Clearing Out, 01 00 00 For a Certificate
for unlading enumerated Goods, 00 05 00 For a List of the Vessel's Company, 00
05 00 For Coasting Vessels to the neighboring Colonies, for Entering In and
Permit to unload from New Hampshire, Massachusetts, Connecticut, New York, the
Ierseys, and Pennsylvania, 00 10 00 For Clearing Out to Ditto, 00 10 00 More
where Bond is given, 00 03 00 For Entering In from other Ports between
Annapolis-Ro^^^ and South Carolina, and Permit to unlade, 00 15 00 For Entering
Out and Per^^t to lade, 00 05 00 For Clearing Out, 01 00 00 For a Cocket ^or
European Goods to the said Colonie^* 00 03 00 For a Bill of Store, 00 02 00

The Naval Officer's Fees.
L. s. d. FOR a Register, 00 05 00 Naval Officer's Fee*
For Entering In of all Vessels from Foreign Parts, 00 15 00 For Clearing Out to
Ditto, 00 15 00 For Entering In from New Hampshire, Massachusetts, Connecticut,
New York, the Iersies, and Pennsyl^ania, 00 06 00 For Clearing Out to Ditto. 00
06 00 For Entering In from other Ports between Annapolis-Royal and
South Carolina, 00 08 00 For Clearing Out to Ditto, 00 08 00 For taking Bonds
for enumerated Goods, 00 05 00 For signing Certificate of unlading enumerated
Goods, 00 02 06 For c^ncelling every Bond given for enumerated Goods. 00 02 06

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if the Colle^^or of
His Majesty's Customs, or the Naval Officer of this Co^^^y, Penalty for taking
greater Fees.
shall demand and take ((...) by themselves or any Pers^^ ^mployed under them
in (...) r^spective Offices) any other o^ (...) Fees than what are by this Law
established, he or they so offending, shall for every such Offense, forfeit the
Sum of Ten Pounds, to and for the Use of the Colony; to be recovered by the
Attorney General in any Court of Record within this Colony. And shall also
forfeit to the Person or Persons from whom such unlawful Fees have been
exacted, double the Sum so taken, more than the lawful Fees established by this
Act; to be recovered by such Person or Persons, at the Inferior Court of Common
Pleas within the County where such Offense is committed, together with Costs of
Suit.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if the Collector or
Naval Officer of this Colony, shall delay or refuse to enter or clear any Ship
or Vessel, or to dispatch the Busines^ of any Merchant or Merchants in his or
their Course, under Pretense of demanding any other or greater Fees than what
are by thi^ Law estab^^shed, or under any other Pretense whatsoever, he or they
so off^nding, shall forfeit to the Person or Persons i^^ured ther^by, double
the Damages which shall be ^^used by such D^lay o^ R^^usal; to be recovered by
such Person or Pers^n^, in the Inf^rior C^urt of Common Pleas in the County
where the Offense is ^^mmitted, with Costs of Suit.

AND be it fur^^^r E^act^d by the Authority aforesaid, That from and after the
Publication of this Act, (...)
the Collector and N^v^l Officer of (...) Colony, shall have a Copy of the
Table of Fees established by this Act, for ea^h of their respective Offices,
hanging up in their said Offices, upon the Penalty of forfeiting Five Pounds
for each Day's Neglect or Refusal of the same; to be recovered by the Attorney
General, to and for the Use of the Colony, in any Court of Record within the
same.

Provided Always, That all the Penalties, Forfeitures, and Damages arising
from, P^nal^^ to be ^ued in Six Months.
or by Reason of any Breach of this Act, be sued for within Six Months after
such Offense shall be committed, and not afterward: Any Law, Custom, or Usage,
to the Contrary hereof, in anywise, notwithstanding.

An ACT for Establishing the Fees of the Court of Vi^e-Admiralty within this
Colony.
WHEREAS it is the undoubted Right of the General Assembly of this Colony, to
^stablish and state the Fees of all the Courts within the same.

AND whereas there are no Fees for the Court of Vice-Admiralty yet stated by
any Law of this Colony; for Want of which many Inconveniences do arise.

For the Preventing whereof for the Future,

BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly of this Colony, and by the Authority
thereof, That from and after the Publication of this Act, no Judge or other
Officer of the Court of Vice-Admiralty within this Colony, their Surrogates or
Deputies, shall demand or receive any other or greater Fees than what are
contained or stated in the following Table.

Establishment of FEES in the Court of Vice-Admiralty for the Colony of
Rhode Island, etc. in Bills of the Old Tenor.
Ju^^e's F^^^. Advoca^^'s Fe^^. (...) Fe^^. (...) F^e^. ^. s. d. L. s. d. ^. s.
d. L. s. d. FOR drawing ^ (...), 00 ^3 04 (...) allo^ing the same, 00 13 04 00
10 00 ^itation ^o^ App^arance, S^al and Se^vice, ^^ 06 0^ 00 06 00 0^ 0^ 0^
S^^mons for Wi^^^sses and S^al, ^0 04 00 00 04 00 (...) Pap^^s and ^axing
Costs, ^0 04 00 00 04 0^ An (...), and Re^^rding, (...) ^0 13 04 0^ 10 00 00 ^5
0^ An (...). 0^ 03 0^ (...), and Recordin^, 0^ ^^ 00 00 13 04 00 0^ ^^ For
(...) Eviden^^ (...) of the ^ourt, ^0 ^2 0^ (...) ^0 0^ 0^ (...) Pound, ^0 01
06 (...) Pound ^0 01 00 (...) Pound, ^^ 0^ 09 (...) Pound, ^0 00 0^ All above
(...), 0^ 0^ 0^ For E^ecu^ing ^ Warra^^ for Debto^s, (...) board Ship ^f at the
(...) 0^ 10 0^ If in (...) this Side, or (...), (...) I^^and, ^0 15 0^ If (...)
Is^and, ^0 05 0^ For ^aking a Ve^^^l (...) C^st^dy on Arrest (...). 00 10 00
For ^aking every E^idence in C^urt, 00 02 00 ^0 02 00 00 01 ^^ (...) 01 00 00
To (...) Ad^o^^te G^n^ral for drawing an Info^mation on Penal (...) 01 00 00
(...) ^l^^ding ther^to (...) Decr^^ ^e obtain^d, 01 0^ 00 (...) Copy of a
Lib^l, 00 05 00 (...) C^py o^ an Inform^tion, 0^ 05 00 For C^py of a Decree, 00
08 00 For a (...), 00 10 00 00 05 00 0^ 04 ^0 Warrant for S^rv^^ o^
Appra^^ements, or for (...) or De^e^e^s, 00 06 00 0^ 06 00 For ev^^y
Condemn^tion of Ship or G^^ds, ex^^pt Pri^^^ or Prize Go^ds taken in War, Two
and Half (...) Com. vi^. Two T^i^d^ ^o the Judg^, Two Thi^^^ o^ the other (...)
to the Register, and ^e^ainder to the Marshal. ^or all Money paid i^to ^^^rt on
Condemnation. One per Cent. Pounda^^, vi^. One Third to the Judg^, and Two
^hi^d^ to the Register. For Entering every Mo^^on for an Appeal, ^0 05 00 For
allowing or (...), ^0 10 00 ^0 05 00 For Copy of every Case, Ten Shilli^g^ the
^^rst Shee^, and Fiv^ Shilli^gs for ^^ch She^^ alter, to the Re^i^^er* e^^ry
(...) containing Four Hundred Words. For every Adjournment, 20 15 00 00 05 00
0^ 0^ 0^ ^or every ^^nd for Prosecuti^^ of Appeal^, 00 06 00 For summoning of
Apprai^^^^, each 0^ 02 00

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Judge or
other Officer of the said Court within this Colony, their Surrogates or
Deputies, Penalty (...) demanding and ^ecei^ing gr^^ter (...).
shall demand and receive any other or greater Fees than what are by this Law
established (excepting only in such Cases where the Fees of the said Court are
stated by any Act of Parliament, wherein the Plantation^ are expr^^sly
mentioned, he or they so offending, shall for every such Offense, forfeit the
Sum of Twenty Pounds, to and for the Use of the Colony; to be recovered by the
Attorney General* in any Court of Record within thisColony, paying Costs of
Suit.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Judge or
other Officer of the said Court, their Surrogates o^ Deputies, The Person
aggri^ved, to recover d^uble Damag^s.
shall demand and take any other or greater Fees than what are allowed and
established by this present Act, the Person or Persons from whom such unlawful
Fees shall be exacted, shall have an Action against the Officer or Officers who
shall demand and receive the same, and shall recover double the Sum which he or
they have paid more than the lawful Fees stated by this Act, with Costs of Suit.

Provided Always, That the Penalties and Forfeitures in this Act expressed be
sued for within Six Months after such Offense shall be committed, P^nalty to be
(...) for in Six Months.
and not afterward. Any Law, Custom, or Usage, to the Contrary hereof, in
anywise, notwithstanding.

An ACT for the settling and ascertaining Damages upon Protested Bills of
Exchange.
WHEREAS there is no Law of this Colony s^ttling and ascertaining the Damages
arising upon Bills of Exchange being protested; for Want of which, many
Controversies and Inconveniences do arise a^ong the trading Part of the
Inhabitants of this Colony.

For Preventing whereof for the Future,

BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly of this Colony, and by the Authority of
the same, That when and so often as any Bill or Bills of Exchange shall be
returned from any Parts beyond Sea, duly protested for Non-Payment, the Person
or Persons to whom the same were payable, shall be entitled to have and
recover of the Drawers or Endorsers of said Bill or Bills of Exchange, Ten per
Cent. Damages, over and above the Principal Sum for which the said Protested
Bills of Exchange were drawn, and also lawful Interest from the Time said Bills
of Exchange so Protested, were purchased by him or them, until final Judgment
for the same be obtained, and also all the legal Charges of Protesting the said
Bills. Any Law, Custom, or Usage, to the contrary, in anywise, notwithstanding.

LAWS, Made and past by the General Assembly of His Majesty's Colony of
Rhode Island, and Providence-Plantations, in New England, held by Adjournment
at South-Kingstown, on the Fourteenth Day of February, in the Seventeenth Year
of His Majesty's Reign, A. D. 1743.
An ACT for Emitting the Sum of Forty Thousand Pounds in Bill^ of Public
Credit of the New Tenor, to be let upon Loan.
WHEREAS the Colony has been at great Expense and Charge in putting themselves
in a Posture of Defense in the pr^sent War with Spain, which still subsists,
and continually en^r^a^es the Public Demands on the Government; and a War with
France being greatly to be feared at this Iuncture; at which Time, considering
the Situation of this Colony, and its exposed S^ate and Condition, more than
common Care ought to be taken, to secure the same from the Depredations of so
formidable Foreign Enemies: And at this Iuncture also, the Four Banks emitted
by this Colony in the Years 1715, 1721, 1728 and 1731, being sunk, and annually
sinking; which so lessens the former Medium of Exchange in this growing Colony,
that the Inhabitants are put to (...) Difficulties, for Want of a due and
proper Medium of Exchange, and to whom therefore, High Public Rates and Taxes
under these Circumstances would be Ruinous; and it appearing not possible, upon
due Consideration, that the public Affairs and Concerns of the Government can
be put into such a State and Condition for the Security and Preservation
thereof, against all future Danger, as is consistent with the Rules of Prudence
and Precaution in this Time of Difficulty, without considerable Emission of
Bills of Public Credit.

Wherefore,

BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly of this Colony, and by the Authority
thereof, it is Enacted, Forty Thousand Pounds N^w T^nor made.
That by a Grand Committee or Trustees for the Colony hereafter appointed and
n^med, there shall be (as soon as conveniently may be done) impressed, signed,
and emitted, the Sum of Forty Thousand Pound^ in Bills of Public Credit of the
New Tenor, so called, which shall be made and pass Equivalent to Silver at Six
Shillings and Nine (...) per Ounce T^^y Weight, or Sterling Alloy, or Gold Coin
Equivalent, at the Rate of Five Pounds per Ounce; which Bills when so signed,
shall be proportioned by such Committee as the General Assembly shall appoint
for that Purpose, to the several Towns in the Government, and in such
Proportion for that End to be delivered into the Hands of the Trustees of the
several Towns, to be by them proportioned to the Inhabitants of each, who see
Cause to give Security for the same, as is herein after required, taking the
said Bills upon Loan for Ten Years, and paying Four per Centum Interest for the
same annually, during said Time, and then to be sunk by Ten equal annual
Payments of the Principal, to be successively made; and the Trustees are hereby
required to take Land Security of double the Value, by Way of Mortgage, for the
Principal Sum let, and the Interest annually arising thereon: And the
Mortgagers shall oblige themselves to pay the Principal Sum in the same Bills,
or in such other Medium of Exchange as shall be Passing in the Colony, at the
Time of Payment, according to the Value of the said Bills when emitted, or in
Silver Money at Six Shillings and Nine Pence per Ounce Troy Weight of Sterling
Alloy, or Gold Coin at Five Pounds per Ounce, according to the Face and Tenor
of said Bills at the several Periods of Sinking the same. And as a Collateral
Security, the said Trustees are ordered to take Bonds of every Person taking
said Bills for the Payment of the Interest annually, to be made Payable to the
General Treasurer, and the Principal made Payable to the Grand Committee, as
the Mortgage expreseth, the one Referring to the other.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That said Bills be
expressed in the Face thereof, to be of the same Tenor, that is, to be drawn
after the same Form of the Bills last emitted, called the New Tenor, and be of
the Denominations of Two Pounds, One Pound, Ten Shillings, Five Shillings, Two
Shillings and Six Pence, One Shilling, Six Pence, and Four Pence.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Grand Committee
hereafter appointed, purchase Plates for the Colony, and procure the same to be
engraven after the best Manner they can, and the Bills to be printed upon the
Back, and form such other Devices as they shall apprehend Needful, to prevent
said Bills from being counterfeited; and said Grand Committee shall also
procure Paper for the Impressing said Bills, and draw Money out of the General
Treasury for that End, and procure the same to be impressed; and the said Grand
Committee shall sign said Bills, they or any three of them.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That said Money shall
not be proportioned and let out in less Sums than Six Pounds or greater than
One Hundred Pounds, except such Bills lie in the Hands of the Trustees two
Months after proper Notice to the Inhabitants.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the following
Persons be the Grand Committee or Colony's Trustees, viz. Messrs. Iahleel
Brenton, Thomas Richardson, Daniel Updi^e, Gideon Wanton, John Dexter, Edward
Scott, James Arnold and George Brown, who shall govern and behave themselves
according to the Rules now stated, when they sign the Bills of Public Credit,
and who shall have the same Fees as in the last Bank; and the following Persons
shall be the Trustees for the several Towns, viz.

FOR Newport, Messrs. Samuel Rodman and Pardon Tillinghast.

FOR Providence, Messrs. Richard Fenner and Edward Arnold.

FOR Portsmouth, Messrs. Gideon Freeborn, jun. and Giles Slo^um.

FOR Warwick, Messrs. Joseph Stafford and William Holden.

FOR Westerly, Messrs. John Maxon, and William Hern.

FOR New-Shoram, Messrs. Edward Sands and Robert Hull.

FOR North-Kingstown, Messrs. Daniel Coggeshall and George Tibb^ts, jun.

FOR South-Kingstown, Messrs. Rouse Helm and John Watson.

FOR East-Greenwich, Messrs. John Fry and Joseph Nichols.

FOR Iamestown, Messrs. Abel Franklin and John Martin.

FOR Smithfield, Messrs. William Smith and Thomas Steer.

FOR Situate, Messrs. Job Randall and Jeremiah Angel.

FOR Gloucester, Messrs. Abraham Tourtelot and Richard Smith.

FOR Charlestown, Messrs. Stephen Hoxsie and John Webster.

FOR West-Greenwich, Messrs. Ishmael Spink and Samuel Hopkins.

FOR Coventry, Messrs. Abel Potter and John Johnson.

FOR Exeter, Messrs. John W^^ght and John Reynolds, jun.

FOR Middletown, Messrs. Daniel Gould and John Tailor.

Which Officers shall be duly sworn before His Honor the Governor or Deputy
Governor, for the faithful Discharge of their Duty, and shall have the same
Fees as in the last Bank.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That one Quarter Part of
the Interest arising from said Bank, and received by the General Treasurer,
shall be annually paid by him to the respective Towns aforesaid, to be
distributed to the Treasurers of said Towns, according to their Towns
Proportions of said Bills; the Rest of the Interest to be for the Use of the
Government, to defray the Charges thereof.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Honorable
Joseph Whipple, Esquire Mess^s. Job Randall and Samuel Perry, be, and they are
hereby appointed a Committee, to consider in what Manner the Bills of Public
Credit emitted in this Act, shall be proportioned among the several Towns.

An ACT ordering the Committee Men of the several Towns, to give Bonds for the
faithful Execution of their Trust.
BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly of this Colony, and by the Authority of
the same, it is Enacted, That every Town's Committee appointed to let out the
Bank Money, T^w^'s Com^itte^s to give Bo^d.
shall give Bond, with one or more Sureties, equal to the Sum received, to the
Grand Committee, in Behalf of the Colony, for the faithful Execution of their
Trust, upon receiving said Money, and that the Security shall be such as ^he
said Grand Committee shall approve of; and upon the said Committee Men
returning the Mortgages and Bonds to the Grand Committee, which they shall
receive for the Money to be let out by them as afores^id, sufficient to secure
the Sums taken out as aforesaid, the Bonds given by said Committees, shall be
delivered up.

An ACT to prevent the Spreading of the Small Pox and other Contagious Sickness
in this Colony.
WHEREAS the Small Pox and other Contagious Distempers have been several Times
brought into this Colony, by Masters of Ships and other Vessels coming from
infected Places; which has proved of pernicious Consequence to the Trade, and
greatly endangered the Lives of many of the Inhabitants of this Colony, and
occasioned a very great Expense to the Town of Newport in particular.

AND whereas the Laws to prevent the same, by Reason of their great Number, and
the various Occasions on which they were made, are become perplexed and
intricate.

BE IT THEREFORE ENACTED by the General Assembly, and by the Authority of the
same, it is Enacted, That all Laws heretofore made, relating thereto, be, and
they are hereby absolutely Repealed, and Declared Null and Void; and the
following Rules and Orders, shall for the Future, be kept and observed.

FIRST, It is Enacted by the General Assembly, and by the Authority of the
same, That no Master or Commander of any Ship or other Vessel that shall come
into any Port or Harbor of this Colony, N^ ^nfect d V^ss l to a^chor within
one M^l^ of any Landing Place.
and shall have any Person or Persons on board sick of the Small Pox or any
other Contagious Distemper, or that has had any Person sick of such Distemper
in the Passage, or that shall come from any Port or Place where the Small Pox
or any other Contagious Distemper is Rife and Prevalent, shall presume to bring
such Vessel to Anchor in any of the Ports of this Government, within the
Distance of one Mile of any Public Ferry, Pier or Landing Place, nor permit or
suffer any Person or Persons on board such Vessel, to be landed, or any Person
to come on board such Vessel, without a License first had and obtained from the
Governor or Deputy Governor of this Colony for the Time being (if such Vessel
be near the Harbor of Newport) or in their Absence (or if such Vessel be near
any other Harbor of this Colony) from one or more Assistants of this Colony,
or in his or their Absence, from two or more Justices of the Peace, or Warden^
of such Town where such Vessel shall arrive, on the Penalty of forfeiting One
Hundred Pounds Money of the New Tenor, to and for the Use of the Colony; to be
recovered by the General Treasu^er, by Bill, Plaint, or Information, in the
Court of Common Pleas, in the County where such Offense shall be committed, and
where such Offender shall be allowed no Essoign, Protection, or Wager of Law.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Person
whatsoever shall presume to land or come on Shore from on board such Vessel,
Persons co^in^ (...) suc^ V ^sel without a ^^cen^^ to (...) sent b^ck o^
confined.
without License first had and obtained as aforesaid, it shall be lawful for
any Assistant, Justice of the Peace, or Warden, to send back such Offender or
Offenders immediately on board such Vessel, or to confine him or them on Shore,
in some convenient Place as to him shall appear most Effectual to prevent the
Spreading of any Infection, until the Town Council of such Town shall have
Information and Opportunity to remove said Offender or Offenders, as they are
hereafter empowered and directed; and the Person or Persons so offending, shall
satisfy and pay all Charge that shall arise hereon, and also, each of them
shall forfeit Twenty Pounds Money as aforesaid; and if such Offender have not
Estate suffici^^t to pay the same, then he shall be set to work by the
Direction and at the Discretion of the Judges of the Court where such Cause
shall be tried, until the same be satisfied and paid.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Governor,
Deputy Governor, Assistants, Justices and Wardens as aforesaid, be, A Doct^r
(...) be sent on board.
and they are hereby empowered and directed to send a Doctor or other suitabl^
Person to examine into and make Report to him or them respectively, of the true
State of such Vessel, and the People on board, at the Charge of the Master or
Commander of such Vessel: And the Naval Officer is hereby forbid to clear out
such Vessel, 'til said Charge (having been adjusted and settled by the Town
Council of the Town where such Vessel shall arrive) i^ fully sati^fied and paid.

AND ^e it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Town Council of
Newport or other Town where such Ves^el shall arrive, (...)
be, and they are hereby empowered and directed, forthwith to put on board such
Vessel, some suitable Person or Persons to secure said Vessel, and effectually
prevent any Communication therewith, at the Expense of the Owners.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Town Council of
Newport or other Town as aforesaid, To^^ Coun^^l (...) send (...) to the (...)
them o^ boa^d.
be, and they are hereby empowered and directed to confine on board said
Vessel, or send to some Pesthouse or other suitable Pl^ce, all Persons,
Mariners or Passengers, or others that came in said Vessel, for a convenient
Time, until such of them as have or are liable to have the Small Pox or other
Infectious Distemper, are perfectly recovered and cleansed from said Distemper,
or have passed a suitable Quarantine, and also all other Persons that have gone
on board such Vessel without License as aforesaid, at the Charge and Expense of
such Persons respect^v^ly* and also all other Persons that came in said Vessel,
until they (...) been sufficiently aired and cleansed.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Town Council of
the Town where such Vessel arrive^, Town Council to app^^nt Persons to air and
(...) Inf^^ted Goods
be* and they are hereby empowered and directed, to appoint two meet Persons to
take effectual Care, that all Goods, Ware^, and Merchandises imported in such
Vessel, which they think liable to hold and communicat^ the Infection, be
landed on some of the Islands in the Narragansett Bay, and exposed to the Sun
and Air, and Cleansed, not exceeding Ten Days, nor under Six Days before they
are permitted to be brought into any House, Shop, or Warehouse, other than
where they are cleansed as aforesaid,; and when such Goods are sufficiently
aired and cleansed, said Persons shall give the Owners or P ssessors thereof a
C^r^ificate; and the Town Council shall (...) and order s^id Good^ to be
delivered to the Owner or Owners thereof; And the Charge and Expense of
Landing, Airing, and Cleansing such Goods, Wares, and Merchandises, shall be
born by the respective Own^^ or Owners; and all Goods that are judged by the
Town Council not liable to hold the Infection, shall be delivered to the Own^^
or Owners without Delay, and Expense of Airing, as soon as may be consistent
with the Safety of the Town in Regard to the other Parts of the Cargo. And all
Goods, Wares, or Merchandises imported into any Town in this Colony by Land,
from any Place infected with the Small Pox or other Contagious Distemper, shall
be aired cleansed at the Discretion of the Town Council of such Town, and at
the Expense of the Owner or Owners thereof.

AND be it fur^^^^ Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all Goods imported
in such Vessel as aforesaid, that shall be clandestinely landed or brought into
any House, Shop, or Warehouse, All Goods Impo^ted without such Air^^g and
^le^ns^^^, to be forfeited.
without Certificate and Allowance as aforesaid, or that shall be imported by
Land as aforesaid, and not cleansed or aired by order of the Town Council as
aforesaid, shall be forfeited; one Third to and for the Use of the Colony, and
the other two Thirds to him or them that shall inform and sue for the same in
the Inferior Court of Common Pleas in the County where such Offense shall be
com^i^ted; and all Assistants, Justices and Wardens are hereby e^powered and
required, upon Information given them, to seize and secure all such Goods,
Wares and Merchandises in their respective Jurisdictions, until legal Trial.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Town Council of
Newport, or other Town as aforesaid, be, Town Council to (...) the Change.
and they are hereby empowered and directed to fix, settle, and adjust all
Wages and Charges demanded by Persons employed by them to secure such Vessel,
or to air and cleanse such Goods, or to attend upon and nurse such Persons as
aforesaid. And that if any Owner, or Freighter, or Mariner, or Passenger as
aforesaid, shall refuse to pay such Wages and Charges so settled, adjusted, and
fixed by the Town Council, that then the Town Treasurer of such Tow^ ^hereby
empowered and required to sue for and recover such Wages and Charges, if above
Five Pounds, in the Inferior Court of Common Pleas in the County where such
Charges shall be adjusted and settled; and if under that Sum, then before any
two Justices or Wardens, as in the Case of other Actions; and the Judges of
such Court where such Action is brought, are hereby empowered to tax double
Costs for the Plaintiff. Any Law, Custom, or Usage, to the Contrary,
notwithstanding.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That for the better
Security of the Payment of what Charges may arise on the Nursing or Attendance
upon any Sailor or Mariner belonging to such Vessel as aforesaid, the Master
thereof, Sa^lors Wa^e^ (...) stopped (...) the Charg^ is paid.
is hereby required to stop Payment of the Wages due to such Mariner, until
certified from the Town Council, that such Charges are fully satified and paid,
on Penalty of paying the same so far as the Amount of the Wages so paid by him:
And no Court in this Colony shall make up Judgment for any such Wages, until
Satisfaction be made as aforesaid; and thi^ Act being pleaded in any Court
where such Wages is sued for by such Mariner, shall be a Temporary Bar of such
Action. Any Law, Usage or Custom, to the Contrary, notwithstanding. And the
Master or Owner of any Servant or Slaves on board such Vessels, or the Persons
to whom such Slaves are consigned, shall pay all Charges arising by them, for
their Nursing and Attendance.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Master of any
Ship or other Vessel coming into the Harbor of Newport, Ship-Masters to pay
for the Shot fired to bring them to.
who shall refuse to bring to his Vessel when the Gunner at Fort George shall
fire a Shot at him, shall pay Ten Shillings for the first Shot, and Twenty
Shillings for the Second, and Five Pounds for every Shot afterward, to and for
the Use of the Colony, and Three Shillings to the Naval Officer as his Fee for
receiving the same, who shall not clear out said Vessel till the same is paid.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That when the Small Pox
shall be Prevalent in the Town of Boston, Travelers to remain five Days on the
Borders of the Colony.
or in any other Town in New England, all Persons whatsoever (the Post only
excepted) who shall come from such Town into this Colony, without remaining
five Days on the Borders of this Colony, shall forfeit for such Offense Five
Pounds, to and for the Use of the Colony, upon legal Conviction thereof before
any two Assistants or Justices of the Peace, who are hereby empowered to hear
and try the same, and also to send back or confine said Offender in some
convenient Place, until the Term of Five Days be expired, after such Trial and
Judgment. And the Assistants, Justices of the Peace, or Wardens in any Town in
this Colony, are hereby empowered to appoint proper Persons at all Ferries or
Places that to them seem necessary, to examine on Oath or Engagement, all
Persons suspected to transgress this Law, and on Occasion to apprehend and
bring such Offenders before said Assistants, or Justices of the Peace, or
Wardens, that they may be dealt with according to Law.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all Persons who
keep Public Houses, All Persons keeping Boarders, to acquaint the Authority
when any of their Lodgers are taken sick of the Small Pox.
or Boarders in their Houses, shall immediately acquaint the next Assistant,
Justice of the Peace, or Warden of the Town wherein they dwell, when any Person
boarding or lodging in their House is taken sick of the Small Pox or any other
Contagious Distemper, or suspected to be so, on the Penalty of forfeiting Five
Pounds, to and for the Use of the Town, to be recovered by the Town Treasurer,
before any two Assistants, Justices of the Peace, or Wardens of said Town; and
the Assistant, Justice of the Peace, or Warden so notified, is hereby empowered
and directed to make proper Examination by some Doctor or other skilful Person,
and if it be the Small Pox or other Contagious Distemper wherewith such sick
Person is visited, then immediately to set a proper Guard to prevent the
Spreading of the Infection, and to summon the Town Council of such Town, who
are hereby authorized and empowered to remove said Person, being an Inmate or
Boarder in any House in any Town in this Colony, to any such Place in the said
Town as they shall think the most proper to prevent the Spreading of the
Infection, or to continue the said Guard as aforesaid, according as to them
shall seem necessary, and likewise to confine all such Persons as may be by
them suspected to have taken the Distemper, in some proper Place, till they are
recovered and cleansed from the said Distemper, or have performed a suitable
Quarantine; and all Charges arising hereby, shall be adjusted, settled, and
fixed by the Town Council, and paid by the Parties respectively concerned; and
upon his or their Refusal, shall be sued for and recovered by the Town
Treasurer as aforesaid.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That in Case the Small
Pox shall break out in any House or Family in any Town in the County of
Newport, the Assistants, Persons taken with the Small Pox in the County of
Newport, to be sent to the Pesthouse, etc.
Justices of the Peace, or Wardens in said Town, together with the Town Council
thereof, be, and they are hereby fully empowered to remove any Inhabitant of
said Town, visited with the Small Pox, to the Pesthouse in said Town, or any
other convenient Place, in order to prevent the Spreading of the Infection, or
otherwise at their Discretion, to place a Guard round the Dwelling House of the
infected Person, as to them shall seem necessary. Any Law, Custom, or Usage, to
the Contrary, notwithstanding.

AND be it further Enacted by the Autho^^ty aforesaid, That so long as the Town
Council of any Town, shall think fit to endeavor the Preventing the Spreading
of the Small Pox, No Person to go to any House suspected to be infected,
without a License.
no Person whatsoever, under any Pretense whatsoever, shall presume to visit
any Person suspected to have the Small Pox, or to go into the House where
suspected Persons are confined, without a License first had from the Town
Council, or from one Assistant, or from two or more Justices of the Peace, or
Wardens of the Town, on the Penalty of forfeiting for every such Offense, Ten
Pounds Money of the New Tenor; one Half to and for the Use of the Town where
such Offense is committed, and the other Half to him or them that shall inform
and sue for the same in the Inferior Court of Common Pleas in the County; and
such Persons, on Information of their Offense, shall be liable to be confined
till they are suitably aired and cleansed, or have performed a suitable
Quarantine, at the Discretion of the Town Council to whom Complaint of the same
shall be made.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That any Person or
Persons that shall be legally convicted of wilfully and purposely Spreading the
Small Pox within this Colony, Persons convicted of wilful spr^ading the Small
Pox. to suffer Death.
he, she or they shall be adjudged to suffer the Pains and Penalty of Death, as
in the Case of Felony, without B^nefit of the Clergy. And all Persons legally
convicted of wickedly endeavoring to spread the same, shall be sentenced to be
whipped, not exceeding Thirty Nine Lashes, and suffer Six Months Imprisonment,
and be kept to hard Labor.

AND be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That it shall and may be lawful
for any two or more Assistants, Justices of the Peace, Suspected Persons to be
committed.
or Warden, in any Town in this Colony, having Reason to suspect, that any
Person or Persons have endeavored Wickedly and Wilfully to spread the Small
Pox in any Town in this Colony, to commit such Person or Persons to His
Majesty' Goal, there to remain, till he, she or they give good and sufficient
Security to appear at the next General Court of Assize, and General Goal
Delivery, and of their good Behavior during said Time. Provided, Nothing in
this Act shall be construed, or understood to ex end to such Practitioners in
Physic as shall be allowed by the Town Council, to inoculate the said
Distemper, after the said Town Council have thought fit to desist their
Endeavors to prevent the further Spreading of said Distemper.

An ACT establishing the Proceedings and Trials of Actions not exceeding Five
Pounds.
BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly of this Colony, and by the Authority of
the same, it is Enacted, That all manner of Debts, Trespasses, and other
Actions, not exceeding the Sum of Five Pounds, Actions not exceeding Five
Pounds, to be try d by Two Justices.
excepting Actions wherein Title of Lands is concerned, and such other Actions
as are excepted by any particular Law of this Colony, shall and may be heard,
tried, adjudged and determined by any two or more Justices of the Peace, or
Wardens, who are hereby required to keep a fair Record of their Judgments from
time to time, and fully authorized and empowered; if no Appeal be prayed, to
grant forth Execution, to be levied as in this Act is after expressed.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That one Justice or
Warden may, The C^^rt may be adjourn^d by one Justic^.
upon Complaint made of any such Matter or Cause as aforesaid, grant forth a
Warrant or Summons against the Party complained of, provided that said Party
lives in the sam^ County where the Plaintiff dwells; which Warrant or Summons
may be directed to and served by any Town Serjean^ or Constable in the County
where such Cause of Action (...); and to prevent the Falling of the Court, one
Justice or Warden shall have Power to adjourn the same.

AND it is further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That in Actions of Debt,
or of the Case, for Goods, Wares, Account to be (...) to the Warrant.
and Merchandises sold, Work done, etc. the Plaintiff shall annex his Account
of Debt and Credit to the Warrant, and the Defendant shall be thereby estopped
from bringing a cross Action, but may bring an Account of the Charge of Debt
tha^ he has against the Plaint^ff, into the Court that sha ll try the Action,
The Defendant allowed to bring in his Account, and to have an Ac^ion for the
B^lla^ce, i^ any cue to him.
and shall have the full Credi^ of his just Account allowed by the Judges of
said Court, who shall settle and balance the Accounts of each Pa^^y; and if
the Plaintiff be nonsuited or ^ound in Debt, he shall pay Costs, unless the
Defendant has refused to account wi^h him when thereto required; and the
Defendant shall have Liberty to bring an Action for the Balance that shall be
due to him.

AND it is further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Party
recovering Judgment, s^all be allowed Five Shillings for an Attorney, if he
employed one; No Execution to be taken out till Ten Days after Judgment.
and that no Execution shall be taken out in less than ten Days after Judgment
given; and that all Executions shall be returnable to the Justices Court that
granted the same, in twenty Days afte^ taking out thereof, and shall be
directed to any Town Sergeant or Constable as aforesaid, who shall levy the
same upon the Goods and Chattles of the Person cast in the Suit, unless said
Person satisfy and pay down the Judgment and Costs awarded against him, and
such Goods and Chattles taken by Distraint, after five Days shall by said
Officer be exposed to Public Sale to the Highest Bidder, and the Overplus, if
any, returned to the Owner; and for want of such Goods and Chattles, the
Officer shall take the Body of such Person into Custody, and him commit to His
Majes^y's Goal within the County, there to remain until the Fine, Debt, or
Damages, with ^osts, be fully satisfied and paid.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That either Party,
Plaintiff or Defendant, shall and may have Liberty to appeal from the Judgment
given against him, Either Party may appeal.
to the next Inferior Court of Common Pleas to be held for the County
wheretheAction is tried, the Appellant paying down the Costs of Court, and
entering into Bond, with one sufficient Surety in double the Debt and D^mages
sued for, and sufficient to answer all the Costs that shall arise on the
Prosecution of his said Appeal with Effect, to abide the Judgment of said
Court, which shall be final, and which Bond taken as aforesaid, shall be
returned into the Clerk's Office of said Court, at the Sitting of the same.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Appellant shall
file Reasons of Appeal in the Clerk's Office appealed unto, Reasons o^ Appeal
to be (...) six Days before the Court.
Six Days before the Sitting of such Court, and bring an Attested Copy of the
whole Case to said Court, where he shall be allowed the Benefit of any further
Evidence.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all Acts
establishing the Proceedings of Trials of Justices, heretofore made in civil
Actions, be, and they are hereby declared to be Null and Void, and of none
Effect.

An ACT for Repealing an Act made in the Fifteenth Year of his present
Majesty's Reign, entitled, An Act for Appointing and Erecting a Court of
Equity, to hear and determine all Appeals in Personal Actions from the Judgment
of the Superior Court, and for granting Reviews in Personal Actions.
WHEREAS it is found by Experience, that the Trial of Causes by the said Court
of Equity, is inconvenient, and a great Grievance to the Inhabitants of this
Colony.

BE IT THEREFORE ENACTED by the General Assembly, Court of Equity a^olished.
and by the Authority of the same, That the said Act and every Clause thereof,
be, and it is hereby repealed and made Null and Void, and that the said Court
be, and it hereby is dissolved and abolished.

The Records to be lodged ^n the Secre^ary'^ Off^ce.
AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all Records of the
said Court shall be lodged and remain in the Secretary's Office, and that they
be and remain as Valid, and all Copies extracted therefrom, and attested by the
Secretary, shall be as authentic to all Intents and Purposes in the Law, as if
the said Court of Equity were still in being.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authori^y aforesaid, That all Executions upon
any Judgments obtained in said Court, and not satisfied, shall be hereafter
granted forth by the Secretary, and be returnable into his Office, on such Day
as would have been the ^^rst Day of said Court of Equity's Sitting, had not the
s^m^ (...) hereby abolished.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all Wri^s of Scire
Facias upon any Judgment obtained in the said Court of Equity, Writs of Scire
Facias to be brought to the Superior Court
shall be brought before the Judges of the Superi^r Court of Judicature, who
are hereby authorized and e^p^wered to take Cognizance of the same, in the same
Manner they might have done, if the said Judgment had been obtained in the said
Superior Court.

AND to the End that there may be no Failure of Justice, and that no Person or
Persons be foreclosed by any Judgment where they might upon a new Trial be
provided with new and further Evidence for their Defense.

Be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Person or Persons that
shall be aggrieved at any Judgment of the Superior Court, A Review ^ranted at
the Sup^rior Co^rt
shall and may have Liberty to bring a Writ of R^vi^w, and thereupon have
another Hearing of said Cause in the said Superior Court, provided the said
Party has obtained a Judgment in the said Cause, either at the Inferior or the
Superior Court, and no other Person whatsoever; and the Party bringing such
Writ of Review, shall bring an Attested Copy of the whole Case, and each Party
shall have the Benefit of any new and further Pleas in Evidence; and the Party
who shall recover Judgment in such Action of Review, shall recover all lawful
Co^ts by him at any Time before expended in said Suit.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That when and so often
as it shall happen both Parties shall bring Actions of Review to the Superior
Court in the same Case, When both Parties Review, their Actions to be ^^^ed by
the same Jury.
that then and in such Case, the Writs in both Actions, and all the Evidence of
both Parties shall be committed together by the Court to the same Jury, in
order to confirm, reverse, or alter the former Judgment of the Superior Court,
according to Law and Justice, and the Party who shall recover Judgment, shall
recover the whole Costs of both Suits.

All Actions of Revi^w to b^ brought within a Year.
PROVIDED, That no Action of Review shall be brought after the Expiration of
one Year from the Time of Rendering the Judgment to be reviewed, and that the
said Writ or Summons of Review shall be taken out and served Thirty Days before
the Sitting of the said Court to which such Action of Review shall be brought,
and the Reasons of such Review shall be therein contained; saving to any
Infant, Feme Covert, or Person Non Compos Me^^is, or beyond Sea, one Year after
such Impediment be removed, to bring their Writ of Review as aforesaid.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That Execution shall not
be stayed or suspended by Reason of any such Action of Review, The Review (...)
to stop Execution or Appeal.
and ^h^t any Jud^ment given in any Action of Review, shall no way^ hind^r ^he
Party who shall be aggri^ved thereat, to appeal ^o His Majesty in Council, in
all Cases where the L^w of this Co^ony permits and allows the same.

AND be it further Enacted b^ the Authority aforesaid, That the Sheriff or
their D^puties shall take good and sufficient B^il in all Writs of Review that
shall be directed to them, The S^e^iff to ^ake su^^^ci^nt Bail.
to answer the Judgments that shall be thereon given, and where the B^^y of the
Defendant cannot be found, nor sufficient Estate be found to attach, to answer
the said Action of Review, that th^n an^ in such Case, it shall and may be
lawful for the Sheriff or hi^ Deputy, He may attach what he had levied on the
former Execution.
to attach the Money, Goods or Lands by him rec^iv^^, levied, or attach by
virtue of the Execution taken out in Pursuance of the former Judgment obtained,
if the same be remaining in his Hands, or unsold at the Time of his receiving
the said Writ of Review.

Provided Nevertheless, and it is the true Intent and Meaning of this Act, That
the same, and every Part thereof, shall take Place, and be in Force the first
Wednesday in May next ensuing the Date hereof, and not before; Any Thing herein
contained, or any Law, Custom, or Usage to the Contrary hereof, in anywise,
notwithstanding.

An ACT empowering the Sheriffs of the several Counties within this Colony, to
call Special Courts.
WHEREAS it often happens that the Sheriffs by Virtue of Executions issued out
in Pursuance of Judgments obtained against Persons living out of the
Government, and Persons concealing themselves, have attached the Real or
Personal Estates of such People who are not to be found, and have exposed them
to Public Vendue; and the Persons bidding or purchasing the same, have failed
in the Performance of their several Contracts and Agreements; by Means whereof,
the Creditors are unjustly deprived of receiving their just Demands.

For Prevention whereof for the Future,

BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly, and by the Authority of the same, it is
Enacted, Sheri^^ (...) Special Cour^^.
That the Sheriff of each respective County within the Government, upon
attaching real or personal Estates by Execution, of such Persons mentioned as
aforesaid, and disposing of the same at Public Vendu^, shall have full Power
and Authority to call Special Courts, for the Compelling any Persons who shall
bid for or purchase such Estate, on the Non-Payment of the Money contracted
for; which Special Court shall consist of any three Judges of the Superior
Court, who are hereby fully empowered and authorized to hear and determine the
same; and the Sheriff to observe the same Rules and Orders in bringing forward
his Suit, as are directed by the Act empowering Vendue Masters of the several
Towns to call Special Courts.

An ACT to prevent Wares being made across Petaquamscut River.
BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly, and by the Authority thereof, it is
Enacted, (...) ^iver.
That no Ware be made or erected across Petaquamscut River, at any Time
whatever. And that no Seine or Seines, or any other such Contrivances for the
Catching Fish, when set across said River, be continued longer than Six Hours
in Twenty Four without being ta^en up, and not to be set across again during
said Twenty Four Hours, when once taken up; and all Seines set partly across
said River, which do not leave open one Third Part of said River, shall be
deemed equally to such set wholly across, and shall be taken up in the said
Time. And any Person offending against this Act, and being duly convicted by
Presentment or Information, at the Sessions, s^^ll be fined the Sum of Twenty
Pounds: one Half to the Informar, and all the other to the Government: Any Law,
Usage or Custom relating the Fishery in said River, notwithstanding.

An ACT for Preventing Trespasses.
BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly of this Colony, and by the Authority
thereof, it is Enacted, No Perso^^ to cut Wo^d, etc. (...)
That after the Publication of this Act, no Person or Persons do or shall cut,
fell, destroy or carry away any Tree or Trees, Timber Wood or Under Wood
whatever, standing, lying, or growing on the Land of any other Person or
Persons, without Leave or License from the Owner or Ownersofsuch Lands whereon
such Trees, Wood, Timber, or Underwood, was standing, lying, or growing, on
Pain, that every Person so cutting, felling, destroying, or c^rrying away the
same, or that shall be Aiding or Assisting therein, shall for every such
Trespass, forfeit and pay to the Party or Parties, injured or trespassed upon,
the Sum of Twenty Shillings Old Tenor, for every Tree of one Foot over; and for
all Trees of greater Dimensions, three Times the Value thereof, besides Twenty
Shillings as aforesaid; and Ten Shillings for every Tree or Pole under the
Dimensions of one Foot Diameter; and for other Wood or Under Wood, treble the
Value thereof; which several Penalties, Forfeitures, and Damages, shall and may
be recovered by Action, Bill, Plai^^, or Information, Conviction of ^he
Trespasser or Trespassers, as is hereafter especially provided and en^cted,
before any Court of Justices of the Peace in the County, if the Penalty or
Damage exceed not the Sum of Five Pounds Old Tenor; but if it be above that
Value, then before the In^erior Court of Com^^n Pleas in the same County.

And Forasmuch as it is very hard and difficult to detect and convict any
T^espasser o^ Trespassers against this Act, in the ordinary Course and M^thod
of the Law, by Reason the Trespasses are generally committed where Positive
Evidences can scarc^ly ^ver be had.

BE it therefore further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That in case any
Dispute arise upon any Action, Method of convicting Offe^ders.
Bill, Plaint, or Information brought as aforesaid, where the Plaintiff,
Complainant, or Informer, shall charge the Defendant in Trespass, for cutting,
felling, destroying, or carrying away any particular Tree or Trees, Parcels of
Timber, Wood, or Under Wood, off or from any such Land as aforesaid, or of
being Aiding or Assisting therein, th^n and in such Case, if the Plaintiff,
Complainant, or Informer, or his Agent or Attorney, shall make Oath, or give
his Engagement bona fide, that there has been cu^, felled, destroyed, or
carried away, such and so many Trees, Parcels of Wood, or Under Wood, as
mentioned in the Writ; and that he suspects the Defendant to have committed the
said Trespass, although the laintiff, Complainant, or Informer, or his Agent or
Attorney may not be able to produce any other Evidence thereof, than such
Circumstances as render it highly probable in the Judgment of the Court of
Justices, or such otherCourt beforewho^ the Trial is, then and in every such
Case, unless the Defendant shall acquit himself upon Oath or Engagemen^ to be
administered to him by the Court or Justices that shall try the Cause, the
Plaintiff shall recover against the Defendant, Dam^ges and Costs. But if the
Defendant shall acquit himself upon Oath or Engagement as aforesaid, the Court
o^ Justices before whom the Trial is, may and shall enter up Judgment for the
Defendant, to recover against the Plaintiff, double his Costs occasioned by
such Prosecution.

PROVIDED, That nothing in this Act shall be construed, so as to debar or
hinder the Surveyors of Highways, of taking any Tree or Trees, Wood or
Under-Wood as aforesaid, for doing any Thing necessary and convenient, in and
about their Duty.

An ACT altering the Time appointed for choosing Deputies and Proxing for
General Officers in the several Towns ^n this Colony.
BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly of this Colony, and by the Authority
thereof, it is Enacted, Time of Pr^^ing ^or General Offic^rs.
That the Town Meetings in this Colony, which heretofore were held on the first
Tuesday in March annually, for choosing Deputies for May Sessions, and Proxing
for General Officers to be chosen at the General Election be altered: And that
for the Future said Meetings be annually held on the third Wednesday of April;
and that no Person Proxing at said Meeting shall have Liberty of withdrawing
his Proxy at the General Election.

An ACT empowering the General Treasurer to appoint proper Attorneys to sue for
Interest Money due from Persons that have left this Colony.
WHEREAS sundry Persons indebted to this Colony for Interest Money, have
removed into the neighboring Governments, whereby the Colony are kept out of
the same.

BE IT THEREFORE ENACTED by the General Assembly, and by the Authority thereof,
it is Enacted, That the General Treasurer be authorized to constitute and
appoint such Person or Persons living out of this Colony, Treasurer to su^
(...) Interest out of the Colon^.
Attorneys in his Behalf, to sue those Persons for their Interest Money, as
have removed out of this Colony, and neglect to pay the same; and that the
Charge thereof be paid out of the General Treasury, if any accrues.

An ACT settling the Allowance of ^panish or other Prisoners of War.
BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly, and by the Authority thereof, it is
Enacted, That for the Future, when and so often as any Spanish P^isoners or
other Prisoners of War shall be brought into this Colony, Allowa^ce to
Prison^r^ of ^ar.
Fifteen Shillings per Week and no more shall be allowed to each Prisoner for
his Maintenance, so long as they shall be detained in this Colony; to be paid
by the General Treasurer, from the Tim^ they shall be delivered up to the
Authority by the Captors. And that His Honor the Governor or Deputy Governor
send away said Prisoners, in order that they may retu^n into some Part of the
Dominions of the Prince to whom they are Subjects, as soon as may be, after
they are delivered up by the Cap^ors as afores^id; and with as little Charge as
may be.

An ACT for repealing a Part of the Act, made and passed by the General
Assembly of this Colony, at their Sessions, held at Newport, by Adjournment,
the Second Monday in June, A. D. 1743, entitled, An Act for preventing the
Counterfeiting Bills of Public Credit.
BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly of this Colony, and by the Authority
thereof, it is Enacted, That that Part of said Act, which inflicts Pains and
Penal^ies on such Persons as have counterfeited the Colony's Bills, shall be,
and the same is hereby repealed, so far as the same does retrospect or look
back and affect those Persons that were convicted before the Making of said
Law, without the Disannulling or Altering of any Part of said Law, relating to
any future Prosecution, or any Person hereafter accused or sued for the Breach
thereof.

LAWS, Made and pas^'d by the General Assembly of his Majesty's Colony of
Rhode Island, and Providence-Plantations, in New England; held by Adjournment,
at Newport, the Twenty Second Day of May, in the Seventeenth Year of His
Majesty's Reign, A. D. 1744.
An ACT for putting this Colony in a Posture of Defense, and for rend'ring the
Militia in the several Towns thereof, more Useful in Time of an Actual Invasion.
[The First Part of this Law, was super^^ded by an Act made in June following.]
IN Order to render the Militia of this Colony more Useful in the Time of an
Actual Invasion;

BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly, and by the Authority of the same, No
Person to (...) out of any Town after an Alarm, ^^^hout Orders.
That after an Alarm is beaten in any Town in this Colony, no Man whatsoever
shall leave or go out of said Town so alarmed, but by Leave or Order from the
Commanding Officer there, upon the Penalty of paying to and for the Use of the
Colony, the Sum of One Hundred Pounds; to be recovered by the General
Treasurer, by Action of Debt, Bill, Plaint, or Information, in any Court of
Record within this Colony; and in case any Person shall not have sufficient
Estate to pay the same, then such Person shall be committed to Goal in the
County wherein he shall be convicted, and there continue for the Space of Six
Month, or else shall be sent to the Fort, there to serve the Colony as a
Soldier the Space of Six Months, which shall be at the Discretion of the
Governor and Council of War.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That on the Enemies
landing in, or actually attacking any Town in this Colony, upon the first
Notice thereof, Militar^ Officers to mus^er the Compani^s on an Alarm.
the Captain of ^ach respective Company in the Colony, or in their Absence, the
other Commission Officers of the Companies, shall muster their respective
Companies, in order to march to the Assistance of the Town attacked as
aforesaid, at the Command of theSuperiorOfficer. And that upon any such Attack
upon the Town of Newport, the Gove^nor, Deputy Governor, or the Commanding
Officer for the Time being, shall order or command such a Number of Seamen and
others as he shall think proper, to go over to Fort George, Men to be ordered
to For^ George.
in order to join the Company that belongs to the Fort; which Men so sent over,
shall be subject to the Command of the Captain and other Officers of the Fort,
in the same Manner as the Company belonging thereto are.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That when it shall be
thought necessary to set a double Watch in any Town in this Government, Double
Watchs
every Person that shall be legally notified to watch at such Times, and shall
refuse or neglect to appear, and watch at such Time and Place as shall be
appointed by the proper Officer, or send a good and sufficient Man in his Room,
such Person for every such Offense, shall pay a Fine of Sixteen Shillings.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That every Person who
shall ^ctually be upon any Military Watch, Penalty for Negligence of the Watch.
and who shall disobey the Commands of the Commanding Officer of said Watch, or
other his Superior Officers, or shall otherwise neglect to do their Duty, shall
be fined, not exceeding Three Pounds, or shall be ordered to ride the Wooden
Horse, or be laid Neck and Heels, not exceeding the Space of one Hour, at the
Discretion of a Court Martial; which Court Martial shall consist of one Field
Officer, and the Commission Officers of the Company to which such Offender
shall belong; but that the Commission Officers at New Shoram, without a Field
Officer, be a Court Martial.

An ACT for Repealing a Part of an Act, passed by the General Assembly, held at
South-Kingstown, the Second Tuesday in February, A. D. 1743, entitled, An Act
Establishing the Proceedings and Trials of Actions not exceeding Five Pounds.
BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly, and by the Authority thereof, it is
Enacted, That that Part or Paragraph of the abovementioned Act, which states
the Fees, be, and it is hereby Repealed, and made Null and Void.

An ACT for S^ating the Fees on Actions not exceeding Five Pounds.
BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly, and by the Authority of the same, it is
Enacted, That the Justices, Wardens, and other Officer^ concerned in the
Proceedings or Trials of Actions not exceeding Five Pounds, shall for the
Future take the following Fees and no more.

FEES in Actions not exceeding Five Pounds.
Justice's Fees.
FOR a Warrant of Arrest, 00 02 00 Fees in the Justice'sCourt.
For every Summons, 00 01 00 For annexing an Account, 00 01 00 For administering
an Oath or Engagement, 00 01 00 For writing an Evidence, 00 01 06 For Judgment,
00 08 00 For Recording thereof, 00 03 00 For Bond to the Peace or good
Behavior, 00 03 00 For Bond on Appeal, 00 02 00 For Execution, 00 03 00 For
Copy of a Case, the same as the Clerk of the Superior Court.

Town Serjeant's and Constable's Fees.
FOR serving of every Warrant, if not above one Mile from home, 00 01 06 If
above one Mile, Two Pence forward and Two Pence backward. For a Copy of a
Warrant, 00 01 06 For Bail Bond in Civil Actions, 00 02 00 For every Person
summoned, if not above one Mi^^, 00 01 0^ If above one Mile, Two Pence forward
and Two Pence backward per Mile. For every Execution served upon Personal
Estate, not above one Mile, the same as the Sheriff. If above one Mile, Two
Pence forward and Two Pence backward per Mile. For every Execution upon the
Body, the same as the Sheriff. If above one Mile distant from the Goal, Two
Pence forward and Two Pence backward per Mile. The Constable and Town Sergeant
to be allowed for Attendance, at the Discretion of the Court. For every
Evidence for taking Engagement, 00 01 00 For every Witness for Attendance per
Day, 00 04 00 If above one Mile from home, Two Pence forward and Two Pence
backward per Mile.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That when and as often
as any Justice of the Peace shall take any Evidence and put the same in
Writing, he shall enter the whole Charge thereof upon the Back or Bottom of
every such Evidence, upon the Penalty of forfeiting his whole Fee for taking
said Evidence, or neglecting to enter the same as aforesaid; and nothing shall
be allowed in any Bill of Cost for the Charge of such Evidence, unless the same
be entered upon the Back or Bottom thereof as aforesaid.

An ACT for Repealing an Act, entitled, An Act prohibiting the Innholders and
other Retailers of this Colony, from trusting the Inhabitants thereof, above
Twenty Shillings.
WHEREAS there was an Act of the General Assembly of this Colony made on the
Second Monday in June, A. D. 1732, entitled, An Act prohibiting the Innholders
and other Retailers of this Colony, from trusting the Inhabitants thereof above
Twenty Shillings; the same being designed to prevent extravagant Expenses in
Taverns: But the good Design and Int^nt of said Act has ever been defeated,
and the same often pleaded to defraud Innholders and Retailers of Debts justly
due to them; so that the same now seems to be rather a public Grievance than a
Remedy.

BE IT THEREFORE ENACTED by the General Assembly, and by the Authority thereof,
it is Enacted, (...) Act rep^^led.
That the said Act, and every Part thereof, be, and it is hereby Repealed, and
Declared Null and Void.

An ACT for enlarging a Trooper's Fine, from Ten Shillings for a Day's
Nonappearance, to TwentyShillings.
BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly of this Colony, and by the Authority
thereof, it is Enacted, That every enlisted Trooper belonging to any Troop of
Horse in this Colony, Trooper's^in^.
who shall be legally cited or notified to meet and Troop upon any Day or Days,
as by Law is required, and shall refuse or neglect to make his Appearance at
the Time and Place appointed, shall for every D^y's Defect in not appe^ring,
forfeit and pay a Fine of Twenty Shillings; to be taken and disposed of, as by
the former Laws of this Colony, are directed and ordered.

An ACT granting an Addition to the Fees of the Clerks of the several Courts,
and the several Town Clerks within this Colony, for Recording and Copying of
all Writings.
WHEREAS the Fees of the Clerks of the several Courts, and the Town Clerks
within this Colony, by Reason of the Depreciating of the Paper Currency, are
become so low, that they are not now a sufficient Reward for the Services done
by said Clerks.

BE IT THEREFORE ENACTED by the General Assembly, and by the Authority thereof,
it is Enacted, That from and after the Publication of this Act, Fees for
Cop^ing.
there be for the Future allowed to be taken by the Clerks of the several
Courts, and the several Town Clerks within thi^ Colony, an Addition of Twelve
Pence on each Page described a^ aforesaid, for Recording and Copying of all
Writings in their resp^^^ive Offices.

A LAW, Made and passed by the General Assembly of his Majesty's Colony of
Rhode Island, and Providence-Plantations, in New England; held at Newport, the
Nineteenth Day of June, in the Eighteenth Year of His Majesty's Reign, A. D.
1744.
An ACT laying a Duty on all Vessels trading in this Colony, for supplying Fort
George with Gunpowder.
BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly, and by the Authority thereof, it is
Enacted, That there be paid by the Master of every Ship or Vessel coming into
any Port in this Colony, (...) for (...) U^e of the (...)
and entering in the Custom-House, Six Pence per Ton at each Time of Entry for
every Ton such Ship or Vessel is in Burden by Register, to be paid to the
Naval Officer, and employed for the Use of said Fort George, excepting
Coaster^, for which Three Pence per Ton shall be paid in Manner a^ aforesaid.
And this Act to continue in Force during the present War, and no longer.

LAWS, Made and passed by the General Assembly of His Majesty's Colony of
Rhode Island, and Providence-Plantations, in New England, held by Adjournment,
at Newport, on the Twenty First Day of August, in the Eighteenth Year of His
Majesty's Reign, A. D. 1743.
An ACT for the Relief of Persons of Tender Consciences; and for Preventing
their being burdened with Military Duty.
WHEREAS there are a great Number of the sober Inhabitants of this Colony, who
by their Religious Principles hold the Art of War and Fighting with their
Fellow Creatures, contrary to the Principles of their Religion and a good
Conscience, whereby said Persons have been put to great Hardships and Charges
by the Law that regulates the Militia in said Co^ony* and have suffered in
their Estates, and been otherwise di^quieted.

For the Remedy whereof,

BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly of the Colony aforesaid, and by the
Authority thereof, it is Enacted, T^^der (...) from (...) A^ms.
That any Person inhabiting in said Colony, and of a sober Life and
Conversation, who can and shall Frankly and Freely, upon his solemn Affirmation
(according to the Form prescribed in this Act) declare before the Governor,
Deputy Governor, or any one Assistant, that his Opinion and Religious
Sentiments are, that in Matters relating to War, he ought to be Passive; and
that the Practice of War, or the Art thereof, and the Use of Arms, and the
Exercise thereof in War, are inconsistent with his Beli^f as a Christian, and
that he declineth the Custom^ry Use of Arms in War, and would be excused from
the Law relating to Military Discipline for Conscience Sake and out of
P^inciple, and for no other End or Purpose whatever: In this C^se such Person
s^^ll be exempted from bearing Arms as a Soldier, and from the Law of said
Colony relating Military Discipline or Equipment. Any former Law or Custom to
the Contrary notwithstanding.

AND all such Engagements so made, shall by the Officer that takes the same,
be made Matter of Record; and the same, or a Copy thereof, shall be received by
all Military Officers, as Matter of Evidence, for the Exempting all Persons
from Military Duty, that are cleared by this Act. The Form of the Affirmation.
I A. B. do solemnly, sincerely and truly Affirm and Declare, that the Art of
War and Fighting, and the Use and Exercise of Arms, ^orm of the Oa^^.
either O^^ensively or Defensively in Time of War, is utterly Inconsistent with
my Belief as a Christian: And that I do not decline and re^use the Use and
Exercise thereof out of Obstinac^ or Singularity, but for Conscience Sake
alone. And this Affirmation I make and give, without any Evasion or Mental
Reservation.



Provided Nevertheless, That this Act, or any Thing herein contained, shall not
exempt the Persons who take such Affirmation as aforesaid, from such Duties in
Time of an Alarm, as they are obliged to do, by an Act of the General Assembly,
made and passed in the Fourteenth Year of his present Majesty's Reign,
entitled, An Act for the more Effectual putting the Colony in a proper Posture
of Defense.

An ACT for the Augmentation of Fees to the Attorney General.
BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly, and by the Authority thereof, it is
Enacted, That the Attorney General in this Colony, Attorney Gener^l's F^^s.
be allowed Two Shillings for every Bond which shall be delivered him by the
Grand Commit^ee or General Treasurer, to be put in Suit; and for every Writ
that shall be put out and served, to be allowed T^o Shillings and Six Pence* to
be paid by the Person who gave the Bonds; in Addition to his former Fees. And
that he do not file the Declarations above two Days before the last Day of
filing Declarations.

LAWS, Made and passed by the General Assembly of his Majesty'^ Colony of
Rhode Island, and Providence-Plantations, in New England; held by Adjournment,
at Newport, the Eighteenth Day of September, in the Eighteenth Year of (...)
Maj^sty'^ Reign, A. D. 1744.
An ACT ascertaining what Estate is Rateable, and for proportioning the same in
Value.
BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly of this Colony, and by the Authority
thereof, it is Enacted, V^lu^ of R^t^able (...).
That the following Estates shall be deemed Rateable in all Public Colony
Rates and Taxes, therein made and levied, and shall be included and considered
in the Proportioning the same, and that inthe following Manner, and according
to the Specific Value they are hereafter fixed at, viz.

A l Neat Cattle of Four Years old and upwards, shall be valued at Ten Pounds
per Head.

All Neat Cattle from Two Years old to Four Years old, shall be val^ed at Five
Pounds per Head; and Neat Cattle that are under Two Years old, are not to be
considered.

All Horse Kind to be ra^ed in the like Manner, as to their Age and Value.

All Sheep and Goats of One Year old and upwards, shall be valued at Fifteen
Shillings per Head* and if younger, not to be valued.

All Swine of One Year old and upwards, shall be valued at Thirty Shillings per
Head; but not to be considered before.

All Slaves for Life, that are between Sixteen and Fifty Year^ of Age, shall be
set at the Price of Eighty Pounds; those under Sixteen, or above Fifty, not to
be rated.

All decked V^ssels that are in Port, shall be set at Five Pounds per Ton; and
those not decked, at Three Pounds per Ton.

All Trading Stock shall be set at Half the real Value thereof; to which is to
be added, what Estate every Man has, either in Mone^, Bonds, or other Estate
that lie^ concealed, to be considered as other person^l Estate, which the
Ratemaker^ shall have Power to require, and take an Account of as visible
Estate.

All Lands, Houses, Mills, Whar^^s, and other real Estates, shall be valued at
the Rate of Ten Years, and so considered in the Assessment.

All Mal^s from Sixteen Years old and Upwards, shall be stated at One Shilling
per Head, for every Thousand Pound Rate assessed by the Colony; and in
Proportion for a greater or lesser Sum: In which Assessment upon Poles, shall
be included all Servants for Years, of the Age aforesaid.

AND be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the A^^essor^ in all and
every Rate, levied as a^or^said, shall consider all Persons who make P^ofit by
their F^c^lties, and shall rate them accordingly.

An ACT for ascertaining the Quota of the several Towns in this Colony, to
discharge the public Rate.
WHEREAS the General Assembly of this Colony, at their Sessions, held at
Newport, within and for said Colony, by Virtue of a Warrant from His Honor the
Governor, on the Nineteenth Day of June last past; a mong other Things, passed
an Act for Levying or Assessing a Rate of Ten Thousand Pounds Old Tenor, upon
the Inhabitants of said Colony, for putting this Colony in a proper Posture of
Defense in the present War.

BE IT THEREFORE ENACTED by the General Assembly, and by the Authority thereof,
it is Enacted, That the same be assessed upon the several Towns in the Colony,
in the Proportions following, Viz. Upon the Town of Newport, Twelve Hundred and
Fifty Pounds; Of Providence, Eleven Hundred and Seventy Five Pounds; Of
Portsmouth, Five Hundred Pounds; Of Warwick, Seven Hundred Pounds; O^ Westerly,
Six Hundred Pounds; Of N^w-Shoram, One Hundred and Twenty Five Pounds; Of
North-Kingstown, Six Hundred Fifty Two Pounds and Ten Shillings; Of
South-Kingstown, Eight Hundred and Eleven Pounds and Five Shillings; Of
East-Greenwich, Four Hundred and Forty Pounds; Of Iamestown, One Hundred Sixty
and Two Pounds and Ten Shillings; Of Smithfield, Six Hundred Seventy and Five
Pounds; Of Situate, Five Hundred Pounds; Of Gloucester, Four Hundred Eighty
and Seven Pounds and Ten Shillings; Of Charlestown, Five Hundred Pounds; Of
West-Greenwich, Three Hundred and Fifty Pounds; Of Coventry, Two Hundred Thirty
and Three Pounds and Fifteen Shillings; Of Exeter, Four Hundred Thirty and Two
Pounds and Ten Shillings; And of Middletown, Four Hundred and Five Pounds: And
that the General Treasurer grant out his Warrants to the several Towns, for
levying the same.

A LAW, Made and passed by the General Assembly of his Majesty's Colony of
Rhode Island, and Providence-Plantations, in New England; held at Providence,
the Thirty First Day of October, in the Eighteenth Year of His Majesty's Reign,
A. D. 1744.
An ACT for the Taking-off the Bounty upon Hemp, Flax, Whale-Oil, Cod-Fish, and
Whale-Bone.
WHEREAS it is found by Experience, that the Bounty allowed by this Government,
for the raising of Hemp and Flax, and for the Catching and Making of Cod-Fish,
Whale-Oil, and Whale-Bone, has not answered the Ends and Purposes for which it
was intended; but on the Contrary, has been attended with many Frauds and
Forgeries, whereby large Sums of Mone^ have been drawn out of the General
Treasury, to the manifest Hurt of the Colony.

For Preventing whereof for the Future,

BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly, and by the Authority of the same,
Useless ^ou^ties repealed.
That from and after the first Day of April, A. D. 1745, no Bounty shall be
paid for any Hemp, Fl^x, Whale-Bone, Cod-Fish, or Whale-Oil; but that the same
shall entirely cease, and be stopped.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Clause of an
Act made in the Twelfth Year of his present Majesty's Reign, for the Continuing
of the said Bounty, be, and it hereby is repealed, and made Null and Void, from
and after the said first Day of April, A. D. 1745.

A LAW, Made and passed by the General Assembly of his Majesty's Colony of
Rhode Island, and Providence-Plantations, in New England; held at Providence,
the Fifth Day of February, in the Eighteenth Year of His Majesty's Reign, A. D.
1744.
An ACT for fitting out the Colony Sloop, in order to join the Forces of the
Province of the Massachusett's- Bay, on an Expedition against Cape-Breton.
WHEREAS there is an Expedition began by the Province of the Massachusets-Bay,
in order to reduce Cape-Breton; and the Assistance of this Colony has been
requested in said Expedition.

BE IT THEREFORE ENACTED by the General Assembly, and by the Authority thereof,
it is Enacted, Colony S^oop equipped.
That the Colony Sloop Tartar be immediately equipped with all necessary
Wa^like St^res by the Commissary, and manned with a Number of good able Sea
Men, not exceeding One Hundred and Thirty: And that all Sorts of Provisions be
put on board said Sloop by the s^id Commissa^y also, for Four Months, according
to the Allowance stated by the Law of this Colony, And after she be so equipped
and manned with a sufficient Number of Volunteers, that she immediately proceed
to join the Forces raised by the Province of the Massachusets-Bay, at the Place
of Rendezvous that shall be appointed by that Government; and that she continue
in the said Service, and be subject to the Commodore or Council of War of the
N^val Force of the said Expedition, until the first Day of June next, if there
be occasion of her Continuing there so long; at which Time she shall return
directly to this Colony, unless the Captain shall receive further Instructions
from this Government.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Officers and
the Men belonging to said Sloop, shall have and receive the same Wages that
were stated by an Act of the General Assembly, made and passed in June, A. D.
1744. And that they be entitled to all Prizes and Plunder that they shall take
in the s^id Expedition, in the P^oportions stated in and by said Act; and that
each Man be paid one Months Pay Advance, before their sailing from this Colony.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That for the Def^^ying
the Charges and Expenses of said Expedition, the Sum of Two Thousand and Five
Hundred Pounds in Bills of Credit of the N^w Tenor, Two thousand Five Hundred
Pounds N^w T^nor ^^itted.
be immediately struck off upon the large Plate that wa^ made for the l^st
B^^k; and that the same be signed by the Grand Committee, and delivered to the
General Treasurer for that Purpose. And that the same be called in and sunk by
a Tax upon the Inhabitants of this Colony; the one Half in the Year 1748, and
the other Half in the Year 1749. Which Taxes shall be assessed upon the
Inhabitants of this Colony, according to the Poles and Value of the Rateable
Estates in each Town of said Colony. And that a Captain and Lieutenant be
appointed for said Sloop Tartar, and commissionated. And that Instructions be
given to the said Captain, by His Honor the Governor, agreeable to this Act.

LAWS, Made and passed by the General Assembly of His Majesty's Colony of
Rhode Island, and Providence-Plantations, in New England, held by Adjournment,
at East-Greenwich, on the Fourth Day of March, in the Eighteenth Year of His
Majesty's Reign, A. D. 1744.
An ACT in Addition to and Amendment of an Act, made and passed by the General
Assembly, held at Providence, on the Fifth Day of February, A. D. 1744,
entitled, An Act for the Fitting-out the Colony Sloop, to join with the Forces
of the M^ss^chu^^tts-B^y, in an Expedition against Cape-Breton.
[BY this Act, it was ordered that One Hundred and Fifty Men should be enlisted
as Soldiers, exclusive of Commission Officers, in order to go in said Expedion;
and that each Soldier, upon hi^ Enlisting, should have Six Pounds in Bills of
the Old Tenor, given him as a Bounty, and also a Blanket. And it was further
Enacted, That the Sum of Two Thousand Five Hundred Pounds in Bills of the New
Tenor, ordered to be emitted by an Act of Assembly, for defraying the Charges
of equipping and manning the Colony Sloop to go in the aforesaid Expedition,
should be augmented to the Sum of Six Thousand Two Hundred and Fifty Pounds of
the New Tenor, and be appropriated for defraying the Charge and Expense of both
the Land and Sea Forces to be sent in said Expedition. But the Levies not being
raised timely enough, the General Assembly in May, A. D. 1745, o^dered that
only Two Thousand Five Hundred Pounds in Bills of the New Tenor, should be
signed and delivered to the General Treasurer for that Purpose; and that the
same be sunk agreeable to the former Act for Impressing the Sum of Two Thousand
Five Hundred Pounds.]

An ACT for the further Regulation of the Sitting of the General Assembly of
this Colony.
WHEREAS the General Assembly of this Colony, before the Expiration of the
Session which by Law is held in the County of Providence, has been frequently
adjourned to diverse Parts and Places of said County, altogether Inconvenient
for holding the same, so that the Members of said Assembly, as well as those
who attend the same, are much incommoded thereby.

BE IT THEREFORE ENACTED by the General Assembly of this Colony, and by the
Authority of the same, The Assembly to s^t (...) in Newport, Pro^id^nc^, and
So^^^-K^^gst^^n.
it is hereby Enacted, That whenever the General Assembly of this Colony by
Law ought to sit, or be convened in the several Counties of Newport,
Providence, or King's- County, that then the said Court of Ass^mbly shall sit
and be h^ld in the Colony House at Newport, in the County House at Providence,
and in the County House at South-Kingstown, and not elsewhere; nor shall the
same be adjou^n'd to any other Parts or Places in said Counties, during the
whole Time which by Law they ought to sit in each of said Counties; nor shall
the said Court of Assembly be convened or called together in any other Part or
Place in said Counties, except by the Governor's Warrant, given on some special
Occasion* Any Law, Custom, or Usage, to the Contrary heretofore,
notwithstanding.

An ACT for the more Regular appointing of Deputy Sheriffs within this Colony.
WHEREAS several Inconveniences have arisen in this Colony, by Reason of
Persons acting in the Capacity of Deputy Sheriff, without being duly qualified.

For the Preventing whereof for the Future,

BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly, and b^ the Authority of the same, That
from and after the first Wednesday in May next, the Sheriffs of the several
Counties in this Colony, Deputy S^e^i^^s to be (...).
when they or either of them shall appoint any Person to be their Deputy, they
shall do the same by a Deputation in Writing, under their Hands and Seals. And
the Person or Persons who shall be so deputed, before he officiate in said
Office, shall go before some one of the Judges of any Court of Record in this
Colony, and shall take an Oa^h or Engagement, to the due and faithful
Performance of his said Office, which Oath or Engagement shall be cer^ified by
the said Judge, upon the said Writing of Deputation.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That such Deputy
Sheriff, after having been sworn or engaged as aforesaid, Deputation to be
recorded.
(...) before he acts in said Office, carry his said Deputation to (...) of the
Inferior Court of Common Pleas within the County wherein he is to o^^iciate,
and shall cause the same to be registered by the said Clerk, in a Book for that
Pu^pose; which Clerk shall receive as a Fee for the same, Five Shillings, and
no more. And in Cas^ the Sheriff who gave such Deputation, shall think fit at
any Time to revoke the same, he shall go to the Clerk's Office, and declare to
the said Clerk, that said Deputation is revoked; and the Cl^rk shall enter the
said R^vocation under the said Record.

Provided Nevertheless, That nothing in this Act shall extend or be understood
to prevent any She^iff within this Colony from making or appointing any special
Deputy, On Speci^l O^casio^s.
provided the same be done upon the Back of the W^^t, or other Precept which
such ^e^^on shall be appointed to execute, and also that such Person be duly
sworn, duly and faithfully to execute such Writ or other Precept. Any Law,
Custom, or Usage to the Contrary hereof, (...).

An ACT for regulating the Service of Writs in Case where the Sheriff and Town
Sergeant of such Town where the Sheriff lives, are concerned.
WHEREAS it sometimes happens, that Disputes at Law arise between the Sheriffs
of the several Counties in this Colony, and the Town Sergeant of the same Town
where the Sheriff lives; and there being no Provision by Law made, by whom
such Writs shall be served, said Sheriffs and Sergeants have no lawful Remedy
against each other.

BE IT THEREFORE ENACTED by the General Assembly and by the Authority thereof,
it is Enacted, That when any Suit of Law shall arise between the Sheriff of any
County in this Colony, Constable (...) s^rve a Writ be^^een a Sh^riff and Town
Sergeant.
and the Town Sergeant of the Town where such Sheriff lives, that the Writ on
which such Action is founded, and all other Writs or Processes that may be
necessary in any Suit or Suits commenced as aforesaid, shall be served by a
Constable of the Town where such Sheriff or Sergeant live (he being duly sworn
thereto) and such Service shall b^ good and valid in Law. Any Law, Custom, or
Usage, to the Contrary heretofore, notwithstanding.

LAWS, Made and passed by the General Assembly of his Majesty's Colony of
Rhode Island, and Providence-Plantations, in New England; held by Adjournment
at Newport, the Twen^y Seventh Da^ of May, in the Eighteenth Year of His
Majesty's Reign, A. D. 1745.
An ACT for the Protection of the Members of the General Assembly, and of
Persons chosen to serve on the J^ry, from being arrested or sued during Service.
FORASMUCH as the Public Service of His Majesty and this Government, ought to
be preferred to private Interest: And that no Person may be discouraged from
Serving the Public, as Members of the General Assembly of this Colony, or as
Jurors upon Trials and Inquests.

BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly of this Colony, and by the Authority of
the same, it is Enacted, Protection ^f the Membe^^ (...) the General Assembly.
That all and every Person and Person^, and the Estates of such Persons as
shall be chosen to serve as Members of the General Assembly, shall be free and
exempt from all Writts of Summons, Arrest, Attachment and Executions
whatsoever, at the Suit of any private Person, to answer any Debts or Damages,
due or pretended to be due to such private Persons, during the Sessions of such
Assembly, wherein they are chosen to serve, and also three Days before the
Beginning and three Days after the Rising of such Assembly.

AND be it further Enacted, That all Persons that shall be lawfully chosen to
serve on any Grand Jury or Petit Jury, Jurors prot^^ted.
in any Court within this Colony, they and their Estates shall be likewise free
and exempt from all Writs of Summons, Arrest, Attachment, and Executions,
during the Sitting of such Court wherein they are chosen to serve, and also
three Days before the Sitting of such Court, and three Days after such Jurors
are legally dismissed and discharged from said Service, for their coming to
said Court and returning home to their respective Habitations.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all and every
Summons, Writ, Execution, or other Process which shall be served upon any of
the Persons aforesaid, contrary to this Act, shall be Null and Void, and of
none Effect in the Law.

AND be it further Enacted, That all Laws heretofore made in this Colony,
relating to the Protection of the Persons aforesaid, be, and they are hereby
Repealed, and made Null and Void.

An ACT enabling Creditors to ^ecover their just Debts of such Persons who have
removed ^ut of this Colony, and of others not Inhabitants thereof, or who
conceal themselves therein.
WHEREAS it often happens that Persons indebted, remove or dwell out of this
Colony, or conceal themselves therein, so that neither their Bodies can be
arrested nor ^^^ir Estates attached in the ordinary Method of the Law.

For Remedy whereof,

BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly, and by the Authority thereof That when
any Person has removed or dwells out of this Colony, or conceals himself
therein, the personal Estate of such Person lodged or lying in the Hands of his
or her Attorney, P^rso^^l Estate of Pe^^on^ abse^^ or (...)* how to ^e attached.
Agent, Factor, Trustee, or Debtors, shall be liable to be attached to answer
any just Debt; and the Serving any Person or Persons who have such personal
Estate in their Hands, with a Copy of a Writ taken out against such absent
Debtor, shall be a good Service of said Writ; and the Person so served with
such Copy, shall be obliged to render an Account upon Oath, of what Estate he
or she had of such Debtors in their Hands, at the Time such Writ was served, if
any they have, or otherwise to make Oath that they had not directly or
indirectly any such Estate in their Hands; which Oath shall be made before the
Court to which such Writ shall be bro^ght; o^ before one or more of the Judges
of said Court, and be filed in the Clerk's Office before the Sitting of the
Court.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if it shall appear
by the Account or Oath of such Person or Persons who have been served with the
Copy of any Writ against any absent Debtor as aforesaid, Judgment o^tained
(...) abse^^ or conc^aled D^bt^^s how to be satis^^ed.
that he or they had at the Time of the Service of the sa^^ Writ, any of the
personal Estate of the Debtor in his or their Hands, that then in such Case,
the Plaintiff, after having recovered Judgment against the absent Debtor, may
have his Action against the Person or Persons in whose Hands such personal
Estate appears to lie or be lodged, to recover so so much as will satisfy the
said Judgment and Costs, if there shall appear to be a Sufficiency for the
same, otherwise, for what shall appear to be in such Persons Hands. And in case
it shall appear that several Persons who have been served with Copies of Writs
as aforesaid, shall have of the personal Estate of the Defendant in their
Hands, that then the Person, after Judgment obtained, may have his Action
against either or all such Persons, as far as will satisfy said Judgment and
Costs, and no farther.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Person or
Persons, Persons (...) a C^p^ o^ the Wri^, to pay the (...).
after having been served with a Copy of such Writ against any absent Debtor as
aforesaid, shall refuse or neglect to render an Account and make Oath as
aforesaid, of what personal Estate he or they have of the De^endan^s in his or
their Hands, such Person or Person so neglecting or refusing, shall be liable
to satisfy the Judgment (that shall be obtained against any such absent Debtor)
out of his or their own proper Estate; to be recovered by a Special Action of
the Case.

Provided Always, That if it shall happen that several Persons shall neglect or
refuse to render Account upon Oath as aforesaid, Several Persons so neglecting,
to be (...)
in the same Case, that then the Action that shall be brought upon such
Judgment, shall be brought jointly against all such Persons, and in no other
Manner.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That any Attorney,
Agent, Factor, Trustee, or Debtor, Persons s^rv^d with a C^p^, etc may defend
the Suit.
who shall be served with a Copy of a Writ against any absent Deb^or as
aforesaid, shall have Liberty to file an Answer to such Action, and defend the
Suit in Behalf of the absent Debtor; and the Court (if need be) may continue
the Action for one Term: The Action'^ be co^tin^^d.
And if it shall appear by the Oath of the Person or Persons who have been
served with the Copy of any Writ as aforesaid, that he or they have not any of
the personal Estate of the Defend^nts in their Hands, that then such Writ shall
be Null and Void, and no Judgment shall be made up thereon; but the Person who
shall appear to defend said Suit, shall recover his Costs.

Provided Always, That this Act, or any Thing therein contained, shall not
extend or be deemed to extend, to attach any Sum or Sums of Money, An Exception.
in the Hands of any Person who has given his Negociable Promissary Note for
the same.

And whereas there was an Act made and passed by a General Assembly, held at
Providence the last Wednesday of October, A. D. 1736, entitled, An Act for
making the Real Estate of Persons that have left this Colony or conceal
themselves therein, or do not live in this Government, liable to the Payment of
Debts. The last Clause or Paragraph whereof, relates wholly to the Attachment
of Personal Estates: Note: that this Claus^ is not printed.
Be it therefore Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the last Clause or
Paragraph of the said Act, be, and it is hereby Repealed, and made Null and
Void.

An ACT for the Allowing of taking Depositions, and for regulating the Swearing
to Accounts out of Court.
BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly, and by the Authority of the same, That
it shall and may be lawful for any Assistant, Depos^tions to ^e taken out of
Court.
Justice of the Peace, or Warden in this Colony, at the Request of either the
Plaintiff or Defendant, in any Suit commenced or depending in any Court in this
Colony, to grant out a Summons for any Person or Persons to appear before him,
to give in his or their Evidence upon Oath or solemn Affirmation, of what he or
they know in the Case then depending; and the Assistant, Justice or Warden,
before he shall take such Deposition, shall give out a Notification to the
adverse Party, to be present at a certain Time and Place, to hear such Witness
or Witnesses examined, provided he dwell within twenty Miles of the Place where
such Deposition is to be taken; and the Officer that is charged with such
Notification, is hereby fully empowered to serve the same in such Town where
the adverse Party dwells, The adverse Party to be noti^ed.
or is at the Time of serving the same, within this Colony; which Notification
shall be read to the Party, if he is to be found; and if not to be found, then
a Copy thereof shall be left at his usual Place of Abode, a reasonable Time
before the Examination of such Witness or Witnesses; and the Assistant,
Justice, or Warden, who shall take such Deposition, shall carefully examine
such Witness or Witnesses, and shall take or cause to be taken down in Writing,
the whole of what he or they shall declare, and shall cause the said Witness or
Witnesses to sign the same, and make Oath or solemn Affirmation to the Truth
thereof; which shall be attested by the said Assistant, Justice, or Warden, and
delivered to the Party at whose Request the same was taken, and a Copy thereof
shall be delivered to the ^dvers^ Party, if by him r^q^^sted, he paying for the
same. And in case the said Deposition shall be written or drawn up by either of
the Parties or their Attorneys, the same shall be utterly Void

AND be it further Enacted, That all Depositions taken in Manner as aforesaid,
Val^d^^y of such (...).
shall be received as Evidence in any Court in this Colony, and shall have the
same Force and Effect in the Law as though they had been taken in open Court.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That in all Actions of
the Case, for Goods sold or work done, A (...) to be sworn (...) out of (...),
unless the ad^verse Party be (...).
or any any other Book Account whatsoever, the Parties in the said Suits,
neither Plaintiff or Defendant, shall be allowed to swear or give their
Engagements to prove their respective Accounts out of the Court wherein such
Suit is depending, except the Assistant, Justice, or Warden, who shall
administer such Oath or Engagement, shall previously thereun^o, cause the
adverse Party to be notified to be present at the taking such Oath or
Engagement (if dwelling within twenty Miles of the Place) in the same Manner as
the adverse Party is to be notified by this Act, in taking Depositions out of
Court; and such Account shall by said Assistant, Justice, or Warden, be
compared by the Book of the Person swearing as aforesaid, and the same shall be
certified by said Assistant, Justice, or Warden accordingly; and no Oath or
Engagement taken to prove any Account out of Court contrary hereunto, shall be
received as Evidence in any Court in this Colony, in any Cas^ whatsoever, but
the same shall be utterly Void: Any Law, Custom, or Usage, to the Contrary
hereof, in anywise, notwithstanding.

AND be it further En^cted by the Authority aforesaid, That an Act made and
passed by a General Assembly, held at Newport by Adjournment the Ninth Day of
September, A. D. 1718, entitled, An Act for taking Depositions out of Court;
b^, and it is hereby Rep^^led and Declared to be Null and Void.

An Act in Addition to An Act, made and passed at East-Greenwich, on the fourth
Day of March, A. D. 1744, entitled, An Act for the m^re Regular appointing of
Deputy Sheriffs in t^is Colony.
WHEREAS (...) Provision is made in and by said Act, who shall be accountable
and Responsible in Case of any Mis-Doing or Def^ciency of such Deputy Sheriffs
as shall be appointed by the Sheriffs in this Colony.

For Remedy (...),

BE IT ^^ACTED by the (...) A^^^mbly, and by the (...) of (...) same That each
and ev^^y Sheriff of the (...) Colony, wh^nsoever they or either of them shall
appoint any Person or P^rso^s to be their Deputy or D^puties, they and each of
them shall be Accountable and Responsible for any Neglect, Mis-doing,
Imbe^^^ment, ^r Deficiency of their respective Deputies, in all Matt^r^ and
Things which shall be committed to their Charge and Trust to execute, in every
Branch of their Duty.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all Acts and
Clauses of Acts heretofore made, ordering and directing who shall be
responsib^e for the Conduct of Deputy Sheriffs, be, and they are hereby
Repealed, and made Null and Void.

An ACT for Impounding of Cattle, Sheep, Horses, and Hogs, and for recovering
Damages that shall be done by them.
BE IT ENACTED by the General Assembly, and by the Authority of the same, That
if any N^at-Cattle, Horses, Sheep, or Hogs, D^mage^ done by Cr^^tu^^s (...) how
(...).
shall break through a lawful Fence, into the Grounds of any Person, the Person
aggrieved shall have the Liberty either to recover his Damages by an Action
against the Owner or Owners thereof, or to impound the said Cattle, Horses,
Sheep or Hogs in the Public Town Pound, until the Damage and Charge of
Impounding be paid by the Owner or Owners. And the Party aggrieved, in order to
entitle him to recover his D^mages, either by Action or Impounding, shall
within Four Days after such Creatures break into his Ground, get two
Freeholders of the Town wherein the Trespass is committed, to appraise the
Damage, and give the same under their Hands, and lodge the same with the
Pound-Keeper.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That in Case the Owner
or Owners of such Cattle, Cr^at^^^s impounded, to be sold, unle^s Repleived o^
the Damages paid.
etc. impounded as aforesaid, shall not within Ten Days afte^ the Impounding
thereof, pay and satisfy the Damages appraised as aforesaid, and the Charge of
Impounding and Feeding such Creatures, or otherwise shall Replevi^ the same in
manner as is hereafter in this Act directed, that then so many of said
Creatures shall be sold by Public Outcry by the Pound-Keeper, as will pay and
satisfy the Damages and Charges as aforesaid; and the Pound-Keeper shall be
allowed the same Fees for said Sale, as are stated for the Vendue-Masters in
this Colony; and the Overplus, if any there be, shall be paid to the Owner or
Owners of such Creatures.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Pound-Keeper
shall feed such Cattle, D^ty and Fee of the Pound-Keep^r.
etc. so impounded, at the Charge of the Owner or Owners thereof, and shall
also be allowed as his Fee for I^pound^ng, for each Nea^ Be^st and Horse F^^r
Pence, and for each H^g or Sheep, One Penny; which shall be paid him before
said Creatures are released from Pound.

Provided (...), And it is further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That in
Case the Owner or Owner of such Cattle, M^thod of R^^plevi^.
etc. shall see Cause, they may Replevie the same, giving sufficient Bond to
the Justice or Warden who shall grant such Writ of Replevin, in double ^he
Damages appraised, to prosecute the same with Effect; if the Damages exceed not
the Sum of Five Pounds, before two or more Justices or W^rdens of the Town
where such Creatures were impounded; and if the Damages be above Five Pounds,
then to be prosecuted at the next succeeding Inferior Court of Common Pleas, to
be held for the County where the Damage was sustained: And the Justices or
Wardens who shall grant such Writ of Replevin, shall return the same, with the
Bond by them taken (if Tryable at the Inferior Court of Common Pleas) into the
Clerk's Office of said Court, five Days before the Sitting of such Court; and
the Party distraining, shall before Trial, put in his Avowry or Justification
of Impounding: And in Case the Replevin be Tryable before the Justices or
W^rdens of the Town as aforesaid, that then the same shall be prosecuted and
determined by them within five Days after such Writ of Replevin shall be
served, and not afterward.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority ^fores^id, That no Hog or Hogs in
any Town in this Colony, Hogs not to run at La^ge.
from the first Day of February to the fifteenth Day of October annually, shall
g^ ^t large without being yoked and ring'd (unless by Act of any Town for such
Town, it be ordered otherwise) And it shall and may be lawful for any Person to
impound any Hog or Hogs running loose, contrary to this Act* and the Owner of
such Hog or Hogs shall pay the Poundage thereof, before they be discharged from
Pound. Form of the Writ of Replevin.
To the Town Sergeant of the Town of or to any of the Constables of said Town,
Greeting. F^rm of the Writ of Replevin.

YOU are hereby in His Majesty's Name, required to replievie (...) belonging to
(...) of (...) in the County of (...) now distrained or impounded by (...) of
(...) in the County abovesaid, and deliver the said (...) unto the said (...)
he having given Bond to me, in the Sum of (...) Pounds, to prosecute his
Replevin at the next Inferior Court of Common Pleas, to be held for said
County, on the (...) Tuesday in (...) next, and to pay such Costs and Damages
as the said (...) shall then and there recover against him. Hereof fail not,
and make true Return to me of this Writ, with your Doings thereon. Given under
my Hand and Seal, in (...) aforesaid, the (...) Year of His Majesty's Reign,
Annoque Dom. (...)



The same Form of Writs of Replevin to be observ^^, when Cognizable before the
Justices (...).

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all Laws heretofore
made and passed for the I^pounding of Ca^tle, Horses, Sheep, and Hog^, be,
(...) they hereby are Repealed, and made Null and Void.

An ACT for raising of Three Companies of Soldiers to join the Forces of the
neighboring Governments sent against the Island of Cape-Breton.
[BY this Act it was Enacted, That for a present Supply of the Treasury, for
the Defr^ying the Charge and Expense of enlisting and paying the Officers and
Soldiers, and all other Expenses relating thereto, the Sum of Three Thousand
Seven Hundred and Fifty Pounds in Bills of the New Tenor be emitted, and be
appropriated for the Uses aforesaid, and that it shall be called in and sunk by
a Tax upon the Polls and Rateable Estates of the Inhabitants of this Colony, in
the following Manner, viz. One Third Part thereof in the Year 1750; One Third
Part in the Year 1751; and the remaining Third Part in the Year 1752; which
Taxes shall be proportioned on the several Towns in this Colony, according to
the Number of Polls, and the Value of Rat^able Estates in each respective Town.]


