The Danger of Spiritual PRIDE represented. A SERMON PREACHED AT PHILADELPHIA,
December the 30th, 1744. On ROMANS XII. 3. WITH SOME ENLARGEMENTS.

By GILBERT TENNENT, A. M. Minister of the Gospel at Philadelphia.

Prove. xi. 2. When Pride comes, then comes Shame: But with the lowly is
wisdom.

Prove. xiii. 10. Only by Pride comes Contentention, but with the well advised
is wisdom.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed by WILLIAM BRADFORD, at the Sign of the Bible in
Second-Street.

ROMANS XII. 3. For I say, through the Grace given unto me, to every Man that
is among you, not to think of himself more highly than he ought to think; but
to think soberly according as God has dealt to every Man the Measure of Faith.


THE Apostle having in the first Verse of this Chapter, affectionately Exhorted
the believing Romans, to Holiness in general; does more partiticularly in the
following Verses, dissuade them from two Evils which are great Hindrances
thereof, viz. Conformity to the sinful Customs of the World, and high Thoughts
of their own Seize. It is the last of these which the Apostle speaks
against in the Words of our Text, For I say through the Grace given unto me: i.
e. I require and enjoin you, by the Authority that God has graciously given me
as an Apostle, 1 Cor. iii. 10.
to every Man that is among you: i. e. To one as well as another: As if the
Apostle had said; I address you all, my Brethren, as if I particularly
mentioned your Names; I except none of any Condition or Character, for you all
need the Injunction, not to think of himself more highly than he ought to
think: i. e. Not to be proud or puffed up with overweening extravagant Conceits
of his Endowments and Seize, such as wisdom, ability, etc. but to think
soberly, i. e. modestly; let him contain himself within Bounds, and not take
upon him what does not belong to him; let him not contemn others, and pretend
to more than he has. See Pool's Annotations
As God has dealt to every Man the Measure of Faith. By Faith the Apostle
doubtless intends, spiritual Gifts, which are called Faith, because they are
given with it, and exercised by it. These Gifts are given forth in various
Degrees or Measures to the Children of Men, a modest Notice of which, we may,
and ought to take, that so we may be induced to give to God the Glory of them,
and encouraged to improve them for his Honor and Kingdom. But then we should
be careful that we do not indulge an unreasonable Conceit of the Extent of our
Powers, or Measure of our Talents, imagining them to be much greater than they
are; for though that may flatter our Arrogance, yet it betrays our Ignorance and
Weakness; it is as injurious to our Honor among the Intelligent, as it is
prejudicial to our Usefulness in the World. It is surely a great Instance of
true Wisdom, to think soberly of our selves; and hence the original Word
Sophronein.
in our Text, signifies to be wise to sobriety. Mr. Poole justly observes, That
there is an elegant Paranomasia, (or symphony of Sounds) in this Place of
Scripture in the Greek, which our Language cannot reach. Me uperphronein, par O
Dei phronein alla phronein, eis to Sophronein.


From what has been said I would observe, That even good Men are in great
Danger of spiritual Pride, and of being puffed up for a Time with groundless
and foolish Conceits of their Seize. If this was not the Case, there
would have been no Need of the Injunction in our Text; nether would their have
been any Necessity of a Messenger of Satan sent to buffet Paul, least he should
be lifted up through the Abundance of Revelations that were given him.

In Discoursing upon this Subject, I shall speak upon the Nature, Ingredients,
Causes, Fruits and Cure of spiritual Pride.

Now Pride, as to its general Nature, may be thus described, viz. That it is a
groundless Conceit of our Seize, accompanied with an inordinate Desire of
our own Honor and Contempt of our Neighbor's Excellencies and Credit. To
understand which, let the following Ingredients (or particulars included in it)
be considered, viz.

First: High-Mindedness, which is the Loftiness or Swelling of the Mind with
unreasonable Self-Conceit. When Persons have too high Thoughts of their Powers
and Talents, and are hereby disposed to overvalue themselves and undervalue
others; this is as natural to Mankind as it is unreasonable in it self, and
fatal in its Consequnces. Against this pernicious Evil, the Text I am
discoursing upon is expressly Directed. This is indeed the bitter Root, the
poisonous Fountain from which the other sinful Ingredients grasped in spiritual
Pride (which I shall anon mention) do flow. Against this the Apostle Paul
excellently cautions the Gentile Churches, in his Epistle to the Romans, Romans
xi. 20.
in the following Words: Well, because of Unbelief they were broken off;
(meaning the Jews) and thou stand by Faith. Be not high minded but fear. Now
although gracious Persons may for a Time be carried away with High-Mindedness,
through the Violence of Temptation; yet to be under the Habitual or general
Government of it, is certainly an Evidence of a bad State toward God. This the
Apostle Paul assures us of in his Epistle to Timothy 2 Timothy iii. 3, 4.
in these Words: Without natural Affection, truce Breakers, false Accusers,
incontinent, fierce, despisers of those that are good, Traitors, Heady, high
Minded, Lovers of Pleasures more than Lovers of God. Upon these Words, viz.
heady, high-minded, Mr. Poole thus glosseth: Vide Pool's Annotations in loc.
Rash, inconsiderate, blown up as Bladders with an Opinion of their own
Deserts. You may observe in the Verses now quoted, that the Apostle puts
high-minded Persons in the same Catalogue with the grossest Transgressors, and
declares that they love not God transcendently. Surely those that are renewed
by the Holy Ghost, do learn of Jesus to be meek and lowly in their habitual
Temper of Mind and outward Behavior. Matt. xi. 29.
They are made to receive the Kingdom of Heaven as little Children, Luke xviii.
17.
are Fools in their own Eyes; 1 Cor. iii. 18.
and in comparison of many others, they sometimes see themselves to be in
respect of Knowledge, but as brute Beasts. Prove. xxx. 2.


The Apostle in his Epistle to the Colossians, Coloss. ii. 18.
justly Terms high-mindedness, to be the puffing up of a Person, vainly by his
fleshly Mind; probably alluding to Liquors swelling by the Yest into Spume and
Froth, which has a Show but no Solidity. For indeed, Pride is to the Mind of
Man, in respect of Agitation and Tumor, as Yest is to Liquors.

Secondly: Another Ingredient in spiritual Pride is Ambition, which is an
inordinate Seeking of Dignity, or high Places; proud Persons have aspiring
Thoughts, and imagine themselves to be the fittest to manage the Helm of the
State, or the Church; and if others don't think so, they are not well pleased;
they cannot bear to have others preferred before them, although the Preference be
just and reasonable. Something of this sinful Temper appeared in the Apostles
Conduct, before the extraordinary Effusion of the Holy Spirit at Pentecost;
there was also a Strife among them which of them should be accounted the
Greatest. This our Lord seasonably opposed, Luke xxii. 24, 25, 26.
and for what we can learn, it soon evanish'd. But when a Love of Pre-eminence
among the Brethren is habitual as well as inordinate, and attended with a
malicious pratting against the faithful Servants of Christ, on the Account of
small Differences in Sentiment or Practice, which seems to have been the Case
of Diotrephes, as the Apostle John informs us, 3 Epist. 9, 10.
it is an awful Sign of a bad State! But to proceed,

Thirdly: Another Ingredient in spiritual Pride is Arrogance; which consists in
pretending to what we have not, and in desiring that others should think of us
above what we are or have; this was the Practice of the false Teachers who
troubled the Church of Corinth; they commended themselves by boasting of Things
beyond their Measure, hereby seeking to lessen their Esteem of the Apostle Paul
and other sound Preachers. 2 Cor. x. 10, -- 12, 13.
The very contrary whereof he determined should be the Measure of his Conduct:
2 Cor. x. 12, 13.
For we dare not, (says he) make our selves of the Number, or compare our
selves with some that commend themselves. -- But we will not boast of Things
without our Measure, but according to the Measure of the Rule which God has
distributed to us. This leads me

Fourthly: To another particular included in spiritual Pride, which is boasting
of the Gifts or Graces which we really have: Proud Persons and Boasters are put
together in the same Class by the Apostle Paul in his Epistle to the Romans,
Romans i. 30.
thus, Backbiters, haters, of God, despiteful, Proud, Boasters. Proud Persons
are full of Blaze and Ostentation about their Seize; they take up much of
their Time in trumpeting their own Praises, either more openly or covertly, and
would have all to admire them without Cause, as they do themselves. But this
low Artifice, procures not for them the Esteem and Respect they desire and
Design from the Judicious, but the Contrary.

Fifthly: Another Ingredient in spiritual Pride is, Contempt of, and Envy
against others Excellencies, because they stand in our Light and seem to
diminish our Luster. This the Apostle James confirms Jam. iv. 5, 6.
in the following Words: Do ye think that the Scripture says in vain, the
Spirit that dwells in us lusts to Envy. -- Wherefore he says, God
resists the Proud, but gives Grace to the Humble. As much as we overvalue
our own Seize, so much will we be inclined to undervalue others, that so
we may Triumph in an imaginary Assendant over them. But this Disposition of
Mind is very Displeasing to God and detrimental to us; and hence Solomon
assures us, that the Almighty scorneth the Scorners, but gives Grace unto the
lowly. Prove. iii. 34.


Sixthly: Another Ingredient is Presumption, which appears in our attempting
what exceeds our Strength, and meddling with Things two high for us. Proud
Persons are full of vain Confidence, not knowing their Ignorance and Weakness,
they rush into Snares and grasp at a Weight which their Shoulders are not equal
to. Directly contrary to this was the Psalmist's Practice, and hence he was
able to appeal to God in the following Language: Lord my Heart is not haughty
nor mine Eyes lofty, neither do I exercise my self in great Matters, or in
Things too high for me. Psalm cxxxi. 1.
In these Words it is plainly intimated, that haughty or proud Persons have
lofty Looks, and are disposed to meddle with Things above their Capacity, which
turns to their Disgrace in the Issue.

Now the Causes of Pride are these, viz.

First, Our Violation of the Covenant of Works, by this we have lost the Image
of God, and contracted that of the Devil, of which Pride is a dreadful
Lineament, Romans vii. 18. Romans iii. 12.19.
and although the Governing Power of this evil be broken by Conversion, yet there
are such Remains of it, as will be a Grief and Exercise to us while we live.
Romans vii. 24.
This Original Apostasy is therefore the primary Cause of Pride. But,

Secondly, A more immediate Cause is the neglect of our own Hearts. If these
were constantly watched, and frequently examined, as they should be, we would
see continual Reason for Humiliation, and have an Opportuniry of giving check
to the first budings of Pride within us; But when our Hearts are neglected, our
Wickedness is hid from us, the first Motions of Sin are not opposed, and thus
we are puffed up in our vain Imaginations, and look on our selves in a false
Light.

Thirdly, Another Cause of Pride, is the Temptations of the Devil. He tries to
blow the Coal of Corruptions in us to a Flame; he sooths our Vanity, and
flatters our Arrogance until we fall from the imaginary Pinnacle into the Mire.
Thus he treated David and Hezekiah; the former he stirred up to Number the
People, 1 Chronicles. xxi. 17.
and the Latter to show his Treasures to the Assyrian Ambassador, which brought
Wrath upon the Nation. Isa. xxxix. 4 -- 7


Fourthly, The groundless Esteem and Applause of ignorant People, and the
Hypocritical Panegyricks of designing Parasites, are apt to stir up Pride, though
they be equally unworthy of our Notice; for the former know not our Weakness,
and the latter are not so Honest as to acquaint us of it.

It is true, Applause is apt, at first especially, to affect and please us; for
as Solomon observes, as the fining Pot is for Silver, and the Furnace for Gold,
so is a Man to his Praise. Proverbs xxvii. 21.
However it is a Sign of a weak Mind to be frequently overcome by such a
Temptation! Certainly the less Knowledge we have of God, our selves, or the
Things of God, and the smaller Measure of Divine Grace we possess, the more apt
we are to be puffed up. Superficial Notions of Things give Occasion for Pride,
but a thorough Knowledge of them has a humbling Tendency.

But I proceed to speak of the Fruits of Pride, and that both in Relation to
God, our selves, and others.

Now in Relation to God, Pride has the following awful Fruits! It disposes to
contemn his Authority, to slight his Love, to murmur at his Providence, and
refuse a Submission to his Righteousness,

Pride disposes to disdain the Divine Authority and Government, like the wicked
Israelites, of whom the Prophet Jeremiah speaks. Jer. ii. 31.
They said they were Lords and would come no more to the Almighty. Surely those
that would hear the Commands of God to Purpose, must oppose Pride, and hence
the Prophet entreated the People of Israel in the following Manner, Jer. xiii.
15.
Hear ye, be not proud for the Lord has spoken.

And indeed Pride does equally dispose to Ingratitude, against the Divine Love
and Goodness. The Reason of which is this, such Persons have a high Opinion of
their own Excellency's, and hence are inclined to look upon the Gifts of God,
as less then their Merit.

Pride does likewise for the same Reason dispose Men to murmur at God's
providential Government, of the World in general, and of their Lot in
Particular. They think that Things are not so well managed as they should be,
and especially as to their Circumstances: The Language of which is, that had
they been of God's Council, they could have taught him Knowledge. O blasphemous
Arrogance!

I may add, that another Fruit of Pride in Relation to God, is the Sinners
Labor to establish a Way of Justification by his own Righteousness, and his
Refusal of Submission to the Righteousness of God. Romans x. 3.
The Pride of Man's Heart is such, that he dislikes to be stripped of all
Self-Dependance, and saved in a Way of pure Grace! But,

Secondly, The Fruits of Pride in Relation to our selves, are these; viz. It
tends to deceive us, as to our State of Soul, and Progress in Religion, as well
as to corrupt us in Principle and Practice.

Pride tends to deceive us as to the State of our Souls, by inclining us to
think that we are something when we are nothing. Gal. vi. 3.
Many are prompted by the Pride of their Hearts, to take Conviction for
Conversion; legal, for evangelical Sorrow, and Presumption for that Faith which
works by love, and changes the Life as well as the Heart. What avail such
Comforts as do not humble the Soul and reform the Practice?

But if it does not entirely deceive us as to the State of our Souls, yet it
tends to impose a cheat on us, as to our Progress in Religion, and to rob us of
the Comforts of it; for by this we are inclined to think that we are better in
Degree than we are, and for this God looks upon Sinners a-far off. Psalm
cxxxviii. 6.


Pride has likewise awful Tendency to corrupt us in principle; and no wonder,
because it gives access to the influence of that proud Spirit who is the Father
of Lies, and great Heresiarch; as well as creates an Aversion to Truth, which
is of a humble Tendency, and so its contrary. It was a just Observation of
Austin, "That Pride is the Mother of Heretics." Simon Magus, who was the
Hatcher of many Heresies, was a very proud Man; he gave out that he was some
great one. Acts. viii. (...)
Pride makes Persons rash and positive in their Opinions, and that even about
Things of a doubtful and circumstantial Nature, and will not give them leave to
weigh well what (...) objected against them. Mark those, says one, who are
turned any where from the Way of Truth, and see if they are not proud and
conceited Persons.

But this is not all, Pride also has a corrupt Influence upon the Practice; by
this Men are disposed to neglect the secret Duties of Relegion, because of the
Distance from God occasioned by it, and as to their public Performances; they
are more for Show than Substance, regarding the Praises of Men more than of
God. I may farther observe, That Pride inclines different Persons, yea
sometimes the same Persons at different Times to contrary Vices: e. g. To
Covetousness and Prodigality. What is Covetousness but the Purveyor of Pride,
that greedily seeks something to support its grandeur; and hence the Prophet
Habakkuk assures us, That the proud Man enlarges his Desire as Hell, and is as
Death and cannot be satisfied Hab. ii. 5.
And on the contrary, Men are prodigal from the same proud Principle, with
design to appear great and to be talked of. But I hasten

Thirdly, To show the bad Fruits of Pride in relation to others. And these are
indeed many: such as lying, rash-judging, backbiting, sinful Contention, hatred
of Reproof and Schism!

Proud Persons are generally great Liars; the inordinate Desire they have to be
admired and applauded, makes them tell lies in order to answer that End, they
knowingly and repeatedly stretch Things beyond the Truth in Conversation, that
they may affect those they speak to, and excite either their Surprise, Love,
Admiration or Hatred, to a great Degree!

Pride likewise causes rash judging of others States and Conduct for small
Matters. Too much of this unhappy Temper and Practice appeared for a Time among
both the Jewish and Gentile Converts, in the Apostolic Day, they judged and
censured one another severely for their different Opinions and Practice about
Days and Meats; Bigots on both sides of the Question were very positive and
Fire-hot, yea to such a Degree of uncharitableness, did indiscreet and
disproportioned Zeal, carry those Ignorant but well meaning Zealots; that they
not only condemned one another States, but were also disposed to despise and
reject one another out of Church Communion, on the Account of the aforesaid
circumstantial Differences. This temper and Practice the Apostle Paul condemns.
Romans xiv. 3, 4.
Let not him that eats, (says he,) despise him that eats not, and let not
him which eats not, judge him that eats, for God has received him. Who art
thou that judge another Man's Servant? To his own Master he stands or
falls. On the Contrary he recommends, Forbearance, Romans xiv. 5.
Love, 1 Cor. x. 32, 33. 1 Cor. viii. 13. Acts xvi. 3. Act xxi. 20, 21, 24.
Condescension, Romans xiii. 9, 10.
Peace, and a mutual receiving each other into Church Fellowship. Romans xiv. 1.
Rom xv. 7.
But to proceed,

Another Fruit of Pride is, Whisperings and Backbitings; these the Apostle puts
together in his Epistle to the Corinthians, 2 Cor. xii. 20.
in these Words: Envyings, Wraths, Strifes, Bacbitings, Whisperings, Swellings,
Tumults. Where there are Swellings of Pride, there will be Whisperings and
Backbitings: Proud Persons will not content themselves, with Romans xiv. 9.
rash Judging of others in their Hearts, which is a great Evil; but they will
reproach them with their Tongues also, that so they may raise their own Credit
upon the Ruin of another Character!

Again, Pride causes by the Evils before mentioned, and many others, sinful
Contenition, and makes Persons hate Reproof; as Solomon observes, he that is of
a proud Heart stireth up Strife: Prove. xxviii. 25
And he elsewhere informs us, that a Scorner loves not one that reproves him.
Prove xv. 12.
Herod imprisoned John for telling him of his Sin, though he before reverenced
him. Mark vi. 20, 27.


And indeed Pride makes Persons Separatists and Schismatics, these are they
says Jude, with separate themselves, sensual, having not the Spirit. Jude xix.
Undoubtedly Pride is the great Source of all those Divisions and Factions with
which the Church of Christ has been rent and torn into so many Parts, from its
early beginnings through the Successive Periods of Time to this Day! Pride does
not only prompt Men to rend themselves from Churches, but also by unsound
Doctrines and other sinful Methods, to cause Divisions in them. Of such the
Apostle speaks in his Epistle to the Romans in the following Manner: Romans xvi.
17, 18.
Now I beseech you Brethren, mark them that cause Divisions and Offenses,
contrary to the Doctrines which we have learned, and avoid them. For they that
are such, serve not our Lord Jesus Christ, but their own Belly; and by good
Words and fair Speeches, deceive the Hearts of the simple. But it is Time to
proceed to the last General Head of Discourse, which was to speak of the Cure
of Pride; to which End I would observe,

First: That it is necessary to inspect our own Hearts and Lives, and labor to
get a Sense of our Guilt as to this Sin; and doubtless all of us are in a
greater or lesser Degree guilty of it; but such as are generally under its
governing Power are in the Gaul of Bitterness and Bond of Iniquity, and
therefore should repent of this their Wickedness, and pray to God, if perhaps,
the Thoughts of their Hearts may be forgiven them Act viii. 21. -- 23.
And indeed, all that are in any Degree guilty of this malignant Evil, have
great Cause for Grief and Shame!

Secondly: We should consider seriously and frequently upon the Aggravations of
this Sin; which are these following, viz.

1st: It is an ancient Evil, the first Enemy that ever God had: By this the
Angels and our first Parents fell from their original Integrity and Happiness;
the Angels wanting to be independent like God, became Devils; and we by the
same Iniquity, have made our selves worse than Beasts.

2dly, It is an unreasonable Evil; we have nothing to be proud of, who are
sinful dependent Creatures, that derive all the Good we possess from God, and
carry our Breath in our Nostrils.

Neither the Endowments of Nature, Improvements of Art, or Aids of Birth and
Fortune, though they raise Men above the common Level, give them reason for Pride
or a Contempt of their Fellow Creatures; when it is considered, that these
Accomplishments were not their own originally, but the immerited Gifts of a
soverign Providence, which might have ordered us the Lot of Beggars or Idiots:
Now seeing the difference between us and others is entirely owing to the divine
Disposal, and we have received all our Gifts from God, wherefore should we
glory as though we had not received them? 1 Cor. iv. 7.


The Continuance of those Things is also so short and uncertain, that it may
justly give check to our aspiring Thoughts about them; it is the vainest Vanity
to be high-minded, and trust in uncertain Riches, which often make to
themselves Wings and fly away, as the Eagle toward Heaven! Prove. xxiii. 5.


But even though Wealth were permanent, yet its use is but narrow and limited, it
cannot satisfy the Desires of the Mind, or heal the Distresses of the
Conscience; all the Treasures of the Indies cannot purchase a Balm for a
wounded Spitit; and instead of curing the moral Disorders of the Soul, it is
frequently the occasion of increasing them; yea there are many Miseries
incident to human Life, wherein it can yield no Relief: e. g. if a Man is
afflicted with a Fit of the Gout or Stone, all the Banks of the Universe cannot
purchase a Moments ease; and if our Character is aspersed, whole Ingots of Gold
cannot stop the Mouth of Fame! What has been said of Wealth is justly
applicable to other Gifts: and therefore let not the wise Man glory in his
Wisdom, nor the mighty Man in his Might, nor the rich Man in his Riches; but
let him that glories, glory in this, that he understands and knows me,
says the Almighty by the Prophet. Jer. ix. 23, 24.


I may add, that it is very unreasonable for us to be proud, considering the
Meanness of our Original; surely we had our rise from Nothing at first, and
after we received a Being, it was, and is but a precarious One, and that
conveyed with a criminal Taint, for we are shapen in Iniquity and conceived in
Sin. Psalm li. 5.
Now it is enough to take down the Spirit of the brightest Intelligence, to
consider that nothing was his Original, for this is a State more dishonorable
than the Chaos it self; yet the Depravity with which we received our Nature,
adds such an Increase of Meanness and Dishonor to our Original, as no Words
are equal to!

Thirdly, Pride is a pregnant Evil, most of the Sins of the World are either
contained in it, or issue from it, as appears in some Measure from what has
been said, to which let me add a few Particulars.

Pride strikes at the Foundation of all those Offices that we owe to our
Neighbor; which take up the second Table of the Law: For if we slight our
Neighbor, how shall we perform any Duty we owe to him?

And when we slight our Neighbor, do we not consequently contemn God, who has
by his Authority enjoined us to honor him?

Moreover by Pride we bring contempt upon ourselves: For as those that honor
God, shall be honored by him; so those that contemn him, shall be lightly
esteemed. 1 Samuel ii. 30.


By Pride our Neighbor is wronged of that which is next to his Life, viz. His
Character. Solomon justly observes, that a good Name is as precious Ointment.
Pro. vi. 16.17.
Our Usefulness as well as Comfort do in some Measure depend upon our
Rep^^^^ion; both which are struck at by Pride.

Pride, in its Tendency, breaks the Bands (...) ^^^^iety, and saps the
Foundations of all social Justice, Comfort, and Benefit! It aims at the final
Overthrow of all Society whether in Families, Churches, or Commonwealths. The
Comfort and Use of which depend upon that Honor which is due from Inferiors to
their Superiors; without which social Offices cannot be with Reason expected.

It was Pride, my Brethren, that brought Strife into Heaven it self, and cast
down the Apostate Angels thence. It is Pride that robs God of the Honor due to
his Providence, and makes Men guilty of the wildest Idolatry in burning Incense
to their own Net!

Surely it is Pride that makes men so masterly and imperious in their
Behavior; so rash in their Judgments and Censures; so peevish in their
Tempers, and obstinate in their Resolutions. This makes Men, Argus-ey'd, in
spying Motes in their Brothers Eye, but as blind as Moles in not discerning the
Beam that is in their own! And thus it prevents Repentance, and puts a Bar to
improvement. It makes Men storm at reproof, and deaf to Advice and Council: It
magnifies the slender Shadow of Piety and Virtue in those that are under its
Government, and silences the Checks of Conscience. And thus it paves the Way
for Delusion and Ruin! Which brings me to say,

Fourthly: That Pride is a God-provoking Evil. It is one of the Six Things that
God hates, yea of the Seven which is an Abomination to him. Prove. vi. 16.17.
And hence we are told that he resists the Proud, James iv. 6.
and looks on them afar off: Psalm cxxxviii. 6.
As if they were not fit, as one expresses it, to be touched with a pair of
Tongs. And Jehovah likewise assures us, that Pride goes before Destruction, and
a high Mind before a Fall. Prove. xvi. 18.
But,

3dly: We should not only think often on the Aggravations of Pride, but
likewise upon the Imperfections of our Graces and Duties; how weak are the
former and corrupt the latter? How much Water is mingled with our Wine, and
Dross with our Silver?

4thly, We should often meditate upon the Evils of our Hearts and Practice:
Shall we be proud who have such a Sink of Wickedness within us? Who have done
so little for God and so much against him?

Fifthly: We should also think frequently upon Death and Judgment: Shall such
dying Worms as we be proud, who must be so soon reduced to rotteness, and
brought to a strict Account for all our Talents? As to civil Differences,
they will soon be levelled in undistinguished Dust!

Sixthly: My dear Brethren! let us seek after more of the Knowledge of God, and
greater Nearness to him, both which have a noble Tendency to break the Pride of
our Hearts, it was this that made Job abhor himself, Job xlii. 6.
and Isaiah complain, that he was a Man of unclean Lips! Isa. vi. 5.


Seventhly: Think often on the Example of the Cloud of Witnesses that have gone
before you to Glory; particularly upon Abraham, who in his Supplication,
expressed the humblest Reverence of God's Majesty; behold, said he, I who am
but Dust and Ashes, have taken upon me to speak to the Lord, O let not the Lord
be angry! Genesis xviii. 27.
Upon David who was abased by the Thoughts of the divine Goodness to him,
saying, What am I, and what is my Father's House, that thou has brought me
hitherto? There are also many others that deserve your Thoughts and Imitation,
which time would fail to enumerate! and therefore I proceed to say,

Eighthly: Think on the Example of Christ's Humility, who though he was in the
Form of God, assumed the Form of a Servant: And shall not we for whose Sake
this was done be clothed with Humility, and seek to have the same Mind in us
which was also in Christ Jesus? Surely the astonishing Stoop of Divine Majesty,
to the humblest Circumstances of Humanity, may make us ashamed of ambitious
Aspirings!

In fine, my dear Brethren! It should be seriously considered that the subduing
of our Pride, is the Design of God's providential Dealings toward us, both in
its prosperous and adverse Occurrences. The former should make us ashamed of
it, and the latter imbitter it to us! O! therefore let us oppose the Stirrings
of that malignant Disorder in us, and invite the Assistance of Heaven by
importunate Supplications; in the mean Time, thinking of our selves soberly as
we ought to think.

FINIS
CORRIGENDA.
SERMON I Page 5, line 9, for they better, read the better; p. 7, l. 14, read
there; p. 9, l. 1, dele from; in Do. l. 23, read Desertion; p. 13, l. 8, read
Crucifixion, p. 16. l. 17. read Appearance.


