The Necessity of praising God for Mercies received

A SERMON OCCASIONED, By the Success of the late Expedition, (under the
Direction and Command of Genesis PEPPEREL and Com. WARREN,) in reducing the City
and Fortresses of Louisburgh on Cape-Breton, To the Obedience of His Majesty
King GEORGE the Second.

Preached at PHILADELPHIA July 7. 1745.

By GILBERT TENNENT, A. M. Minister of the Gospel in Philadelphia.

Psalm xcviii. 1. O Sing unto the Lord a new Song, for he has done Marvelous
Things: His right Hand, and his holy Arm has gotten him the Victory.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed and Sold by William Bradford at the Bible in Second
Street.

To the HONORABLE GEORGE THOMAS, Esquire Lieutenant Governor and Commander in
Chief OF THE Province of Pennsylvania, and Counties of New Castle, Kent and
Sussex:

THE following SERMON is most humbly Dedicated,

By Your HONOR'S Most humble And obedient Servant, G. TENNENT.

PSALM cxlix. 1. Praise ye the Lord. Sing unto the Lord a new Song, and his
Praise in the Congregation of Saints.


THE Book of Psalms, my Brethren, may be called the Summary of both Testaments,
there is in it so much of God and his Law, as well as of Christ and his Gospel.

The Word Psalm, though it primarily signifies Praises, is doubtless of larger
Extent, and intends all Compositions of Meeter that are fit to be sung, whether
of History or Doctrine, of Prayer or Praise, because many of them are really
such; and hence we are directed not only to praise God, but to teach one
another in Psalms, Hymns and spiritual Songs.

The Author of the Psalms is undoubtedly the third Person of the adorable
Trinity, they contain the Words which the Holy Ghost teaches, and therefore
are better fitted for the use of the Church, in every Age to the utmost period
of Time, than any mere human Composure.

The Penman of them, for the most part, was David the Son of Jesse, who is
therefore called the Sweet Singer of Israel.

The Scope of them, is principally to inflame our Love to, and excite our Trust
in the blessed God, who is our Creator, Redeemer and Benefactor; and thus to
enduce us to universal Holiness in Practice.

But more particularly, the Occasion of the Psalm from which our Text is taken,
was probably some Victory which Israel obtained over their Enemies. Some
conjecture that it was penned when David had taken the strong Hold of Zyon, and
settled his Government there, This, says Muis, the latter part of the second
Verse plainly signifies. And Maldonate observes, that this Psalm is a form of
Thanksgiving for some famous Victory, and mystically contains the favor of God
to his Church, and the Triumphs of the Christian Faith over Heathen Princes.
vid. Pol. Synop. in Locum.
on which account he exhorted the People to praise God and rejoice in him.
Praise ye the Lord, i. e. Exalt and glorify him for all his Mercies. Sing unto
the Lord a new Song, i. e, let your grateful Sentiments break forth into vocal
Melody, and either compose a new Hymn of Praise upon every special Occasion, or
sing with new and raised Affections, which makes the Song new to us, though we
have been accustomed to use it before. And his Praise in the Congregation of
Saints, i. e. Let not your thankful Sense of Mercies received, be confined to
your own Bosoms or Retirements, but express it openly to the Honor of the
Giver, in the most public and solemn Assemblies, as those that are neither
afraid or ashamed of doing your Duty, and as desirous to excite others
concurrence in it: The greater the Number is that joins in this sacred grateful
Harmony, the more it resembles the Choirs above, whose continual Business and
Happiness it is, to celebrate the Divine Praise.

Now the Words of our Text, considered in their Connection, may be resolved
into this Proposition, viz.

That Praising God for Mercies received is an important Duty.

In discoursing upon which, I would observe the following Order, namely, I.
Enquire what are the Mercies we should Praise God for. II. Show what is
supposed by and implied in praising God for his Mercies. III. Show the
reasonableness and importance of this Duty.


And then proceed to the Improvement.

1st. As to the Mercies we should praise God for, I may say, that every Benefit
he vouchsafes, deserves our grateful Acknowledgments, whether it be temporal or
spiritual, personal or public, the least Mercy we receive may justly be
counted great in respect of us, who have by Sin forfeited a Right to all, and
therefore merit none; and it is likewise the Will of God, that in every Thing
we should give Thanks; No Mercy that a gracious God vouchsafes, should be
passed over with a Stupid inobservant Neglect: And truly it is a lamentable and
awful Sign of the Degeneracy of human Nature, that the Commonness and long
Continuance of Benefits, which should enhance our Esteem of them, does often
lessen it.

But methinks those Benefits which tend to promote the public Interest, and
safety of the Community to which we belong, and in which our Persons and
Properties, our civil and religious Liberties are embarked, claim our peculiar
Acknowledgments; for surely so much the more extensive any Good is, so much the
more valuable it is. Bonum quo Communius, eo Melius.
Private Interest is no farther excellent, than as it is consistent with, and
conducive to the Good of the Public, which we are born to promote, and
therefore should be sensibly affected, when this noble End is in any Degree
attained, which it certainly is, by notable Victories over the Enemies of our
Religion and Liberties; and the more the Hand of God appears in bringing them
to pass, the stronger Engagements we are under to praise him; this the Psalmist
signifies in the following emphatical Lines; O sing unto the Lord a new Song,
for he has done mavelous Things: His right Hand and his holy Arm has gotten
him the Victory. Although it be vile and Antichristian to propagate Religion by
Force and Arms, for doubtless all Mankind have an equal Right to judge for
themselves in Matters purely Religious: Yet when our religious Liberty is
involved in the Defense of our Civil, it ought to make us the more in earnest,
for then we fight pro aris et focis, and it should therefore excite our Praises
to the highest Key, when by any Victory or Conquest, not only our Civil but
religious Liberty is the more established! And praise JEHOVAH for it with
joyful Lips! This leads me to the

II. Head of Discourse, which was to show, what is supposed by, and implied in
praising God for Mercies received.

Now I think that this Duty supposes, 1st. A Love to God's Majesty. In
proportion to the Degree of this shall we be inclined to praise him. Praise is
indeed the proper Fruit of Love; love tunes the Heart to Gratitude, and makes
the Lips move in Praise; while Love inspires the Soul with grateful Sentiments,
the Tongue is as the Pen of a ready Writer, in speaking the Honors of the
King. Until Men be possessed of this noble Grace of Love, transcendent Love to
God, they do not praise him aright for Mercies received; they are inclined
either to pass them by with entire Neglect, or return but a complimental
Gratitude, which that God who is a Spirit does not regard: It is not the
Strength of the Voice, or Harmony of Sounds, but the Fervor of our Love that
makes Melody in the Ears of God Non vox sed Votum, non musica chordula, sed
cor; non clamans sed am^ns, cantat in aure Dei.
.

2dly. Praising God for Mercies received, supposes, a firm Persuasion of his
providential Government over all Events. If we imagine that Things come at
Random and by Chance, how shall we be enduc'd to praise God for what we think
does not happen by his Interposal and Direction? It is therefore of the last
Necessity, that our Minds be fully established in the Belief of this
Fundamental Article, that the Great God has an absolute, eternal and universal
Empire; and that by his Sovereign and superintending Providence, he conducts
all the Works of his Hands, to the End designed for them at their Formation,
which without this they never could attain. No Effect of the divine Power, is
beneath the Cognizance and Care of his Providence: That Pagan Proverb, That the
gods inspected great Affairs, but neglected small, Dei magna Curan^, parva
negligunt.
is unworthy of the Christian Character! What but divine Providence crowns (at
times) the most improbable Enterprises with surprising Success, and renders the
most promising Schemes abortive! and hence we are truly told in the sacred
Volumn, that the Race is not to the Swift, nor the Battle to the strong, and
that Promotion comes neither from the East, nor West, nor South, but that God
raises up one and pulls down another. No doubt the most probable Measures are
generally succeeded, and this should enduce us to use them, and to give due
honor to the Instruments that God is pleased to improve in the Conveyance of
any Benefit, But seeing they are not always prosperous, and that even when they
are, it is God who directs to them and gives the Success; therefore divine
Sovereignty and Mercy should be supreamly acknowledged, and celebrated as the
Fountain of all our Benefits! But I proceed to show what is implied in praising
God for Mercies received And

1st. It implies a careful Attention to, and due Consideration upon the Nature
and Circumstances of Benefits received, as well as our Unworthiness of them;
The Works of the Lord (says the Psalmist) are great, sought out of all that
have Pleasure therein. Psalm. cxi. 2
Whosoever is wise and will observe these Things, even they shall understand the
loving Kindness of the Lord Psalm. cvii. 43.
. And elsewhere he observes, that Men shall fear and shall declare the Work of
the Lord, for they shall wisely consider of his Doings Psalm. lxiv. 9.
. With what Affection does the Almighty speak by the Prophet Isaiah upon this
Head? Hear O Heavens! and give ear O Earth! For the Lord has spoken. I have
nourished and brought up Children, and they have rebelled against me, the Ox
knows his Owner, and the Ass his Master's Crib, but Israel does not know, my
People does not consider. Isaiah i. 2, 3.
The Almighty likewise complains of Israel by the Prophet Hosea, that she did
not know, that he gave her Corn, and Wine, and Oil, and multiplied her Silver.
Hos ii. 8.
That is, She didn't take Notice of those Benefits as coming from the Hand of
God, but ascribed all the Honor to second Causes. Where God's Mercies are not
observed and considered upon, due Praises will not be given for them. Again

2dly. Praising God for Mercies received, implies a high Esteem of them, this
is indeed the Measure of our Praises. When Men slight the Mercies of God, as
the Israelites the Manna, they are not disposed to offer just Praises for them,
we should therefore admire the Multitude, the Greatness, the Freeness of divine
Favors, as well as their seasonable Conveyance to us: These Considerations
invited the Psalmist's Song; I will praise thee O Lord among the People, I will
sing unto thee among the Nations, for thy Mercy is great unto the Heavens, and
thy Faithfulness reaches unto the Clouds! How excellent is thy loving Kindness
O God, How precious are thy Thoughts unto me, and how great is the Sum of them?
If I should count them they are more in Number than the Sand, the Lord is good
unto all, his tender Mercies are over all his Works. Psa. xxxvi. Psa. cxlv. 9.


3dly. Praising God for Mercies received implies, a faithful Retention of them
in our Memory's, without this Jehovah will be robbed of the Glory of his
Goodness: The Saints of Old were sensible of this, and therefore used a variety
of Means to preserve and perpetuate the Memory of God's Mercies: To this End
they erected Monuments. When Jacob had a comfortable extraordinary Dream, he
set up a Stone as a Memorial of it. Psa. xxxvi. Psa. cxlv. 9.
When the Almighty had discomfitted Amaleck, Moses built an Genesis xxviii. 18.
Altar with this Inscription, Johovah Nisi (or the Lord my Banner) Gen xvii ^.
When God, by a signal Providence, in answer to the cries of Samuel, gave the
Men of Israel a memorable Victory over the Philistine Army, he toook a Stone
and set it between Mispeh and Shen, and called the Name of it Ebenezer, (or the
Stone of help) saying, hitherto has the Lord helped us. 1 Samuel vii 12.
To this End also they gave places Names suited to the Mercies they received in
them: Thus Hagar called the Place where she saw the Fountain in her Distress,
Beer lahai-roi, or the Well of him that lives and sees me. Gen xvi. 13, 14.
And Jacob called the Place of his Vision Bethel (or the House of God) Genesis
xxviii. 19.
They likewise gave their Children Names in Commemoration of Benefits. Thus
Rachel called one of the Sons of her Handmaid Naphtali, (i. e. my Wrestling)
saying, with great Wrestings have I wrestled, and have prevailed. Genesis xxx. 8.
Thus Hannah, who obtained a Son in Answer to Prayer, called his Name Samuel,
which signifies asked of God. 1 Samuel i. 20.
Yea they gave the very Days a Name that signified the Mercies conferred in
them: Thus when it pleased God to bring upon the Head of Haman the wicked Plot
which he had formed against the Jewish Nation, they called the Days in which
this great Event happened Purim, Este. ix. 26.
signifying the Lot that Haman had cast for their Lives. And did not Almighty
GOD expressly enjoin Moses to record the Discomfiture of Amaleck? write this for
a Memorial in a Book, and rehearse it in the Ears of Joshua. Ex. 17.14.
It is a just Observation of Seneca, That he who falsely denies the Reception of
a Benefit, he that dissembles it, and he that does not repay it is ungrateful,
but most ungrateful of all, is he that forgets it.

If to be sensible of a Benefit just at the present, deserved the Title of
Gratitude, then the most of Men would be grateful; and the wicked Jews were
doubtless so, whom yet the Almighty complains of for forgetting his Works, and
the Wonders he had showed them! They remembered not his Hand, nor the Day he
delivered them from the Enemy. Psa. lxxviii. 11.
On the Contrary we find that great Pattern of Gratitude David, reflecting and
meditating upon the divine Favors, I will, says he, remember thy Wonders of
old, I will meditate of all thy Works, and talk of thy doings. Psa. lxxvii.
11.12.
Bless the Lord O my Soul, and forget not all his Benefits! Psa. ciii. 1, 2.
My Mouth shall praise thee with joyful Lips, when I remember thee upon my Bed,
and meditate on thee in the Night Watches, because thou have been my help
therefore in the Shadow of thy Wings will I rejoice. Psa. lxiii. 5, 6, 7.
No length of Time should deface the Memory of our Mercies, or other Cares and
Amusements justle it out of our grateful Minds.

And, dear Brethren, pray observe, that the Mercies of God should be remembered
with affectionate and grateful Sentiments of Mind, our Hearts should be moved
with a generous Passion, proportioned to the Moment of his Goodness vouchsafed.
While we muse on the Number, Importance, and long Continuance of the divine
Benefits we enjoy together with our utter Unworthiness of them, Wonder and Love
should fire our Souls with the most passionate grateful Emotions, inclining us
to speak in the Language of Jacob, I am not worthy of the least of all the
Mercies, and of all the Truth which thou have showed unto thy Servant: Genesis
xxxii. 10.
And of David, Who am I, O Lord God? And what is my House that thou have
brought me hitherto? 2 Samuel vii. 18.
Unless we be deeply affected with the Mercies of God, we will not return due
Praises for them. Again,

4thly: Praising God for Mercies received implies, an open Acknowledgment of
them by our Lips to the Honor of the Giver, and of our Obligations by them to
his Service: When Gratitude inspires the Breast, it will perspire through the
Lips, into Thanksgivings and Songs of Praise: This not only Reason it self
teaches, but the frequent Practice of the Psalmist confirms, his g^^^teful Soul
was often tuned to vocal Melody! I will sing of the Mercies of the Lord (said
he) for ever, with my Mouth will I make known his Faithfulness to all
Generations. Psalm. lxxxix. 1.
I will publish with the Voice of Thanksgiving, and tell of all thy wondrous
Works. Psa. xxvi. 7.
There is such a Correspondence between the Mind and the Tongue, that when the
one is sensible, the other will not be silent; when the Spring of a Clock is
well set, the Wheels move, and the Bell in its proper Season publishes the
Matter with a proper Accent.

The Saints of God have at times, such a View of the Divine Excellency, such a
Sense of the Importance of his Benefits, and their Inability to return equal
Praises for them; such a Desire to exalt Jehovah, and such Delight in his
Praises, that they are dissatisfied with their lonely Tunes, and private
Soliloquies, and want with the Psalmist Psa. cxlviii.
to summons the whole Creation to join in Consort in the Song, and assist the
Harmony, that it may reach the Concave of the Heavens, and resound to the
utmost Limits of the Globe! Farther

5thly. Praising God for Mercies received, implies a Life conformed to the
Obligations of them; He that offers Praise glorifieth me, and to him that
orders his Conversation aright will be shown the Salvation of God. Psalm. l.
23.
Without this real Gratitude, all vocal Melody is but like a sounding Brass and
tinkling Cymbal, mere sham and pretense, which God abhors! Isa. i. 11.
As ingenious Mr. Flavel observes, It is the Life of the Thankful, which is the
Life of Thankfulness, Obedience and Service are the only real Manifestations of
Gratitude. Sincere Thankfulness will incline us to desire after and endeavor
for all the Requital we can make; to this the Psalmist's Sentiments and
Practice agree; What shall I render to the Lord for all his Benefits? I will
take the Cup of Salvation and call upon the Name of the Lord: I will pay my
Vows unto the Lord. Psalm. cxvi. 13, 14.
It is true our Goodness does not extend to God, neither is it any Gain to him
that we are Righteous, yet we may show our Willingness to serve and exalt him;
and most certainly those that Praise God aright, will endeavor to express
their grateful Sentiments in a pious Course of Action.

In Sum, the Duty of Praise implies our having an affecting Sense of Jehovah's
Excellencies, and the Value of his Benefits, our recollecting them in our Minds
with Humility and Gratitude, and our expressing those inward Sensations, by
thankful Speech and a pious Life. When therefore we set our selves down, and
call to Remembrance the many Experiences we have had of the divine Benignity,
when we dwell on them by long Meditation, and fix indelible Signatures of them
in our Minds; when we raise our Conceptions to a high Esteem of them, by
attending to every Circumstance of their Worth, when upon this our Hearts glow
with Love and Gratitude, and our Lips overflow with Acknowledgments of his
Kindness to all around us, when we form our Lives by his Laws, and in return
for his Mercies, devote our selves and our all to his Glory and Service. But I
proceed to the

III. Proposed, which was to show, the Reasonableness and Importance of this
Duty. Now this appears from the following Considerations, viz. The Law of God,
the Nature of God considered as related to Man, and from the Nature of Man as
related to God, as well as from the Nature of the Duty it self, and the Example
of Christ. And

1st. Almighty God expressly requires it; Call upon me in the Day of Trouble,
and I will deliver thee, and thou shall glorify me. i. e. Thou shall make
grateful mention of my Kindness and live to my Praise. This is an Instance of
Homage and Tribute, which the blessed God will by no Means dispense with. If
God give us the Comfort of Mercies, it is but reasonable that he should have
the Glory of them; This is the Will of God, says the Apostle to the
Thessalonians, that in every Thing we give Thanks.

2dly. The Nature of God especially considered as related to Man, teaches us
the Reasonableness of Praising him for Benefits received.

Jehovah is indeed possessed of infinite transcendent and incommunicable
Excellency, and as such Merits our Praises; for Excellency is the proper Object
of Esteem and Commendation.

But besides this, his relative Goodness gives him a claim to it, both in point
of Duty and Gratitude. He that has made us, has by creation a just and
irrefragable Right, to be adored and served by those Creatures which he has
made capable of Moral Homage. Nothing is more rational, than that the Powers
God has given should be improved to his Glory and in his Service; Shall a Man
plant a Vineyard and not eat of the Fruit of it? -- Moreover, the innumerable
Benefits of Protection, Support, Redemption, etc. which divine Goodness has
conferred upon intelligent Creatures, oblige us to praise him by the Ties of
Ingenuity and Gratitude. Slighting Kindnesses received, and neglecting to make
due Returns for them: Or in other Words, Ingratitude, is one of the most odious
Characters, one of the most sordid complicated Evils, abhorrent to the Reason
of Mankind, and tending to the Discomfort and Dissolution of civil Society:
Even a Pagan by the Dint of Natures Light could say, If you mention
Ingratitude, you mention every Evil. Si ingratum dixeris, omnia dixeris.


Should we not praise Him who is the Author and preserver of our Beings?
Without whose creating Power we had never existed, and without whose careful
Providence we could not subsist one single Moment? Him who has formed the
spacious Globe on which we tread, furnished with so vast a Variety of
Entertainments for our Support and Delight: Him who has given us Bodies of
such Beauty and Proportion, inspired with noble Souls, resembling the Father of
the Universe in their Nature and original Dispositions: Souls by which we are
distinguished from and advanced above the Brute-Creation: Him who, though by
unalianable Right, the absolute Lord of all, took upon him the State of a
Servant, veiled his divine Glory by assuming Humanity in its most humble
Circumstances, when Sin had stained its original Glory, and exposed it to
innumerable Maladies: Him who is that Nature endured all Manner of Reproaches
and Injuries even to Death it self of the most formidable Kind, and all with
Design to save worthless Rebels from the Ruin they deserved by Sin, and exalt
them to the highest Glory and Dignity ye know, says the Apostle, the Grace of
our Lord Jesus, that though he was rich, yet for our sakes he became poor, that
we through his Poverty might be made rich. The Chastisement of our Peace was
laid upon him, says the Prophet, that through his Stripes we might be healed.
Shall we not praise Him, who gives us civil and religious Liberty? Who grants
us familiar Access to his Throne and Honors us with the Titles of his Friends
and Children: Him who hears our Cries, compassionates our Infirmities, asswages
our Pains, heals our Maladies, comforts us in our Sorrows and Soltitude: Him
whose Goodness is as the strong Mountain, and whose Mercies never fail: Him
whose Majesty and Excellence to admire and celebrate, and whose Benignity to
experience (to perfection) is Heaven it self, the supreme Felicity of
intelligent Beings.

3dly. The Nature of Man, considered as related to God, shows the
reasonableness and importance of the Duty I am discoursing upon. We are
dependent, indigent Creatures supported continually by his infinite Power, and
fed out of the Treasures of his unexhausted Goodness. We move on his Earth, and
breath in his Air; every Morsel we eat, and every Rag we wear, we derive from
him. But we are not only indigent and dependent Creatures, but sinful ones; who
have by our abuse of Mercies forfeited a Right to every of them, and summons'd
the Wrath of Omnipotence to arms, and yet behold deserved Vengeance is
deferred; abused Patience waits, and immerited Benignity is diffused in
innumerable and valuable Benefits both of a temporal and spiritual Nature.
Benefits important in their Kind. Benefits almost equal in their Number, to the
flying Moments of Time, or falling Drops of the Rain. Wonder O Heavens and be
astonished O Earth at this!

But methinks, my Brethren, redeeming Mercy shines among the rest, as the Moon
among the lesser Stars. O how amazing is it, that while Creatures of a nobler
Order were passed by, that we should be redeemed from a State of the basest
Slavery and admitted into the most glorious Liberty, by no less a Price than
the Blood of God, as well as entitled to an unfading Inheritance which exceeds
all Thought and Expression! So that if there be any influence, engagements or
endearments, in creating Power, supporting Goodness, forbearing Patience, and
redeeming Love, or in the Expectation of future Blessedness, we should be
enduc'd to praise that God from whom those Blessings flow. Especially
considering

4thly. That there are additional Excitements in the Nature of the Duty itself.
This the Psalmist observes in the following Words, Praise ye the Lord: for it
is good to sing Praises unto our God; for it is Pleasant, and Praise is comely.
Here several Arguments are at once suggested by the sweet Singer of Israel,
concerning the amiable Properties of Praise.

(1.) It is profitable. The best Way to obtain new Mercies is to be thankful
for the Past. Praise is good, It is our Duty and therefore Good in itself, it
is our Interest and therefore Good for us, it is acceptable to our Creator, and
answers the End of our Creation, the Law for it is Holy, Just and Good, and the
Practice of it will turn to a good Account. This enlarges and enobles our
rational Powers by fixing them upon the sublimest Objects, viz. The divine
Attributes and Benefits; This Facilitates the Performance of other Duties, by
increasing the Springs of Love and Delight from which they proceed; this
contents the Mind with present Circumstances, and confirms our Expectation of
Future Mercies: In this Way we may humbly hope that a gracious God will rejoice
over us to do us Good.

But on the Contrary, Ingratitude bereaves us of present Mercies, and prevents
future Benefits: When the People of Israel took no thankful Notice of the Corn,
and Wine and Oil that God gave them, he threatened to take them away: She did
not know, says the Almighty by the Prophet, that I gave her Corn, and Wine,
and Oil, therefore will I return and take away my Corn in the Time thereof, and
my Wine in the Season thereof: And will recover my Wool and my Flax. Hos. ii.
8, 9.
Likewise when Israel cried to God by Reason of the Oppression of the
Ammonites, the Lord answered them in the following Manner, Did not I deliver
you from the Egyptians, and from the Amorites, from the Children of Amon, and
from the Philistines? The Zidonians also and the Amalekites, and the Maonites
did oppress you, and ye cried to me and I delivered you out of their Hand, yet
ye have forsaken me and served other Gods, wherefore I will deliver you no
more, go and cry unto the God's ye have chosen, let them deliver you in the
Time of your Tribulation. Judge. x. 11, 12, 13, 14.
But

(2dly.) Praise says the Psalmist is Pleasant, Joy, which is the Source of it,
is Pleasant to us as Men; and the Glory of God, which is the Scope of it, is
Pleasant to us as Saints, who are devoted to his Honor. Praising God is a Work
which is its own Wages, that Love from which it proceeds is a pleasing Passion,
which gives every Thing its true Relish, and is as Oil to the Wheels of
Devotion. Praise unbends the pious Mind, which is never more gratified than in
making Returns for Kindnesses received: Praise gives a repeated Enjoyment of
past Benefits by a Reflection upon them. In a Word, it is the exactest Emblem
we have on Earth of the Temper and Employment of the Inhabitants of Heaven.
Again,

(3dly) Praise is comely, it is rational and ornamental, it becomes us as Men,
who are endowed with Reason and Reflection, which should direct and induce us
to take thankful Notice of Benefits, and to abhor the contrary Practice as base
and brutish, and every Way unworthy of the human Nature. It becomes us as
Christians who are under additional Engagements to this by Covenant, and under
special Advantages directing and inclining to it, by Gospel Light and Grace.
What is more amiable than a just Sense of the divine Goodness, and a
Celebration of it with adoring Reverence, and grateful Hosannas? Surely Sirs
our Tongues are never so much our Glory, as when employed in expressing the
Divine Praise; and indeed Praise seems to be one of the most generous Parts of
Divine Worship, while Prayer seeks a selfish Good, Praise attempts the requital
of Benefits received, by rendering a tribute of Honor for them, agreeable to
the Directions of Reason and of God.

I may add to what has been said this Consideration, that our Lord Jesus
Christ, has recommended the Duty of Praise and Thanksgiving, both by Precept
and Example, he reproved the Nine Lepers for their Ingratitude, and commended
the Samaritan who glorified God on the Occasion of his Cure; and Jesus
answering said, were there not ten cleansed? But where are the Nine? There are
not found that returned to give Glory to God save this Stranger.

Luke xvii. 17, 18.
The Life of our dear Lord was a Pattern of Thankfulness and Praise, and in
this he was a true Son of David. When he raised Lazarus from the Dead, he
thanked his Father that he heard him. John xi. 41.
Yea he didn't eat common Bread without first blessing of it by giving of
Thanks. Mat. 14.18.
But I proceed to the Improvement of this Discourse. And

First. If it be an important Duty to praise God for Mercies received, then
surely those are to be reproved, who take no Notice of the divine Benefits,
such are more stupid than the Ox and Ass, that know their Owner and Master's
Crib; they resemble the Swine, who greedily devour falling Fruit, but look not
up to the Tree from whence they come.

And such are also to be reproved, who though they take some Notice of Mercies
conferred, return but superficial Praises for them: Such Hypocrites refuse to
the Almighty the Male of their Flock, and offer the Lame and the blind in
Sacrifice: Those the Almighty denounces a Curse upon, and rejects their
Service; for they draw nigh to God only with their Lips, but their Hearts are
far from him.

Farther: Such are to be reproved who though they have had some Sense of the
Mercy of God, do not retain the Impression and Remembrance of them; nor are
thereby induced to Repentance and Reformation of Life: The Almighty complains
of such in very affecting Language; O Ephraim what shall I do unto thee? O
Judah what shall I do unto thee? For thy Goodness is as the Morning Cloud, and
as the early Dew which soon passes away. Ye did run well who hindered you. O
Sirs! unless the Blossoms of our religious Affections and Resolutions ripen
into the Fruits of a holy Practice, we are still unthankful and unfruitful in
the Eye of God; and have reason to fear his eternal Indignation!

Again: Such are also to be reproved, who arrogates the Honors of Mercies
received to themselves, and so sacrifice to their own Net, and burn Incence to
their own Dreg. Thus Nebuchadnezer vainly boasted of the Babel he had built,
and for this was turned among the Beasts, and Herod for not giving God the
Glory was devoured by Worms.

Let us therefore, Dear Brethren! avoid those Evils, and speak in Ezra's
Language; Seeing that thou our God have punished us less than our Iniquities
deserve, and have given us such a Deliverance as this, should we again break
thy Commandments? Would thou not be angry with us, till thou had consumed
us, so that there should be no Remnant or escaping? Ezra ix. 13, 14.
But

Secondly. Is it a Duty to praise God for Mercies received? Then let us be
entreated to perform it with Speed and Sincerity, to this End think often on
your Unworthiness by reason of Sin; this tends to affect the Heart with every
Mercy, and make us speak in the Language of Mephibosheth, who when David told
him that he should have his Lands, and eat Bread at his Table, bowed himself
and said, what is thy Servant, that thou should look upon such a dead Dog as
I am? And seek for the Assistance and Influence of God's Holy Spirit, without
which ye cannot Praise God to Purpose; Be not drunk with Wine wherein is
Excess, but be filled with the Spirit, speaking to your selves in Psalms and
Hymns, giving thanks always for all Things unto God and the Father, in the Name
of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Dear Brethren! shall we be stupid and insensible, and indulge a sinful
Silence, while we are encompassed with innumerable Mercies? Mercies freely
vouchsafed without any Desert of ours, yea contrary to our Desert: Mercies
seasonably voucsafed in the very nick of Extremity: Mercies long continued
after a vile Abuse: Mercies distinguishing in their Kind: While many grope in
the thickest Darkness, we enjoy the Light of the glorious Gospel: While many
are oppressed by Tyranny and Want, we enjoy both civil and religious Liberty
and Plenty. O the amazing Mercy of God! Let our Souls and all that is within
us, bless his holy Name!

Surely Sirs, there is no Disposition more deeply engraven in the original
Constitution of Human Nature, than a Sense of Benefits received; the very worst
of Men have some Remains of this; Do not the Publicans so? said our Lord. Yea
diverse of the Beasts who are devoid of the Direction of Reason, do by natural
Instinct express a Kind of Gratitude; the Ox knows his Owner, and the Ass his
Master's Crib; and not only the gentle and sociable, but those of a fiercer
Kind, express a Kindness to Benefactors; even the Lion and the Tiger are not
wholly lost to a Sense of this, if we may credit civil Story.

And the inanimate Creatures seem not altogether insensible of Benefits; the
Rivers return to the Ocean these Waters they derive from it, by obscure,
meandrine Conduits; the Heavens return to the Earth in balmy Dews and fruitful
Showers, the Waters exhaled from it by the Sun's Influence, and the teeming
Earth by its Fruits requites the Labors of the Husband Man.

The Obligation to Praise and Gratitude is most rational; surely he unjustly
asks a Benefit, who is not disposed to requite it; we are indebted for what is
freely given, as well as for what is lent; the Freeness of the Giver, does not
diminish but increase the Debt to a generous and considerate Mind.

But on the contrary, Ingratitude is the Sin of Sins, it rebels against God's
commanding Authority, is disingenuous to his Love, and exposes us to his
fearful Displeasure; it is like a froward Child's attempting to beat his
Mother's Breasts, and kick his Father's Bowels.

You are doubtless aware, my Brethren, that the Occasion of this Discourse, is
the late memorable Success with which it has pleased indulgent Heaven to crown
his Majesty's Arms, in the late Expedition against the City and Fortresses of
Louisburgh on Cape Breton, on the Account of which this Town was so lately
illuminated, and so justly and generally expressed a joyful Sense of the
Benefit.

I need not inform you Sirs, of how great Importance this Conquest is to all
the British Dominions in general, and to this English Main in particular;
hereby our Commerce is both protected and increased, and a Barrier fixed which
may be of great Service to prevent the Inroads of the French and Indians, upon
the Eastern Inhabitants of this Continent.

But that which peculiarly enhances the Value of this Mercy is, that it gives
some check to the ambitious Designs and cruel Intrigues of a proud and potent
Prince, who unweariedly labors to rob us of our civil and religious Liberties,
and bring us into the most wretched Vassalage to arbitrary Power and Church
Tyranny. A Prince who disturbs all Europe by his Councils and Arms, in order to
erect a universal Monarchy upon the Ruins of other Kingdoms and States. How
admirable therefore is the Mercy of God in giving into our Hands this strong
Hold of the Enemy of our Religion and Liberties!

What Cause have we, dear Sirs! to praise a gracious God, for his propitious
Smiles on this Expedition? especially when we consider how remarkably divine
Providence has appeared in it, by a Train of surprising Incidents!

That a City so well fortified by Nature and Art as Louisburgh, a City almost
impregnable, should be so soon reduced by so small and unexperienced an Army,
and that with so little Effusion of Blood, is truly amazing!

Although the prudent Council's of the Massachusetts Government, in forming the
Plan of the Expedition, and the discreet Conduct and intrepid Courage of their
Forces, in the Prosecution of it, in Conjunction with the Naval Armament, under
the Command and Direction of brave Commodore WARREN, are much to be commended.
Yet surely it was the blessed God, my Brethren* that directed them to it, and
spirited them for it: 'Twas He that conducted them in it, and gave the Success:
'Twas He that inclined our gracious Sovereign to favor the prudent Project:
'Twas He who gave such a Scene of uncommon, but agreeable Weather, as served to
accelerate the Design: 'Twas He who preserved Health in the Camp and in the
Fleet, and made their Councils harmonious: 'Twas He that prefac'd this
memorable Event by the Capture of the Vigilant: -- And therefore to him let us
ascribe the Glory; Whose right Hand and holy Arm has given us the Victory, and
made us tread upon the high Places of our Enemies.

Surely the same superintending Providence, that directed the Arrow to pierce
between the Joints of Ahab's Harnace, guided the Bombs to the Annoyance of the
Island-Battery.

Neither should the seasonable Juncture of the Surrender, be passed over in
sordid Silence and stupid Neglect, when it is considered, that the very Day
after it, news were brought to our Army of Two Thousand five Hundred French and
Indians within seven Miles of them, designed for the Relief of Louisburgh;
which if they had heard of before the Surrender, would probably have encouraged
them to a vigorous and obstinate Resistance.

I may add my Brethren, that this merciful Success has been given in answer to
Prayer, which should excite the more our Love and Praise; I love the Lord,
says the Psalmist, because he has heard my Supplication, because he has
inclined his Ear unto me, therefore will I call upon him as long as I live. The
Army that Almighty God chiefly used in bringing to pass this great Event, were
a praying Army; of which, as it is reported, General PEPPEREL gave them a noble
Example!

Sirs, when we consider how much we have by Sin abused the past Mercies that a
gracious God has vouchsafed upon us, we have Reason to be astonished at this
additional immerited and important Benefit! therefore, praise ye the Lord. Sing
unto the Lord a new Song, and his Praise in the Congregation of Saints. Let
Israel rejoice in him that made him: Let the Children of Zyon be joyful in
their King. Let them Praise his Name in the Dance: Let them sing Praises with
the Timbrel and Harp; for the Lord takes Pleasure in his People: He will
beautify the Meek with Salvation. Let the Saints be joyful in Glory: Let them
sing aloud upon their Beds.

GOD's People are especially called upon to praise their God, with all proper
Expressions of Esteem and Honor, both in their private Retirements and public
Assemblies, from a Principle of Love to and Joy in him, because of his Dominion
over them, delight in them, and marvelous Doings for them, as well as gracious
Designs toward them in after Time. He is a King that takes Pleasure in his
Peoples Prosperity, and has made Israel what she is in Point of Privilege both
Civil and Religious, and will beautify the Meek with Salvation, i. e. adorn the
humble with temporal Deliverances, crown their attempts with Successes, and at
last instate their Persons in eternal Happiness. In the Expectation of which,
let us all with united Ardor say, Glory to GOD the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
for Ever and Ever, Amen, Amen.


