The NECESSITY of keeping the SOUL.

A SERMON PREACHED AT PHILADELPHIA, December the 23d, 1744. On DEUTERONOMY IV.
9.

By GILBERT TENNENT, A. M. Minister of the Gospel at Philadelphia.

(...) xix. 16. He that keeps the Command^^^^^ keeps his own Soul; but he
that des^^^^^ his Ways shall die.

(...) 23. Keep thy Heart with all Dili^^^^^ For out of it are the Issues of
Life.

(...) Printed by WILLIAM (...) Sign of the Bible in Second-Street.

DEUTERONOMY IV. 9. Only take heed to thy Self, and keep thy Soul diligently,
least thou forget the Things which thine Eyes have seen, and least they depart
from thy Heart, all the Days of thy Life.


MY Brethren, seeing the Soul is the great Seat of Principles and Source of
Action, it follows necessarily from thence, that the chief Points of Practical
Religion are these two, namely, First, to use all proper Means to get it right
set or fixed upon suitable Objects, and then to keep it so against all
Temptations to the contrary. Attempts to regulate the Speech and Life, are like
to be but of little Service, while in the mean Time the Thoughts and Tendencies
of the Soul are neglected, and suffered to run at random without Notice and
control, like a Vessel a-drift without a Compass or Helm, wandering wherever
the Winds or Waves carry her: For when the Soul is neglected, the bad Temper
hereby contracted, must needs have a corrupt Influence upon the whole
Behavior, of which it is the Parent.

As we cannot be truly religious at all until our Souls be thoroughly renewed
by divine Influence; so we cannot make Progress in Religion unless we keep a
strict Guard over their Temper and Motions.

All outward Services before the Heart is changed, is like a Building without a
Foundation, (especially when depended on,) and all care and pains to regulate
the Speech and Practice afterward, while the Heart is neglected, are like
endeavors to regulate a Watch, by observing or trying to alter the Motions of
the Wheels, while the Main-Spring is not touched, in which the chief Fault lies.

Moses therefore with great Reason exhorts the People of Israel to this Duty,
in the Words of our Text, and enforces his Entreaty by a weighty Argument; only
take heed to thy self, and keep thy Soul diligently: i. e. particularly,
especially and above all, be careful and diligent in the use of all proper
Means to keep thy Soul from Sin; the Soul being the principal and most noble
Part of Man, may be justly called himself; and he that keeps it takes heed to
himself to purpose, and only he. Here it may be observed, That this Duty is
recommended in our Text in the singular Number, that so every Person may be the
rather induced to apply it to himself, as if it were directed to him
particularly by name; and hence we may infer, That the more close and distinct
pubblick Discourses are, they better they are like to answer their Design, for
generals do not strike.

Now the Argument that inspired Moses offers to press the preceding Duty is
this, viz. That unless the People of Israel performed it, they would forget the
Mercies and Judgments of God, and loose the Impressions of them; least thou
forget the Things which thine Eyes have seen, and least they depart from thy
Heart. Moses here refers to the manifold Appearances of divine Power and Mercy,
which the People of Israel had beheld in their Deliverances from Egyptian
Oppressors, and all the other Enemies which labored to obstruct their Passage
into the promised Canaan, as well as the Displays of divine Glory and Goodness
at Horeb; and likewise the Judgments of God inflicted on impenitent
Transgressors among themselves. Now the Remembrance and Sense of these Things,
tended to increase their Love to God and fear of him and incite Obedience to
his Laws; which were but just returns of Gratitude for the invaluable Benefits
they had received, and of the last Necessity to secure their highest Honor and
their dearest Interests, both in this Life and that to come. But the contrary
thereof, viz. Forgetfulness and Stupidity, served to prepare the Way for their
Sin and Ruin!

By the Word Soul in our Text, is intended that spiritual and immortal
Substance endowed with Understanding and Will; which it has pleased the great
Creator to confer upon Man, by which he is distinguished from, and advanced
above the Brute-Creation. This is frequently called the Heart in Scripture,
Prove. xxiii. 26. Matt. xxii. 37.
to signify that it is the chief and most noble Part of Man, the Source of Life
and spring of Action. The Terms Soul and Heart are doubtless synonymous (or of
the same import) in our Text, as appears by comparing both Parts thereof
together.

In Discoursing upon this Subject I shall endeavor to show what is supposed
by, and implied in keeping the Soul diligently, and then proceed to the
Improvement.

And, First: Keeping the Soul, supposes the good State and Frame of it, for
what is not good cannot be kept so.

The Soul of Man indeed at his first Creation, was adorned with the divine
Image, which consisted in Knowledge, Righteousness and Holiness, with Dominion
over the Creatures. The Mind was furnished with divine Light, and the Will and
Affections with pious Propensities: Neither was their any vicious Taint in any
of the Faculties to mar their religious Tendencies.

But when our first Parents violated the Covenant of Works, their primitive
Integrity was entirely lost; a universal Disorder seized the human Soul, and
corrupted all its Powers; Darkness possessed the Mind, and a complicated
Depravity the Will and Affections: So that their natural and general Bias is
toward Sin and Vanity!

And hence a Renovation of them, or Restoration to some Degree of that moral
Image of God, which they have lost becomes necessary in order to communion with
God here, and the enjoyment of him hereafter. The native Darkness of the Mind
must be banished and the Light of Day introduced. The Obstinacy of the Will
broken, and 't made plyant to the Will of God; the Disorder of the Affections
removed, and they fixed in their free, general and supreme Bent, upon God and
divine Objects. Before this Change passes upon the Soul, it cannot be kept in a
holy Frame; and therefore this should be first sought after with the utmost
Vehemence: And indeed, 'till this be obtained, the Foundation of vital Piety is
not laid. Hence our Lord enjoins us, First, to make the Tree good and then the
Fruit will be good.

Secondly: The Command of keeping the Soul supposes, the liableness even of the
renewed Person to neglect his Soul, and wander from God like a lost Sheep,
because of remaining Corruption. Although the governing Power of Sin be broke in
the Regenerate, yet there is in them Flesh as well as Spirit, the old as well
as the new Man; a Law in their Members waring against the Law of from their
Minds: This corrupt Principle lusts against the Spirit, tempts them to
backslide from God, and sometimes leads them captive. Psalm cxix. 176. Romans
vii. Col. iii. 5.10. Gal. v. 17. Heb. xiii. 18.
The numerous Falls of the Saints of God recorded in Scripture, are
incontestible Evidences of this awful Truth. The best of Men are in Danger of
the worst of Sins while on this Stage of Temptation; and especially at such
Seasons, when they neglect their own Hearts, and rest upon Grace received.

It is true, neglecting and overlooking the Heart generally, because it is
hidden from the World, and taking care to regulate the Life chiefly for the
sake of Applause or any other selfish End; is doubtless the Character of
Hypocrites: And hence our Lord reproved the Pharisees for cleansing the out
side of the Cup and Plater, while the inside was neglected. Matt. xxiii. 25.


On the Contrary, gracious Persons no doubt (for the general) are chiefly
careful of their Hearts: Yet in times of spiritual Desertions and Decays, when
with the Churches of Ephesus and Sardis, they forget their first Love and fall
from their first Works, and the Things that remain are ready to die, they may
for a Time under the Power of Temptation, sadly neglect their own Hearts!

Thirdly, This Command of keeping the Soul, supposes the evil Nature and
dangerous Consequences of neglecting it. As this is a manifest Violation of
God's Authority and Contempt of his Love; so it is hurtful in its Fruits to our
selves and others; this robs us of our Peace and Comfort, this weakens our Hope
and mars our Joy, as well as hinders our usefulness. When the Soul is
neglected, the gust or relish of divine Things gradually abates, and we grow
cold and insipid in our religious Performances; the World greatens in our Eyes,
and through want of a proper Guard, we are the more easily ensnared by its
Temptations, and being ensnared our Minds are perplexed with guilt, and our
Evidences for Heaven, blotted and eclipsed: Now do not Deadness and slavish
Fear indispose us to speak and act for God, as well as make us very
uncomfortable in our selves?

But this is not all, while Persons neglect their own Hearts, the View of their
own Iniquities being hid from them, they are in danger of being lifted up with
Pride, and inclined to a censorious Severity, concerning the Conduct of others;
who are, perhaps, more advanced in Knowledge and Goodness than themselves;
which Iniquity is as prejudicial to the Peace and Benefit of Society, as it is
contrary to the Word of God, which enjoins us to be merciful as he is merciful,
and assures us, that he shall have Judgment without Mercy, who has showed no
Mercy. James ii. 13.


I might add, that through Neglect of the Heart some are suddenly involved into
those crimson Impieties, which bring Reproach upon the Name, Ways and People of
God, as well as harden the Hearts of the Wicked; and thus they do greater
Injury in a little Time to Religion, then they have done Good in the past Space
of their Lives. O lamentable! should not therefore the Psalmist's Petition
respecting this be often in our Hearts and Mouths? Let none that seek thee he
ashamed for my sake Lord God of Hosts! Psalm lxix. 6.


Surely Brethren the Disorders of the Tongue and of the Life, do generally flow
from the Neglect of the Heart. But to proceed,

Fourthly, This command of keeping the Soul diligently, supposes the Difficulty
of it, which arises partly from the Deceitfulness, and desperate Wickedness
that is in it, Jer. xvii. 9.
and partly from the innumerable Temptations to Sin, which are injected into it
by the Devil and the World, all which it is very Difficult to oppose. Moreover
though the Souls Affections are sometimes warmly engaged toward God and Religion
by the Spirits Influence, yet so soon as that is withdrawn, they return to
their Native Coldness by Degrees, as warm Water taken from the Fire, or the
Earth when the Sun withdraws his beamy Warmth far from the Horizon: now it is
exceeding difficult to withstand Deadness, when it comes upon us like an armed
Man.

And that which renders this Work the more Difficult, is the Constancy of it,
it must be continued in to our dying Breath; if we intermit but a few Moments
we run a dreadful Risque of incurring the Consequences before mentioned. To
keep the outside tolerably regular, and to perform Duties with a careless Frame
of Heart, is no great Matter, and does not require great Labor.

But to withstand all Temptations to Sin, and labor for the Crucifixtion of
it; with Groans that cannot be uttered! To strive in the faithful Use of all
proper Means, to preserve good Impressions, and to stir up our selves to take
hold on God in every Duty, and that not only when he is present with us, but
absent from us. O this is exceeding Difficult! and is therefore justly compared
by our Lord to a strait Gate and narrow Way. Mat. vii. 13.14.
Such as do mind their own Hearts, will find Work enough there, without being
busy Bodies in other Men's Matters. --

In the mean Time let me observe my Brethren, that though the keeping of our
Souls is exceeding Difficult, yet through Mercy it is not an impossible and
hopeless Task. Allbeit considered in ourselves we are not equal to it, yet he
who enjoins it, is able to assist us in the Performance of it: Through Christ we
can do all Things, but without his Assistance and Influence we can do nothing
to Purpose in Religion. John xvi 5.


I proceed to show what is implied in keeping the Soul, and here I may observe.
That it implies in General, the earnest and constant Use of all appointed Means
to keep the Soul from Sin, and preserve its Sense of divine Things: And hence
we are bid to keep our selves in the Love of God. Jud. xxi.
But particularly,

First, It implies, our Jealousy and Watchfullness over the Thoughts,
Affections, and Designs of our Souls. We should be jealous over them with a
godly Jealousy, least a deceived Heart turn us aside, and we feed upon Ashes
and die with a Lie in our Right Hand. The Heart by Nature is a grand Cheat.
Jer. xvii. 9.
And even after Conversion so much of that Falacy remains as should put us
constantly upon our Guard. Mat. xvi. 23.
Surely as Solomon observes, There is a Way which seems right to a Man, the End
whereof is Death. Pro. xiv. 12.
And elsewhere he informs us, That every Way of Man is Right in his own Eyes,
but the Lord ponders the Hearts. Pro. xxi. 2.
It is therefore no wonder that he declares him to be a Fool, that trusts in
his Heart, and on the Contrary pronounces a blessing on the Man that fears
always. Pro. xxviii. 14.
And as we should beware of believing rashly, and confidently the Notions of
our Hearts without a strict Trial of them by the Law and the Testimony, to
which, except we attend and abide by, the Prophet declares that there is no
Light in us. Isa. viii. 20.
So we should keep a constant Watch over the Thoughts of our Souls that the
Disorders thereof may be seasonably suppressed, at their first rise, before
they come to a Head. And hence our Lord has frequently recommended the Duty of
Watchfulness. Mark xiii. 37.
That which I say unto you all, I say Watch. Without this we are in a very
perilous Situation, seeing we are in an Enemy's Country, and have a Traitor
within the Walls. 2 Cor. iv. 4.


Secondly, Keeping our Souls, implies our faithful opposing the first Risings
of Corruption in them, and a careful avoiding of those Things that tend to
inflame them. We are bid to resist the Devil, and informed, that he will fly
from us, Jam. iv. 7
i. e. in the Way of Duty we may expect a Conquest over him, but not otherwise:
We must therefore wrestle with Principalities and Powers, and spiritual
Wickednesses in high Places, Ephesians vi. 12.
Sin is most easily suppressed, and Temptations thereto repelled in their
Beginnings; but by our Delays they gain Strength, and then like a formidable
Torrent, resistless bear down all before them.

And seeing our Corruptions are apt to be inflamed by the Presence of some
Objects, it is therefore necessary to keep at a Distance from them, and thereby
avoid the Appearances of Evil. 1 Thessalonians. v. 22.
If we pray as we are directed, that we be not led into Temptation, and yet run
unnecessarily into it, do we not contradict our Prayers by our Practice, as
well as betray our Insincerity, and tempt the righteous God to forsake us, and
suffer our Enemies to ensnare and triumph over us? We cannot sincerely and
consistently labor to keep our Souls from error in principle and Evils in
Practice, without a conscientious avoiding those Things that tend to seduce and
corrupt us.

Thirdly, Keeping the Soul, implys a frequent Examination of its Thoughts and
Tendencies, together with a bitter bewailing over the Evils that we discern in
them. How can we be suitably affected with the Case of our Souls, unless we
know it: And can this be reasonably expected without Enquiry? No surely! It is
therefore highly necessary, attentively to observe the Dispositions of our
Souls; and impartially, as well as frequently, to examine them by the
Touchstone of God's Word. 2 Cor. xiii. 5.
This is the Way to know the plague sore of our own Hearts, which is necessary
to excite our just Sorrows for it, and the Way in which we can only on a
scriptural Foundation, expect the Acceptance of our Supplications. (...) viii.
38.
Our Lord pronounces a Blessing upon those that mourn* and assures us that they
shall be comforted. Mat. v. 4.
And the Prophet Zachariah informs us, that when a Spirit of Prayer is poured
out, according to the Promise of the New Covenant, and Persons are enabled by
Faith to behold a pierced Redeemer, they weep bitterly, as one for the Loss of
a first born. Zech. xii. 10.
And certainly the Sins of the Soul, which are the fatal Sources of those that
taint the Life, require our sadest Sorrows! The Psalmist lamented his being
conceived in sin; Psalm. li. 5.
And Hezekiah humbled himself for the Pride of his Heart, together with the
Inhabitants of Jerusalem, and the Wrath of God was turned from them all his
Days 2 Chronicles. xxxii. 26.
.

Fourthly, Keeping the Soul implys, frequent and humble Supplications to God,
for the enlightening and sanctifying Influences of his Holy Spirit, without
which we cannot be preserved; as well as a realizing of his Omnipresence. And
hence the Psalmist prayed, that God would unite his Heart to fear his Name;
lxxxvi Psalm. 11.
and signifies how much he was affected with the Thoughts of God's being every
where present, and observing every Thought of his Mind, as well as every
Instance of his outward Behavior. cxxxix Psalm. 2, 3.
It is indeed Needful to be continually sensible of our Ignorance and Weakness
to perform Duty aright; and under a humble Impression thereof, to attempt it,
in the mean Time earnestly imploring divine Assistance, and believingly relying
on the Mediator for it. Indeed, without frequent lifting up of the Heart to God
by ejaculatory Prayer, as the various Occasions of Life require, the savor of
Piety will gradually languish in our Souls. The Improvement of this Subject yet
remains.

Methinks, Sirs, what has been said, offers Matter of Reproof to those who
wholly neglect their Souls, and depend on outward Acts of Worship: Surely that
God who is a Spirit, will not accept of bodily Worship without the Spirit.
Those who habitually neglect their Souls and rely on externals, are Hypocrites
in Religion, like the Pharisees of old; their sacred Service is abhorred by
God! Isa. i. 11.13, 14.
and their Persons will be finally rejected of him, if they continue in this
Case. For except our Righteousness exceeds that of the Scribes and Pharisees,
the Mouth of Truth has told us, we can in no case enter into the Kingdom of
God. Matt. v. 20


^^d such are likewise to be reproved, who, though they have the root of the
Matter in them, slumber and sleep with the foolish Virgins; and for a Time in
some Degree neglect their Souls, which causes leaness in them, and an
unsavirousness, if not something worse, in their Speech, as well as Barenness
and Disorders in Life.

The Neglect of the Soul, my Brethren, soon manifests it self in the Practice:
What but this, is the Cause of Debates, Envyings, Wraths, Strifes, Backbitings,
Whisperings, Swellings, Tumults? 2 Cor. xii. 10.
which are so dishonorable and detrimental to Religion!

Surely all such as neglect their own Souls, are guilty of rebellion against
God's Authority, and ingratitude against his Love. For which of all God's
Kindnesses do they thus requite him? O that such would consider the Evil of
their Negligence, as well as the Injury they thereby do to themselves, and the
Way they prepare to do mischief to others! For when Persons neglect their own
Souls, then are they disposed to be most severe and critical upon others
Conduct, and that in such a Way as has no Tendency to reform it. But

I proceed to exhort those that are unconverted, to use all proper Means to get
new Hearts, without which change, the Heart cannot be kept holy. O! plow up the
fallow Ground of your Hearts and sow not among Thorns! Cleanse your Hands ye
Sinners, and purify your Hearts ye double Minded. Be afflicted, and mourn, and
weep, and let your Laughter be turned into mourning, and your Joy into
Heaviness. Jam. iv. 8, 9.


I likewise exhort, in the Name of the LORD JESUS CHRIST, those that are
converted, to keep their Souls in the Manner before represented.

Without this, my dear Brethren! you will forget the Mercies which your Eyes
have seen, and loose the thankful Impression of them, which is as ungrateful to
God as it is prejudicial to your Progress in Piety.

Again, Sirs, you should keep the Soul! because it is the Fountain of Action;
from hence says Solomon are the Issues of Life. Prove. iv. 23.
All vital Actions flow from the Heart, and therefore keeping it is like
casting Salt into the Spring to heal it. In the Heart is the Treasury of good
and evil, which appears in the Practice, as our Lord observes. Matt. xii. 35.
It is from the Heart that the Tongue speaks and the Hand acts; and therefore
Heart-Disorders are like Errors of the first Concoction, which cannot be
rectified afterward; and hence it is so necessary to keep our Hearts with all
keeping; we should keep our Eyes, our Tongues, but above all our Hearts, only
take heed to thy self and keep thy Soul diligently.

By this, God will be glorified, not only by your Obedience to this particular
Precept, but by a holy Conversation issuing from it; which is one of the most
beautiful Ornaments and strongest Attractives to invite others to sincere
Religion.

By this, my Brethren, your Love to Jehovah-Jesus will be increased, which
disposes to speak of him, and to him, with seriousness and savor; for surely,
as Solomon observes, the Mouth of the Righteous speaks wisdom, Prove. x. 31.
and love will likewise constrain you to bring forth much fruit, whereby, our
Lord informs us, his Father is glorified. John xv. 8.


By this, Sirs, your Humility will be enlarged, by a farther Discovery of that
Depth of Abominations which is in your Hearts; this will sweetly incline you to
Meekness and Mercy, to candor and Charity, which hopes all things, which
suffers long and is kind. -- And what can be more amiable in it self, and
useful to us and others than Humility? Seeing the High and lofty One who
inhabits Eternity, dwells with such; though he resists the Proud, yet he gives
Grace to the humble. O! what Charms are there in Humility, to allure the
respectful Attention of Mankind to our Speeches and Actions. But to proceed,

By this, (I mean by keeping your Souls) our Peace of Mind will be preserved,
and our joy increased. The Lord has graciously promised, to keep him in perfect
Peace whose Mind is stayed on him. Though God gives divine Joy freely, yet
usually in such a Way as encourages the Diligence of his Creatures in Religion.

By this, our Evidences for Heaven will be confirmed, which is an inestimable
and soul-supporting Privilege; and hence we are commanded to give all Diligence
to make our Calling and Election sure: Intimating that this is the only Way in
which we can expect the Assurance of Salvation. In the Way of Sloth and
Negligence, (whatever seemingly spiritual Apoligies are made for it,
notwithstanding) we are more like to meet with the Devil's Delusions, than with
the holy Spirit's comforting and sealing Influences. 1 John i. 6.


By this, in a Word, all our Graces are like to be strengthened, for to him that
has shall be given, i. e. to him who believingly labors to improve what he
has, more shall be given.

Keeping the Soul as it tends to prevent Guilt, Distance from God, and Deadness
in Duty, so it of consequence lays the Person open as it were, to divine
Influence, which drops like the Dew of Hermon on the Mountains of Zion. Without
this we cannot grow in Goodness, but by it we are fed and nourished as with
Marrow and Fatness.

We are commanded, my Brethren! to grow in Grace; which, doubtless, implys our
earnest use of means for that end, among which, that of keeping the Soul is a
principal One; in this Way we may humbly hope, that Christ will dwell in our
Hearts by Faith, and that we shall be rooted and grounded in Love, and so be
prepared for the various Trials which await us in this present World of change,
labor and misery, and be at last received into the Mansions of Blessedness:
Which may God grant for Christ's sake.

Amen.

