Mr. Barnard's Election-SERMON.

MAY 28th. 1746.

THE Presence of the Great GOD in the Assembly of Political Rulers.

A SERMON Preached before His EXCELLENCY WILLIAM SHIRLEY, Esquire; GOVERNOR; The
Honorable His MAJESTY'S COUNCIL; And the Honorable House of REPRESENTATIVES
of the Province of the Massachusetts Bay in NEW ENGLAND, MAY 28th. 1746.

Being the DAY for the Election of His MAJESTY'S COUNCIL for the said Province.

By John Barnard, M. A. Pastor of a Church in Andover.

Prove. 15. 3. The Eyes of the Lord are in every Place. Psalm. 29. 1. Give unto
the Lord, O ye Mighty, Give unto the Lord Glory and Strength. BOSTON in
NEW ENGLAND: Printed by John Draper, Printer to His Excellency the GOVERNOR
and COUNCIL, for Daniel Gookin, over against the Old-South Meeting House. 1746.

At a Council held at the Council Chamger in Boston, on Thursday the
Twenty-ninth of May 1746.
Ordered, THAT JACOB WENDELL and THOMAS BERRY, Esqrs. give the Thanks of this
Board to the Reverend Mr. John Barnard, for his Sermon preached Yesterday
before the Great and General-Court or Assembly; and that they desire a Copy
thereof for the Press.

Copy Examined, per J. WILLARD, Secr.

AN Election-SERMON.
PSALM LXXXII. 1. First Clause. GOD stands in the Congregation of the Mighty.
--
IT was a very foolish Assertion, and grossly reproachful to the infinite GOD,
which was uttered by the Ancients of Israel, That the Lord has forsaken the
Earth. Ezekiel 8. 11.


Such a Conclusion, as it is highly blasphemous, so it subverts the Foundation
of religious Duties resulting from the Circumstances of particular Persons, and
Condition of Societies. It destroys Affiance in the Almighty, utterly
discourages Prayer to Him for temporal Mercies, leaves no Place for the
Exercise of Repentance and Submission to His Will, in a Day of Adversity; nor
for devout and holy Joy and Gratitude, in a Time of Prosperity. It rob^ every
sober and considering Mind of the Comfort and Satisfaction among from an
Apprehension of GOD's universal Presidency over His Creatures. How much soever
the abandoned Sons of Vice might be gratified with a Persuasion, that the Deity
is confined to the Third Heaven, and not concerned about Persons and Things in
this lower World: It is certain, this Thought would overspread the Souls of the
wise and serious Part of Mankind with Clouds and Darkness.

But Thanks be to GOD; notwithstanding the many and great Apostacies of this
Land, our Degeneracy has not proceeded to this Degree and Pitch of Atheism: We
yet believe there is a glorious Providence managed by the sovereign, unerring,
powerful, righteous, faithful and merciful Hand of the Most High.

What but the Consideration of this induces us religiously to assemble in this
sacred Place, upon the joyful Return of our Anniversary Solemnities? Is not a
Sense of our Dependence upon GOD, the great Motive of our coming into His
House, this Morning? Is not the Belief, that He interests Himself in the
Concerns of Men on Earth; that it is with Him graciously to continue us in the
Enjoyment of the invaluable Privileges, which He has given us; to direct and
influence in the momentous Transactions of this Day, and the Affairs of
Government the Year ensuing: Is not this Belief the Reason of the (...)
Supplications we present unto Him, and the Oblation of Praise we pay Him, for
public Blessings?

The inspired Book of Psalms, out of which I have chosen the Passage, now read
in your Audience, abounds in a peculiar Manner, in the Displays of the
matchless Glory and Grandeur of the blessed GOD, as the supreme Ruler and
Governor of the World; it is fruitful in the Exhibitions of His boundless and
everlasting Dominion and Kingdom; gives us Assurance, that His Angels, those
Ministers whom He has made Flames of Fire, do His Commandment, and hearken to
the Voice of His Word Psalm 10^. ^0
. That He does what He pleases in the Realms of Light above, and Governs in
the inferior Heavens Psalm, 148. 8
. That His Footstool is not below His Cognizance and Concern; but that He
extends His Inspection and providential Influences to all Parts of this lower
Creation Psalm. 135. 6.
. -- And, that the Legions of Darkness are under His Government Psalm. 78. 49.
.

But not to be too general, I shall contract and confine my Thoughts to one
particular Branch of Divine Providence, plainly directed to in the Words of the
Psalmist, GOD stands in the Congregation of the Mighty.

The heavenly Intelligencies have the Style Mighty given them in the sacred
Oracles. The great Apostle declares, That the Lord Jesus Christ will be
revealed from Heaven with His Mighty Angels 2 Thessalonians. 1: 7.
: And St. John in his Visions, saw a mighty Angel make his Descent from the
upper World Rev. 10. 1.
: But the Mighty, whom the sacred Penman speaks of, are, in the Context,
charged with judging unjustly, and accepting Persons, are exhorted to defend
the Poor and Fatherless, and do Justice to the Afflicted and Needy; and though
they are called Gods, yet were obliged to die like Men: Characters utterly
incompatible to those spotless and immortal Creatures who surround the Throne
of GOD.

It is evident then, That by the Mighty, in the Congregation of whom GOD is
said to stand, we are to understand Men that are concerned in the Government of
a People, those that sustain high Posts, who have the Legislative Power in
their Hands, who assemble and sit to consider, determine and resolve upon what
will be for the Relief and Good of particular Persons, and Bodies and Societies
of Men under their Jurisdiction; and the Defense, Peace and Happiness of the
People in general, committed to their Charge: These are the Persons, I
conceive, whom the Psalmist means, when he says, GOD stands in the
Congregation of the Mighty.

In this great Congregation GOD stands: I suppose every one will easily
conceive, that bodily Parts and Postures are by no means strictly and properly
to be ascribed unto Him, who is an immense Spirit; but without any Difficulty
will see a Figure in the Word. Should we take it strictly and literally it
would be to debase the Godhead, and make Him such an one as ourselves Psalm 50.
21.
: When it is said then, GOD stands in the Congregation of the Mighty, we are
to understand (as I apprehend) His inspecting and affording this honorable and
important Assembly His protecting Presence and gracious Influence.

I shall endeavor to discourse upon the Words under the two following
PROPOSITIONS.

I. IT is most fit and suitable, that there should be a Number concerned in the
Civil Government of a People. II. THE great GOD is present in the Assembly of
Political Rulers.
I. It is most fit and suitable, that there should be a Number concer^^d in the
Civil Government of a People.

The Congregation of the Mighty, says the Text, implying there was a Number
invested with Power and Authority convened for the Exercise thereof. Now that
it is most fit and suitable it should be, will appear from the three following
Things.

1st, Such is the Infirmity and Darkness of the human Understanding in Man's
present Condition, as to render Government managed by a Number of Men most
eligible.

In this State of Imperfection, the intellectual Powers of Mankind labor under
great Disadvantages; though they may be greatly improved, strengthened and
brightned by Use, Study, Education and Conversation: The wisest Man is not
always wise; his Mind is subject to Inadvertency, and his Memory needs a
Monitor: Though his Capacity be large and extensive, yet there may be some Things
relating to the public Good, that have escaped his Observation, that others
may take Notice of; and for this Reason it is best there should be an Assembly
of Rulers: The Welfare of a People may be more promoted by having many Heads
employed for it, than One only.

When there is a Number concerned in Government, setting to deliberate and
resolve upon Measures proper to be taken for the Safety, Peace and Advantage of
a People, or the Relief and Happiness of particular Men; the Debates, in such
an Assembly, are productive of Light, which tends to prepare and ripen the
Thoughts of Rulers for coming to a Determination upon the weighty Matters that
call for their Consideration.

2dly, The Burden of Government, if faithfully attended, is too great for a
single Person to bear.

It is a Business that is very ponderous; the Cares and Fatigues of it are too
painful and heavy to be sustained by one Man; his Strength had need be the
Strength of Scones, and his Flesh (...), or he will sink under them.
Apprehensive of (...) was Jethro, Father-in-law to Moses; when he saw him sit
alone, from Morning to Evening, to judge the People; he was concerned for him,
and said, the Thing that thou do is not good, thou will surely wear away;
this Thing is too heavy for thee, thou art not able to perform it thyself
alone; and then he gives him this prudent Advice, to provide out of all the
People able Men, such as feared GOD: Men of Truth, hating Covetousness, and to
place them over the People. Exodus 18. 17, 18, 21, 22.


There is a Multiplicity of arduous Concerns that he upon the Hands, and fill
the Head of a Civil Ruler; and it is so especially at some particular
Junctures. The Safety and Defense of his People is to be intensely regarded,
when Enemies make War against them: Their Trade is to be protected; it may be,
they are fallen into perplexed and distressing Circumstances, and, if it can be,
are to be extricated and delivered out of them: Good Laws must be supported,
and new ones occasionally made; meet Persons to execute them are to be chosen,
and put into Commission: Religion and Learning are to be upheld, and Measures
taken to promote the flourishing of these great Interests: The Grievances of
particular Persons and Societies must, if it be practicable, be redressed. It
is not enough, that a Ruler take Care, that the People don't suffer in their
Persons and Interests; but he must lay himself out to advance their Prosperity:
And it may be further observed, that sometimes a People are grievously out of
Frame; and this renders the Difficulties of Government so much the greater. The
composed, meek and patient Leader of Israel, found the Discontent and
Uneasiness of his People to be more than he could bear, How can I myself alone,
said he, ^ear your Cumbr^nce, and your Burden, and your Strife? Deuteronomy. 1. 12.
And he than expostulated with the glorious GOD, Numb 1
Have I conceived all this People, have I begotten them? that Thou should say
unto me, Carry them in thy Bosom, (as a nursing Father carries the sacking
Child) unto the Land which Then ^^^rest unto the^^ Fathers: I am not able to
^ear all this People alone, because it is too heavy for me. The compassionate
GOD heard the Complaint of his dejected Servant, and provided Assistance for
him, said unto him, Gather unto Me seventy of the Elders of Israel, whom thou
know to be the Elders of the People, and Officers over them, and bring them
unto the Tabernacle of the Congregation, that they may stand there with thee,
and I will come down, and talk with thee there; and I will take of the Spirit,
that is upon thee, and I will put it upon them, and they shall bear the Burden
of the People with thee, that thou bear it not thyself alone. It is very
evident then, that the Government of a People is too great a Labor and Burden
for One to bear; and consequently it is most fit and suitable, that a Number
should be employed and concerned therein, that there should be an Assembly of
Rulers to share the Labors, Cares and Troubles which attend it.

3dly, For one Person alone to have the Government of a People in his Hands,
would be too great a Temptation.

It tends to excite and draw forth the Pride of Man, to make him unsufferably
haughty; it gives him too much Liberty to exert his Corruptions; and it
encourages him to become a Tyrant and an Oppressor, to dispense with Laws, and
break the most solemn Oaths; to proceed so far in his unrighteous Practices,
that his Subjects, weary of the Doctrine of passive Obedience and
Non-resistance, are necessitated to plead their own Cause, and vindicate their
Rights by Measures which for a long Time they were loath to make Use of. -- Thus
King James the Second, tired with Parliaments, and thirsting after a despotick
Power, set them aside; and such arbitrary Courses did he take, that his
injured, provoked Subjects, armed themselves in Defense of their Religion and
Liberties; the Consequence of which was his abdicating the Throne, which, by
all his Attempts and the Endeavors of his Friends, he could never afterward
recover. So let the Efforts of his pretended Son to seat himself upon the
British Throne, be blasted by Heaven, and rendered abortive, as (blessed be
GOD) they have hitherto been.

From the Whole then, it appears, that it is most fit and suitable that a
Number should be concerned in Civil Government, that it is best for a People to
be under such a Constitution and Establishment, whether it be a mixed Monarchy,
that excellent Form which our Nations, and the British Plantations are happily
in the Enjoyment of, who are governed by a KING, House of Peers, and Commons,
the latter of which are chosen by the People; or an Aristocracy, which is the
Government of a Commonwealth, by Nobles; or a Democracy, wherein Magistrates
are elected from among and by the People.

I pass now to take the Second Proposition under Consideration. II. The great
GOD is present in the Assembly of Political Rulers.
To illustrate this Head, I shall consider in what Respects He is present in
this Assembly.

It would be too great a Departure from the Intention of the Text, should I
observe, that He is present in it Representatively, although it is so in Fact,
for Rulers are his Vicegerents, his Agents, and exhibit some Image of His
Authority and governing Power: For this Reason they are called Gods in
Scripture, they are styled so twice in the Psalm that contains my Text: He
judges among the Gods: I said ye are Gods: But not to dwell upon this Thought.

1st, The inspecting Presence of the great GOD is always in this Assembly.

He is an immense Being, and therefore Omniscient: Is He a GOD at hand, and not
afar off; and can any hide themselves in secret Places, that He should not see
them? He fills Heaven and Earth with His Presence; and nothing escapes His
Observation (...)
.

Has not He, who governs and will judge the World, a universal Knowledge of
Men, their Actions and Behavior? Besure His Eyes are in every Place, beholding
the Evil and the Good Prove. 15. 3.
; He pandereth Men's Goings Prove. 5. 21.
; and all Things are open and naked unto Him Heb 4. 13.
: Who can doubt then of His inspecting Presence, it is being in the Assembly of
Political Rulers? He takes a particular and critical View of them, sees who
they are who compose the Congregation of the Mighty, and sit in this Honorable
Assembly; He calls them all by Name: His Eyes are like a Flame of Fire; and
penetrate into the Hearts of Rulers: The Lord sees not as Man sees; Man
looks at the outward Appearance, but the Lord looks at the Heart 1 Samuel ^6.
7.
If any of the Members that compose this Society are governed by low, mean,
base and selfish Principles in their Proceedings; if they are influenced by a
Party-Spirit, and have no Regard for the public Good, any further than is
consistent with their private Interests, the Omniscient GOD remarks it: Are
there any careless, indolent Members, contented with the Honors and Emoluments
of their advanced Seats, not attending to the weighty Concerns of Government,
the great GOD is privy to it: He is conscious of it, if there be any who
indulge themselves in letting their Minds be absent from the Business of their
exalted Stations, who depend upon their Brethren to think for them; and by an
implicit Faith, will give their Votes with the Majority, not weighing and
examining Matters themselves, which they act upon: If Iniquity should be
established by a Law, in this Assembly, the righteous LORD, who loves
Righteousness, has a perfect Knowledge of it.

If obvious Measures to promote the Honor of GOD, the Interests of Religion,
and the Relief and Prosperity of his People be neglected, it comes under his
Observation: He was able, from His own Knowledge, thus to expostulate with the
Congregation of the Mighty of old, How long will ye judge unjustly? Psalm. 82.
2, 10 5.
And this was His Complaint, They know not, neither will they understand, they
walk in Darkness, all the Foundations of the Earth are out of Course. In short,
He is thoroughly acquainted with all the Sins of this Assembly, whether of
Omission or Commission.

And indeed, this His Inspection is very awful; for it is in order to a future
Account, which He will exact of the Rulers of the Earth: The Great, as well as
Small, must stand before His enlightened Tribunal: Rev. 20. 12.
Though Rulers are called Gods, yet they must die like Men Psalm. 82. 6, 7.
. The Breath even of Princes goes forth, and after Death is the Judgment Psalm.
46 4.
. The exalted Potentates of the Earth are accountable to Him, who is higher
than the highest: And with GOD there will be no Respect of Persons: He will
judge impartially; and none of the Distinctions, which make a Difference
between Men in this World, will be regarded at the last Day; but every Man
shall be treated according to his Works, whether he be high or low, rich or
poor.

And if the Great GOD takes Cognizance of what is amiss in the Assembly of
Civil Rulers, besure He does of what is pleasing to Him. He observes the
Integrity, the Diligence and the Faithfulness of those who sit in the Assembly
of the Mighty: He beholds their Patience and Self-denial, their public Spirit,
and the agreeable Application of their Talents; the good Improvement they make
of their superior Accomplishments, and their peculiar Opportunities to do Good,
and singular Advantages to serve the Honor of His Name in their exalted
Stations, and to approve themselves public Blessings: They may address Him in
the Words of Governor Nehemiah, Think upon me, my GOD, for good, according to
all that I have done for this People Neb. 5 19.
. He keeps a Record of their Fidelity and Serviceableness; and will gloriously
Reward them therefore in the World to come: They shall have Boldness in the Day
of Judgment, and rejoice with Joy unspeakable; when Shame shall cover the Face,
and Regret and Anguish fill the Soul of the unfaithful, unprofitable and
mischievous Ruler.

2dly, The great GOD is present in the Assembly of Political Rulers
influentially.

He has a tender Regard for human Societies; and in order to their Safety,
Peace and Prosperity, establishes and preserves Government in them: He
furnishes them with Rulers: The raising up Persons of this Character is His
Work, The Powers that be, are ordained of Him Romans 13. 1.
. The Shields of the Earth are His Psalm. 47. 9
. By Him Kings reign, and Princes decree Justice: By Him Princes rule, and
Nobles, yea, all the Judges of the Earth Prove. ^ 15 6.
. He vouchsafes His favorable Influences in the Assembly of Rulers; otherwise
how could His kind Intention and Purpose in setting up and continuing a good
Form of Government among a People be ever accomplished?

(1.) The great GOD is present with Political Rulers, when they have sufficient
Light, for their Direction in the important Work they are called unto.

Light proceeds from Him, He is the Father of it: James 1. 17.
He gives Understanding, Wisdom and Prudence: He made King David wise as an
Angel, to discern both Good and Evil; gave his Son Solomon an understanding
Heart, so that there was none like him, before nor after him; and furnished
Daniel with extensive Measures of Wisdom.

When He, who dwells between the Cherubims, shines forth, affords Light,
gives Counsel and Direction in this Assembly, He is present in it by His
Influences upon the Minds of His Servants. And is it not oftentimes so? Don't
He lead them in a right and plain Path? He is the GOD of the Spirits of all
Flesh Numb. 16. 22.
; and has an easy Access to the Souls, which He has made; strengthens Men's
thinking Powers and Faculties; scatters the Clouds which darken the Minds of
Rulers, and irradiates their Understandings; leads them into such wise and
prudent Measures as answer the great Purposes of Government: Under the
illuminating Influences of Heaven they make good Laws, do Justice to Persons
who complain to them of Grievances; project such Schemes, as greatly tend to
the Peace, Safety and Prosperity of a People; are directed to Means conducive
to their Defense, from the Insults and Depredations of their Enemies; and which
issue in the Annoyance of those that rise up against them: We have had a late
Instance of a great and good Projection of this Kind, formed by the Government
we are immediately under.

(2.) The great GOD is present in the Assembly of Political Rulers by His
animating Influences.

Courage is an Endowment necessary in the Leaders of a People. Rulers should
not be Cowards. When the LORD advanced Joshua to be Successor to His Servant
Moses, He bid him be strong, and of good Courage Joshua 1. 6.
. Unhappy is it for a People when they have Women and Children to govern them;
those who are not only void of Political Wisdom, but Persons who are apt to be
disheartened at the Sight of Difficulties, and affrighted at the Appearance of
Dangers: But happy is it when GOD provides strong Rods for the Scepter of them
that bear Rule over a People. Civil Rulers should be steady and unmovable, as
the great Mountains, in just and good Proceedings, steadfast in the Discharge of
the Duties of their superior Places, and ought with Intrepidity to pursue what
makes for the Welfare of the Public, though they incur the ill Resentments of
particular Men, and expose themselves to the Malignity of some People.

Now when they are resolute and courageous in the Discharge of their weighty
Betrustments, it proceeds from the divine animating Influences: Being
vigorously moved hereby, they had rather offend Men than the great and mighty
Ruler of the Universe, whose Trustees they are; had rather preserve a good
Conscience, than gratify ill Humors, and keep in good Terms with those who
impertinently meddle with State Affairs, and addict themselves to inspect the
public Administration, and find Fault with every Thing almost, which they
themselves have not a Hand in. Being thus influenced by Heaver, the Pilots of a
Province will not baulk their Duty, through a base Fear of being dropped out of their
public Character at the next Election: They had rather live neglected, and in
an obscure private Capacity, than omit doing what appears to them to be for the
public Weal, or have a Hand in what they they think will be an Encroachment
upon the Royal Prerogative, or Detrimental to the People, with whose Interests
they are betrusted.

As (...) which they have received from above will restrain them from lavishing
away the Public Money, so they will not let a Projection drop, if they can help
it, when the common Safety and Prosperity makes the Prosecution of it
necessary. They will engage in chargeable Enterprises, in Behalf of their
People, trusting in GOD to give them an Ability in Time, to discharge the
Expenses arising therefrom. The Outcries of inconsiderate People will not
terrify them so much as to prove a Temptation to Unfaithfulness.

(3.) The great GOD is present in the Assembly of Political Rulers by His
pacifick Influences.

When there is Peace among the Heads of a People it proceeds from Him: He is
the GOD of Peace. He makes Peace in the high Places of the Earth, and
preserves it among Rulers: By an Impression upon the Souls of Men, He creates
and upholds a Harmony among them. When Love and a good Agreement subsists among
Rulers, in their Essays to promote the common Welfare, it is evident, GOD is
with them in a gracious Manner. How favorable is He to them, and to those who
are under their Authority, when one Spirit and Soul appears to animate this
Body of Men; and they are united in employing their Talents for the Honor of
Him, from whom they have derived them, and the Good of the People, who are
their Care and Charge? But on the other Hand, when there are Jars and a
Misunderstanding among Rulers, GOD absents Himself from them, as to His
gracious Presence; and it bodes ill to this Assembly, and has a dark Aspect
upon the Circumstances of a People. Where there is Envy and Strife among
Persons of low Life, there is Confusion; but much worse is a Fire kindled and
blown up in the Bowels of a Political Body: It Is a bad Omen, when this is the
State of the Congregation of the Mighty: It presages ill to Rulers and Ruled:
The Contrary is a Token for Good, that GOD has a gracious Design and Purpose
(...) respect to those who are in Authority, and them who are subject to them.
A good Harmo^^ is the Strength, the Beauty and Glory of Societies, and
especially of political Assemblies. A House divided against itself is a Place
of Confusion, and in Danger of falling; and it is well if a Kingdom divided
against itself is not brought to Ruin. Matthew. 1^. ^5.


(4.) When Rulers are patient and resigned, the great GOD is influentially
present with them.

They have need of Patience and Resignation: The Occasions for the Exercise of
these Virtues are many and various. The Labors and Fatigues of Government are
very heavy, if it be faithfully attended: Sometimes the Schemes and
Projections, which they form to promote the Public Good, don't succeed
according to their Hope and Expectation; the Smiles of Divine Providence don't
accompany them, although they are most wisely adapted to bring about the End
they are designed for: This Disappointment calls for their Patience and
Resignation to the Will of GOD. Sometimes their Way is so dark, encumbered and
embarassed that they cannot proceed with Satisfaction of Mind: And let them be
never so diligent and faithful in serving the Public, many will fault and
reproach them: This is too often the Case. Moses was a Ruler of rare
Accomplishments, he was a wise Man, and learned in all the Learning of the
Egyptians, and was eminently faithful in his Post; yet were there some that
disliked him, and were uneasy under his Conduct; their discontented Spirits
moved them to an Insurrection against this excellent Servant of the LORD; there
was a Confederacy to throw off his Government: The great Cry was, that he took
too much upon him; but GOD awfully rebuked these bold and wicked Men. Numb 16
When Civil Rulers are patient and resigned under the uneasy and difficult
Things they meet with, from a Consciousness of the Divine overruling
Providence, and their own Integrity, the great GOD is graciously present with
them by His Influences upon their Spirits. He is the GOD of Patience Romans 15. 5.
. They are the Words of the Apostle, Strengthened with all Might, according to
His glorious Power unto all Patience and Longsuffering, with Joyfulness. Col.
1. 11.


I have considered, that the inspecting and influential Presence of the great
GOD is in the Assembly of Political Rulers: I would observe,

3dly, That His safe-guarding Presence is in this Assembly.

The Congregation of the Mighty is sometimes exposed to great Dangers. There
are secret Plots and Devices, formed against it by the Enemies of the
Government, the Execution of which would be fatal and destructive to it. When
GOD, who is knowing to all the Works of Darkness, and has the wicked
Contrivances of Men and Devils under His Observation, brings to Light
treasonable Machinations against Government, He is graciously present with the
Assembly of the Mighty: Thus was He present with the great Convention of our
Nations, in the Reign of King JAMES the First; He wonderfully discovered the
Gunpowder Treason, when it was ripe for Execution: In the Mount was GOD seen;
the sudden Design was in an astonishing Manner detected, and the wicked
Instruments of it were brought to condign Punishment.

Sometimes the Enemies of a Government seek its Ruin by open Violence, by
hellish Insurrections and Rebellions: But the supreme Ruler of the World, who
sits in the Heavens, laugheth at their Attempts, makes them as Chaff before
the Wind; and His Angel chaseth them. This was the Case in our Nations, A. D.
1715. And we have had a late Instance of it: GOD's People have seen the Rebels
in Scotland fleeing before the Mighty and Puissant DUKE of CUMBERLAND: Their
Hands have not been able to perform their Enterprise. Blessed be the most high
GOD, who grants Deliverance, and gives Salvation unto Kings, that the horrid
Rebellion, conceived and formed in the Conclave of Hell and Rome, fostered and
spirited up by the Courts. of France and Spain, has been so far obstructed in
its Progress: May it be utterly discouraged, and all the Sparks of it
extinguished!

It remains now that I make some Application of what has been said.

APPLICATION.
1st. Is it most sit and suitable, that a Number should be concerned in the
Civil Government of a People, what Cause have We to bless GOD, for the
agreeable Political Establishment which we are under.

The supreme Government at Home, which we are the Subjects of, calls for our
most hearty Gratitude to Heaven. That Form of Government is thought by many
wise Men to be the Best, which is lodged in the Hands of a KING and Parliament;
the best adapted for the Security and Advantage of a People: Should we not be
very thankful for so good a Constitution? It has been once and again struck at,
and the Subversion of it has been greatly attempted, the Liberties and
Privileges of the British Realm have been in great Hazard; but the Gates of
Hell, and Men of arbitrary Principles, have not been able to prevail against
them: Being safe guarded by the kind and watchful Providence of GOD, they have
continued unto this Day.

And what Reason have we to bless the great Ruler of the World, for the
Charter-Privileges which we enjoy? That the Form of Government we are
immediately under, is not oppressive. We are ruled by a GOVERNOR who
represents the KING, a Board of Councellers, chosen by and from among
our-selves; and by a House of Representatives, elected by the Freeholders of
the respective Towns of the Province. It is of GOD, that our political
Circumstances are so comfortable; We should rejoice in them, and give Him
Praise, that it is our Lot to be subject to such a desirable Constitution: May
we never be so imprudent and ungrateful to GOD and the KING, as to take any
Steps, which may expose us to the Loss of our Charter; but let us be solicitous
that we may enjoy it all our Days, and leave it as a most rich and valuable
Inheritance to our Children.

2dly, Is the inspecting Presence of the great GOD in the Assembly of political
Rulers, then they ought to be greatly influenced by the Consideration hereof in
all their Proceedings.

They should act up to Conscience, as remembering they are under His Eye, who
is a Being of consummate Righteousness and Goodness. These divine Perfections,
which He displays in the Government of the World, they should be concerned to
Copy. They should be Followers of Him, in the Exercise of the same Virtues and
Perfections; hereby their Administrations will be highly pleasing to Him: But
if they are conducted by Principles that are corrupt and vicious, He will
behold it with Displeasure. The Presence of such a GOD, the Virtues which He
discovers in the Government of His Creatures, should keep the Gods of the Earth
under a proper Regimen. Shall not these Excellencies make them afraid? Shall
not the Dread of a just and good GOD fall upon and influence them in all their
Transactions? Shall it not engage them to the greatest Fidelity in the Services
He requires of them? Shall not the Intention for which He takes Notice of their
Actions, have a mighty Force to make them sincere and conscientious? Does He
inspect them, in order to the calling them to an Account, and rendering to them
according to their Behavior in the public Capacity they sustain; and should
not the Thought hereof oblige them to acquit themselves well in their exalted
Stations, that they may escape His tremendous Rebuke, and through Grace,
receive His transporting Well done, good and faithful Servant? Faithful Rulers
shall receive a great and blessed Reward from Him, who knows their Services,
and is acquainted with the Integrity of their Hearts: And when we lament the
Loss we sustain by the Deaths of our wife, faithful and serviceable Patriots,
may we not rejoice in their superior and peculiar Felicity; and particularly
should we not refresh our Souls, in the midst of our Sorrow, by thinking of the
distinguishing Glory, which is already, and will at the last Day be assigned,
by the Grace of our Lord JESUS CHRIST, to the lately deceased Honorable Thomas
Cushing, Esquire; who uprightly employed his rare and sanctified Political Talents
for the Honor of the great GOD, and in the Service of His People?

And will the Honorable Gentlemen, who are to be concerned in the important
Elections of this Day, suffer me to say, Let the Consideration of GOD's
inspecting Presence make a powerful Impression upon your Hearts, and govern you
in the great Affair before you. Let me entreat your Honors, to consider
yourselves in the Sight of GOD, and accountable unto Him: He will cite us all
before His Bar in a little Time, and treat us according to our Demeanor in the
respective Relations and Stations we are now in: Let a Sense of this guide you
in your Elections, and make you studious of electing those into His Majesty's
Council who are most likely to be serviceable, and who come nearest to the
Scripture-Character of those who are meet to be introduced into high Places of
Trust, Power and Authority.

And need I be your Monitor, that they should be Men of Knowledge and Wisdom?
Did not the Head of the Tribes of Israel direct to Persons thus qualified? Take
ye wise Men, says he, understanding and known among your Tribes, and I will
make them Rulers over you Deuteronomy. 1. 13.
. A Councellor should be a good Thinker: Not that it be necessary he should be
a great Philosopher; but he should understand his Duty as a Magistrate, in such
an elevated Station, be well acquainted with the State of his Country, and be
understanding in the Times. So necessary was Wisdom thought to be in a Ruler by
the Egyptians, that their Kings had their Crowns and Diadems twisted with
Serpents, as an Emblem of this excellent Endowment.

And does not Justice and Honesty enter into the Character of a good Ruler?
Every one, I hope, will acknowledge these Virtues should be found in all those
that fit at the Council Board; He that rules over Men, must be Just 2 Sa^ ^3.
3.
. Machiavel would have a Ruler be a cunning Deceiver; but such a vicious Man is
not be trusted with private Concerns, much less with the Affairs and Interests
of the Public. A Ruler should deserve the Commendation that was given to a
Heathen Emperor, that he was Wise without Improbity.

And ought they not to be Men of a public generous Spirit? Moses was advised
to appoint Men bating Covetousness, for Rulers Exodus 18. 21.
. The Emperor Adrian's Motto was, Non mihi, sed Populo, I am not for myself,
but for my People. Mordecai was a bright Example of this Spirit Es^^. 10. ^.
.

Again, would not he who is chosen to sit at the Council Board, be wanting in
his Character, should he be destitute of Zeal, Courage and Magnanimity? Jethro
advised Moses to choose able M^^, and set them over the People: According to the
Hebrew it is Men of Strength or Courage. The Steps of Solomon's Throne were on
both Sides supported with Lions: They were designed, no doubt, to be Symbols of
that Courage which should be in a Ruler. A King, that sits in the Throne of
Judgment, scatters away all Evil with his Eyes, says the wise Man. Prove. 20.
8.


And is not Mercy, as well as Zeal and Justice, essential to a good Ruler? In
Government Mercy must be mixed and blended with Justice. We read the Throne is
established by Righteousness Prove. 16. 12.
. We also read, it is established by Mercy. Prove. 25. 5.
Summum Jus, summa injuria, is a true Maxim. Mercy makes a Ruler's Face to
shine. I remember, the Roman Orator in an Oration which he made to Julius
Caesar, in Behalf of one who had been on Pompey's Side, says, That Men resemble
the Gods in nothing more than in Goodness and Mercy. It was the Advice of
Maecenas to the Emperor Augustus, that he would not abuse his Power, nor think
it any Diminution of it, if he did not do all that he could do.

Finally, Is it not of great Importance that those who are chosen into His
Majesty's Council, be Gentlemen of Sobriety and Religion? Are those so fit to
govern others who don't govern their Passions and Appetites? Rulers should be
able to rule their own Spirits, to restrain their criminal Inclinations. It was
a poor Character given of an Assyrian Monarch, That he was the best Man alive
at Eating and Drinking. Is an Epicure or a Debauchee a meet Person to be a
Senator? And is it not to be wished, that all who sit at this Honorable Board
might be of a Religious Character? The stronger the Ties of Conscience are, the
better qualified are Persons (caeteris paribus) for a public Trust, King David
thought so, he could not bear with irreligious Courtiers Psalm 101.
.

3dly, Are the Divine gracious Influences so necessary in the Assembly of
Political Rulers, we see where their Dependence should be placed.

A great Trust is reposed them, they need Help from above, for the right and
acceptable Discharge of it: Being sensible hereof, it is of Consequence that
they exercise Faith in the allsufficient GOD, through the great Mediator. GOD
is able to guide the Guides of a People, to lead their Leaders, and give their
Senators Wisdom; to animate and inspire them with Resolution and Courage; to
fill their Souls with Patience and pacifick Dispositions; and carry them
through the weighty Affairs they are engaged in. And have they any Reason to
suspect His Inclination to afford them His gracious influential Presence? If
they make Him the Object of their Trust, with a sincere Regard to His Glory,
and are found in a Way of Well-doing.

4thly, What we have heard, suggests to us the great Duty of Gratitude to a
gracious GOD, when Things go well in the Assembly of our Rulers.

When it is so, GOD is with them of a Truth, by His favorable Influences; and
we should observe and gratefully acknowledge it, to His Praise and Glory.

And has He not appeared to smile upon the Administrations of Government in
this Province, from Time to Time? Have we not had good Laws enacted by our
Political Fathers? Laws well calculated to prevent Irreligion; and for the
promoting of Virtue and Piety; to deter Persons from profaning the Sabbath;
from needlessly absenting themselves from the public Worship; and to guard the
adorable Name of GOD, from the Abuses of the Tongues; and to defend our
Persons, Names and Interests; to curb Men's licentious Passions and Appetites;
to maintain our Peace, and advance our Prosperity? Have not Means been used to
protect us from an Invasion of our Enemies by Sea; and have not our exposed
inland Frontiers been the Care of our Honorable Rulers? And have they not
carried on the Business of the Public with a great Measure of Peace and good
Agreement?

And here I cannot pass by in Silence, the late ever-memorable successful
Expedition, first plan'd, concerted and resolved upon in the General Assembly
of this Province: An Enterprise of the greatest Consequence, in its prosperous
Event to our Merchandise and Fishery! A Design succeeded by such a Series of
astonishing Providence, that we need not doubt, that He who has the Hearts of
all Men at His Disposal, influenced our Honorable Rulers to form and prosecute
this wonderful Scheme.

When the News was first brought us of the very remarkable Success, that
attended that great Affair, every Mouth was filled with Laughter, and Tongue
with Singing: Then said we, The Lord has done great Things for as, The Lord
has done great Things for us, whereof we are glad. Our Obligations to be
thankful to the GOD of Armies and Victory, still remain as strong as ever:
Though alas! We are called to mourn the Deaths of many Hundreds of our brave
Men, cut down in the surrendered City, by the Sword of the destroying Angel!
What shall we say? The Ways of Divine Providence are unsearchable! But GOD is
always infinitely Wise, Just and Holy, when Clouds and Darkness are round about
His Throne. The awful Scene of Death, which has been in that Place, should not
make us unthankful for the Conquest of it.

Will your EXCELLENCY now permit me humbly and thankfully to take Notice of the
observable gracious Presence of Heaven, that has been with you since your
Access to the Chief Seat of Government among us: Through the good Hand of GOD
upon you, your Administrations have (as we trust) been easy to your own Mind;
besure they have been Satisfactory to your People.

And here let me congratulate your EXCELLENCY, upon the Reduction of
Cape-Breton, to the Obedience of the British Crown; a great Event, which your
Heart was much set upon; and in the Accomplishment of which you have (under
Divine Providence) been the principal Leader.

We have Reason also to bless the Heart-disposing GOD, that, when your Presence
was so needful at Louisbourg, your Self-denial was so great, as to reconcile
you to a Voyage to that Place; where your Essays to regulate Matters were, in a
good Measure, succeeded; and, that you were contented to make so long a Stay
there, in a Time of raging Sickness: And we would gratefully acknowledge the
Goodness of the great Preserver of Men, in returning you to your Government* in
Safety.

As your EXCELLENCY has been favored with GOD's gracious Influences hitherto,
so may that GOD, who has been with you, be so for the future, and render you a
great and lasting Blessing to us; enable you successfully to use your Interest
at Home, as well as your best Endeavors here, for the Good of this People;
and, in due Time, gloriously Reward you for your faithful Services.

5thly, Is the great GOD willing to be influentially present in the Assembly of
Political Rulers, this should be a great Motive to Prayer.

It should be so with those who have a Seat in this superior Convention.
Rulers should be moved by this Consideration, often to repair to the
Prayer-hearing GOD, who is both able and willing to supply all their Needs,
according to his Riches in Glory through JESUS CHRIST (...)
. We read of Rulers in Scripture, how were Men of Prayer, David was so, Solomon
prayed for Wisdom, that he might know how to go out and come in before the
great People, whom he had the Charge of. Nehemiah, Governor of Judah, was a
Man of Prayer, so was Moses, Samuel and Jehos^^ph^t: But not to insist upon
this, I hope our (...) Rulers, have such a Sense of their Dependence upon GOD,
as not to need any Excitations to Prayer from me.

I (...) apply myself to you, my Brethren, who are not of the Legislature, I
would do it to all the People of GOD in the Province, were they within hearing,
and beseech you and them to be excited, by what has been said, to pray for your
Rulers GOD is willing to afford them His Help, to afford them His gracious
Presence, and what an Encouragement is this to their People to pray for them Is
not their Work attended with Difficulties, and especially in this tempestuous
and dark Time of War? Don't our Prosperity depend very much upon the Divine
favorable Presence with them? Are they not betrusted with our invaluable
Interests, and shall we not seek the Prosperity of this important Assembly by
our Prayers? Is it not agreeable to the Apostolic Direction, to pray for our
Rulers? I exhort, says St. Paul, that first of all Supplications, Prayers,
giving of Thanks be made for all Men; for Kings, and for all that are in
Authority, that we may lead a quiet and peaceable Life, in all Godliness and
Honesty 1 (...) 2. 1, 2.
. But let us not confine our Prayers to the Government we are more immediately
under, but let us offer up our Supplications for our rightful, lawful and
gracious King GEORGE, His Council, the Ministers of State, and both Houses of
Parliament, That the great GOD would be in these Assemblies of the Mighty,
graciously influencing of them; affording Protection from the secret Attempts,
and open Violence of all the Adversaries of our happy Establishment.

And that our Prayers in Behalf of our Rulers may be effectual, we must be
concerned that we be obedient to the Holy GOD: Will He attend to our
Supplications, if we do not cleanse our Hands, and purify our Hearts? If we
turn away our Ear from hearing the Law, Will our Prayers be heard, though they
be many? Prove. 28. 9.
GOD may be provoked by the Sins of a People, to fill the Way of their Rulers
with Darkness; and though they abound in Prayer for them, they shall not be
heard. When He was angry with His ancient People, for their Iniquities, He
denounced this Commination against them, that He would do a mavelous Work
amongst them, a mavelous Work, and a Wonder, the Wisdom of their wise Men
should perish, and the Understanding of their prudent Men should be hid Isaiah
29. 14.
: On the contrary, having promised His People to pour out His Spirit upon them,
He gives them Assurance of His Favor with Regard to their Political
Government, Isaiah 1. 25, 26.
I will turn my Hand upon thee, and purely purge away thy Dross, and take away
all thy Tin; and I will restore thy Judges as at the First, and thy Counselors
as at the Beginning: Afterward thou shall be called, the City of Righteousness,
the faithful City.

FINIS.

