PHILOSOPHIC SOLITUDE: A POEM

Philosophic Solitude: OR THE CHOICE OF A RURAL LIFE. A POEM.

By a GENTLEMAN educated at YALE College.

Me placeant ante omnia sylvae.

VIRG Otium sine literis mors est, and vivi hominis sepultura.

SEN. NEW YORK: Printed by James Parker, 1747.

TO THE INGENIOUS AUTHOR OF THE POEM ENTITLED. Philosophic Solitude, etc.
WHILE in your verse with transport and surprise
We see the rural scene sublimely rise;
While country pleasures innocently gay
Smile in your song, and steal our souls away;
With joy the varied landscape we pursue,
And all Arcadia opens to our view.
Listening we hear the soft melodious strains,
Over lofty mountains, and subjacent plains;
While bending forests echoing back the sound,
And groves responfive send the music round:
Intranc'd we hang suspended on your tongue,
And every pulse beats concert to your song.
Wrapped into ages past, and future times,
To distant regions, and to happier climes;
When native innocence adorned mankind,
Ever fraud and lux'ry had debauched the mind, --
Even in the golden age, (as poets feign)
When peace attended Saturn's gentler reign,
In patriarchal bowers, our fancy roves
Through sylvan scenes, gay lawns, and shady groves;
Fired by your lays, we long to taste the sweets
That breathe in vernal groves, and green retreats.
While warmed with generous scorn and manly rage,
You form the taste of a degenerate age,
Nobly disdaining the renowned resorts
Of pompous palaces, and glittering courts;
(The pride of fools! --) we feel the enchanting strains,
And covet kingdoms, less than groves or plains.
When to sequestered scenes our view you guide,
And paint out nature in her virgin-pride,
We see the mossy banks, and opening flowers,
The elysian fields, and amaranthin bowers;
And listening hear the sleep-inspiring rills
Flow in your verse, and murmur down the hills.
Still as we trace you through the harmonious theme,
New beauties flourish, and fresh glories beam;
Pleasures on pleasures, scenes on scenes arise,
And varied prospects glad our wandering eyes.
When waked by Phoebus, and the vocal choir,
To nature's God you tune the warbling lyre;
The sacred transport every power controuls,
And warm devotion swells our raptured souls:
Nor less we wonder while you range the mead,
Converse with angels, and the mighty dead:
Or from the learned throng selected choose
Or authors to instruct or to amuse;
With wisest art and judgment drawn, we trace
Each different genius, -- each peculiar grace.
There Virgil, Milton, Pope and Dryden shine,
And gentlest Watts, harmonious and divine;
Newton and Lock, and more of deathless name,
There live distinguished in the rolls of fame:
The Trojan hero, who with glory shines,
Drawn in the Mantuan and the Laureat's lines,
Warmed by your quickening touch to life returns,
Glitters in arms, and for the combat burns.
When in your verse over heavens crystalline road,
Thunders the chariot of the Filial-God,
We hear the rattling wheels and axils bound,
And all heaven's pavement trembling with the sound:
Then gentler strains the flowing notes prolong,
And Windsor-plains reflourish in your song.
But when you celebrate the nuptial ties,
Connubial sweets, and matrimonial joys,
And paint the beauties of a virtuous wife,
To soothe the cares, and share the joys of life;
The radiant charms our amorous passions move,
Subdue our breasts, and bend our souls to love.
We pant to prove what Hymen's rites contain,
To taste the bliss, and rush into the chain.
But why should we on single features dwell,
Since all the parts of the fair piece excel?
Through out the whole with wonder and surprise,
We view dispersed unnumber'd beauties rise!
Smooth, yet sublime, and regularly strong,
The shining incidents the theme prolong;
Ravished we gaze, in admiration lost,
And know not where to praise or wonder most.
YALENSIS smiles the finished piece to view,
And fondly glories in a son like YOU.
N. W.
TO Mr. L*********, ON HIS Philosophic Solitude, etc.
SLOW though I am to wake the silent string,
Yet should the muse inspire my voice to sing,
That favorite song to L***** I give,
That favorite song, thy just desert, receive.
Hail Youth, beloved and honored by the Nine!
In thy harmonious verse united shine
Pope's nervous phrase, and Homer's sacred fire,
And all the muses all the verse inspire!
When ever you sing in tuneful rural strains
The shady forests, and the flowery plains,
A second Windsor starts in every line,
The plains and forests in full glory shine:
Fired with the song, through all the painted mead,
Well-pleased I wander where by numbers lead:
What varying scenes in every page appear!
What varying scenes my busy fancy cheer!
Rapt by your Notes, from maze to maze I rove,
And hear soft music echo through the grove;
Now thoughtful wander through the waving wood;
Now hear the murmur of the falling flood;
Here branching trees crowd to a living shade,
There breathing Zephyrs fan the opening glade:
Where ever I tread the purple flowers appear,
The rich profusion of the smiling year!
But when your lofty numbers reach the skies,
The excursive soul through every region flies;
Reads nature's volume with supreme delight,
And joyous roams the boundless fields of light.
To raise the genius, and exalt the thought,
What the learned sons of Rome and Albion wrote,
You travel over, -- and taught by heaven you sing
Each author's merit on the sounding string.
Or if the fair one's charms you would rehearse,
How smooth the numbers, and how soft the verse!
My fancy forms her of Angelic-race,
And more than human sparkles in her face:
In her a thousand beauties we survey.
A thousand charms her lovely form display;
While virtue's beams serene around her shine,
Dart from her soul and speak her all divine.
With flowing wine, and noisy converse gay,
In guilty mirth let others waste the day;
Snatch me, some God, to L******s retreats,
The bow'ry mazes, venerable seats!
Far from the eternal hurries of the great,
The din of cities and the farce of state:
There let me pass the golden hours away,
While books and walks prolong the silent day.
Stranger to civil and religious strife,
There sail serene along the stream of life,
Dye unlamented, as I lived unknown:
Nor ask, to note my grave, the monumental stone.
But ah! for me no gilded landskips rise,
While the thick town obscures my clouded eyes;
No blooming hills here rise in distant views,
No stream or opening glades invite the muse;
In one short space, subjected to my eye,
Chairs, carts, drays, coaches, dirty-pavements lie;
Here when I strive to tune the sounding lyre
The same dull prospect damps the rising fire:
Thrice happy bard! who in some lone abode
Spreads bolder wings, and feels the rushing God;
Thrice happy you! -- ah hapless! not to dwell
Amid the sylvan scenes you paint so well.
Oh would the Power supreme my wish complete!
And fix us in some solitary seat,
(May fair Queen's Village The Manor of Queen's-Village on Nassau-Island.
be the soft retreat!)
There on the verge of a meandring flood,
Brown with an arching shade, and pendant wood,
Smit with the love of heavenly song, we'd choose
To catch the inspirations of the muse:
There too in converse innocently gay,
Should the fleet minutes smoothly glide away.
And when kind death should seal these willing eyes,
And bid our Soul as^^^ their kindred Skies,
From star to star famil^^^ would we roam,
Explore sublimer regions, and confess our home.
W. P. S.
PHILOSOPHIC SOLITUDE: OR, THE CHOICE OF A RURAL LIFE.

The ARGUMENT.
THE Subject proposed. Situation of the Author's House. His Frugality in its
Furiture. The Beauties of the Country. His Love of Retirement, and Choice of
his Friends. A Description of the Morning. Hymn to the Sun. Contemplation of
the Heavens. The Existence of God inferred from a View of the Beauty and
Harmony of the Creation. Morning and Everning Devotion. The Vanity of Riches
and Grandeur. The Choice of his Books. Praise of the Marriage State. A Knot of
Modern Ladies described. The Author's Exit.

PHILOSOPHIC SOLITUDE, etc.
LET ardent heroes seek renown in arms,
Pant after fame, and rush to war's alarms;
To shining palaces, let fools resort,
And dunces cringe to be esteemed at court:
Mine be the pleasures of a rural life,
From noise remote, and ignorant of strife;
Far from the painted Belle, and white-glov'd Beau,
The lawless masquerade, and midnight show,
From ladies, lap dogs, courtiers, garters, stars,
Fops, fiddlers, tyrants, emperors, and czars.
FULL in the center of some shady grove,
By nature formed for solitude and love;
On banks arrayed with ever-blooming flowers,
Near beauteous landskips, or by rosiate bowers;
My neat, but simple mansion I would raise,
Unlike the sumptuous domes of modern days;
Devoid of pomp, with rural plainess formed,
With savage game, and glossy shells adorned.
No costly furniture should grace my hall;
But curling vines ascend against the wall,
Whose pliant branches should luxuriant twine,
While purple clusters swelled with future wine:
To slake my thirst a liquid lapse distill
From craggy rocks, and spread a limpid rill.
Along my mansion spiry firrs should grow,
And gloomy yews extend the shady row;
The cedars flourish, and the poplars rise
Sublimely tall, and shoot into the skies:
Among the leaves refreshing Zephyrs play,
And crowding trees exclude the noontide ray;
Whereon the birds their downy nests should form,
Securely sheltered from the batt'ring storm;
And to melodious notes their choir apply,
Soon as Aurora blushed along the sky:
While all around the enchanting music rings,
And every vocal grove responsive sings.
ME to sequestered scenes, ye muses guide,
Where nature wantons in her virgin-pride;
To mossy banks edged round with opening flowers,
Elysian fields, and amaranthin bowers,
TO ambrosial founts, and sleep-inspiring rills,
To herbag'd vales, gay lawns, and sunny hills.
WELCOME ye shades! all hail, ye vernal blooms!
Ye bow'ry thickets, and prophetic glooms!
Ye forests hail! ye solitary woods!
Love-whisp'ring groves, and silver-streaming floods!
Ye meads, that aromatic sweets exhale!
Ye birds, and all ye sylvan beauties hail!
Oh how I long with you to spend my days,
Invoke the muse, and try the rural lays!
No trumpets there with martial clangor sound,
No prostrate heroes strew the crimsoned ground;
No groves of lances glitter in the air,
Nor thundering drums provoke the sanguine war:
But white-rob'd peace, and universal love
Smile in the field, and brighten every grove.
There all the beauties of the circling year,
In native ornamental pride appear.
Gay rosy-bosom'd SPRING, and April showers
Wake from the womb of earth the rising flowers:
In deeper verdure SUMMER clothes the plain,
And AUTUMN bends beneath the golden grain;
The trees weep amber, and the whispering gales
Breeze over the lawn, or murmur through the vales.
The flowery tribes in gay confusion bloom,
Profuse of sweets, and fragrant with perfume.
On blossoms blossoms, fruits on fruits arise,
And varied prospects glad the wandering eyes.
In these fair Seats I Would pass the joyons day
Where meadows flourish and where fields look gay;
From bliss to bliss with endless pleasure rove,
Seek crystal streams, or haunt the vernal grove,
Woods, fountains, lakes, the fertile fields, or shades,
Aerial mountains, or subjacent glades.
THERE from the polished fetters of the great,
Triumphal piles, and gilded rooms of state;
Prime ministers, and sycophantic knaves,
Illustrious villains, and illustrious slaves!
From all the vain formality of fools,
And odious task of arbitrary rules,
The ruffling cares which the vexed soul annoy,
The wealth the rich possess, but not enjoy,
The visionary bliss the world can lend,
The insidious foe, and false designing friend,
The sevenfold fury of Xantippe's Soul,
And S*****'s rage that burns without control;
I Would live retired, contented, and serene,
Forgot, unknown, unenvied, and unseen.
YET not a real hermitage I Would choose,
Nor wish to live from all the world recluse;
But with a friend sometimes unbend the soul
In social converse, over the sprightly bowl.
With cheerful W****, serene and wisely gay,
I Would often pass the dancing hours away:
He skilled alike to profit and to please,
Politely talks with unaffected ease;
Sage in debate, and faithful to his trust,
Mature in science, and severely just;
Of soul diffusive, vast and unconfined,
Breathing benevolence to all mankind;
Cautious to censure, ready to commend,
A firm unshaken, uncorrupted friend:
In early youth fair wisdom's paths be trod,
In early youth a minister of God:
Each pupil loved him when at Yale he shone,
And every bleeding bosom weeps him gone.
Dear A**** too, should grace my rural Seat,
Forever welcome to the green retreat.
Heaven for the cause of righteousness designed
His florid genius, and capacious mind:
Often have I heard, amidst the adoring throng,
Celestial truths devolving from his tongue;
High over the listening audience seen him stand:
Divinely speak, and graceful stretch his hand:
With such becoming grace and pompous sound,
With long-rob'd senators encircled round,
Before the roman bar, while Rome was free,
Nor bowed to Coesar's throne the servile knee,
Immortal Tully plead the patriot cause,
While every tongue resounded his applause.
Next round my board should candid S*** appear,
Of manners gentle, and a friend sincere,
Averse to discord, party-rage, and strife
He sails serenely down the stream of life.
With these three friends, beneath a spreading shade,
Where silver fountains murmur through the glade;
Or in cool grotts, persum'd with native flowers,
In harmless mirth I Would spend the circling hours;
Or gravely talk, or innocently sing,
Or in harmonous concert strike the trembling string.
AMID sequestered bowers, near gliding streams,
Druids and Bards enjoyed serenest dreams.
Such was the seat where courtly Horace sung,
And his bold harp immortal Maro strung:
Where tuneful Orpheus' unresisted lay,
Made rabid tigers bear their rage away;
While groves attentive to the extatic found
Burst from their roots, and raptured danced around.
Such seats the venerable Seers of old
(When blissful years in golden circles rolled)
Chose and admired: Even Goddesses and Gods
(As poets feign) were fond of such abodes.
The imperial consort of fictitious Jove
For fount-full I Would, forsook the realms above.
Often to Idalia on a golden cloud,
Veiled in a mist of fragrance Venus rode:
There numerous altars to the queen were reared,
And lovesick youths their amorous vows preferred,
While fair-hair'd damsels (a lascivious train!)
With wanton rites adored her gentle reign,
The silver-shafted Huntress of the Woods,
Sought pendant shades, and bathed in cooling floods.
In palmy Delos, by Scamander's side,
Or where Caijster rolled his silver tide,
Melodious Phoebus sang; the Muses round
Alternate warbling to the heavenly sound.
Even the feigned MONARCH of heavens bright abode,
High-thron'd in gold, of Gods the sovereign God,
Often times preser'd the shade of Ida's grove
To all the ambrosial feasts, and nectar'd cups above.
BEHOLD, the rosey-singer'd morning dawn,
In saffron robbed, and blushing over the lawn!
Reflected from the clouds, a radiant stream
Tips with etherial dew the mountain's brim.
The unfolding roses, and the opening flowers
Imbibe the dew, and strew the varied bowers,
Diffuse nectareous sweets around, and glow
With all the colors of the show'ry bow.
The industrious bees their balmy toil renew,
Buzz over the field, and sip the rosy dew. --
But yonder comes the illustrious God of day,
Invests the east, and gilds the etherial way:
The groves rejoice, the feathered nations sing,
Echo the mountains, and the valleys ring.
HAIL Orb! arrayed with majesty and fire,
That bids each sable shade of night retire!
Fountain of light! with burning glory crowned,
Darting a deluge of effulgence round!
Waked by thy genial and prolific ray,
Nature resumes her verdure, and looks gay;
Fresh blooms the rose; the drooping plants revive,
The groves reflourish, and the forests live.
Deep in the teeming earth, the ripening ore
Confesses thy consolidating power:
Hence labor draws her tools, and artists mould
The fusile silver, and the ductile gold:
Hence war is furnished, and the regal shield
Like lightning flashes over the illumined field.
If thou so fair with delegated light,
That all heavens splendors vanish at thy sight;
With what effulgence must the ocean glow
From which thy borrowed beams incessant flow!
The exhaustless source, whose single smile supplies
The unnumber'd orbs that gild the spangled skies!
OFTEN would I view, in admiration lost,
Heavens sumptuous canopy, and starry host,
With levelled tube, and astronomic eye
Pursue the planets whirling through the sky:
Immensurable vault! where thunders roll,
And forky lightnings flash from pole to pole.
Say, railing Infidel! can thou survey
Yon globe of fire, that gives the golden day,
The harmonious structure of this vast machine,
And not confess its Architect divine?
Then go, vain wretch! though deathless be thy soul,
Go, swell the riot, and exhaust the bowl,
Plunge into vice, humanity resign,
Go, fill the stie, and bristle into swine!
NONE but a Power omnipotent and wise
Could frame this earth, or spread the boundless skies:
He made the whole; at his omnific call
From formless chaos rose this spacious ball,
And one ALMIGHTY GOD is seen in all.
By him our cup is crowned, our table spread
With luscious wine, and life-sustaining bread.
What countless wonders does the earth contain!
What countless wonders the unfathomed main!
Bedrop'd with gold, there scaly nations shine,
Haunt coral groves, or lash the foaming brine.
JEHOVAH'S glories blaze all nature round,
In heaven, on earth, and in the deeps profound;
Ambitious of his name, the warblers sing,
And praise their maker, while they hail the spring:
The zephyrs breathe it, and the thunders roar,
While surge to surge, and shore resounds to shore.
But MAN, endu'd with an immortal mind,
His maker's image, and for heaven designed!
To loftier notes his raptured voice should raise,
And chaunt sublimer hymns to his creator's praise.
WHEN rising Phoebus ushers in the morn,
And golden beams the impurpled skies adorn;
Waked by the gentle murmur of the floods;
Or the soft music of the waving woods,
Rising from sleep with the melodious quire,
To solemn sounds I Would tune the hallowed lyre.
Thy name, O God! should tremble on my tongue,
Till every grove proved vocal to my song:
(Delightful task! with dawning light to sing
Triumphant hymns to heavens eternal king.)
Some courteous angel should my breast inspire,
Attune my lips, and guide the warbled wire,
While sportive echoes catch the sacred sound,
Swell every note, and bear the music round;
While mazy streams meandring to the main
Hang in suspense to hear the heavenly strain,
And hushed to silence all the feathered throng
Attentive listen to the tuneful song.
FATHER of Light! exhaustless source of good!
Supreme, eternal, self-existent GOD!
Before the beamy Sun dispensed a ray,
Flamed in the azure vault, and gave the day;
Before the glimmering Moon with borrowed light
Shone queen amid the silver host of night,
High in the heavens, thou reigned superior Lord,
By suppliant angels worshipped and adored.
With the celestial choir then let me join
In cheerful praises to the POWER DIVINE.
To sing thy praise, do thou O God! inspire
A mortal breast with more than mortal fire.
In dreadful majesty thou sit'st enthroned,
With light encircled, and with glory crowned:
Through all infinitude extends thy reign,
For thee, nor heaven, nor heaven of heavens contain;
But though thy throne is fixed above the sky,
Thy omnipresence fills immensity.
Saints robbed in white, to thee their anthems bring,
And radiant Martyrs hallelujahs sing:
Heavens universal host their voices raise
In one eternal chorus to thy praise;
And round thy awful throne with one accord
Sing, HOLY, HOLY, HOLY IS THE LORD.
At thy creative voice, from ancient night
Sprang smiling beauty, and yon worlds of light:
Thou spak'st -- the planetary Chorus rolled,
And all the expanse was starr'd with beamy gold;
LET THERE BE LIGHT, said God, -- Light instant shone
And from the orient burst the golden Sun;
Heavens gazing hierarchies with glad surprise
Saw the first morn invest the recent skies,
And strait the exulting troops thy throne surround
With thousand thousand harps of heavenly sound;
Thrones, Powers, Dominions, (ever-shining trains!)
Shouted thy praises in triumphant strains:
Great are thy Works, they sing, and all around
Great are thy Works, the echoing heavens resound.
The effulgent sun insufferably bright
Is but a beam of thy overflowing light;
The tempest is thy breath: the thunder hurled
Tremendous roars thy vengeance over the world;
Thou bow'st the heavens; the smoking mountains nod,
Rocks fall to dust, and nature owns her God;
Pale tyrants shrink, the atheist stands aghast,
And impious kings in horror breathe their last.
To this great God, alternately I Would pay
The evening anthem, and the morning lay.
FOR sovereign GOLD I never would repine,
Nor wish the glittering dust of monarchs mine.
What though high columns heave into the skies,
Gay cielings shine, and vaulted arches rise,
Though fretted gold the sculptured roof adorn,
The rubies redden, and the jaspers burn!
Or what alas! avails the gay attire
To wretched man, who breathes but to expire!
Often on the vilest riches are bestowed,
To show their meaness in the sight of God.
High from a dunghill, see a Dives rise,
And Titan-like insult the avenging skies:
The crowd in adulation calls him Lord,
By thousands courted, flattered, and adored:
In riot plunged, and drunk with earthly joys,
No higher thought his groveling soul employs;
The poor he scourges with an iron rod,
And from his bosom banishes his God.
But often in height of wealth and beauty's bloom,
Deluded man is fated to the tomb!
For, lo! he sickens, swift his color flies,
And rising mists obscure his swimming eyes:
Around his bed his weeping friends bemoan,
Extort the unwilling tear, and wish him gone;
His sorrowing heir augments the tender shower
Deplores his death -- yet hails the dying hour.
Ah bitter comfort! Sad relief to die!
Though sunk in down, beneath a canopy!
His eyes no more shall see the cheerful light
Weighed down by death in everlasting night:
And now the great, the rich, the proud, the gay
Lies breathless, cold -- unanimated clay!
He that just now was flattered by the crowd
With high applause, and acclamation loud;
That steeled his bosom to the orphan's cries
And drew down torrents from the widow's eyes;
Whom, like a God, the rabble did adore --
Regard him now -- and lo! he is no more.
MY eyes no dazzling vestments should behold
With gemsinstarr'd, and stiff with woven gold
But the tall ram his downy fleece afford
To cloth in modest garb his frugal lord.
Thus the great Father of mankind was dressed,
When shaggy hides composed his flowing vest:
Doomed to the cum'brous load for his offense,
When clothes supplied the want of innocence;
But now his sons (forgetful whence they came)
Glitter in gems, and glory in their shame.
OFTEN would I wander through the dewy field,
Where clustring roses balmy fragrance yield;
Or in lone grotts for contemplation made,
Converse with angels, and the mighty dead:
For all around unnumber'd spirits fly,
Waft on the breeze, or walk the liquid sky
Inspire the Poet with repeated dreams
Who gives his hallowed muse to sacred themes,
Protect the just, serene their gloomy hours,
Becalm their slumbers, and refresh their powers.
Methinks I see the immortal Beings fly,
And swiftly shoot athwart the streaming sky:
Hark! a melodious voice I seem to hear,
And heavenly sounds invade my listening ear.
"Be not afraid of us, innoxious band,
"Thy cell surrounding by divine command;
"Ever while like thee we led our lives below,
"(Sad lives of pain, of misery, and woe!)
"Long by affliction's boisterous tempests tossed,
"We reached at legth the ever-blissful coast:
"Now in the imbow'ring groves, and lawns above
"We taste the raptures of immortal love,
"Attune the golden harp in roseate bowers,
"Or bind our temples with unfading flowers.
"Often on kind errands bent, we out the air
"To guard the righteous, heavens peculiar care!
"Avertimpending harms, their minds compose
"Inspire gay dreams, and prompt their soft repose.
"When from the tongue divine hosannas roll,
"And sacred raptures swell thy rising soul,
"To heaven we bear thy prayers like rich perfumes,
"Where, by the throne, the golden censer fumes.
"And when with age thy head is silvered over,
"And cold in death, thy bosom beats no more,
"Thy soul exulting shall desert its clay,
"And mount triumphant to eternal day.
BUT to improve the intellectual mind,
Reading should be to contemplation joined.
First I Would collect from the Parnassian spring,
What muses dictate, and what poets sing.
Virgil as Prince, should wear the laureled crown,
And other bards pay homage to his throne:
The blood of heroes now effus'd so long
Will run for ever purple through his song.
See! how he mounts toward the blessed abodes,
On Planets rides, and talks with demigods!
How do our ravished spirits melt away,
When in his song Sicilian shepherds play!
But what a splendour strikes the dazzled eye,
When Dido shines in awful majesty!
Embroidered purple clad the Tyrian queen,
Her motion graceful, and august her mien;
A golden zone her royal limbs embraced,
A golden quiver rattled by her waist.
See her proud steed majestically prance!
Contemn the trumpet, and deride the lance!
In crimson trappings, glorious to behold!
Confusedly gay with inter-woven gold;
He champs the bitt, and throws the foam around,
Impatient paws, and tears the solid ground.
How stern Aeneas thunders through the field!
With towering helmet and refulgent shield!
Coursers o'erturn'd, and mighty warriors slain,
Deformed with gore, lie welt'ring on the plain:
Struck through with wounds, ill-fated cheiftains lie,
Frown even in death, and threaten as they die.
Through the thick squadrons see the Hero bound!
(His helmet flashes, and his arms resound!)
All grim with rage, he frowns over Turnus' head,
(Re-kindled ire! for blooming Pallas dead)
Then in his bosom plunged the shining blade --
The soul indignant sought the stygian shade.
THE far-fam'd bards that graced Britannia's isle,
Should next compose the venerable pile.
Great Milton first, for towering thought renowned
Parent of song, and famed the world around!
His glowing breast divine Urania fired
Or GOD himself the immortal Bard inspired.
Borne on triumphant wings he takes his flight,
Explores all heaven, and treads the realms of light:
In martial pomp he clothes the angellic train,
While warring meriads shake the etherial plain.
First Michael stalks high -- towering over the rest,
With heavenly plumage nodding on his crest:
Impenetrable arms his limbs infold,
Eternal adamant, and burning gold!
Sparkling in siery mail, with dire delight,
Rebellious Satan animates the sight:
Armipotent they sink in rolling smoke,
All heaven resounding to its center shook.
To crush his foes, and quell the dire alarms
MESSIAH sparkled in refulgent arms;
In radiant panoply divinely bright
His limbs incas'd, he flashed devouring light:
On burning wheels, over heavens crystalline road
Thundered the chariot of the Filial-God;
The burning wheels on golden axles turned,
With flaming gems the golden axles burned.
Lo! the apostate host with terror struck
Roll back by millions! -- The empyrean shook!
Scepters, and or bed shields, and crowns of gold,
Cherubs, and Seraphs in confusion rolled;
Till from his hand the triple thunder hurled
Compelled them headlong to the infernal world.
THEN tuneful Pope whom all the nine inspire
With saphic sweetness, and pindaric fire,
Father of verse! melodious and divine!
Next peerless Milton should distinguished shine.
Smooth flow his numbers when he paints the grove,
The inraptur'd virgins listening into love.
But when the night, and hoarse-resounding storm
Rush on the deep, and Neptune's face deform,
Rough runs the verse, the sonorous numbers roar
Like the hoarse surge that thunders on the shore.
But when he sings the exhilirated swains,
The imbow'ring groves, and Windsor's blissful plains,
Our eyes are ravished with a sylvan scene,
Embroidered fields, and groves in living green:
His lays the verdure of the meads prolong,
And withered forests blossom in his song.
Thame's silver streams his flowing verse admire,
And cease to murmur while he tunes his lyre.
NEXT should appear great Dryden's lofty muse;
For who would Dryden's polished verse refuse?
His lips were moistened in Parnassus' spring,
And Phoebus taught his laureat son to sing.
How long did Virgil untranslated moan,
His beauties fading, and his flights unknown;
Till Dryden rose, and in exalted strain
Re-sang the fortune of the God-like man?
Again the Trojan Prince with dire delight,
Dreadful in arms, demands the lingering fight:
Again Camilla glows with martial fire,
Drives armies back, and makes all Troy retire.
With more than native luster Virgil shines,
And gains sublimer heights in Dryden's lines.
THE gentle Watts who strings his silver lyre
To sacred odes, and heavens all-ruling sire;
Who scorns the applause of the licentious stage,
And mounts yon sparkling worlds with hallowed rage,
Compells my thoughts to wing the heavenly road,
And wafts my soul exulting to my God.
No fabled Nine, harmonious bard! inspire
Thy raptured breast with such seraphic fire;
But prompting Angels warm thy boundless ^age,
Direct thy thoughts, and animate thy page.
Blessed man! for spotless sanctity revered,
Loved by the good, and by the guilty feared:
Blessed man! from gay delusive scenes removed,
Thy maker loving, by thy maker loved,
To God thou tun'st thy consecrated lays,
Nor meanly blush to sing Jehovah's praise.
Oh! did, like thee, each laureled bard delight
To paint Religion in her native light.
Not then with Plays the laboring press would groan.
Nor Vice defy the PULPIT and the THRONE;
No impious rhymers charm a vicious age,
Nor prostrate virtue groan beneath their rage:
But themes divine in lofty numbers rise,
Fill the wide earth, and echo through the skies.
THESE for Delight; -- for Profit I would read
The labored volumes of the learned dead.
Sagacious Lock, by providence designed
TO exalt, instruct, and rectify the mind.
The unconquerable Sage Cato.
whom virtue fired,
And from the tyrant's lawless rage retired,
When victor Coesar freed unhappy Rome
From Pompey's chains, to substitute his own.
Longinus, Livy, famed Thucydides,
Quintilian, Plato, and Demosthencs,
Persuasive Tully, and Corduba's Sage, Seneca.

Who fell by Nero's unrelenting rage;
Him Socrates.
whom ungrateful Athens doomed to bleed,
Despised when living, and deplored when dead;
Raleigh I Would read with ever-fresh delight,
While ages past rise present to my sight:
Ah man unblest! he foreign realms explored,
Then fell a victim to his country's sword!
Nor should great Derham pass neglected by,
Observant sage! to whose deep-piercing eye
Nature's stupendous works expanded lie.
Nor He, Britannia, thy unmatched renown!
(Adjudg'd to wear the philosophic crown,)
Who on the solar orb uplifted rode,
And scanned the unfathomable works of God!
Who bound the silver planets to their spheres,
And traced the elliptic curve of blazing stars!
IMMORTAL NEWTON! whose illustrious name.
Will shine on records of eternal fame.
BY love directed, I would choose a wife,
TO improve my bliss, and ease the load of life.
Hail Wedlock! hail, inviolable tie!
Perpetual fountain of domestic joy!
Love, friendship, honor, truth, and pure delight
Harmonious mingle in the nuptial rite.
In Eden first the holy state begar,
When perfect innocence distinguished man;
The human pair the Almighty Pontiff led,
Gay as the morning to the bridal bed;
A dread solemnity the espousals graced,
Angles the Witnesses, and GOD the PRIEST!
All earth exulted on the nuptial hour,
And voluntary roses decked the bower;
The joyous birds on every blossomed spray,
Sung Hymeneans to the important day,
While Philomela swelled the spousal song,
And Paradise with gratulation rung.
RELATE, inspiring muse! where shall I find
A blooming virgin with an angel-mind?
Unblemished as the white-rob'd virgin-quire
That fed, O Rome! thy consecrated fire?
By reason awed, ambitious to be good,
Averse to vice, and zealous for her God?
Relate, in what blessed region can I find
Such bright perfections in a female mind?
What Phoenix- woman breathes the vital air,
So greatly good, and so divinely fair?
Sure not the gay and fashionable train,
Licentious, proud, immoral and profane;
Who spend their golden hours in antic-dress,
Malicious whispers, and inglorious ease. --
Lo! round the board a shining train appears
In rosy beauty, and in prime of years!
This hates a flounce, and this a flounce approves,
This shows the trophies of her former loves;
Polly avers that Sylvia dressed in green,
When last at Church the gaudy Nymph was seen,
Cloe condemns her opties, and will lay
'Twas azure satin inter-streak'd with gray;
Lucy invested with judicial power
Awards 'twas neither -- and the strife is over.
Then parrots, lap-dogs, monkeys, squirrels, beaux,
Fans, ribbands, tuckers, patches, furbeloes,
In quick succession through their fancies run,
And dance incessant on the flippant tongue.
And when fatigued with every other sport,
The belles prepare to grace the sacred court,
They marshal all their forces in array,
To kill with glances, and destroy in play.
Two skillful maids with reverential fear
In wanton wreaths collect their silken hair;
Two paint their cheeks, and round their temples pour
The fragrant unguent, and the ambrosial shower;
One pulls the shape-creating stays, and one
Encircles round their waist the golden zone:
Not with more toil t'improve immortal charms,
Strove Juno, Venus, and the Queen of Arms,
When Priam's Son adjudg'd the golden prize,
To the resistless Beauty of the skies.
At length equipped in love's enticing arms,
With all that glitters, and with all that charms,
The ideal goddesses to church repair,
Peep through the fan, and mutter over a prayer,
Or listen to the organ's pompous sound,
Or eye the gilded images around;
Or, deeply studied in coquettish rules,
Aim wily glances at unthinking fools;
Or show the lilly hand with graceful air,
Or wound the sopling with a lock of hair.
And when the hated discipline is over,
And Misses tortured with Repent, no more,
They mount the pictured coach, and to the play,
The celebrated Idols hie away.
NOT so the Lass that should my joys improve,
With solid friendship, and connubial love:
A native bloom with intermingled white
Should set her features in a pleasing light;
Like Helen flushing with unrivaled charms,
When raptured Paris darted in her arms.
But what alas! avails a ruby cheek,
A downy bosom, or a snowy neck!
Charms ill supply the want of innocence,
Nor beauty forms intrinsic excellence:
But in her breast let moral beauties shine,
Supernal grace and purity divine:
Sublime her reason, and her native wit
Unstained with pedantry, and low conceit:
Her fancy livelt, and her judgment free
From female prejudice and bigotry:
Averse to idle pomp, and outward show,
The flattering coxcomb, and fantastic beau.
The fop's impertinence she should despise,
Though sorely wounded by her radiant eyes;
But pay due reverence to the exalted mind
By learning polished, and by wit refined,
Who all virtues, without guile commends,
And all her faults as freely reprehends.
Soft Hymen's rites her passions should approve,
And in her bosom glow the flames of love:
To me her soul by sacred friendship turn,
And I for her with equal friendship burn:
In every stage of life afford relief.
Partake my joys, and sympathize my grief:
Unshaken walk in virtue's peaceful road,
Nor bride her reason to pursue the mode;
Mild as the saint whose errors are forgiven,
Calm as a vestal, and composed as heaven.
This be the partner, this the lovely wife
That should embellish, and prolong my life;
A nymph! who might a second fall inspire,
And fill a glowing Cherub with desire!
With her I Would spend the pleasurable day,
While fleeting minutes gayly danced away:
With her I Would walk delighted over the green,
Through every blooming mead, and rural scene,
Or sit in open fields damask'd with flowers,
Or where cool shades imbrown the noontide bowers
Imparadis'd within my eager arms,
I Would reign the happy monarch of her charms.
Often on her panting bosom would I lay,
And in dissolving raptures melt away;
The lulled by nightingales to balmy rest,
My blooming fair should slumber at my breast.
AND when decrepid age (frail mortal's doom!)
Should bend my withered body to the tomb,
No warbling Sirens should retard my flight
To heavenly mansions of unclouded light.
Though Death, with his imperial horrors crowned,
Terrific grinn'd, and formidably frowned,
Offenses pardoned, and remitted sin
Should form a calm serenity within:
Blessing my natal and my mortal hour,
(My soul committed to the eternal power)
Inexorable Death should smile, for I
Who knew to LIVE, would never fear to DIE.
FINIS.

