THE Scripture Doctrine CONCERNING PREDESTINATION, ELECTION and REPROBATION.
Extracted from a late AUTHOR.

By John Wesley, M. A. Fellow of Lincoln College, Oxford.

Therefore we both labor, and suffer Reproach, because we trust in the living
God, who is the Savior of all Men, specially of those that believe.

1 Timothy iv. 10. LONDON Printed: Reprinted in Boston, and sold by Thomas Fleet,
at the Heart and Crown in Cornhill, 1746.

(Price single One Shilling, Old Tenor.)

THE Scripture Doctrine of Predestination, Election and Reprobation.
1. THE Scripture says, Ephs. i. 4.
God has chosen us in Christ, before the Foundation of the World, that we
should be holy, and without Blame before him in Love. And St. Peter calls the
Saints, 1 Pet. i. 2.
Elect according to the Foreknowledge of God the Father, through Sanctification
of the Spirit, unto Obedience. And St. Paul says unto them, 2 These. ii. 13, 14.
God has from the Beginning chosen you to Salvation, through Sanctification of
the Spirit, and belief of the Truth; whereunto he has called you by our
Gospel, to the obtaining of the Glory of our Lord Jesus Christ.

2. From all these Places of Scripture, it is plain that God has chosen some
to Life and Glory, before or from the Foundation of the World. And the Wisdom
of all Christians is, to labor that their Judgments may be informed herein,
according to the Scripture. And to that End let us consider the Manner of God's
speaking to the Sons of Men.

3. God says to Abraham, Romans iv. 17. As it is written, I have made thee a
Father of Many Nations before him whom he believed, even God who quickens the
Dead, and calls Things that are not as though they were. Observe, God speaks
then, at that present Time, to Abraham, saying, I have made thee a Father of
many Nations notwithstanding Abraham was not at that Time the Father of one
Child, but Ishmael. How then must we understand I have made thee a Father of
many Nations?

4. The Apostle tells us plainly, it was so, Before God, who calls Things
that are not, as though they were. And so he calls Abraham, The Father of many
Nations, though he was not as yet; though he was not as yet the Father even of
Isaac, in whom his Seed was to be called.

5. God uses the same Manner of Speaking, when he calls Christ, Revel. xiii
8.
The Lamb slain from the Foundation of the World; although in Deed he was not
slain for several thousand Years after. Hence therefore we may easily
understand what he speaks of Electing us from the Foundation of the World.

6. God calls Abraham a Father of many Nations, though not so at that Time. He
calls Christ, The Lamb slain from the Foundation of the World, though not slain
till he was a Man in the Flesh. Even so he calls Men Elected from the
Foundation of the World, though not elected till they were Men in the Flesh. Yet
it is all so before God, who knowing all Things from Eternity. Calls Things
that are not, as though they were.

7. By all which it is clear, that as Christ was called The Lamb slain from the
Foundation of the World, and yet not slain till several thousand Years after,
till the Day of his Death; so also Men are called Elect from the Foundation of
the World, and yet are not elected perhaps till several thousand Years after,
till the Day of their Conversion to God.

8. And indeed this is plain, without going farther, from those very Words of
St. Peter, Elect, according to the Foreknowledge of God, through Sanctification
of the Spirit, unto Obedience. For,

If the Elect are chosen through the Sanctification of the Spirit, then they were
not chosen before they were sanctified by the Spirit. But they were not
sanctified by the Spirit, before they had a Being. It is plain then neither
were they chosen from the Foundation of the World. But God calls Things that
are not, as though they were.

9. This is also plain from those Words of St. Paul, God has from the
Beginning chosen you to Salvation, through Sanctification of the Spirit, and
Belief of the Truth. Now,

If the Saints are chosen to Salvation, through believing (...) the Truth, and
were called to believe that Truth by the hearing of the Gospel, then they were
not chosen before they believed the Truth, and before they heard the Gospel,
whereby they were called to believe. But they were chosen through Belief of the
Truth, and called to believe it by the Gospel. Therefore they were not chosen
before they believed; much less before they had a Being, any more than Christ
was slain, before he had a Being. So plain is it, that they were not elected,
till they believed; although God calls Things that are not, as though they were.

10. Again, how plain is it, where St. Paul says that they whom Ephesians. i. 11,
12.
God did predestinate, according to the Counsel of his own Will, to be to the
Praise of his Glory, were such as did first trust in Christ? And in the very
next Verse, he says, that they trusted in Christ, after they heard the Word of
Truth (not before.) But they did not hear the Word before they were born.
Therefore, it is plain, the Act of Election is in Time, though known of God
before; who, according to his Knowledge, often speaks of the Things which are
not, as though they were. And thus is the great Stumbling Block about Election
taken away, that Men may make their Calling and Election sure.

11. The Scripture tells us as plainly what Predestination is: It is, God's
fore appointing obedient Believers to Salvation, not without, but according to
his Foreknowledge of all their Work, from the Foundation of the World. And so
likewise he predestinate or fore appoints all disobedient Unbelievers to
Damnation, not without, but according to his Foreknowledge of all their Works,
from the Foundation of the World.

12. We may consider this a little farther. God from the Foundation of the
World fore knew all Men's believing or not believing. And according to this his
Foreknowledge, he chose or elected all obedient Believers, as such, to
Salvation, and refused or reprobated all disobedient Unbelievers, as such, to
Damnation. Thus the Scriptures teach us to consider Election and Reprobation,
according to the Foreknowledge of God from the Foundation of the World.

13. But here some may object, that I hold our Faith and Obedience to be the
Cause of God's electing us to Glory.

I answer, I do hold, That Faith in Christ producing Obedience to him is a
Cause without which God electeth none to Glory; for we never read of God's
electing to Glory, any who lived and died a disobedient Unbeliever. But I do
not hold, that it is the Cause for which he elects any: The contrary of this is
easily shown, thus:

Suppose my Obedience is a Cause of my Election to Salvation, What is the Cause
of my Obedience?

Ans. My Love to Christ.

But what is the Cause of my Love to Christ?

Ans. My Faith in Christ.

But what is the Cause of my Faith in Christ?

Ans. The Preaching of the Gospel of Christ.

But what is the Cause of the Preaching of the Gospel to us? Ans Christ's dying
for us.

But what is the Cause of Christ's dying for us?

Ans. God's great Love of Pity wherewith he loved us, even when we were dead in
Trespasses and Sins.

14. Thus all Men may see, that I do not hold God chose any Man to Life and
Salvation for any Good which he had done, or for any which was in him, before
he put it there. And this I shall now show more at large from the Oracles of
God.

1. God's great Love of Pity, wherewith he loved the Sons of Men, even while
they were dead in Trespasses and Sins, was the Cause of his sending his Son to
die for them; as appears from the following Scriptures; John iii. 16.
God so loved the World, that he gave his only begotten Son, to the End that
all who believe in him, should not perish but have everlasting Life. For Romans
v. 6. etc.
when we were yet without Strength, in due Time Christ died for the Ungodly.
And, God commends his Love to us, in that while we were yet Sinners, Christ
died for us.

2. Christ's dying for our Sins is the Cause of the Gospel's being preached to
us, as appears from those Scriptures, Matt. xxviii. 18.
Jesus came and spoke unto them, saying, All Power is given unto me in Heaven
and Earth. Go ye therefore and teach all Nations. Mark xvi. 15.
Go ye into all the World and preach the Gospel to every Creature.

3. The Gospel's being preached to Sinners is the Cause of their believing, as
appears from those Scriptures, Romans x. 15. etc.
How shall they call on him in whom they have not believed? And how shall they
believe in him of whom they have not heard? And how shall they hear without a
Preacher? So then Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the Word of God.

4. Men's believing is the Cause of their Justification, as appears from those
Scriptures, Acts xiii. 39.
By him all that believe are justified from all Things. Romans iii. 26. etc.
He is the Justifier of all that believe in Jesus. Therefore we conclude that a
Man is justified by Faith, without the Deeds of the Law. Romans iv. 3, 23, etc.
Abraham believed God, and it was imputed to him for Righteousness. Now it was
not written for his Sake alone, that it was imputed to him; but for us also to
whom it shall be imputed if we believe on him that raised up Jesus from the
Dead; who was delivered for our Offenses, and rose again for our Justification.

5. Our knowing ourselves justified by Faith is the Cause of our Love to
Christ, as appears from these Scriptures, 1 John iv. 10.
Herein is Love, not that we loved God, but that he loved us, and sent his Son
to be the Propitiation for our Sins. 1 John iv. 19.
We love him, because he first loved us.

6. Our Love to Christ is the Cause of our obeying him, as appears from those
Scriptures, John xiv. 15, 21. etc.
If ye love me keep my (...) them, he it is that loves me. And, If any Man
loves me he will keep my Words. 1 John v. 3.
For this is the Love of God, that we keep his Commandments.

7. Our obeying Christ is the Cause of his giving us eternal Life, as appears
from those Scriptures, Matt. vii. 21.
Not every one that says unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven; but he that does the Will of my Father which is in Heaven. Rev. xxii.
14.
Blessed are they that do his Commandments, that they may have Right to the
Tree of Life, and may enter in through the Gates into the City. And Hebr. v. 9.
Christ being made perfect through Sufferings, he became the Author of eternal
Salvation to all that obey him.

15. This may be more briefly expressed thus: 1. God's Love was the Cause of his
sending his Son to die for Sinners. 2. Christ's dying for Sinners is the Cause
of the Gospel's being preached. 3. The preaching of the Gospel is the Cause (or
Means) of our believing. 4. Our believing is the Cause (or Condition) of our
Justification. 5. The knowing ourselves justified through his Blood, is the Cause
of our Love to Christ. 6. Our Love to Christ is the Cause of our Obedience to
him. 7. Our Obedience to Christ is the Cause of his becoming the Author of
eternal Salvation to us.


16. These following Things therefore ought well to be considered by all that
fear God. 1. There was a Necessity of God's Love in sending his Son to die for
us, without which he had not come to die. 2. There was a Necessity of Christ's
Love in dying for us, without which the Gospel could not have been preached. 3.
There was a Necessity of the Gospel's being preached, without which there could
have been no believing. 4. There is a Necessity of our believing the Gospel,
without which we cannot be justified. 5. There is a Necessity of our being
justified by Faith in the Blood of Christ, without which we cannot come to know
that he loved us, and washed us from our Sins in his own Blood. 6. There is a
Necessity of our knowing his Love, who first loved us, without which we cannot
love him again. 7. There is a Necessity of our loving him, without which we
cannot keep his Commandments. 8. There is a Necessity of our keeping his
Commandments, without which we cannot enter into eternal Life.


By all which we see, that there is as great a Necessity of our keeping the
Commandments of God, as there was of God's sending his Son into the World, or
of Christ's dying for our Sins.

17 But for whose Sins did Christ die? Did he die for All Men, or but for Some?

To this I shall answer by the Scriptures, showing 1. The Testimony of all the
Prophets. 2 Of the Angel of God. 3. Of Christ himself. And 4 Of his Apostles.

First, The Prophet Isaiah says thus, Isaiah liii. 4, 5, 6.
Surely he has born our Griefs, and carried our Sorrows; yet did we esteem him
stricken, smitten of God and afflicted. But he was wounded for our
Transgressions, he was bruised for our Iniquities, the Chastisement of our
Peace was upon him, and with his Stripes we are healed. All we, like Sheep,
have gone astray; we have turned every one to his own Way; and the Lord has
laid on him the Iniquities of us all. Thus Isaiah shows plainly, that the
Iniquities of all those who went astray, were laid upon Christ. And to him the
Testimony of all the other Prophets agrees: Acts 10.43.
To him give all the Prophets Witness, that through his Name whosoever believes
in him shall receive Remission of Sins. The same says that great Prophet, John
the Baptist, who John 1.7.
came to bear Witness of the Light, that all Men through it might believe. And
again, v. 29
Behold, says he, the Lamb of God, that takes away the Sins of the World.
Thus have all the Prophets with one Consent testified, that God laid upon
Christ the Iniquities of all that were gone astray; that he is the Lamb of God,
which takes away the Sins of the World; that all Men through him may believe;
and that through his Name whosoever believes in him, shall receive Remission of
Sins.

Secondly, The Angel of God testified the same Thing, saying, Luke ii. 10.
Fear not; for I bring you glad Tidings of great Joy, which shall be to all
People, which was, that there was born unto them a Savior, even Christ the
Lord. By this also it appears, that Christ died for all Men For else it could
not have been glad Tidings of great Joy, to all People; but rather sad Tidings
to all those for whom he died not.

Thirdly, We come now to the Words of Christ himself, who knew his own Business
better than any Man else; and therefore, if his Testimony agree with these, we
must needs be convinced that they are true. Now, he speaks thus, John iii. 14.
etc.
As Moses lifted up the Serpent in the Wilderness, even so must the Son of Man
be lifted up, that whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have
everlasting Life. For God so loved the World that he gave his only begotten
Son, that whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have everlasting
Life. For God sent not his Son to condemn the World, but that the World through
him might be saved. Thus we see the Words of Christ agree with the Words of the
Prophets; therefore it must needs be owned that Christ died for all.

Fourthly, And now we will hear what the Apostles say concerning this Thing. 2
Cor. v. 14. etc.
The Love of Christ, says the Apostle Paul, constrains us, because we thus
judge, that if one died for all, then were all dead; and that he died for all,
that they which live should not henceforth live unto themselves, but unto him
that died for them, and rose again. And to Timothy he says, 1 Timothy ii. 5, 6.
there is one God, and one Mediator between God and Man, the Man Christ Jesus
who gave himself a Ransom for all, to be testified in due Time. Again, he says
to Titus, Tit. ii. 11.
The Grace of God, which brings Salvation to all Men, has appeared. And yet
again to the Hebrews, Heb. ii. 9.
that he, by the Grace of God, tasted Death for every Man. And to this agrees
St. John, witnessing 1 John ii. 2.
He is the Propitiation for our Sins; and not for ours only, but also for the
Sins of the whole World. And again, speaking of himself and the rest of the
Apostles, he says. 1 John iv. 14.
We have seen and do testify that the Father sent the Son, to be the Savior of
the World. Thus we have the Testimony of all the Prophets, of the Angel of God,
of Christ himself, and of his Holy Apostles, all agreeing together in one to
prove, that Christ died for all Mankind.

18. What then can they, who deny this, say? Why, they commonly say All Men, in
these Scriptures, does not mean All Men, but only The Elect; that Every Man
here does not mean Every Man, but only every one of the Elect; that The World
does not mean the whole World, but only the World of Believers; and that the
whole World, in St. John's Words, does not mean the whole World, but only, The
whole World of the Elect.

19. To this shameless, senseless Evasion, I answer thus:

If the Scripture no where speaks of a World of Believers or Elect, then we
have no Ground, Reason, Pretense or Excuse for saying, Christ died only for a
World of Believers or Elect. But the Scripture no where speaks of such a World.
Therefore we have no Ground or Pretense for speaking thus.

Nay, the Scripture is so far from calling Believers or elected Persons, The
World, that they are every where in Scripture plainly and expressly
distinguished from The World. John xv. 19.
If ye were of the World, says Christ, the World would love its own; but
because I have chosen you out of the World, therefore the World hates you.

20. But let the Scripture itself speak, what World Christ died for. Romans v. 6,
10
When we were yet without Strength, Christ died for the Ungodly. While we were
yet Sinners, Christ died for us. When we were Enemies, we were reconciled to
God by the Death of his Son. From all which we may clearly see, that Christ
died for the World of the Ungodly, for the World of Sinners, for the World of
his Enemies; the Just One for the World of the Unjust. But the Elect, as Elect,
are not unjust. Therefore he died not for the Elect, as Elect; but even for
that World, St. John speaks of, when he says, The whole World lies in
Wickedness.

21. If it be said, The Elect were Sinners once as well as others; I answer,
True; but not as they are Elect in Christ, but as they were out of Christ,
without Hope and without God in the World. Therefore, to say that Christ died
for the Elect, as Elect, is absolute Nonsense and Confusion.

22. To put this Matter out of Doubt, I would commend these following
Considerations to all sober-minded Men.

1. The Scripture says, Christ came to seek and to save that which was lost.

But the Elect, as Elect, were not lost.

Therefore Christ died not for the Elect, as or because they were Elect; for
that had been to seek and save what was found and saved before.

2. The Scripture says, Christ died for the Unjust.

But the Elect, as such, are not unjust.

Therefore, Christ died not for the Elect, as Elect; for that had been to
justify them who were just before.

3. The Scripture says, He came to preach Deliverance to the Captive.

But the Elect, as Elect, are not Captive; for Christ has set them free.

Therefore he died not for the Elect, as Elect; for that had been to set them
at Liberty who were at Liberty before.

4. The Scripture says, He quickened them who were dead in Trespasses and Sins
such as were without Christ, Aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel, and
Strangers to the Covenant of Promise, without Hope and without God in the World.

But the Elect, as such, are not dead in Trespasses and Sins, but alive unto
God. Neither are they without Christ; for they are chosen in him: Nor are they
Aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel, and Strangers to the Covenant of
Promise But they are Fellow-Citizens with the Saints, and the Household of God.

Therefore Christ died not for the Elect, as or because they were Elect. For
that had been to quicken them that were alive before, and to bring them into
Covenant, who were in Covenant before. And thus, by these Men's Account, our
Lord lost his Labor of Love, and accomplished A SOLEMN NOTHING.

23. Thus having shown the grievous Folly of those who say, that Christ died
for none but the Elect. I shall now prove by undeniable Reasons, that he died
for All Mankind.

Reas. 1. Because all the Prophets, the Angel of God, Christ himself, and his
holy Apostles with one Consent, affirm it.

Reas. 2. Because there is not one Scripture, from the Beginning of Genesis to
the End of the Revelation, that denies it, either negatively, by saying, that
he did not die for all; or affirmatively, by saying, that he did die but for
some.

Reas. 3. Because he himself commanded, that the Gospel should be preached to
every Creature.

Reas. 4. Because he calls all Men, every where to repent.

Reas. 5. Because those who perish, are damned for not believing in the Name of
the only begotten Son of God. Therefore, he must have died for Them. Else they
would be damned for not believing a Lie.

Reas. 6. Because they which are damned might have been saved. For thus says
the Word of God, 2 Thessalonians. ii. 10.
They received not the Love of the Truth that they might be saved. Therefore
God shall send them strong Delusions, to believe a Lie, that they all may be
damned.

Reas. 7. Because some deny the Lord that bought them, and bring upon
themselves swift Destruction. But they could not deny the Lord that bought
them, if he had not bought them at all.

24. I shall now briefly show the dreadful Absurdities that follow from saying
Christ died only for the Elect.

1. If Christ died not for All, then Unbelief is no Sin in them that finally
perish; seeing there is not any Thing for those Men to believe unto Salvation,
for whom Christ died not. 2. If Christ died not for All Men, then it would be a
Sin in the greatest Part of Mankind to believe he died for Them; seeing it
would be to believe a Lie. 3. If Christ died not for those that are damned,
then they are not damned for Unbelief. Otherwise, you say, that they are damned
for not believing a Lie. 4. If Christ died not for All, then those who obey
Christ, by going and preaching the Gospel to every Creature, as glad Tidings of
Grace and Peace of great Joy to all People, do sin thereby, in that they go to
most People with a Lie in their Mouth. 5. If Christ died not for All Men, then
God is not in Earnest in calling all Men every where to repent; For what good
could Repentance do those, for whom Christ died not? 6. If Christ died not for
all, then why does he say He is not willing that any should perish? Surely he
is willing, yea resolved that most Men should perish; else he would have died
for them also. 7. How shall God judge the World by the Man Christ-Jesus, if
Christ did not die for the World? Or how shall he judge them according to the
Gospel, when there was never any Gospel or Mercy for them?
25. But, say some, If Christ died for all, why are not all saved?

I answer, Because they believe not in the Name of the only begotten Son of
God. Because God called, and they refused to answer; he stretched out his Hand,
and they regarded not; he counseled them, but they would none of his Counsels;
he reproved them, but they set at naught all his Reproofs; they followed after
lying Vanities, and forsook their own Mercies; they denied the Lord that bought
them, and so brought upon themselves swift Destruction; And because they
received not the Love of the Truth, that they might be saved, therefore (if you
would know wherefore) God gave them up to believe a Lie, and to be damned. How
often (says our Lord) would I have gathered you together, and ye would not? Ye
would not. Here is the plain Reason, why all Men are not saved. For God
promises no Man Salvation, whether he will or no. But leaves them to
everlasting Destruction, who will not believe and obey the Gospel.

26. O, then you are an Arminian! You are a Freewiller. You hold Free will in
Man!

I hold nothing but what the Scripture says; and that you shall give me Leave
to hold. I do not hold, that any Man has any Will or Power of himself, to do
any Thing that is Good; but by the Grace of God we may do all Things. I have
already shown, he has given Christ for all Men. And he who spared not his own
Son, but delivered him up for us all, how shall he not with him freely give us
all Things? And what Man knows not, that if he make Use of all the Will and
Power God has given him, God will double his Talent, and give him more? If any
therefore desire to have more, let him faithfully improve what he has. Likewise
what Man is he, who does not know that he is not condemned, for not doing what
he could not do, but for leaving undone what he could have done if he would.
Let any Man deny it if he can.

27. "What then, may all Men be saved if they will?"

Before I answer this Question directly, I shall show that those who ask it,
are themselves compelled to grant as much Freedom of Will, as we desire to
plead for.

For 1. The Assembly of Divines, in their Confession of Faith, c. 9. do
expressly say, God has endowed the Will of Man with that natural Liberty, that
it is neither forced, nor by any absolute Necessity determined to do Good or
Evil. 2. Mr. Baxter, in the Preface of his Call to the Unconverted, says, that
Calvin as well as Arminius held Free Will, and that no Man of Brains denies,
that Man has a Will that is naturally free; it is free from Violence, it is a
self-determining Principle. Sure here is as much said for Free Will, as any Man
need to say, and perhaps more. For,

The Difference between us, is this. They say, Man has a Will which is
naturally free. We say, Man has this Freedom of Will, not naturally, but by
Grace.

We believe, that in the Moment Adam fell, he had no Freedom of Will left; But
that God, when of his own Free Grace he gave the Promise of a Savior to him
and his Posterity, graciously restored to Mankind a Liberty and Power to accept
of proffered Salvation. And in all this, Man's boasting is excluded; the whole
of that which is Good in him, even from the first Motion of his Will, being of
Grace and not of Nature. And now we come directly to the Question, Whether All
Men may be saved if they will?

28. To those who have considered what has been premised; I answer, 1. What
should hinder them if they be willing? For 2. God is not willing that any
should perish; yea, 3. He is willing that all Men should be saved. And Christ
is willing; for he came not to judge the World, but to save the World. And how
did he weep over Jerusalem? How often would he have gathered them together,
even as an Hen gathers her Chickens under her Wings, but they would not? And
now, what hinders Men's Salvation, but that same, they would not?

29. They would not, they will not come at Christ's Call, and hearken to his
Reproof, and wait for his Counsels, and receive Power from on high to live to
him who died for them, walking in all his Commandments and Ordinances
blameless, and following him whithersoever he goes. This Way i^ so narrow that
few care to walk therein; and therefore they are not saved, even because they
reject the Counsel of God against themselves. They choose Death; therefore they
perish everlastingly.

FINIS.

