Mr. Dunbar's ARTILLERY-ELECTION SERMON.

June 6. 1748.

True FAITH makes the best Soldiers, A SERMON Preached before the ancient and
honorable Artillery-Company, On their Anniversary Meeting FOR THE Election of
Officers, June 6th. 1748.

By Samuel Dunbar, A. M. Pastor of a Church of Christ in Stoughton.

BOSTON: Printed for D. HENCHMAN in Cornhil. 1748.

True FAITH Makes the best Soldiers.
HEB. XI. 32, 33, 34. And what shall I more say? For the Time would fail me to
tell of Gideon, and of Barak, and of Sampson, and of Jepthah, of David also --
who through Faith subdued Kingdoms -- waxed valiant in Fight, turned to Flight
the Armies of the Aliens. --
THE inspired Author of this Epistle, having at the 38th Verse of the
preceding Chapter, cited that (...) Passage of the Apostle, The Just shall
live by Faith; in this gives an Account of the Nature, Necessity, Usefulness
and Excellency of Faith, and shows of what eminent Service it was to the
ancient Saints, famous in the Book of God.

It was this, that animated their Obedience; carried them through the heaviest
Trials; overcame the greatest Difficulties; and made them more than Conquerors
over their most formidable Enemies. It was this, that made the Feeble as David,
and the Strong as the Angel of the Lord. It was this, that enabled Martyrs
patiently and joyfully to endure the utmost Cruelty of their Persecutors, and
the most warlike valiant Soldiers to exceed themselves, and do Wonders against
their Enemies.

Of these last Feats of Faith the Apostle speaks in the Text. He mentions by
Name, several Heroes renowned in the Church of God in their Day, for their
Valor and Victories over the Enemies of God's People. The History of their
Exploits is preserved in the sacred Records, and was written for our Learning
and Admonition; as we learn from the Use the Apostle makes of it in this Place.
In setting down their Names, he observes not the Order of Story, aiming only at
mentioning their signal Acts of Courage and Conquest.

In the Story we find them all, except Barak, eminent for their Fortitude.
Gideon was saluted by the Angel, as a mighty Man of Valor Judge. vi. 12.
And though Barak, at the Time when God called him, and put him into Commission
of General of the Army against the Enemies of his People, discovered something
of a timorous Spirit; yet doubtless he was well known to be a Man of good
Courage, and therefore God chose him for that important Trust and Service. God
is wont ordinarily to do his Work by the fittest Instruments. Jepth^ was known
to be a mighty Man of Valor Judge. xi. 1.
, and was therefore courted by the Elders of his People to be their Captain in
an Expedition against their Enemies Ver. 5, 6.
. Sampson was famous for his great Strength and valiant Acts Judge. xvi. 6.
. And David, when even a Youth and Stripling, had the Courage to encounter with
a Lion and a Bear, and the more brutish Goliath 1 Samuel xvii. 36.
; and bore the Character of a mighty valiant Man, and a Man of War Chap. xvi.
18.
.

These heroic Men in their Wars against the Enemies of their People, used their
best Policy, and acted their natural Courage: They fought valiantly, and played
the Men for their God, and for the Cities of their God; and they gained
complete Victories. Their martial Achievements, humane Reason may be ready to
ascribe to their superior Courage and Conduct; and to look no higher: But the
Apostle takes not the least Notice of them, but ascribes them to their Faith
only. It was their Faith gave them Courage, and procured them Success. Their
Strength of Body, Fortitude of Mind, and ^ilitary Skill were natural Causes of
their Success: But these alone would never have enabled them to do such great
Exploits upon their Enemies, who possibly might equal them in all the natural
and acquired Accomplishments of Soldiers; and far overmatch them in the Number,
Strength and Artillery of their Armies. It was their Faith that differenced
them from their Enemies: This gave them the Advantage; and was more and better
to them, than Troops of Horses, Chariots of Iron, and all other Instruments of
War were to their Enemies: This encouraged their Hearts and strengthened their
Hands: Made them valorous and victorious: This gave the finishing Stroke to
their other military Qualifications, and was the Crown of all. This inspired
them with Courage and Resolution, made them undaunted at the Approach of
Enemies, intripid in the most bloody Scenes of War, and valiant in Fight: This
crowned their valiant Attempts with Success, turned to Flight the Armies of the
Aliens, those that were Aliens to their Commonwealth, and Enemies to their
Religion: And this enabled them to make proper Advantage of their Victories, to
subdue Kingdoms under them, and make them tributary.

The proud Hearts of Men are prone to take the Glory of their Courage and
Success to themselves, as if they had given themselves their Courage, and by
the Might of their Hand alone had gotten them Victory: But the Holy Ghost
attributes it wholly to their Faith, to show that it was all of God: That the
wise Man should not glory in his Wisdom, nor the mighty Man in his Might Jer.
ix. 23.
; But that he that glories should glory in the Lord 1 Cor. i. 31.
.

These Persons here spoken of, were all of them Leaders of Armies, except
Sampson, who had the Force of an Army in himself: And we find they were as
famous for their Faith, as for their Prowess. Doubtless they had many Soldiers
in their Armies that had Faith as well as they; which gave them the same
valorous martial Spirit that their Leaders had; and enabled them, in their
Places, to act as valiantly in Battle, as their Leaders did in their's.
Believing and praying Commanders, at the Head of believing and praying Armies,
have been so owned and honored of God, that nothing can stand before them.

The Observation from the Words, by divine Leave and Help to be spoken to, may
be this, viz.

That true Faith makes the best Soldiers, the most valiant and successful.

It is a Day of War and Trouble in the Land. -- When Enemies unjustly rise up
against us, and do all the Mischief they can, it is lawful and a Duty to take
up Arms, and stand in our own Defense; yea, and to go forth to War against
them. Good Soldiers, under God, are our Defense and Safety. -- But what shall
the People of God do for good Soldiers? What Method must be taken to make our
Men such? -- They who have the Honor to bear a Commission in the Militia,
should doubtless take Pains to furnish themselves with a good Knowledge in
military Affairs, and then, should be faithful in training their Companies;
should make a Business of teaching their Men the right Use of the Gun and
Sword, and whatever else is necessary for them to be acquainted with: And they
should see to it, that their Soldiers under Arms, keep good Order, and attend
to their Duty. -- But when Men have perfected themselves in this Knowledge,
they will be far from being good Soldiers, if they have not good Courage. This
is absolutely necessary to make a Soldier. If a Man had a Body as bulky as
Goliah's, a Head as wife as Solomon's, and an Arm as strong as Sampson's, but a
Heart like a Hare, Could this Man make a Soldier? What avail the large and
branchy Horns of the Stagg, since he starts and runs at the Bark of a Dog? A
Coward is no Soldier: He cannot keep Possession of his Soul, nor find his
Hands, nor use his Arms, in the Time of Battle and Danger.

Men have invented and use a Variety of artificial Methods to inspire
themselves and one another with Courage: The Beat of Drums, the Blast of
Trumpets, and Shouting for the Battle; these may somewhat rouse the Spirits,
and breed a Kind of brutal Courage, a wild and mad Fury, like that of the
War-Horse; Job. xxxix. 21, --
who faith among the Trumpets, Ha, ha, goes on to meet the armed Men, mocketh
at Fear, and is not affrighted; neither turns back from the Sword; swalloweth
the Ground with Fierceness and Rage, and rushes into the Battle. This is false
Courage, purely a mechanical Business: It hurries Men on precipitately into the
Mouth of Danger, without Thought or Wit, Consideration or Conduct; and often
leaves them when they have the greatest Need. It degenerates into Fear and
Cowardice. It is a sudden Flush of the Spirits, which quickly goes off, like
the Crackling of Thorns under a Pot, makes a great Noise and Blaze, but is soon
over.

True Valor, or Fortitude, is an excellent Virtue, the Mean between Temerity
and Timerousness; as the Poet says, -- Courage dwells not in a troubled Flood
Of mounting Spirits, and fermenting Blood;
Lodged in the Soul with Virtue overruled,
Inflamed by Reason, and by Reason cooled. Addison's Campaign.



It will not foolishly and needlessly run upon the Point of the Sword, or Muzzel
of the Gun; nor will it through Fear neglect a Duty, nor quit a Post because of
Danger. True Courage makes the Soldier patient in Labors, unwearied in Fight,
composed in the utmost Confusion of Battle; bold and intrepid in the midst of
Enemies. The Thunder of the Captains, Clashing of Swords, Roaring of Cannon,
Shouts of Enemies, Groans of Friends, Clouds of Dust and Smoke, all the Terrors
of War, do not in the least discourage him. The truly courageous Man will not
presumptuously throw away his Life, nor sneekingly save it: He neither wishes
for Death, nor fears it.

This manly rational Temper of Mind is not the Effect of Noise and Sounds only.
Martial Instruments of Music may well be used: The Drum and Trumpet naturally
tend to fire the Soul, work upon animal Nature, and breed a Kind of Courage;
but as Paul said in another Case, I show you a more excellent Way 1 Cor. xii.
31.
; more rational and divine, more accommodate to us as Men and Christians.

True Courage will make Soldiers bold and daring, inspire them with the best
Courage, most solid and lasting; such a Courage as will make them undaunted,
not fearing the Force of their Adversaries; no, though they be like the Chaldeans
of old, a bitter and hasty Nation, terrible and dreadful, of a fierce
Countenance and hard Language. This will enable them to stand the Shock of
Armies, and drive home upon the Foe; and the more fierce and furious their
Enemies are, the more will their Faith whet up their Courage, add Vigor to
their Minds, and Strength to their Arms. This is the Wisdom that is better than
Strength, yea than Weapons of War. Eccl. ix. 16, 18.


And Faith gives the best Assurance of Success. Success goes a great Way in
establishing and aggrandizing the Soldier's Character. Success indeed is not
always a certain Evidence of the best Soldier. A most expert and valiant
General, with an Army better disciplined, equipped and posted, and consisting of
more sturdy, resolute and bold Men, through some unforeseen Accident, some
unexpected Turn of Providence, the Change of the Wind and Weather, may through
their too great Boldness, and pursuing the Enemy too far, loose the Day: The
Race is not always to the Swist, nor the Battle to the Strong; but Time and
Chance happens to all. Chap. ix. 11.
There is a secret, powerful, overruling Providence, that determines Events,
quite cross to the natural Tendency of Things, and the rational Expectations of
Men. But true Faith gives Soldiers the best Reason to hope they shall be
prosper'd in all their Engagements against their Enemies; and that the Event of
the Battle, at least of the War, will be in their Favor.

Now that Faith makes the best Soldiers the most valiant and successful, we
learn from the Heroes in the Text. By reading the History of their Wars, we
find that they behaved valiantly in Fight; and that their Valor was crowned
with Success. They fought with Armies vastly superior to their own, in Respect
of Numbers and military Accoutrements; and yet their Enemies were not able to
stand before them: Yea, Kings did flee away apace. From the Blood of the Slain,
from the Fat of the Mighty, their Bow turned not back, nor did their Sword
return empty. They seldom or ever fought a Battle, but they gained a Victory.

And so it was in Aftertimes, when the Faith of God's People was strong and
lively. What and how many notable ^^ctories did Judas Maccabaeus win over the
Enemies of (...) People? The most puissant Armies were unable to grapple with
the Valor of Judas and his Men, though vastly inferior to them in Number and
Arms 1 Maccab. iii. 18, --
. It was their Faith in God that gave them this Spirit, Courage and Success.

If we come down to later Times, we shall find Faith animating the Hearts of
Christian Soldiers in the same Manner, and crowning them with Success. In the
History of the Persecutions and Wars of the Waldenses Fox's Acts and Monuments.
, a godly People, and full of Faith, we see how valiantly they defended
themselves from their Enemies, though they were but few in Number, and poorly
furnished with Weapons of War; nay, and not only defended themselves, but many
Times drove their numerous and enraged Enemies before them. It was their Faith
in God that made them thus valiant and victorious. They were good Soldiers of
Jesus Christ; valiant for the Truth; and God gave them a Spirit and Courage
that all their Enemies were not able to withstand.

Should we come down to the Days and Wars of our Forefathers in this Country,
we shall see the same Fruits of Faith? They were a holy praying Generation; Men
of strong Faith, and eminent Piety: And their Faith gave them Courage against
their numerous salvage Enemies, and helped them to the signal Victories they
gained over them. We may say of them as David did of his Ancestors: Our Fathers
trusted in thee: They trusted and thou did deliver them. They cried unto thee
and were delivered* They trusted in thee and were not confounded Psalm. xxii. 4,
5.
. Nay, so far from it, that they waxed valiant in Fight, and turned to Flight
the Armies of the Aliens.

And what was it made our Officers and Soldiers so valiant and victorious in
the Siege of Louisbourg, that strong and almost impregnable Fortress? Was it
not Faith? Were not many good Men, Men of Faith and Prayer engaged in it?
Doubtless it would be a Wrong to their Faith, not to attribute their Courage
and Success to that.

A small Army with great Faith, will do more than a great Army without Faith,
though it have all necessary and convenient Weapons of War. This we have an
Instance of in Abraham, that ancient renowned Believer; he with his Household
Troops, three hundred and eighteen Men, obtained a Victory over four Kings, who
just before had prevailed against five Kings Genesis xiv. 14, 15.


But what is this Faith that inspires Soldiers with such uncommon Courage, and
crowns them with such Success?

It is not a vain presumptuous Confidence, a groundless enthusiastic
Persuasion, arising in the Mind from an overweening Conceit of our own
Goodness, and of our peculiar Interest in the special Love of God: It is not
any sudden unaccountable Impression and Impulse upon the Mind, that God will
infallibly defend us, and destroy our Enemies. It is no proud vapouring
Imagination, nor Satanic Delusion. -- No:

This Faith is a rational Thing: A divine Principle wrought in the Soul by the
Spirit of God.

It is a firm and undoubted Belief of the Being and Perfections of God Context
v. 6.
, and in particular, of his Wisdom, Goodness, Justice and Power: It is a full
Persuasion of the Providence of God Context Ver. 6.
: That he orders and overrules all the Affairs of the World; holds all Men and
Things in his Hands; can curb and restrain, weaken or strengthen, deliver or
destroy them, just as he pleases: And that he is righteous in all the
Administrations of Providence; and that therefore, when his People appeal to
him by War, he will decide the Cause according to Justice. This Way more
especially the Faith of Jephthah wro't. I have not finned against thee, said he
to his Enemies, but thou do me Wrong to War against me: The Lord the Judge be
Judge this Day between the Children of Israel and the Children of Ammon Judge.
xi. 27.
.

It is a hearty Reliance upon the Promises of God Ver. 13.
: A Belief that God is sincere in making them, is able to make them good Ver.
19.
, and will not suffer his Faithfulness to fail. The Faith of Gideon, Barak and
David, had a more special Reference to the Promises God made them. God promised
Barak, that he would deliver Sisera and his Army into his Hand Chap. iv. 7.
; and Gideon, that he would surely be with him, and that he should smite the
Midianites as one Man Chap. vi. 16.
. And David had many Promises made to him, that God would be with him and
prosper him. These good Men embraced these divine Promises; and though there was
some Weakness in their Faith at first receiving them, they afterward most
firmly relied on them. --

It is a fiducial Dependence upon God as our God in Covenant Ibid.
; who has taken us near to himself, and through Christ is reconciled to us.

It is a dutiful Acknowledgment of God in all our Ways Ver. 27.
; lifting up our Eyes, and Hearts, and Cries to God for Direction, Protection
and Success. In this Way the Faith of good Hezekiah expressed itself 2 Kings
xix. 14.


It is the Root and Principle of all holy Obedience Context Ver. 8.
; influences to all holy Living; brings into Subjection to God's Law, and makes
willing and careful to follow his Orders: It produces an entire Resignation to
the Will of God in his Providence, that he may do as seems him good.

It shows itself by Works Ver. 7.
: Puts upon using the most apt Means and best Endeavors for Self-preservation
and Defense, and for annoying and repelling an Enemy; as if all depended upon
our own Skill and Strength, Courage and Conduct; still looking up to God, and
depending entirely upon him for his Blessing upon all.

In a Word, It is a realizing View of another World Ver. 1.
, looks more to the Things that are not seen, and that are eternal, than to
transitory visible Things Ver. 10.
: And carries the Soul out in earnest Desires after them Ver. 16.
, and diligent Preparations for them.

This is the Faith which makes the best Soldiers; and the stronger and more
lively this Faith is, the more will it animate their Courage, and increase
their Hope of Success. --

But Whence is it that Faith has this Virtue and Influence, to inspire Solders
with the best Courage, and assure them of Success?

It is partly from the Divine Sovereignty. Faith is a Grace that most honors
God: It is a Dependence upon him alone; a practical and professed
Acknowledgment of our own Insufficiency, and of his Power and Goodness, that he
is willing and able to help his People. This is pleasing to God, and from his
sovereign Goodness he gives his People the Comfort of that which gives him
Honor. Having by his Spirit stirred up the Faith of his Servants, he does by
the same Spirit stir up their Courage. After Jophthah's believing Appeal to God
as Judge, it is said, Then the Spirit of the Lord came upon him Judge. xi. 29.
: A martial Spirit, a Spirit that did in an uncommon Manner fire him with
Courage and Zeal against the Enemies of the Lord's People. God delights in the
Faith of his People, and from his sovereign rich Goodness, will not let it go
unrewarded. When a Man's Ways please the Lord, and this Way of Faith always
does, He makes his Enemies to be at Peace with him Prove. xvi. 7.
, or yield to him, or fall before him.

It is partly from the Nature of Faith. Faith possesses the Soul with a sacred
Dread of this great God; Context Ver. 7.
a Reverence of his Majesty and Greatness; a Fear of doing any Thing unworthy
of him, unbecoming our Relation to him, and displeasing to his Holiness: It
makes us careful to observe his Laws, follow the Steps of Providence, and yield
to the Motions of his Spirit. It represents God to the Soul, in the Glory of
his Perfections and Operations; and causes us to sactify the Lord of Hosts, and
to make him our Fear, and our Dread Isai. viii. 12, 13.
: And when we do this we shall not fear nor be afraid of Man. A Soul possessed
with a holy Fear of God, is elevated above the slavish Fear of Man. As the
Light of the Sun extinguishes the Light of a Candle, yea of the brightest
Stars; so does the Fear of God drive out the undue Fear of Men, the highest and
greatest. They that fear God, will not fear them that can kill the Body, and
after that can do no more, unless abuse and disgrace the Carcass. The Fear of
Man is weakening to the Body and Mind, preys upon the Spirits, and makes
cowardly; but the Fear of God has a quite contrary Effect, The Righteous is
bold as a Lion Prove. xxviii. 1.
; nothing can terrify them. The fiercest Enemies, most cruel Threatenings, and
Death it self in the most frightful Forms, no Ways dismay them. A notable
Instance of this we have in the three jewish Worthies: They would not be
frightened from their God and their Duty, by the stern Looks, furious Threats,
and flaming Furnace of Nebuchadnezzar, that Terror of the Mighty.

Faith represents the Enemies of God's People in a diminishing Light. Unbelief
and carnal Fear are apt to magnify them. As, They are so numerous, so expert in
their Discipline, so well furnished with all Kinds of Weapons, and withal, as
they are such mighty Men, and are enraged; and we, compared with them, are few
in Number, poor and unprovided, have no Might nor Strength. But Faith gives
God's People quite another View and Account of them, diminishes them as much as
Sense and Unbelief magnified them. The unbelieving Spies made Report of the
Inhabitants of Canaan, That all the People that they saw in it were Men of
great Stature: And there they saw the Giants the Sons of Anak, and that they
were in their own Sight as Grasshoppers, and such in their Sight too Numb. xiii.
32, 33.
: Little, weak, contemptible Insects. But the Faith of Joshua and Caleb, two of
that Number of Spies, beheld them in a quite different Light; made no Account
of them, and reported of them as not at all to be feared: They are Bread for us
Chap. xiv. 9.
, say they: Not Corn, that will take some Time and Trouble to prepare it for
Food: But Bread, ground, made up, baked, ready to eat: They are set before us,
rather to be fed upon, than to be fought with. Where Faith thus lessens
Enemies, it will raise and keep up the Soldiers Courage in fighting with them.
Whatever mighty Shows their Enemies make, how formidable soever they appear in
Battle-array, and how loud and threatening soever their Words may be, Faith
shows them, That they are Men and not God, and their Horses Flesh and not
Spirit; weak and mortal Creatures. Overrating an Enemy breeds Discouragement,
damps the Spirits, and awakens Fear: But seeing them by the Eyes of Faith
diminished to almost nothing, strengthens the feeble Knees, raises up the Hands
that hang down, and recovers the fainting Spirits.

Carnal Soldiers many times make Use of something like this to to fortify their
Minds, and keep up their Spirits. They endeavor to think meanly of their
Enemies, and they speak contemptibly of them, as having neither Skill nor
Valor; But Faith does this most satifyingly to the Soul.

Faith excites a mighty Spirit of Prayer. Faith and Prayer ever go together;
and the stronger Faith is, the more fervent is Prayer. Believing Soldiers know
they can call in the Help of God, when Things are come to the last Extremity,
and are in such a desperate Situation, that vain is the Help of Man. And they
hope, that the God who hears Prayers, and delights in the Prayers of Faith,
will some Way appear for them, open some Way of Escape, and preserve them from
the Rage and Cruelty of their Enemies. Believing Soldiers can wrestle with God,
at the same Time they are combating with Men: They can shoot up their Prayers
to God in the Heavens, while they are discharging their Shot upon the Enemy in
the Field. This is a mighty Support to their Spirits, and begets in them a holy
Confidence in God; in that they know, that where God gives a Spirit of Prayer,
he is not wont to deny his People the Mercy they have prayed unto him for. They
know, that fervent believing Prayer can do more and greater Execution than Guns
and Swords. These have Power with God, and prevail: And rather than the Enemy
should prevail against an Army of Prayers, God will bow the Heavens and come
down, fly upon the Wings of the Wind for their Help; muster up the Militia of
Heaven, discharge his Artillery upon their Enemies, thunder in the Heavens,
shoot out his Lightnings, and send down Hailstones, and the great Rain of his
Strength. Oh what Courage must this give praying believing Soldiers, who have a
God of infinite Power and Goodness to cry unto in their Distresses! a God with
whom inwrought fervent Prayers avail much; and who never said to the Seed of
praying wrestling Jacob, seek ye me in vain.

Faith engages and realizes the gracious Presence of God with his fighting
People. It engages the Presence of God with them. God has promised his People
to be with them in their Difficulties and Dangers. Faith lays hold of the
Promise, and pleads it with God: And while the believing Soul does this, God
will not leave him nor forsake him. By Faith in the Promise, the Believer has a
fast Hold upon God, and God will not rend away from him. The Lord is with his
People, in a Way of Grace and Favor, while they are with him, in the Way of
Faith and Duty 2 Chronicles. xv. 2.
. -- And Faith realizes the gracious Presence of God with them: That he goes
forth with their Armies, accompanies them in the Field of Battle, beholds the
Number, Force and Rage of their Enemies, and their Weakness and Dependence upon
him. And besides, Faith realizes, that God is not present with them only as an
unconcerned Spectator, but stands ready to help them in all that they need, and
call upon him for: To guide their Counsels, cover their Heads, direct their
Shot, strengthen their Hearts and Hands, and fight for them by his Power and
Providence.

Surely this will kindle the Fire in every Soldier's Breast, give Life and
Spirit, and strengthen with all Might. -- If God be for us, who can be against
us Romans viii. 31.
? If God fight for us, who can prosper that fight against us? When David could
say, The Lord is on my Side, he adds, I will not fear what can Man do unto me
Psalm. cxviii. 6.
? If God be with the Armies of his People, though an Host, vastly superior to
them, encamp against them, they will not fear. God's Presence will be their
Defense: The Lord will go before them, and their God will be their Rearward
Isai. lii. 12.
.

The Presence of God with his People was always esteemed a sufficient Reason
for fortifying their Minds against their Enemies. God himself uses this as an
Argument for their Courage. I will be with thee, I will not fail thee nor
forsake thee, said he to Joshua; therefore, be strong, and of a good Courage
Josh. i. 5, 6.
. And so to Jehoshaphat, when a great Multitude came against him: Be not afraid
nor dismayed by reason of this great Multitude -- for the Lord will be with you
2 Chronicles. xx. 15, 17.
. And Reason good this, to make God's believing People strong, and of a good
Courage: For God with and for his People, is more than all the World against
them: And with this good Hezekiah encouraged himself and his People, when
invaded by the vast and insulting Army of Sennacherib: Be strong and
courageous, be not afraid nor dismayed for the King of Assyria, nor for all the
Multitude that is with him: For there be more with us, than with him. With him
is an Arm of Flesh, but with us is the Lord our God, to help us, and to fight
our Battles Chap. xxxii. 7, 8.
. How greatly, will the Presence of a valiant, politic, experienced, successful
General, inspire his Soldiers with Resolution and Courage? Who would not fight
bravely, and play the Men, in the Presence and Sight, and under the Conduct of
our illustrious Prince WILLIAM Duke of Cumberland? But surely, it must much
more raise the Spirits, and sharpen the Courage of the Christian Soldiers, when
by Faith they behold GOD himself going with them, conducting them, and fighting
for them. --

Faith sees the Glory of God much interested in the Wars of his People: And
this fires them with Zeal and Courage. God's Glory lies nearer the Hearts of
his People, than any of their own Interests; and they will venture harder to
secure, defend, and vindicate that, than any Thing of their own. In this Case
they will not' count their Lives dear to them, nor love them to the Death.

One Thing that very much contributes to lead Soldiers on to gallant and brave
Actions in Fight, is the Honor of their King and Country: For the Honor of
their Prince, they will behave with the utmost Resolution and Obstinacy. Surely
the Honor of God will as much sway with the believing Soldier, in fighting the
Lord's Battles. Should the Enemy prevail, what would God do for his great Name?
What would the blasphemous Egyptians say? And therefore to prevent their
blasphemous Reproaches, the Christian Soldier is willing to jeopard his Life,
and spend his Blood. It is not so much for the Honor of his King (though this is
dear to him) as of his GOD, that he fights. It is the Cause of God, and
Religion, and his People, he is fighting for: And the Though It of this adds Vigor
to his Spirit, and Force to his Arms. It was the Sense of this that stirred up
David's Spirit, and emboldened him to enter the Lists with enormous Goliath: He
defied the Armies of the living God 1 Samuel xvii. 36.
; and thereby virtually defied the living God, Israel' s God, the God of
Armies. David's Zeal for God's Glory armed him with Resolution to undertake the
Fight, and his Faith bro't him off a Conqueror.

Faith commits the Body and Soul, and all their Concerns into the Hands of God.
It puts over all that we are and have unto God, for him to look after, take
Care of, and dispose of, just as he pleases. It is the Property and Privilege
of Faith, to devolve all our Cares and Concerns upon God; to cast our Burdens
on him, and commit the Keeping of our Souls to him. And Faith knows that God's
Hands are safe, powerful, and merciful Hands: That he is able to keep what we
have committed to him. Now what has that Soldier to fear, who has lodged all
that he has in such glorious Hands? He knows his Enemies can have no Power
against him, except it be given them from above: That not an Hair of his Head
can fall to the Ground, much less a Drop of his Blood, or his Life, without the
Will of his heavenly Father: And that God will give them no more Power against
him, than shall be most for his Glory. He knows God can sustain him under the
greatest Burdens, deliver him in the most imminent Dangers, and preserve him
untouched, unhurt in the midst of Swords, Shot and Deaths. Such a believing
Soldier has nothing to terrify him, nothing to be careful about; but to keep
in the Way of Duty, and leave the Event to God. He can address his
Fellow Soldiers, and urge them on to the Fight, as Joah that famous General in
Israel did; Be of good Courage, and let us play the Men for our People, and for
the Cities of our God: And the Lord do that which seemesh him good 2 Samuel x. 12.
.

Faith calls fresh to Mind, and feeds upon, the wonderful Appearances of God
for his People in Times past, against their Enemies; and takes Courage from
thence, with Respect to present Engagements: And more especially does it thus,
when the People of God are bro't into the same Mounts of Difficulty, Distress,
and Danger that God's People were in in former Generations. Then it remembers
the Years of the right Hand of the Most High, and encourages the believing Soul
to hope for the same almighty Power to defend and strengthen him, the same
unerring Wisdom to conduct him, and the same rich Goodness to supply him. It is
said, Thou breakest the Heads of Leviathan in Pieces, and gave him to be Meet
to the People inhabiting the Wilderness Psalm. lxxiv. 14.
. They fed their Souls with the Sweetness of this Mercy. This Providence was
meat to their Faith and Hope, to support and comfort them in Reference to the
other Difficulties, they were likely to meet with in the Wilderness.

Carnal old Soldiers are wont to keep up their Courage, by recounting how many
Wars they have served in; how many Battles they have fought; what Dangers they
have been in; what Wounds they have received; what narrow Escapes they have
made with their Lives; and how many Victories they have won: The Remembrance of
these Things inspires them with fresh Courage. But the Actings of Faith upon
God's Works of Power and Mercy for his People, will do it much better. How
mightily will this embolden the Soldier's Spirit, when his Faith assures him,
that this God of Salvation is the same God that ever he was; that his Arm is
not shortened, nor his Love abated. Oh, to believe, that as God has delivered
his People, and does still deliver them, he will yet deliver them. -- Once more,

Finally;

Faith looks to the Glory and Blessedness of the unseen eternal World; and this
administers Courage. Faith is the Evidence of Things not seen Context Ver. 1.
: It gives a realizing presentiating View of another World, and of the great
Good that is laid up for Believers there: And it begets a good Hope of coming
to the Enjoyment of it, whenever God shall call out of this World; yea, and
sometimes it enables the Christian to see his Title to it: It rises up to the
Riches of the full Assurance of Faith and Hope. The Christian thus raised in
the Actings of Faith and Hope, has nothing to terrify him: He can with the
greatest Presence of Mind, and unshaken Fortitude of Soul, rush into the midst
of Enemies and Danger, when Duty calls him. Death is no Terror to him. When
there is nothing but Blood and Death around him, his Heart is undaunted,
because his Faith shows him a Crown of Life and Glory reserved in the Heavens
for him.

Carnal Soldiers look for only some temporal Reward, a Garland of Flowers, a
little higher Post, a more honorable Commission; or to enrich themselves with
the Spoil of the Enemy, or, if they fall in Battle, to have it said of them,
They died in the Bed of Honor. These are sorry trifling Considerations, and
yet they serve mightily to embolden them in Fight. But surely, if Soldiers will
make such adventrous and desperate Pushes on the Enemy, only for a corruptible
Crown, the Honor that comes from Men; the Christian Soldier's Faith will urge
him on to do so, for an Incorruptible. He that by Faith knows, that if he
looses his Life on Earth, fighting the Cause of God and his People, he shall
win a Crown in Heaven, a far more exceeding and eternal Weight of Glory, will
not count his Life dear to him. He that fights, and keeps Heaven in his Eye,
will not want Courage. This Faith, which has rendered Martyrs patient and
joyful in the midst of Flames, will make Soldiers so in the most dreadful
Scenes of War.

Thus Faith gives Soldiers the best Courage. And as I said before, the more
lively and strong the Actings of Faith are, the more and better is the Courage.

And Faith makes successful Soldiers too. We find it so in the many Instances
upon sacred Record. God's People always won the Day when they fought in Faith.
-- They who are the best, most skilful and courageous Generals, and have been
very successful, yet sometimes meet with a Discomfiture, loose the Day, and
quit the Field: But Faith ever prevails. This calls in, and engages God and his
Providence to fight for his People. And though God do not now miraculously
interpose for his People, yet he so orders Matters in Providence, as to
accomplish Success for them, as surely, as if it was bro't about by apparent
Miracles. The Finger of God is very visible in it; the Arm of the Lord is made
bare; his almighty Power discovered, to the Admiration and Joy of his own
People, and to the Astonishment and Ruin of their Enemies. God so orders Things
in Providence, that at the very Instant of Time, when his People stand in need
of Help from him, they receive it: And though it be not purely a miraculous
Interposition of Providence, it is a very extraordinary and remarkable one; and
was to them according to their Faith: They believed in God, that he would
appear for them, but in which Way they knew not: And when; as to all outward
Means they could look to, all Hope perished, then in the Mount it has been
seen. It were easy to produce many Instances to prove this, were it needful. --
Was it not by this signal Interposition of Providence, in Answer to Faith and
Prayer, that God in former Times delivered the English Nation from the Spanish
Invasion? Was it not from the special Appearances of God for his People of
New England, by causing strong Winds to fulfill his Word, and by sending wasting
Sickness among them, that we were of very late Time delivered from the French
Fleet that came into these Northern Seas, with Orders to make all desolate that
they could come at? And was it not the signal Providence of God that succeeded
our Siege of Louisbourgh; wonderfully changing the usual Course of the Winter,
both here, in preparing for it, and there, in fighting against it, 'till it was
surrendered, and not a Day longer. This Success and Salvation God gave his
People in Answer to their Faith and Prayer. God never disappoints the
well-grounded, well regulated, and well-experienced Faith of his People.

God enquires of Job, Job xxxviii, 22, 23.
Have thou entered into the Treasures of the Snow? Or have thou seen the
Treasures of the Hail? which I have prepared against the Time of Trouble,
against the Day of Battle and War. God has these Treasures to bring in the Day
of Battle and War: With them he fights against sinful Men. And, as Mr. Henry
notes upon the Place, Sometimes they come so opportunely to serve the Purposes
of Providence, in God's fighting for his People, and against their Enemies,
that one would think, they were laid up as Magazines or Stores of Arms, and
Ammunition, and Provision against the Time of Trouble, and the Day of Battle.

Faith is a prevailing Thing with God: It takes hold of God's Strength, and
like Jacob, if I may be allowed the Expression, Closes in with God, and refuses
to let him go without a Blessing, a Deliverance from Esau, an enraged Enemy.
Indeed Faith will obtain almost every Thing from God. The Prayer of Faith
avails much: Who can say how much? God says to it, Concerning the Work of my
Hands, command ye me Isai. xlv. 11.
. Be it unto thee even as thou will Mat. xv. 28.
. Blessed are they that believe, they shall see the Performances of all Things.
Their Faith and Hope being set in God, shall never make ashamed.

Victory is of the Lord Prove. xxi. 31.
: And to whom will he give it, if not to his own believing fighting People?
Then are the Weapons of their Warfare, though carnal, mighty through God, when
managed by the Hand of Faith, to the pulling down the strong Holds of their
Enemies. Be their Walls as high as those of Jericho, as thick and strong as
those of Babylon, and defended with Towers and Batteries; down they must come,
when Faith engages them; or the Gates of Iron and Brass must fly open. The
strongest Armies must flee or fall before Faith. This makes the People of God
invincible, and victorious.

What a Series of Victories did David obtain over his Enemies? He pursued and
overtook them, neither did be turn again 'till they were consumed Psalm. xviii.
37.
. He wounded them, that they were not able to rise Ver. 38.
. He subdued under him those that rose up against him Ver. 39.
. He beat them small as the Dust before the Wind, he cast them out as the Dirt
in the Streets Ver. 42.
. Great Deliverances God gave to him, and great Victories he wro't for him Ver.
50.
, and all was, because the Lord was his Rock, and his Fortress, and his
Deliverer; his God, his Strength, in whom he trusted, his Buckler, and the Horn
of his Salvation, and his high Tower. Ver. 2.
. David's Faith in God obtained these Successes for him: And if we had the
Faith of David, doubtless we should have the like Success. The Faith of God's
People is as pleasing and honorary to God now, as then, and will as surely
engage God on their Side. When God's People fight against their Enemies by
Faith and Prayer, God will fight against them too by his Power and Providence:
Not a Man shall be able to stand against them: Either they must run, or be
ruined. --

Should not this stir up Gentlemen of the military Life and Order, to get and
exercise this Faith, which makes the best Soldiers, the most valiant and
victorious. Especially since Valor and Victory are their greatest Glory. --
Perhaps an Exhortation to it may be deemed by them foolish and ridiculous. --
Alas, the generality of Soldiers, it is to be feared, are of that Character,
Unreasonable and wicked Men, that have not Faith 2 These. iii. 2.
: That have not God in all their Tho'ts; living, acting, fighting in the World
without God: That have no Fear of God in their Hearts: That call not upon his
Name, unless in a Way of horrible Cursing and Swearing: That have no Reverence
for his Word, nor Regard to any of the Operations of his Hands and Providence.
Yea, may it not be justly feared, that many of them are such Fools as to say in
their Hearts, There is no God, no Providence, no Heaven, nor Hell? Are they not
generally Men that trifle with the most solemn and important Things, and make a
Mock of all that is sacred? Such Gentlemen Soldiers would doubtless take in
Disdain this Kind of Exhortation; make it the Subject of their Mirth and
Railery; and condemn the Preacher for a dull Phonetic, that would make them
Enthusiasts and Madmen, rather than accomplished Soldiers.

Soldiers of this Stamp think Religion makes Men Cowards: That a Man will never
make a gallant, brave, bold Fellow in the Army, 'till he has thrown off all
Veneration for the Deity, and all Regard to Religion: That he will never dare
to look his Enemies in the Face, unless he be so horridly impious as to fly in
the Face of his Maker; nor to storm a City, or enter a Breach, 'till he storm
Heaven itself, with his horrid Imprecations, and blasphemous Oaths. All they
desire is, to have good Guns and Swords; a good General, a well disciplined
Army, and complete Artillery; and then, show them their Enemies. They trust in
their own Bow, their Swords, Guns, Bombs, Cannon, Ships and Horses, because
they are many: They trust in their own Prowess and Policy, Strength and
Conduct, and what, in an heathenish Manner, they call, their Good Fortune.

An Army made up of such Men, has no true Courage in it. They may be ventrous
and foolhardy, but not truly valiant. True Courage is founded in Reason, and
tempered and guided by Prudence; and is as different and distant from Rashness
and Fury, as Reason is from Phrensy, or Religion from enthusiastic Wildness.
The Courage of such Men, such as it is, arises from their Inconsideration,
Infidelity, Ignorance, Pride and Arrogance; or from their (...); or from an
unmanly cruel Disposition, (...) delights in Blood and Slaughter.

Did they only know their State; Had they a lively (...) and the dreadful
Punishment (...) World; it would pall their Courage, and drink up their
Spirits. Should God display the Tokens of his Wrath in the Works of Providence;
Should God look upon their Hearts, as he did upon the Host of the Egyptians,
they would be as much troubled and terrified as the Egyptians were; and like
Belshazzer, their Countenances would change, their Tho'ts trouble them, the
Joints of their Loins be loosed, and their Knees smite against each other.
Their mighty Men would go into the Holes of the Rocks, and into the Caves of
the Earth for fear of the Lord, and for the Glory of his Majesty. Yea, these
great Men, and chief Captains, and mighty Men, would cry to the Mountains and
Rocks to fall on them. Fear and the Pit would be before them; and Destruction
from the Lord be a Terror to them. -- Solomon tells us, The Wicked flee when no
Man pursues Prove. xxviii. 1.
. Their vain guilty Consciences terrify them; they are frighted at their own
Shadow; start and run at the Shaking of a Leaf. Sin, and the Sense of Guilt,
make Cowards: And however carnal atheistical Men may bear it out for a While,
their Fears will overtake them.

But,

Gentlemen of the Artillery, I am persuaded better* Things of you, Things that
accompany Salvation. You are Christians, professing Godliness; some of you have
obtained a a good Report in the Church of God; and some of you purchased to
yourselves a good Degree, and, I hope, Boldness in the Faith. Since you see how
excellent and necessary a Qualification Faith is for a Soldier, you will be
desirous of it, that you may become Soldiers, the best of Soldiers. --

Doubtless, Gentlemen, You are expert in War. Your Genius, Calling, Studies and
frequent Exercises, have no doubt accomplished you in military Skill: And the
honorable Commissions which many of you bear under his Excellency; have no
doubt quickened your Ambition to cultivate your martial Disposition, and excel
in military Knowledge; especially since our Captain General has discovered such
a martial Spirit and Zeal against our Enemies, in advising and promoting an
Expedition against them at CapeBreton; which God wonderfully succeeded: -- Is
still promoting another against our Enemies at Crown Point: Commissions under
such a Governor should make you industrious and ambitious of being good
Soldiers. The honorable Example of the Governor should be a strong Argument
hereto. You understand the Beat of the Drum and the Exercise of all your Arms;
can keep Rank and File; know how to advance and retreat, and can perform the
various military Figures.

Doubtless you have a natural Fortitude of Mind, a noble Valiantness of Soul:
But yet, if you would be Heroes, to all your other military Accomplishments,
you must add Faith: Whatever other Qualifications you have, and in how great
Perfection soever, if you have not Faith, One Thing is lacking, yea, the chief
Thing; that which will inspire you with the best Courage, and give you the
surest Success.

Gentlemen, You know that a holy God, for the provoking Sins among us, has
bro't War into our Borders. The Sword of the Wilderness is drawn against us,
and making Havoc in our inland Frontiers. And you cannot but remember the
Designs and Attempts of the French against us by Sea; and what an Alarm and
Consternation it threw the Country into. How soon God may send such Numbers of
Enemies against us, as may call you into the Field of Battle, to jeopard your
Lives in fighting for our God, and for the Cities of our God, none can tell. --
Still Iniquity abounds in the Midst of us. -- We have indeed had a great Show
of Religion in the Land, and I hope it has not been a mere Show. But for all,
Are we not an hypocritical People? and for that Reason the People of God's
Wrath, who therefore makes the Indians and the French, the Rod of his Anger,
and gives them a Charge to take the Spoil, and take the Prey. Now though, we
hope, God will, in the midst of Judgment, remember Mercy for us, yet we may not
expect it in a miraculous Way. We must not think to do as Israel of old were
ordered, Stand still, and see the Salvation of God; doing nothing ourselves.
No: We must be up and doing, working and fighting for our Lives: We must play
the Men for our Religion and People; for our Churches and Country. Surely it
behooves you, You, Sirs, especially upon whom our Eyes are for Leaders in a Day
of Battle, to be thoro'ly versed in the Art of War, and to have all those
Qualifications that may render you the most finished Officers and Soldiers. If
you would prove valiant in Fight, and turn the Armies of the Alient to Flight,
you must add to your Knowledge, Virtue; and to Virtue, Faith: This will make
your Courage of the right (...). If like Gideon and Barak, Jephthah and David,
those (...) Warriors and Conquerors, you would deliver our People, and drive
the Enemy from the Gate; If you would gain any Victory over them, it must be
through Faith. Without this you cannot hope, upon any Scripture Grounds, to do
any thing against them, to Purpose; nay, you have Reason to fear, whether God
will not send his Terrors into you, and cause your Hearts to be moved, as the
Trees of the Wood are moved by the mighty Wind; to be perplexed and confounded
in your Counsels, tossed and shaken out of the Possession of your Souls.

Oh then, Have Faith in God. Believe his Word, and ye shall be established:
Settle your Hearts in the Belief of his governing Providence: That he who
concerns himself in the least Things that befall a Person, is much more
concerned in the great Affairs of his People, where Religion, and the Interests
of Christ's Kingdom, are much depending. Raise your Faith to the Promises of
the Word; and lay hold of them for your Establishment and Support. Clear up
your Interest in the Blessings of the Redeemer's Purchase; and labor for the
full Assurance of Faith.

Live in the Exercise of Faith. Faith is for daily Use; and by exercising, it
grows. And especially, live in the lively Exercise of it in these Times, as
that, which will truly spirit you to go out against the Enemy, should you be
called to it; and which will keep up your Spirits in all the Fatigues and
Dangers of War. To believe and know, that you are called of God, and have his
gracious Presence with you, his glorious Perfections to shield you, his
Providence to guard you, his Spirit to lead you, and his Angels to encamp about
you; Oh, how would this elevate your Spirits, and invigorate your Minds. You
might then sing in those Strains of Faith; God is in the midst of us, we shall
not be moved: God shall help us, and that right early: The Lord of Hosts is
with us; the God of Jacob is our Refuge: He breaks the Bow, and cutteth the
Spear in sunder: He burns the Chariot in the Fire Psalm. xlvi. 5, 7, 9.
. The Horse and his Rider has he thrown to the Ground. If in the Name of God,
and Faith in that Name, you set up your Banners, the Lord will hear you in the
Day of Trouble; the Name of the God of Jacob will defend you. He will send you
Help from the Sanctuary, and strengthen you out of Zion Psalm. xx. 5, 1, 2.
. He will cover your Heads in the Day of Battle, and preserve your Souls alive.
Nay he will not only defend you, but give you Success against your Enemies; put
them to the Rout, and make them flee before you. If you should be in any
pressing Dangers, he would ride upon the Heavens for your Help, and in his
Excellency upon the Sky. -- Oh, Blessed is that Man whose God is the Lord!
Blessed is that Army that takes God into the Field with them against their
Enemies. Rather than they should not prevail, he would take the Work into his
own Hands: His right Hand would dash the Enemy in Pieces: His right Hand and
holy Arm would get them the Victory.

But because the Sword devours one as well as another, and a good Man, full of
Faith and of the Holy Ghost, may fall in Battle; consider, if he does, he not
only dies in the Bed of Honor, as Men call it; but he dies in Peace, as godly
Josiah did, who was slain in Battle. He is only sent to Heaven an easier Way,
than by languishing Sickness; and a little sooner than, it seems, he otherwise
might have been. He enters into Peace, and wings away to that World, where God
makes Peace in his high Places, where Love reigns in every Breast, where he
shall no more hear the confused Noise of the Warrior, nor see Garments rolled
in Blood. His Warfare is accomplished: He puts off his Harness, lays by his Gun
and Sword, and Soldier's Apparel and Apparatus, is clothed in a white Robe,
and a Palm is put into his Hand. Yea, he is gone to that blessed World, where
he finds himself out of the Reach of his spiritual Enemies, and has no
Occasion to combat with them any more.

See now the Excellency and Usefulness of Faith, in managing the Wars of the
Lord. What David said of the Sword of Goliath, There is none like it 1 Samuel xxi.
9.
; I may say of Faith, there is no military Qualification like it; and must
advise you, as blessed Paul does of the spiritual Armor, Above all take the
Shield of Faith Ephesians. vi. 16.
. Leave nothing untried to gain a good Understanding in the Art and Affairs of
War: This you must have, or you cannot fight in Faith; and having this, suffer
me to put an Above all, to Faith.

Surely, Christian Soldiers should have something to difference them from
Heathens and Idolators. And what can it be, if not their Faith? Our Enemies
have Swords, Guns, and Hatchets, as well as we: They have been trained up to
fight in their Way, as well as we in our's; and are as dextrous in it. Yea and
they invocate their Gods and Saints to help them, and depend upon their Help.
And shall not Christian Soldiers do one Thing more than they? Especially when
they have a God, who invites their Trust in him, is pleased with it, and
accounts himself glorified by it.

Honored Sirs, Labor to get such a Faith in God, through Christ; that if you
should be called to go forth against, and meet and fight your Enemies, you may
be able to address them as David, that religious young Hero, did Goliath, Thou
come to me with a Sword, and with a Spear; but I come to thee in the Name of
the Lord of Hosts 1 Samuel xvii. 45.
: And to give that believing Shout, that Gideon and his Soldiers did, The Sword
of the Lord, and of Gideon Judge. vii. 20.
: The Sword of the Lord, and of his People. -- Oh what a Damp would this strike
to the Enemy, and what a Presence of Mind, and Fortitude of Soul, would it give
to yourselves!

But, Whatever your Thoughts may be of the Use and Excellency of Faith, in
managing War with your FellowMortals; yet there are other Enemies that you, and
all of us, have to fight with: For we wrestle, not only against Flesh and
Blood; but against Principalities, and Powers, and the Rulers of the Darkness
of this World, and spiritual Wickednesses Ephesians. vi. 12.
. And there is no carrying on the War valiantly and successfully with these,
without Faith. The Devil, with his Legions, in Confederacy with our own Lusts,
are warring against our Souls: He lays his Snares for us, shoots his fiery
Darts at us, and makes the most violent Assaults upon us. Guns and Swords,
carnal Weapons, are of no Service in this spiritual Warfare. This Leviathan
esteems Iron as Straw, and Brass as rotten Wood: Makes not the least Account
of them. Nor are the Reasonings and Resolutions of our own Minds sufficient to
withstand him. No Weapons but Faith and Prayer, are suitable for an Engagement
with him; and these will do. Faith will give us Courage against this infernal
Enemy, put Strength into (...) Souls, and make us steadfast in resisting him.
This will quench his fiery Darts, and frustrate all his mischievous Designs and
Attempts against us. Without Faith we shall never approve ourselves good
Soldiers of Jesus Christ, nor endure Hardness for him: We shall not be able to
stand in the evil Day, when it comes to resisting unto Blood. Without this we
shall never fight the good Fight of Faith. When once we loose our Faith, we
shall loose our Strength; and like Sampson, when his Locks were shorn, shall
become weak like other Men, and the Enemy will make an easy Conquest of us, and
take us captive at his Will. -- But Faith, in a lively Exercise, will animate
us in our spiritual Conflicts, make us bold and courageous, strong and
steadfast; and enable us to stand our Ground. This will make us strong in the
Lord, and in the Power of his Might; and by this we shall come off more than
Conquerors; make the Devil flee from us, and fall as Lightning from Heaven
before us. This is the Victory that overcomes the World, and Satan the God of
it, even our Faith 1 John v. 4.
. -- Oh, Let us all labor to get this precious Faith, that we may be able to
manage our spiritual Warfare with spiritual Valor, and with Success.

There is another Warfare, wherein we are all engaged; and none of us can plead
or obtain an Exemption: A War in which there is no Discharge Eccl. viii. 8.
for any, of any Station, Order, Age or Sex; and in which we must all fall. The
last Enemy, Death; an unavoidable, irresistible Enemy, will ever long make his
Attacks upon us, and in spite of all Reluctance and Resistance, will carry the
Day; For no Man has Power over the Spirit, to retain it: Neither has he Power
in the Day of Death Ibid.
Death is the universal Conqueror. -- A most formidable Enemy this! the King of
Terrors. Without Faith, there is no Way to combat with him. But Faith fortifies
the Christian. He will not stand trembling and aghast at his grim Aspect, and
frightful Approach. No; he goes forth to meet him, challenges him to do his
worst, and patiently and joyfully receives the killing Stroke. Faith puts that
Song of Triumph into his Heart and Lips, Oh Death, where is thy Sting? Oh
Grave, where is thy Victory? Thanks be to God, which gives us the Victory,
through our Lord Jesus Christ 1 Cor. xv. 55, 37.
. Nay,

Faith alters the Nature and Property of Death, and shows the Believer, that it
is a Privilege and Favor to him, and acts the Part of a Friend; delivers him
from all the Snares and Sorrows, Temptations and Miseries of this Life, and
introduces him into the Joy, the Glory, and the Blessedness of the next. The
dying Saint, when in the raised Exercises of Faith, gives Death a welcome
Reception; He rejoices that the Time of his Departure is nigh at Hand, and
desires to depart and be with Christ, which, in his gracious Esteem, is by far
the (...) of all.

Thus does Faith make the Christian more than a Conqueror over this last Enemy.
And nothing but Faith will do it. -- An unbelieving Sinner may die without any
Bands, any Terrors in his Conscience; yea, and with a Kind of Hope and Joy, but
it proceeds from Ignorance and Stupidity. Where a Sinner is really awakened to
know his true State, to feel the Guilt of Sin in his Conscience, and to have a
Prospect of where is he going, and must take up his everlasting Abode, Horror
takes hold of him. Oh, the amazing Dolours and Anguish of his Soul! To him
Death is dreadful indeed. He cannot live, and he dares not die. Oh, the earnest
Cries he now sends up to the God of his Life, for a little longer Time, for a
Space for Repentance! Oh, the solemn Promises he makes of living better for
Time to come, if God will spare his Life. -- He dies in the utmost Distress and
Agony of Soul, filled with a fearful Looking for of Judgment, and fiery
Indignation, to devour him. But mark the perfect Man, and behold the Upright,
for the End of that Man is Peace Psalm. xxxvii. 37.
.

Would you have this Faith, which is so absolutely necessary, and eminently
serviceable, in managing every Kind of Warfare? Oh look up to God for it. Beg
it by secret Prayer of the God of all Grace. It is his Work in the Soul, It is
his Gift; and he is willing to bestow it on us; for he is rich in Mercy, and
gives liberally: But he will be sought unto, to do it for us. -- Oh, be sincere
and importunate in your Prayers to God for it: Fill your Mouths with Arguments;
pray with all Prayer and Supplication, watching thereunto with all
Perseverance. -- Beg it in Christ's Name, and for his Sake: Christ has
promised us, that if we ask any Thing in his Name, He will do it John xiv. 14.
.

Where God has of his free Grace and rich Mercy bestowed Faith upon you, Pray
for the Establishment and Increase of it. The stronger you are in Faith, the
more Glory will you give to God. This will make your Obedience the more ready
and cheerful, and your Sufferings the more light and easy. This will make you
bold in the Cause of God, will inspire you with a holy Courage against all your
Enemies, Men, Devils, and Death: And will give you a certain and blessed
Victory over them. This will be your Honor and Comfort, while you live; your
Support and Joy, when you die; and will usher you into the glorious World of
Light and Love, Peace and Joy, after Death. And when it has enabled you to
conquer and triumph over all Enemies, it shall cease. You shall have no more
Occasion or Use for it. Having lived a Life of Faith here, you shall live a
Life of Vision hereafter: And that God and Savior, whom you now see by the Eye
of Faith, darkly, you shall then see Face to Face, clearly. And having overcome
all your Enemies, Christ will take you to sit with him in his Throne Rev. iii.
21.
; He will bring you near to himself, and crown you with Glory and Honor. --
And the more eminent the Victories of your Faith have been, the more
distinguishing Glory will be put upon you.

Now that we may all obtain and exercise this Faith, and receive the ^^nd of
our Faith, even the Salvation of our Souls,

GOD of his infinite Mercy grant, for CHRIST'S

AMEN.

