Mr. Niles's ESSAY ON GOD's Wonder-working Providence for New England, in the
Reduction of Louisburg, etc.

A Brief and Plain ESSAY ON GOD's Wonder-working Providence FOR NEW ENGLAND, In
the Reduction of Louisburg, and Fortresses thereto belonging on CAPE-BRETON.
WITH A short hint in the Beginning, on the French Taking and Plundering the
People of CANSO, which led the several Governments to Unite and Pursue that
Expedition. With the Names of the Leading Officers in the Army and the several
Regiments to which they belonged.

By SAMVEL NILES.

-- Non Magis est quaerere, quam Tueri. -- If ye forsake the LORD, then he will
turn and do you hurt, and Consume you, after that he has done you good,

Josh. xxiv. 20. The Victory that day, was turned into Mourning, unto all the
People --

2 Samuel: xix. 2. N. LONDON, Printed and Sold by T. GREEN, 174^

The Introduction.
MY Pen, and Skill, fall exquisitely short,
To give the World, an adequate Report
Of what high Work was done, in wondrous wise,
By Providence, both on the Land, and Seas,
In this great Action, which I here relate,
Against CAPE-BRETON, and of the Frenches fate.
In which sage-Consults, and each Motion prove
As by immediate Dictates, from above.
No instance like, Historians do relate,
Whether of Ancient, or more Modern date.
What here is offered, in so mean a Dress,
Is not for you, whose Wits do far surpass:
Nor the Polite, of such refined Taste,
'Ought but Poetic Strains, gives them disgust.
But such whose Candor, prompts them to Excuse
Defects, in what is designed for Common Use.
May these rude Lines, Excite and Stimulate,
Some better hand, this to Commemorate,
And hand it down to after Time, that may,
(As we should do) GOD's Praises forth display,
Who wrought for Us, Salvation did ordain;
But now behold! great Numbers he has Slain.
Which loudly Calls, to Lamentation sore;
JEHOVAH's Name! and Sov'reignty ^d^re.
AN INDEX.
The Introduction. On the taking of Canso by the French, page 1. On the Motions
of the several adjoining Governments in New England soon after the Taking of
Canso, etc. ibid. On Commissioning the Head Officers, and the Enlistment of
Men, page 3. Some Hints on the Preparations made for Invading Louisburg, page
6. On shipping the Troops for Cape- Breton, page 7. On the Forces from
Connecticut, etc. page 9. On the Forces when United under Sail, ibid. On the
Troops Landing at Cape- Breton, page 10 On the Siege laid against the City,
page 11. On Commodore Warren taking the Vigilant, and other Vessels in the time
of the Siege, page 14. On the Modes of Devotion among the French, when thus
distressed and in great fear, page 15. On the attempt made for the taking the
Island Battery in Boats, page 16. On the Stratagem of War in erecting a Battery
at the Light-House, and the Success it had, p. 17. On the Bravery shown to the
Enemy by the principal Officers in the Army and Fleet, etc. page 18. On the
Surrender of Louisburg and the whole Island of Cape- Breton to the Crown of G.
Brit. 19. The Names of the Leading Officers, page 22, -- 30. A short Remark on
raising the advanced Bat. p. 31. The Conclusion, page 33 A short and very
humble Address to the Gov. etc. p. 34
On the Taking of CANSO by the French, and Plundering the People there, 1744.
POor Canso! Thou have felt the force of Wars,
When all thy Buildings, whatso'ere they were
Reduced to ashes by devouring Flame,
Designed to raise Renown and spread the Fame
Of thy near Nei'bours, and show what they would done
That dwellers were upon the Isle- Breton.
Then leading Captive, the poor People thus
Spoiled of their Substance, send them here to us
With Flags of Truce, repeated on our Coast,
In which with Pride, they vauntingly did Boast.
Triumphing in their Victim Trophies show,
The fate of Arms from an insulting Foe.
On the Motions of the several adjoining Governments, in NEW ENGLAND soon after
the Taking of Canso, etc.
NEW-Englands Sons with just Resentments moved
At this proud, daring Treatment were resolved
To move in Arms Unite, and make Attempts,
On the strong Holds and raised Battlements,
Of Louisburg, though by French deemed to be
Impregnable, both by the Land and Sea.
This scene of Action, as 'twas now begun,
Must needs, without delay, be carried on.
As Bears, bereaved of young, or Lions strong
Roused from their Dens of ease, resenting wrong,
Lash up their fury with their waving Tail,
Resolve Revenge on all, that them assail.
Round on Opponents, when they come to feel
The force of strength and teeth more keen than steel
Make the Earth to tremble, with the adjoining throng,
Roaring like Thunder as they march along.
Rebounding Echoes from the nei'bring Wood,
From Hill and Dales, fearless to be withstood.
Thus did our Force, with daring Courage show,
Their strong resolves to curb and quell this Foe.
Then with joint View^, and Spirits raise high,
ARM, ARM'S the word, and to their Arms they fly,
Not with tumultuous Noise, or boasting Cheer,
Lest the Enemy should of this Motion hear.
And by that means stand strictly on their Guard,
Which might our hoped for conquest much retard.
As loyal Subjects of the British Crown,
Their lives, their fortunes, and their all lay down,
KING GEORGE'S glory, and their Churches cause,
The Country's Peace, her Liberties and Laws.
These to secure they wisely make a Stand,
Against what portends much ruin to our Land.
Now Sons of M^rs, and of Apollo too,
Though Heathen terms, do thus much to us show,
That wise and warlike in Conjunction act,
To bring this Scheme to its desired Effect.
SHIRLEY, that fills of Government the Chair
Wisely Conducting in our Hemisphere,
Fired with zeal, for's King and Country's Cause,
To whom is due much honor and applause.
SHIRLEY, chief Leader at the Council Board,
Whose worthy Deeds, Posterity shall Record.
He with the Senators, maturely Sage,
Each acts his part, as mounted on a Stage,
With utmost foresight, skill and activeness,
Impending evil Aspect to suppress.
Resolving, by GOD's help, which they implore
Form measures of Defense, all to restore,
Our Peace and Safety both on Seas and Shore.
HIS EXCELLENCY filled with anxious Care,
To prosecute this weighty, grand Affair,
Exerts himself, in Labors, More and New,
TO obtain the Conquest, which we had in View,
Writes home in humble wise, with strong request
For Aids from Thence, by Sea, our Force to assist,
Hence noble WARREN'S Squadron was sent over
Under's Command, who was the Commodore.
Whose Courage, Skill, admired Activeness,
Secured the Harbor, gave our Force Success,
GOD has him honored, who was hither sent,
To curb our Foes, made him an Instrument.
By Seizure made, of that tall Ship of War,
Strong for Defense, laden with warlike Store.
On Commissioning the Head Officers, and the Enlistment of Men.
THings thus concerted, and in wisdom laid,
That this Affair no longer be delayed,
A Proclamation is soon Issued then,
With large Rewards, for the Enlisting Men.
In which adjoining Governments Unite,
This deep laid Scheme to have and expedite.
Commissions now are filled for every Post,
Of Martia Leaders, to conduct the Host.
The chief Command, was g^'n to PEPPERILL,
Worthy of Trust, appointed General.
With mind Heroic, and ^^spos'd to War,
Freely accepts, to Lead in this Affair.
Though uninur'd, to encamp in hostile Field
Or, fore Battalions his brandished Sword to wield
Yet with consummate Probity and Skill
Each trust of honor wisely did fulfill.
"Whose renowned Name and Fame will ever last,
"Till future Ages have forgot the Past.
Mean time precautions of all kinds they use,
Lest these our motions should our Foes amuse.
Embargoes then are laid on Vessels all,
(In each and every Port) both great and small.
The French suspected here, consigned in Hold,
Lest ought hereof, to Countrymen be Told.
Previous to which, all sorts are called upon,
On these designs, against the Isle- Breton,
By public Fasting, and with solemn Prayer.
To seek direction, fervertly to implore
The divine Aids, succeeding this Design,
As to GOD's Hand our All and this Resign.
The zeal and fervor of God's People gave,
Some early hopes that be would not us leave
Until he had completed what we Crave.
Which some by Faith, firmly relied on,
Till tidings came that LOUISBURG was won.
Some Reverend Pastors minds deeply impressed
With glowing warmth to see our Foes suppressed.
To act their Part, are willing forth to go,
With Christian Courage, and Heroic too.
The Venerable Moody, white with Age,
Habits himself, in hostile Equipage.
With His Sword of War, but on the Spirit more
Firmly relying, leaves his Native Shore,
His skill in arms to prove as he had twice before
Imploring heavens guidance in their way,
And bring to this desired Triumphant Day.
Those of like Function, but of younger years
Engage most freely, in fateagues of Wars.
Williams late Rector of Yale-College goes,
With western Troops and Hawley, to oppose
The Gallics at Breton, and Peace restore
To this our Land, both on the Seas and Shore.
Crocker and Walker, Balch and Newman move,
With Langdon, these jointly proclaim CHRIST'S Love.
His Laws, his Worship, Sabbaths these with care,
The Soldiers to impress with godly Fear. The Reverend Mr Moody, Crocker,
Walter* Balch and Newman, were Chaplains in the Massachusetts, and Langdon in
the New Hampshire Forces. The Reverend Mr Williams was Chaplain in the
Connecticut Force, and Hawley with the Soldiers from North Hampton Quarter.



They pray, they preach, and teach out of GOD'S Word,
The way of Life, through JESUS CHRIST our LORD.
Whose Names and Deeds, enrolled long shall stand
Bright patterns of true zeal in this and distant Lands.
Surviving they return with praises high,
For wonders wrought against the Enemy,
Our Troops secured the Victory is won,
Subjected to our Crown is the whole Isle Breton.
These with their leaders of the Martial part,
And godly Soldiers, joined in hand and heart,
Commit the Cause to GOD, and then pass on,
With raised hopes, to Conquer Cape-Breton.
Some hints on the Preparations made for Invading Louisburg.
PRep'rations large, of needful warlike Store,
Provided are, lest' ought be wanted there.
Bombs, with great Cannon and their Cannon balls,
Ladders prepared, to scale the City Walls:
Fascines likewise, in bundles, fit to rear,
High Mounts, of Fence, they wisely do prepare.
As this Attempt was great, all Instruments
Of less, or larger Sise, for Intrenchments.
Carri'ges for Guns and warlike Engines made.
In Martial Mode, the Enemy to invade.
All means concurred, this motion to Commence
As though the Stars in Course, and Influence
United were, in their combined bands,
Under GOD'S wise and heavenly Commands,
To still the Air, and make the Sky serene,
So that to Labor, naught did intervene,
On which, --
(The French confined did in their fear foretell,
The downfall of that daring Citadel.)
Thus in their Labors Indefatigable,
Each did his part, as he was rendered able.
Leaders Conducting in their higher Sphere,
Give pledges of their wisdom, skill and care.
Craftsmen, with heart and hand conjunctly move,
In dextrous wise, the Season to Improve.
All things designed, prepared are which show,
The joint Concurrence of each Station, -- Now
All Officers, in gallant^y appear,
And Soldiers armed, stand ready for the War.
On the Shipping the Troops, for Cape-Breton.
WHen all things thus made ready, and equipt,
Battalions, in respective Transports Shipped,
Under Command, in chief of PEPPERILL
(As is already said,) their General.
Who willingly did for his Country's Weal,
Accept the Trust, with Courage mixed with Zeal.
Then March 24. 1744, 5.
with all speed, not willing to delay,
With wide spread Sails, from Massachusetts Bay
They steer their Course, in semblance of a Fleet,
Of warlike Ships, strike dread on all they meet.
But now when floating on the watery Main,
In hopes with speed, the enemies Shore to gain,
Bor' as obstructs, by's waters still Congealed
Into large bodies that were not dissolved:
Ice in large Cakes, do on the waters glide,
From Bays and Rivers, drove by winds and tide.
Northward (its said) there often does appear,
Mountains of Ice congealed by frigid Air,
Whose lofty Tops, directed to the Skies,
Appear to move, on surface, of the Seas,
Surprising to behold, hence Sailors dread,
By winds, or tides, 'twixt these to be enclosed.
To shun this fate, to Canso then they go,
And with fair winds, do through the Ocean plow,
There to remain, for a short space of time,
That from Seasickness health they might reprime
Those that disused were to cross the Seas,
Many of them were seized with this disease,
However common, gave them great surprise.
Escaping this dire, doleful dreaded Death,
Courage renews, with their renewed Health,
And what makes them more fearless of defeat.
Behold! with Joy, they spy Warren, the great,
Warren, the Com-'door, in warlike feats expert.
Who with wise Conduct, does himself exert,
In this grand Cause, having at his Command,
Squadron of Ships, by Sea, to guard the Land,
Preventing succors, to the Enemy,
From foreign parts, or those that were more
On the Forces, from CONNECTICUTT, and RHODE ISLAND, Joining the MASSACHUSETTS
and NEW HAMPSHIRE at Canso.
FIve Hundred Men, came from Connecticot,
Commanded by, much Honored WOLCOTT,
Who, to the honor, he sustained before,
Has added, to his honor, now much more,
As the chief Judge, he wisely graced the Bench
Of their high Courts, but now deigns to Entrench
And Camp, in hostile-fields, willing to bear*
To's Sword of Justice, the bright Sword of War.
Then for long time Enrolled be his Fame,
And's Government, rejoice in Wolcott's Name,
Whose pious mind, and Counsel for the War,
Exceed (perhaps) some placed in higher Sphere.
(Give leave to say) Worthies of such a Stamp,
Never Retrograde, in an impartial Camp,
Who now as heretofore, Courageously has done
Deeds worthy of his own, and Country's renown.
Rhode-Islands Force with these above do meet,
They in Conjunction, do compose a Fleet,
Of smaller Vessels, to transport their Men,
With Massachusetts and New Hampshire join.
On The Forces when thus United Sailing from Canso to Cape-Breton.
THE Forces thus complete, they all agree,
To forward the intent, they put to Sea,
Then with Full-sail, to the intended Shore,
Under chief Convoy of the Commodore,
Direct their Course, and soon arrive in the Bay
Of Chappaurogue, where they intend to stay.
Large Ships of war, remain as guards without,
Priv'teers to clear, the coast scour the seas about.
This scheme so laid in Politics of War,
The' Gallics 'nought of this our motion hear,
Surpised they are, and struck with pannick fear.
Ensigns of War, ours, gallantly display,
At Harbors mouth, and in the brightned Bay,
Jack, Ant'ent, Pendant, these they all let fly,
Charming appearance, daz'ling to the Eye.
Whilst French, with terror, and confusion seized
With these displays of War, stand all amazed.
God did our Force conduct, preserve from fear,
His praises therefore, let us all, declare.
On the Troops Landing, at Cape-Breton.
THen pushing on, their purpose to complete
By gained Conquest, and the Foes defeat.
When thus arrived, they Land without delay,
On first of May, that Memorable Day, [1745]
Under the Cannon of some Privateers,
Of smaller size, that could draw nigh the Shores,
To prevent Landing French, in ambush lie,
No sooner Landed, but their Balls let fly
Volleys of Guns, sharp sire with roaring sounds
In which Encounter, two received slight wounds*
Ours as brave Soldiers, valiantly withstand,
This warm Engagement, from their ^oes on Lan^
Un^^^ll'd in modes of War, fearless they ran,
As to surround the French, was their design.
This with their fire and shouts, the Foes affright
They turn their Backs, betake themselves to flight
This as a pledge of following Success,
I^^oldens them, undauntedly to press.
Then marching on, Possessors of the Field,
General in Front, his brandished Sword does wield
Bidding defiance to their Numbers large,
Declares he sought for Christ, and for King George.
New Courage they imbibe, then passing on,
Advance in view, and fair sight of the Town,
Press on the City walls, in which French were innur'd,
Where their main Body deem themselves se^^^'d
Trust on their strength, by Nature, and by Art,
Resolve defense, but with an aching Heart.
On the Singe laid, against the City Louisburg.
When of the Field, they had possession took,
Which the enemy had in their flight forsook,
A warlike Council, then, is largely held,
By Martial Leaders, in the Hostile Field.
In sine, Conclude, some Batt'ries to erect,
From whence they may, the Enemy affect.
Thus in wise Counsel, the whole Plan they lay,
Proceed to Action, nor admit delay.
With Trenches deep, and Mounts cast up on high,
From whence they might, their roaring Cannon plie,
Against the Walls, to shake, and batter down,
Thereby to enter, and possess the Town.
Mean while the French, surprised, make their Flight,
From their Grand Batt'ry by dark shades of night
Resort unto their Strength, and strongest Hold,
Which they defend, with seeming Courage bold.
The English enter this strong Fortress, Turn
The Cannon of their Foes, against the Town.
A second Instance of Success, that gave
New Life to Motion, and to Soldiers brave.
With spirits high, they valiantly push on,
The Siege, which they maturely had begun,
And then proceed to Action.
The wide mouthed Cannon, with their heavy Balls,
And strength of Powder, scale the City Walls,
Lake thunders roaring and the lightning bright,
Do Execution, both by Day and Night,
Mortars discharged, the Bomb Shells sw^^tly f^^e,
Like blazing Comets in the open Sky:
These warlike Engines, when with Art improved
More fatal are, than Batt'ring Rams of old,
(Which were strong Machines forced against the Walls,
That by repeated blows, the Bulwark falls;
And Entrance gives to the Besiegers there,
These were in use as Politics of War.
His head was Iron, with a peaked Horn,
In semblance of a pictured Unicorn.)
Breaches they make, in the walls and western-gate,
Adds life to ours, foretells the Frenches fate.
Bold then as Lions, destitute of Fear,
Advance their Troops, both in the Front and Rear.
Standing fierce Fire from the City Walls,
Disdain their Cannon, and their Cannon Balls.
Thus Gallics and New England British Sons,
Conflict with fury, whilst Ambition burns,
With glowing Heat, mixed with wrathful Ire,
They keep a constant and continued Fire,
From either side, till smoaky Vapors rise,
Sulphurious Smells, and baneful to the Eyes.
The slain in the Field was sew, but in the City rather.
Who sought in deep delv'd Vaults themselves to Shelter.
Bomb Balls on Houses fall, the splinters fly,
Dispersed into the Air, the Gallics Cry,
Each Sex in consort, aggravate their Fears,
Females, with frightful Shricks and flowing Tears,
Beg for themselves, and Infants in their Arms,
Some kind Relief and Rescue from these Harms.
The stout in heart before, now trembling stand,
No longer able to hold Sword in hand;
With confused Thought and Agitations great,
Hover in Crowds, now conscious of Defeat.
Fear and distress surrounds them more and more,
Their Dead's increased and Wounded in great Store,
Thenceforth from Fire the French in part give over.
It Is worth our Notice, with Remarks upon,
This mighty Theme, of Taking Cape- Breton,
GOD's Smiles, and works of Wonder to us show,
The Praise of all, we do unto Him owe,
Though Bomb shells fall, and split upon the ground,
Where English are Entrenched all around,
O're^ruld they were in Providence sublime,
That, sew were hurt in dangers at that Time.
On Commodore WARREN'S taking the Vigilant, and other Vessels, in the time of
the Siege.
WHilst Pepperell thus warring on the Shore,
In Combat close, Warren the Commodore,
With his bright Squadron, guards the Harbors mouth,
And Coasts along, in special on the South:
Prevents Supplies to the Besieged within,
Constraining them their City to Resign,
Made Captures of all that in sight appear,
At length he spies, that tall, strong Ship of War
The Vigilant, Attacks and Seises her,
Laden with Men, and with much war like Store.
(Of which something, was Noticed before.)
This gal^ant Action worthy of Record,
Strike French with terror, they stand all amazed,
With palled looks, and trembling hearts foresee
The quick approach of their di^e Destiny.
All hopes of Succor is entirely lost,
For which the English in GOD's Mercy boast.
Our Frigates small, had blown into the Air,
If warlike WARREN had been wanted there.
On the M^^es of Devotion, among the French, when thus Distressed and in great
Fear.
LAudate Dom'num, Papists Nocturnal Song,
Te Deum's cease, Processions from among,
To Masses, Pater-Nosters French repair,
With Ave-Maries, strongly do Implore,
That blessed Virgin's Aid, and Intercessions for
Them, to her Son, their Sorrows to deplore,
They, cannonized Saints, pretend to move
To hear their Cries, and Prayers loud, approve,
And as joint Advocates, to change this Scene.
Their Influence to use, with the whole Trine.
Saints Statues they adore, Im'ges numberless,
And Beads, tell over, the greater with the less.
They mortify their Flesh, with lashings manifold
As Heathens, cut themselves in days of old.
Profound Confessions, Pennances renew,
Devoutly strict, much Sanctity, in show.
Indulgences, from Priests and Pardons given,
Substantiated Wafers, makes ripe for Heaven,
To Crosses, Cruc'fix^s, Relicts of Saints they bow
But now Besieged on Pilgrimage cannot go,
The Shrines of Saints, to pay their homage to.
These meritorious Acts, as they pretend,
Challenge Rewards, from GOD Almighty's Hand.
Denying Scripture use to the Vulgar sort,
Is to Romes Clergy, as a mighty Fort:
It Is falsely said, the Mother of Devotion,
-- Is Ignorance, --
But, Maxim true, of Papacies Subjection,
The implicit Faith, that Sons of Rome profess,
Is faithless Fraud, which wants words to express.
Merit they plead, on Super'rogation Acts,
And all that Cruelty suggests against Heretics
In fine, these are the Popes Artillery,
Whereby he holds, his Vassals, in Idolatry.
These Popish Rites, and Ceremonial Cants,
Give no Relief to the poor Gallic'ants,
In sable Darkness, they do still remain,
From the Gygantick Force of English Men.
On the Attempt made for the Taking the Island-Battery in Boats.
AMidst the smiles of providence upon,
Besiegers motions on the Isle- Breton,
Impatient of delay a Scheme they Form,
The Island Fortress forcebly to Storm.
This they attempt in darksom glooms of Night
With hopes of Conquest er'e the Morning light.
Gallic's discovery make, of this Intent,
Use utmost Force their Landing to prevent.
-- A Tragic Scene Ensues --
Whilst thus Engaged in an unequal Strife,
Some loss of Limbs sustain, more of their Life,
Brains mixed with Blood and shattered Limbs appear,
Expiring Cries and Groans assault the Ear.
Eyes here affect the hearts of stoutest Mould,
Hard to conceive, but harder to behold.
Distorted Limbs and mangled Bodies roll
In their own Gore, survivers loud Condole,
Their Friends dire Exit, and their Fate, less sad
Who aimed at Conquest, Prisoners are made,
Here confused Noise and Garments rolled in blood
Warriors have found upon the briny Flood,
After sharp Conflict what escaped Retreat:
The single Instance of New-Englanders Defeat.
On the Stratagem of War, in Erecting a Battery at the Light-House, and the
remarkable Success it had, against the Enemy.
THe English then, with warlike Minds and Skill
Go, by Command, unto the Light-house Hill
There to Erect a Battery, and Annoy,
The Island Fortress, then their Bombs Employ
Swift Messengers of Death, with roaring Noise,
By Art directed, on an equal Poise,
Successful these become to that degree,
That Gallics, there, Escaped into the Sea:
Seek shelter from, these fi'ry blazing Balls,
That scatter Death, each one, where e're it falls.
Then French convinced of their impending Fate,
By Flag-of-Truce, move to Capitulate
They that before, had vauntingly sent Word,
What English, gained, should be at point of Sword:
Do now, in humble wise, tamely make Tender,
On Terms proposed, the City to Surrender.
'Twas through Constraint, this Motion Gallics made,
From force of Arms, by those that them invade,
Now spirits sank, with heart-relenting Moans,
Of Wife, and Children, mixed with dying Groans,
Of Men and Women, Children, Sociates all,
Each one expects, under, like Fate, to fall.
On the Bravery shown, to the Enemy by the principal Officers in the Army and
Fleet, with some Reasons offered, to show, the Justice on our Part, of this
Enterprise.
FRom martial Honor mixed with Clemency
Besiegers brave, offer the Enemy,
In Candor great, as Victors did become,
Them, with Effects, safely to Transport home,
Allege the Reasons of this Enterprise,
In Terms, becoming them, (after this wise)
It Is not from thirst of Blood, nor for your Lives,
O! you Besieged, your Children, nor your Wives,
That we against you this formal Siege Commence,
But Country's Freedom, from Praeeminence,
Which you assume, in these our Northern Seas,
Obstruct both Im-, and Export of Supplies.
You for long time, by your usurped Measures,
Robbed some of Life, and many, of their Treasures.
Combining, likewise with the Heathen Tribes,
Delusive, Popish Doctrines, and with Bribes:
By these Incentives they do us Annoy,
Whose Cruelties, give you, with them, much Joy.
Which moves us thus, our Weapons, to Employ.
As Heroes brave, Commanders all do stand,
Each in his Order, holding Sword in hand,
With Courage bold, and Resolution strong,
Conclude, this Parley, they will not prolong.
Cohorts in Ranks, and various Stations move,
As by Command, Commanders do approve:
Impatience moves, in the combined Bands,
Till Louisburg be thrown into their Hands,
Determined all, in Mind most Uniform,
Unless the Treaty hold, the Citadel they will Storm.
Here interposing Mercy steps between,
Prevents their Progress on this Tragic Scene,
Which must have ^^su'd in much Blood and Slaughter,
On either Side, in this, though bold, yet brave Adventure.
From Force of English Arms, French daren't deny.
Surrender, to our Troops, desist to Vie,
At Arms, with English, grown expert in War,
And Valor high, exceeded them by far.
On the Surrender of Louisburg, and the whole Island of Cape-Breton, to the
Crown of GREAT BRITAIN.
BOth Parties now agreed, the Compacts Signed,
That City Louisburg to English Troops Resigned
The Island Fortress, is Resigned likewise,
Our Ships to Enter, which were on the Seas:
Hostages given are, by which they plight,
Their Faith each one, his Contract, to complete.
Behold, the Gates are now wide open thrown,
Which to our English Arms adds much Renown.
The Seventeenth of June PEPP'REL then lead 1745
His hostile Troops (appearing at their Head)
Into that City fortified with Walls,
Raised up on high; fully rewards their Toils.
Now in triumphant State as Conquer'rs in War,
Pepperrell and Warren, Wolcott, all appear,
These as with wreathen Laurels, on their head,
Shall live in Fame when numbered with the dead.
The Officers, with their respective Bands,
Both on the Seas, and those upon the Lands:
Col'nels, with their Lieutenants, march along:
The Clergy, though but few, in Faith were strong.
The Majors, Captains, Adjutants, pass on,
And Seisen take, of the whole Isle Breton.
Victorious now New-Englands Sons appear,
With gallantry in form and modes of War.
The Scene is changed, King GEORGE'S Ensigns fly
Display His Banner, Lewis's defy.
Proud Gallics, that of late, were Masters here,
Are now become tame Prisoners of War.
This Acquisition, shall in Time be told,
As Action great, HEROICAL and bold.
The Crown and Kingdoms of GREAT BRITAIN here
Are now enlarged, in Triumph take their share.
New-Englands Glory, Peace and Trades advance,
All beg, it may,-never be Resigned to France.
That Dunkirk Sold by the English to the French, Anno, 1662
Dunkirk like, a Snare it may not become,
Unto this Land as that is now at Home.
Given up to France 'twas by the English Crown,
Mischiefs resulting thence are too well known.
What further Crowned this Conquest, Seisures made,
Of Three large Ships, each vastly rich in Trade,
East India Two a Third from the South-Seas,
A Fourth from France, that WARREN To^k with Ease,
She not suspecting Louisburg, was won,
Sailed boldly up, the Harbor, of Breton:
Dull Market, of her Lading, Merchants fear,
As numbers of large Ships, were Anchored there.
Convinced of the Mistake, madness them seize,
That thoughtless thus, they would made themselves a Prize,
To WARREN, and his Squadron in the Road,
Too late to flee, or Capture, to avoid.
When all is said, and all that has been done
On this bright Theme, of taking Cape-Breton.
It Is GOD alone the Victory has won
Who smiled upon, each Motion, gave Success,
To English Arms, our Foes, thus to Suppress.
United were our Troops, by Land and Seas,
No treacherous Designs, or fact'ous Mutinies,
Appeared, in the Camp, but Loyalty profound,
Ran through the Host, in every Quarter round,
Which GOD, in favor, did for us Ordain,
To free our Land, and on the Oceans Main,
From Pickeroon, pretending Privateers,
Infesting these our Coasts, and Maritime Affairs.
HERE follows the Names of the Leading Officers, in the several Regiments, that
Served in the Army, under the Command of the Honorable WILLIAM PEPPERRELL Esquire
(now Baronet) Lieutenant General, in the Reduction of Cape-Breton, to the Crown
of GREAT BRITAIN, June 17, 1745.

Commissioned by his Excellency WILLIAM SHIRLEY Esquire Captain General and
Commander in Chief, in and over the Province of the Massachusetts Bay in
New England, etc.

The Honorable Lieutenant General Pepperell's Regiment.
PEPPERRELL, as Head of the New England Bands,
Extends his Conquests, unto distant Lands.
Surpasses far, attempts, in all past Time,
Or hostile Motions, in this Western Clime.
Raises Renown, establishes his Fame,
Restores Repute, and gets our Land a Name.
Colonel Bradstreet, as an Instrument,
With active Mind and Labors did prevent,
The Heathen Tribes pursuing their Intent;
By crossing Cancer-gut, to fall upon
Our Troops Encamped on the Isle-Breton.
Storer Lieutenant, in this Regiment,
With Major Cutts, adventure the Event,
In dangerous Attempts, with spirits high,
Fearless advance against the Enemy.
Captains in this Regiment,
Peter Staples, Ephraim Baker, John Fairfield, Bray Dearing, John Kinslagh,
John Harmon, Moses Butler, Thomas Perkins, William Warner, Moses Pearson.
The Honorable Major General Wolcott's Regiment.
WOLCOTT' s high Station, bravery in War,
Adds to his Fame, distinction from afar,
Leading his Cohort from Connecticut,
With martial State, and moving in his Lot,
Appears sedate in Mind, unshaken stood,
Zealous of's Churches, Col'nies, and his Country's good:
Intrepid moves, with all, in Station high,
Constrains the Gallics, from their Walls to fly.
Colonel Burr, makes his Advances next,
Worthy high honors to his Name affixt;
Leads on his Troops, with Bravery and Art,
In combat close, acts the Commanders part:
With mind disposed to War, and Conquest gain,
This has in view, is restless to obtain.
Lothrop likewise, in his Lieutenancie,
Gives pledges of his Skill and Loyalty,
And Major Goodridge does in's Station move,
With valiant Leaders, mentioned above.
Brave Major Newton, fell by Sickness sore,
Soon after, Landed on the Enemies shore,
Greatly lamented, as a heavy Loss,
By Friends at home, and weakening to our Force.
Entombed, he lies' among slain in hostile Fields,
A Sacrifice for's Country, and the British Shields.
These with their Troops, merit Encomiums high
Bespeak the Honors of their Colony:
Who gladly did, their Lives and all lay down,
When some declined serving the British Crown.
Captains in this Regiment.
David Wooster, Stephen Lee, Daniel Chapman, William Whiting, Robert Denison,
Andrew Ward, James Church, Henry King.
Colonel Waldo's Regiment.
WAldo, Commissioned is a Colonel,
And over Land-force, Brigadier-General,
Gracing his Station, and superior Post,
Becoming him, and grateful to the Host,
Gives proofs of Courage, Loyalty and Zeal,
For's KING, his Country, and our Churches Weal.
Waldo's Lieutenant, Noble is by Name,
His noble Acts, adds Luster to his Fame,
Distinguished himself, Commander brave,
In that heroic Act, Defeat he gave,
To French, and Indians, in smart bloody Fight,
Killing and wounding, puts the rest to Flight.
Wards off the Blow, from the besieging Bands,
Designed by cruel and most barbarous Hands.
Not to omit, Remarks on honor due,
To Major Hunt, who did his Trust pursue:
Filling his Major's, and the Chaplains post,
Performed Prayers, with his part of the Host,
Acting the Soldiers, and the Christian part,
With all in the Camp, that were of pious Heart.
Captains in Brigadier General Waldo's Regiment.
Samuel Moody, John Watts, Philip Dumarisque, Benjamin Goldthwait, * Daniel
Hale, Jacob Stevens, James Noble, Richard Jaques, Daniel Fogg, Joseph
Richardson.
A Cannon splitting, slew, brave * Captain Hale,
Worthy Esteem, whose Death all do bewail.
Brigadier Dwight, here stands in Honor high,
Col'nel over Train of the Artillery.
Expert in use of Arms, and martial Skill,
Directs, each hostile Posture, to fulfill.
Col'nel also, Commissioned is, and stands,
Ready to Act, in Regimental Bands
He, with his Lieutenant Thomas, grace the Plain,
In hostile Fields, the Gallics do disdain:
With Courage Bold, undaunte I^ Pursue,
The Conquest great, which then was had in View.
With them, their Major Gardner acts his part,
From warlike-mind, and Country's good at heart.
Colonel Moulton's Regiment.
MOulton, next Colonel, in order stands,
Honors his Station, giving forth Commands
Unto the Troops, under's immediate Care:
With Donnell his Lieutenant, in their Sphere,
And Major Ellis, these in concord Move,
With all in Rear, and also those above.
Captains in this Regiment.
John Card, John Lane, Christopher Marshal, James Grant, Charles King, Peter
Prescott, A. Ruhamah Cutter, Samuel Rhodes, Bartholomew Trow, Estes Hatch.
Colonel Willard's Regiment.
WIllard, with his Lieutenant Chandler now,
In Regimental Order plainly show,
Their wi^^ing Minds, and r^^diness for War,
With Major Pe^^^oy, joined in this Affair.
Captains in this Regiment.
* Joshua Pi^rce, John T^rry, John Alexander, John Warner, David Melvin, Jabez
Homestead, John Huston, Joseph Milter, James Goulding, James Stephens.
Brave * Captain Pierce meets with his fatal Lot,
Torn is, to pieces, by a Cannon Shot.
From Courage bold, this Fate did him befall,
At advanced Batt'ry, from the City Wall.
Colonel Hale's Regiment.
NExt, Col'nel Hale proceeds, in's brave Advance,
In martial Order against the Sons of France,
With Eveleigh, his Lieutenant march along,
And major Titcomb, resolutely strong,
To gain full Conquest, and enhance the Fame,
Of English Arms, and get themselves a Name.
Captains in this Regiment.
Benjamin Ives, Daniel Eveleigh, Titcomb, John Dodge, Jonathan Bagley, Jeremiah
Foster, Samuel Davis, Thomas Stanford, Charles Byles.
Colonel Richmond's Regiment.
RIchmond, with other Colonels we find,
Active in War, of Hostile make and mind,
Push't on with Courage, bold, as him became,
Amongst Thirty of our Chiefs, has got a Name.
Pitts his Lieutenant, acts the Martial part,
Victorious stands, but by Deaths fatal dart,
* He fell constrained in that grand point to yield,
With all brave victors when they have won the field
In gloomy shades, he lies, concealed from sight,
Who 'scap'd the fury of our Foes in Fight.
And Major Hodges, much Lamented over,
Not suffered to arrive at Native Shore.
Cast into Seas, amidst the briny Waves,
Where multitudes do meet, with their untimely graves.
Captains in this Regiment.
Nathanael Bosworth, Thomas Gilbert, Jos^^h Pratt, Robert S^^n, Ebenezer
E^stman, Cornelius Sole, John Lawrence, Nathanael Williams, Ebenezer Nichols,
Weston.
Though * Captain Bosworth did to's Country come,
Expired, by Sickness in his Travels home.
And * Captain Prat, over whom his Friends do mourn,
Expires at home, soon after his Return.
Colonel Gorham's Regiment.
WHilst we in honor, these Commanders have,
Lets turn our tho'ts to Col'nel Gorham's grave
Who with his Ancestors, distinguished are,
As men of Courage, mighty in the War.
He lies Interred, in that new conquered Soil,
The fruit of others, and his warlike Toil.
Lieutenant Col'nel Gorham, nigh of Kin,
To his deceased Head, did honor win:
Unite in Nature, Name, and Trust they stood,
Unitedly, have done, their Country good.
May Major Thacher live, in rising Fame,
Worthy of Ancestors, that bear the Name,
And Copy after virtuous Relations,
Who so well filled their Civil, Sacred, Military Stations.
Captains in this Regiment.
* Jonathan Carry, Elisha Doane, Silvanus Cobb, Israel Bagley, * Edward Demmick,
Gershom Bradford, Samuel Lombard.
Now Captain * Cary's seized with Sickness sore,
Resigned to Death, when touched his native Shore
And* Captain Demmick slain by Heathens hand,
As was his Father, under like Command.
Colonel More's Regiment.
MOre with his Force now comes from N. Hamp-shire,
Fills up his place in Regimentall Rear,
Gives marks of Courage, Probity and Skill,
His post of Honor, bravely does fulfill.
With his Lieutenant Colonel, Mosserve,
And Major Gilman, these, with all above,
As Patriots brave, in this New-Englands Land,
The Conquest, that is obtained, takes, rise from their Command.
Captains in Colonel More's Regiment.
Samuel Whitten, William Waldren, True Dudley, Tuftan Mason, William Seaward,
Daniel Ladd, Henry Sherburne, John Turnel, Samuel Hale, Jacob Tilton, Edward
Williams.
-- These all to Serve, --
Their KING, and Country, did their Lives Expose
In high Attempts have vanquished our Foes,
Whose Names and Acts times Annals shall proclaim
Enrol'd, with Honor, in his Book of Fame.
Fame, puffs up Mind, as Bubbles blown by Air,
That soon do rise, and soon they disappear.
The height of Fame, consists in holy Strife,
To find a Name in the Lambs Book of Life.
Words here are wanting, to express how brave
Our gallant Adm'ral WARREN, did behave,
With counsels Sage, in Politics of War,
Conjunctly moves, with Leaders on the Shore,
Covers the Force on Land, and guards the Coast,
In whose great Acts, both KING and Country boast.
Still, Wonder-working Providence appears,
In the brave Conduct of the Engineers,
Who with consummate Skill, and rules of Art,
With active Minds, fidelity of Heart,
(I Would almost said) had done their double part.
The roaring Cannon, execute their will.
Mortars discharged, their wishes do fulfill.
These blazing Bomb^, do give the final Blow,
Which scatter Death, and terrify the Foe.
The Engineers, as Instruments, its owned,
Directed were, by whom the Action's Crowned.
Fame, sounds their worth and hovers ore the head
Of each Surviver, and of him that is dead.
-- But, ah! alas, --
How vain and empty, is the sound of Fame,
To which, old H^roes make the strongest claim?
Garlands in Triumph their Ambition sought,
At these they aimed, and for these they fought.
But better things, to us, appear in View,
Which Reason, Conscience, and the Gospel show.
What Is all the Glory, Pageantrie, and State,
Which Heathens attribute, to Chance and Fate,
Compared with, the Christians Renown,
Consisting in, a never-fading Crown?
Seraphick Light, shall fill their Souls with Joy,
Hosonnas, Hallelujahs, their Employ.
A short Remark, on Raising the advanced Battery in the Siege of Louisburg.
[Omitted in the former part.]
AMong the mighty stratagems of War,
Here Is one, we find, perhaps transcends compare.
Unite, in Mind, and Measure, Heart and Hand,
Resolved, all agree to make a Stand,
At Western Gate, the Walls to batter down,
Thereby, to Conquer, and Possess the Town.
Some, to Direct, and issue out Command,
Others to Guard, holding their Swords in hand.
Some tug at Cannon, drawing with their might,
As pleasing Service, which gave them delight.
Some with the Pick-ax, penetrate the Soil,
Others with Spades and Shovels sweat and toil.
Some Fascines place, others each Instrument,
Improve, assigned them, for this grand Intent,
With spell and spell, speedy dispatch pursue,
The S^eme to effect which then was had in view.
A Line is drawn, some sixty Pace in length,
In form of Siege, proportioned in breadth:
A Mount cast up, with Cannons fixed in Form,
(Determined all the Citadel to Storm.)
Such near approach unto the City Walls,
As fell within the reach of Musket Balls.
To pass and repass, covered from harm.
A Trench is drawn, of oblique Make and Form,
Five Rods in Length, its Breadth proportion bears,
Gives Entrance safe, and dissipates their fears.
Here Loyalty, and Politics appear,
Exerted Force, and Courage for the War.
What adds a Luster, to this Work so great,
Is in one Night, '^was rendered near complete
The Gallic^ are secure, nor ever dreamt,
Of such a Bold, Courag^ous Attempt,
Till darksom Shades disperse, and Morning Light
Present, these mighty Labors to their Sight.
Beholding which, surpised amazed cry,
Who may, or dare, with English Men to Vie?
Whose Counsels, Aids, and Politics, do prove
Agents, if not from H -- ll, are from Above.
Death (...) our doom, unless a speedy Tender,
Be made, to British Sons, of tame Surrender.
Let Us this ascribe, (as a removed Rod)
With Praises, to, our Prayer Hearing GOD.
The CONCLUSION.
YOU brave Commanders in this Action Great,
Merit, amongst Martial Sons, the highest Seat:
Gave Instances, of Loyal Minds and Skill,
Respective Posts, exactly to fulfill.
And Soldiers all, who for your Count^ies Good,
Laid down, your Lives, your Limbs, and cra^^st blood,
Give Thanks to GOD, devote your selves to CHRIST,
Your Captain General, who did, you assist;
Gave Conduct, Prosperd your Victorious Arms,
Rescued from Death, and from imperd^ng Ha^a^s.
Fear, and Adore Him, who for you has Fought,
Devoutly Serve Him, in Life, Lip, and Thought.
Remember, as you live, it is owing to f^^e Grace:
Beware of Sin, which does the Soul d^^ale.
Remember, whilst you Live, your L^^^ is given,
To live a Life of Faith, prepare for Heaven.
Never forget, GOD's Wonders, wro^^^ (...)
In spa^ing Life, but mary (...)
Some, fell by force of A^m^, by (...) is more,
Some, on the Sea^, some ^wor^ to Nati^^ S^^^e.
Some, sprig^tly So^^ Co^^^^ and ^^a^^^,
Found at ^^^ton, a Congrest, and ^ Grave.
Judgment with Me^cy, here is (...)
Ordered in Wisdom, by the great JEHOVE,
To keep from Pride, and Sel^ ^^^^ng ^^sts
Leads us, to Glory in the LORD OF HO^TS.
GOD having, by His own A^m^ghty ^^a^^,
Put these strong Holds, ^eer (...) King's Command,
Removed, Popish Idols, and turned Over
The state of Things, from what they were before,
What pious Zeal, and Ardours should be shown.
On Papal Ruins, to Erect CHRIST's Throne;
And Gospel Kingdom, by pure Churches there,
In Faith, and Practice, all may Persevere?
GOD's Great, His Dreadful, and Adored Nam^,
None can be guiltless, that take it in Vain.
From Profane Swearing, let each one depart,
More Wounding it is, than Swords sheathed in the Heart.
By Sin indulged, and by Profaneness may,
GOD be Provoked, in Wrath to turn away,
And Dispossess us, of this Acquisition,
That cost much Wealth, and Blood, in its Reduction.
What then alas! Shall be New-Englands Case?
If this her Glory's, swallowed in Disgrace,
By GOD provoking Sins, or from Neglects,
Of's Worship there, in'ts Beautiful Effects?
A short, and very humble Address, to his Excellency, the Governor of the
Massachusetts Bay, and to the Honorable the Governor of Connecticut, and our
much honored Fathers at the Council-Boards, and Representatives of the People.
YOU that first Led, in this Event, so great,
GOD grant your Hearts with Zeal may be repleat
For CHRIST, his Kingdom, Worship, Word, and Laws,
For pure Religion, and His Churches Cause:
Our Wishes are, Pr^phaneness to prevent,
That pious Preachers, to B^eton be sent,
Whose Doctrine, Life, Example, Influence,
May all con^ur, with Gospel, they Dispense:
That Soldiers there, may Learn to Fear the LORD.
Depart from Sin, and keep His Holy Word;
Then shall Renown, be added to your Fame,
With much Thanksgiving, to GOD's GLORIOUS NAME.
AMEN, AMEN.

