THE NEW-YEAR VERSES Of the PRINTER's BOY, who carries the Pennsylvania-Gazette
to the Customers. 1748.
WHENCE this tumultuous Noise, these dire Alarms?
These Shouts of Battle, and this Din of Arms?
Shall noble Belgia, long untaught to fear,
(...) distant Wars in Safety wont to hear,
(...) her dispeopled Fields, her Cities stormed,
and all the beauteous Works of Peace deformed;
(...) Homebred Faction, roused by Foreign Foes,
^^erse to Freedom, and the World's Repose,
^^lignant lift her hateful Head on high,
^^und her loud Trump, and bid her Ensigns fly?
Drunk with the Dictates of Tyrannick Rome,
(...)! the fierce Sons of lawless Rapine come:
(...) impious Race, in horrid League combined,
^o rivet Fetters on the freeborn Mind;
(...) what Revenge, and senseless Zeal inspire,
And argue with the Eloquence of Fire.
Thus (as old Bards in lofty Numbers sing)
The Titans rose against Heaven's immortal King;
With mad Ambition durst his Power disown,
And fondly strove to shake his mighty Throne.
But, uncontrolled, shall daring Faction reign,
Till prostate Holland bleed at every Vein?
(...)! Let them rise, assert their Country's Cause,
Protect her Freedom, guard her sacred Laws,
^^rge the rash Foe, that dares their Peace invade,
and call the God of Battle to their Aid;
(...) God! who deigned from flying Deaths to shield
(...) BRUNSWICK's Head in Oud'narde's glorious Field.
To WILLIAM, known in martial Scenes to dare,
Calm 'mid the rising Horrors of the War,
His potent Father gives his high Command,
The French to ch^ce, from the now injured Land;
While Anson, still the Dread of haughty Spain,
Procures new Honor to the British Name.
Here, fired with Liberty, with Virtue Charmed,
The willing, brave, illustrious Warren armed;
And fought so bravely in his Country's Cause,
Wonder is silent and we pant Applause.
There with like Ardour bold Boscawen glows,
To pour Britannia's Vengeance on her Foes,
And with the greatest Heroes adds his Name,
High in the Lists of Freedom and of Fame.
Unnumber'd others rise at Virtue's Call,
Fixed or to conquer, or, like Grenville, fall;
Grenville! whose Fate demands the grateful Sigh
From every Heart, and Tears from every Eye!
Celestial King! Whose righteous Arms alone
Can guard, unmoved, an earthly Monarch's Throne,
Far, far from Britain keep the raging Pest,
And make our Sovereign, as he blesses, blessed:
On that distinguished Prince, that favored Isle,
Again with cloudless Rays serenely smile;
Safe in those Realms (her last, her loved Retreat)
Bid Heaven-born Freedom fix her blissful Seat;
Be Peace by George's conquering Arms restored,
And every Briton own his Lawful Lord.
Let Pennsylvania still be blessed with Ease,
And let our civil Discords ever cease;
So prays your Boy: -- Who Is willing to receive
What, in your Bounty, you are pleased to give.
PHILADELPHIA, January 2. By Capt. Gantony, arrived at Wilmington from St.
Eustatia, we have the following Extracts. A letter from a Gentleman at Eustatia
to his Friend here, dated December 1, 1747.
I Make no Doubt but you have heard, long ere now, of the Success of Admiral
Hawke; who having fell in with a large Fleet of French Merchantmen, under
Convoy of 9 Men of War of the line [ supposed in the Bay of Biscay] has taken
the following Ships, viz. Names. Guns.
La Neptune, 74 La Grand Monarch, 74 La Terrible, 70 La D^esse, 64 La Constant,
64 Severn, 50


One Ship of 84 Guns, and another of 74, put back to France in a shattered
Condition. And,

One 64 Gun Ship and a Frigate, proceeded with 260 Sail of Merchantmen for the
West Indies.

We likewise hear, that Adm. Hawke having dispatched an Advice-Boat to the W.
Indies, to inform the Men of War and Privateers there, of his Success in taking
the Convoy, in Order that they might be upon the Watch to intercept the
Merchantmen; and that they accordingly were out, and have taken several, who
are arrived at Antigua.

By a Letter from Capt. Bowne, of the Privateer Brigt. Trembleur, of this Port,
we learn, That on the 1st of Nov. last, he fell in with and took a Spanish
Privateer Sloop, of 6 Carriage Guns, 6 Pounders, 12 Swivels, Blunderbusses,
Lances, with other Small-Arms, and 140 Men, after a very obstinate Engagement;
the Enemy, when they struck, not having one Sail nor Rope left whole, and their
Boom and Bow-sprit shot to Pieces; Capt. Bowne (who had one Man killed in the
Engagement, and his Sails and Rigging much damaged) took her in Tow, and
carried her into St. Thomas; and was, on the Date of his Letter, going in
Company with the Castor Privateer of New York, off Martineco, to wait for a
French Fleet daily expected there, very probably that mentioned above. Capt.
Bowne had but 89 Men,


