Mr. Lewis's ELECTION SERMON May 25, 1748.

Good Rulers the FATHERs of their People, And the Marks of Honor due to them:
A SERMON Preached at BOSTON: In the AUDIENCE Of His EXCELLENCY WILLIAM SHIRLEY,
Esquire GOVERNOR; The Honorable His MAJESTY's COUNCIL, And House of
REPRESENTATIVES, Of the Province of the Massachusetts Bay in NEW ENGLAND: On
the DAY of Electing His MAJESTY's COUNCIL May 25, 1748.

By DANIEL LEWIS, A. M. Pastor of the Church in Pembroke.

Job 29.14. I put on RIGHTEOUSNESS, and It clothed me, my Judgment was as a
Robe and a Diadem. Isaiah 49.23. Kings shall be thy nursing Fathers. -- Mal.
1.6. A Son honors his Father, etc. BOSTON: Printed by John Draper, Printer
to His Excellency the GOVERNOR and COUNCIL, for Daniel Gookin in Marlborough
Street, over against the South Meeting House.

In Council, May 26. 1748.
ORDERED, THAT John Cushing and John Otis, Esqrs. give the Thanks of this Board
to the Rev'd Mr. Daniel Lewis, for his Sermon preached Yesterday before the
General Court, being the Anniversary for the Election of Counselors; and
desire a Copy thereof for the Press.

W. Shirley.
Copy examined, per J. Willard, Secr.

AN ELECTION SERMON.
ISAIAH XXII. 21. And I will clothe him with thy Robe, and strengthen him with
thy Girdle; and I will commit thy Government into his Hand, and he shall be a
FATHER to the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, and to the House of Judah.
I Need not tell any here the Occasion of this Anniversary Solemnity; It being
too well known already to make this necessary; but shall choose rather, in the
Words of another, spoken, not upon the same, yet on an high and great Occasion,
Vid Atterbury's Ser. before the President and Governors of the Hospitals, etc.
to say, (partly in order to obtain, if it may be, the Candor of this august
Assembly; and partly, to apologize for the many Defects which my Hearers will
doubtless discover in the present Performance) That So many eminent Pens have
gone before in this Way, as have left it very difficult for those who come
after, either to say any Thing which they have not said, or not to say, that
much worse which they have.

Upon being informed, that our Honorable Rulers (sure I am, very unexpected to
me) had Ordered I should Preach before Them on this solemn Occasion, my
Thoughts fixed upon the Words read; which, if God shall please to afford his
gracious Assistance, may be profitably handled, and appear to be a Word in
Season.

In order to the clearer Understanding of them, it will be requisite to look
back to the 15th Verse of the Chapter, where, and in the Verses following, the
Prophet is directed to go and deliver a sad Message to Shehna, to tell him,
that though he made Preparation for a pompous Sepulture in the Place where he
then was, he should surely be violently tossed like a Ball into a large
Country, and there die, and be succeeded in his Office by one better than he,
meaning Eliakim. As to Shehna and Eliakim Both of them had been Ministers of
State under King Hezekiah, Shehna having been his Scribe or Secretary, and
Eliakim the Master of his Household. And their History (says a learned Man
Prideaux's Connection, etc. Vol. I. P.45.
) as far as may be collected from the Words of the Prophet, appears to be thus.
Shehna being a very wicked Man was a fit Person to serve the Lusts and evil
Inclinations of Manasseh in the first Part of his Reign, and therefore was made
his first Minister Of State; and Eliakim, who was of a quite contrary
Character, was quite laid aside. But on the Revolution that happened on the
coming of the Army of the Assyrians, Shehna was taken Prisoner with his Master,
and carried to Babylon, and there detained in Captivity to his Death. And
therefore Manasseh on his Repentance and return to Jerusalem, having resolved
on other Measures, called for Eliakim, and put the Management of all his
Affairs into his Hands, who being a Person of great Wisdom, Justice and Piety
soon re-established them upon the same Foot as they had been in the Days of
Hezekiah, and so preserved them in Peace and Prosperity all his Time, to the
great Honor of the King, and the Good of all his People, and therefore he has
the Character given him of being a Father to the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, and
to the House of Judah. Thus he.

The Robe and Girdle mentioned in the Text, are Ensigns of Authority. The
Former very peculiar to Princes and Magistrates, hence it is said concerning
the King of Israel, and Jehosophat the King of Judah, that they sat each on his
Throne, having put on their Robes. 1 Kings 22.10.
-- Purple was anciently the Color of the Garment or Robe worn by the Chief
Ruler among the Romans: So that to send any one the Purple was in Effect to
declare him Emperor Due Hist. Vol II. P.76.
The Latter, viz. the Girdle, is likewise a Mark of Distinction; the Word
signifies Strength Caryl.
, as well as a Girdle, because a Girdle causes Strength. A good Ruler is the
Strength, the Girdle of his Poeple. For by his wise and just Administration, an
enseebled State will be cherished and invigorated, confirmed and united, as a
Girdle or Belt does bind and strengthen the Loins of him that wears it.

It follows,

And I will commit thy Government into his Hand. Civil Government is not an
accidental Thing, which Men have hit upon by Chance, but is of Divine
Institution; By Me Kings reign Prove. 8.15.
. The Powers that be, are ordained of God, says the Apostle Romans 13.1.
. And this Ordination is so necessary that Public Communities cannot subsist
without it. Anarchy unavoidably tends to Confusion and Ruin. When there was no
King in Israel, it is said every Man did that which was right in his own Eyes.
Judges 17.6.
And when this comes to be the Case, a worse State of Things can hardly be
imagined.

Whereas, When the Civil Magistrate is to those under his Inspection, what
Eliakim is told here in the Text, he should be to the Inhabitants of Jerusalem,
and to the House of Judah, viz. A FATHER, there will be more than a seint Image
of the happy Times that were in Solomon's Reign, when it is said, Judah and
Israel dwell safely, every Man under his Vine, and under his Fig Tree. 1 Kings
4.25.
The Appellation here fixed upon Eliakim is a fit Title for a good Governor.
Eng. Annot. in loc.
And therefore you may be sure, that in the Progress of this Discourse I shall
not forget it.

What has been said upon the Words under Consideration, opens the Way for these
Two Observations, which I shall offer from them,

Obs. I That there are outward Marks of Distinction and Honor, and Ensigns of
Authority, which especially belong to the Civil Magistrate.

Obs. II That Good Rulers are, and should be FATHERS to their People.

I shall handle both these Points with as much Brevity as I can conveniently;
supposing that the Elections to be made this Day of His MAJESTY'S COUNCIL, will
not admit of a long Discourse from the Pulpit. The

1st Obs. is this, That there are outward Marks of Distinction and Honor, and
Ensigns of Authority which especially belong to the Civil Magistrate.

Notice is here taken of the Robe, Girdle, or Belt, and elsewhere Job 29.14
of the Diadem; all which, as also Crowns, Scepters, Gold Chains, etc. are
Emblems of Honor and Authority; and therefore Princes and Potentates, have by
the unanimous Vote of Mankind, had these Marks of Respect conferred upon them.
All Ages have been content, that those who govern them should be distinguished
from the Vulgar, and make a more splendid Appearance upon all Occasions than a
Peasant. And if they do not, they are apt to be looked upon with Contempt.
History (says one Caryl.
) makes report of a very famous King, who coming to Egypt, a mighty Concourse
of people flocked from all Parts to see him, but when they found him without
any State, an old man in a mean Habit, they went away Laughing, none regarding
him.

But not to enlarge here; I shall proceed to offer a few Reasons, why those who
are advanced to Places of Power (as Civil Rulers are) should be distinguished
from others, by external marks of Grandeur. And they are these that follow,

1. To be a Motive to Rulers to excite them to Vigilance and Care for the Good
and Welfare of those, on whose Account they have a just Title to those Ensigns
of Authority. A Ruler is not preferred to that Dignity only to give him Liesure
to be slothful and indolent, put in order to inspire him with Resolutions of
acting in his exalted Station agreeable to it: So that the Honors done to him
ought, and should be so many Monitors to him, to lay out himself with so much
the greater Diligence and Fidelity in serving the Public.

I believe the high Dignity Joseph was raised to in Egypt, was a considerable
Incentive to him to be very active in promoting the Welfare of that Kingdom.
For after the Account that is given of the Marks of Respect Pharaoh put upon
him, by placing him next to himself in Authority, and giving him his Ring from
off his Finger, clothing him with sine Linen, and putting a gold chain about
his Neck; I say, after all this, it is said, that Joseph went out over all the
Land of Egypt Genesis 41.41, 42, 43, 45.
. He forthwith applied himself to the Duties belonging to his Station, and did
not content himself at Home in the enjoyment of the Honors conferred upon him,
but by his Diligence and Activity in his Office, let the King who had thus
advanced him see, that his Favors were not misplaced.

Indeed, Civil Rulers have much better, stronger and higher Motives to be
public Benefactors than any External Honors, that are done them, can be; such
as their being in a Capacity more extensively to serve their Generation, than
those who move in a lower Sphere; and the high Reward that shall be given them
in Heaven, if they do it religiously. But still outward Marks of Respect and
Honor have their use and influence to this Purpose.

2. The public Honors paid to Civil Rulers are partly designed for the
Safeguard and Security of their Persons. If Rulers behave in their Office
suitable to the Dignity of it, and discharge with a laudable Fidelity the Trust
reposed in them, the State ought to be more than a little concerned to preserve
and protect them. Men in high Stations are sometimes exposed to the Rage of
unthinking People, and malign'd by envenomed Tongues, while at the same Time
they are endeavoring faithfully to serve the Public; Is it a small Thing that
thou have brought us up out of a Land that flows with Milk and Honey, to kill
us in this Wilderness, except thou make thy self altogether a Prince over us?
-- Will thou put out the Eyes of these Men? We will not come up, Numb. 16.13,
I4.
is Language that the meekest Man on Earth, and one of the best Rulers, was
treated with, by an obliged, though ungrateful People. And it were well, if
nothing of this Spirit were now to be found in the World, The Civil Ruler being
the Guardian of the public Quiet; appointed to restrain Violence, -- and to
preserve that Order and Peace which preserves the World: It is apparent, on
these, and many other Accounts, what Hazards a good Magistrate runs; and
therefore the Retinue of State which belongs to him, is such as may, at the
same Time, be his Ornament and Defense.

3. and Lastly, External Marks of Honor are likewise appropriated to Rulers,
in order to promote in those under their Authority a proper Esteem and Regard
for them. Not that it is to be supposed any are so weak as to be influenced to
behave dutifully toward Rulers, and treat them with Reverence merely on the
Account of the outward Splendour, annexed to their Office, but that this may be
some Inducement to People to show them that Respect and pay that Defference to
them which is justly due to their Character.

None then should envy the civil Ruler those Marks of Honor which the Oracles
of God entitle him to, and the Wisdom of Nations has thought it proper he
should enjoy: Since such valuable Ends as we have heard may be served hereby.

I now proceed to the

II. Obs. That Good Rulers are, and should be FATHERS to their People.

'Twas my Purpose chiefly to have insisted upon this, but the Time, I perceive,
will not admit of much (...) here; and therefore shall content myself as
briefly as I can,

1. To show, Wherein Civil Rulers should be FATHERS to their People. And,

2. What Obligation they are under to be so.

1. I am to show, Wherein Civil Rulers should be FATHERS to their People.

This is an Appellation given in the Scripture to Persons clothed with Public
Authority. Hence KINGS are called nursing Fathers; and Naaman's Servant
addressed him in the same Style of Respect and Reverence, who was a great Man
with his Master (the King of Syria) and Honorable, 2 Kings 5.1.13.
My Father, if the Prophet had had thee do some great Thing, etc. And it is
related of Augustus (who perhaps was one of the best and wisest of all the
Roman Emperors, before the Christian Religion was publicly countenanced in
that State,) that when the People offered him the Title of Lord, he refused it,
and thought the Title of Pater Patria more honorable Ducter. Hist. Vol. II. P.
3.4.
, as indeed it was.

Now there are several Ways wherein Civil Rulers, (who are Political Fathers)
may, and should manifest their paternal Regards to those who are under their
Authority,

1. By their Love to them. The Love of natural Parents to their Children is
exceeding great: Can a Woman forget her sucking Child Isal. 49.15.
? Intimating that it is a very unlikely Thing, and next to an Impossibility,
David wished he might have died instead of his Son Absalom; Would God, says he,
I had died for thee 2 Samuel 18.33.
.

And shall no Footsteps of paternal Affection be found in those who are
political Fathers? Since both are styled Fathers, may it not be justly
expected, that there should be something similar in them? Certainly, civil
Rulers may be looked upon rather as Tyrants than FATHERS, if they be not
cordial Lovers of those whom they rule over: God be gracious to thee my Son,
said Joseph to his Brother Benjamin Genesis 43.29.
. Which, perhaps, was spoken rather as Superiors were wont to do to those
below them Patrick in Loc.
than because he was his near Relation; though it may include both. If the former
be only meant, then it shows great Regard, Love and Affection, civil Rulers
ought to have for those who are Subject to their Authority

The Truth is, if political Fathers have no real Affection for their People,
it is not probable that there will be any mutual Confidence between them. They
will always be jealous one of the other; and the One will be apt to rule as
Tyrants, and the Other to obey as Slaves; because they cannot help it.

So that it is necessary, in order to answer the Ends of civil Government, that
Rulers should behave toward their People, with the Tenderness and Affection of
FATHERS. So did Nehemiah, David, and Jehoshaphat, and diverse others in the
first Chair of Government, which are found on Scripture Record.

And in the same Way, it is still the Wisdom and Duty of civil Fathers to
conduct themselves toward their People: And if they do so indeed, doubtless
they will find their Account in it, sooner or later.

2. Civil Rulers should show themselves Fathers to their People, by protecting
them to the utmost of their Power. This they should do both in Times of War and
Peace.

(1) In a Time of War. In such a World as this is, there is no living without
War; though the Consequents of it are commonly very dreadful; every Battle of the
Warrior being with confused Noise, and Garments rolled in Blood Isa. 9, 5.
.

Therefore civil Rulers (as Fathers of their People) should do all they can, to
preserve them from so great Calamity; as natural Parents, we may well suppose,
would, to save their Children from Destruction. Hence it is their Duty to make
seasonable Provision for their Safety; and this they may do, not only by using
all proper Means to preserve them from the Miseries of War; but likewise by
making, in Times of Peace, suitable Preparation for their Defense, in Case a
War should happen. 'Twas prudent Advice King Asa gave his People, and well
becoming a Father of his Country, Let us build these Cities, and make about
them Walls, and Towers, Gates and Bars, while the Land is yet before us -- 2 Chronicles. 14.7.
.

(2) Political Fathers should be careful to promote the outward Prosperity of
their People in Times of Peace. How much of the Spirit of a true Patriot
breathed forth in these Words, which proceeded from royal Lips; and how much of
the Tenderness and Affection of a Father did they discover toward his People?
And David spoke unto the Lord, when he saw the Angel that smote the People, and
said, Lo, I have sinned, and I have done wickedly, but these Sheep, what have
they done? Let thine Hand, I pray thee, be against me, and against my Father's
House 2 Samuel 24.17.
. As a tender Parent will hazard his own Life to save his Child's, so this good
King had the Welfare of his Subjects so much at Heart, that he was even willing
to redeem their Lives with the Loss of his own: These Sheep, what have they
done? Let thine Hand, I pray thee, be against me.

Civil Fathers, it may be, never act more becoming their Character, than when
they manifest a true Concern for their People's Prosperity, and how they may
most effectually promote it.

And here allow me to say, that a necessary Step to this Purpose, is to provide
good Laws, and to take due Care that they be well executed; Laws that encourage
Industry, and are designedly calculated to put Marks of Disgrace upon the Idle
and Lazy; that Children born of needy Parents, be put out to Trades, and
brought up in honest Callings: Hereby the Public, in all Probability, will,
not only be eased of a Bill of Charge, but reap the Benefit of their diligent
Labors. That good Order, and seasonable Hours be kept in Houses of public
Entertainment; and Intemperance (the growing Iniquity of the present Age) be
suppressed, if possible. Especially, that the LORD'S DAY be religiously observed,
and kept as a Day of holy Rest. In a Word, that ALL Immoralities, of what Kind
soever be discountenanced and punished.

And while I am speaking of these Things, I cannot pass over in Silence, the
late excellent ACT made concerning profane Cursing and Swearing; for which, I
doubt not, all good Men are very thankful, and bless God, that he was pleased
to put it into the Hearts of our honorable Rulers to make such a noble and
heroic STAND against so prevailing an Iniquity.

And to encourage (if need be) our civil Fathers in their future Endeavors to
reform the Lives and Manners of this People; I would further say, that the ACT
referred to, has been thought (by those who are most likely to know) to have
given a considerable Check to that bold Transgression. It were to be wished,
that something like it had been also, or may be invented, more effectually to
suppress Drunkenness; a Sin which threatens Ruin to this Land.

3. Civil Rulers, as Fathers of their People, should use much Prudence in
exercising their Authority. It is said, concerning David, that he behaved
himself wisely -- and he was acceptable in the Sight of all the People, and
also in the Sight of Readiness Servants 1 Samuel 18.5.
, The whole Court, it seems, admired him for his discreet Conduct: And in such
a Society, to behave so as to be universally applauded, is no common Thing.

For Want of prudent Management, Rehoboam lost the greater Part of his
Subjects. Had he given them good Words, and followed the sage Advice offered
him by his grave Counselors, the unhappy Separation that ensued, might
(humanely speaking) have been prevented:

But his Conduct was such, even when his all, in a Manner (as to his Regal
Authority) lay at Stake, that the worst of his Enemies could not wish him to
act more foolishly than he did.

It was said by the old Men, who had been of his Father's Council, If thou will
be a Servant unto this People this Day, and speak good Words to them, then they
will be thy Servants forever 1 Kings 12.7.
. But he had not the Wisdom to take their Advice, and thereupon great Confusion
followed. See here, How requisite Prudence, and wise Conduct is in Civil Rulers.

4. and Lastly, Civil Rulers should manifest their Paternal Care of their
People, by setting before them a good Example.

It Is not easy to imagine what a mighty Influence a pious Ruler's Example is
apt to have upon those who are under his Authority. Children, we see, have a
strong Propensity to approve and practice what is done by their Parents: And
the Case is much the same with Respect to Civil Fathers; THE EXAMPLE OF THE
KING being a Maxim that most seem willing to conform unto.

Therefore it must needs have a great Tendency to promote the best Intersts of
a People when their political Fathers are Persons of eminent Piety, and bright
Examples of pure and undefiled Religion.

The Prophet Elisha would have had no Regard to the distressed Host of Israel,
and those that were with them, had it not been for the Respect he bore to King
Jehosaphat on the account of his great Piety; And Elisha said unto the King of
Israel, What have I to do with thee? -- Surely were it not that I regard the
Presence of Jehosaphat, the King of Judah, I WOULD NOT LOOK TOWARD THEE, NOR
SEE THEE 2 Kings 3.13, 14.
.

If a People see their Rulers to be loose or profane, they will either despise
them, or be too ready to imitate their bad Example; and thus their Leaders will
cause them to err Isai. 9.16.
.

Having showed in a few Particulars, Wherein Civil Rulers should be FATHERS to
their People: I come in the

II Place, as was proposed, to mention the Obligations they are under to be so.

And I shall Name only Two at present,

1. The great Trust committed to Civil Rulers ought to be a strong Inducement
to them to exert their Authority, in all proper Ways, for the Good of their
People, and to carry as Fathers to them.

Natural Fathers look upon their Offspring to be an important Charge (as
indeed it is) and therefore are willing to run all Hazards to preserve them,
and to promote their Welfare.

And the like Concern (in some Degree) ought Civil Fathers to have for their
Poople.

Thus they should carefully consult their Interest in all Respects; advise them
in the best Manner they can, and upon all difficult Emergencies appear in the
Gap for their Relief. Hear how Job (who doubtless had been a Man in Authority)
speaks concerning himself, I delivered (says he) the Poor that cried, the
Fatherless, and him that had none to help him. The Blessing of him that was
ready to perish came upon me; and I caused the Widows Heart to sing for Joy. I
was Eyes to the Blind, and Feet was I to the Lame: I was a Father to the Poor,
and the Cause which I knew not, I searched out: And I brake the Jaws of the
Wicked, and plucked the Spoil out of his Teeth Job. 29.12, -- 17.
.

Thus to do is the surest Course Civil Rulers can take to secure to themselves
the amiable Character of true Patriots. And indeed for this very End and
Purpose were they appointed, and not to lord it over their Inferiors.

And upon the Account of the great Trust reposed in Political Fathers, and the
heavy Burden they sustain, those who are subject to their Government, ought to
look on themselves as bound in Duty and Conscience to pray earnestly to God for
them 1 Timothy 2.1, 2.
As for his Direction and Assistance, in the Discharge of their high Office, so
likewise for his powerful Grace to preserve them from Sin and Evil, in the
midst of those manifold Temptations to which they are continually exposed, in
Appearance much beyond other Men, from the Height of that Condition, and he
Extent of their Power, -- and from the officious Servility of Parasites and
Flatterers,, who sooth them in their Faults, and humor them in their Passions,
and comply with their corrupt and vicious Inclinations, and are always ready at
hand, and forward Instruments to execute their Commands, and to serve their
Lusts and Vices. Arch-Bp. Tillo^son, Vol. II. P.432, 433.


2. If Rulers do not behave as Fathers toward their People, there is Danger of
their losing the Honor, Esteem and Reverence, which otherwise they might
justly expect to receive from them. The Subject's Love is the Prime's strongest
Citadel. If Rulers are tyrannical and cruel in their Government, they must
look for no cheerful, but only a forced Submission to be paid them. If those
under Authority perceive their Rulers have no paternal Concern for them, they
will be apt to have but little Affection for their Civil Fathers; which must
needs be productive of great Confusion and Disorder in the Body Politic: One
will be jealous of the other; and when Power is visibly abused Submission will
be found an hard Task.

That Parent who governs his Children with a prudent Lenity or Gentleness, and
appears to be deeply concerned for their Welfare on all Accounts, takes the
surest Course to entitle himself to their sincere Respect, and to be truly
honored by them. Whereas he that is rigorous and always treats them in a
churlish imperious Manner, is only slavishly feared, but not cordially loved.

And the Case is much the same as to Political Fathers: If by them the People
enjoy great Quietness, and very worthy Deeds are done unto them, by their
Providence, they probably will accept of it always, with all Thankfulness. Sure
I am, they would be liable to severe Censures if they did not. But if nothing
but Frowns and Rebukes, haughty and imperious Carriage be to be expected, no
wonder if such Rulers soon lose the Hearts of their People. But Beloved, I hope
better Things of you, our Civil Fathers, though I thus speak.

But there is one Thing that I must by no Means omit the mentioning of, and
that is, to recommend a PUBLIC SPIRIT, which is so much wanting in this Land;
and which is equally necessary to be found not only in Rulers, but the People
also, in order to our becoming a prosperous and flourishing State. A learned
Man, whose Words I have had Occasion to cite before, says, ' It Was the Temper of
the Romans to do and receive all they could for the Interst of the
CommonWealth, without taking or reserving any Thing to themselves, but the
Honor of serving it to the utmost of their Power; and as long as this Temper
lasted, they prospered in all their Undertakings; but afterward, when this
Public Spirit became turned all into Self-Interest, and none served the Public
but to serve themselves, by plundering it, every Thing then went backward with
them as fast as it had gone forward with them before, till they were soon after
swallowed up, first in Tyranny, and afterward in Ruin. Prideaux's Connect.
Vol. III. P. 425.
Thus he.

And elsewhere P. 90.
the same Person says, And so it must happen with all other States and
Kingdoms, when the Public Interest is sacrificed to that of private Men, and
the Offices and Employments of the State are desired only to gratify the
Ambition, and glut the Avarice of them that can get into them.

If this be thought an Excursion, I hope it may prove no unuseful one, and so I
leave it without further enlarging upon it.

Thus I have done with the Observations raised from the Text, and shall now
proceed the the

APPLICATION
In which it is my Purpose to be very brief.

Use I. Hence how great a Mercy ought a People to account it, when God gives
such to rule over them who are concerned to promote their best Interests, and
desirous to show them all the Affection and Tenderness of kind Fathers. And
such a Mercy our Nation and Land enjoy in his present MAJESTY, our Rightful and
most Gracious Sovereign King GEROGE II. who, we trust, esteems it a greater
Honor to be the Common Father of his Loyal Subjects, than to wear the Imperial
Crown of Great Britain.

And such, we hope, His Excellency our Commander in Chief, and all our Civil
Rulers will be to this Province. And if they are indeed so, and we do not
accordingly Esteem and Honor and Support them, let every Body call us
ungrateful, and they cannot call us worse, or say any Thing of us that is more
to our Discredit.

It Is justly to be looked upon as an high Favor when Rulers are ambitious of
arriving to the Character of being Fathers to their People. All Things in the
State will then probably be carried on with much Ease and Unanimity; Rulers
will not grasp after more Power than properly belongs to them, nor the People
be under a Temptation to wish it less than it is.

And thus there will be an admirable Harmony between Rulers and Ruled, which is
the Beauty and Glory of all Communities both civil and sacred.

Use II. Are Rulers Civil FATHERS? Then it is our Duty to honor them as such;
and not with a curious or (which is much worse) a malicious Eye, to pry into
their Failings (which none are without) and magnify them beyond what they
really are. Those of lower Rank know little of the Cares and Burden of
Government. Whatever ambitious and inconsiderate Men may think (says one) wise
Men do certainly know and find by Experience, that to discharge all the Parts
of a good Governor is a very difficult and troublesome Province. Inferior
Magistrates (as he goes on) find Care and Trouble enough, in that small Share
and Part of it which they sustain; and if so, then certainly the Care and
Concernment of the whole must needs be a heavy Burden indeed. Abp. Tillot. Vol.
II. P. 432.


Therefore, instead of Murmuring and Railing at our Civil Fathers, we ought to
pity and pray for them, to reverence and honor them; and as much as we can to
encourage them in their faithful Endeavors to serve the Public, as they did
Ezra; Arise, for this Matter belongs unto thee, WE ALSO WILL BE WITH THEE: Be
of good Courage and do it Ezra 10.4.
And to put Marks of great Respect upon them, when they are seen to have the
Public Good much at Heart, and to be true Friends to Religion, and the Interest
of CHRIST'S Kingdom.

Use III. Lastly, Let what we have heard be a persuasive Motive to our Civil
Rulers to be indeed FATHERS to the People of this Province.

And here in the first Place, Duty obliges me to address myself to YOUR
EXCELLENCY, our chief civil Father under the KING.

I have no Design nor Inclination to flatter Your Excellency, and if I had, I
suppose YOU are as much above it, as I am sure it is beneath an honest Mind to
attempt it.

Nor would I be unmannerly in my Address to a civil Father in the first Chair
of Government. If I may be so happy as to avoid both these Extremes, and yet be
faithful, I shall reach the Point I aim at.

Suffer me then, Excellent SIR, with all suitable Respect to say, That as YOU
are entrusted by our common FATHER, the KING, with the Government of the People
of this Province (dear, I hope, To God) so it is their general Expectation, I
believe, that Your Excellency would please to consider, how great an
Opportunity is hereby put into your Hands to be a Father to us all; not only by
consulting our temporal Interest; but, which is of much greater Importance, by
promoting pure and undefiled Religion among us.

Those who have been your Predecessors, in your present exalted Station, have
done worthily, and greatly in their Day; and it is, I doubt not, the unanimous
Wish of this People, that YOU may excel them ALL.

And now need I put Your Excellency in Mind, how much it will induce to your
own Ease and Quiet, in your Government, to countenance and encourage Virtue and
Religion among your People, as well as to be a bright Example of the same YOUR
SELF! For (as a great and wise Man says) How can it be expected, from that Man,
who dares affront and despise God himself, that he should have any hearty
Reverence for his Deputies and Vicegerents Bp. Wilkins Princip. Not. Relig. P.
297.
?

Need I use Importunity with Your Excellency, to improve your Interest in the
Court of Great Britain, as there shall be Occasion, on Behalf of this Province.

Your Excellency's past Solicitations for us, have shown You to be a true
Patriot, and may You ever be so.

Or, Need I bespeak your paternal Care for the SCHOOL of the Prophets, which is
the Glory of New England.

Your Excellency knows too well the Advantage of a liberal Education to
discourage Learning, and therefore, it is hoped, you will continue to be a kind
Patron to that learned Body. The Governors and Heads of that Society are at
present, and may they ever be, Persons of Prudence, Piety and good Literature;
and while they are such, there is no good Ruler but will think it his Duty to
be a Father to them.

As to inferior Schools, I need not (indeed I cannot) say more than has been
already urged upon that Head, by others who have gone before me.

To close then my Address to Your Excellency; May God by his Grace, enable You
to serve Your Generation, in the high Station you are, according to his Will;
May you be able to appeal to Him in your last Moments, in the same Manner that
the excellent Cyrus did, Thou know (said he then) That I have been a Lover
of Mankind, and now that I am leaving this World, I hope to find that Mercy
from thee, which I have showed to others.

The hearty Prayer of all good Men for Your Excellency, I doubt not is, That
you may at last sleep in JESUS, and your Rest in him be glorious.

I now turn my self to the honorable His Majesty's COUNCIL, and the Gentlemen
of the honorable House of REPRESENTATIVES;

To the Former, (by whose Appointment, in Conjunction with his Excellency's, I
stand here to Day) I would humbly suggest, that the very Title you wear, His
Majesty's Council! should be a powerful Motive to engage you to consult,
according to the best of your Skill and Judgment, the Affairs of the Province,
and all the valuable Interests of it; and to give the wisest Advice you are
able, under our present difficult and perplexed Circumstances. Let your Counsel
have no Mixture, no Alloy of selfish Views, but mainly aim at the Good of the
Public. We have been almost undone by the Prevalency of a private,
self-seeking Spirit; may it no more be found among us: Especially, may you, who
are civil Fathers, excel in public Spiritedness, and teach us all by your
Example, to be ambitious of the same excellent Character.

To the Gentlemen who represent the Province, I would only say; do you need to
be put in Mind, how great a Trust is reposed in you by your Constituents; and
what an Influence the Choice of Counselors to be made this Day (chiefly by
your selves) may have upon the Government?

Let not then the Business of the Day seem as a light Matter or trifling
Concern to any of you. Remember that your Trust is great (as I intimated but
now) and that both God and Man expect you discharge it faithfully.

There is one Thing, though it may seem a little out of the Way to mention it
here, yet in as much as it is so great a Frown of Providence upon us all, and
so much damps our public Joy this Day, I cannot but name it, and that is the
Destruction of our State-House by Fire, which we may still behold lying all in
Ruins. May we be duly affected therewith, and bewail the burning which the LORD
has kindled.

To proceed,

As to those who are in the Ministry: It Is needless now to take up the Time in
an Address to them, since that will be particularly done Tomorrow by a much
abler Hand.

To the People in general, I have only this comprehensive Word to offer, Be
dutiful and obedient to your Civil Fathers, and at Peace among yourselves.
Forget not the Words of our blessed Savior, Every Kingdom divided against
itself is brought to Desolation; and every City or House divided against itself
shall not stand Matthew. 12.25.
.

No Republic ever excelled Rome in profound Polity Ducter. Hist. Vol. II. P.
235.
. But notwithstanding this, She carried in her own Breast the Cause of her
Ruin, in the perpetual Jealousy of the People against the Senate, or rather of
the Plebeians against the Patritii The one alleging always, That Excess of
Liberty would at last destroy itself; and the others fear just the contrary,
That Authority, which in own Nature was always for increasing, would last
degenerate into Tyranny. Between these two Extremes a People otherwise so grave
and wise could find no Medium. Idem, P. 236.
O then let all Jealousy between Rulers and Ruled be laid aside, and
extinguished forever.

To conclude, The Lord our God be with us, as he was with our Fathers, Let Him
not leave us, nor forsake us. -- And the Lord maintain the Cause of his People
at all Times, as the Matter shall require. AMEN.

FINIS.

