Mr. Eliot's ESSAY ON Field-Husbandry.

AN ESSAY UPON Field-HUSBANDRY IN New England As it is or may be Ordered.

By JARED ELIOT, M. A.

Eccles. v. 9. Moreover, the profit of the Earth, is for all, the King himself
is served by the Field.

N. LONDON, Printed and Sold by T. GREEN, 1748.

The Preface.
THERE are sundry Books on Husbandry wrote in ENGLAND: Having read all on that
Subject I could obtain; yet such is the difference of Climate and method of
Management between them and us, arising from Causes that must make them always
differ, so that those Books are not very Useful to us. Besides this, the Terms
of Art made use of are so unknown to us, that a great deal they Write is quite
unintelligible to the generality of NEW ENGLAND Readers.

Although GREAT BRITAIN in its Situation be above six Hundred Miles more Northerly
than this Country, yet the Winters there are ordinarily so Mild, that their
Books direct to Ploughing in Lays all the Winter Months; whereas at that Season
we are commonly bound fast in Frost and Snow.

For these Reasons Books of Husbandry calculated to the State and Circumstances
of the Country may be of great Service; not an History of our Practice, not an
Account of what we do in our present Husbandry, but rather what we might do, to
our Advantage.

Having spent more than Thirty Years in a Business that required a great deal
of Travel, although it did not much hinder Reading and Study, gave me an
opportunity to see much of the Country, of making many Observations, and of
being acquainted with very many Persons of Worth and Ingenuity, both Farmers
and Others.

Yet all this while I was in a great measure prevented hereby, from making
Trials and Experiments of those things which occurred to my Mind. Having had
but One Years Leisure, am not so well Furnished as the Readers may expect. If
it does no more, it may serve to Excite those who are more Sufficient and more
Equal to the Business, and set on Foot what is so much wanted.

It may be thought that a Subject of this Nature is not very suitable for one
of my Calling.

Certainly the Cultivation of the Earth affords the most useful Philosophy,
opens to us a glorious scene and discovery of the Wisdom and Power of the
Creator and Governor of the World. It is what has employed Men of all Rank and
Orders, from the Prince to the Peasant.

Besides, Useful Knowledge has come from a Quarter from whence it was not so
natural to Expect it: A Monk first discovered Gunpowder, and the useful Art of
Printing was the Invention of a Soldier.

It is acknowleged by our best Writers, That while other parts of Learning less
useful, have been Cultivated, Agriculture or Husbandry, has been strangly
Neglected. Some suppose the Reason of this Neglect is, that the Subject is too
low for Polite Writers. It was not so accounted by King Solomon; He did not
think it below his Dignity as a King, nor inconsistent with his Character as a
Preacher. The Text says, For he spoke of the Trees, from the Cedar Tree that
is in Lebanon, to the Hyssop that springs out of the Wall. This must include
all useful Plants, Grain and Grass, even the whole Vegitable Kingdom.

This useful Branch of Learning is Revived in Ireland, where some Hundreds of
very considerable Persons in the Kingdom are Associated together to promote
Husbandry and other Manufactures, and are made a Chartered Corporation by the
Government: Pens and Hands are set to Work; it has set a new Face upon the
Country, and the whole Kingdom feel the Advantage of this fine Institution.

I rather think Husbandry has been Neglected as being too high; That is,
Writers do not care to be at the trouble of Projecting, nor at the charge of
Trials and Experiments upon what has been Projected: It being a great deal
easier to write a Book upon the known Arts and Sciences that shall be accepted
and applauded, than to write upon Husbandry so us not to be despised; for some
think we do not need it, and that we know all that can be known already.

If any think that I am mistaken, I would desire them to try; the Subject needs
all the Help that can be afforded, Especially at a Time when there is such a
heavy Load of Debt upon the Country.

If in this Essay, or any other way I may be so happy as in the least degree to
promote the Temporal or Spiritual Interest of my dear Friends and Countrymen,
it is what will afford me a sensible Pleasure.

The plain Style in which the following Pages are written, is what will render
the whole the more Intelligible and Useful to Farmers.

J. Eliot.
Killingworth, December. 31. 1747.
An Essay upon Field-Husbandry in New England.
IT is not an Hundred and Thirty Years since the first Settlement of
New England, and much less than that since the greater Part has been Planted.

When we consider the small Number of the first Setlers, and coming from an old
Cultivated Country, to thick Woods, rough unimproved Lands; where all their
former Experience and Knowledge was now of very little Service to them: They
were destitute of Beasts of Burden or Carriage; Unskilled in every part of
Service to be done: It may be said, That in a sort, they began the World a New.

Their unacquaintedness with the Country, led them to make choice of the worst
Land for their Improvement, and the most expensive and chargeable Methods of
Cultivation: They thot themselves obliged to stubb all Staddle, and cut down or
lop all great Trees; in which they expended much Cost and Time, to the
prejudice of the Crop and impoverishing the Land.

When we consider these things, the Progress that has been made in so short a
Time is very wonderful.

There has been great Improvements in Husbandry far and wide; besides various
Trades and Manufactures, which are Yearly increasing.

Particularly,

1. There are considerable Advances made in the Linen and Woolen Trades. There
are many alive at this Day, who remember since the Linen was Coarse, and what
we call Tow Cloth; the other Cloth for outer Garments, Linsy-Woolsy; and for
some time was worn without Fulling or any kind of Dressing: After they began to
Full Cloth, for a time they used neither Tentering or Pressing; they only
stretched and wound the Cloth hard upon a smooth log of Wood.

2. We have Improved in the Iron-mongers Trade. In the early Times of the
Country, the most of the Iron made and in use, was Taunton Iron, made of Bog
Oar, and so coarse and brittle as to break in the working, and when it was
wrought, to the loss and vexation of the Smith and the Farmer.

This Metal, such as it was, was all the Iron then in use among us, except a
little Spanish and Sweeds Iron for some special Uses; so that it is wonderful
to think how that Generation did to Subsist.

After a while Bog Oar of a better sort and of a more kindly nature and temper
was found, after that Mountain Oar was discovered, which being melted and
refined makes excellent Iron.

We have further Improved upon it by converting it into Steel; which was entered
upon without previous Skill, and wrought and beat out by frequent Experiments
and by continued Practice.

3. We have also Increased in our Stocks of Cattle, and Improved our Breed of
Horses. For some time after the Country was Settled, they had no Cattle at all;
when some were brought over, what with the bad Hay they provided, it being cut
upon Bog Meadow, the multitude of Wolves and other Beasts of Prey, for sundry
Years they were kept so low and had so few Cattle, that the common Price for a
grown Bullock was Twenty Pounds Sterling, which is Equal to Two Hundred Pounds
Old Tenor.

I remember when I was a Boy, I heard a very ancient Woman of good Credit say,
That she had seen Twenty broad Pieces paid down for a Two Year old Heifer,
which is now Equal to Two Hundred and Fifty Pounds Old Tenor.

Although the Progress we have made be very Considerable, our Country yet needs
and is capable of greater Improvement in the management of our Lands; of which
I design to consider in several Sorts.

1. Those Coves and Swamps that are adjoining to Salt Marsh, which ly so flat
and low that they cannot be Dreined: I have seen sundry such places upon the
Sea Coast. I have such a piece of Ground, which I am obliged to Fence in, in
order to enclose some other Land; which put me upon thought of trying to make
something of it, it being now wholly unprofitable.

Last Fall I began upon it and drew a Ditch of four Foot wide from a large Salt
Creek, and carried it up in the middle of the Cove seventy Rods, in order to
turn it into Salt Meadow, that being the best that I could do with it: It so
far answers the design, that the Tide flows regularly into it, to the upper end
of it; the Tide now flowing, where I suppose it never reached before. There
must be smaller Ditches on each Side, to cut off the Fresh Springs, and small
Grips cut from the great Ditch in sundry places, that so the Salt Water may be
spread and communicated to all parts of it.

The lower part next the Salt Marsh is Rushes, the next are Reeds, then large
Brakes and Bushes, and last of all a thick Swamp. If this Land can be converted
into Salt Meadow, it will be much cheaper than to Purchase so much Salt Marsh,
and will lie very convenient to my other Land.

Salt Water will effectually kill Trees and Bushes where it comes, both Root
and Branch.

2. The second sort of Land that I shall consider, is, the low sunken Lands,
which have no Communication with Salt Marsh: Of this sort there are three
Kinds, viz. Thick Swamps, Boggy Meadow, and smooth, even, shaking Meadow; this
last sort is called Cramberry Marsh: He that would do any thing to Effect with
either of these Sorts, must in the first place see whether there be deep Mire;
if it be shallow and soon come to hard Sand, Clay or Gravel, it will be not
worth while to expend Cost upon it.

Again, You must examine what Fall there is. If the Fall be apparent to the
Eye, and this for ten or fifteen Rods, you may be satisfied; if you are
uncertain, try it with a water Level or spirit Level: If your Marsh be small,
the Drein long, rocky and likely to be chargeable, it may be best to let it
alone; but if it be a large Swamp or Meadow, although the main Drein should be a
considerable Charge, that should be no discouragement.

That low Ground which is thick with Wood and Brush, will be the most
Chargeable; the Bog Meadow the next in Charge, because the Bogs must be cut up
with a Bog Plough or with the Hoe; either way is Chargeable: The shaking Meadow
has the best Surface, and is easiest to bring to Mowing.

Last August was Twelve Month I began to Drein a Pond that lies but a Mile from
my House; it was not a natural Pond, but made so upon design. Our Record
informs that it was granted to a Man to prevent the miring of Cattle; the Owner
of it laid it under Water about Eighty Years ago: It was overgrown with Pond
Lilly's; it was thought by most that to Drein it was impractible: Some said,
That it was as unlikely as to Drein the Ocean. At the outlet there seemed to be
little or no Fall; but trying it with a Level, my Son and I found that in forty
Rod there was Fall sufficient: We therefore set about Dreining it, have
succeeded so far that it bids fair to make a good piece of Land. It had been
under Water so long, and was so full of Pond Lilly-Roots, that when the Water
was drawn off and the Lilly-Roots dried and shrunk up, it grew to be Puffy, and
did not for this Reason do so well as we expected: The Grass Seed did not come
up well, nor stand so well as in Land that has lain open to the heat of the Sun.

The whole Pond was about Twenty Acres, and the Soil is eight or ten Foot deep:
There are in it many large Springs, which are fifteen Foot deep.

I began last March to Drein another Meadow of Forty Acres, up in Guilford
Woods; this was a shaking Meadow; A Man standing upon it might shake the Ground
several Rods round him. It seemed to be only a strong sword of Grass Roots laid
over a soft Mud of the consistence of Pan-cake Batter: There was not abundance
of Bushes in it, but abundance of Cramberry Vines, and a great burden of poor
wild Grass: The Meadow was deemed so poor that none would take it up. I was
pitied as being about to wast a great deal of Money; but they comforted
themselves that if I spent it unprofitably, others that stood in need of it
would get it: They are now of another opinion.

At the only Outlet of this Meadow there was Fall sufficient, but very Rocky;
we must dig four or five Foot deep to get the Advantage of it.

In March when I went up to make the Outlet Drein, there was such a torrent of
Water that we could do nothing; I ordered therefore a Tree to be cut down
across the Brook, and prepared Flitches instead of Plank, which we set aslant,
the upper end resting upon the Staddle that was fallen cross the Brook, laid
them as close as we could, and stopped the Chinks and large Casms with top Tow,
by which means we shut the Water into the Meadow, then wrote at the Trench or
main Drein in the Day and let it out at Night, till it was in a good measure
accomplished. When I ordered the top Tow to be carried, the Men wondered what it
was designed for, but when they saw how useful it was in making a cheap Dam
they were pleased with it. I put them in mind of the Dutch Proverb, who say of
things that are very mean, That something is always good for something.

When the Weather grew sufficiently warm and the Meadow a little settled, we
began to Ditch. I cut a Ditch on each side and one in the middle: As far as we
went it soon rendered the Meadow firm and dry: I then proceeded to sow
Grass-Seed, such as red Clover, soul Meadow Grass, English Spear Grass, and
Herd Grass: Of all the sorts of Grass Seed I sowed, none seemed to take hold
and come up so well as red Clover; this I found to be the boldest and most
hardy Grass.

Where the Sword was strong, although the Clover came up well, yet what with the
toughness of the Ground and the over-topping growth of the wild natural Grass,
the Clover made but slow progress till the Fall of the Year, and then it mended
considerably. But where there happened to be no Sword to hinder it, the Clover
grew up to the height of mid Thigh, went to Seed and the Seed was ripe.

Of the other sorts of Grass came up but poorly: The Land I suppose was too new
and too tough for it.

Some time in September I Ploughed up a piece of it where I had not Sowed any
Grass Seed, it Ploughed very tough and the Cattle mired some, but we kept them
upon the Grass as well as we could; after all we left many Baulks: About a
Month after I set some Men to Hoe up the Baulks, and was agreeably surprised to
find how easy it Hoed up. I find the Meadow rotted and mellowed more in one
Month in the Fall than it had done in the whole Summer: The same I found by the
Ditch Banks. If I had omitted my Ploughing till a Month later, it had been done
with much more ease to Man and Beast.

In July I sowed a little piece of Turnips, they came up, but never grew till
the Ground began to rot in the Fall of the Year, then grew well in the short
time they had left: I expected they would have been Rank, but they were good
and sweet.

Some are deterred from such an undertaking as that of Dreining their Land, by
reason of the great Charge: They terrify themselves without Reason. When I was
about to cut my main Drein, some thought it impossible, but at best it would
cost an Hundred Pounds: It was a bad place of Rocks; some I dug up, some we
broke up with Steel Wedges, and some we blew up with Powder: But after all it
did not cost more than Twenty Pounds.

As to the great Charge of Ditching, they do not consider that the outside
Ditches serve for Fence, as well as to cut off the Springs and drein the
Meadow, and it is as cheap Fence as any we can make; so that there is none but
the middle or intermediate Ditches, that are properly to be considered as a
Charge in Dreining.

Some may think this long Hystory of two pieces of Meadow, this tedious Detail
of so many minute Particulars to be needless, trifling and impertinent.

I have been particular in describing the main or outlet Drein of each Meadow,
that it may be seen that the difficulty of Rocks is not insuperable, nor the
charge of a long Drein intolerable.

I mentioned the cheap movable Dam, which may be made in a few Hours, that if
they should be encumbered with Water to hinder their work, there is a Remedy at
hand.

I informed you of the growth of one of the Meadows, that it was Moss and Pond
Lillies, which will soon die when the Water is gone: The Moss creates the most
trouble, but will burn when it is a dry Season.

I gave an account of the depth of the Soil, because I was when I began
uncertain whether by Ditches three Foot wide and two and half deep (such as
mine are) would be sufficient to fix the shaking Meadow, and render the deep
Mire firm and dry enough for Grass and Tillage. I think there is reason to
believe that the shaking Meadows have been formerly Bever Ponds.

I described the extent and bigness of each Meadow, because I was uncertain
whether the Ditches would draught well when they were very long.

Some of mine are an hundred and fifty Rods long, and must be yet much longer;
yet as far as we have gone they draw well. In order to have them draw well and
run free, it is absolutely needful, and a main point, to have your outlet
Drein deep, so that the water run briskly.

If the Ditches draw well there is another Advantage; in the Spring when there
is much Water, by stopping one Ditch you may shift the Water into another to
cleanse it, and so to a third: Hereby you will save the charge of the Yearly
Scouring of them with the Shovel, which is a good saving: I find by Experience
I have that Advantage.

I have insisted the longer upon this Article, it being an affair of
Importance: If it should answer our Expectation, it will put us into the
Improvement of Land of which as yet we have had no Benefit; nay, it has been
rather hurtful. It opens to us a new Scene, and Time may possibly discover it
to be the easiest of Tillage, the richest and best Land,

By the working of my own Mind I judge of others; however if I have been
mistaken, and that which is uncertain to me, is clear and easy to others, and
so have been longer upon this Particular than is needful or useful, I beg
pardon of the Reader.

When I engaged in this Affair, it was with some distrust and uncertainty: I am
sure last Year I should have been glad of such an Hystory of Facts (as
imperfect as it is) it would have afforded me Light, Courage and Instruction.

As to what remains farther to be done, I should be glad to meet with an
experienced Person to give me Directions. Our Reasonings and Speculations
without Experience are delusory and uncertain. It used to be the Saying of an
old Man, That an Ounce of Experience is better than a Pound of Science.

In a Country where such like Dreining is become a common Practice, such an
account as I have given would be needless.

I find by Experience, that such dreined Land must have one Summer to ferment
and rot, so as to become proper Soil, before it will be fit for Grain and every
sort of Grass. If I had sowed red Clover instead of the other sorts of Grass, I
had saved five Pound in Seed. Clover out-did my Expectation, and the other
sorts fell short of it: If others save where I lost, and mend wherein I was
mistaken, it answers my design in Writing.

By a little Experience we have had of these dreined Lands, we find they will
produce Indian Corn, sixty or seventy Bushels to the Acre, and Flax. If Life
and Health be continued, I design to try Liquorice Roots, Barley, Cape-Breton
Wheat, Cotton, Indigo Seed, and Wood for dying, which I have sent for, as also
water Melon Seed, which came originally from Arch Angel in Russia, which is
said produces Melons which grow to a great Size. But what I have principally in
view is Hemp. New England does not, I suppose, Expend less than several Hundred
Thousand Pounds worth of Foreign Hemp Yearly. If we can raise more than to
supply our own Occasions, we may send it Home. I remember when I was Young, a
Gentleman came from England, sent over by the King, to invite the Country into
that Trade; he offered in the King's Name to find Seed to begin with, and
Four-pence Sterling per Pound, let us Raise what we would (which is Three and
Four-pence Old Tenor,) and if I remember right, Forty Shillings Bounty on every
Ton.

England is possessed of the Woolen Trade, and Ireland of the Linen Trade; so
that this Hemp Trade lies open to us, which may in time become our Staple for
Returns Home; and so bring the Balance of Trade to be in our Favor, which has
always as yet been against us.

A Staple Commodity is of great Importance to a Country: Such is the Woolen
Manufacture to Great Britain, the Linen Trade to Ireland, Tobacco to Virginia,
Rice to Carolina, and Sugars to our West India Islands. The Herring Trade is of
such Importance to the Dutch, that the Emperor Charles the Fifth coming into
the Low Country's with the Queen of Hungaria, made a Journey to Bier Ulict, on
purpose to see the Tomb of William Buckelsz, who first found out the method of
Curing and Barrelling of Herring Fish. That great Prince and States Man, in
paying such Regard to the Memory of that useful Man, thereby testified the
Value he set upon that beneficial and extensive Trade, which is said to be
worth Two Millions in a Year to the Dutch.

It is not a mere Conjecture that the dreined Lands will produce Hemp. I am
informed by my worthy Friend Benjamin Franklin Esquire of Philadelphia, that they
Raise Hemp upon their dreined Lands.

Hemp requires such very strong Land to produce it, that it would consume all
our Dung to Raise it in any great Quantities; so that we should not be able to
raise Bread Corn: Therefore how Inviting fo ever the Trade is, and how great so
ever the Encouragements have been, both from Home and by our own Governments,
we have not as yet engaged in that Affair: We have now a promising Prospect of
Success in these dreined Lands; what may be the Issue, Time and Experience must
determine.

The Books of Husbandry say, That a Thousand Weight to the Acre is an ordinary
Crop of Hemp.

If a Man had a small Meadow of Dreined Land, that he could lay under Water and
draw it off at his pleasure to Water his Hemp, it would, I fancy, be of great
Value. I have heard that a Man in the Jersies, has such a Meadow of half an
Acre, which yields him as much Hemp Yearly, as fetches him Fifty Pounds York
Money; but this seems incredible.

Some think that it is good to lay their low Lands under Water in the Winter to
enrich them, and practice accordingly: But this will kill your English Grass
after a few Years: For English Grass will not subsist without a Winter. In the
Southern Colonies the less Winter the less Grass. In Virginia, North and South
Carolina, they have no English Grass at all. Where there is no English Grass,
it is difficult to make Cattle truly fat; so that Winter brings its good as
well as its evil Things.

3. The third sort of Land I would speak of is our old Land which we have worn
out. This is a difficult Article without Dung, which cannot be had for Love nor
Money: Where that is wanting, it may be supplied with other Manure. Clay will
mend Sandy Land, especially if the Clay be burnt; and Sand will mend Clay
Ground: The Clay will fix the too loose contexture of the Sand, and Sand will
open the parts of Clay which is too close.

I found at my Farm at Guilford, a sort of Shell Sand, tried it and found it
equal to good Dung: Some that I ordered to be carried up on the Tilled Land,
has produced five Crops, and is not yet spent; how long it will last we do not
know: They begin to carry it up into the Town.

I have carted this Fall upon my Land at home some loads of Creek Mud, that had
been laid up a rotting two Years: I also carted home one load from the dreined
Pond; it looks like Dung: Also one load of Clay, one load of Sand, and a load
of Loam: What all or any of these will do, Experience must inform.

Another way to help Worn-out Land is to sow it with Clover Seed; but if the
Land be too poor it will not grow: Therefore if we can raise our Indian Corn
upon our Dreined Land, then we may spare a sprinkling of Dung for our old poor
Land: Then sow it with ten Pound of Clover Seed, which is five Quarts to the
Acre; it might cause it to set very thick. Ten Pounds is not too much. He that
raises Clover Hay, need not be afraid of the expense of Seed; for an Acre of
Clover will yield Two Bushels of clean Seed: The second Crop of Clover is the
best for Seed: So that in getting Seed, you have no need to spoil your best
Crop of Hay; as we know what Threshing will do, it spoils the Hay in a great
measure.

If you depend upon the second Crop of red Clover for your Seed, the Land must
be very rich, and you must Mow your first Crop early. There is so much profit
in Clover Grass, that it is strange it is so much neglected. As Seed sells now,
that is Twelve Shillings a Quart, an Acre of good Clover will make Thirty Five
Pounds, Old Tenor. There is no charge about it but only the Price of the Seed,:
Mowing and Cleansing the Seed, which is done with a great deal of ease, in a
way that deserves to be made Public.

If Seeding the Land with Clover will not make poor Land rich, yet it would
prevent our better Land from being worn out; and by ploughing in a good Coat of
white Clover, the Land would be prepared for a Crop of Wheat.

Seeding the Land when we lay it down is of so much importance for present
Profit and future Advantage, that it is a settled Opinion at the Isle of Wight,
That if they should fail but one Year to Seed their Land for Grass, it would be
to their damage more than Twenty Thousand Pounds Sterling.

Another way of mending poor Land, is, by Feeding it close a few Years with
Sheep, to destroy the Briars, Weeds and mangy Grass: This has succeeded to
bring in the English Grass and make a strong Sword.

It will be best to take out the Sheep at the latter end of August, that so
what English Grass there is, may make coat for the Ground before Winter, and
then shut it up that it may not be Fed: By the end of August the wild Trash has
done growing.

In England, to recover their poor Land, they direct to sow their Land with
Turnips, and at Winter put their Sheep upon it; and they will live a while upon
the Tops and then scoop out the Turnips it self; by that time the Land with the
Sheep Dung will be rich enough for Barley in the Spring: But our poor Land is
so poor that it will not bear Turnips bigger than Buttons. This method looks
likely, if tried, to make rich Land richer.

Some propose to sow Oats and when grown up Plough them in.

4. I designed to write something concerning our poor, rough, stony, uneven Land
in the Woods, which is now of little Service to us: I would propose a way how
it might be Improved so as to become useful and profitable Land, which I
proposed to submit to the Readers better Judgment: But finding that I have
already gone a greater Length than I at first designed, it must be omitted.

A better Breed of Sheep is what we want. The English Breed of Cots-wold Sheep
cannot be obtained, or at least without great difficulty: For Wool and live
Sheep are contra-band Goods, which all Strangers are prohibited from carrying
out, on pain of having their right Hand cut off.

I have one Ram which is of a good Breed, in part, has had no better Keeping
than our ordinary Sheep (I was of the mind to see what he would do with mean
Keeping) notwithstanding his poor Keeping two Years, he is very large and long,
has fine Wool, and last Shearing time afforded a Fleece of six Pounds.

As the mixture of this Breed with our ordinary Sheep successively will run the
Breed quite out, so putting the same Breed together, as they approach nearer to
the Original, the true Breed may be recovered.

A Barrel of Cider of sweet Apples when made into Melasses, will be worth Three
Pounds, abating Five Shillings for the Making, when Cider made of common
Apples, a Barrel will be worth but Twenty Shillings, exclusive of the Barrel.

I have been told that half a Peck of the little round white Beans mixed with a
Bushel of Rye, will make Bread something like Wheat; I have never tried it, but
design to see what it will do.

I have been told that Summer Wheat sowed with Barley is not apt to Blast, and
do well together; also Summer Rye and Oats: As also Oats and Peace produce a
good Crop when sowed together; the Oats bearing up the Pea Vines prevent their
falling to the Ground.

I find by Experience the best time to Fatten Swine, is to begin at the first
of August, if you have old Corn: Hogs will fat slowly in very cold Weather:
they will eat much and fatten but little: If you make a very warm House, they
heat in Bed and catch cold when they come out into the cold Air.

To save Corn, steep it in Water or Swill till the Corn grow very soft; this
opens the parts: Give them the Corn to eat and the Water to drink in which the
Corn has been Steeped: The hard dry Corn, a great deal of it, passes through
them undigested; this is the hardest part of the Corn and that which
principally makes the Flower. There is a Tradition, that if you feed one Hog
with Corn, the Dung of the first Hog will fat another Hog, and his Dung a
third. Although I believe the Story to be Fabulous, yet it serves to show that the
sense of Mankind, is, that in the manner we feed Swine, there is a great deal
of Loss.

I took the hint of steeping Corn, from the advantage I once found by some Corn
I bought that had been Ship-wreck'd, had lain in the Water till it was grown
soft.

Such is the difference in Corn and in Swine, that it is impossible to fix it
absolutely and know certainly how much there is saved by this method. It is
better than Grinding, besides what we save in the Toll and the time and charge
of the Carriage: For it is found by Experience, that even Bran when steeped in
Water a long time, is much the better.

I asked an honest judicious Neighbor of mine, who had leisure to try this
Method of steeping Corn longer and with more exactness than I had done, How
much he thought was saved by it? He said, At least one Bushel in seven; he
believed more: But we will suppose it save but a Tenth part, then see how much
it will save in the whole Colony? Suppose there are in this Colony, about Sixty
Towns, great and small, new and old: We will suppose Two Hundred Families in
each Town, one with another, and each Family to consume or spend as much Pork
as will require one with another Twenty Bushels of Corn to make the Pork for
each Family. Sixty Towns of Two Hundred Families each, makes Twelve Thousand
Families, and Twenty Bushels of Corn to each Family makes Two Hundred Forty
Thousand Bushels of Corn: The Tenth part of this is Twenty Four Thousand
Bushels. If there be not so many Towns and Families as is supposed, there is
much Pork fatted and sent away in Barrels, and many Herds of fat Swine drove
away that are not consumed in the Government, enough to make it up: And surely
the saving Twenty Four Thousand Bushels of Corn Yearly, is worthy of our Care
and Consideration.

Since the foregoing was Written, a Person of good Credit informed me, That
there being in his Neighborhood a dealer in Horses, who was famous for skill
in making Horses fat in a short Time; he desired the Jockey to tell him how he
did it: The secret was to mix Indian Corn and Oats together and soak it in
Water till it was soft; that in cold weather he steeped it in a Cellar that it
might be kept from freezing.

My Informer told me, he had made trial of it and found it did well, giving it
to his Horse in the same proportion as he was wont to do of dry Provender.

An hand full of dry Ashes put upon each hill of Indian Corn, in some Land, has
been found to do good equal to Dunging in the hole: Some say there ought to be
half a pint of Ashes to each Hill, and it should be put on a little after the
Corn is come up.

I was told by an experienced Farmer, that if you girdle Trees, or cut Brush in
the Months of May, June and July, in the Old of the Moon, that day the Sign
removes out of the Foot into the Head, especially if the Day be Cloudy, it will
kill almost all before it: They will bleed, he said, more freely in a cloudy
Day; for the hot Sun dries up the Sap. I have never tried it. If this could be
certainly found out, it would Expedite the clearing Land and save a great deal
of Labor: But Experience is Authority, to whom we are to submit, I am not
forward to believe without Trial.

Swamps that are full of Wood and Brush and covered with Moss, if they are deep
Soil and can be well Dreined, Cleared and Ditched, will make good Land for Corn
and Grass.

Elder Bushes are stubborn and hard to Subdue, yet I know by Experience that
Mowing them five times in a Year will kill them.

It might serve to increase useful Knowledge, if something of this Nature were
Published every Year, giving a faithful account of the Success of all the
Experiments and Trials that may be made on various sorts of Land, and of diverse
sorts of Grains, Roots, Grass and Fruits, not only such as we have in use, as
also what we have not as yet introduced among us.

There are few Men of Business, Ingenuity and Observation, but what have found
out things Valuable and Useful, but for want of some proper Method to
communicate them, they die with the Discoverers and are lost to mankind.

Therefore who ever has made any Observations or Discoveries, although it be but a
Hint, and looks like a small Matter, yet if pursued and improved, may be of
public Service. If they see cause to favor me with such Discoveries and
Experiments as they have or shall make, I shall Receive it with Thankfulness,
and Publish it either with or without their Names to it, as they shall see fit:
For if this Essay shoud be thot Useful, if GOD give Life and Health I purpose
next Year to furnish you with another Winters Evening Entertainment: For I
would be glad to do Good as far as lies in my power.

A Discovery of the Nature and Property of Things and Applying them to useful
Purposes, is true Philosophy: A great deal of what has passed in the World for
Learning, is Philosophy falsely so called.

A certain Person among the Greeks being a Candidate for some Office in the
State, it was Objected against him, That he was no Scholar. True, says he,
according to your Notion of Learning I am not; but I know how to make a poor
City rich, and a small City great.

The World was a long time amused with the Learning of Aristotle, and the
Arabians spun out of their own Brains and not founded in Truth: Yet among all
this Trumpery, there was Two pieces of useful Knowledge, for which we are
indebted to them; One was the knowledge of the Nine Figures, so useful in
Arithmetic; the other was the first Rudiments of Algebra, now grown up to a
great height. Experimental Philosophy being founded in nature and truth is
obtained no way but by time and diligence: The Knowledge of things Useful are
gained by little and little.

We are not to admire or despise things merely because they are new; but value
things or disregard them just so far as they are found (by Experience that
faithful Instructor) to be useful or unprofitable. Wisdom is profitable to
direct.

Wisdom is the principal Thing, therefore get Wisdom; especially that Wisdom
that is from Above: It is first pure, then peaceable, gentle, easy to be
entreated, full of mercy and good fruits; without partiality and without
hypocrisy.

APPENDIX.
THere are some pieces of Pasture Land wholly destitute of Water, which renders
them less Useful and Valuable. It is known that frequently Springs are nearer
the Surface on Hills, than in Plains: Therefore to Remedy this Inconvenience,
dig a Well on the brow of an Hill: When you come to Water, Stone it over, or
Stone it up; then dig a Trench in the side of the Hill to reach the bottom of
the Well: Stone up your Trench and cover it over with Earth; or a Trough may
answer the End when buried in the Ground. Where the Water issues out, there dig
a Watering-place.

Since the foregoing Pages were written, I have made trial of Ditching in
Swamp Land when the Ground was frozen Two Inches deep: It is performed with a
broad Ax having a long Helve, with which we cut the Ground, Roots of Brakes and
Bushes, with speed and success.

You must have an Iron Hook with two or three Teeth set in a Handle, to draw
out the Sodds when they are cut.

The Labourer works clean and dry: You cannot conveniently make the Ditch quite
half the proper depth; the rest must be left till Summer to be finished. If we
could do half our Ditching in the Winter it would be a good saving.

Under the Article of ways to mend old wornout Land, by sowing it with red
Clover, some may wonder to find it there said, that five quarts was a proper
proportion of Seed, when it has been found by Experience that Two Quarts to
the Acre will produce a good Burden: It is true; but you will find when the
Crop is carried off, that the Roots will be at a great Distance from each
other; nor will these void Spaces fill up till the Clover is run out its
Period: Whereas it would quit cost in Feed and after Crops, to Seed so much
that the Grass may set thick. It was not proposed to use so much Seed to the
Acre, till in the common Method we have a plenty of Seed.

What is here written is but a Foundation laid for a future and more agreeable
Superstructure. Having prepared a sort of Land that has been but little in Use
among us, I propose to have a new sort of Improvement.

N. B. What has been inserted in this Essay only upon Hearsay, is not offered
as certainly to be depended upon; but only as probable and worthy to be tried.

I have been at a loss whether it would not have been better to defer this
Publication until another Year, that I might present the Readers with something
more Curious and Entertaining; but considering that this would make the Book
bigger and more costly; and if it should not be Acceptable, it would render the
disappointment the greater: The smaller the Book the less the charge in the
Purchase and Trouble in Reading, therefore offer it as it is.

FINIS.

