THE LIFE OF Mrs. Row.

THE LIFE OF Mrs. Elizabeth Row.

With some Account of Mr. Walter Singer, her Father, and Mr. Thomas Row, her
Consort.

LONDON, Printed: BOSTON, N. E. Reprinted and Sold by ROGERS and FOUL in
Queen Street. 1747.

THE LIFE OF Mrs. ELIZABETH ROW.
AMONG other illustrations of that vanity to which all things under the sun are
made subject, Solomon mentions this as one, That the wise man dies as the
fool, and that ther^ is no remembrance of the wise more than of the fool for
ever; seeing that which now is, in the days to come shall all be forgotten: And
in another place, The living know that they shall die; but the dead know not
any thing, neither have they any more a reward, (as to this world) for the
memory of them is forgott^n. I believe it will be allowed, that this is the
usual way in which the present generation of men treat those that are past. But
the question is, How ^ar it is right?

The s^uggish, the indolent part of mankind, who^e life it self differs little
from death, being but one degree above the animal, are justly condemned to
obli^ion: They come in with vanity, and depart in darkness, and their names are
covered with darkness. As to the viti^us, the kindest thing we can do, is never
to speak or think of them more: since, if they are remembered, it must be to
their disadvantage, with contempt and infamy affixed to their characters. Nor
is it of much importance to (...) public whether the worldly-wise are delivered
(...), or sunk in silence; unl^ss for a warn^^g to others not to imitate their
egregious folly, in spending the whole of a short life in things which cannot
pro^^t them in the next and longest stage of their existence. But, surely, the
truly-wise, the virtu^^^, persons equally eminent for great and good qualities,
for their extraordinary accomplishments, and the use they made of them, to the
honor of the supreme Being, and the benefit of mankind, these ought not to be
swept away into forgetfulness with the common rubbi^h of the species. While
their reward is with God in the regions of immortality, the world is concerned,
not more out of gratitude to those that have been such benefactors to it, than
for its own sake, to perpetuate their memory, if possible, to all posterity,
for the service of the example, which has a strangely animating and attractive
force, where it meets with any ^^tent seeds of goodness and ingenuity in the
tempers of men. The care with which they shunned the applause they merited, is
an addition^l reas^n why they should be drawn out of their loved obscurity,
after they have (...) our world; especially* as there is no danger now of
offending their modesty, or awakening their pride; who, if they know ought of
what is done here below, are too well satisfied with the honor that comes
from God to need the concurring suffrage of such diminutive beings as we are to
complete their happiness. All that they can be supposed to rejoice in is, that
their usefulness, not that their fo^^e, survives them.

But is there no ill consequence to be apprehended as to the living, lest the
prospect of the respect and veneration that will be paid to their memory should
corrupt their virtue, undermine their humility it self, and* by having too much
influence in the performance of actions, which ought to be entirely derived
from higher motives, lessen the value of them. What ever weight there be in
this objection, it cannot countervail the Reasons before given for consecrating
deceas^d merit; but it is really of little or no force. A common goodness cannot
expect to b^ taken notice of in this public manner, and (...) eminent one will
not. The persons most deserving this distinction, will be the least apt to
think so of themselves, and most above the fond desire of it, being secured by
the superior pleasure they immediately perceive in the steady practice of
virtue and piety, and the glorious hopes from hence arising of future
everlasting rewards. The following life will furnish an example that very much
confirms this reasoning.

Mrs. ELIZABETH ROW, not more admired for her fine writings by the ingenious
that did not know her, than esteemed and loved by all her acquaintance, for the
many amiable qualities of her heart* was born at Ilchester in Somers^tshire,
Sept. 11. 1674. being the eldest of three daughters of Mr. Walter Singer, a
gentleman of a good family, and Mrs. Elizabeth Portnell, both of them persons
of very great worth and piety. Mr. Singer was not a native of the ^own
now-mentioned, nor an inhabitant, before his imprisonment there for his
nonconformity in the reign of King Charles II* Mrs. Portnell thinking herself
obliged to visit those that suffered for the sake of a good conscience, as a
testimony of her regard, not to them only, but also to our (...) Lord,
agreeably to the representat^^n he himself makes of such kind and christian
o^fices: It was from hence that acquaintance first commenced between these two
virtuous and well-pair'd minds, which afterward proceeded to a union that
death alone could dissolve. And this it did too soon for the mournful survivor,
if the tenderest affection might be judge, and for the world, which can badly
bear to lose any, and much more (...) eminent examples of virtue and religion
in the several scenes and relations of life. 'Till her death Mr. Singer resided
at Ilchester, but not long after removed into the neighborhood of From in the
same county, where he became so well known and distinguished for his good
sense, primitive integrity, simplicity of manners, uncommon prudence, activity
and faithfulness in discharging the duties of his station, inflexible adherence
to his principles, and at the same time truly catholic spirit, as to be held in
high esteem, even by persons of superior rank* My Lord Weymouth, who was
reckoned a very good judge of men, not only writing to him, but honoring him
with his visits; as (...) the devout Bishop Kenn very frequently, some^^mes
once a week; such a charm is there in un^ffected goodness, and so naturally do
kindred (...), warmed and actuated by the same heavenly (...), and pursuing the
same glorious end, run and mingle together with the greatest pleasure, after
they are once acquainted, notwithstanding any accidental diversity of
sentiments in some smaller things. I mention this to the honor of that
venerable Bishop as well as of Mr. Singer. But the public will be best pleased
with the character of this good man, as drawn by his daughter, after her
beautiful and easy manner, in one of her familiar letters to a friend. I have
ease and plenty to the extent of my wishes, and can form desires of nothing but
what my father's indulgence would procure: and I ask nothing of Heaven but the
good old man's life. The perfect sanctity of his life, and the benevolence of
his temper, make him a refuge to all in distress, to the widow and fatherless:
The people load him with blessings and prayers when ever he goes abroad* which
he never does but to reconcile his neighbors, or to right the injured and
oppressed; the rest of his hours are entirely devoted to his private devotions,
and to books, which are his perpetual entertainment.

He was religiously inclined, as he said himself, when about ten years old, and
never from that time neglected prayer; and as far as he knew his own heart, had
sincerely endeavored to keep a good conscience; and he died as he had lived
April 18. 1719. full of that blessed calm and peace of mind and humble
confidence in the mercy of God, through a Redeemer (for there was his trust)
which a long course of active virtue, and constant lively devotion, joined with
the most generous and exalted ideas of the divine goodness, free from all
mixtures of a gloomy, sullen superstition, may be expected to produce: For he
was not of those who confine that infinite benignity which loves to diffuse
itself abroad, unrestrained in its salutary influences by every thing else but
the wilful opposition of reasonable and free beings, to the methods used for
their recovery and happiness. And this it was that helped, no less than a happy
natural temper, to make him so cheerful a christian. A worthy and intimate
friend of his, and witness to the heroic and christian manner in which he
finished life, observes, that he settled his affairs, and took leave of the
world with the same freedom and composure, as if he had been setting out on a
journey; was peculiarly careful that the widows and orphans, with whose
concerns he was entrusted, might not be injured after he was gone; conversed,
though under great bodily disorders, with those that came to see him, who were
not a few, in the easiest, freest manner; spent his time in praising and
blessing God, and praying to him, and giving good counsel to those about him;
showed an uncommon sweetness and patience in his behavior; and was exceeding
thankful to those who did the least thing for him, though they owed him a great
deal more. In a memorandum, relating to her father's last sickness and death*
Mrs. Row herself has these words, My fath^^ often felt his pulse, and
complained that 'twas still ^^gular, and smiled at every symptom of approaching
death: He would be often crying out, Come, Lord Jesus, (...) quickly; Come, ye
holy angels, that rejoice at the ^^nversion of a sinner, come and conduct my
soul to the (...), ye propiti^us spirits; and then would add, But (...) time*
Lord, not mine, is best. When shall I awak^, and be satisfied with thy
likeness? What is death? I never made the experiment, and no body about me
knows when persons are dying. I have heard of jaws falling, and eye-strings
cracking, but where are the t^kens? And yet nature fa^ls, and I am dying. I
have seen people die without half so much ado, just lean back, and, having
fetched a calm sigh, expire. If I may use the expression, how lovely and
tempting is such a death! What an instance of the power of religion, and the
true dignity of human nature, when raised and supported by the grace of God,
and the hope o^ immortality! The sight was so (...), that a person listed among
the freethinkers of the age, as they are pleased to comp^iment themselves,
being present, was exceedingly struck with it, and ready to say, Almost thou
per^wadest me to be a chris^ian; as every one who rightly considers such
examples, and how naturally they arise out of the principles of the gospel,
firmly believed, and steadily practiced upon, must be entirely persuaded by
them; persuaded to embrace i^* not merely as a pleasing imagination, but a most
sacred truth, which all that allow it to be the former, have reason to wish it
may prove; and which no man that wishes it to be true, so far (...) to examine
the evidences of it with candor and sincerity, can pronounce to be false. And
thus the supposed confession of the infidel, on a like occasion, Friendship in
Death, Letter 1.
That, though he thought religion a delusion, yet it was the most agreeabl^
delusion in the world; and the men who flattered themselves with those gay
visions, had much the advantage of those that saw nothing before them but a
gloomy uncertainty, or the dreadful hope of annihilation: This confession, I
say, if he be true to himself, must end in his being a thorough convert to
Christianity.

I have been the larger in this account of Mr. Singer, not only in justice to
so deserving a character, but because of the singular veneration which the
person who is the chief subject of these papers, had for it; which was such
that she frequently pleads her relation to it, and, as it were* glories in it,
in her private devotions. A single instance may serve for a specimen. Vid.
Devout Exercises of the Heart, published by Dr. Watts, page 129.
I humbly hope I have a rightful claim. Thou art my God, and the God of my
religious ancestors, the God of my mother, the God of my pious father: Dying
and breathing out his soul, he gave me to thy care; he put me into thy gracious
arms, and delivered me up to thy protection: He told me thou would never
leave nor forsake me* he triumphed in thy long-experienc'd faithfulness and
truth, and gave his testimony for thee with his latest breath.

Of Mrs. Rowe's two sisters, one died in childhood* the other survived to her
twentieth year, a lovely concurrent in the race of virtue and glory. She had
the same extreme passion for books, chiefly those of medicine, in which art she
arrived to a considerable insight; and if it could not be said of them in the
letter, as of the virtuous woman in the Proverbs, that their candle went not
out by night, yet it frequently burnt till after the middle of it; so great was
their thirst of knowledge, and the pleasure they had in gratifying it* What
from a laudable emulation, from the ties of blood and friendship, and the
advantage of perpetually conversing together, the improvements which two such
minds received from each other, could not be little; and, had heaven seen fit
to spare both, would have been still growing. But the sovereign Disposer of
human affairs, who has so ordered it, doubtless in infinite wisdom, that few
of our blessings in the present life should be enjoyed without some abatement,
was pleased to determine otherwise; yet we have no reason to repine, but with
grateful joy should own that goodness which, while it summoned one of these
seraphick spirits to the skies, continued the other for so many years after, as
a ministering angel here below.

Those who were acquainted with this extraordinary person in her childish
years, could not but have observed a great many things not common in that age
of life, which promised the bright day that afterward ensued; and it must have
been with peculiar satisfaction that Mr. Singer, in whom parental affection,
conspired with a penetrating* discernment to heighten the pleasure, beheld the
early dawnings of a great and good mind in hi^ charming daughter.

When she received the first serious impressions of religion, does not appear;
not unlikely it might be as soon as she was capable of it, at once ^^rceiving
her obligations to the author of her being; and, in the same measure, as her
opening reason discovered these to her, feeling the force of them. A lady of
character for good sense and piety, who began her life with her, thinks so; and
in one of her pious addresses she herself thus speaks to God: ^
My infant ^ands were (...) to thee, and I (...) to know and acknowledge the
God of my fathers. To this, with a prudent and pious education, the felicity of
her natural disposition, under the heavenly influence, conspired; for though
^^e had an unusual sprightliness in her temper* which held out to the last, yet
she was at the ^^me t^me blessed with a turn of mind to noble and ^levated
subjects, that gave her a high relish for the pleasures of devotion. It would
be exceeding unjust to draw a contrary conclusion from the severity of some
expressions concerning her self, that (...) in her (...); for* besides that,
this (...) of language was dictated by her profound humility, it might partly
be owing to a a notion of (...) by which is meant religion's becoming a
reigning principle in the mind* not so well grounded as it is common, as if it
always consisted in a (...), and sort of instantaneous revolution in the soul,
(...) with an over-turning of what^ver (...) ^^^timents pe^^ons had of them^^^,
and (...) condition before; a notion which, for ought I know, might take its
rise from not distinguishing between the change which the first converts to
christianity underwent, or which passes on those who having led a vi^ious life,
enter at length into quite a new way of thinking and acting, which has
something of the violence of a storm in it; and that sense of piety which often
silently steals upon tender and uncorrupted minds, like the light of the
morning, hardly perceivable when it breaks, or in its gradual increase, and yet
shining more and more unto the perfect day; and which, I doubt, is not very
properly expressed by the word conversion. Nor, while the duties of religion
are regularly performed, and every thing plainly criminal in the conduct of
life is avoided, and this from a principle of conscience, and an inward
approbation of what is good; will some little sallies, supposing such
occasioned by the vivacity of youth and those passions, which though weaker in
elder persons, they find it no easy matter, with all their reason to govern,
prove any more than the imperfection of the good principle, which,
notwithstanding this, may by many degrees have the superiority in the soul.

There Is a story, which, because it has been con^^dently reported by some, and
credited by a great many others, I shall mention for the sake of the reflection
it will afford me, and the opportunity of assuring the world, after enquiring
of persons bent able to inform me, that it is entirely without foundation;
though, were it ever so true, it could not be made an argument against Mrs.
Rowe's early piety, as it has been thought by some to be. The story is this:
Mrs. Row, then Miss Singer, being dangerously ill, and under visible distress
at the apprehension of her approaching change, her sister, who observed it,
asked her tenderly, whether she was not willing to die? and Mrs. Row frankly
confessing she was not, the other said she would retire then* and pray to God
that she might be taken in her room* being as willing to leave the world as the
other could be to continue in it, which accordingly she did; and the
consequence was, that Mrs. Row recovered, and her sister sickned and died.
Now, supposing the truth of the story, what is there so very wonderful in a
young person's being desirous to live longer, if it pleases God, when with the
natural love of life every thing concurs that can render life agreeable, easy
circumstances, a good constitution, cheerfulness of temper, the love and esteem
of friends, and a (...) reputation? Or is a modest diffidence of on^^ self such
a crime, as to prove our not being prepared for death, because we doubt whether
w^ are or no? When will persons learn to judge in a more rational way, and by
other marks than (...) uncertain appearances of such mechanical and variable
things as the passions, of their own moral state and character, and that of
others.

There is so great a similitude between p^inting and poetry, as being each of
them a pleasing and ^udicious imitation of nature, and depending upon the
beauty and strength of the imagination, that it is no way surprising one who
possessed this faculty in so high a degree of perfection, did very early
discover an inclination to these two sister arts* which have often the same
followers, perhaps always the same admirers, it having been, I believe, seldom
known that those who have excelled in one of ^hese arts, have not at least had
a taste for the charms of the other, and been qualified to judge of its
beauties, whether they have made any attempts in it or no.

She loved the pencil when she had hardly strength and steadiness of hand
sufficient to guide it; and in her infancy (one may almost venture to say so)
would squeeze out the juices of herbs to serve her instead of colors. Mr.
Singer perceiving her fondness for this art, was at the expense of a master to
instruct her in it; and it never ceased to be her amusement at times, and a
very innocent one it was, till her death. Perhaps (says an ingenious
gentleman, who knew her perfectly well) she liked it the better for the
opportunities it yielded her of pleasuring her friends with presents of the
best of her drawings, and therein gratifying her beneficent disposition; for
she kept very few of them her self, and these only such as she judged unworthy
the acceptance of any one else.

She was also, what every one acquainted with her writings will suppose of such
a well-tuned soul, very much delighted with music; chiefly of the grave and
solemn kind, as best suited to the ^randeur of her sentiments, and the
sublimity of ^er devotion.

But her strongest b^nt was to poetry and writing* Poetry indeed was her
favorite employment, in youth, her most distinguishing excellence. So
prevalent was her genius this way, that her very prose has all the charms of
verse without the f^tters, the same fire and elevation, the same bright images,
bold figures* rich and ^^owing dictio^* She could hardly write a familiar
letter but it bo^e the stamp of the poet. One of her acquaintance remembers to
have heard her say, she began to write verses at twelve years old, which was
almost as soon as she could write at all. In the year 1696, the 2^d of her age,
a collection of her poems on various (...) at the desire of two of her friends,
Vid. Preface to the genuine edition of (...) collection.
(...) we may suppose did not contain all that she had by her, since the
ingenious prefacer gives the reader to hope that the author might in a little
while be prevailed with to oblige the world with a second part, no way inferior
to the former.

The occasion of her poetical name, Philomela, which from this time she was
known by to the world, and whether she assumed it her self, or was complimented
with it by her friends, I have not been able to learn. The latter is most
probable, and that it was given her at the publication of her poems, before
which her modesty not consenting that her own name should appear, this was
substituted in the room of it, as bearing a very easy allusion to it, and
happily expressing the softness and harmony of her verses, not less soothing
and melodious than the strains of the nightingale, when from some leafy shade
she fills the woods with (...) melancholy plaints. Qualis populea moerens
Phil^m^^a sub umbra. VIRG. Sweet bird that shun'st the noise of folly
Most musical, most melancholy.
MILTON.


Though many of these poems are of the religious kind, and all of them
consistent with the strictest regard to the rules of virtue; yet some things in
them gave her no little uneasiness in advanced life. To a mind that had so
entirely subdued its passions, or devoted them to the honor of its maker, and
endued with the tenderest moral sense, what she could not absolutely approve,
appeared unpardonable; and, not satisfied, to have done nothing that injured
the sacred cause of virtue, she was displeased with her self for having writ
any thing that did not directly promote it. How were it to be wished, that none
of our celebrated poets had any thing worse to answer for ^han the harmless
gayeties of a youthful muse, for which too they had atoned by more serious and
instructive compositions; or, that after all the guilt they had contracted, by
corrupting the manners of the age with their loose productions, they were
conscious but of half the remorse the virtuous Philomela felt, for what no
^ngenuous reader will impute as a reproach to her memory.

What first introduced her into the notice of the noble family at Longl^^t, was
a little copy of verses of here is, with which they were so highly delighted as
(...) express a curiosity to see her; and (...) friendship that commenced from
that time, (...) ever after; not more to her honor, who was the favorite of
persons so much superior to her in the outward distinctions of life, than to
the praise of their judgment and taste who knew how to prize, and took a
pleasure to cherish such blooming worth. She was not then twenty. Her
paraphrase of the 38th Chapter of Job was writ at the request of Bishop Kenn,
who was entertained in that family and gained her a great deal of reputation.

She had no other tutor for the French and Italian languages, than the
honorable Mr. Thynne, son to the Lord Viscount Weymouth, who willingly took
that task upon himself, and had the pleasure to see his fair scholar improve so
fast under his lessons, that in a few months she was able to read Tasso's
Jerusalem with great ease.

Her shining merit, with the charms of her person and conversation, had
procured her a great many admirers. Among others, it is said, the famous Mr.
Prior would have been glad to share the pleasures and cares of life with her;
so that, allowing for the double license of the Poet and Lover in the manner of
expression, the concluding lines in his answer to the pastoral on Love and
Friendship, by Mrs. Singer, were not without foundation in truth. Vid. Priors's
Poems, page 32. Edit. in 12 mo*
She was the nameless lady to whom the following copy of verses in the same
author is inscribed. But Mr. Thomas Row was the person reserved by Heaven to
be the happy man; both to be made, and to make happy.

This gentleman was born at London, April 25* 1687* the eldest son of the Rev.
Mr. Ben^ni Row* who, with a very accurate judgment, and a co^^siderable stock
of useful learning, joined the talents of preaching, and a most lively and
engaging manner in conversation. By both his parents he was creditably
descended He was the grandson of Wiliam Row, Esquire a gentleman of worth and
considerable estate, and Alice (a lady of distinguished sense, beauty and
virtue) daughter of Thomas Scot, Esquire member of parliament for Ailesbury, in the
county of Bucks: And by the maternal side he was des^ended from the Rows of
Devon; some account of which ancient family is given by Dr. Welwood, in his
preface to the translation of Lucan, by N. Row, Esquire Folio edit. page 18.
; but, as he had too much personal worth to be under a necessity of borrowing
from such foreign aids, so he thought too justly to pride himself upon it,
being able to say with the Satirist, Et genus and proavos, and qua^ non fecimus
ipsi,
Vix ^a nostra voc^.
JUV. His superior genius, and insatiable He was the grandson of Wiliam Row,
Esquire a gentleman of worth and considerable estate, and Alice (a lady of
distinguished sense, beauty and virtue) daughter of Thomas Scot, Esquire member of
parliament for Ailesbury, in the county of Bucks: And by the maternal side he
was des^ended from the Rows of Devon; some account of which ancient family is
given by Dr. Welwood, in his preface to the translation of Lucan, by N. Row,
Esquire Folio edit. page 18.
thirst after knowledge, made themselves taken notice of at an age when the
generality of mankind have scarcely out-grown the merely sensitive life. He was
able to read as soon almost as he could speak; had such a pleasure in books, as
to take none at all in the diversions which children are usually so fond of;
and, when he was prevailed on by his companions, which was but seldom, to make
one in their little parties at play, his unreadiness and inattention plainly
showed it was not out of choice he engaged, but pure^y from his goodnature and
complaisance, to which he should offer too much violence, always to (...) their
(...).

He commenced (...) acquaintance with the Classics at Ep^^m, while his father
resided there; and by his swift advances in this part of learning, quickly
became the delight of his master, a man very able in his profession, and was
treated by him with a very particular indulgence, in spite of the natural
ruggedness and severity of his temper. When Mr. B. Row removed to London, he
placed his son under the care of Dr. Walker, the eminently learned master of
the Charter House school, justly famed for the great numbers of excellent
linguists that have received their education in that ancient nursery of poli^^
literature* He was one of those who, the ^octor could easily foresee, would do
him honor when they should appear abroad in the world, and, we may suppose,
did not please him the less on that account. His exercises never failed of
being distinguished even among those that had the approbation of the master,
who, when he had finished his pupil in the Latin, Greek, and Hebrew tongues
would fain have persuaded his father to send him to one of our English
universities. But how honorably soever Mr. Row might think of the learning of
those noble seats of the muses, not having the same advantageous notion of the
principles in too much credit there, he would by no means trust a son of his
hopes in such hands, but entered him first at a private academy in London, and,
some time before his death, that he might not want any advantages which the
most liberal education could give him, he had de^^^min'd his going to L^yd^n,
for the last hand of the great (...). And well (...) the fruit reward (...)
expense of the culture. For, after having ^tudied Jewish Antiquities under
(...), Civil Law under Vitri^rius, the Belles Lettres under Peri^^^ius, and
Experimental Philosophy under S^^guerdius, and established a reputation for
capacity, application, and an obliging deportment both among the professors and
students; he returned from that celebrated mart of learning with a vast
accession of treasure, in books he had purchased, and knowledge he had amassed,
and no l^ss in his morals, which he had preserved as incorrupt as he could have
done under the most vigilant eye and strictest hand, though le^^ without all
other restraints but those of his own virtue and prudence.

The love of liberty had been always one of Mr. Rowe's most darling passions.
'Twas a kind of ideal mistress, to whose charms no one ever had a soul more
sensible than his; the generous inclination beat strong in his breast, and was
not to be extinguished but with the vital flame. In these sentiments so natural
to him, he was not a little confirmed by his familiar acquaintance with the
history, and the noble authors of ancient Greece and Rome, whose very spirit
was transfused into him, and residing so long in a republic, where he had
examples continually before him, of the inestimable value of freedom, as the
parent of industry, the nurse of arts and sciences, and universal source of
social happiness; this made him, with so much anxiety for his native country,
not very long after his return thither in the year 1708, observe, that a set of
wretched principles, destructive of its liberties and welfare, were growing in
fashion under the countenance of some in power. To these he opposed himself
with a zeal which might have had more influence indeed in a higher sphere, but
could not have been more honest and open. Tyranny of all sorts he most
sincerely detested, but most of all ecclesiastical, in every shape; deeming the
slavery of the mind, as the most abject and ignominious, so, in its
consequences, more pernicious than any other. His Lives will be a glorious
monument of his love of liberty and public good; to which may be added his
Poems, now first published, and in both which this commendable ardor is very
visible. From the same cause proceeded his attachment to the illustrious house
of Hanov^^, in which he had the satisfaction to see the protestant succession
to the British throne take place, before he died, leaving the world more
willingly after having been witness to this happy event.

It was with Mr. Row, in respect of his learned avarice, as with those that
love money; his desires after knowledge enlarged with his acquisitions, instead
of abating. All his morning hours, and a large part of the afternoon, were
devoted to study, till the time of his being seized with the distemper of which
he died. His lib^^ry, in collecting which he was assisted by his great
knowledge of the best editions of books, consisted of a great number of the
most valuable authors; and as he was making continual additions to it, amounted
at his death to above five thousand volumes.

He was a perfect master of the Greek, Latin, and French languages, and, which
is seldom known to happen, had at once such a prodigious strength of memory and
inexhaustible fu^^ of wit* the effect of a lively imagination, as would singly
have afforded a stock of reputation for any man to trade upon, and much more
united. This, with an (...) fluency of words, the frankness and benevole^ce of
his temper, a readiness to communicate (...) his learned store, and a life and
spirit which nature must bestow, since it can be but poorly imitated, made his
company universally coveted and prized by those that knew him. 'Twas impossible
there should be a drowsy soul where Mr. Row was present; he animated the
conversation, every one was awake, and every one pleased. He had a penetration,
and quickness of thought, hardly to be imagined, so as upon just glancing over
an author, to see to the bottom of his sentiments. None of the politer kinds of
learning were neglected by him. He was a good judge in poetry, and had it in
his power to have been himself an eminent poet; for he had actually the most
essential parts belonging to that character, the vivid fire, the rich vein, the
copious diction; but, as poetry was not his predominant inclination, his genius
had not all the polishing which art and constant practice might have added to
nature. History was his favorite study, for which his talents of a vast
memory, before taken notice of, and an exquisite judgment, for one of his
years, peculiarly qualified him.

He had formed a design to compile the lives of all the illustrious persons in
antiquity, omitted by Plutarch, and for this purpose read the ancient
historians with great care. This design he in part executed. Eight lives were
published since his decease, by way of supplement to that admired Biographer;
in which, though so young a guide, he strikes out his way like one well
acquainted with the dark and intricate paths of antiquity. The style is
perfectly easy, yet concise and nervous, the reflections just, and such as
might be expected from a lover of truth and mankind; and the facts interesting
in themselves, or made so by the skill used in relating them. There Is a preface
by the reverend and learned Mr. Chandler, writ after the usual manner of that
agreeable and lively author, with great spirit and elegance, and worthy of the
excellent person for whose memory he expresses so high an esteem. He must be
insensible to true merit (says the ingenious prefacer) and to all just regards
to the public good, that can look over these valuable remains, without finding
in himself a due respect and esteem raised for the author, and his own heart
in^pir'd with an increasing love to the liberties and welfare of his country.
Besides these Lives, the author had finished and fitted for the press the life
of Thr^sy^ulus, which being put into the hands of Sir Richard Steel, for his
revisal, was, some how or other, unhappily lost, and could never since be
^^^over'd. Should this manuscript be yet in being, Mr. Theophilus Row, the
author's brother, will acknowledge it as a very great favor, if the person
into whose hands it is fal^en, will be so good as to return it him, in order to
its being communicated to the public. The famous Mr. Dacier having translated
Plutarch's Lives into French, with remarks historical and critical; the Abbe
Bellenger, already known (says the Journal des Scavans) in the Republic public
of Letters, by some works that do (...) honor, added in 1734, a ninth ^ome to
the other eight, consisting of the life of Hannibal, and Mr. Rowe's Lives, made
French by that learned Abbe; in the preface to which version he transcribes
from the preface to the English edition, the character of the author, with
visible approbation: and says, the Lives were written with taste, though being a
posthumous work, the author had not put his last hand to it. We may presume,
from the fidelity with which the French translator follows his original, not
omitting the freest passages, and boldest strokes against tyranny, or any way
qualifying or correcting, and expressing his dissent from them, that he had no
aversion to the author's notions of the unalienable rights and liberties of
mankind. And I must own, it added not a little to the pleasure this gave me, to
find an approbation in form under the hand of the person appointed by the
Keeper of the seals, to read that work. It looks as if there were some true
Frenchmen still in being, the remains of a generous race (to use a warm phrase
of Mr. Rowe's The life of Aristomenes thus faithfully translated in the French,
tells etoient les principes, d'un peuple genereux, ^qui^ne s^etoit point laisse
corrompre par^d^ fausses subtilites, qui n'obe^ssoit point en esclaee, and qui
ignoroit to^te autre puissance que celle qui (...) dirigee and limitee par les
loix.
) undebauch'd (...) slavish sophistry, and justly ignoran^ ^f any (...) guided
by the laws, and accountable to them. May (...). Rowe's being made to speak
French be one means of increasing the number, and rekindling their zeal in the
glorious cause.

On occasion of the honor done the memory of his dear brother, by this learned
foreigner, Mr. (...) Row composed the following lines: O FRIEND! O brother!
can thy dear-lov'd name
Rise to my view, nor pious sorrows claim?
O early ^^ed to thy congenial skies,
^^er I could know thy marchless worth to prize!
Now ripened judgment gives that worth to see,
And, next a father lost, I mourn for thee;
For thee, whose friendship had that loss supplied,
In youth my guardian, and in age my guide.
Thy voice had taught to bend my stubborn will
Lured me to good, and warned my wish from ill.
While virtue in thy life to fight confessed,
With heavenly charms had vanquished all my breast,
With borrowed vigor I had learned to tread
The path she points, by thy example led:
Now, my guide lost, I trace the arduous way
With feeble step, and scarce forbear to stray*
O fri^^^! O brother! -- but why thus a^^in
Will these dear names my tortured (...)?
For ever gone, thou will not leave the ski^^^
For friendship's wild complaints, or nature's cries.
Ah! what availed with studious toil to explore
What ancient wit had taught, or modern lore,
Since not the treasured stores of wisdom save
The laureled head from the devouring grave!
Yet if, blessed spirit, minds celestial know
To joy at honor paid their names below,
Hear Philomela's strains rehearse thy praise,
While every muse inspires the moving lays;
Lays that shall last while virtue boasts to warm
The generous breast, or sacred verse can charm:
And see thy works through foreign nations known;
France views their worth, and makes thy Lives her own,
And conscious of their right to equal fame,
The rival volume joins to Plutarch's name.
Nunquam ego te vita frater amabi^^^r
Aspiciam p^sthac? ae certe semper amab^,
Semper m^^sta tua car^ina ^^rte leg^^^.
CATULL.

Being at Bath in the year 1709. Mr. Row was introduced by a gentleman of her
acquaintance, into Mrs. Singer's company, who lived in a retirement not far
distant from that city. The idea he conceived of her from report, and from her
writings, charmed him; but when he had seen and conversed with her, he felt
another kind of impression from the presence of so much beauty, wit and virtue;
and the esteem of the The^rist was converted into the rapture of a Lover.
During the courtship, he writ a poetical epistle to a friend that wa^ a
neighbor of Mrs. Singer, and intimate in (...). I shall take the liberty to
quote a few ^ines out of it, not so much for a specimen of Mr. Rowe's poetical
genius (though that appears in them too) as his passionate veneration for Mrs.
Singer.

Youth's liveliest bloom, a never fading grace,
And more than beauty sparkles in her face;
Yet the bright form creates no loose desires,
At once she gives, and purifies our ^ires,
And passions chaste as her own soul inspires;
Her soul, heaven's noblest workmanship, designed
To bless the ruined age, and succor lost mankind;
To prop abandoned virtue's sinking cause,
And snatch from vice its undeserved applause Thus far was wrote by the late
Mr. Grove, whose beautiful manner of writing, and long acquaintance with Mrs.
Row, peculiarly fitted him to compose the history of her life. Since the
sudden death of this learned and ingenious gentleman deprived the world of the
pleasure of seeing this work completed by the same excellent hand which begun
it, the editor found himself, by a (...) unhappy kind of necessity, obliged to
attempt the finishing these memoirs; a task, which through decent respect to the
public, and just regard to the memory of Mrs. Row* he undertook with
inexpressible reluctance, and for which he cannot be insensible a constant ill
state of health is the smallest part of his incapacity. Et veni^m pro laud
p^t^* contentus abunde,
Non fastiditus si tibi lector er^*
OVID.
.
Mrs. Elizabeth Singer was married to Mr. Th^mas Row in the year 1710, on
which occasion a ^
learned friend of Mr. Rowe's wrote the following beautiful Latin epigram:

In nuptias Thoma^ Row and Elizabethae Singer.
Quid doctum par usque t^^m, sociosque labores
Fabrae and Dacerii, Gallia va^a cr^pas?
Par maj^s gens Angla dedit, juvenem atque pu^^lam,
Quos (...) sacro foedere junxit amor.
(...) Phoebo ^ecinere d^conte*
(...) gloria summa foret.
Thus translated by a young gentleman:

On the marriage of Mr. THOMAS ROW and Mrs. ELIZABETH SINGER.
No more, proud G^llia, bid the world revere
Thy learned pair, L^ Fevre and Dacier;
Britain may boast this happy day unites
Two nobler minds in Hymen's sacred rites*
What these have sung, while all the inspiring Nin^
Exalt the beauties of the verse divine;
Those (humble critics of the immortal strain)
Shall bound their fame, to comment and explain.
Mrs. Rowe's exalted merit and amiable qualities could not fail to inspire the
most generous and lasting passion. Mr. Row knew how to value that treasure of
wit, softness and virtue, which the divine providence had given to his arms in
the most lovely of women, and made it his study to repay the felicity with
which she crowned his life. The esteem and tenderness he had for her is
inexpressible, and possession seemed scarce to have abated the fondness and
admiration of the lover. 'Twas some considerable time after his marriage, that
he wrote to her a very tender ode, under the name of Delia, full of the warmest
sentiments of connubial friendship and affection; in which the following lines
may appear remarkable, as it pleased heaven to dispose events in a manner so
agreeable to the wishes expressed in them.

So long may thy inspiring page,
And great example bless the rising age!
Long in thy charming prison may thou stay,
Late, very late, ascend the well-known way,
And add new glories to the realms of day!
At least heaven will not, sure, this prayer deny
Short be my life's uncertain date,
And earlier far than thine the destined hour of fate!
Whenever it comes, may thou be by,
Supp^rt my sinking frame, and teach me how to die:
Banish desponding nature's gloom,
Make me to hope a gentle doom,
And fix me all on joys to come!
With swimming eyes I Will gaze upon thy charms,
And lasp thee dying in my fainting arms:
Then gently leaning on thy breast,
Sink in soft slumbers to eternal rest.
The ghastly form shall have a pleasing air,
And all things smile, while heaven and thou art there.
As Mr. Row had not a robust natural constitution, so an intense application
to study beyond what the delicacy of his frame would bear, might, perhaps,
contribute to that ill-state of health, which allayed the happiness of his
marriage life, during the greater part of it. In the latter end of the year
1714, his weakness increased, and he appeared to labor under all the symptoms
of a consumption. This fatal distemper, after it had confined him some months,
cut off the fairest hopes of his doing great honor and service to his country,
and put a period to his life, May 13, 1715, when he was but just past the
twenty-eighth-year of his age. He died at Hampstead, near London, where he had
resided some time for the benefit of the air; and was buried in the vault
belonging to his family, in the coemetery in Bunhill fields; where on his tomb
are only marked his name, and the date of his birth and death. But an
inscription of greater pomp is rendered unnecessary by the honor Mrs. Row did
his memory in the Elegy she wrote on his death, which is deservedly ranked
among the most admirable of her poetical works.

The exquisite grief and affliction Mrs. Row felt for his loss, is described
with such beautiful and unaffected eloquence in the poem I have just mentioned,
and several of the letters inserted in the following collection, that I shall
only add on this subject, that she continued to the last moments of her life to
express the highest veneration and affection to his memory* and a particular
regard and esteem for his relations, several of whom she honored with a long
and most intimate friendship. 'Twas also but a short time before her death, she
showed how incapable she was of forgetting him, by shedding fresh tears on
occasion of the mention of his name.

'Twas only out of regard to Mr. Row, that with his society she was willing to
bear London during the winter season; and as soon after his decease as her
affairs would permit, she indulged her unconquerable inclinations to solitude,
by retiring to From in Somersetshire, in the neighborhood of which place the
greater part of her estate lay. When she forsook the town, she determined to
return to it no more, but to conceal the remainder of her life in an absolute
retirement; yet on some few occasions she thought it her duty to violate this
resolution. In compliance with the importunate requests of the honorable Mrs.
Thynne, she passed some months with her at London, after the death of her
daughter the Lady Brook; and on the melancholy occasion of the decease of Mrs.
Thynne herself, she could not dispute the commands of the Countess of Hertford,
who earnestly desired her to reside some time with her at Marlborough, to
soften, by her conversation and friendship, the severe affliction of the loss
of so excellent a mother: And I think, once or twice more, the power this last
illustrious Lady had over Mrs. Row, drew her, by an obliging kind of violence,
to spend a few months with her at some of the Earl of Hertford's seats in the
country. Yet even on these occasions she never quitted her retreat without very
sincere regret; and always returned to it again as soon as ever she could, with
decency, disengage herself from the importunity of her noble friends.

'Twas in this recess that she composed the most celebrated of her works, The
dates of these several pieces are as follows: Friendship in Death, in twenty
Letters from the Dead to the Living, 1728. Letters Moral and Entertaining in
Prose and Verse, PART I. 1729, -- PART II. 1731. -- PART III. 1733.




Friendship in Death, and the several parts of the Letters Moral and
Entertaining. The drift of the Letters from the dead is (as the ingenious
author of the preface expresses it) to impress the notion of the soul's
immortality, without which all virtue and religion, with their temporal and
eternal good consequences, must fall to the ground; and to make the mind
familiar with the thoughts of our future existence, and contract, as it were,
an ^abitual persuasion of it, by writings built on that foundation, and
addressed to the affections and imagination. It may also be added, that the
design both of these, and the Letters Moral and Entertaining, is, by fictitious
examples of the most generous benevolence and heroic virtue, to allure the
reader to the practice of every thing that ennobles human nature, and benefits
the world; and by just and lively images of the sharp remorse and real misery
that attend the false and unworthy satisfactions of vice, to warn the young and
unthinking from being seduced by the enchanting name of pleasure, to inevitable
ruin; the piety of which design is the more worthy of the highest panegyrics,
as it is so uncommon. The greater part of the poets of our country have
apparently employed all their wit and art to disguise the native deformity of
vice, and strew flowers on the paths to perdition. But this excellent lady (as
was observed of an Mr. Cowley.
eminent genius of the last age) possessed so much strength and firmness of
mind, and such a perfect natural goodness, as could not be perverted by the
largeness of her wit, and was proof against the art of poetry it self. The
elegant Letters which gave occasion to remark this distinction in Mrs. Rowe's
character as a polite writer, are not only chaste and innocent, but greatly
subservient to the interest of heaven, and evidently designed, by representing
virtue in all her genuine beauty, to recommend her to the choice and admiration
of mankind.

In the year 1736, the importunity of some of Mrs. Rowe's acquaintance, who had
seen the History of Joseph in manuscript, prevailed on her (though not without
real reluctance) to suffer it to be made public. She wrote this piece in her
younger years, and when first printed, had carried it on no farther than the
marriage of the hero of the poem; but at the request of her friends
(particularly of an The Countess of Hertford.
illustrious lady, to whom she could scarce refuse any thing) that the relation
might include Joseph's discovery of himself to his brethren; she added two
other books, the composing of which, I am informed, was no more than the labor
of three or four days. This additional part, which was her last work, was
published but a few weeks before her death.

This grand event, to prepare for which she had made so much the business of
her life, befell her, according to her wish, in her beloved recess. She was
favored with an uncommon strength of constitution, and had passed a long
series of year^ with scarce any indisposition severe enough to confine her to
her bed. But about half a year before her decease, she was attacked with a
distemper, which seemed to herself as well as others, attende^ with danger:
Though this disorder (as she express^^ herself to one of her most intimate
friends) fou^^ her mind not quite so serene, and prepar^^ to meet death, as
usual; yet when, by devout contemplations on the atonement and mediation of our
blessed Redeemer, she had fortified herself against that fear and diffidence,
from which the most exalted piety does not always secure in such an awful hour,
she experienced such divine satisfaction and transport, that she said, with
tears of joy, she knew not that she had ever felt the like in all her life; and
she repeated, on this occasion, Mr. Pope's verses, entitled, The Dying
Christian to his Soul, with an air of such intense pleasure, as evidenced that
she really felt all the elevated sentiments of pious ecstasy and triumph, which
breathe in that exquisite piece of sacred poetry. After this threatening
illness, Mrs. Row recovered her usual good state of health; and though at the
time of her decease she was pretty far advanced in age, yet her exact
temperance, and the calmness of her mind, undisturbed with uneasy cares and
passions* encouraged her friends to flatter themselves with a much longer
enjoyment of so valuable a life, than it pleased heaven to allow them.
Saturday, Feb. 19, a day which she had set apart, to employ a large portion of
it in extraordinary devotion.
On the day in which she was seized with that distemper, which in a few hours
proved mortal, she seemed, to those about her, to be in perfect health and
vigor. In the evening of it, at about eight of the clock, she conversed with a
friend with all her wonted vivacity, and not without laughter; after which she
retired to her chamber. At about ten, her servant hearing some noise in her
mistress's room, ran instantly into it, and found her fallen off the chair on
the floor, speechless, and in the agonies of death. She had the immediate
assistance of a physician and surgeon, but all the means used were without
success; and after having given one groan, she expired a few minutes before two
of the clock, on Sunday morning, Feb. 20, 1736-7. Her disease was judged to be
an apoplexy. A pious It contained some meditations on religious subjects, but
the book is lost, and the title of it cannot be exactly remembered by those who
were about Mrs. Row at the time of her death.
book was found lying open by her, as also some loose papers, on which she had
wrote the following unconnected sentences These papers contain a few more lines
which I have not transcribed, because they are so ill written (occasioned,
perhaps, by the trembling of her hand at the approach of death) that it was not
possible for me to make any consistent sense of them.
; O guide, and counsel, and protect my soul from sin!
O speak, and let me know thy heavenly will,
Speak evidently to my listening soul!
O fill my soul with love, and light, and peace,
And whisper heavenly comfort to my soul!
O speak, celestial Spirit, in the strain
Of love and heavenly pleasure to my soul!


Thus it appeared, that in reading pious meditations, or forming devout
ejaculations for the divine favor and assistance, Mrs. Row made the last use
of the powers of reason below the skies.

As she was greatly apprehensive that the violence of pain, or languors of a
sickbed, might occasion some depression of spirits, and melancholy fears,
unsuitable to the character and expectations of a Christian, her manuscript
book of devotions contains frequent petitions to heaven, that she might not, in
this manner, dishonor her profess^^ (...) to her friends she often expressed
her (...) desirous of a sudden removal to the skies, as (...) must necessarily
prevent any such indecent behavior in her last moments: So that the suddenness
of Mrs. Rowe's death may be interpreted as a reward of her singular piety, and
a mark of the divine favor in answer to her prayers. Indeed (to borrow Mr.
Grove's expressions in a letter wrote to a friend, soon after this lady's
decease) though her death be universally lamented, yet the manner of it is
rather to be esteemed a part of her happiness* One moment to enjoy this life,
the next, or after a pause we are not sensible of, to find our selves got
beyond not only the fears of death, but death itself; and in possession of
everlasting life, and health, and pleasur^ This moment to be devoutly
addressing ourselves to God, or employed in delightful meditations on his
perfections; the next in his presence, and surrounded with scenes of bliss
perfectly new, and unspeakably joyous; is a way of departing out of life to be
desired, not dreaded by our selves, and felicitated, not condoled by our
surviving friends. When all things are in a readiness for our r^moval out of
the world, it is a privilege to be spared the sad ceremony of parting, and all
the pains and s^^uggles of feeble nature.

Mrs. Row seemed, by the gaiety and cheerfulness of her temper, to be
peculiarly fitted to enjoy life, and all its innocent satisfactions; yet,
instead of any excessive fondness for things present and visible, her contempt
for what she used to term a low state of existence, and a dull round of insipid
pleasures, and the ardor with which she breathed after the divine enjoyments of
a future world, were inconceiveably great. When her acquaintance expressed to
her the joy they felt at seeing her look so well, and possessed of so much
health as promised many years to come, she was w^nt to reply, that it was the
same as telling a s^ave his (...) like to be lasting; or complimenting him to
the strength (...) the walls of his dungeon. And the f^rvor of her (...) to
commence the life of angels, (...) broke from her lips in numberless other
(...). This satiety of all things beneath the skies* and impatience after the
perfect fruition of God, might, perhaps, be the occasion, that in several
periods of her life she had flattered herself that she was near that blessed
state on which she had fixed all her hopes. And in particular, a little time
before her death, she expressed to several of her friends, her firm persuasion
that her continuance on earth would be very short; but without assigning any
peculiar reason for this opinion. I would not presume to lay any stress on such
supposed presages; but as they have already been related to the public, I
thought not proper to omit all mention of them.

She was buried, according to her request, under the same stone with her father
in the meeting place at From; on which occasion her funeral sermon was
preached to a very crowded auditory, by the reverend and worthy Mr. Bo^d^n. Her

(...) The world recedes, it disappears;
Heaven opens on my eyes, my ears
With sounds s^raphic ring:
Lend, lend your wings! I mount! I fly!
O grave! where is thy victory?
O death! where is thy sting?
The nearer I am approaching to immortality, the more extensive and enlarged I
find the principles of amity and good will in my soul: From hence arise the
most sincere wishes for your happiness, and of the charming pledges your lovely
Henrietta left. Oh! my Lord, if you would discharge the sacred trust, keep them
under your own inspection.

This will not reach you, my Lord, till I am past the ceremony of subscribing

Your humble servant, ELI^ ROW.


To Mr. JAMES THEOBALD.
SIR,
THE converse I have had with you has been very short, but I hope the
friendship begun by it will be transmitted to the regions of perfect amity and
bliss. It would not be worth the while to cherish the impressions of a virtuous
friendship, if the generous engagement was to be dissolved with mortal life:
Such a thought would give the grave a deeper gloom, and add new horrors to the
fatal darkness.

But I confess, I have brighter expectations, and am fully persuaded, those
noble attachments that are founded on real merit, are of an immortal date. That
benignity, that divine charity, which just warms the soul in these cold
regions, will shine with new luster, and burn with an eternal ardor in the
happy seats of peace and love.

My present experience confirms me in this truth; the powers of nature are
drooping, the vital spark grows languid and faint; while my affection for my
surviving friends was never more warm, my concern for their happiness was never
more ardent and sincere.

This makes me employ some of the last part of my time in writing to three or
four persons, whose merit requires my esteem, in hopes this solemn farewell will
leave a serious impression on their minds.

I am going to act the last and most important part of human life; in a little
time I shall land on the immortal coasts, where all is new, amazing, and
unknown. But however gloomy the passage appears Sweet fields, beyond the
swelling flood,
Stand dressed in living green:
So to the Jews old Canaan stood,
While Jordan rolled between.
Dr. WATTS.

Nature cannot but shiver on the fatal b^^^ks, unwilling to try the grand
experiment, whilst the hopes of Christianity can alone support the soul in this
solemn crisis. In this exigence the eternal Spirit whispers peace and pardon to
the dying saint, through the atonement, and brightens the shadow of death, with
some glimmering of immortal light.

Tell Mrs. Theobald, I hope to meet her in the shining realms of love and
unmingled bliss; Where crowned with joy, and ever-blooming youth,
The jocund hours dance on their endless round.


ELIZ. ROW.


To Mrs. SARAH ROW.
My dear Mother,
I AM now taking my final adieu of this world, in certain hopes of meeting you
in the next. I carry to my grave my affection and gratitude to your family, and
leave you with the sincerest concern for your own happiness, and the welfare of
your family. May my prayers be answered, when I am sleeping in the dust! O may
the angels of God conduct you in the paths of immortal glory and pleasure! I
would collect the powers of my soul, and ask blessings for you with all the
holy violence of prayer. God Almighty, the God of your pious ancestors, who has
been your dewlling place for many generations, bless you!

It Is but a short space I have to measure, the shadows are lengthening, and my
sun declining. That goodness which has hitherto conducted me, will not fail me
in the last concluding act of life* that name which I have made my glory and my
boast, shall then be my strength and my salvation. To meet death with a
becoming fortitude, is a part above the powers of nature, and which I can
perform by no power or holiness of my own; for oh! in my best estate I am
altogether vanity; a wretched, helpless sinner: But in the merits (...) perfect
righteousness of God my Savior, I hope to appear justified at the supreme
tribunal, where I must shortly stand to be judged.

E. ROW.


Since Mrs. Rowe's death, agreeable to her request, the reverend Dr. Watts has
revised and published her devotions, under the title of Devout Exercises of the
Heart, etc. In which, if some expressions (as the ingenious editor observes,
and In a letter to a lady to whom she sent one of these sacred meditations, she
thus expresses herself: You will find by the enclosed, how my thoughts were
employed in the little ^it of sickness which lately confined me. There is, I
confes^, something so glittering and romantic in this description of a future
state* that I am afraid you will think I have been reading the Alcoran, and am
become a proselyte to the Turkish religion*
Mrs. Row herself was not insensible) may seem a little too rapturous; a just
regard to the sex, and particular genius of the author, will, I hope, prevail
for a gentle censure. It could scarce be expected that a lady should be versed
in the arts of strict reasoning; and it ought to be easily forgiven, if she
wrote on religious subjects, even in prose, rather with the fire and bold
license of a poet, than the accuracy of a divine and a philosopher. It may also
be added, that many of these exercises of piety were the productions of youth;
and at least part of them at first composed (...) to assist her own private
devotion, and im^^^ment in virtue though she afterward thought (...) order
them for public view after her decease, in pursuance of the following vow.

April 20. 1735.
MY father's God, if thou will now speedily deliver (...), and send me an
an^wer of peace, then I will record thy several mercies, and leave the
catalogue as a testimony of thy truth, and a seal to the veracity of the
scripture promises; and leave it with a charge to be (...) to thy (...) at my
death, that ages yet unborn may ri^^ up and ble^s thee, and trust in thy word.


The miscellaneous pieces that compose the following collection, were written
in various periods of Mrs. Rowe's life, and are communicated to the world, in
obedience to her commands, delivered to me since her decease. She had no other
view in their publication (to use the words of the letter in which she
entrusted them to my care) but the profit, or (...) entertainment of the
reader. I hope, ^ continues ^he) all my present design is abstractly the
interest of virtue; for a reputation among mortals is a very insignificant
thing to one who hopes, before these (...) are published, to be above their
censure or applause, and to receive the approbation of the supreme Judge: But
if they may be any advantage to the cause of virtue, it will be a great
satisfaction to me. To the papers now first printed from the author's
manuscripts, I have judged it proper to prefix the poems that she permitted, in
her lifetime, to (...) inserted in the Mis^ellanies: So that these (...)
volumes, with her Letters formerly published, the History of Joseph, and her
Devotions, may be reckoned to complete her works. For the small collection in
verse, written in her youth when ^he was at a boarding-school in the country,
(...) after leaving it, appeared rather such as mig^^ be expected from this
early season, and disadvantageous situation in life, than fit to accompany the
productions of her maturer years: nor could I, without violating the respect
due to Mrs. Row, endeavor to revive the memory of her first attempts in
poetry, which, as juvenile follies, she th^^ght only worthy of perpetual
oblivion.

It Is also, by Mrs. Rowe's order, that this edition of her remains is enlarged
with some select poems on several occasions, by Mr. T^^mas Row; of which no
more than two small translations from the French of Madam Des Houliers, were
printed in his life time. These essays in poetry, may be looked on only as the
elegant amusement of some hours of relaxation from severer studies: They do not
appear to have been fitted for the press; and, as by the immature death of the
author they were deprived of the advantage of his last corrections, it would be
scarce reasonable to expect they should be above all need of that candor which
is eminently due to posthumous pieces. Yet (if I may presume to give my
opinion) they show so much strength of genius, and true poetic fire, as will
easily atone for any slight inaccuracies, which the severity of malignant
criticism may be able to discover.

On occasion of this present collection, it is fit to a^quaint the public, that
a large debt of grati^^^^ is due from the^ to Mr^. Rowe's friends, for the
elegant and instructive entertainment they (...) fail to receive from her
familiar letters; and in justice to the writer's memory, it is nece^^^ry to
add, that if some of these letters seem abrupt and imperfect, it is owing to
the delicacy of the persons to whom they were wrote, who have oblig^d the
editor to sacrifice several passages in them, to that modesty which is so
usually attendant o^ merit.

As Mrs. Row passed her days in almost perpetual retirement, the fewness of
the facts related in the former part of these memoirs, will not, I hope, appear
surprising. Her Mr. Dryden's expressions concerning Plutarch.
life was not varied with accidents to divert the reader: 'Twas more pleasant
for herself to live, than for an historian to describe. So that being an
uniform course of devotion, benevolence, and indifference to the separate
interests and pleasures of the animal life, and of ardor in pursuing the
perfect and divine felicity of heaven and immortality; when you have the
history of one week, you have the history of the whole. This occasions her
character being so much longer than the historical part; her character, which
only represents what she was every day, and which could not be shortened without
injustice to her and the world.

I shall not attempt to give a character of Mrs. Rowe's works, since the number
of their editions, and the approbation and applause they have received from
some of the best judges, and most celebrated writers of the age, may seem to
render any farther panegyric superfluous. I will only add, that her exquisite
wit, and delicate imagination, were scarce any thing indebted to the assistance
of art or labor; and Mr. Prior, who in the preface to his poems has done
justice to the fineness of her genius, might, with equal truth, have applied to
her what he has so beautifully said of an The Earl of Dorset. See Prior's
dedication of his Poems.
eminent wit of the last age. Such (...) the natural faculties and strength of
her mind, that she had occasion to borrow very little from education; and she
^wed these advantages to her own good parts, which others acquire by study and
imitation. Wit, in most writers, is like a fountain in a garden, supplied b^
several streams, brought through artful pipes, and (...) sometimes agreeably.
But Mrs. Row 's was a source arising from the top of a mountain, which (...)
its own way, and with inexhaustible supplies delighted and enriched the country
through which it passed. She read no critics, nor could her genius brook the
discipline of rules: And as the pains of correcting appeared to her some kind
of drudgery, she seldom made any great alterations in her composures from what
they were when she first gave copies of them to her friends. For she did not
set so high a value on her works, as to employ much labor in finishing them
with the utmost accuracy; and she wrote verses through inclination, and rather as
an amusement, than as a study and profession, to excel in which she should make
the business of her life.

Mrs. Row was not a regular beauty, yet she possessed a large measure of the
charms of her sex. She was of a moderate stature, her hair of a fine auburn
color, and her eyes of a darkish gray, inclining to blue, and full of fire*
Her complexion was very fair, and a natural rosy blush glowed in her cheeks.
She spoke gracefully, and her voice was exceeding sweet and harmonious, and
perfectly suited to that gentle language which always flowed from her lips. But
the softness and benevolence of her aspect is beyond all description: It
inspired irresistible love, yet not without some mixture of that awe and
veneration which distinguished sense and virtue, apparent in the countenance,
are wont to create.

Her acquaintance with the great, had taught her all the accomplishments of
good breeding, and complacency of behavior; and without formality or
affectation, she practiced, in a distant solitude, all the address and
politeness of a court; but she learned no more than the real elegancies of
grandeur. She was very remote from extravagance in habit, and seemed to have
perfectly subdued the love of the vain show of life; in which she may be
thought to discover an elevation of soul superior to the natural inclinations
of her sex, and great strength of virtue in resisting the general example of
the age in which she lived. The labors of the toilette consumed very little of
her time: She justly despised the arts of dress and ornament, and endeavored
to infuse the same contempt of them into all her acquaintance; yet without
falling into the other extreme of indecent negligence.

The love of solitude, which seems almost in separable from a Scriptorum chorus
omnis amat nemus, and fugit urbe^. HOR. lib. 2. ep. 2.
poetic genius, discovered itself very early in Mrs. Row, and never forsook
her but with life itself. Before her marriage, though it cannot be doubted that
she was often solicited to quit her beloved obscurity, yet she had only made a
short visit to the town of a few weeks. After Mr. Rowe's decease, as a decent
retreat seemed to her alon^ suited to a state of widowhood, her aversion to a
public appearance in the world increased; and the approach of the decline of
life determined her more strongly to devo^^ the remainder of her days to
retirement; nor could any arguments, or persuasions of her friends, prevail
with Mrs. Row to alter her sentiments and conduct in this instance. This
resolution was unhappy for the world, as it deprived them of the knowledge of
so fair a pattern of piety and goodness, and ought not to be proposed to the
imitation of the virtuous part of mankind. For, as a Dr. Sp^at, Life of Cowley,
page 38.
celebrated writer says, the good ought not to be allowed to forsake the world,
unless the bad ^ad the sam^ moderation, and were willing to follow them into
the wilderness. Nor did Mrs. Row recommend such a conduct to others; for she
thus expresses her sentiments on this subject, in a letter to a friend, which
she wrote about three weeks before her death. It Is an injury to mankind, to
wish you had been born to a life of repose and leisure: There are too few
examples of generosity and justice in the world, to wish any person of good
character concealed. There are indeed, a set of insignificant and pro^^igate
mortals, who, if they should take it into their ^eads to elope from mankind,
and run wild in the woods, the public would be so far from being d^trimented,
that they would be highly obliged by it; that so those only who are a grace to
human nature, might appear in active and public stations. I do not, says she,
in a letter to another friend, affect any recluse ^otions of religion; my
thoughts of that are just the reverse, and all easy and sociable. Upon the
whole, it may be said with the greatest truth, in defense of Mrs. Rowe's
retreat, that she did not fly to deserts that she might wholly resign herself
to sloth, and a monastic kind of devotion, unprofitable to the world; but
amidst the silence and quiet of solitude, she employed no small part of her
time in actions of m^nificence and charity; or, in composing those works with
which she has obliged the public, which, as they inspire the noblest sentiments
of benevolence and piety, may be of the most lasting and extensive benefit to
mankind.

It has been imputed to persons of recluse and ascetic lives, that though their
austere virtue may preserve them from sensual indulgencies, against which they
are wont to express the utmost severity; yet they are too frequently apt to
sooth themselves in pride, ill nature, censoriousness, and the like hateful
dispositions of the mind. The luster of Mrs. Rowe's character was not sullied
by so great a blemish. She was as exemplary for every social and good-natured
virtue, as for the exact sanctity of her manners; and justly thought the sins
to which the soul is tempted by its union with the body, attended with less
degrees of guilt than those other vices of a graver sort, which she believed,
debased human nature into a nearer resemblance to that most evil and malevolent
spirit, who is represented, in the sacred writings, as perfectly opposite to
the benignity of the supreme Being.

She had the happiest command over her passions, and maintained a constant
calmness of temper, and sweetness of disposition, that could not be ruffled
with adverse accidents, nor soured by the approach of old age it self. It has
been questioned whether she was ever angry in her whole life, at least with
regard to those little misfortunes, and displeasing incidents, that occur in
common life, which, tho^ really of a trivial nature, frequently prove too
strong temptations to indecencies of passion; she was only wont to turn these
into subjects of mirth, and agreeable raillery. And as persons are apt to be
least on their guard against excesses of this kind toward inferiors and
domestics, it ought to be observed, that her servant who lived with her near
twenty years, scarce ever discovered in her misteris, any tendency to anger
toward herself, or any warmth of resentment against others, except in the
cause of heaven, against great impiety, and ^^agrant crimes; on which
occasions, some degree of indignation is not only irreproachable, but truly
deserves the name of commendable and virtuous zeal.

The uncommon praise that is given to Mr. Cowley, by the author of his life,
that no one had reason to wish his wit l^ss, is equally due to Mrs. Row: For,
together with the most manly genius, she possessed all that gentleness and
softness of disposition, which gives her own lovely sex such irresistible
charms; and was entirely free from that severity of temper which has made the
character of a wit unamiable, if not quite infamous As much detested as a wit;
Dr. Young's Universal Passion, SAT. 6.
. Next ^o lewd and profane writings, she expressed the strongest aversion to
satire, as it is usually so replete with personal malice and invective. No
strokes of this kind can be found in her works; and her conversation was not
less innocent of every appearance of ill nature, than her writings. She
fortified her resolutions against evil-speaking, by particular and solemn vows,
as appears by the following sacred engagement transcribed from her manuscript.

Oct. 6* 1726.
O let me once again ^ind my self to the Lord, never (by his grace) to speak
evil of any person. O help me to govern my tongue by the strictest rules of
charity and truth, and never to utter any evil surmis^^, or make the least
ref^ection on the honor of my neighbor. Let me, in the minutest circumstance,
do to others as I would they should act to me. Let me hope, let me believe all
things to the advantage of others. Give me thy divine assistance to perform
this great duty, and set thou a watch on my words; and keep, O strictly keep
the door of my lips, that I offend not with my tongue. Now let thy grace be
sufficient for me, and thy strength be manifest in my weakness. In thy
strength, in the name of the Lord my Redeemer, let me engage with all my future
temptations. Look graciously on this petition, and remember me when I am in any
suspense, any exigence, or am ready to forget my engagements. In the moment
that I shall waver, strengthen me; restrain me when the malignant thought
aris^s; and while the yet unuttered words are ready to issue from my lips,
(...) thou thy bridle there, and govern my rebellions faculty.


Mrs. Row strictly regulated her conduct by this solemn vow, and could hardly
think any occasion would justify the reporting what was prejudicial to the
reputation of another. I can appeal to you (says she, in a letter to a lady who
had been long and intimately acquainted with her) if you ever knew me make an
envious, or an ill-natured reflection on any person upon earth. Indeed, the
follies if mankind would afford a wide and various scene; but charity would
draw a veil of darkness here, and choose to be for ^ver silent, rather than
expatiate on the melancholy theme. Scandal and detraction appeared to her
extreme inhumanity, which no charms of wit and politeness could make tolerable*
If she was forced to be present at such kind of conversation, she had sometimes
(when the freedom might be decently used) the courage openly to condemn it;
and, I think, always the generosity to undertake the defense of the absent,
when unjustly accused, and to extenuate even their real faults and errors.

She was as unacquainted with envy, as if it had been impossible for so base a
passion to enter into the human mind; and was always forward to do justice to
every fine writer, and illustrious character of the age. She exceedingly loved
to praise, and never failed to observe and applaud every appearance of merit in
those with whom she was acquainted; but over-looked all their frailties with
more than even the usual partiality of friendship. Yet, though she could have
wished to have made no other use of speech than to commend worth and virtue, on
some occasions a sense of duty compelled her to reprove; but the seeming
severity of this virtue, was tempered by the softest arts of gentleness and
goodness. In proof of which, it may not be improper to add the following
instance of the honest artifices she used to disguise her admonitions. She has
been frequently observed to commend persons of distinguished eminence for one
kind of moral worth, before some of her friends, who were deficient in that
particular virtue, in hopes they might be struck with the beauty of the
example, which she proposed to their imitation, in a manner so little apt to
give offense.

She had few equals in her excellent turn for conversation. Her wit was
inexhaustible, and she expressed her thoughts in the most beautiful and flowing
eloquence; and as these uncommon advantages were accompanied with an easy
goodness, and unaffected openness of behavior, she infinitely charmed all who
knew her. A peculiar elevation of understanding, made her despise those trifles
which usually dwell on the lips of the fair sex, and she would always have
chosen to talk on important and instructive themes; yet, least constant
discourse of a serious kind should prove distastef^l and wearisome, she
sometimes entertained her friends on more gay and indifferent subjects. But as
soon as it could be done without the appearance of affectation, she returned to
her favorite topics, on which she exerted all her exquisite talents, to
recommend the most exact morality and sublime piety; so that it seemed
impossible to be in her company without growing wiser and better, or to leave
it without regret.

Mrs. Rowe's wit, beauty and merit* ^ad even from her youth* conciliated to her
much compliment and praise, and from such judges of worth as might have made
some degree of vanity seem almost pardonable in a lady and an author. Yet*
amidst these temptations to pride, she retained all the humility of the meanest
and most obscure person of the human race. She rarely mentioned any of her
writings, even to her most intimate friends; nor ever discovered the least
elation of mind at their great success, and the approbation they received from
some of the finest writers of the age. The praises with which her works were
honored, only led her to ascribe the glory to the original of all perfection,
on whose power she maintained a constant sense of her dependence, and with the
most grateful piety owned her obligations to his goodness. It is (...) for
heaven, said she, to give a turn to one of (...), and I should be an idiot. She
was exquisitely sensible of her own defects, and the frailty inseparable from
our nature. H^w small a part, ^he was wont to say, i^ (...) in hum^n actions,
(...). She assumed no indecent share in conversation, and has been frequen^ly
known to be silent on subjects she well understood, and on which she could have
displayed her wit to great advantage. Her friends could not fall to observe the
modest care she (...) avoiding the mention of any thing that might tend to her
own honor: Nor can I, during the long intimacy with which she favored me,
remember one expression of vanity, or sense of her own worth, that might seem
to stain her humility. She never dictated to others, nor arrogated any respect
and deference to her own sentiments; but in conversing with persons of parts
and abilities, far beneath her own, seemed to study to make the superiority of
her genius easy to them, by the most obliging goodness and condescension of
behavior. Nor were her affability and readiness of access, to those of the
lowest rank* less remarkable and exemplary* 'Twas impossible for her to treat
any one with insolence and contempt. On the contrary, as she infinitely loved
and reverenced true goodness, I have been witness of the real and peculiar
respect she paid to sincere piety, when great degrees of ignorance, and
extremely mean circumstances, might have quite obscured it to less humble and
generous minds.

She was perfectly untainted with that love of pleasure which has so
universally corrupted the present age; and is justly thought to have the most
unfriendly influence on the noblest kinds of virtue Admiratione afficiuntur ii,
qui anteire (...) in virtute putantur, and cum omni ca^ere (...)* cum vero iis
vi^iis, quibus alii non fa^il* possunt obsis^ere* Nam voluptates* blandissi^^as
domina^ majores parts animi a virtute (...). CIC. de Off lib. 11. cap. 1^.
. She was ignorant of every polite and fashionable game. Play, she believed, at
best, was but an art of losing time, and forgetting to think; but when she
reflected on the fatal consequences that attend a fond attachment to this
diversion, she had even an horror for it. Her taste was too refined and
delicate to relish those insipid trifles, called Novels and Romances, usually
as defective in wit, and true imitation of nature, as replete with indecent
images, which pollute the imagination, and shock every chaste mind. She would
have esteemed the diversions of the English theater (especially those of the
tragic kind) capable of affording the most noble and rational pleasure, if she
could have believed them innocent; but so few of them appeared to her
inoffensive to virtue, that she thought fit to abstain from th^se
entertainments, which* in her opinion, genera^ly tended to promote impurity of
manners, and expose piety to scorn and ridicule. The native grandeur of her
soul, preserved her from a fondness for any kind of luxury, judging it much
beneath the dignity of a being possessed of reason, and born for immortality.
She was always pleased with whatever she found on her table; and neither the
nature of her food, nor the manner of dressing it, gave her any uneasiness: For
if in either of these respects it was not perfectly agreeable, it only afforded
her a subject of wit and pleasantry, instead of occasioning any disgust, or
serious resentment. She mixed in no parties of pleasure, and extremely despised
the trivial and uninstructive conversation of formal visits, which she avoided,
at least, as much as decency would allow; and, indeed* except (...)* she had
almost an equal contempt for every thing that bears the name of diversion and
amusement, even of the most innocent kind. But, I confess, this part of the
character of this excellent lady may not be so fit for general imitation. For
though the constant vivacity and cheerfulness of Mrs. Rowe's natural temper might
possibly seem to set her above the necessity of allowing herself proper
intervals of amusement to relax the mind, yet such great abstinence from every
kind of recreation, might, in most persons, tend to sour the mind with austere
and unamiable dispositions; or, at least, to depress the spirits to such a
degree of melancholy, as would unfit them for the necessary duties and offices
of life.

She had a contempt of riches that has been rarely equaled, and which, I
believe, may be looked upon as a certain mark of a truly great mind Maxim
admirantur ^um, qui pecunia non (...)* quod in quo viro perspectum ^it, hunc
igni spec^atum arbitrantur. CIC. de Off. lib. 2. cap. 11.
. As ^he expressed herself much pleased with the moderate fortune, allotted her
by the divine providence, which afforded her ease and plenty to the extent of
her wishes; so she never pursued any designs to advance her circumstances in
life. She could not be persuaded to publish her works by subscription, or even
to accept the advantageous terms offered by the bookseller, if she would permit
her scattered pieces to be collected and published together. She wrote no
dedications to the great, and the name of no minister of state is to be found
in her works. She never saw a court; and if she has mentioned, with honor,
some of the princes under whose reigns she lived, 'twas only from a sincere
veneration for the fauiors of liberty (which inestimable blessing she highly
valued) and without the least expectation of any reward, beyond the pleasure of
discovering her gratitude to those, who appeared to her, public benefactors to
their country. The high esteem she expressed for some of her friends of
distinguished rank, was equally free from the suspicion of interested views;
for as she gained nothing by their friendship but the happiness of their
conversation, and an acquaintance with their virtues; the praises she gave
them, ought, in justice, to be looked on as the incense due to merit. The love
of money she thought the most sordid and ignoble of passions, and frequently
lamented its general prevalence over the human mind. She did not know her own
estates from others, till some motives of prudence obliged her to inform
herself, when she apprehended she was soon to leave them; and was so far from
that rigor in exacting her due, which approaches to inhumanity, that her
neglect of her interest may rather be censured as excessive: She let her
estates beneath their intrinsic value, as appears by the considerable advance
of the rents since her decease; and was so gentle to her ^enants, that she not
only had no lawsuit with any of them, but would not so much as suffer them to
be threatened with the seizure of their goods, on the neglect of the payment of
their rents. When one of them, who owed her an hundred pounds, carried off all
his stock in the night, she could not be prevailed on to embrace an opportunity
in her power of seizing it afterward; and if he had not, in this manner
quitted the estate upon receiving some just menaces without her knowledge, it is
more than probable that her excess of goodness would have always prevented her
from having recourse to rigorous methods to eject him, and compel him to do her
justice. 'Twould be easy to add several other instances highly prejudicial to
her interest, in which she voluntarily departed from her right* when she had
the highest claim of equity Conveniet cum in dando munificum esse, tum in
exigendo non acerbum, in omnique re contrahenda, vendendo, ^mendo, conducendo,
locando, vicinitatibus, and confiniis, acquum, and facil^m: multa multis de
jure suo concedentem; a litibus vero, quantum lic^at, and n^scio an paullo plus
etiam, quam liceat, ^b^orrentem* CIC. de Off. lib. 2. cap. 18.
. She could scarce bear the mention of injustice, without trembling; and the
tenderness and delicacy of her conscience, with regard to this sin, was so
great, that she hardly thought she could keep far enough from it. I can appeal
to thee, says she in an address to God, how scrupulously I have acted in
matters of equity, and how willingly I have injured my self to right others.
She spoke with much warmth of the extreme danger of any dishonest and
fraudulent practice, and expressed her wonder, how persons could die with any
repose of mind, under the least degree of such kind of guilt.

Her indifference to glory was scarce less remarkable. As she seemed to shun
fame by concealing herself, during almost the whole of her life, in an obscure
solitude, so she practiced no arts to promote her reputation. She wrote no
preface to any of her works to prepossess the public in their favor Dr. Young
was the author of the preface to Friendship in Death.
, nor suffered them to be accompanied with panegyrics of her friends. She would
not, indeed, so much as allow her name to be prefixed to any of them, except
some few poems in the earlier part of her life The last of her writings, which,
by her consent, appeared in public under her own name, were some copies of
verses printed in the Miscellanies* in the year 1704.
: And though this was the occasion that a beautiful Sir Richard Steel, when he
published this pastoral in his Poetical Miscellanies, ascribed it to the author
of the anonymous verses before the tragedy of Cato: A mistake, I suppose, only
owing to some fancied resemblance in the handwriting.
pastoral of here is was ascribed to another hand, she would not alter the
modesty of her conduct. When she intended to communicate to the world
Friendship in Death, the most celebrated of her works, she showed the
manuscript to no more than one person, on whose secrecy she could rely; and
after he had, by her order, copied it in his own hand, she sent it to Dr.
Young, only knowing him by his works, and inscribed his name to the dedication,
in hopes that being published by him, and appearing under the patronage of his
name, all her acquaintance would imagine this piece to be written by some
friend of that eminent poet. And when the inimitable beauties of Mrs. Rowe's
manner of writing discovered the true author, and this performance began to be
universally admired, she still continued to avoid owning it, as far as was
consistent with a strict regard to truth: She even declined the honor due to
her ashes and memory after death* for when she selected from her manuscript
volume of devotions some exercises of piety, with a view to their publication
after her decease, she studiously omitted those parts that would have
discovered her unexampled charity, and other virtues which conciliate the
esteem and veneration of the world: Nor could any thing, perhaps, but the
suddenness of her death, have prevented her committing to the flames the book I
have just mentioned, which has so often assisted me in my attempt to do justice
to her character. And as she entrusted the care of her posthumous pieces to
one, who (she could not be insensible) had never entertained a thought of being
an author, and whose incurable want of health must render him peculiarly unfit
to compose any thing for public view* there is the highest probability, that
'twas her intention that this collection of her remains should be communicated
to the world without any account of her life and character; which, through
extreme humility, she judged unworthy the knowledge and imitation of posterity.
The same modest disposition of mind appears in the orders that she left in
writing to her servant, in which, after having desired that he^ funeral might
be by night, and attended only by a small number of friends, she adds, charge
Mr. Bowde^ not to say one word of me in the sermon. I would lie in my father'^
grave, and have no stone nor inscription over my (...) dust, which I gladly
leave to oblivi^n and corruption, till it rise to a glorious immortality.

Mrs. Row was exemplary for every relative duty. Filial piety was a remarkable
part of her character. She loved the best of fathers, as she ought, and repaid
his uncommon care and tenderness by all just returns of duty and affection. She
has been heard to say, That she could die rather than displease him; and the
anguish she felt at seeing him in pain in his last sickness was so great, that
it occasioned some kind of convulsion, a disorder from which she was wholly
free in every other part of her life.

When she was entered into a marriage state, the highest esteem and most tender
affection appeared in all her conduct to Mr. Row; and by the most gentle and
obliging manners, and the exercise of every social and good-natured virtue, she
confirmed the empire she had gained over his heart. She complied with his
inclinations in several instances, to which she was naturally averse; and made
it her study to soften the anxieties, and heighten a^l the satisfactions of his
life. Her capacity for superior things did not tempt her to neglect the less
honorable cares which the laws of decency impose on the softer sex in the
connubial relation: Much less was she led by a sense of her own merit to assume
any thing to herself inconsistent with that duty and submission which the
precepts of Christian piety so strictly enjoin. Mr. Row had some mixture of
natural warmth in his temper, of which he had not always a perfect command. If
at any time this broke out into some little excesses of anger, it never awaked
any passion of the like kind in Mrs. Row; but, on the contrary, she always
remained mistress of herself, and studied by the gentlest language and most
soothing endearments, to restore Mr. Rowe's mind to that calmness which reason
approves. And she equally endeavored, in every other instance, by the softest
arts of persuasion, and in a manner remote from all airs of superiority, to
lead Mr. Row on toward that perfection of virtue, to which she herself
aspired with the truest Christian zeal. During his long illness, she scarce
ever stirred from him a moment, and alleviated his severe affliction by
performing, with inconceivable tenderness and a^^duity, all the offices of
compassion suited to that melancholy season. She partook his sleepless nights,
and never quitted his bed, unless to serve him, or watch by him. And as she
could scarce be persuaded to forsake even his breathless clay, so she
consecrated her future years to his memory, by honoring his ashes with
resolutions of perpetual widowhood, which with more than female constancy she
inviolably maintained. Her conduct, in this last instance, on the review of it
after an interval of several years, afforded her great satisfaction; for she
thus expresses herself in a letter intended, after her own decease, to be
delivered to Mrs. Marrow, i^ that lady had survived her: Whatever such
distinguished sense and merit could claim, I have endeavored to pay my
much-loved husband's memory. I reflect with pleasure on my conduct on this
occasion; not only from a principle of justice and gratitude to him, but from a
conscious sense of honor and love of a virtuous reputation after death. -- But
if the soul, in a separate state, should be insensible of human censure or
applause, yet there is a disinterested homage due to the sacred name of virtue.

She mourned over the death of her husband and father, with all that becoming
tenderness and sensibility which ought to touch every humane and generous
heart, at the loss of the dearest persons on earth; yet her submission to the
determination of divine providence was exemplary, and she never presumed to
breathe any indecent murmurs against the will of heaven, which is ever just and
good; or behaved, in this hour of temptation, in a manner unsuitable to that
eminent piety which appeared in every other part of her life.

She was a gentle and kind mistress; treating her servants with great
condescension and goodness, and almost with the affability of a friend and
equal. She caused due care to be taken of them when they were ill; and did not
think it misbecame her to sit by the bed of a sick servant to read to her books
of piety. Her great humanity would not suffer her to ^e offended with light
faults; and as she never dismissed any one from her family, so, I think, none
of her servants ever left her, but with a view to the changing their condition
by marriage. She knew when she was well served, and reposed so much trust in
those whose fidelity she had experienced, that it might seem to verge toward
excess; yet, even such great confidence was hardly more than was due to that
servant who was with Mrs. Row at the time of her death; whose long and
faithful duty to her mistress, and remarkable sorrow for her loss, deserve to
be mentioned with honor.

She was a warm and generous friend, just, if not partial, to the merit of
those whom she loved, and most gentle and candid to their errors. She was
always forward to do them good offices; but in a distinguished manner she
studied, with infinite art and zeal, to insinuate the love of virtue into all
her acquaintance, and to promote their most important interest, by inciting
them to the practice of every thing that would recommend them to higher degrees
of the divine favor. This she proposed as the best end of friendship.

Mrs. Row was not entirely free from the attacks of malice, that she might not
be without opportunity to exercise the divine virtue of forgiveness; yet one
could scarce have learned from her discourse that she had an enemy; for she was
not wont to complain of any indecent conduct or injuries done to herself: So
that it was apparent, such things made light impressions on her mind; or that
she had endeavored to efface them with the happiest success.

It Is a celebrated thought of the Emperor Juliani Caesares, Edit. Par. p. 91.
Julian, which he makes Antonine express, when he represents him, with other
Roman Emperors, undergoing the scrutiny of Jupiter: When he was asked what he
had done to merit an Apotheosis, he replied, He had always studied to resemble
the Gods: And being asked again in what he had endeavored to be like them, he
answered, In having as few wants as possible of my own, and doing good most
extensively to others. This is certainly a just account of a divine temper; and
this was, in a great degree, the temper of Mrs. Row: For scarce any of the
human race was more sensible of the truth of that saying of the sacred Founder
of our religion, IT IS MORE BLESSED TO GIVE THAN TO RECEIVE. There is, says she
in a letter to a lady, written in the year 1697, an eternal propensity in my
soul to love and beneficence. I received the generous principle with the breath
of life, and find it inseparable from my existence. The exercise of this
god-like virtue was half the pleasure of her life Caritate, benevolentiaque
sublata, omnis est^^e vita sublata jucunditas. CIC. de Am. c. ult.
; so she once expressed herself to another of her friends. Nor was this only
the peculiar softness of her sex, or a natural felicity of temper, but the most
virtuous desire ^o diffuse happiness. Her zeal to do generous actions is
inexpressible; it broke out on all possible occasions; and there was not, I
believe, one of her friends in any rank of life, who did not experience her
beneficent disposition, by receiving from her presents of books, pictures, etc.
if not gifts of higher value.

Her charities were so great (if we consider the mediocrity of her fortune)
that they can scarce be paralleled, except in the histories of better times,
when Christianity had all its due power over the hearts of those who professed
it: They were, indeed only limited by the utmost extent of her power; for she
devoted the whole of her income, besides what was barely sufficient for the
necessities of life, to the relief of the indigent and distressed. This her
manuscript acquaints us with in the following vow; which, as it evidences a
heart glowing with the love of God and mankind, is worthy of the highest
praise; but as this solemn engagement involved Mrs. Row in some perplexities,
it seems peculiarly fit to add, that her example ought not to influence pious
minds thus to ^etter themselves in things not absolutely commanded; since the
observation of such vows may be attended with unforeseen difficulties injurious
to the peace of their future lives.

I consecrate half of my yearly income to charitable uses. And though, by this,
according to human appearances, I have reduced myself to some necessity, I cast
all my care on that gracious God to whom I am devoted, and to whose truth I
subscribe with my hand. I attest his faithfulness, and bring in my testimony to
the veracity of his word; I set to my seal, that God is true* and oh! by the
God of truth, I swear to perform this, and beyond this. For if thou will,
indeed, bless me, and enlarge my coast, all that I have beyond the bare
convenience and necessity of life, shall surely be the Lord's. And oh! grant me
sufficiency, that I may abound in every good work. O let me be the messenger of
consolation to the poor. Here I am, Lord, send me. Let me have the honor to
administer to the necessities of my brethren. I am, indeed, unworthy to wipe
the feet of the least of the servants of my Lord, much more unworthy of this
glorious commission; and yet, oh! send me, for thy goodness is free. Send whom
thou will on embassies to the kings and rulers of the earth; but let me be a
servant to the servants of my Lord* Let me administer consolation and relief to
the afflicted members of my exalted and glorious Redeemer. Let this be my lot,
and I give the glories of the world to the wind.

Pursuant to this sacred vow, which (as she expresses herself in another place
of her manuscript) was not made in ^^ hour of fear and distress, but in the joy
and gratitude of her (...), she not only avoided all superfluous expenses in
dress and luxury, but through an excess of benevolence (if there can be any
excess in such a god-like disposition) to enlarge her abilities of doing good
to her fellow creatures, she denied herself what might, in some sense, be
called the real necessaries of life.

Misery and indigence were a sufficient recommendation to her compassionate
regard and assistance; yet she showed a distinguished readiness to alleviate
the afflictions of persons of merit and virtue: And one who had the best
opportunities of making this observation, assures me, that she never knew any
such apply to Mrs. Row, without success, when she had it in her power to
relieve their wants. The first time she accepted of a gratification from the
bookseller for any of her works, she bestowed the whole sum on a family in
distress* and there is great reason to believe that she employed all the money
that she ever received on such an account in as generous a manner. And once,
when she had not by her a sum of money large enough to supply the like
necessities of another family, she readily sold a piece of pla^e for this
purpose. She was accustomed, on going abroad, to furnish herself with pieces of
money of different value, that she might relieve any object^ of compassion who
should fall in her way, according to their several degrees of indigence. She
contributed to some designs that had the appearance of charity, though she could
not approve of them in every respect: For ^he said, It was (...), sometimes, to
give for the credit of religion, when other inducements were wanting, that the
professors of Christianity might not be charged with covetousness. A vice which
she abhorred so much, that scarce any grosser kind of immorality could more
effectually exclude from her friendship. I never, said she, grudge any money,
but when it is laid out on my self* for I consider how much it would buy for
the poor. Besides the sums of money which she gave away, and the distribution
of practical books on religious subjects, she employed her own hands in labors
of charity to cloth the necessitous. This she did, not only for the natives of
the lower Palatinat^, when they were driven from their country by the rage of
war, which appeared a calamity peculiarly worthy of compassion, but it was her
frequent employment to make garments of almost every kind, and bestow them on
those who wanted them. She discovered a strong sense of humanity, and often
showed her exquisite concern for the unhappy, by weeping over their
misfortunes. These were the generous tears of virtue, and not any feminine
weakness; for she was rarely observed to weep at afflictions that befell
herself. She was, indeed, so sensibly touched with the miseries of the poor, as
not only to send her servant to examine what they ^^ood in need of when they
were sick, but often visited them in person, when they were so wretched that
their houses were not fit for her to enter into; and even (...) ^hey were ill
of malignant and contagious (...). One kind of (...) in which she greatly
delighted, was causing children to be taught to read and work: These she
furnished with supplies of clothing, as well as (...)* and other necessary
books of instruction. This she did not only at Fr^m^, but also at a
neighboring village, where part of her estate ^ay. And when she met in the
streets with children of promising countenances, who were perfectly unknown to
her, if upon enquiry, it appeared, that through the poverty of their parents they
were not put to school, she added them to the number of those who were taught
at her own expense. She condescended, herself, to instruct them in the plain
and necessary principles and duties of religion; and the grief she felt when
any of them did not answer the hopes she had entertained, was equal to the
great satisfaction she received, when it appeared that her care and bounty had
been well-placed. She was also a contributor to a charitable institution of
this kind at From of a more public nature; though, according to the general
custom of such schools, all who were educated in it were compelled to worship
God in that one particular form, from which she herself took the liberty to
dissent. But Mrs. Row was not corrupted by this example of contracted
goodness, which can scarce be reconciled to that universal benevolence the
gospel enjoins: Her charities were not confined to those of her own party or
sentiments, but bestowed on indigent persons of almost all the sects into which
Christianity is divided; and even those whose religious opinions seemed to her
of the most dangerous consequence, partook largely of her bounty. Nor was her
benef^cence limited only to those who in strict terms might be called poor; for
as she was wont to say, 'twas one of the greatest benefits that could be done
to (...), to free them from the cares and anxi^ties that attend a narrow
fortune; in pursuance of these generous sentiments, she has been often known to
make large presents to persons who were not oppressed with the last extremes of
indigence. She possessed, in an eminent degree, the art of giving, a nobler
accomplishment than the art of enjoying, on which one great poet of antiquity
compliments another Di tibi divitias dederint, ^rtemque fruend^. HOR. lib. 1.
^ep. 4. ad Tibu^^.
. She knew how to heighten every favor, by the ready and obliging manner in
which she conferred it. With regard to those whose circumstances were such,
that the accepting alms might have put their modesty to some pain, she studied
to spare their blushes while she softened their adversity. When one such person
of her acquaintance was in some distress, she contrived to lose at play a sum
of money sufficient to supply the necessity of the case. This was, perhaps, the
only time she touched a ca^d in her life. To the poor she seemed a ministering
angel: Her goodness prevented their requests; and smiles, gentle language, and
the warmest expressions of good will, always accompanied her actions of mercy.
The distressed were encouraged to disclose all their wants, by the kindest
assurances of relief* and she treated them with the sweetness and easy goodness
of a friend, rather than the superiority of a benefactor; nor was she inclined
to take offense at the appearance of ingratitude in her dependants. When she
chanced to overhear some unthankful poor, entertained at her servant's table,
murmur at their food, though she had fed on the same herself, she only put this
gentle construction on their behavior* That they expected something better
than ordinary from her table. And she was so far from resenting this indecent
delicacy of appetite, that she did not, even at that time, omit the alms she
usually gave when any indigent persons were entertained at her house.

It Is astonishing how the moderate estate Mrs. Row was possessed of, could
supply such various and expensive benefactions; and her own sense of this once
broke out to an intimate friend; I am surpised, said she to her, how it is
possible my estate should answer all these things! and yet I never want money.
This she only spoke to giver honor to the divine blessing, which, as she was
wont to acknowledge with great piety, apparently protected her from losses, and
prospered all her affairs. 'Twould be extreme injustice, to interpret her
expressions of gratitude to the goodness of providence in a different manner;
for her great care to conceal her charities from the observation of mortals,
gives the highest evidence that no love of human applause tainted the purity of
her benevolent dispositions. Indeed, her modesty and aversion to the appearance
of show and* ostentation, caused her to cast such a veil of secrecy over all
her beneficent actions, that I fear many of them, highly worthy to be known and
imitated by posterity, must remain concealed from the world till that day when
they shall be rewarded in the fight of the whole universe, by that almighty
Judge who was alone witness to them.

Such an assemblage of virtues as united in Mrs. Rowe's character, could only
be the offspring of piety. This divine principle discovered itself very early
in her mind; and since Mr. Grove wrote the former part of these memoirs, I have
received fresh evidence to confirm his observation, that it is not improbable
the first dawnings of reason guided her to acknowledge and adore the author of
her being, and commence that uniform and exemplary course of obedience to his
laws, which, by the assistance of heaven, she maintained in every part of her
life.

Her writings give a faithful picture of her soul. Her profound humility, and
supreme affection to God; her faith in his promises, and dependence on his
providence; her zeal for his glory, and love to the holiness of his laws,
appear in the strongest light in her works; and particularly in her Devotions,
published since her death by the reverend Dr. Watts. But as it would too much
swell these memoirs to transcribe her sentiments on these heads, I shall only
relate the means she made use of to cultivate these excellent dispositions;
with the addition of some passages from her manuscripts, that have not yet been
communicated to the public.

She devoted herself to the service of heaven in a solemn covenant See D^vout
Exercises, page 25.
. In this she imitated the example of her pious mother, to whose sacred
engagement of this kind Mrs. Row has made this addition, which evidently
appears by the hand to be written in her younger years.

MY God, and my father's God, who keep covenant and mercy to a thousand
generations, I call thee to witness, that with all the sincerity of my soul I
consent to this covenant, and stand to the solemn dedication made of me in my
baptism: And to this

I God's high name my awful witness make* And thus, with the utmost willingness
and joy, I subscribe with my hand to the Lord.

E. SINGER.

And beneath, in the same paper, she writes thus:

Renewed Sept. 1728. When I am standing before the Judge of all the earth, to
be sentenced for all eternity, let this contract be an evidence that I renounce
the world, and take the sup^^me God for my portion and happiness.

Her manuscript also affords the following larger renewal of this sacred
covenant.

Let me renew my vows to thee, let me repeat the sacred obligation; let me, if
possible, make ties more strong -- more entirely devote my self to thee. With
what pleasure do I reflect on the obligations I have to be thine! I bless the
sacred engagement, and would not be free for ten thousand worlds. I never kn^w
a happy moment till I was thine; all my joys (...) from that happy period; from
thence (...) their spring, and from thence they (...) flow. Oh! therefore let
me joyfully (...) my vows to thee; let angels instruct me how to confirm them;
let them teach me their forms, and give me their flames; let all be noble, and
pathetic, and solemn as their immortal vows. I would bind my self beyond the
ties that mortals know -- But I cannot speak with the ardor I wish; I cannot
find words to express the vehemence of my soul: But oh! thou who can
understand these desires which language fails me to utter, accept the sincerity
of my heart, regard and accept my vows; and oh! let them be confirmed for ever.

Attend, ye angels! let heaven and earth hear me! the most high God, the
possessor of heaven and earth, himself be my witness! for even to him I dare
appeal, from whom no disguise can veil my thoughts; even thy sacred name I dare
attest, whose favor is my only hope, and whose frown is the only thing I can
fear: Yet my words are not the effect of terror and distress, but of reason and
of love. No action of my life was ever more deliberate and voluntary. My soul
gives its entire assent, and offers up all its powers; I make no reserve, thou
have my whole, my undivided heart.

O Thou that look down from the exaltations of thy majesty, that ridest upon
the heavens in thy excellency; and from thence do not disdain to be a father
to the fatherless, and the judge of the widow; I come to thee destitute, and
forlorn, and abandoned of every name of joy or confidence upon earth. I have
found all the sp^cious titles and relations among men, to be vanity and a lie:
But I rejoice in the conviction, I bless the happy circumstance that has thrown
a reproach on all human trust; that has broke my engagements with every thing
below, and forced me, friendless and defenseless, to fly to thee. Oh! receive
me with the affection of a father; take me into thy tenderest care and
protection. Oh! remember thy covenant with my pious ancestors, to be a God to
them, and their seed after them, by an everlasting covenant. Thy compassions
exceed those of the tenderest relation on earth; thou do delight to exercise
loving kindness and truth in the earth; thou art the God of all grace and
consolation: These are thy free, thy natural operations. Fury is not in thee;
thy name, thy boasted name is Love; and thou do never deviate from its gentle
dictates; it is the beginning and end of all thy works, the glorious end thou
had from all eternity in view: Thou do not withdraw thy eyes from this
design, but have set thy heart upon it from everlasting to everlasting:
Goodness and compassion for ever flow from thee. Thou can not restrain those
glorious emanations; they will, and must for ever stream from thee, the
infinite abyss, the spring of goodness, the sum, the plenitude of joy, its
neverfailing source.

Oh, thou have purchased my soul with thy own blood; before God and angels I
put it into thy custody; with thee I solemnly deposite the sacred pledge; into
thy hand I commit the precious treasure; it is my all, my very being: Oh, form
it after thy pleasure, and secure it from the stratagems of hell. I am
surrounded with danger, and a thousand snares attend me; I have but one cast
for eternity. Look with eyes of pity on my impotence and distress; I fly to
thee, let me find a hiding place from the wind, a covert from the tempest.

I am not, I cannot be my own keeper; flesh and blood is too weak to struggle
with principalities, and powers, and the rulers of darkness in high places; the
combination is too strong for unassisted nature to conquer. Thou know my
strength is weakness, my wisdom folly, my natural light all darkness. I know
not the next step before me, and if I stumble, 'twill bring reproach on thy
holy ways.

I am of the Lord's side; I am in league with thee against the confederacy of
hell: I li^t my self under thy banners, to oppose the kingdom of darkness; give
me strength and wisdom to encounter all opposition; let me never be left to my
own conduct, or dishonor thy cause by any weakness or inadvertency: O thou
that do not slumber nor sleep, watch my goings, and let none of my footsteps
slide. O fountain of love and grace, let me feel thy present influences. There
is no relation in all nature, so near as that between God and a virtuous mind:
And will thou not adorn it with those Graces which are capable of being
improved for ever?

In the name of the Lord God of hosts, the God of the armies of Israel, let me
conquer the principalities and powers of darkness. I have taken thy word for my
defense, I have fled to the name of the Lord for safety; let me rejoice, let me
triumph in that sanctuary, nor know a thought of diffidence or fear. Let me
hope against hope, believe above belief, with confidence worthy of that power
on which I trust, and of that veracity which is engaged to protect me. Be the
powers of he^l confounded, while I make my boast in the Lord, and rejoice in
thy salvation!

I can, I must, I dare set to my seal, that God it true. I need not scruple to
affirm what thou have attested; I may, without hesitation, give my a^sent to
the words of the living God. Let not my footsteps slide, for thou art my only
counselor. Leave me not to choose for my self; give me no advantage but what I
may employ for thy glory; cancel every prayer that has not been agreeable to
thy will. I retract every petition, whose success will not center in thy
interest; it is thee, not my self, I would honor; it is thee I would live and
die for: Make thy own terms, let them be what they will, I take thee for my
only portion for this life, and to all eternity: And with full consent I
subscribe with my hand to the Lord.

Mrs. Row 's birthday.
Sept. 11. 1735. E. ROW.

She practiced secret prayer three times a day, as appears by this resolution
taken from her manuscript: At morning, at noon, and at night, I will praise
^hee, and pay my constant homage to the supreme and independent Being. And as
she was wont to say, That we ought to consecrate our brightest ^^tervals to the
service of heaven; agreeably to these just sentiments, she employed those parts
of the day in which she believed the powers of the mind most free and active,
as seasons of holy retirement: But (as far as I could judge) her devotions were
rather frequent, than protracted to such an undue length, as might tend to
distract the attention, and fatigue and exhaust the spirits.

She had an high veneration and love to the Lord's Day, which (excepting
offices of goodness and compassion) she wholly consecrated to piety and
devotion. No slight indisposition, or any severity of weather, prevented her
constant attendance on public worship, at which her attentive and reverent
behavior showed the utmost composure and elevation of soul. She also, in
imitation of our blessed Savior's example of doing good on the Sabbath,
sanctified the Lord's day, by entertaining a set of poor people at her house,
and by an abundant distribution of charity. But her devout regard to the public
worship of God will best appear by the following passage extracted from the
manuscript volume of her devotions, which I have so often cited.

I Solemnly set apart one day in the week (if possible Saturday) to prepare my
self for the noble employment of public worship; and then let all the powers of
my soul be exercised in love and humble adoration. Let me make more sensible
approaches to the propitious Being, whom unseen, I love; and let him fill me
with the ineffable delights that his presence affords, and make me joyful in
the house of prayer: Let me be abundantly satisf^^d with the fatness of his
house, and drink of the rivers of his pleasure.

She never neglected any opportunity of partaking of the holy communion, for
which she had the highest affection and reverence; and the same manuscript will
show what virtuous resolutions she made at such sacred seasons.

With every sacrament let me renew my strength, and with the bread of life
receive immortal vigor. Let me remember the vows of God, and at my return to
the world, let me commit my ways to thee. Let me be absolutely resigned to thy
providence, nor once distrust thy goodness and fidelity. Let me be careful for
nothing, but with prayer and supplication make my wants known to thee. Let the
most awful sense of thy presence dwell on my heart, and always keep me in a
serious disposition. Let me be merciful and just in my actions, calm and
regular in my thoughts: And oh! do thou set a watch on my mouth, and keep the
door of my lips. Let me speak evil of no man; let me advance the reputation of
the virtuous, and never be silent in the praise of merit. Let my tongue speak
the language of my heart, and be guided by exact truth and perfect sincerity.
Let me open my hands wide to the wants of the poor, in full confidence that my
heavenly Father will supply mine; and that the high possessor of heaven and
earth will not fail to restore, in the hour of my distress, what I have parted
with for his sake.

O let thy grace be sufficient for me, and thy strength be manifest in my
weakness. Be present with me in the hour of temptation, and confirm the pious
resolutions thou have enabled me to form.

She had an inexpressible love and veneration for the Holy Scriptures, and was
affiduous in the reading of them, particularly the New Testament, the Psalms,
and those parts of the prophetical writings which relate to our blessed
Savior. For some time before her death she scarce read any thing but these
sacred books, and practical treatises on religious subjects. She was also wont
to assist her improvement in virtue and she Christian life, by frequent
meditations on the blessedness of a future state, the perfections of God,
particularly his infinite goodness and Mercy in the redemption of the world by
Jesus Christ; and on other important parts of religion, which appeared best
suited to promote devout and holy dispositions. And besides these her usual
exercises of piety, in the latter part of her life, she observed some stated
seasons of abstinence and extraordinary devotion.

The fervor of her zeal in the cause of religion, was beyond the rate of common
examples. As she could not command her tears of transpo^t, when she was witness
to any eminent instance of piety, so the sinking state in which the interest of
heaven now appears, and the fatal advances of infidelity in this nation, rent
her very soul. She spoke with the highest esteem and gratitude of those
excellent persons, who, in the present age have defended Christianity by their
learned writings, and truly venerated them as public benefactors to mankind.
She much interested herself in the prosperity of the colony of Georgia. An
establishment projected on the justest principles of liberty, and with the most
generous views to promote social happiness, could not but give a very sensible
pleasure to so benevolent a mind: But her exquisite satisfaction in this
design, was chiefly owing to her piety, and the hopes she entertained, that
this remote part of the world would be blessed with the knowledge of the true
religion. I do pray, says she, I cannot help praying for a glorious success of
the gospel in th^se dark regimes, where the name of a Savior has not been
known. -- Though the prospect seems (...) here, it lo^ks bright there, and my
soul rejoices in it. God will, no d^^bt, bless our present government (...)
good an undertaking: It will shine in history to their immortal honor.

Mrs. Row seemed born for the practice of sublime and ascetic piety, 'twas the
supreme pleasure of her life; yet her own words assure us, that she did not set
too high a value on strong emotions of the passions, and religious fervors; nor
was tempted by the love of devotion to prefer it to social virtue. For the thus
expresses herself in a letter to a noble friend, I have wrote no pious
meditations of late. The warmth of devotion, perhaps, as well as other
passions, declines with life* But I hope the calm, the reasonable and solid
part of religion will be still improved. And in another letter to the same
lady, she says, I have no restitution to mak^, nor the least known injury to
repair. I lay a much greater stress on this part of religion that regards
mankind, than I do on any height of devotion, as necessary as I think it, to
reconcile the mind to death. She affected no kind of singularity or appearance
of severity, nor presumed to censure those who came not up to that strictness
to which she obliged herself. And she was so far from imposing any methods of
devout life which she herself used, on others to whom, on account of their
difference of tempers, and deeper engagements in the business of the world,
they might be inexpedient, that she did not recommend, or I think, so much as
mention them to her most intimate friends; but, on the contrary, studied
concealment so much, that it is only from her manuscripts, and the information
of her servant (from whom they could not be hid) that I have arrived at the
knowledge of the greater part of them, since her death.

She possessed a large measure of that serenity and cheerfulness of temper,
which seem naturally to flow from conscious virtue, and the hopes of the divine
favor. This happy disposition of mind, which is more than once recommended in
the sacred writings, and is so great an ornament to sincere piety, continued
with Mrs. Row to her last moments, and was never interrupted by any of those
fantastic disorders that so often cloud the imaginations of the softer sex; so
that (excepting the intervals of sorrow, occasioned by her devout and
compassionate dispositions, and just affliction for the loss of Mr. Row and
Mr. Singer.) Her whole life seemed not only a constant calm, but a perpetual
sunshine, and every hour of it sparkled with good humor, and inoffensive
gaiety.

As it may seem improper to relate the sentiments of a lady who was not versed
in controversial divinity, or the erudition of the schools, on subjects that
have divided the learned and religious world; I will only take the liberty to
say, that she openly avowed* what appeared to her to be truth, and defended it
with warmth; yet the sweetness of her disposition made her incapable of the
impious rashness of those, who, without mercy, pronounce a sentence of
damnation on all who dissent from them in abstruse and disputable points: But
she expressed herself as if it was less necessary to guard against the contrary
extreme. For she says, in one of her letters, My charity is very large, and
from this catholic spirit I have often canonized some libertine or atheist for
a great saint. Her love of piety was not confined to those of her own party in
religion; and it ought to be related as an exemplary instance of Christian
moderation, that she continued all the latter part of her life in constant
communion with some who differed from her in articles which she thought of
great importance; though she was frequently solicited to an opposite conduct by
persons of a more narrow spirit; and could not escape censure for her adherence
to the charity of the gospel. And as her zeal did in no part of her life
degenerate into religious fury, so, toward the close of it, her gentle and
charitable dispositions increased, and she seemed to be visibly ripening into
the temper of that blessed region to which she was soon to be removed.

Her friendships were founded on virtue, but not a perfect agreement in those
lesser matters which divide us as Christians and Englishmen; in which she
showed a generous mind, elevated above the mean principles of party and
bigo^ry. She was favored with the esteem and acquaintance of the Countess of
Winchels^a, the Viscountess Weymouth, the Viscountess S^udamore, the Lady
Carteret, the Lady Brook, the honorable Mrs. Thynne, the Earl of Orr^ry, Dr.
Kenne, Lord Bishop of Bath and Wells, Sir Richard Blackmore, Dr. Watts, Mr.
Prior, Mr. Grove, etc. But above all she possessed the highest degree of
friendship with another illustrious ornament of the age, which as it began as
soon as ever her Ladyship was capable of this generous passion, so it continued
without the least interruption to the last moments of Mrs. Rowe's life. And it
gives me great pleasure that I can conclude the character of a lady whose
memory ought to be most dear to me, with this testimony to her virtue and
merit; that her life was honored with the friendship, and her death lamented
with the tears of the Countess of Hertford.

Nec tua, praeter te, chartis intexere quisquam
Facta queat, dictis ut non majora supersint.
TIBULLUS. To Mrs. ELIZABETH SINGER. On her Divine Poems.
July 19. 1706.
I.
ON the fair banks of gentle Thames
I tuned my harp; nor did celestial themes
Refuse to dance upon my strings:
There beneath the evening sky,
I sung my cares asleep, and raised my wishes high
To everlasting things.
Sudden from Albion's western coast
Harmonious notes came gliding by,
The neighboring shepherds knew the silver sound;
It Is Philomela's voice the neighboring shepherds cry,
At once my strings all silent lie,
At once my fainting muse was lost,
In the superior sweetness drowned.
In vain I bid my tuneful powers unite;
My soul retired, and left my tongue,
I was all ear, and Philomela's song
Was all divine delight.
II.
Now be my harp forever dumb,
My Muse attempt no more. 'Twas long ago
I bid adieu to mortal things,
To Grecian tales, and wars of Rome;
'Twas long ago I broke all but the immortal strings:
Now those immortal strings have no employ,
Since a fair angel dwells below,
To tune the notes of heaven, and propagate the joy,
Let all my powers with awe profound,
While Philomela sings,
Attend the rapture of the sound,
And my devotion rise on her seraphic wings.
I. WATTS.

To Mrs. ROW. On her excellent Poems.
TEACH me the art, fair regent of the soul,
To raise the passions, or at will, control;
That heavenly art which can our cares beguile,
Make envy pleased, and pensive sorrow smile.
Circe with magic spells the soul could bind,
And change the shape: here the reverse we find;
The brute, transformed by you, assumes a nobler kind.
O had I but thy voice, and skill, and lyre!
Soon would I set the listening swains on fire.
Virtue's majestic form before their eyes,
Her lovely train, her palace in the skies,
And high refulgent throne, should stand confessed,
And with aspiring wishes swell each breast.
The tenants of the grove, a tuneful throng,
Should cease their lays, to hear my sweeter song;
Thyself too transports feel, before unknown,
And in another praise what was thy own:
Else the too modest nymph will never believe,
How soft the strains! the joys how vast they give!
But while (...) admiring audience sit around,
And faint beneath the rapture of the sound,
Calm and unawed, she will herself appear,
And think we flatter what she scarce can bear.
Fond wishes these! to think she would impart
Heaven's inspirations, like the rules of art;
Or trust to any mean, unskilful hand,
(The speaking strings that knows not to command)
The golden gift, a welcome present made
By Gabriel; who with grace celestial said:
'Hail, thou of heaven beloved! this harp is thine,
'So often sat to hymns and airs divine;
'Still let it sacred be to praise and love;
''Twill kindle ardors pure as ours above,
'Assist thy rising soul, and bear her flight
'Beyond the rolling spheres, to realms of endless light:
'Morning and evening let me meet thee there.'
No more he spoke -- but mixed unseen with air.
HENRY GROVE.

To Mrs. ROW. After her Recovery from the Smallpox.
PERMIT, great awful soul, the muse
The rough, unpracticed muse, to bring
Her humble joy upon her feeble wing,
Nor the bold address refuse;
Weak though her wings, and faint her fire,
Yet true the heart, and ardent the desire.
O! could I rise, and soar like thee,
On sounding pinions through the skies;
My daring muse should hail the auspicious fate*
(...) no^es that would the listening world surprise;
And proud in pompous harmony,
With solemn and majestic state,
Should bring an off^ring that might be
Worthy Heaven, and worthy thee.
Cruel ^^sease! that d^st not (...)
The Great, the Witty, or the Fair!
Bless Maria's royal charms
Yielded to thy hideous arms:
From us at once thou did remove
To the brighter realms above
That heaven of beauty and of love.
Thou did attack the Imperial crown,
And strike the Roman eagle down.
Proud Gallia wears a mournful face,
To see her haughty Bo^ri^n race,
Her boasted heirs reduced by thee
To a weak infant progeny.
Young Churchill felt thy poisoned dart
Pierce his generous, tender heart,
Dropped in life's advancing bloom,
Nor saw his mighty father's doom:
Europe freed, and France subdued,
And the old English gratitude;
Cursed by those his courage saved,
By every senseless coward braved*
All his godlike acts disprais'd,
Sunk by the power his virtue raised:
Yet just posterity shall call
The Hero greater by his fall.
Ah! the laureled Poet's breath,
That saves the Patriot's name from death,
Stopped by thy relentless power,
Cruel disease! is heard no more.
Bright Orinda! sacred name,
Sacred to virtue and to fame!
Yet we lament her destiny,
Bright Orinda fell by thee.
Cruel disease! that do not spare
The Great, the Witty, or the Fair!
But vacant thrones are filled again;
New heroes with their warlike train
Triumph on the hostile plain.
Even bright Orinda's harmony,
Great Philomel's supplied by thee:
Thy double portion of her fire
Kindles soft joys and pure desire.
Favorite of the tuneful Nine!
Sweet the notes! the thoughts divine!
Much already has been given
By thee, inspired by bounteous Heaven*
Now o'erjoy'd we hope for more
From thy wit's unmeasured store.
Still we find this gaudy town
Without thee a desert grown:
But when winter's rugged face
The rural honors does disgrace,
Then returning home with thee
A new* a wondrous spring we see,
Beauty, Joy, and Harmony.
Forgive the thought! how happy we
At such distance placed from thee!
None with their officious haste
Told the danger, till 'twas past;
Our sympathizing souls were spared,
Nor thy Delius' torments shared;
Yet with horror we dilate
On the near impe^^^ing fate.
When thou shall to death submit,
Who shall supply those eyes and wit?
Never again we hope to find
Two such heavenly wonders jo^n'd,
So fair a face, so bright a mind!
Kind disease! that once did spare
The Great, the Witty, and the Fair!
Sept. 8. 1712. JOSEPH STANDEN.

To Mrs. ROW. On her excellent Poems.
WHILE Phoebus' favorite sons in lofty lays
Attune their lyres to Philomela's praise,
Will the fair saint without a frown receive
The humble homage these low numbers give?
Virtuous their zeal, if in the attempt they fail,
In duteous strains distinguished worth to hail.
Consummate mistress of the tuneful art!
To thee the Nine their various gifts impart,
Teach thee alike with matchless skill to inspire
The rural reed, or touch the courtly lyre;
And bid thy verse with blended beauties please,
Sweetness with strength, and majesty with ease.
What shining sense in purest diction told!
The current limpid, and the bottom gold.
What glowing figures warm with heavenly flame!
What happy judgment, fancy's rage to ^ame!
Bold as the flight of the Pindar.
Dirc^^n swan,
Whose daring pinions earth's low scenes disdain;
Wild, unconfined, he wantons, roams, and soars,
And leaves the stars behind, in his unbounded course.
Yet softly sweet thy melting numbers move,
As when the Sappho.
Lesbian tunes her lute to love;
When gentle harmony, and easy art,
Sooth every sense, and steal upon the heart.
Thy meanest worth, the gift of tunef^l lays,
To use that gift aright thy nobler praise;
To own the Giver, and direct thy songs
To the high themes that dwell on s^raph's ^ongues;
In faithful verse to bid bright virtue shine
Fair as she looks to angels e^es, and thine;
And audient of her lore, beneath the sky,
The Immortal strains of paradise to try;
This praise shall last when Homer's fame decays,
And vengeful fire over total nature preys;
When every work of man, in equal scales,
Just Heaven shall weigh, and al but virtue fails.
Then impious poets, who profane of heart,
To ^^atter vice debased the heavenly art,
Still weep their blasted bays, and howl below,
Amid their kind^ed ^^ends, in gulphs of woe.
Not so the Bard who guilty laurels shunned,
Whose daring muse the cause of virtue owned;
Immortal palms his honored brow shall grace,
God own his worth, and angels speak his praise.
This, Philomela, all the fame you seek,
For this you every fond engagement break;
For this from sure applause to shades retire,
To consecrate to heaven your hallowed lyre*
Content while God approves, you pleased forego
Fame, wealth and every boasted joy below;
To lead the life of heaven, to all unknown.
Till the last day, when God thy deeds shall crown.
Then hid no more, thy worth the world shall know,
And angels loud the trump of glory blow.
Then by th'applauding universe approved,
By seraphs honored, and by God beloved,
Thou, friend of virtue in degenerate days!
Who dared assert her cause, and sing her praise,
Shall take, though late, the great, the immortal prize,
Crowned with distinguished honors in the skies
While brighter stars shall round thy temples shine,
And near the martyr host a throne be thine.
To Mrs. ROW. Occasioned by her pr^senting me with Moliere's Works*
WELL may you part with Moliere's comic strains,
Whose polished soul no female fault retains;
But might revealed with modest pride, defy
The nicest search of his discerning eye.
Wise without sourness, without lightness gay,
Devout as angels, and as mild as they:
Not warmer flames their noblest songs inspire,
Nor deeper reverence sinks the adoring quire,
Than yours, when to their theme you tune the lyre.
Your piercing wit the best goodnature sways,
Quick the least merit to discern and raise,
But ^low to censure what you cannot praise.
The spleen over you never sheds his baleful ray,
You still enjoy, and give un^ullied day
No hideous pedantry with learned noise
Confounds the music of the female voice;
But while the wisest maxims you infuse,
With rapture we attend, and ha^l the heavenly muse.
In you religion's native beauties shine*
Attract our love, and prove its rise divine.
Courted by fame, with pleasure compassed round,
Unhurt you traverse this enchanted ground,
To heaven with faintless speed your course pursue,
Nor can the gaudy scene from heaven divert your view.
And when this darling theme your tongue employs,
Seraphic notions rule your charming voice,
We hear an angel, and we taste the joys.
If finished scenes you draw of bliss above,
Libertines gaze, admire, begin to love,
Confess him wise, whose heart and hope's on high,
And dread their sensual joys at such a price to buy.
But whither would I rove -- fair saint, excuse
The feeble efforts of a grateful muse,
Which not aspired a perfect draught to frame,
But only meant to give those charms a name,
Which late with pleasing transports filled my soul,
And bid the happy hours unnumber'd roll,
Taught me unmoved to view the unthinking fair,
And made even Moliere less a wit appear*
THO. AMORY.

Verses to the Memory of Mrs. ROW.
By a FRIEND.
WHILE pensive in the lonely shades I stray,
Or through enameled meads pursue my way.
A gloomy sorrow hangs about my heart,
And sudden tears over my dim eye balls start.
In vain (I cry) in vain, delightful spring,
Thou deckst the plains, who now thy charms shall sing?
Who from the various beauty of the fields,
And every herb thy genial influence yields,
Shall teach us their Great Author to discern,
And from each tree and flower his goodness learn?
Since Philomela her last debt has paid,
And cold, and silent, in the tomb is laid.
No more the echoes shall repeat her song;
Nor crystal riv'lets, as they glide along,
Shall on their waters bear her tuneful lays,
Devoted all to her Redeemer's praise:
No more shall I her friendly converse share*
Nor hear the dictates of her pious care*
Yet though the bright example is removed,
Be its idea still revered, and loved;
To imitate her virtue may I try,
And on the path she marked still fix my eye*
Though far behind, imperfect, and distressed,
Fain would I seek the climes of balmy rest:
Where ^in no more can tempt, nor pain annoy,
Nor pining sorrow interrupt their joy;
Where rivers of eternal pleasure flow,
And gales of peace forever round them blow.
Say, could I see her in this happy state,
And that she lives no more on earth regret?
That freed, and victor in the glorious strife,
No more she labors through the toil of life;
But wears the starry crown, the bright reward,
By God himself for all his saints prepared?
How often, when I joined her evening walk,
Would she in rapture of this period talk
How often the fetters of her clay bemoan,
And wish them broke, impatient to be gone!
Yet still resigned to wait the appointed day,
Nor dared to murmur at her fate's delay.
The thought of earthly bliss she long had fled,
Desirous to be numbered with the dead,
And meet her dear Alexis, on that shore,
Where fear of parting can torment no more:
Faithful to him, she from the world retired,
Though by that world distinguished and admired.
In solitude she past the circling days,
Fearless of censure, negligent of praise.
In contemplation all her hours were spent,
Her thoughts on heavenly objects ever bent*
Till by the hand of death from hence removed;
Whose dart she met in the retreat she loved.
Obscure and peaceful may her ashes lie,
No marble pomp attract the curious eye;
Nor weeping angel shall her grave adorn,
And teach the careless passenger to mourn;
No sunburned pilgrim from afar shall come,
With superstitious rites to hail her tomb;
Nor shining tapers through the gloom of night,
Upon her urn diffuse a trembling light*
Her worth a far more lasting fame shall give,
Her worth in every virtuous breast shall live.
On the Death of Mrs. ROW.
ACCEPT, illustrious shade! these artless lays,
The muse a tribute to thy memory pays:
Thy loss to no one private grief confined,
Demands the general sorrow of mankind.
Often did intrigue its guilty arts unite,
To blacken the records of female wit;
The tuneful song lost every modest grace,
And lawless freedoms triumphed in their place.
The muse, for vices not her own accused,
With blushes viewed her sacred gifts abused:
Those gifts for nobler purposes designed,
To raise the thoughts, and moralize the mind*
The chaste delights of virtue to inspire,
And warm the bosom with seraphic fire,
Sublime the passions, lend devotion wings,
And celebrate the first great cause of things.
These glorious tasks were Philomela's part,
Who charms the fancy, and who mends the heart.
In her was every bright perfection joined,
Whatever adorns, or dignifies the mind;
Her^s every happy elegance of thought,
Refined by virtue, as by genius wrought:
Each low-born care her powerful strains control,
And wake the nobler passions of the soul.
When to the vocal grove, or winding stream,
She hymn'd the almighty Author of its frame,
Transported echoes bore the sounds along,
And all creation list'ned to the song.
Bold as when raptured seraphs strike the lyre,
Chaste as the vestal's consecrated fire,
Soft as the balmy airs that gently play,
In the calm sunset of a vernal day,
Sublime as virtue, elegant as wit,
As fancy various, and as beauty sweet.
Applauding angels with attention hung,
To learn the heavenly accents from her tongue:
They in the midnight hour beheld her rise
Beyond the verge of these inferior skies;
Where rapt in joys to vulgar minds unknown,
She felt a flame ecstatic as their own.
Oh! while distinguished in the realms above,
The blissful seats of harmony and love,
Thy happy spirit joins the heavenly throng,
Glows with their transports, and partakes their song;
Fixed (...) my soul shall thy example grow,
And be my genius and my guide below:
To this I Will point my first, my noblest views,
Thy spotless verse shall regulate my muse.
And oh! forgive (th^^ (...) the transcript be,
That copies an original like thee)
My highest pride, my best attempt for fame,
That joins my own to Philomela's name.
ELIZABETH CARTER.

On the Death of Mrs. ROW.
WHAT heavenly power bends over you gaping grave,
And weeps the illustrious dead she could not save?
^o! from her flowing robes divinely bright
A da^^^ng glory gilds the shades of ^ight*
It Is thou, (...)! the celestial maid
This tribute pays to Philomela's shade:
For thee, great bard, she bids her sorrows flow,
Lost in her grief, an ecstacy of woe.
But hark! from her long trance the goddess breaks,
And thus in wild, despairing accents speaks*
(Thou midnight moon, and all ye starry throng,
Retard your course, and hear the immortal song!
Ye silver ^^oods, your murmuring flux restrain,
Nor roll your crystal volumes to the main!)
No more let flowers receive their annual birth,
Or vernal verdure cloathe the laughing earth*
No more, thou solar l^mp, the day restore;
Ye stars, the fields of ^^ther gild no more;
Thou luner orb, withdraw thy silver ^ight,
To total darkness give the horrid night:
Dead is the bard, who wont from you to raise
A song immortal to your Maker's praise;
In your fair volumes saw the God designed,
And from his works s^ng the creating mind.
Dead is my boast, in whom I meant to show
What gifts the first of muses could bestow.
Oh! she had power the wildest rage to charm,
To bend the haughtiest, and the coldest warm;
Power to seduce unthinking crowds from bliss,
And bid delusion and perdition please:
Far other her design; her heavenly page
To truth and wisdom guides the listening age.
Undazzled by the glittering pomp of state*
Not here is the part to praise the guilty great;
Merit alone boasts her unbrib'd applause,
And all her art she used in virtue's cause.
Drawn by her hand in native beauty bright
Religion rises lovely to the sight.
No more can vice, with all her borrowed charms,
Tempt thoughtless mortals to her fatal arms;
They for false bliss no more the true destroy,
Or rush on misery, for a dream of joy.
Even death, supreme of terrors, now appears
No more the object of mistaking fears;
He frees the immortal mind from humble clay,
And gives a passage to eternal day:
Though dark the way, with joy they tread the road,
That leads to bliss, to virtue, and to God.
Such, heavenly bard, thy works, whose lasting praise
Shall crown thy head with never fading bays,
Secure of life shall the grave's power defy,
And last unchanged till time and nature die.
Yet what to thee the fame by mortals given?
To thee, applauded in the courts of heaven?
There thy least glory, first of bards, to have sung
In accents worthy of a seraph's tongue;
Thy nobler praise, fair saint, that when below
Thine was the god like pleasure to bestow:
That the prime grace, celestial charity,
The first and fairest daughter of the sky,
Thy hands extended, triumphed in thy breast,
And her great vot'ry's total soul possessed.
What loud laments were sent to heaven that day
That to its earth restored thy breathless clay!
How did the wretched curse the hour that gave
Their patron, friend, and parent to the grave!
These are thy honors! honors that can grace
None but the foremost of the human race.
Tyrants may sleep beneath the Parian dome,
And sculptured marble breathe around their tomb;
Stupendous piles, whose turrets wound the sky,
May tell the world where its destroyers lie.
Thy soul, great bard, disdained the meaner part
To borrow grandeur from the works of art*
Not thine the praises of a flattering stone,
By thy sepulchral structure only known:
Far other honors future ages owe,
Than monumental marbles can bestow;
While wit or sacred verse shall know to charm,
While virtue's self the human breast shall warm,
Thy memory shall survive, secure of fame,
And latest times shall celebrate thy name.
Lo! I, the first of muses, grace thy shade,
And honors give, not often to mortals paid.
Less mourned the inspiring muse, when Lesbos' pride
(By thee alone excelled) famed Sappho died.
Mean time, while all the great and good below
Lament their loss in agony of woe,
The angelic hosts receive the immortal mind,
No more on earth in humble clay confined;
The sons of heaven the kindred spirit greet,
And pleased, conduct thee to thy native seat:
There pleasures flow eternal and divine,
And all the joy of paradise are thine.
Such thy blessed lot, and such the bright reward
For such distinguished excellence prepared!
The goddess ceased, and in a blaze of light,
To heaven, her native region, urged her flight.
Aug. 1737. NICOLAS MUNCKLEY.

Elegiac Verses. Sacred to the Memory of Mrs. ELIZABETH ROW.
FAREWELL, O ever honored, ever dear!
The bard demands a song, the saint a tear.
'Twas thine with native force to touch the heart,
And scorn to steal a grace from rules of art:
So raise the warblers of the woods their notes,
Heaven taught alone to tune their slender throats.
Unlabored beauties deck the song divine,
And every charm, inspiring muse, is thine:
So boasts some wilderness of sweets to smile
By nature's gift, nor asks the aids of toil.
Estranged from flattery, and to courts unknown,
And vice thy generous scorn even on a throne;
Thy muse disdained the guilty great to sing,
No stateman's name profaned her sacred string:
Thy happier choice to match the heavenly choir,
And tune to virtue's praise the ennobled lyre.
Nor praised alone, you practiced what you sung,
That virtue ruled your breast, which warmed your tongue;
From the full heart flowed every godlike thought*
And thy life acted what thy numbers taught.
O thou had all that can the soul engage*
The fire of youth chasten'd by sapient age:
Gay without lightness, grave, yet not severe,
Polite as courts, as rustic truth sincere;
Perfection all (as far as mortal can)
As soft as woman, and as wise as man.
Fair like the snowy beauty of thy mien*
The unsullied whiteness of thy soul within;
Good without show, thy virtue, like thy lays,
Sincere of art shone with unborrow'd grace.
No lures of glory could thy wish persuade,
Fitted to shine in courts you sought the shade,
Declined the honors worth like thine might claim,
And hid in distant deserts fled from fame:
In vain! for which each virtue and each muse
Crowned thy retreat, fair fame their steps pursues.
Concealed from sight, thus sparkling diamonds shine
Midst lonely wastes, deep in the distant mine;
But hid in vain, even there, with searching eyes
Men mark their beauty, and their value prize*
Yet not applause could taint thy humble mind,
To thy own worth, as others frailties, blind;
So dead to vanity, thy angel guard
Here ceased their needless wa^ch, nor danger feared*
Gold's glittering baits, which all mankind betray,
Thou could with undesiring eyes survey:
Thy soul replete with virtue's sacred store,
The world forgot, preferred no prayer for more*
Thus the rapt seraph, crowned with heavenly joys,
Wastes not a wish on all earth's slighted toys.
Fond to commend, unknowing how to blame,
Thy lips never learned a harsher sound to frame;
The good with praise thy z^alous tongue addressed,
Silence was all thy censure of the rest.
Thy soul serene, in all events the same,
Scarce felt a warmth that virtue's self could blame;
No gust of ire disturbed her blessed repose,
Like Eden's skies, where never tempest rose:
Reason triumphant, and the passions chained,
Unshaken rule the victor mind maintained.
Angel to bless and save! what faithful strain
Can sing thy goodness to the suffering train?
To all the joys of luxury unknown,
Scarcely what nature's wants required, your own,
The poor had all the rest; and still thy heart
Grudged natu^e's real wants their slender part.
Studious to soften every human ill,
And all the wounds of adverse fortune heal,
Thy liberal hand dealt happiness around,
Nor indigence was near thy mansion found:
While modesty still threw a veil between
Thy deeds and praise* so angels bless unseen.
O early lost, though length of days was thine*
Their friend, their parent must the poor resign?
Who now shall sooth the sinking heart to hope,
And blend with lenient sweets woe's bitter cup?
Where shall the orphan's cry find pitying ears?
Into whose breast the widow pour her tears?
Where modest merit find the generous friend,
Prompt ever she sues the liberal aid to lend?
Whose zeal to bless shall servile tasks repeat,
Bind the saints wounds, and wash their wearied feet,
Court worth in rags to share her bounteous board,
The servant of the servants of the Lord?
Dear to thy God! while habitant on earth,
The Almighty goodness owned thy favored worth,
And bad thy life, to mingled woe unknown,
A long-extended line of golden fate run on.
Thus some fair stream, that from a plenteous source
Derives its rise, maintains its happy course:
No baser wave its silver current blends,
No ruffling storm from angry heaven descends;
But smooth and limpid, over the flowery plain
It rolls its lengthened way, and seeks the distant main*
Peace crowned thy days, and the propitious skies
White, like the rest, bad thy last hour arise.
Wan sickness, gloomy fear, the fury, pain,
With scorpion scourge, and all death's direful train;
That often around the expiring good man's bed
Terrific stand, and hell-born horrors shed,
Rage to afflict thy mortal hour in vain,
Heaven's high behefts the unwilling fiends restrain*
Sudden, with scarce a pang, the vital chains
Break -- the freed soul her native sky regains.
So falls some monarch oak, that flourished long
With verdure beauteous, and with vigor strong;
Whose spreading arms stretched over the gladsome plain,
Shade to the flock, and shelter to the swain:
Not destined to the woes of long decay,
While years on years roll sad and s^ow away;
At once the lifted steel his trunk assails,
He falls, and every swain his loss bewails.
Farewell! if it is the muse's boast to crown
With deathless fame, and virtue meets renown;
While yonder orbs their measured dance pursue,
The wise shall praise, the good shall copy you.
On the Death of Mrs. ROW.
COME, all ye wise, and all ye virtuous, come,
To pay due honors at this sacred tomb!
Pressed by this rude, unpolished marble lies
What Philomela left beneath the skies.
What though no ar^ist's hand has marked the stone,
And her fair form in breathing sculpture shown;
Her weeping friends no want of Phidias' mourn,
Nor wish the Parian bust, or pompous urn:
Suffices this to show, this earth can claim
The sacred relics of so great a name.
Nor need these lines in trite expression praise
The matchless beauties of her heavenly lays;
Secure of fame, her own immortal song
Speaks her the pride of the poetic throng,
Fitter her virtuous use of verse to show,
And what saints laud above, commend below.
Too mean the task for thy immortal lays,
To deck the infamous in power with praise:
His crimes disguised, no cruel tyrant shines
The Father of his people in thy lines.
Not thine from virtue's sacred paths to entice,
And add false beauties to the monster vice;
Not thine to bid religion's heavenly rules
Become the laughter of licentious fools:
Thy strains, fair saint, teach us, from er^or free,
Like thee to live, and to be blessed like thee.
Thou glory of thy sex and age, farewell!
Thy various virtues future bards shall tell;
Men yet unborn thy memory shall revere,
And wet thy marble with a pious tear:
No more to thee by mortals can be given,
This earth shall pay -- the rest is left to heaven*
Nov. 1737.
On the Death of Mrs. ELIZABETH ROW.
MUCH honored shade! while sorrowing over thy urn,
The friend, the sister, and the saint I mourn,
O that my lays each tuneful grace could boast,
Sweet as the strains that wept Alexis lost;
That while I sigh thy fate, and sing thy name,
My al^er'd verse might catch thy heavenly flame!
Then with my theme my numbers should agree,
Inspired by every muse, and worthy thee.
Fair shone thy form, how fitted to impart
Joy to the eye, and passion to the hear^!
Yet was thy sex's pride, to lure the gaze
With radiant beauty, but thy smallest praise;
Exalted goodness, and a soul divine,
(Immortal charms by seraphs loved) were thine.
So 'midst the blooming race the spring supplies,
Smiles some fair flower decked with distinguished dies*
No^ sooths the fight with painted pride alone,
But wondrous virtues its gay honors crown;
Potent to heal, the sacred plant contains
Balm for our wounds, and medicine for our pains*
O favorite of the nine! in whom conspire
The Sappi^ sweetness, and Pindaric fire,
What various beauty decks thy happy song!
Soft as thy form, and as thy virtue strong.
Smooth as the gliding stream, that over the plain,
With stealing lapse, rolls on his watery train;
And softly murmuring winds its gentle way,
While vernal hours the temperate season sway*
Yet strong, as when the wintry tempests pour
The gushing rains to augment the liquid store;
When swol^ to ^^ge, it foams, and roars, and raves,
And rolls resistless violence of waves,
Bursts like a swelling ocean over the plain,
And thundering pours along impetuous to the main.
Whenever thy Doric lays delight the grove
With generous friendship, or with guiltless love,
O solitude! how smiles thy calm retreat,
The muses haunt, and virtue's best-lov'd seat!
Courts lure no more, the blaze of grandeur fades*
And every heart ^ighs for thy peaceful shades.
If plaintive of Alexis^ early doom,
We hear the mourning over a husband's tomb;
Kind, wise, and good, snatched from thy widowed arms
In all the blooming pride of manly charms;
What bosom bleeds not at thy moving strains?
What eye the tributary tear refrains?
Or if thy muse, warmed with diviner flame*
Scorns mortal themes, and sings the Almighty's name,
Taught by thy verse celestial heights to soar,
Earth lessens to our view, and charms no more;
Our raptured breasts thy sacred ardors share,
Heaven all our hope, and virtue all our care:
While wondering angels from the skies bend down,
To hear the song they scarce would blush to own.
O born to bless, adorn, and mend the age!
Thou dar'dst for friendless piety engage.
Yet too well natured for satiric rhymes,
(Thy part to weep, not lash licentious times)
Thy gentle muse Iambi^ rage declined,
And chose a task more suited to thy mind:
To paint what woe to guilty joy succeeds,
And ^^re the breast with love of godlike deeds*
Woe al^en to thy days, for ever true
To piety, and promised heaven in view;
But every godlike deed thy page displays,
Shone in thy living worth with rival grace.
O happy work! which every bosom charms,
That wit allures, or sacred virtue warms.
The libertine, who lost in guilty joys,
Scorns heaven's just lore, and shuns the preacher's voice,
Won by thy artful tales of generous deeds,
Shall ^eel the wish to copy what he reads:
No more by vice enslaved, the unfettered youth,
Freed by thy hand shall find the paths of truth;
And formed by thee, his better hopes shall rise
On virtue's solid base, and reach the skies.
So charm thy works! whose lasting fame shall shed
Unblasted laurels on thy honored head;
No vulgar boast! yet nobler is the praise
Of angel goodness than of angel lays:
Parnassian wreaths with faded luster shine,
While palms celestial round thy temples twine.
Reclus'd from all the world, and worldly care,
Thy life's sole business charity and prayer;
Gold's tempting charms never gave thy breast to glow,
Who knew no use of wealth but to bestow.
The store heaven lent thy liberal bounty spread,
Clothed were the naked, and the famished fed;
Saved by thy hand, the widow wiped her eye,
And orphans breasts forgot the frequent sigh:
Parent to pity, patron to relieve,
Merit never mourned, while you had more to give.
^e witness, O thou charitable door,
Which ever opened, received the crowding poor,
That never suff^ring virtue's weeping train
Before thy threshold breathed their wants in vain.
Assist me, O celestial muse, to paint
The holy fervors of the adoring saint!
Her hours of heavenly converse, prayer and praise,
(The largest, best-lov'd portion of her days)
When prostrate low she poured (...) soul to God,
All rapt to heaven, and like a (...) glowed:
But cease, my lays, nor dare the ^^bject try,
Guess it, ye saints, if thought can reach so high!
Ye ministers of heaven, whose guardian grace,
Attends the good, witness her prayer and praise;
Say, if from mortal tongue ye ever have known
Prayers more sincere, or praise more like your own.
Those joys, thou Virtue, only can bestow,
Crowned with eternal peace her open brow;
The tranquil mind, from favoring heaven serene,
Transpierc'd her frame, and shone upon her mien:
Such sweetness decks a smiling angel's face,
Breathing around benevolence and grace.
Blessed in thy life and genius! blessed in death!
Allowed without a pang to yield thy breath;
Unfelt the stroke, and spared the painful strife,
Of nature struggling, ever she parts with life:
One hour in blooming health, the next, the skies
Receive the saint to ever-during joys.
Thy gracious God thus heard thy favored vows,
And crowned thy virtue with the death you chose.
Such fate, if heaven approves, my prayers implore,
Such be my life, and such its latest hour!
Blessed hour! that shall returning peace decree,
And bid this bosom bleed no more for thee.
Dear to the wise and good! but dear in vain!
Not Hertford's tears recall the saint again.
O friend! O sister! to this bosom dear,
By every name that prompts the sigh sincere,
T^^rn from my longing hope, in thee I mourn
Life's fondest joy -- ah! never to return!
No more these eyes on thy loved form shall ga^e,
Where more than Beauty glowed in every grace.
No more, while envious shades unheeded rise,
And summer suns too soon forsake the skies,
My ravished soul shall hang upon thy voice,
Imparadis'd in more than mortal joys.
O with what transport did my listening ear*
Thy converse, like an angel's rev'renc'd, hear!
While sacred truths in softest accents flowed,
Breathed heaven around, and rapt my soul to God.
Ye hours of heaven (if ought beneath the skies
Can boast resemblance to celestial joys)
Why will your memory wound my tortured thought?
Never to return, can ye be never forgot?
So fate ordains! through future life to me,
No joy shall smile sincere from grief for thee.
Yet not eternal absence shall divide
Those virtuous hearts, which generous friendship tied,
If following thee my feet shall learn to tread
That arduous way, from which you never strayed,
The path shall guide me to thy blessed abode,
And oh! perhaps few steps remain untrod.
There, though high-thron'd, and to thy God more near,
Sublime thou shin'st in thy exalted sphere;
Yet may I distant, on thy glories ga^e,
And hear thee hymn thy God in heavenly lays*
There (lower far my seat, my robe less white)
Bliss, though unequal, shall our souls unite.
Yes, we shall meet again, no more to part!
Hope at the sound awakes, and ^ooths my heart.
Blessed hope! that aids with strengt^en'd step to tend
Over life's rough road, while heaven and thou the end.
Though sunk in woe, with years of sickness worn,
I languish in decay, of joy forlorn,
And thou art lost; yet welcome every ill
My life has felt, or future hours shall feel,
If virtue, weak like mine, may hope to share
Thy heaven, and find the meanest mansion there.
Mean time, O ever-honour'd shade, farewell!
It Is thine, in everlasting joys to dwell;
It Is mine, the loss of angel worth to sigh,
Never to be found again beneath the sky.
Ah friend! how sad, how slow shall roll the hours,
'Till heaven my soul to thee and bliss restores!
April, 1737. THEOPHILUS ROW.

On the present publication of Mrs. ROWE'S Poems after her death.
THUS Philomela, sung on earth detained,
While cumb'rous clay the rising soul restrained:
Now the freed spirit, with the angelic choir,
In fields of light attunes the immortal lyre,
And hymns her God in strains more soft, more strong;
There only could she learn a loftier song.
FINIS.

