The late ASSOCIATION for Defense encouraged OR The lawfulness of a Defensive
WAR. REPRESENTED IN A SERMON PREACHED At PHILADELPHIA December 24. 1747.

By GILBERT TENNENT, A. M.

Psalm, cviii. 11.13. Wilt not thou, O God, go forth with our Hosts? Through
God we shall do valiantly: For he it is that shall tread down our Enemies.

Psalm clxiv. 1. Blessed be the Lord my Strength, which teaches my Hands to
War and my Fingers to Fight.

Heb. xi. 32.33. For the Time would fail me to tell of Gideon, and of Barak,
and of Sampson, and Jephtae, and of David also and Samuel, and of the Prophets,
who, through Faith, subdued Kingdoms, waxed valiant in Fight, turned to flight
the Armies of Aliens.

Lex est nationum, ut vim et injuriam propulsemus; nam jure hoc evenit, ut quod
quisque ob tutelam corporis sui fecerit, jure fuisse existimetur.

Digest. lib. 1. Tit. 1. de. just. et jure leg. 3. Est amor et cunctis, rerum
tutels suarum.

Valor. Flac. Published at the request of the Hearers.

Philadelphia: Printed by William Bradford.

TO THE HONORABLE THE PRESIDNET and COUNCIL, OF THE Province of Pennsylvania.
To the WORSHIPFUL THE MAGISTRATES OF THE City of Philadelphia, AND To ALL that
have joined in the late ASSOCIATION for DEFENSE, The following SERMON is humbly
Dedicated, by

Gentlemen Your sincere Well-wisher, Friend, and Servant, G. TENNENT.

Exodus, XV. 3. The LORD is a Man of WAR.


THESE Words are part of a memorable Song, which Moses and Israel sung, after a
complete Victory over their Egyptian Enemies, at the Red Sea. It is one of the
most antien^ Songs we read of, and of elegant Composure, the Language is rich,
flowery and magnificent, the Thoughts sublime, and the Images proper, strong and
affecting: Moses gives Glory to GOD and triumphs in him, not only as their GOD,
and consequently their Salvation, but as their Father's GOD, and as the GOD of
Battles! The LORD is a Man of War, i. e. a strong and potent Warrior, a famous
and eminent Warrior. The Word Man among the Hebrews, was mostly used to signify
peculiar and transcendent Eminency: Vid poli Synop in loc.
This TITLE therefore instructs us, That God presides over all Wars and
Battles, and brings them to such an issue as he pleases: Surely the Race is not
to the Swift nor the Battle to the Strong. Eccl. 9, 11.


And likewise that Jehovah shows a special regard to those that fear him, in
those Martial incounters; he covers their Head in the Day of Battle. Ps. 140.7.


Moreover this Expression signifies, the Almighty's Approbation of a just WAR,
otherwise it would be improper to ascribe to him such a Title, the Lord is a
Man of War. And hence we read in the sacred Oracles of many WARS begun and
carried on, and much Blood shed therein, by God's Direction and with his
Approbation and Blessing, upon which Occasion it is said, that the War was of
God 1 Cron. 5.22.
And no doubt it is upon this Account, that the Almighty is frequently ^^lled,
the Lord of Hosts, 2 Samuel 6, 2,
the God of the Armies of Israel. 1 Samuel 17, 45.
And this Warlike title is elsewhere said to be his Name. Isa. 48 ^.
And can we think Sirs, that the Almighty would accept of a Name contrary to
his Nature, or suffer himself to be called by any Thing he dislikes and
detests, No surely: The Scriptures but now referred to, are parallel to our
Text, the Lord is a Man of War. In discoursing upon which, let us enquire,

I. What WAR is approved of by God?

II. Offer some Evidences or Arguments of his Approbation.

And then, after answering some Objections, proceed to the Improvement of the
whole. And

1st. Negatively, That kind of War is not approved of by God, which is
commenced merely to gratify the Ambition and Avarice of Princes, as in
Benhadad's War against Ahab, or the Romans of old, who like the French now,
made War upon all the Countries round about them, merely to enlarge their own
Dominions by the ruin of others: Or like those which Satan excites, and
Antichrist carries on, against the Church of God, for their inviolable
adherence to divine Truths. Such Wars are undoubtedly unlawful, and likewise
all such as are begun without a View to Justice and Peace, and carried on
without Compassion and Humanity. But

2dly, Positively, WAR is lawful in the three following Instances, viz.

1st. When undertaken for necessary Defense against unjust Invasion of such as
design to do us ^arm, either by assaulting our Persons, or rob^ng us of and
ruining our Estates.

2dly. When commenced for the Recovery of ^omething of great Importance
unjustly taken from us, which we cannot do well without, ^r after Application,
obtain by milder Measures; ^pecially when the Consequences of the Loss, (...)
like to be more prejudicial and distressing, in the Consequences of the War
entered into (...) recover it: Thus David pursued the Ama^kites, who carried
his and his Peoples Wives ^ay Captives, together with their Sons and Daughters.
1 Samuel 30.


3dly. WAR is no doubt lawful, and consequently approved by God, when
undertaken by the Magistrate, for the Punishment of some great injury or wrong
which much affects the Credit and Interest of a Nation or People, after all
softer Means for redress fail of success: Thus the Royal Psalmist commenced War
against the Amonites for their contemptuous usage of his Ambassadors. 2 Samuel 10.


WAR is certainly a grave and solemn Business, of uncertain issue, and attended
with distressing Consequences, and therefore should not be entered into rashly,
but, as Solomon observes, with good Advice, Prove. xx. 18.
i. e. with Council and Caution, yet when the Cause is just, the Authority
encouraging it legal, the Design honest and honorable, and the Manner of
prosecuting it warrantable, and agreeable to the unalterable Laws of Humanity,
I cannot yet see any just Exception against it.

Surely if Protection from Injuries, Peace among Neighbors, and the
Administration of Justice, be desirable and valuable Benefits, which all
Mankind must with one Voice acknowledge; then of Consequence that which at
times is the only Mean left to procure them, must be lawful, necessary and
valuable also: Surely it is the End, that gives value to the Means leading to
it, without the Use of which it is in vain expected, and therefore, when any
End is enjoined by divine Authority, apt Means directing to it are enjoined
likewise, without which it cannot be attained. Religion is a reasonable
Service. Romans xii. 1.
The Almighty deals with us in the Business of it as intelligent Creatures, he
draws us with the Cords of a Man. Hos. xi. 4.
This leads me to the Second general Head, which was to show, the divine
Approbation of lawful WAR.

This, methinks my Brethren, the Light of Nature, the Law of GOD, and the
Gospel of CHRIST conspire to evince.

Although the Light of Nature obliges Mankind to entertain Peace with others, as
much as is possible, yet considering how prone many are to violate this
Precept, it is but reasonable to consult our own Safety, by concerting and
compasing betimes all innocent Measures of Defense, such as providing Arms and
Ammunition, as well as training up Persons in the Use of them, laboring to
shut up all the Avenues to the Enemy's Approach, watching their Motions, and
such like. It is justly esteemed Wisdom in a Nation to think of War and prepare
for it in a Time of Peace; the prudent Man, as Solomon observes, Prove. xxii. 3.
xxvii, 12.
foreseeing Evil, hides himself, i. e. prepares for his Defense, when he
rationally apprehends, that according to the common Course of Things, Calamity
is coming upon him, or impending over him; but the Simple pass on and are
punished, i. e. such as are so in the worst Sense of the Word, while for a
Tract of Time they indulge ^ vain Confidence, and sordid Neglect of prope^
Means for their own Security, are at last attacked unprovided for Defense, and
so justly punished for their Presumption and Sloth! Though Innocence may expect
Protection in the Use of proper Means, yet it is the vainest Vanity to expect a
miraculous Deliverance, in a Course of idleness, security and neglect!

Though our Goods in Civil States, are in some Measure secured by penal
Sanctions, yet he is reckoned, and that justly, careless and improvident, who
would be thence induced to leave his Doors open in the Night, or not to provide
any for his House, and therefore it was a prudent Advice of Asa; and well
becoming a Father of his Country, that during the Time of rest, which GOD gave
them, they should fortify their Cities with Walls and Bars and Gates. 2 Chronicles.
xiv. 6, 7, 8.


And if we should use proper Means to preserve our Goods, much more our Lives,
which are a more valuable dep^situm. Self-preservation, Brethren, the clearest
Reason dictates, and the tenderest Passion recommends, it is a Principle so
deeply riveted in human Nature, that it is unnatural to doubt of its
Lawfulness: Now to this Principle belongs Self-defence, or the warding off of
Evils, without or with the Hurt of the Oppressor, the former none question, but
the latter some scruple, because hereby a Man like ourselves is destroyed, with
whom we are obliged to live in a social Manner.

It is true, Man was originally created for the maintaining of Peace with his
fellows, and to this all the Laws of Nature respecting others have a primary
regard; yet when milder Measures cannot screen us from intolerable Injuries,
the Light of Nature directs to fly to Force as the last Remedy, the last
Resource; for the Obligation to the Offices of Peace is mutual, and binds all
alike. Nature has given no Man a Privilege of breaking her Laws at pleasure
toward others, and yet obliged them to maintain the Peace toward him, No! the
Duty being mutual, should be mutually performed, and he that violates the Laws
of Peace, and seeks another's Destruction, may impute to his own Wickedness,
all the Misery which another is necessitated in his own Defense, and in
pursuance of the Principle of it, to inflict upon him.

Does not the universal Practice of all Nations, as well of the most civilized,
as of the most rude and barbarous, who all with one Consent as far as we can
learn, from the Beginning of the World to this Day, have opposed Force to Force
in their own Defense in War, together with the Writings of diverse of the most
celebrated Pens of the more polite Kingdoms and States, in favor of their
Practice from Time immemorial, show that Self-defence, and consequently a
defensive WAR, is agreeable to the Light and Law of Nature; The Roman Lawyers
lay it down as a Maxim of the Law of Nations, That we ought to repulse Force
and Injury for this comes by Law and Right, that whatsoever one does in his own
Defense, be deemed just and equitable. Digest. Lib. 1. Tit. 1. de justet, et
Jure, leg. 3.
and who is the Author thereof but GOD himself? I know not that a defensive War
was ever questioned by any of the human Race till the Christian Institution
strictly so called commenced, that some from a wrong Apprehension of several
Passages of Scripture, have scrupled it, and have been thence induced to oppose
themselves, to the Common Sense, Sentiments and Suffrage of Mankind; which no
doubt many of them do, from a Principle of Conscience, (though misinformed) and
therefore should be rather pitied than envyed, on Account of their unhappy
Mistake, which in the present State of Things, is so exceeding perilous and
prejudicial to Society!

If it be not lawful to oppose by Force unjust Invaders, then the Goods of
Providence are vouchsafed to us in vain, and Men of the strictest Integrity, as
well as Females of the most unblemished Virtue, will ever be exposed as an easy
Prey to the vilest Insults of the most scandalous Scoundrels!

To banish Self-defence, though pursued by Force, would be so far from promoting
Peace, that it would rather contribute to the utter Ruin of the human Race: The
certain Expectation of Impunity would tempt ambitious covetous and abandoned
Creatures, to violate the Laws of Nature and of GOD, to lay waste the necessary
and noble Enclosures of Honor, Virtue, and Property, and destroy all before
them.

It cannot be with Reason imagined, that the Law of Nature, which was
instituted for Man's Security, should favor so absurd a Peace, as tended to
destroy it.

He that suffers his Life to be taken from him, by one that has no Authority
for that Purpose, when he might preserve it by Defense, incurs the Guilt of
Self-Murder, since GOD has enjoined him to seek the continuance of his Life,
and Nature itself teaches every Creature to defend itself when assaulted, in
particular, Nature has not only given to Man a quick Sense of Injuries, that
he might not suffer himself to be oppressed and insulted, but she has also
armed him with Strength and Ability of Body, that he should not be forced
tamely and sordidly to submit!

If we may not defend ourselves by Force, why did the blessed GOD allow the
Jews to kill a Night-robber with Impunity? Exodus xxii. 2.
and why did the blessed JESUS enjoin his Disciples, that each of them who
wanted a Sword should sell his Coat and buy one. Luke xxii. 36. If Christ was
against all fighting, and (...) P^^pose did he council his Disciples to buy
S^^^ds: must they (...) and never used, or bought for nothing?


Though there is a Self-love which is criminal and vicious, viz. that which has
no regard to the Honor, Safety, and Interest of our Neighbor: yet there is a
Self-love which (...) rational and excellent, which inclines us primarily to
regard our own; and hence is that of the Apostle, that no Man ever yet hated
his own Flesh, but nourishes and cherishes it. Ephesians. v. 29.
If so, then it is every Man's Duty to love his own Life, to desire its
continuance, and use proper Means for its preservation. For this End the
Almighty has put into our Nature a Principle that desires Life, avoids Death,
and is afraid of its Approaches: For which reason it is called the King of
Terrors. Job xviii. 1^.


As Self-Murder is an Insurrection against the Government of GOD, in whose
Hands our Times are, so it affronts his Goodness, in granting us the Favor of
Life, and injures human Society of which we are all Members, for Man was made a
sociable Creature, to promote not only his own but the public Good. Besides
Self-Murder puts a Period to our Opportunities of glorifying GOD, and working
out our own Salvation, as well as exposes to the Hazard of eternal Death. Well,
if Self-Murder be a heinous Sin, it will follow by the Law of Contraries, that
Self-defence is an important Duty; surely he who is unjustly attacked, and does
not endeavor by suitable Means to preserve his Life, especially if there be
any probability of Success in so doing, betrays it, and so is guilty of
Suicide; a Crime of the first Magnitude and deepest Dye! But to proceed,

WAR my Brethren was lawful under the Old Testament Dispensation, and therefore
it is lawful under the New, it is certain that GOD approved of, and appointed
his People to make War, under the Law of Moses, When David enquired of God,
whether he should pursue the Amalakites, he was answered, pursue. 1 Samuel xxx. 8.
and by the Moral Law: The sixth Commandment (...) undoubtedly imply a lawful
WAR, for if we must not kill others, much less our selves, and if we must have
no Hand in our own Death, we must defend our Lives against unjust Violence,
which sometimes cannot be done without WAR. Now the blessed JESUS never came to
destroy the Moral Law or the Law of Nature, which is in Substance the same, but
to fulfill it. Do we make void the Law by Faith? (or by the Doctrines of the
Gospel) says the Apostle, No: But we establish the Law. Moral Precepts are
grounded upon invariable Equity, upon the Nature and Reason of Things, and
therefore cannot be altered.

Now if the Almighty has approved of WAR formerly, and there is still the same
Necessity of it under the Gospel Dispensation as before, it will follow that it
is equally lawful now. It is absurd to suppose, that the blessed GOD who is
infinite in Wisdom, and unalterable in his Nature, would determine contrarily
at d^fferent Periods of Time, concerning a Case that is substantially the same!
The Injustice and Encroachments of neighboring Nations and States, to and upon
each others Rights and Properties, are in diverse Instances as flagrant as under
the Jewish Economy: The Nature of Man in his fallen State does not alter by a
Succession of Ages, multitudes do now grasp after Wealth and Dominion, as much
as formerly, and do concert and pursue as unjust Measures to attain them; and
if we are now deprived of that which is the only Barrier against Injustice and
Violence, viz. Self-defence, and must tamely suffer our Lives, our Liberties,
both Civil and Religious, and all that is dear to us as Men and Christians, to
be made an easy Prey of by insulting Enemies, our Case is really miserable, and
more unhappy than that of the Jewish Church, or of any others who lived before
them! It is strange to think, and hard to reconcile it with any just Notion of
divine Goodness, that Almighty GOD should under this last and brightest
Dispensation of his Grace toward the Children of Men, instead of enlarging,
deminish our Privileges, and that in so tender and important a Point! Indeed,
methinks such a Notion tends to cast a dishonorable and inglorious Reflection
upon the divine Benignity and Goodness, and the most illustrious Display of it
that was ever given to the Children of Men, by the Gospel of our Lord JESUS
CHRIST!

Why, my Brethren, should it be now a Sin to perform (in respect of Things of a
moral Nature) that which was under the Jewish Dispensation a Sin to neglect?
Was not Meroz exposed to a bitter Curse, because she came not to help the Lord
against the Mighty? i. e. as appears by the Context, because they came not to
assist their Brethren engaged in Battle in a good Cause: Judges v. 23.
Is not GOD the same as formerly, and the Nature of Justice or Injustice the
same? Did not the Jews live under the same Moral Law that we are to be governed
by? and had they not the same Gospel for Substance? For, were not those that
were pious among them saved by Faith in the Messiah? Which is certainly the
Substance of the Gospel which we now profess; the Difference between that
Dispensation and this, consists in Circumstantials only, and not in Substance:
the pious Jews did all eat the same spiritual Meat, and drink of the same
spiritual Rock, which was CHRIST 1 Cor. x. 3.4.
[See the Appendix for further Explication of this]

Can we think, my Brethren, that GOD would enjoin and approve of any Practice
formerly, that was contrary to the Moral Law and Gospel, which the Jews
enjoyed? Surely no, that is contrary to his unalterable Purity, of which the
Moral Law is a legible Copy and Exemplar. Well, if a just War was not contrary
to the Moral Law under the Jewish Dispensation, and before it, why should it be
so now in the like Circumstances of Necessity? and if it be not contrary to the
Moral Law, the standing and unalterable Rule of our Conduct, why should any
scruple it, or oppose it now?

Again, let it be considered, that the Office of the Magistrate necessarily
requires WAR, when a just Occasion offers; for as the Apostle observes, he is a
Minister of GOD, a Revenger to execute Wrath upon him that does Evil, and
should not bear the Sword in vain, Romans xiii. 4.
and elsewhere Governors are said, to be sent for the Punishment of Evildoers,
and for the Praise of them that do well. 1 Pet. ii. 14.
Now unless Injustice be punished by the Magistrate, he bears the Sword in
vain, a final Period is put to the Comforts of Society, all Property becomes
precarious, an Acaldema opens, a Scene of Rapine, Desolation and Blood, civil
Society disbands and terminates, and Men degenerate into savage Beasts of Prey!
Now if it be necessary for the Magistrate, in order to prevent the aforesaid
unhappy Consequences, to punish lesser Robberies committed against a few, is it
not just and necessary, by a parity of Reason, that greater Robberies committed
against a Nation or Community should be punished with greater Severity? But how
shall this be done without WAR? Is it always practicable to get reparation for
national Injuries by Treaties? No, by no Means! Do not the strongest generally
keep the Advantages they have got, as long as they can, and use the most
labored Subterfuges, and crafty Artifices to elude Application for Redress,
and color their Fraud and Oppression? e. g. what more Specious then the
Apologies of the Court of France, for their present unjust Encroachments upon
their neighbor's Territories, and ambitious grasping after an universal
Monarchy over Europe? Then either WAR must take place, or Injustice, in the
most enormous and crimson Instances, must pass unpunished, must spread
triumphant, to the utter Ruin of Kingdoms and States! Wrongs committed amongst
ourselves, may be brought to a judicial Trial, but can we bring foreign Nations
to our Bar? Is there any common Magistrate that presides over contending
Kingdoms? or any Law common to both by which they will abide? No, surely! in
this Case the Injured must have Recourse to WAR, which is that to different
Nations, which Law is to Persons of the same Nation, or else indolently and
ignominously suffer, and perish without a Remedy!

And should not the Magistrate protect his Subjects from unjust violence? Is
not this the Design of their Office? that under them we may live quiet Lives,
and that they may be to us a hiding Place from the Wind, and a Covert from the
Tempest of Oppression! 1 Timothy ii. 2. Isa. ii. 2.
why else is the Sword committed to them, and can they always protect us
without WAR, without opposing Force to Force? No surely!

Now unless the Magistrate punishes Criminals in his own Community, and screens
his Subjects from a foreign Force, what is his Office but an empty Name, a mere
Cipher, of no Moment and Consequence to Society, nor is it reasonable he should
expect Support, Honor and Obedience from his Subjects, if they in Consequence
hereof do not obtain Protection from him. In the mean Time it should be
carefully observed, that the Magistrates Office, and consequently the Duties of
it, does not belong to the political Law of the Jews, which was alterable, but
to the Moral, which is invariable and perpetual, surely by the Word Parent in
the fifth Command, we are not only to understand natural, but political
Parents, the Magistrate is the Father of his Country by Office, and then only
indeed does he merit that honorable Character, and act up to it, when by
forming I use the Term Magistrate in a large Sense as including all those that
bear a Part in the civil Government.
and executing wholesome penal Laws, he suppresses Injustice among his
Children, when by prudent and necessary Preparations, and when Necessity urges
by vigorous and valiant Efforts, he guards them from a foreign Enemy!

If a Magistrate may and sometimes must use Force, in suppressing, Tumults, and
punishing Delinquents in his own Domains, and among his proper Subjects, else
all Order and Government must cease, and the wildest Anarchy ensue; why then
may he not use Force, when easier Methods avail not, in protecting them from
the Insults of others? May he according to the express Word of GOD, punish his
criminal Subjects in some Cases with Death? agreeable to that famous Scripture,
he that sheds Man's Blood, by Man shall his Blood be shed, Genesis ix. 6.
and shall he not inflict it upon others equally guilty, especially when this
becomes necessary to defend himself, and his Country from Desolation and Ruin?
Can it be reasonably imagined, that a Magistrate should show greater Love and
Clemency to Foreigners and Strangers, than to his own Sons and Subjects, to
whom he is under peculiar Obligations both natural and political?

Nor has our Lord JESUS in the New Testament disanull'd the Magistrates Office,
which is so needful to Society, No! but on the contrary, honored and
established it, by his Doctrine and Example; he enjoined his Disciples to give
to Caesar the Things that are Caesar's, to give Honor to whom Honor is due,
and Tribute to whom Tribute; to be subject to the higher Powers, and that for
this Reason, because there is no Power but of GOD, and the Powers that be, are
ordained of GOD; Romans xiii. 1, 2.
And he himself paid Tribute, yea rather than this important Duty should be
neglected, he procured Money by a Miracle. Matt. xvii. 27.


I may add, that the Lawfulness of WAR especially defensive, is signified in
the New Testament, in diverse Instances. When the Soldiers asked John the
Baptist, What they should do? he advised them not to quit their Military
Office, which doubtless he should and would have done, had it been in it self
unlawful and vicious, but directed how to behave in it, viz. to do Violence to
no Man, i. e. privately, to accuse none falsely, and to be content with their
Wages: Luke iii. 1^.
While he councils to be content with the Wages of WAR, does he not of
necessity approve the Work, or would he have Wages to be paid for nothing? Can
we reasonably conjecture, that this inspired Person would give Directions, how
to conduct a Manner of Life that was simply unlawful, and hateful to GOD. Would
he not rather have condemned it absolutely, and exhorted the Soldiers speedily
to forsake and abandon it? Surely he had a good Opportunity so to do, when he
was applied to by the Soldiers for Council, but of this he is entirely silent.

Nor did our Lord JESUS rebuke the Centurion or Roman Captain, on account of
his military Employment, when he applied to him for the Cure of his sick
Servant, but commended his Faith, though he used his Calling as an Argument to
support it; for, said he, I also am a Man set under Authority, having under me
Soldiers, and I say unto one go and he goes, and to another, come and he
comes. When JESUS heard these Things he marveled at him, and said, I have not
found so great Faith no not in Israel.* Had not CHRIST a fair Opportunity to
reprove this Man for his military Station, when he mentioned it to him, and
made an Argument of it to enforce his Petition, had it been wrong? And yet he
speaks not a Word of reprehension, but grants the Petition enforced by that
Argument, and commends the Faith encouraged by it. And does not this fairly
imply our LORD'S Commendation of his Office, and consequently of WAR? Can we
think that the blessed JESUS, whose Words are like Apples of Gold in Pictures
of Silver, who always improved every Opportunity that presented, to promote the
good of those with whom he conversed, would neglect this, had WAR been against
his Mind? Or may it be consistently imagined, that infinite Wisdom and
unspotted. Holiness would commend without any allay of Censure, a Faith which
had a wrong Support or Encouragement, no surely! The Substance of the
Centurion's Argument from his Calling was this, viz. That surely CHRIST was
able to cure his sick Servant, because if he who was but a Captain, had such
authority over his Soldiers to command them, to come and go at his Word, how
much more dominion had the Lord JESUS over Diseases and Death.

But methinks our LORD signifies his Approbation of WAR, more expressly
elsewhere in these Words, my Kingdom is not of this World, if my Kingdom were
of this World, then would my Servants fight, that I should not be delivered to
the Jews.* The Meaning of which is apparently this, That though WAR and Fighting
is no proper Mean to promote the spiritual Kingdom of CHRIST, yet that if the
Nature and Design of his Humiliation, had permitted him to assume a temporal
Crown, then his Servants ought to fight in Defense of his Person and Dignity.
To propagate Religion by Force, seeing it must be voluntary and of Choice, is
as absurd and ridiculous, as to pretend to defend the Life and Estate by
Arguments and Prayers without it, against armed Violence; for as the Mind
cannot be forced, so neither is an angry Adversary, when our Lives and Estates
are at his Mercy, like to be soothed into gentleness and good humor by
entreaty, or stopped in his ambitious and covetous Career by the Force of
Argument: No: In such a Situation they are wont to be as deaf to Importunities
as an enrage^ Tempest or a rapid Torrent, which, without stronger Defense
intervenes, sweep all before them, and spread the Ruin far and wi^e!

But to proceed. Does not Luke the Evangelist highly commend Cornelius the
Centurion of the Italian Band, without any Mixture of Invective upon his
Martial-Office? Acts x
And is he not also adorned with the Angels Testimony? And why is all this, but
to signify the Lawfulness of WAR in Gospel Times?

The Apostle Paul plainly insinuates the Lawfulness of WAR in that Expression
of his, where he enjoins us to live peaceably as much as possible with all Men,
Rom xii 18
which supposes that it is sometimes impracticable, impossible. The same
Apostle in his Epistle to the Hebrews, gives an honorable Encomium upon diverse
ancient Heroes, and records their military Prowess and Exploits, with Applause
and Approbation, the Time would fail me, says he, to tell of Gideon and of
Barack, of Sampson and of Jephtae, of David, of Samuel, and of the Prophets,
who through Faith subdued Kingdoms; stopped the Mouths of Lions; escaped the Edge
of the Sword; waxed valiant in Fight; turned to Flight the Armies of Aliens.
(...)
Observe here, Brethren, that the inspired Apostle asserts, that the aforesaid
warlike Achievements were compassed by Faith: What Faith? I answer, a
Gospel-Faith, for it is of that he treats. This necessarily supposes, that they
went to War in Obedience to GOD'S Command, and depended upon his Power and
Promise for Guidance, Assistance and Victory. These Worthies the Apostle
observes wrought Righteousness, they were righteous in their own Persons, and
in their Administration of Justice to others; and though sometimes they were
inferior to their Enemies in Number and Power, yet by Faith they waxed bold and
valiant in Fight, and obtained surprising and renowned Victories over their
numerous and potent Foes! Now can it be thought that WAR should be agreeable to
and encouraged by Faith in the Messiah, that grand peculiar, and Foundation of
the Gospel, and yet be contrary to it? Can it be thought that the Apostle would
commend the aforesaid Wars, as well as the Piety, the Justice and Bravery of
those concerned in them, without the least Hint of any Alteration in
Gospel Times in that respect, and yet he himself of a contrary Sentiment? While
he elsewhere virtually and consequentially signified his Approbation of WAR by
his Practice in not rejecting the Protection of an armed Force.*

Not to say that the Book of the Revelations relates and proves various Wars of
pious People, under the New-Testament-Dispensation, which the Circumstances of
Places sufficiently evince, are not to be understood only of spiritual
Conflicts, but also of external WAR and effusion of Blood. If it be objected
that here is only mentioned, the Wars of Infidels, such as Gog and Magog, it
may be replied, that i^ the Offensive be unjust, the Defensive must of
Consequence be just.

Nor is it an insuperable Difficulty to reconcile to the aforesaid Doctrine,
some Passages of Holy Scripture, that at first View seem to have a contrary
Aspect.

That Saying of the Apostle James, from whence come Wars and Fightings among
you, come they not hence, even of your Lusts that war in your Members?* may be
understood in this natural and easy Sense, viz. to signify that the original
Cause of WAR is Evil, because it is always unjust upon one Side, and had Man
preserved his original Integrity, there would be no Need of it. But this
Scripture does not assert that WAR is ever unjust and sinful upon both Sides,
or unnecessary in Man's fallen State, or that it is unlawful for the Magistrate
to repel Injuries by Force, and therefore it does not oppose a lawful WAR, but
such only as are unlawful and criminal, which we also detest^

But it is again objected, that the Apostle observes to the Corinthians, that
the Weapons of their Warfare were not carnal. I answer it is true, the Weapons
of the Ministerial and Christian Warfare against Sin and Satan are Spiritual,
but what then, there is a great Difference between the War we must sustain
between Sin and Satan, and a War with wicked Men; to pretend to vanquish the
former by carnal Weapons is as absurd, as to expect a Conquest over the latter
(always) without them! It is presumptuous to expect an End without the Use of
Means adapted to it: To expect a Crop by the Dint of our Supplications, without
plowing, sowing and fencing our Ground, would be exceeding fond and vain; and
so to expect Protection from unreasonable and violent Men, without using proper
Measures for Defense, on Account of our Piety and Prayers, is equally
unreasonable! When proper Means are neglected, viz. such as are temporal in
temporal Cases, and we hope for Impunity and Safety, we tempt GOD instead of
trusting in him. The Justice of this, the very Light of Nature only, taught the
Pagans to acknowledge.

As the Christian and Ministerial Calling do not destroy, or render unnecessary
the Magistrates Office, so neither do the spiritual Arms, which Ministers and
Christians use, and with which they fight in the Business of Religion, render
corporal Arms unnecessary, which the Magistrate uses and enjoins? These Things
are subordinate to each other, and therefore do not clash, but harmonize in
promoting the same End. Su^ordinata non pugnant.


Another Objection against WAR, is that Prophesy of Isaiah, which signifies
that under the Messiah Reign, Men shall beat their Swords into Plow-shears, and
their Spears into pruning Hooks, that Nation shall not list up Sword against
Nation, neither shall they learn War any more. Isa. ii. 4.
I answer, it is probable that this Scripture, at least principly, respects the
spiritual and internal Peace of CHRIST'S Kingdom. It is certain that the Gospel
inclines all that receive it in Truth, to live as much as is possible in Peace
with all Men: It subdues, in a Measure, Men's Corruptions, which are the fatal
sources of Contention and War, and makes them humble and meek. But there is a
vast difference between the internal and spiritual Peace of CHRIST'S Kingdom,
and that which is political and external, or outward: CHRIST himself assures
us, that an external Peace would not be the immediate issue of his coming, I
came not (says he) to send Peace on earth ^^t a Sword. Mat x ^
Though the Doctrines and Power of his Religion tend to Peace; yet our LORD
prophesies, that those who reject them, would kindle the Flame of an unjust
WAR, and Persecution against his followers upon a religious Account. If we take
the aforesaid Prophesy in this view, as intending only a spiritual Peace, it no
ways opposes the Doctrine I have been advancing; for doubtless every good Man
is disposed to Peace, and uses WAR with reluctance as the last remedy, when all
other Methods of Accommodation have proved abortive. But if the Scripture
aforesaid be understood of an external and general Peace among Nations, to be
in the Days of the Messiah: If this be the true Meaning of it, no doubt it will
have its Accomplishment in due time, when the fullness of the Gentiles is come
in, and all Israel are saved. Romans xi. 25, 2^.
Then we hope that Religion will prevail more generally then at present, and
Peace flourish as the consequent of it. It is not necessary that Prophesies
respecting the Messia's Kingdom, should be accomplished at the Beginning of it:
it is enough that they be fullfil'd before the End of it. So that whether we
consider this Prophesy as intending an internal or external Peace, it no way
opposes a lawful WAR. It is certain (...) the Causes of a just WAR do not yet
cease, namely, national and important Injuries, and therefore the Effect cannot
but in Reason continue.

But does not our LORD enjoin us, not to resist evil? And that if one smite us
on the right Cheek, we must turn to him the other, and that if a Man take away
our Coat, we should let him have our Cloak also: And likewise that we should
love our Enemies, bless those that Curse us, and show Kindness to those that
despitefully use us. Mat. v. 44.


I answer, those Places of Scripture, and others of like tendency, which I have
not time to speak upon particularly at present, only signify these Things
following, viz.

That we should rather endure smaller and tolerable Injuries with Patience,
than contend or go to Law for Satisfaction.

That we should not indulge private Revenge, for this makes us Judges in our
own Cause, and tends to overthrow all Government. Judicial revenge is so sacred
a Thing, that none should intermeddle with, but GOD himself, and such as he
has appointed, Vengeance belongs unto me says the Almighty and I will
recompense. Romans xii. 19.


Now the Almighty has constituted the Magistrate as his Deputy, to execute
Punishment proportioned to crimes; and hence he is called expressly, a revenger
to execute Wrath upon him that does evil. Romans xiii. 4.
Farther, the aforesaid Places of Scripture do signify, that we should wish
well to our Enemies, and treat them with Humanity and Kindness when in want and
distress, and be ready to forgive the Injuries they have committed against us,
when they repent over them. Luke xvii 3.4.


And that we should not exercise severity toward them, till the Case comes to
^^emity, and our own safety absolutely re^^ires it, and only then as far as it
does require it, and that with Reluctance and Compassion!

Agreeable to what has been now said, for Substance, is the answer of the
learned Grotius, ^o the aforesaid Objection, which I would beg leave to
mention, and it is as follows, CHRIST does not say, if any Man smite you
mortally, you must bear it patiently, but if one smite you on the right Cheek,
turn to him the other also; for a blow upon the Cheek is a small Injury and
easy to be born. Moreover in these Words there is a proverbial Expression,
which imports thus much, that rather than revenge ourselves against those that
have done us personal wrong, we should suffer ourselves to receive some new
Injuries. Nor does JESUS CHRIST say, if any Man will take away all your Goods,
or the greatest part of them, do not resist the spoiler, neither by your own
Act and Deed, nor by seeking Protection from the Magistrate, but if any man sue
thee at Law, and take away thy Coat, let him take away thy Cloak also, i. e.
rather than engage thyself in a lawsuit, for so small a Matter, be ready to
undergo a fresh loss. Thus far he. V^de Grotium in loc. Mat xxxix 40. It may be
farther observed, that if the aforesaid Scripture be taken in a strict and
litteral Sense, going to Law is as much contradicted thereby, as defensive WAR:
But the former is absurd and therefore the latter!

To what has been said for the explication of the aforesaid texts of
scripture, viz. Mat. v. 38, 39, 40. I would add, that when Christ says, ye
have heard, that it has been said; etc: But I say unto you. It cannot be
reasonably supposed, that Christ opposes by his doctrine, the laws which the
jews enjoyed, either judicial or moral, but only the pharisees corrupt glosses
upon them. Here give me l^ve to mention the words of Mr. Pools annotations on
the place. viz. This (says he) was the commandment of God to the magistrate.
(referring to that of an eye for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth) in case a
woman with child were struck, and any mischief came of it; Ex. 21.24. and
Levit. 24.20. in case of damage done to a neighbor, but in the mean time God
had said to private persons, Levit. x^x. 18. thou shall not avenge. And it is
said Pro. 24.29. say not I will do unto him, as he has done unto me. The
pharisees had interpreted this law of God, into a liberty for every private
person, who had been wronged by another, to exact a satisfaction upon him,
provided he did not exceed this proportion, of taking an eye for an eye, and a
tooth for a tooth, doing no more wrong to another then that other had done to
him. Observe in the aforesaid scriptures, an exact parallel between the old and
new testament dispensation in respect of revenge while private is prohibited,
public is enjoined, private persons are forbid to execute it, but the
magistrate is commanded to inflict it.




But here it may be farther queried, how killing of our Enemies is consistent
with love to them? I answer, It is more consistent then self-murder is with
love to ourselves: Seeing that love to ourselves, is proposed by God as the
Standard of our love to our Neighbor, it must needs be highest in Degree.
Optimum in unoquoque gene^e est regula et mensura cetorarum.

The Words of Cicero the Roman Patriot upon this Head are very remarkable,
which are these, P^aecla^um illud est, rectum quoque, et verum, ut eos qui
nobis ca^issimi esse debeant, eque ac no met ipso^ amemus; at vero plus fieri
nullo pacto potest; ne optandum quidem est in amicitia, ut me ille plus quam
se, ego illum plus quam m^^ perturbatio vite, si ita fit, atque officiorum
omnium consequatur. Which may be thus englished. That is excellent and right
and true, that we should love those as ourselves, who should be most dear to
us! but to love them more is impossible, if so life itself would be disturbed,
and all its offices unhinged.


Though we should love our Neighbors with the same kind or truth of love we do
ourselves yet not in the same Measure: We may, we must love our selves first
and most, and if so, we must first consult our own Safety, and if another's
come in competition with it, we must rather secure our own; if we do not so, we
are accessory to our own Death, and so without natural Affection; which the
Apostle Paul in his Epistle to the Romans classes with the most crimson
Enormities! Romans i. 31.


If we are not to love our Enemies above our selves, which we have no Warrant
for from Scripture or Reason: We are not to prefer their lives to our own, or
assist them in compassing our Destruction, by s^oth and indolence.

Moreover it should be considered, that love to our Enemies was enjoined under
the Jewish Dispensation, as well as now; for they had the whole moral Law as
well as we, the Substance of which, according to our LORD'S Explication, is to
love God and Man. Mat. xix. 19. Romans xiii. 10.
Now if love to Enemies, which is a moral Duty, could not consist with killing
of them in a lawful WAR, surely it would not be enjoined at any time by the God
of love and purity. But it was enjoined, and therefore it could consist then;
and if then, why not now? For my part I think it is the Glory of Christianity,
that it enforces, by Arguments of love and ingenuity, the whole moral Law, the
whole Law of Nature, and enjoins nothing contrary to it, nothing that is absurd
and unreasonable!

Moreover is not the Magistrate enjoined, as well as other Men, to love capital
Offenders? And yet at the same time he is enjoined to put them to Death. How
can these consist together? I answer, very well, he is to love them as ^ellow
Creatures, and compassionate their Miseries from a principle of Humanity; and
yet in the mean time he must put them to Death, not out of personal revenge,
but to promote Justice and the good Ends of Government. Now when Persons are
slain in a lawful WAR, the Case is substantially the same.

I must beg your patience, my Brethren, until I consider one Objection more,
which is contained in these Words of CHRIST to Peter, put up again thy Sword
into his place, for all they that take the Sword, shall perish with the Sword.
Mat. xxvi. 52.


I answer, That this Place of Scripture, concludes nothing against a lawful
WAR, because this act of Peter, in defense of his Master, was the Act of a
private Person against the lawful Magistrate.

Moreover it was a rash and unreasonable act, done without Council, without
VVarrant, and without probability of Success. Some of the Disciples had asked
their and our LORD, whether they should smite with the Sword? but before an
answer was given, Peter struck, and thereby exposed himself and his Companions,
to the rage of the Multitude! For what could such a little handful do with two
Swords against a numerous armed band of Soldiers?

Besides the act of Peter was unnecessary, and unseasonable: His Master did not
need his weak Efforts, he could have called the whole Host of Heaven into his
Service, if he had so pleased; ^s he himself observes in the following Verse,
think thou that I cannot pray to my Father, and ^e will presently give me
more than twelve Le^ions of Angels. Mat. xxvi. 53.
CHRIST'S Sufferings were voluntary and of choice.

Nor was it a proper Season to make any de^ence at all in behalf of CHRIST'S
Person, for, ^ he himself observes, in relation to this Point, ^ow then should
the Scriptures be fullfild, that thus ^ must be. See ver. 54.
CHRIST must suffer for the Sins of ^n according to the Scriptures, and
therefore it was vain to attempt the Prevention of it.

Now a lawful WAR is contrary to all the aforesaid Particulars, for it is the
Act of the Public in behalf of the lawful Magistrate: It ^s advised,
countenanced by the Magistrate, and ^ttended with a probability of succeeding;
it is necessary and seasonable; and therefore the aforesaid instance does not
in the least oppose a lawful WAR, which is of a different and contrary Nature:
It only exposes the folly and danger of such rash, unnecessary, unseasonable
and illegal acts as that was, for all they that take the Sword, in the
aforesaid Manner, may expect to perish with it. Or as Grotius observes, these
words, all they that take the Sword, shall perish with the Sword, may be
applied to the Officers and Soldiers that came with Swords to take CHRIST: As
if he had said, Peter thou need not draw thy Sword to punish them, GOD will
certainly, shortly and severely reckon with them. And thus the Event soon
happened They took the Roman Sword to seize CHRIST with, and by the same they
and their Place and Nation, were not long after destroyed.

Sed ja -- tempus est equm, spumantia soivere colia.

The Time requires that I hasten to a Period.

But before I conclude, give me leave my Fathers and Brethren, to offer a few
practical Reflections from what has been said.

If the Almighty be a Man of WAR, as well as a God of Love and Peace, why
should any imagine that those are inconsistent Characters in Men? Though the
blessed GOD loves all his Creatures, yet does he not execute Indignation and
Wrath upon those that do Evil? Now seeing Jehovah is the Fountain of
Excellency, it must of Consequence be the highest Honor our Nature is capable
of, to be conformed to him. Let none then, think it a Disparagement to their
Character, to be concerned in WAR, but on the contrary, their high Honor and
Dignity: Forasmuch as it is the Name and Title of the great GOD himself, to be
a Man of WAR!

And may it not encourage and animate us in our warlike Preparations for
Defense, to consider, that our GOD is a Man of WAR; that he manages the Helm of
the Universe, that as he has the Supreme Direction and Disposal of all Events
in general, so that the Issues of WAR are under his Cognizance and Control in
particular. That our Cause is just, and important viz. the Defense of all that
is dear to us against lawl^^^ Patience, and that in the Way of Means we may
humbly expect Assistance and Success!

And here my Brethren, suffer me to say, that ^he ASSOCIATION not long since
entered into in his House, is, considering the Posture of our Affairs, the best
Expedient that could be concerted, and of the last Necessity to promote the
Security and Advantage of this City and Province. I am glad, and bless GOD,
that so many have already joined in it, but admire the Number is not greater!
However, I trust it will daily increase: The Case is so evident and important,
that if any are so unhappy as to entertain prejudices against it, and would
rock us asleep again into our former Laish-like Security, we hope that in Time
they will come to be of juster Sentiments.

The Necessity of the aforesaid ASSOCIATION, from a view of our present
Circumstances, has been already set in so just and strong a Light, in a late
ingenious excellent Performance, styled PLAIN TRUTH; a Performance that stands
so firm upon its own Basis, that it needs no Encomium to support its Credit
among the impartial and judicious: I say, the Necessity of the aforesaid
ASSOCIATION, has been so well and so fully represented already, that had I a
Genius equal to that Province, and Time to spend that Way, yet it would be
needless to add any thing to what has been already said: What I have therefore
had in View in this Discourse, is, to show my Approbation of the Design; as
well as to essay the Encouragement of it, by attempting to remove the Scruples
of such, who by their Religious Principles, are hindered from joining in the
ASSOCIATION. I have not designed to disparage or give Offense to any, but to
offer freely my Sentiments on WAR, with the principal Reasons of them, having
been invited and urged thereto.

I confess, that a View of the defenseless State of this Place, together with
the fatal Consequences of the Enemy's coming suddenly upon such a secure and
unprovided People, has sometimes affected my Mind; when I have heard great Guns
go off, I have been sometimes inclined to muse upon this melancholy Subject in
the following Manner; What if this be the Firing of an Enemy! How dismal is our
Case! Alas! we have nothing to resist them! But must submit to their Tyranny
and ^^w^ess Rage! Though we have Men enough, they are not provided with Arms and
Ammunition, they are not prepared for an Attack, by martial Discipline; we have
no Officers, no F^rtr^sses, no Ships of WAR to protect us! Shall we, can we
resist in this Situation? What can a Number of undisciplined, unarmed Men do
against a regular Force, but tempt them to greater Severities against
themselves and others? Should they be disposed to unite, and dare to attack
them, which is improbable. Shall we flee? But is there a safe Retreat near us,
to screen us from the Inclemencies of the Weather, and the Violence of the
Enemy? No! But if there was, how should the Aged, the unweildy, especially of
the weaker Sex, and little Children flee to it? But if we could all flee, with
what Consistency can we desire Protection of others, who neglect to defend
ourselves? Or must we stay to behold as silent and unactive Spectators such a
rueful Tragedy? To behold without one Effort to prevent it, this great and
growing City laid in Ashes, or its Inhabitants reduced to Beggary, by an
intolerable Ransom; or perhaps both these dire Events in a dismal Succession!
How shall we endure to see the sad Symptoms of wild afright, and extreme
Distress, in our Relations and Neighbors upon such a mournful Occasion! When
through our presumtuous Confidence, Security, and Negligence, we are unable to
succor and protect them! Will not their Tears and Shrieks affect us, together
with a View of our own Danger, in such a Manner as Words fail to express! It is
too shocking to mention the sordid Abuse of the Aged and venerable, as well as
of dear Relatives of the softer Sex, in spite of all their reluctant Cries and
incessant Importunities, by the rudest Russians, the basest Banditti, but I
forbear, it is too tender a Point to enlarge upon!

My dear Brethren, and Fathers! let the Consideration of these Things excite
you to go on unweariedly, undauntedly, in this necessary and noble Attempt for
defense, according to your late Engagements; lay aside all your private petty
Animosities and unite as one Man in your Country's Cause; Unita vis fortior.
Union is the Glory of Society, its Safety, and its Strength. Oh! let a generous
love to your Country, ever fire your Bosoms; this when exerted in prudent
Council, unfainting Industry, and heroic Bravery, contains almost every thing
in it that is Great and Noble!

This is the grand Support of Society, with all its Honors, its Sweets, its
Interests; without which it soon crumbles into a Chaos of Ruin, dissipates and
expires!

This sublimates the human Soul, and raises it above the narrow and
comparatively mean Circle, of our own private Interests!

This inspires us with the tenderest Sentiments of the most extensive
Benignity, to that whole Community, of which we are a Part, and therefore are
bound by our Relation, to promote its Interests, in the most diffusive Manner
we are capable of! It is a just and general Maxim, that (Benum quo communius co
melius) the more general any good is the more valuable it is.


This (considered in its whole extent) is the sublimest Character; it perfects
our intelligent Nature, advances and enlarges our noble Souls, and is therefore
the principal Ornament and Beauty of a great Mind!

This extensive Benignity conforms us in some Measure to the blessed God, who
is the Parent of our Spirits, and the Fountain of our Mercies; and in that
Property which is the prime Excellency, the Felicity and Glory of his Nature!

Projects of this Kind are worthy of Humanity, become the native Grandeur of a
Soul, and suit the Design of our Existence! The following Words of Cicero are
exceeding beautiful, viz. Cari f^nt Parents, cari ^^beri, propinqui,
Familiares sed omnes om^^um caritates Patria una complexa est. Cic. de offi^i.
Our Parents ^e dear! Our Children are dear! and so are our Kindered and
Acquintance! But love to our Country alone, comprizes all other ende^men^s!

Plato likewise speaks well upon this head, viz. That we were not born for our
selves only; but also for our country, for our relations, and for the rest of
our friends:

'Ecastoos hemoon aut axt^o monon gogo^^^' --

Epist. 9.


But on the contrary, to be unconcerned about our Countries Safety and
Interest, and that in their utmost Extent, bewrays a narrow, a grovelling, a
mean, a sneaking, a sordid Mind!

In a Word, Sirs, all that is dear and valuable concur to incite you to persist
in this Enterprise In this we contend pro ^ris et focis, for our civil and
religious Interests.
. Regard to God's Authority, the Imitation of his Example, Love to your
Country, Regard to the Protection of your own Lives, and the Lives of those to
whom you are related, by the Ties of Nature, of Grace, of Gratitude; Regard to
your Estates and Liberties, both civil and Religious! --

But Sirs, allow me to observe, that though outward Means are necessary and
excellent in their Place, yet they are not like to be crowned with Success,
except we look above them to God for Direction and Assistance; except we repent
of our Sins, and reform our Lives!

Indulgent Heaven has loaded us for a long Series of Time, with an
uninterrupted Train of various and valuable Benefits, both Civil and Religious.
But have we not abused them? and, Jeshurun like, kicked against our blessed,
our bounteous Benefactor? Does not Sin, almost of every Sort, abound among us,
notwithstanding of the late gloomy and alarming Providence that have passed
over us? Do we not therefore deserve a desolating Scourge? And can we
reasonably hope to escape it, without grieving for our Offenses, and turning to
God and Righteousness? What will all outward Defenses avail, if the God of
Armies be against us?

Among all the Evils that abound here, Swearing and Sabbath-Breaking seem to be
peculiarly flagrant. For these our Land mourns! And therefore, may I here, in
all Humility, and with due Deference, offer a few Words to the Consideration of
the Magistrates of this City. Honorable and worshipfu^ Gentlemen, You know
best, whether you can, by exerting the Powers of your Office with increasing
and united Vigor, put some greater Restraint upon the aforesaid Evils, and
others. -- If so would not i^ be for the Glory of God, and one proper Mean to
avert the impending Storm of Divine Indignation; to unite therein? The civil
Sword is in your Hands, Gentlemen, I hope you will not let it rust in the
Scabbard, whilst there seems to be such an urgent Necessity to brandish it to
the Terror of Transgressors!

Once more let me take Occasion from the Subject of a temporal War, to remind
all present of the spiritual War against Sin and Satan, which every of us ought
to engage in, and maintain; and must, if we would obtain Salvation Heb. xii.
14. Ephesians. vi. 12.
.

The Lord Jesus Christ is a Man of War. He is likewise styled, The Lion of
Juda's Tribe; the Captain of our Salvation! I would therefore beat up for
Volunteers for this great, this good Redeemer, who has on his Vesture a Name
written, the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords!

Enlist, my dear Brethren! enlist under the Banner of his Gospel, his Cross;
and that speedily, by believing in him, and resigning yourselves to his
Guidance and Government!

The spiritual War you are to engage in, is of absolute Necessity, and
transcendent Excellency; for if we live after the Flesh, we shall die; but if
we through the Spirit, mortify the Deeds of the Body, we shall l^ve.

The General you are to fight under, is wise, experienced, successful, infinite
in Power and Goodness The Enemies you are to fight against, though crafty and
malicious, are, however, comparatively weak and impotent!

The Time you have to fight in, is short and uncertain. What is our Life but a
Vapor, which appears for a little Time, and then vanishes away. We know not
what a Day will bring forth. --

The Armor you have to fight with, at the General's Expense, is excellent and
complete: There is a Helmet, a Breast Plate, a Sword, a Shield. --

The Wages ye fight for, are so great, as no human Mind can conceive or Tongue
express; No less than needful Supports and Comforts here, and eternal
Blessedness hereafter! --

Come then, my dear Brethren, without Delay, into the Camp of CHRIST, and
enlist under his Colors; put on the Robe of his Righteousness, and gird on the
spiritual Harness; take Care of your Arms, and expect the Battle; keep your
Ranks; face your Enemies, and eye your General, that ye may stand in the evil
Day, and having done all to stand. Stand therefore, having your Loins girt
about with Truth, and having on the Breast Plate of Righteousness. -- See the
Ensign of CHRIST, having LOVE for its Motto, is spread, and invites Rebels on
their Return to God to accept Protection. Hark! the Gospel trumpet sounds to
WAR and BATTLE: Let those that are armed take the Field. Watch ye, stand fast
in the Faith, quit ye like Men, be strong. May GOD, for CHRIST'S Sake, by his
Holy Spirit, grant this Mercy to us all. And to this blessed THREE-ONE GOD, be
eternal Praises. Amen. Amen.

APPENDIX.
BUT least what I have said be misunderstood, I would have it observed, that by
the Gospel, or New Covenant, (which are the same) we are to understand the glad
Tidings of Salvation through the MESSIAH, to be obtained by Faith in Him, (Acts
xx. 24. Romans xv. 29. Mark xxvi. 16. Jer. xxxi. 33. Heb. viii. 10.) The
aforesaid general Representation of the Nature of the Gospel, or New Covenant,
is agreeable to the current of the Scriptures; and therefore I think it
needless to mention any more Passages at present to confirm it. Now this Gospel
was revealed, though more obscurely, to Adam, immediately after his Fall from
God, in that gracious Promise, Genesis iii. 15. That the Seed of the Woman should
bruise the Serpent's Head; i. e. That the Messiah who was to be born of a
Woman, should crush the Power of Satan, and be victorious over him. This Gospel
was in Substance made manifest to Abraham Gal. iii. 8. And the Scripture
foreseeing, that God would justify the Heathen through Faith, preached before the
Gospel unto Abraham, saying, in thee shall all Nations be blessed. In thee, i.
e. in thy Seed, or in the Messiah, who is to def^^d from thee, Shall all
Nations be blessed. (See Gal. iii. 16.)

This Gospel or New Covenant, in regard of its Substance or Essence, was
discovered to the Jewish Church as really as to us: All the Pious among them
believed in the Messiah, Heb. xi. 39.

The Difference between the Old and New Testament Dispensation of the Covenant
of Grace, is not essential but circumstantial, or accidental, in respect of the
Circumstances, Manner, and Degree of the Thing, and not in regard of the Thing
itself; e. g.

I. These two Dispensations differ in respect of Clearness and Obscurity. In
the New, the Mysteries of Religion are proposed with greater Clearness, the
Vails of the ancient Types and Ceremonies being removed: And hence we are said,
With open Face (by Way of Contradistinction to Moses, who covered his Face with
a Veil) to behold, as in a Glass, the Glory of the Lord, 2 Cor. iii. 18. And
hence the Time of the Old Testament is compared to the Night, because the Son
of Righteousness, CHRIST JESUS, was not yet risen: But in the New, the
Dayspring from on high, is said to visit us (Luke i. 78.) The Old Testament
Dispensation was figurative and symbolical; and hence the Law (that is, the
legal or Jewish Dispensation of the New Covenant) is said to have a Shadow of
good Things to come (Heb. x. 1.) but the New is open and plain; and hence the
Apostle observes ( Tit. ii. 11.) That the Grace of God, that brings
Salvation, has appeared to all Men. Now the original Word, translated appear
(^p^phane) signifies a bright Manifestation; so that the Sense of the Words is
this: The new Dispensation of the Covenant of Grace is clear, and extends to
all Nations of Men; whereas the Old was obscure, and limited to one certain
Nation: But now the Partition Wall between Jew and Gentile is broken down.
Albeit the same heavenly Inheritance and Promise of Life is proposed in both
Dispensations of the Covenant of Grace, yet they are proposed in a different
Manner in the Old and New: In the Old, they are wrapped up in Types and temporal
Gifts, among which that of the Inheritance of the Land of Canaan, was an
eminent Instance, which, doubtless, was a Type of the Heavenly: But in the New,
these Things are nakedly proposed, without a Type or Vail.

II. The aforesaid Dispensations differ in Respect of Perfection; although the
Old had an essential Perfection, inasmuch as it contained the Substance of the
Covenant of Grace; yet it had not an accidental Perfection, as to Degree,
because that whole Dispensation was typical and shadowy, and differed from the
New as much in Degree, as the Shadow, or rough Draught of a Thing, from the
lively and express Image of it ( Heb. x. 1.) And hence the Author to the
Hebrews ascribes Imperfection to it, ( Heb. vii. 11.) Which Charge is just, not
only in the Instance now mentioned, but also in regard of the Levitical
Priesthood and Sacrifices. The High Priest was imperfect and mortal. Their
Sacrifices and Washings could not reach the Conscience, as the Apostle observes
in the forecited Chapter, (and Heb. x.) yet that Dispensation contained the
promised Messiah, concealed (comparatively) under Types and Ceremonies, which
did represent him, and his Sufferings, and Glory, though obscurely and covertly;
and hence the Gospel is said to be a Mystery, which was kept secret since the
World began (Romans xvi. 25.) yet so that Christ might be discerned through the
(...), which was done by Moses and others. He esteemed the Reproach of Christ,
greater Treasures than the Riches of Egypt (Heb. xi. 26.) The pious People of
that Time died in Faith, Not having received the Promises (actually and
according to Sense) but having seen them afar off.

III. The aforesaid Dispensations differ in Respect of Sweetness and Liberty.
Under the Old Testament, the Moral Law, and perfect Obedience to it, was more
frequently urged, and though Gospel-Promises were not excluded; yet they were but
rarely mentioned. The Design of which Rigor was, that the then Infant-Church
should be kept under Tutorage, and so as it were compelled to seek to the
Messiah for Relief and Rest, and with Gladness embrace an easier Dispensation
at his Advent: Under the New Testament, the Promises of Light and Strength, to
direct us in, and assist us to the Performance of Duty, as well as of God's
gracious Acceptance thereof, through Christ, are more frequent, and yet the Law
obliging to Obedience is not excluded.

Besides, though the pious Jews had the Holy Spirit, yet not in so great a Degree
generally, as Believers under the New Testament-Dispensation, under which he is
said to be poured forth, according to the Prophecy of Joel (ii. 28.) Though the
religious Israelites, by being truly in the Covenant of Grace, had a Right to
the Promises, and in Consequence thereof, to Gospel-Liberty; yet being under a
dark Dispensation, under the severe Tutorage of the Law as a Schoolmaster,
which alarmed their Fears of Divine Vengeance, and rather compelled them to
Obedience, by the Scom^es of its dreadful Threatenings, than allured ^m by the
gender Charm of divine Promises and ^ Lo^^ And likewise having generally but a
^ Leg^^ of Grace, they had for the most Part but a small Sense of their
Liberty, and hence they were so terrified on Occasion of extraordinary divine
Appearances, as frequently to say, we shall die because we have seen the Lord:
(Is. vi. 5.) The Spirit of GOD was to them generally in a comparative Sense, a
Spirit of Bondage to fear. (Romans viii. 15.) But under the New Testament, the
Evangelick jubilee takes place, Liberty is proclaimed to Captives (Isa. lxi.
1.) and the Riches of the Promises are more fully and frequently opened, the
Spirit of Adoption given forth generally in a greater Measure, whereby we are
enabled with humble but familiar and Child-like Boldness, to come to the Throne
of Grace, and cry Abba, Father. (Romans viii. 15.2 Cor. iii. 17.)

IV. The New-Testament-Dispensation, is easier than the Old, being freed from
the heavy and intolerable Yoke of the Ceremonial Law, that Handwriting of
Ordinances is nailed to the Cross of Christ. We have now no need of the costly
and troublesome Jewish Sacrifices, or of their numerous ceremonious washings
and observances, diverse of which were hard to be performed.

I might farther observe, that the two aforesaid Dispensations differ as to
time. The one preceeded the Exhibition of the Messiah, and the other follows
it: The one respected the Messiah as to come, the other as come actually.
Moreover the Old was to evanish, Heb. 10. but the New to continue till the End
of Time. Heb. vii. 16.

FINIS.
CORIGENDA.
PAge 9 line 5, read all. Page 10, line 26, add therefore. Page 15. line 7,
read sometimes. Page 24. line 17. for he, read be. Page 30, line 36. read
Ceterorum.


