A JOURNAL OF THE PROCEEDINGS OF THE COMMISSIONERS

Appointed for Managing A Treaty of Peace: To be Begun and Held at Falmouth, in
the County of York, the Twenty-seventh of September, Anno Domini One thousand
seven hundred and forty-nine; BETWEEN Thomas Hutchinson, John Choate, Israel
Williams, and James Otis, Esqrs; COMMISSIONED by the HONORABLE SPENCER PHIPS,
Esquire Lieutenant-Governour and Commander in Chief, in and over His Majesty's
Province of the Massachusetts Bay in New England, on the one Part; AND THE
EASTERN INDIANS on the other Part.

BOSTON; NEW ENGLAND: Printed by JOHN DRAPER, Printer to His Honor the
Lieutenant-Governour and Council.

A JOURNAL, etc.
September 29. 1749.
THE Commissioners being all arrived, were informed by Capt. Lithgow, Commander
of Richmond Fort, That a Number of the Norridgowock Tribe were attending in
order to the Treaty, and desired to pay their Respects to the Commissioners:
Who appointed Ten o'Clock the next Morning for that Purpose. And Notice was
given to Theodore Atkinson, and John Downing, Esqrs; commissioned by the
Governor of New Hampshire, desiring them to be present if they saw Cause.

September 30. 1749.
EIght of the Norridgowock Tribe ( Toxus the Chief being absent and indisposed)
appeared at the Commissioners Lodgings, where the Salutations to and from the
Commissioners of both Governments were passed in the usual Form. After which
the Indians desired a Supply of Provisions, etc. which were accordingly ordered
them. They then were informed by the Commissioners, That as soon as the
Penobscott Tribe should arrive, who were daily expected, they would proceed to
the Treaty.

October 3. 1749.
THere being no News of the Penobscott Tribe, the Commissioners dispatched a
Whale-Boat to St. George's Fort, with Letters to Capt. Bradbury the commanding
Officer there, desiring him to let them know the Reason of the Indians Delay;
and what his Expectations concerning them were. -- Fourteen Men, Women and
Children, of the Pigwacket Indians, who had lived among the English, in the
County of Plymouth, during the War, and were sent down to be present at the
Treaty, arrived this Day.

October 4 th.
THe Norridgowock Indians desiring to speak to the Commissioners, expressed
some Uneasiness at the Delay of the Treaty, and desired to know whether they
might not be treated with separately, and so dismissed: But at length agreed to
wait some Time longer, for the Arrival of the Penobscotts.

The Commissioners enquired of them, Whether there had been a general Meeting
of all the Tribes of Indians, in order to propose a Peace, as the Delegates
informed his Excellency Governor Shirley at Boston. And they confirmed the
Account given by the Delegates of such a general Meeting in Grand Council.

October 6 th.
THe Whale-Boat sent to St. Georges returned about Noon, with Letters from
Capt. Jabez Bradbury, dated the 5th, advising, That two Messengers from the
Indians came in that Day to inform him they would certainly be there in two
Days, to embark for Falmouth.

October 8 th.
CApt. Thomas Bradbury came down from Saco Fort, with an Indian called
Aisaidoo, who, with two Others, came into the Fort on the 6 th Instant, with a
Flag of Truce. The other two declined coming to Falmouth to the Treaty.
Aisaidoo informed the Commissioners, That he had been about ^^^ty Days from
Canada; That Pooran, Chief of the St. Francois, with three Others to represent
that Tribe, came away before him, and he expected to have found them here. The
Indians brought Letters directed to Capt. Dominicus Jordan from his Relations
at Trois Rivicres, dated the 13 th and 15 th of September. 1749. Capt. Lithgow
was sent in a Whaleboat to St. Georges with Letters, informing Capt. Bradbury,
That the Norridgowocks grew impatient; and directing him immediately to send
back the Sloop sent for the Penobscotts, unless he had a good Degree of
Certainty, that a Number of the Chiefs would be ready to embark by Thursday:
And to inform them, in case they should arrive afterward, that the
Commissioners apprehended it was not for the Honor of the Government to wait
any longer, and that they would return to Boston, and make Report to his Honor
the Lieutenant-Governour.

The Commissioners from the Governor of New Hampshire, set out this Day for
Portsmouth, having left an Instrument under their Hands, impowering and
desiring the Commissioners of the Massachusetts to comprehend the Province of
New Hampshire in the Treaty: And Roland Cotton, Esquire to sign the Articles in
their Name and Behalf.

October 14 th.
THe Penobscott Indians arrived this Morning, with an English Captive, who was
restored, agreeable to a Promise made at Boston; and being brought to the
Commissioners Lodgings, Mr. Hutchinson spoke to them in the Name of the
Commissioners, as follows, viz.

Commissioners. We are glad to see you safe arrived, and in Health. We have
been waiting here above a Fortnight for you. Toxus, and a Number of the
Norridgowock Tribe, and the Pigwackets from Boston, have also been here about
the same Space of Time. We have been so long kept from home, that we design to
return as soon as possible. We propose to have a Conference with you all in the
Afternoon, and have notified the other Tribes of it. And if any Thing previous
is to be said, you may now speak with Freedom.


Eger Emmet. What made the Hindrance was Loron's writing a Letter to the
Governor, discouraging our coming hither.


Commissi. Did not you write you would come notwithstanding?


Eger Em. Yes: Casimit wrote a good Letter, and we are come accordingly; and
have now no more to say.


Then the Commissioners drank King GEORGE's Health to the Indians, which was
pledged by all the Indians present.

Commissi. Do you expect that the Captive William Mackfarland, shall be any
longer with you.


Indians. No, We have delivered him up.


Commissi. He shall go Home with his Father, who is here present.


Indians. We are content.


The Norridgowocks coming in, Mr. Hutchinson told them, That the Penobscotts
were now arrived, and that the Treaty would begin at Three o'Clock: And if they
had any Thing previous to Offer, they might also do it.

They were then told that they might all go on board the Massachusett's Sloop
and Dine, where Provision should be ordered them.

They, making no Reply, were told, That the Reason of directing them to go on
board was, that they might, if they pleased, consuit together before the
Conference in the Afternoon: Which they then replied was agreeable to them. The
Norridgowocks also drank King GEORGE's Health with the Commissioners, and then
withdrew.

Post Meridiem.
THE Commissioners being seated in the Meeting House, and the several Tribes of
Indians being present; they were informed that an Oath would be now administered
to Roland Cotton, Esquire truly to enter all Matters that should pass at this
Conference: And to Capt. Joseph Bean truly to interpret what should be said
both by the English and Indians. Which Oaths were administered accordingly.

Then Mr. Hutchinson, in the Name of the Commissioners, spoke as follows, viz..

Commissi. Sometime in the Month of June last Nine of your Brethren came up to
Boston, and they made proposals of Peace in the Name of all the Tribes to
Governor Shirley, in a Conference had with him. They also proposed a Meeting
of their Tribes in this Part of the Province, to treat and agree upon the
particular Articles or Terms of Peace; declaring they were not then fully
authorized for that Purpose. The Governor promised to meet them by himself, or
by his Commissioners at this Place the 27th of September last. Soon after this,
His Excellency's Affairs obliged him to go to Great Britain: And some Affairs
of Consequence requiring the Presence of the Lieutenant-Governour at Boston, He
has appointed Commissioners with as full Power as He would have had if He had
been personally present.

We have been waiting here fourteen Days: The two Gentlemen from the Government
of New Hampshire waited here also some Time; but being obliged to return, they
have empowered us to act in their Behalf; and have authorized Roland Cotton,
Esquire to Sign in their Name and in behalf of their Government, such Articles as
we shall agree to.

Sundry Gentlemen of both Governments have been likewise waiting here some Time
upon this Occasion, but were obliged to return Home.

The Norridgowocks have also waited as long as we have; but we have deferred
treating with them till the Penobscots should arrive.

We have now taken the first Opportunity to confer with you all together.

We have brought the Conference from Boston of June last; and hope you have
brought what was delivered you.

We are pleased you have brought the Captive agreeable to your Engagement.

We desire to know what Tribes you appear for, and how far your Power extends.


Toxus. Pray hear what I am going to say.

I have thought of this Matter a great while, and am now come.

It has been foul Weather; I have stayed till fair Weather.

Ever since Governor Dummer treated with us, all the Indians liked it well,
and have reckoned it well ever since.

But yet there has been a dark Cloud for a Time, and a great deal of Blood
spilt: But now let us try to cover it over and forget it; and then when that is
done, Love will increase.

For my Part I am come here for Good. Time has been when your young Men
terrified ours and ours have terrified yours: But now the Time will come when
they may see one another without Fright.


Commissi. We understand that you are the Chief of the Tribes; and that you are
the proper Person to speak for them; and what you engage they will perform.


Toxus. I am Chief, and they are all of my Mind.


Eger Emmet. I went to Boston for Peace; and you now see me for the same End
here.

There were three Indians retarded our coming here in Time, viz. Loron,
Sabousit and Wombamando; who would break up any Thing that is doing for Good.
Notwithstanding I am now come to propose what can be done in Peace; for God is
willing that we should both English and Indians live in Peace. But Loron says,
when there is a French War we must break again.


Commissi. Your Tribe is numerous; and but Five here! Are you properly
empowered to act for the whole Tribe? Are they acquainted with your coming?


Eger Emmet. Yes, We are to act for them all. We don't come here for Nothing.


Commissi. When the Delegates were at Boston, they gave as one Reason why they
could not finally agree upon a Treaty, because their young Men were not
present; and they chose this Place that the young Men might be here.

How can you now agree without them?


Eger Emmet. I was at Boston, and am now here to make Peace.


Commissi. Are you any ways better empowered now to make Peace, than when you
was at Boston?


Eger Emmet. The King has made Peace, now therefore we will; and who shall
contradict it?


Commissi. The King's Subjects are bound by that. But how are you empowered?


Eger Emmet. We can bind our People, if they are not drunk.


Commissi. Can you bind and oblige the young Men of your Tribe as strong as if
they were here present?


Eger Emmet. Yes, They are obliged; and will stand by what We do.


Commissi. When the Delegates were at Boston, they proposed Governor Dummer's
Treaty to act upon.


Eger Emmet. Yes; and We now do so.


Commissi. In that Treaty a Peace is to last as long as the Sun and Moon endur.
Is it your Design and real Intention now to establish a Peace which shall last
forever, notwithstanding what Loron says, or the French shall hereafter do?


Eger Emmet. Yes.


Toxus. For our Parts We shall not break it.


Commissi. The English have never encouraged the Indians to make War with the
French; but when the Indians, or their Ancestors have desired a Peace with the
English, it was always readily granted: The English have always taken Measures
to preserve and not to hurt them; but the French have always stirred them up to
War to their Destruction.

If a War should happen between the English and French, are you resolved to
keep Peace with us? We don't know of any War, but only desire to know your
Sentiments.


Eger Emmet. What you have said we will carry Home.


Commissi. Have you no Power without going Home?


Eger Emmet. You speak angrily.

Commissi. No, We only speak loud, as the Interpreter is hard of Hearing.


Toxus. As to taking part with the French, I cannot now answer: We must consult
upon it.


Commissi. When the Delegates were at Boston, they said they would consult
their Tribes; and it is now expected they will Answer.

Tomorrow is the Lord's Day, upon which we do no Business. Therefore we desire
you will retire to the Island prepared for you, where proper Provision is
ordered you. We shall meet you again in this Place on Monday Morning next: And
shall bring with us Governor Dummer's Treaty, and c. And before that Time We
and You may both consider of what has been now said.


Eger Emmet and Toxus. Very well.


They then drank King GEORGE's Health, and the Gentlemen's present; and
withdrew.

October 15 th.
SIX of the St. Francois Indians came into Falmouth to attend the Treaty.

October 16 th.
THE Commissioners having notifyed the Indians, they were all present at the
Meeting House, when Mr. Hutchinson spoke to them as follows, viz.

Commissi. We are glad to see you well in Health this Morning: We hope you have
wanted for nothing since you were here.


Indians. Nothing at all: We have had every Thing.


Commissi. It was agreed that both Sides should consider of what was said on
Saturday. We were surprised to hear of some Things then offered on your Part
relating to the Continuance of the Peace; The English never made any such Peace
as that. It would be dishonorable for this Government, and no Service to you;
and we can entertain no Though It of it. You have always spoke well of Governor
Dummer's Treaty; and the English have liked it well. There was a better
Understanding after that Treaty than ever before, and it lasted long; and the
Indians then said it should last as long as the Sun and Moon endure. We have
taken great Care of that Treaty. We have it with us now. Here M. Hutchinson
showed the Original Treaty in Vellum.
And the Delegates at Boston then proposed this should be the Plan; And if you
are of the same Mind now, we are ready to go over the Articles of that Treaty,
and to come into a Peace agreeable to that. We desire now to hear what you have
to say.


Toxus. You Gentlemen Commissioners: We have agreed to follow the Path of
Governor Dummer's Treaty: We desire to turn all the Blood upon the Ground,
under it; and that all may be forgotten.


Commissi. Do you speak for your self or your Tribes?


Toxus. We don't speak for our selves only, but for all the Tribes.


Commissi. Is it the Mind of Eger Emmet and that Tribe to pursue the same Path?


Eger Emmet. Yes; We are all of that Mind.


Toxus. I will tell something. I know the Minds of the Canada Indians; one of
them, being present, is an Evidence.

Upon the Cessation of Arms, the French and Indians were sent for, and went up
to Canada, and discharged all the Guns which were loaded in the War; and the
Governor then told them, that if they should shoot at any of the English, they
had as good shoot against their own Brothers: The Governor of Albany sent Belts
of Wampum to the several Tribes of Indians between there and Canada, and then
the Path of Peace was open.


Commissi. Desire the Indians to tell the Names of all that are present, that
they may be inserted in the Treaty.


They then declared their Names as follows, viz.

Penobscotts;
Eger Emmet, Maganumba, Nictumbouit, Esparagoosaret, Neemoon.
Norridgowocks;
Toxus, Eneas, Magawombee, Harrey, Sooseph nia, Naktoonos, Nesaqumbuit,
Peereez,
Arresuguntcocooks and Weweenocks;
Sawwaramet, Aussaado, Waaununga, Sauquish, Wareedeon, Wawawnunka.
Commissi. We don't take the Names of the Pickwacket Indians, because they have
not been at War with us; therefore the former Treaty holds good with respect ^o
them, as they have not broke it.

We will now read over Governor Dummer's Treaty; and it shall be distinctly
interpreted to you: Which after it was shown to them and the Marks of several
present (who had signed that Treaty) acknowledged by them, it was read, and
distinctly interpreted to them.


Commissi. We will first offer what we have to say on the several Articles. --

Have you any Captives among you?


Indians. We have one named John, who was taken near Berwick.


A Woman then appeared, and declared to the Commissioners it was her Son, taken
with her: Upon which Mr. Hutchinson said,

Commissi. Do you know this Woman?


Indians. No.


Commissi. Was the Mother taken and three Girls, and an Infant at the same Time?


Indians. Yes; The Husband of the Woman was killed: The Girls are returned Home.


Commissi. Was the Boy the Brother of the Girls?


Indians. They were all taken at the same Time. -- There were two Boys; one
died some Time ago.


Commissi. How long since you have seen that living Boy?


Indians. Twenty Days agone.


Commissi. Was this Boy the same you took at New-Casco?


Indians. Yes it was.


Commissi. This Woman brought one of her Sons home, the other died and yet you
say one is left, which cannot be.


Indians. We believe the Boy that was left was taken from Piseataqua.


Commissi. It is expected, agreeable to this Article, that this Boy be returned
home.


Indians. We would have had him come home last Spring, but he would not come.


Commissi. We insist upon it, that if he is willing, or can be prevailed upon
to come, that you will return him.


Indians. We will deliver him up.


Commiss. If there should be any necessary Charge in bringing him down, we will
allow or refund that Charge.


Indians. It is very well.


Inquiry was also made after a young Man taken at Colerain, but no certain
Account given.

Inquiry was then made after two young Men, one taken at or near Albany, the
other at Goreham Town; but no Account of them.

Commiss. We expect you deliver up all the Indian Captives taken, as much as if
they were our own English People.


Indians. There are two Indian Captives at Arreseguntoocook, and one at
Moorena; who, though they are linked in with the Indians, must be returned when
the Peace is settled. One of them named Caleb, the other Wabquish, the other in
the Mountains; all taken at Annapolis.


Then Mr. Hutchinson informed the numerous Assembly present, that if any of
them had any Friends of Relations in Captivity, they might repair to the
Commissioners at their Lodgings, and all proper Care should be taken for
recovering them from the Indians.

Commiss. to the Indians. Do you know one Christo, an Indian about 24 Years of
Age, that lived near Winnepesioket Pond, that was taken by the English some
Time since.


Indians. Yes, We know him.


Commiss. That young Man has learned to read and write, and has a Trade, and
would not come down with the Commissioners: However, if you will return the
young Man beforementioned, the Governor of Piscataqua will oblige Christo to
return to the Indians again.


Indians. Very well.


Commiss. We now proceed to another Article. We propose to keep two
TruckHouses, one at St. George's, the other at Richmond.


Sayweremet. We desire there may be a Truck-House at Saco likewise.


Commiss. The Trade has been so small at Saco, that the Government supposed
there would not be any Need of a Truck-House there, but that Richmond
Truck-House, would accommodate any Indian that used to trade at Saco. But if
you don't think the two Truck-Houses will generally accommodate you, we will
inform the Governor of it.


Sayweremet. We always thought there would be a Truck-House at Saco, agreeable
to Governor Dummer's Treaty.


Commiss. How much further is it to Richmond than Saco, for the St. Francois
Indians to carry their Beaver to?


Sayweremet. We don't know. But it is a great Way, and who can carry Beaver
such a long Way?


Commiss. We have heard what you have said about a Truck-House at Saco, and
will acquaint the Governor punctually with it when we return home.

We have but one Word more to say.

There was a Misunderstanding about the Trade in Governor Dummer's Treaty: We
will have every Thing plain and clear now.

We are directed by the Government to assure you, That you shall have Goods as
cheap as you shall be able to purchase them at the same Time in like Quantities
at Boston with ready Money. And that we will give you as much for your Peltry
as it can be bought for at Boston.

We are now ready to hear you upon any of the Articles.


Toxus. We have nothing further to offer. We like all that has been said, only
we hear that there is an Indian Boy at Richmond's Island, which we desire may
be restored.


Commissi. That Boy was given to Capt. Jordan before the War by his Father, who
is since dead. However, we will enquire into the Circumstances, and give you an
Account in the Afternoon.


Jo, a Pigwacket Indian. That Boy was taken at Saco at the same Time we were.


Commissi. We have provided a Dinner for you, and in the mean Time we will
prepare the Articles of Peace, and desire to know whether it will be agreeable
to you to meet in order to sign them in the Afternoon.


Toxus. We don't know of any Thing more to do to prevent it.


The Commissioners then drank King GEORGE's Health, which was pledged by the
Indians.

In the Afternoon the Commissioners met the Indians in the Meeting House.

Toxus. We have now almost finished in Love and Unity. Time was in Governor
Dummer's Day and Treaty, we made Peace in all Love and Unity. Why cannot we do
it now? We hope it will be so now, and that we shall live in Peace and Unity
again. I wish all our Friends and Neighbors had been here, but since they are
not, we will still do well. What we have been saying and doing, all our Tribes
will like well. There are three of our young People that we shall be thankful
to return to their native Land, viz. Oone^z, Mareuso, and Mareagit, at Plymouth.


Commissi. We suppose these are Pigwacket Indians. We shall force none of that
Tribe to remain among the English, but they shall all be returned home. There
was in the Morning something said by one of the Pigwackets, as if they were
forced away from Home. This is the first Time any such Thing has been publicly
suggested. Capt. Cutter brought them up, and declared they desired to come and
live with the English; and when the Government asked them if it was so, they
declared that it was so. Soon after the Treaty was appointed, the Government
told them they might attend it if they would, and you now see them here with
your own Eyes, at Liberty to return. And the Children were not kept back by the
Government, but it was their own Choice, and they shall be sent down
immediately.


Toxus. As for the Boy at Canada, though he is not willing to come, yet we will
take him out a Hunting and return him.


Commissi. Where would you have the Children sent to?


Toxus. To Brunswick.


Consmissi. The Sloop goes to Richmond this Fall. Will it do to send the
Children there.


Toxus. Yes, very well.


Commissi. We shall now read the Articles of the Peace, and they are to be
interpreted to you. If you don't perfectly understand every Article, let us
know it, and we will explain it.

We shall begin with the Articles of the Treaty you are to Sign; and then go on
with those we are to Sign: Both which were read, Paragraph by Paragraph, and
distinctly interpreted to them.


Toxus. I am grown Old, and Capt. Lithgow is very kind to me; therefore I
desire he may be continued at Richmond, and that an Armourer may be appointed
there.


Commissi. We cannot promise this; but we will recommend these Matters to the
Government when we go home. Have you any Thing further to offer?


Toxus. No.


Commissi. Are you now ready to sign?


Indians. Yes.


The Indians then signed their Articles, which are as follows, viz.

Province of the Massachusetts Bay in NEW ENGLAND.
At Falmouth, in Casco-Bay, the sixteenth Day of October, in the twenty-third
Year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord GEORGE the Second, by the Grace of GOD,
of Great Britain, France, and Ireland, KING, Defender of the Faith, etc. in the
Year of our Lord, 1749.
The Submission and Agreement of the Eastern Indians.
WHEREAS a War has for some Years past been made and carried on by the Indians
of the Tribes of Penobscot, Norridgowock, St. Francois, and other Indians,
inhabiting within His Majesty's Territories of New England, against the
Governments of the Massachusetts Bay and New-H^^pshire, contrary to several
Treaties heretofore solemnly entered into: And the said Indians being now
sensible of the Miseries and Troubles they have involved themselves in, and
being desirous to be restured to His Majesty's Grace and Favor, and to live in
Peace with all His Majesty's Subjects; and that all former Acts of Injury may
be fogotten;

WE the Underwritten, being delegated and empowered to represent and act for
and in behalf of the Indians aforesaid, have concluded to make, and do by these
Presents in their Name make, our Submission unto His most Excellent Majesty
GEORGE, the Second, by the Grace of GOD, of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
KING, Defender of the Faith, etc. in as full and ample a Manner as any of our
Predecessors have heretofore done.

And, We do by these Presents engage with Thomas Hutchinson, John Choate Israel
Williams and James Otis, Esqrs; commissioned by the Honorable SPENCER PHIPS,
Esquire as He is Lieutenant-Governour and Commander in Chief of the Province of the
Massachusetts Bay, and with the Governors or Commanders in Chief of said
Province for the Time being,

That is to say;

IN the Name and Behalf of the Tribes and Indians aforesaid, We do promise and
engage, THAT at all Times for ever, from and after the Date of these Presents,
We and They will cease and forbear all Acts of Hostility, Injuries and Discords
toward all the Subjects of the Crown of Great Britain, and not offer the least
Hurt, Violence or Molestation to them or any of them, in their Persons or
Esttaes, but will henceforward hold and maintain, a firm and constant Amity
with all the English, and will never Confederate or Combine with any other
Nation to their Prejudice.

THAT all the Captives taken in this present War shall forthwith be restored,
without any Ransom or Payment to be made for them or any of them.

THAT His Majesty's Subjects the English, shall and may peaceably and quietly
enter upon, improve and enjoy all and singular their Rights of Land, and former
Settlements, Properties and Possessions within the Eastern Parts of the said
Province of the Massachusetts Bay, together with all Islands, Islets, Shoars,
Beaches and Fishery within the same, without any Molestation or Claims by us or
any other Indians, and be in no ways interrupted or disturbed therein. Saving
to the Tribes of Indians within His Majesty's Province aforesaid, and their
natural Defendants respectively, all their Lands, Liberties and Properties, not
by them conveyed or sold to or possessed by any of the English Subjects as
aforesaid; as also the Privilege of Fishery, Hunting and Fowling as formerly.

THAT all Trade and Commerce which hereafter may be allowed between the English
and the Indians, shall be under such Management and Regulation as the
Government of the Massachusetts Province shall direct.

IF any Controversy or Difference at any Time hereafter happen to arise between
any of the English and Indians, for any real or supposed Wrong or Injury done
on either Side, no private Revenge shall be taken for the same; but a proper
Application shall be made to His Majesty's Government upon the Place for Remedy
or Redress thereof in a due Course of Justice: We submitting our selves to be
ruled and governed by His Majesty's Laws, and desiring to have the Benefit of
the same.

WE do further engage, That if any Indians shall at any Time hereafter commit
any Act of Hostility against the English, we will join our young Men with the
English in reducing such Indians to Reason.

In the next Place, We the Underwritten do promise and engage with Theodore
Athinson and John Downing, Esqrs; commissioned by His Excellency BENNING
WENTWORTH, Esquire Governor and Commander in chief of His Majesty's Province of
New Hampshire, and with the Governors and Commanders in chief of said Province
for the Time being: That we, and the Indians we represent and appear for, shall
and will henceforth cease and forbear all Acts of Hostility, Injuries and
Discords, toward all the Subjects of His Majesty KING GEORGE, within the said
Province. And we do understand and take it, That the said Government of
New Hampshire is also included and comprehended in all and every the Articles
aforegoing, excepting that respecting the Regulation of the Trade with us.

In Testimony whereof, we have signed these Presents, and affixed our Seals.
Arrasaguntacooks and Weewenocks,
Sawwaramet, and a Seal Aussado, and a Seal Waaununga, and a Seal Sauquish, and
a Seal Wareedeen, and a Seal Wawawnunka, and a Seal
Norridgowocks
Toxus, and a Seal Eneas, and a Seal Magawombee and a Seal Harry, and a Seal
Sooseph nia, and a Seal Naktoonos, and Seal Nesagumbuit, and a Seal Peereez,
and a Seal
Penobscotts,
Eger Emmet, and a Seal Maganumba, and a Seal Nictumbouit, and a Seal
Es^aragoosaret, and a Seal Nemooon, and a Seal
WITNESSES,
John Storer Jabez Fox William Welsteed William Lithgow Benjamin Titcomb
Nathaniel Coffin Thomas Bradbury Charles Frost Samuel Moodey Thomas Smith
Joseph Wise George Berry Samuel Cobb Thomas Scales Moses Pierson Job Lewis
James Otis, jun. William Cotton Enoch Freeman Joseph Bayley


The English then signed their Article, which are as follows, viz.

Province of the Massachusetts Bay in NEW ENGLAND.
By Thomas Hutchinson, John Choate, Israel Williams, and James Otis, Esqrs;
commissioned by the Honorable SPENCER PHIPS, Esquire Lieuttenant Governor and
Commander in chief of His Majesty's Province of the Massachusetts Bay, for
treating with the Indians engaged in the late War.
WHEREAS Eger Emmet, Maganumba, Nictumbuit, Esparagoosaret, and others,
Delegates from the Penobscots; Toxus, Sachem and chief Sagamore of the
Norridgowocks, with others; Sawweeremet, and others of the Arresaguntacoock and
Weewenock Tribes appearing for and representing the several Tribes of Indians
inhabiting within His Majesty's Territories of New England, have, in the Name
and Behalf of the said Tribes, signed and executed an Instrument of Submission
to His Majesty, bearing Date with these Presents, therein firmly promising and
engaging for ever, to cease all Hostilities and Violences, and to live in Peace
and Amity with all His Majesty's Subjects;

WE do therefore, by Virtue of the Commission aforesaid, receive and recommend
the said Tribes to His Majesty's Grace and Favor. Promising them the Benefit
and Protection of His Majesty's Laws, in like Manner as his English Subjects
have and enjoy.

And we do further engage,

That all Acts of Hostility from this Government, against the said Tribes of
Indians shall cease, and that a firm and constant Friendship and Amity shall
hereafter be maintained with them.

That upon the Indians delivering up all the English Prisoners, any Captives
from the Indians that may be within this Government shall likewise be set at
Liberty.

That the Indians shall peaceably enjoy all their Lands and Properties, which
have not been by them conveyed and sold unto, or possessed by the English, and
be in no Ways molested or disturbed in their Planting or Improvement. And
further, That there shall be allowed them the free Liberty and Privilege of
hunting, fishing and fowling as formerly.

That Commerce and Trade shall be carried on between the English and Indians
according to such Directions as shall be agreed on by His Majesty's Government
of this Province.

That no private Revenge shall be taken by the English; but in Case any Person
shall presume so to do, upon Complaint thereof, Justice shall be done the
Person aggrieved.

That if any other Tribes of Indians shall make War upon any of the Tribes now
entered into the Peace: In such Case, Assistance shall be afforded them by the
English, as shall be necessary.

In the next Place, It is hereby promised and engaged by Theodore A^kinson and
John Downing, Esqrs; commissioned by his Excellency BENNING WENTWORTH, Esquire
Governor and Commander in Chief of His Majesty's Province of New Hampshire,
That the said Government shall be included and comprehended in, and bound to
the Observance of all and every the Articles aforegoing, excepting that which
respects the regulating the Trade.

In Testimony whereof, We have signed and sealed these Presents. Dated at
Falmouth in Casco-Bay this Sixteenth Day of October, Anno Domini One Thousand
Seven Hundred and Forty Nine. And in the Twenty-third Year of His Majesty's
Reign. Thomas Hutchinson, and a Seal. John Choate, and a Seal. Israel Williams,
and a Seal. James Otis, and a Seal. Roland Cotton, and a Seal,
In the Name and by Order of Theodore Atkinson and John Downing, Esqrs;
Commissioners from the Governor of New Hampshire.
WITNESSES, John Storer, Charles Frost, Moses Pierson, Jabez Fox, Samuel
Moodey, Job Lewis, Wm. Welst^ed, Thomas Smith, James Otis, jun. Wm. Lithgow,
Joseph Wise, Wm. Cotton Benja. Titcomb, Nath. Coffin, George Berry, Enoch
Freeman, Samuel Cobb, Joseph Bayley, Thomas Bradbury, Thomas Scales.


Commissi. Whose Hands do you choose the Articles signed by us should be put
into?


Indians. Into the Hands of Toxus.


Commissi. Now we have signed the Peace, all Enmity is taken away, and
henceforward we shall always salute and treat you as Brethren.


Toxus. We are sensible that God directs in this Affair.


Commiss. We are sensible of it likewise; and both we and you may justly expect
that God will be greatly offended with those who break such solemn Promises and
Engagements. -- If you have any Thing further to offer, now is the Time, as we
shall not meet together again for a Conference.


Toxus. We have said and done every Thing that is right and just, and have now
finished.


Commiss. We have a small Present from the Government which we were directed to
deliver you as a Token of Friendship, after Peace should be settled with you;
which we shall deliver you Tomorrow in the Forenoon, and desire you to dine
with us afterward. We have provided a Lodging for you in Town, that you may be
here in the Morning.


Then the Commissioners drank to the Indians, King GEORGE's Health; also Health
to all their Tribes, and a long Continuance of the Peace as now established:
Which was pledged by Toxus and all the rest.

October 17th. 1749.
THE Indians being notified to be present at the Commissioners Lodgings; The
Present from the Government was delivered to them, and they were informed, That
as it was the Custom of the Government, in their Conferences with the Indians
^f the six Nations, to deliver them Belts of Wampum to bind such Agreements as
were made with them, so these Presents were delivered in Lieu of Belts to the
^ndians, who had executed the Articles of the Treaty, in order to bind and
strengthen ^he same, and as a Pledge of the Friendship which the Government now
bore to them: At which the Indians expressed their Approbation.

The same Evening the Commissioners left Falmouth in order to return home.

Attr. Roland Cotton.

By the HONORABLE SPENCER PHIPS, Esquire Lieutenant Governor and Commander in
Chief, in and over His Majesty's Province of the Massachusetts Bay in
New England.
A PROCLAMATION.
WHEREAS, at the Instance and Request of the Indians of the Penobscot,
Norridgewalk, Arrasaguntacook, Wewenock, and other Tribes, inhabiting within
His Majesty's Territories of New England, who have lately been at War with this
Government, signified by their Delegates to his Excellency William Shirley, Esquire
Captain General of the said Province, at Boston in the Month of June last, a
Treaty was begun and held at Falmouth in Casco-Bay, upon the 14th of October
Instant, between Commissioners by me appointed and empowered for that Purpose,
and certain Chiefs and other Indians, for and in Behalf of the said Tribes; and
upon the 16th following, Articles os Peace and Friendship between this
Government and the said Indians were agreed upon, finally settled and
concluded;

I HAVE therefore thought fit, with the Advice of His Majesty's Council, to
issue this Proclamation, that all Persons within this Government may be duly
informed of the Peace concluded as aforesaid.

And I do hereby strictly command and require all His Majesty's good Subjects
to live in Peace and Amity with the Indians of the Penobscot, Norridgewalk,
Arresaguntacook and Wewenock Tribes, and the other Indian Tribes, within the
Territories aforesaid, who have lately been at War with this Government. And
not to com^^^ any Acts of Violence or Hostility against the said Indians, or
give them any Trouble or Molestation; but on the contrary to afford them all
necessary Comfort and Assistance, as Occasion may require; And His Majesty's
Justices of the Peace, and all other Officers in such Places where the said
Indians may resort, are hereby commanded to use their utmost Endeavors, that
no Wrong or Injury be offered to the said Indians, and that the good Laws of
this Province be strictly observed and maintained in all Dealings and
Transactions with them.

Given at the Council Chamber in Boston upon Friday the 27th Day of October,
1749. in the twenty-third Year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord GEORGE the
Second, by the Grace of GOD, of Great Britain, France and Ireland KING,
Defender of the Faith, etc. S. PHIPS.
By Order of the Honorable the Lieut Governor, with the Advice of the
Council. J. Willard, Secr.

GOD save the KING.

